==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
5G mobile radio performance prediction
using machine learning
Drive test minimization using deep learning with Bayesian
approximation
Kristoffer Gordon Clausen (s134523)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
info@fotonik.dtu.dk
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Mobile network operators commonly carry out drive test measurements in order to
assess and optimize the coverage and capacity aspects of their networks. Drive test
measurements, however, are time-consuming and costly for dense areas due to the
many differing facades and obstacles causing Non-Lone-of-Sight (NLoS) scenarios im-
pairing the signals. This implication of signal impairments is even further toughened
in 5G mobile networks due to the increased densification and radio resource sharing.
Computer models capable of assessing the coverage and capacity aspects of the mobile
network are therefore highly sought after, since they have the potential to drastically
minimize the amount of required drive tests. Deep learning (DL) techniques provide
the ideal set of tools for this purpose, as DL models are capable of inferring a mapping
from drive test measurements to network throughput. The models are thus capable of
predicting the downlink data rates based on previously seen drive test measurements,
allowing for a minimization of the drive tests (MDT).
The results show that DL methods such as Deep Neural Networks (DNN) and
Random Forests (RF) are capable of performing decently generalizing data rate pre-
dictions on LTE networks. The models’ predictions were based solely on LTE signal
quality metrics and GPS measurements. The RF models were at greater risk of over-
fitting to the GPS measurements, and the DNN as a result proved to provide the
best generalization for mobile network performance predictions. The models further-
more provide an insight into where additional drive test measurements are required
through a model uncertainty metric. MDT is thus achievable for LTE networks with
data rate predictions from these models, however, this methods is also applicable in
5G mobile networks.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Photonics Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in partial fulfillment of the requirements for acquir-
ing a master’s degree in Electrical Engineering.
The project was carried out from September 10th 2018 to February 10th 2019 under
the academic supervision of associate professor Henrik Lehrmann Christiansen and
Ph.d. student Jakob Thrane.
The workload of the project corresponds to 30 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, February 10, 2019
Kristoffer Gordon Clausen (s134523)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor, Henrik Lehrmann Chris-
tiansen, for excellent guidance by making every thing as simple as possible, but not
simpler.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Jakob Thrane for his great support and advising
regarding the model development and result evaluations.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The need for 5G
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis objective and structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
5G mobile networks
7
2.1
Drivers for the 5G mobile network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Key technologies for 5G systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
5G network architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4
Chapter summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Predictive methods using machine learning
33
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
ML approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3
Classification and Regression Trees (CART) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4
Artificial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.5
Model comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.6
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4
Mobile network measurements
57
4.1
Data preprocessing techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3
Feature engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.4
Feature investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.5
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.6
Hyper parameter tuning in ML models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.7
Chapter summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Mobile network performance predictions
73
5.1
Mobile network performance predictions with GPS measurements . . .
73
5.2
Mobile network performance predictions without GPS measurements .
81
5.3
Chapter summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6
Discussion
89
7
Conclusion
93
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A Model- and feature selection for the first data set
97
A.1 Without geographical features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.2 Model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The world is becoming increasingly dependent on wireless communication. The num-
ber of internet-enabled devices are ever increasing, and the expansion of smartphones
as an essential everymans device is driving the evolution of the already existing mobile
network infrastructure. The coverage and capacity of the networks are thus among
the most important objectives for mobile network operators in order to cope with the
growing demand. Assessments of the coverage and capacity in the mobile network is
usually carried out through drive tests that measure relevant network variables, such
as noise, power etc. Capacity enhancements in the mobile network are, among other
things, realized through a densification process in cooperation with a utilization of
higher transmission frequencies, which experience higher path-losses. However, these
network enhancements toughens the assessment of the quality of experience (QoE)
in the mobile network, due to the increased number of cell deployments and shorter
coverage of each cell, thus requiring more areas to be drive tested. The efforts and ex-
penses associated with drive tests are considered rather high as explained in [Thr+18].
Drive test minimization will therefore become especially relevant for densely deployed
5G mobile networks.
Minimization of drive tests (MDT) is thus desired and several solutions have there-
fore been proposed. MDT have been introduced in [3GP18a], and regards the concept
of using network-related user equipment (UE) data to evaluate the coverage of the
mobile network. An advantage of MDT is its use of data (including GPS) obtained
directly from the UEs, which improves the evaluations of coverage and capacity. Fur-
thermore, this approach also naturally include geographical locations for mapping the
coverage and capacity.
1.1
The need for 5G
Mobile communication has fundamentally revolutionized the way we live and conduct
businesses in the modern world.
Smart phones, tablets and machine to machine
(M2M) type communications have all all sky rocketed in popularity. This has forced
the operators to deploy a more capable mobile network, in order to meet customers
continuous demand of even greater datarates. Figure 1.1 clearly illustrates the trend
of growing demands, and hence growing capacity needs, as internet enabled devices
become embedded in the customers daily lives.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Announcement of the new pope in 2005 and 2013 [Cla15]
The demand for mobile data is growing exponentially, and new technologies are
being researched and developed in order to deploy a capable 5G mobile network.
Especially the internet of things (IoT) and video streaming plays an essential role
in the development of 5G. Billions of devices will be connected, summing up to a
tremendous capacity demand [Eri16], inducing strict requirements to the capacity of
the mobile network. The cellular providers around the world will therefore continue
to face the endless problem of achieving capacity enhancements.
1.2
State of the art
The growing diversity and complexity of mobile network architectures has made mon-
itoring and managing the multitude of network elements intractable [ZPH18]. The
domain of network-related prediction models in mobile networks has as a result ex-
perienced an increasing amount of attention. Especially deep learning based models
have grown in popularity [ZPH18]. Network predictions refers to inferring a mapping
from mobile network traffic or performance indicators given historical measurements
or related data.
Östlin et al. were among the first to successfully use artificial neural networks
(ANN) for path loss prediction in macro cells [OZS10].
Their results show that
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Thesis objective and structure
3
a simple artificial neural network (ANN) model performs very well compared with
traditional propagation models with regard to prediction accuracy, complexity, and
prediction time.
Pierucci and Micheli investigates the relation ship between quality of Services
(QoS) metrics and quality of experience (QoE) metrics with deep learning [PM16].
They employ an ANN to predict the users’ QoE in mobile networks based on through-
put, cell load and channel quality indicators (CQI) showing high achievable prediction
accuracies. Zhang et al. more recently proposed a citywide cellular traffic prediction
model by using a deep learning approach to model the nonlinear dynamics of wireless
traffic. By treating traffic data as images, both the spatial and temporal dependence
of cell traffic are well captured utilizing densely connected convolutional neural net-
works [Zha+18].
Thrane et al. shows how deep learning (DL) techniques can be used to predict
LTE signal quality metrics using drive test measurements [Thr+18]. Their results
show that DL models can achieve a 70% reduction in the required drive tests. Their
results furthermore provide insight into where additional measurements are required.
Lastly, Chang and Wicaksono shows that LTE network load and downlink through-
put can be estimated using the RF scanner measurement data without performing
UE’s FTP downloading tests [CW17]. The proposed algorithm calculates the poten-
tial downlink throughput at each location at which the RF scanner measured RSRP,
RSRQ and SINR.
1.3
Thesis objective and structure
The objective of this thesis is to investigate how Machine Learning (ML) models can
be used to predict the performance of mobile networks, as measured in terms of the
downlink throughput for an individual UE. It serves as a proof of concept, proving that
predictive ML models are capable of predicting the performance of mobile networks
based on signal quality metrics and GPS measurements. Accurate models can then
be used to achieve MDT through predictions, rather than measurements.
The idea is to let predictive models infer a mapping from signal quality and
geographical measurements to the downlink throughput. The signal quality metrics
are measured in terms of RSRP, RSSI, RSRQ and SINR, whereas the geographical
metrics are measured in terms of GPS position and distance between the equipment
(UE) and base station (BS). These predictive models will become especially relevant
for 5G mobile networks whose channels, and thus signals, are expected to become
more complex due to the sharing of network resources among multiple UEs, thus
requiring more drive tests. Figure 1.2 illustrates the flow of achieving the objective
of MDT.
The preliminary goal of this thesis is to construct a model capable of accurately
predicting the performance impacts based on previous measurements of the above-
mentioned metrics. This model would thus allow network operators to reduce the
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
ML models 
(RF and NN models) 
Throughput 
prediction  
(data rate [kbit/s]) 
Minimization 
of drive tests 
(map of throughput) 
Signal quality and
GPS measurements
(RSRP, GPS, etc.) 
Input 
Output 
MDT
Predictive model
MDT
Performance prediction
Input features
Figure 1.2: A predictive model is used to predict the throughput from the signal
quality and GPS measurements. MDT is then achieved with the predictions.
amount of drive testing needed in order to determine the performance of specific ge-
ographical areas. This will become especially relevant in 5G mobile networks, which
are expected to become more densely connected, thus requiring more drive tests. Four
sub-objectives have been defined in order to reach the preliminary goal.
The first sub-objective is to understand why MDT is important for 5G mobile net-
works, and how this can be alleviated through the use of ML modelling techniques.
The second sub-objective is to gather sufficient data for ML model development
since the ML models are trained based on a foundation of data. Part of this sub-
objective also includes adequate preprocessing, as done in order to prepare the data
for direct use in ML model development.
It is within the scope of this thesis to
document the work of the experimental setup, the measurements observed and the
preprocessing steps applied to the measurements.
The third sub-objective is to develop the actual models based on the measure-
ments in order to carry out the performance predictions. Part of this sub-objective
also include an analysis and comparison of the results achieved from the individual
models. It is within the scope of this thesis to document the model-parameter tuning
process leading to the best performing models.
The fourth sub-objective of this thesis, is to compare the generalizability of the RF
and NN models, in order to determine which model that provide the best predictive
capabilities. There is no direct measure of generalizability, so it is estimated based
on the model’s accuracies on unseen data as well as the distribution of their reliance’s
on the individual input features.
Finally, the general applicability of the ML approaches is discussed in relation to
other performance prediction models such as HMMs, GPRs and LSTMs. This thesis
follows the structure outlined below.
Chapter 2: 5G mobile networks and the key technologies required for its real-
ization are initially introduced with the fundamental architectural changes re-
quired in order to deploy said technologies. The relevance of MDT in 5G mobile
networks are furthermore demonstrated.
Chapter 3: Predictive methods using ML are explained in detail to provide a
mathematical foundation for the predictive model development. The basic prop-
erties supporting RF and NN models are thoroughly reviewed and compared.
These are the methods used to alleviate the MDT.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Thesis objective and structure
5
Chapter 4: Mobile network measurements are documented to provide the in-
formative data foundation on which the models are developed. The data pre-
processing steps undertaken as well as the data investigation and selection is
also described herein.
Chapter 5: Mobile network performance predictions are showcased through
the results achieved by each model. The predictability and generalizability are
compared for each model in order to determine the best performing model.
Chapter 6: Conclusion finalizes the thesis with a conclusion based on the final
results. The results of the predictive methods are furthermore discussed where
advantages and concerns are highlighted. A suggestion future work is lastly
provided.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
5G mobile networks
The 5G mobile network is anticipated to be flexible, green and fast [Chi+16]. It is
therefore not sufficient to keep evolving the existing fourth generation (4G) mobile
network to meet these anticipations. A new network architecture for the 5G mobile
network is required to meet the requirements set by IMT-2020 [ITU18]. The new
network architecture includes a densification of the network, achieved by increasing
the number of small cells, and thus increasing the needed drive tests.
2.1
Drivers for the 5G mobile network
The mobile network is experiencing an exponential growth in the data traffic carried
through it. The global mobile data traffic will increase sevenfold between 2016 and
2021 according to Cisco’s mobile data traffic predictions [Cis17]. The forecast showed
in figure 2.1 is based on a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 47% from 2016
to 2021, reaching 49 exabytes (EB) per month by 2021, compared to 237 petabytes
(PB) per month in 2010.
From this forecast, it becomes clear that an evolution of the current mobile net-
work is necessary to meet the growing demand for mobile data traffic. The growth in
mobile data traffic demand is primarily driven by the rapid development of handhold
mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets. Further development of devices and
Figure 2.1: Cisco Forecasts 49 Exabytes per Month of Mobile Data Traffic by 2021
[Cis17]
==PAGE:18==
8
2 5G mobile networks
applications such as ultra-high definition (UHD) video streaming, vehicle-to-vehicle
communication, tele-medicine, smart cities and more is also accelerating the growth
of mobile data traffic [Rod15]. These devices and applications have to be taken into
account when considering the requirements for the Fifth Generation Mobile Networks
(5G). A new network architecture is fundamental to alleviate these requirements. The
wireless air interface for the new radio access network (RAN) will have to be rein-
forced as part of this new architecture. This new wireless air interface will consist of
two components: the evolution of the Long Term Evolution (LTE) and what is know
as 5G New Radio (NR). It’s essential to create a solid coupling between these two
components in order to achieve the goals set by IMT-2020 [ITU18].
The 5G mobile network will incorporate diverse deployment adaptations such
as a large deployment of small cells, cloud-based Radio Access Network (C-RAN),
Multiple-Input Multiple Output (MIMO), mmWave antennas, Three-Dimensional
(3D) beamforming and Non-Orthogonal-Multiple-Access (NOMA) in order to cope
with the ever increasing capacity demands.
2.2
Key technologies for 5G systems
The existing mobile network is poorly suited for the exceptionally large number of
devices generating the need for additional capacity. The Internet of Things (IoT)
(i.e., a network of physical devices such as vehicles, home appliances, and other items
embedded with electronics, software, sensors, actuators, and connectivity) enables
these things to connect, collect and exchange data over the mobile network. Emerging
new technologies such as self-driving vehicles, mobile health (i.e.
remote surgery,
patient monitoring etc.) and remote control of robotics applications require ultra-
low (sub millisecond) latency and ultra-high reliability bringing about the notion of
the Tactile Internet. Researchers and standardization bodies have with this in mind
worked on the development and set up the requirements for 5G [Ass15; Won+17].
These requirements are shown in table 2.1.
A bare evolution of the existing mobile network is inadequate in order to reach
the aforementioned requirements. Not only is the LTE infrastructure incapable of
meeting these requirements, but it also has to remain backwards compatible [Mar18].
A genuine revolution of the mobile network is thus required in both the RAN and
core network. The RAN will incorporate new fundamental technologies like MIMO,
mmWave antennas, 3D beamforming techniques, NOMA and C-RAN in order to
achieve the capacity requirements. The core network will will also undergo funda-
mental changes in order improve the energy efficiency and scalability of the network
by employing a metro core network structure.
2.2.1
Millimeter Wave
One of the main requirements for 5G mobile networks is to achieve a 100 fold increase
in mobile data rates. This increase is unrealizable through improvements in spectral
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Key technologies for 5G systems
9
Table 2.1: Requirements for 5G wireless systems [Won+17]
Figure of merit
5G requirements
4G requirements
Peak data rate
10 GB/s
100 times higher
Guaranteed data rate
50 MB/s
—
Mobile data volume
10 Tb/s/km2
1000 timer higher
End-to-end latency
> 1 ms
25 times lower
Number of devices
1 M/km2
1000 times higher
Human-oriented terminals
≥20 billion
—
IoT terminals
≥1 trillion
—
Reliability
99.999%
99.99%
Energy consumption
—
90% less
Peak mobility support
≥500 km/h
—
Outdoor terminal location accuracy
≤1 m
—
efficiency, nor is it feasible to homogeneously densify the network by adding more
LTE macro cell sites. The final option that can be used to leverage the data rate is
to increase the bandwidth. The cellular frequencies used in todays mobile network
ranges from 300 MHz to 3 GHz, in which less than 1 GHz of spectrum has been
allocated to the mobile network [Rap+14]. The spectrum below 3 GHz is extremely
congested due to the manifold of services operating at this frequency range such
as AM/FM radio, TV, Wi-Fi and current cellular communications are some of the
popular examples [Mar18]. Hence, it is natural to explore the frequency bands above
3 GHz, where substantial amounts of untouched spectrum is available. With this in
mind the mmWave frequency bands, ranging from 30 to 300 GHz, proves to be able to
deliver the bandwidth required, and has thus received noticeable attention [Rap+14].
Figure 2.2 illustrates the radio spectrum and available bandwidth up to 100 GHz.
Figure 2.2: Radio spectrum and available bandwidth up to 100 GHz [Mar18]
The mmWave bands offers large amount of available spectrum, which makes it
==PAGE:20==
10
2 5G mobile networks
highly attractive for the 5G access network. More spectrum allows for higher data
rates for identical modulation schemes while also providing extra network resources,
allowing more users to be served simultaneously.
However, despite mmWaves ex-
tremely promising solution to the 5G capacity enhancements, the use of mmWaves
in 5G cellular networks is also greatly impaired by its challenging propagation char-
acteristics [Rap+14]. mmWaves, as the name suggest, offer very short wavelength of
less than 1 cm. The majority of objects appear enormous relative to the wavelength
at this scale and the signals thus experience high attenuation as a consequence of the
scale differences. The signals therefore attenuate fairly quickly at the mmWave fre-
quencies because of the high path losses which then limits the transmission distances
to approximately 100 meter [Wei+14]. This is why mmWaves initially was deemed
impractical for cellular networks, since macro cells at that time covered distances
up to 1 km. However, The cells have shrunk to the point where it advantageous
to utilize mmWaves for the carrier frequencies with the densification of the network
and the introduction of HetNets. High attenuation furthermore proves to become an
advantage rather than a limitation for densely deployed HetNets due to the reduced
inter-cell interference [Rap+14].
However, there are still many challenges to overcome before mmWaves small cells
can be deployed. Most notably, communication at mmWaves frequencies has to occur
under relatively strict propagation conditions. Rain attenuation and oxygen (O2) ab-
sorption highly limits the transmission distances achievable with mmWaves due to the
short wavelength [Rap+14]. Figure 2.3 illustrates the rain (water) and atmospheric
(oxygen) absorption experienced for frequencies up to 200 GHz.
Figure 2.3: Atmospheric and molecular absorption characteristics at the mmWave
frequencies [Sal16]
Most notable from figure 2.3 is that the 60 GHz band experience high attenuation.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Key technologies for 5G systems
11
Likewise, 180 GHz also seems unfit for 5G cellular due to the high attenuation. Rain
attenuation furthermore heavily impact the achievable transmission distances with
mmWaves. Water vapor in itself does not notably impact the attenuation of mmWaves
signals. Water drops, however, highly attenuate the mmWave signals. Raindrop sizes
typically range from 0.5 mm to 4 mm in diameter which is the similar size order of the
wavelength for mmWaves. Heavier rain furthermore also leads to higher attenuation.
Figure 2.4 shows the specific rain attenuation for different rain intensities, based on
the mmWave atmospheric and weather propagation model from [Cla15].
Figure 2.4: Rain attenuation for frequencies up to 200 GHz.
The high radio attenuation of mmWaves signals limits the signal propagation,
which implicates its usage in outdoor mobile communication systems due to the high
losses experienced. These high losses, however, can be overpowered by taking advan-
tage of steerable antenna arrays. Multiple antennas arranged in an array can be used
to enhance the antenna gain which allows the mmWave signals to overcome greater
pathlosses [Rap+14]. Antenna arrays can furthermore be used to steer the beam in
advantageous direction (i.e. beamforming) by exciting the antennas in different pat-
terns. mmWave signals can thus be made more robust through the incorporation of
antennas arrays and beamforming techniques, which allows the mmWave connections
to achieve up to a 200 meters of coverage [Qua17]. The interference of these mmWave
connection will be nonessential due to the high attenuation and power concentration
of the signals. The narrow beams and short transmission distances of mmWave sig-
nals makes them ideal for unlicensed and light-licensed transmissions [Mar18]. These
narrow beam, high attenuating transmissions furthermore allow for a higher level of
security and privacy.
Diffraction is the propagation of waves bending around an object (or through an
opening), and is the physical mechanism that enables radio communication when a
mobile device is blocked or shadowed by an obstruction (i.e. going from Line-of-Sight
(LoS) to Non-Line-of-Sight (NLoS). Diffraction introduces vast dynamic changes in
==PAGE:22==
12
2 5G mobile networks
the received signal at the mmWave frequencies over relatively short distances since
the obstacles appear much bigger than the wavelength, ruining the diffraction prop-
erties [Cla15]. One of the major challenges in the mmWave propagation environment
is therefor to overcome the greater pathloss induced by diffraction. NLoS transmis-
sions, however, are made feasible through the use of high-gain steerable antennas.
The transmission link for mmWave signals with beam forming have primarily been
thought done with LoS transmissions due to the steerability of the signal beams. Scat-
tering and reflections, however, have been found to be useful in establishing NLoS
transmission links.
With steerable antennas it is possible to utilize reflections off
of surfaces (such as structures, building etc.) to establish a NLoS transmission link
[Qua17; Rap+14]. Figure 2.5 illustrates an example of a small cell using a reflected
link to give a NLoS UE access to the mobile network.
Small cell 
Microwave BS 
mmWave BS
LOS mmWave AL
NLOS mmWave 
reﬂection AL
UE
Wireless BH
Blocked AL
Figure 2.5: 5G mobile network access through a reflected NLoS mmWave link
mmWave small cells will have to be equipped with high gain antenna arrays,
which require beam steering techniques in order to direct the beams towards the users.
These steering functionalities are going to be managed by the Medium Access Control
(MAC) layer [Rap+14]. The processes associated with the control plane (C-plane),
such as synchronization, cell discovery and initial access introduce challenges to the
mmWave small cells. The high gain antennas used in mmWave small cells narrows
the beam and steers it in the optimal direction (hence the name beam steering)
relative to the UE. However, beam steering also implies that only limited section of
the cell can be scanned by the base station (BS) at a particular time. This does not
just implicates the process of maintaining a coherent mmWave channel, but also the
initial cell discovery. [MC16] proposes a Joint Search Method (JSM), where the macro
cell, which manages the control plane, provides a rough estimate of the UE’s location
inside the small cell, limiting its initial search-area. The small cell then uses this
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Key technologies for 5G systems
13
knowledge to sectorize the search area, speeding up the cell discovery process. JSM
requires a tight network synchronization, but allows small cells to use beamforming
throughout the entire search process. Figure 2.6 illustrates the search process of JSM.
Macro Cell
Small cell 
Microwave BS 
mmWave BS
Microwave AL
mmWave AL
Search beam
UE
Wireless BH
θ
θ
Small cell BS
recieved report
of UE location
Small cell sectorizes
search area based on
beam width    and
start search
Small cell
ﬁnds UE
Search area
θ
θ
Beam width
C-plane report
Figure 2.6: JSM search process for mmWave small cells [MC16]
mmWaves will thus drastically advance the architecture of the mobile network.
The top left mobile network displayed in figure 2.6 shows an example integration of
the mmWave architecture. High gain antenna arrays are used to provide connectivity
to the mobile users in small cells, while simultaneously reducing inter-cell interference.
Beamforming techniques enable a higher reuse factor, which enables backhaul links
to share the same spectrum as the access links allowing for a quick and cost efficient
deployment. mmWave backhaul links furthermore provide the foundation for a tight
integration among both mmWave and microwave BSs, which can help offload traffic
from microwave BSs, boosting the capacity of the mobile network.
2.2.2
Massive MIMO and 3D beamforming
One of the key properties of mmWaves is the small antenna size, which allows multi-
ple mmWaves antennas to be implemented on a single chip. This chip-setup increases
the antenna gain and thereby improves the propagation properties, encouraging its
use (i.e. use of mmWave antenna array on a single chip) in 5G mobile communica-
tions. These antenna arrays are also known as Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output
(MIMO), where both the transmitter and receiver utilize antenna arrays to increase
==PAGE:24==
14
2 5G mobile networks
the antenna gains. MIMO networks usually use between two to four antennas on
both the transmit and receiver side of the network. But with mmWaves, the antenna
sizes become so small that up to 128 antennas (arranged in an 8 by 16 array) can
be used, also known as massive MIMO (mMIMO) [Int17].
When considering the
implementation cost, complexity and timeline of the real deployment however, 3GPP
determined tens of antennas arranged in a two dimension (2D) array structure would
be a fitting starting point [Ji+16].
Full-Dimension MIMO (FD-MIMO), the official name for the MIMO enhancement
in 3GPP, targets the system utilizing up to 64 antenna ports at the transmitter side.
FD-MIMO differs from regular MIMO in the ability to propagate signals in both the
horizontal (azimuth) and vertical (elevation) plane. FD-MIMO is achieved through
the use of 3D beamforming techniques. These techniques allows for the excitement
of the individual antennas in a 2D antenna array, creating spaces of constructive and
destructive interference, thereby shaping the beam in 3D space [Ji+16; Cla15]. The
signal is shaped in the direction of the constructive interference, while cancelled in the
direction of the destructive interference. These techniques are furthermore designed
to construct multiple beams, allowing multiple users to benefit from the enhanced
coverage and capacity provided from beamforming. This technique is especially rele-
vant for hard-to-reach users, such as those in high buildings etc., since the beams can
be directed vertically, and thus directly towards those users, reducing unidirectional
power spillage. However, The transmitters ability to beamform, depends on the num-
ber of antennas and their arrangement the 2D antenna array, as more antennas allow
for more complex beamforms and thus more users served with beamforming simul-
taneously [Cla15]. Fortunately, a large number of antennas can be accommodated
without increasing the deployment space since the antennas are placed in a 2D array,
rather than the traditional 1D antenna array used on LTE cell sites, facilitating the
deployment of large antenna arrays in 5G mobile communications [Mar18].
Most research up to date have focused primarily on beamforming techniques for
frequencies below 6 GHz [Boc+15]. Nevertheless, mmWaves and mMIMO are both
expected to be integrated in 5G mobile networks in order to harvest the extensive
gains in spectral efficiency and network capacity. Furthermore, mmWaves antennas
will due to their short wavelength shrink the antenna sizes, allowing for multiple of
antennas to be implemented on both BSs and UEs.
The successful implementation of mmWaves will, as mention in section 2.2.1, be
highly dependent on beamforming techniques in order to overcome the high propaga-
tion losses. 3D beamforming techniques are thus vital for the usefulness of mmWaves
in 5G mobile networks. The inter-operability of mmWaves, mMIMO and 3D beam-
forming techniques are thus an essential requirement for a seamless deployment of the
5G NR access interface. Figure 2.7 illustrates an example architecture of a network
architecture combining 3D beamforming, mMIMO, and mmWave.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Key technologies for 5G systems
15
Small cell 
FD-mMIMO 
mmWave BS
Azimuth  
beamforming 
Elevation  
beamforming
UE
Figure 2.7: Integration of mmWaves, mMIMO and 3D beamforming in 5G mobile
access
Multiple challenges still remain within the domain of MIMO. A natural next step
is to further increase the number of supported antennas. More antennas are needed
create larger antenna arrays which can produce higher levels of beamforming, thus
allowing more users to be served, also known as Multi-User-MIMO (MU-MIMO).
mMIMO was initially introduced in Release 14 and supported up to 32 antennas
[3GP17]. MU-MIMO brought improvements in beamforming accuracy and efficiency.
Further mMIMO enhancements are reasonable for Release 15, which are going to lead
the advancements in 5G mobile networks [Mar18]. The deployment of mMIMO and
3D beamforming thus complicates the assessment of coverage and capacity in 5G mo-
bile networks due to the channel complexification introduced with these technologies.
2.2.3
Non-orthogonal Multiple Access
A new RAT has also been developed besides the aforementioned techniques and tech-
nologies intended to be used in communications networks due to its capabilities in
increasing the system capacity. Non-orthogonal based system designs have recently
been developed for communication networks, and have as a result gained significant
attention by the 5G research community due to its ability to increase the spectral effi-
ciency [Din+17]. Hence, multiple access (MA) techniques can now fundamentally be
categorized as either Orthogonal Multiple Access (OMA) or Non-Orthogonal Multiple
Access (NOMA) [Ald+18]. In OMA, each user can exploit, as the name suggests, or-
thogonal communication resources within either a specific time slot, frequency band,
or code in order to avoid multiple access interference (i.e. no two users share the
==PAGE:26==
16
2 5G mobile networks
same time slot, frequency band or code at the same time). All previous generation
of mobile networks have relied on OMA schemes in order to share the network re-
sources among multiple users. The first generation (1G) mobile networks relied on
frequency division multiple access (FDMA), 2G relied on time division multiple ac-
cess (TDMA), 3G relied on code division multiple access (CDMA) and 4G relied on
orthogonal frequency division multiple access (OFDMA). In NOMA however, multi-
ple users can share non-orthogonal resources concurrently by accommodating a high
spectral efficiency while allowing some degree of multiple access interference at the
receivers [Ald+18; HB15]
NOMA schemes can broadly be categorized into two types: power-domain NOMA
(also known as power-domain multiplexing) and code-domain NOMA (also known
as code-domain multiplexing). In Power-domain NOMA, the network resources are
shared by allocating different power coefficient to different users in accordance to
their channel conditions in order to achieve a high network performance. More specif-
ically, power-domain NOMA superimposes multiple users’ signals at the transmitter
side, allowing multiple user’s to share the same network resources (time and fre-
quency) simultaneously. Successive interference cancellation (SIC) is then applied
at the receiver(s) side, decoding the signals one by one until the desired user’s sig-
nal is retrieved. Power-domain NOMA provides a reasonable trade-off between the
throughput of the network and the user fairness (i.e.
sharing of the network re-
sources) [Ald+18].
In code-domain NOMA, the network resources are shared by
allocating different codes to different users and then multiplexing their signals over
the same network resources. Code-domain NOMA is realized through one of three
methods; MUltiuser Shared Access (MUSA), Sparse Code Multiple Access (SCMA),
and Low-Density Spreading (LDS). Furhter NOMA schemes exist, such as Pattern Di-
vision Multiple Access (PDMA) and Bit Division Multiplexing (BDM) in addition to
power-domain and code-domain NOMA. All of the aforementioned NOMA schemes
are summarized in [Ald+18]
Code-domain NOMA has a huge potential at enhancing the spectral efficiency,
however, it is difficult to incorporate with the current mobile communication system
and requires a high transmission bandwidth.
Power-domain NOMA on the other
hand does not require a high transmission bandwidth in order to enhance the spec-
tral efficiency. It furthermore proves to be easily implementable, since hardly any
adaptation are required in the current mobile communication system. Researchers
therefore tend towards power-domain NOMA for the multiple access scheme in 5G
mobile networks [Ald+18; HB15; Din+17; Mar18; Rod15]. Likewise, this thesis will
also focus on power-domain NOMA, so this scheme will be referred to as NOMA for
the rest of this thesis.
The OMA schemes used in 4G LTE allocates full power to the individual downlink
transmission, but separates them by bandwidth. This approach, however, underuti-
lizes the quantization rates in the mobile system [Mar18]. The UEs report a quantized
Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) to the BSs, which is determined based on the Signal-
Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR), meaning that a higher SINR results in a higher
channel gain and vice versa. The CQI values correspond to a Modulation and Coding
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Key technologies for 5G systems
17
Scheme (MCS), and hence also correspond to a discretized data rate.
Each of the radio resource blocks (RB) used in 4G LTE OMA schemes are only
allocated to one UE at the time. This results in power spillage for UEs with poor
CQI, and thus underutilizes the RBs. NOMA, on the other hand, allows the for the
allocation of multiple RBs between multiple UEs. A RB allocated to a UE with a poor
CQI can thus simultaneously be shared with a UE with a strong CQI which reduces
the power spillage, and thus improves the spectral efficiency of the network. NOMA
furthermore achieves a good balance between throughput and fairness, as the UEs
with a good CQI can utilize the underutilized radio resources of UEs with a poor CQI.
However, implementing NOMA over OMA comes with the cost of increased network
complexity, as the network constantly has to adapt the pairing of the UEs. Figure
2.8 illustrates the radio resource allocation for both OMA and NOMA.
Power domain
Frequency domain
Power domain
Frequency domain
Power domain
Frequency domain
Power domain
Frequency domain
Power domain
Frequency domain
Power domain
Frequency domain
Time domain
NOMA
Time domain
OMA
UE1
UE2
UE3
UE4
Radio resource block
Figure 2.8: Example user multiplexing using OMA and power-domain NOMA
NOMA basics
The principle of NOMA is based on resource sharing between UEs with good and
poor channel conditions. Here, the idea is to multiplex two or more UE signals on
the same time/frequency resources, but separate them in the power domain. This
allows the UEs with good channel conditions to access the radio resources assigned
to the UEs with poor channel conditions, increasing the resource utilization, hence,
increasing the spectral efficiency and the system capacity [Mar18; Din+17].
This
principle lays the foundation for the advantage of using NOMA over OMA for 5G
mobile networks.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 5G mobile networks
NOMA performs the multiplexing of multiple UEs signals through a physical layer
technique known as superposition transmission, which allows an individual transmit-
ter (BS) to simultaneously transmit to multiple receivers (UEs) through one single
signal, by combining (multiplexing) their signals into one [Mar18]. The superposed
signal to be transmitted for n UEs is established as:
X =
n
∑
i=1
√
PiXi
(2.1)
with
n
∑
i=1
Pi = 1
(2.2)
where Xi is the signal carrying UEi’s message (denoted Mi) and Pi is the power ratio
for UEi.
The trick in NOMA is to pair UEs with high enough power differences
(Pi’s), such that the superposed signal can be respectively decoded.
[Din+16] in-
troduces three multi-user superposition transmission (MUST) schemes, which is how
the 3GPP references to NOMA for the DL transmission, for two UEs sharing the
same time and frequency resources based on [3GP16]. The first category has been
the mostly adopted in academy up to date [Mar18], and is thus the only category
that will be explained. The first category uses an adaptive power ratio and label-bit
assignment on each component constellation as well as non-Gray-mapped composite
constellation. The encoded bits are independently modulated, followed by a scaling
of the symbols accordingly to the power allocation and then summed to obtain a com-
posite constellation. Figure 2.9 illustrates the MUST category 1 transmission process
for two UEs.
The decoding of the superposed signal (X) represents one of the major challenges
with NOMA. The implications regarding the decoding process correlates with the
similarity in the UEs channel conditions. Interference is intentionally added in the
power domain because of the non-orthogonality of NOMA [Mar18]. Successive Inter-
ference Cancellation (SIC) can be applied at the receiver (UE) side to mitigate this
added interference. The received signal Yi at UEi would then look like:
Yi = hiX + Wi
(2.3)
where hi represents the complex channel coefficient for the link between UEi and
the BS, and Wi represents the Gaussian noise plus inter-cell interference experience
by UEi. Decoding the received signal is then optimally performed by decoding in
the order of increasing signal strength [Sai+13]. The UEs signal strength therefore
determines the order in which its signal is decoded.
Any UEn start by decoding
the strongest signal and subtracts it from the received superposed signal in order to
isolate its signal. This process is iteratively performed for n UEs until UEn’s signal
is decoded. For two UEs, UE1 and UE2, where UE2 has the higher signal strength,
the decoding process for UE2 goes as follows [Mar18]:
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Key technologies for 5G systems
19
Figure 2.9: NOMA transmission using category 1 MUST schemes for two UEs [Mar18]
1. UE2 starts by decoding its message M2 from Y2 by treating X1 as noise. This
is possible because UE2 has the higher signal strength, and X1’s interference is
insignificant compared to X2.
This method is legitimate as long as the transmitter performs adequate power al-
location, in order to mitigate inter-signal interference. The process for UE1 is more
complex however, and require SIC in order to decode its signal. The decoding process
for UE1 goes as follows [Mar18]:
1. UE1 initially performs the same decoding process as UE2, by decoding UE2
message, M2, from Y1 and treating X1 as noise. This step is possible because
UE1 has the higher channel gain as long as it is in compliance with the Shannon
limit of its receiver.
2. UE1 can then regenerate X2 by using an encoder Y ′
1 which can be obtained
through equation 2.3 with knowledge of h1 and P2 by subtraction UE2’s signal
as:
Y ′
1 = Y1 −h1
√
P2X2 = h1
√
P1X1 + W1
(2.4)
3. UE1 can then decode its message M1 from Y ′
1
==PAGE:30==
20
2 5G mobile networks
Figure 2.10 illustrates the decoding process for the same UEs as in figure 2.9. UE2
simply just decodes the stronger signal, whereas UE1 applies SIC in order to decode
its signal.
Figure 2.10: NOMA signal reception for two UEs using regular decoding and SIC,
respectively [Mar18]
The implementation of NOMA comes with several benefits and challenges. First
and foremost, NOMA increases the number of simultaneously connected UEs, as each
sub-frame can serve more UEs in addition to the improved data rates. However, one
of the major challenges in NOMA, if not the biggest, is that of user pairing. NOMA
provides the highest performance enhancements, when the channel gain (i.e. CQI) dif-
ference between the paired UEs is the highest. A dynamic pairing scheme is therefor
a requirement for NOMA implementations in order to ensure capacity enhancements.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Key technologies for 5G systems
21
[MC18] introduces four generic user pairing methods and analyzes their performances,
and finds an close-to-optimal pairing method offer a 22% to 24% capacity gain.
One last method remains, that can further alleviate the performance enhance-
ments brought to mobile networks by NOMA. Hybrid multiple access schemes, where
NOMA and OMA schemes can be applied to each individual UEs, depending on the
network’s load and the UEs channel conditions. This allows the network to decide
when and to which UEs to assign OMA or NOMA resource blocks, thus maximizing
the channel gain differences, allowing for more optimal NOMA UE pairings [Mar18].
NOMA is thus not intended to replace OMA, but rather coexist through hybrid mul-
tiple access schemes in order to improve 5G mobile network capacity. Figure 2.11
illustrates an example user multiplexing using both OMA and NOMA.
Power domain
Frequency domain
Power domain
Frequency domain
Power domain
Frequency domain
Time domain
UE1
UE2
UE3
UE4
Radio resource block
Hybrid multiple access: OMA+NOMA
Figure 2.11: Example user multiplexing using hybrid multiple access
Lastly, NOMA’s reliance the power allocation will highly impact the power-related
signal quality metrics [OS18], which for LTE networks correspond to Received Signal
Strength Indicator (RSSI), Reference Signal Received Power (RSRP) and Reference
Signal Received Quality (RSRP), which also directly impacts the Signal to Noise plus
Interference Ratio (SINR). The RSRP and RSRQ are key measures of signal quality
in LTE networks, and are among other things used for cell selection during handover.
However, these signal quality metrics also impacts the downlink throughput, as the
noise and power in the downlink channels dictates the usable modulation schemes
used for encoding the data, and thus also the data rate. The use of NOMA thus
complexifies the network channels, which as a result will require more drive tests in
order to sufficiently assess the coverage and capacity of 5G mobile networks.
2.2.4
Cloud RAN
China Mobile (CMCC) proposed the concept of C-RAN for the first time in 2009
[Ins10]. The basic idea of C-RAN revolves centralization of RAN-units, such as aggre-
gating different Baseband Units (BBUs), which are traditionally deployed at different
geographical locations. The different BBUs can then effectively communicate once
==PAGE:32==
22
2 5G mobile networks
centralized, enabling the implementation of cooperative algorithms that improve sys-
tem performance. The centralization alone does not improve the performance. The
resource sharing between BBUs allows for a more dynamic resource allocation, that
can be done on demand, which results in performance enhancements [Won+17]. The
ultimate goal of C-RAN is to realize the feature known as resource cloudification.
Virtualization is the key to realizing this resource cloudification. The idea behind
the RAN virtualization is to design future RAN components to be in compliance with
standard IT virtualization technologies, allowing them to be integrated as software
solutions [Ins10].
The implementation of C-RAN in 5G mobile networks comes with two major chal-
lenges: the fronthaul issue and the virtualization for cloudification. The fronthaul link
is used to transfer data between a BBU and a Remote Radio Head (RRH). As a result,
more fiber is needed for larger centralization, in order to connect the RRHs to the
BBU pool. This means that the centralization may come at a large implementation
cost due to the scarcity of fibers. Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) and Op-
tical Transport Networks (OTN) proves to provide a robust solution to this problem.
Regarding the virtualization for cloudification, it is widely believed that cloud comput-
ing is one of the key goals in network virtualization [Won+17]. However, carrier-grade
telecom functionalities has extremely strict processing requirements. LTE systems for
instance require that an acknowledgement (ACK/NACK) message must be transmit-
ted and processed between the UE and eNodeB (eNB) within a 3 ms window after
the frame is received [Won+17]. This processing requirement is unrealizable with the
current virtualization technologies, and thus has to be optimized before they can be
integrated in future mobile communication systems.
2.3
5G network architecture
An increase in mobile network capacity can be achieved through three different ac-
tions: adding more spectrum, increasing spectral efficiency and adding more cells.
Adding more spectrum to a mobile network is the equivalent of adding more lanes
to a highway. It allows a greater amount of data to be transported on the network
simultaneously, or in the case of the highway a, greater number of cars can drive on
the same highway simultaneously. Spectral efficiency is a measure (in bit/s/Hz or
less frequently bit/s) of how efficiently a limited frequency spectrum is utilized by the
physical layer protocol [Mia+16]. Examples of spectral efficiency include modulation
schemes, which determines how the bits are encoded into a carrier signal. The high-
way equivalent would be how many cars or people are transported on the highway per
lane per time. Lastly, deploying more cells, especially in densely populated areas such
as apartments complexes, shopping malls etc. can also improve the network capacity.
It’s simply just the equivalent of adding more highways to the highway network.
==PAGE:33==
2.3 5G network architecture
23
2.3.1
Network densification
Network densification basically means adding more cell sites to increase the amount of
available capacity. Network densification can be accomplished in two ways, through
homogeneous or heterogeneous deployments. In the former, a densification of the
network is accomplished by adding more macro cell sites and thus maintaining a ho-
mogeneous network deployment. An increase in macro cells site deployments in the
same area will reduce the inter-site distance (ISD) and thereby increase the capacity
per km2 by assigning fewer user to each macro cell. However, homogeneous deploy-
ments are unfavorable for 5G given the use of mmWaves, which inherently have a
high attenuation due to the high carrier frequencies, implying a shrinkage in cell site
coverage.
The densification can alternatively be accomplished through heterogeneous net-
works (HetNets).
Here, multiple small cells are deployed in hotspots, where the
capacity is needed, inside the coverage site of a macro cell, creating a multi-tier net-
work. An example of a homogeneous densification, where the macro cell sizes are
shrunk and a heterogeneous densification, where the small cells are deployed inside
the macro cell coverage area, is shown in figure 2.12. It is clear from figure 2.12 that
more area has to be covered with drive tests, in order to assess the coverage and
capacity of the individual cells in the mobile network.
Macro Cell
Small cell 
Heterogeneous
densiﬁcation
Homogeneous
densiﬁcation
Figure 2.12: Examples of homogeneous and heterogeneous network densification
==PAGE:34==
24
2 5G mobile networks
2.3.2
Heterogeneous networks
Ultra-Dense Networks (UDN) will become a key enabler for 5G mobile networks, with
small cells tightly deployed inside the coverage area of macro cells to efficiently boost
the capacity where it is needed. Small cells brings an abundant of benefits to the
5G mobile network. They are first and foremost easy to deploy due to their small
physical size which means that they can be deployed on lampposts, traffic lights and
building facades. The deployment of small cells is furthermore eased through new
network features such as interference mitigation and Software Defined Networking
(SDN). Small cells will operate at mmWave frequencies, which experience high atten-
uation. High attenuation is normally undesired to the reduced coverage. However,
high attenuation is desired for small cells, since small cells will be tightly deployed,
thus reducing Inter-Cell Interference (ICI).
An advantage of SDN is that Inter-Cell Interference Coordination (ICIC) can be
incorporated to mitigate ICI. Enhanced ICIC (eICIC) and further enhanced ICIC
(feICIC) can furthermore be applied to manage the interference and help guarantee
that the capacity added by the small cells are efficiently utilized [WM14]. feICIC
is mainly implemented at the UE side and effectively extends the cell expansion by
increasing the biasing level, thus improving HetNets efficiency. The overall result
of feICIC is that the users experience higher data rates, especially at the cell edges.
Interference mitigation plays a vital role in efficiently integrating multiple small cells
and ensuring cooperation with the macro cell for in-band deployments. However, 5G
heterogeneous networks will require even more advanced interference mitigating tech-
niques due to the shortened ISD. Shorter ISDs means that the UEs will be affected by
more interfering signals from different BSs. [Sor+18] proposes 4 different interference
mitigation schemes that are compatible build toward 5G NR, being highly dynamic,
flexible, and multi-service capable.
A reliable, ultra wide bandwidth (GHz) and cost-effective backhaul, connecting
the densely deployed small cell BS’s to the macro cell BS’s, will become an essential
enabler for mmWave small cells in order to realize a heterogeneous densification of the
5G mobile network. Fortunately, mmWaves can be used both for the access link, and
also the backhaul link. [Gao+15] has demonstrated that a backhaul with 1 to 10 GHz
bandwidth is required to realistically support the densification of the mobile network.
An optical fiber connection would conventionally be used for backhaul as it supports
a reliable connection and provides substantial bandwidth. However, an optical fiber
based backhaul solution for UDN’s may not be economically feasible for the operators
due to the extended number of small cell deployments and installation of small cell
BSs in inaccessible environments. A wireless backhaul solution is therefore suitable
to overcome the abovementioned environmental constraints of a wired backhaul. The
wireless backhaul link would in this case operate at the mmWave frequencies where
large amounts of unlicensed spectrum is available. A wireless backhaul link provides
two distinct advantages:
1. There are plentiful of unlicensed and underutilized spectrum available in the
==PAGE:35==
2.3 5G network architecture
25
mmWave band which can be utilized to provide the GHz transmission band-
width required for the wireless backhaul link [Wei+14].
2. mMIMO antenna arrays can easily be utilized to increase the signal directivity
of the beam, hence reaching reliable transmission distances required for the
wireless backhaul link [Han+15]
Large antenna arrays are especially relevant for wireless backhauling since it can
be used to mitigate the large pathlosses inherently occurring in mmWave communi-
cations. The implementation of large antenna arrays for wireless backhaul is further
eased due to the macro cell and small cell BS’s being stationary. This means that the
transmitter (the small cell BS) does not have to continuously steer its beam towards
the receiver (the macro cell BS). This makes tracking of the receiver irrelevant, as
required for moving cellular users in order steer the beam in their direction, which
greatly simplifies the system. No tracking of the receiver implies that a higher degree
of beamforming can be applied to narrow the beam, strengthening the signal to over-
come greater path losses and longer backhaul links can as a result be reached.
The out-of-band implementation as defined in [3GP18b] highlight an additional
benefit of using mmWaves for 5G. mmWaves doesn’t just provide a wider spectrum to
allow higher datarates, but also allows for the decoupling of the control and user plane
(e.g. C/U plane split) [Mar18]. The data planes and control planes have convention-
ally been coupled in HetNet in which macro cell and small cells operate at identical
frequencies, causing data and signalling information to be administered by both types
of cells simultaneously. This network configuration disadvantageously only achieve
a sub-optimal network resource and energy utilization due to the constant network
configuration required between the macro and small cells [Mus+16]. Splitting the
C/U plane however, allows the macro cell to administer the control plane of all UE’s
inside its coverage and thus handles the mobility (such as handover etc.), while also
providing ubiquitous coverage (i.e. data services) for UE’s outside small cells using
the standard E-UTRA operating bands. The macro cell can furthermore beneficially
administer the user plane (i.e. the data services) for fast-moving UE’s (such as on
highways etc.) in order to avoid frequent handovers between small cells. The small
cells are deployed in urban areas to boost the capacity where it’s needed by employing
mmWave frequencies to provide high data rates for the UE’s and cost-energy efficient
operation for the operators [Mus+16; Rod15; Eri16].
The mmWaves frequencies prove to be ideal for small cells since the propaga-
tion losses are proportional to the transmission frequency and thus provide confined
coverage areas. Dual-connectivity, where a UE is connected to both types of cell
simultaneously, is a fundamental feature inherited with the C/U plane split configu-
ration. Dual-connectivity improves the robustness of the mobile network, by allowing
macro cells to manage the UEs connection and thus perform instantaneous handovers
in case the connection to a small cell drop. A new interface will therefore be required
that allows a macro cell to control the small cells within its coverage. The small cell
can be switched on or off through this interface (by the macro cell) in order to reduce
==PAGE:36==
26
2 5G mobile networks
energy consumption or to improve the utilization of radio resources by reducing in-
terference [Deh+14; Mus+16]. Figure 2.13 illustrates a HetNet with C/U plane split
configuration.
Macro Cell
Small cell 
Microwave BS 
mmWave BS
Microwave AL
mmWave AL
mmWave BH
UE
U-plane
C-plane
U+C-plane
U+C-plane
U+C-plane
Metro Core 
network
Wired BH
Figure 2.13: Example of a heterogeneous network, with a C/U plane split
2.3.3
5G access network
The access mobile network will correspondingly have to evolve too, in order to cope
with the continuous evolution of the 5G NR. Novel features such as NFV and SDN
will be integrated in the network architecture to provide the flexibility required for
the 5G HetNet architecture. This flexibility of the 5G radio network will be realized
in the RAN through the use of C-RAN. Cloud-RAN (sometimes referred to as cen-
tralized RAN) becomes very relevant for UDNs due to its tight network integration
and cooperation. C-RAN can be used to alleviate some of the complications involved
with the implementation of 5G HetNet cells by moving equipment from the cell site
to the C-RAN, thus reducing power and space requirements.
The fourth generation (4G) legacy mobile network have traditionally been de-
ployed with a Distributed-RAN (D-RAN) architecture, where all the BS’s have been
deployed with all radio components on site. These components include a RRH which
functions as a transceiver or an antenna and a BBU which processes the baseband
(i.e. the original frequency range of a transmission signal before it is modulated) and
thus functions as a baseband controller [EXF]. The BBU and RRH is connected using
either a Common Public Radio Interface (CPRI) or an Open Base Station Architec-
ture Initiative (OBSAI) [Mar18]. The centralization of the BBUs into BBU pools in
C-RAN represents its major difference to D-RAN. The BBUs are completely trans-
ferred from the individual cell sites into a BBU pool in the C-RAN. Multiple RRHs
==PAGE:37==
2.3 5G network architecture
27
are now connected to the BBU pool unit; this connection is known as the fronthaul.
Centralizing the BBUs into a BBU pool eases future deployments and improves net-
work scalability as advantageous for the 5G core, controlling multiple HetNet cells.
Figure 2.14 shows an example of a 5G access network access network with a C-RAN
deployment.
 
 
 
 
 
BBU pool 
SDN
NFV
WDN
Cloud-RAN
Metro core 
Network 
RRH
Microwave AL
mmWave AL
Wired BH
Wireless BH
Wired FH
Wireless FH
BS
Figure 2.14: 5G access network with C-RAN
The centralization of the RAN does, however, induce several implementation chal-
lenges. The relocation of the BBUs from the cell sites to the C-RAN implies a higher
latency for the data to be transmitted, due to the increased distances that the data
has to be carried. It furthermore also entail tighter constraints on the synchroniza-
tion on the CPRI link. An ultra-low latency is an absolute requirement for fronthaul,
and could be realized with an optical fiber point-to-point connection, but is undesired
due to the high deployment costs. [Bjø18a; Bjø18b] outlines four preferable access
technologies for 5G fronthaul:
PON Passive Optical Networks uses unpowered fiber optical splitters to make a
single fiber from a BBU pool serve multiple RRHs simultaneously. Wavelength
Division Multiplexing (WDM) is used to split the capacity of a fiber by offering
==PAGE:38==
28
2 5G mobile networks
different wavelength to each access point (RRH). WDM allows bidirectional
communications over one strand of fiber, as well as multiplication of capacity,
and thus allows a the single BBU pool to control multiple RRHs. This approach
is known WDM-PON.
Ethernet CPRI over Ethernet (eCPRI) is made possible by Time Sensitive Net-
working (TSN) (an extensions in the IEEE 802.1 standardization group) which
enables low-latency and high throughput utilization through statistical multi-
plexing. IEEE 802.1cm standardization specifies ”Time Sensitive Networking
for fronthaul” which in cooperation with IEEE 1914 is working on mapping
CPRI over Ethernet (IEEE 1914.3).
Flex-E Flexible-Ethernet enables fronthaul by splitting an Ethernet pipeline (e.g. a
100 Gb/s) into multiple Ethernet pipelines (e.g 5 X 20 Gb/s), based on times-
lots. Timeslots allow the individual pipelines to be multiplexed into a higher
throughput pipeline, hence the flexibility.
OTN The Optical Transport Network (ITU-T g.709) delivers absolute transport
guarantees in the network. OTN utilized Time Division Multiplexing (TDM)
to split the capacity, which enables packet transport with zero packet loss, low
packet delay and delay variations.
Figure 2.15 illustrates an example deployment of a 5G air interface with possible
fronthaul access technologies. However, a single access technologies for 5G fronthaul
is preferred in order to push for high-volume component production, which is done
to lower component cost. A common trait for the aforementioned access technologies
for 5G fronthaul is that they all benefit from NFV through SDN. Powerful servers
can as a whole virtualize the functionality of the BBUs through C-RAN and thus
further improve the flexibility and performance while lowering the implementation
costs associated new cell deployments.
 
 
 
 
 
BBU pool 
SDN
NFV
WDM-PON/ 
eCPRI/OTN 
Cloud-RAN
RRH
Microwave AL
mmWave AL
Wired FH
Wireless FH
BS
Fronthaul link
LTE legacy radio 
microwave AL 
5G NR 
mmWave AL 
Macro cell
Small cell
NR Fronthaul  
access technology
Figure 2.15: 5G NR fronthaul deployment
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Chapter summary
29
The core network will as a result of the centralization and virtualization of network
functionalities become heavier loaded. Centralization and NFV increases the amount
of traffic that the core network has to handle which increases network congestions.
The core network will therefor likely become the bottleneck of the mobile network.
An evolution of the core mobile network is thus required for the mobile network to
cope with the increasing traffic demands. The majority of this traffic growth stems
from the centralization of network functionalities. The capacity of the core network
can therefor effectively be alleviated by introducing metro core networks which are
designed to handle local traffic. Metro core networks essentially operate as local core
networks, functioning as a combined aggregation and distribution hub for traffic in
the metro network. Metro core networks can thus be used to offload the core network,
allowing it to allocate more resources to handle inter-metro and core transit traffic
[Mar18]. Metro core networks will with that respect improve the capacity, flexibility
and lower the cost of the mobile network.
The incorporation of all the aforementioned novel architectural technologies will
together redesign the mobile network architecture, making it possible for the 5G mo-
bile network to reach the service and operation requirements. Figure 2.16 shows an
example 5G network architecture, illustrating the heterogeneous architecture with co-
operating LTE and NR, realized through the use of Cloud-RAN, and the introduction
of the metro core network as well as the decentralization of data centers, all done in
order to support the scalability and flexibility required for the 5G mobile network.
2.4
Chapter summary
The mobile network is experiencing an ever increasing exponential growth, setting
new requirements to the capabilities of the mobile network. A standalone evolution
of the current LTE is inadequate to meet these requirements, hence the need for 5G.
New technologies are being developed to facilitate with the deployment of 5G NR.
Most notably, technologies such as mmWave frequencies, mMIMO, 3D beamforming
and NOMA will all be integrated and incorporated in 5G NR to assist the progress of
reaching the network capacity and data rate requirements. Small cells will emerge in
order to exploit spatial reuse and benefit the deployment of mmWaves, which enables
a greater areal spectral efficiency to further increase the capacity. New cooperative
architectures such as HetNets, mmWave based wireless backhaul links and inter-cell
interference cancellation will contribute to performance improvements. C-RAN will
be deployed to manage the increasing number of RAN-related deployments and reduce
OPEX by centralizing baseband-equipment.
C-RAN furthermore allows for quick
deployments of small cells through RRHs, increasing network flexibility. These small
cells will offload macro cells, as they are deployed inside their coverage zone, thus
creating dense HetNets, which require extended coverage and capacity assessments.
The densification of the network implies that the distance between the UE and BS
will on average become shorter, resulting in lower propagation losses which generates
higher throughput and reduces the power consumption required for the transmission.
==PAGE:40==
30
2 5G mobile networks
 
 
 
 
 
BBU pool 
SDN
NFV
WDN
Cloud-RAN
Microwave AL
mmWave AL
Wired BH
Wireless BH
Wired FH
Wireless FH
NFV
SDN
Metro core
network
NFV
SDN
Core network
Distributed 
data center 
Entertainment
V2V/V2X
Smart
cities
IoT
Health
care 
Centralized 
data center 
Entertainment
V2V/V2X
Smart
cities
IoT
Health
care 
Internet
4K UHD
Access
Backhaul
Figure 2.16: Example 5G network architecture [Mar18]. The 5G access network architecture utilizes LTE and NR RATs
in cooperation with mmWaves, mMIMO and NOMA.
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Chapter summary
31
However, more densely deployed cells in combination with more complex channels
implicates the assessment of the coverage and capacity in 5G mobile networks, thus
requiring more drive tests. Computer models capable of assessing the coverage and
capacity are therefore highly sought after, as these have the potential to drastically
minimize the needed drive testing.
Figure 2.17 shows an overview of the requirements (i.e. challenges) of 5G, the
technologies used to facilitate said requirements and the fundamental design features
of these facilitators.
==PAGE:42==
32
2 5G mobile networks
Capacity
Data rate 
End-to-end 
latency 
Massive number
of connection
Cost
Quality of
Experience (QoE)
x1000 
>70% indoor 
x100
< 1 ms
x1000
Sustainable
Consistent
mmWave spectrum
Massive MIMO
New air interface
Optical networks
Small cells
Local ofﬂoading
Content Delivering
Network (CDN)
Control/User plane
split
Software-based
approaches
User deployment
models
Simple access points
Energy efﬁcient
hardware
Energy management
techniques
Trafﬁc management
Self Organizing
Networks (SON)
Big data-driven
network intelligence
Use higher frequencies
and other spectrum
options like pooling and
aggregation. 
New air interfaces and
multiple access schemes
to provide optimized high
frequencies, latency and
connectivity
Optical transmission and
switching wherever
possible
Bring communicating
endpoints closer together
Address coverage and
capacity seperately
Minimize number of
network layers and pool
resources as much as
possible using cloud
Minimize functionalities
performed by access
points (NFV)
Maximize energy
efﬁciency across all
network entities
Use an intelligent agent
to manage QoE, routing,
mobility and resource
allocation
Challenges
Facilitators
Design fundamentals
NOMA
Figure 2.17: Overview of the 5G challenges, facilitators, and design fundamental
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Predictive methods
using machine
learning
Predictive ML modelling methods are capable of inferring mappings from input pa-
rameters to output variables. An ML model is thus capable of creating a mapping
from network measurements to throughput measurements. This means that an accu-
rate ML model has the potential to reduce the needed drive testing, by being capable
of predicting the throughput based on previously seen measurements. The ideal ML
methods for this purpose are described herein.
Machine learning can broadly be summarized as the study of algorithms that allow
computer programs to automatically improve through experience. Tom M. Mitchell
provides a widely quoted, more formal definition of the algorithms studied in the field
of machine learning [Mit97]:
”A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to
some class of tasks T and performance measure P, if its performance at
tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E”
3.1
Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) have fundamentally revolu-
tionized the modern world. Most human beings, without realizing it, interact with AI
on a daily basis through applications such as personalized advertisement campaigns,
self-driving vehicles, financial technologies (FinTech) and many more. The constant
surfacing of new applications benefiting from AI approaches drives the advancements
in the field of AI. The fundamental underlying principles of the ML algorithms, as
defined by Tom M. Mitchell, however, have hardly changed since they were first intro-
duced by Arthur Samuel in 1959 [Sam59]. The ML theory have steadily evolved over
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
time, but advancements have been restricted by the limited and high cost of compu-
tational hardware up to the year 2000. The recent advancements and cost-reduction
of computer hardware have resulted in the skyrocketing of the applicability of AI,
which has been the primary enabler of the advancement within the fields of AI and
ML over the last 15 years.
Personalized advertisement campaigns, self-driving vehicles, FinTech’s and many
more technologies have been the drivers for the recent developments and advance-
ments within the field of AI1. However, big data (i.e. enormous amounts of data) is a
vital requirement for the applicability of AI. Machine learning (e.g. AI in practice) is
said to learn from experience, as stated by Tom M. Mitchell, with experience referring
to data. Ironically (with respect to mobile communications), most of the data used
to support this advancement, have been captured through mobile devices [Den+17].
The advancements in mobile devices, and their expansion among human beings, have
enabled companies to exponentially increase the amount of data gathered. Mobile de-
vices are embedded with cameras, microphones, GPS’s and many more sensors used
to capture and gather data. Camera data (such as photos and videos) can be used
to train classifier to identify and distinguish between objects, where microphone data
(such as voice) can be used to train Natural Language Processing Algorithms (NLP
AI) as used in Apples Siri, Google’s assistant and many similar applications. Multiple
ML approaches have been researched and developed to facilitate the implementation
of the aforementioned applications.
3.2
ML approaches
Machine learning approaches obtain results by using large data sets X of N examples
X = {x1, . . . , xN}, called a training set to tune the parameters of an adaptive model
y(x).
The results of running machine learning algorithms can be expressed as a
function y(x) which takes a new input x and that generates an output y.
Machine learning approaches can broadly be split into three categories, Supervised
learning, Unsupervised learning and Reinforcement learning.
3.2.1
Supervised learning
Applications in which the training data X comprises of examples of the input vectors
along with corresponding target vectors t (i.e. labels) are known as supervised learn-
ing problems. Note that there is one target vector t for each data point x. Cases
such as image recognition, in which the goal is to assign each input vector (i.e. data
point) to a finite set of discrete categories, are called classification problems. If the
1https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-analytics/our-insights/ask-
the-ai-experts-whats-driving-todays-progress-in-ai
==PAGE:45==
3.2 ML approaches
35
cases deals with assigning input vectors outputs consisting of one or more continu-
ous variables, then the task is a called a regression problem. Examples of regression
problems include prediction of housing prices, in which the input vector consists of
location, number of rooms etc. Classification and regressions are known as supervised
learning since the labels supervises the learning algorithm in the prediction making
process.
Supervised learning is thus dealing with creating a mapping from inputs to out-
put(s). A supervised learning algorithm can be defined as: Given a set of N training
examples of the form {(x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn)} such that xi is the feature vector of the
i-th example, and yi is its corresponding label (i.e., class or dependent variable). A
supervised learning algorithm seeks to map a function f : X →Y , where X is the
input space and Y is the output space.
There exist two distinct sets of categories addressed by supervised learning algo-
rithms, classifications and regressions. Figure 3.1 illustrates the characteristic differ-
ences between classification and regression problems.
• Classification: A supervised learning problem is categorized as a classification
problem if the target vector, t, consists of a finite set of discrete values. Cases
such as digit recognition, in which the goal is to assign each input vector, xn,
to one of a finite set of categories ranging from one to ten, are an example of a
classification problem.
• Regression: A supervised learning problem is categorized as a regression prob-
lem if the target vector, t, consists of one or more continuous variables. An
example of a regression problem could be prediction of the yield in a chemical
manufacturing process, in which the input vector xn consists of the concentra-
tion of the reactants, the temperature, the pressure etc.
Feature(s)
Target
Feature 1
Feature 2
Measurement
Model
Class 1
Model
Class 2
Classiﬁcation
Regression
Figure 3.1: Characteristic differences between classification and regression problems
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
3.2.2
Unsupervised learning
Other machine learning approaches, however, may comprise of examples in which the
training data consists of a set of inputs vectors x without any corresponding target
values. The goal in such an unsupervised learning approaches may be to discover
groups of similar examples within the data, also known as clustering or project the
data from a high-dimensional input space down to a lower dimensional space while
preserving as much information as possible, known as compression, or even lower to a
two or three-dimensional space for the purpose of visualization. Figure 3.2 illustrates
the characteristic differences between supervised and unsupervised learning problems.
Feature 1
Feature 2
Class 1
Model
Class 2
Supervised Learning
Feature 1
Feature 2
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Unsupervised learning
Data point
Figure 3.2: Characteristic differences between supervised and unsupervised learning
problems, illustrated with a classification and clustering problem, respectively
3.2.3
Reinforcement learning
The final approach, reinforcement learning, deals with the task of finding suitable
actions for an agent to take in a given environment (i.e. situation) in order to max-
imize a reward. No examples of input and output data is given in this approach (in
contrast to the previous approaches), but the algortihm must instead discover these
sets through a process of trial and error. This process typically unfolds sequentially
in a state/action space in which the learning algorithm, Q-learning, interacts with
the agents environment. Each action is associated with a reward, and the goal of
the learning algorithm is to find the set of actions that maximizes the reward. The
current action will in most cases also affect all subsequent rewards in addition to
the immediate reward received. An important aspect of reinforcement learning is
to appropriately attribute rewards to all the actions that let to it, since some ac-
tions will produce favorable rewards and others won’t. This is an example of a credit
assignment problem.
A general feature of reinforcement learning is the trade-off
between exploration, where the agent explores new action-sequences to effectively at-
tempt to increase the reward, and exploitation where the agent uses already explored
action-sequences known to yield high rewards. A balance between exploration and
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Classification and Regression Trees (CART)
37
exploitation generate the best results. Figure 3.3 illustrates the basic idea and ele-
ments involved in a reinforcement learning model.
Figure 3.3: Reinforcement learning model
Although each of these approaches require their own tools and techniques, many
of the underlying key ideas are common to all such approaches.
3.2.4
Regression techniques
Regression techniques will be thoroughly introduced, since the purpose of this thesis
is to carry out performance predictions, as measured in terms of data-rates, in the
mobile network. The data rates inherently follows a continuous variable, and are
used as targets for the learning algorithms, hence the used of supervised learning
regression techniques.
There exists several different methods for fitting data to a regression, such as
logistic regressions, linear regressions, artificial neural networks, decision trees, long
short term memory models, hidden markov models, Gaussian processes etc., each with
its own benefits and drawbacks. The classical regression models such as logistic and
linear regression have a more statistical foundation, whereas the hidden markov mod-
els and Gaussian processes have a more probabilistic foundation [Bis06]. A regression
tree and artificial neural network have been implemented for this case, and will thus
be thoroughly explained.
3.3
Classification and Regression Trees (CART)
A regression tree (i.e a type of decision tree) has its origin in graph theory. The
terminology of decision trees is described using nodes and branches. A decision trees
consists of nodes and branches, with a root node at the top. The tree grows from
the root node by branching into new nodes known as child nodes with respect to the
root node. The individual child nodes are then again split into new nodes and this
continues recursively until some predefined stopping criteria is reached.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
The structure of the tree has to be determined in order to learn a tree-based
model. This structure includes which input features to split on at which node, i.e. the
splitting criterion, as well as the value of the threshold for the split. The structure
furthermore requires the determination of the target variable region R, i.e. which
parts of the tree the target variable falls into. Minimization of the error function
(typically sum-of-squares (SSE) of mean-squared-error (MSE)) can be applied if the
partitioning of the input space (i.e. the tree structure) is given. This means that
the optimal value of the target variable within any given region is determined by the
average of all the values tn, whose data points fall into that region. However, the
problem of determining the optimal structure of a tree to minimize the sum-of-squares
error, even for a fixed number of nodes, is typically computationally infeasible due
to the exponentially large number of combinatorially possible solutions [Bis06]. A
greedy optimization is usually done instead, where the root node contains the whole
input-space and is recursively grown by splitting each node, one at a time. The joint
optimization of the choice of region to split s, and the choice of input feature and
associated threshold, can be determined efficiently through exhaustive search. The
target variable is then simply calculated as the average of all the data-points in that
region. This process is repeated for all possible choices of input features that can be
split and the result that provides the smallest sum-of-squares error is kept. Algorithm
1 clarifies the regression tree growing procedure.
Algorithm 1 Regression tree growing procedure
1: procedure Greedy optimization
2:
for all iterations do
3:
for all features xk do
4:
min
s [SSE(yτ|xτk < s) + SSE(yτ|xτk ≥s)]
▷Find optimal split, s
5:
Choose k yielding lowest SSE
6:
Terminate when SSE gain becomes too low
There are two typical methods used when choosing the stopping criteria in the
decision tree growing process:
1. The stopping criteria can be based on the number of data-points contained in
each leaf-node. Then prune back the resulting tree
2. The stopping criteria can be based on a maximum allowed number of nodes and
branches.
It has been empirically found that a majority of the possible splits results in an
insignificant error reduction, while various later splits result in a notable error reduc-
tion [Bis06]. This is the foundation for the pruning in the first stopping criteria. The
pruning in the first option is based on a criterion that balances the error against an
estimate of the models complexity. The collapse of internal nodes by combining the
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Classification and Regression Trees (CART)
39
corresponding regions can be defined by letting T0 denote the initial tree for pruning,
and then setting T to be a subtree of T0. τ is used to index the leaf nodes ranging
from τ = 1, . . . , |T|, with leaf node τ representing the region Rτ containing Nτ data
points out of |T| total number of lead nodes. The best prediction, producing the
lowest average error, yτ for any region Rτ can then be calculated by
yτ = 1
Nτ
∑
xn∈Rτ
tn
(3.1)
with the corresponding sum-of-squares error as
Qτ(T) =
∑
xn∈Rτ
(tn −yτ)2
(3.2)
The pruning criterion is then given by
C(T) =
T
∑
τ=1
Qτ(T) + λ|T|
(3.3)
where λ denotes the regularization parameter and determines the trade-off be-
tween the error and the complexity of the model as measured by the number |T| of
leaf nodes.
3.3.1
Advantages and disadvantages
There are several advantages in using trees. Trees, most notable, provide an intuitive
illustration and interpretation of the feature partitioning which is especially relevant
when working with a high dimensional feature spaces with more than three features.
Trees, however, are prone to having a high variance problem, meaning that a small
change in data can give a completely new tree [Bis06]. The splits in a decision tree
are furthermore hard, meaning that each region is only coupled with one leaf node.
Lastly, for regressions, each node in the decision tree results in a piecewise-constant
prediction with discontinuities, which is not ideal for modelling smooth, continuous
functions. Figure 3.4 illustrates an example decision tree regression with a depth
of two. The examples uses the distance from the base station (feature) in order to
predict the downlink data-rate (target). The dataset used in the example contains
650 observations.
3.3.2
Random Forest
The high variance problem, as mentioned earlier, can be overcome by introducing a
bagging approach, where the average of several trees is used. A random forest (RF)
however, takes this approach a step further by constructing the trees to be pairwise
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
(a) Prediction of the data rate
(b) Decision tree for the prediction of the data rate
Figure 3.4: Example illustration of the prediction process involved in a regression
tree. The decision tree predicts the downlink data rates (target) given the distance
from the base station (feature). The binary split methods implies that a decision tree
with a depth of two will have four prediction region Rτ, as shown with the different
colors. The three decision boundaries (splits) are denoted sk. The prediction is the
average of the target values within each of the four regions.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Classification and Regression Trees (CART)
41
decorrelated [Jer01]. The advantage of the RF approach become clear when observing
the variance across multiple trees. The variance of B trees can be found as
Σ = ρσ2 + 1 −ρ
B
σ2
(3.4)
where σ2 represents the variance of each tree and ρ represents the pairwise corre-
lation between trees. Here it becomes clear that having many trees (i.e. a large B)
results in the second term vanishing. Furthermore, creating trees such that ρ is low-
ered, in order to lower the first term as well, will further reduce the overall variance.
The pairwise decorrelating process is performed during the tree-growing proce-
dure by selecting from a random subset s ≤Z of the features at each split, where
Z denotes the total number of features. This means that minimizing s will result
in a decrease in the pairwise correlation and thus the variance Σ of the ensemble.
Lowering s too much however will negatively impact the regression performance, as
the most most descriptive features might be excluded from the subsets. A bootstrap
sample is furthermore employed in the creation of each tree, meaning that the data
observations are sampled with replacement
RF trees comes at a cost since they require more computational power than regular
decision trees and reduces the trees advantage of interpretability since the regressors
(i.e. a model performing a regression task) no longer can be visualized. They do
however lower the regressors variance and as a result lowers the generalization error
[Jer01]. Having multiple predictions for an observation can furthermore be used to
determine the models uncertainty. The trees uncertainty can be measured as the
standard deviation across all the predictions for a specific observation. Figure 3.5
illustrates the prediction process involved with RF regression trees.
3.3.3
Out-of-bag observations and feature importance
Usage of the bootstrap sample method means that some observations are omitted
for each of the trees. These observations are denoted out-of-bag (OOB) observations.
These OOB observations can be used to validate the model in a similar fashion that
k-fold cross-validation is used for neural networks [Jer01].
This is possible since
some trees have not been trained on some of the observations.
Predicting those
observation on trees they weren’t trained on can be used to calculate percentage of
wrongly predicted OOB observations, called the OOB error.
The OOB observations serves multiple purposes. Not only can they be used to
validate the model, but they can also be used to get an estimate of how important each
feature is for the prediction. The features importances are estimated by predicting
the OOB observations for both normal and permuted data of feature j. The feature
importance for feature j is the determined as the increase in the prediction error
for the permuted data. The feature importance is sometimes also referred to as the
permuted variables (i.e. feature) delta error. The feature importance can also be
calculated for ensembles with multiple trees. This is done by averaging the feature
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
4
3
4
5
>
<
>
5
3
6
2
<
>
<
3
2
5
4
<
>
<
Tree 1
5
Tree 2
6
Tree B
4
Model prediction: 5 
Model uncertainty: 0.87 
Average & 
Standard deviation 
Figure 3.5: Prediction process for random forest regression trees
importances for each tree in the ensemble followed by a division of the standard
deviation of the ensemble [Bis06].
3.4
Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial neural networks (ANN) have proven to be powerful function approximators,
and can in theory approximate any function given a sufficient model structure and
adequate data [Bis06]. Starting off with the linear models for regression (and clas-
sification) which are based on linear combinations of fixed nonlinear basis functions
ϕj(x) and take the form
y(x, w) = f
( M
∑
j=1
wjϕj(x)
)
(3.5)
where f(·) in the case of a regression is the identity, but would be a nonlinear ac-
tivation function in case of a classification. This model can be extended by letting
the basis function ϕj(x) depend on trainable parameters as well as trainable weight
coefficient {wj}. Artificial neural networks (ANN or Neural Networks (NN) for short
or Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)) use similar basis functions as in (3.5) with each
basis function itself being a nonlinear function of linear combinations of inputs, where
each of the weight coefficients wj are trainable (i.e. adaptive) parameters. This leads
to the basic neural network model, which can be described as a series of functional
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Artificial Neural Networks
43
transformations. The neural network starts at the input layer by constructing M
linear combinations of the input features x1 . . . , xD in the form
aj =
D
∑
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0
(3.6)
where the superscript (1) indicates that the parameters belong to the first layer in
the network and j = 1, . . . , M indicates what neuron the values is associated to in the
first layer. The weights wji represents the weight coefficients, and the parameter wj0
represents the biases. The quantities aj are known as the activations. The activations
are transformed through differentiable, nonlinear activation functions h(·) to produce
zj = h(aj)
(3.7)
The quantities in (3.7) are equivalent to the outputs of the basis function in (3.5)
and are in the context of neural networks referred to as hidden units (or hidden
neurons) in the hidden layer.
Finally, the same calculations are done using σ as
activation function from the final hidden layer to the output layer.
The output
unit activations are transformed using a different activation function to produce the
network output(s) yk. The activation function for the standard regression problem is
just the identity so that the prediction can be determined as:
yk = σ(ak)
(3.8)
where, for the regression problem
σ(a) = a
(3.9)
The activation function takes on different functions for classification problems
based on the nature of the data and the assumed distribution of the target variable
[Bis06].
The model of the target in a neural network, when performing a regression, can
be described as
tn = y(xn, w, θ)
(3.10)
where θ contain the hyperparameters such as depth and size of the neural network.
3.4.1
Two-layer feed forward neural network
A two-layer feed forward neural network can be created by combining the various
stages described above.
This is done by connecting the output of one activation
function to the input of a forthcoming layer. A two-layer feed forward neural network
takes the form
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
yk(x, w) = σ
( M
∑
j=1
w(2)
kj h
( D
∑
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0
)
+ w(2)
j0
)
(3.11)
where all the weight and bias parameters have been grouped together into one
matrix w. A neural network is thus simply just a nonlinear function mapping from
a set of input features {xi} to a set of output variables {yk} determined by a matrix
w of trainable parameters. Figure 3.6 illustrates the two stages (i.e. layers) of the
two-layer neural network.
Figure 3.6: Network structure for the two-layer neural network corresponding to 3.11
[Bis06]
It is common practice to include the bias in the set of weight parameters by
defining an addition input variable x0 whose value is fixed at x0 = 1. Likewise, the
second layer bias can be included in the second layer weights, simplifying 3.11 to
yk(x, w) = σ
( M
∑
j=1
w(2)
kj h
( D
∑
i=1
w(1)
ji xi
))
(3.12)
A NN with a structure similar to figure 3.6 also has the potential to predict the
throughput of the mobile network. This NN is capable of predicting the throughput
as output by feeding network and GPS metrics to the network as inputs. Linear
combinations of the inputs are thus used to predict the outputs. The training done
in order to obtain such optimized weights capable of predicting the throughput based
on the network and GPS metrics are done through the error function.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Artificial Neural Networks
45
3.4.2
The error function
Finding the optimal set of weights is an optimization problem that can be considered
as a maximum likelihood problem. All observations for the regression problems have
a corresponding target variable (or vector in the case for multiple targets) t, for which
each t is Gaussian distributed with a mean depending on x such that
p(t|x, w) = N(t|y(x, w), β−1)
(3.13)
where β is the inverse variance (precision) of the Gaussian noise. If the obser-
vations contain multiple targets values such that t = t, . . . , tN and are independent,
then the likelihood function is
p(t|X, w, β) =
N
∏
n=1
p(tn|xn, w, β)
(3.14)
where X = {x1, . . . , xN}.
Maximizing the likelihood function is equivalent to
minimizing the error function [Bis06]. The SSE error function, for instance, can be
obtained by taking the negative logarithm of (3.14) as
β
2
N
∑
n=1
{y(xn, w) −tn}2 −N
2 ln(b) + N
2 ln(2π)
(3.15)
The final error function can then be obtained by removing both the constant
additive and multiplicative terms such that
E(w) = 1
2
N
∑
n=1
{y(xn, w) −tn}2
(3.16)
Considering several output values 3.16 becomes
E(w) = 1
2
N
∑
n=1
||y(xn, w) −tn||2
(3.17)
The cost function (which is a type of objective function) can then be found as the
average error over all the observations as:
C(w) =
1
2N
N
∑
n=1
||y(xn, w) −tn||2
(3.18)
The cost function is often denoted J(θ), where θ represents the trainable model
parameters w and J represents the cost C. The cost function is usually a more general
form of the error function. The error function is a part of a cost function which is
a type of an objective function. The objective function is the most general term for
any function that is optimized during training. The maximum likelihood estimation
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
(MLE) is a common type of objective function. The derivative of the above mentioned
error functions, which is identical for both (3.16) and (3.18), can then be found as
∂E
∂ak
= yk −tk
(3.19)
It is often sufficient to only find a local minimum with an error value close to the
error value of the global minimum [Bis06].
The optimization methods used to minimize the error are usually based on first
order information (i.e. first derivatives) exclusively since the neural networks often
contain a large number of learnable parameters (i.e.
weights) [Bis06].
Gradient
descent (GD) is one of the simpler optimization methods. It optimizes the weight
parameters by taking sequential steps in the direction of the negative error gradient
which effectively lower the error when updating the weights. The updated weight
parameters for each epoch (i.e. updating of weights based on all observations) can
then be found such that
w(τ+1) = w(τ) −η∇E(w(τ))
(3.20)
where η > 0 is the learning rate and determines the length of each step, τ is
the epoch number and ∇E denotes the error gradient. Gradient descent calculates
the gradients precisely from all the observations (i.e. data points) for each epoch.
A shortcoming of gradient descent is that error function has to be calculated for
all observations in order to move just a single step towards the minimum. Stochas-
tic gradient descent (SGD) is another optimization algorithm that overcomes this
shortcoming by calculating the error gradient, and update the weights, based on one
individual observation at each iteration instead of using the sum of the error gradient
of all observations. The updated weight parameters are thus calculated as
w(τ+1) = w(τ) −η∇Ei(w(τ))
(3.21)
Lastly, SGD can also be implemented using batches of the observations, called
batch gradient descent (BGD), to calculate the error gradient. SGD’s path to the
minima is usually noisier (i.e. more random) than that of the BGD since SGD uses one
observation for each gradient update [Bis06]. However, the indifference in the paths
isn’t a problem, as long as it converges to the minimum and shortens the training
time. The batch size is a hyper parameter (i.e. its an unlearnable parameter) which
ideally should be tuned. The SGD and BGD optimization algorithms are viable due
to the assumption of independent observations, since the error function (3.16) then
can be expressed as
E(w) =
N
∑
i=1
Ei(w)
(3.22)
Figure 3.7 illustrates an example error function E(w) as a surface over two weight
parameters w1 and w2. Point wA is a local minimum where wB is the global minimum.
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Artificial Neural Networks
47
The local gradient on the error surface is determined by the vector ∇E at any point
wC [Bis06].
Figure 3.7: Illustration of the error surface across two weight parameters [Bis06]
The derivative of the total error can then be found through (3.22) as
∂E
∂wji
=
N
∑
i=1
∂Ei
∂wji
(3.23)
It’s hereby possible to calculate the error derivatives using the individual obser-
vations. Notice that E(w) is expressed without the argument w in order to ease the
notation. This is also done for the next subsection.
3.4.3
Error backpropagation
Error backpropagation (sometimes simply known as backprop) is an efficient technique
used to compute the gradients for feed-forward neural networks. The error function
is differentiable, meaning that any error can be propagated backwards through the
network in order to update the weights in the direction that minimizes the error,
i.e.
in the direction of the negative gradient.
In other words, backprop is done
by propagating the errors backwards through the network in order to compute the
derivatives. The backprop process is performed using every observation in the training
set to update the weights. One iteration of this process is known as an epoch, and
NN models are usually train over several epochs.
Each neuron (also called unit) in a general n-layer feed forward neural network
computes the weighted sum of its input (i.e. the activations) in any given layer j as
aj =
∑
i
wjizi
(3.24)
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
where j = i −1 since the bias were included as the first value of the inputs
and concurrent weight parameters. It unnecessary to deal with the biases explicitly.
Applying the non-linear activation function h(·) gives the output
zj = h(aj)
(3.25)
The associated input vector for each observation in the training data can be for-
wardly propagated through the network by successively applying 3.24 and 3.25 for
each layer in the network. This process is known as forward propagation, since the
information essentially flow forwardly through the network.
It’s possible to apply the chain rule to the right hand side of (3.22) since Ei only
depend on the individual weight wji, which is calculated via 3.24 and 3.25, so that
the right hand side of (3.22) becomes
∂Ei
∂wji
= ∂Ei
∂aj
∂aj
∂wji
(3.26)
Using 3.24 it can be shown that
∂aj
∂wji
= zi
(3.27)
Introducing the useful notation that
δj ≡∂Ei
∂aj
(3.28)
where δ is referred to as the error, then (3.26) can be expressed as
∂Ei
∂wji
= δjzi
(3.29)
It can be seen from (3.19) and (3.28) that the following is true for the output
neurons
δk = yk −tk
(3.30)
Applying the chain rule once more for the partial derivatives
δj ≡∂Ei
∂ak
=
∑
k
∂Ei
∂ak
∂ak
∂aj
(3.31)
where the sum covers all the neurons k to which neuron j sends information (i.e.
is connected to). The backpropagation formula can be obtained by rewriting (3.31)
using (3.24) and (3.25) to get
δj = h′(aj)
∑
k
δkwjk
(3.32)
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Artificial Neural Networks
49
which shows that any δj for the hidden layer prior to the output layer can be
determined using the output layer. This procedure can be repeated recursively back-
wards through the network to determine δi in the layer prior to δj. This procedure
is performed for every layer back to the first hidden layer, hence the name backprop-
agation. Notice that the summation in (3.32) starts at the first index to indicate it
is backpropagation, whereas it starts at the second index in summation in (3.7) to
indicate it is the forward propagation. Figure 3.8 illustrates the process involved with
backpropagation.
Figure 3.8: Illustration of the backpropagation procedure [Bis06]. The blue arrow
indicates the direction of the forward propagation while the red arrows indicates the
direction of the backward propagation
The entire error backpropagation procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2. Note
that it is used to calculate the gradient for one individual observation. Algorithm
2 has to run N times simultaneously with (3.26) in order to calculate the complete
gradients.
Algorithm 2 Error backpropagation
1: Forward propagate the input vector xi using (3.24) and (3.25)
2: Calculate δk for all k = 1, . . . , K output neurons using (3.30)
3: Backpropagate the δk’s using (3.32) to obtain δj’s for all hidden neuron in the
previous layer.
4: Evaluate the derivatives using (3.29).
3.4.4
Regularization and model uncertainty
The number of input and output neurons in a neural network is usually decided by
the dimensionality of the data, unless some feature engineering has been performed.
The number M of hidden neurons in each layer is a hyperparameter that can be that
can be manually fine-tuned to provide the best predictive performance. M thus also
==PAGE:60==
50
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
inherently controls the number of learnable parameters (such as weights and biases)
in the network as they depend on the structure of the network. This means that
there, in a maximum likelihood setting, also exists an optimal value of M that leads
to the best generalization performance. This value of M corresponds to the optimal
balance between under- and overfitting. Figure 3.9 illustrates the effect of M with an
examples of two-layer networks trained on 10 data points drawn from the sinusoidal
data with multiplicative Gaussian noise. The graphs show the result of fitting neural
networks with M = 1, 3 and 10 hidden units, respectively [Bis06].
Underﬁt
Good ﬁt
Overﬁt
Figure 3.9: Illustration of the effect of different M’s [Bis06]
The generalization error, however, is not clearly correlated with M due to the
presence of local minima in the error function, as illustrated in figure 3.10 [Bis06]. A
common practice to choosing M is in fact to plot a graph similar to figure 3.10 and
then choosing the specific solution having the smallest validation set error.
Number og hidden neurons (M)
sum-of-squares error
Figure 3.10: Correlation between the sum-of-squares error function and M for the
sinusoidal regression example [Bis06]
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Artificial Neural Networks
51
Avoiding overfitting
There is a greater risk of doing overfitting when implementing complex networks, that
are either deep or wide. A neural network is considered deep when it contains more
than one hidden layer, and it is then appropriately known as a deep neural network
(DNN). A common way to reduce overfitting is to put constraints on the weights, w,
to keep their values small. Two common approaches to reduce the level of overfitting
in regression networks are L2 weight regularization2 and dropout.
L2 weight regularization is done by putting a weight penalty on larger weights, in
which the weight penalty is proportional to its square values, and is defined as
Ωw =
H
∑
h=1
Mh
∑
j=1
D
∑
p=1
(w(h)
jp )2
(3.33)
where H is the number of hidden layers in the network and Mh is the number
of hidden neurons in the hidden layer h in the network. The regularization is per-
formed by adding Ωw to (3.18) with a factor λ which effectively controls the extent
of regularization [Bis06]. The regularized objective function thus becomes
E(w) = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
||y(xn, w) −tn||2 + λΩw
(3.34)
Dropout is another effective method used to reduce the overfitting in neural networks.
The key idea of dropout is essentially to randomly drop neurons (along with their con-
nections) from the neural network during training [Sri+14]. Dropout works because it
prevents neurons from overly-adapting to noise in the data. Dropout is implemented
by setting the output activation of a neuron to zero with a probability of p for each
forward propagation during training (i.e.
during the backpropagation procedure),
which is why the weights of those neurons are not being fitted (i.e. updated) for that
specific observation [Sri+14]. The probability p functions similarly to the regulariza-
tion parameter λ in L2 weight regularization. A lower p means that fewer neurons
are being dropped, effectively reducing the regularization effect, whereas a higher p
increases the number of neurons being dropped and thus increases the regularization
effect. Figure 3.11 illustrates the concept of dropout.
2L1 weight regularization exists too and is mainly used when trying to compress the complexity
of a model, otherwise, L2 weight regularization is usually prefer over it
==PAGE:62==
52
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
Standard fully conencted  
neural network
Same neural network  
after applying dropout
Figure 3.11: Example dropout neural network models. Crossed neurons have been
dropped. [Sri+14]
Dropout as Bayesian approximation
Bayesian models offer a mathematically grounded framework to reason about model
uncertainty, but this usually come with a prohibitive computational cost. On the
other hand, deep learning tools such as neural networks for regression and classifi-
cation do not capture a metric for the uncertainty in the model. The prediction of
a neural network is the expected output for a particular set of inputs and is practi-
cally just a sequential multiplication of optimized weights. As a result, the model
thus becomes a black-box where the predictions allegedly are reliable. One example
of applying Bayesian probability theory to to compute uncertainties is the Gaussian
Process. The Gaussian process (GP) regards the joint probability of the inputs in
order to approximate the posterior probability distribution [GG16].
The basic idea in [GG16] is to introduce a new learnable matrix M so that a
new weight matrix W is produced when columns of M are dropped. W can then
be regard as a sample from the variational approximation distribution and are thus
still good for predicting the target variable(s). The posterior distribution p(w|X, y) is
intractable, so [GG16] thus defines W as a distribution over matrices whose columns
are randomly set to zero3, to approximate the intractable posterior from p(w|X, y).
Wi for the i-th layer is defined as:
Wi = Mi · diag([zi,j]Ki
j=1)
(3.35)
where
zi,j ≈Bernoulli(pi)
for i = 1, . . . , L, j = 1, . . . , Ki−1
(3.36)
3[GG16] referrers to the joint term of (3.35) and (3.36) as q(w)
==PAGE:63==
3.4 Artificial Neural Networks
53
where pi are some given dropout probability, Mi are variational parameter ma-
trices and Wi is the weight parameter matrix of layer i, with dimension Ki × Ki1.
The variable zi,j = 0 then corresponds to neuron j in layer i −1 being dropped as an
input to layer i. A Monte Carlo (MC) integration with a single sample ˆwn is used to
get an unbiased estimate of −log p(yn|xn, ˆwn). The new objective function can then
be obtained given the model precision τ (not to be confused with the epoch number)
by scaling the result by the constant 1/(τN) as
EGP-MC( ˆwn) ∝1
N
N
∑
n=1
−log p(yn|xn, ˆwn)
τ
|
{z
}
MSE
+
L
∑
i=1
(
piλ||Mi||2
2
)
|
{z
}
L2 regularization
(3.37)
where λ, representing the regularization factor, is defined as
λ =
l2
2τN
(3.38)
The posterior distribution of the target variable(s) can then be estimated by run-
ning (3.37) multiple times. The model prediction is then the average of the posterior
distribution, where as the model uncertainty can be found as the standard deviation.
This, in essence, works just like the random forest models.
In other words, [GG16] shows that it is possible to obtain an approximation of
the posterior distribution of the model predictions by doing a stochastic forward
propagation of the network (i.e. by applying dropout during testing).
Feature importance
Artificial neural networks have proven to provide powerful modeling techniques, how-
ever, they provide little information about the contributions of the independent vari-
ables (i.e. feature) in the prediction process. A relative feature importance analysis is
done in order to partition the explained variance among multiple predictors in order
to build a better understanding of the importance induced by the model on each
feature. The work done by [Alt+10] introduces the method permutation importance
(also referred to as Mean Decrease Accuracy (MDA)) for quantifying the feature im-
portances across various models.
The basic idea is that the feature importances can be determined by observing
how the error (in the paper referred to as score) decreases when a feature is excluded.
The model is repeatedly re-trained with a new dataset, in which a new feature has
been systematically excluded for the individual re-training procedure. The scores for
the all the training procedures (and thus all the feature exclusions) are then used to
determine the individual features importances. The more the score decreases at the
absence of a feature, the higher its importance. It’s also possible that the score might
increase at the absence of a feature. In this case, said feature should be excluded
from the final model training, as it negatively impacts the scoring function. The fea-
ture importances are lastly normalized in order to make them comparable between
==PAGE:64==
54
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
different ML approaches (such as random forest and neural networks).
The constant re-training of the models can be computationally expensive. This
problem can be completely avoided by performing the permutation importance analy-
sis on the testing data only. This solution doesn’t however work as a true replacement
of the re-training since the models expect all features to be present during testing.
The authors of [Alt+10] therefore propose to replace the feature with random noise
(instead of removing it) in order for it to still be available but without providing any
useful information to the model. The noise should be drawn from a similar distribu-
tion as the original feature for this proposal to be valid, the model can not otherwise
provide a guarantee for trustworthy predictions [Alt+10]. This noise is, in practice,
obtained by shuffling observations for another feature. The final result of this opera-
tion is the permuted feature importances.
The calculation of the permuted feature importances can be computationally in-
tensive, so this method best suitable for a relatively low number of features.
3.5
Model comparison
There are many differences between regression trees and artificial neural networks de-
spite both models being able of performing the same ML approaches (i.e. regression).
There are however, in practical terms, three main things to consider when comparing
said models: speed, interpretability and accuracy.
The decision trees should, in theory, be faster at predicting targets once trained
(although both algorithms can train slowly depending on the amount of data and
dimensionality of the data). The decision tree inherently discards the input features
that it doesn’t find useful, thus making it faster, whereas the neural network is forced
to use all the features (though lowering the weights for features irrelevant to the error
function). Trees are furthermore very interpretable, and it’s easy to inspect the de-
cision process involved with the regression. The neural network, however, functions
like a black-box modelling technique where the predictions supposedly are trustwor-
thy. Pruning can furthermore be applied during the training process of the decision
trees in order to avoid overfitting. The decision tree is on the other hand capable
of handling categorical input data (which is relevant when working with time-related
features etc.), whereas the input data to neural networks inherently have to be nu-
merical variables since its output prediction is based on non-linear combinations of
the input features. Categorical data can however be one-hot encoded and then still
be feed to the input of a neural network.
Regression trees however can not generalize to data outside the range of the tar-
get variable. This might restrict its applicability compared to neural networks that
are capable of generalizing to missing data (think for example of a linear regression).
Neural networks on the other hand are slower (both for training and testing). Neural
networks can be trained with incremental updates if the data arrives in a stream, un-
like decision trees, which inherently use batch-learning algorithms. Neural networks
can preferably model any arbitrary function (through non-linear interaction) and
==PAGE:65==
3.5 Model comparison
55
might therefore provide a higher accuracy, provided that the data contains the true
distribution of the target variable. Neural networks are lastly prone to overfitting,
but tight regularization alleviates this problem and easy to detect by using testing
and validation data sets.
3.5.1
Coefficient of determination
The coefficient of determination (denoted R2 or r2) is the proportion of the vari-
ance in the dependent variable (i.e. target) that is predictable from the independent
variable(s). It serves as the ideal accuracy measurement required for comparing the
predication-accuracy of the models. The variability of the data set can be measured
using two sums of squares formulas4. The total sum-of-squares (proportional to the
variance of the data) can be found as
SStot =
∑
i
(yi −¯y)2
(3.39)
where ¯y is the mean of y, and i ranges over the observation of data points. The error
residual sum-of-squares (also called The sum-of-squares of error residuals) can then
be found as
SSres =
∑
i
(yi −ˆyi)2
(3.40)
and the coefficient of determination can lastly be calculated as
R2 = 1 −SSres
SStot
(3.41)
The ideality of using the R2 score as an accuracy comparison measurement between
models arises from the fact that it directly correlates the predictions with the variance
in the target. An R2 score of 0.82, for instance, implies that 82% of the variability of
the target has been captured by the model, and the remaining 18% of the variability
is still unaccounted for in said model. In other words, it provides a strong estimate
of how much of the variance that has been captured in the model. The R2 score
furthermore also includes the an element of the mean error as shown in 3.39
It is important to note that it can be negative because the score is dependent on
the mean of the test data. It is highly possible that the mean of the test data is
different from the mean of the training data since test data is taken from a separate
part of the route unseen to the model during training. This alone is likely to induce a
much higher incurred squared error in the prediction versus just predicting the mean
of the test data, which results in a negative R2 score.
4The confidence of determination value is typically defined with three sums-of-squares formulas.
The general definition of the coefficient of determination, however, only makes use of two
==PAGE:66==
56
3 Predictive methods using machine learning
3.6
Chapter Summary
The basic concepts of the three major approaches typically used in ML settings have
been quickly introduced, with a special emphasis on supervised learning models since
this thesis seeks to implement performance predicting models on the mobile network.
The primary focus has dealt with regression techniques since the performance of
the mobile network is measured in terms of the downlink throughput, which inherently
reflects a continuous target variable.
Regression trees and artificial neural networks are ideal ML techniques used to
produce regression models for the particular type of data available to the model
training. Both techniques have their own advantages and disadvantages, which is
why both are included and thoroughly reviewed. A sanity check can furthermore be
evaluated by working with multiple models of different kinds in order to check the
validity of the models predictions. An element of uncertainty have been included in
the review of both models in order to further analyze the validity of the models. The
feature importance have lastly been introduced not only to perform feature selection,
but once again allow for a comparison between the two modelling techniques.
The accuracy, uncertainty and feature importance of the decision tree and neural
network models are both be examined identically in order to provide a genuine analysis
of the prediction process and performance of the models.
The predictive RF and NN modelling methods can thus be used to carry out
mobile network performance predictions, resulting in MDT. However, the models will
only be capable of performing these predictions if they are trained with sufficient
data.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4
Mobile network
measurements
Data provides the essential foundation from which ML algorithms learn the mapping
from input to output. The data used for the training of the ML models mentioned
in the previous chapter are based on measurements captured on the mobile network.
These ML algorithms will produce inaccurate models, if they are fed with incomplete
data, since the models are trained based on the observations. The phrase garbage in,
garbage out is particularly applicable in ML settings. This chapter will initially intro-
duce the data preprocessing techniques involved with ML used to prepare the mobile
network measurements for ML modelling. The initial data and model exploration is
also introduced herein.
4.1
Data preprocessing techniques
The raw data is likely to be inappropriate for direct use in ML algorithms due to
a number of complication. Missing data points will make observations incomplete,
and thus useless for the ML algorithms. Observations in which some of the feature
variables contain null-values (such as NULLs (null-values) and NaNs (Not a Value))
are unusable since the models expect to be feed real-valued features. This also means
that the individual null-valued features in each observation can not just be excluded,
as it makes the forward propagation impossible. It is also unreasonable to set the
null-valued features to zero, since this will lead to the model learning an incorrect
mapping during the training-phase.
The raw data can also contain irrelevant and redundant information, which usually
doesn’t add any information during the learning phase and just increases the time
required during the training phase. It is also possible that the the raw data contains
noisy and unreliable observations.
Outliers within the features, for instance, will
once again lead to the model learning an capricious mapping during the training-
phase. Inducing a low learning rate (say η < 0.05) is one method used to reduce the
inference learned from the outliers. Complex models, as mentioned earlier, are prone
to overfitting to noise in the data. Regularization is in these cases a powerful tool
used to impair the models ability to fit to noisy observations, hence the need for data
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Mobile network measurements
preprocessing.
Data preprocessing usually involves five distinct steps [Pyl99] which are done in
a sequential order, so that the data has a specific structure, as required for the next
step to perform its function as intended:
1. Cleaning: The first step in data preprocessing is usually data cleaning (or
sometimes referred to as data cleansing).
It is the process of detecting and
removing (or correcting) corrupt and invalid observations from the raw data
set. This process entails identifying incomplete, incorrect, inaccurate or irrele-
vant parts of the raw data and then replacing, modifying, or deleting the dirty
observations.
2. Transformation: The second step in data preprocessing, known as transfor-
mation or data transformation, is simply just the process of converting the raw
or cleaned data from one format or structure (such as an object or string) into
another format or structure (such as integer or float). It is a fundamental
aspect of most data preprocessing steps as some features might be encoded as
strings when captured. Some models however (such as neural networks), can not
support non-numeric features, and therefor require the data to be transformed
into integers or floats. Hence the need for data transformation.
3. Instance selection: The third step in data preprocessing, known as instance
selection, is the process of reducing the size of the raw, cleaned or transformed
data into a manageable volume. Doing so often leads to a reduction in training
times without a noticeable impacts on the models accuracy. Instance selection
can also be done in order to discard noisy observations, which can improve the
accuracy in regression- and classification problems.
4. Feature engineering: The fourth step in data preprocessing, known as fea-
ture engineering (sometimes include feature selection), deals with the process of
extracting or creating informative and non-redundant features from the above
processed data set. This is done to facilitate the subsequent learning and gen-
eralization process, which often leads to more accurate models and better hu-
man interpretations. It’s essentially a dimensionality reduction process, where
an initial data set of cleaned (or raw) variables is reduced to smaller, more
manageable feature-sets for processing, while still maintaining an accurate and
complete description of the original data set.
5. Normalization: The fifth and final step in data preprocessing, known as nor-
malization or data normalization, is the process of reducing the above processed
data sets to any kind of canonical form, and is done in order to minimize re-
dundancy and dependency between features.
It furthermore accelerates the
learning process for neural networks by scaling all the features to the same or-
der of magnitude, which essentially equalizes the absolute influence of all the
features.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Experimental setup
59
Data cleaning and data transformation are common data preprocessing steps
which are applied to all data sets before working with any ML approaches.
The
rest of the preprocessing steps, however, vary depending on the data set and the ML
approach. Regression trees, for instance, does not benefit from normalization in any
way. In fact, it will likely reduce the accuracy of the tree-based models since the
regions where the trees are split become narrower. Neural networks, however, benefit
greatly from normalization due to the equalization of the features. This means that
higher-valued features doesn’t supersede smaller-valued features. This is particularly
important for neural networks since its prediction is based on nonlinear combinations
of the input features.
It should also be noted, that the preprocessing procedures creates what’s known
as a processed dataset, which is much smaller than the original raw dataset. How-
ever, the preprocessed data set contains only usable observations, as optimal for the
learning process.
4.2
Experimental setup
Measurements has to be carried out on the mobile network in order to obtain the
data necessary for training of the predictive ML models. These measurements have
been obtained using Rhode and Schwarz’s cellular measurement application (named
QualiPoc Android), installed on a Samsung tablet with two receiver antennas (de-
noted Rx0 and Rx1). QualiPoc can be setup so it constantly downloads a specified
file while simultaneously recording the downlink data rates with associated radio qual-
ity measurements. The tablet has an integrated GPS module enabling a complete
synchronized dataset to consist of GPS location, radio quality measurements and IP
downlink throughput (i.e. data rate). The measurements have been captured at the
811 MHz LTE band 20 for basestation PCI 65 from the danish operator TDC.
The mobile network measurements have been conducted on foot in the geograph-
ical area of the Technical University of Denmark, which is split into four quadrants,
covering roughly 1.4 km2. The measurements have been captured on a route stretch-
ing approximately 2.5 km. The route network at DTU covers roughly 14 km [Thr+18].
The route’s arrangement spans from the center of each of the quadrants. The route
used for the mobile network measurements is illustrated in figure 4.1, where the red
cross marks the start of the measurements. The lap imprints marks the kilometer-
marks along the route, whereas the 3rd lap-mark marks the end of the measurements.
The measurements were carried out twice, on different days and at different times
of the day, in order to measure different distributions of the downlink data rate (i.e.
the target). The first dataset, consists of approximately 8000 raw data points where
the second dataset, consists of roughly 15000 raw data points. Each data point con-
tain a timestamp, a PCI label, a GPS position, a data rate and associated radio
quality measurements. The route used for testing is a different subset of the original
route as illustrates with the orange box in figure 4.1.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Mobile network measurements
Figure 4.1: Routes used to capture the mobile network measurements, as well as the
regions used to evaluate the final models. Observations from these parts of the route
are unseen to the models during training. The route has been plotted in Google
Earth
GPS measurements controversy
It should be noted that the majority of the GPS values measured with the tablet
contained null-values, making them practically unusable. The GPS measurements
were therefore carried out once more with a Garmin 735XT GPS sport watch, which
captured the precise route used to obtain the measurements. The GPS signal was
lost during indoor measurements and therefore had to be manually constructed and
added to the measurements of the GPS data.
It was unfortunately impossible to export the geographical measurements with
associated timestamps, meaning that the timestamps couldn’t be used to merge the
network measurements with the GPS measurements. The GPS measurements were
therefore broadcasted onto the mobile network measurements since there were approx-
imately 80 mobile network measurements for each GPS measurement for the second
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Feature engineering
61
dataset. This merging-methods holds due to the assumption of evenly distributed
spacing between the measurements for both the GPS and mobile network along the
route.
4.3
Feature engineering
The GPS coordinate measurements went through several feature engineering processes
in order to become applicable to ML approaches.
Distance to base station
The pathloss (i.e. signal attenuation) experienced by communication signals is propor-
tional to the distance between the transmitter and receiver [Mia+16]. Given that high
pathloss results in weaker signals which then require simpler modulations schemes.
This means that the distance between the transmitter and receiver is directly corre-
lated with feasible data rates. The distance between the UE and BS should therefore
be a strong interpretable feature from which the models should be able to predict the
data rate.
It is possible to calculate the direct distance between the UE and BS since all
the measurements have an associated GPS location and PCI label. All measurements
were in fact taken from the same base station, PCI 65 from the danish operator TDC,
whose coordinates (longitude and latitude) could be found on google maps. Pythago-
ras theorem were used to calculate the distance to the BS for each measurement.
Figure 4.2 shows the correlation between the data rates and the distance to the BS.
A standalone dataset was obtained (i.e. measured) specifically for this illustration.
The figure shows the effect of pathloss on the data rates in both LoS and NLoS sce-
narios, as marked with the red and cyan boxes, respectively. It’s apparent from the
figure that the pathloss increases significantly in NLoS scenarios, which results in a
much more rapid drop in data rates.
Figure 4.2 also highlights the importance of a feature revealing whether a mea-
surement were taken in a LoS or NLoS scenario. The figures visibly shows that there
is a strong correlation between the distance to the BS and the data rates. This corre-
lation however, appears to be two-fold, depending on the LoS scenario. This calls for
an additional feature providing information regarding whether a measurement were
taken during a LoS or NLoS scenario. This feature indicating whether a measurement
were taken during LoS or NLoS is left as future work.
4.4
Feature investigation
It is common in machine learning settings to manually investigate the features prior
to beginning the model development phase in order to get a feel for the correlations
between the input features and the target value(s). Figure 4.3 shows the measured
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Mobile network measurements
Going NLOS
NLOS test 
measurements 
LOS test 
measurements 
Figure 4.2: Correlation between downlink data rates and distance between UE and
BS for the first data set
data rate plotted against the first 28 features. It can clearly be seen from the figure
that there is a correlation between for instance the RSRP and the RSSI (i.e. two of
the signal quality metrics) and the data rate. The figure shows that a higher RSRP
or RSSI leads to a higher data rate. The same principle, as discussed in the previous
section, also applies to the distance metric. Here, a short distance leads to a higher
data rate. These feature correlations should indicate that the RSRP, RSSI and the
distance, in theory, should be accredited with a higher importance for the model
predictions. A closer inspection of the RSSI and the RSRP shows that they appear
to be redundant features. The RSSI and RSRP, however, also appears to provide
the same information (in terms of correlation) when predicting the data rate, as the
correlations are hard to tell apart. It may therefore be unnecessary for the model to
have access to both features. A feature exploration process is therefore required to
assess the necessity of each feature in an assured manner. This feature exploration
process is described in the upcoming section.
The rest of the features, however, appears to provide no apparent correlation be-
tween the data rate and said features. The correlations for these features appears to
be disorganized and provide little to none direct information in the data rate predict-
ing instance. One of the advantages in machine learning algorithms, however, is their
ability find patterns in data, by combining weak signals such as the aforementioned
into stronger signals, which provides a stronger foundations on which the models
more accurately perform predictions.
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Feature investigation
63
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the feature inspection. Each subplot is plotted with the
data rate (i.e. the target variable) on the y-axis and a feature on the x-axis. The
specific features are marked in the title above the individual subplots.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Mobile network measurements
4.5
Feature selection
Utilizing all the features during the model development will likely add unnecessary
model complexity which in tern provides unnoticeable accuracy gain.
Redundant
features, which provides similar information, are excessive for the decision making
process and can advantageously be excluded from the feature set in order to simplify
the model. The simplification of the models allows for faster model training, as fewer
parameters has to be trained, and also resulting in faster predictions times.
The simplest way, however, to assess the importance of the features in relation to
the different model structures for the decision tree models is through a brute-force
exploration process. The brute-force method is only applicable to the decision tree
due to a newly released machine learning package called XGBoost (short for extreme
gradient boosting), which is implemented in C++, allowing for decision tree models to
be trained within minutes through the XGBRegressor module1. XGBoost is a wrapper
built on top the popular scikit-learn (shortend sklearn) machine learning package.
Sklearn provides the GridSearchCV module2 which exhaustively tries every given
combination of specified hyper-parameter grid and returns the highest performing
combination of hyper-parameters. The quick model training means that its possible
to simply try every single combination of the feature sets with the model structure
sets. An analysis of similar complexity for the neural network models would take
approximately 100 times longer to execute, resulting in months of continuous training.
The feature exploration is for this reason done solely on the tree model, and the
optimal feature-set is then applied to both the tree- and neural network models.
4.5.1
Feature exploration
It is infeasible to test every single feature combination of the feature-subsets due to the
exponentially many possible combinations. A reasonable approach to overcome this
infeasibility it to incrementally add the features one by one in the order of decreasing
importance. This method allows for the testing of the relative information gain in
each feature. The test accuracy is determined for each feature subset in order to
determine the information gain from adding said feature to the feature subset. The
accuracy should, in theory, decay exponentially as each subsequent feature is less
important (i.e. provide less information) than the one previously added.
The initial step in the feature exploration process is to develop a simple model
for the sole purpose of determining the importance of the individual features.
A
simple random forest regressor is implemented. The structure, and thus the actual
performance, of said regressor is of lesser importance for the initial step since its only
sought to determine the feature importance. However, a decent generalization is still
1https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/latest/python/python_api.html#module-xgboost.
sklearn
2https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.
GridSearchCV.html
==PAGE:75==
4.5 Feature selection
65
required for the feature importances to be valid. The random forest for this purpose
is implemented with 200 trees (also known as estimators) and a depth of two. The
model obtained an R2 score of 0.83 which for produced the following predictions for
the first 300 (scrambled) measurements of the test data:
From figure 4.4 it can be seen that just 4 leaf nodes does a decent job of predicting
the datarates on unseen data. The belonging feature importances for this model is
shown in figure 4.5. The two GPS coordinates account for 60% of the information gain
relating to the data rate. The fact that the model doesn’t utilize the network quality
measurements indicates that it achieve a poor generalization outside the geographical
area. This is, however, also to be expected based on 4.3 which shows a much clearer
correlation between the geographical based features (such as latitude, longitude and
distance to BS (shortened dist)) than the radio quality measurements. The models
can therefore, based on figure 4.5, not be expected not to gain any significant predic-
tion improvements since the information gain is relatively low after the three most
important features. This assumption is confirmed in figure 4.6, from which it can be
seen that there is absolutely no information gain after the introducing the third most
important feature to the model. Any model producing an R2-score below 0.5 have
been excluded.
Figure 4.6 shows the grid of model structures on the y-axis and number of fea-
tures, in the order of most important, on the x-axis. The model structures are listed
in terms of depth D, learning rate L and number of estimators (trees) E in each model.
This means that D3L2E15 is a decision tree model with 15 trees which each has a
depth of 3 and are updated with a learning rate of 0.2.
The decision tree models can, based on 4.6, be expected to rely primarily on the
geographical features when predicting the datarates. This is however not entirely cor-
rect, as the expected data rate depends on the load of the network, the signal quality
and many more parameters. The affect of the information gain in the geographical
features is mainly a result of the limitations in the limited size of the data set and
relatively little variance in the measured data rate across the data set. Excluding the
geographical measurements produces a vastly different outcome, where the feature
Figure 4.4: Measurements and predictions for the datarate for the model including
the geographical data
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Mobile network measurements
Figure 4.5: Feature importances for the regression tree models
importances decays at a slower exponential rate, and as a result, the R2 test score
also experiences a slower fading exponential gain at the addition of each new feature.
Figure 4.6 furthermore illustrates the curse of dimensionality in which it is compli-
cated for the model to differentiate between all the different combinations of features
and model structures. However, for the case when the geographical measurements
are included, figure 4.6 shows that having only 15 trees underfits the data whereas
having 16 or 17 trees seem to generalize sufficiently, but only for measurements take
at the geographical area of DTU.
The fact the model bases it predictions so heavily on the geographical measure-
ments is a clear sign of memorization, rather than generalization, meaning that this
specific model will be likely to perform incorrect predictions for unseen data, outside
the range of the training set.
Feature exploration without geographical measurements
The same process can be repeated without the geographical measurements in an at-
tempt to improve the generalization. This process is also done in order to explore the
affect of the geographical measurements influence on the accuracy of the prediction.
The initial model structure has been altered slightly in order to compensate for the
information lost when excluding the geographical measurements from the data set.
==PAGE:77==
4.5 Feature selection
67
Figure 4.6: Test-score comparison for the different combinations of model structures and features. A hotter color indicates
a higher test accuracy.
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Mobile network measurements
Figure 4.7: Measurements and predictions for the datarate for the model excluding
the geographical data
Figure 4.7 shows the accuracy of the model which obtains an R2 score of 0.75.
The corresponding importances of each feature is shown in figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Feature importances for the regression tree models without geographical
features
It can be seen from figure 4.8 that the information gained from each feature is
much more broadly distributed across the entire set of feature. The information gain
is still exponentially decaying, but at a much slower pace. This indicates that the
accuracy of the model on the test data should be exponentially decaying, as more
features are added. Figure 4.9 confirms that the models accuracy improves with the
addition of each feature up to 10 features, from which point off the accuracy plateaus.
This trend is experienced for every model.
A similar feature analysis is performed on a first dataset in order to dive deeper
into the information gain in each feature in correlation to the different model struc-
==PAGE:79==
4.5 Feature selection
69
Figure 4.9: Test-score comparison for the different combinations of model structures and features, excluding the geo-
graphical features. A hotter color indicates a higher test accuracy.
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Mobile network measurements
tures. This analysis is shown in appendix A for the first dataset with a higher variance
in the target vector.
4.6
Hyper parameter tuning in ML models
Assessing the structure of the models (i.e.
tuning of the hyperparameters) is an
important aspect when implementing machine learning models.
This is typically
done by assessing the bias-variance tradeoff [Bis06].
Bias-variance tradeoff
Machine learning models are idealistically tuned to the point where the model not only
accurately captures the underlying function in the training data but also generalizes
well to the unseen test data.
It is unfortunately rarely possible to achieve both
simultaneously [Bis06].
• The bias error origins from the supervised leaning algorithms flawed inferences
from the training data. High bias leads to the model underfitting to the train-
ing data and thus misses relevant generalizations between features and target
output(s).
• The variance error origins from the supervised learning algorithms over sensi-
tivity to small fluctuation in the training data. High variance leads to model
overfitting to random noise in the training data, rather than generalizing to the
underlying function.
High-variance models are capable of sufficiently representing the underlying func-
tion in the training data but prone to overfitting to noisy observations. Low-variance
models, however, usually result in a simpler structure which tends to avoid overfitting
but also a greater risk of failing to capture the underlying function in the training
data.
Models with a low-bias, on the other hand, typically involve a more complex
structure, which enables said models to capture a more accurate representation of
the underlying function in the training date. This training process, however, is also
likely to capture a large noise component from the training data, making the models
less likely to generalize to unseen test-data.
Predictions on unseen data are thus
likely to be less accurate, despite the added complexity. Models with a high bias, in
contrast, tend to capture simpler representations of the training data, but are also
likely of producing lower-variance predictions when applied beyond the training data
[Bis06].
In short, the bias–variance tradeoff regards the conflicting optimization occurring
when trying to simultaneously minimize the bias- and variance errors which hinder
supervised learning algorithms from generalizing beyond the training data [Bis06].
Model development, i.e. tuning of the model parameters, in machine learning is
==PAGE:81==
4.6 Hyper parameter tuning in ML models
71
an iterative process in which the hyper parameters constantly are tuned during each
iteration in an attempt to increase the generalization of the models. However, there is
no direct measure of a models generalizability, so it’s estimated based on the achiev-
able R2-score and feature importance distribution. The hyper parameters are tuned
one at a time in order to assess said hyper parameters influence on the generalization
of the model.
Models that produce a high variance error are likely overfitting to noise in the
training data. The model architecture should therefore be simplified to reduce the
effects of overfitting. This can be done for tree-based models by either shortening the
depth or reducing the number of trees in the ensemble. Likewise, for neural networks,
a simplification of the models can be achieved by reducing the number of neurons
in each layer, lowering the learning rate or number of epochs used for training the
model.
Models that produce a high bias error, on the other hand, are likely underfit-
ting the to the training data. The model architecture should therefore in this case
be complexified in order to allow the models to build a better generalization of the
underlying mapping. This can be done for tree-based models by either deepening
the tree depths or increasing the number of trees in the forest. Likewise, for neural
networks, a complexification can be achieved by adding more neurons to each layer,
slacking on the regularization or increasing the number of epochs used for training
the model.
Training 
Training of model on  
new architecture 
Testing 
Test newly trained
model to determine
its generalization 
Tuning 
Tuning of hyper parameters 
in model architecture
Tune
Train
Test
Figure 4.10: Illustrates of the three cycles involved in each iteration of the hyper
parameter tuning process
Figure 4.10 illustrates the cyclic iteration of hyper parameter tuning. Each iter-
ation is a cyclic process consists of three steps, namely training, testing and tuning,
in that specific order. The process starts off with the training of a model based on
a given model architecture. The generalization capabilities of the trained model is
==PAGE:82==
72
4 Mobile network measurements
then determined by feeding the unseen test-data. The hyper parameters are then
tuned based on the test results and this cycle continues til a valid-generalizing model
is produced.
4.7
Chapter summary
The experimental setup and route used to carry out the drive test measurements on
TDC’s LTE network have been introduced, covering roughly 2.5 km of roads at DTU.
The ML methods are trained and tested on two different subsets of these measure-
ments.
The data preprocessing techniques were introduced next, which are used to trans-
form the raw measurements into workable a dataset applicable in ML models. Part
of this transformation process involved the feature engineering of a distance metric,
providing the models information about the distance between the BS and UE.
These processes were followed by a feature investigation and selection procedure,
in which it was found that the geographically related features provided a high infor-
mation gain relating to the data rate. A quick and simple RF model was developed
in order to assess the optimal combination of features and model structures, which is
used as a starting point for the development of the final models.
The ML model development process for DNNs and RFs were furthermore intro-
duced. The bias-variance trade-off is used in this regard in order to determine the
generalization capabilities of the developed models.
The mobile network measurements introduced in this chapter thus provide the
foundation on which the final predictive models are developed. These models how-
ever, have to be thoroughly explored in order to assess the generalizability of the
models based on different sets of hyperparameters.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5
Mobile network
performance
predictions
The ML models performing the mobile network performance predictions has to be
trained and tested on the mobile network measurements in order to determine which
model provides the best generalization. This model can then be used to predict the
data rates at the rest of the geographical area at DTU, proving the applicability of
ML model towards achieving MDT.
The results of the mobile network performance predictions are split into two sec-
tions. One section has been devoted to the dataset with geographical measurements,
and the other has been devoted to the same dataset without geographical measure-
ments. This split allows for an assessment of the optimal generalization of the data
rate across different sets of features.
Each section explores the generalization capabilities of three different models. The
RF, NN and NN with Bayesian approximation are all compared in terms of R2-score
and feature importances in order to assess their generalization capabilities. The hyper-
parameter tuning of the individual models will be discussed as an introduction prior
to examining the results of the mobile network performance predictions. The test
data used to carry out the mobile network performance predictions consist of 1000
measurements which account for approximately 8% of the total dataset.
5.1
Mobile network performance predictions with GPS
measurements
The GPS measurements showed a strong information gain relating to the data rate.
It is therefore expected that the GPS measurements will account for the majority of
the information gain in these model based on the observations noted in section 4.5.1.
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Mobile network performance predictions
5.1.1
RF data rate prediction including GPS measurements
The hyper parameters for the RF model was initially explored during the data explo-
ration process in order to assess the importance of each features prior to the actual
model development. The combination of hyper parameters for the RF models produc-
ing the model with the highest test score were explored using sklearns’s gridsearch
module. The gridsearch function considers the set of hyper parameters as a grid, thus
the name, and sequentially tries the different combinations of hyper parameters in
order to determine which combination of hyper parameters that produces the best
model. However, a shortcoming of gridsearch is that its decision of best model is
based solely on training data. This means that its decision of the best model, if given
a complex enough set of hyper parameters, is likely overfitted to the training data and
has a very poor accountability of the generalization. Whereas gridsearch is great for
the initial architectural investigation, the actual random forest regressors have been
implemented using Scikit Learns RandomForestRegressor module1 as it provides a
great environment for hyperparameter tuning in RF models.
It has through an iterative process, based on the starting point described in section
4.5.1, been found that a RF model containing 200 trees with a depth of 6 provides the
highest R2 score for the test data captured at DTU. Figure 5.1 shows the predicted
and measured data rates for the RF model with the associated error residual. The
predicted data rate is shown in orange whereas the measured data rate is shown in
blue. This model achieved an R2 score of 0.92 on the test data.
Figure 5.1: Top: Predicted (orange) and measured (blue) data rates for the RF model.
Bottom: Associated error. This model achieved an R2 score of 0.92 on the test data
Figure 5.1 also clearly shows the hard decision boundaries naturally occurring
in RF models. A smoothing (i.e. running average) filter has been applied to the
1https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.
RandomForestRegressor.html
==PAGE:85==
5.1 Mobile network performance predictions with GPS measurements
75
predictions in order to account for the slow varying fading in the data rate. A window
with a length of 80 samples has been used for the smoothing of this, and all subsequent
predictions. Figure 5.2 shows the smoothed version of the predictions in 5.1.
Figure 5.2: Smoothed version of 5.1. This model achieved an R2 score of 0.88 on the
test data
The smoothed version shown in figure 5.2 achieves an R2 score of 0.88 on the test
data. The R2-score apparently drops slightly after the smoothing has been applied.
This is likely caused by the slight increase in the mean of the error. The feature
importance of the RF model is shown in figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Feature importance for the RF model. The models induce a heavy weight
on GPS measurements
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Mobile network performance predictions
From figure 5.3 it can be seen that the RF model relies heavily on the GPS
measurements in order to predict the data rates. 82% of the basis for its decision
is based on those features alone. This is also to be expected based on the feature
investigation explored in section 4.5.1.
The high R2 scores on the test data indicates that the model has been fitted well to
the measurements. However, the model is expected to produce a poor generalization
beyond the route of measurements, given the small-scaled subset of data captured,
and the models high reliance on the GPS measurements.
This model would provide likely provide accurate predictions inside the coverage
zone of the test route. However, this model would also be very untrustworthy outside
the route at which the measurements were captured, since the RF models cannot
generalize beyond the training data.
5.1.2
DNN data rate prediction including GPS measurements
The training and implementation of the DNN was done with the open-source library
Tensorflow. Both mean squared error (MSE) and absolute squared error (ASE) error
function were used for the training of the model. The MSE error function was found
not only to result in faster training but also resulted in slightly lower validation er-
rors during the training phase, and have thus been used for training all subsequent
DNN’s.
Tensorflow furthermore provides various optimization algorithms for per-
forming SGD weight optimizations. Both RMSprop and Adam optimizer were tried
as they are popular optimization algorithms with momentum (i.e. a method that
helps accelerate SGD in the relevant direction and dampens oscillations). RMSprop
is characterized by dividing the learning rate by an exponentially decaying average
of squared gradients. Adam (adaptive moment estimation) is similar to RMSprop in
storing an exponentially decaying average of past squared gradients but also keeps an
exponentially decaying average of past gradients, similar to momentum. This means
that the Adam optimizer penalizes heavy momentum higher on flatter error surfaces.
The Adam optimizer was found to yield models with a lower MSE and are thus used
for optimization of all subsequent DNNs.
The initial architecture for the network was based off of [Thr+18] which uses a
two-layer feed forward DNN with a layer size of 40 for both layers, a dropout prob-
ability of 0.3 and ReLU activation functions for a similar purpose of predicting the
signal quality metrics. The model was trained for 150 epochs, taking a total training
time of 10 minutes. This model was found to produce a high bias error (i.e. underfit-
ting to the training data), so the regularization was relaxed by reducing the dropout
probability to 0.2. Figure 5.4 shows the training and validation loss during training.
The gap shown between the training and validation error seen in figure 5.4 might be
a coincidence, because of the smaller validation set.
Figure 5.5 shows the predicted and measured data rates for the DNN model with
the associated error residual. The predicted data rate is shown in orange whereas the
measured data-rate is shown in blue. This model achieved an R2 score of -57.32 on
==PAGE:87==
5.1 Mobile network performance predictions with GPS measurements
77
Figure 5.4: The training and validation error for the DNN model.
The dropout
is disabled during validation which causes the validation loss to be lower than the
training loss
the test data. The substantially lower R2 score, compared to that of the RF model,
is likely caused by RF model ability to fit directly to the targets through hard splits
on the input features, whereas neural networks are based on non-linear combinations
of input features. This however also means that the DNN is likely to be better at
generalizing beyond the data, given that the RF’s generalization is bound by the
minimum and maximum of the target(s).
Figure 5.5: Top: Predicted (orange) and measured (blue) data rates for the DNN
model. Bottom: Associated error. This model achieved an R2 score of -57.32 on the
test data
==PAGE:88==
78
5 Mobile network performance predictions
Figure 5.6 shows a high variability on the predicted data rates. A smoothing filter
has therefore also been applied to these predictions in order to account for the slow
varying fading in the data rate. A window with a length of 80 samples has been
used for the smoothing of this, and all subsequent predictions. Figure 5.6 shows the
smoothed version of the predictions in 5.5 The smoothed version shown in figure 5.6
achieves an R2 score of -50.28 on the test data. The R2-score for the DNN model
decreases slightly after the smoothing has been applied. This is caused by the shifting
of the mean of the error, which on average, have moved closer to zero. The feature
importances of the DNN model is shown in figure 5.7 From figure 5.7 it can be seen
that the DNN model relies heavily on the latitude measurement and distance metric
in order to predict the data rates. 61% of the basis for its prediction is based on those
features alone. Similar feature importances are also expected from the DNN, based
on the high information gain in the geographical measurements. The latitude likely
contains a higher information gain than the longitude due to the route being twice as
long in the latitudinal-direction (north-south) compared to the longitudinal-direction
(west-east).
The low R2 scores on the test data indicates that the model has achieved a mod-
est fit to the measurements. However, the DNN model is likely to provide a better
generalization beyond the route of measurements than the RF model given its higher
reliance on the distance feature.
The prevailing agreement of the feature importances among the DNN and RF
models indicates a trustworthy sanity check of the reliability of the predictions in the
two models, given that both models independently have come to the same conclusion.
Figure 5.6: Smoothed version of 5.5. This model achieved an R2 score of -50.28 on
the test data
==PAGE:89==
5.1 Mobile network performance predictions with GPS measurements
79
Figure 5.7: Feature importance for the DNN model. The models induce a heavy
weight on latitude measurements and distance metric
DNN data rate prediction with Bayesian approximation including
GPS measurements
The DNN models does not include a metric of uncertainty. This metric, however, can
be obtained by applying a Monte Carlo approach to the NN during test-time while
the dropout layers are active [Thr+18]. The posterior distribution of the Bayesian
approximation was based on a batch size of 1000 samples.
Figure 5.8: Top: Predicted (orange) and measured (blue) data rates for the DNN
model with dropout during testing. Bottom: Associated error. This model achieved
an R2 score of -30.61
==PAGE:90==
80
5 Mobile network performance predictions
The model shown in figure 5.8 is based on the same model as shown in figure 5.5
with the added uncertainty metric obtained through dropout. The model shown in
figure 5.8 achieves an R2 score of -30.61. It was found over several model iterations,
that the DNN models with and without Gaussian approaches, before smoothing, re-
sulted in similar means of the R2 score around -40, but with the Gaussian approaches
having a higher variance in the R2 score.
Figure 5.9: Smoothed version of 5.8. This model achieved an R2 score of -15.31 on
the test data
Figure 5.9 shows the smoothed version of the model in figure 5.8. Once again,
this model achieves a lower R2-score due to the shift of the mean.
This model is, despite its relatively precise predictions, very uncertain in its pre-
diction. This is likely due to the fact that the training data contains a small subset
of the variance that is actually present in the test data. The model has thus only
seen a small subset of the training data with a distribution similar to that of the test
data on which it bases the predictions.
The feature importances for the DNN model with Bayesian approximation are
shown in figure 5.10. These feature importance indicate that this DNN model pro-
vides a decent generalization of the date rate due to the varied importance distribution.
This indicates that the models hasn’t overfitted solely to the geographical features,
but generalized to the entire set of features.
==PAGE:91==
5.2 Mobile network performance predictions without GPS measurements
81
Figure 5.10: The DNN model provides trustworthy predictions and decently general-
izes when the Bayesian approximation is applied
The NN model with Bayesian approximation thus proves to provide the best
generalization capabilities among the models including the GPS measurements.
5.2
Mobile network performance predictions without
GPS measurements
The GPS measurements have clearly shown to provide a strong information gain relat-
ing to the data rate in the above mentioned models. This strong correlation, however,
presumably means that the model is memorizing the different datarates at the differ-
ent geographical positions rather than generalizing to the set of input features. The
models performances are therefore reassessed with a new input feature space exclud-
ing the geographical measurements. These models exhibits similar characteristics as
for the models developed with the GPS measurements so only the smoothed versions
of these models are shown.
These models, trained without the GPS measurements, are all basically duplicates
of their GPS-modelled counterparts with the only exception of the GPS measurements
being excluded from the dataset. The model architectures are practically identical
for both the RFs and DNNs.
5.2.1
RF data rate prediction excluding GPS measurements
Figure 5.11 shows the predicted and measured data rates for the RF model with the
associated error residual excluding the GPS measurements. The predicted data rate
==PAGE:92==
82
5 Mobile network performance predictions
is shown in orange whereas the measured data-rate is shown in blue. This model
achieved an R2 score of -31.91 on the test data. The effects of the exclusion of the
geographical measurements is clearly seen in figure 5.11, where the performance of the
models predictability drops substantially compared to the model in figure 5.2. This
performance decline is also evident in the heavy drop in the R2 score. The feature
importance of the RF model trained without the GPS measurements is shown in figure
5.12. The RF model unsurprisingly induces a strong importances on the distance
metric as it also proved to contain a high information gain relating to the data rate.
Figure 5.12: Heavy weight on distance metric
Figure 5.11: Top: Smoothed version of the predicted (orange) and measured (blue)
data rates for the RF model excluding the GPS measurements. Bottom: Associated
error. This model achieved an R2-score of -31.91 on the test data
==PAGE:93==
5.2 Mobile network performance predictions without GPS measurements
83
It is important to note that this model is likely to provide a better generalization
than the one excluding the GPS measurements, despite its drop in R2-score, solely
due to the fact that it has not fitted purely to the GPS measurements.
This model is likely to provide proper predictions within the maximum measured
distance to the BS. However, this RF model cannot reasonably provide trustworthy
predictions outside this range, as with the other RF model. This is due to the fact
that RF models are incapable of inferring a mapping beyond what’s captured in the
training data.
5.2.2
DNN data rate prediction excluding GPS measurements
The data rate predictions for the DNN excluding GPS measurements is likely to be
more more inaccurate in its predictions. However, this model is also likely to provide a
better generalization due to the impossibility of overfitting to the GPS measurements.
The training and validation loss for this DNN model is shown in figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13: The training and validation error for the DNN model without GPS
measurements. The dropout is disabled during validation which causes the validation
loss to be lower than the training loss
The gap between the training and validation error, rather interestingly, have short-
ened with the exclusion of the GPS measurements for the DNN model. This indicates
that model provides a better generalization of the data rate than the model including
the GPS measurements. Figure 5.14 shows the predicted and measured data rates for
the DNN model with the associated error residual excluding the GPS measurements.
The predicted data rate is shown in orange whereas the measured data-rate is shown
in blue. This model achieved an R2-score of -235.93 on the test data.
==PAGE:94==
84
5 Mobile network performance predictions
Figure 5.14: Top: Smoothed version of the predicted (orange) and measured (blue)
data rates for the DNN model excluding the GPS measurements. Bottom: Associated
error. This model achieved an R2-score of -235.93 on the test data
The model shown in figure 5.14 performs significantly poorer, in terms of the
R2 score, than its GPS-included counterpart, while achieving similar generalization
capabilities on the test route due to its similar dependence across the set of features,
as shown in figure 5.15.
Figure 5.15: Feature importance for the model shown in 5.14
The feature importances shown in figure 5.15 for the DNN in figure 5.14 are
broadly spread across the entire set of features. Surprisingly, the distance metric only
ranks six in terms of most important feature despite proving to be an information
rich feature. This is once again a sign of the DNN model providing an favorable
==PAGE:95==
5.2 Mobile network performance predictions without GPS measurements
85
generalization, beyond the training data, and thus beyond the route of measurements.
However, this DNN model has shown to produce a relatively high prediction error
compared with the other models.
DNN data rate prediction with Bayesian approximation excluding
GPS measurements
The Bayesian approximation is applied once again on the DNN model of the data
rate in order to estimate the uncertainty involved with the predictions when exclud-
ing the GPS measurements. The model shown in figure 5.16 is based on the same
model as shown in figure 5.14 with the added uncertainty metric obtained through
dropout. The model shown in figure 5.16 achieves an R2 score of -210.69. The data
rate predictions for the model trained without the GPS measurements exhibits sim-
ilar characteristics as the model trained with the GPS measurements. This model,
however, without the GPS measurements, achieves slightly more accurate predictions
of the data rate.
Figure 5.16: Top: Smoothed version of the predicted (orange) and measured (blue)
data rates for the DNN model with Bayesian approximation excluding the GPS mea-
surements. Bottom: Associated error. This model achieved an R2 of -210.69
The feature importances associated with this model are shown in figure 5.17.
These feature importances appear to be slightly more reliable than those for the model
with the GPS measurements, due to the wider spread of the feature importances This
is a strong indication of the DNN model providing a trustworthy generalization.
==PAGE:96==
86
5 Mobile network performance predictions
Figure 5.17: Feature importance for the model shown in 5.16
This DNN model advantageously bases its prediction foundation across the entire
feature set. However, these models, without GPS measurements may produce slightly
better generalizing models, but at the cost of significantly poorer accuracy in its data
rate predictions.
It is therefore justifiable to consider the NN model with Bayesian approximation
including the GPS measurements as the best performing model in terms of its accu-
racy and generalization capabilities.
5.3
Chapter summary
Both DNN and RF models have been tested and compared in order to determine
which type of model that produces the best generalization of the data rates. Each
model type was furthermore trained on two different data sets, with and without GPS
measurements, in order to assess the influence of these features on the models ability
to generalize.
The GPS measurements contained a very high information gain relating to the
data rates. The RF model is capable of achieving near perfect predictions of the data
rate. This model, however, relied heavily on the GPS features in order to perform its
predictions. This means that this model would generalize insufficiently beyond the
test route. Similar results were obtained for the DNN models which, despite achieving
lower scores, also relied heavily on the latitude measurements and distance metric,
meaning it too would generalize poorly beyond the test route. The DNN model with
Bayesian approximation, however, proved to provide a properly generalizing model
while also providing decent accuracy in its predictions.
The GPS features induced what appeared to be a high variance error in the predic-
tions, so another sequence of modelling was therefore carried out with these features
==PAGE:97==
5.3 Chapter summary
87
excluded. The RF models this time induced, as expected, a high reliance on the dis-
tance metric, given its high information gain. The absence of the GPS features led to
the RF model achieving poorer data rate predictions, but at the reward of improved
generalization, given its notable reliance on the distance metric.
The DNN models also seemed to achieve a better generalization, at the cost of
poorer data rate predictions. This model induced a relatively low dependence on the
distance metric, despite its high information gain. This model based its predictions
widely across the entire set of features, indicating that the model had achieved a sat-
isfactory generalization. Lastly, the generalization capabilities of this DNN model im-
proved even further when the Bayesian approximation was introduced to estimate the
model uncertainty. However, the NN models excluding the GPS measurements pro-
vided significantly poorer predictive capabilities, than the NN model with Bayesian
approximation including the GPS measurements.
It can therefore be determined, based on these results, that the NN model with
Bayesian approximation including the GPS measurements served as the best perform-
ing model in terms of its prediction accuracy and generalization capabilities. This
model will be referred to as the final model throughout the rest of this thesis.
==PAGE:98==
88
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
The proposed solution derived in this thesis is in its essence based upon the work
done in [Thr+18].
Model performances
The proposed solution in this thesis only required drive test measurements in order to
obtain the data required for its predictions. This data is considered relatively easy to
obtain compared to methods utilizing building information. The model is also fairly
simple to obtain, as it only takes
10 minutes of training on a 2015 MacBook Pro,
which is very cheap compared to traditional ray-tracing solutions.
Data limitations
The biggest complication regarding the generalization is caused by the lack of test-
related target measurements in the training data. Figure 6.1 depicts the data rate
of the entire dataset and how it has been split into training (blue) and test (orange)
data. The figure clearly shows that it is only a limited part of the training data
containing data rate measurements similar to that of the test data. The first 6000
data rate measurements in the training set are notably lower than those in the test
set, and therefore do not provide any information regarding the measurements in the
test set. The rapid increase in the measured data rate is likely caused by load shifts
in the mobile network during the time of the measurements. A clear illustration of
the correlation between network load and network data rate can be found in [PM16].
A mobile network cell only has a limited amount of network resources available that
have to be shared among the UEs inside its coverage zone. More UEs will therefore
have to share the available network resources, effectively reducing the individual UEs
data rates.
The network load is highly dependent on time and geographical regions.
The
time of the day and the time of the year also appear to be vastly important features
relating to the data rate. The collection of the two datasets varied both regarding
to the time of the day and the time of the year. As a result, the measured data
rate in the first dataset varied between 3 and 5 Mbit/s, whereas it varied between
8 and 11 Mbit/s in the second dataset. This variation in the data rate is explained
==PAGE:100==
90
6 Discussion
Figure 6.1: Distribution of train and test data in the total data set
with the differences in the network loads, considering that the measurements were
captured during the holidays and lunchtimes, respectively. Two time-related features
could therefore ideally be added to the set of features. The week of the year is likely
correlated with the network load, given that some geographical areas, such as DTU,
will be unoccupied during holidays, thus reducing the network load. The hour of
the day could furthermore be added too, given the spike in traffic during at different
geographical areas at different times of the day, and especially the significant drop at
night. The mobile network at DTU is likely going to be heavier loaded during the
8 to 17 window, given the number of people present at DTU in that time-window.
In other words, the geographical network load varies drastically throughout the day,
and could beneficially be added to the feature set in order to improve the models
generalizability.
Model generalizability
The results seem to show that there is an inverse relationship between the models
accuracies on the test data and their ability to generalize beyond the route of mea-
surements. The models achieving the highest performance prediction accuracies are
also the ones to provide the lowest generalizability, whereas the models achieving the
lowest performance prediction accuracies are also seemingly the ones to provide the
highest generalizability beyond the route at which the measurements were captured.
This inverse relationship thus introduces a new trade-off between the model’s ac-
curacy and the model’s generalizability. Models with a higher generalizability are
usually preferred, however, the model’s accuracy should also be taken into consider-
ation. Properly generalizing models are essentially useless if they provide inaccurate
data rate predictions.
A model may be able to provide highly accurate performance predictions, such
as the RF model with GPS measurements, but likewise also appear to be incapable
==PAGE:101==
6 Discussion
91
of generalizing beyond the route. On the other hand, a model may also prove to be
capable of generalizing well beyond the route, like the DNN without GPS measure-
ments, but at the cost of inaccurate performance predictability.
The RF and NN models, however, have still both yielded sufficient results dis-
playing their capabilities of generalizing to the network in the specific scenario (i.e.
specific geographical area and time). The predictive performances and model uncer-
tainties have been verified on the test data based on real measurements. The next
step towards improving the generalizability of the models would be to reiterate the
model development process based on an extended dataset containing data from mul-
tiple scenarios.
The current models explored in this thesis were very sensitive due to the limited
amount of scenarios captured in the data. The final model shown in the results chap-
ter was trained on measurements captured during the holiday at DTU, meaning few
people were around campus, and the network thus experienced a lower load. The
measurements for the first dataset were captured on a weekday during lunch, where
the network load was found as being much higher. The final model would provide
inaccurate data rate predictions on this data set since these datarates are outside the
range of those used for testing.
The current models are displaying difficulties in generalizing beyond the specific
scenario, especially when the GPS measurements are included, except for the final
model. This means that these models will be likely to provide inaccurate predictions
beyond the geographical area of DTU at different times. More data is thus required
to improve the generalizability of the models, as noted in the previous subsection.
Other predictive ML methods
The data rate in the mobile network will naturally contain a time-related dependency,
meaning that the current measurement of the data rate will depend on the previous
measurement of the data rate. In other words, the current measurement will likely be
very close to the previous. Hidden Markov Models (HMM) provide an ideal structure
for modelling this time-dependency, through its state-dependency modelling. This
state modelling has the potential to provide a decently generalizing regression model
for the performance predictions. The HMM furthermore provides a natural element
of uncertainty through its state-transition probabilities. Another ideal method is the
Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) model, which is a so-called kernel method that
utilizes kernel functions to perform regression. These kernels basically model the sim-
ilarity between two inputs, which can be used to perform the predictions based on the
similarity between new and observed data. The kernels allow for the manipulation of
the feature space without evaluating the basis functions as done for the NN models.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM, essen-
tially just an advanced RNN) models could also prove to be viable models due to their
incorporation of attention mechanisms. These mechanisms allow adjacent predictions
to be dependent on previous activations of the neurons in the network, which could
==PAGE:102==
92
6 Discussion
help improve the predictability of the models.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to investigate the use of ML techniques in order per-
form performance predictions in the mobile network with a decent generalizability. It
has experimentally been proved that ML methods such as DNNs and RFs are capable
of performing data rate predictions. These models have been developed based on data
from LTE networks, relying only on signal quality metrics and GPS measurements.
A minimization of the required drive tests are thus achievable for LTE networks with
these data rate predictions. This method serves as a proof-of-concept, proving the
applicability of deep learning usage in mobile communication for MDT, including 5G
mobile networks. However, it was found that the ML models need more data, prefer-
ably from different scenarios, in order to provide sufficiently generalizing performance
predictions. The final model is capable of providing trustworthy predictions in one
single scenario. These results do however prove the concept of achieving MDT by
using ML.
The key technologies enabling 5G mobile networks have been introduced, which
are required in order to alleviate the need for more capacity. These technologies will
fundamentally change the architecture of the network. This makes classical methods
for predicting the performance inadequate, thus opening the possibility of applying
ML methods for this purpose.
Supervised learning algorithms prove to provide the obvious set of tools, such as
RF and NN models, capable of predicting the performance since it is measured in
terms of the downlink throughput. The underlying theory supporting these models
has been thoroughly described in order to assess their applicability for predicting the
throughput. Cross-model feature importance, model uncertainty and accuracy mea-
sure has furthermore been introduced in order to allow for a fair comparison between
the individual models generalizability.
A route was selected for the capturing of the mobile network measurements cov-
ering roughly 2.5 km in the geographical area of DTU. The relatively small route was
selected, allowing all the measurements to be captured from the same BS. These mea-
surements have undergone a preprocessing sequence in order to become applicable in
ML models. The features were explored in order to determine their correlation with
the data rate, from which it was found that the geographical features (i.e. latitude,
longitude and distance to BS) were very closely correlated to data rate for the spe-
cific data set. The starting point for the model-development process was investigated
along with the cyclic hyper-parameter tuning procedure.
==PAGE:104==
94
7 Conclusion
It has through the results been shown that the models are capable of predicting
the downlink data rate based on GPS and signal quality metrics. The results showed
that the RF model was very accurate and certain in its predictions of the data rate,
but only for the measurements along the test route. The model has induced a high re-
liance on the GPS measurements, indicating that it had memorized the datarates for
the specific positions, rather than generalizing to the feature set. Similar results were
found in the DNN model which also relied heavily on the latitude measurement and
distance metric for its predictions. It could be argued that the DNN model provides
a slightly better generalization due to its wider spread decision foundation (i.e. wider
spread feature importances). The same DNN model with Bayesian approximation
however, lead to a trustworthy generalization while also providing relatively accurate
data rate predictions. This model was found to provide the best trade-off between
prediction accuracy and generalizability beyond the route of measurements.
The modelling procedures were carried out one more time with the GPS mea-
surements excluded from the datasets.
This time, The RF model experienced a
significant drop in the accuracy of its predictability of the data rate along with an
increased uncertainty in its predictions. This was also expected due to the high cor-
relation between the GPS measurements and data rate. The decision foundation for
the RF model, however, were still based primarily on the distance metric, making
it likely to memorize the correlation between the distance and the data rate, rather
than generalizing to the new set of features.
The DNN models, on the other hand, seems to provide a descent generalization.
However, the exclusion of the GPS measurements also resulted in a significant drop
in the models prediction accuracy. The Bayesian approximation of this DNN mod-
els uncertainty provided what appeared to be an even better generalization with a
reasonable uncertainty in its predictions. However, these NN models without GPS
measurements couldn’t justifiably be selected over the NN model with GPS measure-
ments and Bayesian approximation as the final model due to their higher data rate
prediction errors. The NN model with GPS measurements and Bayesian approxima-
tion therefor selected as the final model.
The model uncertainties can furthermore be used to inform the operators of where
more drive tests are required. Geographical areas in which the model produces a high
uncertainty indicates that the model is vague in its predictions, thus indicating the
areas in which additional drive tests preferably should be carried out.
Finally, it has been shown that accurate predictions of the LTE data rate are
achievable from a reduced set of measurements, offering a reduction in the needed
drive testing.
This approach is also applicable in 5G mobile networks, which are
expected to become densely connected, thus increasing the advantage of applying DL
for drive test minimization. Figure 7.1 shows the prediction, error and uncertainty
associated with the final model, respectively. Notice that the uncertainty increases
as the measurements are captured further away from the BS.
==PAGE:105==
7.1 Future work
95
Figure 7.1: The three maps shows the resulting data rate prediction, error and un-
certainty, respectively, associated with the final model
7.1
Future work
A performance evaluation of the predictive ML methods mentioned in the discus-
sion could prove to provide accurately predicting models, allowing for more precise
throughput estimates and less required drive testing.
However, the most prosperous future work lies with the data.
More data, es-
pecially from multiple different regions, would provide the models with a stronger
foundation for mapping input features to target variables, thus improving the models
predictability. The addition of more time-related featured would also help improve
the models predictability, while also improving the models ability to generalize, due
to the time-varying shifts in the throughput.
Lastly, it is clear from the different measurements that the network throughput,
and thus the load, varies drastically throughout the day and year. The inclusion of
time-related features would therefore also allow for the prediction of network load in
addition to the throughput.
==PAGE:106==
96
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX A
Model- and feature
selection for the first
data set
This measurements for this dataset were also taken at geographical area of DTU.
However, the measurements were carried out on a different day and at a different
time of the day. The measurements in the first data set were taken during the winters
holiday, meaning that there was a very low load on the network. The measurements
for the first dataset however, were taken on a regular day during lunch, where the
students didn’t have classes, so the network load was higher, as noted in the data
rate, which averaged approximately 3350 kbit/s. Figure A.1 shows the measured and
predicted data rate.
A.1
Without geographical features
Figure A.2 shows the feature importances associated with the model in A.1, which
shows the expected exponentially decaying information gain from the features.
Figure A.1: Data rate prediction for the first data set. The model obtains an R2
score of 0.93. The model is slightly overfit. It has 50 trees with a depth of 7.
==PAGE:108==
98
A Model- and feature selection for the first data set
Figure A.2: Feature importances for the regression tree models without the geograph-
ical features.
Figure A.3 shows the R2 test scores for the different model structures and feature
combinations.
Rather interestingly, there appears to be 4 (or 6) performance regions in A.3. The
blue region is a clear underfit, in which to model doesn’t capture the underlying
function in the data, whereas the light-brown regions also still appears to underfit,
but at a lower level. The the dark red region appears to overfit to noise in the data
and thus memorizes the patterns rather than generalizing.
The final regions, the
orange ones, appears to provide the best generalization. More specifically, a model
with 25 trees having a depth of 5 trained with a learning rate of 0.2 and using only
the 10 most important features will, based on this analysis, provide the best model.
A.2
Model performance
A model with an identical architecture to the final model in trained on the second
data set was also trained on the first data set. Figure A.4 shows predictions from
the model, which achieved an R2 score of -3.19. This dataset contained significantly
==PAGE:109==
A.2 Model performance
99
Figure A.3: Test-score comparison for the different combinations of model structures and features, excluding the geo-
graphical features
==PAGE:110==
100
A Model- and feature selection for the first data set
more data-points with datarates similar to that of the test-set, providing the model
with a strong foundation for its prediction, thus resulting in the improved accuracy.
Figure A.4: Smoothed version of the predicted and measured data rates for the DNN
with Bayesian approximation trained on the first data set. This model achieved an
R2 score of -3.19
The feature importances associated with this model are shown in figure A.5.
Figure A.5: Feature importances for the model shown in A.4
These feature importances indicates that the model fitted properly to the training
data, providing a descent generalization.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[3GP16]
3GPP. Study on downlink multiuser superposition transmission (must)
for LTE (release 13). Technical report 3GPP TR 36.859 V13.0.0. 2016.
url: https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/Specifications/
SpecificationDetails.aspx?specificationId=2912.
[3GP17]
3GPP. Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Ac- cess (E-UTRA); Physical
layer procedures (Release 14). Technical report TS 36.213 V14.4.0. 2017.
[3GP18a]
3GPP. Radio measurement collection for Minimization of Drive Tests
(MDT); (Release 15). Technical report ETSI TS 137 320 V15.0.0. Avail-
able: https://www.etsi.org/standards-search. 2018.
[3GP18b]
3GPP. Scenarios and requirements for small cell enhancements for E-
UTRA and E-UTRAN. Technical report 36.932 V15.0.0. 2018.
[Ald+18]
Mahmoud Aldababsa et al. “A Tutorial on Nonorthogonal Multiple Ac-
cess for 5G and Beyond”. In: Wireless Communications and Mobile Com-
puting (2018). url: https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/9713450.
[Alt+10]
André Altmann et al. “Permutation importance: a corrected feature im-
portance measure”. In: Bioinformatics 26 (2010), pages 1340–1347.
[Ass15]
5G Infrastructure Association. The 5G Infrastructure Public Private Part-
nership: the next generation of communication networks and services.
Accessed: 06-11-2018. 2015. url: https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2015/02/5G-Vision-Brochure-v1.pdf.
[Bis06]
Christopher M Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer,
2006. isbn: 978-1-4939-3843-8.
[Bjø18a]
Steinar Bjørnstad. 5G Mobile fronthaul transport: PON, OTN, Ethernet
or Flex-E? - Has the time come? Accessed: 05-11-2018. 2018. url: https:
//bit.ly/2Otgmyi.
[Bjø18b]
Steinar Bjørnstad. What is preferable access technology in 5G fronthaul
and backhaul? Some thoughts. Accessed: 05-11-2018. 2018. url: https:
//bit.ly/2DnKc6s.
[Boc+15]
Federico Boccardi et al. “Five disruptive technology directions for 5G”.
In: IEEE Communications Magazine (2015), pages 74–80. url: https:
//dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/cm/cm52.html%5C%7b%5C%5c.
==PAGE:112==
102
Bibliography
[Chi+16]
I Chih-Lin et al. 5G: Rethink mobile communications for 2020+. Vol-
ume 374. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathemat-
ical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 2016.
[Cis17]
Cisco Systems. Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic
Forecast Update. Cisco Systems, 2017.
[Cla15]
Kristoffer Gordon Clausen. “mmWaves for 5G mobile communication: An
investigation of the potential for mmWaves as an en-abler for 5G cellu-
lar networks”. Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of Denmark,
2015.
[CW17]
K. Chang and R. P. Wicaksono. “Estimation of network load and down-
link throughput using RF scanner data for LTE networks”. In: 2017
International Symposium on Performance Evaluation of Computer and
Telecommunication Systems (SPECTS). July 2017, pages 1–8.
[Deh+14]
Cedric Dehos et al. “Millimeter-wave access and backhauling: the solution
to the exponential data traffic increase in 5G mobile communications
systems?” In: IEEE Communications Magazine 52.9 (2014), pages 88–
95.
[Den+17]
Li Deng et al. Ask the AI experts: What’s driving today’s progress in
AI? Edited by McKinsey & Company. Accessed: 27-11-2018. 2017. url:
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-analytics/
our-insights/ask-the-ai-experts-whats-driving-todays-progress-
in-ai.
[Din+16]
Zhiguo Ding et al. “Application of Non-orthogonal Multiple Access in
LTE and 5G Networks”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine (2016). url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.08610v2.
[Din+17]
Zhiguo Ding et al. “A Survey on Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access for
5G Networks: Research Challenges and Future Trends”. In: IEEE JSAC
(2017). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05347v1.
[Eri16]
Ericsson. 5G radio access. Cisco Systems, 2016. url: https : / / www .
ericsson.com/assets/local/publications/white-papers/wp-5g.
pdf.
[EXF]
EXFO. Baseband Unit. Accessed: 05-11-2018. url: https://www.exfo.
com/en/resources/glossary/baseband-unit/.
[Gao+15]
Zhen Gao et al. “MmWave massive-MIMO-based wireless backhaul for
the 5G ultra-dense network”. In: IEEE Wireless Communications 22.5
(2015), pages 13–21.
[GG16]
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Dropout as a Bayesian Approxima-
tion: Representing Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning”. In: Proceedings
of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning. Edited by
Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger. Volume 48. PMLR, 2016,
pages 1050–1059.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
103
[Han+15]
Shuangfeng Han et al. “Large-Scale Antenna Systems with Hybrid Analog
and Digital Beamforming for Millimeter Wave 5G”. In: IEEE Communi-
cations Magazine 53.1 (2015), pages 186–194.
[HB15]
Kenichi Higuchi and Anass Benjebbour. “Non-orthogonal access with suc-
cessive interference cancellation for future radio access”. In: IEICE Trans-
actions (2015).
[Ins10]
China Mobile Research Institute. C-RAN International Workshop ”the
1st C-RAN International Workshop”. Accessed: 27-11-2018. 2010. url:
http://labs.chinamobile.com/focus/C-RAN.
[Int17]
National Intruments. 5G Massive MIMO Testbed: From Theory to Reality.
Accessed: 09-11-2018. 2017. url: http://www.ni.com/white-paper/
52382/en/.
[ITU18]
ITU. ITU Towards ”IMT for 2020 and Beyond”. ITU, 2018. url: https:
//www.itu.int/en/ITU-R/study-groups/rsg5/rwp5d/imt-2020/
Pages/default.aspx.
[Jer01]
Robert Tibshirani Jerome Friedman Trevor Hastie. The elements of statisit-
cal learning. Volume 1. Springer, 2001.
[Ji+16]
Hyoungju Ji et al. “Overview of Full-Dimension MIMO in LTE-Advanced
Pro”. In: IEEE (2016). url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1601.00019.pdf.
[Mar18]
Andrea Marcano. “Capacity Dimensioning for 5G Mobile Heterogeneous
Networks”. PhD thesis. Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of
Denmark, 2018.
[MC16]
Andrea S. Marcano and Henrik L. Christiansen. “Macro Cell Assisted
Cell Discovery Method for 5G Mobile Networks”. In: IEEE (2016).
[MC18]
Andrea S. Marcano and Henrik L. Christiansen. “Impact of NOMA on
Network Capacity Dimensionin for 5G HetNets”. In: IEEE Access (2018).
[Mia+16]
Guowang Miao et al. Fundamentals of Mobile Data Networks. Cambridge
University Press, 2016. isbn: 1107143217.
[Mit97]
Tom M. Mitchell. Machine Learning. McGraw-Hill series in computer
science, 1997. isbn: 0070428077.
[Mus+16]
Hafiz Atta Ul Mustafa et al. “Separation Framework: An Enabler for
Cooperative and D2D Communication for Future 5G Networks”. In: IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials 18.1 (2016), pages 419–445.
[OS18]
Jose Armando Oviedo and Hamid R. Sadjadpour. “On the Power Alloca-
tion Limits for Downlink Multi-user NOMA with QoS”. In: CoRR (2018).
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.06333.
[OZS10]
E. Ostlin, H. Zepernick, and H. Suzuki. “Macrocell Path-Loss Prediction
Using Artificial Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology 59.6 (July 2010), pages 2735–2747. issn: 0018-9545. doi: 10.
1109/TVT.2010.2050502.
==PAGE:114==
104
Bibliography
[PM16]
Laura Pierucci and Davide Micheli. “A neural network for quality of
experience estimation in mobile communications”. In: IEEE (2016).
[Pyl99]
Dorian Pyle. Data Preparation for Data Mining. 1st. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., 1999. isbn: 1558605290, 9781558605299.
[Qua17]
Qualcomm. “Mobilizing 5G NR Millimeter Wave: Network Coverage Sim-
ulation Studies for Global Cities”. In: Qualcomm Technologies Inc. (2017).
[Rap+14]
T. S. Rappaport et al. Millimeter Wave - Wireless Communications. Pren-
tice Hall, 2014. isbn: 9780132173636.
[Rod15]
Jonathan Rodriguez. Fundamentals of 5G Mobile Networks. Wiley, 2015.
isbn: 978-1-118-86752-5.
[Sai+13]
Yuya Saito et al. “Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access (NOMA) for Cellular
Future Radio Access”. In: IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (2013).
url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6692652.
[Sal16]
Sana Salous. “COST IC1004 White Paper on Channel Measurements
and Modeling for 5G Networks in the Frequency Bands above 6 GHz”.
In: COST IC1004 (2016).
[Sam59]
Arthur L. Samuel. “Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game
of Checkers”. In: IBM Journal of Research and Development (1959),
pages 210–229. issn: 0018-8646. doi: 10.1147/rd.33.0210.
[Sor+18]
Beatriz Soret et al. “Interference Coordination for 5G New Radio”. In:
(2018). issn: 1536-1284.
[Sri+14]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural
Networks from Overfitting”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research
15 (2014), pages 1929–1958. url: http : / / jmlr . org / papers / v15 /
srivastava14a.html.
[Thr+18]
Jakob Thrane et al. “Drive test minimization using Deep Learning with
Bayesian approximation”. In: (2018).
[Wei+14]
Lili Wei et al. “Key Elements to Enable Millimeter Wave Communica-
tions for 5G Wireless Systems”. In: IEEE Wireless Communications 21.6
(2014), pages 136–143.
[WM14]
Jeanette Wannstrom and Keith Mallinson. Heterogeneous Networks in
LTE. Edited by 3GPP. Accessed: 02-11-2018. 2014. url: http://www.
3gpp.org/technologies/keywords-acronyms/1576-hetnet.
[Won+17]
Vincent W. S. Wong et al. Key Technologies for 5G Wireless Systems.
Cambridge University Press, 2017. isbn: 9781316771655.
[Zha+18]
Chuanting Zhang et al. “Citywide Cellular Traffic Prediction Based on
Densely Connected Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Commu-
nications Letters 22 (2018), pages 1656–1659.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
105
[ZPH18]
Chaoyun Zhang, Paul Patras, and Hamed Haddadi. “Deep learning in Mo-
bile and Wireless Networking: A Survey”. In: IEEE (2018). url: %5Curl%
7Bhttps://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.04311.pdf%7D.
==PAGE:116==
