==PAGE:1==
Optimizing and Managing BIM
Coordination Workﬂow
A case study of a high-rise building project from contractor’s
perspective
Master’s Thesis, February 2019
Nikoleta Kolitsopoulou-Maridaki
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
NIKOLETA KOLITSOPOULOU-MARIDAKI
Optimizing and Managing BIM
Coordination Workﬂow
A case study of a high-rise building project from
contractor’s perspective
Master’s Thesis, February 2019
Supervisors:
Flemming Vestergaard, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Ole Berard, Industry Supervisor
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2018
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Optimizing and Managing BIM Coordination Workﬂow
This report was prepared by:
Nikoleta Kolitsopoulou-Maridaki
Supervisors:
Flemming Vestergaard, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Ole Berard, Industry Supervisor
DTU Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
September 2018- February 2019
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Civil Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Mas-
ter of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The project
was carried out from 27th of August 2018 to 17th of February 2019 and it is credited to
30 ECTS points. The project was performed in collaboration with a construction com-
pany.
First of all, I would like to thank my main supervisor, Flemming Vestergaard, Profes-
sor at the Civil Engineering Department of DTU, and my co-supervisor Ole Berards for
their support, time and valuable guidance provided throughout this Project Thesis.
Additionally, I would like to express my appreciation to the people working at the
construction company for spending time through interviews and emails exchanged, shar-
ing their knowledge and experiences with me as well as contributing to my research.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends for their support and encourage
during the execution of this Thesis.
Kgs. Lyngby February 17, 2019
Nikoleta Kolitsopoulou-Maridaki (s162461)
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
The smooth changeover from design to construction is a fundamental part of construction
projects. The main challenge of this process is the design changes during the construction
phase. For this reason, the purpose of this Master Thesis is to analyze ways which could
ensure that the detailed design of a construction project could lead to a buildable concept
focusing on the coordination between the main contractor and the rest stakeholders. The
contribution of Building Information Modeling aiming the avoidance of conﬂicts on site,
prevention of time delays and cost overruns, enhancement of information transparency
and quality assurance is investigated.
The present Thesis researches a single case study, which refers to on an on-going
construction project approaching it from the contractor’s point of view. All data is pro-
vided by the conduction of two interviews and exchange of emails. The limitations that
were mentioned during the interviews are the unfortunate decision-making, insufﬁcient
transmission and transparency of information ﬂow, the inefﬁcient initial planning and the
partial manual estimation of cost.
Taking into consideration the aforementioned data, eventual countermeasures based
on BIM implementation are discussed in order to minimize the risk of changes on site.
The proposed concept suggests the application of Integrated Design Project model by
exploiting to the maximum the capabilities of BIM, the proper use of the collaboration
platform and the 5D model, as well as the involvement of professionals relevant to this
case for an efﬁcient project planning and management.
iii
==PAGE:10==
Table of Content
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vii
Nomenclature
ix
1
Introduction and hypothesis
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Method of Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Structure of Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
I
Theoretical Framework
7
2
Building Information Modelling
9
2.1
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Level of Development (LOD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Levels of Maturity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Contractors
15
3.1
BIM for contractors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Main types of BIM process ﬂow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Main BIM beneﬁts for contractors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Project Management
21
4.1
Deﬁnition of Project Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Scheduling Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
iv
==PAGE:11==
TABLE OF CONTENT
v
4.3
Stakeholder Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Dependent Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Planning of construction projects
27
5.1
Project Delivery Strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Types of construction scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
II Research Framework
33
6
Case Study
35
6.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
IIIContribution
43
7
Discussion
45
7.1
Identiﬁed Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2
Proposal-Suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8
Conclusion
59
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.2
Further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Bibliography
63
Appendices
69
A Interviews
71
A.1 Strategies for the interviews guides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.2 Interview guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
==PAGE:12==
List of Figures
1.1
Structure of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Chapters presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
Dimensions of BIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Different Level of Development [BIMForum, 2018] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Levels of Maturity 2.3 [PAS, 2013] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Traditional BIM process ﬂow [Eastman et al., 2008] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Integrated BIM process ﬂow [Eastman et al., 2008] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Shared project model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
BIM Beneﬁts for the contractors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1
Project delivery strategies comparison [Eastman et al., 2008] . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Traditional, phased and fast-track concepts [Fazio et al., 1988] . . . . . . . .
31
6.1
Presentation of the project’s phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
BIM Work-ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.1
Considered project members for the analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Integrating exchange knowledge [Fischer and Khanzode, 2017] . . . . . . . .
50
7.3
Integrated Design Project [Hardin and McCool, 2015] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.4
Decision-making Process Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.5
MacLeamy Curve [Hardin and McCool, 2015] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.6
The comparison between BIM Coordinator [Jacobsson, 2018] and BIM Man-
ager [Tulke and Schumann, 2018]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
vi
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
6.1
Stakeholders of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.1
Identiﬁed challenges and the contribution of the relevant body
. . . . . . . .
57
vii
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
2D
Two Dimensions, page 13
3D
Three Dimensions, page 10
4D
Four Dimensions, page 10
5D
Five Dimensions, page 10
6D
Six Dimensions, page 10
7D
Seven Dimensions, page 10
AEC
Architecture, Engineering and Construction, page 1
BIM
Building Information Modeling, page 1
DB
Design-Build, page 27
DBB
Design-Bid-Build, page 27
HVAC Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning, page 16
IPD
Integrated Design Project, page 27
IT
Information technology, page 55
LOD
Level of Development, page 11
MEP
Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing, page 2
ix
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction and hypothesis
1.1
Introduction
”χειϱ χε´ιϱα ν´ιπτει”, M ´ενανδϱos, 4os αι´ων π.X.
"One hand laves the other" is the accurate meaning of the aforementioned ancient
Greek phrase. This apothegm was said by the Ancient Greek poet, Menandros. This
phrase means that the members of a team should help and support each other in order to
have the desired result. This standpoint applies not only to interpersonal relationships in
every-day life but also to the coexistence of participants involved in a construction project.
Construction projects need collaboration of many different disciplines. For this rea-
son, it is required that the relationships are built on trust and synergy between stakehold-
ers. Moreover, a deﬁned workﬂow should be followed, in order for a sufﬁcient result to
be achieved. Every step has to rely on the previous one and as a consequence all the team
members are dependent on each other.
Building Information Modeling (BIM) is a pioneering method which enhances the
whole Architectural, Engineering and Construction (A/E/C) Industry. BIM is a sequence
of procedures that provides a new collaborative way of working. It is structured to opti-
mize all stages of a building’s design, construction, and life-cycle. Moreover, BIM can be
used also as an effective communication tool and its full utilization can improve produc-
tivity and quality of the project. In that way all stakeholders can streamline the processes
of managing and minimizing conﬂicts during the pre-construction phase, in order to pre-
vent issues on site during construction.
1
==PAGE:18==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND HYPOTHESIS
1.2
Scope of Thesis
This research focuses on how to manage the BIM workﬂow and achieve the optimum
coordination between the contractor and the other stakeholders during the project. The
main purpose of this report is to ensure that the detailed design could lead to a buildable
concept. Moreover, the designed structure has to be statically even and identify with the
other BIM models (architectural, MEP, facade). The better coordination of the different
discipline models in the design phases, the less requirement for changes due to design
issues during the construction phase.
Taken into consideration the aforementioned data, the implementation of BIM in the
project has to be investigated. Furthermore, it is important how the data of the project
are exchanged or networked between the participants throughout the project and the level
of its transparency. Shared models and needed information on a regular basis could be a
way to support right decision-making regarding the life-cycle of the project, decrease the
risk of big changes during the construction and lead to proper planning.
The project’s target is to ﬁnd ways to optimize the process from design to construc-
tion focusing more especially on the contractor perspective. Delivered information and
changes from the client during the design and construction phases will be out of the focus
of this investigation.
1.3
Method of Investigation
In order for the scope of this thesis to be accomplished, a multi-faceted research is used.
This section presents the different methods used for this investigation.
Literature study
A holistic idea of the project is vital to deﬁne what is necessary for the literature review
in terms of research. After coming to a ﬁnal decision, online sources, existing articles,
books, conference papers and researches relevant to the thesis topic are searched thor-
oughly so that the required information can be collected. Study in a theoretical context
helps understanding the terms, which the thesis focuses on.
Case study analysis
Case study analysis is one of the most appropriate research method. It must be said that
on particular occasions case studies have been proved to be extremely beneﬁcial. For in-
==PAGE:19==
1.4. STRUCTURE OF THESIS
3
stance, when large samples are not easy to collect, the choice of the case ought to take into
consideration the maximum beneﬁt that can be gained while study is executed [Winston,
1997]. Case studies reinforce both the given research in terms of quantity and quality and
they are particularly helpful in depicting and analyzing realistic conditions which cannot
sometimes be found in surveys. Besides, they can provide useful insight regarding var-
ious methods used in the research. Additionally, single cases are often applied to verify
or refute a given theory, or to depict a special or unusual case [Winston, 1997]. They
often show an upgraded theory and in doing so they provide a better understanding of the
project.
Furthermore, case studies present information in the context of a real, on-going project,
including the characteristics and the actual data of it. The chosen case study refers to a
complex building structure, which will be covered thoroughly in Chapter 6. The given
data has basically a qualitative character regarding BIM coordination between contrac-
tors and the other project participants. This analysis will successfully answer of "how the
detailed design could lead to a buildable concept".
Interviews
The ﬁnal part of this research is the interviews. This is one of the main investigation
methods as it contributes to the collection of the needed information. The experience and
knowledge of the interviewees give a better insight to the eventual reasons of coordina-
tion lack. The interview’s type is decided to be structured consisting of predetermined
questions but allowing also a degree of freedom in order both to save time and ensure that
all the areas will be covered sufﬁciently. The questions asked to each interviewee were
chosen based on their position and their responsibilities on the examined project. For this
reason, all the interviews have been carried out by following a speciﬁc guideline which is
presented in Appendix A.
1.4
Structure of Thesis
This research started with the idea to look for improvements in a project which imple-
ments BIM. Out of the data collected during the case study, fruitful discussions and ex-
changes of ideas concerning the arisen problems of the examined project were made be-
fore taking a decision regarding the ﬁnal goal of this study. This leads to a complete
interdependence between the goals and research as they are interactively connected with
each other. When this process was over, the main target was identiﬁed, the study was
limited, and a more detailed analysis of project processes followed by contractors was
==PAGE:20==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND HYPOTHESIS
made. It is determined to ﬁnd ways to improve the procedure from design to construction
phase so that conﬂicts can be prevented on site.
The actual goals are set. These are the ones determining the methodology. The chosen
tools strategies are selected to be literature research and case study analysis. Simultane-
ously, interviews with two experts involved in different areas of the project are performed
and additional data are emerged. After the aforementioned steps, the necessary literature
review in terms of research is deﬁned. Online sources, journals, books and relevant arti-
cles are searched thoroughly so that the required information can be collected to support
and facilitate the application of methods, tools and terms needed for the speciﬁc project.
This is absolutely essential for the analysis, understanding and interpretation of the data
so that optimum results can be obtained. Considering all the previous stages, the study
concludes to the ﬁnal part where suggestions with a recommended plan are put forward to
ﬁnd solutions to the existing problems. The procedure of the Thesis structure is presented
in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Structure of thesis
More analytically, this research is divided into four parts. The ﬁrst one includes only
Chapter 1 which is the introduction of the report and presents an overview of the thesis
content, identifying its scope. The second part consists of four chapters and constitutes the
Theoretical Framework. Chapter 2 describes the basic deﬁnitions of Building Information
Modeling and Chapter 3 focuses on the involvement of the contractor in a project. After
that, Chapter 4 refers both to project delivery methods and to the main types of project
scheduling. Additionally, Chapter 5 elaborates the Project Management in construction.
Next part is the Research Framework which is represented by Chapter 6 and bases on
the case study and the performed interviews. In more detail, Chapter 6 is a summary
==PAGE:21==
1.4. STRUCTURE OF THESIS
5
of the collected information of the examined project and a general presentation of its
main followed processes. Finally, the last part is the Contribution including Chapter 7
and Chapter 8. Chapter 7 is the discussion of the results and the problem statements. It
includes also suggestions for improvement of the project performance. While Chapter 8
is the conclusion of this report which presents the most important ﬁndings of the research
and recommends also further studies. Figure 1.2 illustrates analytically the parts and the
chapters of this study.
Figure 1.2: Chapters presentation
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
Part I
Theoretical Framework
7
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Building Information Modelling
This chapter provides the basic theories of Building Information Modeling. More speciﬁ-
cally, the BIM deﬁnition, dimensions categories, the different process stages, the Level of
Development as well as the Maturity Levels are presented.
2.1
Deﬁnition
The last decades, construction projects have become more and more complex. For this
reason, large-scale projects are difﬁcult to be managed. The most crucial part is how all
the different stakeholders such as engineers, architects, contractors etc. can collaborate
in the most fruitful way. BIM is currently an innovative collaborative working method of
approaching the design, construction, and maintenance of buildings [Bryde, Broquetas,
and Volm, 2013]. As a consequence, BIM has been widely adopted by the construction
sector as it is increasingly inﬂuencing the A/E/C industry. Many deﬁnitions have been
formulated for Building Information Modelling due to its complex concept [Matusova
and Bartošová, n.d.]. According to the National BIM Standard, the following deﬁnition
applies:
"BIM is a digital representation of physical and functional characteristics of a facility
and a shared knowledge resource for information about a facility forming a reliable basis
for decisions during its life-cycle."
The aim of BIM is to create a virtual building information model including the func-
tional and physical features of a structure before physically building it [Liu et al., 2013].
More speciﬁcally, BIM consists of not only design software but also project management-
based tools, which are able to manage and exchange all the models’ containing informa-
tion. As a result, it enhances productivity by avoiding potential errors and cost overruns
9
==PAGE:26==
10
CHAPTER 2. BUILDING INFORMATION MODELLING
during the construction phase [Ghaffarianhoseini et al., 2017].
Dimensions of BIM
For every type of information added to the BIM-model, a different dimension category
is generated. Regarding to the BIM fundamentals, BIM can be implemented in seven
different categories. More speciﬁcally, the Three Dimensions model (3D) is sufﬁcient for
design visualization by creating digital models in order to present a realistic rendering
of the structure. Moreover, the planning stage helps to contemplate and prevent possi-
ble conﬂicts among the different disciplines, known as clash detection and consistency
check. The evolved form of the 3D model is related to project’s scheduling, referred as
Four Dimensions model (4D). During the construction planning, the time management of
a project plays a crucial role. Issues such as lack of communication and data loss from
design to construction usually cause delays to the execution of the works. As a result, it
is needed to review and re-organize the project schedule [Liu et al., 2013].
After the 4D, follows the Five Dimensions BIM (5D). It includes the quantity survey
of structural elements in order to estimate the cost of the project. The next two categories,
Six Dimensions (6D) and Seven Dimensions (7D) BIM refer on the sustainability and the
facilities management respectively. The former one focuses on the environmental issues,
ensuring the maintenance and reproduction management capacity of natural resources.
It includes the social part of it as well, guaranteeing the human well-being. About the
latter one, different types of information are introduced in the BIM-model. As it is known
during the construction phase, many of the processes are reviewed and modiﬁed on site
to avoid operational issues. For this reason, the main target of the 7D BIM is to create a
three-dimensional model, containing not only what has been designed, but also what has
ﬁnally been built. This virtual model is called "As-Built". Aspects such as maintenance,
dismantling and renovation of the existing building are also included, as they are parts of
the “building life-cycle” [Liu et al., 2013].
This concept continues to grow and evolve over the years. For this reason, the ﬁnal
Dimensions have not yet been ﬁnalized and instead only a future number of dimensions
is set without deﬁning to what they will be referred (nD). The last developing categories
for the moment are 8D, 9D and 10D, which are represent safety, acoustics and security
respectively. The technical functions of BIM are presented on the Figure 2.1:
==PAGE:27==
2.2. LEVEL OF DEVELOPMENT (LOD)
11
Figure 2.1: Dimensions of BIM
2.2
Level of Development (LOD)
The acronym LOD was introduced to the A/E/C industry as “Level of Detail” by the
American Institute of Architects (AIA). Nevertheless, years ago the LOD abbreviation
was changed to “Level of Development” [Treldal, Vestergaard, and Karlshøj, 2016].
These two deﬁnitions have some important differences. The ﬁrst one describes how much
detail is presented graphically in the Model Element. On the other hand, the latter one rep-
resents a set of requirements regarding the content of Model Elements during the design
and construction processes. The concept of Level of Development constitutes a language
which allows the project participants to use BIM models mainly as a standardization tool
but also as mean of communication. LOD deﬁnes also the project responsibilities and ex-
pectations. All stakeholders need to know what a BIM deliverable is supposed to include
[Berlo and Bomhof, 2014]. Through this speciﬁcation, the A/E/C Industry deﬁnes with
accuracy the content of Building Information Models at the various design and construc-
tion phases [BIMForum, 2018]. The LOD levels are as described below [BIMForum,
2018]:
LOD 100: The model elements are not represented geometrically but generically and
graphically. In this stage, the appearance of the elements is shown but their shape, precise
location or size are not speciﬁed. Any given information about the elements should be
thought of approximate.
LOD 200: The model elements are generic placeholders and recognized as the com-
ponents they represent. Non-graphic information may also be added to the model. Any
information resulting from this LOD, such as size, shape, location, and orientation should
==PAGE:28==
12
CHAPTER 2. BUILDING INFORMATION MODELLING
be thought of approximate.
LOD 300: Elements data such as shape, size, orientation, and location, can be ex-
ported from the model without any additional information. The project origin is speciﬁed
and the elements location are deﬁned accordingly. Non-graphic data may be added to the
model as well.
LOD 350: Parts needed for the element coordination with other components are de-
signed. For instance, these parts consist of supports and connections. Non-graphic data
may be added to the model as well.
LOD 400: The model element is graphically designed with a high level of clarity and
detailed information regarding its fabrication, assembly, and installation guidance. Non-
graphic data may be added to the model as well.
LOD 500: The model element can be used for facility management needs as it is
represented as a veriﬁed ﬁeld and an As-Built format. Non-graphic data may be added to
the model as well.
Figure 2.2: Different Level of Development [BIMForum, 2018]
==PAGE:29==
2.3. LEVELS OF MATURITY
13
2.3
Levels of Maturity
Various challenges need to be addressed by architectural/structural engineering, construc-
tion, and operations stakeholders through BIM implementation. Knowing the BIM ﬁelds,
the implemented maturity levels can also be delineated. The maturity levels of BIM de-
scribe the progression from the drawing concept to the computer and ﬁnally to the digital
age. These levels are outlined so far within a range from 0 to 3 [Succar, 2009]. There
is a debate about the punctual deﬁnition of the levels, for this reason, a broad concept is
presented below [Succar, 2009]:
Level 0: Level 0 is the simplest step of the process generating information. In this
Level, the 3D reality of a building is described through Two Dimensions (2D) drawings.
Moreover, the data regarding speciﬁcations, quantities and cost estimations do not emerge
from the visualization model. Furthermore, in this level, the team members’ collaboration
has not a dominant role, as well as the workﬂow follows a linear course.
Level 1: BIM implementation is introduced in Level 1. This level is mainly focusing
on the transition from CAD to 2D and 3D pieces of information. Participants create 3D
single-disciplinary models for the whole project life-cycle, that do not include modiﬁable
parametric attributes. There is not a well-structured model in order for the different disci-
plines to interact with each other and as result collaboration between the stakeholders is
still poor.
Level 2: As at Level 1, single-disciplinary models have been already created, so at
Level 2 all project participants have now the potential to collaborate with each other. In
this case, one collaborating model with 3D geometric data is needed allowing the data ex-
change between two different disciplines. For instance, a discipline model which includes
information about the structural elements can interchange data with the scheduling or the
cost estimation database. In that way, the generation of time analysis (4D) and cost esti-
mating (5D) are carried out. The model-based interchanges are now increased and they
replace the document-based workﬂows. The aforementioned processes may be achieved
with the proper use of BIM software tools and contribute to the fast-tracking and chang-
ing modeling during the life-cycle of the building.
Level 3: Project members should be able to provide integrated models that will be
referred across project life-cycle phases. These BIM models are considered as interdisci-
plinary nD models which allow complex analyses both at design and construction stages.
Models include information not only about construction elements but also environmental
==PAGE:30==
14
CHAPTER 2. BUILDING INFORMATION MODELLING
policies and life-cycle costing. Tthe main target of this Level is the creation of an exten-
sive and integrated data model while allowing the exchange of model and document-based
data. In this way, all project activities regarding its design, construction, and operation
are well-planned in order to optimize constructability, safety, and operability.
The BIM maturity model which identiﬁes the evolution between the CAD and the
Maturity Level 3 is illustrated in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Levels of Maturity 2.3 [PAS, 2013]
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Contractors
This chapter focuses on the contractor’s involvement in a construction project. The con-
tent of a project model which the contractor needs in order to achieve a proper construc-
tion is described. Furthermore, the different BIM process ﬂows that a contractor follows
during a project are analyzed.
3.1
BIM for contractors
It is known that a detailed BIM model beneﬁts the construction process. Especially,
BIM implementation leads to a smoother changeover from design to construction and
prevents potential conﬂicts. One of the main targets of the contractor should be its early
involvement in the project. Moreover, the proper models coordination can be achieved as
long as all consultants and subcontractors contribute to the building models creation in a
standardized way [Eastman et al., 2008]. In that way, they can analyze in detail their parts
in the project, perform clash detection and correct the clashes before they cause problems
on site. By utilizing BIM technology, architects are able to create models to facilitate the
contractors. In order for the project model to provide sufﬁcient capabilities to contractors,
the following data should be included [Eastman et al., 2008]:
1. Detailed building information: included in the 3D model that presents graphical
illustrations of a building and provides quantity and component property informa-
tion.
2. Temporary components: elements necessary for the planning and integration of
the project. For instance, temporary elements, equipment, and formwork.
3. Speciﬁcation information associated with each building component: concern-
ing the building components which the contractors need to build or obtain.
15
==PAGE:32==
16
CHAPTER 3. CONTRACTORS
4. Data analysis related to performance levels and project requirements: for ex-
ample structural loads, shear and axial forces, maximum moments, cooling and
heating loads of HVAC systems. Needed information for MEP designing and in-
stallation.
5. Design and construction status: presents the progress of procurement, design,
installation and testing processes. The contractor is responsible for communicating
this information.
3.2
Main types of BIM process ﬂow
Traditional BIM process ﬂow
Many contractors build their own 3D models from 2D papers drawings. In some cases,
the use of these models is for the visual representation of the project, the performance of
clash detection or visual scheduling (4D). Alternatively, contractors create 3D/parametric
models, which include BIM components. In that way, coordination and quantities take-off
are allowed as well [Eastman et al., 2008]. The aforementioned processes are portrayed
in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Traditional BIM process ﬂow [Eastman et al., 2008]
Integrated BIM process ﬂow
In contrast, the architects create 2D drawings and the contractor or consultants convert
them into 3D/BIM model. Moreover, the contractor is responsible for the integration of
these disciplines that are built independently by different project participants. Then, these
models are merged into a shared coordinated discipline model. All project members use
this model for planning, coordination, quantity take-off, etc and in this way, the construc-
tion time and cost can be decreased. As a result, all stakeholders collaborate under one
==PAGE:33==
3.3. MAIN BIM BENEFITS FOR CONTRACTORS
17
model which comprises the information for all the construction activities and at the same
time describes them with a great accuracy [Eastman et al., 2008]. This type of process is
illustrated in the Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Integrated BIM process ﬂow [Eastman et al., 2008]
3.3
Main BIM beneﬁts for contractors
There is a lot of confusion about how Building Information Modeling can help contrac-
tors during a project. A frequent misinterpretation is that BIM is just a tool which bases
only on 3D design, but in reality, BIM is also a method for creating and managing all of
the required information about a project. For this reason, BIM deﬁnitely beneﬁts every
phase of the project life-cycle. Its greatest uses for contractors are listed below [Autodesk,
2018]:
Shared model: The shared model reduces reworking as well as duplicating drawings
required from building disciplines to meet certain needs. It includes a greater amount of
information than the traditional drawing and in this way it provides explanations to facil-
itate the execution of the project. BIM drawing tools outweigh 2D drawing tools in terms
of speed and they are connected to a database. The model provides an excellent bank of
exchanging valuable knowledge as well as a pool for communicating ideas regarding the
plan, section, elevation with the other members of it. In doing so, saving time can be suc-
cessfully achieved. This database also helps in this direction by being constantly updated
thus; it reduces considerably the amount of money and labor needed for the project.
The digital-model-based workﬂow provides substantial help by allowing its users to
have access to all needed information. This sort of connection to the model’s development
prevents the users from unfortunate situations such as disappearing archives, ﬁles distor-
tions etc. Undeniably, working collectively and cooperating with models is much more
==PAGE:34==
18
CHAPTER 3. CONTRACTORS
functional than the drawing sets. The digital integration among all those involved in the
project secures a smoother design and coordination of the project before its construction
phase. Therefore the BIM-model facilitates the coordination of the different stages and
processes, providing a predictable path to the expected ﬁnal result. The shared project
model is presented in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Shared project model
Clash Detection: The performance of clash detection is a method that identiﬁes de-
sign conﬂicts. The design errors are divided into two categories; objects with insufﬁcient
distance in between (soft clash) and objects occupy the same space (hard clash). There
are BIM tools which can detect structured and qualiﬁed clashes. Contractors use them in
order to check clashes among different discipline models. Each model corresponds to a
different system such as the structural, architectural, mechanical etc. The clash detection
can be carried out at any level of detail. Contractors are responsible for checking whether
the models are built with an optimum accuracy and present all the required details in order
for the clashes to be precisely detected. Otherwise, the number of identiﬁed conﬂicts will
be lower compared to the actual ones. As a consequence, the real problems will not ap-
pear until the construction phase and then will negatively affect the project terms of time
and cost. In other words, BIM tools can detect clashes at the initial stages of the project
and therefore it minimizes also extra outlay when these types of clashes are discovered
during the construction.
Immediate access: One of the greatest advantages of the BIM-model is its practical-
ity. Being connected to a database, it can provide any type of information that is needed
since all participants can have immediate access to project details through the cloud from
anywhere, on any device.
==PAGE:35==
3.3. MAIN BIM BENEFITS FOR CONTRACTORS
19
Construction Scheduling: As well as saving money, BIM saves valuable time during
project phases and minimizes construction delays. Furthermore, it enables the parallel ex-
ecution of designing and documentation. on top of this, adaptability of new information,
like those deriving from the building site is added to the existing documentation . Finally,
planning time outlines, deadlines can be carried out with greater accuracy and therefore
this helps to the prompt delivery of the project.
Figure 3.4 shows the resulting beneﬁts for contractors provided by BIM implementa-
tion in the project.
Figure 3.4: BIM Beneﬁts for the contractors
The Stanford University’s Center for Integrated Facilities Engineering carried out a
great deal of research with information collected from 32 large-scale projects regarding
the beneﬁts of BIM use [Matusova and Bartošová, n.d.]. The most notable ﬁndings are
listed below:
• Up to 80% decrease of the time is needed to estimate the project’s cost.
• Up to 10% saving of the contract value due to clash detection of the different disci-
plines.
• Accuracy of cost estimation around 3% in contrast to former methods.
• Avoidance up to 40% of unpredictable changes.
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Project Management
This chapter clariﬁes different terms of project management in the construction industry.
The deﬁnition of Scheduling Management is presented ﬁrstly. However, the model-based
scheduling is analyzed more in detail in this report, as represents closely the examined
case study. In addition, Stakeholder Management is described, as it plays a crucial role
in the organization of complex construction projects. Moreover, its combination with the
proper implementation of Dependent Management in a project could lead to the desired
outcome for the client.
4.1
Deﬁnition of Project Management
According to Project Management Institute (PMI), a project is deﬁned as “a temporary
endeavor undertaken to produce a unique product, service, or result” [PMBOKGUIDE,
2017]. In other words, a project is executed only once. When it occurs repetitively then
it loses the meaning of a project. It ought to have a speciﬁc starting and ending time,
a well-planned budget, clear objectives regarding the works involved in it as well as to
meet the particular performance needs derived from it during the course of action [Lewis,
2007]. Additionally, PMBOK deﬁnes project management as “application of knowledge,
skills, tools and techniques to project activities to achieve project requirements" [PM-
BOKGUIDE, 2017]. To achieve an ideal project management outcome, the combination
and application of various management procedures are required and in particular those of
monitoring, planning, initiating, controlling, executing as well as closing [Lewis, 2007].
The main duty of the project manager is to guarantee the timely completion of all
the works involved in the project, which should take place within the budget limits and
time length together with their optimal execution. Undoubtedly, the top priority when
scheduling a project is to meet the deadline as the majority of projects has a pre-deﬁned
21
==PAGE:38==
22
CHAPTER 4. PROJECT MANAGEMENT
deadline. Moreover, the client’s needs should be entirely fulﬁlled and not to rely on the
notion of what the team believes is best for the client [Lewis, 2007].
4.2
Scheduling Management
Project scheduling is a system which helps the coordination of the tasks that should be
executed as well as in the allocation of organizational resources so that those tasks should
be completed in the given time frame. Scheduling determines the timing and sequence
of operations of a project as well as their assembly to anticipate its overall time needed
for completion. It concentrates on individual parts of the planning scheme, and deals
with them in detail. When the ﬁrst computerized performance showing the duration of
the project is completed this automatically signals the beginning of scheduling. Next,
there is a comparison between the project duration and the desired result and scheduling
commences [Lewis, 2007].
Model-Based Scheduling
BIM is also commonly used for tying the model, referring to either design or construction,
to a program so that the sequence of works can be animated and the development of the
project at can be shown at any time. This constitutes a new method in promoting work to
clients, estimating logistics of construction for effectiveness and safety. At the same time,
an estimation to justify subcontractors billing during construction for the completion of
work is provided to the client. The ability to provide a clear understanding of the project
schedule to all stakeholders involved in it, is what makes it so popular nowadays, as the
traditional gantt chart can be difﬁcult to comprehend. However, when a simulation of the
construction is being watched then the notion of the whole idea of building becomes more
perceptible [Hardin and McCool, 2015].
Besides, depending on the scheduling methodology, LOD contributes to this use, as
more precise model-based schedules arise, and the development of the model reaches
more precision. Indeed, the more precise and detailed the model is, the more accurate
simulation it can produce. Nonetheless, the potential return on the time investment needed
to connect certain elements of the model with the actual schedule reduces at a particular
level of detail. This type of scheduling can be applied during all stages of the project,
for instance, throughout construction to display the sequence of work or to analyze site
logistics and to estimate expenses needed for the completed construction. It must be men-
tioned that no exceptional skills are required to produce model-based simulations, how-
==PAGE:39==
4.3. STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT
23
ever, a skillful person is needed having a good understanding of the scheduling rationale
and the sequence of construction [Hardin and McCool, 2015].
4.3
Stakeholder Management
A rather complex issue is that of delays and their solutions. For this reason, a number
of attorneys require that technical issues arising at construction sites should be explained
to them by stakeholders together with witness testimony provided by experts (consulting
engineers, schedulers, etc.)[Mubarak, 2010]. It must be said that stakeholder manage-
ment is the principal element contributing the most to the optimal delivery of a project.
PMBOK deﬁnes stakeholder as "an individual, group, or organization who may affect,
be affected by, or perceive itself to be affected by a decision, activity, or outcome of a
project" [PMBOKGUIDE, 2017]. Stakeholder management develops fruitful collabora-
tion among stakeholders during the course of action so that the agreed objectives can be
met. Besides, there are underlying principles which control, plan and guide this sort of
procedure. For this reason, a particular project strategy is prepared to facilitate stake-
holder management in any given ﬁeld such as business, organizations, companies etc. by
using data collected throughout the common processes [Vogwell, 2003].
The initial stage in the stakeholder analysis is to identify the stakeholder through a
brainstorming procedure. In doing so, one has to take into consideration all the people
being affected by one’s work, who exert inﬂuence on it or show an interest in its success-
ful or unsuccessful outcome. Furthermore, it has to be mentioned that even though both
organizations and individuals are involved in it, basically there is an intense interaction
between the people. Also, it needs to be ensured that the most suitable professionals from
a stakeholder organization have been chosen [Vogwell, 2003].
The main advantage of stakeholder analysis is that it facilitates the understanding of
complex issues and as a result it aids project managers and teams to collaborate with
stakeholders in the most fruitful way, thus helps them to gather resources where they can
be exploited to the fullest and in doing so to inform communications planning for the
project. Nonetheless, stakeholder analysis is only a mean which facilitates the project
manager and the team to identify the necessary management actions [Vogwell, 2003].
Internal stakeholders’ management is more complex though, as internal stakeholders
are in general associated closely to the issues and as a result are inﬂuenced to a greater
degree. If great changes are to be avoided in the course of the project, then it is necessary
==PAGE:40==
24
CHAPTER 4. PROJECT MANAGEMENT
to guarantee that it is well-established from the beginning with the appropriate involve-
ment and consultation [Vogwell, 2003].
It is essential that the broader internal stakeholder team should get not only involved
as early as possible in the project but also to participate in the detail of its processes, and
their comments to be taken into consideration. All stakeholders need to learn about the
project, have their say and share their thoughts with the rest of the team members. Simul-
taneously, all the complexities of the project, as well as its limitations and opportunities,
must be presented and discussed by all involved in it. No one can get what they want
but at least they are willing to accept what they can get when they are informed about
the rationale of a decision and whether they have played an active part in it [Vogwell,
2003]. Although this is a time-consuming procedure, it is essential as it will bring about a
smoother transition to the later stages of the project and it is considered the most appropri-
ate method to make sure that the project is the most effective for the client. In other words,
an opportunity might appear in which the project is streamlined by sharing facilities in-
stead of satisfying individual needs and better project brieﬁng can be achieved through
broader consultation. Through these processes, the creativity, knowledge, and skills of
each individual can be fully exploited. Undoubtedly, especially at the early stages, free
communication between designers and contractors provides the designers the chance of
building a better understanding of their designing and also enables contractors to realize
what is attainable and what is not [Vogwell, 2003].
As stated before, project managers are usually evaluated on whether they deliver the
project on time and follow the budget. So, the more stakeholders are needed to be in-
volved in the project the greater is the risk to time and budget. However, if the project has
to meet the long-term requirements of organizations then the needs of the organization’s
stakeholders have to be met and this can only be achieved via active stakeholder manage-
ment. [Vogwell, 2003].
To sum up, the stakeholder management is consisted of four steps:
• Identiﬁcation, recognition and acknowledgement of the stakeholder.
• Determination of their inﬂuence and interest.
• Establishment of communication management plan.
• Support of stakeholder’s inﬂuence and engagement.
==PAGE:41==
4.4. DEPENDENT MANAGEMENT
25
4.4
Dependent Management
By the term dependencies certain actions, deliverables or pre-conditions are meant which
inﬂuence the optimal completion of the project. The tasks associated with the project de-
pendencies such as the identiﬁcation, reporting and management of a project are consid-
ered to be some of the most essential tasks that the project team has to deal with. It must
also be stated that all of the different project dependencies are not so easily noticeable
and might not be completely explored so as to assess their inﬂuence. The management of
dependencies guarantees that [COGTA, 2009]:
• Existing dependencies can be managed only when an effective process takes place.
• There is a clear identiﬁcation of new dependencies and an action plan has been
agreed and implemented for that purpose.
• The inﬂuence of dependencies on the project is fully comprehensible.
• Effective communication between all of the dependency –associated members can
be achieved.
The project plan can enable the project planners to identify the impact of the dependencies
on the given time-frame. Any deviation on this schedule could result in considerable
project’s delay, that is why there should be a constant dependency information process.
Various factors such as the project complexity and organization structure may have an
impact on the design of the process. The duty of the planning manager is to brief and
identify members of the project being involved in the Dependency Management Process
while the organization’s human resources management procedures are followed where
it is needed. Finally, orientation sessions ought to be planned for every staff member
individually so that they agree to job descriptions [COGTA, 2009].
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Planning of construction projects
This chapter presents the deﬁnitions of the project delivery strategies and the main types
of construction scheduling in order to clarify the difference between them. Further focus
is made in the most common types of the two concepts.
5.1
Project Delivery Strategies
There are various project delivery methods and a lot of different deﬁnitions of it. An ap-
proach of them is described below [Ohrn and Rogers, 2008]:
"The process through which constructed projects are organized and completed includ-
ing establishing how the contractor will be selected, the scope of services provided, the
type of relationship with owner, and how the contractor will be compensated."
It is noteworthy that a right understanding of this system gives the chance to the stake-
holders to comprehend the importance of the delivery method selected for the particular
project and of their contribution needed in order for the project to be successfully com-
pleted. For this reason, the three most common types of construction contracts are an-
alyzed in this section, which are the Design-Bid-Build (DBB) , Design-Build (DB) and
Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) .
Design-Bid-Build
A particularly popular method in the USA is the design-bid-build process, where 60% of
both construction and design stages are carried out under the design-bid-build method.
[AIA, 2011]. In case of DBB the project owner contract at the beginning with an ar-
chitectural/engineering company. This contract lists identiﬁed requirements that are de-
27
==PAGE:44==
28
CHAPTER 5. PLANNING OF CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS
termined by the owner and need to be followed by the architects. They provide design
models/drawings and speciﬁcations for the construction. Afterward based on these docu-
ments, different construction companies give bids. Therefore, the company with the best
bid enters into a contract with the owner [Hale et al., 2009]. As a consequence, the design
phase precedes the construction and two contracts are needed in order for the project to
be completed [Ohrn and Rogers, 2008].
However, an information barrier can be created between organizations, which impede
the electronic exchange of accurate and timely provided data. This is mainly due to the
fact that both the architect and the contractor deal with the information ﬂow through sub-
consultants and sub-contractors affecting in this way the required time of the delivery
stages. For this reason, a construction manager can be employed by the client to super-
vise and manage better the interdependence between the design and construction bodies
[Eastman et al., 2008]. This method does not facilitate the application of technologies in
the project team because of its contractual divides. Thus, the term of deliverables is used
in this case, where they are submitted at the ﬁnal part of each stage with almost no co-
operation or interaction between all those involved in the various phases. Usually, at the
beginning of each phase the given data is redesigned or duplicated and this consequently
minimizes the value of project documentation and also leads to a loss of knowledge re-
garding the particular project. As this approach hampers the optimum implementation
of BIM tools and processes which have to be integrated harmoniously in such cases, the
client can use the BIM applications on DBB projects by ensuring the speciﬁcations con-
cerning the construction format and the purpose of the building model as well as any
other type of information at ﬁnal stage of each phase. Also, the owner can check upon
the collaboration of the different bodies involved in it to facilitate the BIM procedure of
each phase separately [Hardin and McCool, 2015].
Design-Build
Another delivery method is the Design-Build. In this case, the owner makes a single
contract with one company which provides both design and construction services for a
project. This system has a signiﬁcant beneﬁt compared to the aforementioned case that
the construction phase can start before the design process ended. Therefore, designer and
contractor coexist during many project phases and in this way both beneﬁt from the oth-
ers expertise and knowledge [Ohrn and Rogers, 2008]. Furthermore, when this method
is used, it does not automatically mean the shortening of design and construction phases
but this type of overlapping throughout the project’s execution decreases the time needed
for its completion and valuable time can be saved [Ohrn and Rogers, 2008].
==PAGE:45==
5.1. PROJECT DELIVERY STRATEGIES
29
Additionally, the Design –Build method secures a more functional ﬂow of information
when it comes to delivery stages between designers and contractors. The deﬁnition of the
works procedure should be stipulated at the initial stage of the project though. Moreover,
the DB can identify BIM applications throughout the stages of a project and concentrates
more on the overall deliverables in comparison to DBB method which focuses on partic-
ular deliverables and time restrictions [Hardin and McCool, 2015].
Integrated Project Delivery
Integrated Project Delivery method is a variation of Design-Build. The two methods
have many common characteristics, however, there is a marked differentiation in terms
of risk allocation. As, in this method, the risk is handled by the client, contractor, and
architect and not only to the contractor[Hardin and McCool, 2015]. What is more, IPD
encourages a pioneering and creative way of thinking in comparison with the other tra-
ditional methods which follow rather conservative and somehow less ﬂexible techniques
in their approach to constructions [O’Connor Jr., 2009]. Therefore, it focuses on cooper-
ation between the owner and all those involved in the project. Besides, it pinpoints that
a productive collaboration between the stakeholders beneﬁts both the consultants and the
contractor and this ought to start at the initial stages of the project. This method pro-
motes teamwork, communication, exchanging of ideas and interaction by all involved in
the project as all the participants work for the same goal [O’Connor Jr., 2009].
Figure 5.1 summarizes the key information regarding the three contractual forms.
Figure 5.1: Project delivery strategies comparison [Eastman et al., 2008]
==PAGE:46==
30
CHAPTER 5. PLANNING OF CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS
5.2
Types of construction scheduling
There are three main types of projects: traditional, phased and fast-track. This demar-
cation is based on how projects are scheduled. Construction planning and scheduling is
the sequence of activities in space and time, considering procurement, resources, spatial
constraints, and other concerns in the process. All procedures are linked and based on
construction logic. The different types of construction scheduling are described below.
Traditional
A traditional type of project including the designing of it can be carried out while the
contractor preparing the ﬁnal documentary modiﬁcations so that approval can be obtained
by the owner before the beginning of the actual construction. This can cover the need for
minimizing the length of time required regarding the designing and materializing projects.
Nevertheless, a number of such traditional type-projects involve the design completion of
each phase separately and their construction while the designing of each stage has been
actually or virtually ﬁnalized [S.D.Bynum, 1983]. These sorts of projects entail their
designing by professionals of this ﬁeld (architects, engineers, consultants, technical ﬁrms
etc.) being hired by the client so that the stipulated speciﬁcations and requirements can
be met. After the ﬁnal delivery of the project, its construction commences. The choice
of the contractor is achieved via negotiating or bidding procedures after ensuring the
responsible execution and delivery of the project based on the ofﬁcially-approved design
and speciﬁcations. A step by step procedure is secured in all phases [S.D.Bynum, 1983].
Phased
The special feature of this type of phased construction project is that the construction
stage begins prior to completion of its ﬁnal design. As a result, the phases of construction
and design happen at the same time [Elvin, 2007]. This automatically leads to even more
perplexed managerial procedures concerning the construction, which can result in the
rise of costs, loss of time as well as less quality than the required one for such projects.
However, it can accelerate the execution of the project, which means less needed time
and consequently all the derived beneﬁts from this shortening. That is why it is vital
throughout the development and execution of the project the constant, immediate and
accurate access to the right source and data concerning the actual type of project [Fazio
et al., 1988].
==PAGE:47==
5.2. TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULING
31
Fast-track
The term "fast-track" refers to the construction procedure prior to the completion of the
whole design. The major beneﬁt of such a process to the client is that if it occurs in re-
ality as it has been planned, then it lowers the outlay and curtails the potential inﬂation
impact on a construction budget. This type of project could also be deemed as a project
of acceleration in terms of construction phases [Fazio et al., 1988], as it can shorten the
length of the project’time up to 25% [Elvin, 2007]. It is about a method where the greatest
number of tasks is executed simultaneously, which automatically requires better planning.
Besides, fast-track demands an optimum interaction, coordination, cooperation and com-
munication by those involved in it. Nonetheless, its practicality is based on the notion
of whether the given tasks can be overlapped and reshufﬂe from the original schedule.
However, it entails higher risks because the activities occur in parallel which could result
in the project’s reorganization meaning waste of invaluable time [Fazio et al., 1988].
The three different types of construction project scheduling are presented in Figure
5.2 in relation to time.
Figure 5.2: Traditional, phased and fast-track concepts [Fazio et al., 1988]
==PAGE:48==
32
CHAPTER 5. PLANNING OF CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS
5.3
Conclusion
To conclude, design-build/design-bid-build and fast-track/traditional concepts respectively
have not substantial linkage, but in practice, they are very often applied together. These
two concepts should not be confused. As DB/DBB/IPD refer to the content of the con-
tracts, while the fast-track/phased/traditional methods are types of construction schedul-
ing and indicate how the works must be carried out during the project regarding its re-
quested needs.
==PAGE:49==
Part II
Research Framework
33
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Case Study
This chapter brieﬂy describes the basic points of the examined project that is used to
acquire real case information. Moreover, the information gained both by the interviews
and the available project material are presented. The interviews were conducted with
experienced people involved in the project for the better understanding of its processes
and challenges. In order for the privacy requirements to be respected, the name of the
project and participated companies will not be mentioned but generally described.
6.1
Analysis
The examined project is a high-rise building. The project initiated in 2018 with an ex-
pected completion date in 2021. It is designed and planned between the client and a team
consisting of four main companies, which for the purpose of this analysis are named as
Company A, Company B, Company C and Company D. Their contribution on the project
is presented in more detail on Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Stakeholders of the project
Involved Companies
Role
Responsibilities
Company A
Consultant
Responsible for Cost Estimation
General Contractor
Responsible for Execution
Design & BIM management (Execution)
Company B
Architect
Architectural Design
Company C
Consultant
Design management (Planning)
MEP design
Company D
Consultant
Structural design
Companies n
Subcontractors
Contribution in Execution
35
==PAGE:52==
36
CHAPTER 6. CASE STUDY
The project is operated by a Turnkey contract, consequently it is a Design-Build
project. The client cooperates mostly with the Company A and in this way, they consti-
tute the basis of the collaboration, which is based on the early involvement of all parties
in a two-part contract process divided into planning and execution. The current status of
the project is that the detailed design just started. More analytically the project’s phases
are shown in the Section 6.2. The building is designed virtually before it is built, and
as an essential part of this process, the team works actively with 5D BIM. Detailed 3D
models form the basis for optimizing project feasibility, while 4D simulations and 5D
calculations are used to optimize the project’s schedule and economy.
6.2
Interviews
In this section, data collected by the conducted interviews are presented in order to pro-
vide insights from different perspectives regarding the examined project. The conclusions
resulted from the interviews are discussed analytically in Chapter 7. More speciﬁcally,
two interviews were conducted with two experienced members of the General Contractor.
The project roles of the two interviewees are: Design Manager and Assistant of BIM Co-
ordinator. Both interviews lasted approximately 60 minutes and were carried out with a
structured interview guide consisting of the research questions, but simultaneously allow-
ing a degree of freedom and adaptability in order to approach the topic in a wider context
as well. Afterward, the interviews were recorded, transcribed and summarized as follows.
Project’s phases
The studied project is divided into three phases (Phase 0, Phase 1 and Phase 2) and uses
an alternative phase system in relation to what is followed by Denmark. This phase sys-
tem is analysed subsequently in detail. The interviewers start to be part of this project at
the beginning of Phase 2. For this reason, the information regarding Phase 0 and Phase 1
are limited.
In Phase 0 the participants worked only for the design intent. For this reason, the de-
sign was not sufﬁciently developed and the contract after this phase was just a general cost
estimation. While during Phase 1 the preliminary design was carried out. At this phase,
Client had contracts with the contractor (Company A), the architects (Company B), MEP
designer (Company C), and structural designer (Company D), as the design management
was controlled by Company C.
==PAGE:53==
6.2. INTERVIEWS
37
After Phase 1, the client entered a new contract whose content referred primarily again
at cost, but it included a more precise cost estimation compared to the previous one be-
cause of the more detailed design. As the client is basically investor and they have to see
an interest and a proﬁt in the chosen offer, they decided that Company A would take over
as a Design Manager and General Contractor at Phase 2. After that, Company A signed
also contracts with Company B, Company C, and the subcontractors.
The contractor can not build according to the drawings/models received from Phase 1.
They are not 100% coordinated and they need to be speciﬁed. For this reason, right now
the designers are upgrading the discipline models by adding more details and utilizing
mainly the 3D opportunities. Through this procedure, they resolve also the arisen issues.
After that, the contractor will be able to buy the required materials and ready to build it
when the construction starts. Therefore, the main responsibility of Company A prior to
the execution is the design coordination of the different discipline models and the devel-
opment of the central BIM model. These processes are taking place in their site ofﬁce.
To sum up, during Phase 2, all the parties are working closely together to minimize
the risk and optimize the design, schedule, and economy of the building, in order to create
a buildable project. Then the execution will start before the design is ﬁnalized.
At Phase 2 the General Contractor represents the client and has the ﬁnal decision
which always has to comply with the general framework of the client. In general, the
client is involved during the whole project so they know what is going on and if the
budget is kept in reasonable terms regarding the contract’s requirements. They have to
approve the ﬁnal design, but not every material or every detail. So the General Contractor
gives to the client all the input but they do not ask approval for every change order.
The Project Delivery Method as well as the organization of the project stakeholders
are illustrated in Figure 6.1.
==PAGE:54==
38
CHAPTER 6. CASE STUDY
Figure 6.1: Presentation of the project’s phases
==PAGE:55==
6.2. INTERVIEWS
39
Stakeholders
Sometimes there are architects who only create design concepts and they do not care
about design development. They do not recruit professionals with a technical background
in their team, because it is not a business case for them. But in this case, the hired archi-
tects are construction architects as well and the client has as a condition in the contract
that the architect should be the same both at phase 1 and 2, the same people, the same
team.
The Design Manager is not from the same company in every phase. At Phase 2, the
General Contractor plays this role. The previous Design Manager transmitted the nec-
essary input to the current one. Calling and leading meetings, organizing time schedules
and the proper collaboration between all the stakeholders are the main tasks of the Design
Manager. For a buildable result, it is needed the deliverables to comply with the client’s
requirements which are associated with the asked time-frame and budget.
As mentioned before, during Phase 1 architect/consultants were in charge of the build-
ing design. For example, the architect designed accurately the shafts, but approximately
the dimensions of speciﬁc elements (e.g. ducts of ventilation system), their size based on
some constants, and rules. Then Phase 2 comes, the General Contractor has to bring on
board the subcontractors before execution starts. The General Contractor, for instance,
has to sign a contract with a ventilation expert. They will check the design drawings and
decide if the shafts have the right size for them. If they do not approve it, it may have con-
sequences for the General Contractor who has to ﬁnd a solution or change the design.
After ﬁnalizing the design, the subcontractors are delivering the elements, and installing
the ventilation system. The General Contractor is responsible for the whole construction.
They have to inspect all the construction works on site frequently and deal with the Site
Managers on a daily basis.
Documentation
Before Phase 0, a competition was carried out, where the client asked from different ar-
chitectural companies to present their own design approach to this project. In order to
have a more complete and realistic illustration of the concepts, the architects produced
3D models. After that, the client concluded to the best design concept for them and to the
architectural company, which they want to cooperate with. Then the project starts with
Phase 0, where the design intent was decided. Therefore, the tenders were developed.
Usually, the tenders are only drawings with black thick lines without any additional de-
tails. But in this project, the tenders are 3D models as they had been already created from
==PAGE:56==
40
CHAPTER 6. CASE STUDY
the competition process. At the end of Phase 0, the models were mainly used to take
the quantities out and to prepare the ﬁrst cost estimation. During Phase 1, the designers
developed the existing disciplines 3D models by adding more details to achieve a more
accurate cost estimation.
At Phase 2, based on the preliminary models, the architects/engineers/consultants are
producing the ﬁnal detailed models for their needs, estimations and for understanding the
whole project. The more detailed the better, especially for the contractors. Furthermore,
the General Contractor is performing for the ﬁrst time the clash detection among the dis-
cipline models and checking the constructability conﬂicts. During this phase, they are
creating also the coordinated BIM model. A model-based project planning is carried out
visualizing the building’s construction. Moreover, it is an opportunity for the General
Contractor to ﬁnd out potential challenges in the design and establish transparent data
interchange.
The last part of the project, where the General Contractor actually plays a vital role,
is the Execution (construction phase). After the end of each detailed design process, the
relevant construction documentation will be produced. Simultaneously, the communica-
tion with the subcontractors will have started where the changes will be identiﬁed and
the models will be reviewed and approved. The construction drawings will result from
the most updated discipline models, called work-shop drawings. This type of drawings
will be in 2D format because most of the workers are still not familiar with 3D models.
However, some of them cannot read 2D drawings either. For this reason, every subcon-
tractor will have a site representative, who will collect all the needed drawings and will be
responsible to transmit all the instructions to the workers. He can also show the workers
through a tablet app the 3D renders of the building in order to understand how the ﬁnal
result should look like.
After the completion of the construction, the General Contractor has to submit the As-
Built documentation to the client. They have to include all the changes happened during
the construction phase and to present the ﬁnal result. Their exact content is decided in the
very beginning of the project between the client and the Facility Manager. The type and
the level of detail of these documents are described in the contract.
BIM coordination meetings
In order for proper coordination to be achieved and conﬂicts on site to be avoided, regular
project-design meetings occur every two weeks. They are organized by the General Con-
==PAGE:57==
6.2. INTERVIEWS
41
tractor according to Design Management schedule and their main target is the participants
to get deeper into the constructability issues and ﬁnd potential solutions. This process is
called BIM classiﬁcation check. These meetings are not totally ﬁxed and are depended on
the project and design coordination’s needs. For instance, before important milestones,
the Design Manager adds additional meetings on the schedule if there is a special need.
In these cases, during the meetings, the participants are doing the calculation control and
are checking the collisions and then they are deciding which variations should be done
on the project. Moreover, it is important to note that all the designers are working in 3D
models, so it is easy to check for clashes and then to coordinate their discipline models
by themselves, as all of them have access to the coordinated model. Figure 6.2 shows a
typical work-ﬂow of the classiﬁcation check process.
Figure 6.2: BIM Work-ﬂow
Collaboration platform
The stakeholders exchange their discipline models, drawings and documents through a
collaboration platform, called ACONEX. This platform is used also as a mean of commu-
nication, as the emails need to be tracked for legal reasons. Each organization/stakeholder
owns a part of the platform and can upload their drawings, documents which are acces-
sible only for them. Then they decide what they will share and with who. Every stake-
holder has access to this platform, except for the client. Due to a large number of projects
that the client has undertaken, it was decided to create their own platform. This permits
them to include all the projects’ documentation structured and organized in the same way.
In the future, the General Contractor (Company A), subcontractors and site managers
will have a mobile app connected to the platform, which will be digital and really simple
for everybody. It will have a lot of potentials. For example, everyone can take a picture
of cracks or other issues on site, and then upload it to the platform.
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
Part III
Contribution
43
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This Chapter discusses the challenges of the examined project and the eventual BIM con-
tribution in order to address them. This investigation will be divided into two parts.
Firstly the identiﬁed challenges are analyzed and then, an overall suggestion is proposed
based on information from relevant literature, the conducted interviews, and the individ-
ual experience.
7.1
Identiﬁed Challenges
This section presents the issues that may occur in a construction project impeding its
successful completion, as they were identiﬁed through the available project material and
the interviews. During the interviews, the participants focused more on the challenges
that the processes from design to construction phase address with. In addition, some of
the ideal solutions are discussed based on the experience and technical knowledge of the
interviewees.
Contractor Involvement
As mentioned in the previous chapter, Company A (General Contractor) was involved in
Phase 1 as a contractor and not as Design Manager and contributed only to the decisions
of cost estimation. In Phase 1 unbuildable and uncoordinating things were decided by
the designers and the architects due to their lack of experience and knowledge in terms of
construction. They do not pay special attention on how the contractor would solve these
problems or how he would install and build every part of the construction. Therefore, the
contractor is now responsible for solving the arisen issues. For this reason, the General
Contractor wants to be involved from the early beginning of the project and have an im-
pact on the taken decisions regarding the construction process in order to avoid conﬂicts
45
==PAGE:62==
46
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
on site in a later phase. Moreover, only the General Contractor (Company A) has a close
relationship with the subcontractors who give the ﬁnal offers and is able to estimate with
accuracy the ﬁnal cost of the project. All these facts lead to delays and design changes
and as a consequence they cause an increase of the primary cost.
In an ideal case based on the interview outcome, the General Contractor would be
involved as Design Manager in the project from the early beginning by taking care of
all the coordination design meetings and would also have continuous input about the
materials, colors, geometry. In this way, they can continuously update the price estimation
of the whole construction, and keep the cost very strict. However, in this case, the different
stakeholders are independent, and they do not have a detailed design for everything, so
the cost estimation is currently ﬁne because they do not know for example, how thick the
concrete slabs are. After the contract, the General Contractor realized that the budget is
not sufﬁcient, so they possibly have to structure the slabs thinner. For this reason, they
should ask the structural engineers to check this alternative option. Another example was
about the material of an element on the facade. If the architects knew that this element has
to be from another material/color, they may had designed different facades or windows
to work with this other type of element. So, it does not mean that the solution will
conclude to a cheaper or worse design, but that the changes which have an impact on
the ﬁnal architecture design, would be incorporated earlier in it. As a consequence, the
early involvement of General Contractor is not a necessity, but a prerequisite for a more
effective design planning and it does not mean that he will always agree with the cheapest
option, but it is more about coordinating all the design stages.
Involved People
The next challenge of the project was observed to the composition of the participanted
team. The representatives of Company A in Phase 1 are still working for Company A but
they are now participating in other projects. For this reason, these employees were re-
placed in Phase 2. Consequently, the problem comes down also in the level of individuals
because the new participants were not in the meetings during Phase 1 and they were not
informed analytically for every detail before their involvement in the project.
The ideal solution would be a group of people involved from the beginning of the
project until its completion. But in reality, different types of professionals are needed in
Phase 1 than in Phase 2, so it is not possible to have exactly the same people during the
whole project. Moreover, it is absolutely beneﬁcial for new people to come in the team as
they have fresh points of view and can drive the project forward. However, it is necessary
==PAGE:63==
7.1. IDENTIFIED CHALLENGES
47
to have at least one person in Phase 1, who can remain the same and be present at meetings
and able to give input to the new team members regarding the previous phases. Otherwise,
there is a possibility of knowledge loss.
Dimensions of the BIM model
The dimension of the BIM model goes up to 5D in this project. It is known that on 5D
BIM models, the calculation of the cost estimation of a construction are based on. In
Phase 2 the General Contractor does not exploit all the possibilities of this dimension.
Company A is a foreign-owned company and has different standardization and regula-
tions than the Danish ones. For this reason, they created a speciﬁc classiﬁcation of their
models and their software was developed based on this standard system. The company’s
representatives in Denmark are using this type of model, which is still an alive model
and is connected to the cost module providing all the updates. Despite their effort, there
are still a lot of software issues. It is not easy to manage the live connection to the BIM
model. They have to interface the different classiﬁcations codes and then to be able to
translate the models. They still do not trust 100% this solution. Therefore, they decided
to do it in the old school way, to extract the quantities in an spread sheet and carry out the
cost estimation.
Collaboration Platform
Company A doesn’t own the collaboration platform, which is used by the stakeholders of
the project. The team members insert the acquired data on it and afterwards they decide
which of the participants will have access to which of the provided documents. Only the
client has no access to this platform and this is a challenge in this project. The General
Contractor can be informed for a variation by the client through the client’s platform,
while the rest of the stakeholders cannot be up to date directly as the relevant information
is not distributed immediately through their collaboration platform. At the moment the
process goes like this; the General Contractor has to receive the information from the
client and then to share it with the rest project members which concerns them, thus losing
time. As a result, the optimal solution could be a collaboration platform where all the
stakeholders including the client would have access and communicate straight with all
the participants.
==PAGE:64==
48
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
Level of Development
The level of development is decided by the client in this project during Phase 1. The LOD
of each model/system/element is stated in the contract. There is a scheme, that describes
which element will be developed up to which LOD. In this way, the contractor is not
allowed to contribute to this decision and consequently, some elements are not detailed
as much as it is required for its construction. This could cause delays and also a loss of
money, as the General Contractor would possibly request from the consultants a more
detail design which needs extra working hours and all these in a later phase of the project.
The potential for improvement could be if the General Contractor was responsible
for the Design Management and BIM Management from Phase 1, as they would decide
the more detailed design on the traits for which they need more input. For instance, the
dimensions of the ventilation system, elevators, etc., and generally everything that has an
impact on the geometric design.
Time schedules
It is not clear for the stakeholders the type of the schedule processing which they have
to follow during the design and construction phases. Nevertheless, the team members
concluded that the scheduling type of this project is a combination of phased and fast
track, without being 100% sure.
7.2
Proposal-Suggestions
In Section 7.1 a discussion of the project’s challenges and the ideal solution of the in-
terviewees viewpoint are carried out. The following suggested proposal is based on the
combination of information collected by the literature study, interviews, and individual
recommendations. In order for a successful devolution from the design phases to the
execution with BIM incorporation to be achieved, an alternative initial project planning
has to be applied. Countermeasures need to be taken by all the participants. But in this
case, the suggestions are referred to the BIM implementation mainly within Company
A (General Contractor), which is also the primary purpose of this investigation. There-
fore, a deep analysis regarding the rest stakeholders will not be performed and the ﬁnal
recommendations are categorized based on which of the considered project members are
responsible for their implementation. They are represented in the Figure 7.1 in priority
order.
==PAGE:65==
7.2. PROPOSAL-SUGGESTIONS
49
Figure 7.1: Considered project members for the analysis
Client
The contract type plays a crucial role in construction projects. It is worth to note that the
relationship between the parties as well as the processes which the stakeholders have to
follow during the project are dependent on the signed contract. Moreover, it is known that
the contractual agreement is made in the early phase of the project by the client. For this
reason, proper project planning should start with the client. This proposal requires the
implementation of Integrated Project Delivery so that the possibilities offered by BIM
can be exploited to the maximum.
AIA deﬁnes IPD as a process and BIM as a tool despite the fact that there is a dif-
ferentiation in their concepts. Besides, there is an optimal outcome when they are used
simultaneously [AIA, 2011]. They can support a more advanced BIM maturity level,
which provides collaboration, share information and data, reinforce transparency, as well
as the chance of making timely changes in the models throughout the designing stage
[Eastman et al., 2008]. In order to consider that this project delivery method is success-
ful, the participants should have the chance to exchange their data frequently, while the
design of the building is still in progress. This can be achieved by implementing the tradi-
tional scheduling type. Given the fact that it provides the required time to the designers to
receive immediate and fast-feedback by the General Contractor concerning the estimated
cost, sequencing, and constructability of the project. The earlier the data is integrated into
the process, the more beneﬁts are offered to the client and the architect and thus creating
a collaborative, complete and buildable design concept. The data exchange process is
illustrated in Figure 7.2.
==PAGE:66==
50
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
Figure 7.2: Integrating exchange knowledge [Fischer and Khanzode, 2017]
Furthermore, there is the possibility of determining the LOD by the General Con-
tractor. As, in the studied project, the decision of LOD is taken by the client and it is
noticed by the General Contractor that some of the elements’ design is not enough de-
tailed. This could lead to delays and lower quality of the construction. Indeed, the more
precise the discipline model is, the more detail simulation it can be produced. While
on the other hand, on phased and fast-track constructions, the execution starts before the
design phases are ﬁnalized. These two types of construction scheduling may save time
and money but they do not ensure that the quality of the result will be the desirable one.
Consequently, the combination of IPD and BIM has been proven to be one of the most
signiﬁcant assets in change management as it minimizes to zero the potential of changes
orders and it helps the contractor to make decisions, which are not entirely depended on
the cost but also on quantitative and qualitative criteria [Hardin and McCool, 2015]. The
Figure 7.3 describes how a project which has an IPD contract is organized.
Figure 7.3: Integrated Design Project [Hardin and McCool, 2015]
==PAGE:67==
7.2. PROPOSAL-SUGGESTIONS
51
As mentioned before, a building information model can provide immediate feedback,
while developing designs for constructions, cost implications as well as the quantity of a
design change. When a design modiﬁcation is suggested by the General Contractor, this
provides immediate visual and cost feedback. Additionally, it enables the client to come
to an agreement with the contractor or not. If the design change is ﬁnally ﬁxed by the
client, then the architects should evaluate the impacts and decide if they agree with this
variation. In case the design change is not approved by the architects, it is withdrawn,
otherwise, the design is revised and the General Contractor has to update and complete
the ﬁnal estimation. The suggested Decision-making Process Chart is portrayed in Figure
7.4.
Figure 7.4: Decision-making Process Chart
==PAGE:68==
52
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
To sum up, the main advantages of this concept are listed below [Eastman et al., 2008,
Hardin and McCool, 2015]:
• IPD strengthens collaboration among project team.
• No misunderstanding among stakeholders.
• The signiﬁcant design decisions are made during the design phase
• The contribution of the contractor is not based only on the cost estimation but also
on the quantitative and qualitative decisions.
• IPD can be considered as the fastest delivery method from design to construction.
• The contractor can calculate the cost by performing estimates throughout the whole
design phase.
• IPD enhances innovation.
• IPD can bring to zero the change orders and conﬂicts in the ﬁeld.
Finally, some potential challenges of this concept are mentioned thereunder as well
[Hardin and McCool, 2015].
• IPD is not a traditional method and needs a collaborative and trust-based relation-
ship among the participants to succeed.
• The cooperation between the architect and the General Contractor typically needs
more time competing in order to take over the contract in this delivery, thus increas-
ing the budget.
• IPD is not acceptable by any public organization yet.
It is worth to note that the ﬁrst two disadvantages could be overcome by the simultaneous
implementation of IPD and BIM. As it promotes the collaboration among the stakeholders
and limits the time needed for designing a construction. Regarding the last challenge a
solution could be the brieﬁng of construction companies as well as conducting seminars
for the interested professionals.
Organization/Contractor
As noted before, the ideal solution is the same professionals to be involved during the
entire project. It is known that in some cases this is not feasible. Because in phase 1, it
is needed the tender department, the cost estimators and in general, people that contract
==PAGE:69==
7.2. PROPOSAL-SUGGESTIONS
53
for the preliminary design; people who are not useful for the rest phases. Furthermore,
they should have the experience to deal with architects contrary to Phase 2 which needs
experienced people able to deal mainly with subcontractors. Nevertheless, at least one
person should be active in all phases, as the BIM Manager. The role of BIM Manager is
analyzed in detail below in this section. This decision depends entirely on the contract
signed between the client and the stakeholders. But either it is decided to involve BIM
Manager from the beginning of the project or not, there should be a rule about the trans-
mission of the information. Every team member should upload all data received from
the processes on the collaboration platform and communicate them to the stakeholders
of Phase 2 in order to prevent the loss and ensure the transparency of every individual’s
knowledge.
The aforementioned suggestions could be veriﬁed by the provided information given
in the Figure 7.5. This famous graph created by MacLeamy, reveals that the most beneﬁ-
cial time to resolve arisen issues is during the design phase and not during the execution.
Moreover, if constructible models are not provided and/or the employers participated to
design are not involved later to the construction phase, then it is less possible to proac-
tively solve the conﬂicts and save the client’s money [Hardin and McCool, 2015].
Figure 7.5: MacLeamy Curve [Hardin and McCool, 2015]
Project
The projects which apply BIM in their portfolio have most of the times in their project
team the position of BIM Coordinator, like the studied project. The responsibilities of
this specialist are limited to the following [Jacobsson, 2018]:
==PAGE:70==
54
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
• Clash detection: integration, identiﬁcation and proposing solutions
• Managing information ﬂows and communication ﬂows
• Coordinating design changes throughout the construction process
• Supporting new working procedures and technical development
• Acting as a boundary spanner
This proposal model should be supported by a new position: the BIM Manager. A
BIM Manager instead of a BIM Coordinator may be more useful for complex construction
projects. As the former one has a wider range of responsibilities. Moreover, the combina-
tion of the two professionals could be also a good solution for projects which implement
BIM since some of their responsibilities are similar and their cooperation could lead to a
better result.
BIM Manager is a new role in the project design. It is recommended that the person
assigned to this position should have been trained and developed skills not only regarding
BIM but also Stakeholder and model-based Scheduling Management. Although this extra
role of BIM Manager - with all the particular requirements accompanying it - might be
considered as an extra cost, in reality it has been proven to be extremely advantageous
in terms of savings coming from the successful application of BIM. At the beginning of
a project, the BIM Manager thoroughly examines it by taking into consideration the re-
lated project’s BIM use cases and records them in the equivalent BIM Execution Plan.
Additionally, the BIM Manager facilitates, aids, supports and secures the course of action
in the project by taking into account all the elements involved in it such as technologies,
staff, processes and all the methods required for its optimal execution. Then, to achieve
this, there is an alignment of the BIM’s application to the project needs [Tulke and Schu-
mann, 2018].
Consequently, the BIM Manager’s role is to be the central point of contact as well as
the one who coordinates staff training, ﬁnds on-the-spot solutions for various problems
appearing on the project, seeks the most optimal and cost-effective methods to improve
the execution of the project. In this case, the improper use of 5D of BIM is a challenge
which should be faced by ﬁnding a solution for this issue. It is very important for the
General Contractor to be able to calculate at any time the cost. The process which is
followed now, creating excel sheets with the costs, causes delays and also inaccuracy of
the result. For this reason, the BIM Manager should include in the team a BIM expert to
deal only with this task. He should decide which of the standard systems is more efﬁcient
==PAGE:71==
7.2. PROPOSAL-SUGGESTIONS
55
for this speciﬁc project and then align and adapt the 5D model to the project needs and
requirements. Because the simultaneous use of two different standardizations could lead
undoubtedly to dysfunction of the 5D model. Consequently, the BIM Manager’s role is
to be the central point of contact as well as the one who coordinates staff training. In
order to be guaranteed that the BIM has only advantages to offer to the project and this is
mainly for the client’s beneﬁt [Tulke and Schumann, 2018].
What is more, the BIM Manager tries to integrate the interests of the parties involved
in the project in terms of cost and beneﬁts that is why the harmonious operation of the
project is of utmost importance. To achieve this, there must be a clear deﬁnition of BIM
processes, materials and software to be applied, data to be linked and used, model struc-
ture, model objectives as well as updating of the project’s cycles and phases. The role of
the BIM Manager is to supervise, facilitate and encourage all project participants through
the use of BIM and to pool all the ﬁndings of BIM applications in a database during
the course of the project. The location of the BIM Manager is between IT infrastructure
management and the users of the applications being specially designed for that purpose.
Furthermore, he plays an active role in managing this type of interaction and coordi-
nation by gathering, analyzing and examining users’ comments and feedback and then
interpreting them for the smoother development of IT systems. Also, the procedure of
creating and processing data can be reconstructed throughout the course of action [Tulke
and Schumann, 2018].
In Figure 7.6 the main responsibilities of BIM Coordinator and BIM Manager are
summarized in order for their differences to be more clear.
Figure 7.6: The comparison between BIM Coordinator [Jacobsson, 2018] and BIM Man-
ager [Tulke and Schumann, 2018]
==PAGE:72==
56
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
Individuals
The fast response to clients’ demands is extremely valuable. It must be said that 4D mod-
els allow the simulation and evaluation of the planned construction sequence as well as
its sharing with other members of the project team. Furthermore, there must be a group-
ing of all objects in the building related to the construction stages as well as their linking
to equivalent activities in the schedule of the project. It is fundamental that coordina-
tion and support is ensured during the project, because various factors such as working
under pressure and following particular deadlines may lead project participants to turn
to old-fashioned working patterns when some insecurities or malfunctions mat emerge,
concerning the application of the new software tools [Eastman et al., 2008].
As a result, undesirable concurrencies may occur, which in turn will put in danger
the successful implementation of BIM methods. However, sometimes it is difﬁcult for all
the processes and activities to be organized and completed within a tight time frame. For
this reason, the proposed model requires weekly meetings for stakeholders’ brieﬁng in
order to be informed by the BIM Manager about the processes which they have to follow
regarding the project ’s construction scheduling. The meeting could be taken place in
a room at the project site ofﬁce, which would have a big screen where the participants
will communicate and share all their outcomes and proposals. There is an imperative
need for the client, the architect, and the General Contractor to participate physically in
the meetings aiming to an effective collaboration and decision-making. Simultaneously,
the integrated model provides the chance to the General Contractor and subcontractors to
enrich the design with constructability knowledge as it progresses and to ﬁnd out imme-
diately effective solutions for arisen conﬂicts [Eastman et al., 2008].
==PAGE:73==
7.2. PROPOSAL-SUGGESTIONS
57
Table 7.1: Identiﬁed challenges and the contribution of the relevant body
Responsible
Root cause
Solution
Client
Unfortunate
decision-making
by consultants,
which leads
to
design-changes
during
construction phase
Implementation
of
Integrated
Project Delivery (IPD) - taking
full
advantage
of
BIM
pro-
vided applications - deﬁning a
decision-making process
Client
Insufﬁciently detailed design of
various elements/systems caus-
ing delays due to the need of
upgrading the Level of Devel-
opment
Early involvement of the Gen-
eral Contractor on the design
phase - participation in decisions
not only about cost estimation
but also regarding the construc-
tion processes
Organization/General
Contractor
Inefﬁcient
transmission
and
transparency
of
required
information
between
the
stakeholders
Uploading and communicating
all the data resulting from the
processes on the collaboration
platform
Project
Insufﬁcient initial project plan-
ning with regards to integration
of BIM processes
Recruitment of BIM Manager
Project
Partial use of 5D BIM model
Integration of BIM expert in
project team - alignment of 5D
model to the project require-
ments and needs
Individuals
Misunderstanding of the type
of construction scheduling
Weekly meetings for all stake-
holders’ brieﬁng in order to in-
form them about the processes
which they have to follow re-
garding the project’s type con-
struction scheduling exploiting
the 4D BIM model
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This Chapter quotes a summary of the analysis and the results of this research. Addi-
tionally, it highlights the most important ﬁndings of the conclusions and propositions of
improvements in this project. Finally, recommendations for further studies are proposed.
8.1
Conclusion
This project has studied ways to achieve a smooth transition from design to execution of
a construction. The ﬁrst step was to identify the challenges of this process. The main pur-
pose of this report is to ensure that the detailed design could lead to a buildable concept
avoiding changes due to design issues on site, preventing time delays and cost overruns
by enhancing simultaneously the information transparency and quality assurance of the
project. The study focused on the management and optimization of this procedure by
implementing Building Information Modeling from the contractor point of view.
In more detail, the investigation is based on a construction project of a high-rise build-
ing. It is operated by a Design-Build contract. Undoubtedly such a type of contract affects
the processes between the design and the construction stage. This project applies BIM
within its processes but without taking full advantage of all the possibilities that it offers.
This fact was conﬁrmed by the conducted interviews, which revealed the inhibitors of the
successful implementation of BIM methods in this project. The main obstacles in this
construction project are the lack of transmission and transparency of the required infor-
mation, the poor decision-making, the partial use of 5D model, as well as the inefﬁcient
initial project planning. In addition, the gained data by the available project material and
the interviews were utilized in order to evaluate these challenges and conclude to the sug-
gested proposal.
59
==PAGE:76==
60
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
Considering the needs of the examined project as well as the provided information, it
was noticed that the capabilities of BIM are not exploited to the maximum so there is a
great room for improvement. The implementation of Integrated Project Delivery which
is known as a collaborative agreement for the client and the stakeholders in conjunction
with the traditional scheduling type, could lead to a proper initial project planning. The
combination of these two concepts provides collaboration between the client, the archi-
tect and the General Contractor due to the early involvement of the last one. Moreover, it
gives the required time for exchanging the needed information and feedback among the
participants concerning the estimated cost, sequencing, and constructability of the project.
It is worth to note that the earlier the data is integrated into the design process, the more
beneﬁts are offered to the stakeholders. Consequently, a common decision-making pro-
cess is followed by ensuring that changes will be limited to the design phase and it will
be developed a buildable design concept. In this way, there will not be overruns of time
and initial cost, as design changes on site will be avoided. In addition, it is fundamental
from the early stage of the project that all the resulting information should be uploaded on
the collaboration platform and communicated to all the stakeholders in order to prevent
losing individual knowledge.
Furthermore, the creation of a new position in the project which is the BIM Manager
in cooperation with the BIM Coordinator, could cover all the project needs regarding the
proper use of building information modeling. The main responsibility of this role is to
facilitate and secure the course of project actions by taking into account technologies,
staff, processes and all the methods required for its optimal and cost-effective execution.
Furthermore, the full extent of the 5D model is suggested. This task needs a skilled
professional as a BIM expert in order to align and adapt the existing 5D model to the
project needs and requirements. Finally, the suggested model requires weekly meetings
for team members’ brieﬁng, to be informed about the processes which should be fol-
lowed regarding the project ’s construction scheduling. That is because it is difﬁcult in
complex projects all the processes and activities to be well-organized and ﬁnalized within
a tight time frame while the needs change all the time. During these meetings, the par-
ticipants will share all their outcomes and proposals. The client, the architect, and the
General Contractor should participate physically aiming at an effective collaboration and
decision-making as well as on-the-spot solutions for arisen conﬂicts.
All in all, even if most researches approach individual, independent problems of a
project, in this case, the access to data for a speciﬁc problem was limited (due to conﬁ-
dentiality reasons), leading to a more holistic approach. The suggested solution covers
all the aspects of the project challenges, demonstrating a proposal that all of the solutions
==PAGE:77==
8.2. FURTHER RESEARCH
61
are interlinked and approached collectively, rather than individually.
8.2
Further research
Several important topics were not analyzed during this research. That is because the
examined project is still in progress and also a lot of documents are not available due to
conﬁdentiality reasons. Therefore the suggestions for further studies are presented below:
• Investigation of the application of IPD contract considering the perspective of the
client, architect/consultants, and subcontractors to cover the topic in various aspects
of this project. As, it is known that IPD represents a collaboration contract which
inﬂuences the involvement of stakeholders.
• Implementation of the proposal on a real case project in order to evaluate the results
and identify potential additional improvements.
• Another research could be the study of quantitative results, for instance how much
time and money could be saved by implementing the suggested proposal.
• Assessment of the process of a project that is initially organized under the IPD con-
tractual agreement but, implementing the phased or fast-track scheduling method
instead of the traditional one. In order for comparisons to be performed and to con-
ﬁrm if the concept of IPD in conjunction with traditional method is, in fact, the best
practice when carrying projects with challenges like these.
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
AIA (2011). “Paper ID : 10363 oral MATERIALS AND STRUCTURES SYMPOSIUM
( C2 ) Space Structures II - Development and Veriﬁcation ( Deployable and Dimen-
sionally Stable Structures ) ( 2 ) Author : Dr . Yuanjie Zou China Academy of Space
Technology ( CAST ), Beijing , Chi”. In: 2, p. 10363.
Autodesk (2018). “Top 10 Beneﬁts of BIM in Construction”. In: URL: https : / /
connect.bim360.autodesk.com/benefits-of-bim-in-construction.
Aziz, Nor Diana, Abdul Hadi Nawawi, and Nor Rima Muhamad Ariff (2016). “Building
Information Modelling (BIM) in Facilities Management: Opportunities to be Con-
sidered by Facility Managers”. In: Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 234,
pp. 353–362. ISSN: 18770428. DOI: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2016.10.252. URL:
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1877042816315063.
Bargstädt, Hans Joachim (2015). “Challenges of BIM for construction site operations”.
In: Procedia Engineering 117.1, pp. 52–59. ISSN: 18777058. DOI: 10.1016/j.
proeng . 2015 . 08 . 123. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
proeng.2015.08.123.
Berlo, L. A. H. M. van and F. Bomhof (2014). “Creating the Dutch National BIM Levels
of Development”. In: Computing in Civil and Building Engineering (2014), pp. 129–
136. DOI: 10.1061/9780784413616.017. URL: http://ascelibrary.
org/doi/10.1061/9780784413616.017.
BIMForum (2018). “LOD Speciﬁcation 2018 Part I: For Building Information Models
and Data”. In: September, p. 253. URL: www.bimforum.org/lod.
Bryde, David, Martí Broquetas, and Jürgen Marc Volm (2013). “The project beneﬁts of
building information modelling (BIM)”. In: International Journal of Project Manage-
ment 31.7, pp. 971–980. ISSN: 02637863. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2012.
12.001. arXiv: 0402594v3 [arXiv:cond-mat]. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2012.12.001.
63
==PAGE:80==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bui, Nam, Christoph Merschbrock, and Bjørn Erik Munkvold (2016). “A Review of
Building Information Modelling for Construction in Developing Countries”. In: Pro-
cedia Engineering 164.1877, pp. 487–494. ISSN: 18777058. DOI: 10.1016/j.
proeng . 2016 . 11 . 649. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
proeng.2016.11.649.
Cassano, Manuele and Marco L. Trani (2017). “LOD Standardization for Construction
Site Elements”. In: Procedia Engineering 196.June, pp. 1057–1064. ISSN: 18777058.
DOI: 10.1016/j.proeng.2017.08.062. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.proeng.2017.08.062.
COGTA (2009). “MIG: INDUSTRY GUIDE: INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICE DELIV-
ERY LEVEL AND UNIT COST”. In: cooperative governance & traditional affairs.
URL: http : / / www . cogta . gov . za / mig / toolkit / toolbox / PM /
Dependency%5C%20Management.pdf.
Eastman, Chuck et al. (2008). BIM Handbook Paul Teicholz Rafael Sacks, pp. 20–21, 65–
84, 93–135. ISBN: 9780470185285. DOI: 2007029306.
Elvin, G. (2007). “Integrated practice in architecture: mastering design-build, fast-track,
and building information modeling.” In: John Wiley and Sons.
Eschenbruch, Klaus and Jörg L. Bodden (2018). “Integrating BIM in Construction Con-
tracts”. In: Building Information Modeling, pp. 303–314. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
319-92862-3_17. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-
3-319-92862-3%7B%5C_%7D17.
Fink, Thomas (2018). “BIM for Structural Engineering”. In: Building Information Mod-
eling, pp. 329–336. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-92862-3_19. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-92862-3%7B%5C_%7D19.
Fischer Ashcraft, Reed and Khanzode (2017). “Integrating Project Delivery”. In: John
Wiley and Sons.
Ghaffarianhoseini, Ali et al. (2017). “Building Information Modelling (BIM) uptake:
Clear beneﬁts, understanding its implementation, risks and challenges”. In: Renew-
able and Sustainable Energy Reviews 75.November 2016, pp. 1046–1053. ISSN: 18790690.
DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.083. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3.
Grytting, Iver et al. (2017). “Use of LoD Decision Plan in BIM-projects”. In: Procedia
Engineering 196.June, pp. 407–414. ISSN: 18777058. DOI: 10.1016/j.proeng.
2017.07.217. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2017.
07.217.
Hale, Darren R et al. (2009). “Empirical Comparison of Design / Build and Design / Bid /
Build Project Delivery Methods”. In: Journal of Construction Engineering and Man-
agement 135.July, p. 579. ISSN: 07339364. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-
7862.0000017.
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
Hardin, Brad and Dave McCool (2015). BIM AND CONSTRUCION MANAGEMENT.
Vol. 39. 5, pp. 561–563. ISBN: 9781118942765.
Jacobsson, Merschbrock (2018). “Engineering, Construction and Architectural Manage-
ment”. In: Emerald Publishing Limited, pp. 989–1008. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1108/%20ECAM-03-2017-0050.
Lewis (2007). “Fundamentals of PROJECT MANAGEMENT”. In: AMACOM.
Liu, Fangxiao et al. (2013). “Building Knowledge Modeling : Integrating Knowledge in
Bim”. In: Cib W78 30, pp. 9–12.
Manu, Emmanuel et al. (2015). “Trust inﬂuencing factors in main contractor and sub-
contractor relationships during projects”. In: International Journal of Project Man-
agement 33.7, pp. 1495–1508. ISSN: 02637863. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijproman.
2015.06.006. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.
2015.06.006.
Mattern, Hannah and Markus König (2018). “BIM-based modeling and management
of design options at early planning phases”. In: Advanced Engineering Informatics
38.December 2017, pp. 316–329. ISSN: 14740346. DOI: 10.1016/j.aei.2018.
08.007. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2018.08.007.
Matusova, Dominika and Viera Bartošová (n.d.). “Utilization the Process BIM – Building
Information Modeling in Facility”. In: pp. 429–436.
Migilinskas, Darius et al. (2013). “The beneﬁts, obstacles and problems of practical bim
implementation”. In: Procedia Engineering 57, pp. 767–774. ISSN: 18777058. DOI:
10.1016/j.proeng.2013.04.097. arXiv: 0402594v3 [arXiv:cond-mat].
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2013.04.097.
Mubarak (2010). “construction project, scheduling and control”. In: John Wiley and Sons.
O’Connor Jr., Patrick J. (2009). “Integrated Project Delivery: Collaboration through New
Contract Forms”. In: Faegre & Benson, LLP, pp. 1–57.
Ohrn, L. G. and Thomas Rogers (2008). “Deﬁning project delivery methods for design ,
construction , and other construction-related services in the United States”. In: North-
ern Arizona University, pp. 2–9.
PAS (2013). “Speciﬁcation for information management for the capital / delivery phase
of construction projects using building information modelling”. In: Speciﬁcation for
information management for the capital / delivery phase of construction projects using
building information modelling 1.
Pavlovskis, Miroslavas et al. (2017). “Problems in reconstruction projects, BIM uses and
decision-making: Lithuanian case studies”. In: Procedia Engineering 208, pp. 125–
128. ISSN: 18777058. DOI: 10.1016/j.proeng.2017.11.029. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2017.11.029.
==PAGE:82==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
PMBOKGUIDE (2017). “A Guide to the PROJECT MANAGEMENT BODY OF KNOWL-
EDGE”. In: Project Management Institute, Inc.
Redmond, Alan et al. (2012). “Exploring how information exchanges can be enhanced
through Cloud BIM”. In: Automation in Construction 24, pp. 175–183. ISSN: 09265805.
DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2012.02.003. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.autcon.2012.02.003.
S.D.Bynum (1983). “Construction management and design-build/fast track construction
from the perspective of a general contractor.” In: Law and Contemporary Problems,
pp. 25–38.
Succar, Bilal (2009). “Building information modelling framework: A research and de-
livery foundation for industry stakeholders”. In: Automation in Construction 18.3,
pp. 357–375. ISSN: 09265805. DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2008.10.003. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2008.10.003.
Trani, Marco L. et al. (2015). “BIM Level of Detail for Construction Site Design”. In: Pro-
cedia Engineering 123, pp. 581–589. ISSN: 18777058. DOI: 10.1016/j.proeng.
2015.10.111. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2015.
10.111.
Treldal, Niels, Flemming Vestergaard, and Jan Karlshøj (2016). “Pragmatic use of LOD
- a modular approach”. In: Proc., 11th European Conference on Product and Process
Modeling (ECPPM).
Tulke, Jan and René Schumann (2018). “BIM Manager”. In: Springer International Pub-
lishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 A. Borrmann et al. (eds.), Building Infor-
mation Modeling, pp. 293–302. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-92862-3_16.
Vogwell (2003). “Stakeholder management”. In: PMI R⃝Global Congress 2003. URL:
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/stakeholder-management-
task-project-success-7736.
Volkov, A., P. Chelyshkov, and D. Lysenko (2016). “Information Management in the
Application of BIM in Construction. the Roles and Functions of the Participants of the
Construction Process”. In: Procedia Engineering 153, pp. 828–832. ISSN: 18777058.
DOI: 10.1016/j.proeng.2016.08.250. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.proeng.2016.08.251.
Vozzola, Mariapaola, Gregorio Cangialosi, and Massimiliano Lo Turco (2009). “BIM
use in the construction process”. In: Proceedings - International Conference on Man-
agement and Service Science, MASS 2009, pp. 3–6. ISSN: <null>. DOI: 10.1109/
ICMSS.2009.5305126.
Wang, Jun et al. (2016). “Building information modeling-based integration of MEP layout
designs and constructability”. In: Automation in Construction 61, pp. 134–146. ISSN:
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
09265805. DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2015.10.003. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2015.10.003.
Winston, Tellis (1997). Application of a Case Study Methodology. URL: http://www.
nova.edu/ssss/QR/QR3-3/tellis2.html?ref=dizinler.com.
Won, Jongsung and Ghang Lee (2016). “How to tell if a BIM project is successful: A goal-
driven approach”. In: Automation in Construction 69, pp. 34–43. ISSN: 09265805.
DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2016.05.022. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.autcon.2016.05.022.
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
Appendices
69
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX A
Interviews
A.1
Strategies for the interviews guides
• Identify which areas need to explored by the interviewee.
• Considering the available time, the number of questions to be adjusted accordingly.
• Depending on the person’s position to adapt the questions ﬁts that particular re-
spondent
• Introduce ourselves in order the participants to feel more comfortable.
• Provide a brief description of the aim and the context of the thesis in order the
interviewee to know which is the area will focus on.
• Begin the interview with some “warm-up” questions and thus the rest of the inter-
view will ﬂow more smoothly.
A.2
Interview guide
Purpose of the Interviews
1. Become familiar with the structure and the phases of the project.
2. Get detailed knowledge of stakeholder functions and processes.
3. Understand in depth the interaction between the designers and contractors, as well
as the reasons of the coordination lack.
71
==PAGE:88==
72
APPENDIX A. INTERVIEWS
Introduction
1. What are your main responsibilities/tasks on the project?
2. What is the status of the project’s part which are you responsible?
First Main Part (Project Manager)
1. What does the contract of the project include? Is it a Design-Build or a Design-Bid
Build project (Turnkey)?
2. What kind of project is? (Fast track, phased or traditional)
3. Which is the organization plan of the project?
4. Who is the person which gives the approval to start building?
5. How do you coordinate with the other consultants? Who has the ﬁnal decision -
you?
6. At which phase of the project are the contractors starting to participate?
7. Is there any diagram that presents the project information work-ﬂow, in order to un-
derstand the phases of it (Tendering-Preliminary design-Detailed design-Construction)?
8. Is it possible to give me the Schematic Time Schedule of the project?
9. Which are the subcontractors/subconsultants and which are their responsibilities?
10. The design department of Zueblin is in German, so in that case do you follow a
speciﬁc process because of the distance?
11. Are you following a speciﬁc BEP?
Second Main Part (BIM Coordinator)
1. Which processes are described in your contract? Are you following the schedule or
are there any deviations? If yes, which kind and why?
2. Which maturity level of BIM do you implement to this project (Level 1 etc.)?
3. Which category of BIM is used to the project (3D, 4D, 5D etc.)?
4. Regarding the BIM coordination, how do you try to avoid clash?
5. How often do you perform clash detection/detect clash/inconsistency and how?
6. Is there a common platform where all the stakeholders have access?
==PAGE:89==
A.2. INTERVIEW GUIDE
73
a) If yes could you please describe me the method and if there are rules regarding
the use?
b) If no how are you sharing the needed information?
7. What are the shared data (drawings, models, requirements, documents, etc.)?
8. In case of changes, how are the project’s members informed and how do they give
their feedback and approval when it is needed?
Third Main Part (Design Manager)
1. Who was responsible for the tender documents and what is your contribution to
them? How detailed are the tenders?
2. How detailed are your drawings and which is their Level of Development?
3. What kind of drawings do you have? For instance, work-shop drawings, As-Built?
4. Which are the drawings/models that the contractors take into consideration? What
kind of information are presented on them?
General Questions
1. What are the challenges of these processes? In which stage do you mentioned more
often issues regarding the coordination which cause delays, changes on site and to
cost estimation? - How do you overcome this kind of problems?
2. Do you have any suggestions for improvement?
3. Are there any barriers, which the contractors are phasing often and complaining
for? If yes which are them?
4. Do you think that a well organized project management could help the evolution of
the project?
Conclusion
1. What do you think based on your experience is the most crucial factor in order a
detailed design to lead to a buildable concept?
2. Is it possible to give me a presentation of the project?
