==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Unravelling Mononuclear Phagocyte
Heterogeneity by Single-Cell Sequencing
Line WulﬀChristensen
Supervisors: William Agace and Thomas Fenton
External supervisor: Kirstine Belling
Hand-in: 3rd of February 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Mononuclear phagocytes are suggested to have important roles in maintain-
ing intestinal homeostasis.
Dendritic cells and macrophages are diﬀerent
subsets of mononuclear phagocytes, which are involved in orchestrating both
inﬂammatory and tolerogenic immune responses.
Though, these cells are
functionally diﬀerent, there still does not exist a deﬁnitive strategy for sepa-
rating their diﬀerent intermediates with ﬂow cytometry due to the high het-
erogeneity within the subsets. Furthermore, we only have limited information
on how the diﬀerent subsets of mononuclear phagocytes are implicated in gut
inﬂammation.
In this project we have used a human single cell RNA sequencing data
set to study patterns of diﬀerentiation from monocytes to macrophages and
monocyte-derived dendritic cells by diﬀerent bioinformatic approaches. From
these analyses a set of potential surface markers were selected to construct a
panel for ﬂow cytometry. Finally, the ﬂow cytometry panel was tested on ﬁve
healthy patient samples and a sample from a patient with Crohn’s disease.
With the bioinformatics and ﬂow cytometry approaches combined we could
include novel markers which identiﬁed seven populations of cells seemingly
belonging to the monocyte lineage. We found four subsets of intermediate
cells, where one seemed to initiate a bifurcation towards a dendritic cell-like
lineage. The marker expression indicated three mature cell populations, two
with a macrophage-like proﬁle and one with a dendritic cell-like expression
pattern. We compared the abundance of the diﬀerent populations between
small and large intestinal samples: Early monocyte-derived cells seemed to
be more abundant in the large intestine, whereas fully matured macrophages
were more frequent in the small intestine.
The sample from the patient
with Crohn’s disease revealed remarkable diﬀerences in frequencies of the
diﬀerent populations compared to the samples of healthy subjects. These
results might propose that a speciﬁc subset or pathway of monocyte-derived
cells could be involved in the pathology of Crohn’s disease and might be a
potential target for novel therapy.
1
==PAGE:3==
Resum´e
Mononukleære fagocytter er blevet foresl˚aet at have en central rolle i vedlige-
holdelse af tarmens homeostase. Dendritiske celler og makrofager er forskel-
lige grupper af mononukleære fagocytter, som er involveret i igangsættelse
af b˚ade inﬂammatoriske og tolerogene immunresponser. Selvom disse celler
er funktionelt forskellige, eksisterer der stadig ikke en deﬁnitiv strategi, som
kan adskille de forskellige mellemstadier med ﬂowcytometri grundet den høje
heterogenitet inden for disse celletyper.
Derudover har vi kun begrænset
information om, hvordan de forskellige undergrupper af mononukleære fago-
cytter er impliceret i tarminﬂammation.
I dette projekt studerede vi mønstre i diﬀerentiering fra monocytter til
makrofager og til monocyt-aﬂedte dendritceller ved hjælp af et humant enkelt-
celle-RNA-sekventeringsdatasæt. Fra dataanalysen udvalgtes et sæt poten-
tielle overﬂademarkører til at konstruere et antistofpanel til ﬂowcytometri.
Vi testede ﬂowcytometripanelet p˚a fem prøver fra raske forsøgspersoner og
en prøve fra en patient med Crohns sygdom.
Med de kombinerede til-
gange fra bioinformatik og ﬂowcytometri kunne vi inkludere nye overﬂade-
markører, der muliggjorde identiﬁkation af syv populationer af celler, som
tilsyneladende er aﬂedte af monocytter. Vi fandt ﬁre grupper af mellem-
stadieceller, hvoraf ´en muligvis initiere en forgrening mod en dendritcelle-
agtig proﬁl. Markørekspression indikerede tre fuldt-udviklede cellepopula-
tioner, to med en makrofaglignende proﬁl og en med et dendrititcelle lignende
ekspressionsmønster. Vi sammenlignede den relative mængde af de forskel-
lige populationer mellem tynd- og tyktarms prøver: Tidlige monocyt-aﬂedte
celler syntes at være beriget i tyktarmen, mens fuldt udviklede makrofager
var hyppigere i tyndtarmen.
Prøven fra patienten med Crohns sygdom
afslørede bemærkelsesværdige forskelle i frekvenserne af de forskellige popu-
lationer sammenlignet med prøverne fra raske forsøgspersoner. Disse resul-
tater kan indikere, at en bestemt cellepopulation eller forgrening af monocyt-
aﬂedte celler kan være involveret i Crohns sygdoms patologi og et muligt felt
for ny behandling.
2
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is the work of Line WulﬀChristensen, student at DTU Bioinfor-
matics and Systems Biology. The thesis has been done in collaboration with
DTU Health Technology Division of Biopharma - Mucosal Immunology to
fulﬁll the requirements for a master’s degree in engineering. The supervisors
of the project were professor William Agace, and postdoc Thomas Fenton
from the Technical University of Denmark and associate professor Kirstine
Belling from Copenhagen University. The work for the thesis has been com-
pleted between 3rd of September 2018 and 3rd of February 2019.
The main focus of the project has been studying a human intestinal sin-
gle cell RNA sequencing data set to construct the diﬀerentiation path from
monocytes to macrophages. The gene patterns of distinctive cell stages were
used to explore upregulation of possible surface proteins for the diﬀerent
populations of the diﬀerentiation process with ﬂow cytometry.
Lyngby, 3rd of February 2019
Line WulﬀChristensen
s134900
Supervisors:
William Agace, Professor
Thomas Fenton, Postdoc
Kirstine Belling, Associate professor
3
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
First, I would like to thank Bill for giving me the opportunity to do my
master’s thesis in the exciting ﬁeld of mucosal immunology. Then I would
like to give my thanks to Tom, who has supervised all my experimental work,
had helpful questions directing the bioinformatic analyses of my project, and
read through several drafts of this thesis.
I am thankful to Kirstine, Kristoﬀer and Txema whom have given me
helpful inputs and constructive criticism regarding the bioinformatic side of
my project. And especially to Kirstine, whom has taken the time to comment
on various draft of this thesis. I would also like to thank the Agace lab team
for general support and an encouraging work environment.
Finally, I would like to thank my sister, Anna, for mathematical inputs,
Annie for sharing the despair on late weekend nights and of course to my
boyfriend, Frede, for letting me go on and on about my project with never
wavering support.
4
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviation List
AB - Antibody
APC - Antigen presenting cell
cDC - Classical/conventional dendritic cell
cDC1 - Conventional dendritic cell 1
cDC2 - Conventional dendritic cell 2
CDP - Common dendritic cell progenitor
cDNA - Complementary DNA
DC - Dendritic cell
DEG - Diﬀerentially Expressed Gene
DGEA - Diﬀerential Gene Expression Analysis
FACS - Flow-activated cell sorting
GEM - Gel beads in emulsion
hi - High
IFN - Interferon
IL - Interleukin
ILF - Isolated lymphoid follicles
int moDC - Intermediate moDC
LI LP - Large Intestine Lamina Propria
LI LP wDC2 - LI LP with cDC2 clusters
LP - Lamina Propria
MAC - Macrophage
MAMP - Microbe-associated molecular pattern
MHC - Major histocompatibility complex
MNP - Mononuclear phagocyte
MO - Monocyte
MO int - Monocytes intermediate
mRNA - Messenger RNA
Padj-value - Adjusted P-value
PAMP - Pathogen-associated molecular pattern
pbMOs - Peripheral blood monocytes
PC - Principle component
PCA - Principle component analysis
PRR - Pattern recognition receptor
RNA-seq - RNA sequencing
RT - Reverse transcription
SC - Single cell
scRNA-seq - Single-cell RNA sequencing
SI LP - Small intestine lamina propria
SI LP wmoDC - SI LP with moDC clusters
SI LP wDC2 - SI LP with cDC2 clusters
Th - T helper cell
TIP-DC - TNF-α and iNOS producing DC
TLR - Toll like receptor
TNFα - Tumor necrosis factor alpha
UMI - Unique Molecular Identiﬁer
QC - Quality control
Nomenclature for expression
X- - Cells are negative for expression of X
X+ - Cells are positive for expression of X (all expression included)
Xint - Cell have intermediate expression of X
Xhi - Cells have high expression of X
5
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
1
Resum´e
2
Preface
3
Acknowledgements
4
Abbreviation List
5
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Mononuclear Phagocytes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.1.1
Macrophages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.1.2
Dendritic Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.1.3
Monocyte-Derived Dendritic Cells . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.2
Single Cell RNA Sequencing Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3
Single Cell Transcriptome Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.3.1
Preprocessing of Raw Sequencing Outputs . . . . . . .
18
1.3.2
Trajectory Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.4
Project Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2
Methods
22
2.1
Experimental work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.1.1
Human Gut Compartment Isolation . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.1.1.1
Media and materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.1.1.2
Compartment Isolation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.1.1.3
Digestion of Tissue and Freezing of Cells . . .
23
2.1.2
Antibody Staining with Frozen Cells
. . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2
scRNA-seq Analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.1
Cluster Identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.2
Pseudo-Temporal Ordering with Monocle . . . . . . . .
27
2.2.3
Estimating RNA Velocity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3
Experimental Work: Optimization of Antibody Panels
. . . .
29
3
Results
31
3.1
Identifying Cell Types within Clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
RNA Velocity Predictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Pseudo-temporal Trajectories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.1
Small Intestine Lamina Propria Trajectories . . . . . .
36
6
==PAGE:8==
7
3.3.2
Large Intestine Lamina Propria Trajectories . . . . . .
38
3.4
Antibody Panel Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5
Identiﬁcation of Monocyte Derived Cell Populations . . . . . .
44
4
Discussion
49
5
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
54
Appendix
61
==PAGE:9==
1.
Introduction
The primary task of the immune system is to defend the host against harmful
entities. It defends the host against invading pathogens like bacteria, viruses,
and fungi, and clears dead, old and injured host cells. It also surveys for
abnormal host cells and kills these.
The immune system has an innate and an adaptive branch. The fast,
innate immune response reacts to pathogens immediately or within hours
or minutes. In contrast, the adaptive immune response is slower and needs
hours, days or even weeks to respond to a primary insult. The innate im-
mune system recognizes conserved pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMP) by pattern recognition receptors (PRR), which are germline en-
coded, whereas the adaptive immune system recognizes microbes in an anti-
gen speciﬁc manner. Adaptive immune cells are activated initially in lym-
phoid tissues by recognizing antigen expressed on antigen presenting cells.
When an antigen and an antigen-speciﬁc receptor interact, the adaptive cell
will be expanded and the resulting eﬀector cell will speciﬁcally target the
pathogen. The adaptive cells consist of T and B cells. T cells’ main task is
secreting cytokines and cytotoxicity depending on the T cell subset, while B
cells produce antibodies (AB) [1].
The intestinal mucosa is the largest surface in the human body. It si-
multaneously has to absorb nutrients and still function as a barrier towards
pathogens. The intestine consists of several anatomical layers that diﬀer in
cell composition (Figure 1).
Directly facing the lumen of the intestine is
the epithelial cell layer, which in itself functions as a barrier. The epithe-
lial layer consists of various cell types: The nutrient absorbing enterocytes,
intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL), anti-microbial peptide producing paneth
cells, mucus producing goblet cells, and stem cells required for renewal of
enterocytes and goblet cells. The small intestine (SI) has extensive villi and
each enterocyte has microvilli on the lumenal surface creating a brushborder,
where digestive enzymes can break down nutrients before they are absorbed.
Paneth cells and stem cells are localized in crypts, which are found in both
the SI and large intestine (LI). In the SI, crypts are located at the base of
the villi. The LI does not have villi and the crypts are here located closer to
the lumen [2].
Below the epithelium is the lamina propria (LP), where eﬀector cells
such as activated T cells, plasma cells, dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages
(MACs) are found. Under the LP is a thin muscle layer called the muscularis
mucosa. Together the epithelial layer, the LP, and the muscularis mucosa
form the mucosa. The mucosa is lined by the submucosa, which also contains
8
==PAGE:10==
9
diﬀerent isolated lymphoid tissues where adaptive cells are initially primed.
The submucosa is lined with both blood and lymphatic vessels and a nerve
bundle in form of the submucous plexus. The ﬁnal two layers separating
the intestine from the cavity are another muscle layer and the ﬁbrous serosa
[2, 3].
Figure 1: Layers in the small (left) and large (right) intestine and their cell
composition: The intestine is composed from a layer of epithelial cells harbouring en-
terocytes, intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL), goblet cells, and crypts with paneth cells,
and stem cells. Below the epithelial cell layer is the lamina propria (LP), where cells with
immune eﬀector functions can be found including macrophages, T cells, dendritic cells
(DC), and B cells that produce IgA for secretion into the lumen. The LP is followed by
the muscularis mucosae, the submucosa, and another thicker muscle layer. Figure adapted
from [2].
Due to the changes in environment and function moving from the SI
towards the LI diﬀerent properties of immune cells are needed at diﬀerent
sites along the intestine. For example there has been reported an inverse
correlation between diﬀerent subsets of T helper cells (Th) from the SI to the
LI in mice. Th17 cells, which are generally involved in controlling infections
with extracellular bacteria and fungi, are found to decrease in abundance
towards the LI, while the number of regulatory T cells is increased in the
LI [1, 2].
Immunological homeostasis is carefully regulated in the gut in
order to avoid unnecessary responses towards harmless food and microbiota
==PAGE:11==
10
associated antigens, while still remaining alert towards opportunistic and
pathogenic invasions. The task of preserving homeostasis is conducted by
specialized immune cells like the mononuclear phagocytes (MNPs).
1.1
Mononuclear Phagocytes
The MNPs are a group of cells with speciﬁc capacities, which help conserve
homeostasis and survey for unwelcome pathogens. The intestinal mucosal
subsets of MNPs are the focus of this thesis.
MNPs consist of two subset of cells and their progenitors: DCs and MACs.
MACs and DCs are the ”professional” antigen presenting cells (APC). To
present antigens they engulf antigens or entire pathogens, which are then
degraded and presented on cell surfaces as peptide fragments on major his-
tocompatibility complex (MHC) I or II. MHCI are expressed by all cells
except red blood cells, while MHCII is speciﬁc for the APCs. In humans
MHC is referred to as human leukocyte antigen (HLA). T cells are activated
in tissues by recognizing these MHC:peptide complexes by their T cell recep-
tor. DCs are regarded as the link between the innate and adaptive immunity
due to their capacity to activate na¨ıve T cells in lymphoid tissues [1, 4].
1.1.1
Macrophages
MACs are a tissue-resident subset of MNPs. MACs are in some tissues self-
renewing and in others depend on bone marrow derived stem cells for renewal.
MACs can be found in all human tissues and though they share some overall
features, they vary in phenotype and functions [5].
Intestinal MACs have previously been shown to be dependent on periph-
eral blood monocytes (pbMOs) for renewal [6]. However, newer studies have
suggested that the intestine also harbours a population of long-lived MACs,
which are not dependent on the turn-over from pbMOs [7–9]. pbMOs dif-
ferentiate from myeloid progenitors in the bone marrow, then migrate to the
intestine and other tissues where they develop into MACs [10]. In the in-
testines of mice under homeostatic conditions Ly6C and MHCII expression
can be used to identify the diﬀerent stages of development from pbMOs into
MACs. This diﬀerentiation pattern of the monocyte (MO) →MAC observed
with the two aforementioned markers is known as ”the MO waterfall” (Figure
2). pbMOs are Ly6Chi, MHCII-, CD64+, and CX3CR1int, when they enter
the LP of the intestines (P1)(See expression nomenclature on p.
5).
P2
cells still express Ly6C, but have gained expression MHCII, and upregulated
CD64 to intermediate levels. At P3, the cells have switched oﬀexpression of
==PAGE:12==
11
Ly6C, while remaining MHCIIhi, CD64int, and CX3CR1int. P4 cells have a
similar phenotype to P3 apart from an increase of CX3CR1 expression along
with further upregulation of CD64 (Figure 2)[11, 12].
Ly6C
MHCII
P1
P3/P4/P5
P2
Figure 2: The monocyte (MO) waterfall in mice: The MOs entering the intestines
are Ly6Chi and MHCII- (P1). As MOs diﬀerentiate towards macrophages (P4) they reach
intermediate stage P2. At this stage, cells are Ly6Cint and have upregulated MHCII. As
cells reach P3 Ly6C expression is completely downregulated. P4 and P5 cannot be distin-
guished from P3 by Ly6C/MHCII expression, but these cells have diﬀerential expression
of CD64 and CD11c, which enables identiﬁcation. Inspired by [12].
During intestinal inﬂammation, the MO waterfall is interrupted and cells
accumulate in stages with P1 and P2 associated expression of the men-
tioned markers [11]. In these stages, MOs can respond to toll like receptor
(TLR)(speciﬁc PRRs) stimulation and produce inﬂammatory cytokines such
as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα). When MOs reach P3 and P4 they
lose their ability to produce such cytokines to some extent [12].
In the literature, human MOs and MACs are identiﬁed by the expression
of CD14 and by being negative for lymphocyte markers (CD3, CD19, CD20,
CD56). The human subsets can be divided into CD14int and CD14hi cells,
where the CD14hi cells are thought to be human homologous of the mice
CX3CR1int cells (P1/P2/P3). In the CD14int subset a population of CD11cint
exist: these are proposed to be later transitional stages than the CD14hi
cells. Otherwise, the human CD14int cells are mainly associated with tissue
resident MACs, which also express HLADR, CD209, and CD163, but not
CD11c. These subsets of CD14 expressing cells can be further divided by
their expression of HLADR, CD209 and CD163: HLADRintCD209intCD163int
cells are proposed to be homologous to murine P1 cells, while HLADRhi
and CD209intCD163int cells are compared to murine P2 cells. Both of these
subsets express CD11c consistent with them being relatively immature cells
as pbMOs in human express CD11c [13]. The human MNPs proposed to be
homologous to the murine P3/P4 cell are HLADRhiCD209hiCD163int/hi and
CD11cint/-, correlating with them being more mature subsets [12].
The impact of inﬂammation on human MOs and MACs has been assessed
==PAGE:13==
12
by studying the subsets in patients with Crohn’s disease. Crohn’s disease is
a gut inﬂammatory disease which often involve the distal SI but can aﬀect
any part of the gastrointestinal tract [1]. In inﬂamed tissues an accumulation
of CD14hi cells appears compared to non-inﬂamed. In non-inﬂamed tissue
populations of both high and low expressing CD163 and CD11c cells are
present, whereas the predominant population in inﬂamed tissue consists of
CD163- and CD11chi cells [12, 14].
However, Subsetting and diﬀerentiation of MOs in the human intestine
are currently based on expression of a limited set of surface markers. The
biased approach prevents a clear distinction of what subsets and lineages are
prevailing in the disease inﬂected tissues.
The human MNP subsets have been studied by transcriptome analysis,
which revealed overlapping expression patterns between the diﬀerent stages
of diﬀerentiation. The analysis by Bujko et al. revealed considerable tran-
scriptional diﬀerences between diﬀerentiating MOs, pbMOs and DCs [15].
During diﬀerentiation intestinal MOs downregulate their capacity to re-
spond to TLR activation.
MACs still express several diﬀerent TLRs for
recognizing pathogens, but the adaptor facilitating downstream signalling
from these receptors is downregulated to a level making them incapable of
activating the NFκB pathway [16]. Along with loss of responsiveness to TLR
signaling, intestinal MACs also gain the ability to produce anti-inﬂammatory
interleukin 10 (IL-10). MACs also depend on IL-10 themselves to be able to
repress an inﬂammatory proﬁle [17]. MACs remain anti-inﬂammatory after
diﬀerentiation into the P4 subset even if inﬂammation sets in. Inﬂammatory
mediators will instead recruit new pbMOs for inﬂammatory responses such
as respiratory burst and production of inﬂammatory cytokines. The arrival
of newly recruited pbMOs is observed as an increase in the ratio of cells in
P1/P2 stages compared to P4 [18].
In the intestine, homeostasis is constantly challenged due to the pres-
ence of microbiota and uptake of food antigens. Mucosal MACs must have
a non-inﬂammatory proﬁle responding to the constant antigen exposure, as
constant mucosal inﬂammation would cause disruption of the barrier leading
to very severe infections. In order to maintain a non-inﬂammatory proﬁle, a
range of functions normal to other tissue MACs are downregulated in intesti-
nal MACs. These downregulated functions are especially related to signals
of inﬂammation to the surrounding cells (Table 1)[5, 19, 20].
==PAGE:14==
13
Table 1:
Functions of MACs inhabiting other tissues compared to non-inﬂammatory
intestinal MACs. Adapted from [5].
other tissue MAC
Intestinal MAC
Phagocytosis
+
+
Killing
+
+
Chemotaxis
+/-
-
Respiratory burst
+
-
Antigen presentation
+
+
Cytokine production
+
-
Co-stimulation
+
-
1.1.2
Dendritic Cells
DCs can be divided into subsets dependent on their location, surface markers,
gene expression, and by their function. For the purpose of this thesis only
DCs of the intestine are considered.
The common DC progenitor (CDP) arises from the MO DC progenitor in
an Flt3L-dependent manner and give rise to the main DC progenitors. At this
point cells are not known to be restricted to any of the speciﬁc DC lineages
but can potentially develop into both main subsets of DCs: plasmacytoid
DCs (pDCs) and classical DCs (cDCs). Each of these two main population
have a restricted progenitor, which the CDP have potential to give rise to. In
order to generate cDCs the CDP diﬀerentiates into a pre-cDC, while CDPs
diﬀerentiating into pre-pDCs are restricted to the pDC lineage. Development
from CDP into pre-pDC is controlled by ID2, whereas E2-2 inhibits ID2 and
directs cells towards pre-cDC [21–23].
The pDCs have prominent endoplasmatic reticulum and golgi apparatus
and their main function is to produce type 1 interferon (IFN) in defense
against viral pathogens. The key surface markers to identify the pDC subset
are CD123 and CD303. Additional markers have been found using RNA
sequencing, these include FCER1, ILT3, ILT7 and DR6 [21].
The cDC subsets are conventionally separated into two groups, which
both arise from the pre-cDC population. The two cDC subsets can be dif-
ferentiated by marker expression of CD103 (Integrin αEβ7, gene ITGAE),
SIRPα and XCR1. Development into cDC1s from the pre-cDC progenitor re-
quires expression of transcription factors Batf3 and Irf8. Based on the above
mentioned markers, cDC1s are homogeneously CD103+, XCR1+ and SIRPα-.
The cDC2s consist of a heterogeneous population of CD103+/-, SIRPα+ and
XCR1- cell, which can be divided into further subsets. Pre-cDC development
into cDC2 lineage is proposed to be dependent on Irf4. The CD103+ subset
==PAGE:15==
14
have further been suggested to depend on KLF4 and Notch2, whereas Zeb2
have been implicated in survival of CD103- cDC2s [23, 24]. The subsetting of
the cDCs by the above mentioned phenotype markers is illustrated in Figure
3A and more surface markers for both human and mice are underlined in
Figure 3B [25].
Functionally the cDCs are conventionally grouped into two subsets by
their ability to activate CD4+ or CD8+ T cells. The cDC1 subset can ac-
tivate CD8+ T cells by cross-presenting antigens on MHCI and the cDC2s
activate CD4+ T cells by antigen presentation on MHCII. However, the di-
vision is not deﬁnitive: apart from activating CD8+ T cells, cDC1s are also
reported to drive the diﬀerentiation of CD4+ T cells to the Th1 lineage. Ac-
tivation of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells by cDC1s are supported by the
production of IL-12 [26, 27]. Furthermore, cDC2s are mainly reported to
drive diﬀerentiation of CD4+ T cells to Th2 and Th17 lineages [24].
The above ﬁndings show that while the cDC1s are a relatively homoge-
neous subset the cDC2s are a highly heterogeneous population and much is
still to be discovered about them.
Figure 3: Phenotypic markers of intestinal cDCs: A) Division of the intestinal
cDCs into three subsets based on their expression of CD103 and SIRPα.
B) Further
surface markers from both mice and human to identify the three cDC subsets. Grey =
cDC1, Blue = CD103+ cDC2, Green = CD103- cDC2. Adapted from [25].
The ratios of the above mentioned cDC subsets vary along the intestine.
In the SI LP the CD103+ cDC2s are the most abundant, while the CD103-
cDC2s are dominant in the LI LP. The cDC1s are found in both tissues, but
have a slightly higher abundance in the LI LP [24, 25].
An important functional diﬀerence between MACs and DCs is the ca-
==PAGE:16==
15
pacity of DCs to prime na¨ıve T cells in lymphoid tissues in order to give
rise to speciﬁc adaptive immune responses. DCs are activated in peripheral
tissues by recognition with PRRs of microbe-associated molecular patterns
(MAMP) on pathogens. The signalling from the PRR upregulates phagocy-
tosis and pathogen degradation to provide pathogenic antigens for presenta-
tion on MHC molecules. Upregulation of the chemokine receptor CCR7 is
another important event triggered by PRR signalling and it is required for
DC migration to lymphoid tissues. MACs do not have this migratory capac-
ity and remain tissue resident throughout their life cycle. After entering the
lymphoid tissues DCs interact with na¨ıve lymphocytes by MHC:TCR inter-
action, co-receptor stimulation and cytokine production. The three signals
allows lymphocytes with high aﬃnity for the presented antigens to diﬀeren-
tiate towards speciﬁc lineages of T cells appropriate for defense against the
encountered pathogen. This priming of na¨ıve T cells is how DCs enable the
adaptive immune system to target speciﬁc pathogens [28].
1.1.3
Monocyte-Derived Dendritic Cells
Monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs) are a controversial subset of cells,
which to some extent share DC expression patterns. They are, as their name
suggests, believed to diﬀerentiate from pbMOs in the intestine and other
human tissues. MOs were ﬁrst found to be able to diﬀerentiate into DCs
in vitro by Sallusto et al. in 1994, but whether development occurs in vivo
in humans is still unknown [29]. Diﬀerent subsets of DCs have over time
been suggested to be derived from MOs in vivo. The CD103-Sirpα+ cDC2
subset has for example been suggested to be a moDC population based on
their transcriptome proﬁle which shared many similarities with MO tran-
scriptomes. This cDC2 subset also had some CX3CR1 expression, which
at that time only was known to be expressed on MO-derived cells [30–32].
In 2015 the equivalent population of cDC2s in mice showed dependence on
Flt3L for diﬀerentiation, proposing they were in fact descendants of the CDP
and, thus, not MO-derived [4].
The best established in vivo moDC population is found in tumour-associ-
ated DCs. Laoui et al. deﬁned these in mice tumours as Ly6chi, CD64hi,
CD24+ and CD11b+. In CCR2 deﬁcient mice, which have a reduction of
MOs exiting the bone marrow, the tumour moDC population was almost not
present, while populations of cDC1s and cDC2s were unaﬀected. Laoui et al.
also used mouse models with tagged progenitors to determine from which pro-
genitors moDCs arised. Following diﬀerentiation of tagged pre-cDCs, none
developed to have CD64hi and CD11b+ expression like the moDCs had. Us-
ing similarly tagged MOs, to follow MO diﬀerentiation, the only gate with
==PAGE:17==
16
tagged cells within the DC subsets was the moDC population. These moDCs
could not induce proliferation of T cells and had an immunosuppressive phe-
notype similar to the one found in inﬂammatory TNFα and iNOS producing
DCs (TIP-DC). Furthermore, the moDC population did not have an upreg-
ulated expression of CCR7 and could not be found in the tumour draining
lymph nodes. The same study also identiﬁed the equivalent human tumour
moDC subset among BDCA2-, IRF8-, BDCA1+ cells being uniquely CD14+,
CD11bhi compared to the cDC2s [33].
In a study from 2017, Goudot et al. identiﬁed the transcription factor Irf4
as being essential for MO diﬀerentiation to moDCs in agreement with the
cancer setting study. They also found that activation of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) could increase diﬀerentiation of MOs into moDC along with
decreasing MAC development in vitro [34].
In 2017 Schrøder et al. found that the CD1c+ DC population is hetero-
geneous and can be split by the expression of CD14. The CD14+ CD1c+
population was ineﬀective at priming na¨ıve T cells and was concluded to be
MO-derived. The conclusions from this study were in agreement with the
moDC population observed in tumours [35].
Though the cancer setting study found that moDCs could not prime
na¨ıve T cells, other studies of inﬂammatory subsets of DCs also believed to
be moDCs do have the capacity to prime na¨ıve T cells in lymphoid tissues
ex vivo in humans and in vivo in mice [36–38].
The previously identiﬁed moDC populations are based on diﬀerent mark-
ers and are from diﬀerent tissues, which makes comparison problematic. Fur-
thermore, the presence of human moDCs have only been tested in inﬂamed or
otherwise disease inﬂected tissues. Whether moDCs exist in healthy human
tissue and have the capacity to migrate to lymph nodes to activate na¨ıve
T cells is unknown. In order to comprehensively separate cDCs, MOs, and
MACs, an unbiased method could be implemented. Such a method might
also unveil where moDCs originate from and in which tissues they are present.
1.2
Single Cell RNA Sequencing Technology
Transcriptome analysis allows us to study how the genotype aﬀects the phe-
notype in health and disease.
Transcriptome data can provide us with
knowledge on which genes are transcribed from the genome and thus can
be translated into protein.
Studies have shown that the best messenger
RNA (mRNA) to protein correlations can be found when studying highly
diﬀerentiating cells [39–41].
Previously, transcriptome data was produced from samples of bulk RNA
==PAGE:18==
17
from sorted cells, tissue samples etc., thus, the results were an average across
numerous cells. Recently, single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technol-
ogy was developed, which enables the capture of trancriptome data for single
cells. A main advantage of scRNA-seq is the ability to ﬁnd heterogeneity in
what is otherwise thought to be homogeneous populations of cells [42]. As-
suming homogeneity can especially be problematic regarding lineage tracing
as cells undergoing diﬀerentiation will have highly variable gene expression
proﬁles compared to fully mature subsets of cells. Expression proﬁles of such
diﬀerentiating cells can be explored by pseudo-temporal ordering of single
cells also known as trajectory analyses [43, 44].
Single cells can be captured for sequencing by the 10x technologies. 10x
Genomics has developed a microﬂuidics chip, which is loaded with gel beads,
oil, cells, and reagents as illustrated in Figure 4.
The gel beads contain
oligonucleotides for reverse transcription (RT), sequencing adapters and prim-
ers, a 30 basepair (bp) oligo-dT to prime the poly A tail of the mRNA for
RT, a 14 bp gel beads in emulsion (GEM) barcode and unique molecular
identiﬁer (UMI) to identify transcripts [45].
The gel beads and cells are
mixed in the microﬂuidics channel and oil generates emulsion droplets at
the next intersection in the channel. These emulsion droplets are referred
to as GEM and they are loaded with single cells as illustrated in the lower
panel of Figure 4. After encapsulation in GEMs cells are lysed and the gel
beads start dissolving to release their content for RT. When cells have gone
through RT the emulsions are broken and cDNA are ampliﬁed followed by
library construction and sequencing [45].
Figure 4: 10x scRNA-seq technology: The eight-channel microﬂuidics chip is loaded
with oil, gel beads, cells and reagents. The beads are captured in gel beads in emulsion
(GEM), which are loaded with single cells in in the microﬂudic channels.
When cells
are encapsulated in the GEMs they will start lysing the gel beads will dissolve to release
their content of oligonucleotides needed for the reverse transcription (RT) of the mRNA to
cDNA. The emulsions droplets are broken and barcoded cDNA can ampliﬁed and libraries
constructed before sequencing. Adapted from [45].
==PAGE:19==
18
1.3
Single Cell Transcriptome Data Analysis
1.3.1
Preprocessing of Raw Sequencing Outputs
Many tools have been developed to analyse the amount of data generated
by scRNA-seq. Though many tools exist, there has yet to be deﬁned a gold
standard for a scRNA-seq pipeline [46, 47].
Figure
5:
Analysis
workﬂow
for
scRNA-seq data: The ﬁrst step is qual-
ity control (QC) of the raw reads, align-
ment to a reference genome and then another
round of QC of the mapped reads (yellow
boxes).
scRNA-seq data needs further QC
on single cell level followed by normalization
and consideration of confounding factors (or-
ange boxes).
Once the data has been pre-
processed, various methods can be applied to
interpret the data biologically (blue boxes).
Adapted from [48].
Common for all RNA sequenc-
ing (RNA-seq) data is initial qual-
ity
control
(QC)
of
sequenced
reads, trimming of reads, align-
ment to a reference genome and
further QC of the aligned reads.
The CellRanger pipeline can be
applied for this purpose on 10x se-
quencing outputs [49].
The pre-
processing output is a n genes
x m cells matrix (a count ma-
trix), which needs further prepro-
cessing to ensure the quality on
the single cells level (Figure 5, yel-
low steps)[50]. After these initial
steps the data is ready for sec-
ondary analysis, which can be used
for biological interpretation. Bio-
logical meaningful results are of-
ten obtained by initially cluster-
ing groups of similar cells together.
Clustering is dependent on pre-
processing steps and the resolu-
tion parameter, which decides the
threshold of similarity for cell clus-
ters [51].
The R package Seurat
[52] can handle preprocessing of
scRNA-seq (orange steps, Figure
5) and is well recommended for
clustering [53, 54].
==PAGE:20==
19
After clustering, cell identities can be decided by looking at diﬀerential
expressed genes (DEG) for each cluster or by overlaying expression of known
cell type markers. Soneson and Robinson compared robustness and scala-
bility in single-cell data of 36 diﬀerent approaches for diﬀerential expression
analysis (DGEA). They found that tools build for bulk RNA-seq data could
perform equally well as those build speciﬁcally for scRNA-seq [55].
To make sense of single cell data, it is useful to be able to represent
the high dimensional data in a 2D plot. A currently favored technique for
reducing dimensionality of single cell (SC) data is t-stochastic neighbour em-
bedding (tSNE). tSNE is a dimensionality reduction method, which attempts
to not only retain global structures of the data but also local structures [56].
1.3.2
Trajectory Analysis
Trajectory analyses are applied to SC data to determine the pseudo-time
line of cells. In doing so the analysis can assist in unveiling diﬀerentiation
patterns and how cell subsets are connected [47]. A pseudo-time line is a
term for a relative time line determining the order in which events occur, e.g.
cell diﬀerentiation. In trajectory analyses the time line will often be drawn
as a tree, which can be projected onto an existing 2D space or the included
cells can be projected onto the tree shape. Usually the analysis will consist
of two overall tasks: ﬁrst, a dimensionality reduction and then the trajectory
modelling itself.
Monocle was one of the ﬁrst tools to perform trajectory analysis [44]. It
is built on an initial DGEA to determine the n most varying genes between
settings and then uses reversed graph embedding to unsupervised learn the
manifold of the trajectory: Simultaneously a graph in reduced dimension is
calculated for the cells, while the points of this graph is mapped back into
high dimension space of the n most varying genes x m cells matrix (resulting
in n dimension space)(Figure 6). It is an optimization problem to keep points,
which are close on the learned manifold, close when they are back in high
dimension as well. The same is keeping the low dimension points as close to
their ”true” high dimension position. The trajectory is the result of the best
balanced solution between the two optimization problems [57].
==PAGE:21==
20
Figure 6: Reversed graph embedding: The dimensions of the matrix is reduced into
low dimension space, where a manifold is learned. The cell positions are forced onto the
manifold before the resulting positions are mapped back into high dimensional space. The
points are continually run through this process until there is found a balance between high
dimension space and low dimension space positions on the manifold. Adapted from [57].
The output for Monocles trajectory includes both a pseudo-time line and
a new set of clusters, which can be used for further DGEA analyses to unveil
DEGs in diﬀerent states of the pseudo-time. Time lines will often include
bifurcations, where one progenitor cluster (tree root) of cells split into two
diﬀerent cell fates (tree leaves) [57].
A disadvantage to Monocle is the assumption that all included cells are
connected, the trajectory will force every cell into the pseudo temporal order,
even if it is of a diﬀerent lineage.
RNA velocyto is a newer open-source tool for estimating cells’ diﬀerenti-
ation patterns. The developers found that 15-25% of reads from scRNA-seq
data contain intron sequences. As intron sequences are spliced out of im-
mature mRNA before it becomes mature mRNA, it was hypothesized that
the transcripts containing introns are less mature and have yet to undergo
splicing. The theory was then that a cell, which had just received a signal
for upregulation of a certain gene, would produce increased amounts of the
corresponding unspliced mRNA. If the cell was observed a short time later,
the mRNA would have undergone splicing and a parallel increase would then
be measurable in the spliced mRNA [58].
==PAGE:22==
21
Figure
7:
RNA
splicing
of
Intronic
Regions: Rates of RNA
splicing processes yield
diﬀerential equations to
predict
RNA
velocity
with Velocyto. Adapted
from [58].
To predict future positions of cells based
on their splicing data a mathematical model
was deduced. A set of diﬀerential equations
are assembled from the theory behind splic-
ing, where each step represent an equation
(Figure 7).
Cell positions can then be pre-
dicted by the collected diﬀerential equation
system. Some variables like splicing are easily
estimated for steady state systems, whereas
others like transcription are inﬂuenced by bi-
ological factors and are more problematic to
constrain. A master equation calculates the
probability of diﬀerent cell positions from the
diﬀerential equation system. It assigns a prob-
ability to the possible combinations of un-
spliced and spliced mRNA amounts for a given
time.
The system will converge towards a
Poisson distribution for the variables.
RNA velocities are calculated in the high dimensional space of the n genes
x m cells matrix.
To help meaningful embedding of projections into 2D
space neighbouring cell directions are used. The neighbourhood parameter
is evaluated to be most inﬂuential in estimating velocities in the 2D-space.
When neighbourhood cells have high heterogeneity it can thus aﬀect the
embeddings and lead to misdirecting results [58].
1.4
Project Aim
The human MO →MAC diﬀerentiation is currently based on mouse mod-
els and the investigated markers have not yet given clear separation of the
intermediate subsets. To investigate possible new surface markers, we ana-
lyzed a human scRNA-seq data set. Trajectory analyses were implemented
to examine the diﬀerent stages of the diﬀerentiation path and to assess how
diﬀerent cell types are related. The diﬀerentiation stages were then inspected
for upregulated genes associated with surface markers, and ﬁnally we have
explored the the markers with a ﬂow cytometry panel on human samples.
==PAGE:23==
2.
Methods
2.1
Experimental work
2.1.1
Human Gut Compartment Isolation
2.1.1.1
Media and materials
• Cold HBSS (HBSS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 16 mM Hepes)
– 437 mL autoclaved Mili Q water
– 50 mL HBSS 10X without Ca2+ and Mg+
– 5 mL penicillin/streptomycin
• Cold R5 (RPMI 1640, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 5% heat-inactivated
FCS)
– 500 mL RPMI 1640 with L-Glut
– 25 mL heat inactivated FCS
– 5 mL penicillin/streptomycin
• DTT buﬀer (R5, 4 mM DTT)
– 50 mL warm R5
– 200 µL of 1 M stock DTT (4 µL/mL)
• EDTA buﬀer (HBSS, 5 mM EDTA)
– 50 mL warm HBSS
– 500 µL of 0.5 M stock (10 µL/mL)
• Digestion buﬀer (R5, 60 µg/mL TM or 5 mg/mL collagenase D, 15
µL/mL DNase)
– 10 mL warm R5
– 150 µL DNase (15 µL/mL)
– 240 µL 2.5 mg/mL TM stock (24 µL/mL)
– OR 400 µL of 5 mg/mL collagenase D (40 µ/mL)
• Freezing media
– 22.5 mL R5
– 22.5 mL FCS
– 5 mL DMSO (10%)
• Dumont #7 forecps, curved dissecting scissors, scalpels, dissecting mi-
croscope in BSC, petri dishes, falcons, pasteur pippettes
• 37oC shaking incubator (set to 380 RPM)
2.1.1.2
Compartment Isolation
• Wash the sample in cold R5 and place it in a petri dish with more cold
R5.
22
==PAGE:24==
23
• Cut oﬀmuscularis externa and serosa with scissors and forceps and cut
sample into pieces of 5 cm2.
• Wash of mucus by placing the sample sections in 50 mL falcon tubes
with DTT buﬀer on a shaking incubator for 10 min x2.
• Place sample in petri dish with cold R5, if muscularis mucosa is to
be colored with methylene blue, as much of the submucosa should be
removed as possible.
• To separate LP from muscularis mucosa slowly peel muscularis mucosa
of LP under a dissection microscope using two forceps. Start at a corner
and try to keep a straight line along the section. SI LP will be more
diﬃcult to detach compared to colon LP.
• Store samples in cold R5 in Falcon tubes placed on ice until ready for
next step.
• Prepare 40 mL (enough for 4 washes) of EDTA buﬀer per LP tissue
section and place in water bath until use.
• Wash oﬀepithelium with EDTA buﬀer by placing samples in 50 mL
falcon tubes with 10 mL EDTA buﬀer and placing on shaking incubator
for 10 min. Vortex colon LP samples before removing EDTA buﬀer.
The EDTA solution will become clearer when epithelium is washed oﬀ
approximately 3 washes for colon LP and 4 washes for SI LP.
2.1.1.3
Digestion of Tissue and Freezing of Cells
• Place tissue in petri dish with R5 and cut tissue into 5mm2 pieces with
a scalpel. Put the tissue into a 50 mL falcon and remove excess R5.
• Add 5 mL of digestion buﬀer to each falcon tube.
• Let LP samples digest for 40 min on shaking incubator.
• Complete digestion by dissociating LP with a Pasteur pippette 100x
or until completely dissolved.
• Pass the suspension through a 100 µm ﬁlter into a new 50 mL falcon
tube. Do not let ﬁlter dry out but keep adding R5 until ∼30mL.
• (Make sure the Sysmex is turned on.)
• Spin tubes down for 6 minutes, remove supernatant and resuspend in
1 mL cold R5 and move to eppendorf tubes.
• Count cells on the Sysmex and split cells into new eppendorf tubes
according to, number aimed for per tube for freezing.
• Spin cells down. While tubes are centrifuged label the cryo vials with
patient number, tissue compartment, cell number, enzyme used for
digestion (collD or TM) and date.
• Resuspend cells in 1 mL of freezing media and move to cryo vials.
• Place vials in a styrofoam box and tape lid on. Put the box in the
==PAGE:25==
24
-80oC freezer.
2.1.2
Antibody Staining with Frozen Cells
• Mix antibody (AB) panel - remember to check that you have the right
amount of antibody panel afterwards (normally 40 µL pr test)(Final
antibody panel Figure ??).
• Mix mouse block (4% in brilliant violet buﬀer, 10 µL per test)
• Thaw samples in water bath (next steps are to be done fairly quick to
avoid killing the cells in the freezing media, which is toxic to them).
• Move sample to 15 mL falcon tube.
• Add warm R5 dropwise (ﬁrst mL mixed with DNAse 15 µL/mL) then
slowly adding more and more (until 10 mL).
• Spin down 6 min at 400g at room temperature on a centrifuge.
• Remove supernatant and resuspend in 1 mL R5 move the wanted
amounts oﬀcells to new eppendorf tube - remember to save some cells
for viability stain control. The amount of cells needed diﬀer depending
on what cell types are studied and how rare these are. For MOs and
MACs 2x106 cells per test tube is suﬃcient.
• Spin test tubes down and remove supernatant. Resuspend the cells in
10 µL mouse block and allow to work for 10 min.
• Add AB panel and stain for 30 min (40 µL AB panel per test).
• Make up compensation for each ﬂuorophore with beads:
Label tubes with the lasers which will be used in the experiment except
the laser for viability stain. Label two eppendorf tubes with ultracomp
and onecomp. Vortex the UltraComp and OneComp eBeads, drop one
drop into the eppendorf tube with the appropriate label. Distribute 10
µL beads into each of the tubes for the lasers UltraComp eBeads for UV
lasers and OneComp eBeads for all other lasers. Add 0.2 µL antibody
to the beads for UV and violet lasers (for BV421 add 20 µL MACS
buﬀer and 500µL for BV605). Add 1 µL antibody to all other lasers.
Just before the compensation is run 300 µL MACS buﬀer is added
to the eppendorf tubes (only those with volume less than 300µL) and
everything is transferred to labelled FACS tubes.
• Viability control:
Kill 30 µL of the cells saved for viability stain control by placing them
on a heating incubator (set at 70oC) for 1 min and thrn put them back
on ice for another min. Add another 30 µL of live cells to the tube
with the dead cells.
• Wash the stained cells with MACS buﬀer 500 µL and spin them, remove
supernatant and repeat wash.
==PAGE:26==
25
• Mix per test 300 µL MACS with 2 µL 7AAD (remember the viability
control stain too)
• Remove supernatant from test tubes and resuspend each test in 300
µL MACS+7AAD viability dye.
• Filter samples into marked FACS tubes and run them on the ﬂow cy-
tometer.
2.2
scRNA-seq Analyses
The scRNA-seq data set used for this thesis is the product of the above exper-
imental process executed by Postdoc Thomas Fenton, Technical University
of Denmark. The 10x protocol was run with 10 cycles of cDNA ampliﬁcation,
then sequencing libraries were prepared and ampliﬁed over 10 cycles and sent
for sequencing on Illumina HiSeq. The 10x protocol and library preparation
were performed by our collaborators at Tune Hannes Pers laboratory. The
data set originally consisted of data from three diﬀerent segments from the
same patient: SI LP, LI LP and isolated lymphoid follicles (ILF).
The initial preprocessing of the raw sequencing reads was performed with
the CellRanger (version 2.2)[49] count pipeline following aggregation of the
three samples. Primary processing of the scRNA-seq data and several rounds
of clustering were performed using Seurat [52]. The tool ccRemover was used
to remove the eﬀect of cell cycling genes on clustering [59]. These tasks were
performed by Associate Professor Jose Maria Gonzalez-Izarzugaza, Technical
University of Denmark. The pre-processed data set I received consisted of
1,984 MNPs combined from the SI LP and the LI LP. All following R scripts
were run with R version 3.5.1 [60].
2.2.1
Cluster Identities
Preprocessing and clustering of data was run in the Seurat (edition 2.3.4) R
package [52]. To calculate tSNE dimensions resolution was set to 3, while
30 Principle Components (PCs) and Principle component analysis (PCA)
was used for the graph based clustering approach. The resolution parameter
was set quiet high to enable separation of clusters containing MO and MO
intermediates (MO int) along with separation from cDC2s. Clustering with
these parameters resulted in 18 distinct clusters.
To determine cell identities of the diﬀerent clusters we explored how mark-
ers classifying diﬀerent subsets of MNPs were expressed in the diﬀerent clus-
ters. The markers were overlaid the tSNE plot and for intuitive visualization
Seurats DotPlot function was applied (DotPlot Figure 8, tSNE overlay Sup-
==PAGE:27==
26
plementary Figure S1 and S2). Cell identities were also based on the top
DEGs by the diﬀerent clusters.
The MO clusters were identiﬁed by co-expression of CD14, FCN1, VCAN,
and S100A8[15, 61, 62].
The MAC cluster had a unique expression of
MERTK, CD209, andCD14[15, 24, 63, 64]. Intermediates between the two
had overlapping expression of the above mentioned markers and high CD14
expression compared with non MO-associated clusters. cDC2s were recog-
nized by expression of the markers CD207, FLT3, and CD1C [21, 65]. Clus-
ters with expression of both MO markers like FCN1 and CD14 and the
cDC2 marker CD1C, are here denominated moDC clusters. The moDC clus-
ters were also named so due to their RNA velocities, which pointed towards
these clusters being of MO origin (see Results section 3.2).
moDC/cDC2
preDC
pDC
moDC/cDC2
prolif.
cDC2
cDC2
MO int/moDC
moDC/cDC2
MO
MAC
cDC2
cDC1
moDC
cDC1
cDC2
MO int
MO int
preDC
prolif.
pDC
cDC1
inte-
grins
cDC2
MAC
MO
Figure 8: Cluster Identities Based on Gene expression: Genes associated with
diﬀerent subsets of MNPs were chosen to classify the identity of each of the diﬀerent cell
clusters. The genes were chosen on background of relevant literature. Overlay with the
diﬀerent genes on the tSNE plot can be found in Supplementary Figure S1 and S2.
==PAGE:28==
27
cDC1 clusters were recognized by expression of CLEC9A, CADM1, and
XCR1 [21]. Proliferating cells were identiﬁed based on expression of BIRC5,
KIAA0101, and TK1 [66, 67], while preDC clusters were pinpointed on ex-
pression of IRF4, S100B, and SOX4 [21, 65]. Finally, high expression of
IL3RA, GZMB, and CLEC4A were used to classify the pDC cluster [21, 61].
2.2.2
Pseudo-Temporal Ordering with Monocle
Monocle version 2 was used to perform trajectory analyses [44, 57, 68]. Mon-
ocle normalizes data according to data distribution, which is manually spec-
iﬁed when building the CellDataSet (the appropriate object for analysis in
Monocle). A negative binomial distribution allows for variance to be diﬀer-
ent from the mean, which is why it is preferred in DGEA with RNA-seq data
[55, 69].
Data was read into Monocle from the Seurat object based on cluster
numbers. The analysis was performed on 31 diﬀerent combinations of cell
clusters.
Genes with expression lower than 0.1 for all cells along with genes ex-
pressed by less than 10 cells were ﬁltered out.
The initial DGEAs were
based on the inputted clusters from Seurat and not the unsupervised clus-
tering done by Monocle. This was done to preserve the biologically sensible
clusters, which were obtained with Seurat. Monocle uses DESeq [69] to per-
form the DGEA and even though it was designed for bulk RNA-seq data
it is a robust test setting for scRNA-seq too [55, 70]. The pseudo-temporal
order is based on the top 1000 most signiﬁcant DEGs. To order the cells
onto a pseudo-time line a reversed graph embedding algorithm is used. The
algorithm optimizes the tree without need for inputting expected number
bifurcations or where to put the root of the tree [57].
Monocle assigns new clusters referred to as states for the trajectories,
some of these states only contained very few cells and others were assigned
based on insigniﬁcant branching. These states along with the assigned pseu-
dotime and Seurat clustering was used to assign suitable states for further
analysis. The states can be analyzed to reveal transcriptome patterns for
diﬀerent time points in the diﬀerentiation process.
The DGEAs were performed in Seurat as Monocle does not output logfold
changes nor which group of cells a given DEG belongs to. For each trajec-
tory a Seurat object was created from the original Seurat object, but only
including the cells from the relevant trajectory. The states from the trajec-
tory was added as metadata to enable running DGEAs based on those. The
DGEAs were run with a Wilcoxon Rank sum test, which is the default for
the FindMarker function in Seurat (Seurat DGEA). This is appropriate for
==PAGE:29==
28
scRNA-seq data and the test weaknesses ﬁt well with the simple test setup in
Seurat [55]. Each state was tested against the pooled cells of all other states.
Only genes detected in 25% of one group were tested, otherwise all settings
were set to default. The upregulation of DEGs on the pooled cell states were
not of interest, hence the negative logfold changes were ﬁltered out to only
include upregulated DEGs for the state of interest in the results. Seurat uses
Bonferoni correction to calculate adjusted p-values (Padj-value) for DEGs.
This means many genes included in the DEG lists are not signiﬁcant as Bon-
feroni corrections are quite conservative. The non-signiﬁcant DEGs were not
removed from the DEG lists, as I was not interested in excluding possible
surface markers from further analysis.
2.2.3
Estimating RNA Velocity
Splicing information in the form of expression matrices needs to be deter-
mined from the alignment ﬁle in order to estimate RNA velocity with the
velocyto pipeline [58].
The spliced and unspliced matrices are calculated
by running velocyto for python command line on the CellRanger count out-
put ﬁles (count matrices)[49]. Currently the advanced run function is the
only functioning possibility with a Cell Ranger count output. As input this
function requires a minimum of the BAM ﬁles (sorted genome BAM-ﬁle)
from the alignment and a genome annotation ﬁle (should be the same as
used for reference genome during alignment - gene.gtf). To exclude irrele-
vant cell barcodes the barcode ﬁles from the ﬁltered gene barcode matrices
were used (ﬁltered barcodes.tsv). A masked expressed read annotation ﬁle
(repeat msk.gtf) was used in the run to avoid confounding downstream anal-
ysis by introducing low-complexity regions in the form of low-complexity
repeats.
The annotation ﬁle was downloaded from UCSC genome Table
browser [71] and modiﬁed to ﬁt the annotation of chromosomes in the gene.gtf
ﬁle. The function was run on the three samples separately as aggregated
samples are not yet supported.
The samples were run with the following settings for velocyto advanced
run [58]:
velocyto run -b filtered barcodes.tsv -m repeat msk.gtf
sorted genome BAM-file genes.gtf
The resulting loom ﬁle for each sample can then be combined by the
loompy package with a small python script [72]:
files = ["∼/sample 1.loom", "∼/sample 2.loom", "∼/sample 3.loom"]
loompy.combine(files, "∼/splicing .loom", key = "Accession")
==PAGE:30==
29
Finally the spliced and unspliced expression matrices were read into R by
reading from the combined loom matrix. Cell names were corrected according
to their segment so they were comparable with the same cells in the Seurat
object.
tSNE embeddings from clustering in Seurat was imported, so was coloring
for cell clusters and a cell-to-cell distance matrix was calculated for the Seurat
object.
The RNA velocities were calculated for the combined samples and for the
tissue separated samples. The velocities were predicted for 1 arbitrary unit
time steps. Pooling of similar cells was set to 5 cells to increase robustness of
calculation. Other values for pooling were assessed, but maximal eﬀect was
reached at 5 cells. The quantile ﬁt was set to 0.02 for all calculations. For
embedding velocities into 2D space the number of cells included in neigh-
bourhoods was set to approximately 10% of cells (SI and LI LP: 190 cells, SI
LP: 100 cells and LI LP: 80 cells).
2.3
Experimental Work: Optimization of An-
tibody Panels
Surface markers were found in the DEG lists by searching for CD numbers
or by recognition of common surface proteins. Protein expression data from
a commercially available antibody screening kit was to used determine which
of the DEGs had a bimodal expression on CD14+ MNPs.
CD11a and CD11c was included in the AB panels, as they have been
reported to be upregulated on MOs in addition to bimodal expression of
CD14+ MNPs [5, 12].
The ﬁrst step to identify cell populations in ﬂow cytometry data is setting
a gating strategy.
For the purpose of this thesis two diﬀerent strategies
have been exercised. The ﬁrst has been applied throughout all AB panel
optimization and the other was developed for the ﬁnal AB panel. The initial
steps are unchanged, as the strategies only diﬀer after the gate for MNPs
have been set (Figure 9). The initial gating strategy identiﬁes cells by being
of a certain size and density. Cells were classiﬁed as leukocytes based on
expression of CD45.
Dead cells are excluded by staining of the viability
marker 7AAD and only single cells are included for further analysis. T and
B cells are excluded by expression of CD3 or CD19 (lineage markers). Only
cells which are both lineage negative and HLADR positive are MNPs (Figure
9).
==PAGE:31==
30
Cells
Leukocytes
Viable
Single 
cells
MNP
Figure 9:
Gating Strategy for Flow Cytometry Tests: Example of the applied
gating strategy for basic gating on MNPs. Representative gating on sample from P44 SI
LP. Leukocytes are recognized by CD45 expression, dead cells by 7AAD and MNPs by
being CD3 and CD9 negative and HLADR positive.
Diﬀerent optimization AB panels have been designed and run to assess
the eﬀects of diﬀerent AB clones, AB concentrations, enzyme sensitivity and
how well the chosen ABs could separate MOs and MACs.
These panels
assessed:
• CD11a clones: HI111 (closed integrin conformation), LFA1 (open inte-
grin conformation) and TS2/4 (both conformations)
• CD81 clones: 5A6 and JS-81
• CD81 clones sensitivity to collagenase D vs. TM enzymatic digestion -
here we compared CD81 expression on cells from samples digested with
collagenase D with expression in samples digested with TM
• CD55, CD81, CD52 and FPR1 in separating MOs and MACs
The ﬁnal AB panel (Appendix p. 80) was run on 12 samples from 6 diﬀerent
patients both SI and LI LP. The samples from P100 are from a patient with
Crohn’s disease and were excluded in statistic analyses. The comparison of
populations within SI and LI LP was done with a paired Wilcoxon test, as it
was not possible to decide whether the data was normally distributed. The
cells from the MNP single positive CD14+ and the MNP CD1c+CD11a+
gates were concatenated for P90, P98, P101 and P103, SI and LI LP sepa-
rately. P44 was here excluded as it in the statistical analyses showed very
diﬀerent abundances of the diﬀerent populations. The concatenated data was
dimensionality reduced with tSNE in FlowJo and each of the seven popula-
tions were identiﬁed in the tSNE plots by overlaying the diﬀerent markers.
==PAGE:32==
3.
Results
3.1
Identifying Cell Types within Clusters
The ﬁnal Seurat clustering had 18 diﬀerent clusters, where some clusters
had very similar DEGs and thus, probably the same cell type (Figure 10A).
The cell identities were assigned based on expression of markers already as-
sociated with certain cell types and by examining DEGs for each cluster.
Some clusters like cDC1s (cluster 3 and 5, Figure 10A) and pDCs (cluster
15, Figure 10A) were easily distinguished, while others were more diﬃcult
to classify. The reddish middle clusters (cluster 4, 9, 10, 14 and 17, Figure
10A) for example had expression of both MO-associated genes like FCN1 and
CD1C normally associated with cDC2s (Supplementary Figure S1 FCN1 x
CD1C overlay)[15, 21]. The clusters in these overlapping zones of the tSNE
plot (reddish clusters, Figure 10A) are here provisionally labeled moDC even
though they might not be MO-derived.
A)
Figure 10: tSNE clustering: A) Unsupervised clustering of the scRNA-seq data set
at resolution 3 with 30 PCs. Cluster identities were decided based on expression proﬁles
from Figure 8. Green clusters are MOs, MO intermediates (MO ints) and MACs, blue
clusters are cDC2s and red clusters share features of both MO and cDC2s. B) scRNA-
seq data set colored according to the segment (SI LP or LI LP), which samples each cell
originated from.
Cells from SI and LI LP cluster closely together in some instances and less
in others (Figure 10B). For example MACs, MO intermediates, and cDC1s
31
==PAGE:33==
32
are some clusters, which contain roughly equal numbers of cells from both
segments. Common for moDC clusters, 4, 9, 10, and 14 (reddish clusters,
Figure 10A), especially cluster 4, is the over-representation of cells from the
LI LP. The opposite trend is seen for the blue cDC2 clusters (2, 6, 11, and
12), which contain mainly cells from SI LP. This can interpreted two ways:
either the under-represented cells are infrequent in the respective tissues,
or the clustering technique cannot remove the eﬀect of the cells being from
distinct locations.
3.2
RNA Velocity Predictions
After identiﬁcation of cell types within distinct clusters Velocyto was used to
explore, how cells were predicted to evolve based on their splicing patterns.
RNA velocities embedded into the 2D tSNE space shows varying degrees of
transitions between clusters. Especially proliferating cells (cluster 13, Figure
11) and cells of MO origin (green clusters, Figure 11) are predicted to progress
from their former positions. Both observations are expected, as proliferat-
ing and diﬀerentiating cells should have high degrees of cellular dynamics
compared to more mature cells [58]. The cells on edges of the diﬀerent MO
stages are shifted considerably forwards to new stages of MO diﬀerentiation.
This is apparent between cluster 8 and 0 (MO →MO early intermediate)
and between cluster 0 and 1 (MO early intermediate →MO late intermedi-
ate). According to RNA velocities, MOs are not only diﬀerentiating towards
MACs, but also towards the red moDC clusters. Both cluster 8, 0, and 1
have cells with direction toward moDC clusters. The main involved moDC
clusters seem to be cluster 4, 9, 10, and 17. The cells in cluster 4 and 9 are
more stationary, which could indicate them as possible diﬀerentiation end
points (Figure 11).
The trends were similar, when calculating the velocities separately for
each segment. There were two main diﬀerences, which was observed when
comparing the tissue separated velocities: the trend of MOs diﬀerentiating
toward moDC clusters was more pronounced in the LI LP, while MACs (clus-
ter 7) in the SI LP are more stationary than their counterpart in the LI LP
(Supplementary Figure S3).
Over all the results of calculating RNA velocities suggest that MOs can
develop into both MACs and moDCs.
==PAGE:34==
33
Figure 11: RNA velocities: RNA velocity calculated for the scRNA-seq data set and
embedded onto the Seurat tSNE. The calculation was done for 1 arbitrary timestep and
pooling of 5 cells. For the embedding the cell neighbourhood was set to 190 approximately
10% of the included cells.
==PAGE:35==
34
3.3
Pseudo-temporal Trajectories
Monocle was used to investigate pseudo-temporal ordering of cells, which
were implied to have relation by Velocyto and gene expression proﬁles. By
ordering cells based on their expression patterns we obtain predictions on
longer time-scales compared to those obtained with Velocyto. Furthermore,
RNA velocities are calculated on splicing information, while Monocle uses
DEG patterns to order cells, these are two very diﬀerent methods of predict-
ing cell trajectories. Results from one method validated by results from the
other strengthens the suggestions of the overall results.
Analyses with diﬀerent combinations of clusters have been performed to
compare resulting DEGs and to assess the eﬀect of including diﬀerent clusters
on bifurcations. The basic analyses consisted of the clusters, which were most
associated with MO and MACs (cluster 8, 0, 1 and 7, Figure 10A). Other
combinations included less associated MO clusters to help interpret their
relation to MOs and MACs. Eventually also combinations with a minimal
number of clusters were performed to observe, which cell clusters could cause
bifurcations. The exact cluster combinations can be seen in Table 2. moDC
clusters were included in order to examine how well these cells relate to the
MO →MAC diﬀerentiation. It was necessary to include all suspected moDC
clusters in trajectories for SI LP cells, as these were relatively rare in the SI.
Similarly most cDC2 clusters had to be added in LI LP trajectories, when
the eﬀect of adding cDC2s were investigated. The analyses were performed
on separate tissues as the micro environment likely aﬀects cell phenotype,
and thus also the transcriptome.
==PAGE:36==
35
Table 2: Cluster Combinations for Trajectories: The cluster combinations of Seurat
clusters from Figure 10A which were used to perform trajectory analyses. Segment indicates
from which tissue cells were included.
For trajectories 1-10 the same combinations of
clusters were used in separate analyses of SI LP and LI LP. The visualized trajectories can
be located in the listed ﬁgures.
Trajectory Name
Clusters Included
Segment
Trajectory
SI LP momac
8, 0, 1, 7
SI LP
Figure 12A
SI LP wmoDC
8, 0, 1, 7, 9, 4, 10
SI LP
Figure 12C
SI LP wDC2
8, 0, 1, 7, 9, 4, 10, 6, 2
SI LP
Figure S7A
LI LP momac
8, 0, 1, 7
LI LP
Figure 13A
LI LP wmoDC
8, 0, 1, 7, 10, 4
LI LP
Figure 13C
LI LP wDC2
8, 0, 1, 7, 10, 4, 11, 6, 2
LI LP
Figure S7C
1
8, 0, 1, 7, 10, 4
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
2
8, 0, 1, 7, 10, 4, 9
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
3
8, 0, 1, 7, 10, 4, 14
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
4
8, 0, 1, 7, 10, 4, 9, 14
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
5
8, 0, 1, 7, 10, 9
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
6
8, 0, 1, 7, 10, 9, 14
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
7
8, 0, 1, 7, 9, 4
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
8
8, 0, 1, 7, 4
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
9
8, 0, 1, 7, 9
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
10
8, 0, 1, 7, 10
Both separately
Figure S8& S9
11
8, 0, 1
LI LP
Figure S9
12
0, 1, 7
LI LP
Figure S9
13
0, 1
LI LP
Figure S9
14
8, 0, 7
LI LP
Figure S9
15
8, 1, 7
LI LP
Figure S9
Though, many trajectory analyses were performed only the overall trends
and a few speciﬁc trajectories will be described here.
==PAGE:37==
36
3.3.1
Small Intestine Lamina Propria Trajectories
For the SI LP the most linear pseudo-temporal ordering of cells occured
when including Seurat cluster 8, 0, 1, and 7 (green clusters, Figure 10A)(SI
LP momac trajectory). For this trajectory no signiﬁcant bifurcations occured
(Figure 12A). Cell identities for root and leaf of the trajectory were found by
looking at the top DEG (Figure 12B) and by overlaying some of the markers
used to classify cell identities on the trajectory plot (Supplementary Figure
S4A).
The MO state of the SI LP momac trajectory had 409 upregulated DEGs,
among these were genes correlating to surface markers like CD52, CD55,
CD300E, and FPR1. The two intermediate stages P2 (blue, Figure 12A)
and P3 (purple, Figure 12A) had 85 and 63 upregulated DEGs, respectively.
For P2 33 of the 85 upregulated genes overlapped with genes also upregulated
in the MO state. For P3 only one gene overlapped with MO DEGs, while 15
overlapped with the MAC DEGs. Among these overlaps were diﬀerent HLA
and C1Q genes. P3 also had upregulation of CLEC10A, which is the gene
coding for the surface protein CD301. The overlaps in DEGs between inter-
mediate states and start/end states suggest, how mature these intermediate
states are: P2 is closely transcriptionally related to MOs indicating an early
intermediate MO state, whereas the overlap between P3 and MACs suggest
a more mature intermediate state.
The MAC state had 292 upregulated DEGs, which included several MAC
related markers like CD209, CD163, MAF, HES-1, and C1Q genes [15, 62].
Furthermore, the MAC state had transcriptome upregulation of several genes
coding for surface markers, which are not previously known to be associated
with MACs. These include CD84, CD74, and CD81 (full DEG lists for each
state can be found in the Appendix p. 67). The ﬁnding of expression proﬁles
of MO and MAC states similar to those found in literature conﬁrms that
trajectory analyses can depict non-random features of cell diﬀerentiation.
To explore how moDCs are linked with MOs, moDC clusters were intro-
duced in the trajectories. By including moDC clusters 4, 9, and 10 (SI LP
wmoDC trajectory) one bifurcation could be observed in the resulting trajec-
tory (Figure 12C). The identies of leaves and root were again investigated by
overlaying well known markers on the cell trajectory (Supplementary Figure
S4B) and by inspecting top DEGs (Figure 12D).
==PAGE:38==
37
A)
B)
C)
D)
Figure 12: SI LP Trajectories: Trajectories only including cells from SI LP A) Trajectory plot for analysis with cluster
8, 0, 1 and 7 (SI LP momac), colored by supervised states. B) The top 25 DEG for each of the supervised states of the
trajectories - full DEG list can be found in Appendix p. 67. C) Trajectory plot for analysis with cluster 8, 0, 1, 7, 9, 4
and 10 (SI LP wmoDC), colored by supervised states. D) Top 25 DEG for each of the supervised states of the trajectory -
full DEG list can be found in Appendix p. 68. Red = MO, Blue = P2, Purple = P3, Green = MAC, Pink = intermediate
moDC, Orange = moDC
==PAGE:39==
38
The DEGs for the intermediate moDC state leading away from the MAC
path include genes related to cDC2s like CD1C, CD1E, and FCER1A [21].
The moDC branch does not only comprise of cells from the Seurat moDC
clusters, but also includes cells from Seurat MO cluster 0 and 1, and even
from the Seurat MAC cluster 7 (Supplementary Figure S6A). This indicates
that the bifurcation might be caused by including moDC cells, but other
cells, of more certain MO origin, share expression patterns with the cells in
the branch.
The MO state had 239 DEGs in the SI LP wmoDC trajectory, of these 176
overlapped with the MO state from the SI LP momac trajectory. Patterns in
overlapping DEGs between the P2 and P3 states were similar to those seen
in the SI LP momac trajectory: Even though P2 and P3 had only 25 and
21 upregulated genes, respectively, these shared an overlap of approximately
50% with the similar states from the former trajectory. The surface markers
CD55, CD52, and FPR1 could again be found on the upregulated DEGs
for the MO state, along with CD81 and CD209 for the MAC state. CD14
was a DEG for both MACs and MOs, but not for the bifurcation towards
moDCs. Though CD14 was not a DEG for P2 and P3, it seemed CD14 was
more highly expressed along the entire MO →MAC pathway compared to
the moDC branch (Supplementary Figure S4B).
Adding the moDC clusters to the trajectory only lead to one bifurcation
in the SI LP. The path from MO to MAC was still distinct and had a high
transcriptional resemblance to the linear trajectory. The same trends were
seen for other similar cluster combinations in the SI LP (Supplementary
Figure S8).
3.3.2
Large Intestine Lamina Propria Trajectories
In order to investigate whether a linear trajectory could be assembled from
LI LP cells, ﬁve trajectories with minimal numbers of cell clusters (combi-
nations of Seurat cluster 8, 0, 1, and 7, Figure 10A) were performed. None
of the cluster combinations resulted in an absolutely linear trajectory (Sup-
plementary Figure S9 trajectory 11-15). The most linear trajectory (Supple-
mentary Figure S9 trajectory 11) was obtained, when the MAC cluster 7 was
excluded. However, the resulting trajectory had a cDC2-like end point, but
no branch toward MAC diﬀerentiation. A similar eﬀect could be observed for
the trajectory only including MO intermediates (cluster 0 and 1, Figure 10):
The MAC branch became much less pronounced, while the moDC branch
was prevailing in the trajectory (Supplementary Figure S9 trajectory 13).
Curiously, when excluding only cluster 0 (MO late intermediates), the leaf of
the moDC branch was not well connected to the trajectory. The observations
==PAGE:40==
39
made from the minimal trajectories could suggest moDC vs MAC cell lineage
decision happening in cells related to Seurat cluster 0 or 1.
For the LI LP trajectory only including cluster 8, 0, 1, and 7 (LI LP
momac trajectory) a bifurcation appeared (Figure 13A). The bifurcation to-
wards the moDC state contained 24% of the included cells, and had 115
upregulated DEGs.
None of the genes were also upregulated in the MO
state for the same trajectory, and only 13 were also found in DEGs for the
MAC state (Figure 13B). A higher overlap was observed, when comparing
the moDC branch with the similar states from the SI LP wmoDC trajectory:
17 genes were shared with intermediate moDC state, and 27 genes overlapped
compared with the moDC state.
Due to the cells being spread out over a substantial part of the pseudo-
timeline the P2 state only had 17 DEGs. Of these genes, 8 were shared with
the MO state and one gene was shared with the MAC state. P3 had 108
upregulated DEGs of which none were shared with the MO state, while 45
were common with the MAC state (Figure 13B, full DEG lists can be found
in the Appendix p. 70). The P3 intermediate state seemed more mature than
P2 due to the upregulation of MAC-associated genes like CD209, AXL, and
C1Q genes [15, 62]. As in both the SI LP trajectories surface markers CD55,
CD52, and FPR1 were DEGs for the MO state, while CD209 and CD81
were upregulated in the MAC state.
CD14 was upregulated on the MO
state but not on any other states for the LI LP momac trajectory. Though,
by inspecting the expression of CD14 overlaid the trajectory, CD14 looked
almost evenly expressed (Supplementary Figure S5A).
The trajectory was visually altered, when moDC cluster 10 and 4 were
included in the analysis (LI LP wmoDC trajectory)(Figure 13C). The branch
towards the moDC state became much more pronounced, which could be
explained by most cells from cluster 4 and 10 locating there (Supplementary
Figure S6B). The intermediate moDC state had only 8 upregulated DEGs
among these were cDC2-related genes like FCER1A and CLEC10A [36, 73].
Of the 8 genes, 7 genes overlapped with genes from the moDC state of LI LP
momac trajectory. The MO state had upregulation of genes associated with
a MO-proﬁle like S1008A, FCN1, CD14, and VCAN along with the genes
for surface markers CD55, CD52, and FPR1 [15, 61, 62].
==PAGE:41==
40
A)
B)
C)
D)
Figure 13: LI LP Trajectories: Trajectories only including cells from LI LP, A) Trajectory plot for analysis with cluster
8, 0, 1 and 7 (LI LP momac), colored by supervised states. B) The top 25 DEG for each of the supervised states of the
trajectory - full DEG list can be found in Appendix p. 70. B) Trajectory plot for analysis with cluster 8, 0, 1, 7, 4 and 10
(LI LP wmoDC), colored by supervised states. B) Table represents top 25 DEG for each of the supervised states of the
trajectory - full DEG list can be found in Appendix p. 72. Red = MO, Blue = P2, Purple = P3, Green = MAC, Pink =
intermediate moDC, Orange = moDC
==PAGE:42==
41
Overall there were many similar trends, when comparing the trajectories
for the SI and LI. The MO states from the four trajectories had 136 common
genes including surface markers like FPR1, CD55, CD52, and CD14. The
MAC states shared 151 genes among which CD209, CD163, and CD81 could
be found. The P2 states had only FCN1 and AREG in common, where FCN1
was also common with the MO states. The P3 states had 8 shared genes,
4 of which were also common with the MAC states including C1Q genes.
The P3 states also shared diﬀerential expression of the two surface markers
CD9 and CLEC10A (CD301) (Full gene lists for each trajectory state can
be found in the Appendix p. 67 along with the compared DEG lists of the
four trajectories p.
74).
Both P2 and P3 have relatively few DEGs for
each trajectories, which is also why we only observe very few shared genes
between trajectories. The main diﬀerence between the SI LP and the LI
LP trajectories was the moDC bifurcation. In the SI LP a linear trajectory
from MO →MAC could be obtained by including the main MO-associated
clusters, whereas even the most minimal combinations of clusters could not
exclude a moDC branch in the LI LP. This eﬀect could suggest that the
micro environment of the SI preferentially imprints cells towards the MAC
lineage, while more cells in the LI are imprinted to diﬀerentiate towards
moDC lineage.
3.4
Antibody Panel Optimization
We then wanted to design a ﬂow cytometry panel, which could exploit what
we learned on the diﬀerentiation of MOs from the SC data. The panel should
be able to reﬂect intermediates and ﬁnal MAC and moDC populations within
patient samples in order for us to investigate changes between tissues and
disease states. To design such an AB panel the DEG lists were searched for
genes which were known to have corresponding proteins expressed on cell
surfaces. The genes with surface marker potential, which were also common
for the four main trajectories were included for further analysis (Figure 14A
and Supplementary Figure S10)[74]. Transcriptome upregulation of a gene
does not always correlate linearly with protein expression, thus, the predicted
surface markers had to be investigated on relevant subsets of cells. Protein
expression data from a commercially available antibody screening kit was
to used determine which of the DEGs had a bimodal expression on CD14+
MNPs, which would indicate heterogeneous subpopulations. CD55, CD52,
FPR1, CD301, and CD81 showed bimodal expression on CD14+ MNPs (Fig-
ure 14C). AB panels for ﬂow cytometry were designed with ABs for CD52,
FPR1, CD55, CD81, and CD11a to compare ABs with each other. FPR1 and
==PAGE:43==
42
CD55 showed similar expression patterns: a small population had very high
expression of the two markers, while most cells had low or medium expres-
sion. CD14+ MNPs mainly showed low expression of CD52 (Figure 14D).
This lead us to continue with CD55 and FPR1, while CD52 was excluded
from further analyses. According to the SC trajectory analyses both CD55
and FPR1 would allow us to stain MOs, and though they were not DEG
for intermediate stages of moDCs, they did show some expression on these
states when overlaid the trajectories (Figure 14A).
Diﬀerent clones of ABs were also investigated as these can have a diﬀering
expression ranges as well. CD11a is an integrin and has both a closed and
an open conformation [75]. The AB clone used for the closed conformation
(HI111) had bimodal expression, whereas the clone for the open conformation
(LFA1) primarily had lower expression (Figure 14E). The TS2/4 clone was
explored as it can bind both closed and open conformations of CD11a. The
CD11a TS2/4 clone had a wide, though slightly higher expression range
compared to the HI111 clone (Figure 14F).
Enzyme digestion of tissues can sometimes aﬀect the AB-binding epitopes
of surface proteins. This was the case for CD81 expression as it was found
to be sensitive to tissue digestion with TM, while using tissue digested with
collagenase D gave a better expression range (Figure 14G). CD81 expression
was also tested with diﬀerent AB clones. The 5A6 clone resulted in a rela-
tively narrow but high expression of CD81, whereas the JS-81 clone was able
to split the CD14+ MNPs into a low and high expressing population (Figure
14H). From the SC trajectories we expected that the CD81+ cells would be
later intermediate stages and mature MACs (Figure 14A).
CD11c was tested in the ﬁnal multiplexed AB panel as it has been shown
to be speciﬁc for immature MOs [12], but in the ﬁnal tests it had a homoge-
neously high expression and was thus excluded from the gating strategy.
It was decided to continue with the ﬁnal AB panel using collagenase
D treated tissue to avoid issues with CD81 JS-81 expression.
CD55 and
FPR1 were both included in the ﬁnal panel due to their bimodal expression
on the CD14+ cells. The TS2/4 clones seemed to be the best option for
CD11a as it could bind both conformations of the integrin along with showing
bimodal expression. CD1c and CD14 were included in the panel to be able
to distinguish DCs from MOs and MACs (Final panel Supplementary Figure
S11).
==PAGE:44==
43
D)
A)
C)
E)
B)
H)
F)
Negative control
CD14+ MNP
viable single CD45+
HLADR+lin-
HI111
TS2/4
CD11a clone
HI111
LFA1
CD11a clone
TM
collD
Enzyme
5A6
JS-81
CD81 clone
Population
G)
Figure 14: Optimization of the antibody (AB) panel: The AB panel was optimized and designed for several
surface proteins. A) The SI LP wmoDC trajectory from Figure 13C overlaid expression of CD55, CD81, and FPR1.
These genes were found among the DEG for the diﬀerent stages of monocyte (MO) development in almost all the
calculated trajectories. CD55 and FPR1 are expected to be able to detect MOs, and CD81 should be expressed on
MACs. B) All following ﬂow cytometry plots are composed by gating on the CD14+ of the CD45+lin-HLADR+
viable single cells. C) Upregulated genes with potential to be surface markers (with CD numbers) were investigated
with the protein expression data from the commercially available antibody screening kit.
Red = expression by
MNP CD14+ cells, Grey = negative control. D) AB panels were designed with the most promising markers and
the bimodal expression within the CD14+ cells were explored. Red = expression by MNP CD14+ cells, Grey =
negative control. E) The range of expression of AB clones for closed (HI111) and open (LFA1) conformations of
CD11a were compared. Green = HI111 clone, Blue = LFA1 clone. F) CD11a expression was compared for the closed
conformation clone HI111 and for the TS2/4 clone, which can capture both open and closed integrin conformations.
Blue = HI111 clone, Red = TS2/4 clone. G) CD81’s sensitivity to digestion enzymes was studied for clone JS-81 by
comparing expressing ranges. Blue = TM digested tissue, Red = collagenase D digested tissue. H) CD81 range of
expression for AB clones JS-81 and 5A6, both with collagenase D digested tissue. Green = 5A6 clone, Red = JS-81
clone.
==PAGE:45==
44
3.5
Identiﬁcation of Monocyte Derived Cell
Populations
With the ﬁnal AB panel it was possible to identify seven diﬀerent MO as-
sociated populations within the MNP CD14+ and the CD1c+ gates. The
seven populations were identiﬁed by combinations of CD11a, HLADR, CD55,
FPR1, CD81, CD14, and CD1c (Table 3).
Table 3: Identiﬁcation of seven MO-associated populations based on expression of the
following seven markers. Nomenclature as explained in abbreviation list, p. 5.
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
CD11a
+
+
+
-
-
high
high
HLADR
int
high
high
high
high
high
high
CD55
+
+
-
-
-
-/+
-/+
FPR1
+
+
-
-
-
-/+
-/+
CD14
high
high
int
int
high
int
-
CD81
-
int
int
int
int
int
-
CD1c
-
-
-
-
-
int
high
The MNP gate was, as with the optimization gating strategy, set on
viable single CD45+ cells. To separate MO and MACs from DCs we explored
expression of CD14 and CD1c on MNPs. According to our SC data and
previously published papers MO and MACs are believed to be the only CD1c-
and CD14+ cells [15]. pDCs and cDC1s will both be double negative for the
two markers, whereas cDC2s and moDCs are CD1c+ (Figure 15A)[21].
The CD14+CD1c- MNPs were explored with CD11a and HLADR, these
two markers can subset the cells into three gates. CD11a+HLADRint, are
thought to be recently arrived MO [5]. Here we ﬁnd that these cells (P1)
are also CD55+FPR1+ and mainly CD14hi and CD81- (Figure 15A, A1 dou-
ble positive, red population). The CD11a+HLADRhi (A2, Figure 15) cells
can be split in two populations by expression of CD55 and FPR1: P2 are
CD55+FPR1+ and mainly CD14hiCD81int (Figure 15A, A2 double positive,
blue population), whereas P3 has a downregulation of both CD55, FPR1
and CD14, while remaining CD81int (Figure 15A, A2 double negative, pur-
ple population). Cells in the CD11a-HLADRhi (A3, Figure 15) gate are all
FPR1-CD55-, but they have heterogeneous expression of CD81 and CD14:
P4 are CD14int and CD81int (Figure 15A, A3 double negative, green popu-
lation), while P5 are CD14hi and CD81int (Figure 15A, A3 double negative,
yellow population).
==PAGE:46==
45
The above gating strategy allows us to identify ﬁve cell populations, which
all seem to be related to the MO →MAC diﬀerentiation path.
As our scRNA-seq trajectory analyses suggested the existence of a CD1c+
MO derived population, we set a new gate on MNPs to investigate all CD1c+
cells. Recent data from the lab shows that CD103+CD1a+ cDC2s are CD11a-.
This lead us to exclude cDC2s from the CD1c+ cells by gating on CD11ahi
cells. With the current panel we found that both CD55 and FPR1, which
is highly expressed on MOs, was lowly expressed on some CD1c+CD11ahi
cells. This was also an observation from the SC trajectories were interme-
diate moDC states seemed to have some CD55 and FPR1 expression. The
CD1c+CD11ahi cell subset was further investigated by CD81 and CD14 with
the same gating strategy as applied to the CD14+ gated cells. Two subsets
could be found with this strategy: P6 was CD81int and had low CD14 ex-
pression (Figure 15A, CD1c+CD11a+ gate, pink population) while P7 was
double negative for CD14 and CD81 (Figure 15A, CD1c+CD11a+ gate, or-
ange population). From the SC trajectories it was expected that intermediate
states of moDC would have some expression CD14 and CD81, whereas end
point moDCs should be CD81 negative and low or negative expression of
CD14.
A comparison of relative abundances of the diﬀerent populations between
SI and LI LP was performed. In this comparison the data from the patient
with Crohn’s disease (P100) was excluded, as it was expected that this pa-
tient would have rather drastic changes in relative abundances compared to
healthy persons [12, 14]. Trends could be observed between tissues, though
there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the relative population abundances
between the LI and SI (Figure 15B-C).
P1 was increased in the LI compared to the SI of healthy patients, sug-
gesting more newly arrived MOs in the LI LP. P2 abundances were generally
low and we could not observe any diﬀerences between the SI and LI. Both
P3 and P4 seemed to have a higher abundance in SI compared to the LI.
We could also observe that the abundances of P4 especially in the SI were
highly varying between subjects. For P5 in healthy patients no trends could
be observed between SI and LI LP and ratios were highly varying in both
tissues. The abundance of P6 cells was low in both tissues of healthy sub-
jects, whereas P7 moDCs seemed to have a tendency to increase in the LI
(Figure 15B). The relative abundance of cDC2s varied considerably between
patients, but most patient had a decrease of cDC2s in the LI compared to
the SI (Figure 15C).
For the patient with Crohn’s disease (P100) the relative abundances were
quite diﬀerent to those of healthy subjects. The sample from the patient
with Crohn’s disease had an increased abundance of P1 cells in the SI in
==PAGE:47==
46
comparison with the LI, which was opposite to the trend observed in healthy
subjects. Furthermore, the abundance of P1 in the SI LP was considerably
higher for the patient with Crohn’s disease compared to all other included
patients. The patient with Crohn’s disease also had a much higher levels of P2
cells in the SI LP, whereas the abundance was comparable to healthy patients
in the LI LP. The abundance of P3 cells was almost equal in the SI and LI in
the Crohn’s disease sample, where all other subjects had a decreasing trend
in abundance of P3 cells from the SI to the LI. The mature P4 cells were
in extremely low abundances in the SI of the patient with Crohn’s disease,
whereas the level was comparable to the abundances in healthy subjects in
the LI. P5 cells were generally in lower abundance in both tissues for the
patient with Crohn’s disease compared to all other samples. P6 cells, on the
other hand, were more abundant in both tissues and were especially abundant
in the LI. The abundance of P7 cells was very similar to those observed in
healthy subjects (Figure 15B).
To investigate whether the populations could be identiﬁed when the data
was merged for several samples, the ﬂow cytometry data was concatenated
for four patient samples. The Crohn’s disease patient and P44 were both
excluded, as they had the most diﬀering abundances compared to the other
patients. The included cells were from the MNP CD1c+CD11ahi and MNP
CD14+CD1c- gates to ensure all the identiﬁed populations would be present.
The data was dimensionality reduced with tSNE for the seven dimensions
(seven markers) and visualized in 2D tSNE space (Figure 15D). In the tSNE
plot for the SI LP all the cells from the P1-P5 clustered together. Cells from
P6 clustered close to P3, while P7 cells only shared an edge with P6 cells.
The seven populations could be identiﬁed by overlaying each of the markers
(Supplementary Figure S12 S13). The LI LP had four distinguishable cell
clusters, two of these could not be identiﬁed by overlaying the seven mark-
ers. Similarly to the SI, P6 and P7 clustered together, while P1-P5 shared
another cluster. Again we observed that cells from P6 clustered closely to
P3, suggesting a close relation between these two populations (Figure 15D).
By introducing the seven markers, it was possible to identify seven diﬀer-
ent MO-associated populations. Each population could be identiﬁed in both
SI and LI LP, but at varying abundances both between tissues and patients.
==PAGE:48==
47
SI LP
LI LP
C)
D)
A)
A1
A2
A3
A1
A2
A3
B)
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
Viable single CD45+ 
HLADR+lin-
CD1c+ MNPs
CD14+CD1c- MNPs
cDC2
MNP
CD14
Max
Min
Figure 15: Subsets of MOs and MACs within the intestinal LP: Continued caption on the following page.
==PAGE:49==
48
Figure 15: Subsets of MOs and MACs within the intestinal LP: A) Representative
gating on P98 SI LP: Pre-gated CD45+ viable single cells which are lin-HLADR+ are gated
on for further analysis (MNP gate). MO and MACs are gated on by being CD14+CD1c-,
whereas cDC2s and moDCs are CD14-/int but CD1c+. The CD14+CD1c- MNPs can be
investigated by CD11a and HLADR expression giving three subgroups CD11a+HLADRint
(A1), CD11a+HLADRhi (A2) and CD11a-HLADRhi (A3). A1, A2 and A3 are further ex-
plored with CD55 and FPR1. Cells from A1 are all double positive for FPR1 and CD55,
whereas A2 have a double positive and a double negative population. Cells belonging to the
A3 gate are homogeneously double negative for CD55 and FPR1. Finally, the four subsets
can be further divided by inspecting expression of CD81 and CD14. A1 CD55+ FPR1+
are mainly CD14hi and CD81- (P1 - red). A2 CD55+FPR1+ are primarily CD14hiCD81int
(P2 - blue), whereas the A2 double negative population are CD14intCD81int (P3 - pur-
ple). A3 CD55-FPR- are heterogeneous in CD81 and CD14 expression. One group is
CD14intCD81int (P4 - green) and the other is CD14hiCD81int (P5 - yellow). Moving back
to the CD1c+ MNPs, CD11ahi are gated on for being MO associated. These can separated
into two subsets with CD81 and CD14, one subset being CD81intCD14- (P6 - pink) and the
other being double negative (P7 - orange). B) The relative abundance of MNPS for each
of the the seven identiﬁed populations was compared for SI and LI by a paired Wilcoxon
test. P100 (Crohn’s patient) is excluded from the statistical analysis. C) The relative
abundance of MNPs for cDC2s was compared between SI and LI with a paired Wilcoxon
test excluding P100. D) Cells from the CD14+CD1c- gate and the CD1c+CD11ahi were
concatenated for P90, P98, P101 and P103. Their concatenated data was used for a di-
mensionality reduction with tSNE, where each of the seven populations could be identiﬁed
for both SI and LI LP. The overlaid expression is here CD14, other overlays can be found
in Supplementary Figure S12 and S13.
==PAGE:50==
4.
Discussion
The human MNPs have been extensively studied, but the heterogeneity of
the diﬀerent subsets are still poorly understood.
In order to unravel the
heterogeneity within the human MNP population, we undertook a study
with starting point in a scRNA-seq data set. While scRNA-seq is a useful
technique, there is a number of issues to take into account to insure the best
possible reﬂection of the biology. Firstly, similar cells must cluster together in
2D space to make sense of the high dimensional data. Here, a problem occurs
as user inputs are needed in order to determine how similar cells should be
to share a cluster. The current solution relies on user interpretation of the
data: each user must decide which questions they want answered, and at
which level of resolution this will be easiest to examine [53]. For the scRNA-
seq data included in this thesis, the ﬁnal resolution resulted in 18 clusters.
The high number of clusters was necessary to pull apart intermediate stages
of MOs. In less ﬁnely grained clustering MACs and MOs were divided into
only two clusters, which was disadvantageous regarding the later trajectory
analyses, as more clusters enabled us to assess how diﬀerent intermediates
eﬀect the ﬁnal trajectory.
The trajectory analyses with Monocle suggested that MOs can diﬀerenti-
ate into two distinct lineages. However, the algorithm used by Monocle orders
all the included cells on the pseudo-time line no matter their true relation. If
cells from coarsely grained clustering are included in trajectories, it can give
misleading bifurcations, simply because cells not otherwise associated are
forced together. The calculation of RNA velocities was used to help make
the decisions on which clusters to move forward with for pseudo-temporal
ordering. RNA velocities are calculated as high dimensional vectors, but to
be visualized for interpretation in 2D space, they are embedded according
to their neighbouring cells. Therefor highly heterogeneous neighbourhoods
of closely clustering cells can infer misguiding cell predictions. The best so-
lution seemed to result from setting neighbourhoods to values which include
mainly cells from within the same clusters.
Surface markers to distinguish MNP subsets were validated by using a
combination of SC data from the trajectories and protein expression data.
The potential markers were only selected for further analysis, if they showed
potential with the protein expression data and not dependent on their sig-
niﬁcance level as DEG. The signiﬁcance level was a lesser criteria, as mRNA
levels are not necessarily linearly correlated with their protein counterparts.
CD52 for example had a higher signiﬁcance level as DEG than CD55, but
the protein was not widely expressed on MOs. This can be caused by sev-
49
==PAGE:51==
50
eral factors like post-transcriptional modiﬁcations, protein stability, protein
translation rates, or simply by the use of an inadequate AB [76].
Within the tSNE clustering of scRNA-seq data we found two populations,
which were enriched within either LI or SI respectively. The cDC2 clusters
were mainly from the SI LP, while the moDC clusters were primarily from
the LI LP. This could suggest that there is a some sort of batch eﬀect from
the two diﬀerent samples, which was not removed in the pre-processing. Al-
ternatively, the abundance of these cell types is truly diﬀerent between the
two tissues. The relative abundance of cDC2s compared to all MNPs from
the ﬂow cytometry data does imply a decrease in the abundance of cDC2s
in the LI LP compared to the SI LP. Furthermore, the relative frequency of
P7 moDCs has a tendency to be increased in the LI LP. Given the unique
environment of the LI vs the SI, the observation here could reﬂect an ac-
cumulation of certain subsets, which might be driven by the microbial or
dietary inﬂuences.
It is generally acknowledged that the microbiota has a considerable eﬀect
on the cells inhabiting the LI [2, 5]. This eﬀect might be reﬂected in our
data by an increase of P1 MOs and P7 moDCs in the LI compared to the SI.
Furthermore, we see a decreasing trend in the abundance of P4 MACs, which
could also be an eﬀect of the micro environment in the LI. The abundances of
P1 and P7 in the LI might suggest that the micro environment preferentially
imprints cells to follow P1 to moDC development. In the SI, where large
quantities of food antigens are found, the enrichment of P3 and P4 might
propose an imprint of the micro environment enhancing cell diﬀerentiation
towards MACs. We saw the same tendencies with the SC trajectories were
we found a prevailing branch towards moDC lineage in all LI trajectories,
whereas SI trajectories were more dominated by the MAC lineage.
From the trajectory analyses, I could identify 4-6 populations of MO-
associated cells, whereas ﬂow cytometry revealed 7 populations.
P1 and
P2 were both CD14hi by ﬂow cytometry and were both relatively sparse
populations in the SI LP. In the SC data there was an over representation of
cells from LI LP compared to the SI LP in the most immature MOs (cluster
8, Figure 10), which are probably the most comparable to P1 and P2 due to
their high CD14 expression.
Bujko et al. found a subset of MOs in the human intestine, which had
a very similar transcriptional proﬁle to pbMOs.
This subset has a very
similar set of DEG compared to the MO states of our trajectory analyses,
again suggesting that these cells are recently arrived MOs. Interestingly, a
subset similar to our P2 cells is not identiﬁed in the study by Bujko et al.
They identiﬁed a MO population as being CD14hiCD11c+HLADRint, which
is comparable to our P1. They also found a MO intermediate stage expressing
==PAGE:52==
51
CD14intCD11c+HLADRhi like our P3 cells, but found no transitional stage
between the two [15]. With our markers, we could identify the stage of the
MOs →MACs before cells downregulate CD14 to an intermediate level. P2
cells diﬀer from P1 as they express HLADRhi and CD81int, and from P3 by
their expression of high levels of CD14, and also by expressing FPR1 and
CD55. In the SC trajectories CD55 and FPR1 are upregulated on MOs, the
downregulation of these markers on P3 cells indicate P3 as a more mature
population compared to P2 cells.
P4 and P5 cells are mature MACs, when comparing to the SC trajec-
tories, as they are both negative for CD55, FPR1, and CD11a, while being
CD81 positive. By ﬂow cytometry P4 and P5 cells are separated by expres-
sion of CD14: P4 are CD14int, while P5 are CD14hi. A few SC trajectories
from the LI LP suggested two diﬀerent MAC populations, but between these
states CD14 was not found to be a DEG. Overall the SC clustering gives
no evidence of two diﬀerent MAC populations, however the CD14 expres-
sion seems higher on the MAC cluster compared to the intermediate clusters
of MOs.
Bujko et al.
also found two diﬀerent end-stage MACs one be-
ing CD14hiHLADRhiCD11c- and one being CD14intHLADRhiCD11c-. These
two MAC subsets are by phenotype comparable to our P4 and P5 cells.
However, they showed by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy that their CD14hi
MACs mainly were located in the submucosa, whereas our cells are isolated
from the LP. The ﬁnding of CD14hi MACs is controversial as it has previ-
ously been believed that intestinal MACs only express CD14 at intermediate
levels and recently arrived MOs are the only intestinal CD14hi MNPs [5].
From the SC trajectories the ﬁnal moDC population are suggested to be
negative for CD14, while the intermediate moDCs appear to have moderate
expression. This is consistent with our ﬂow cytometry, where we observed
both P6 which were CD14int and CD14- P7 cells. The same trend was ob-
served for CD81 expression in both ﬂow cytometry data and in the SC tra-
jectories: consistently with the intermediate moDC populations from the SC
trajectories P6 cells expressed CD81int, while P7 cells were CD81-.
A study by Bain et al. identiﬁed ﬁve populations of MAC associated cells
in mice and compared them to human subsets. The immature human subsets
were all described to be CD14hi, whereas the more mature sets were homoge-
neously CD14int. One of the CD14hi populations was described to be a more
mature intermediate due the upregulation of CD209, CD163, and HLADR
and the downregulation of CD11c. This population might be comparable to
our population of CD14hi P5, but as they only used CD11c to target imma-
ture cells a deﬁnitive conclusion cannot be reached. CD209 and CD163 are
both diﬀerentially expressed on MAC states in our SC trajectories. CD209
is high on all CD14int in the study by Bain et al., which might indicate it
==PAGE:53==
52
being upregulated earlier than other MAC markers [12]. To achieve improved
separation of P1 and P2 cells, we could attempt to include CD209 for future
analyses.
During inﬂammation an increase of MOs with expression proﬁles simi-
lar to those of early diﬀerentiation intermediates are observed. These cells
maintain a pro-inﬂammatory set of functions compared to later diﬀerentia-
tion stages [12, 14]. Jones et al. found that patients with active inﬂammatory
bowel disease (IBD) had a signiﬁcant increase of both CD14hiHLADRint and
CD14hiHLADRhi lin-CD45+ cells compared to both healthy subjects and
patients with dormant IBD. In the current study, the sample from a Crohn’s
disease patient indicated similar results by a high abundance of P1 and P2
in the SI, where the disease is located. P1 would here be associated with the
increase in CD14hiHLADRint cells, while the increase in P2 could correlate
with the CD14hi and HLADRhi cells. The lowest relative abundance of P4 is
observed in the SI of the patient with Crohn’s disease, whereas Jones et al.
does not see any reduction in the frequency of CD14int MAC. This could be
due to disease progression or age [14]. Noteworthy, it seemed that mainly the
SI sample from the patient with Crohn’s disease had strikingly diﬀerences
compared to the healthy patient samples. This was an expected observation,
since Crohn’s disease primarily aﬀects the distal parts if SI.
Considering how the ﬂow cytometry data compared to the scRNA-seq
data and other studies, the most likely start point of the diﬀerentiation from
MOs to MACs or moDCs is P1. P2 seems to be a natural next stage of
diﬀerentiation due to its closely related expression proﬁle: The only diﬀerence
from P1 is the upregulation of HLADR and a slight increase in the expression
of CD81. Since P3 cells express CD11a it is likely a relatively immature cell,
as CD11a is an integrin which among other functions is used for migration
from blood into tissues [75]. However, P3 has downregulated expression of
CD55, FPR1 and CD14, which from the SC trajectory data indicates a later
diﬀerential stage. P4 has close resemblance to fully diﬀerentiated MACs from
other studies and compared to the SC trajectories it does seem to match the
MAC end-point best by expression of CD81 and downregulation of CD55 and
FPR1. The expression proﬁle of P5 mainly suggest a mature population: it
expresses all the markers related to fully diﬀerentiated MACs and none of
the markers related to MOs used in this study, the only exception is the high
level of CD14. This might propose an alternative CD14hi MAC population in
the human intestine. P6 only diﬀers from P3 by expression of CD1c, which
suggests this as the bifurcation point for moDC diﬀerentiation. From the SC
trajectories the bifurcation is suggested to arise before intermediates start
expressing genes closely related to MAC proﬁles. Given the current markers,
this could be a further point of investigation.
==PAGE:54==
5.
Conclusion
It has been proposed that intestinal populations of human MNPs are impor-
tant in gut homeostasis, though their role in inﬂammation has not yet been
clariﬁed. Previously used surface markers do not handle the heterogeneity of
the MNPs well. Analyzing a scRNA-seq data set of human intestinal MNP
provides an unbiased approach to extract information on cell identities and
development. We used pseudo-temporal ordering of MNPs to infer how the
cells diﬀerentiate and how their expression patterns change as they develop.
DEGs from the pseudo-temporal ordering were used to design a ﬂow cytome-
try panel, which was then tested on ﬁve healthy patient samples and a sample
from a patient with Crohn’s disease.
We could identify ﬁve cell populations from the MO →MAC pathway
and two from the divergent MO →moDC branch. These populations could
be sequentially ordered based on the markers we included in our panel, which
suggested a trajectory similar to that found by the pseudo-temporal ordering
of the SC data.
We also showed diﬀerences between SI and LI in a number of the identiﬁed
populations. Though, there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences, there seemed to
be an enrichment of MOs and moDCs in the LI, while P3 and P4 were
enriched in the SI. This might suggest that the micro environment imprints
speciﬁc promotion of MO →moDC in the LI while preferentially promoting
MO →MAC in the SI.
Interestingly, some of the populations also showed large changes in the
sample from the patient with Crohn’s disease, suggesting these speciﬁc pop-
ulations may be involved in Crohn’s disease pathology. In future studies the
results presented here could be used to assess the implications and functions
of the uncovered populations in Crohn’s disease. Further understanding of
the cell subsets involved in Crohn’s pathology may in turn beneﬁt research
on treatments for this debilitating disease.
53
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1] Kenneth Murphy, Casey Weaver, and Charles A. Janeway. Janeway’s Immunobiology.
Garland Science,, 9th edition, 2017.
[2] Allan M. Mowat and William Winston Agace. Regional specialization within the
intestinal immune system. Nature Reviews. Immunology, 14(10):667–685, 2014.
[3] J. Warberg. Human fysiologi :. Polyteknisk Forlag,, 5th edition, 1989.
[4] C. L. Scott, C. C. Bain, P. B. Wright, D. Sichien, K. Kotarsky, E. K. Persson, K. Luda,
M. Guilliams, B. N. Lambrecht, W. W. Agace, S. W. F. Milling, and A. M. Mowat.
Ccr2(+)cd103(-) intestinal dendritic cells develop from dc-committed precursors and
induce interleukin-17 production by t cells. Mucosal Immunology, 8(2):327–339, 2015.
[5] P. D. Smith, L. E. Smythies, R. Shen, T. Greenwell-Wild, M. Gliozzi, and S. M.
Wahl.
Intestinal macrophages and response to microbial encroachment.
Mucosal
Immunology, 4(1):31–42, 2011.
[6] Calum C. Bain, Alberto Bravo-Blas, Charlotte L. Scott, Elisa Gomez Perdiguero,
Frederic Geissmann, Sandrine Henri, Bernard Malissen, Lisa C. Osborne, David Artis,
and Allan Mci Mowat. Constant replenishment from circulating monocytes maintains
the macrophage pool in the intestine of adult mice. Nature Immunology, 15(10):929–
U236, 2014.
[7] Tovah N. Shaw, Stephanie A. Houston, Kelly Wemyss, Hayley M. Bridgeman,
Thomas A. Barbera, Tamsin Zangerle-Murray, Patrick Strangward, Amanda J. L.
Ridley, Ping Wang, Samira Tamoutounour, Judith E. Allen, Joanne E. Konkel, and
John R. Grainger. Tissue-resident macrophages in the intestine are long lived and
deﬁned by tim-4 and cd4 expression. Journal of Experimental Medicine, 215(6):1507–
1518, 2018.
[8] Sebastiaan
De
Schepper,
Simon
Verheijden,
Javier
Aguilera-Lizarraga,
Maria Francesca Viola,
Werend Boesmans,
Nathalie Stakenborg,
Iryna Voy-
tyuk, Inga Smidt, Bram Boeckx, Isabelle Dierckx de Casterle, Veerle Baekelandt,
Erika Gonzalez Dominguez, Matthias Mack, Inge Depoortere, Bart De Strooper,
Ben Sprangers,
Uwe Himmelreich,
Stefaan Soenen,
Martin Guilliams,
Pieter
Vanden Berghe, Elizabeth Jones, Diether Lambrechts, and Guy Boeckxstaens.
Self-maintaining gut macrophages are essential for intestinal homeostasis.
Cell,
175(2):400–+, 2018.
[9] Calum C. Bain and Anika Schridde. Origin, diﬀerentiation, and function of intestinal
macrophages. Frontiers in Immunology, 9:2733, 2733, 2018.
[10] Frederic Geissmann, Markus G. Manz, Steﬀen Jung, Michael H. Sieweke, Miriam
Merad, and Klaus Ley. Development of monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells.
Science, 327(5966):656–661, 2010.
[11] Samira Tamoutounour, Sandrine Henri, Hugues Lelouard, Beatrice de Bovis, Colin
de Haar, C. Janneke van der Woude, Andrea M. Woltman, Yasmin Reyal, Do-
minique Bonnet, Dorine Sichien, Calum C. Bain, Allan McI Mowat, Caetano Reis e
Sousa, Lionel F. Poulin, Bernard Malissen, and Martin Guilliams. Cd64 distinguishes
macrophages from dendritic cells in the gut and reveals the th1-inducing role of
mesenteric lymph node macrophages during colitis. European Journal of Immunol-
ogy, 42(12):3150–3166, 2012.
[12] C. C. Bain, C. L. Scott, H. Uronen-Hansson, S. Gudjonsson, O. Jansson, O. Grip,
M. Guilliams, B. Malissen, W. W. Agace, and A. Mc I. Mowat. Resident and pro-
inﬂammatory macrophages in the colon represent alternative context-dependent fates
54
==PAGE:56==
55
of the same ly6c(hi) monocyte precursors. Mucosal Immunology, 6(3):498–510, 2013.
[13] Prakash Saha and Frederic Geissmann. Toward a functional characterization of blood
monocytes. Immunology and Cell Biology, 89(1):2–4, 2011.
[14] Gareth-Rhys Jones, Calum C. Bain, Thomas M. Fenton, Aoife Kelly, Sheila L. Brown,
Alasdair C. Ivens, Mark A. Travis, Peter C. Cook, and Andrew S. MacDonald. Dy-
namics of colon monocyte and macrophage activation during colitis.
Frontiers in
Immunology, 9:2764, 2764, 2018.
[15] Anna Bujko, Nader Atlasy, Ole J. B. Landsverk, Lisa Richter, Sheraz Yaqub, Rune
Horneland, Ole Oyen, Einar Martin Aandahl, Lars Aabakken, Hendrik G. Stunnen-
berg, Espen S. Baekkevold, and Frode L. Jahnsen. Transcriptional and functional
proﬁling deﬁnes human small intestinal macrophage subsets. Journal of Experimen-
tal Medicine, 215(2):441–458, 2018.
[16] LE Smythies, M Sellers, RH Clements, M Mosteller-Barnum, G Meng, WH Benjamin,
JM Orenstein, and PD Smith. Human intestinal macrophages display profound in-
ﬂammatory anergy despite avid phagocytic and bacteriocidal activity. Journal of
Clinical Investigation, 115(1):66–75, 2005.
[17] Ehud Zigmond, Biana Bernshtein, Gilgi Friedlander, Catherine R. Walker, Simon
Yona, Ki Wook Kim, Ori Brenner, Rita Krauthgamer, Chen Varol, Werner M˜Aller,
and Steﬀen Jung. Macrophage-restricted interleukin-10 receptor deﬁciency, but not
il-10 deﬁciency, causes severe spontaneous colitis. Immunity, 40(5):720–733, 2014.
[18] Jaime De Calisto, Eduardo J. Villablanca, and J. Rodrigo Mora.
Fc gamma ri
(cd64): An identity card for intestinal macrophages. European Journal of Immunol-
ogy, 42(12):3136–3140, 2012.
[19] Calum C. Bain and Allan McI Mowat. Intestinal macrophages - specialised adaptation
to a unique environment. European Journal of Immunology, 41(9):2494–2498, 2011.
[20] Allan McI Mowat. Mucosal macrophages in intestinal homeostasis and inﬂammation.
Journal of Innate Immunity, 3(6):550–564, 2011.
[21] Matthew Collin and Venetia Bigley. Human dendritic cell subsets: an update. Im-
munology, 154(1):3–20, 2018.
[22] Babacar Cisse, Michele L. Caton, Manfred Lehner, Takahiro Maeda, Stefanie Scheu,
Richard Locksley, Dan Holmberg, Christiane Zweier, Nicolette S. den Hollander, Sa-
rina G. Kant, Wolfgang Holter, Anita Rauch, Yuan Zhuang, and Boris Reizis. Tran-
scription factor e2-2 is an essential and speciﬁc regulator of plasmacytoid dendritic
cell development. Cell, 135(1):37–48, 2008.
[23] Martin Guilliams, Florent Ginhoux, Claudia Jakubzick, Shalin H. Naik, Nobuyuki
Onai, Barbara U. Schraml, Elodie Segura, Roxane Tussiwand, and Simon Yona. Den-
dritic cells, monocytes and macrophages: a uniﬁed nomenclature based on ontogeny.
Nature Reviews Immunology, 14(8):571–578, 2014.
[24] Thorsten Joeris, K M¨uller-Luda, William Winston Agace, and A McI Mowat. Di-
versity and functions of intestinal mononuclear phagocytes. Mucosal Immunology,
10(4):845–864, 2017.
[25] Vasileios Bekiaris, Emma K. Persson, and William Winston Agace. Intestinal den-
dritic cells in the regulation of mucosal immunity. Immunological Reviews, 260(1):86–
101, 2014.
[26] Sarah L. Jongbloed, Andrew J. Kassianos, Kylie J. McDonald, Georgina J. Clark,
Xinsheng Ju, Catherine E. Angel, Chun-Jen J. Chen, P. Rod Dunbar, Robert B.
Wadley, Varinder Jeet, Annelie J. E. Vulink, Derek N. J. Hart, and Kristen J. Radford.
Human cd141(+) (bdca-3)(+) dendritic cells (dcs) represent a unique myeloid dc
subset that cross-presents necrotic cell antigens. Journal of Experimental Medicine,
==PAGE:57==
56
207(6):1247–1260, 2010.
[27] Annabell Bachem, Steﬀen G¨uttler, Evelyn Hartung, Fr´ed´eric Ebstein, Michael Schae-
fer, Astrid Tannert, Abdulgabar Salama, Kamran Movassaghi, Corinna Opitz,
Hans W. Mages, Volker Henn, Peter-Michael Kloetzel, Stephanie Gurka, and
Richard A. Kroczek. Superior antigen cross-presentation and xcr1 expression deﬁne
human cd11c+cd141+ cells as homologues of mouse cd8+ dendritic cells. Journal of
Experimental Medicine, 207(6):1273–1281, 2010.
[28] Antonio Lanzavecchia and Federica Sallusto. Regulation of t cell immunity by den-
dritic cells. Cell, 106(3):263–266, 2001.
[29] Federica Sallusto and Antonio Lanzavecchia. Eﬃcient presentation of soluble antigen
by cultured human dendritic cells is maintained by granulocyte/macrophage colony-
stimulating factor plus interleukin 4 and downregulated by tumor necrosis factor
alpha. Journal of Experimental Medicine, 179(4):1109–1118, 1109–1118, 1994.
[30] Payal B. Watchmaker, Katharina Lahl, Mike Lee, Dirk Baumjohann, John Morton,
Sun Jung Kim, Ruizhu Zeng, Alexander Dent, K. Mark Anse, Betty Diamond, Hu-
sein Hadeiba, and Eugene C. Butcher. Comparative transcriptional and functional
proﬁling deﬁnes conserved programs of intestinal dc diﬀerentiation in humans and
mice. Nature Immunology, 15(1):98–108, 2014.
[31] Emmanuel L. Gautier, Tal Shay, Jennifer Miller, Melanie Greter, Claudia Jakubzick,
Stoyan Ivanov, Julie Helft, Andrew Chow, Kutlu G. Elpek, Simon Gordonov, Amin R.
Mazloom, Avi Ma’ayan, Wei-Jen Chua, Ted H. Hansen, Shannon J. Turley, Miriam
Merad, Gwendalyn J. Randolph, and Immunological Genome Consortium.
Gene-
expression proﬁles and transcriptional regulatory pathways that underlie the identity
and diversity of mouse tissue macrophages. Nature Immunology, 13(11):1118–1128,
2012.
[32] Jennifer C. Miller, Brian D. Brown, Tal Shay, Emmanuel L. Gautier, Vladimir Jojic,
Ariella Cohain, Gaurav Pandey, Marylene Leboeuf, Kutlu G. Elpek, Julie Helft,
Daigo Hashimoto, Andrew Chow, Jeremy Price, Melanie Greter, Milena Bogunovic,
Angelique Bellemare-Pelletier, Paul S. Frenette, Gwendalyn J. Randolph, Shannon J.
Turley, Miriam Merad, and Immunological Genome Consortium. Deciphering the
transcriptional network of the dendritic cell lineage. Nature Immunology, 13(9):888–
899, 2012.
[33] Damya Laoui, Jiri Keirsse, Yannick Morias, Eva Van Overmeire, Xenia Geeraerts,
Yvon Elkrim, Mate Kiss, Evangelia Bolli, Qods Lahmar, Dorine Sichien, Jens
Serneels, Charlotte L. Scott, Louis Boon, Patrick De Baetselier, Massimiliano Maz-
zone, Martin Guilliams, and Jo A. Van Ginderachter. The tumour microenvironment
harbours ontogenically distinct dendritic cell populations with opposing eﬀects on
tumour immunity. Nature Communications, 7(1):13720, 2016.
[34] Christel Goudot, Alice Coillard, Alexandra-Chloe Villani, Paul Gueguen, Adeline
Cros, Siranush Sarkizova, Tsing-Lee Tang-Huau, Mylene Bohec, Sylvain Baulande,
Nir Hacohen, Sebastian Amigorena, and Elodie Segura. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor
controls monocyte diﬀerentiation into dendritic cells versus macrophages. Immunity,
47(3):582–+, 2017.
[35] Martine Schrøder, Guro Reinholt Melum, Ole J B Landsverk, Anna Bujko, Sheraz
Yaqub, Einar Gran, Henrik Aamodt, Espen S. Bækkevold, Frode L Jahnsen, and
Lisa Richter. Cd1c-expression by monocytes - implications for the use of commercial
cd1c+ dendritic cell isolation kits. Plos One, 2017.
[36] Elodie Segura, Maxime Touzot, Armelle Bohineust, Antonio Cappuccio, Gilles Chioc-
chia, Anne Hosmalin, Marc Dalod, Vassili Soumelis, and Sebastian Amigorena.
==PAGE:58==
57
Human inﬂammatory dendritic cells induce th17 cell diﬀerentiation.
Immunity,
38(2):336–348, 2013.
[37] Maud Plantinga, Martin Guilliams, Manon Vanheerswynghels, Kim Deswarte, Fil-
ipe Branco-Madeira, Wendy Toussaint, Leen Vanhoutte, Katrijn Neyt, Nigel Killeen,
Bernard Malissen, Hamida Hammad, and Bart N. Lambrecht.
Conventional and
monocyte-derived cd11b(+) dendritic cells initiate and maintain t helper 2 cell-
mediated immunity to house dust mite allergen. Immunity, 38(2):322–335, 2013.
[38] Ehud Zigmond, Chen Varol, Julia Farache, Elinor Elmaliah, Ansuman T. Satpa-
thy, Gilgi Friedlander, Matthias Mack, Nahum Shpigel, Ivo G. Boneca, Kenneth M.
Murphy, Guy Shakhar, Zamir Halpern, and Steﬀen Jung. Ly6c(hi) monocytes in
the inﬂamed colon give rise to proinﬂammatory eﬀector cells and migratory antigen-
presenting cells. Immunity, 37(6):1076–1090, 2012.
[39] Antonis Koussounadis, Simon P. Langdon, In Hwa Um, David J. Harrison, and
V. Anne Smith. Relationship between diﬀerentially expressed mrna and mrna-protein
correlations in a xenograft model system. Scientiﬁc Reports, 5(1):10775, 2015.
[40] Samuel Marguerat, Alexander Schmidt, Sandra Codlin, Wei Chen, Ruedi Aebersold,
and Juerg Baehler. Quantitative analysis of ﬁssion yeast transcriptomes and pro-
teomes in proliferating and quiescent cells. Cell, 151(3):671–683, 2012.
[41] Samuel H. Payne. The utility of protein and mrna correlation. Trends in Biochemical
Sciences, 40(1):1–3, 2015.
[42] Quin F. Wills, Kenneth J. Livak, Alex J. Tipping, Tariq Enver, Andrew J. Gold-
son, Darren W. Sexton, and Chris Holmes. Single-cell gene expression analysis re-
veals genetic associations masked in whole-tissue experiments. Nature Biotechnology,
31(8):748–+, 2013.
[43] Peter See, Josephine Lum, Jinmiao Chen, and Florent Ginhoux. A single-cell se-
quencing guide for immunologists. Frontiers in Immunology, 2018.
[44] Cole Trapnell, Davide Cacchiarelli, Jonna Grimsby, Prapti Pokharel, Shuqiang Li,
Michael Morse, Niall J. Lennon, Kenneth J. Livak, Tarjei S. Mikkelsen, and John L.
Rinn. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudo-
temporal ordering of single cells. Nature Biotechnology, 2014.
[45] Grace X. Y. Zheng, Jessica M. Terry, Phillip Belgrader, Paul Ryvkin, Zachary W.
Bent, Ryan Wilson, Solongo B. Ziraldo, Tobias D. Wheeler, GeoﬀP. McDermott,
Junjie Zhu, Mark T. Gregory, Joe Shuga, Luz Montesclaros, Jason G. Underwood,
Donald A. Masquelier, Stefanie Y. Nishimura, Michael Schnall-Levin, Paul W. Wy-
att, Christopher M. Hindson, Rajiv Bharadwaj, Alexander Wong, Kevin D. Ness,
Lan W. Beppu, H. Joachim Deeg, Christopher McFarland, Keith R. Loeb, William J.
Valente, Nolan G. Ericson, Emily A. Stevens, Jerald P. Radich, Tarjei S. Mikkelsen,
Benjamin J. Hindson, and Jason H. Bielas. Massively parallel digital transcriptional
proﬁling of single cells. Nature Communications, 8:14049, 2017.
[46] Byungjin Hwang, Ji Hyun Lee, and Duhee Bang. Single-cell rna sequencing technolo-
gies and bioinformatics pipelines. Experimental and Molecular Medicine, 50(8):96,
2018.
[47] Robrecht Cannoodt, Wouter Saelens, and Yvan Saeys. Computational methods for
trajectory inference from single-cell transcriptomics. European Journal of Immunol-
ogy, 46(11):2496–2506, 2016.
[48] Vladimir Kiselev, Tallulah Andrews, Jennifer Westoby, Davis McCarthy, Maren
B¨uttner, and Martin Hemberg.
scrna-seq analysis course.
http://hemberg-
lab.github.io/scRNA.seq.course/introduction-to-single-cell-rna-seq.html, 2018.
Ac-
cessed: 2018-12-19.
==PAGE:59==
58
[49] 10x Genomics. What is cell ranger?
https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-
gene-expression/software/pipelines/latest/what-is-cell-ranger. Accessed: 2010-09-19.
[50] Oliver Stegle, Sarah A. Teichmann, and John C. Marioni. Computational and analyt-
ical challenges in single-cell transcriptomics. Nature Reviews Genetics, 16(3):133–145,
2015.
[51] Shifei Ding, Mingjing Du, and Hong Zhu. Survey on granularity clustering. Cognitive
Neurodynamics, 9(6):561–572, 2015.
[52] Andrew Butler, Paul Hoﬀman, Peter Smibert, Efthymia Papalexi, and Rahul Satija.
Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across diﬀerent conditions, technologies,
and species. Nature Biotechnology, 2018.
[53] Saskia Freytag, Luyi Tian, Ingrid L¨onnstedt, Milica Ng, and Melanie Bahlo. Compar-
ison of clustering tools in r for medium-sized 10x genomics single-cell rna-sequencing
data. F1000research, 7:1297, 1297, 2018.
[54] Angelo Du`o, Mark D. Robinson, and Charlotte Soneson. A systematic performance
evaluation of clustering methods for single-cell rna-seq data. F1000research, 7:1141,
2018.
[55] Charlotte Soneson and Mark D. Robinson. Bias, robustness and scalability in single-
cell diﬀerential expression analysis. Nature Methods, 15(4):255–+, 2018.
[56] Laurens van der Maaten and Geoﬀrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 9:2579–2605, 2008.
[57] Xiaojie Qiu, Qi Mao, Ying Tang, Li Wang, Raghav Chawla, Hannah Pliner, and
Cole Trapnell. Reverse graph embedding resolves complex single-cell developmental
trajectories. BioRxiv, 2017.
[58] Gioele La Manno, Ruslan Soldatov, Amit Zeisel, Emelie Braun, Hannah Hochgerner,
Viktor Petukhov, Katja Lidschreiber, Maria E. Kastriti, Peter Lonnerberg, Alessan-
dro Furlan, Jean Fan, Lars E. Borm, Zehua Liu, David van Bruggen, Jimin Guo, Xi-
aoling He, Roger Barker, Erik Sundstrom, Goncalo Castelo-Branco, Patrick Cramer,
Igor Adameyko, Sten Linnarsson, and Peter V. Kharchenko. Rna velocity of single
cells. Nature, 560(7719):494–+, 2018.
[59] Martin Barron and Jun Li. Identifying and removing the cell-cycle eﬀect from single-
cell rna-sequencing data. page 12, 2016.
[60] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foun-
dation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2018.
[61] Alexandra-Chlo´e Villani, Rahul Satija, Gary Reynolds, Siranush Sarkizova, Karthik
Shekhar, James Fletcher, Morgane Griesbeck, Andrew Butler, Shiwei Zheng, Suzan
Lazo, Laura Jardine, David Dixon, Emily Stephenson, Emil Nilsson, Ida Grundberg,
David McDonald, Andrew Filby, Weibo Li, Philip L. De Jager, Orit Rozenblatt-
Rosen, Andrew A. Lane, Muzlifah Haniﬀa, Nir Hacohen, and Aviv Regev. Single-cell
rna-seq reveals new types of human blood dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors.
Science, 356(6335):eaah4573, 2017.
[62] A. Schridde, C. C. Bain, J. U. Mayer, J. Montgomery, E. Pollet, B. Denecke,
S. W. F. Milling, S. J. Jenkins, M. Dalod, S. Henri, B. Malissen, O. Pabst, and
A. Mcl Mowat.
Tissue-speciﬁc diﬀerentiation of colonic macrophages requires tgf
beta receptor-mediated signaling. Mucosal Immunology, 10(6):1387–1399, 2017.
[63] Gaetano Zizzo, Brendan A. Hilliard, Marc Monestier, and Philip L. Cohen. Eﬃcient
clearance of early apoptotic cells by human macrophages requires m2c polarization
and mertk induction. Journal of Immunology, 189(7):3508–3520, 2012.
[64] Tanja Buchacher, Anna Ohradanova-Repic, Hannes Stockinger, Michael B. Fischer,
and Viktoria Weber. M2 polarization of human macrophages favors survival of the
==PAGE:60==
59
intracellular pathogen chlamydia pneumoniae. Plos One, 10(11):e0143593, 2015.
[65] Mapping the human dc lineage through the integration of high-dimensional tech-
niques. Science, 356(6342):eaag3009, 2017.
[66] H Caldas, YY Jiang, MP Holloway, J Fangusaro, C Mahotka, EM Conway, and
RA Altura. Survivin splice variants regulate the balance between proliferation and
cell death. Oncogene, 24(12):1994–2007, 2005.
[67] Wei Lv, Benhua Su, Yuyang Li, Chong Geng, and Na Chen. Kiaa0101 inhibition
suppresses cell proliferation and cell cycle progression by promoting the interaction
between p53 and sp1 in breast cancer. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Com-
munications, 503(2):600–606, 2018.
[68] Xiaojie Qiu, Andrew Hill, Jonathan Packer, Dejun Lin, Yi-An Ma, and Cole Trapnell.
Single-cell mrna quantiﬁcation and diﬀerential analysis with census. Nature Methods,
2017.
[69] Simon Anders and Wolfgang Huber.
Diﬀerential expression analysis for sequence
count data. Genome Biology, 11(10):R106, 2010.
[70] Yanzhu Lin, Kseniya Golovnina, Zhen-Xia Chen, Hang Noh Lee, Yazmin L. Serrano
Negron, Hina Sultana, Brian Oliver, and Susan T. Harbison. Comparison of normal-
ization and diﬀerential expression analyses using rna-seq data from 726 individual
drosophila melanogaster. Bmc Genomics, 17(1):28, 2016.
[71] D Karolchik, AS Hinrichs, TS Furey, KM Roskin, CW Sugnet, D Haussler, and
WJ Kent.
The ucsc table browser data retrieval tool.
Nucleic Acids Research,
32(Database issue):D493–D496, 2004. http://genome.ucsc.edu/, downloaded the 28th
of October.
[72] Linnarsson lab.
Loompy:
Open source scientiﬁc tools for Python,
2017–.
http://www.loompy.org/, Online; accessed 2018-10-21.
[73] Lukas Heger, Silke Balk, Jennifer J. Luehr, Gordon F. Heidkamp, Christian H. K.
Lehmann, Lukas Hatscher, Ariawan Purbojo, Arndt Hartmann, Fayna Garcia-
Martin, Shin-Ichiro Nishimura, Robert Cesnjevar, Falk Nimmerjahn, and Diana
Dudziak.
Clec10a is a speciﬁc marker for human cd1c(+) dendritic cells and en-
hances their toll-like receptor 7/8-induced cytokine secretion. Frontiers in Immunol-
ogy, 9:744, 2018.
[74] Janos X. Binder, Sune Pletscher-Frankild, Kalliopi Tsafou, Christian Stolte, Sean I.
O’Donoghue, Reinhard Schneider, and Lars Juhl Jensen. Compartments: uniﬁcation
and visualization of protein subcellular localization evidence. Database-the Journal
of Biological Databases and Curation, 2014(0):bau012, 2014.
[75] Chafen Lu, Motomu Shimaoka, Qun Zang, Junichi Takagi, and Timothy A. Springer.
Locking in alternate conformations of the integrin ˆIlˆI2 i domain with disulﬁde bonds
reveals functional relationships among integrin domains. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98(5):2393–2398, 2001.
[76] Christine Vogel and Edward M. Marcotte. Insights into the regulation of protein
abundance from proteomic and transcriptomic analyses. Nature Reviews Genetics,
13(4):227–232, 2012.
==PAGE:61==
60
==PAGE:62==
61
Appendix
Clustering
Figure S1:
tSNE Overlay of Markers to Identify Cell Clusters: Overlay of expression of
genes associated to specﬁc cell types. MO were recognized by expression of CD14, FCN1, VCAN and
S100A8. MAC were identiﬁed by MAFB, MERTK, CD209 and CD14. cDC2s were classiﬁed based on
expression of FLT3 and CD1C. ITGAL have been associated with immature MO. To identify moDCs
a combination FCN1 and CD1C were used: blue = high expression of FCN1, green = high expression
of CD1C, red = high coexpression of CD1C and FCN1.
==PAGE:63==
62
Figure S2: tSNE overlay of markers to identify cell clusters: To identify the cDC1 cluster
expression of XCR1, CADM1, CLEC9A [21]. For the pDC cluster CLEC4A, GZMB and IL3RA [21, 61].
Proliferating cells were identiﬁed with BIRC5, KIAA0101 and TK1 [66, 67]. Pre-DCs were identiﬁed
based on expression of IRF4, S100B and SOX4 [21, 65].
==PAGE:64==
63
Velocyto for Separate Tissues
Figure S3: Velocity Calculations for Separate Tissues: Left: SI LP calculation and embedding
into 2D space of RNA velocities. Calculations were done for 1 arbitrary timestep and pooling of 5 cells.
The embedding was done with a neighbourhood of cells set to 100 ( 10% of included cells). Right: LI
LP calculation and embedding into 2D space of RNA velocities. Calculations were done for 1 arbitrary
timestep and pooling of 5 cells. The embedding was done with a neighbourhood of cells set to 80 ( 10%
of included cells).
==PAGE:65==
64
Trajectories Expression of Cell Identity Markers and
Seurat Clustering on Trajectory
Figure S4: Overlaying Expression of Known Identity Markers on SI Trajectories: The two
SI LP trajectories overlaid markers to identify MO root (FCN1) and MAC leaf (CD209): A) SI LP
momac trajectory B) SI LP wmoDC trajectory.
==PAGE:66==
65
Figure S5: Overlaying Expression of Known Identity Markers on LI Trajectories: The two
LI LP trajectories overlaid markers to identify MO root (FCN1) and MAC leaf (CD209): A) LI LP
momac trajectory. B) LI LP wmoDC trajectory.
==PAGE:67==
66
Figure S6: Seurat Cluster Coloring overlaid Trajectories: The Seurat Cluster
Identities (Figure 10A) were used to color the cells included in the trajectories for A) SI
LP wmoDC and B) LI LP wmoDC.
==PAGE:68==
67
DEG for Trajectory States
SI LP momac Trajectory
MO
S100A9 S100A8 S100A12 VCAN FCN1 APOBEC3A SLC11A1 SERPINA1 S100A4 FTH1
AQP9 CTB-61M7.2 FPR1 VIM S100A6 FAM65B FGR LINC01272 NAMPT CD44 CYBB
CD300E ZEB2 SOD2 LTA4H CD52 CTSS C5AR1 ZBTB16 ATP2B1 IFITM2 TSPO
EMP3 TCEB2 TNFAIP6 NEAT1 PTPRC JMJD1C LINC00936 TPM3 EIF1 LST1 ATP5E
GMFG S100A11 FCER1G OAZ1 SELL LRRFIP1 EAF1 S100A10 PTPRE ARF6 LILRA2
SAMSN1 NFKBIA BASP1 PSAP C10orf54 TKT H3F3A PLP2 CD48 SNU13 TRMT6
IL1RN BTG1 ANXA1 MAML1 RNF144B SH3BGRL3 RBX1 CLEC12A PPP1R15A TREM1
LIMD2 GLIPR2 CSTA COTL1 ATP5I PNPLA8 YWHAZ LILRA1 RAB21 ITGB2 LAM-
TOR4 RILPL2 DUSP6 LCP1 BCL2A1 MX2 VAMP5 MSN STXBP2 LYST CALM2 CCL4
SAT1 JUND EREG POU2F2 DDX3X NFKBIZ CD37 POMP H3F3B CD55 TSC22D3
ERGIC1 TIMP1 IL1B HMGB2 UBR4 CAPN2 CARD16 PTGER2 RBM3 FKBP5 NCF2
IRAK3 C15orf57 ZNF281 IVNS1ABP ABRACL MAFB C1orf162 FCGR3A CSGAL-
NACT2 AP1S2 ARF1 PRKCB G0S2 MBD2 CSF3R RP11-386I14.4 PLEK GPCPD1
TUBA1A MCL1 MNDA LUCAT1 AHNAK EIF5 ATP1A1 ASAH1 ARHGEF40 PDE4B
RP11-1143G9.4 ETS2 GCA ADGRE5 SLC6A6 BLOC1S1 MT2A RBM8A CAPZA1 MALAT1
RAC2 MTPN TNFRSF1B ELF1 MARCKS IRF2BP2 IQGAP1 APLP2 NBPF19 TN-
FAIP2 XBP1 OGFR LILRA5 FKBP1A CORO1A MXD1 GLUL CTNNB1 DAZAP2
STAT6 MFSD1 MAP2K1 WARS NBN ZYX TWISTNB CNIH4 SLC36A4 CHD2 CAPG
SAT2 FAM45A SH3GLB1 NUMB MYCBP2 PIK3AP1 CKLF VPS4B MYADM RBMS1
PECAM1 MOB3A IER3 ELL2 DDX5 SERPINB1 MEGF9 CFP CCL3 VIM-AS1 TN-
FSF13B EIF4E PILRA PTP4A2 NBPF14 GBP2 RAB31 ARRB2 SAP30BP ABI1 RIPK2
ZFP36L1 SLC2A3 SH3KBP1 HSD17B11 EIF1B LILRB2 SF1 DCP2 CXCL2 MIR3945HG
CCNK ANXA2 TMEM107 SELPLG SRSF5 GTF2F1 CLEC4E C19orf43 PKN2 HN-
RNPH2 IFITM3 GK C6orf62 ZSCAN16-AS1 CCNI LYN RAP1A EIF4A1 RBMX RASSF5
AKIRIN2 LILRB3 C19orf38 CUX1 CCNDBP1 ZEB2-AS1 ICAM2 WDR43 ARL6IP4
CAPZA2 FKBP15 ANKRD28 TLR2 ALDOA EIF4G2 TAX1BP1 FNDC3B LIMS1 NDUFB9
SFPQ MANBA GAPT MED13L BLVRA FYB LRP1 SERP1 SIRPB1 ATP6V0B SPCS3
HNRNPH1 PLAC8 PNKD PPP1R15B ZNF385A MAP3K2 TSPAN14 MAP2K3 MIER1
PTEN SF3B1 NLRP3 SYAP1 ACSL1 THBS1 TALDO1 USP8 RIOK3 RAB11FIP1 SLC25A37
CH17-373J23.1 VCP UPP1 TLE4 RAP1B ATP5EP2 ARHGDIA CCRL2 VAPA PPP1CB
B4GALT5 IFI27L2 UBE2D1 DDX17 OTUD1 SERPINB9 CTD-3252C9.4 RAD21 RHOQ
UGP2 PRPF38B WBP4 SLC38A2 UBE2R2 KYNU DIAPH1 OTUB1 CPPED1 NDUFS6
ATG3 PDAP1 VASP ZBTB43 SDF2L1 CAPNS1 ISG15 C15orf48 BRI3 PPP1R18 RTN3
ACTR3 TES DMXL2 C12orf57 SH3BP5 GUK1 SPAG9 MMP19 ARFGAP3 CYTIP GLRX
KHDRBS1 CHMP4B HDAC9 XRCC5 PTGES3 NUP214 SHOC2 PAG1 EMILIN2 ELF2
NUFIP2 IFI35 TDG ARHGAP30 CELF1 CHD1 SLC7A7 CALCOCO2 VMP1 PSMB8-
AS1 ARL4A LPCAT1 CDC26 ZC3H12A MAPK1IP1L RB1CC1 SNX10 RNF13 OLR1
PCNP SLA ASGR1 CYTH1 MYH9 PTPN18 SYK PRKAR1A HIF1A GNS RSRP1
JARID2 CCNY SNHG15 ERICH1 PDE4A CDC37 SNHG25 ATP6AP2 NDUFB6 CWC25
NDUFA6 GNG2 PLK3 BACH1 SQRDL WTAP COPA NFKB1 SSH2 MRFAP1
P2
RPL18A RPS25 RPS12 FCN1 RPS8 IL1B S100A4 SOD2 RPS13 RPL35A RPL27 RPLP0
PLAUR RPS21 EMP3 TNFAIP8 IL1RN CSTA WTAP MIR3945HG SAMSN1 TOMM7
EREG OLR1 BTG1 COTL1 CD44 FAM49A NFKBIA DUSP6 PLAC8 CCL20 G0S2 IER3
RP11-160E2.6 ARL8B PNRC1 HMGA1 C1orf162 CH17-373J23.1 THBS1 ACSL1 NLRP3
==PAGE:69==
68
UQCRH CFLAR TNFAIP6 EHD1 RPL13 MARCKS CXCL3 RP11-1143G9.4 CXCL8
BCL2A1 PIM2 GRB2 PHPT1 BID SSBP1 XBP1 IL1A THAP2 BIRC3 C14orf2 DDX21
LSM7 ST8SIA4 SNRPG TNF TP53BP2 RBM8A WDR1 MDH2 PPIF ISG20 LINC00936
NBN IL23A SPTLC2 TLR4 TNIP1 DOCK10 EDEM1 SOCS3 TUBA1C IGKC
P3
HLA-DPB1 CLEC10A HLA-DQB1 HLA-DQA1 HLA-DRB1 FCER1A CD74 HLA-DRA
FCGR2B HLA-DPA1 CD1E JAML PKIB VSIG4 DNASE1L3 RALA HLA-DMB NAP1L1
CD1C IFNGR1 CXCR4 GRN HLA-DMA CST3 C1QC AREG RP11-404O13.5 RNASE6
ACP5 CPVL CACNA2D3 CSF2RA GLO1 IL1R2 SLAMF8 ELMO1 SPINT2 CD40 MIF4GD
ALOX5AP ZC3HAV1 C1QA LGALS2 GPR65 AIP RP5-1171I10.5 PPA1 HEXA ADAM28
CPM CD33 LYZ IGSF6 AKR1B1 CD300A INSIG1 ZNF331 MALAT1 CXCL10 GBP1
SDS PPIB TUBA1B
MAC
SEPP1 C1QB C1QA PDK4 RGS1 SLC40A1 C1QC DAB2 HERPUD1 DNAJB1 LGMN
JUN CD163L1 A2M LILRB5 FOS MAF HES1 ATF3 DNASE1L3 TXNIP FOSB FOLR2
CTSC DUSP1 NR4A2 LINC00996 SLCO2B1 GADD45B PLTP GPR34 HSPA1A IGF1
GPNMB HLA-E CXCL12 JUNB NR4A1 ADAMDEC1 MS4A7 ZNF331 NRP1 ACP5
FGL2 KLF4 PLD3 C1orf54 SERPING1 AXL HSPA1B HSP90AA1 MERTK SASH1 EGR1
CKS2 HLA-DMA CLEC9A DDIT3 MS4A4A SERPINF1 TNFAIP3 CD74 HLA-DPA1
HSPA5 LACC1 RGS10 STAB1 LMNA GCLC FUCA1 FRMD4A MAFF ARHGAP18
CTSD TIPARP LIPA TSC22D3 ZFAND5 SLA GPR155 CXCL1 ITPR2 CCNL1 MRC1
CD209 CMKLR1 ADAP2 ITM2B ADORA3 HIST1H4C KLF6 WLS HLA-DQA1 CALR
ID3 APOC1 SEMA4A FILIP1L NCF4 PRDM1 VMO1 FPR3 CSF1R EPB41L2 FTL
CCL4L2 PIK3IP1 BTG2 IFI16 HSPA8 TSPAN4 CD69 ARID4A PLIN2 CD83 ARRDC2
RPL22L1 BRD2 HSP90B1 HSPH1 CXCR4 IER2 GIMAP7 ZFP36L2 STMN1 BST2 FC-
GRT ASAP1 WWP1 FCGR2A RHOB PRNP ALDH1A1 MPHOSPH8 MKNK1 ATG4C
EPHX1 NPC2 CTSL TGFBI HSP90AB1 GATM PDGFB EVL PPIG CHKA ACP2
HLA-DRA SGMS1 NFKBIZ RNASET2 Sep-11 ABI3 CD63 MS4A6A FAM21A CD68
SCARB2 NEU1 TFRC MPEG1 TBC1D15 HLA-DOA ITM2C MAFB CIRBP CTSB
CD163 SNX6 CPM ZMYND8 TRA2B ZFP36 NISCH FAM105A NR1H3 CD81 PRKACB
GFRA2 DAPK1 PARL MSR1 C12orf45 TCP1 PER1 FAM53C PRDX4 GLUL GPR82
YPEL5 TMEM176B DDX24 ADAM28 FRMD4B TMEM176A RAD50 KLF2 CCDC28A
EIF4A2 SDS VIMP TIMP2 SIGLEC1 TCOF1 GALM IL18BP ARL4C RAB7A IST1
TSC22D1 PIAS1 DUSP2 SREK1IP1 LY96 CD164 SCAF11 TEX264 RDX WASF2 ERAP2
DNAJA1 CAPZB SMIM3 DHRS3 RNF114 PTGS2 DPEP2 PTTG1IP EEA1 CEBPB TN-
FRSF21 BAIAP2 NAIP SQSTM1 MIS18BP1 PHF3 CD86 CHD9 EIF4A3 CTSZ ABL2
DSTN VSIG4 CSRNP1 RB1 SNRPN KLF10 CD14 C5AR2 CCL3 PUM1 CXCL16 CD59
SLC20A1 KLF9 CREG1 POLR2A PDIA6 RWDD1 RAB13 SNX9 LCP2 IFI30 CD84
SNX2 WDR45B RASGEF1B CD9 CHMP1B SNX5 HNMT SOX4 DYNLL1 MGST2
NET1 YBX3 RCBTB2 RGS2 ICAM1 CXCL2 GADD45A IRF1 GRASP CITED2 ZBTB10
ALCAM DBI CCL4 CCL3L3 CH25H LGALS3 FABP5
SI LP wmoDC Trajectory
MO
SOD2 FTH1 AQP9 CTB-61M7.2 FCN1 IL1B S100A9 TNFAIP6 NFKBIA S100A8 CCL4
NAMPT SERPINA1 MARCKS CCL3 PNRC1 BCL2A1 DUSP6 VIM IL1RN S100A4
C5AR1 LINC00936 CXCL2 CD44 FPR1 S100A12 IER3 BTG1 VCAN ATP5E MT-ND3
EREG DUSP1 SAMSN1 SLC11A1 CXCL8 CD300E MIR3945HG EMP3 LUCAT1 COTL1
==PAGE:70==
69
LST1 NLRP3 ZEB2 RP11-1143G9.4 THBS1 FTL CSTA DDX3X XBP1 PSAP EHD1
TNFAIP2 CCL3L3 CYBB S100A11 LINC01272 ACSL1 OLR1 PABPC1 CXCL3 ELL2
SDCBP ATP2B1 CCL20 TOMM7 JUND CLEC4E PPP1R15A TNF RNF144B CTSS
WTAP PLEK PNP PLAUR PTGS2 TCEB2 NBN RPL13 BIRC3 PDE4B MAFB CD52
TSPO KLF6 LAMTOR4 ASGR1 G0S2 S100A6 GBP2 CTNNB1 PTGER2 IVNS1ABP
NUMB MT-ND4L SERPINB9 SH3BGRL3 UBR4 THAP2 LPCAT1 DDX5 RP11-386I14.4
FGR ZFP36 RAB31 CCRL2 IL1A TNFAIP8 PNPLA8 BASP1 C6orf62 RBM3 MT-ND5
ZNF281 VAMP5 IRAK3 STXBP2 MAP2K3 RP11-160E2.6 LCP1 CH17-373J23.1 TREM1
MCL1 ARL8B CLEC12A CFLAR ATP13A3 EIF1B DUSP2 LTA4H EIF5 CARD16 MXD1
RBBP8 RNF19B RBX1 CD37 APLP2 ATP1A1 TRAF1 TKT PPIF TLR2 ICAM1 C14orf2
GPCPD1 UPP1 PPP1CB GRINA AZI2 LYN S100A10 RGCC NINJ1 EIF4A3 ATP1B3
NFKB1 LIMS1 IFITM2 LILRB1 PRKCB SLC2A3 PTP4A2 CD55 IQGAP1 HIF1A RIPK2
C9orf72 CD48 VMP1 IER5 IFI27L2 ZNF385A TMEM107 SESTD1 YBX3 PHLDA1 ETS2
MAPK6 PLK3 LSM7 SDF2L1 NBPF19 ARFGAP3 CHD2 RAP1B RAB21 ZC3H12A
DMXL2 CD93 SKAP2 TLE4 ZNFX1 CSF3R ARF6 OTUD1 SNX10 PPP1R15B LYST
TWISTNB GNS C12orf57 AHNAK KCTD12 CTA-292E10.6 GLRX CD14 ZFP36L1 MNDA
KYNU IL10RA GCA CASP1 ASGR2 PECAM1 ZEB2-AS1 IRF2BP2 GLIPR2 NUP214
NCF2 BACH1 TUBA1C MT2A AP1S2 ZYX CCNI CHD1 CNIH4 SLC25A37 ADGRE5
EMILIN2 EIF4E VCP IFNGR2 IGKC SNHG25 SOCS3
P2
EPM2AIP1 PLAUR S100A4 CH17-373J23.1 FCN1 CSTA EEF2 G0S2 CD44 C1orf162
RP11-160E2.6 IL1B LILRA5 TNFAIP8 CCR7 SLC25A11 CACNA2D4 ARHGEF2 SFPQ
USE1 ISG20 HMGB2 AREG DUSP6 OFD1
P3
C1QC C1QA C1QB CD209 SLC40A1 TLR4 ACP5 DNASE1L3 VSIG4 TNRC6B JAML
CXCL10 INSIG1 CLEC10A THAP2 TUBA1B CH25H AREG CD9 GLO1 SOX4
MAC
SEPP1 C1QB C1QA C1QC PDK4 SLC40A1 DAB2 DNASE1L3 RGS1 CD163L1 A2M
HES1 MAF HERPUD1 DNAJB1 JUN TXNIP IGF1 SLCO2B1 ACP5 LGMN CTSC
LILRB5 HLA-E GADD45B FTL FOS ATF3 AXL LINC00996 ADORA3 NR4A2 SASH1
GPR34 GPNMB ZNF331 FOSB HSPA1A NRP1 CD209 ADAMDEC1 TNFAIP3 JUNB
PLD3 DUSP1 NPC2 MS4A7 CTSD FOLR2 HSPA5 PLTP C1orf54 RGS10 FRMD4A
ZFAND5 SLA HSP90AA1 HLA-DMA CCL4L2 SERPING1 STAB1 FUCA1 EGR1 HSPA1B
CXCL12 LIPA DDIT3 CD83 KLF6 TMEM176B CD68 VMO1 MERTK ACP2 FGL2
CMKLR1 GPR155 LACC1 NR4A1 PRDM1 CXCL1 CLEC9A ALDH1A1 CD74 NR1H3
ITM2B PDGFB CTSB CTSL NCF4 MAFB GIMAP7 HLA-DPA1 WWP1 TSC22D3
TMEM176A PLIN2 KLF4 FILIP1L MAFF TGFBI ITPR2 SIGLEC1 BST2 GCLC CD69
TSPAN4 CSF1R LMNA ZFP36 MKNK1 MS4A4A FCGRT FCHO2 CD63 SCARB2 ARHGAP18
APOC1 VSIG4 TFRC MPEG1 DUSP2 SERPINF1 CKS2 FAM21A ADAP2 HSPH1 PIK3IP1
FPR3 CCL3 HLA-DRA LGALS3BP TIPARP EPHX1 PTGS2 ID3 RHOB ATG4C HLA-
DQA1 CALR NISCH BTG2 IER2 GPR82 VIMP IRF8 CD163 FCGR2A LITAF GLUL
HSPA8 CD9 CCNL1 PSAP CXCL8 MSR1 ABL2 ABI3 ZFP36L2 PRNP C5AR2 NFKBIZ
ICAM1 CXCR4 CXCL2 CD81 MS4A6A RPL22L1 KLF2 GFRA2 EVL AP2A2 IL18BP
SDS DPEP2 RB1 C3AR1 ARRDC2 IFI16 HSP90B1 GNAS STOM TMBIM6 MRC1
RP11-472N13.3 MBP CTSZ DAPK1 HLA-DOA IRF1 CEBPB SEMA4A CD14 HNMT
EIF4A2 TRA2B CREG1 PRDX1 SNX6 LGALS3 CCL3L3 LCP2 SLC20A1 FOXO3 UTRN
SELK EEA1 SQSTM1 RNASET2 DNAJA1 CIRBP CSRNP1 CD84 CXCL10 MPHOSPH8
FAM26F YBX3 CCL4 DHRS3 CIR1 CD36 LAMP2 GATM EPB41L2 NAIP HIST1H4C
ARF4 LAIR1 SMIM3 RCBTB2 TCP1 PELI1 PARL RWDD1 CPM ZMYND8 DSTN
==PAGE:71==
70
TSC22D1 TIMP2 RASGEF1B LY96 ZNRD1 TCOF1 CH25H RBBP6 HSP90AB1 BRD2
CXCL16 SNX2 IST1 ZFP36L1 ITM2C CXCL3 IRS2 KLF10 SLAMF7 DYNLL1 ZBTB10
C12orf45 MGST2 CHMP1B ABHD5 PRKACB TNFAIP2 PER1 CD4 BAIAP2 FAM53C
ARL5B YME1L1 DNAJB6 PPP1R15A CITED2 PDIA6 RGS2 FABP5
int moDC
FCGR2B HLA-DPB1 DRAP1 NHLRC3 HLA-DQA1 AP3B1 HLA-DQB1 JAML CD1E
IL2RG CLEC10A CLEC2B NMT1 CD1C HLA-DRB1 GBP1 ENO1 ALOX5AP DDOST
CTSH PARK7 STAT1 GBP4 PDCL3 FCER1A COPZ1 LARS CPM DNASE1L3 CXCL10
moDC
moDC FCER1A CD1C LSP1 CORO1A SLC38A1 IL1R2 STK4 ACTG1 RPSA HINT1
FCGR2B RPL5 RHOC GAPDH TCTN3 IFI30 EZR CXCR4 CKLF REV3L CFL1 CST7
PKIB HLA-DQB1 MALAT1 TUBA1A PPA1 MYL12A LDHA AKAP13 ENO1 AIM1
SON CD52 RPL4 PLAC8 ACTB CREM PSMA4 CLIC1 CLEC10A RAB11FIP1 SEP06
CACNA2D3 AGO2 CPVL NDRG2 CEP68 NUCKS1 GSTP1 PSMD14 FAM118A ATP5C1
RALA EIF2AK4 SEP07 FIBP RP5-1171I10.5 CD86 VPS29 HNRNPA1 ZC3HAV1 PAK1
PSME2 PSMA7 BDP1 AKNA UPF2 CNN2 PNISR VPS35 TPM3 ARL4C TPI1 PKM
PDCL3 ELMO1 UBE2L3 ANXA2 SNRPF ACOT9 PSMD4 ATRX FDFT1 HPS5 GOLGB1
GPR65 SRP72 HNRNPR PNN PSME1 EIF3A JAML PSMB6 AKAP9 CDC37 CSF2RA
PRCP NCL SNRPD1 ARL4A LRRFIP1 HLA-DQA1 BOD1L1 PHF20 RAN JARID2
YPEL5 BBX ENTPD1 PPIB RBM25
LI LP momac Trajectory
MO
S100A8 S100A9 S100A6 S100A4 AQP9 APOBEC3A SERPINA1 VCAN FTH1 FCN1
CD300E CCL4 SOD2 CTSS TNFAIP6 PLAC8 PTX3 IFITM2 SH3BGRL3 S100A12 FPR1
VIM FAM65B IL1B FCER1G LINC01272 PSAP MARCKS EMP3 TIMP1 COTL1 CTB-
61M7.2 CCL3 CD52 SERPINB2 CCL20 IL1RN G0S2 NAMPT NLRP3 OAZ1 CCL3L3
NRGN ATP2B1 CSTA LST1 SLC11A1 CD44 THBS1 RILPL2 CD48 TSPO RNF19B
NFKBIA EHD1 MAFB ADGRE5 DUSP6 DNAAF1 H3F3A GCH1 IRAK3 S100A10 FGR
SLA TREM1 MTF1 CLEC4E CYBB EREG BCL2A1 CCL4L2 AP1S2 S100A11 BTG1
GMFG DUSP1 SAMSN1 FKBP5 FPR2 MIR3945HG GPR84 IFITM3 LCP1 DAZAP2
YWHAZ CD37 PLAUR LILRA5 TCEB2 RP11-670E13.6 MCL1 ATP5E APLP2 LYST
CARD16 BASP1 TNFRSF1B HMGB2 PTGER2 LINC00936 SLC2A6 GLIPR2 NFKBIZ
PILRA ACSL1 CLEC12A RHOA MID1IP1 WTAP UPP1 RIPK2 PFN1 NEAT1 CORO1A
NEDD8 VAMP5 VIM-AS1 SERPINB1 PTPRC SPATA13 ANXA1 PLEK XBP1 C14orf2
ZEB2 PNPLA8 FYN CASP4 AGTRAP ERICH1 OLR1 MCEMP1 RXRA PABPC1 TNIP1
IL1A TNFAIP3 SELL LPCAT1 NUMB CXCL2 HCK PCID2 LRRFIP1 CAST SER-
PINB9 TNF C5AR1 RBX1 TKT PIK3AP1 CAP1 PSME2 PLP2 POLR2L EIF1B LU-
CAT1 RAC2 OTUD1 TNFSF13B PSMB9 LAMTOR4 ZFP36 ASAH1 TMEM120A MT2A
GPCPD1 ADD3 GK LY6E ITGB2 AGPAT4 STXBP2 NBN EAF1 RNF144B MYH9
ZBTB7A CCRL2 RP11-160E2.6 LTA4H ETS2 CD99 SLC1A3 MBNL1 ICAM2 PAIP2
SMARCA5 GNB1 NCF2 CAPN2 CXCL3 IVNS1ABP ANPEP TALDO1 TNIP3 PTGS2
MXD1 MBOAT7 C9orf72 FYB STAT6 BLVRB PNP CCNI PSMA4 HSBP1 PPP2CA
B4GALT5 CSF3R PTK2B SNX10 ERAP2 PIM3 MTPN CBX3 CD55 POU2F2 EIF5A
AHR CTNNB1 DDX3X PAK2 SLC16A6 MPHOSPH6 HNRNPA3 TLR2 RP11-386I14.4
ARF6 PTPRE CELF1 HIF1A SRSF5 PRKCB BLOC1S1 PRKAG2 SIRPB1 NDUFS6
EFHD2 PTP4A2 CHMP4B GLUL CD93 METTL7A STK10 AZIN1 SLC3A2 RPN1 ASGR1
GBP2 CFP DMXL2 TLE4 PDCD4 LYAR MX2 SDC4 CAPNS1 ACSL4 CYTIP EIF4G2
==PAGE:72==
71
NBPF19 CASP1 SERPINB8 LILRB1 NR4A1 MNDA PLK3 C19orf38 IER2 MYO1G
CHMP2A ARL4A FNDC3B TWISTNB DPYD DBNL CNIH4 DIAPH1 IL10RA SLC2A3
CD14 MAPK1 MSN PHLDA1 RYBP ANAPC16 CRTAP SLC43A2 MRPL33 SLC25A37
WBP11 CWC25 PPIF BRD4 UBA1 PECAM1 WARS ISG15 BRI3 CYTH1 RBBP8
METTL9 CRBN HDGF BTG2 CCR1 PSEN1 SELPLG ZYX MAP2K3 TES HP1BP3
SPN PFKFB3 GNG2 MSR1 RIT1 UBE2L6 IL23A MYCBP2
P2
FCN1 EREG CH17-373J23.1 THBS1 CSTA ANKRD28 CXCL2 RNMT AREG SAMSN1
ZEB2 CXCL3 SYTL3 AGO2 MAFG MMP19 C1orf56
P3
C1QC C1QB C1QA VSIG4 HLA-DPB1 HLA-DPA1 DNASE1L3 CD74 HLA-DQA1 LIMA1
GALM SLC40A1 HLA-DMA ACP5 RGS1 HLA-DQB1 AHSA1 HLA-DRA HERPUD1
RB1 ZNF331 CST3 HLA-DRB1 SEPP1 CLEC9A PLD3 GOLGB1 PKIB FCER1A CLEC10A
FTL FCGR2B NCF4 EIF4A2 IGF1 REL ALOX5AP RGS10 A2M IFNGR1 HNRN-
PUL1 CXCR4 P2RY13 PDGFB LILRB5 HSP90AA1 CD9 AXL SERPINF1 CD69 AR-
RDC3 VMO1 HSPD1 DOCK10 HLA-DOA PMP22 RNASE6 PTRH2 FGL2 CD209 CLN8
ATP6V1C1 P2RY14 TXNIP CD72 LAIR1 SUPT4H1 CD300A PTTG1IP HSPE1 FPR3
MS4A6A ARL4C CKS2 ZC3H15 OFD1 GDI2 PREX1 C1orf54 CTTNBP2NL GTF2B
OCIAD1 DNAJB1 LARP7 PLIN2 TMED9 NKAP SDS CHMP1B HIST1H4C MMP12
LGALS3 GPR183 GLA SAP18 HSPH1 RGS2 CTSC BTF3L4 VEGFA SMIM3 TSC22D1
EIF4A1 MRPS5 ZNRD1 RARRES3 SGK1 GNL3
MAC
SEPP1 DAB2 SLC40A1 RGS1 LGMN SLCO2B1 HERPUD1 PDK4 FOSB MAF A2M
HES1 CD163L1 LILRB5 DNAJB1 LINC00996 NR4A2 FOLR2 FOS JUN HSPA1B RNASE1
C1QA STAB1 ATF3 DUSP1 HSPA1A TNFAIP3 CTSD IGF1 RHOB ZNF331 UNC5B
C1QC AXL C1QB KLF4 ZFP36 TXNIP NPC2 EGR1 HSPH1 ARHGAP18 F13A1 ARL4C
JUNB ZFAND5 CSF1R ITM2B ADAP2 NISCH AP2A2 LMNA WWP1 ITPR2 GPR34
MS4A4A FAM13A MAFF ZFP36L2 ATP8B4 STMN1 MS4A7 RGL1 KLF2 CEBPB DDIT3
CXCR4 PDXK GADD45B CD83 BST2 MRC1 IRS2 CTSC VEGFB ZBTB10 IER3 TSC22D3
AAK1 SPRED1 RGS10 JMY SRGAP1 FILIP1L APOC1 PLTP TIPARP EIF4A3 FGL2
LY96 MERTK CSRNP1 HLA-E PALD1 TCF4 KLF6 GCLC GATM FRMD4A MAR01
LIPA SNX6 FCGR3A ABI3 SASH1 PLD3 ADORA3 JUND EIF4A2 DHRS3 GPNMB
CYTH4 PRDM1 ALOX5AP CD81 PER1 CCNL1 BMP2K EIF5 HSP90AA1 RPL22L1
MS4A6A MITF ZFP36L1 ITM2C NEU1 SLC25A44 SGK1 PELI1 FRMD4B CTD-3252C9.4
RB1 TRA2B EEA1 WSB1 NR4A1 FCHO2 CKS2 DNAJB4 KCTD12 CTSL YME1L1
TGFBI FCGRT CITED2 ARMCX1 CD84 HNRNPU EMB DDIT4 NCF4 IRF1 HSPA5
JMJD1C ATP2A2 HEXA TIMP2 TPP1 PRMT9 PDGFB CLK1 USP53 AMD1 GNL1
IER5 HSP90B1 NEAT1 CREBRF YWHAH AP1B1 MGAT1 IGHA1 PABPC4 MGAT4A
ABL2 YBX3 IL6ST HSP90AB1 CD163 PHACTR1 SLC38A2 CXCL1 CYB5D1 BAG3
IER2 NHLRC3 HLA-DOA ATRX ZSWIM6 UTRN MYLIP C1orf54 CREG1 SLC20A1
SLC12A7 ARHGAP4 NFKBIZ SERTAD1 MAFB ZFYVE16 ICAM1 GNPTAB USP36
PLIN2 GLUL SCML1 PPP1R15B LAIR1 WDR45B ABCA1 ARL5B RCSD1 PLEKHO1
STK17B MALAT1 CD209 FAM105A VSIG4 CTSB SETD7 GNAS CH25H NAIP PRNP
HDLBP XIST IRF8 LPAR6 CLIC2 CANX NASP DIAPH2 YTHDF2 SERINC1 ADAM28
FCGR2A RNASE6 SIRT1 BNIP3L ATP1B1 TCOF1 HSPA8 TNRC6B CXCL2 DNAJB6
NXF1 ZFHX3 NQO2 AIG1 SCAMP2 CHD9 RSRC2 LAPTM5 RAC1 SDS ALOX5 RAL-
GDS RASSF4 CALR MDM4 GFRA2 ATF6 SEMA4A PLAU CEBPD DDX5 ELL2 GTF2B
MAP1LC3B DNAJA1 CEP170 PSMA3-AS1 HNMT SUSD6 DDX24 MFSD1 MAN1A1
COLGALT1 ALDH9A1 LAMP1 MTRNR2L8 CACUL1 ELMO1 RAB13 MCL1 KLF9
==PAGE:73==
72
PPP1R10 EIF1AX CCDC88A DPYSL2 PHIP KLHL24 TSPAN4 KLF10 GNPDA1 TRIP12
BAZ2B BAZ1B GRASP DUSP2 LITAF DRAM2 ICAM4 KIDINS220 SERPINF1 LINC00998
CIITA QKI UBALD2 C10orf54 IQGAP2 NFE2L2 BRD2 GCC2 FAM26F NUDT3 CD69
PTGS2 TBC1D9 VEGFA DDX18 OGFRL1 ASH1L FUCA1 PDCD6IP DDX27 C12orf57
IFI30 TFRC NCKAP1L KDM6B PPP1R15A ITSN2 IL1RAP RBBP6 ZC3HAV1 NR4A3
SNAPC1 EIF4E IFI16 PARVB TAF1D ZNRD1 IGKC WBP4 BPTF PAPSS2 CNOT2
CPM DAPK1 MT1X CTSZ CXCL10 CHMP1B PPP1R12A CDKN1A TRIM38 SELK
SOCS3 RGS2 TGIF1 KPNA2
moDC
HLA-DQA1 HLA-DQB1 DNASE1L3 HLA-DPB1 HLA-DRB1 HLA-DRA CD74 HLA-
DPA1 CLEC10A CD1E CST7 RALA HLA-DMA NPM1 MMP12 IL7R FCGR2B TMSB4X
C1QB GSN C1QC C1orf54 SLAMF8 ACP5 FCER1A HLA-DRB5 RPSA RPL3 HLA-
DMB ALOX5AP CDC123 NAP1L1 GPR157 GPR137B AXL SMIM3 CD40 S100B TMEM14C
ENO1 SLC25A5 NDRG2 EEF1B2 CSF2RA VOPP1 CD80 SPINT2 PKIB TUBA1B C1QA
CD86 LYZ ENTPD1 TCTN3 HINT1 PPA1 GLO1 RUNX3 FAM60A CTSH SERPINF1
PRMT1 CST3 SDS HSP90AB1 ATP5B TUBA1C PARK7 RAN CPVL IL1R2 TXN
LINC01420 DAPP1 ATP1B1 PDCD5 SUB1 CD1C CD300A CXCL10 PSMA1 STK4 IN-
SIG1 DAD1 JAML MDH1 CCR7 MAP3K13 VSIG4 CD63 LGALS3 GBP1 CD58 RHOF
LITAF LDHB LSP1 C12orf45 LDHA FABP5 AKR1B1 REL PSMA3 ECH1 C15orf48
LGALS2 TMED9 GPR65 CD9 RHOG MMP9 ATF5 TUBA1A TUBB PRDX1
LI LP wmoDC Trajectory
MO
S100A8 SOD2 AQP9 S100A9 FTH1 TNFAIP6 CCL3 IL1B CCL4 CCL3L3 FCN1 VCAN
NFKBIA CTB-61M7.2 CD300E CTSS CCL20 THBS1 SERPINB2 APOBEC3A IL1RN
EREG SLC11A1 S100A4 MARCKS CXCL2 NLRP3 PTX3 G0S2 CCL4L2 PSAP NAMPT
SERPINA1 EHD1 FPR1 VIM DUSP6 S100A6 CLEC4E TNFAIP3 S100A12 MAFB TNF
PNRC1 BCL2A1 CYBB LINC01272 C5AR1 CD44 PLAUR TYROBP PTGS2 LST1
CXCL3 NFKBIZ IL1A IER3 DNAAF1 DUSP1 BTG1 KLF6 CSTA SAMSN1 EGR1
COTL1 MT-ND3 FCER1G IFITM2 EMP3 ZFP36 PABPC1 IRAK3 MIR3945HG ACSL1
RILPL2 LINC00936 SRGN VIM-AS1 RP11-160E2.6 RP11-670E13.6 TNFAIP2 CXCL8
PPP1R15A IER2 PLAC8 NEAT1 WTAP GPR84 TNIP3 BIRC3 GCH1 XBP1 LPCAT1
ICAM1 DUSP2 CCRL2 ZEB2 OTUD1 RNF19B TREM1 PLEK ATP2B1 CD48 SER-
PINB9 MCL1 PILRA FAM65B CCNI LUCAT1 IVNS1ABP DAZAP2 CLEC12A SH3BGRL3
MTF1 APLP2 TSPO JUNB AGTRAP AP1S2 SLC2A6 BASP1 TNFRSF1B CFLAR
GLIPR2 OLR1 CARD16 YBX3 UPP1 SLA CD52 LCP1 CASP4 ADGRE5 PNPLA8
TNIP1 AHR CH17-373J23.1 RNF144B LINC00877 B4GALT5 CSF3R TMEM176B PIK3AP1
PIM3 GPCPD1 PFKFB3 NUMB NBN RP11-386I14.4 DMXL2 YWHAZ HCST FKBP5
ASAH1 TIMP1 VAMP5 DDX3X ATP1B3 DPYD CD14 FGR ZNF281 CD93 LYST TLR2
RASGEF1B IFITM3 FNDC3B HMGB2 C9orf72 FAM49A BLVRB SDC4 EIF1B POU2F2
LTA4H TKT SOCS3 BTG2 RIPK2 ADAM17 GBP2 NR4A1 NINJ1 CRTAP RAB31 ETS2
ZC3H12A RYBP ELL2 CAST MBNL1 KLF10 PNP LYAR CCNL1 ABL2 PTK2B PLK3
GRB2 LILRA5 TLE4 MAP2K3 ASGR1 CD55 CDC42EP2 SERP1 PHLDA1 TNFAIP8
SNX10 PPIF MTSS1 ZFP36L1 MXD1 STXBP2 RAPGEF2 JUND MBOAT7 LDLR
MT2A AZIN1 C19orf38 HCK NCF2 NBPF19 GLG1 TWISTNB LCP2 CD37 FGD4 FYB
CTNNB1 RB1CC1 PECAM1 GK SLC43A2 NOTCH2 MPHOSPH6 ARL5B ERICH1
PMAIP1 IL10RA GRINA FAM177A1 HIF1A RAP1B PRKAG2 SLC25A37 UBE2R2
MYH9 PNRC2 CEBPB PRKCB GLUL IER5 TANK CELF1 RGCC RIT1 CAPNS1
HDGF ARL4A B4GALT1 ANXA1 BRI3 EVI2B EMILIN2 MAPK6 TET2 SFPQ ISG15
==PAGE:74==
73
LILRB1 GNG2 SFMBT2 WARS
P2
CLEC4E IL1B NPC2 CXCL8 SOD2 C5AR1 FTL PLAUR CXCL3 ABCA1 CD68 BTG1
EREG NFKBIA C1QA TMEM176B GPR183 SAMSN1 MS4A7 SDCBP CXCL2 IER3
HCST EIF4E CCL20 MMP19 ELL2 NINJ1 TNF ITM2B LYPD3 TNFAIP8 FGD4 KMO
CHMP1B FCGR2A NBPF19 C3AR1 FCN1 DUSP6 BLVRA RP11-1143G9.4 TXN DUSP2
WDR45B AREG
P3
DNASE1L3 C1QC C1QB MMP12 RGS1 HLA-DQA1 C1QA HLA-DRB1 ACP5 CD74
HLA-DRA HLA-DQB1 CD80 S100B LYZ HLA-DPA1 HLA-DPB1 HSP90AB1 SDS CLEC10A
SLAMF8 C1orf54 MMP9 AXL HLA-DMA RGS10 VSIG4 CD9 ALOX5AP HSP90AA1
LGALS3 TUBA1B TMEM176A VOPP1 TXNDC12 CD63 YWHAH CST3 CD1E ATP1B1
SERPINF1 GSN HLA-DMB SLAMF7 FTL SMIM3 FILIP1L NCF4 CD40 CD68 TMEM176B
FCGR2B GADD45B CXCL10 FABP5 PRDX1 MS4A6A CTSH CD69 CTSC HSPA1A
TUBB IL7R GBP1 RALA C15orf48 TXN IL1R2
MAC
C1QB C1QC C1QA SLCO2B1 IGF1 SEPP1 DAB2 LILRB5 A2M STAB1 SLC40A1 MAF
RGS1 NPC2 CD163L1 CD209 FTL AXL HES1 GPR34 EGR1 PDK4 GATM CTSD
ZNF331 MAFF MS4A7 NCF4 VSIG4 NISCH MS4A4A HLA-E LGMN PLD3 HSPA1B
DNAJB1 DUSP1 GADD45B JUN FCGR3A TNFAIP3 SASH1 HSPH1 CSF1R ICAM1
CD83 HERPUD1 GPNMB AP2A2 DNASE1L3 STMN1 LIPA TXNIP CSRNP1 RGS10
FOLR2 FGL2 RNASE1 ARHGAP18 CXCL8 ITM2B MKNK1 ZFP36 KLF6 ZFAND5
NR4A2 CD81 FOSB PRDM1 CLEC9A IER3 SRGAP1 CD163 NFKBIZ SDS WWP1
SLC20A1 ALOX5AP PLTP HSP90AA1 DNAJB6 CXCL10 ATF3 RHOB FRMD4B HSPA1A
NEU1 ACP5 HSPA5 JUNB VEGFB ABL2 ATP8B4 BST2 HLA-DMA FUCA1 CD63
CD14 DDIT3 TGFBI CCL4L2 KLF7 IRF8 CTSL TIPARP FCGRT C3AR1 CD69 MS4A6A
MRC1 C1orf54 CTSB CD84 RGL1 CCL3 HLA-DPA1 F13A1 PDGFB LPAR6 ZFP36L1
ABCA1 CTSC LMNA PLIN2 HEXA RB1 ITPR2 CCL4 ICAM4 SERPINF1 MSR1 ARL5B
FOS NSL1 ATP2A2 FCGR2A MPEG1 RASGEF1B IRF1 CYB5D1 NFKBIA CD68 TNF
CD36 TMEM176B AKR1B1 UBB NQO2 MGAT4A HSP90B1 KCTD12 WSB1 KLF4
TCF4 SERTAD1 CKS2 SGK1 ADAP2 AAK1 REL ZFP36L2 CD9 YBX3 EMB HBEGF
DUSP2 GNPDA1 GPR183 KLF2 CEBPB FILIP1L GALM SOCS3 RBM47 EIF4A2 PPP1R15B
PNRC1 DAPK1 ID2 IRS2 MYLIP FNBP1 HSPB1 LITAF YME1L1 VMO1 TFRC DDX24
GM2A RP11-160E2.6 PTGS2 CCL3L3 NR4A1 CECR1 CREBRF IER2 HNRNPU IER5
PMP22 TIMP2 ZBTB10 C5AR1 PABPC4 CXCL2 KLF10 SLC25A44 LAIR1 FAM26F
SCAMP2 GLUL SNX6 HNRNPUL1 UTRN MAFB PELI1 CPM Mar-01 HSP90AB1
PMAIP1 VIMP DNAJA1 HSPA8 BTG2 HLA-DQA1 MGAT1 APMAP JMY EIF4A3
CDKN1A P2RY13 RPL22L1 GTF2B TSC22D3 VEGFA CLK1 WDR45B CTD-3252C9.4
SNAPC1 CLN8 DDX5 CXCR4 SKAP2 ARL4C PHACTR1 PPP1R15A TCOF1 GBP4
TRA2B CCNL1 USP53 HN1 SLC38A2 PER1 CHMP1B ELL2 CNOT2 LGALS3 EIF5
CTSZ ZNRD1 JUND SELK DDX18 IFI16 IGKC RBBP6 GBP1
int moDC
FCER1A FCGR2B HLA-DQB1 IL1R2 CLEC10A CCR7 GBP1 MT2A
moDC
CD1C HINT1 RPSA RPS18 RPL3 RPL5 RPS7 TRMT6 SLC38A1 RPS5 CST7 LSP1
EZR NDRG2 RPL8 LDHA RPL6 TCTN3 LRRFIP1 RPL4 CORO1A GSTP1 MYL12A
ICAM3 ACTB RUNX3 TUBA1A IFI30 CFL1 SEP06 STK4 RAB11FIP1 ARL4C ACTG1
TMSB10 RP5-1171I10.5 CREM VDR CLIC1 PLP2 FCER1A WBSCR22 CD52 GAPDH
EIF2AK4 HLA-DQB1 UPF2 IRF4 ZC3HAV1 PSMB6 AIM1 FAM118A SDPR TOB1
==PAGE:75==
74
ENO1 NCL SELL S100A10 GPR157 MESDC2 PRPF4B SERBP1 AKAP13 EIF3L EEF1E1
REV3L RALA CKLF RAC2 LAPTM4A SH3BGRL3 PPIB TAGLN2 CCDC12 PARK7
HPS5 TPM3 LDHB CXCR4 ATP5C1 CCND2 MIR181A1HG C10orf128 ATP5A1 SRRM1
PNN SNRPF CACNA2D3 RBM39 DECR1 CD86 PPA1 PSMA1 NUTF2 DUSP4 PGK1
JAML ATP5F1 SAMHD1 DAPP1 NPM1 NDUFV2 ANKRD11 CFP ATP5B ANP32A
PKM SEP07 YPEL5 C1orf162 PNISR NDUFS8 SERPINB1 IL1R2 HIST1H4C EIF6
RSL1D1 GOLGB1 LDLRAD4 CLEC10A IFITM2 ANXA2 MAT2A RGS2
Common DEGs for Trajectory States
MO
S100A8 S100A9 S100A6 S100A4 AQP9 SERPINA1 VCAN FTH1 FCN1 CD300E CCL4
SOD2 CTSS TNFAIP6 IFITM2 SH3BGRL3 S100A12 FPR1 VIM IL1B LINC01272 PSAP
MARCKS EMP3 COTL1 CTB-61M7.2 CCL3 CD52 CCL20 IL1RN G0S2 NAMPT NLRP3
CCL3L3 ATP2B1 CSTA LST1 SLC11A1 CD44 THBS1 CD48 TSPO RNF19B NFKBIA
EHD1 MAFB ADGRE5 DUSP6 IRAK3 FGR TREM1 CLEC4E CYBB EREG BCL2A1
AP1S2 BTG1 DUSP1 SAMSN1 MIR3945HG LCP1 CD37 PLAUR MCL1 APLP2 LYST
CARD16 BASP1 LINC00936 GLIPR2 ACSL1 CLEC12A WTAP UPP1 RIPK2 VAMP5
PLEK XBP1 ZEB2 PNPLA8 OLR1 PABPC1 IL1A LPCAT1 NUMB CXCL2 SERPINB9
TNF C5AR1 TKT EIF1B LUCAT1 OTUD1 ZFP36 MT2A GPCPD1 STXBP2 NBN
RNF144B CCRL2 RP11-160E2.6 LTA4H ETS2 NCF2 CXCL3 IVNS1ABP PTGS2 MXD1
C9orf72 PNP CCNI CSF3R SNX10 CD55 CTNNB1 DDX3X TLR2 RP11-386I14.4 HIF1A
PRKCB CD93 ASGR1 GBP2 DMXL2 TLE4 NBPF19 LILRB1 PLK3 TWISTNB IL10RA
CD14 PHLDA1 SLC25A37 PPIF PECAM1 MAP2K3
P2
FCN1 AREG
P3
C1QC C1QB C1QA VSIG4 DNASE1L3 ACP5 CLEC10A CD9
MAC
SEPP1 DAB2 SLC40A1 RGS1 LGMN SLCO2B1 HERPUD1 PDK4 FOSB MAF A2M
HES1 CD163L1 LILRB5 DNAJB1 NR4A2 FOLR2 FOS JUN HSPA1B C1QA STAB1
ATF3 DUSP1 HSPA1A TNFAIP3 CTSD IGF1 RHOB ZNF331 C1QC AXL C1QB KLF4
ZFP36 TXNIP NPC2 EGR1 HSPH1 ARHGAP18 JUNB ZFAND5 CSF1R ITM2B ADAP2
NISCH AP2A2 LMNA WWP1 ITPR2 GPR34 MS4A4A MAFF ZFP36L2 MS4A7 KLF2
CEBPB DDIT3 CXCR4 GADD45B CD83 BST2 MRC1 IRS2 CTSC ZBTB10 TSC22D3
RGS10 FILIP1L PLTP TIPARP FGL2 CSRNP1 HLA-E KLF6 GATM LIPA SNX6 SASH1
PLD3 EIF4A2 GPNMB PRDM1 CD81 PER1 CCNL1 HSP90AA1 RPL22L1 MS4A6A
ZFP36L1 PELI1 RB1 TRA2B NR4A1 CKS2 CTSL YME1L1 TGFBI FCGRT CD84
NCF4 IRF1 HSPA5 TIMP2 PDGFB HSP90B1 ABL2 YBX3 HSP90AB1 CD163 IER2
UTRN C1orf54 SLC20A1 NFKBIZ MAFB ICAM1 PLIN2 GLUL LAIR1 ARL5B CD209
VSIG4 CTSB IRF8 FCGR2A TCOF1 HSPA8 CXCL2 DNAJB6 SDS DNAJA1 KLF10
DUSP2 LITAF SERPINF1 FAM26F CD69 PTGS2 FUCA1 TFRC PPP1R15A RBBP6
IFI16 ZNRD1 CPM DAPK1 CTSZ CXCL10 CHMP1B SELK
==PAGE:76==
75
Trajectories for other Cluster Combinations
A)
B)
C)
D)
Figure S7: Trajectories Including cDC2 Clusters: A-B) For SI LP the included clusters were 8, 0, 1, 7, 10,
4, 9, 6 and 2. A) Trajectory for the included clusters. B) Top 25 DEG for each of the supervised states. C-D) For
LI LP the included clusters were 8, 0, 1, 7, 10, 4, 11, 6 and 2. C) Trajectory for the included clusters. D) Top 25
DEG for the supervised states of the trajectory.
==PAGE:77==
76
Figure S8: SI LP Trajectories for Diﬀerent Combinations of Clusters: Combination of clusters as seen
in the table to create diﬀerent trajectories. Clusters 8, 0, 1 and 7 was used in all combinations to include the
MO→MAC diﬀerentiation pathway. Coloring by supervised states for each trajectory: Red = MO, blue and purple
= MO intermediates, green = macrophages, pink = moDC/moDC intermediates, orange = moDC.
==PAGE:78==
77
Figure S9: LI LP Trajectories for Diﬀerent Combinations of Clusters: Continued caption on next page.
==PAGE:79==
78
Figure S9: LI LP Trajectories for Diﬀerent Combinations of Clusters: Combi-
nation of clusters as seen in the table to create diﬀerent trajectories. Clusters 8, 0, 1 and
7 was used in the ﬁrst 10 combinations to include the MO→MAC diﬀerentiation pathway.
In 11-15 combinations of clusters were used to explore, where the moDC bifurcation ori-
gins from. Coloring by supervised states for each trajectory: Red = MO, blue and purple
= MO intermediates, green = macrophages, pink = moDC/moDC intermediates, orange
= moDC.
==PAGE:80==
79
Trajectories overlaid Surface Marker Expression
Figure S10: Overlaying Trancriptional Expression of Surface Markers on Trajectories: A)
SI LP wmoDC trajectory overlaid expression of the surface markers CD55, FPR1 and CD81. B) LI
LP momac trajectory overlaid the same markers. C) LI LP wmoDC trajectory overlaid the same three
surface markers.
==PAGE:81==
80
Antibody Panel
Laser
Label
Filters
Flurophores
Target
Per  test (50 ul)
MB
10.0
A
740/35
BUV737
B
450/50
BUV563
 
C
379/28
BUV393
CD45
0.3
A
780/60
BV786
B
710/50
BV711
C
670/30
BV650
D
610/20
BV605
CD11c
0.2
E
525/50
BV480
F
431/30
BV421
CD14
1.0
A
695/40
BB700
B
530/30
BB515
CD1c
2.0
A
780/60
PE/Cy7
CD55
3.0
C
670/30
PE/Cy5
7AAD
2/300 MACS
D
615/20
PE/CF594
CD3, CD19
3.0
E
575/15
PE
FPR1
2.0
A
780/60
APCFire750
CD11a (TS24)
3.0
B
730/45
AF700
HLADR
1.5
C
670/30
APC
CD81 (JS-81)
4.0
FACS
20.0
355 UV 
405 Violet 
488 Blue 
561 Y/Grn 
633 Red 
Figure S11: Final AB Panel: The ﬁnal AB panel used to identify MO associated populations with
ﬂow cytometry.
==PAGE:82==
81
Populations Found with Flow Cytometry
P1
P2
P3
P5
P6
P7
P4
0
30
60
90
120
3
7554.5896
FJComp-APC-Cy7-A
P1
P2
P3
P5
P6
P7
P4
1059.352
66094.4623
FJComp-Alexa Fluor 700-A
P1
P2
P3
P5
P6
P7
P4
3
48422.6056
FJComp-PE-A
P1
P2
P3
P5
P6
P7
P4
0
30
60
90
120
0
30
60
90
120
tSNE 2
3
38773.595
FJComp PE Cy7 A
Sample Name
Subset Name
Count
concat_1.fcs 
Ungated 
14286 
P1
P2
P3
P5
P6
P7
P4
0
30
60
90
120
tSNE 1
P1
P2
P3
P5
P6
P7
P4
0
30
60
90
120
3
7487.6691
FJComp-FITC-A
CD1c
HLADR
FPR1
CD55
CD81
CD11a
Figure S12: tSNE Concatenated Cells from MNP CD14+ and CD1c+CD11ahi Gates
SI LP: The cells from the MNP CD14+ and CD1c+CD11ahi gates were concatenated for four
SI LP patients samples and a dimensionality reduction was calculated with tSNE. By overlaying
expression of the markers each of the seven populations of MO associated cells could be identiﬁed.
==PAGE:83==
82
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
0
30
60
90
120
3
8137.0407
FJComp-APC-Cy7-A
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
1059.352
52924.04
FJComp-Alexa Fluor 700-A
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
3
48422.6056
FJComp-PE-A
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
0
20
40
60
80
tSNE 1
0
30
60
90
120
tSNE 2
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
0
20
40
60
80
3
250748.0608
FJComp-Alexa Fluor 647-A
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
0
20
40
60
80
3
7487.6691
FJComp-FITC-A
CD11a
HLADR
FPR1
CD55
CD81
CD1c
Figure S13: tSNE Concatenated Cells from MNP CD14+ and CD1c+CD11ahi Gates
LI LP: The cells from the MNP CD14+ and CD1c+CD11ahi gates were concatenated for four
LI LP patients samples and a dimensionality reduction was calculated with tSNE. By overlaying
expression of the markers each of the seven populations of MO derived cells could be identiﬁed.
