==PAGE:1==
Açai: a backup protocol for
Lightning Network wallets
Master thesis
Margherita Favaretto
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Master of Science in Engineering
Computer Science and Engineering
Açai: a backup protocol for Lightning Network wallets
Master thesis
Margherita Favaretto
s170065@student.dtu.dk
Advisors:
Nicola Dragoni, Associate Professor at DTU Computer Science Department
Stefano Pepe, CEO Uniquid Inc.
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
DTU Compute
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DENMARK
Tel. +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Nowadays, Bitcoin is considered the world’s most widely used and valuable
digital currency. The scope of this technology is allowing anyone to send value
without a trusted intermediary or depository, with the purpose to give to each
user the complete control of their own money and a higher level of privacy on
own use.
As all new technologies, Bitcoin is not perfect immediately, and a long work
has to be done to make this technology more solid and a possible candidate to
become the main payment system in the next future.
Bitcoin, also known as Digital Gold, is a network based on distributed consensus,
which means that the nodes on the network has to verify the transactions, and
agree with their order and existence on the Blockchain. In order to achieve the
consensus, there are scalability issues that limit at 7 transactions per second
[Cro+16] the current bandwidth. This limit of Bitcoin is called Scalability
problem, and refers to the fact that this technology presents some limits on the
number of transactions that can process. For this reason, diﬀerent technologies
have been proposed to solve this issue, including Lightning Network.
The focus of this thesis is on this last technology, which is the second layer
payment of Bitcoin and permits fast payments transactions inside a network of
participants without the use of the Blockchain for each transaction. The main
problem of Lightning Network, from the user point of view, is the absence of
a recovery mechanism for the unspent bitcoins in case of a wallet failure (e.g.
loss of the device, or corrupted transaction data inside the wallet local storage).
In fact, the absence of an underlying distributed ledger in Lightning makes
impossible the recovery of unspent transactions through the address derivation,
which is normally provided by the Bitcoin legacy protocol. Therefore, this issue
does not permit to have the portability among diﬀerent devices and even the
possibility to be able to recover their funds if own device is damaged.
The objective of this research project is to analyze Bitcoin and Lightning
technology, their mechanism and their main features, ending up with a tech-
nically feasible solution to mitigate the recovery of unspent Bitcoin after a
Lightning wallet failure. To this aim, we have analyzed the literature, the
most recent upgrade, we have met the most active developers of the Lightning
Network open source protocol, validating our possible solution also from an
engineering and practical point of view. All the gathered information has been
ﬁnally used to design a possible solution, called Açai Protocol. Thanks to our
interaction with the Lightning Network community, we were able to identify
the Watchtower functionality and design Açai as an extension for it. In more
details, the proposed solution is aimed to adopt the mechanism of Watchtowers,
already introduced in the Lightning Network to monitor the channels when a
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
node is oﬄine, as a possible mechanism of backup.
In conclusion, we will provide an implementation of the protocol to demonstrate
how it is possible to extend the current code implementing the Watchtower,
including the backup functionality introduced in our solution.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark, and at
Uniquid Inc., placed in San Francisco (CA, United States). This work was done
in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.in Computer Science
and Engineering.
The project has been completed in the period between August 28th 2018
and January 27 th 2019 with an assigned workload of 30 ECTS credits.
The thesis was conducted under the supervision of Nicola Dragoni, Associate
Professor at DTU Compute, and Stefano Pepe, CEO of Uniquid Inc.
Kgs. Lyngby, 27-January-2019
Margherita Favaretto
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deep gratitude to Prof. Nicola Dragoni, for helping
and guiding me during the development of this work, and allowing me to reach
important goals that I would have never expected to achieve.
I would also like to thank Stefano Pepe, for the opportunity to implement
a part of my thesis at his company. Thanks for being so patient to teach me,
listening to my doubts and guiding me to this so innovative world of Bitcoin.
Thanks for allowing me to discover the inspiring life in San Francisco, for all
the professional dialogues and tips: this experience will be a part of me, as well
as a source of inspiration for my future.
I would like to thank all the members of the Lightning Network Commu-
nity, especially Alekos Filini, Peter Todd, Christian Decker, Alex Bosworth and
Conner Fromknecht for the important feedbacks and invaluable advice, which
were fundamentals for this work.
With this thesis, I will conclude two very important years of my life, so I
would like to thank all my friends, my roommates and my colleagues that have
helped me to feel at home, even in a country that is not mine. I will take
with me all of your life-lessons and thanks for having been my family in these
wonderful years.
Finally, I would like to thank my Family, that has always supported me to
pursue my academics studies. Thank you for allowing me to live this experience,
celebrating with me my happiest moments and teaching me to smile in front of
every diﬃculty. This accomplishment would have not been possible without
you. Thank you.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
Bitcoin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The Bitcoin workﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Scalability problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Lightning Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Bitcoin Technology
13
3.1
Transactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Proof-of-Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Consensus Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Privacy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Wallets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.7
Building Blocks Primitive of Bitcoin
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Lightning Network
31
4.1
Payment Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Basic concepts and terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Simple Payment Channel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Timelocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Asymmetric Revocable Commitments
. . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6
Hash Time Lock Contracts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.7
Lightning Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.8
Transport and Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.9
Lighnting Network beneﬁts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Problem Description and Related Work
41
5.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Reformulate the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Methodology
47
6.1
Game Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Lightning Network Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
The solution: Açai Protocol
51
7.1
What is missing in Eltoo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.2
Nodes as lockbox of Backup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.3
Introducing Watchtowers as a mechanism of backup
. . . .
56
7.4
Açai Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.5
Comparison of the three solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8
Implementation
69
8.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
8.2
Watchtower Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8.3
Client Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
9
Evaluation
79
10 Conclusion
81
10.1
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
10.2
Results and Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Bitcoin can be deﬁned as a collection of concepts and technologies that are the
basis of a digital money ecosystem. The term Bitcoin, that is both the name
of the technology and the name of the units of currency, is used to store and
transmit value among the participants in the Bitcoin network [Ant14].
Research produced by the University of Cambridge estimates that in 2017,
there were 2.9 to 5.8 million unique users using a cryptocurrency wallet, most
of them using Bitcoin [HR17]. Furthermore, in [SA] it is possible to observe
that the number of Bitcoin transactions in December 2016 were 180 million, the
number is steadily increasing, and in December 2018 was 368 million, Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Total Number of transactions.[SA].
Compared to the current payment system based on centralization, the Bit-
coin permits to have a ﬁnality condition, since the probability that a transaction
will be reverted is extremely lower over time [CK17]. Furthermore, it permits
to have a privacy environment, due to the use of pseudonymous, neither trans-
action or accounts are connected to real-world identities. In fact, the Bitcoins
are received on the so-called address, which is not possible to connect to a
real-world identity, unless the intermediaries reveal their user-base information
like emails and phone numbers under their custody. Unlike the normal payment
system, which requires several days to complete a transaction if the payee and
the payer are completely in a diﬀerent physical location, Bitcoin is fast and
global since a transaction is propagated almost immediately in the network
and they are completely independent of the physical location. Moreover, it is
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
permissionless, in fact, everybody is able to download the software of Bitcoin
for free [Inc].
Every transaction inside the Bitcoin is stored on a single, distributed pub-
lic ledger, called Blockchain.
All conﬁrmed transactions are included in a
so-called ‘block’, that it is broadcast to the Blockchain, so all users are aware
of each transaction. This prevents stealing and double-spending, that happens
when someone spends the same currency twice [Eco].
Blockchain has evolved in the last 10 years and has been steadily moving
from mathematical concepts to implementations with diﬀerent network tech-
nologies and architectures. The use of this technology permits to achieve the
main goals of Bitcoin: transparency, decentralization, ﬁnality and anonymity
[Put+].
In fact, as a public ledger system, Blockchain records and validates each and
every transaction made, which makes the system transparent. Despite Bitcoin
users make their wallet addresses publicly, it is extremely hard to trace trans-
actions back to their real-life identity. Moreover, even if the wallet addresses
was publicized, a new wallet address can be easily generated. This allows to
achieve anonimity inside the system. All the transactions made are authorized
by miners, a network of communicating nodes, which makes the transactions
ﬁnal and prevent it from the threat of hacking. Blockchain technology discards
the need of any third-party or central authority for peer-to-peer transactions,
and this permits to have a decentralization of the technology.
On the other hand, Bitcoin presents some limits on the amount of trans-
actions that the network is able to process. This is related to the fact that the
blocks are limited in size and frequency, and the Bitcoin network is able to
handle maximally around 7 transactions per second. Compared to a centralized
payment system like Visa, which can handle up to 45,000 transactions per
second, this is an obstacle If we want extend the use of Bitcoin on a large scale
[Con18].
This question called also as the Bitcoin scalability problem refers to the discus-
sion concerning the limits on the number of transactions the Bitcoin network
can process. This has created a bottleneck in Bitcoin, causing transaction fees
and delayed processing of transactions that cannot be ﬁt into a block [Pea].
Various proposals have emerged on how to scale Bitcoin, and a contentious
debate has resulted, that is characterized as an ideological battle over Bitcoin’s
future [WP].
One of the proposed solutions to the Bitcoin scalability problem is Light-
ning Network technology, introduced in the paper by Poon and Dryja [PD16].
This technology permits the users to have transactions without publishing all
of them on the Blockchain, but just the initial and ﬁnal status. This does not
increase the capacity of the Bitcoin system and allows that more transactions
can be done.
The Lightning Network consists of interconnected payment channels. A payment
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Thesis Objectives
3
channel is a one-to-one channel allowing two participants to exchange funds
between each other. A network is created by connecting multiple channels
with diﬀerent users, making transactions possible across multiple channels. For
instance, Alice can pay Bob without having a channel directly connecting them,
but using intermediary channels [Neta].
The develop of Lightning Network technology is still in progress, and like
all emerging technologies, there are diﬀerent challenges to face to ensure that
the technology is successfully adopted on a large scale.
Nevertheless, this
technology is already very utilized and on 1st January 2019, the number of
Lightning Network Channels were 16,872 [Vis].
One of the problems of Lightning Network is not oﬀering a mechanism of
backup if one of the nodes loses accidentally all transaction data, stored inside
the conﬁdential status channels. As a result, if a wrong channel status is sent
to another peer, the node could be considered malicious and be punished with
a Lightning Network penalty, which impose the loss of own funds on the channel.
The purpose of this work is analyzing this problem and ﬁnding a solution
that can permit to have a recovery mechanism that avoids the usage of wrong
channel states. This research is fundamental for all who want to make Bitcoin
as the main payment system in the next future. The solution, deﬁned as Açai
Protocol, has to manage a backup mechanism to guarantee to nodes to recover
own status if they accidentally lose all information.
1.1
Thesis Objectives
Given all the information and the context above, we believe that Bitcoin and
Lightning Network technology is very interesting ﬁelds to study but they are still
in their infancy. The main aim of this thesis is to study the Bitcoin, Lightning
Network technology and proposing a solution to oﬀer a Lightning Network
recovery mechanism.
In summary, the thesis presents the following objectives:
• Analysing the Bitcoin technology, Blockchain and the Scalability problem.
• Studying Lightning Network and its main properties.
• Performing a literature survey of the state of the problem that we want
to focus on, to get a better overview of what has been done and what still
needs to be done.
• Study how the ﬁelds of Game Theory and Cryptography are connected
to Bitcoin and how these ﬁelds are addressed in this thesis.
• Propose a possible solution to the recovery mechanism in Lightning
Network.
• Implement the Açai Protocol, to show how the code of the Watchtower
can be extended to incorporate the back-up functionality.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
• Proposing future works that can be improved further Lightning Network,
and also the Bitcoin technology.
1.2
Thesis Outline
The structure of this thesis is as follows:
• Chapter 1- Introduction. It gives an overview of the technologies analyzed
in this thesis, the problem that we focus on, the thesis objectives and the
outline.
• Chapter 2- Theoretical Background. This chapter provides some basics
concepts of Bitcoin and Lightning Network. Moreover, it analyzes the
Scalability problem in more details.
• Chapter 3- Bitcoin technology. This chapter will analyze Bitcoin, with
an analysis of the white paper "Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash
System" written by the unknown person or people who developed Bitcoin,
called Satoshi Nakamoto, in 2008. [Nak].
• Chapter 4- Lightning Network. This chapter analyzes the Lightning Net-
work mechanism, seeing all the features important for a full comprehension
of the next chapters.
• Chapter 5- Problem Description and Related Work. The aim of this
chapter is explaining the problem faced in the thesis in more details. This
chapter also describes what has been done before in the literature and
what is needed.
• Chapter 6- Methodology. This chapter describes how we have reached
the goals, which features we have considered and which theoretical aspects
we have used.
• Chapter 7 - Açai Protocol. This chapter proposes a possible solution to
have a recovery mechanism in Lightning Network, using the concept of
Watchtowers. All the steps to achieve this solution are demonstrated and
explained.
• Chapter 8 - Implementation. This chapter aims to provide an implemen-
tation of the solution proposed in Chapter 7.
• Chapter 9 - Evaluation. This chapter documents which goals we have
achieved and if the proposed solution can completely solve the problem.
• Chapter 10 - Conclusion. This chapter concludes what we have reached
and also discuss hindsight: what things were even better or a little worse
than we have expected and how this project could be improved by further
work.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
Background
Before facing the main chapters of this project, some theoretical fundamentals
are here presented. The aim of this chapter is to give an overview of the main
basics concepts connected to Bitcoin and Lightning Network technology.
The chapter is organized as follows.
First, a general overview of the Bit-
coin technology is giving, analyzing also its ledger, the Blockchain. Secondly,
an analysis of the Scalability problem is presented, on what it consists and why
it is so crucial in the progress of technology as future currency. Subsequently,
the Lightning Network technology is introduced, analyzing its main aspects.
In the next two chapters, Bitcoin and Lightning Network will be explored
in more details to understand the mechanisms which permit these two technolo-
gies to work.
2.1
Bitcoin
With the term Bitcoin, we refer to both a virtual currency, indicated by the
symbol ( ), and also to the behind technology. The goal of Bitcoin is to send
money in a peer-to-peer network without the need for intermediaries [Net16].
It can be used to buy or sell goods and services as with the other common
cryptocurrencies.
Bitcoin users communicate with each other using the Bitcoin protocol mainly
via the internet network, even if other transport networks can also be used.
The Bitcoin protocol stack is an open source software, that can be run on
several computing devices, including laptops and smartphones [Ant14]. In the
Figure 2.1, it is shown Mycellium, an Android application that permits to have
a Bitcoin wallet, send and receive bitcoins using own mobile phone [Dev].
Through Bitcoin is possible to do all common things that it is possible to
do with conventional currencies, for example: buy and sell goods, send money
to people or organizations, or extend credit. Bitcoin can be also purchased,
sold, and exchanged for other currencies at specialized currency exchanges. For
instance, on 22nd January 2019, 1 Bitcoin was worth 3,526.95 USD (United
states dollar) [Des].
As it was already mentioned, Bitcoin is a distributed, peer-to-peer system,
so there is no central server or point of control. Bitcoin represents the culmi-
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theoretical Background
Figure 2.1: Mycelium bitcoin Wallet application [Dev].
nation of decades of research in cryptography, game theory and distributed
systems. It is the result of a unique and powerful combination of four key
innovations brought together, that permits to this technology to work:
1. The Bitcoin Protocol: a decentralized peer-to-peer network
2. The Blockchain: a public ledger containing all the transactions
3. Consensus rules: a set of computational rules for independent transaction
validation and currency issuance
4. Proof-of-Work algorithm: a mechanism for reaching global decentralized
consensus on the valid blockchain [Ant14]
The Bitcoin system consists of users with wallets containing keys, transactions
that are propagated across the network, and miners who produce the consensus
Blockchain, which is the authoritative ledger of all transactions.
As it was mentioned in Chapter 1, Bitcoin was invented in 2008 with the
publication of a paper titled "Bitcoin: a Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System"
[Nak], written under the alias of Satoshi Nakamoto. In this paper, Nakamoto
combined diﬀerent prior inventions such as b-money and hashCashTo, giving life
a decentralized electronic cash system that does not rely on a central authority
for currency issuance or settlement and validation of transactions.
The system is based on a distributed computation system, called a "Proof-
of-Work" algorithm, that aims to conduct a "global" election every 10 minutes,
permitting the decentralized network to arrive at a consensus about the state
of transactions [Ant14].
Bitcoin is not controlled by any person or organizations, neither Satoshi
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Bitcoin
7
Nakamoto nor anyone else experts individual control over the system, that
operates based on fully transparent mathematical principles, open source code,
and consensus among participants. The invention itself is also revolutionary
and has already become a new science in the ﬁelds of distributed computing,
economics, and econometrics [Ant14].
Bitcoin is also a practical and novel solution to a problem in distributed
computing, called Byzantine General’s Problem. With this term, we deﬁne
the problem consists of trying to have an agreement on a course of action or
state of a system by exchanging information over an unreliable and potentially
compromised network. The Proof-of-Work algorithm represents a breakthrough
in distributed computing, in fact, this solution can be used to achieve consensus
on decentralized networks to prove the fairness of elections, lotteries, asset
registries, digital notarization, and more [Ant14].
The Bitcoin network started to be active in 2009, based on an implemen-
tation published by Nakamoto and since revised by many other programmers.
In January 2019, the 24-hour average block size was 0.79 MB. The average
of conﬁrmed Bitcoin transactions per day was 250,000. The average size of
transactions waiting to be conﬁrmed was 267,707 Bytes [SA].
2.1.1
Blockchain
Blockchain was invented by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008 [Nak] to serve as a
digitized, decentralized, public ledger of Bitcoin. All of the Bitcoin users have a
copy of the Blockchain, that can be used to have a unique chronological history
about the transactions happened in the network [Nak].
The Blockchain can be seen as a chain of blocks: each block contains a hash,
generated using the SHA256 cryptographic hash algorithm of the previous block,
(parent block), up to the ﬁrst block of the chain, called genesis block.
The previous block hash ﬁeld is inside the block header and aﬀects the current
block’s hash. The child’s own identity changes if the parent’s identity changes.
When the parent block hash is modiﬁed, the parent’s hash also changes. As
consequence, the parent’s changed hash causes a change in the previous block
hash pointer of the child. Subsequently, this causes the child’s hash to change,
which necessitates a change in the pointer of the grandchild, which in turn
changes the grandchild, and so on...
Therefore, if a block has many generations following it, it cannot be changed
without forcing a recalculation of all subsequent blocks. Since the recalculation
would require enormous computation power, the existence of a long chain of
blocks makes the Blockchain’s deep history immutable, which is a characteristic
of Bitcoin’s security [Ant14].
In [Ant14], the authors compared the Blockchain to layers in a geological
formation or glacier core sample. The surface layers could change with the
seasons, or even be overthrown before they have time to settle. But as time
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theoretical Background
goes on, geological layers become more and more stable and if you look a few
hundred feet down, you are looking to the past that has remained undisturbed
for millions of years. In the Blockchain, the most recent few blocks could be
changed if there is a chain recalculation due to a fork. The top six blocks are
possible to recalculate. But if you go more deeply into the Blockchain, blocks
are less and less likely to change.
The Blockchain is a decentralized system.
Having a decentralized system
permits to have no third party that can access to information, the transactions
are fast and transparent, everyone can see the transactions that have taken
place on the network. Three advantages to have a decentralized system are:
• Fault tolerance: decentralized systems are less likely to fail accidentally
since they rely on many separate components.
• Attack resistance: decentralized systems are more expensive to attack and
destroy or manipulate because they lack sensitive central points that can
be attacked at much lower cost than the economic size of the surrounding
system.
• Collusion resistance: it is much harder for participants in decentralized sys-
tems to act in ways that beneﬁt them at the expense of other participants
[But] .
Figure 2.2 compares the centralized system with the decentralized Blockchain
system.
Figure 2.2: Comparison between the (a) centralized system with intermediaries
and a (b) decentralized Blockchain system [Put+].
The size of the Blockchain system is steadily increasing.
In August 2014,
the dimension of the Blockchain was of 20 Gigabyte, in January 2019 the
dimension was of 198 Gigabyte, as it is demonstrated in Figure 2.3.
The Figure 2.4 gives a good overview, summarizing all aspects of Bitcoin
system that we see so far.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 The Bitcoin workﬂow
9
Figure 2.3: The total size of all block headers and transactions. Not including
database indexes[Blo].
Figure 2.4: Bitcoin overview [Ant14].
2.2
The Bitcoin workﬂow
The Figure 2.5 summarizes the entire workﬂow of the Bitcoin, that we men-
tioned above.
How it is possible to observe, when a new transaction takes place, it is broadcast
in the Bitcoin network. There is no gold or government issued money backing
this money, it’s a completely decentralized form of money. Each node inside
the Bitcoin network has an own copy of the transactions in the Blockchain,
and they can validate the new transaction based on the data inside their own
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theoretical Background
copy. To validate the transaction a crucial point is the use of cryptography,
that permits to have integrity and maintain chronological order. Once the
transaction is conﬁrmed, it can be combined with the other new transactions
to create a block to add in the Blockchain. If the transaction is included in
the ledger, it can be considered conﬁrmed. Including all transactions in the
Blockchain allows Bitcoin wallets to calculate their spendable balance in a way
that new transactions can be veriﬁed and ensuring that they’re actually owned
by the spender.
Figure 2.5: Bitcoin workﬂow [how].
2.3
Scalability problem
Bitcoin is the world’s most widely used and valuable digital currency, but
despite this, there are some drawbacks to its decentralized design. In fact, trans-
actions conﬁrmed on the bitcoin Blockchain take up to one hour before they
are ﬁnal. In fact, as Satoshi Nakamoto shows in [Nak], if an attacker has 0.1%
of the hashing power in the network, the minimum number of valid blocks, in
order to have 99,9% probability that he is not able to reverse the transaction, is 6.
The Bitcoin scalability problem refers to the limits on the number of transactions
the Bitcoin network can process. Scaling means to facilitate transactions within
a given amount of storage space and network capacity, and how to perform more
transactions at rates that are economically feasible. The on chain transaction
processing capacity of the Bitcoin network is bounded by the average block
creation time of 10 minutes and the block size limit of 1 MegaByte. These also
restrict the network’s throughput. In fact, the transaction processing capacity
maximum is estimated between 3.3 and 7 transactions per second [Cro+16].
This block size limit and the exceptional adoption of its infrastructure has
created a bottleneck in Bitcoin, causing increased transaction fees and delayed
processing of transactions that cannot be ﬁt into a block [Netb]. As we have
mentioned in Section 1, compared to a centralized payment system like Visa,
which can handle up to 45,000 transactions per second, this is an obstacle If we
want extend the use of Bitcoin on a large scale [Con18], Figure 2.6.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Lightning Network
11
Figure 2.6: Cryptocurrencies Transaction Speeds compared to visa and Pay-
pal[how].
The problems connected to the Scalability Problem are:
• Limitations: the Blockchain includes each created block to its ledger, but
at the same time also each block increases with data as it carries the
history of the last blocks.
• Data Size: The Bitcoin Blockchain is limited in size to 1MB, this restricts
the maximum throughput to 3.3–7 transactions/sec. [Cro+16]
• Response Time: Each conﬁrmed transaction requires peer-to-peer ver-
iﬁcation, which could become time-consuming with the increase of the
number of blocks involved. Bitcoin is currently verifying, or creating, one
block every ten minutes.[Bit]
2.4
Lightning Network
One of the solutions proposed to solve the scalability problem is Lightning
Network. This technology is a decentralized network using smart contract
functionality in the Blockchain, to create instant payments across a network of
participants.
We can deﬁne a smart contract as a computer protocol intended to digitally
facilitate, verify, or enforce the negotiation or performance of a contract. Smart
contracts permit the performance of credible transactions without third parties.
Lightning Network is one of the ﬁrst application of a multi-party smart contract
using Bitcoin’s built-in scripting, and is providing a technological development
in multiparty ﬁnancial computations with Bitcoin [Neta].
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theoretical Background
It is important to analyze this technology, since it is widespread and more and
more people are beginning to use it, as it is shown in Figure 2.7, indicating the
number of Lightning Network channels.
Figure 2.7: Number of channels in Lightning Network between February 2018
and December 2018. [Vis].
This technology permits to have high volume, low latency digital micropay-
ments without relying on trusted intermediaries [Lar18]. In this way Lightning
participants do not give unilateral custody of funds to a third trusted party,
reducing transaction costs and counterparty risk. Hence, it achieves instant
micropayments via smart contracts. In Lightning Network, through a network
of multisignature transactions, any participant is able to pay anyone else within
the graph of participants [Neta].
Payment channel, a local two-party consensus, is the core of the Lightning
Network technology. The use of the Lightning Network is based on opening a
payment channel by committing a funding transaction to the relevant Blockchain.
Once the transaction is broadcast on the chain, the payment channel is open
and ready for transactions. When one of the parties wishes to update the
balance with a new balance, both parties must consent to the new balance and
generate a new spend from the transaction [PD16]. When one of the users or
both of them decide to close the payment channel, they broadcast the ﬁnal
version of the transaction to the ledger [Neta].
Therefore, the payment channels permit the participants to transfer Bitcoin
to each other without having to make all their transactions public on the
Blockchain. This is done by using a system to penalize uncooperative par-
ticipants. In Lightning Network, the penalty works in this way: if one party
broadcasts an old transaction state, the counterparty take all the funds in the
channel.
Therefore, Lightning Network can oﬀer a scalable, decentralized micropayments
solution on top of the Bitcoin Blockchain, through a network of interconnected
payment channels [Neta].
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Bitcoin Technology
In this Chapter, we’ll analyze in more details Bitcoin technology, explaining the
important concepts that we need to know to understand completely the work
that will be presented in the next chapters.
As we’ve seen in the previous chapter, Bitcoin is a solution against the double
spending problem, it is a decentralized digital currency without a central part
that can be sent from user-to-user on the peer-to-peer Bitcoin network without
the need for intermediaries [Net16].
Furthermore, the transactions are veriﬁed by network nodes through cryp-
tography and recorded in a public distributed ledger, the Blockchain. Bitcoins
are created as a reward for a process known as mining.
In this chapter, we will analyze the original white paper published by Satoshi
Nakamoto in October 2008 [Nak], extending the work also with the most recent
Literature.
3.1
Transactions
The electronic payments in Bitcoin are created by generating transactions that
transfer bitcoins among users.
As it is shown in Figure 3.1, a transaction is characterized by the follow-
ing key elements: bitcoin version, a hash of the transaction, a Locktime, which
indicates when the transaction may be spent on the blockchain, then one or
more inputs, and one or more outputs.
Every input consists of the following information:
• hash pointer to a previous transaction, that is necessary to identify the
output that is used as input
• an index to speciﬁc unspent previous transaction output (UTXO) that is
spent in the current transaction
• unlocking script length
• unlocking script, called scriptSig, which satisﬁes the conditions associated
with the use of UTXO
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Bitcoin Technology
Figure 3.1: Bitcoin transaction [Con+18].
The output consists of the following elements:
• the number of bitcoins that are being transferred
• the locking script length
• the locking script, also known as scriptPubKey, which set a condition that
must be met before the UTXO can be spent
In this network, an electronic coin is seen as a chain of digital signatures. So,
each transaction processes in this way: the owner transfers the coin to the next
by digitally signing a hash of the previous transaction and the public key of the
next owner and adding these to the end of the coin. This mechanism is called
chain of Ownership, in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Transactions Ownership in bitcoin [Nak].
This procedure presents a possible issue: the payee is not able to verify that
one of the owners did not double spend the coin. For example, a user (e.g.
Alice) might simultaneously generate two diﬀerent transactions, using the same
set of coins, to two receivers (e.g. Bob and Charlie). To this aim, the earliest
transaction is considered as the one that counts, and the later attempts to
double-spend are not considered. Moreover, to accomplish this without the
use of intermediaries, transactions have to be publicly announced and the
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Blockchain
15
participants must agree on a single history of the transactions order. This is
achieved through the use of Blockchain.
3.1.1
Combining and Splitting Value
Although in the transactions, it would be possible to handle coins individually,
it would be inconvenient to make a separate transaction for every cent in a
transfer. To allow value to be split and combined, transactions contain one or
more inputs and outputs. Therefore, there will be either a single input from a
larger previous transaction or multiple inputs combining smaller amounts: one
for the payment, and one returning the change back to the sender if the output
is higher than what the user wishes to pay.
In this way, the Bitcoin achieves two goals:
• it introduces the idea of change
• it is possible to identify the unspent coins or balance of a user by verifying
the outputs from its previous transactions
This mechanism is managed using a Forth-like scripting language which veriﬁes
the essential conditions to claim the coins. There are two scripts: the "Pay-to-
PubKeyHash" (P2PKH), which requires only one signature from the owner to
authorize a payment, and the "Pay-to-ScriptHash" (P2SH), which is typically
used as multisignature addresses, but it also used for a variety of transaction
types and supports future developments [And].
3.2
Blockchain
The Bitcoin Blockchain is a public ledger that records Bitcoin transaction
history in form of blocks. In each block, the transactions are stored using
Markle Tree [Mer87], and a relatively secure timestamp and a hash of the
previous block is stored. To guarantee independent veriﬁcation of the chain of
ownership each node stores its own copy of the Blockchain. Then, the nodes of
the network may conﬁrm the transactions, add them to their copy of Blockchain
and then broadcast these additions to the other nodes. About every 10 minutes,
a new block is created, added to the Blockchain, and quickly published to all
nodes, without requiring a central party. Bitcoin is based on a timestamp server
functionality, that works by taking a hash of a block of items to be timestamped
and widely publishing the hash.
Figure 3.3: Transactions Ownership in bitcoin.[Nak].
Moreover, it is possible to verify payments without running a full network
node. A user only needs to keep a copy of the block headers of the longest
proof-of-work chain, which he can obtain by querying network nodes until he
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Bitcoin Technology
veriﬁes to have the longest chain, and obtain the Merkle branch linking the
transaction to the block it’s timestamped in. By linking the transaction to a
place in the chain, he can see that a network node has accepted it, and blocks
added after it further conﬁrms the network has accepted it.
Figure 3.4: Simpliﬁed Payment Veriﬁcation [Nak].
3.3
Proof-of-Work
The Blockchain is kept consistent, complete, and unalterable by miners, which
repeatedly group newly broadcast transactions into a block, which is then broad-
cast to the network and veriﬁed by recipient nodes. With the term mining, we
indicate a record-keeping service done through the use of computer processing
power.
Pending transactions that have occurred over Bitcoin network and are therefore
awaiting approval by a miner, are held in what is known as the Mempool
(Memory pool) [Aso].
To be accepted by the rest of the network, a new block must contain a Proof-
of-work (PoW). The PoW requires miners to ﬁnd a number called nonce, that
when hashed, such as with SHA-256, the hash begins with a number of zero bits.
The number of zero bits required is provided by the target. The target is a very
large number and known to every Bitcoin client. For a block to be accepted,
the resulting hash has to be a value less compared to the current target and it
has to contain a certain number of leading zero bits to be less than that.
This proof is easy for any node in the network to verify, but extremely time-
consuming to generate, as for a secure cryptographic hash, miners must try
many diﬀerent nonce values before meeting the diﬃculty target. Once the
nonce value is found, the block cannot be modiﬁed without redoing the entire
calculation again.
As we have mentioned in the Section 2.1.1, make a modiﬁcation of the block in
the ledger is very hard, since if an attacker wants to modify a past block, he
has to do the proof-of-work of the block and all blocks after it.
The proof-of-work can also determine the representation in majority decision
making. In Proof-of-work is essentially one-CPU-one-vote and the majority
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Consensus Protocol
17
decision is represented by the longest chain, which has the greatest proof-of-work
eﬀort invested in it. Suppose that a majority of CPU power is controlled by
honest nodes, the honest chain will grow the fastest and outpace any competing
chains.
The Figure 3.5 summarizes the important steps to validate a transaction in the
Bitcoin.
Figure 3.5: The steps to run the network [Nak].
To guarantee that the nodes stay honest, it was introduced incentives. For
example, the ﬁrst transaction in a block is an important transaction that creates
a new coin owned by the miner, that created of the block. This adds an incentive
for nodes to support the network and create a way to initially distribute coins
into circulation since there is no central authority to issue them.
The incentive can also be created with transaction fees, for example, if the
output value of a transaction is less than its input value, the diﬀerence is a
transaction fee that is added to the incentive value of the block containing the
transaction.
In order to receive the incentive, miners mine in the form of the so-called
mining pools. This means that all miners that are associated with a pool work
cooperatively to mine a particular block under the control of a pool manager.
In case of successful mining, the manager distributes the reward among all the
associated miners proportional to the resources expended by each miner.
This is important, in case of an attacker inside the network. In fact, if he
is able to assemble more CPU power than all the honest nodes (51% attack),
he would have to choose between using it to defraud people by stealing back
his payments or using it to generate new coins. For him, it is more proﬁtable
to play by the rules, which favour him with more new coins than everyone else
combined, than to undermine the system and the validity of his own wealth
[Nak].
3.4
Consensus Protocol
The nodes interact over a network and collaboratively construct the Blockchain
without trusting on a central authority. It is necessary to consider the case in
which the individual nodes crash, behave maliciously, act against the common
goal, or the network communication becomes interrupted. To oﬀer a continuous
service, the nodes run a fault-tolerant consensus protocol to ensure that they
all agree on the order in which entries are appended to the Blockchain. In order
to add a new block in the Blockchain, every miner has to follow a set of rules
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Bitcoin Technology
speciﬁed in the consensus protocol. Bitcoin achieves the distributed consensus,
through the PoW based consensus algorithm.
The distributed consensus protocol is based on the following rules:
• input and output values are rational
• transactions only spend unspent outputs
• all inputs being spent have valid signatures
• no coinbase transaction outputs, which is a unique type of bitcoin trans-
action only created by a miner, was spent within 100 blocks
• no transactions spend inputs with a lock time before the block in which
they are conﬁrmed
Bitcoin is considered as secure and as robust, thanks to its consensus model
[Con+18].
3.5
Privacy
Figure 3.6 shows the diﬀerence between traditional privacy method and new
privacy model in Bitcoin. The traditional banking model reaches a level of
privacy by limiting access to information to the parties involved and using
a third party as a trusted party. The use of the ledger, that announces all
transactions publicly precludes this method, but privacy can still be maintained
by keeping public keys anonymous. The other nodes can see that someone
is sending an amount to someone else, but without information linking the
transaction to anyone.
Figure 3.6: Comparison between Traditional Privacy Model and New Privacy
Model [Nak].
As an additional ﬁrewall protection, a new key pair should be used for each
transaction to keep them from being linked to a common owner. The risk is
that if the owner of a key is revealed, linking could reveal other transactions
that belonged to the same owner.
3.6
Wallets
In Bitcoin, the wallet refers to the data structure used to store and manage a
user’s keys, necessary to transact bitcoins.
==PAGE:29==
3.6 Wallets
19
In each transaction, the destination address, called Bitcoin address, is gen-
erated by performing a series of irreversible cryptographic hashing operations
on the user’s public key. Moreover, a user can have multiple addresses by
creating several public keys, and these addresses could be associated with one
or more wallets. The private key of the user is used to spend the owned bitcoins
in the form of digitally signed transactions. Thus, using the hash of the public
key as receiving address permits to the users a certain degree of anonymity,
and as we have seen in the section 3.6, it is recommended the practice to use
diﬀerent bitcoin address for each receiving transaction [Con+18].
A common misconception is that wallets contain bitcoin, that are recorded in
the Blockchain on the Bitcoin network instead. In fact, users control their own
coins on the network by signing transactions with the keys in their wallets.
There are two primary types of wallets: non-deterministic wallet and determin-
istic wallet, distinguished by if the keys they contain are linked to each other or
not.
Non-deterministic wallet
In the non-deterministic wallet, each key is independently generated from a
random number. In this case, the keys are not related to each other, and is also
known as a JBOK wallet from the phrase "Just a Bunch Of Keys."
Deterministic wallet
In the deterministic wallet, all the keys are derived from a single master key,
known as the seed. All the keys in this type of wallet are linked to each other
and can be generated again if the user has the original seed. There are diﬀerent
key derivation techniques used in deterministic wallets, but the most commonly
used derivation method uses a tree-like structure and is known as a hierarchical
deterministic or HD wallet.
The use of non-deterministic wallets is discouraged for anything other than
simple tests because they are simply too cumbersome to back up and use. In
this thesis, we consider a deterministic HD wallet with a mnemonic seed for
backup [Ant14].
3.6.1
Deterministic Wallets
Deterministic, or "seeded," wallets are wallets that contain private keys that are
all derived from a common seed, through the use of a one-way hash function.
The seed is a randomly generated number that is combined with other data, such
as an index number or chain code to derive the private keys. In a deterministic
wallet, the seed is suﬃcient to recover all the derived keys, and therefore a single
backup at creation time is suﬃcient. The seed is also suﬃcient for a wallet
export or import, allowing for easy migration of all the user’s keys between
diﬀerent wallet implementations. In the following paragraph, we will examine
the HD wallets.
Figure 3.7 and 3.8 compare the non-deterministic wallet and the deterministic
wallet.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Bitcoin Technology
Figure 3.7: Non-deterministic (random) wallet: a collection of randomly gen-
erated keys.
Figure 3.8: Deterministic (seeded) wallet: a deterministic sequence of keys
derived from a seed..
3.6.2
HD Wallets- BIP 32/44
As we have mentioned in the previous section, deterministic wallets were devel-
oped to permit to derive many keys from a single seed. The HD wallet is also
deﬁned as the BIP-32 standard and is the most advanced form of deterministic
wallets.
The keys are derived in a tree structure, such that a parent key can derive a
sequence of children keys, each of which can derive a sequence of grandchildren
keys, and so on, to an inﬁnite depth. This structure is illustrated in Figure
3.9. The structure of HD wallets oﬀers two major advantages over random
keys. First, the tree structure can be used to express additional organizational
meaning, for instance when a speciﬁc branch of subkeys is used to receive in-
coming payments and a diﬀerent branch is used to receive change from outgoing
payments. The second advantage of HD wallets is that users can create a
==PAGE:31==
3.6 Wallets
21
Figure 3.9: Type-2 HD wallet: a tree of keys generated from a single seed.
sequence of public keys without having access to the corresponding private keys.
This allows HD wallets to be used on an insecure server or in a receive only
capacity, issuing a diﬀerent public key for each transaction [Ant14].
3.6.3
Seeds and Mnemonic Codes (BIP-39)
BIP-39 standard gives the possibility to create seeds from a sequence of English
words that are easy to transcribe, export, and import across wallets. In this
way the user instead of remembering the seed in hexadecimal, they can recover
their data through a sequence of 12 or 24 English words. For example:
Seed in hex: 0C1E24E5917779D297E14D45F14E1A1A
Seed as a sequence of the following words: army van defence carry jealous true
garbage claim echo media make crunch
3.6.4
Creating an HD Wallet from the Seed
HD wallets are composed by a single root seed, which can be a 128-, 256-,
or 512-bit random number. Every key in the HD wallet is derived from this
root seed, which gives the possibility to recreate the entire HD wallet from
that seed in any compatible HD wallet. This makes it easy to back up, re-
store, export, and import HD wallets containing thousands or even millions of
keys by simply transferring only the mnemonic that the root seed is derived from.
The process of how creating the master keys and master chain code for an HD
wallet is shown in Figure 3.10. The root seed is input into the HMAC-SHA512
algorithm and the resulting hash is used to create a master private key (m) and a
master chain code(c). The master private key (m) then creates a corresponding
master public key (M) using the normal elliptic curve multiplication process m
* G.
Whereas, the chain code (c) is used to introduce entropy in the function that
creates child keys from parent keys.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Bitcoin Technology
Figure 3.10: Creating master keys and chain code from a root seed [Ant14].
3.6.5
Private child key derivation
Subsequently, HD wallets use a child key derivation (CKD) function to derive
child keys from parent keys. The child key derivation functions are based on a
one-way hash function that combines:
• A parent private or public key (ECDSA uncompressed key)
• A seed called a chain code (256 bits)
• An index number (32 bits)
As we have already mentioned, the chain code is used to introduce deterministic
random data to the process so that knowing the index and a child key is not
suﬃcient to derive other child keys. The initial chain code seed (at the root of
the tree) is made from the seed, while subsequent child chain codes are derived
from each parent chain code.
The children keys are generated as follows:
1. The parent public key, chain code, and the index number are combined
and hashed with the HMAC-SHA512 algorithm to produce a 512-bit hash.
2. This 512-bit hash is divided into two 256-bit halves.
3. The right-half 256 bits of the hash output become the chain code for the
child.
4. The left-half 256 bits of the hash and the index number are added to the
parent private key to produce the child private key.
In 3.11, we see this illustrated with the index set to 0 to produce the "zero"
(ﬁrst by index) child of the parent. Modifying the index allows us to extend
the parent and create the other children in the sequence, e.g., Child 0, Child 1,
Child 2, etc. Each parent key can have 231 children (231 is half of the entire 232
range available because the other half is reserved for a special type of derivation).
Repeating the process one level down the tree, each child can, in turn, become
a parent and create its own children, in an inﬁnite number of generations.
==PAGE:33==
3.6 Wallets
23
Figure 3.11: Extending a parent private key to create a child private key [Ant14].
3.6.6
Using derived child keys
Child private keys are indistinguishable from non-deterministic keys because
the derivation function is a one-way function, in fact, the child key cannot be
used to recover the parent key. Moreover, the child key also cannot be used to
ﬁnd any siblings, in fact, if you have the nth child, you cannot ﬁnd its siblings,
such as the n–1 child or the n+1 child, or any other children that are part of
the sequence. Only the parent key and chain code can derive all the children.
It needs both the child private key and the child chain code to start a new
branch and derive grandchildren. So, the child private key can be used to make
a public key and a bitcoin address. Then, it can be used to sign transactions to
spend anything paid to that address.
3.6.7
Extended keys
The key derivation function can be used to create children at any level of the
tree, based on the three inputs: a key, a chain code, and the index of the desired
child. The two essential ingredients are the key and chain code and combined
these are called an extended key. The term "extended key" could also be though
as "extensible key" because such a key can be used to derive children.
Extended keys are stored and represented simply as the concatenation of
the 256-bit public key and 256-bit chain code into a 512-bit sequence. There are
two types of extended key: the extended private key, which is the combination
of a private key and chain code and can be used to derive child private keys.
And the extended public key, that is a public key and chain code, which can be
used to create child public keys.
So, it is important to highlight that through the extended private key can
create a complete branch, whereas through the extended public key can only
create a branch of public keys. This gives us two ways to derive a child public
key: either from the child private key or directly from the parent public key.
So, this technique permits to produce an inﬁnite number of public keys and
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Bitcoin Technology
bitcoin addresses, but cannot spend any of the money sent to those addresses.
The Figure 3.12 illustrates the mechanism for extending a parent public key to
derive child public keys.
Figure 3.12: Extending a parent public key to create a child public key [Ant14].
In this solution, there is a potential risk. Since, an extended public key contains
the chain code, if a child private key is known, it can be used with the chain
code to derive all the other child private keys.
To solve this risk, HD wallets use an alternative derivation function called
hardened derivation. The hardened derivation function uses the parent private
key to derive the child chain code, instead of utilizing the parent public key. This
creates a "ﬁrewall" in the parent/child sequence, with a chain code that cannot
be used to compromise a parent or sibling private key. The diﬀerence compares
to the normal child private key derivation, is that the parent private key is used
as input to the hash function, instead of the parent public key, as shown in the
diagram in 3.13. The result of using the hardened private derivation function is
completely diﬀerent from using normal derivation. The resulting "branch" of
keys can be used to produce extended public keys that are not vulnerable be-
cause the chain code they contain cannot be exploited to reveal any private keys.
So, if you want to use the convenience of an expand public key to derive
branches of public keys, without exposing yourself to the risk of a leaked chain
code, you should derive it from a hardened parent, rather than a normal parent.
As a best practice, the level-1 children of the master keys are always derived
through the hardened derivation, to prevent compromise of the master keys.
3.6.8
Index numbers for normal and hardened derivation
The index number utilized in the derivation function is a 32-bit integer. In order,
to distinguish between keys derived through the normal derivation function
versus keys derived through hardened derivation, this index number is split into
two ranges.
==PAGE:35==
3.6 Wallets
25
Figure 3.13: Hardened derivation of a child key; omits the parent public key
[Ant14].
• Index numbers between 0 and 231–1 (0x0 to 0x7FFFFFFF) are used only
for normal derivation.
• Index numbers between 231 and 232–1 (0x80000000 to 0xFFFFFFFF) are
used only for hardened derivation.
To make the index number easier to utilize, the index number for hardened
children is displayed starting from zero, but with a prime symbol. The ﬁrst
normal child key is therefore displayed as 0, whereas the ﬁrst hardened child
(index 0x80000000) is displayed as 0’. In sequence then, the second hardened
key would have index 0x80000001 and would be displayed as 1’, and so on.
When you see an HD wallet index i’, that means 231+i.
3.6.9
HD wallet key identiﬁer (path)
To simplify the writing of keys in an HD wallet, a convention is used, where
each level of the tree is separated by a slash (/) character (see Figure 3.14).
Private keys derived from the master private key start with "m". Whereas,
public keys derived from the master public key start with "M". So, the ﬁrst
child private key of the master private key is m/0. The ﬁrst child public key is
M/0. The second grandchild of the ﬁrst child is m/0/1, and so on.
For instance, the path m/x/y/z describes the key that is the z-th child of key
m/x/y, which is the y-th child of key m/x, which is the x-th child of m.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Bitcoin Technology
Figure 3.14: HD wallet path examples [Ant14].
3.6.10
Navigating the HD wallet tree structure
The HD wallet allows having tremendous ﬂexibility in the creation of the tree
structure. In fact, every parent extended key may have 4 billion children: 2
billion normal children and 2 billion hardened children. Each of those children
may have further 4 billion children, and so on.
On the other hand, it is quite diﬃcult to navigate this inﬁnite tree. Two
BIPs, Bitcoin Improvement Proposals, oﬀer a solution to deceive this com-
plexity by creating some proposed standards for the structure of HD wallet
trees.
• BIP-43: it proposes to use the ﬁrst hardened child index as a special
identiﬁer that means the "purpose" of the tree structure. For example, an
HD wallet using the only branch m/i’/ is intended to signify a speciﬁc
purpose and that purpose is identiﬁed by index number "i."
• BIP-44: it extends the previous proposal and oﬀers a multi-account
structure as "purpose" number 44’ under BIP-43.
BIP-44 speciﬁes the structure as consisting of ﬁve predeﬁned tree levels:
m / purpose’ / coin_type’ / account’ / change / address_index
Purpose’
In the case of BIP-44 is always set to 44’.
Coin_type’
The second-level "coin_type" speciﬁes the type of cryptocurrency coin, allowing
for multicurrency HD wallets where each currency has its own subtree under the
second level. There are three currencies deﬁned for now: Bitcoin is m/44’/0’,
Bitcoin Testnet is m/44’/1’, and Litecoin is m/44’/2’.
Account
The third level of the tree is "account", which allows users to subdivide their wal-
lets into separate logical subaccounts, for accounting or organizational purposes.
For instance, an HD wallet might contain two bitcoin "accounts": m/44’/0’/0’
and m/44’/0’/1’. Each account is the root of its own subtree.
Change
==PAGE:37==
3.7 Building Blocks Primitive of Bitcoin
27
On the fourth level, "change", an HD wallet has two subtrees, one for creating
receiving addresses and one for creating change addresses.
Address_index
Usable addresses are derived by the HD wallet as children of the fourth level,
making the ﬁfth level of the tree the "address_index".
For example, the
third receiving address for bitcoin payments in the primary account would be
M/44’/0’/0’/0/2 [Ant14].
The Figure 3.15 shows more examples.
Figure 3.15: BIP-44 HD wallet structure examples [Ant14].
3.7
Building Blocks Primitive of Bitcoin
The Bitcoin Technology oﬀers some guarantees, that has been used as building
blocks to create several other applications.
This section summarizes all these guarantees:
• No-Double Spend: one of the main important aspects of Bitcoin is that
ensures that no UTXO (Unspent Transaction Output) can be spent twice.
• Immutability: As we’ve seen in the previous chapter, once a transaction
is recorded in the blockchain and suﬃcient work has been added with
subsequent blocks, the transaction’s data becomes immutable. In fact
once deeply recorded, the computation and energy required to change
make change practically infeasible.
• Neutrality: Anyone can create a valid transaction and trust they will be
able to transmit that transaction and have it included in the blockchain
at any time.
So, the decentralized Bitcoin network propagates valid
transactions regardless of the origin or content of those transactions.
• Secure timestamping: The consensus rules do not accept any block whose
timestamp is too far in the past or future. In this way, this ensures that
timestamps on blocks can be trusted.
• Authorization: Digital signatures, validated in a decentralized network,
provide authorization guarantees. Scripts that ask a requirement for a
digital signature are not executed without authorization by the holder of
the private key contained in the script.
• Auditability: All transactions are public and can be audited. While blocks
may be linked back in an unbroken chain to the genesis block.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Bitcoin Technology
• Accounting: It is not possible to destroy or create bitcoin in a transaction.
Since, in any transaction, the value of inputs is equal to the value of
outputs plus fees, whereas the outputs cannot exceed the inputs.
• Nonexpiration: If a transaction is valid today, it will be valid also in the
near future, as long as the inputs remain unspent and the consensus rules
do not change.
• Integrity: Each bitcoin transaction signed with SIGHASH_ALL or parts
of a transaction signed by another SIGHASH type cannot be modiﬁed
without invalidating the signature, and so invalidating the transaction
itself.
• Transaction Atomicity: Bitcoin transactions are atomic. They are either
valid and conﬁrmed (mined) or not. In case of partial transactions, they
cannot be mined and there is no interim state for a transaction.
• Discrete (Indivisible) units of Value: Transaction outputs are discrete
and indivisible units of value, so they cannot be divided or partially spent.
• Quorum of Control: Multisignature constraints in scripts requires a quo-
rum of authorization, predeﬁned in the multisignature scheme.
The
M-of-N requirement is imposed by the consensus rules.
• Timelock/Aging: A script clause containing a relative or absolute timelock
can only be executed after its age exceeds the time speciﬁed.
• Replication: The decentralized storage of the blockchain ensures that when
a transaction is conﬁrmed a suﬃcient number of times, it is replicated
across the network and becomes durable and resilient to power loss, data
loss, etc.
• Forgery Protection: A transaction can only spend validated, existing
outputs.
• Consistency: In the absence of miner divisions, blocks that are stored in
the ledger are subject of reorganization or disagreement with exponentially
decreasing likelihood, based on the depth at which they are recorded.
• Recording External State: A transaction can commit a data value, utiliz-
ing OP_RETURN, representing a state transition in an external state
machine.
• Predictable Issuance: Less than 21 million bitcoin will be issued, at a
predictable rate [Ant14].
These building blocks oﬀered by bitcoin can be the basis to compose a trust
application, that is utilized to create applications. One example of these appli-
cations is Payment Channels, that it will be analyzed in the next Chapter.
The payment Channels uses mainly these building blocks of Bitcoin:
1. Quorum Of Control
2. Time Lock
==PAGE:39==
3.7 Building Blocks Primitive of Bitcoin
29
3. No double Spend
4. Nonexpiration
5. Censorship Resistance
6. Authorization
==PAGE:40==
30
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Lightning Network
In this chapter, we’ll analyze in more details Lightning technology, explaining
the important characteristics that it is necessary to know in order to understand
completely the work that will be presented in the next chapters.
As we’ve seen in the previous chapter , Lightning Network is a decentral-
ized network using smart contract functionality in the blockchain, in order to
create instant payments across a network of participants.
Moreover, this technology aims to solve the scalability problem of Bitcoin,
without publishing all transactions on the Blockchain, but just the initial and
ﬁnal status.
In this chapter, we’ll analyze ﬁrst the Payment Channels, then Lightning
Network and subsequently its beneﬁts.
4.1
Payment Channel
Payment channels, also known as Micropayment Channel, is a class of trustless
techniques designated to exchange bitcoin between two parties, outside of the
bitcoin blockchain [she]. In fact, these transactions are held oﬀ-chain, as a
sort of notes for eventual batch settlement. Since the transactions are not
settled, they can be exchanged without the usual settlement latency, allowing
extremely high transaction throughput, low (sub-milliseconds) latency, and ﬁne
(satoshi-level) granularity.
We deﬁne the concept of state channel as a virtual construct represented
by the exchange of state between two parties, oﬀ-chain. The payment channel is
a state channel, where the state channel being altered is the balance of virtual
currency [Ant14].
4.2
Basic concepts and terminology
In this paragraph, we will deﬁne the main concepts and terminology to know, to
understand completely the mechanism behind Lightning Network. The concepts
that we analyze are funding, commitment and settlement transaction.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Lightning Network
Funding transaction
The Funding transaction must be transmitted to the network and mined to
establish the channel. In the example of a payment channel, the locked state is
the initial balance of the channel.
Commitment transactions
The commitment transactions are signed transactions exchanged by the parties,
that alter the initial state. These transactions are held-oﬀchain by each party
pending the channel closure.
Settlement transaction
The channel can be closed either cooperatively, by submitting a ﬁnal settlement
transaction to the ledger, or unilaterally, by either party submitting the last
commitment transaction to the blockchain. The settlement transaction repre-
sents the ﬁnal state of the channel and is settled on the ledger.
During the entire lifetime of the channel, just two transactions are broad-
cast to the blockchain: the funding and the settlement transactions. Between
these two states, the two parties can exchange any number of commitment
transactions that are never submitted to the blockchain, as it is shown in Figure
4.1.
4.3
Simple Payment Channel
to explain how the payment channels work, we consider two participants: Alice
and Bob. Suppose that Alice has to pay a service oﬀering by Bob, and they
have a micropayment channel. Both Alice and Bob use special software that
handles the payment channel, for example, Alice is running the software in her
browser, Bob is running it on a server. In more details, the software is composed
of basic bitcoin wallet functionality and can create and sign bitcoin transactions.
Funding transaction
To set up the payment channel, Alice and Bob establish a 2-of-2 multisignature
address, with each of them holding one of the keys. Alice submits a deposit and
found an address. The ﬁrst transactions by Alice, paying to the multisignature
address, is the funding and anchor transaction for the payment channel. The
funding transaction establishes the maximum amount, called deposit, that can
be transmitted in this channel, so setting the channel capacity. Once the anchor
transaction is funding, Alice can use the service.
Commitment transactions
Alice’s software creates and signs a commitment transaction that changes the
channel balance to credit some money to Bob’s address and refunds the money
to Alice. The transaction is signed by Alice, and it requires two signatures
(2-of-2), but only has Alice’s signature.
When Bob’s server receives this transaction, it adds the second signature and
returns it to Alice with the service. Now both parties have a fully signed
commitment transaction that either can redeem, representing the correct up-to-
date balance of the channel. Neither party broadcasts this transaction to the
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Simple Payment Channel
33
Figure 4.1: A payment channel between Bob and Alice, showing the funding,
commitment, and settlement transactions.[Ant14].
network.
Suppose that Alice wants to use the service a second time. In this case, Alice’s
software creates and signs another commitment transaction that consumes the
same 2-of-2 output from the funding transaction. The second commitment
transaction allocates one output to Bob’s address and another one to Alice’s
address. Fabian’s software signs and returns the second commitment transac-
tion, together with the service.
Settlement transaction If Alice wants to stop to use the service, either Bob or
Alice can now transmit the ﬁnal state of the transaction for settlement. This
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Lightning Network
last transaction is the settlement transaction and pays Bob for the service that
Alice utilized, refunding the remainder of the funding transaction to Alice.
4.4
Timelocks
Let us consider again Alice and Bob with a micropayment channel, there are
two possible scenarios when the state channels can fail:
• Once the funding transactions happen, Alice needs Bob’s signature to get
any money back. If Bob disappears, Alice’s funds are locked in a 2-of-2
and eﬀectively lost. This channel, as constructed, leads to loss of funds
if one of the parties disconnects before there is at least one commitment
transaction signed by both parties.
• While the channel is running, Alice can take any of the commitment
transactions Bob has countersigned and transmitted one to the blockchain.
So, the channel fails because Alice can cheat by broadcasting a prior
commitment that is in favour.
A proposed solution to solve the problem above is using timelocks (nLockTime).
Refund Transaction
As we’ve seen, Alice cannot risk funding a 2-of-2 multisig unless she has a guar-
anteed refund. To solve this issue, Alice constructs with the funding transaction,
a refund transaction at the same time. She signs the funding transaction but
without transmitting it to Bob. Alice transmits only the refund transaction to
Bob, in order to obtain his signature.
The refund transaction acts as the ﬁrst commitment transaction and it is
linked to a timelock, that establishes the upper bound for the channel’s life. In
this case, Alice could set the nLocktime to 30 days or 4320 blocks into the future.
All subsequent commitment transactions have to have a shorter timelock, in
this way they can be redeemed before the refund transaction.
Once Alice has a fully signed refund transaction, she can transmit the signed
funding transactions knowing that she can eventually after the timelock expires,
redeem the refund transaction even if Bob disappears.
Each commitment transaction that the parties exchange during the life of
the channel will be time-locked into the future. But the delay will be slightly
shorter for each commitment, in this way the most recent commitment can be
redeemed before the prior commitment it invalidates. Using the nLockTime,
neither party can successfully broadcast any of the commitment transactions
until their timelock expires. If all goes well, they will cooperate and close the
channel cooperatively with a settlement transaction, making it unnecessary to
transmit an intermediate commitment transaction. Otherwise, the most recent
commitment transaction can be propagated to settle the account and invalidate
all prior commitment transactions.
The ability to broadcast a commitment earlier ensures it will be able to spend
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Asymmetric Revocable Commitments
35
the funding output and preclude any other commitment transaction from be-
ing redeemed by spending the output. The guarantees oﬀered by the bitcoin
blockchain, preventing double-spends and enforcing timelocks, eﬀectively allow
each commitment transaction to invalidate its predecessors.
So, state channels use timelocks to enforce smart contracts across a time
dimension. Despite all the advantages, Timelocks presents two drawbacks:
• By establishing a maximum timelock when the channel is ﬁrst opened,
they limit the lifetime of the channel.
• The second problem is that since each subsequent commitment transaction
must decrement the timelock, there is an explicit limit on the number of
commitment transactions that can be exchanged between the parties.
4.5
Asymmetric Revocable Commitments
In order to punish the other party if they try to cheat, it is possible to use a
revocation key. To explain revocation keys, we will construct again a payment
channel between Alice and Bob. Alice and Bob start the channel by collabora-
tively constructing a funding transaction, which locks the channel state in a
2-of-2 multisig, each funding the channel with 5 bitcoin.
In this scenario, instead of creating a single commitment transaction that
both parties sign, Alice and Bob create two diﬀerent commitment transactions
that are asymmetric.
Alice has a commitment transaction with two outputs. The ﬁrst output pays
Bob the 5 bitcoin he is owed immediately. The second output pays Alice the 5
BTC she is owed, but only after a timelock of 1000 blocks. In this way each
party has a commitment transaction, spending the 2-of-2 funding output.
This input is signed by the other party. at any time the party holding the
transaction can also sign and broadcast. If they broadcast the commitment
transaction, it pays the other party immediately whereas they have to wait for
a short timelock to expire. We refer to this mechanism of penalty as Lightning
Network Penalty.
Therefore, the revocation key permits the wronged party to punish the cheater
by taking the entire balance of the channel. The revocation key is composed
of two secrets, each half generated independently by each channel participant.
This is quite similar to a 2-of-2 multisig but constructed utilizing elliptic curve
arithmetic, so that both parties know the revocation public key but each party
knows only half the revocation secret key.
For each transaction, both parties reveal their half of the revocation secret to
each other, this means to request the penalty output if this revoked transaction
is ever broadcast.
Each of the commitment transactions has a delayed output. The redemp-
tion script for that output allows one party to redeem it after a total number of
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Lightning Network
blocks, or the other party to redeem it if they have a revocation key, penalizing
transmission of a revoked commitment.
4.6
Hash Time Lock Contracts
An important feature can be added to payment channels, to extend them with
a special type of smart contract that allows the participants to commit funds
to a redeemable secret, with an expiration time. This feature is called Hash
Time Lock Contract, HTLC, and can be used in both bidirectional and routed
payment channels.
To create an HTLC, the intended recipient of the payment must create a
secret R and then they create the hash of the secret H:
H= Hash(R)
This produces a hash H that can be included in an output’s looking script. This
technique expects whoever knows the secret can use it to redeem the output.
The secret R is also seen as a preimage to the hash function, and is just the
data that is used as input to a hash function.
The second part of an HTLC is the time lock component.
In fact, if the
secret is not revealed, the payer of an HTLC can get a refund after some time.
This result is achieved with the use of the CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY.
4.7
Lightning Network
The Lightning Network is a routed network composed of bidirectional payment
channels connected end-to-end. This network permits the participant to route
a payment from channel to channel without trusting any of the intermediaries.
The Lightning network was ﬁrst introduced by Joseph Poon and Thadeus Dryja
in February 2015 [PD16], and it was based on the concept of payment channels.
To explain lightning Network, suppose to have a network with ﬁve partici-
pants: Alice, Bob, Carol, Diana and Eric. These ﬁve participants have opened
payment channels with each other, in pairs. Alice has a payment channel with
Bob, Bob is connected to Carol, Carol to Diana, and Diana to Eric. For simplic-
ity, we assume that each channel is funded with 2 bitcoin by each participant,
for a total capacity of 4 bitcoin in each channel, Figure 4.2.
Consider the case, in which Alice wants to pay Eric 1 bitcoin. the scenario is
shown in Figure 4.3.
Step 1: Alice is running a Lightning Network node that is storing her payment
channel to Bob and can discover routes between payment channels. Moreover,
Alice’s LN node can also connect to Eric’s LN node through the Internet.
To receive the payment from Alice, Eric’s LN node creates a secret R using a
random number generator, without revealing it to anyone, and he calculates a
==PAGE:47==
4.7 Lightning Network
37
Figure 4.2: A series of bidirectional payment channels linked to form a Lightning
Network that can route a payment from Alice to Eric.[Ant14].
hash H of the secret R and transmits this hash to Alice’s.
Figure 4.3: Step by step payment routing through a Lightning Network.[Ant14].
Step 2: Alice’s node then constructs an HTLC, payable to the hash H, with a
10-block refund timeout: current block + 10, for an amount of 1.003 bitcoin.
The extra 0.003 will be used to compensate the intermediate nodes for their
participation in this payment route. Alice oﬀers this HTLC to Bob, deducting
1.003 bitcoin from her channel balance with Bob and committing it to the
HTLC. The HTLC has the following meaning: "Alice is committing 1.003 of her
channel balance to be paid to Bob if Bob knows the secret, or refunded back to
Alice’s balance if 10 blocks elapse." The channel balance between Alice and Bob
is now expressed by commitment transactions with three outputs: 2 bitcoin
balance to Bob, 0.997 bitcoin balance to Alice, 1.003 bitcoin committed in
Alice’s HTLC. Alice’s balance is reduced by the amount committed to the HTLC.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Lightning Network
Step 3: Bob now has a commitment that if he is able to get the secret R
within the next 10 blocks, he can claim the 1.003 locked by Alice. With this
commitment in hand, Bob’s node constructs an HTLC on his payment channel
with Carol. Bob’s HTLC commits 1.002 bitcoin to hash H for 9 blocks, which
Carol can redeem if she has secret R. Bob knows that if Carol can claim his
HTLC, she has to produce R. If Bob has R in nine blocks, he can use it to
claim Alice’s HTLC to him. He also makes 0.001 bitcoin for committing his
channel balance for nine blocks. If Carol is unable to claim his HTLC and he
is unable to claim Alice’s HTLC, everything reverts back to the prior channel
balances and no one is at a loss. The channel balance between Bob and Carol
is now: 2 to Carol, 0.998 to Bob, 1.002 committed by Bob to the HTLC.
Step 4: Carol now has a commitment that if she gets R within the next nine
blocks, she can claim 1.002 bitcoin locked by Bob. Now she can make an HTLC
commitment on her channel with Diana. She commits an HTLC of 1.001 bitcoin
to hash H, for eight blocks, which Diana can redeem if she has secret R. From
Carol’s perspective, if this works she is 0.001 bitcoin better oﬀand if it doesn’t
she loses nothing. Her HTLC to Diana is only viable if R is revealed, at which
point she can claim the HTLC from Bob. The channel balance between Carol
and Diana is now: 2 to Diana, 0.999 to Carol, 1.001 committed by Carol to the
HTLC.
Step 5: Finally, Diana can oﬀer an HTLC to Eric, committing 1 bitcoin for
seven blocks to hash H. The channel balance between Diana and Eric is now: 2
to Eric, 1 to Diana, 1 committed by Diana to the HTLC.
Step 6: However, at this hop in the route, Eric has secret R. He can, therefore,
claim the HTLC oﬀered by Diana. He sends R to Diana and claims the 1
bitcoin, adding it to his channel balance. The channel balance is now: 1 to
Diana, 3 to Eric.
Step 7: Now, Diana has secret R. Therefore, she can now claim the HTLC
from Carol. Diana transmits R to Carol and adds the 1.001 bitcoin to her chan-
nel balance. Now the channel balance between Carol and Diana is 0.999 to Carol,
3.001 to Diana. Diana has "earned" 0.001 for participating in this payment route.
Step 8: Flowing back through the route, the secret R allows each participant
to claim the outstanding HTLCs. Carol claims 1.002 from Bob, setting the
balance on their channel to 0.998 to Bob, 3.002 to Carol.
Step 9: Finally, Bob claims the HTLC from Alice.
Their channel balance
is updated as 0.997 to Alice, 3.003 to Bob.
Alice has paid Eric 1 bitcoin without opening a channel to Eric. None of
the intermediate parties in the payment route had to trust each other. For the
short-term commitment of their funds in the channel, they are able to earn a
small fee, with the only risk being a small delay in a refund if the channel was
closed or the routed payment failed.
==PAGE:49==
4.8 Transport and Routing
39
4.8
Transport and Routing
All communication between the nodes in Lightning Network are encrypted, and
every node has a long-term public key that they use as an identiﬁer and to
authenticate each other.
The path between Alice and Charlie, presented in the previous section is
known just to Alice’s node. All other nodes in the payment route know only
the adjacent nodes.
This features is very crucial in Lightnig Network, since it ensures the pri-
vacy of payments and makes it very diﬃcult to apply surveillance.
This is possible because Lightning Network implements an onion-routed protocol
based on a scheme called Sphinx. This routing protocol ensures that a payment
sender can construct and communicate a path through the Lightning Network
such that:
• Intermediate nodes can decrypt just their portion of route information
and ﬁnd the next hop.
• Intermidiates nodes cannot learn about any other nodes that are part of
the path, except the previous and the next hops
• Intermediates nodes cannot know the length of the payment path or their
own position in that path.
• Each part of the path is encrypted in a way that a network level attacker
cannot associate the packets from diﬀerent parts of the path to each other.
• Unlike Tor, that is an onion-routed anonymization protocol on the Internet,
there are no "exit nodes" that can be placed under surveillance. The
payments do not need to be transmitted to the bitcoin blockchain; the
nodes just update channel balances. [Ant14]
4.9
Lighnting Network beneﬁts
As Lightning Network can adopt beneﬁts from Bitcoin, also the viceversa is
true. In fact, the bitcoin network can gain a signiﬁcant increase in capacity,
privacy, granularity, and speed, without sacriﬁcing the principles of trustless
operation without intermediaries:
• Privacy While the payments on the bitcoin blockchain are public, the
Lightning Network payments instead are much more private. The partic-
ipants in a route can know payments propagated across their channels,
they do not see the sender or recipient.
• Fungibility A Lightning Network makes it much more diﬃcult to apply
surveillance on bitcoin, in a way to increase the fungibility of the currency.
• Speed Bitcoin transactions using Lightning Network are settled in millisec-
onds, rather than minutes, while HTLCs are cleared without committing
transactions to a block.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Lightning Network
• Granularity A Lightning Network permits payments at least as small as
the bitcoin "dust" limit, maybe even smaller.
• Capacity A Lightning Network increases the capacity of the bitcoin system
by several orders of magnitude. There is no practical upper bound to
the number of payments per second that can be routed over a Lightning
Network, as it depends only on the capacity and speed of each node.
• Trustless Operation A Lightning Network utilizes bitcoin transactions
between nodes that operate as peers without trusting each other. So, a
Lightning Network preserves the principles of the bitcoin system, while
expanding its operating parameters signiﬁcantly [Ant14]
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Problem Description
and Related Work
In this Chapter, we will analyze the problem description and the related work
in more details.
The problem that this thesis aims to analyze is the recovery of the unspent
bitcoins stuck inside the Lightning Network after a wallet failure (e.g. lost or
corrupted transaction data put into the wallet storage).
A user with Bitcoin wallet may use the traditional cryptographic seed and the
BIP32 address derivation, presented in Section 3.6.2, to recover the UTXO
on the Blockchain. On the opposite, the Lightning Network does not use any
distributed ledger, so the loss of all own data implies the loss of all own channel
funds.
This problem has been faced in literature, and there are also diﬀerent ap-
plications that try to solve it. In the next sections, we will analyze these
proposed solutions, and then we will reformulate our goals, based on what has
been already done and what is needed.
The solutions that we will analyze in the next sections are:
• Eltoo
• Electrum Wallet
• Lightning Wallet based on Olympus server
• Piln
5.1
Related Work
5.1.1
Eltoo
Eltoo is a new protocol for payment channels and was proposed by Christian
Decker, Rusty Russel and Olaoluwa Osuntokun in [decker2018Eltoo]. This
solution oﬀers some starting points in order to solve the proposed problem.
Eltoo is a very recent improvement on Poon-Dryja channels, which aimed
to improve the eﬃciency of the network, by applying the following principles:
• The two sides of a channel shares the same commitment
• Using of a new Opcode (operation code) on the Blockchain
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Problem Description and Related Work
This does not only make the setup of payment channels more eﬃcient but
removes some of the complexities in maintaining a Lightning Network node as
an end user [Ant].
The problem that Eltoo tries to solve is how to guarantee that an old state may
not be broadcast to the Blockchain, once it has been replaced. In the Lightning
Network, all updates happen oﬀ-chain, so it is necessary for Blockchain to have
a way to evaluate all sides of the transactions before making a ﬁnal conﬁrmation.
In order to solve this issue, in Eltoo every state is composed of two trans-
actions:
• An update transaction, that spends the previous contract’s output to
generate a new output
• A settlement transaction, that splits the funds based on the agreed upon
distribution
Both the two types of transactions are shown in Figure 5.1. In Eltoo, the new
update transaction may be attached to a conﬁgurable timeout. In this way,
the participants have to agree on an update before the timeout expires, other-
wise, they will create a new update transaction, spending the previous output
and double-spending the corresponding settlement, so eﬀectively invalidating it.
Figure 5.1: In Eltoo protocol the intermediate states can be skipped by rebind-
ing a later update transaction to an earlier one, or directly to the
setup transaction.[decker2018Eltoo].
The repeated invalidation of prior state to agree on a new state builds a
long chain of update transactions, which terminate by the latest settlement
transaction. To solve this issue, Eltoo permits to skip intermediate updates,
basically connecting the ﬁnal update transaction to the contract creation.
To this aim, the authors propose a new SIGHASH ﬂag, SIGHASH_NOINPUT,
which permits a transaction input to be bound to any transaction output with a
matching script. In fact, all output scripts of prior update transaction outputs
match later input scripts, in this way it is possible to bind a later update
to any prior update, to skip any number of intermediate updates. Thus, to
implement Eltoo, it is necessary to do a minor change to Bitcoin, adding the
SIGHASH_NOINPUT ﬂag for signatures.
Compare to the Lightning paper [PD16], that uses LN-penalty to punish
a misbehaving party, Eltoo simply enforces the latest agreed-upon state of
the oﬀ-chain contract. In this way, it is possible to eliminate all transactions
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Related Work
43
belonging to outdated states. Therefore Eltoo reduces the amount of data
stored by the nodes and the footprint on the network.
As the development of our solution, the main advantage the Eltoo brings
is the shared status between the two parties. In this way, if one of the two sides
loses all own status channel data, it may verify on the blockchain the nodes
with which it has a Lightning channel, and then request to the counterparts
the common status.
This scenario assumed that the counterpart is cooperative and help the unlucky
node to recover own data. But, what could it happen if the counterpart is
malicious?
Scenario:
Let suppose that two users Alice and Bob, are using Eltoo protocol.
Alice loses all her status channels. Eltoo is based on common share transaction
between two nodes, so Alice simply asks Bob to recover own previous status
and not risk to have an LN-penalty.
Problem:
This could be a very useful solution, but, unfortunately, presents
key vulnerabilities. The biggest one comes from the case that an adversarial
node, in this case, Bob doesn’t respond with the latest channel status to Alice,
providing instead a previous one. The LN-Penalty fee, involuntary triggered by
Alice, represents an economic incentive for Bob to act adversarially. In fact, if
Alice broadcast the transaction to the Blockchain, it simply acts as malicious
node and Bob can obtain all the funds of channels.
5.1.2
Electrum Wallet
The problem to oﬀer a mechanism of back up in Lightning Network was analyzed
also by Electrum Wallet. Electrum is a software that permits to have wallet
created to be used in Bitcoin network, Figure 5.2. In 2017, it has began to
develop a wallet dedicated to Lightning Network, available for all users [Kon].
The aim of this wallet is to solve three current problems connected to Lightning
Network wallet:
• Backup of the entire Lightning Wallet (the problem addressed in this
thesis)
• The lightning nodes have to have the entire Blockchain, to be aware of
each transaction happened on-chain in the Bitcoin network
• The Lignting Network wallet has to be online often, to monitor the open
channels to avoid frauds
To solve the backup problem, Electrum Lightning Network wallet considers to
send all data to a third party which oﬀers an on-cloud service, and all data
stored of the user are encrypted. In this case, if the device is damaged or is
lost, the user can recover all own data of the wallet including the open wallet,
without that the service on-cloud knows anything about the user information.
Problem: As presented in Electrum Lightning Network wallet, the backup
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Problem Description and Related Work
Figure 5.2: Electrum Bitcoin Wallet [Gmb].
problem can be solved using an on-cloud service. This solution causes a central-
ization of the network, against the distributed nature of Bitcoin. Moreover, a
number of security threats are associated with cloud data services:
• Traditional security threats, such as network eavesdropping, illegal inva-
sion, and denial of service attacks
• Speciﬁc cloud computing threats, such as side-channel attacks, virtualiza-
tion vulnerabilities, and abuse of cloud services.
Thus, this solution would not guarantee a secure service and also it would make
the system centralized [Lui].
5.1.3
Lightning Wallet: An Android phone application
The Lightning wallet is an android application, that permits to use Lightning
Network wallet on own phone and relies on a server, called Olympus. The
Lightning wallet does not depend on or ever shares any personally identifying
information with Olympus and is designed to remain functional even when
Olympus server goes oﬄine.
One of the services that Olympus server permits to have is storing encrypted
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Reformulate the problem
45
payment channel backups which can be used to reimburse locked channel bal-
ance if the user loses access to own phone.
The application uses a mechanism, called double backup strategy: two copies of
encrypted channel data are saved on both Olympus server and on user’s Google
Drive. The user may utilize own mnemonic phrase as an encryption key, in
order to obtain and decrypt own channel backups.
This service is not for free and a Lightning payment is automatically made by
the Lightning wallet in exchange when the ﬁrst payment channel is created. A
requirement is that the peer, on the other side of the lost channel, has to be
online and well-behaving to receive the recovery request, and initiate a remotely
forced channel closure. In fact, both the peers have the option to forcefully
close an opened payment channel, without the other’s permission [Wal].
Problem : As in the solution presented in Section 5.1.2, the Lightning wallet
application foresee a centralization of Bitcoin, utilizing external services as
Olympus and Google Drive. On the other hand, it is interesting how this
application utilizes the mnemonic seed, presented in Section 3.6.3, in order to
access to the service.
5.1.4
Piln
A further solution is proposed by Piln, a prepaid IPFS pinning service. The
InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) is a protocol and network designed to create
a content addressable, a peer-to-peer method of storing and sharing hashed
hypermedia ﬁles in a distributed ﬁle system [Fin].
Even if the service, oﬀering by Piln, was available until January 8, 2019,
this technology may oﬀer some idea for our solution. The use of Piln was anony-
mously and instantaneously, and it was created for the Bitcoin payments over the
Lightning Network. Piln established to upload a ﬁle to IPFS through an API or
a website like https://globalupload.io/ and then visit https://piln.xyz/
to pay for hosting. Therefore, the user might utilize this service to memorize
all the status channel for a backup purpose. This service provided a service to
store any data for any period of time, given the amount that the client pays.
The list of pinned objects was public and everyone might extend the pinning
time of any object.
5.2
Reformulate the problem
Analyzing the literature, it is possible to aﬃrm that there is not a solution
that solves complete the issue and respects the decentralized nature of Bitcoin
technology.
I have seen an opportunity within the new mechanism Eltoo, which expects
the two nodes of an open channel to share the same state (or commitments)
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Problem Description and Related Work
for their unspent bitcoins. By leveraging Eltoo, one of the two nodes could try
to recover missing data from the counterpart, since its unspent bitcoins are
stored inside the same commitment. This could be a very useful solution, but,
unfortunately, as we have seen in Section 5.1.1, it presents key vulnerabilities.
Moreover, our idea of leveraging Eltoo to mitigate the issue is still missing
remediation comparable to the mentioned seed + BIP32 recovery which is
provided today by any Bitcoin deterministic wallet.
5.3
Goals
Once analyzing the literature and the existing solutions to the addressed problem,
we have deﬁned the goals that our solution aims to satisfy:
• Maintaining the decentralization nature of Bitcoin, so not relying on
on-cloud or another external service
• It has to guarantee the anonymity of each single user
• It has to guarantee the integrity and the conﬁdentiality of data
• It has to be easy to implement and relying on concepts and mechanisms
already presented in Lightning Network
• It has to guarantee an immediate recovery service
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Methodology
Bitcoin is the results of the combination of three enormous ﬁelds: Game Theory,
Economic and Cryptography. To understand Bitcoin and Lightning completely,
it was crucial to learn how to think in game theory terms, in economic terms
and in term of computer security, so also in cryptography.
In our research, we have used mainly the game theory and the cryptogra-
phy concepts, leaving aside the economic aspect not confront in our work.
6.1
Game Theory
The game theory is a ﬁeld of applied mathematics, that oﬀers tools for studying
situations in which parties, called players, make decisions that are interdepen-
dent [Mye13]. The key pioneers of game theory were mathematicians John von
Neumann and John Nash in 1944, as well as economist Oskar Morgenstern [Inv].
The aim of this science is analyzing the interdependence strategies to analyze
the other player’s possible decisions.
One of the most important concepts in game theory is the so-called the Nash
Equilibrium, named after the late mathematician John Forbes Nash Jr. The aim
is giving a solution for a non-cooperative game involving two or more players in
which each player is supposed to know the equilibrium strategies of the other
players, and no player has anything to gain by changing only their own strategy
[OR94].
6.1.1
Nash equilibrium
We can deﬁne the Nash equilibrium, as follow:
If each player has chosen a strategy, and no player can beneﬁt by
changing strategies while the other players keep theirs unchanged,
then the current set of strategy choices and their corresponding
payoﬀs constitutes a Nash equilibrium [Lev].
To simplify, suppose to have two players, Alice and Bob, we may aﬃrm that
Alice and Bob are in Nash equilibrium if Alice is making the best decision she
can, taking into account Bob’s decision while Bob’s decision remains unchanged,
and Bob is making the best decision he can, taking into account Alice’s decision
while Alice’s decision remains unchanged.
Therefore, a group of players are in Nash equilibrium if each one is making the
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Methodology
best decision possible, taking into account the decisions of the others in the
game as long as the other parties’ decisions remain unchanged.
The Nash equilibrium is used to analyze the outcome of the strategic interaction
of several players, that means what will happen if several people are making
decisions at the same time and if the outcome for each of them depends on the
decisions of the others. John Nash’s idea may show that one cannot predict the
result of the choices of multiple decision makers, if one analyzes those decisions
in isolation.
6.1.2
Game theory and cryptocurrency
Game theory in cryptocurrency all has to do with incentives within the system:
if you break a rule within the algorithm’s system, there has to be a consequence
that far outweighs the beneﬁt. This is called asymmetrical design and aims to
disincentivise bad actors to work against a system.
In this way, attacks inside Bitcoin such as double spend attack, made by a miner
or the 51% attack, by multiple miners might be avoided on the Bitcoin network.
If a minor attempts to do this, they will devalue their mining investment. In fact,
they lose their mined Bitcoins and are not rewarded for completing transactions.
Therefore, miners are incentivised to be good actors on the network and this is
the essence of game-theory science [Can].
6.2
Cryptography
In Bitcoin, diﬀerent techniques of cryptography are utilized, which make up
the essence of this cryptocurrency.
Public key cryptography
When a user sends bitcoin to his/her counterpart, he/she creates a message
(transaction), attaching the new owner’s public key to the number of coins, and
sign it with own private key. When the transaction is broadcast to the bitcoin
network, each node may know that the new owner these coins are the owner
of the new key. The signature veriﬁes for everyone that the message is authentic.
Block-chaining
In order to preserve the integrity of the Blockchain, every block in the chain
conﬁrms the integrity of the previous one. Since the record insertion is costly
because each block must have speciﬁc requirements, this makes it diﬃcult to
generate a valid block.
Hashcash
Hashcash is a cryptographic hash-based proof-of-work algorithm that requires a
selectable amount of work to compute, it is the ﬁrst secure eﬃciently veriﬁable
cost-function or proof-of-work function.
The advantage of hashcash is that is non-interactive and there is no a central
authority that manages secret keys. It uses symmetric key cryptography, that
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Lightning Network Community
49
is a namely one-way hashcash function, typically either SHA-1 and SHA-256.
In Bitcoin, the SHA256 is used as the underlying cryptographic hash function.
It takes as input data and transforms it, in an eﬀectively-impossible to reverse
or to predict way, into a relatively compact string (the hash is 32 bytes in case
of SHA-256). In this way, nobody can have the same hash value if the inputs
are diﬀerent. Bitcoin blocks can be identiﬁed by their hash, which serves the
dual purpose of identiﬁcation as well as integrity veriﬁcation.
6.3
Lightning Network Community
During this project, I could receive feedback and suggestions, writing to the mail-
ing list of the Lightning Network Community (https://lists.linuxfoundation.
org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev). In this way, I could ensure that the
project accurately reﬂects the requirements and needs of the community.
This work is the results of a constant correspondence, that permits me to
increase my knowledge of the technology, keep up with the newest upgrades
and improve continuously my solution. I had also the possibility to participate
to the Lightning Hackday in New York on 27th- 28th October 2018, where I
could talk with the most expert people of the ﬁeld about my thesis and it was
crucial for receiving feedbacks for my research.
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
The solution: Açai
Protocol
This chapter aims to present the Açai Protocol, our proposed solution to guar-
antee a backup service in Lightning Network (Chapter 4).
The chapter is organized to show all the steps that conducted us to ﬁnal-
ize the solution. In the next sections, we’ll present three solutions that we have
developed.
The ﬁrst solution utilizes connected nodes as lockbox of backup, whereas the
second solution uses the Watchtowers to guarantee a recovery mechanism. We
will explore these two solutions through diﬀerent use cases, explaining how they
work, their advantages and what makes impracticable their implementations.
In order to solve these drawbacks, we will develop a third and ﬁnal solution,
called Açai protocol, that we may consider as an improvement of the two ﬁrst
proposals. We will analyze the main aspects and we will demonstrate why this
last solution is able to solve the problem presented in Chapter 5.
In the next sections, we will consider the network represented in Figure 7.1,
where the node of Alice is connected by payment channels to Bob, Charlie and
Eve nodes.
Figure 7.1: Network Features.
==PAGE:62==
52
7 The solution: Açai Protocol
7.1
What is missing in Eltoo
Let consider Eltoo, the protocol presented in Section 5.1.1. As we have seen,
Eltoo allows to share the same information between the two counterparts of a
payment channel. In this section, we aim to demonstrate why Eltoo is not suﬃ-
cient to recover the lost wallets. Suppose to have a payment channel between
Alice and Bob and the software running Alice’s wallet fails, losing all her status
channel information. The following detailed use case documents this possible
scenario.
Use Case: Backup through Eltoo protocol
Name: Backup through Eltoo protocol
Summary: Use Eltoo protocol to recover the channel status in case of wallet
failure
Actors: Alice
Preconditions:
• Alice has an open payment channel with Bob, using Eltoo protocol.
• Bob must be online and available to send the latest channel status to
Alice.
• Alice has lost the most recent status channels, due to a wallet failure.
Main Scenario:
1. Alice asks to one of the counterparts her last status channel.
2. The counterpart receives the request and is in capable to provide the
requested data.
3. The counterpart sends to Alice the data about their status channel.
4. Alice recovers the status channel thank to the selected counterpart.
Alternative Scenarios:
1. The counterpart sends to Alice an obsolete status which was previously
valid, to trigger the protocol penalty (Section 4.5) and steal all the
funds in the channel.
• Alice has no way to verify if data provided from the counterpart
is correct, since the channel data is not written anywhere else.
As it is demonstrated in the alternative scenario and also in 5.1.1, Eltoo does not
solve the case in which Bob is not cooperative and sends a wrong status to Al-
ice. If this happens, Alice might trigger the protocol penalty without knowing it.
Thus, Eltoo alone may not solve the problem completely, even if the pos-
==PAGE:63==
7.2 Nodes as lockbox of Backup
53
sibility to have a shared common state between the two nodes might be useful
in order to have the same status for both the nodes.
To mitigate this problem, we have developed three possible solutions.
7.2
Nodes as lockbox of Backup
The ﬁrst idea that we have developed was using the other connected nodes as a
lockbox of back-up of own recent status.
Let consider that a node, called Alice is connected through payment chan-
nels to nodes Bob, Charlie and Eve (Figure 7.1).
We may formalize the idea as follows:
If a node Alice is connected to Bob, Charlie and Eve, for each transaction
between Alice and Bob, Alice sends encrypted information, regarding the new
backup of all her status channel, to Charlie and Eve. For each commitment
transaction with Charlie, Alice sends encrypted information, backup of
all her status channel, to Bob and Eve. Finally, for each commitment
transaction with Eve, Alice sends encrypted information, regarding the last
backup of all her status channel, to Bob and Charlie.
Thus, Alice uses the connected nodes as lockbox for backup. Moreover, the
data are encrypted with the public key of Alice, so just Alice can decrypt the
information, Figure 7.2. It is important to note, that as it is possible to observe
in the ﬁgure, Alice sends to Charlie her status with Bob and Eve, and not the
status with him. This is a further security protection, since Charlie has not the
possibility to send to Alice a previous backup, diﬀerent from the last one, more
favourable for him. In this way, if Alice sends her back up to Charlie, this one
memorizes her data, without reading or modifying it.
Figure 7.2: Nodes as lockbox of Backup. Alice and Bob change their status
channel, Alice sends to Charlie and Eve the new backup.
Therefore, for each transaction, a new backup is created, encrypted with the
==PAGE:64==
54
7 The solution: Açai Protocol
private key of the owner and sent to the connected nodes.
In this way, if Alice loses her wallets, she may ask the information to the other
connected nodes and update her status. To guarantee the service, for each
request of information Alice has to pay a small fee to her connected nodes. This
solution reduces the probability of successful attacks by Eve, because other
nodes will provide additional proof on the channel status between Alice and
Eve.
7.2.1
Privacy and costs
This solution has two main disadvantages:
• Privacy
• Expensive costs
Privacy
First, this solution may be considered against privacy. In fact, the other nodes
may know when the "unlucky" node has lost all status channels data and use this
information at their advantage, providing a previous version of the encrypted
backup. To solve this lack of privacy, Alice might ask regularly to the other
nodes a backup of her status, for example every time she connects to Lightning
Network, in this way she may put to test her counterparts and verify that the
data are correct. In negative case, she may identify her counterpart as not
trusted and closes the channel with him.
Expensive Costs
As regarding the second disadvantage, to decrease the costs, it is not necessary
to ask information to all nodes every time. For example, consider the network
in Figure 7.2.
• Each transaction with Bob, Alice sends the backup to Charlie and Eve.
• Each transaction with Charlie, Alice sends the backup to Bob and Eve
• Each transaction with Eve, Alice sends the backup to Bob and Charlie
Therefore, if Alice needs to recover the status with Charlie, she may simply ask
to Bob or Eve, and not to both of them. For instance, she might ask Bob the
status with Charlie, to Charlie the status with Eve, to Eve the status with Bob
and every time change this order. On the other hand, it is necessary to send
information every time to all nodes, so if one of the channels will be closed,
there is no risk to lose data.
7.2.2
Assumptions
To develop this solution, we have made the following assumptions:
• A node has to be connected to at least two nodes. For example, Alice has
to be connected to Bob and Charlie, this allows that for each transaction
with Charlie she may send the backup to Bob, and vice-versa.
==PAGE:65==
7.2 Nodes as lockbox of Backup
55
• We presume that Alice maintains mnemonic seed ( Section 3.6.3) in a safe
place, in order to never lose it. Only in this way, Alice is able to connects
to the Blockchain, know her connected nodes and ask to the the backup.
7.2.3
Use cases
In this Section, we’ll present a possible scenario, demonstrating which problems
this solution might present.
Use Case: Backup through connected nodes
Name: Backup through connected nodes
Summary: Recovery the channel status with Bob in case of wallet failure
through connected node Charlie.
Actors: Alice
Preconditions:
• Alice has a payment channel, with Bob, Charlie and Eve.
• The counterpart has to be online and receive the request of Alice.
• Alice has lost the most recent status channels, due to a wallet failure.
Main Scenario:
1. Alice asks Charlie her last status channel.
2. The counterpart receives the request.
3. The counterpart sends to Alice the data about their status channel.
4. Alice recovers the status channel with the selected counterpart.
Alternative Scenarios:
1. The counterpart sends to Alice, not the most recent status, but instead
it sends a previously shared status more favourable for him/her.
• Alice believes that the status sent by her counterpart is correct,
even if it is not favourable for her.
7.2.4
Why we discarded this solution
As it is shown in the use case, a possible problem of this solution is that the node,
in this case, Alice, has to be connected to at least two nodes and, moreover, the
connected nodes might be oﬄine, so they might not guarantee an immediate
backup service. To solve this problem, we’ve decided to maintain the same
design, but instead of using normally connected nodes, we move our focus on
full node always online. For this reason, we have seen a possibility on the
mechanism of Watchtowers.
==PAGE:66==
56
7 The solution: Açai Protocol
7.3
Introducing Watchtowers as a mechanism
of backup
Hence, to solve the problem of the previous solution, we have decided to consider
Watchtowers, full nodes that provide, in exchange of micropayments, the storage
of encrypted Eltoo channel state, without being able to access them. In Light-
ning Network, Watchtowers are designed to broadcast, on the Blockchain, the
latest channel status if an adversarial node tries to spend an old commitment,
exploiting the oﬄine state of its counterpart.
As Tadge Dryja said in [Dry], the price of scalability is having an eternal
vigilance inside the network, this solution provides a form of vigilance inside
the Lightning Network when a node is not online. This concept brings to
create the idea of the Watchtower, as a service which is always online and
watching for channel breaches even at times when your wallet is oﬄine. Further
exploring upcoming Lightning Network features, the Watchtowers, as have been
outlined so far, will provide a protection service to oﬄine nodes, by storing
their encrypted commitments.
In the solution, we will adopt two new concepts of Lightning Network:
• Eltoo
• Watchtowers
We will leverage the availability of Watchtowers to store further data, that will
be used to verify the integrity of Eve and other counterparts. A Watchtower
does not have any economical incentives to cheat Alice, so it represents an
useful defence resource. In our solution, we will add another function to the
Watchtowers, that is a mechanism of backup.
To simplify, let consider a
Watchtower simply as a full node that is constantly online, not considering the
mechanism of monitoring status channel, in order to focus just on the solution
of our problem.
7.3.1
Design
In this solution, we introduce two new concepts using to send and request the
backup:
• nonce-time Tn, as the current value of nonce-time (sequential integer
number that deﬁnes the order of the backups)
• payload P, {zip(T1), T1, Alice} pk(Alice), that consists of
1. a zip of all status channels of Alice at a speciﬁc time T1
2. the nonce-time correspond to the time T1 of status contained in the
zip
3. the owner of the back up, e.g. Alice
This payload is encrypted by the public key of Alice, so the Watchtowers
cannot know the status channel of Alice.
==PAGE:67==
7.3 Introducing Watchtowers as a mechanism of backup
57
To explain the design, let consider the Figure 7.1, where Alice has Eltoo channels
with Bob, Charlie, Eve, and three Watchtowers W0, W1 and W2.
The idea is not sent all data to all Watchtowers, but instead just send the actual
nonce-time and the actual payload to one of the Watchtower, and send just the
new nonce-time to the others. In this way, we may split the data into the three
Watchtowers.
How to send data to the Watchtowers
In this section we’ll list all the steps that Alice does every time that she change
a status channel with one of her connected nodes:
1. Let suppose that Alice and Bob change their status channel.
2. Alice sends the new status to the Watchtowers W0 and shares the current
nonce-time with W1 and W2.
3. When Alice sends her information to the three Watchtowers, these memo-
rize the node, current nonce-time, payload:
W0:
Alice
T0
P0
W1:
Alice
T0
-
W2:
Alice
T0
-
4. Alice and Charlie change the status of their channel.
5. So, Alice sends the new status to W1 and sends the new nonce-time
to the others, which substitute the previous current nonce-time in the
information of Alice:
W0:
Alice
T1
P0
W1:
Alice
T1
P1
W2:
Alice
T1
-
6. Alice and Eve change the status of their channel.
7. Alice sends the new status to W2 and sends the new nonce-time to the
others:
W0:
Alice
T2
P0
W1:
Alice
T2
P1
W2:
Alice
T2
P2
==PAGE:68==
58
7 The solution: Açai Protocol
8. Alice and Charlie change again the status of the channel.
9. Alice sends the new status to W1 and upgrades the nonce in the others:
W0:
Alice
T3
P3
W1:
Alice
T3
P1
W2:
Alice
T3
P2
We assume that each Watchtower is used by more than one nodes, as result we
might represent the data stored by watchtower, e.g. W0, as in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Data stored by Watchtower W0.
How to request back up to the Watchtowers
In this Section, we will list all the steps that Alice has to do every time that
she needs to request back up to the connected Watchtowers.
1. When Alice needs to have the backup of all her data, she has to ask all her
connected Watchtowers the information related to her node. For example,
taking the last example above:
W0 sends
{Alice, T3, P3} to Alice
W1 sends
{Alice, T3, P1} to Alice
W2 sends
{Alice, T3, P2} to Alice
2. Alice analyzes the information sent by W2. She notices that the payload
contains the nonce T2, whereas the new nonce-time is T3.
3. Then, she notices that the payload sent by W1 corresponds to T1, but
the nonce is T3.
4. When Alice analyzes the information sent by W0, she analyzes that the
Payload corresponds to T3, that is also the last nonce-time.
==PAGE:69==
7.3 Introducing Watchtowers as a mechanism of backup
59
5. Alice knows her last status.
7.3.2
Security
Since all the Watchtowers stores the current time-nonce and the payload is
encrypted with the public key of Alice, we may avoid the following situations:
• A Watchtower sends an older payload instead of the last one. The payload
has to contain the current time-nonce to be considered the last one, each
payload with a nonce time older are not considered.
• If the Watchtower W0 with the last payload P3, sends a previous backup
P0 and the current nonce time is T3, it is possible to discover the malicious
activity. If W1 has the payload P1, the W2 has the payload P2 and the
current nonce-time is T3, we could conclude that W0 contains P3 and is
cheating.
• If one of the Watchtowers, W3 decides to change the nonce-time, for
example from T3 to T5 and send to Alice T5 with the payload. Alice can
think that the actual time-nonce is T5, but no one of the Watchtowers
contains a payload corresponding to the state T5. This sort of misbe-
haviour is solved from the majority, e.g. if 2/3 nodes conﬁrm that the
actual nonce-time is T3, Alice considers this last nonce-time as the last
one and not T5. The attack can happen just if the 51% of the Watchtower
agree to cheat and send to Alice another nonce-time.
7.3.3
Fee
Every time that the node Alice requests data to the Watchtower for the backup,
she sends it a small fee through the Lightning channel. This money encourages
the Watchtowers to guarantee the service every time, as the nodes in the solution
presented in Section 7.2.
7.3.4
Why we discarded this solution
Despite the advantages, this solution has a crucial drawback. In fact, since we
use a public key to encrypt the data, another node can personify Alice and send
a forged payload to a Watchtower, since the ‘channel_id‘ is immaterial. Hence,
all an attacker has to do is corrupt the backup data, and modify it with data
that is favourable for him.
With corrupted backup data, the operation of Alice is doomed and irrecoverable,
especially if private keys or even just derivation paths are part of the backed-up
data.
In order to solve this disadvantage, we will apply the use of Watchtower and
utilize them for a backup mechanism, without the use of a public key.
==PAGE:70==
60
7 The solution: Açai Protocol
7.4
Açai Protocol
This solution, named Açai Protocol after the controversial berry fruit, as the
previous solution aims to use the Watchtowers not just for monitoring the
channels, but also as a backup service. It applies some minor modiﬁcations to
the standard protocol, therefore more eﬃcient than the previous solution.
From the problems presented in Section 7.3.4, we have decided to improve the
solution and eliminate the use of a public key that can identify the node using
the service. We have preferred trying to use the same mechanism, that the
Watchtowers utilize for the monitoring of the channel status, to guarantee a
service of backup.
For this reason, in the following Section, we will analyze in more details
the mechanism of Watchtowers and then subsequently the design of the Açai
Protocol.
7.4.1
The Watchtower blob recovery method
To analyze the mechanism of Watchtowers, suppose to have a circumstance
where Alice has open channels with Bob, Charlie, Eve and is using 3 Watchtow-
ers: W0, W1 and W2.
Eve, exploiting the situation of Alice being oﬄine or unable to broadcast her
commitments might try to broadcast an older channel state to the Blockchain,
essentially stealing the last payment done to Alice. In this event, a Watchtower
is capable to identify this malicious transaction from the mempool(Section 3.3),
and intervene in defence of Alice when is oﬄine, sending the correct and most
recent channel state that invalidates Eve’s attack.
Alice, in order to keep the Watchtowers aware of the latest channel status,
has to send a payload made by hint and blob after every update to her com-
mitments with Bob, Charlie or Eve. The hint and the blob are stored by the
Watchtower, and they are utilized for monitoring the channels.
For example, the sequence of events after a Lightning payment between Alice
and Bob is:
• Change of the channel status between Alice and Bob (a new Eltoo com-
mitment is signed).
• Alice calculates the variable ‘hint’ by truncating the commitment hash
(which is also the txid): hint = tixd[:16]
• Alice calculates the payload ‘blob’ by encrypting the commitment itself,
using the hash of txid as the symmetric key: blob = Enc(data, txid[16:])
• Alice sends (hint, blob) to one of the Watchtowers W0, W1 or W2.
Therefore, some of the Watchtowers are storing the information that Alice needs
in case of failure, without the adversarial risks from asking this data to Bob,
Charlie or (worse) Eve as proposed in Section 7.2.
==PAGE:71==
7.4 Açai Protocol
61
7.4.2
Açai Protocol design
In this section, we will present the Açai Protocol. This solution aims to use the
Watchtowers not just for monitoring the channels, but also as a backup service,
without letting the Watchtower itself knowing that the stored Blob is eﬀectively
the Açai payload or a normal commitment.
This protocol adopts the same concepts of txid, hint and blob.
In order
to distinguish the two types of data payload, we’ll use a diﬀerent notation:
txidç, hintç and blobç.
Therefore:
• txid, hint and blob represent the standard format used by Alice to interact
with the Watchtowers and retrieve the normal blobs for veriﬁcation
• txidç, hintç and blobç represent the format used by Alice’s wallet to store
the data of all the txid that she is using inside the Lightning Network.
This data will be the backup in case of failure
Technically, Açai Protocol leverages the same endpoints:
• hintç = txidç[:16]
• blobç = Enc(dataç, txidç[16:])
In the Açai protocol, dataç contains information of all txid:
[txid_Bob,
txid_Charlie, txid_Eve], where txid_Bob is the hash of the Eltoo commitment
between Alice and Bob.
Therefore, once Alice retrieved and decoded her Açai blob, she is able to re-
cover the list of the regular blobs previously stored inside the Watchtowers.
Every time that a channel changes its state, Alice sends to one of the three
Watchtowers W0, W1 or W2 (randomly chosen) two diﬀerent payloads: the
channel state information (hint, blob), and the Açai blob (hintç, blobç) con-
taining the updated list of txid. Note that the Watchtowers will store both the
standard blobs (hint, blob) and the Açai blob (hintç, blobç), without being able
to distinguish them. We can imply that an Açai’s blobç has length and size
comparable to standard Watchtowers blobs. Therefore, Açai Protocol stores
the back up inside a properly crafted blob, using hints as unique data pointers
and the Watchtowers for the backup itself.
The problem is not completely solved: we need a technique for the wallet
to recover the txidç, and so the hintç correspond to the last backup, to be used
to receive the blobç containing dataç.
Taking inspiration from Lightning Wallet: An Android phone application (Sec-
tion ??), we decided to use the BIP39 mnemoninc key (Section 3.6.3) that
allow to restore own Bitcoin wallet. We deﬁne txidç as the obtained public key
through BIP32 8.3 function, calculating with the node seed and the following
derivation path (Section 3.6.2):
==PAGE:72==
62
7 The solution: Açai Protocol
Derivation Path= m’/108’/0(mainnet)/(account number)’/0/Current_Blockheight
Where 108 is an arbitrary purpose number, and account number is needed to
match the wallet subject to restore process.
In the next two sections, we will analyze all the steps how Alice sends data to
the Watchtowers and how she requests her backup.
7.4.3
Scenario 1: Send the backup to the Watchtower
Scenario: After payment to Bob, the channel state changed, so Alice has to send
the new channel information (hint, blob) and the new backup (hintç, blobç) to
Watchtower W0.
Steps:
1. To generate txidç, which represent the key to identify and decrypt blobç,
Alice uses its deterministic wallet address function, applying the current
Block height to generate the derivation Path (Section 3.6.2).
Derivation Path= m’/108’/0(mainnet)/(account number Alice)’/0/Current_Blockheight
Where 108 is an arbitrary purpose number, and account number is needed
to match the wallet subject to restore process.
2. Calculate the txidç_n.
Since it is possible for Alice to perform n payments in the same Block-
height, we must enumerate each new state of the Açai backup inside the
same Blockheight as: txidç_0, txidç_1, txidç_2, txidç_3...txidç_n
Therefore, we can assume that we need to change the hintç while keeping
the same Blockheight in the BIP32 derivation function, so:
txidç_0= 2SHA256(pub-key)
As soon as Alice needs to update her Açai backup, but the Blockheight is
not yet changed, we can apply the following rule: the txidç_n is calculated
as the hash function of the previous txidç_n-1.
For example:
txidç_1= SHA256(txidç_0)
txidç_2= SHA256(txidç_1)
txidç_3= SHA256(txidç_2)
.....
==PAGE:73==
7.4 Açai Protocol
63
3. Truncate the txidç_n into hintç_n= txidç_n[:16] and encrypt blobç_n=
Enc(dataç_n,txidç_n[16:])
4. Send hintç_n and the blobç_n to Watchtower W0, with the information
of the new channel status (hint,blob).
The Figure 7.4 shows the activity diagram for this scenario. Therefore, after
a change of a channel status, Alice has to calculate a public key, through the
Derivation Path and her seed. Then she calculates the txid_ç, through the
function SHA256 on the public key. Through the found value, she calculates the
hint_ç and blob_ç. Blob_ç cointaind the data regarding the channels status
of Alice, encrypted with txid_ç[16:] and she sends the values to one of the
Watchtowers, that stores them.
Figure 7.4: Activity Diagram of Send Data to the Watchtower.
7.4.4
Scenario 2: How to request backup to the
Watchtowers
Scenario: Alice may request the backup when she has lost all her data acci-
dentally or otherwise she requests the backup to the Watchtower every time
she connects to her Lightning node. In this way, she is able to check that the
Watchtowers are storing real data and they are providing the promised service.
Steps:
1. Ask to the connected nodes the current Blockheight. Note that the nodes
cannot cheat, otherwise they could be excluded by the network.
==PAGE:74==
64
7 The solution: Açai Protocol
2. Use the Blockheight and the seed to calculate the deterministic pub-key:
address= m/108’/0(mainnet)’/(account number’)/0/Current_Blockheight.
3. Calculate txidç_0 = 2SHA256(pub-key) and the hintç_0=txidç_0[:16]
4. Ask to W0, W1 and W2 Watchtowers to retrieve hintç_0.
• case a: If one of the Watchtowers contains the hintç_0, it could also
contain hintç_1 (case of more than one transaction in the same Block).
Therefore, Alice’s wallet calculates txidç_1=SHA256(txidç_0) and
asks the Watchtowers if one of them contains the hintç_1. If one
has the hintç_1, calculate txidç_2 and hintç_2 and so on. If no one
has hintç_2, we can assume that txidç_1 contain the latest channel
state so Alice can decrypt blolbç_1 and extract the list of txid.
• case b: If no one of the Watchtowers provides hintç_0, we can assume
that Alice doesn’t have any transactions at the current Block height.
In this case, Alice’s wallet generates a new pub-key, decreasing
the block height by one: pub-key = m/108’/0(mainnet)’/(account
number)’/0/(Current_Blockheight-1). Once generated, Alice’s wallet
calculates hintç_0 and proceed as in the case a.
5. When Alice’s wallet ﬁnds her hintç_n, she requests to the Watchtower
to send the correspond blobç_n. The blobç is composed by dataç and
txidç[:16], where dataç=[txid_Bob, txid_Charlie, txid_Eve]
6. From dataç, Alice can recover the txid_Blob. then she can calculate
the hint_Bob=txid_Blob[:16] and ask the Watchtowers which one has
that value and requests the corresponding blob_Bob. Since Alice knows
txid_Blob[16:], she is able to get the data inside blob_Bob and recover
the status channel with Bob. The same happens with the recovery of the
status channel with Charlie and Eve.
7. At this point, Alice is able to check that her data match the ones stored
in the Watchtowers, or otherwise recovery her data.
The Figure 7.5, shows the activity diagram for this second scenario.
7.4.5
Assumptions
To achieve the solution, we assumed :
• Fees: Watchtowers model still needs a form of trustless payment to be
economically viable, e.g. to cover the extra storage and bandwidth for
the service (both for the normal service and the Açai backup)
• Memory: The Açai data stored in the watchtowers are not deleted or
substituted/tampered.
• Açai Protocol assume that Alice knows the Watchtowers she used, in
order to recover her status.
==PAGE:75==
7.5 Comparison of the three solutions
65
7.4.6
Formalization of the deﬁnition of Watchtower
In literature, there is not an oﬃcial formalization of the Watchtower, since it
is a quite new concept. For this reason, we wish to give a deﬁnition of the
Watchtower, which includes the mechanism of backup.
We deﬁne Watchtower as a full-node, always online, that can watch for channel
breaches even at times when your wallet is oﬄine, by leveraging Açai provide a
backup service if your Lightning-enabled Bitcoin Wallet needs to be recovered.
7.5
Comparison of the three solutions
In this Chapter, we will compare the tree solutions analyzed in the Sections
7.2, 7.3 and 7.4, based on the goals speciﬁed in Section 5.3.
As it is possible to observe in Figure 7.6, all of the three solutions respect
the decentralized nature of Bitcoin, in fact they do not use any on-cloud or any
other external service for back up.
As regarding the anonimity, only the Açai Procol guarantees this feature,
whereas the ﬁrst two solutions are based on the use of public key, and as it is
explained in Section 7.3.4, it might identify the node owner of backup.
All of the three solutions maintains integrity and conﬁdentiality of the data
stored. In fact, in the ﬁrst two solutions, since the backup and the payload are
encrypted with the public key of Alice, no one may modify it or read it. For
the Açai protocol, the txidç is the result of SHA256 hash function of the public
key and dataç is encoding with the value of txid[16:]. Since the hash function
is a one-way operation, it is impossible to compute the input from a particular
output, so the possibility for an attacker to modify dataç is quite minimum
(the unique way to obtain dataç is throught a brute force attack).
For the implementation, the ﬁrst two solutions are not easy to implement: the
ﬁrst one requests a modiﬁcation on Lightning Network channels to support
backup mechanism, and the second requests a new structure for the Watchtower
to implement the mechanism of Backup. For the Açai Protocol, the implemen-
tation is quite easy because the mechanism utilizes the same structure that the
Watchtower use for monitoring the channles.
Th use of Watchtowers compared to normal Lightning nodes may oﬀer an
immediate recovery service, that we obtained in the second and in the third
solution.
In conclusion, Açai Protocol is the unique solution that is able to satisfy all the
settled goals .
==PAGE:76==
66
7 The solution: Açai Protocol
Figure 7.5: Activity Diagram that shows how Alice can request Data to the
Watchtower.
==PAGE:77==
7.5 Comparison of the three solutions
67
Figure 7.6: Comparison among the three solution analyzed in Section 7.2, 7.3
and 7.4.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 8
Implementation
In this chapter, we will report a possible implementation for the Açai protocol,
presented in Chapter 7.4.
Since neither Eltoo nor watchtowers are already completely implemented in
Lightning, we have decided to create a small Java RMI project, to simulate the
communication between a Lightning node, called Alice, and the watchtower.
JAVA RMI project is a technology which permits to distributed system to
communicate through a network. The RMI is generally compromised of two
programs: a server and a client. The former creates the remote objects and
makes references to these objects accessible, and successively waits for the client
to invoke methods on these objects. The latter obtains a remote reference to
remote objects and invokes methods on them.
As simple client/server applications, we will consider a watchtower with the
mechanism of backup and monitoring channels, and our scope is implementing
the Açai Protocol. For semplicity, we consider a unique watchtower and the
implemented transaction as the ﬁrst one of the block.
In this Chapter, we will focus on how to implement the Açai Protocol, more
speciﬁcally: how to create txid_ç, hint_ç, blob_ç, how to send them to the
watchtowers, how to request them back in case of backup, and how utilizing
these information we are able to recover the status channel.
8.1
Design
Figure 8.1 shows the entire mechanism that we are going to build in our project.
Suppose to have the node Alice that use a Watchtower W1 to memorize own
data. In this system, we consider one watchtower, to simplify the project.
Moreover, we will solve the problem of hint and blob storage through a ﬁle where
the hint and the blob are memorized. The solution guarantees the integrity
and the conﬁdentiality, since just the owner node can decrypt the blob, in
fact to be able to decrypt is necessary to have the seed and the derivation
path. The communication between the node and the watchtower is through
Lightning Network. For this reason, in the implementation we consider that
the communication between the watchtower and lightning node is secure, and
the other nodes ccouldn’t steal the information. Furthermore, we will solve the
problem of hint veriﬁcation comparing the hint in the ﬁle with the received hint
from the Lightning node.
==PAGE:80==
70
8 Implementation
Figure 8.1: Entire system considered in the project..
8.1.1
Classes
In our implementation we have an interface, called WatchtowerService.java, a
Server called Server.java, an implementation class, WatchtowerServant.java and
the client ClientNode.java. First of all, when the client wants to communicate
with the Server, it has to create a remote connection with the Watchtower. Now,
the node can send the hint, blob, hint_ç and blob_ç. The Server memorizes
the data in the ﬁle. When the client node loses the information of all status
channels, it sends to the Server the hint_ç. If the Server cointains the hint_ç ,
the server sends to the client the correspond blob, which can be used to recover
all information connected to the channels.
8.2
Watchtower Server
In our implementation, the server code is composed by an interface, Watchtow-
erService.java and two classes, WatchtowerServant.java and Server.java. The
Interface deﬁnes what can be invoked from the client. Essentially, the interface
deﬁnes the client’s view of the remote object. The classes instead provides the
implementation, the connection between the client and the server and implement
a remote object. They also provides the rest of the code that composed the
server program, including the main method that creates an instance of the
remote object, registers it with the RI registry and sets up a security manager.
8.2.1
Server
An RMI server program needs to create the initial remote objects and export
them to the RMI runtime, which makes them available to receive incoming re-
mote invocations. This setup procedure can be either encapsulated in a method
of the remote object implementation class itself or included in another class
entirely. The setup procedure, in our case Server, should do the following: create
and export one or more remote objects, and register at least one remote object
with a naming service accessible through the Java Naming, for bootstrapping
purposes. The main method is used to create a WatchtowerServant instance
and make it available to the client. The main method is used to start the
WatchtowerServant and therefore needs to do the necessary initialization and
housekeeping to prepare the server to accept calls from clients. This method is
==PAGE:81==
8.2 Watchtower Server
71
not a remote method, which means that it cannot be invoked from a diﬀerent
Java virtual machine. Because the main method is declared static, the method is
not associated with an object at all but rather with the class WatchtowerServant.
Before a client can invoke a method on a remote object, it must ﬁrst ob-
tain a reference to the remote object. The system provides a particular type of
remote object, the RMI registry, for ﬁnding references to other remote objects.
The RMI registry is a simple remote object naming service that enables clients
to obtain a reference to a remote object by name. The registry is tipically
only used to locate the ﬁrst remote that an RMI client needs to use. The
java.rmi.registry. Registry remote interface is the API for binding remote ob-
jects in the registry. The java.rmi.registry.LocateRegistry class provides static
methods for synthesizing a remote reference to a registry at a particular network
address (host and port).
The class creates a name for the object: ”watchtower”. The code then adds the
name to the RMI registry running on the server.
Registry reg = LocateRegistry.createRegistry(5099);
This rebind invocation makes a remote call to the RMI registry on the lo-
cal host. The main method creates an instance of WatchtowerServant and
exports it to the RMI runtime with the following statements:
reg.rebind("watchtower", new WatchtowerServant());
Since the program register a reference to WatchtowerServant in the registry, it
is reachable from a remote client, the registry itself.
8.2.2
The remote Interface WatchtowerService
The watchtower server supports the following operations:
void memorize(String s, byte[] blob_ç) throws RemoteException, Throwable;
byte[] GetBlob(String s) throws RemoteException, Throwable;
The method memorize is utilized, to memorize in a ﬁle the pair hint and blob
sent by the client node. While, the method GetBlob is used by the Client node
to request to the Watchtower the Blob correspond to the given hint.
By extending the interface java.rmi.Remote, the WatchtowerService interface
identiﬁes itself as an interface whose methods can be invoked from another
Java virtual machine. Any object that implements this interface can be a
remote object. As a member of a remote interface, the methods are remote.
Therefore, these methods must be deﬁned as being capable of throwing a
java.rmi.RemoteException. This exception is thrown by the RMI system from
a remote method invocation to indicate that either a communication failure or
a protocol error has occurred. A RemoteException is a checked exception, so
any code invoking a remote method needs to handle this exception by either
catching it or declaring it in its throws clause.
==PAGE:82==
72
8 Implementation
8.2.3
The implementation class WatchtowerServant
The class WatchtowerServant implements a remote interface and should at least
do the following: declare the remote interface being implemented, deﬁne the
constructor for each remote object and provided an implementation for each
remote method in the remote interface.
The implementation class for the interface is declared as follows:
public class WatchtowerServant extends UnicastRemoteObject
implements WatchtowerService
This declaration states that the class implements the remote interface and
therefore can be used for a remote object. Arguments to or return values from
remote methods can be of almost any type, including local objects, remote
objects, and primitive data types. The remote objects are essentially passed by
reference. A remote object reference is a stub, which is a client-side proxy that
implements the complete set of remote interfaces that the remote interfaces
that the remote object implements.
This class implements these methods: memorize and GetBlob.
Memorize method
This method aims to store in a ﬁle, called storedFile, the pair (hint, blob) sent
by the Client Node.
public void memorize(String hint , byte[] blob) throws
RemoteException, Throwable
{
try
{
write(storedFile, hint, blob);
}
catch (IOException e)
{
e.printStackTrace();
}
}
The methods call the method write:
public void write(String f, String hint, byte[] blob) throws
IOException
{
FileWriter aWriter = new FileWriter(f, true);
String s1 = Arrays.toString(blob);
System.out.println(s1);
s1 = s1.replaceAll(" ", "");
aWriter.write(hint+ " "+ s1 +"\n");
aWriter.flush();
aWriter.close();
}
==PAGE:83==
8.2 Watchtower Server
73
The ﬁle storedFile looks as in Figure 8.2, where the ﬁrst line is divided in hint
and blob, whereas the second line with a Blob longer is hint_ç and blob_ç. As
it is possible to see, for the watchtower is not possible to distinguish between
the pair hint, blob and the pair hint_ç, blob_ç.
Figure 8.2: Stored File how it is possible to see, it is not visible the diﬀerence
between the (hint, blob) and (hint_ç, blob_ç).
Getblob method
This aims method veriﬁes if the storedFile contains the hintsend by the node
and in positive case, it sends the requested blob.
public byte[] GetBlob(String s) throws IOException
{
String hintToFind= s;
byte[] blob = null;
try
{
FileReader file = new FileReader(storedFile);
Scanner scanner = new Scanner(file);
String str= "";
System.out.println(s);
while (scanner.hasNextLine())
{
Scanner line = new Scanner(scanner.nextLine());
String str1=line.next();
System.out.println(str1);
if (str1.compareTo(hintToFind) == 0)
{
str = line.next();
str = str.replaceAll(",", ", ");
String[] byteValues = str.substring(1, str.length() - 1).split(",");
blob = new byte[byteValues.length];
for (int i=0, len=blob.length; i<len; i++)
{
blob[i] = Byte.parseByte(byteValues[i].trim());
}
}
==PAGE:84==
74
8 Implementation
line.close();
}
System.out.println(blob);
scanner.close();
}
catch(Exception e)
{}
return blob;
}
8.3
Client Node
The client constructs a name to use to look up a Watchtower remote Object,
using the name used by WatchtowerServant to register its remote object. The
client then invokes the lookup method on the registry to look up remote object
by name in the server host’s registry. In the following part of the program the
client calls some methods on the remote Object.
In the next sections, we’ll present the following methods:
• Node class: create txid_ç method
• Node class: calculate hint_ç and blob_ç
• Node class: send hint_ç and blob_ç
• Node class: ask to the watchtowers if it has the hint_ç
txid values and public Key
In the Client Node we initialize the following values:
WatchtowerService service = (WatchtowerService)
Naming.lookup("rmi://localhost:5099/watchtower");
String txid_Bob= "026fc54956f1e473152a8f2eca2ae6b8c386704f1a46
c900434836f697eea53e"; //Alice has a channel with Bob
String txid_Charlie= "026fc54956f1e473152a8f2eca2ae6b8c386704f1a46c
900434836f697eea5e8"; //Alice has a channel with Charlie
String txid_Eve= "026fc54956f1e473152a8f2eca2ae6b8c386704f
1a46c900434836f697eea5e6"; //Alice has a channel with Eve
//change channel status
txid_Bob="026fc54956f1e473152a8f2eca2ae6b8c386704
f1a46c900434836f697eea53e"; //New channel status between Alice
and Bob String
In the ﬁrst line the connection with the Watchtower is created. After the
connection the node can use one of the methods implementing the watchtower,
to send the actual status to the watchtower, through the method memorize.
In the second line the Client node initialize the value of txid_Bob, txid_Charlie
and txid_Eve. Then the channel status with Bob changes and a new txid_Bob
==PAGE:85==
8.3 Client Node
75
is created.
Create txid_ç method
When a channel status changes, the node must to calculate the txid_ç value.
As we mention in the previous chapter, it is the result of the SHA256 function
on the public key.
To calculate the public key, we have utilized the website: http://bip32.org,
in Figure 8.3. To get the Public key it is necessary to provide the seed and the
Figure 8.3: BIP32 Deterministic Key Generator.
Derivation Path.
As Derivation path, we’ve used m/108/0/0/0/558282, where 558282 is a casual
block_height.
In the algorithm, we simplify the case in which the transaction is the ﬁrst in
the block. The class node calls the method with:
String pubKey="026fc54956f1e473152a8f2eca
2ae6b8c386704f1a46c900434836f697eea53ee1";
String txid_ç= calculate2SHA256(pubKey);
where the string pubKey is the Derivate public key, obtained through the
website http://bip32.org.
==PAGE:86==
76
8 Implementation
Calculate hint_ç and blob_ç
The algorithm to calculate the hint and the blob, uses the function Truncate to
split in two parts the txid[:16] and txid[16:]. In the case of the creation of the
blob, also the parameter of data are using, in order to encrypt with the txid[16:].
For the encryption we’ve decidede to use the AES Encryption Standard. The
two algorithms, show how to create hint_ç and blob_ç respectively.
public static String CreateHint(String s)
{
String[] truncated= Truncate(s);
return truncated[0];
}
public static byte[] CreateBlob(String txid_ç, String data)
{
String[] truncated= Truncate(txid_ç);
String txid= truncated[1];
Key aesKey = new SecretKeySpec(txid.getBytes(), "AES");
byte[] blob= null;
try
{
blob= encryptAES(aesKey, data);
}
catch (Exception e)
{
e.printStackTrace();
}
return
blob;
}
8.3.1
Send hint_ç and blob_ç
After creating the hint and blob, and hint_ç and blob_ç , the client nodes
sends them to the Watchtower utilizing the remote method memorize.
try
{
service.memorize(hint, blob);
service.memorize(hint_ç, blob_ç);
}
catch (Throwable e)
{
e.printStackTrace();
}
The class Watchtower implements the function memorize, which aims to store
in a ﬁle the data received from Alice. The watchtower class memorize the hint
and the blob inside the ﬁle called storedFile.
==PAGE:87==
8.3 Client Node
77
Verify if the Watchtower has the hint_ç Suppose that Alice has lost all her
data. In order, to recover the status channel using the Açai Protocol, she has
to get the most recent BlockHeigh value from the other node and then utilize
the BIP32 Generator key to recover the Public Key using as a purpose in the
Derivation Path the code 108. After calculating the hint_ç, she can send the
request to the Watchtower if it contains the blob_ç corresponds to the hint,
calling the method GetBlob.
blob_ç= service.GetBlob(hint_ç);
If the Watchtower contains the corresponded blob_ç, it sends this to the Node,
otherwise, it sends to a node an empty string.
As we have mentioned at the beginnign of this chapter, we’ve assume that Alice
has a unique transaction inside the last Blockheight. Alice ﬁnds diﬀerent data
inside the blob_ç, each of that connected to a channel status between Alice
and Bob, Charlie and Eve.
To recover all information connected to each channel status, Alice has to use
again the method GetBlob to obtain each data for each channel.
Recover data After obtaining the blob_ç, Alice needs to decrypt is in order to
get the data_ç inside.
data_ç= getData(txid_ç, blob_ç);
Scanner in= new Scanner(data);
while(in.hasNextLine())
{
String str=in.next();
String name=in.next();
if(name.compareTo("Bob")==0)
txid_Bob=str;
else if(name.compareTo("Charlie")==0)
txid_Charlie=str;
else
txid_Eve=str;
}
The resulting data looks in this way:
data_ç
026fc54956f1e473152a8f2eca2ae6b8c386704f1a46c900434836f697eea53e(txid_Bob)
026fc54956f1e473152a8f2eca2ae6b8c386704f1a46c900434836f697eea5e8 (txid_Charlie)
026fc54956f1e473152a8f2eca2ae6b8c386704f1a46c900434836f697eea5e6 (txid_Eve)
So the Client Node can recover the txid for each channel status, and derived
the current data.
For example, if the Client Node wants to recover the channel status with
Bob:
hint= CreateHint(txid_Bob);
blob= service.GetBlob(hint);
data= getData(txid_Bob, blob);
==PAGE:88==
78
8 Implementation
The resut data is:
data with Bob Status Channel: Bob=0.8 BTC Alice=0.1 BTC
So in this way, we demonstrate how the client Node can recover all status
channel, only having the public key that is derived from the derivation path
and so the block height and the seed. So, we’ll show how from seed it is possible
to recover not just the Bitcoin wallet, but also the Lightning Wallet.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 9
Evaluation
This section will attempt to give an assessment to the suggested protocol,
mainly with respect to guarantee a backup mechanism in case of Lightning
wallet failure, satisfying the property of preserving the privacy of its users,
which was the main goal of the project.
In the last chapter, we’ve studied Açai protocol, the mechanism and the main
features, that permits this solution to work. Furthermore, we’ve seen a JAVA
RMI implementation, that aims to give a demonstration of the communication
between the node and the watchtower.
Main results
In conclusion, we can aﬃrm that the Açai protocol permits to maintain the
privacy of the user, while providing a decentralized and anonymous solution for
the backup of data that maintains the nature of Bitcoin.
This solution extends the BIP39 wallet recovery mechanisms (Section 3.6.3)
also for Lightning Network wallets and the money stored inside this second
layer, without any change to the user experience.
User experience
From the user experience, the user has not to do anything to execute the Açai
protocol, this can work without the intervention by the user, that can recover
own status channel automatically.
Game Theory, adversarial thinking and economic principles in the solution
This solution also respects the Nash equilibrium, in fact, we don’t have a
cryptographic solution to mitigate the case in which the Watchtower doesn’t
collaborate with the user. On the other hand, game theory principles can be
reasonably used to expect the Watchtowers service to work.
Watchtowers are paid to oﬀer the backup service, through micro-fee every
time that a channel is closed, so they are economically incentivized to continue
to guarantee the service. Moreover, the watchtowers do not know the user iden-
tity, so they cannot ban Alice and the Açai Protocol since it is indistinguishable
from normal transactions.
Watchtower service
This protocol can be proposed from wallet providers and e-commerce companies,
which they can oﬀer this service to own clients in charge of a fee.
Açai Protocol: for a frequent or sporadic user?
One possible criticism is that our protocol is more indicated for all those users
==PAGE:90==
80
9 Evaluation
with several transactions, and high use of Lightning network for example mini-
mum one or more transactions for every one-two blocks.
In fact, for a normal user is inconvenient to calculate the txid_ç utilizing the
value of the block height. Since there is a new block every 10 minutes, it is
quite unlikely that a user has his/her last transaction every time in the most
recent block. On the other hand, in the case of a big company, for example, an
e-commerce company, the probability to have transactions in the last block is
higher.
To customize the proposed protocol for normal users, it would be useful using as
the last parameter in the derivation Path a number, with the functionality to be
a counter. Incrementing this counter permits to a binary research counting from
0 to 232. On a channel that lives more than 32 blocks, this solution permits to
do fewer steps.
Therefore, it is necessary to ﬁnd a trade-oﬀthat permits to be convenient
for both nodes that utilize more Lightning channels, but also for a user that
use this payment system sporadically.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the thesis. It draws the conclusions of the whole study
by pointing out its main contributions and discussing results and possible future
work.
10.1
Contributions
In Chapter 7, we have proposed a possible solution which tries to solve the
problem of recovering the status channels in case of wallet failure, in an eﬃcient
manner. In Chapter 8, we have delineated a possible implementation of the
proposed Açai Protocol.
The aim of the thesis was to study Lightning Network, possibly ending up with
a solution intended to guarantee a mechanism of backup. Furthermore, all
the thesis objectives were successfully accomplished and they eﬃciently drove
the work in the desired direction. Although our system might be considered
complex for some aspects and some parts of the proposed solution are not
already available (eltoo and watchtower implementation), we are conﬁdent that
the system can be implemented to guarantee a backup mechanism in the next
future. Moreover, we have presented our model, conducting an analysis of
possible use cases scenarios.
Although some assumptions were made during the project work, we believe that
they were reasonable to make our solution simple and thus the end result is an
implementation which could be used as a base for a real-life implementation of
a backup mechanism.
10.2
Results and Future Works
As we’ve already mentioned, Bitcoin and Lightning are quite new technology
and a lot of work has to be done, to permit them to improve continuously.
In this section, we propose some possible Future projects, that could extend
further the work done in this thesis to include new interesting features.
“Marketplace” on top of the Lightning Network
This solution can be proposed to the company that can be acted as a watchtower
and oﬀer the solution to their own clients. This would help match users, willing
to pay small fees in order to use services that help the network run.
==PAGE:92==
82
10 Conclusion
Lightning Wallet including the Açai Protocol
As we’ve analyzed in Chapter 5, the application that is already oﬀering a backup
solution is utilizing an on-cloud service or centralized systems. Therefore, it
would be very crucial to realize a Lightning wallet that permits to guarantee a
backup service, maintaining a decentralized nature, typical of Bitcoin.
Introduce IPFS system in the Açai Protocol
InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) is a protocol and network designed to cre-
ate a content addressable, peer-to-peer method of storing and sharing hashed
hypermedia ﬁles in a distributed ﬁle system [Fin]. Hence, a possible idea is
creating shared hashed ﬁle where the watchtower can store all data information.
In this way, the node may ask diﬀerent watchtowers to recover the information.
Moreover, this permits to solve the problem of memory in the watchtowers. In
fact, in this solution, it is assumed that data stored in the watchtowers are not
deleted or substituted/tampered. In real life, this is causing a waste of memory
and have a solution, which includes IPFS can be helpful.
Trade-oﬀsolution for frequent and sporadic user
As we’ve discussed in previous chapter 9, Açai protocol is designated mainly for
a frequent user and could result not convenient for a sporadic user. It could be
seen as a trade-oﬀ, between oﬀering a useful solution for frequent user, at the
expanse of sporadic users. It would be interesting analyzing how this solution
might be modiﬁed to permit to be convenient for each type of user, maintaining
privacy and decentralization.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[And]
G. Andresen. Bip 16: Pay to script hash. url: https://github.
com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0016.mediawiki (cited on
page 15).
[Ant]
Andreas M. Antonopoulos. “Bitcoin Q&A: Eltoo, and the early days
of Lightning”. In: (). url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
o6eFZ5aI9N0&feature=youtu.be&fbclid=IwAR3chExMAD3khjEYazFa0rMSvUeKzp2196HGb-
vhbg6kU-u6awhJqu1oFCo (cited on page 42).
[Ant14]
Andreas M. Antonopoulos. Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking Digital
Crypto-Currencies. 1st. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2014. isbn: 1449374042,
9781449374044 (cited on pages 1, 5–7, 9, 19, 21–28, 31, 33, 37, 39,
40).
[Aso]
Bisola Asolo. Mempool Explained. url: https://www.mycryptopedia.
com/mempool-explained/ (cited on page 16).
[Bit]
BitRewards. Blockchain Scalability: The Issues, and Proposed So-
lutions. url: https://medium.com/@bitrewards/blockchain-
scalability-the-issues-and-proposed-solutions-2ec2c7ac98f0
(cited on page 11).
[Blo]
Blockchain.info. Blockchain Size. url: https://www.blockchain.
com/charts/blocks-size?timespan=3years (cited on page 9).
[But]
Vitalik Buterin. The Meaning of Decentralization. url: https://
medium.com/@VitalikButerin/the-meaning-of-decentralization-
a0c92b76a274 (cited on page 8).
[Can]
Canya. What is Game Theory and how is it applicable to Cryp-
tocurrency? url: https://medium.com/canyacoin/what- is-
game- theory- how- is- it- applicable- to- cryptocurrency-
6bf1fa5b14e2 (cited on page 48).
[CK17]
Jonathan Chiu and Thorsten V Koeppl. “The economics of cryptocurrencies–
bitcoin and beyond”. In: (2017) (cited on page 1).
[Con+18]
Mauro Conti et al. “A survey on security and privacy issues of
bitcoin”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials (2018)
(cited on pages 14, 18, 19).
[Con18]
Jonathan Chester Contributor. Your Guide On Bitcoin’s Lightning
Network: The Opportunities And The Issues. Jun 18, 2018. url:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jonathanchester/2018/06/
18/your-guide-on-the-lightning-network-the-opportunities-
and-the-issues/#5012c11e3677 (cited on pages 2, 10).
==PAGE:94==
84
Bibliography
[Cro+16]
Kyle Croman et al. “On scaling decentralized blockchains”. In: Inter-
national Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security.
Springer. 2016, pages 106–125 (cited on pages i, 10, 11).
[Des]
Coin Desk. Bitcoin Calculator. url: https://www.coindesk.com/
calculator (cited on page 5).
[Dev]
Mycelium Developers. Mycelium Bitcoin Wallet. url: https://
play . google . com / store / apps / details ? id = com . mycelium .
wallet&hl=en_US (cited on pages 5, 6).
[Dry]
Tadge Dryja. Unlinkable outsourced channel monitoring. url: https:
//diyhpl.us/wiki/transcripts/scalingbitcoin/milan/unlinkable-
outsourced-channel-monitoring/ (cited on page 56).
[Eco]
The Economist. The great chain of being sure about things. url:
https : / / www . economist . com / briefing / 2015 / 10 / 31 / the -
great-chain-of-being-sure-about-things (cited on page 2).
[Fin]
Kurt Finley. The Inventors of the Internet Are Trying to Build a
Truly Permanent Web. url: https://www.wired.com/2016/06/
inventors- internet- trying- build- truly- permanent- web/
(cited on pages 45, 82).
[Gmb]
Electrum Technologies GmbH. “Electrum Bitcoin Wallet”. In: ().
url: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.
electrum.electrum&hl=en_US (cited on page 44).
[how]
howMuch.net. Transactions Speeds: How Do Cryptocurrencies Stack
Up To Visa or PayPal? url: Transactions%20Speeds:%20How%
20Do%20Cryptocurrencies%20Stack%20Up%20To%20Visa%20or%
20PayPal? (cited on pages 10, 11).
[HR17]
Garrick Hileman and Michel Rauchs. “2017 Global Cryptocurrency
Benchmarking Study”. In: (2017) (cited on page 1).
[Inc]
Blockgeeks Inc. What is Bitcoin? The Most Comprehensive Guide
Ever! url: https://blockgeeks.com/guides/what-is-bitcoin/
(cited on page 2).
[Inv]
Investopedia. Game Theory deﬁnition. url: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/g/gametheory.asp (cited on page 47).
[Kon]
Shedrach Kongvong. “The State of Lightning Integration in Elec-
trum”. In: (). url: https://bitcointechweekly.com/front/
update- on- lightning- integration- in- electrum/ (cited on
page 43).
[Lar18]
Aleks Larsen. A Primer on Blockchain Interoperability. Dec 21,
2018. url: https://medium.com/blockchain-capital-blog/a-
primer-on-blockchain-interoperability-e132bab805b (cited
on page 12).
[Lev]
Alexander Levakov. Nash equilibrium: a case study. url: http://
rstudio-pubs-static.s3.amazonaws.com/67398_890ed9c3ff97466a8dd33472e6118f19
html (cited on page 47).
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
85
[Lui]
Alberto de Luigi. Bitcoin e adozione di massa: cosa (e quanto tempo)
manca a Lightning Network. url: http://www.albertodeluigi.
com/2018/11/02/bitcoin-mass-adoption-lightning-network/
#4 (cited on page 44).
[Mer87]
Ralph C Merkle. “A digital signature based on a conventional
encryption function”. In: Conference on the theory and application
of cryptographic techniques. Springer. 1987, pages 369–378 (cited on
page 15).
[Mye13]
Roger B Myerson. Game theory. Harvard university press, 2013
(cited on page 47).
[Nak]
Satoshi Nakamoto. “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system”.
In: () (cited on pages 4, 6, 7, 10, 13–18).
[Neta]
Lightning Network. Lightning Network Summary. url: https://
lightning.network/lightning-network-technical-summary.
pdf (cited on pages 3, 11, 12).
[Netb]
Lightning NetworkAuxledger. Blockchain Scalability Hindrance and
How to Overcome It. url: https://medium.com/auxesis/blockchain-
scalability-hindrance-how-to-overcome-it-54378166b804
(cited on page 10).
[Net16]
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. “Statement of Jennifer
Shasky Calvery, Director Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
United States Department of the Treasury Before the United States
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Aﬀairs Subcom-
mittee on National Security and International Trade and Finance
Subcommittee on Economic Policy”. In: (Oct 9,2016) (cited on
pages 5, 13).
[OR94]
Martin J Osborne and Ariel Rubinstein. A course in game theory.
1994 (cited on page 47).
[PD16]
Joseph Poon and Thaddeus Dryja. “The bitcoin lightning network:
Scalable oﬀ-chain instant payments”. In: (2016) (cited on pages 2,
12, 36, 42).
[Pea]
Jordan Pearson. Bitcoin Unlimited’ Hopes to Save Bitcoin from
Itself (cited on page 2).
[Put+]
Deepak Puthal et al. “The blockchain as a decentralized security
framework”. In: () (cited on pages 2, 8).
[SA]
BLOCKCHAIN LUXEMBOURG S.A. Blockchain charts. url: https:
//www.blockchain.com/en/charts (cited on pages 1, 7).
[she]
Medium sheinix. Payment Channels in Bitcoin. url: https://
medium.com/coinmonks/payment-channels-in-bitcoin-470b28e47bb0
(cited on page 31).
[Vis]
Bitcoin Visuals. Lightning Network Channels. url: https : / /
bitcoinvisuals.com/ln-channels (cited on pages 3, 12).
[Wal]
Lightning Wallet. What does Olympus server do. url: https :
//lightning-wallet.com/using-lightning-wallet#forced-
channel-closure (cited on page 45).
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[WP]
Oscar Williams-Grut and Rob Price. A Bitcoin civil war is threat-
ening to tear the digital currency in 2 — here’s what you need to
know (cited on page 2).
