==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Risk-based design of autonomous vehicles
Adam Gergő Mezővári (s163169)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis reports the results of the design process of a self-driving car, subjecting
each step of the design to hazard identification and using the results to revise and
modify the setup and the algorithms of the vehicle. We refer to this design process
as risk-based design of the autonomous vehicle (AV).
The main objective is to demonstrate the different hazard identification methods
and assess whether they are suitable for the automated driving industry. After an
overview of industry standards, existing methodologies and their applications by lead-
ing AV manufacturers, the most promising methods are selected for further studies.
While conventional hazard identification methods, such as Failure Modes and Ef-
fects Analysis (FMEA) or Hazard and Operability Study (HAZOP), usually performs
prominent in other industries, like chemical plants, applying these to a self driving sys-
tem is challenging, due to the complexity of the automated driving systems. These
methods mainly address hardware failures as the dominant causes of safety issues,
while modern vehicles with increasingly complex electronic control systems may get
into unsafe states also due to software errors and potential unsafe system interactions.
In this report, a selection of methodologies for software and hardware analyses were
applied on the different stages of the design. Brainstorming was used to establish
initial safety design principles, FMEA, Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) and systematic
model-based testing were applied for the key software components and HAZOP and
Sneak Path Analysis (SPA) were performed on the hardware.
In order to test and validate the methodologies, a small-scale prototype of an au-
tonomous car was developed and used as a test bed for the project. The prototype
is realized by a 1:10 scale RC-car modified to be capable of autonomous driving in
a closed, marked track. The developed system incorporated advanced technologies,
such as a Robot Operating System (ROS) based software on a Raspberry Pi computer
supplemented by a Lidar sensor and a camera. Moreover, a simulation environment
in the open-source Gazebo tool was developed for model-based test purposes.
After applying the selected hazard identification methods on the designs, a set of
test cases were derived to perform with the physical implementation and/or in the
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
simulation. During testing, problems arose, such as backlash, which were not identi-
fied by the hazard analyses. These problems called emergent problems, which appear
in the system as a whole rather than in single components.
The project demonstrated the feasibility and usefulness of the risk-based design ap-
proach. It also identified the different advantages and disadvantages of manual versus
formal fault tree analysis. Moreover, an important gap in the available analysis meth-
ods was identified, which is the need for identifying or predicting emergent hazards.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master project was carried out as a collaborative project between the Engineering
Systems Divison of the Department of Management Engineering and the Department
of Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in fulfillment
of the requirements for acquiring a MSc degree in Electrical Engineering. The project
work was realized by Adam Gergő Mezővári, from September 2018 to Februray 2019,
under the supervision of senior researcher Igor Kozine, J. Robert Taylor and Ole
Ravn.
The thesis project has been made solely by the author and complies with
DTU regulations and plagiarism. For any text, that is based on research of others, a
reference is provided.
Kongens Lyngby, February 10, 2019
Adam Gergő Mezővári (s163169)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors; Senior Researcher Igor Kozine
for his guidance, Mr. J. Robert Taylor for the provided knowledge and Mr. Ole Ravn
for his supervision.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Industry standards and guidelines
5
2.1
Autonomous vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
ISO 26262 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Other safety standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
12 safety elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Hazard identification
17
3.1
Brainstorming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Hazard and Operability Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Fault Tree Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Sneak Analysis and variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Model-based safety analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Case study
25
4.1
Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Hardware configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Software configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Human Machine Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Results
45
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.1
Brainstorming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Functional Failure Mode and Effects Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Hazard and Operability Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Sneak Path Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.5
Software Fault Tree Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.6
Model-based testing and real life testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Observations
61
6.1
Design challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
Design reliability and safety issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.3
Hazard identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.4
Model-based design and model-based safety assessment . . . . . . . . .
63
6.5
12 safety elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7
Conclusions
65
7.1
Risk-based design philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2
Hazard identification methodologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
ABS
Automated Braking System
ACC
Adaptive Cruise Control
ADS
Automated Driving System
AV
Autonomous Vehicle
CPS
Cyber-Physical System
E/E
Electric / Electronic
FFA
Functional Failure Analysis
FMEA
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
FTA
Fault Tree Analysis
GPIO
General Purpose Input Output
HARA
Hazard and Risk Analysis
HAZOP
Hazard and Operability Analysis
HMI
Human Machine Interface
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit
LKA
Lane Keeping Assistance
NHTSA
National Highway Traffic Safety Association
ODD
Operational Design Domain
OEDR
Object and Event Recognition
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
PHA
Preliminary Hazard Analysis
ROS
Robot Operating System
SAE
Society of Automotive Engineers
SA
Sneak Analysis
SCA
Sneak Circuit Analysis
SPA
Sneak Path Analysis
STPA
System-Theoretic Process Analysis
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Autonomous cars hold the promise for a profoundly changed and safer era in mobile
transportation. Removing the human factor in driving could improve not only the
security on public roads [3], but also change the way how people use cars in their
everyday life. A shared fleet of self driving cars in cities can free up areas, improve
air quality and lower noise for the residents. With the technical development in the
recent years and with more and more manufacturers developing autonomous vehicles
(AVs), this vision is closer than expected, but still far away.
Replacing human driven cars is a huge challenge. While self-driving train systems
have already been running in cities for years [26] and modern aircraft using autopilot
features for decades, fully autonomous cars on public roads are still in the development
phase. Perception and navigation in a constantly and rapidly changing environment
proved to be a much harder task than developing a driver-less metro.
Moreover,
having human and automated drivers simultaneously on the roads complicates the
situation further.
In order to fulfill the expectations and to truly utilize the benefits of AVs, system
safety needs to be ensured. Since hazardous situations are fairly frequent in the every-
day traffic and the human driver is not present to avoid accidents, a self-driving car
must handle a wide variety of driving scenarios. Malfunctions or errors in the system
can lead to situations, where users of the car or pedestrians can be harmed, therefore
system safety must be in mind starting from the development phase of an autonomous
vehicle, through its designated operational life cycle.
As a response for this challenge, the risk-based design approach was followed during
development to ensure system safety right from the beginning of the design proce-
dure. This approach puts emphasis on safety, by taking hazard identification studies
on several stages of the design and using the results to improve system safety from
one design iteration to another.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Project description
As mentioned before, risk-based design applies hazard identification during the de-
sign procedure to ensure the reliable operation of the vehicle. In order to perform a
relatively complete and comprehensive hazard analysis, various protocols have been
used by leading manufacturers. These methodologies are based on methods, such as
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA), Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA), Failure Modes and
Effects Analysis (FMEA) and Hazard and Operability Study (HAZOP), that were
developed many years ago for simpler systems of different nature. Although they
are accurately applicable in other engineering industries and recommended by inter-
national standards (e.g. ISO 26262 [12]), they are not completely suitable for AVs,
as an autonomous car is a new type of systems, that is referred as a Cyber-physical
Systems (CPS).
The aforementioned protocols have various disadvantages in identifying hazards in
complex systems. PHA is usually carried out in an early stage of the development,
in which the design is not complete and modifications are common, therefore it is un-
able to map the potential hazards of the final product. FMEA is a single-point failure
analysis and was one of the first highly structured systematic techniques to identify
how systems and subsystems can fail. FMEA and its variations are widely used in
various systems, but they are time consuming and focuses on functional failures.
Alongside FMEA, HAZOP is also a widely applied hazard identification technique
in the automotive industry.
It is a powerful tool to cover the safety analysis re-
quirements in theory, but in practice issues can occur, since the results are highly
dependent on the used guide words, check lists and on the expertise of the analyst.
It is often assumed that if a risk analysis is carried out, it will help prevent all
accidents. In fact, most methods suffer from varying degrees of incompleteness and
also most methods involve large gaps in coverage. For this reason, it is desired to
use several methods. Therefore, HAZOP, functional FMEA, software FTA and SPA
were used to provide an extensive coverage of failure and error types.
In a project which is so dependent on software, design errors are a major issue, not
just failures. This is especially the case for risk-based design approaches. Therefore
the used methods, such as HAZOP, SPA, software FTA and model-based testing, are
all capable of identifying different classes of design errors.
In this project, a prototype AV was developed following the risk-based design ap-
proach. A selection of hazard identification methods was revised and validated on
the prototype designs to reveal unexpected and unforeseen risks. Moreover, compar-
ing the performed simulations and real-world tests, observations were made regarding
differences in safety analysis of model-based designs and realistic implementations.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Goals
3
1.2
Goals
The motivation for this project was the observation that existing safety analysis proto-
cols, which are suggested by international standards and guidelines for the automotive
industry, could certainly be revised and improved.
The literature review revealed the most frequently applied hazard identification meth-
ods for such systems. However, the completeness and comprehensiveness of these
applications are ambiguous, therefore a goal of the present work was to:
• Demonstrate, improve and validate the possibilities for hazard identification in
AVs.
In this study, a small-scale prototype of an AV was developed and a selection of
the existing methodologies was tested and validated on the designs. The developed
vehicle aimed to provide a base for further studies at the Department of Management
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), therefore another goal
of this project was to:
• Develop a prototype self-driving car following the risk-based design approach.
To illustrate differences between safety analysis of model-based designs and safety
analysis of realistic implementations, a virtual simulation environment was needed,
therefore another goal of the present thesis was to:
• Develop a simulation environment for model-based testing purposes.
Summarizing, the general goal of this master project was to revise and improve ex-
isting safety analysis protocols to be suitable for AVs by prototyping a self-driving
car following the risk-based design approach. By performing tests with the prototype
and in the simulation, gaps were identified in existing methodologies and differences
between risk assessment in model-based design and realistic implementations were
noted.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.3
Thesis structure
The present thesis covers the risk-based design process of an autonomous vehicle,
especially focusing on reviewing and validating existing and widely used hazard iden-
tification methods. The report consists of 7 chapters.
Chapter 2 provides background information concerning the topic of the thesis. It
includes a brief introduction of autonomous vehicles and a general description of the
safety assessment process defined by the relevant standards. Furthermore, the most-
recent industry safety guidelines are summarized and safety reports by manufacturers
are compared. Chapter 3 outlines the different hazard identification methodologies,
while Chapter 4 outlines the case study, including the specification and the develop-
ment process of the prototype autonomous vehicle. Chapter 5 presents the results of
the applied hazard identification methods and their effect on the design. In chapter
6, the results are discussed and relevant observations are stated. Finally, chapter 7
contains overall conclusions and suggestions for further improvements.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Industry standards and
guidelines
In this chapter, an introduction to AVs is presented and relevant industry standards
are discussed. Furthermore, most-recent guidelines for safe AV development are re-
viewed.
2.1
Autonomous vehicles
In general, AV is a generic phrase for a vehicle that is capable of driving itself without
or with human interaction. In this report the focus is on autonomous cars, because
it has the greatest challenges in the AV industry.
To classify a self-driving car by its automated capabilities, the Society of Automo-
tive Engineers (SAE) specified six levels of automation [4], as shown in figure 2.1. As
the level of automation increases, more and more tasks are performed by the auto-
mated driving system. In each step, the computer assists or completely takes over
a driving task, therefore the responsibilities and the necessity of the human driver
are gradually disappearing, until at some point, when it disappears completely. The
driving tasks are categorized under two labels:
• Execution of steering and acceleration / deceleration
• Monitoring of driving environment
Moreover, two additional features, fallback performance and system capability are
declared in the table. Fallback performance indicates whether it is the drivers or
the automated systems responsibility to perform a driving task which was compro-
mised and no longer executed by the automated system, while system capability is
indicating whether the system is working in all driving modes, or only in some of them.
In Level 0, all driving tasks are performed by the human driver without any as-
sistance from the system, therefore this level is called No Automation. For example,
cars equipped with cruise control to maintain a dedicated speed are classified to this
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Industry standards and guidelines
Figure 2.1: The six levels of automation by SAE
group, because cruise control is controlling the speed of the vehicle, although it is not
adapting the speed according to the environment, nor controlling the steering of the
vehicle.
Vehicles with simple assisting systems, such as lane keeping assistant (LKA) or adap-
tive cruise control (ACC) are classified as Level 1 Driver Assistance vehicles, since
the human driver receives assistance in steering and / or speed control under certain
conditions. However, at this level, the driver still needs to maintain full situational
awareness and control the vehicle together with the automation.
At Level 2, the system can manage both the steering and speed control under the
right conditions, but still being unable to monitor its environment. The human driver
must still pay attention at all times and take over if the conditions exceed the lim-
itations of the system. Most commercially available cars with autonomous driving
systems are classified to this level, Partial Automation.
Level 3 offers automated environment monitoring on top of Level 2.
Conditional
automation means that the system takes over the acceleration, steering and monitor-
ing, if the conditions are met, but not able to handle fallback situations. Therefore,
human drivers are a necessity and must be prepared to respond to a request to inter-
==PAGE:19==
2.2 ISO 26262
7
vene. This means that the driver must also maintain situational awareness.
At Level 4, High Automation, cars are able to handle most driving tasks. In other
words, a Level 4 car can handle most normal driving tasks on its own, but still requires
driver intervention from time to time, for example during poor weather conditions or
other unusual situations. Level 4 cars generally drive autonomously, but still have a
steering wheel and pedals for a human driver to take over when needed.
At Level 5, the system is fully automated, which means that the car can drive it-
self in all conditions and driving modes. Since all driving tasks are handled by the
automation, human drivers are no longer necessary and every person in the car func-
tioning mainly as passengers. However, the driver may have the option to control the
car manually.
In this project, a prototype of Level 4 self-driving car was developed by converting a
commercial radio-controlled car to drive in a marked lane fully autonomously.
2.2
ISO 26262
In this section, the most relevant standard for system safety in the automotive in-
dustry is introduced. The standard for functional safety in road vehicles, ISO 26262
[12], is an adaptation of the functional safety standard IEC 61508 [11] for automo-
tive electric/electronic (E/E) safety-related systems. This standard refers functional
safety as the overall safety of the system, depending on the proper operation of the
system components and its goal is to address potential hazards brought forth by
malfunctioning behaviour. The following terms are defined in the standard:
• Item: system or array of systems that implements a function at the vehicle
level.
• Failure: termination of the ability of an element to perform a function as re-
quired.
• Malfunctioning behaviour: failure or unintended behaviour of an item with
respect to its design intent.
• Fault: abnormal condition that can cause an element or an item to fail.
• Error: discrepancy between a computed, observed or measured value or condi-
tion, and the true, specified or theoretically correct value or condition.
• Harm : physical injury or damage.
• Hazard: potential source of harm caused by malfunctioning behaviour of the
item.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Industry standards and guidelines
• Risk: combination of probability of occurrence of harm and severity of that
harm in a specific situation.
• Functional Safety: absence of unreasonable risk due to hazards caused by mal-
functioning behaviour of E/E systems.
• Safety Goal: top level safety requirement of the system from a hazard and risk
analysis.
• Automotive Safety Integrity Level (ASIL): represents an automotive-specific
risk-based classification of a safety goal as well as the validation and confirma-
tion measures.
The safety assessment process of this standard is summarized in figure 2.2. The first
Figure 2.2: The ISO 26262 safety assessment process
step is to select an item of the system. Afterwards, hazard and risk analysis (HARA)
is applied to identify and categorize the possible hazards as hazardous events. The
available methods for hazard identification are outlined and discussed later. In the
third step, ASILs are assigned to the identified hazardous events. The assignment of
ASILs is followed by the derivation of the appropriate safety goal.
There are four ASIL levels, ASIL A, ASIL B, ASIL C and ASIL D, where ASIL
D representing the highest requirements and ASIL A the lowest.
An extra level,
called Quality Management (QM), is used for hazards, that do not dictate any safety
requirements. The ASIL of a potential hazard is calculated by assessing its severity,
exposure and controllability.
Severity (S) defines the intensity of the damage can be caused by the potential hazard.
The order of severity is: S0 for no injuries; S1 for light and moderate injuries; S2 for
severe and life-threatening injuries, and S3 for life-threatening or fatal incidences.
Exposure (E) measures the possibility of the potential hazard.
Various levels of
exposure such as E0: incredible, E1: very low probability, E2: low probability, E3:
medium probability, E4: high probability are assigned to the risk being evaluated.
Controllability (C) investigates to what extent the driver can control the vehicle,
in case of a component or function is malfunctioning or fails by the potential hazard.
The order of controllability is defined as: C0: controllable in general, C1 for easy to
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Other safety standards
9
control; C2 for challenging to control and C3 for difficult to control.
After calculating the three parameters, the ASILs can be expressed as equation 2.1
and safety goals are determined for each hazardous event.
ASIL = Severity × Exposure × Controllability
(2.1)
This project focuses on the HARA procedure of the overall safety assessment process,
especially on the suitability of the hazard identification methods for AV development.
2.3
Other safety standards
Along ISO 262626, other relevant standards were studied to generate a list of fre-
quently specified hazard identification methods. Standards for aircraft systems were
also selected since the complexity of a modern aircraft is similar to an AV.
The following standards were reviewed:
• ISO 31010: Risk management - Risk assessment techniques
• ISO 21448: Road vehicles - Safety of the Intended Function
• MIL-STD-882E: Department of Defense Standard Practice - System Safety
• ARP 4761: Guidelines and methods for conducting the safety assessment pro-
cess on civil airborne systems and equipment
• DO-178C: Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certi-
fication
• MISRA C: Guidelines for the Use of the C Language in Critical Systems
• FMVSS: Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard
• AUTOSAR: Automotive Open System Architecture
In addition, safety reports by commercial AV developers, notably Waymo [25], Gen-
eral Motors [15], Ford [8], Nvidia [17] and Uber [24], were also studied. These doc-
uments have some authority, since the National Highway Traffic Safety Association
(NHTSA) have reviewed the reports and established a voluntary guide for safety as-
sessment [1].
The last four standard on the list above and the safety report by Uber do not specify
hazard identification methods to use, while the military standard specifies the usage
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Industry standards and guidelines
of FHA and FMEA.
According to the reviewed standards and the safety reports the applied methodologies
are summarized in table 2.1. The selected hazard identification methods are indicated
ISO31010
ISO26262
SOTIF
Waymo
GM
Nvidia
Brainstorming
X
X
X
Check-lists
X
X
X
PHA
X
X
HAZOP
X
X
X
X
FMEA
X
X
X
X
X
X
FTA
X
X
X
X
CCA
X
X
X
SA
X
Field studies
X
X
Table 2.1: Frequently used hazard identification methods
bold and their procedures are described in the following chapter.
2.4
12 safety elements
Recently, NHTSA released a guidance for autonomous vehicle developers [1]. In this
document, the agency outlines a voluntary approach for vehicle technology safety, by
providing a framework to address the right way a given safety design element. In ad-
dition, it also encourages manufacturers to perform a voluntary safety self-assessment
of their systems and publish the results. Beside this, the document is also including
best practices for various legislatures to help developers incorporate public road reg-
ulations.
This guidance covers all aforementioned SAE levels of automation, but focusing
mainly on vehicles with conditional, high and full automation. NTHSA defined 12
safety elements, that are generally considered to be the most notable design aspects
to consider when developing, testing, and deploying autonomous vehicles on public
roadways.
2.4.1
System safety
This safety element recommends a systems-engineering approach to be followed in
order to design automated driving systems free of unreasonable safety risks. The
publication suggests following industry standards to assess the safety of the vehicle
in its entire operational design domain. The applied design and validation should
==PAGE:23==
2.4 12 safety elements
11
include hazard analysis and risk assessment for the overall system as well as for the
broader transportation ecosystem.
NHTSA puts emphasis on software validation
and verification by endorsing manufacturers for structured and documented software
development and thorough testing, especially for algorithms based on artificial intel-
ligence. Design decisions should be made based on the assessed risks, including archi-
tecture, hardware and software elements, communication and control, and should be
tested transparently as individual subsystems.
2.4.2
Operational Design Domain
The Operational Design Domain (ODD) holds the information of where and when an
ADS is designed to operate safely. The ODD should be included in the risk assessment
process and should contain the following minimum information to define capability
limitations:
• Roadway types (interstate, local, etc.)
• Geographic area (city, mountain, desert, etc.)
• Speed range
• Environmental conditions (weather, daytime / nighttime, etc.)
• Other domain constraints
In such situations, where the ADS is operating outside of its defined ODD, the vehicle
should transition to the minimal risk condition. For example, in a SAE Level 3 vehicle,
the vehicle should give back the control for the receptive human driver. In such cases,
when a human driver is not present or is not receptive, the vehicle should slow down
and be brought to a safe stop.
2.4.3
Object and Event Detection and Response
Object and Event Detection and Response (OEDR) is the second safety element,
covering detection of objects and events occurring during the operation of the ADS.
It also includes the implementation of the response for the detected events and objects.
When operating within its ODD, the ADS is responsible for detection and response
to other vehicles, pedestrians, bicyclists and objects that could affect safe operation.
Moreover, the OEDR should also include the ability to address a variety of foreseeable
encounters, including emergency vehicles or temporary work zones. During normal
driving, the vehicle should be able to operate in its regularly encountered traffic
condition and should be able to address applicable pre-crash scenarios based on its
ODD.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Industry standards and guidelines
2.4.4
Fallback (Minimal Risk Condition)
When an ADS cannot operate safely or encounters a problem, it should be transitioned
to a minimal risk condition. In order to assure the transition, the ADS first should
be able to detect malfunctioning or operation outside of its ODD. Furthermore, the
system should notify the human driver, if present, of such events in order to hand over
control of the vehicle. Since the human driver plays a significant role for transitioning,
the fallback strategies should take into account that, despite laws and regulations,
human drivers may be inattentive. In higher levels of automation, where a driver may
not be present, the ADS must be able to fallback into a minimal risk condition without
the need for driver intervention. A minimal risk condition will diverse according to
the type and extent of a given failure, but may include automatically bringing the
vehicle to a safe stop, preferably outside of an active lane of traffic.
2.4.5
Validation Methods
In this safety element, NHTSA offers a guideline for validation methods. Since man-
ufacturers have vehicles with different technology, capabilities and automation func-
tions, they are encouraged to develop validation methods to appropriately mitigate
the safety risks associated with their ADS approach. Competencies of an ADS, such
as normal operation, crash avoidance and fallback actions should be demonstrated
through tests, including simulation, test tracks, and on-road testing. Entities should
take industry standards into account when developing and updating tests methods as
well as when developing performance criteria for test facilities that used to validate
tests.
2.4.6
Human Machine Interface
Human Machine Interface (HMI) plays a significant role in an ADS. The importance
of clear and obvious interaction between the driver and the automated system is un-
doubted. This is especially true in vehicles with level 3 automation, where the driver
can be requested to take over the control any time. Therefore the driver, operator or
occupant needs to be constantly aware of the performance and the intentions of the
vehicle. However, the ability of the drivers to stay alert and quickly take over control
is limited when they were not performing driving tasks for a while. Therefore, the
document recommends investigating the necessity of a driver engagement monitor-
ing system in such cases, where drivers could be involved in driving to assess driver
awareness and readiness. At a minimum, an ADS should be capable of informing the
human operator or occupant through various indicators that the ADS is:
• Functioning properly
• Experiencing a malfunction
• Currently engaged in ADS mode
==PAGE:25==
2.4 12 safety elements
13
• Requesting control transition from the ADS to the operator
• Currently unavailable for use
According to the document, considerations should be made for the human driver, op-
erator, occupant(s), and external actors with whom the ADS may have interactions.
Entities are also encouraged to design their HMI to accommodate people with disabil-
ities. In vehicles where no driver or occupant is present, a central control authority
or a remote dispatcher should constantly be aware of the status of the ADS.
2.4.7
Vehicle Cybersecurity
Manufacturers should address cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities of their ADS
by following best practices and design principles published by industry organizations.
Considerations and actions, such as design decisions should be documented and dis-
covered incidents from testing or from consumer feedback should be reported to Auto-
motive Information Sharing and Analysis Center (Auto-ISAC). Furthermore, NHTSA
released an individual document, Cybersecurity Best Practices for Modern Vehicles
[2], to provide a guidance to improve cybersecurity in vehicles.
2.4.8
Crashworthiness
This safety element covers two areas, occupant protection and crash compatibility.
Since automated systems will operate alongside traditional vehicles on public roads
for an extended period of time, developers are recommended to consider the possible
scenario when an another vehicle is crashing into an ADS vehicle. The implemented
automated system should do its best to protect occupants, regardless of whether the
ADS or the human driver is operating the vehicle. In addition, since vehicles with full
automation do not require the driver to take over control, the interior of theses vehi-
cles are often redesigned in way, where the seat configuration differs from traditional.
In these cases, companies are encouraged to evaluate their interior configuration.
In 2003 the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers agreed to a geometric compati-
bility commitment which would provide for alignment of primary energy absorbing
structures among vehicles. The European Union recently introduced a new frontal
crash test that also requires geometric load distribution. Therefore, unoccupied ADS
vehicles should provide geometric and energy absorption crash compatibility with ex-
isting vehicles on the road. ADSs intended for product or service delivery or other un-
occupied use scenarios should consider appropriate vehicle crash compatibility given
the potential for interactions with vulnerable road users and other vehicle types.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Industry standards and guidelines
2.4.9
Post-Crash Behaviour
Post-Crash Behaviour is also essential for vehicles equipped with ADS. This behaviour
is responsible for returning a vehicle to a sate state right after being involved in a crash.
Safety actions, such as shutting off the fuel pump, disabling electrical power, moving
the vehicle to the safest position available and other actions depend on the severity
of the crash. If technology for communication with an operation center or collision
notification center is available, relevant data is recommended to be communicated
and shared. Moreover, authorities, such as police and ambulance should be notified
automatically if a crash has happened.
2.4.10
Data Recording
Learning from earlier accidents is essential for the autonomous vehicle industry.
Recording data not only enables manufacturers to understand causes of an accident,
but it also provides data for proper crash reconstruction. Recorded accident data
could lead to safety developments and subsequent prevention of that crash scenario
in other ADSs. Since there are no valid regulations regarding standardized data col-
lection, therefore developers are encouraged to establish a documented process for
testing, validating and collecting relevant and necessary data related to the occur-
rence of malfunctions or failures.
To promote a continual learning environment, manufacturers should collect data as-
sociated with crashes involving fatal or nonfatal personal injury or environmental
damage. Vehicles should record, at a minimum, all available information relevant to
the crash, so that the circumstances of the crash can be reconstructed. It should
be also logged, whether the ADS or the human driver was in control of the vehicle
leading up to, during, and immediately following a crash.
2.4.11
Consumer Education and Training
Providing a proper education and training for employees, distributors and consumers
helps to develop public trust in automated vehicles and understand the differences in
the use and operation of ADSs. During training, target users should be educated to
utilize ADS technologies properly, efficiently and in the safest manner possible.
Consumer education programs are recommended to include topics such as functional
intent of ADS, operational parameters, system limitations, HMI, fallback scenarios.
Dealers and distributors should be familiarized with ADS operations and HMI func-
tions by an on-road or on-track experience prior consumer release. Innovative ap-
proaches, such as, virtual reality may also be applied.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 12 safety elements
15
2.4.12
Federal, State and Local Laws
Manufacturers should document their approach to account for all applicable laws
in the design of their vehicles. Based on its ODD, the system should account for
all governing traffic laws when operating in automated mode. During its operation,
the ADS faces many safety-critical situations, such as having to cross multiple lanes
on the roadway. While these systems act according to general traffic rules, human
drivers may temporarily violate certain vehicle driving laws. NHTSA recommends to
develop ADSs, that have the capability of handling such foreseeable events safely.
Since the risk-based design approach includes hazard identification analyses during
the development, industry standards and safety reports by manufacturers were re-
viewed to specify frequently applied procedures. A selection of the identified proce-
dures were applied on various stages of the design of the prototype. Furthermore,
the 12 safety elements were introduced considering that the NHTSA guideline cov-
ers most aspects of safety in AVs. After the development of the prototype AV, the
relevant elements were investigated on the vehicle.
==PAGE:28==
16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Hazard identification
Hazard identification is the most important part of the safety assessment process. The
completeness of the hazard identification significantly influences the overall result of
the various safety assessment processes. Since one of the goals of this thesis is to
assess whether these methods are suitable for AV safety assessment, therefore the
previously selected methodologies are described in this chapter based on [13] and
[20].
3.1
Brainstorming
Brainstorming is the most natural hazard identification procedure based on the well-
known process, where a number of experts team up to generate ideas for a dedicated
topic. Because of its simplicity and flexibility, it is a popular method for systems,
where any other method is not applicable.
The result of a brainstorming session highly relies on the composition of the team,
therefore members are expected to be familiar with the analyzed system and the po-
tential hazards. To ensure a structured discussion and an efficient flow, a facilitator,
who moderates the arguments and documenting the results is also required.
There are two important rules in a brainstorming session. First, there is no stupid
idea. Each idea can contribute to the final solution, even if indirectly. Furthermore,
each team member must be able to have the opportunity to contribute.
Once the team is gathered, the facilitator explains the scope objective of the ses-
sion and the group starts to brainstorm ideas for a given period. During this period,
the different ideas are collected and visualized clearly visible for every team member.
Thereafter, a discussion is made to add further ideas.
A popular alternative is called the silent brainstorming, in which the members of
the team note their own ideas on a piece of paper and the hazard are collected af-
terwards.
Silent brainstorming has a significant advantage compared to the open
sessions, it is guaranteed that each team member contributes to the overall outcome.
Brainstorming can be used in almost all hazard identification studies, but for practical
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Hazard identification
purposes it is generally used on a complete system or piece of equipment. It becomes
very heavy if applied to all subsystems or components in large systems, therefore it
is difficult to demonstrate that the process has been comprehensive.
The quality of brainstorming in hazard identification obviously depends on the expe-
rience of the people in the team, but it is possible to reach a completeness of 80%,
therefore brainstorming is a good method for initial high level hazard identification
for many system types.
3.2
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
FMEA is a qualitative step-by-step approach to discover potential failures that may
exist within the design of a product or process and their effects. It is a widely used
method, developed originally by the U.S. Military in the 1940s. The analyzed system
is usually described by a system diagram such as a piping and instrumentation dia-
gram, an electronic circuit diagram or a functional block diagram.
The purpose of the FMEA is to take actions to eliminate or reduce failures and
to document current knowledge and actions about the risks of failures for use in con-
tinuous improvement. Therefore, FMEA is not only used during design to prevent
failures, but it is used later for control the ongoing operation of the process. Ideally,
FMEA begins during the earliest conceptual stages of design and continues through-
out the life of the product or service.
To perform an FMEA:
1. Define the scope of the analysis.
2. Assemble a team.
3. Obtain the necessary drawings and functional description of the system.
4. Break down the system into components
5. Define the function of each component.
6. Select a component.
7. Make a list of the failure modes for the component.
8. Select a failure mode and list its causes and consequences.
9. Discuss the possible damage or harm of the failure.
10. Discuss the possible detection of the failure.
11. Repeat from step 8 until the list of failure modes has been completed.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Hazard and Operability Study
19
12. Repeat from step 6 until all components in the system have been analyzed.
13. Identify modifications in the design to compensate for the failure.
The definition of failure mode varies based on the application area. However, in risk
analysis, the following definition is used according to [20].
“A failure mode is the name of a group of failures in a part, component or sub-
system, all of which have the same effect on the system itself or on its environment.”
Failure modes can be categorized as functional or afunctional failure modes. Func-
tional failure modes affect the system directly, while afunctional failure modes affect
the environment or other system components which are not functionally related to
the failing component. Some failures can be both functional and afunctional.
For large systems, multi-level FMEA is commonly used. In this scenario a top down
approach is recommended, starting with an overall system FMEA, followed by the
analysis of the main subsystems and finally the process components.
FMEA is a powerful tool to present component failure modes, their causes and their
effects on the system in an easily readable format. The results can be used to deter-
mine requirements for redundancy or safety systems and to pinpoint parameters to
monitor during the development.
However, it is not possible to identify combinations of failure modes and a thorough
FMEA is time-consuming. Although FMEA can avoid costly modifications by iden-
tifying problems early in the design process, it is difficult to apply on complex systems.
For this project, functional FMEAs were carried out by selecting a limited set of
functional failure modes through initial trials.
3.3
Hazard and Operability Study
HAZOP is a systematic investigation of a product or a design to identify risks and
to provide solutions for treating the risks if possible. It is a qualitative item by item
study of a given system performed by a multi-disciplinary team, where failure modes
of an item are investigated for causes and consequences using a set of predefined guide
words.
An example of guide words shown in table 3.1 adopted from [13]. HAZOP is sim-
iliar to FMEA, but in HAZOP the deviations from intended outcomes and conditions
are considered first, and tracked back to possible causes and failure modes, whereas
FMEA starts by identifying failure modes.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Hazard identification
Guide word
Definition
No or not
The intended result or condition is not achieved or absent
More (higher)
Quantitative increase in output
Less (lower)
Quantitative decrease
As well as
Quantitative increase, such as additional material
Part of
Quantitative decrease, such as only one or two components from many
Reverse / opposite
Opposite, such as backflow
Other than
No part of or completely different from the intention is achieved
Table 3.1: Example set of guide words for HAZOP
HAZOP studies may be carried out already at the conceptual design stage.
The
advantage of an early analysis is that it is relatively easy to change the design. If
such an early analysis is made, a follow-up analysis is required on the detailed design.
In general, it is also recommended to perform HAZOP at the post commissioning and
every fifth year during operation.
The procedure for a HAZOP study is:
1. Define the scope of the analysis.
2. Establish a set of guide words.
3. Obtain the required documentation.
4. Define and gather a team to perform the analysis.
5. Select a node.
6. Select a deviation.
7. Discuss and record the possible causes for the deviation.
8. Discuss and record the possible consequences for the deviation.
9. Identify and record existing preventive safeguards for the deviation, and protec-
tive safeguards for the consequences.
10. Discuss the need for additional safety measures, or for design changes
11. Repeat the procedure from step 6 until there are no further deviations for the
node.
12. Repeat the procedure from step 5 until there are no further nodes.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Fault Tree Analysis
21
Functional HAZOP can be used for systems described by block diagrams, where each
block represents a component with a dedicated function. In order to ensure the com-
pleteness and comprehensiveness of the HAZOP study, a well-described, thorough set
of guide words is necessary.
Considering identifying the need for system improvements, HAZOP performs effec-
tively.
The result of this analysis are solutions and risk treatment actions, such
as suggestions for design modifications. Analyzing complex systems often results in
many pages of results, therefore it might be problematic to follow the event sequence
and see the causality pattern. In order to provide a simpler and easy to understand
form of the results, safety barrier diagrams were developed.
Although HAZOP provides a thorough examination for a wide range of systems, the
analysis can be very time-consuming and can lost the focus on finding detailed design
issues rather than investigating the wider issues. Moreover, the process relies on the
expertise of the designers who may not be sufficiently objective to seek problems in
their designs.
3.4
Fault Tree Analysis
FTA can be used qualitatively for identifying factors that contribute to an undesired
event, also known as a top event. Factors are represented pictorially in a tree diagram
which also illustrates their logical relationship to the top event. The elements of the
tree can represent component failures, human errors and any other relevant events.
This method can also be used quantitatevely to calculate the probability of the top
event.
The main advantage of this method is that it provides a detailed investigation in
systems, where combinations of failures and errors are required for an accident to
occur. A fault tree is constructed by using AND and OR gates. AND gates connect
inputs that simultaneously needs to occur for the accident to arise, while in case of
an OR gate, any of the inputs can cause the accident.
The method to construct a fault tree includes the following steps:
• Select a top event
• List immediate causes, such as internal failures or specific input conditions
• Analyze these causes/fault modes to identify how their failure could be caused
• Draw a diagram, in which alternative causes are linked by means of an OR gate
and combined causes are linked by AND gates
• Continue adding causes until all causes are basic events
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Hazard identification
Top events can be selected in general as harm to human or in a more detailed man-
ner, such as no sensor data available. Causes can be derived from hazard or failure
mode checklists. The fault tree then is constructed by tracing the propagation of the
disturbances through the system backwards.
When constructing fault trees for large systems, the diagrams are frequently com-
plicated and drawn on multiple pages, therefore it is recommended to analyze subsys-
tems. Since events usually represents states or conditions of the system, by adding
probabilities for the listed states and conditions facilitates calculating unreliability or
unavailability for a system. However, in risk analysis, critical accidents, such as crash
or explosion, are analyzed and these events rather have a frequency than a probability.
FTA is suitable for analyzing systems with many interfaces and interactions. It affords
a systematic approach, but also flexibility to include a variety of factors, including
human interactions and physical phenomena. The tree representation provides an
easy understanding and identification of simple failure pathways in complex systems
where combinations of events leading to the top event could be overlooked.
However, in case causal events are not bound together, it can be difficult to as-
sess whether all important pathways to the top event are included. Moreover, this
analysis uses a static model with binary states, such as failed or not failed, therefore
time interdependencies are not addressed and sequence effects or conditional failures
cannot be included easily.
In this project, software FTA was applied for the lane detection algorithm, which
is a safety-critical component in the overall system.
3.5
Sneak Analysis and variants
SA is a methodology to identify design errors. Sneak conditions include latent hard-
ware, software or integrated conditions that may cause an undesired event or inhibit
a desired event, which is not caused by a component failure. These conditions usually
have a random nature, therefore they are hard to detect by system tests and can
cause erroneous operation or even death or injury.
SCA was developed by NASA for design verification, by discovering unintentional
electrical circuit paths. SA is a broader analysis than SCA, being able to locate prob-
lems in both hardware and software problems by integrating various analyes, such as
FTA or FMEA.
SA uses network trees and clues or questions to find specific type of problems. Net-
work trees are topological groupings of the system, representing a sub-function with
all inputs that may affect the output.
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Sneak Analysis and variants
23
A sneak circuit is defined as an unexpected path or logic flow in safety-critical systems.
These unintended flows can initiate unwanted functions or block normal operation
of the analyzed system, without any hardware or software component failure. Facil-
itating conditions are inadvertently designed into the system, coded into a software
program, triggered by a human error or combinations of these elements.
SCA is aimed to identify sneak paths by uncovering design flaws that allow for sneak
conditions to develop. In contrast with HAZOP and FTA focusing on a single compo-
nent, this analysis examines paths between two elements, the source and the target.
A sneak path that requires a single component to fail in order to develop, called a
single failure sneak circuit.
There are 4 different type of sneak circuits:
1. Sneak paths: unexpected paths along which current, energy, or logical sequence
flows in an unintended direction.
2. Sneak timing: events occurring in an unexpected or conflicting sequence.
3. Sneak indications: ambiguous or false displays of system operating conditions
that may cause the system or an operator to take an undesired action.
4. Sneak labels: incorrect or imprecise labelling of system functions, that may
cause an operator to apply an incorrect stimulus to the system.
The classical approach to SCA involves:
1. Gathering basic design information, and checking its consistency.
2. Understanding the system and circuits.
3. Redrawing the circuit diagrams or schematics as a network tree.
4. Applying a check list of clues and questions for each network path.
5. Evaluating consequences for each of the identified sneak circuit.
6. Recording significant unwanted consequences.
Although this method is highly dependent on the constructed network trees and is
slightly different depending on the examined system, it works well for systems with
multiple states.
SPA [6], a variant of SA, using depth-first search for identifying paths between sources
and targets, instead of looking for topographs. Sources are for example power sup-
plies or control signal sources. Targets are typically actuators, which can have an
external hazardous effect.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Hazard identification
SA and its variants work best when applied together with HAZOP, therefore in this
project, HAZOP and SPA were applied on the same design.
3.6
Model-based safety analysis
To discover hazards in the developed system, which were not identified by the hazard
identification methods, model-based safety assessment was required.
Model-based
design is a standard practice in automotive control system development and model-
based safety assessment was developed already in the 1970’s and has now been used
extensively for automotive control systems validation.
Beyond a simulation environment, a set of test cases was also needed and these
cases could conveniently be derived from the higher level hazard analyses. It was also
necessary to be able to determine whether the results of simulation are ”safe”. An
”oracle” was needed to determine which outputs were unsafe and this was provided
by visualizations of the performance of the vehicle.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Case study
The objective of the case study is to demonstrate the feasibility of using advanced
hazard assessment methods for risk-based design of an AV. A test bed is chosen for
which the technical challenges are large and the technology needed is similar to that
for a full-scale vehicle, but which is nevertheless small enough that any accidents will
be minor.
Since a goal of this thesis is to provide validated safety assessment methods for full
scale AVs, the test bed should as far as possible reflect software and engineering
practices used in commercial AV development. Furthermore, NHTSA recommends
virtual tests as well as real-world test scenarios, therefore a physical prototype and
a simulation environment selected to be implemented, which will serve as a basis for
further studies as well.
Within the scope of a masters study, it was necessary to place some limitations on the
development of the hardware and software object of the study. A certain complexity
was chosen which is representative of the different parts of an AV development, but
it is not possible to make a full vehicle development, which typically requires many
tens of developers working over many years.
For the present project, a single vehicle travelling on a smooth surface with a marked
track with fixed obstacles was preferred since it required only a few weeks effort, allow-
ing a reasonable time for the safety analyses to be carried out. Alongside the physical
vehicle, a virtual simulation environment was also set up using the open-source ROS
[18], together with the well-known simulation environment, Gazebo [9].
The developed platform enabled the selected hazard identification methods to be
validated both on a real implementation and in simulation.
The results and the
observations are discussed in Chapter 5, while the current chapter discusses design
variations and the structure of the prototype and the simulation environment.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Case study
4.1
Prototype
In order to provide some limitation of scope the requirements for the prototype was
specified as:
• The prototype must be able to autonomously navigate on a closed, marked track
with smooth surface
• The prototype must be able to sense obstacles and other traffic elements and
avoid collision
Limitation in the terrain of the track is a necessity. Operation in rough terrain, or
even on normal roadways, requires image stabilization, which in turn requires very
high data rates. It is currently beyond the capacity of the small computers which can
be mounted on a small test-bed such as the Raspberry Pi processors. Operation in re-
alistic roadway simulations requires far more processing power – current commercial
developments of autonomous vehicles require computers with hundreds of processor
cores.
The physical prototype was realized by converting a 1/10 scale RC car to an AV. The
typical RC controller circuit was replaced by a micro-computer with an operating
system, which is responsible for monitoring the driving environment and controlling
the steering and the speed of the vehicle.
In general, any AV can be represented as the see-think-act loop, shown in figure
4.1. Sensing includes various sensors, that are capable of generate raw data about
Figure 4.1: The general architecture of AVs
the environment of the vehicle. Perception represents the step, where valuable infor-
mation gets extracted from raw data provided by the sensors. This stage includes
detection and localization. Detection consists of object recognition and tracking, while
localization is the term to describe the process, in which the vehicle determines its
location in the surrounding environment by using predefined knowledge, such as the
model of the environment.
Decision includes trajectory and behaviour planning. In this phase, the determined
location together with the optional environment model and the detected objects are
used to calculate an optimal trajectory for the vehicle to follow.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Hardware configuration
27
Acting represents motion control, such as speed and steering regulation. In full-scale
cars, speed can be divided into acceleration and braking, since they are realized by
different subsystems.
In order to reflect to full-scale self-driving cars, the aforementioned architecture was
aimed to be implemented.
4.2
Hardware configuration
Considering the specifications of the physical prototype and the general architecture
of self-driving cars, the required hardware components are the following:
• Robot platform - the physical body
• Processor - on-board computer
• Camera - lane detection and tracking
• Radar or Lidar - object detection and environment mapping
• IMU - movement measurements
• Batteries - power source
In the following sections, the selected components are briefly introduced.
4.2.1
Platform
Selecting the right mobile robot platform was the first step of the hardware design.
Mobile robots can be classified as holonomic and non-holonomic drive robots. Holo-
nomic drive refers to the relationship between controllable and total degrees of free-
dom of a robot. If the controllable degree of freedom is equal to total degrees of
freedom, then the robot is said to be holonomic. If the controllable degree of free-
dom is less than the total degrees of freedom, then it is known as non-holonomic drive.
A full-scale car has three degrees of freedom, its position in x and y coordinates
and its orientation.
However, there are only two controllable degrees of freedom
which are acceleration (or braking) and turning angle of steering wheel. To reflect
a full-scale self-driving car, non-holonomic drive was preferred, but other types of
robot platforms were also considered.
The following three commercially available
small-scale platforms were investigated:
• SunFounder PiCar-V
• PiBorg Diddyborg V2
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Case study
• RC vehicles
The SunFounder PiCar-V, shown in figure 4.2, is an open-source robot kit including a
car-like robot platform equipped with a USB camera on a tilt-pan device. The pack-
age includes the required motors, batteries, a remote controller and the corresponding
circuits, except the processor unit. Although this inexpensive platform resembles full
scale hydraulic steering and it is prepared for mounting several circuits, the platform
appeared to be fragile according to user reviews. The Diddyborg V2 is a 6 wheeled
Figure 4.2: SunFounder PiCar-V
robot kit produced by PiBorg, depicted in figure 4.3. It is a differential drive robot
platform, including motors, a remote controller and ample space for the circuitry.
Despite that this platform claimed to have a robust structure, it is only capable of a
limited speed and the differential drive platform was not a preferred choice, since its
steering is very different from that of a full-scale car.
Radio controlled cars are relatively cheap and well constructed vehicles for hobby-
ists. There are many types available for different purposes such as racing or off-road
driving. RC cars made for racing purposes usually include powerful motors in a ro-
bust structure with built-in shock absorbers and suspensions, similar to a full scale
car. Although, these kind of vehicles require additional work to replace their remote
control circuit and to prepare mounting points for various components, they are easily
accessible in local stores for a low price. Since non-holonomic drive was preferred, the
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Hardware configuration
29
Figure 4.3: PiBorg Diddyborg V2
Diddyborg V2 platform was rejected. The SunFounder Pi-Car V would have been an
ideal choice, but too many users were complaining about missing parts and fragile
structure. The suspension, the speed and the availability of the RC car were the main
reasons utilizing it as the robot platform for the project.
The selected RC car was the Racer ”X-Speeder” produced by Revell, a well-known
german-american RC car manufacturer. This vehicle came with a robust body with
built-in shock absorbers, which in fact was useful for image stabilization and road
bumps, and it was capable of a relatively high speed, maximized at around 20 km/h.
The vehicle was equipped with single DC motor for acceleration or deceleration and
a servo motor for the adjusting the steering. However, despite real cars are equipped
with brakes, this radio controlled vehicle had no dedicated brakes, the speed control
was managed by changing the rotational velocity of the driving motor. The DC motor
was single axle 9V motor with 2A peak consumption. Originally, the steering was
controlled by a 5-wire servo motor but it was replaced with a modern 3-wire servo
for easier implementation.
4.2.2
Processor unit
To implement autonomous driving, a central computation unit must have been mounted
on the body of the vehicle. This unit was required to have the capability of control-
ling multiple actuators and read various sensors in real-time. Moreover, it was rec-
ommended to have the ability to monitor the internal processes remotely, therefore
it needed to be capable of wireless communication.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Case study
Figure 4.4: Revell X-speeder
The following three different micro-computers were selected for further studies:
• Raspberry Pi 3 B+
• Arduino
• ESP8266
Although Arduino, ESP8266 and its relatives are quite popular in robotic applica-
tions, these micro-controllers have limited capabilities. Moreover, they operate in an
infinite single loop manner, which means real multi-tasking is difficult or even impos-
sible to implement. However, incorporating multiple pieces in the system would have
been possible, but a more compact and powerful processor unit was selected.
The selected processor unit was the Raspberry Pi 3 B+ model, which is a popu-
lar card-sized computer with built-in Ethernet, WiFi and Bluetooth capabilities. Its
architecture is based on the ARM Cortex-A53 central processing unit, running at
1.4GHz and has 1 Gb of memory. It provides 4 USB, a single HDMI and a dedicated
camera connection as well, alongside with 40 GPIO pins, including I2C, UART, SPI
and other interface connections.
4.2.3
Motor drivers
In order to drive the DC motor, an Adafruit Motor Hat was attached on top of the
Raspberry Pi computer. This device can drive up to 4 DC or 2 Stepper motors with
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Hardware configuration
31
full PWM speed control, however in this project, only one motor was driven by the
hat. Since the Raspberry Pi does not have a lot of pulse-width modulation (PWM)
capable pins, a fully-dedicated PWM driver chip was used on-board to both control
motor direction and speed.
This chip handled all the motor and speed controls over I2C, therefore only two
pins were required to drive multiple motors and it is conveniently extendable with
any other I2C devices. Motors were controlled by TB6612 MOSFET drivers with
1.2A per channel current capability (and up to 3A peak for approximately 20ms at a
time) and there were built-in flyback diodes for protection. The hat required a power
source between 6-12 Volts.
Manipulating the steering wheels required controlling the servo motor. The chosen
RC car came with a traditional 5-wire servo motor which was replaced by a modern
3-wire version. Powering and controlling the servo motor would have been possible
directly from the Raspberry Pi GPIO pins, but to implement a capable platform
for future modifications and extensions a separate servo motor driver circuit was at-
tached via I2C to the computer. The selected servo controller circuit was based on
the PCA9685 chip and it was capable of controlling 16 servos with a 12-bit resolution.
Figure 4.5: Raspberry Pi 3 B+ with the Adafruit motor hat
4.2.4
Sensors
As discussed above, cameras are commonly used for lane and object recognition and
tracking. In this project, the camera was only used for lane detection, since the ob-
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Case study
stacle detection was performed by another sensor and obstacle recognition was not a
requirement. There are two ways to connect a camera to the Raspberry Pi computer.
First is to use the Raspberry Pi camera through the dedicated SCSI port, or use a
regular USB camera through the USB ports. Since the Raspberry Pi Camera V2
offers a good quality with small dimensions, it was selected to be implemented. This
camera includes a Sony IMX219 8-megapixel sensor and supports 1080p at 30 fps,
720p at 60 fps and VGA90 video modes.
Obstacle sensing can also be achieved in various ways. Ultrasonic and infrared sen-
sors are widely used in robotic applications for distance measurements. In general,
these type of devices provide fast enough measurements, but a limited field of view.
Time of Flight cameras are inexpensive and great alternatives for ultrasonic and in-
frared sensors with increased reliability and smaller dimensions, but they have the
same limited field of view. Lidars (fixed and rotating) and binocular cameras are also
popular choices recently. Binocular cameras are quite new technology, therefore they
are costly. When using a single or an array of Lidars, robots are able to map their
working environment, which is indeed an ideal solution for an automated driving sys-
tem operating in public traffic.
Since commercially available rotating Lidars are still quite expensive, a single ray
Time of Flight camera, the TFMini by Benewake was chosen for the prototype. This
particular camera was able to measure distance to an object between 0.3 and 12 me-
ters with an accuracy between 1-2% and a relatively small field of view of 2.3.̂
An IMU was required to calculate movements of the robot. An IMU measures linear
and occasionally angular velocities, therefore by a simple integration between two
measurements, the displacement of the robot can be calculated. The incorporated
sensor was the ADXL345, a 3-axis accelerometer with a resolution of 13 bits. The
device was connected via I2C to the Raspberry Pi and measured the acceleration in
the X, Y and Z axis.
4.2.5
Power
The implemented configuration included two separate power source. The chosen RC
car came with a built-in battery, which consists of 6 regular AAA batteries and pro-
vides 9 Volts. This battery was used to provide an adequate amount of power for the
DC motor.
The secondary battery consisted of two 18650 batteries, providing a nominal 7.4
Volts. Since the Raspberry Pi and the other sensors required a stable 5 V, a voltage
regulator was attached to the batteries. The selected regulator takes an input volt-
age between 4 and 38 volts and it is able to output a voltage between 1.25 and 36
volts, while serving current needs up to 5 Amperes, which fulfilled the total current
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Hardware configuration
33
requirement of the different components.
4.2.6
Circuit diagram
In the following, two different circuit diagrams are illustrated and the differences are
listed and explained. The first version was created rather in an early stage of the
development, while the second version was constructed at a later stage and includes
safety recommendations from the results of the various analyses.
4.2.6.1
Version 1
In the first version of the hardware configuration, shown in figure 4.6, the Lidar
module was mounted on top of a rotating servo in order to cover a wider range in
front of the vehicle for obstacle detection. Later, this module was replaced by the
above described TFMini. Moreover, the whole system was planned to run only on
the built-in battery, but it was modified later to have two independent power sources.
Besides, in this version, the servo motor was connected directly to the Raspberry Pi
GPIO pins, which was later modified to have its own driver circuit in order to provide
flexibility and possibility for extensions. This design version was used to demonstrate
the sneak path analysis.
Figure 4.6: Circuit diagram first version
4.2.6.2
Version 2
The second version, shown in figure 4.7, included the dedicated servo motor driver
circuit and the secondary power source. In this version, the TFMini module was used
in a fixed position, which was an inevitable decision due to space limitations.
The final constructed prototype is shown in figure 4.8.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Case study
Figure 4.7: Circuit diagram second version
4.3
Software configuration
The implemented software of the prototype had to be able to cope with the following
tasks:
• Communicating with the sensors and actuators
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Software configuration
35
Figure 4.8: The final prototype
• Processing incoming sensor data
• Applying logic for sensor data
• Determine speed and steering angle based on sensor data
• Control the actuators based on speed and steering angle
• Providing an interface to monitor and remote stop functionality
4.3.1
Flowchart design
As an initial approach, an Arduino based application was designed in form of a
flowchart. This initial design was created before deeper research for robotic operat-
ing systems. It was mainly created for introductory purposes, to get familiar with
required components, functions and their sequence.
Since other solutions provide
better infrastructure and tools, this design was discarded later, but was subject to an
functional FMEA study.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Case study
Figure 4.9: Software flowchart design
4.3.2
ROS based design
ROS is a open-source framework for robot development. It provides a rich collection
of tools and implementations of commonly used functionalities. The basic structure
of ROS is shown in figure 4.10.
This framework is based on a publish-subscribe
model, in which nodes communicate asynchronously by messages. The communica-
tion is managed by a master node (roscore) and other nodes are able to send and
receive messages from multiple topics. Moreover, ROS has standardized definitions
for frequent message types, such as for images or point clouds. Since the inputs and
outputs of each node are standardized messages, therefore ROS nodes can be pro-
grammed both in C++ and Python languages. Furthermore, ROS provides a shared
dictionary (parameter server) accessible for each node to store and get configuration
parameters at runtime. Services, nodes that provide a response for a request, can
also be implemented in ROS.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Software configuration
37
Figure 4.10: Basic structure of ROS
ROS provides easy implementation for distributed systems with nodes running on
different computers. Furthermore, data recording and playback is also a built-in fea-
ture, called rosbags. Another great advantage of this framework is that simulation
and visualization environments, such as Gazebo and Rviz can be easily implemented
and added to the application.
In this project, a distributed system was set up between the Raspberry Pi and a
PC to provide a monitoring and controlling interface for the vehicle. The master
node was hosted by the PC, while the Raspberry Pi was running the driver nodes for
the sensors and motors. Data processing and tasks related to perception and decision
were performed on the PC.
4.3.2.1
Version 1
The original ROS software design, shown in figure 4.11, reflected to full-scale au-
tonomous car systems, by including environment mapping and trajectory planning.
As figure 4.11 shows, the software used four sensors and their corresponding ROS
nodes to generate standardized messages of raw data:
• Camera - raspicam
• Lidar - TFMini-ROS
• GPS - ublox
• IMU - adi-driver
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Case study
Figure 4.11: First version of ROS based software design
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Software configuration
39
The image of the camera was processed by the lane_detection node based on the
”Curved Lane Detection” article by Kemal Ficici [7] and on the ”Lane Lines Detec-
tion” repository by Tatsuya Hatanaka [10]. The output of this node was a single
value representing the offset of the vehicle from the center point of the detected lane.
Based on this calculated displacement, the goal_generator node was spawning targets
compensating the offset in order to drive the vehicle in the middle of the lane.
The Lidar driver node feeds into a simple node, called range_to_pointcloud, which
converts the message type Range to a PointCloud. This node was required, since the
path planning algorithm only takes this type of messages. Following the output of
the GPS and the IMU driver node, their measurements are fused by a localization
package providing a more accurate positioning of the robot. The navsat_transform
node incorporates the GPS data to the ekf_localization node, which is a nonlinear
state estimator based on the extended Kalman filter. The output of the localization
node was an Odometry message, containing information about the position, speed
and heading of the vehicle.
All aforementioned outputs were used in the path planning part of the algorithm,
realized by the move_base package, a component of the ROS navigation stack. The
move_base package can be divided into a global and a local planner part, each having
a cost map to represent obstacles and free space in the environment. The planners
select navigation routes based on a cost function. In general, global cost maps cover a
larger area with a lower resolution, while the local ones are narrower and have a more
precise resolution. These cost maps were constantly updated based on the sensor data.
The base_local_planner, the default local planner in the move_base package, provides
a Twist message, containing the linear and angular velocities for the robot. In order
to provide a steering and a speed for ackermann type vehicles, the base_local_planner
was replaced by the teb_local_planner package. An example of a calculated trajec-
tory around two obstacles by the teb_local_planner is illustrated in figure 4.12. The
objects are simple marker, the array of red arrows represents the calculated path and
he green lines are alternative trajectories.
Figure 4.12: Example path planning with teb local planner
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Case study
Although this package claimed to be working with ackermann type vehicles, in the
developed system it produced ambiguous paths. In the case of approaching the target
position required reverse movements, the vehicle got stuck and kept going backwards.
4.3.2.2
Version 2
The final version of the software design was a simplified variant of the first one. Due
to configuration problems with the teb_local_planner, the move_base package was
completely removed. There were no target generation and cost maps, therefore the
localization procedure was also removed. Since localization was no longer included,
the IMU was also detached from the system.
In this version, the move_base node calculated the appropriate speed and steering
angle based on the offset provided by the lane_detection node. Moreover, in this
conversion, the range data from the Lidar sensor was incorporated so, if the distance
was lower than a predefined value, the speed of the vehicle was set to 0. Furthermore,
if any of the required data for the speed and steering calculation was not received
continuously, the vehicle stopped. Although the final software resembles a full-scale
Figure 4.13: Second version of ROS based software
self-driving car system to a lesser degree, the project specifications were still fulfilled.
4.4
Human Machine Interface
The implemented system included a simple interface where the various messages and
values could be tracked. This interface was based on the rqt package and contained
console, plot, image and other widgets to visualize different parameters of the system,
as shown in figure 4.14. The plots depicted the offset of the vehicle in the lane, the
speed and the steering parameters, while the console listed messages provided by the
logging service of ROS. A live stream of the camera image with the detected lanes on
top was also placed on the HMI.
==PAGE:53==
4.5 Simulation
41
Figure 4.14: The developed HMI
The on-demand functionality also took place on the user interface. This function
was realized by publishing a high priority message for the node that sets speed and
steering according the lane offset. However, the published message was not a single
stop message, but rather an enabling signal, that needed to be constantly provided for
operation. Therefore, a message publisher widget was set up on the HMI to broadcast
the ”go” signal, which gives the control of a fail safe property.
4.5
Simulation
Testing the implemented software on the physical car in the real world can be ex-
pensive for various reasons, such as setting up a given driving scenario, transporting
the car to the location or rebuilding the vehicle after a crash. Virtual simulation is
an inexpensive test method to validate software and algorithms before performing
real world tests. Moreover, simulations can be done in a significantly higher pace,
therefore an increased number of tests can be performed.
Model-based testing is very effective in identifying software errors, but it depends
very much on the degree to which the model corresponds to real life. For this reason,
real life testing on the physical prototype is also necessary.
Without simulation or real world tests, it is impossible to validate software unless
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Case study
having a dedicated oracle, that certainly knows the desired outcome of situations
with all possible conditions. Since self-driving cars include a system with high com-
plexity, there is no such person or machine that can predict and validate proper
behaviour of developed software solutions. Therefore, virtual tests alongside with
physical tests needed to be performed. In order to provide a platform for virtual
tests, a simulation environment was set up for the current project.
4.5.1
Robot model
A model of the developed vehicle was built in order to use it in the simulations. Since
the prototype operates with a non-holonomic drive, the virtual model should have
incorporated the ackermann drive model, which in fact introduced some difficulties.
There are plenty of sources for robot models with various drive types [19], but ack-
ermann drive robots are less available. Nevertheless, the robot model from the MIT
Racecar [14] project was utilized and modified according to the physical prototype.
The robot model, shown in figure 4.15, contained various simulated sensors, including
a camera, a Lidar and an IMU, and the transformation matrices between the coordi-
nate systems of the different sensors. In ROS, each shape or component is represented
by a link, and links are connected via joints, therefore each link has its own frame
with an optionally different position and rotation compared to its parent link. ROS
uses transformation matrices in order to convert data from one frame to another, for
example a measurement from the Lidar sensor placed in the front of the vehicle needs
to be converted to the base of the mobile robot to ensure appropriate distances in
path planning.
4.5.2
Gazebo and RViz
Gazebo is an open-source robot simulation tool currently developed by the Open
Source Robotics Foundation. It provides accurate and high-quality simulations for
single or multiple robots, both in indoor and outdoor environments. It is mainly used
to rapidly test algorithms and to train AI systems by realistic simulations. In Gazebo,
components can be easily imported and there is already a huge selection of elements
available.
Gazebo also provides various plugins to simulate sensors. In the implemented robot
model, the camera and the Lidar sensors were simulated. In the setup of the developed
environment, shown in figure 4.15 there are road segment components constituting a
racetrack. Moreover, obstacles, such as cardboard boxes and traffic cones are inserted
in the simulation to ensure easy obstacle placement for more advanced scenarios. RViz
is a powerful visualization tool built-in the ROS framework, primarily used for visual-
izing the cost maps and the planned trajectories of the first version of ROS software
design in this project. It is able to visualize robot models and the various messages
==PAGE:55==
4.5 Simulation
43
Figure 4.15: An example simulation scenario with the developed robot model
published by different nodes. Although topics can be monitored in the command line
interface and other ways as well, this tool is useful for supervising the relevant data
in one place.
==PAGE:56==
44
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Results
In this chapter, the result of different applied hazard identification methodologies are
presented. Since some of the following methodologies produce heavy and long results,
for those the complete results are placed in the Appendix A.
5.1
Brainstorming
The brainstorming session took place in the very early stage of the development. The
purpose of this method was to establish safety design principles for the project and
to generate an initial selection of components. In that stage, the specification of the
prototype included overtaking and lane changing, therefore related scenarios were
also taken into account.
At first, ideas for the various causes of a possible crash were generated:
• Hitting a wall
• Track excursion - leaving the lane
• Collision with fixed object
• Collision with dynamic object
• Rear end collision - late braking with car ahead
• Pulling out to overtake
• Cutting in after overtaking
• Cornering over-steer - spinning out
• Cornering under-steer - skidding out
• Cornering roll over
Moreover, the different top level hardware failures were also listed:
• Braking system failure
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Results
• Speed control failure
• Steering failure
• Sensor system failure
• Power source failure
Considering the results above, two main types of crash scenarios can be differentiated.
The first group collects collision with various elements, while the second represents
cornering problems. Regarding the hardware failures, all of them can contribute the
mentioned crash scenarios.
From the brainstorming session, it was obvious that collision avoidance has signif-
icant importance for avoiding many of the crash situations.
For simpler systems,
forward distance measurement is sufficient to evade rear-end crashes. In case lane
changing and overtaking is a requirement, measurements in a single direction is not
satisfactory, therefore survey in multiple directions is recommended. Environment
mapping would be an ideal solution, offering a 360 degree vision around the vehicle.
Since these safety sensors may possibly also malfunction, a further safety process
was recommended for implementation. Normally, the driver would be notified about
occurring malfunctions in the system of the car, but in case of AVs, there is not nec-
essarily a driver. However, a remote operator or a monitoring person has the ability
to detect failures and do actions to prevent collisions, therefore the development of a
monitoring system and an emergency stop function were suggested.
Furthermore, implementing safety measures for normal operation of the dedicated
subsystems, such as braking or steering, was recommended but was not carried out
in the scope of the work. Although establishing redundant subsystems were also sug-
gested to increase reliability, their implementation in the prototype was not possible
due to space limitations.
5.2
Functional Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
This analysis was performed on the flowchart design and later was repeated on the
first version of ROS design. Performing an FMEA study typically requires a great
amount of time and attention to details. Fortunately, computer aided solutions exist
and can be utilized for these studies. In this project, HAZEX was used, which is a
semi-automated tool to perform systematic analyses, such as HAZOP or FMEA and
to produce safety barrier diagrams based on the analysis data. By using a software
for the analysis, consistency in terms and spelling and a more complete coverage are
ensured.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Functional Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
47
The complete results, such as all the analysis tables are placed in the Appendix
A, while the analyses for the lane detection component are presented below in table
5.1 and 5.2.
Five main nodes were selected for analysis in the flowchart design:
• Analyze obstacle
• Estimate obstacle trajectory
• Plan trajectory
• Lane tracking
• Report
A fixed list of deviations were used against them to list causes and consequences of
the given deviations:
• No function
• Inaccurate function
• Too late
• Too early
• More
• Less
The analysis pointed out several recommendations to the flowchart design, such as
reconsidering the hierarchy of the implemented functions and implementing safety
stop function when lane marks were not detected by the vision system. Moreover,
the analysis recommended smoothing for sensor measurements in order to decrease
occurrence of false detection and redundant systems to increase reliability.
By moving to the ROS framework, the single loop structure was replaced by a network
of nodes, therefore the hierarchy issue was fixed. The vision system was extended
with the aforementioned safe-stop functionality after the analysis. Furthermore, the
sensors were set to perform on a slightly higher frequency and an averaging filter of
3 were applied on their measurements.
The first ROS based design was also subject to a functional FMEA study.
This
analysis applied a combined list of deviations:
• No function
• Erroneous functioning - includes More, Less and Too Early functioning
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Results
Deviation
Causes
Consequences
Notes
No function
- No physical track
marks
- No track marks
detected
- - Sensor failure
- Algorithm error
- Possible crash
- Departure from track
Consider safety
STOP
Inaccurate
function
- False tracks detected
- - Algorithm error
- - Noise in sensing
- Possible crash
- Departure from track
- Poor performance
Too late
- Sensing delay
- Algorithm delay
- - Interference
- Possible crash
- Departure from track
- Poor performance
To early
- Incomplete track
detection
- Algorithm error
- Possible crash
- Departure from track
- Poor performance
More
- False track mark
detection
- Interference
- Noise
- Possible crash
- Departure from track
- Poor performance
Less
- Missing detection of
track elements
- Noise
- Delay
- Interference
- Possible crash
- Departure from track
- Poor performance
Table 5.1: Functional FMEA results for lane detection component from Flowchart
design
• Delayed functioning - represents Too Late functioning
The main result of the second analysis was a recommendation to implement zero sig-
nal detection. This safety method realized a fallback strategy by stopping the vehicle
if specific messages were not published on dedicated topics. An investigation and
testing on the localization node were also suggested for specific scenarios, like how
does the algorithm perform, if one of the fused sensors is not available or if the vehicle
stays at the same place for longer time.
The zero signal detection was realized by implementing a watch function on the
frequency of dedicated topics, such as the distance measurement topic from the Lidar
sensor.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Hazard and Operability Study
49
Disturbances
Causes
Consequences
Safety
measures
No function
- Processing overload
- Algorithm error
- Lane not properly
marked
- Noise in video signal
- Obstruction in
the lane
- Program executing
schedule error
- No lane tracking
- - No steering: 1
- - - Racer leaves
lane: 2
- - - - Crash
1. Zero signal
detection
and stop
2. May be on
straight
Erroneous
functioning
- Programming error
- Parameter error
- Noise in video signal
- Colour histogram
problem
- - Scene is noisy
- Lane marking
problem
- - Lane is unmarked
- - Lane marking is
obscured
- - Incomplete lane
marking
- Inaccurate
lane tracking
- - Inaccurate
steering
- - - Racer leaves
lane
- - - - Crash
Delayed
functioning
- Processing overload
- Timing error
- Deadlock or livelock
- Inaccurate
lane tracking
- - Inaccurate
steering
- - - Racer leaves
lane
- - - - Crash
Table 5.2: Functional FMEA results for lane detection component from ROS design
5.3
Hazard and Operability Study
The HAZOP study was completed on the hardware design of the vehicle. The HAZEX
software was used to perform the analysis and produce the results in a standardized
fashion. The study investigated the following major components:
• Camera
• Lidar
• IMU
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Results
• Servo motor
• DC motor
• Battery
• Voltage regulator
• Front wheel
• Rear wheel
The following list of disturbances were used in general, but only relevant ones were
investigated on the different components:
• No function
• Poor function
• Erroneous functioning
• Inadequate functioning
• Delayed functioning
• Camera misalignment
• High output voltage
The results for the HAZOP analysis on the battery component are summarized in
table 5.3.
Disturbance
Causes
Consequences
Safety
measures
No function
- Battery fails
- Connector fails
- Cable fails
- Mechanical failure
- Short circuit
- No power
for the system
- - Vehicle stops
- Overheating: 1
- - Possible fire
1. Fuse
Poor function
- Low battery
- - Failure to recharge
- - Poor battery
charge holding
- Connector failure
- Cable failure
- Erroneous sensor data
- Erroneous velocity
and steering
- - Racer leaves lane
- - - Crash
Table 5.3: HAZOP results for component
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Sneak Path Analysis
51
The results included recommendations for implementing zero signal detection and
fuses, and investigations and tests on power related situations, like overcharged bat-
tery. Moreover, tests were suggested for situations, where one of the power sources
fails. The results of the tests were, that in case the motor power supply failed, the
vehicle simply stopped, while if the secondary power source failed, the Raspberry
Pi shut down and therefore the motor driver stopped. Although the main battery
provided power for the motor hat, the hat did not provide power for the Raspberry
Pi itself.
5.4
Sneak Path Analysis
SPA was performed on the first version of the circuit diagram, described previously.
The inner circuits of the different components are not considered in this analysis,
therefore only a subset of the electronic circuit is analyzed for sneak paths in order
to represent the methodology. The selected target was the steering servo as a safety-
critical key component. The source in that version of the system is the battery, since
it is the only power source in the circuit. The result of the analysis is summarized
in table 5.4 and visualized in figure 5.1. In the analysis, 13 sneak paths have been
Path
Facilitating condition
Source
Target
1
Short circuit on voltage regulator (VIN – GND)
Battery
GND
2
Short circuit on Raspberry Pi (3.3V or 5V – GND)
Battery
GND
3
Short circuit on Lidar (VCC – GND)
Battery
GND
4
Short circuit on Lidar servo (VCC – GND)
Battery
GND
5
Short circuit on steering servo (VCC – GND)
Battery
GND
6
Short circuit on motor hat (+12V - +5V)
Battery
VCC
7
Short circuit on voltage regulator (U2 Pin 1-3)
Battery
VCC
8
Short circuit on steering servo (GND – VCC)
Battery
VCC
9
Short circuit on Raspberry Pi (3.3V or 5V – GPIO4)
Battery
PWM
10
Short circuit on Raspberry Pi (GND – GPIO4)
Battery
PWM
11
Short circuit on steering servo (GND – PWM)
Battery
PWM
12
Short circuit on steering servo (VCC – PWM)
Battery
PWM
13
Wrong signal source on Raspberry Pi (X – GPIO4)
Battery
PWM
Table 5.4: SPA results
discovered, each of them resulting in a single failure sneak circuit by an unintended
short circuit on different components. On path 6, a Zener diode could be attached to
the Vout pin of the voltage regulator to block reverse current flow. The consequences
of the sneaks were either stopping of the vehicle or severe deviations in the steering.
Furthermore, the safety level of the analyzed subsystem is generally high. The com-
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Results
Figure 5.1: Sneak paths identified by SPA
ponents are reasonably safe, because of proper pin isolation and spacing. However,
the instability of Dupont connectors could lead to hazardous events.
Moreover, to increase safety, the following safe-guard components were considered
for implementation:
• Diodes: blocking the current flowing in the wrong way
• Solid state relay: Physically separating circuits
• Redundancy: Provide power and signals from multiple source
• Separate power supplies for different subsystems
• Physical separation
• High integrity ground connections, preferably without switching or plugging
connection
• Power socket connections with an earth before power connection
In the subsequent versions of the hardware configuration, a secondary power source
was implemented to power the DC motor and the rest of the components separately.
Although it did not realize a redundant power system, the separation improved the
reliability of the system.
The different modules are physically well separated, as they are distributed along
the body of the vehicle and the sensors are placed in different vertical positions. Fur-
thermore, implementing solid state relays and diodes would have been possible, but
the available space was reserved for the necessary circuitry.
==PAGE:65==
5.5 Software Fault Tree Analysis
53
5.5
Software Fault Tree Analysis
An example of the FTA analysis was performed on the lane detection software compo-
nent. This piece of software, shown in Appendix B, calculates the difference between
the position of the car in the lane and the middle point of the detected lane, therefore
it is a central part of the autonomous steering system. The input of the function is
the camera image and the output is the calculated offset.
The full software analysis for this component is very extensive, therefore just an
example, the top level function itself, is shown here and sub-functions, such as per-
spective warp or color thresholding, were not investigated in detail, since many of
them are functions from standard libraries, like OpenCV or numpy.
The chosen routine was analyzed manually in an informal way, in which the main
function was backtracked line by line and formally with the SOFTA [21] program,
which applies weakest precondition theory to software fault tree construction [5] [23].
In the informal analysis, the selected top event was the erroneous deviation as the
most important output parameter of the investigated software component. The gen-
erated fault tree is shown in two pieces, in figure 5.2 and 5.3. The analysis allowed a
deeper understanding of the lane detection algorithm and pointed out several safety-
critical parameters, which all had a significant influence in the performance of the
algorithm.
In general, threshold values should be carefully tuned and rigorously tested.
An
erroneous value for color and gradient thresholding affects the overall process, while
incorrect thresholds for the sanity check can discard a legitimate detection and vice
verse.
The definition of the perspective transformation matrix is also a very sensitive pa-
rameter in the process. Furthermore, the camera scaling was also pinpointed as a
hazardous value, as it directly affects the output. Moreover, using the results of the
analysis, various scenarios were determined for model-based testing.
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Results
Figure 5.2: Example software FTA result part 1
==PAGE:67==
5.5 Software Fault Tree Analysis
55
Figure 5.3: Example software FTA result part 2
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Results
Although the original code was written in the Python language, it has been provided
with C style statement block syntax (curly braces) to make the syntax clearer for the
automated analysis. The text for the procedure:
1 def process_image(self,image)
2 {
3
# Gradient thresholding
4
gradient_combined = self.apply_thresholds(image)
5
# Color thresholding
6
s_binary = self.apply_color_threshold(image)
7
# Combine Gradient and Color thresholding
8
combined_binary = self.combine_threshold(s_binary, gradient_combined)
9
# Transforming Perspective
10
binary_warped , Minv = self.warp(combined_binary)
11
# Getting Histogram
12
histogram = self.get_histogram(binary_warped)
13
# Sliding Window to detect lane lines
14
ploty = self.slide_window(binary_warped , histogram, 1)
15
left_fit = self.slide_window(binary_warped , histogram, 2)
16
right_fit = self.slide_window(binary_warped , histogram, 3)
17
# Skipping Sliding Window
18
ret = self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped , left_fit, right_fit, 1)
19
offset = self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped , left_fit, right_fit, 2)
20
# Measuring Curvature
21
left_curverad , right_curverad = self.measure_curvature(ploty, ret)
22
# Sanity check: whether the lines are roughly parallel
23
slope_left= ret.left_fitx - ret.left_fitx_prev
24
slope_right= ret.right_fitx - ret.right_fitx_prev
25
slope_diff= abs(slope_left - slope_right)
26
slope_threshold= 150
27
curve_diff= abs(left_curverad - right_curverad)
28
curve_threshold= 10000
29
if (slope_diff > slope_threshold or curve_diff > curve_threshold)
30
{
31
used_ret= ret
32
return offset
33
} /* end if no else*/
34 }
Listing 5.1: The modified code
One of the resulting fault tree is shown in figure 5.4. The fault tree in this case had
only a single branch. The post predicate for the tree (at the bottom of the tree) was
that the result, the detected lane lines ret, as equal to the true external value for the
lane. The first predicate, at the top of the tree, corresponds to the path predicate
for the particular program path to be followed. This can be used for establishing
values for test data, or can be simplified by applying the fault tree analysis to the
sub-functions and combining the results.
==PAGE:69==
5.5 Software Fault Tree Analysis
57
NOT self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit,  self.slide_window(binary_warped,  self.get_histogram(binary_warped) = 
true_ret 
        | 
[  4.  gradient_combined = self.apply_thresholds(image) ] 
        | 
NOT self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit,  self.slide_window(binary_warped,  self.get_histogram(binary_warped) = 
true_ret 
        | 
[  6.  s_binary = self.apply_color_threshold(image) ] 
        | 
NOT self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit,  self.slide_window(binary_warped,  self.get_histogram(binary_warped) = 
true_ret 
        | 
[  8.  combined_binary = self.combine_threshold(s_binary, gradient_combined) ] 
        | 
NOT self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit,  self.slide_window(binary_warped,  self.get_histogram(binary_warped) = 
true_ret 
        | 
[  10.  binary_warped, minv = self.warp(combined_binary) ] 
        | 
NOT self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit,  self.slide_window(binary_warped,  self.get_histogram(binary_warped) = 
true_ret 
        | 
[  12.  histogram = self.get_histogram(binary_warped) ] 
        | 
NOT self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit,  self.slide_window(binary_warped, histogram) = true_ret 
        | 
[  14.  ploty = self.slide_window(binary_warped, histogram, 1) ] 
        | 
NOT self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit,  self.slide_window(binary_warped, histogram) = true_ret 
        | 
[  15.  left_fit = self.slide_window(binary_warped, histogram, 2) ] 
        | 
NOT self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit,  self.slide_window(binary_warped, histogram) = true_ret 
        | 
[  16.  right_fit = self.slide_window(binary_warped, histogram, 3) ] 
        | 
NOT  self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit, right_fit, 1) = true_ret 
        | 
[  18.  ret = self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit, right_fit, 1) ] 
        | 
NOT ret = true_ret 
        | 
[  19.  offset = self.skip_sliding_window(binary_warped, left_fit, right_fit, 2) ] 
        | 
NOT ret = true_ret 
        | 
[  21.  left_curverad, right_curverad = self.measure_curvature(ploty, ret) ] 
        | 
NOT ret = true_ret 
        | 
[  23.  slope_left= ret.left_fitx - ret.left_fitx_prev ] 
        | 
NOT ret = true_ret 
        | 
[  24.  slope_right= ret.right_fitx - ret.right_fitx_prev ] 
        | 
NOT ret = true_ret 
        | 
[  25.  slope_diff= abs(slope_left - slope_right) ] 
        | 
NOT ret = true_ret 
        | 
[  26.  slope_threshold= 150 ] 
        | 
NOT ret = true_ret 
Figure 5.4: Results by SOFTA
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Results
Comparing the automated analysis to the manual software fault tree analysis, the
formal analysis is carried out much more rapidly, taking only seconds to calculate for
each function. However, interpreting the results took a significant time.
Formal software FTA has been most widely applied for safety systems in which the
post predicates are for example NOT ouput_signal = shutdown. In these types of
analyses, the question of whether failure occurs can be determined from simple logic.
For the present case of steering the provision of a “safety predicate”, that is a post
predicate ensuring safety, involves the question of the quantitative performance of
the algorithm versus the requirement imposed by the input data.
Performance issues cannot be decided on the basis of simple logic alone. The manual
analysis approach was much better than the formal analysis in isolating performance
issues.
5.6
Model-based testing and real life testing
Applying the various hazard identification procedures enabled the derivation of a set
of scenarios to be tested in the simulation and/or with the prototype, shown in table
5.5.
==PAGE:71==
5.6 Model-based testing and real life testing
59
Component
Test
Hardware
Primary power source failure
Secondary power source failure
Low battery voltage
Miscalibrated voltage regulator
Vibration test for servo motor stability
Vibration test for connectors stability
Vibration test for camera mount stability
Obstacle detection
Obstacle placed different spots in the lane
Obstacle placed in front of the vehicle during operation
Transparent obstacle
Small obstacle
Lane detection
Cropped camera image
Different camera image resolution
Camera image vertically flipped
Camera image horizontally flipped
Ambiguous lane markings
Missing lane markings
Sub-optimal light conditions
Different initial offsets
Localization
Performance if vehicle stays the same place
Performance if GPS or IMU data is not available
Performance if GPS or IMU data is erroneous
Path planning
Target close to obstacle
Target is behind of the vehicle
Obstacle placed in path during path execution
Controller
Zero signal detection of lane detector
Zero signal detection of obstacle detector
Absence of ”go” signal
Table 5.5: Test scenarios
==PAGE:72==
60
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 6
Observations
In this chapter the observations made during the design and the hazard analysis
processes are presented. The challenges faced during the development of the hardware
and software configuration are also listed and the 12 safety elements from NHTSA
are revised on the prototype.
6.1
Design challenges
A number of design issues were found, some of which could have an effect on reli-
ability and safety.
Finding a suitable platform and hardware components for the
prototype, was a typical design challenge solved by systematic design by catalogue
[22], in which the designer selects components from standard items to satisfy certain
functions. Selecting the right units requires calculation and judgment. For example,
choosing sensors with lower measurement frequency would affect the rapidity of the
safety stop function.
Space limitations is a frequent design challenge in robot construction. Even though
the chosen RC car chassis initially appeared to have ample space and mounting points,
in practice the need for additional circuitry and an additional power supply proved
to be a design challenge.
In the chassis of the vehicle, there was a large battery compartment, which was
convenient, but which allowed only for one set of batteries and a fixed output voltage.
The power requirements for the drive motor affected the power supply voltage on
motor start. This interacted with the computer power supply, providing insufficient
voltage for the computer, and instability in the computer performance. The problem
was pointed out by several analyses and solved by providing a separate power supply
for the electronics.
The steering servo provided in the platform as purchased was a five wire type. This
would have required reprogramming of the standard servo driver software, which
would be a breach of the design principle of using standard software components
as far as possible. It proved possible to obtain a suitable three wire servo which fit-
ted into the same space but this requires some shimming to make the mounting stable.
==PAGE:74==
62
6 Observations
Part way through the design a decision was made to move to the ROS software
framework. This allowed the use of standard open source software components, and
greatly improved the possibilities for model-based design and testing, as well as fu-
ture proofing the design by providing a framework for expansion of functionality. It
also allowed the use of simulation tools in software testing and validation. However,
two of the modules provided in ROS, for navigation, were much more advanced than
needed for the prototype, and were also unsuited to the application (they were in-
tended for robot mapping and route planning in a complex environment). In this
practical application, the modules proved unstable. A back tracking in the design
process, by developing a much simpler navigation module, solved the problem.
The motor used was a simple brushed DC motor. Speed was controlled by an analogue
current. At low speeds, a low current is required, but low current implies low torque
for this kind of motor. Stiction in the bearings and any road unevenness meant in
the initial design, that the vehicle would not start to move. The problem was solved
by providing an initial high current acceleration mode. Direct feedback from a wheel
or axle rotation odometer would have been useful.
The servo motor used was unable to rotate through small angles.
This is a well-
known problem, usually solved by rotating the servo significantly beyond and then
back to the desired position. However, this is not applicable in a steering mechanism
of a car, therefore the solution was to measure the minimum rotation the servo can
perform and set the steering accordingly.
The camera and lane detection subsystem proved not to work under low light con-
ditions.
The problem was not identified in the initial brainstorming, because the
context of operation assumed was one of good lighting, but was solved by providing
headlights.
6.2
Design reliability and safety issues
Safety measures were derived from the risk assessment, such as auto-stop in the case
of sensor failure, remote stop, stop in the case of crossing a lane boundary and stop in
the case of an obstacle at short range. Other safety measures such as stop in the case
of excessive turn angle demand, excessive rate of turn demand and excessive speed
while turning were included during programming on the basis of software safety prin-
ciples.
There were problems in connector reliability.
These were expected from the out-
set and were considered during component selection, but Dupont connectors, with
their known reliability problems, were nevertheless selected to allow for flexibility in
the design. This flexibility proved necessary during the actual prototyping, as circuit
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Hazard identification
63
changes were made, but a more robust approach to connector selection should be
taken in future prototypes. The connectors should be of guided and locking types.
6.3
Hazard identification
The applied hazard identification methods revealed a number of design errors and
safety issues in the design variations and contributed to the development of a rela-
tively safe overall system.
In general, brainstorming proved to be a flexible method, therefore it was used during
the design to address and generate solutions for various problems.
Both HAZOP and functional FMEA suggested zero signal detection, which proved to
be a safety measure with significant impact on the overall safety. By its implementa-
tion, the vehicle avoided many of the possible crash scenarios.
Furthermore, both methods listed scenarios to test, which resulted in a deeper un-
derstanding of the system. The result of the SPA had a great influence on the safety
level of the hardware configuration, by suggesting a secondary power source and a
physically well separated structure.
The software FTA allowed a greater insight of the underlying procedures of the soft-
ware components and helped identifying the appropriate test cases by pinpointing
safety-critical parameters.
6.4
Model-based design and model-based safety
assessment
The use of ROS and Gazebo allowed the software design to be tested on a software
model of the prototype, and the visualization facilities allowed for easy detection
or steering and navigation errors. The model is not however a true representation
of the actual hardware physics, and several changes had to be made as a result
of observations of the full hardware/software assembly. These include examples of
“emergent” problems such as stiction and backlash.
6.5
12 safety elements
In this section, the 12 safety elements from NHTSA were reviewed on the prototype.
Regarding system safety, the system was subject to risk analysis in several stages
of the design and processes indicated by industry standards were used for hazard
==PAGE:76==
64
6 Observations
identification. The ODD of the developed system is defined as a smooth test track
with white continuous lane markings. Furthermore, the vehicle requires clear vision
conditions and enough light for the designed operation.
The OEDR capabilities consists of object detection and response in a certain direc-
tion, such as safety stop in case of obstacle presence in front of the car. An increased
amount of processing power and advanced sensors would have been required to pro-
vide event recognition and response, therefore those functions were not implemented.
Fallback strategies were realized by the various safe stop behaviours described before
and had a significant overall result in crash avoidance and cost efficiency. Simulation
and physical tests were equally performed on the software and hardware components,
which fulfill the guidelines for validation.
The developed HMI was fairly simple and did not provide too much opportunity
for interaction, but contained the essential information and control elements. Since
investigating cyber-security threats was not a goal of the project, it was not empha-
sized during the development. However, the developed software was running on an
independent encrypted network hosted on the Raspberry Pi, therefore there were no
active internet connection, which significantly reduces opportunities for cyber attacks.
Data recording was realized by recording rosbags systematically, storing every mes-
sage on all topics for each run.
Four safety elements, such as crashworthiness, post-crash behaviour, consumer ed-
ucation and training and federal, state and local laws, were not applicable for the
developed system. In conclusion, the risk-based design approach align properly with
the 12 safety elements. Despite the limited scope of the developed self-driving car,
most of the safety elements are considered and satisfied by the implementation.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions
As a result of the work, a prototype of a Level 4 AV was designed following the
risk-based design approach.
By subjecting each major design variation to hazard
identification, safety improvements were determined and implemented in subsequent
designs.
In this chapter, the conclusions from applying the risk-based design approach for AVs
are discussed and the suitability of the existing hazard identification methodologies
are reviewed.
7.1
Risk-based design philosophy
In this project the risk based design approach was intended to be used, with risk
analysis at each major design step. This worked out in practice, as shown in figure
7.1, with:
• Initial brainstorming, which established safety design principles for the project,
and initial selection of components.
• Flowchart functional FMEA for the initial software design
• Functional FMEA for the first revised ROS based design, and for the second
design revision
• HAZOP for the hardware
• SPA for the hardware
• Systematic model-based testing
• FTA for key software components
Did the risk-based design approach work? For the initial stages of design, certainly.
During the detailed software development there was significant decoupling between
the design and the risk analysis process, but retrospective review shows that the prin-
ciples and requirements established in the initial risk assessments were remembered
and incorporated into the design.
==PAGE:78==
66
7 Conclusions
Furthermore, the risk-based design procedure enabled to pinpoint scenarios, which
should be tested in the prototype.
Figure 7.1: Actual hazard identification activities
The “design by copying” approach [22], i.e. the use of standard (in this case open
source) components was confirmed as a good way of achieving result quickly and reli-
ably. Unfortunately the importance of critical selection of standard components was
also demonstrated. The selection of standard ROS navigation modules did not work
for situations in which the vehicle came within a short range of an obstacle, and a
new navigation algorithm needed to be developed. The designer should always ask
“Even though this component works, will it work for me?”.
The importance of having many risk analysis methodologies for the design was con-
firmed. The various applied methods provided relevant and important recommen-
dations and notes. Most of these recommendations were implemented in the design
during the development. As a result, the developed vehicle included safety functions
that avoided collision or crash caused by malfunctioning software or hardware com-
ponents.
7.2
Hazard identification methodologies
The hazard identification methodologies used proved to be adequate for the risk-
based design approach, with one exception. A large fraction of the challenges arising
were “emergent problems” or “emergent hazards”, that are hazards which cannot
be attributed to a single component alone. They arise in the system as a whole, or
==PAGE:79==
7.2 Hazard identification methodologies
67
in subsystems, or in functions which involve several subsystems, such as control loops.
Methods, such as FMEA and HAZOP, do not identify these problems well, because
they focus on single components or nodes. There is a need for a method which is
specifically aimed at such emergent hazards. STPA [16] provides such a holistic view,
but focuses on “emergent properties” such as reliability and safety, rather than iden-
tifying emergent hazards. An approach to this problem was investigated, on which
control loop failure modes were identified on a loop by loop basis [20], see figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: Control loop failure modes
The extension of HAZOP and FMEA to include a generic check list of failure modes
of control loops and other component configurations is desirable. Moreover, another
generic list of failure modes for general components in a self-driving car is also rec-
ommended to speed up the analyses.
A key observation from the software fault tree analyses is that while formal analysis
provides a complete solution to the identification of algorithm errors for programs
with binary outputs, such as emergency shutdown systems or for space launches start
systems, it does not provide a complete solution for programs that perform numeri-
cal optimization is control. This was illustrated by the lane finding algorithm. The
manual fault tree analysis allowed ”tuning constants” such as curvature thresholds
and perspective transformations in lane finding to be identified and tabulated.
==PAGE:80==
68
7 Conclusions
This in turn allows tuning factor combinations to be selected for simulator or proto-
type testing. The formal software fault tree analysis also allowed this in principle,
since each “leaf” of the fault tree defines a set of test cases, However, the manual anal-
ysis allowed a more direct identification of appropriate test cases and test strategies.
The manual analysis was also an important aid in understanding the performance of
the algorithms.
Moreover, the SPA method proved also to be useful for the design process. As a
result of the method, the reliability of the hardware configuration was increased by
adding a secondary source to power specific components separately.
The risk based design made use of many methods (six in all), but there was little
overlap between them. The different methods identified essentially different classes
of hazard. However, the brainstorming did feed into and supported the functional
FMEA, and the HAZOP, and these in turn supported the software FTA. All of the
methods had an influence on the design.
7.3
Future work
Replacing the untrustworthy connectors with ones providing secure connections is
advised for increased reliability in future developments. Selecting a platform with
more available space for installing additional circuits is also recommended.
Correcting and implementing the original version of the ROS based software design
would result in a system that reflects to full-scale autonomous vehicles. Extending the
circuitry with a rotating Lidar sensor would provide the necessary data for advanced
OEDR capabalities.
Using the measurement from the IMU sensor, crash scenarios could be detected and
post-crash behaviour, such as notification for the monitoring or operating staff, could
be implemented.
Having a single person as the designer and as the safety analyzer, proved to be a
bad practice. With being deeply involved in the design process, the hazard analyses
were not performed with an independent mindset, therefore separating the design
process and the safety analysis is recommended in the future.
Considering the software FTA, providing a semi-automated approach, in which the
advantages of the rapid and reliable formal path tracing can be combined with hu-
man evaluation of performance would help in the selection of tuning parameters for
simulation testing.
==PAGE:81==
7.3 Future work
69
Demonstrating the STPA hazard identification method, used by manufacturers, such
as Ford [8], was not part of this project, therefore it is recommended to validate STPA
for the AV industry.
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Automated Driving Systems
2.0: A vision for safety. 2017. url: https://www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.
dot.gov/files/documents/13069a-ads2.0_090617_v9a_tag.pdf.
[2]
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Cybersecurity Best Practices
for Modern Vehicles. 2017. url: https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&
q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=2ahUKEwjZ_MzcnZ3gAhUSbFAKHb6BCIwQFjAAegQICRAC&
url = https % 3A % 2F % 2Fwww . nhtsa . gov % 2Fstaticfiles % 2Fnvs % 2Fpdf %
2F812333_CybersecurityForModernVehicles.pdf&usg=AOvVaw33nVAk2UWXpL3tzDmpRBjl.
[3]
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Traffic Safety Facts. February
2015. url: https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/
812115.
[4]
Society of Automotive Engineers International. Taxonomy and Definitions for
Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles.
2016. url: https://www.sae.org/standards/content/j3016_201806/.
[5]
Edsger W. Dijkstra. A Constructive Approach to the Problem of Program Cor-
rectness. 1968.
[6]
European Space Agency. ECSS-Q-TM-40-04 Part 1A - Space product assurance
- Sneak analysis - Part 1: Principles and requirements. Standard. 2010.
[7]
Kemal Ficici. Curved Lane Detection. 2018. url: https://www.hackster.io/
kemfic/curved-lane-detection-34f771.
[8]
Ford. A matter of trust. 2018. url: https://media.ford.com/content/dam/
fordmedia/pdf/Ford_AV_LLC_FINAL_HR_2.pdf.
[9]
Gazebo. url: http://gazebosim.org.
[10]
Tatsuya Hatanaka. Lane Lines Detection. 2017. url: https://github.com/
tatsuyah/Lane-Lines-Detection-Python-OpenCV.
[11]
International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 61508 Functional Safety of
Electrical/Electronic/Programmable Electronic Safety-related Systems. Standard.
Geneva, CH, 2010.
[12]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 26262 Road vehicles - Func-
tional safety. Standard. 2018.
==PAGE:84==
72
Bibliography
[13]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 31010 Risk management –
Risk assessment techniques. Standard. 2009.
[14]
MIT. Racecar - A Powerful Platform for Robotics Research and Teaching. url:
https://mit-racecar.github.io.
[15]
General Motors. Self-Driving Safety Report. 2018. url: https://www.gm.com/
content/dam/company/docs/us/en/gmcom/gmsafetyreport.pdf.
[16]
Leveson N. G. and Thomas J. P. STPA Handbook. 2018.
[17]
Nvidia. Self-Driving Safety Report. 2019. url: https://www.nvidia.com/
content/dam/en-zz/Solutions/self-driving-cars/safety-report/auto-
print-safety-report-final-web.pdf.
[18]
ROS.org. Robot Operating System. url: http://www.ros.org.
[19]
ROS.org. Robots using ROS. url: https://robots.ros.org/.
[20]
J. R. Taylor. Hazard identification. 2017.
[21]
J. R. Taylor. Software Documentation and Software Fault Tree Analysis. 1999.
[22]
J. R. Taylor. Understanding and combating design error in process plant design.
2006.
[23]
J.R. Taylor et al. Structural Analysis and Proof, In Verification and Validation
of Real Time Software. 1985.
[24]
Uber. A principled approach to safety. 2018. url: https://uber.app.box.
com/v/UberATGSafetyReport.
[25]
Waymo. On the Road to Fully Self-Driving. 2017. url: https://storage.
googleapis.com/sdc-prod/v1/safety-report/Safety%20Report%202018.
pdf.
[26]
Wikipedia. List of automated urban metro subway systems. url: https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_automated_urban_metro_subway_systems.
