==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
”What Am I Eating”
User experience applied to visualizations in mobile
exploration tool for dietary tracking
Barbara Regina Costa Naydenova
Ferreira (s161526)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Almost everyone believe to have one or more issues related to their diet. With the ad-
vance of technology, diet tracking applications became more popular. People looking
for support in managing a health condition, symptom-checking or increasing self-
awareness are among the many users of such applications.
Many self-tracking tools that rely mainly on manual logging, struggle to keep the
users adherence over longer periods of time. The challenge for these applications is
to convey enough perceived value to justify the users efforts.
In this study a mobile application was designed, developed and evaluated in an
attempt to explore possibilities to make self-tracking more convenient and effective.
”What Am I Eating - Experiments” was designed with the goal of being a visual
diary. It is composed by photo-based visualizations which main goal is to provide
users with more opportunities for observation and reflection as well as insights about
their dietary intake.
The study was developed in an iterative design process, adopting user centered
design as methodology. Many rounds of users tests were carried out, making use of
low-fidelity and high-fidelity prototypes. At the end, an experiment was performed
by 10 volunteers. Each of them defined a goal to achieve and logged their food intake
and symptoms for a period of five days. The usability, level of perceived value and
adherence of the solution were evaluated through the application of interviews, a
questionnaire and analysis of data usage during the tests.
50% of users said they were able to achieve the goals they defined at the beginning
of the test. This shows that there is a potential for applying photo-based visualizations
to exploratory dietary self-tracking mobile apps.
Based on these findings ideas for future improvements were proposed.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a MSc degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, February 1, 2019
Barbara Regina Costa Naydenova Ferreira (s161526)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Since I moved to Denmark three years ago to start a new life, coming from my
homeland, Brazil, one of the first decisions I took in regards of my professional life
was to update my qualifications through a new education. My idea was that it would
help me on introducing my self into a new society and to start a completely different
life, far from family and friends.
DTU was my choice and it has been my ”safety island” since then helping me
to grow personally as well as professionally. It has shaped me into a most valuable
professional and is helping me to achieve my goals and get professional opportunities.
At DTU I counted on an amazing infrastructure, together with the guidance of
excellent professors like my supervisors Per Bækgaard and Jakob Eg Larsen, whose
lessons, mentoring and advises were extremely important for me in the process of
shaping this work. Therefore, I would like to thank them very much.
In this Master’s journey, I also made some friends, who were also important to
me, helping me and encouraging me in many good and not so good moments, and
because of it, I would also like to thank Shishupal Ratore and Andrea Quemada.
Special thanks to my dear Petya, Aleksandra, Rikke, Sindhu, Caio, Andressa, Ste-
fan, Fernando, Wagner and Yves, who gladly agreed on being part on the experiment
proposed on this research study.
Once more, I would like to thank my wife Petya, for all the patience, support,
encouragement and love she gave me during this journey, without whom, I certainly
would not have been able to accomplish this mission.
Finally, thanks to my newborn son, Arthur, who was born in middle of this on
going study, filling me with love at each sweet gesture or smile.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal and research question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
4
2.1
Limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Related Literature Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Related Mobile Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Proposed Solution
19
3.1
Vision of Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Prototypes
24
4.1
Low-fidelity prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
High-fidelity prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Architecture & Storyboards with Microinteractions . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Prototype Limitations and Workarounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Design Process
34
5.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Recruitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Phase 1: Pre-validation of the Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Phase 2: Application of the Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Results
42
6.1
Phase 1: Pre-validation of the Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
6.2
Phase 2: Application of the Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Discussion
65
7.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2
Phase 1: Pre-validation of the Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.3
Phase 2: Application of the Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8
Conclusion
72
9
Future Work
73
A Prototypes and Source-code
76
A.1 Low-Fidelity Prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.2 High-Fidelity Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.3 Source-code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
B User Evaluation Questionnaire
79
C SUS (System Usability Scale)
82
Bibliography
84
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Food plays an important role in people’s health and well-being. Almost everyone
believe to have one or more issues related to their diet.
Research suggests that
”healthy” food choices have not only physical but also mental health benefits and
might be a long-term investment in future well-being [30]. But people’s busy lives
can make it hard for them to keep up with good diet habits.
With the advance of technology, diet tracking applications became very popular
among people who use them for many different purposes. Evidence shows that obesity,
overweight and weight-loss are the main drivers for dietary self-tracking [27, 9]. Mann
J. and Truswell A.S. state in their work ”A healthy diet means different things to
different people.” [23]. This means that there are many other opportunities for the
use of dietary self tracking. Some of those include: monitoring chronicle conditions
like diabetes [29] and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) [22], as well as identifying food
triggers for allergies [20]. There is research evidence showing that social aspects can
also influence and be a driver for engagement on diet tracking [21, 11].
There are many self-tracking dietary apps on the market nowadays which focus
on symptom checking, but to what extent are they effective and can be ”trusted”?
And do they provide good opportunities for reflection in a way to get users engaged
on keeping tracking their intake and achieve behavioral change?
Comparing calories counter and photo-based applications, studies indicate that,
users perceive the calories counter applications as more valuable. Though according to
specialists, the photo-based ones can be more accurate than the applications focusing
merely on calories count. [10, 19].
Myself and two classmates conducted an experiment related to photo-based self-
tracking of dietary intake for the course 02808 Personal Data Interaction for Mobile
and Wearables, in the first semester of 2018. For the experiment we designed, devel-
oped and evaluated a mobile app called What Am I Eating [16]. Its main purpose
was to provide people with a tool to track and monitor diet intake in a simple way,
helping them to increase their awareness about diet habits. It also should provide
opportunities for reflection and possible actions, for users to achieve wellness. The
results showed that in regards of usability the app scored high among the user testers.
This was mostly due to its ”ease to use” characteristic, making use of photos, instead
of users written descriptions for logging the meals. On the other hand in regards of
perceived value, users considered the cost of keeping a self-tracking too high when
compared to the return offered by the app.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Based on what was described so far this study proposes to build upon the What Am
I Eating app, exploring possibilities with the objective of increasing users perceived
value of the application.
To do so a new mobile app called What Am I Eating -
Experiments was designed, developed, and evaluated. Different kinds of photo-based
visualizations are explored in the app, which monitor not only dietary intake, but also
symptoms. Furthermore users can also set and follow up on ad-hoc targets related to
goals that they can define themselves
1.1
Goal and research question
The purpose of this thesis is to explore the use of photo-based visualizations in self-
tracking mobile applications, with the goal of investigating if it can increase users’
perceived value and adherence.
Better visualizations will create more opportunities for reflection, increasing aware-
ness about diet intake, which would lead to actions towards achieving wellness. Be-
sides this they will enable users to quickly identify patterns or make relations between
possible triggers for predefined or add-hoc symptoms.
Based on the above, the research question that this master thesis will resolve is:
”Can photo-based visualizations be useful in a way that
increase perceived value and adherence by the users of
mobile applications for self-tracking of symptoms and
dietary intake?””
In pursuance of the answer, this master thesis will accomplish the following sub-
goals:
1. Research scientific experiments and existent mobile applications related to be-
havioural change in dietary intake.
2. Design a mobile application with the purpose of providing visualizations that
can quickly lead people to have insights about their food intake habits.
3. Build the designed mobile application applying UX knowledge.
4. Run a study and evaluate the design and usefulness of the implemented system.
5. Investigate if used in a adequate period of time, enough data could be produced,
creating opportunities for observations that could lead people to discoveries and
insights about their dietary intake.
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Thesis overview
3
1.2
Thesis overview
The thesis is structured into several chapters that will guide the reader through the
process behind.
Chapter 1 describes the background, motivation behind this project and proposed
research question, acting as a introduction to the project itself.
Chapter 2 describes the related work, researched in order to find scientific basis
and inspiration for the proposed solution detailed on Chapter 3.
Chapter 4 describes the prototypes designed and developed to support the exper-
iments carried out for this project, while Chapter 5 describes in details the design
process which lead to the final version of the high-fidelity prototype and the set-up
of the experiments conducted.
While Chapter 6 describes the results achieved with the user tests experiment,
Chapter 7 presents an extensive discussion about them.
Chapter 8 is the conclusion of the project, evaluating the research question pro-
posed.
Finally, in Chapter 9 possibilities for future work and improvements were explored.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
literature studies and similar food tracking apps were selected and analyzed in order
to look for inspiration, scientific basis and to check what related mobile apps are
already on the market. The research sources used in the project are chosen based on
the following criteria:
• Use of photos to provide effective opportunities of reflection through the visu-
alizations.
• Capacity of assisting on symptom-checking.
The research focused on answering the following questions:
• What problem does your idea solve?
• How are users solving this problem currently?
• How have previous solutions failed?
• Who is your competition?
• Does your target market actually have a need for this product?
• Which are the main challenges of symptom-checker applications?
• What kinds of visualizations are being offered?
• How can a self-tracking app achieve effectiveness in regards of behav-
ioral change?
The Stage Based Model, represented on the Figure 2.1, was the tool used to
support the evaluation of the selected apps.
On the context of this thesis, visualizations that promote good opportunities for
reflections are those on which users can quickly understand the displayed data. More-
over they should enable users to make comparisons, relations and time-series analysis
and to get to conclusions and insights.
The following sections describe the performed evaluation as well as provide the
answers to the questions raised above.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Limitation
5
Figure 2.1: Stage-based Model
2.1
Limitation
For effects of this study, only free features of free iOS smartphone applications found
on the App store, are going to be evaluated. Paid or ”premium” versions of apps in
which more features and services are offered, are out of the scope.
2.2
Related Literature Studies
The research of scientific literature did not identify any study which focuses specif-
ically on the use of photo-based visualizations for dietary self-tracking. There are
specific studies related to design and development of mobile apps which include visu-
alizations, but not as their primary self tracking feature. The visualizations found on
the mentioned apps can be seen on Figure 2.2.
One could argue that self diagnosis applications can be defined as symptom-
checkers apps. A study published in the BMJ by Semigran et al., (2015) [2] evaluated
23 popular symptom checking apps and their ability to perform an effective self di-
agnosis. The overall conclusion of the study is that the apps are generally unable to
provide a correct diagnosis. Some of the apps went to extremes by recommending
sending patients to the ER when they did not necessarily need to go.
Lupton D. and Jutel A. (2015) [12] also made a critical analysis of self diagnosis
smart phone apps, but with an approach turned to the design and adoption by lay
people.
It was found that, although app developers combined claims to medical
expertise together with algorithms and other appeals, all in order to achieve user
engagement, these efforts were undermined by routine disclaimers that users should
seek medical advice to confirm a diagnosis.
On the other hand, relating to effectiveness and engagement, scientific experiments
like TummyTrails [22] attempted to create a mobile tool to support self-experiments
with specific goals with a systematic approach. The achieved results were positive be-
cause the participants could use the tool to reliably undergo a self-experiment, but the
required rigor from the clinical research method, was challenged by the uncertainties
of the everyday life.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Related Work
Figure 2.2: Visualizations from mobile apps developed for scientific experiments: (1)
TummyTrails[22], (2) Nutritionists -Application[24], (3) Crumbs[14], (4) FoodLog[15]
This research investigated also techniques that can be effective for behaviour
change.
In their study Michie et al.
[13], show that combining ”self-monitoring”
with at least one ”self-regulation” technique in a mobile app, can lead to positive be-
havioral change in regards to a healthy diet. Examples of ”self-regulation” techniques
are: (1) prompt intention formation or goal setting, (2) specify goals in relation to
particular contextualized actions, (3) self monitoring of behavior, (4) feedback on
performance, and (5) review previously-set goals.
2.3
Related Mobile Applications
In July 2018, preparing for this thesis, I took the course ”02001 Research Immersion,
DTU Compute Jul 18”, during which I carried a research study titled ”Research study
on photo-based mobile diet tracking applications” [6]. In this study I identified eleven
picture-based mobile diet tracking applications on the App Store. These were chosen
based on ”Biggest number of reviews”.
In the current work I use a different approach for choosing the mobile apps to
review. The main criteria are: ”Use of photos to provide effective opportunities of re-
flection through the visualizations” and ”Capacity of assisting on symptom-checking”.
This time only five out of the eleven identified apps were taken into consideration
for evaluation. In my study [6] the selected apps were placed on the table which can
be seen on Figure 2.3. They are organized by number of reviews from the highest to
the lowest and their scope and key features are mapped and thoroughly evaluated by
making use of Stage-based Model 2.1.
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Related Mobile Applications
7
Figure 2.3: Evaluation of scope and key features of selected Mobile apps
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Related Work
For this thesis the visualizations of each of them were analyzed and discussed in
detail in accordance with the defined criteria, as following:
*1. Calorie Mama
In the study I mentioned above [6], I concluded that the apps I analyzed
could be classified in two main types: ”Calories counter” and ”Dietary photo
diary”.
Calorie Mama is definitely a ”Calories counter”. The app has a broad
scope, being possible to track and monitor food/drink intake, cardio activity,
workout, body weight and ”status”. Counting with the highest quantity of
downloads among the selected for analysis at this thesis, it is also the one
which makes the poorest use of photos in regards of visualizations.
As can be seen on the Figure 2.4, at the home tab of the app, is shown one
day, starting from the current day.
In regards of changing behavior supporting techniques and best practices,
the app includes the definition and following up of predefined goals, which
in this case is the number of calories. Every day has a ”score counter” that
shows the maximum/ideal number of calories to be consumed, set by the user
on the settings section of the app. This information is extremely highlighted
on the home tab.
Below the ”score counter” are the ”logging sections”, that users must scroll
to see. Every day has as default four classifications of meals: Breakfast, Lunch,
Dinner and Snack.
The user can add as many items to each of them, by tapping on the camera
icon, the user is brought to an interesting feature, where he/she can take
a photo or choose one among some ”standard photos”, provided for log of
common meals, such as fruit salad, egg, fried chicken, among others.
The main function of the taken photos is merely simplifying the logging
process. By using photo recognition technology, the app provides the users
with a list of tag options, but still, requiring a lot from them, who have to
select the correct tag that identifies the food content in the photo or enter a
new one, in case none of them are correct. The offered tags are fetched from a
data base, which contains further information about the food, usually number
of calories and nutrients (fat, protein and carbohydrates). These information
is used to calculate the calories intake.
After it, the photos are partially shown on a list, only on the day they
were logged, associated to the type of meal they were added. This makes it
difficult a time-series analyzes and comparison to other meals. There’s also no
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Related Mobile Applications
9
space for logging ”qualitative information” such as ”reason for eating”, ”how
the user is feeling”, ”consequent symptoms” etc.
Figure 2.4: Calorie Mama app
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Related Work
2. YouAte
As described on my previous study [6], the YouAte app follows a different
approach, belonging to the ”Dietary photo diary” group, relying mainly on
photos in order to provide awareness and/or insights to the users about their
food intake.
In regards of changing behavior supporting techniques and best practices,
the app includes a feature for definition of an ad-hoc goal, defined by the user
and provides in the shape of information, some predefined guidelines such as
diets, at users choice. Other potential engagement driver contemplated in the
app, approaching the ”Social aspect”, is an own internal community, where
users can share content.
The app consists almost only of a time-line visualization that can be seen
on the Figure 2.5. The fact that the log is basically composed by the photo,
makes it faster and more convenient to log the meals (from 2 up to 4 taps).
It is also possible logging free comments, which are placed on the time-line
in the same way as the photos. When users tap on an logged entry, they can
visualize details about the log. Data logged within an interval smaller than
5 minutes, are logged as one single entry, composed by as many pictures as
taken.
Besides photos and free comments, the app also offers the option of log-
ging structured qualitative data such as ”Why did you eat?”, ”How was it?”,
”Where did you eat?”, ”How was it made?”, ”How did you feel?”, but, unfor-
tunately, none of these data is used on the main offered visualization.
Another interesting qualitative data associated to the logs is the manda-
tory classification of the photos into ”on path” or ”off path”.
Although a
bit abstract, it is very intuitive and ease to understand the meaning of this
classification.
These characteristics make of YouAte a very practical and objective app
for keeping a ”critic” visual diet diary, making it possible to do analysis and
comparisons about dietary intake, in a limited way (short periods), because
it requires that users scroll up and down through all logs on the time-line to
compare periods such as days, for example.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Related Mobile Applications
11
Figure 2.5: YouAte app
3. Bitesnap
Bitesnap, just like Calorie Mama is definitely a ”Calories counter”. The
app is mainly concerned on calculating calories, carbs, fat and protein of each
meal, summing up to the unit of a day, making a poor use of photos in regards
of visualizations.
Also as the Calorie Mama, Bitesnap contemplates changing behavior sup-
porting techniques and best practices, by including the definition and following
up of a predefined goal, which in this case is the number of calories. Every
day has a ”score counter” that shows the maximum/ideal number of calories
to be consumed, set by the user on the settings section of the app.
Back to the analysis of the use of the photos, on the context of this app,
they are mainly used to simplify the activity of logging and identifying the
composition of the meals, making use of image recognition technology, to offer
options, but still requiring from users the ”confirmation” of the composition
of the meal, so that it is possible to calculate the calories intake and other
data.
Later, the photos are displayed like in a library, gathered by day. When
tapping on a day, users can see more details about.
Similar to the YouAte app, here there is a main visualization that provides
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Related Work
users with the opportunity for limited analysis (short periods) of the logged
data, which is grouped by day and displayed on a list that could be interpreted
as a time-line, from the newest to the oldest, showing small thumbnails of the
photos. Comparisons between intake can be done, but are limited because
they require that users scroll up and down through all logs on the time-line.
It is not possible to log differentiated content, without a photo or ”free
comments”, for example, making it difficult to support self-diagnosis or to
provide the opportunity of having quick ”visual insights”.
Figure 2.6: Bitesnap app
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Related Mobile Applications
13
4. Zany
Zany belongs to the ”Dietary photo diary” and, mandatorily, collects pho-
tos and date/time, while, optionally, users can inform caption, location, type
of log (Breakfast, Brunch, Lunch, Dinner, Snack, Drink, Supplement, Exercise
and Leisure) and mood (emojis) to compose each logged entry.
The app approaches ”Social aspect” by providing an own internal blog,
where users can share content.
The visualizations offered are very simple and ease to understand. The
main one is on the format of a calendar and the data is displayed, grouped
per day, in a view ”Day x Time of the day”. When tapping on an entry, users
can see details of the entry.
As on the cases of the YouAte app and the Bitesnap app, I would argue that
it provides a limited opportunity for analysis and comparison of the logged
data, since users can only visualize data within a day unit.
The fact that app does not contemplate changing behavior supporting tech-
niques and best practices, nor differentiated logs, makes it difficult to provide
quick ”visual insights” or supporting self-diagnose dietary tracking.
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Related Work
Figure 2.7: Zany app
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Related Mobile Applications
15
5. Awesome
Awesome is a very flexible and opened ”Dietary photo diary” app, relying
on photos and ”free notes” disposed on a little bit different approach, where
users can see a type of ”chart time-line”, with days (Y axis) and the hours of
the day (X axis), as can be seen on Figure 2.8.
Only days in which there were logged data are displayed and, on the X
axis, only the interval starting from 7AM and going all the way up to 6AM is
displayed.
I would argue that, the lack of changing behavior supporting techniques
and best practices, makes it more difficult to keep track and following up on
specific goals, but does not prevent users from using the app to support self-
diagnose, because of its characteristics. The fact that an interval of days is
displayed, with one day posed on top of the other, creates a scenario where it
can be possible making quick comparisons and relations, being possible getting
to quick ”visual” insights about the dietary intake and possible symptoms.
Analysis of longer periods would also be possible, but it would require
though, that the users scroll up and down, making it difficult comparing longer
periods such as weeks and months.
Furthermore, displaying the days when there were no data logged could be
as informative as the days when there were. And the fact that the periods be-
tween 0AM and 7AM and 5PM and 0AM can end up excluding some possible
users or making it impossible logging some data.
It also counts positively the fact that the visualizations provides the user
with an interactive factor, where it is possible to pan through both axis and
in the case of the X axis it is also possible zooming in and out.
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Related Work
Figure 2.8: Awesome app
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Key Findings
17
2.4
Key Findings
Based on the knowledge acquired through the research of literature studies
and analysis of the apps described above, the raised questions were addressed
and answered. These are used as a base for the definition of the concept and
vision of the proposed solution:
• What problem does your idea solve? People’s busy routines make
them loose sight of their dietary intake, making it difficult for them to
identify if they have good diet habits or to relate symptoms to a specific
food or drink.
• How are users solving this problem currently? Many people do
nothing, other make use of the most variety of applications to perform
self-tracking.
• How have previous solutions failed? Most of the mobile solutions
failed on getting people to keep self-tracking their diet intake for longer
periods of time.
• Who is your competition? The apps analyzed in this chapter could
be considered competition.
• Does your target market actually have a need for this product?
Many people have the need for monitoring their dietary intake, these
needs can be divided in four main areas: General dietary assessment;
Validation/Epidemiology; Obesity, overweight, weight-loss; and Diabetes
(type I and II).
• Which are the main challenges of symptom-checker applica-
tions?
As any self-tracking tool that relies mainly on manual logging, the ma-
jority of the subjects of the analysis conducted by this study faced the
challenge of keeping sufficient level of adherence over longer periods of
time. Often this is due to people’s busy daily routines [26, 33]. Regarding
symptom-checkers, although there are scientific evidences that lead us to
believe that self-diagnose mobile apps can be reliable [22], most of the
investigated apps were risk averse, sending patients seek medical advice
when they don’t necessarily need to [2]. Another challenge they face is
related to routine disclaimers that users should seek medical advice to
effect a diagnosis [12].
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Related Work
• What
kinds
of
visualizations
are
being
offered?
Visualizations designed for applications developed within the context of
the analyzed scientific literature can be seen on Figure 2.2. Meanwhile,
different and more interesting types of photo-based visualizations were
identified on similar apps analyzed in this section of the study, such as
calendars, charts and time-lines.
• How can a self-tracking app achieve effectiveness in regards of
behavioral
change?
Research evidence shows that in order to create behavioural change re-
garding healthy eating habits, interventions which combine ”self-monitoring”
with at least one ”self-regulation” technique derived from control theory
can be effective.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Proposed Solution
The findings acquired with the research through related work were used as
a base to design and evaluate the What Am I Eating - Experiments app,
developed for this study.
It is an assumption of this study that, such an app could be valuable for
anyone who faces challenges regarding dietary intake. Possible users can be:
people looking for support in managing a health condition, symptom-checking
or increasing self-awareness, among others.
3.1
Vision of Solution
The idealized solution is photo-based visualization that can be described as
a ”visual diet diary”, displaying all the logged intake, as well as possible
symptoms in the format of a chart (Day x Time of the day). This visualization
was very much inspired by the Awesome app (2.8) evaluated in this study.
Users are provided with the possibility of zooming in and out the chart in order
to observe their data in longer periods of time. It is also possible to filter the
data by symptom, giving users the opportunity to look at more meaningful
data in the moment, supporting the observation of possible relations between
a given symptom and food intake.
The Stage-based model 3.1 was used to execute the planning and design of
the app.
1. PREPARATION
The idea is having a multi-faceted app, where user and system collect
the following data:
• photo of dietary intake;
• comments;
• data and time;
• location;
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Proposed Solution
Figure 3.1: Stage-based model applied to design the What Am I Eating - experiments
app
• symptom;
• experiment.
2. COLLECTION
The data is going to be collected in the following way.
• By the user:
– photo of dietary intake;
– comments;
– data and time;
– location.
• By system (mobile app):
– captures data and time when log is made;
– captures GPS location when log is made;
3. INTEGRATION
On the integration phase, three visualizations of the data were designed:
• My Activity:
A chart (Hours of the day vs Day), where the photos of the logged
data (meals and symptoms) are displayed.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Vision of Solution
21
• Experiment’s Details:
A time-line list, where the photos of the logged data (meals and
symptoms) are displayed one on top of the other, in chronological
order, from the oldest to the newest.
• Meal’s Details:
A section where users can visualize the details of the logged meal
(date, time, photo, location and optional comments).
4. REFLECTION
It is believed that through the offered visualizations, the app will enable
users to observe and reflect on their dietary intake. Through the app
users will be able to get insights like the examples given below:
• Actual consumption: the register itself (log) of photos are more
accurate then users’ memory and written meal descriptions;
• Meal/Symptom related to Day/Time of the Day: User crav-
ing a specific food at the same time of the day everyday. Or user is
eating heavy food late at night most days of the week. It is assumed
that these relations can quickly be observed on the My Activities
(chart visualization);
• Meal/Symptom related to Location: User craves specific food
every time he/she is at a specific place;
• Periodicity of meals: User is skipping meal, which makes him/her
eating more during the other meals. It is assumed that, such relation
can be discovered by observing the details of the logged symptom;
• Cause-effect (Meal x Symptom): Every time user eats a specific
food he/she has a symptom f.
ex.
diarrhea or heartburn.
It is
assumed that this relation can be quickly be observed on the My
Activities (chart visualization) and confirmed on the Experiment’s
Details (time-line visualization);
• Other info: Every time user eats late at night he/she feels heavy
and tired on the next morning and through the comments field users
can register and consult it later. It is assumed that this kind of qual-
itative data can be observed on the details of the logged symptom.
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Proposed Solution
5. ACTION
As a consequence of the self-reflection, conclusions can be made and users
can decide to take actions in order to achieve wellness. Some examples
of actions are described below:
• Identifying patterns of behavior regarding eating habits;
• Changing current diet habits based on insights;
• Planning better the content of the meals;
• Finding healthier options of meal at the most often visited places;
• Eating smaller portions with higher frequency.
In the idealized concept the log of the dietary intake will continue through
photos, considering the success of the method achieved in the previous study
(What Am I Eating [16]). Furthermore users can log symptoms by picking
one from a predetermined list of values. The following symptoms were identi-
fied during research through related work: Diarrhea, Bloating, Constipation,
Nausea / Vomit, Heartburn, Infrequent Bowel Movements, Frequent Bowel
Movements, Bowel Urgency.
Following the findings regarding behavioral change [13], in order to im-
prove the effectiveness of the app, beside ”self-monitoring”, the feature ”Set
Experiment” was designed and implemented. Its goal is empowering users on
setting experiments, in which they can define and follow up on target subjects
for a period that must be defined by the users themselves.
Within the experiments details another photo-based visualization is offered.
Namely a time-line showing only the data logged during the period of the
experiment. With this visualization users are given another way to observe
their data. Based on this they can for example determine whether a specific
food or drink triggers a specific symptom.
The main idea behind the proposed solution is that, with the ”My Activ-
ities” (chart visualization) and the ”Experiment details” (time-line visualiza-
tion), users can make observations which can increase their awareness and
provide insights about their dietary intake.
The first draft of the proposed solution can be seen on Figure 3.2.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Vision of Solution
23
Figure 3.2: First sketches of What Am I Eating - experiments
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4
Prototypes
In this section, the architecture and implementation of the prototypes devel-
oped to support the achievement of the goals of this study are described, as
well as the choice behind each tool.
4.1
Low-fidelity prototype
At this phase, to assist on defining the scope, testing the general concept,
upcoming ideas, navigation and usability of the user interface, a low-fidelity
prototype was built in Invision App (Figure 4.1).
The features and visualizations represented in the prototype were named:
”Log Meal”, ”Log Symptom”, ”Set Experiment”, ”My Activities”, ”My Exper-
iments” and ”Meal Details”.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Low-fidelity prototype
25
Figure 4.1: Low-fidelity prototype [5]
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Prototypes
4.2
High-fidelity prototype
The first choice to make in regards of development tools, was which platform
the prototype should be build on.
When it comes to self-tracking, it is vital that mobile applications are
used. The two main operational systems present in mobile applications on the
market are: iOS and Android. iOS applications that only works on iPhones
and/or iPads, while Android applications are included on many devices from
many different brands, such as Samsung, Huawei and Motorola. Together,
they answer for 99.9% of the market nowadays [18].
Native applications offer more options regarding the use of devices’ features
such as camera, GPS and notifications, specific of each device model and
operational system.
Based on all that was said so far, the chosen language for development of
the High-fidelity prototype was React Native, a JavaScript framework which
allows the development of native applications that can be deployed for both,
iOS and Android platforms, with a single code.
Google Firebase was the back-end platform chosen to hold the storage of
the users’ collected data because of the fact that it has no cost for use in small
scale and also, it counts with an extensive documentation.
The first version of the prototype can be seen on Figure 4.2.
The last
version, improved throughout the Design Process, described on chapter 55,
can be seen on the Figure 4.3, while its Architecture and Storyboards with
Microinteractions can be seen on the next topic, respectively on the Figures
4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Architecture & Storyboards with Microinteractions
27
Figure 4.2: First version of the High-fidelity prototype
Figure 4.3: Final version of High-fidelity prototype
4.3
Architecture & Storyboards with Microinteractions
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Prototypes
Figure 4.4: Application’s architecture: client-server
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Architecture & Storyboards with Microinteractions
29
Figure 4.5: Storyboard with Microinteractions - Main features
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Prototypes
Figure 4.6: Storyboard with Microinteractions - Log Meal feature
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Architecture & Storyboards with Microinteractions
31
Figure 4.7: Storyboard with Microinteractions - Log Symptom feature
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Prototypes
Figure 4.8: Storyboard with Microinteractions - Set Experiment feature
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Prototype Limitations and Workarounds
33
4.4
Prototype Limitations and Workarounds
The high-fidelity prototype has some limitations, which don’t invalidate its use
for the context and needs of this study, but which could get users confused and
discouraged. That’s why the testers were briefed about them, before starting
the tests. These limitations are:
• My Activities chart: Sometimes when a meal or symptom is logged,
it does not appear automatically on the chart (My Activities).
- Workaround: In these cases, the only thing needed is to change tab
from and back to My Activities. Uploading photos can take a bit longer,
which causes that the workaround won’t work immediately. The user
than needs to wait until the upload is completed.
• My Experiments: After setting a new experiment, it won’t appear
automatically on the list at My Experiments section.
- Workaround: In these cases, the workaround is the same as the one
described above. Change tab from and back to My Experiments section
and the new experiment will be displayed on the list.
• My Activities chart: My Activities chart: the expected behavior is
that when a user taps on a photo or symptom it opens the details of the
selected data. After the user pans or zooms through the chart, the tap
does not open the data details.
- Workaround: In these cases in order to see the details of the desired
data (meal or symptom) the user needs to go to the experiment and tap
on the meal/symptom he/ she wants to see.
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5
Design Process
5.1
Method
One of the goals of this thesis is to design an easy-to-use user interface, there-
fore, the method chosen for the design process is User-centered design (UCD).
This choice was made, essentially because of its dynamic characteristics of
idealizing and trying, failing as soon as possible and involving users (prefer-
entially potential users) in the design process. Besides these characteristics
the method helps developers and designers to make applications that can ef-
fectively meet users needs.
There are several phases within UCD which require special focus: (1) in-
formation gathering, (2) users’ needs identification, and (3) envisioning and
evaluation. The previous chapters described phases 1, 2 and the envisioning
part of the 3.
The result of this process is the development of the initial
version of the proposed solution. After that these phases are iterated until
reaching the final results of the main experiment proposed by the study.
In this study, the evaluation is divided in two phases:
1. Pre-validation of the Concept: The main product of this phase is
the final scope for the implementation of the High-fidelity prototype.
To get to it, many rounds of user tests were performed, making use of
the Low-fidelity and the High-fidelity prototypes, supported by the use
of techniques such as: ”Observations”, ”Quick and Dirty” and ”Think
Aloud”. The feedback of each round of tests was used to improve the
prototype, until it got to a version that the testers could use without
many problems.
2. Application of the Concept: The main product of this phase is the
feedback from users after tests. This feedback was acquired by getting
users to perform tests, for a limited period of time, making use of the high-
fidelity prototype. During the period of tests, interviews ”in-the wild”
were conducted. Feedback from the interviews were used to improve the
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Recruitment
35
High-fidelity prototype during the tests. At the end, a questionnaire was
applied to collect users’ evaluations.
5.2
Recruitment
The subject tackled by the app seems to be interesting for a large amount
of people. Therefore in both phases, family, friends and work colleagues were
approached and asked if they would agree to test and evaluate the application.
5.3
Phase 1: Pre-validation of the Concept
Given the intent of developing a visualization that provides interactivity to
users, in a way that they can pan or zoom in and out through the time in axis
Y, creating the opportunity for visualizing the logged data in longer periods
of time, the Low-fidelity by itself, was not enough.
As a consequence, a two-stage validation was performed, making use of
different versions of High-fidelity prototype as described below.
5.3.1
First stage
As part of the iterative design process, direct observation of users making
use of the low-fidelity prototype when asked to perform tasks was applied,
together with combined techniques such as Quick and Dirty and Think Aloud.
Users were encouraged to talk while using the prototype. The tasks required
from users during the test were:
• Log a meal;
• Log a symptom;
• Check details of the meal you logged;
• Filter the chart by a symptom;
• Set an experiment;
• Check the experiment you set.
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Design Process
5.3.1.1
Participants
Nine people took part in the tests at this stage. They were were briefed about
the app and its purposes. They were also asked if they believe they have any
problems, issues or something they would like to improve related to their diet
habits. All of them answered positively.
5.3.1.2
Apparatus
The test was performed on Apple iPhone 8 with build in camera. From the
software part, the Low-fidelity prototype[5] was present on the device.
5.3.1.3
Design
The experiment was designed as between-subject, with three levels of a factor,
representing three iterations.
5.3.1.4
Procedure
To get the participant’s feedback as comprehensive as possible, the Think
Aloud technique was used, combined to the ”Quick and Dirty”.
The test
was performed in three iterations. Each iteration was tested by 3 participants
(different participants in each iteration). In each iteration, the testing user was
presented with the latest version of the Low-fidelity prototype, improved with
the feedback from previous iteration. After the third iteration, the interface
was considered mature as it did not contained any significant problems in
navigation and usability.
The results of this phase are described in chapter 6 of this study.
5.3.2
Second stage
The second stage of the concept validation is overall the same as the previous
one with the exception that this time the High-fidelity prototype was used.
Different versions of the application passed through a few rounds of tests
and improvements, when participants were asked to perform the same tasks
described as in item 5.2.1 of this study.
Interviews ”in-the-wind” were also conducted, in order to discuss possible
real case scenarios of use of the app.
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
37
5.3.2.1
Participants
Three participants took part in the tests this time. They were among the
testers on the previous phase, so there was no need to brief them again about
the app and its purposes. This time, usability and utility (perceived value)
matters were focused, mainly related to the My Activity section (chart view).
5.3.2.2
Apparatus
The test was performed on Apple iPhone 8 with built in camera, where the
High-Fidelity prototype was installed and presented to the users.
5.3.2.3
Design
The experiment was designed as between-subject, with three levels of a factor,
representing three iterations.
5.3.2.4
Procedure
Once more, Quick-and-Dirty and Think aloud techniques were used. The test
was performed in three iterations. In the first iteration one user performed
the test. On the second there were two users, where one of them was the same
user as in the first iteration. In the third iteration, all three users performed
the tests.
In each iteration, users were presented the latest version of the
prototype, improved with the feedback from previous iterations. After the
third iteration, the prototype was considered mature as it did not contained
any significant problems, besides the limitations described in section 4.4 of
this study.
The results of this phase are described on chapter 6, item 6.2 of this study.
5.4
Phase 2: Application of the Concept
Given the high amount of possibilities of use of the designed solution, this
study formulated a sub-goal 5 (see section 1.1) to be investigated with the
users tests. This hypothesis states the following:
”Even if the solution was used in short periods of time, enough data
could be produced, creating opportunities for observations that could
lead users to discover insights about their dietary intake.”
In this case, users feedback in such scenario could be considered highly
valuable on the assessment proposed.
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Design Process
Taking this into consideration, the experiment was planned to be performed
in a period of 5 days, which also made it easier to recruit volunteers.
5.4.1
Participants
As mentioned before, family, friends and work colleagues were approached and
asked if they would agree on using and evaluating the app for a 5-days period
.
At this stage of the process, two criteria were used to select volunteers to
take part on the experiment and later, having their results considered on the
analysis:
• Answering ”YES” to the following question: ”Do you believe you have
any issues regarding your diet intake?”
• Logging at least 5 things (meals or symptoms) during the 5-days (in a
row) period of the experiments.
Considering that, 15 people agreed on performing the 5-days experiments
with the high-fidelity prototype, but only 10 of them ”qualified” for the anal-
ysis.
The 5 people who didn’t qualify were questioned why they could not per-
form the experiment as agreed. Three of them told that their busy schedules
made them to forget to use the app, one other reported problems with her
phone device and another did not answer.
The table that can be seen on Figure 5.1 shows characteristics of the 10
volunteers who performed the tests. Their average age is 35 year, they come
from 5 different nationalities and they are distributed equally by men and
women. The group is heterogeneous in regards to occupation and the majority
of testers has Master degree as highest educational background level. Their
distribution can also be seen in the charts on Figure 5.2.
Performing a test for a longer period of time would allow me to evaluate the
Zoom and Filter features on the My Activity (chart) section. I myself tested
the app for a period of one month. But, since I consider myself biased to
give an exempt opinion, I will expose my feedback, combined with the results
acquired from the user tests, as possibilities for Future Work in chapter 9.
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
39
Figure 5.1: Characteristics of the volunteers who performed the tests
Figure 5.2: Distribution of volunteers per gender, educational level and nationality
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Design Process
5.4.2
Apparatus
The hardware for experiment consisted of participants own iOS or Android
phones, allowing them to track meals, symptoms and set experiments in their
everyday lives. Firebase server was used to store collected data, as described
in chapter 5, sent from the mobile devices via HTTP protocol.
5.4.3
Procedure
The experiment began with introduction of application’s features, functioning,
possible scenarios of use and limitations of the prototype (see section 4.4).
This is done to familiarize the participants with the process of meal, symptom
and experiment recording, making sure that testers are able to replicate the
process on their own.
Users were asked to define a goal to achieve during the period of tests
and set an experiment with a length of five days, related to this goal. Then,
they were instructed to record only what makes sense in order to achieve the
defined goal. This could be meals (photo, date/time, comments and location)
or possible symptoms (symptom, date/time, comments and location).
All users gave permission to have their data stored and analyzed for the
purpose of this experiment.
After the test, the participants were given a
questionnaire (see Appendix B).
5.4.4
Design
The experiment was designed as between-subject with two levels of a factor
and the following dependent variables:
1. Data Usage
• Total number of logs
• Total number of Meals logged
• Total number of Symptoms logged
• Total number of Experiments set
• Average number of logs per person
• Average number of Meals logged per person
• Average number of Symptoms logged per person
• Average number of Experiments set per person
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
41
2. Usability
• Per feature
• Overall (using SUS - System Usability Scale)
3. Level perceived value towards the solution
• Overall
– Which was the purpose you wanted to achieve during
the period of tests with the app?
– After using the app, do you feel like you achieved your
goal?
• Per feature
4. Level of adherence to the solution
• It was ease and convenient to keep the routine of self-
tracking with the app.
• Would you use this app on a daily basis, to keep track of
your diet habits?
• Would you use this app sporadically, to suit a specific pur-
pose, setting an experiment and/or tracking specific sub-
jects?
• How likely would you recommend this app for someone?
5. Comparison between users who achieved goal and who did not
The results from the tests described on this chapter are going to be de-
scribed presented on chapter 6 and discussed on the chapter 7 of this study.
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 6
Results
This chapter presents the results acquired during the two phases of the Design
Process, when users tested and evaluated the Low-fidelity and the High-fidelity
prototypes.
6.1
Phase 1: Pre-validation of the Concept
6.1.1
First stage
The main changes in the application after the feedback acquired during the
tests were:
• The inclusion of an icon ”My Activities” on the main menu of the app,
because users were getting confused navigating through the app;
• The inclusion of labels ”Location” and ”Comments”, explaining the data
that can be added on the Log Meal screen.
The final version, that can be seen on the Figure 4.2, was used as base to
the development of the High-fidelity prototype.
6.1.2
Second stage
The resultant changes and its reasons are described and illustrated below.
• Log Symptoms (Figure 6.1):
1. Addition of date-picker.
Reason(s): Making it possible later registers.
2. Inclusion of field for comments.
Reason(s): Making it possible the addition of other important
information, mainly for the case when users chose symptom ”Other”.
==PAGE:51==
6.1 Phase 1: Pre-validation of the Concept
43
3. Inclusion of map location to log where symptom was felt.
Reason(s): Making it possible the addition of other important
information, mainly for the case when users chose symptom ”Other”.
4. Summarizing list of predefined symptoms.
Reason(s): The list of pre-defined symptoms initially offered was
too long, taking the whole screen (without scrolling) and with the
decision for including other data, it was decided that a simplification
would be the best action. Also, the offered options had an approach
turned more to ”formally” diagnosed conditions, disregarding sim-
pler potential cases of use, like ”Craving” for example.
• Symptom’s Details (Figure 6.1):
1. Inclusion of visualization of Symptom’s details.
Reason(s): Providing user the possibility to visualize the details
about logged symptoms, defined on the item above.
• Log Meal (Figure 6.2):
1. Addition of date-picker.
Reason(s): Making it possible later registers.
• Set Experiment (Figure 6.3):
1. Replacing text field for Date of start, with date-picker.
Reason(s): Turning the input easier and without chances for errors
that would end up in error of addition to the data base.
• My Experiments (Figure 6.4):
1. Showing comments added to symptoms on the time-line.
Reason(s): Improving visualization with qualitative data.
• My Activities (Figure 6.5):
1. Showing from current date up to four days before.
Reason(s): Focusing the period of five days, same as the length of
the tests performed for this study, making it not necessary to pan
nor zoom through the chart to have a complete view of logged data.
2. Setting 24 hours as default for X axis.
Reason(s): Focusing the whole day would give an initial complete
visualization of logged data, making it unnecessary to pan through
the X axis of the chart.
==PAGE:52==
44
6 Results
Figure 6.1: Changes on the Log Symptom section and new Symptom’s Details view
==PAGE:53==
6.1 Phase 1: Pre-validation of the Concept
45
Figure 6.2: Changes on the Log Meal section
Figure 6.3: Changes on the Log Meal section
==PAGE:54==
46
6 Results
Figure 6.4: Changes on the My Experiments section
Figure 6.5: Changes on the My Activities section
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Phase 1: Pre-validation of the Concept
47
Figure 6.6: Final version of High-fidelity prototype [8]
1. My Activity
2. Log Meal
3. Meal’s Details
4. Log Symptom
5. Symptom’s Details
6. Set Experiment
7. My Experiments
8. Experiment’s Details
==PAGE:56==
48
6 Results
6.2
Phase 2: Application of the Concept
The answers given to the User Evaluate Questionnaire (see Appendix B) and
the Data usage produced during the 5-days tests were analyzed individually
and combined, in order to assess application’s Usability, Adherence and Per-
ceived Value, providing bases to answer to the research question addressed at
this study.
6.2.1
Data Usage
The summary of results from the users experiments can be seen on the Table
6.7, where ”Total” and ”Average total” numbers were calculated and presented.
But given the importance of the visualizations for this study, below it can also
be seen the ”visual results” of the experiment, corresponding to the screen-
shots of the My Activity (chart) produced by each user during the 5-day
testes.
6.2.1.1
Quantitative Data
Figure 6.7: Data usage resultant from user tests
6.2.1.2
Users Screen-shots
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
49
Figure 6.8: Users 01 and 02
Figure 6.9: Users 03 and 04
==PAGE:58==
50
6 Results
Figure 6.10: Users 05 and 06
Figure 6.11: Users 07 and 08
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
51
Figure 6.12: Users 09 and 10
Summary of data usage collected during 5-days experiments performed by
10 users:
1. Total number of Logs: 132
2. Total number of Meals logged: 104
3. Total number of Symptoms logged: 28
4. Total number of Experiments set: 13
5. Average number of logs per person: 13.2
6. Average number of Meals logged per person: 10.4
7. Average number of Symptoms logged per person: 2.8
8. Average number of Experiments set per person: 1.3
==PAGE:60==
52
6 Results
6.2.2
Usability
6.2.2.1
Per feature
The summary of the evaluation per feature can be seen on the Figure 6.13.
Figure 6.13: Results: Usability x Feature
Further comments regarding each feature can be seen below.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
53
Figure 6.14: Keywords from comments related to Log Meal feature
Figure 6.15: Keywords from comments related to Log Symptom feature
==PAGE:62==
54
6 Results
Figure 6.16: Keywords from comments related to My Activity (chart) feature
Figure 6.17: Keywords from comments related to Meal/Symptom Details feature
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
55
Figure 6.18: Keywords from comments related to Set Experiment feature
Figure 6.19: Keywords from comments related to My Experiments feature
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Results
Figure 6.20: Keywords from comments related to Experiments Details (time-line)
feature
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
57
6.2.2.2
Overall (using SUS - System Usability Scale - see Appendix C)
Figure 6.21: SUS results
As can be seen on the table 6.21 above, the SUS score of the mobile applica-
tion What Am I Eating - Experiments is 73.75 and the pertinent calculations
can be found in Appendix C.
According to the table 6.22 below, the achieved score corresponds to a B-
grade in usability, equivalent to the percentile range 65-69.
Figure 6.22: SUS grades
==PAGE:66==
58
6 Results
6.2.3
Level of perceived value towards the solution
Perceived value is one of the sections of the questionnaire B and it is composed
by open questions. For this reason, the obtained answers are presented below
and discussed later. In this study, it is believed that what provides users with
value in the ”What Am I Eating - Experiments” experiment are the offered
visualizations.
6.2.3.1
Overall
Two were the questions asked to assess the overall level of perceived value
towards the solution. They can be seen below, together with the given answers
and comments.
Figure 6.23: Answers to ”Question 1” from section Perceived Value
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
59
Figure 6.24: Statistics of ”Question 2” from section Perceived Value
Figure 6.25: Comments on achieved Yes or No defined goal”
==PAGE:68==
60
6 Results
6.2.3.2
Per Feature
Figure 6.26: Results on perceived value per visualization offered
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
61
6.2.4
Level of adherence to the solution
Adherence is another of the sections of the questionnaire (Appendix B) and
it is composed by open questions and 5-scale questions. The obtained results
are presented below.
Figure 6.27: Adherence - results for ”Question 1”
Figure 6.28: Adherence - results for ”Question 2”
==PAGE:70==
62
6 Results
Figure 6.29: Adherence - results for ”Question 3”
Figure 6.30: Adherence - results for ”Question 4”
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
63
6.2.5
Comparison between users who achieved goal and who
did not
The testers were instructed to define a goal to achieve during the experiment
and set an experiment.
As could be seen above (Figure 6.24), 5 of the testers (Users 2, 3, 7, 8
and 9), corresponding to 50%, answered ”Yes” when asked if they achieved
their goals during the experiment, while 2 of them of them (Users 4 and 10)
answered ”No” and the other 3 (Users 1, 5 and 6) answered that they ”Don’t
know”.
Some analysis was made, comparing the users who answered ”Yes” to the
ones who answered ”No”, in order to check if their log behavior could have
influenced them positively or negatively.
The P value was calculated in order to verify if there were significant dif-
ferences between the data usage of the two groups (Figure 6.31). Two indexes
showed significant difference between the two groups. These are the ”Average
number of set experiments” and the ”Average SUS rate”.
Figure 6.31: Comparison of data usage of users who achieved and who did not achieve
their goals during the experiment
The comments given by these users can be seen on the Figure 6.32.
==PAGE:72==
64
6 Results
Figure 6.32: Comments given by users who answered Yes or No to achieved their
goals during the experiment
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this chapter the results described on the previous chapter ( 6).
7.1
Limitations
Before starting with the analysis of the results, it is important to mention that
there are few points, independent variables related to the context or to the
implementation, that raise some concerns and need to be addressed. These
points are:
• The issues with the high-fidelity prototype, detailed in section 4.4 of this
study, had an impact on the results.
This impact is reflected in the
answers given to the ”User evaluation questionnaire”B questions.
• All users were briefed on the prototype’s features, functioning, limita-
tions and real cases of use, which might have compromised the results
(Testers did not have to discover the app’s features on their own)
• As described in the Recruitment section 5.2, the subjects which collab-
orated in the study belong to a close network of the study coordinator
and therefore, awareness should be raised on the positive bias of results.
• Although the short period of the experiment (5-days) have a point to
prove, as described on the section 6.2, it also had an impact on the
experiment’s results.
==PAGE:74==
66
7 Discussion
7.2
Phase 1: Pre-validation of the Concept
7.2.1
First stage
The tests with the low-fidelity prototype basically ended up in changes regard-
ing navigation and information architecture.
7.2.2
Second stage
The first tests with the high-fidelity prototype yielded more interesting changes
regarding not only usability but also the scope of the application. The main
objective of these changes is improving usefulness and consequently perceived
value by the users. These changes also gave the possibility to create later logs
and addition of extra information to enrich logged data related to Symptoms.
The initial zoom of the My Activity (chart view) was individually investi-
gated. After users feedback, it was decided to adopt as initial setting, a zoom
of the 24 hours of the day for the X axis. The ”visual results” of the test can
be seen on the final version of the screen-shots of the testers . It shows that in
cases when users logged a large quantity of data, like User 2 (23 logs), User 1
(21 logs) and User 5 (19 logs), (see section 7.2.2), the chart gets polluted with
images. This creates necessity to zoom out to be able to visualize all logged
data. This was identified as the main issue with the High-fidelity prototype
(see section 4.4), which impacted the user experience during the tests.
7.3
Phase 2: Application of the Concept
7.3.1
Data Usage
As showed in the previous chapter on average users registered 13.2 logs (meals
and symptoms together). 10.4 is the total average of logged meals (1.04 per
person per day), and 2.8 is the total average of logged symptoms (0.28 per
person per day).
In regards to the experiments, all users were asked to register at least one
experiment, targeting something related to the goal they defined for the five
days period of tests.
It was interesting to notice that few users set more
than one experiment with different targets for the same period, producing an
average of 1.3 experiments set per user.
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
67
7.3.2
Usability
7.3.2.1
Per feature
Although the overall usability of the application was classified as good (SUS
= 73.75, Grade B-), this work also investigated the usability of each feature
included in the application.
A thorough analysis of the visualizations was
performed, since they are the main focus of the study.
Analyzing the rates given by the testers, all of the features performed
reasonably well. A rank of the average rates granted, ordered from the greatest
to the lowest, can be seen below:
1. My Experiments & Log Symptom = 4.3
2. Log Meal = 4.1
3. Set Experiment, Meal/Symptom Details & My Activity (chart
view) = 3.8
4. Experiment Details view = 3.4
Taking into consideration the given comments related to My Experi-
ments, I believe that users confused the Experiment Details view (time-
line) with the My Experiments, which is a screen with the list of set ex-
periments. Thinking about it now, maybe it was not so relevant to evaluate
usability of the list (My Experiments). For this reason for the matter of
this analysis, I disregarded the Experiment Details view and the rate given
to it. Therefore, the My Experiments feature passed to be related to the
time-line visualization, making it the best ranked feature, together with Log
Symptom with a rate of 4.33 out of 5. The new version of the chart with the
rating results per feature can be seen on the Figure 7.1.
The other “most important” feature of the app, the My Activity (chart
view) was rated worst, with a rate of 3.8. In this case to understand what
happened it was necessary to go deep into the given comments. Results show
that the negative comments (“trouble zooming”, “difficult to us zoom”,
“a bit confusing”, “not easy to interact with”) were mainly related to
the functioning issues of the feature, described on section 4.4 of this study.
But as can be seen on the Figure 6.16, there were also good comments such as
“excellent idea”, “nice overview”, “helpful and practical” and “good
overview”, which indicates that the expectations of this study towards this
feature were confirmed and the visualization can really bring people to get a
quick and good overview of their diet intake and possible symptoms.
==PAGE:76==
68
7 Discussion
Figure 7.1: Usability per feature - revised
As mentioned before, the Log Symptom feature also received a good
grade 4.3 out of 5, with very good comments such as “easy”, “very easy”,
“great advantage”, “diagnose”, “It helped to identify the cause of
my problem”, “very objective”, “intuitive” and “allergic reactions”,
which can be seen at the Figure 6.15. But there were also some ”not so positive
comments” like “lack customization” and “forgot about it”.
On the same line, the Log Meal feature also received a good grade 4.1 out
of 5, with very good comments such as “easy”, “very easy”, “just perfect”,
“quick”, “user-friendly”, “very objective”, “intuitive”, “worked well”,
that can be seen at the Figure 6.20.
According to the given comments, the Set Experiment feature got a
reasonable usability rate from the users (3.8), defined by words like “easy”,
“intuitive”, “easy to experiment”. On the other hand, its own validity or
even usefulness was questioned by some testers (“not necessary”), who said
that the My Experiments (time-line) is valuable and could exist without
the need of setting an experiment. And it seems to be shared by some other
testers as showed on the following comments “not clear” and “did not use”,
“did not notice it”.
The Meal/Symptom Details view was rated with an average of 3.8
and given comments such as “easy” and “self-explaining”. Some negative
==PAGE:77==
7.3 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
69
comments were also given. A close analysis shows that they are related to the
My Activity (chart view) limitations described in section 4.4 of this study.
7.3.2.2
Overall (using SUS - System Usability Scale - see Appendix C)
As described in previous chapters, the SUS was used to evaluate the overall
level of usability of the high-fidelity prototype.
The SUS method is based on the evaluation of a wide variety of products
and services including hardware, software, mobile devices, websites and appli-
cations. Research defines as a convention that a SUS score above a 68 would
be considered above average and anything below 68 is below average.
The SUS score achieved by the mobile application What Am I Eating -
Experiments is 73.75. With this score the application is classified with the B-
grade. This means that it is above average and that users are satisfied with
the application and would be willing to use it in the future.
7.3.3
Level of perceived value towards the solution
7.3.3.1
Overall
Overall level of perceived value was evaluated by a simple verification of
achievement or not of a defined goal. The users were asked to define a goal
to be achieved during the 5-days experiment. At this stage they were asked
to register this goal by answering the question: ”Which was the purpose
you wanted to achieve during the period of tests with the app?” and
then asking if they achieved it ”Yes”, ”No” or ”Don’t know”.
The analysis of this data indicates that the sub-goal 5 of this research (see
section 1.1) might be right. This means that even if using the app for short
periods of time, enough data can be produced to deliver meaningful insights
as well as support the user in achievement of specific goal.
This conclusion is supported by the fact that, despite the short period of
the tests (just five days), 50% of the users stated that they were able to achieve
their predefined goals. And reinforce by the given comments, which include
”I did (achieve my goal)!”, ”I was able to follow my eating pattern
as I wanted” and ”I gained sort of an overview of my diet.”.
The users who answered ”No” were 2 (20%) and their comments were
”The app didn’t encouraged me to analyze effects of sugar on my
diet.”, ”I think it would require longer use to be able to discover
useful patterns in our diet.”.
==PAGE:78==
70
7 Discussion
7.3.3.2
Per Feature
Impressive 90% of users believe that the ”My Activity (chart)” and ”My
Experiments (time-line)” visualizations were useful in regards to conveying
understanding and 70% said that they brought them to reflect and having
insights about dietary habits. These results indicate the users perceived value
of the app.
Same can be said about the details present on the ”Meal/Symptom
Details” view, when 70% of users said they were relevant for them.
On the other hand, 50% of users said there were useless data among the
collected data. By analyzing their comments it was identified that ”location”
was mentioned four times.
One reason for this result can be because people who performed the tests
usually make their meals at the same place. Another possibility is that pre-
sented inside of the ”Meal/Symptom Details” view, this data might have
been misused. Future work can explore other possibilities in order to make a
better use of this data.
7.3.4
Level of adherence to the solution
It would be too ambitious wanting to achieve reliable results regarding level
of adherence to any solution with a 5-days experiment. But given the wide
variety of real possibilities proportioned by the app, 5-days self-experiment
being one of them, it is believed that the results achieved with this study can
be genuinely relevant.
The activity of self-tracking is not an easy task because it requires high
consistency and discipline. Despite that, the answers to the following questions
indicate that testers did not find, using the app as a hassle:
”80%”
of users graded with 3 and 4, the Was it ”convenient” to keep self-tracking
with the app.
”80%”
of them answered ”Maybe” or ”Yes” when asked if they ”would use it
on a daily basis” to track of your diet habits.
==PAGE:79==
7.3 Phase 2: Application of the Concept
71
”90%”
answered ”Yes” or ”Maybe” when asked if they ”would use it
sporadically” with specific purposes.
”30%”
graded the maximum score to the question ”would recommend the app
for someone”, what means that they would be potential promoters in case
the app was released on the market.
7.3.5
Comparison between users who achieved goal and who
did not
Data usage results shows that there is relatively significant difference (P Value
< than 0.5) between ”Average number of set experiments”, being 1.6
to the users who answered ”Yes”, against 1 to the users who answered ”No”.
There was also significant difference between the ”Average SUS rate” given
by the two groups of users, being 73.33 to the users who answered ”Yes” and
60 to the ones who answered ”No”.
These differences show that users who answered they achieved their goals
logged more data and granted a higher rate to the system’s usability on aver-
age.
It is important to cross examine the comments with the predefined goals
of the testers 6.32. Results of this analysis shows that users who stated they
achieved their goals, seem to have defined more realistic goals for the exper-
iment. In comparison, the ones who stated they did not achieve their goals
seem to be having more demanding expectations for the results reached in the
five days period of the test: (”Wanted to cut down on my sugar intake”
and ”Being self-conscious about what I actually eat”).
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
Answer to the proposed research question
”Can photo-based visualizations be useful in a way that
increase perceived value and adherence by the users of
mobile applications for self-tracking of symptoms and
dietary intake?”
The individual evaluation of the designed visualizations shows very high
level of perceived value among the users. 90% of the testers believe visualiza-
tions were useful in regards to conveying understanding about their dietary
habits. 70% state that visualizations helped them to reflect and get insights
about their food intake. Alongside the positive feedback, the analysis shows
that there is room for improvement in regards to functioning and usability of
the application, which might be addressed in future work.
These results lead to the conclusion that there is a great potential in using
photo-based visualizations in exploratory dietary self-tracking mobile apps.
This conclusion is supported by the fact that, despite the short period of
the tests (just five days), 50% of the users stated that they were able to achieve
their predefined goals.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 9
Future Work
Much was said by the testers about how to improve usability and usefulness
of the application. To begin with the issues with the high-fidelity prototype
can be solved and a new experiment can be carried out. The test should be
for a longer period of time and should investigate the same questions of this
study, checking if the results can be improved.
I myself have tested the application for a longer period of time (1 month).
Based on my feedback combined with the feedback acquired in this study I
believe future work can create benefits for this app. The goal will be to improve
usefulness, adherence and perceived value towards similar applications. Below
are state some of the examples for application improvements:
• The fact that it was necessary to give users an introduction about the
application and its possibilities, together with the feedback from more
than one user, indicate that the objective behind the Set Experiment sec-
tion was not very clear. I still believe that it could bring users to adhere
more to self-track, because when a user formulates goals to achieve, it
means that he/she stopped to reflect about it before and that’s when the
discoveries happen. For this reason, it would be interesting to explore
opportunities of improvement. An example could be the addition of an
explanatory content, which could be showed at the first time users log
in the app and easily accessible later.
• Regarding the time-line visualization, given the good results achieved by
it on this study, maybe it could exist by itself, being an item on the
menu, without the need of setting an experiment.
• When it comes to the log of symptoms, it would be interesting to explore
providing users with the possibility to customize the list of symptoms
according to their needs, turning it more meaningful for them.
• About the log of intake, some users reported being discouraged to take
pictures of their meals in some places, like at work for example. It can
==PAGE:82==
74
9 Future Work
sound a bit contradictory when it comes to photo-based applications,
but enabling users with the possibility of logging without the need of a
picture, could increase their adherence to self-track. Also, for the cases
of ”ordinary intake” such as fruits and coffee, the application could offer
standard photos, like on the app Calorie Mama, analyzed on this study.
• Another possibility that could be explored, is the addition of image recog-
nition capacity, in order to make it possible to identify the contents of
photos. By doing so, a search feature could be added, giving users the op-
tion of searching for something specific throughout their data (contents
of photos and comments). It could bring them a lot of value, mainly in
the cases where a lot of data is logged.
• Although the zoom implemented to the chart makes it possible to observe
the data in longer terms periods of time, it didn’t bring me much value
during my own period of tests. By reflecting on it, I believe it would
be interesting exploring a feature which allows seen data by one or more
defined date intervals, being possible making comparisons.
• The location data (coordinates) could be explored in a separated photo-
based map-visualization like the one that can be seen on Airbnb and
many other web sites and applications, where the photos would be dis-
played on the places the intakes happened. This would possibly bring
users to reflect on their data on a different way;
• Push notifications could also be used not only to remind users to log
data, but also to give them a short summary of intake per day and also,
to remind them to reflect on their data.
• AI (Artificial Intelligence) could be implemented, providing the app with
the possibility to give insights related to goals defined by users, as in an
example given by one of the testers during the experiment carried on for
this study: ”It would be nice to be able to set experiments like “reducing
sugar intake” and having only food containing large amount of carbs or
sugar appearing in the time-line ”.
• Gamefication techniques could also be explored in order to increase peo-
ple’s adherence to self-tracking. For instance, users could be given scores
related to the number of tracked content they had during an experiment.
At the end, a list with the best ranked people with similar kinds of ex-
periment could be displayed. In this way, people could feel compelled to
==PAGE:83==
9 Future Work
75
”compete” against each other for better tracking results, adhering more
to the activity.
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIX A
Prototypes and
Source-code
A.1
Low-Fidelity Prototype
Link to prototype at Invision App:
https://tinyurl.com/y8zear9b
A.2
High-Fidelity Prototype
A.2.1
iOS version
Link to the High-Fidelity prototype at App Store:
https://tinyurl.com/y92oguzu
A.2.2
Android version
Link to the High-Fidelity prototype at GooglePlay:
https://tinyurl.com/ycp4al2n
A.3
Source-code
Link to High-Fidelity prototype source code at GitHub:
https://github.com/barbararcbf12/WAIE-experiments
==PAGE:85==
A.3 Source-code
77
Figure A.1: Link to App Store
==PAGE:86==
78
A Prototypes and Source-code
Figure A.2: Link to GooglePlay
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX B
User Evaluation
Questionnaire
To evaluate the experience of volunteer users after the Beta testing period, a
questionnaire was built in Google forms (https://tinyurl.com/ybfh8b3w). The
questionnaire was split into five sections:
• ABOUT YOU: composed simply by three questions: ”What is your
age?”; ”Do you believe you have any problems, issues or something you
would like to improve related to your diet habits?” and ”If you answered
YES to the previous question, which actions do you take about it cur-
rently?”
The questions on this section were looking for addressing the following
questions:
– ”Who are you?”
– ”Do you have a problem?”
– ”How are you solving the problem?”
– ”Are you using another product to solve the problem?”
• USABILITY: composed by twelve statements related to the features of
the application (Log Meal, Log Symptom, Meal/Symptom Details, My
Activity, Set Experiment, My Experiments, Experiment Detail), to which
the user should rate, using a scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly
agree). After each of the statements and rating options, an open multi-
text field was added, asking to the users to add any comments they have
about the previous feature evaluated.
The questions on this section were looking for addressing the following
question:
– ”Did you understand the app?”
==PAGE:88==
80
B User Evaluation Questionnaire
Also, in order to assess the overall usability of the application, the ques-
tions of the SUS method (see Appendix C) where included in this section.
• PERCEIVED VALUE: composed by six questions. The first of them is
an opened question about the user’s purpose towards the use of the app.
The other five questions were multiple-choice ones, with three options:
Yes, No and Don’t know, to which the user should only choose a single
answer. After each of them, the user was asked to explain his/her answer
or talk a bit more about what was previously asked.
The questions on this section were looking for addressing the following
questions:
– ”How did you feel about the app?”
– ”Did you understand what is the app for?”
– ”Do you actually have a need for an app like this?”
– ”Is there competition for the app?”
• ADHERENCE: composed by two statements to be rated by the user us-
ing a scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree), two multiple-
choice questions with three possible answers: Yes, No and Maybe, to
which the user should only choose a single answer and one opened ques-
tion about what could make the user to use/recommend the app. Again,
after each of them, the user was asked to talk a bit more about what was
previously asked.
The questions on this section were looking for addressing the following
questions:
– ”In which scenarios can you pick yourself using the app?”
– ”What, if anything, would make you want to use this product fre-
quently?”
– ”How likely or unlikely would you be to recommend the finished
product to a friend?”
– ”In your opinion, what could be better in this app and how could it
fulfill your needs in a better way?”
• GENERAL OVERVIEW: composed by one open question ”In general
terms, how would you describe the app and your experience while using
it during the tests?” and an optional field, where the user can add here
any other general comments he/she wishes.
==PAGE:89==
B User Evaluation Questionnaire
81
The question on this section is looking for addressing the following ques-
tions:
– ”Does the prototype do what it’s supposed to?”
– ”Do you think the product’s design matches its purpose?”
– ”Do you feel like this product was designed for you?”
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX C
SUS (System Usability
Scale)
In order to calculate the SUS of What Am I Eating - Experiments, the following
equation was used.
where L1 = (1, 3, 5, 7, 9) and L2 = (2, 4, 6, 8, 10) represents a list of the
specific items from the questionnaire, and i, j are extracting the results from
the particular items SUS score which ranges between 0 −4 [33, 56, 57].
The SUS score will vary from 0 to 100. The grade corresponding to the
obtained score can be found in the below.
Figure C.1: Table with intervals of grades for classification
Users are asked to answer the following questionnaire, composed by ten
==PAGE:91==
C SUS (System Usability Scale)
83
questions with one of five responses that range from Strongly Agree to Strongly
disagree.
Figure C.2: Questionnaire and Rating system
More information about the method can be found at the following link:
https://tinyurl.com/zmsq8uf
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
[1]
Adherence to Diet and Exercise Tracking in the Lose IT. 2018.
[2]
Semigran et al. Evaluation of symptom checkers for self diagnosis and triage:
audit study. July 2015.
[3]
et al. Ambrosini G. L. Feasibility of a commercial smartphone application for
dietary assessment in epidemiological research and comparison with 24-h dietary
recalls, Nutrition Journal, 17-5. January 2018.
[4]
Bohn T. Arens-Vollanda A. G. Spassovaa L. Promising approaches of computer-
supported dietary assessment and management—Current research status and
available applications. August 2015.
[5]
Ferreira B. October 2018. url: https://invis.io/4TOTSVL5C3Y#/328210325_
01-Home.
[6]
Ferreira B. Research study on photo-based mobile diet tracking applications. July
2018. url: https://tinyurl.com/yamulyjq.
[7]
Ferreira B. What Am I Eating - experiments (Android version). January 2018.
url: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.waieexperiments.
[8]
Ferreira B. What Am I Eating - experiments (iOS version). January 2018. url:
https://itunes.apple.com/dk/app/waie-experiments/id1448692848.
[9]
et. al. Bacigalupo R. Interventions employing mobile technology for overweight
and obesity: an early systematic review of randomized controlled trials, Obes.,
Rev. 2012.
[10]
Thompson-Felty C. and C. S. Johnston. Adherence to Diet Applications Using
a Smartphone Was Associated With Weight Loss in Healthy Overweight Adults
Irrespective of the Application, Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, 2,
p184-185. 2017.
[11]
et al. Chia-Fang Chung. When Personal Tracking Becomes Social: Examining
the Use of Instagram for Healthy Eating, Proceeding of the SIGCHI conference
of human factors computing systems, CHI conference, p1674-1687. May 2017.
[12]
Lupton D. and Jutel A. ‘It’s like having a physician in your pocket!’ A critical
analysis of self-diagnosis smartphone apps. May 2015.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
85
[13]
Effective techniques in healthy eating and physical activity interventions: A meta-
regression. Health Psychology, 28(6), 690-701. 2009. url: https://psycnet.
apa.org/record/2009-20990-006.
[14]
et al. Epstein D. A. Crumbs: Lightweight Daily Food Challenges to Promote
Engagement and Mindfulness. May 2016. url: https://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?id=2858044.
[15]
et al. Epstein D. A. [Invited Paper] Multimedia FoodLog: Diverse Applications
from Self-Monitoring to Social Contributions, Volume 1 Issue 3 Pages 214-219.
2013. url: https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/mta/1/3/1_214/
_article.
[16]
et al. Ferreira B. ”What am I eating”: Study of usability applied to self-tracking
dietary intake on mobile personal informatic systems. May 2018. url: https:
//barbaraferreirasite.wordpress.com/2018/05/27/what-am-i-eating-
mobile-app/.
[17]
et al. Finkelstein E. A. Obesity and Severe Obesity Forecasts Through 2030,
AJPM, 42, p563-570. 2012.
[18]
Global market share held by the leading smartphone operating systems in sales
to end users from 1st quarter 2009 to 2nd quarter 2018. 2018. url: https:
//www.statista.com/statistics/266136/global-market-share-held-by-
smartphone-operating-systems.
[19]
et al. Hales S. Dunn C. Is a Picture Worth a Thousand Words? Few Evidence-
Based Features of Dietary Interventions Included in Photo Diet Tracking Mobile
Apps for Weight Loss, Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, 10, p1399-
1405. 2016.
[20]
Viller S. Henricksen K. Design of software to support families with food-allergic
and food-intolerant children. November 2012.
[21]
Poirier J. and Cobb NK. Social influence as a driver of engagement in a web-
based health intervention, Journal of medical Internet research. February 2012.
[22]
et al. Karkar R. TummyTrials: A Feasibility Study of Using Self-Experimentation
to Detect Individualized Food Triggers. May 2017. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5432136/#R55.
[23]
Truswell A.S. Mann J. Essentials of Human Nutrition, 5th edition. 2017.
[24]
Monitoring Eating Behaviors for a Nutritionist E-Assistant Using Crowdsourc-
ing. March 2018. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/
8320221.
[25]
et al. Ng Marie. Global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight and
obesity in children and adults during 1980-2013: a systematic analysis for the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2013, p715-828. 2014.
==PAGE:94==
86
Bibliography
[26]
et al. Pellegrini C. A. Daily and Seasonal Influences on Dietary Self-monitoring
Using a Smartphone Application, Journal of Nutrition Education and Behaviour,
50, p56-61. January 2018.
[27]
Rethinking the mobile food journal: Exploring opportunities for lightweight photo-
based capture. 2015.
[28]
Sorensen T. I. A. Rokholm B. Baker J. L. The levelling off of the obesity epidemic
since the year 1999 – a review of evidence and perspectives, Obesity Reviews,
11, p835-846. 2010.
[29]
Chomutare T. Features of Mobile Diabetes Applications: Review of the Litera-
ture and Analysis of Current Applications Compared Against Evidence-Based
Guidelines. September 2011.
[30]
Wahl D. R., et al. Healthy food choices are happy food choices: Evidence from
a real life sample using smartphone based assessments. December 2017.
[31]
et al. Wang C. Y. Health and economic burden of the projected obesity trends
in the USA and the UK, The Lancet, 378, p815-825. 2011.
[32]
et. al. Weiqing M. You Are What You Eat: Exploring Rich Recipe Information
for Cross-Region Food Analysis, IEEE Transaction on multimedia, 20, p950-964.
April 2018.
[33]
et al. Wharton C. M. Dietary Self-Monitoring, But Not Dietary Quality, Im-
proves With Use of Smartphone App Technology in an 8-Week Weight Loss Trial,
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behaviour, 46, p440-444. January 2014.
