==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
I
Preface
This master thesis was submitted as the ﬁnal project for obtaining a MSc Eng degree in me-
chanical engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). This thesis came about
because the author was working as a student at a ceramic ﬂat sheet manufacturer called Cem-
brane. Cembrane was only involved in the very beginning of the project. Supervisors on the
project were Associate Professor Niels Aage and Postdoc Joe Alexandersen - both from De-
partment of Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
I would like to sincerely thank my supervisors for their engagement in this project. Both of
them have always been quick to answer E-mails and they introduced weekly meetings which
was a major help. Their guidance and positive attitude made the project much fun to be a part
of. I would also like to thank Mike Snodgrass, who is Membrane Technology Leader at Ovivo
Water. He is responsible for formulating the hypothesis, which the experiments are based on.
Lastly, I would like to thank my two friends Mads Bjerrum and Simon Backlund for giving me
feedback on my writing and Anders K. Lomholt for studying alongside me during long hours.
The work presented in this thesis could easily be used as a stepping stone for other student
projects. Topics include; multiple CFD projects, mesh reﬁnement, poroelasticity, material sci-
ence, topology optimization, application of upscaling etc.
Should the reader ﬁnd any such
project interesting, please do not hesitate to contact the author.
==PAGE:3==
II
Resumé (Danish)
Formålet med denne kandidatafhandling er at indsamle ﬁltrerings- og mekaniske data på en
keramisk ﬂat sheet membran og replikerer resultaterne vha. numeriske modeller. Således kan
afhandlingen opdeles i to hovedområder; eksperimenter og numerisk implementering af matem-
atiske modeller.
Designet af testopstllingen blev udtænkt således, at det kunne genskabe et fænomen kaldet
dewatering. Permeabiliteten af membranen blev beregnet ud fra de eksperimentelle ﬂow data.
Et lineært udtryk for udbøjning som funktion af ydre trykpåvirkning blev opstillet til bestem-
melse af Young’s modul. Da det ikke er i Cembrane nuværende interesse at ændre på membrane
mikrostruktur, blev mikrostruktur betragtniner udeladt i de mekaniske ligninger.
Den eksperimentelt fundne permeabilitet er blevet brugt som input til den numeriske model.
Flowet er blevet modelleret ved brug af Darcy-Stokes elementer.
Ved denne type ﬂow er
det numerisk nødvendigt at benytte mixed formulation, hvor både tryk- og hastighedsfeltet
bliver anset som afhængige variable.
Denne type formulering skal leve op Babuska-Brezzi-
betingelserne for at kunne opnå stabile resultater.
Hvis det ikke bliver gjort, vil man se
oscillationer i løsningerne.
Stabilitetskravene er her opnået ved indføre en perturbation af
testfunktionen for hastighedsfeltet.
De numeriske løsninger gav resultater svarende til ≈25% af de eksperimentelle data. Det er
vurderet, at det sandsynligvis er upræcise eksperimentelle data, der ligger til grund for dette.
Den numeriske implementering er løbende blevet valideret.
==PAGE:4==
III
Abstract
The purpose of this thesis is to obtain experimental ﬁltration and mechanical data of a ceramic
ﬂat sheet membrane and replicate the results numerically. As such, the thesis has two major
topics; experiments and implementation of mathematical models.
The design of the test setup was made to mimic an event known as dewatering which causes
early breakage of membranes. The permeability of the membrane was calculated using the
experimental ﬂow data. A linear relation between deﬂection and applied pressure was used to
obtain a value of Young’s modulus. Since, it is currently not of interest to Cembrane to mod-
ify the microstructure of the membrane, microstructure considerations were omitted in ﬁnding
Young’s modulus.
The experimentally found permeability will be used an input in the numerical models. The
ﬂow is numerically modeled by Darcy-Stokes elements. With this type of ﬂow it is necessary
to use the mixed formulation, where both pressure and velocity ﬁelds serve as dependent vari-
ables. The mixed formulation must fulﬁll the Babuska-Brezzi stability condition. If not, the
solution becomes unstable with oscillation and inaccurate results. Stability is introduced by
perturbation of the test function of the velocity ﬁeld.
The numerical solutions showed results that were about 25% of the experimentally found re-
sults. This is thought to be caused mainly by inaccurate experimental data. The numerical
implementation has been validated by comparison to analytic data and commercial software.
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Product and Process Description
4
2.1
Membrane Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Membrane Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Process Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Dewatering and Breakage Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Experiments
11
3.1
Experiments - State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Design of Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Flow Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.1
Free Channel Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.2
Porous Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Mechanical Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Porosity Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Numerical Implementation
22
4.1
Numerical Implementation - State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Structural Scales
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Introduction to Navier-Stokes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
The Finite Element Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.1
Weak Form and System Matrix - Darcy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.2
Weak Form and System Matrix - Stokes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.3
System Matrix - Darcy-Stokes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Test Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5.1
Darcy - Uniform Permeability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5.2
Darcy - Dual Permeability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5.3
Stokes - Simple Channel Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5.4
Stokes - Complex Channel Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.5
Darcy Stokes - Complex Channel Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
V
5
Comparison
38
5.1
L as a Variable
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Single Channel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Final Remarks
42
6.1
Subgoal Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Appendices
45
A
Mechanical Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
B
Implementing Weak Form Numerically - Darcy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
C
Discrete Form of Stoke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
D
Uniform Permeability Darcy - Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
E
Uniform Permeability Darcy - Velocity in X
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
F
Uniform Permeability Darcy - Velocity in Y
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
G
Dual Permeability Darcy - Comsol Domain Variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
H
Dual Permeability Darcy - Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
I
Dual Permeability Darcy - Velocity in Y
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
J
Complex Stokes - Velocity in X
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
K
Complex Stokes - Velocity in Y
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
L
Complex Darcy Stokes - Velocity in Y
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
M
Complex Darcy Stokes - Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
==PAGE:7==
ABBREVIATIONS
AFM Atomic Force Microscopy.
BC boundary condition.
CAPEX Capital Expenditure.
CFD Computational Fluid Dynamics.
DTU the Technical University of Denmark.
FEM Finite Element Method.
IBP Integration by Parts.
MatHom Matlab script for homogenization.
MOI Moment of Inertia.
MPT Matlab script for 2D Mindlin Plate Theory.
NS Navier-Stokes equation.
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer.
OPEX Operational Expenditure.
PDE Partial Diﬀerential Equation.
PSPG Pressure Stabilized Petrov Galerkin.
SEM Scanning Electron Microscope.
SiC Silicon carbide.
SUPG Streamline Upwind Petrov Galerkin.
TMP Transmembrane Pressure.
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Motivation
This thesis was made in collaboration with the Danish company Cembrane and DTU. Cem-
brane is an Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM), meaning that it produces a component
used in a larger installment. The core product of the company is a ceramic ﬂat sheet membrane
used as a microﬁlter to purify water. It is made mainly from Silicon carbide (SiC) particles of
diﬀerent sizes.
In recent years, the demand for higher quality and quantity of fresh water in the world has
increased [27]. One of the ways to overcome this challenge is by use of membrane technology
due to high eﬃciency, small space requirement and ease of use [38]. Today, membranes can
be divided into two subgroups - ceramic and polymeric. The major diﬀerences between them
are that polymeric membranes have higher Operational Expenditure (OPEX) compared to ce-
ramic membranes. In return, the installation cost/Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) of polymeric
membranes is very low compared to ceramic.
The low OPEX of ceramic membranes is due to superior chemical resistance, long life time
expectancy, high ﬂux, mechanical and temperature stability as well as having a more eﬃcient
Transmembrane Pressure (TMP) due to its’ hydrophlic nature [20, 22, 38, 41].
For a long time the market has been reluctant to accept ceramic membranes, even though its’
properties are superior to polymeric membranes. The reason is the high CAPEX of ceramic
membranes. Due to a decline in production cost over recent years, CAPEX of ceramic mem-
branes are also decreasing. As a results, ceramic membranes are becoming an increasingly more
viable option compared to polymeric membranes [25].
Because ceramic membranes have only recently been viewed as economically viable, ceramic
membranes are being exposed to new environments. It is only natural that unexpected ap-
plication related phenomena are sometimes discovered. Recently, Cembrane has experienced
membranes breaking during an event called dewatering1. The cause of dewatering is well un-
derstood, but the reason to why it causes membranes to break is not. It is therefore important
to Cembrane to determine why dewatering causes membranes to break in order to prevent it
since it potentially has a big inﬂuence on OPEX.
The purpose of this thesis is to obtain experimental data from a test that replicates the de-
watering event. The membrane will also be modelled numerically and the experimental data
will act as a baseline for comparison. The numerical model should also be easily extended to
include optimization of design.
1Explained in Section 2.5
==PAGE:9==
2
Introduction
1.2
Thesis Structure
This project consists of four diﬀerent stages. First, the cause of breakage during dewatering is
hypothesized. The hypothesis is important in designing the test setup. In the second stage,
experiments are carried out to establish a base line and acquire necessary input for the math-
ematical models. The mathematical models are then implemented numerically in increasing
complexity using arbitrary design problems. Lastly, the numerical models are used to simulate
a dewatering event and the results are compared to the experimental results.
Each stage of the project will be associated with its’ own subgoal(s). The following stage de-
scription will present these and also help the reader to quickly the identify the purpose and
main points of each stage.
Product and Process Description
To better understand the problem, the reader will be presented with a brief overview of the
properties, production and application of the Cembrane SiC membrane. This will help the
reader understand the restrictions in membrane design as well as getting an understanding of
the environment that the membrane is exposed to. Lastly, a hypothesis to why the membrane
breaks during dewatering is formulated.
Subgoal:
• Formulate hypothesis to what causes dewatering events to break membranes
Experiments
A test setup is designed and built to obtain ﬁltration and mechanical properties of the mem-
brane. These will serve as a base line value for the mathematical models. The experiments are
also necessary to obtain certain phenomenological properties in order to model the membrane.
Phenomenological properties are dependent on a combination of both material and geometry
and are best obtained experimentally.
Subgoals:
• Design and build test setup to replicate dewatering event
• Obtain ﬁltering and mechanical properties used as reference values for the numerical
models
• Obtain phenomenological properties needed for implementations of mathematical model.
Numerical implementation
Before an attempt is made to simulate membrane breakage during dewatering, it is important
to validate correct implementation of mathematical models. This will be done by using simple
test problems. Both Matlab and Comsol Multiphysics will be used for implementation.
Matlab is very good at handling matrix operations and very suited for this kind of computations.
The work load of implementing the model in Matlab compared to Comsol is quite high, but it
is possible to have full control of the implementation. The goal is to implement a 2D model of
the membrane.
Comsol Multiphysics is very powerful tool, but as a commercial software, it is harder to gain
full control and understanding of the implementation compared to Matlab. However, the work
==PAGE:10==
Thesis Structure
3
load of implementing the mathematical models in Comsol is much smaller than in Matlab which
makes Comsol suited for a 3D model.
Comsol also has predeﬁned "modules" that can quickly set up a physical problem and reliably
solve it. The modules will be used to validate implementation of mathematical models.
Subgoals:
• Implement Darcy’s law
in Matlab 2D
• Implement Darcy’s law
in Comsol 2D
• Implement Darcy’s law
in Comsol 3D
• Implement Stokes equa-
tion in Matlab 2D
• Implement Stokes equa-
tion in Comsol 2D
• Implement Stokes equa-
tion in Comsol 3D
• Implement DarcyStokes
elements in Matlab 2D
• Implement DarcyStokes
elements in Comsol 2D
• Implement DarcyStokes
elements in Comsol 3D
Comparison
When the numerical implementations have been validated, they will be used to simulate a
dewatering event similar to that of the experiments. If the correct models have been chosen
and implementation is correct, the results of the experiments and the numerical results should
coincide.
Implement Stokes equation in Matlab 2D
• Show that results coincide with experimental data
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESCRIPTION
Designing a water treatment plant is huge undertaking with many diﬀerent aspects. Tasks
include; tank design, piping, pump capacity, energy cost consideration, cleaning of membranes,
water quality control, safety protocol, water ﬂow etc. As an OEM, Cembrane is not involved in
most of these processes. Normally, they simply supply modules containing 40 membranes. That
enables Cembrane to focus on the membrane and become experts. However, it is necessary to
have an understanding of the operational conditions, since the membrane must of course be
able to withstand these.
2.1
Membrane Production
The production of the ceramic ﬂat sheet membrane is quite complex and involves many steps.
Multiple ﬁrings are involved, extrusion, coat dipping, drying and post-processing to prepare
for module installment. Figure 2.1 shows a simplistic illustration of the production steps. The
name of the product will change depending on how far it is in the production line.
Figure 2.1:
Simplistic production steps at Cembrane.
The extrusion is the most relevant
production step in the context of this project.
First, a SiC-based clay-like paste is extruded and ﬁred/sintered. Extrusion is a low-cost pro-
duction method and well suited for continuous production. A drawback is that the production
method limits the design of the membrane in that, the cross section must be constant [2]. This
production method is key to Cembrane in order to keep CAPEX as low as possible. However,
it makes it very hard to optimize the microstructure of the membrane, because it would require
identical mixing of materials every time. It follows that any design optimization that might be
proposed will involve changes to the cross section of the membrane - not the microstructure.
After the ﬁrst ﬁring, the product is known as substrate. The substrate makes up the majority
==PAGE:12==
Membrane Production
5
of the membrane volume. The substrate is then dipped in a coat, which consists of ﬁner grains
of SiC compared to the substrate. The coat and substrate are bound together as a result of a
second ﬁring - at which point, the product is called a membrane.
Figure 2.2:
Grain struc-
ture of coat and substrate
The result is two distinct material phases as shown in Figure 2.2.
The void between the SiC-grains (pores) acts as a ﬁlter. The
pores in the substrate are ∼10µm in eﬀective diameter and
much too large to ﬁlter bacteria, which are typically in the range
of 0.5-50µm. The pore size of the coat is ∼0.2µm and small
enough to ﬁlter germs and bacteria [34].
During operation, the membrane is submerged in feed water
which is the water that needs cleaning. A vacuum pump is used
to suck the water through the sides of the membrane, through in-
ternal channels towards the two endcaps as shown in Figure 2.3.
The endcaps are glued to the membrane and provide connection
to a collective pipe system. The pin on the endcap is used for
placing the membrane in the steel module. The clean water is
called the permeate water .
Figure 2.3: Membrane and nomenclature. Note that only one endcap has a pin at the bottom
==PAGE:13==
6
Product and Process Description
2.2
Membrane Design
The membrane is made by extrusion which is the process of pushing material through a shape
giving tool, see Figure 2.4. By applying pressure to the material, it is pushed through the tool.
The shape of the tool will determine the shape of the extruded product. The pressure can
either be provided by an auger or piston to push the material through the tool [2].
Figure 2.4: Shape giving tool for extrusion
The pores of the substrate are suﬃciently large that water molecules may ﬂow quite easily, but
the ﬂow will be hindered somewhat. To reduce the resistance of ﬂow, 41 channels are designed
in the cross section of the membrane. In the channels of the membrane, the water can ﬂow
freely, see Figure 2.5. The design considerations of the cross section geometry have mainly been
on focused on acquiring good extrusion properties.
Membrane
dimension
Thickness [mm]
Height [mm]
Length [mm]
Channel height [mm]
Channel width [mm]
Channel quantity [-]
6.5
145
520
2.5
2.56
41
Figure 2.5: Cross section and dimension of membrane. In this illustration, thickness of the
coat (■) compared to thickness of substrate (■) is greatly exaggerated.
The outer surface of the membrane has been kept plane in order to decrease the possibility of
settling particles. If particles settles and sediment on the membrane surface, TMP will increase.
This is a very big issue in the membrane industry and known as fouling.
2.3
Module
For installation, membranes are mounted in modules at Cembrane. Each module consists of a
steel frame, 40 membranes and 2 permeate pipes. As shown in Figure 2.6, the steel frame is
equipped with a slot that ﬁts with the pin on the endcap.
==PAGE:14==
Module
7
Restriction
of membrane
X
Y
Z
RX
RY
RZ
1
0
0
1
0
0
0: Totally restricted
1: Slight movement allowed
Figure 2.6: Because SiC is very brittle, the membrane is allowed space to move during ﬁltra-
tion. The table displays in which directions the membrane can move. "R" is an abbreviation
for "rotation about"
The slot is 3.5mm wide and the pin is 3mm in diameter, so there is some space to allow for
movement. For the same reason, it is only one of the membranes that is equipped with a pin,
since membranes tend to twist. The endcap-permeate connection also restricts movement and
the resulting movement of the membrane can be found in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.7: Four modules stacked together with a collective manifold. An aerator is installed
below the four modules.
As shown in Figure 2.7, the modules can be stacked together in towers. A vertical manifold
is mounted on the tower to collect the permeate from the permeate pipes. The manifold can
easily be connected to an external pipe system. An aerator is situated below the tower. It
generates bubbles that can used to sustain movement in water, oxidize microbes and/or be
used for mechanical cleaning of membranes.
==PAGE:15==
8
Product and Process Description
2.4
Process Overview
Depending on application, a ﬁltration cycle will diﬀer. This section present a brief walkthrough
of a possible ﬁltration cycle involving ﬁlling, ﬁltration, emptying and cleaning. The nature
of these phases also depend on the water that needs to cleaned and required quality of the
permeate. Figure 2.8 shows the components needed to explain these phases.
During ﬁltration, a tower will be fully submerged in feed water. The ﬁltration pump provides
suction which sucks the feed water through the membranes and further on to the external
piping system. As time goes by more and more sediments will adhere to the membrane surface,
which increases TMP and thereby lowers ﬂux.
To avoid severe fouling the membrane must be cleaned. Conventionally, fouling is removed
either by backwash, sprinkling, chemically or aeration - or in combination. Backwashing is the
process where water from the backwash tank is pressed back through the membranes in order
to knock loose any sediments that have settled on the membrane surface. In other words, water
is going inside-out duing backwash instead of outside-in.
Figure 2.8: Typical process ﬂow diagram showing the schematics of what is needed for an
installation of one of Cembrane’s modules.
Aeration is a process of blowing air through pipes into a dispenser located beneath the tower,
which will creates bubbles. Travelling from the bottom of the tank to the top, bubbles will
bounce on membranes and knock sediments loose from the membranes. Lastly, a tower is ﬁtted
with a sprinkler on top in order to clean the membranes using a water jet stream. This is done
when the tank is empty.
The frequency and needed processes of cleaning depend on what is in the feed water and what
the permeate water is used for. The feed water and/or cleaning agents can range in pH levels
from pH 1-14.
==PAGE:16==
Dewatering and Breakage Hypothesis
9
2.5
Dewatering and Breakage Hypothesis
Figure 2.9: Particles in the feed water can
cluster together to block the space between
membranes.
The viscosity and content of feed water diﬀer
depending on water treatment applications.
In
some applications with high concentration of or-
ganic matter, feed water can be very viscous and
ﬁlled with large clay-like particles. If enough of
these particles cluster together in a "brick" in the
space between membranes, the membrane will be
blocked. During ﬁltration, the water from the cen-
ter of a brick will be drained due to the suction of
the membrane. If the brick is not removed by the
cleaning routine, it will harden. This is the con-
cept of a dewatering event.
The deﬁnition of a dewatering event and the cause
thereof has been formulated by Cembrane and
Ovivo USA with whom Cembrane has a close col-
laboration.
However, the reason to why mem-
branes break during a dewatering event is still not
fully understood. Ovivo has some pilot tests run-
ning with Cembrane’s membranes. Ovivo is the company that made Cembrane aware of mem-
branes breaking due to dewatering in the beginning of 2018. The two parties plan to carry out
experiments in spring 2019 to test two hypotheses. The author of the thesis has been involved
in designing the upcoming experiments and formulating hypotheses together with Cembrane
and Ovivo.
The ﬁrst hypothesis proposes that the backwash is the cause of broken membranes in a dewa-
tering event. As the brick hardens, it will act as a solid surface. The water that is being ejected
from the membrane during backwashing will push on the brick surface causing the membrane
to bend as shown in Figure 2.10. Depending on how much the membrane is bending during
backwash, it will break.
Figure 2.10: Hypothesis 1: During backwash, membranes that are blocked by bricks will bend
and possibly break due to the ejected water(→)pushing on the solid, dewatered brick (■)
==PAGE:17==
10
Product and Process Description
Figure 2.11: Hypothesis 2: Bricks
will
block
the
path
of
the
air
bubbles(•), forcing more air through
free membrane spacing.
The in-
creased pressure can lead to broken
membranes.
The second hypothesis proposes that air pressure caused
by blocked membrane spacing leads to broken membranes
in a dewatering event. Currently, Ovivo is trying to pre-
vent dewatering with excessive aeration. The idea is to
keep the water in motion, so that no particles will settle
in the space between membranes. However, it is the ex-
perience of Ovivo, that dewatering does occur even with
excessive aeration. In a module with blocked membrane
spacing, the air bubbles have less area to pass through
compared to a module with no blocked spacing.
This
will force a lot of air in between membranes which will
exert a large pressure on the membranes. If the pressure
is high enough, the membrane will break.
In eﬀect, the hypotheses are quite similiar. The diﬀerence
is, that water ﬂow in hypothesis 1 is going inside-out and
in hypothesis 2 the pressure is going outside-in. In both
cases, membranes are breaking due to a pressure being
applied to one of the two large surfaces.
Both cases also require mathematical models to be able
to simulate ﬂow through a porous media while being ex-
posed to a pressure causing the membrane to bend.
Through discussions with Ovivo, it has been decided that
hypothesis 2 is the more plausible one. This is based on
two discoveries made by Ovivo. Firstly, it has been ob-
served that membranes blocked by bricks are still intact
while some unblocked membranes are broken. Secondly,
top modules of a tower are more prone to contain bro-
ken membranes. This is caused by more and more air
accumulating in certain membrane spacing due to blocked spacing throughout the module.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3
EXPERIMENTS
According to the hypothesis, membranes are breaking due to a pressure being exerted by a
dense air distribution during ﬁltration. A test setup will be designed and built to test a single
membrane. The test setup must be able to replicate the pressure causing bending and ﬁltration
conditions. The membrane must also be ﬁxed similar to how it is ﬁxed in a module. A schematic
illustration of the test setup requirements are shown in Figure 3.1.
(a) Permeate connection of the endcap (◦) re-
stricts all movement except rotation around x-
axis. The pin (◦) restricts most of the rotation
around x-axis.
(b) Suction must be applied to the endcap that
drives a water ﬂow (→). Furthermore, pres-
sure (→) must be applied to one of the mem-
brane surfaces.
Figure 3.1: Test setup requirements
The test will be used the obtain mechanical and ﬁltration properties of the membrane.
A
literature review is used to determine which parameters are important to determine and how
they can be obtained. The literature study and experimental data will also be used to determine
which mathematical models are best suited to model the test conditions.
It is apparent that three distinct mathematical models must be found to model;
• Flow in a porous media
• Flow in free channels
• Bending of membrane
==PAGE:19==
12
Experiments
3.1
Experiments - State of the Art
In 1856, Darcy was the ﬁrst to model ﬂow in a porous media which is governed by the perme-
ability [14]. Darcy is also limited to low velocities, but in 1901 Forchheimer made an extension
to Darcy, which allowed high velocity porous ﬂow [17]. Much work have been put into deﬁning
the range of validity of each extension. The general conclusion is that Darcy is valid Reynolds
number of < 10. Many deﬁnitions of Reynolds exists [15, 29, 39] but in this thesis, the deﬁnition
used by [ 2018, Lu et al.] will be used.
The ﬂow in the free channels of the membrane is governed by Navier-Stokes equation (NS).
Simpliﬁed versions of NS include (but not limited to) frictionless ﬂow (Euler’s ﬂow), Bernoulli’s
equation and low Reynolds ﬂow (Stokes’ ﬂow) which is valid for Re << 1. Any ﬂuid mechanics
text books will cover these simpliﬁed versions of NS e.g. [18, 26].
It can be diﬃcult to acquire reliable information of porous structure, but a method known as
upscaling can be used. It is a method of looking at a unit cell of the porous structure on a scale
that is representative to the overall structure. By using upscaling, it is possible to mathemat-
ically derive parameters that are eﬀective on a larger scale. As such, the methods is a mix of
experiments and mathematical tools. Variations of upscaling exists, but homogenization seems
to be favored [3, 4, 6]. Upscaling can be used to obtain poroelastic properties formulated by
Biot [6, 7, 8, 9] which can also be expressed explicitly for Mindlin theory based plates [37].
Andreassen and Andreasen proposes using homogenization to determine permeability by using
Stokes’ ﬂow and a penalized Brinkman equation to enforce no-ﬂow domain. The input is a 2D
unit cell. Imaging in 2D or 3D of the microstructure can be obtained with Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM), Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) or X-ray tomography [1, 33].
Permeability can also be measured purely experimentally. It can be done so in various ways,
but the principle remains the same. A liquid or gas of known viscosity is pushed through a
test subject of known thickness. The pressure drop and mass ﬂow is measured and from this,
permeability is calculated [16, 28, 35, 40]. In some cases, results depend on whether a gas or
liquid has been used to determine permeability [12].
Due to the fact, that Cembrane has no intentions of changing the microstructure, Biot’s equa-
tion of poroelasticity will not be taken into consideration in this thesis. An eﬀective stiﬀness of
the plate will be found that equals a completely solid membrane of the same cross section geom-
etry. Permeability will be found experimentally without using homogenization. This is partly
due to the time frame of the project and partly due to lack of equipment. The microstructure
of the membrane is also quite chaotic, making it diﬃcult to obtain a representative unit cell,
which is the foundation of upscaling techniques.
3.2
Design of Test Setup
It is of course important to design a test setup that meets the requirements illustrated in
Figure 3.1, but other design considerations do also come into play. It must be simple to operate
and the required time for a test must be kept at a minimum. The test setup will be placed and
removed from a water tank repeatedly, so it must also be light and easy to handle. Cembrane
did not have a test setup, that could fulﬁll these requirements, so a new setup had to be built.
Cembrane could however provide a water tank, water pump with a ﬂow meter and access to
compressed air, which will incorporated in the test setup design.
==PAGE:20==
Design of Test Setup
13
(a) Test setup with shown connection
(b) Exploded view with parts of interest
Item #
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Description
HD-Camera
M6 Bolt
for calibration
Backplate
Air
connection
Pressure
bladder
Permeate
connection
Steel frame
Membrane
Membrane hose
connection
Figure 3.2: Test setup used to acquire ﬁltration and mechanical data
The pressure will be applied by an inﬂatable bladder (see Figure 3.1b 5⃝) with a valve system
to control the pressure . The bladder will be able to apply pressure on the membrane surface
by placing it between a wooden backplate and the ﬁxed membrane as shown in Figure 3.2a.
Figure 3.3: Pin ﬁts
into frame slot and
restricts movement
The membrane hose connections (see Figure 3.1b
9⃝) are made by
drilling a hole in a PVC rod according to the O-ring design require-
ments, which ensures a water-tight connection. The membrane hose
connections are mounted on the wooden backplate which restricts move-
ment of the membrane. To fully restrict the movement as required, the
pin of the endcap is positioned in a slot in the steel frame - see Fig-
ure 3.1b 7⃝and Figure 3.3.
A vacuum water pump is used to supply the suction that drives ﬁltra-
tion. The vacuum pump is also equipped with a ﬂow meter that can
measure how many liters of water is sucked through the membrane per
minute. A compressor will supply the air needed for the bladder. The
water pressure is measured near the vacuum pump and not near the
membrane. Therefore, the permeate connection hose (see Figure 3.1b
6⃝) is allowed a large bending radius to reduce pressure loss.
Air pressured is measured by a barometer and the deﬂection is ﬁlm
using a camera (see Figure 3.1b 1⃝) placed directly above the middle
of the membrane. When the videos are being post-processed, it is nec-
essary to have something in the frame that can be used to calibrate
distance. The head of a bolt (see Figure 3.1b 2⃝) is manufactured according to tight tolerances
making it a suitable object for calibration.
==PAGE:21==
14
Experiments
As shown in Figure 3.4, the test setup will be placed in water tank ﬁlled with clean water.
Because the water is clean, no sediments will settle on the membrane surface and
will be
stable.
Figure 3.4: Test setup placed in water tank will all hoses connected
The ﬁnal test setup meets all of the deﬁned requirements but one. Because the bladder will
cover an entire surface, it will block ﬁltration on that side. Therefore, the ﬁltration data was
measured before applying pressure with the air bladder. The schematics of what the setup is
actually testing is illustrated in Figure 3.5. The test procedure is described in Appendix A.
(a) Endcap movement (◦) is restricted in all
direction except rotation except around x-axis
by the membrane hose conenctions. Movement
of endcap pin (◦) is restricted by steel frame.
(b) Suction through endcap drives a water ﬂow
(→). Pressure (→) is applied by the bladder
to one of the membrane surfaces.
Figure 3.5: Schematic of the problem that is being tested by use of the designed test setup.
The water pump will be set to 0.2Bar in all tests and the measured output data are;
• Total ﬂow of water measured in L/min with ±0.01L/min sensitivity
• Membrane deﬂection measured by post-processing
• Air pressure in bladder measured in Bar with ±0.01Bar sensitivity
==PAGE:22==
Flow Measurements
15
3.3
Flow Measurements
An analysis of the measured ﬂow will be used to determine which mathematical models are
best suited to the replicate the experiment. Most mathematical models are deﬁned by Reynolds
number. Reynolds number is a dimensionless parameter used to determine the ﬂow pattern. A
low number corresponds to an ordered, laminar ﬂow and high number corresponds to a chaotic,
turbulent ﬂow. Reynolds is problem dependent and generally deﬁned as;
Re = vDHρ
µ
(3.1)
where v is the ﬂuid velocity, ρ is density of ﬂuid, µ is the dynamic viscosity and DH is the
hydraulic diameter, which is dependent on the geometry in which in the ﬂuid ﬂows.
To simplify the calculations, it is assumed that all pores are shaped like cylinders with its’ axis
normal to the membrane surface. With this assumption, water only ﬂows in y-direction in the
pores and only in x-direction in the free channels according to directions deﬁned in Figure 3.6.
It follows that the volume ﬂow of the porous media and free channels are identical and equal
to the measured volume ﬂow;
QT = QP = QF
(3.2)
, where subscript P and F are abbreviations for porous ﬂow and free channels ﬂow - respectively.
QT is the ﬂow measured in the experiment.
Figure 3.6: Pores are assumed to be shaped as perfect cylinders
3.3.1
Free Channel Flow
The velocity of water of water in one channel (vC) can be calculated from volume ﬂow in one
channel (QC) and the cross section areal (AC). Because of the assumption QT = QP = QF,
this calculation becomes quite simple.
vC = QC
AC
(3.3)
From Equation (3.2), it follows that QC can be calculated from QT and channel quantity (nC).
It is important to remember that there are two endcaps attached to a membrane, meaning that
ﬂow exits the channels in both ends. This causes the multiplication of 2 in Equation (3.4);.
vC = QT
2nC
1
AC
(3.4)
==PAGE:23==
16
Experiments
The velocity vC can be used to ﬁnd Reynolds number of water channel ﬂow. For a rectangular
channel, the hydraulic diameter is deﬁned as DH = 4AC
P . P is the wetted perimeter which in this
case is the circumference of the channel cross section. Inserting the deﬁnition of rectangular
hydraulic diameter and Equation (3.4) into Equation (3.1) yields;
ReC = vCρ
µ
4AC
P
= 2QTρwater
PnCµwater
(3.5)
At this point it is important to note, that velocity of water in the free channels will not be
constant throughout the membrane. Since, there are two outlets. The velocity will be zero at
half channel length and develop as illustrated in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Schematics of velocity development in membrane channels
From Equation (3.5) and the velocity development just explained, Reynolds will vary linearly
throughout the membrane. A mean value of Reynolds representative for the domain can readily
be determined as Rem = ReC
2
which will be used to determine the state of the ﬂow in the free
channels.
Figure 3.8: Reynolds varies linearly throughout the membrane −making it simple to ﬁnd a
mean value −
3.3.2
Porous Flow
The average velocity of water in the porous media ⟨u⟩= can be found by assuming the porous
media to be uniform and again assuming that ﬂow in pores is unidirectional from the ﬁltration
area, AF
⟨u⟩= QT
A∗
F
By using the aforementioned assumptions, it is possible to get Darcy permeability by rearrang-
ing Darcy’s law in one dimension;
κ = ⟨u⟩µ
−∇P
(3.6)
==PAGE:24==
Flow Measurements
17
where ∆P is the driving pressure and κ is the permeability. It is assumed that pressure drops
almost entirely over the porous media. Darcy permeability is a measurement of how easily ﬂuid
is transported across the porous media. A very low value resembles a solid material.
For the porous media, the pore size of the membrane D can be used as the hydraulic diameter
[29]. The mean pore size can be found by using a PMI iPore1100 Advanced Capillary Flow
Porometer. Measurements of pore size has not been performed on the actual samples used for
the tests. However, the pore size distribution has been measured on other samples from the
same production which measured D = 0.35µm.
ReP = Dρwater ⟨u⟩
µwater
(3.7)
3.3.3
Results
Six samples were used for testing. As it can be seen in Table 3.1, the results are quite consistent.
With all of the assumptions it is safe to say that ReP and ReM are not accurate. In reality,
ReP is probably too low and ReM too high. However, with ReP << 1 the ﬂow in the porous
structure can safely be described by Darcy’s Law.
The assumption of Stokes’ ﬂow is that Re << 1. Even though the actual value of Reynolds
in the free channels is probably lower than ReM, assuming Stokes’ ﬂow is valid might be too
crude an assumption. However, Reynolds is quite low, so the ﬁrst attempt of numerical imple-
mentations will be done by assuming Stokes ﬂow to reduce the complexity of implementation.
390-1
390-3
390-4
390-5
390-s1
390-s2
Length[mm]
520
520
520
520
403
403
Filtration surface/AF [m2]
0.151
0.151
0.151
0.151
0.112
0.112
Volume ﬂow/QT [L/min]
3.0
2.9
2.9
3.0
2.4
2.1
Free channel velocity vC [mm/s]
93.8
90.7
90.7
93.8
75.0
65.7
Porous media velocity ⟨u⟩[mm/s]
0.33
0.32
0.32
0.33
0.36
0.31
Reynolds in channel/ ReC[-]
270
260
260
270
215
180
Mean Reynolds in channel /ReM[-]
135
130
130
135
108
90
Reynolds in Porous media/ ReP · 10−5[−]
1.30
1.26
1.26
1.30
1.40
1.23
Darcy Permeability/ κ 10−14[m2]
4.91
4.75
4.75
4.91
5.30
4.63
Table 3.1: Measurements of ﬂow ﬁltering at 0.2Bar. The membranes were taken from pro-
duction batch #390 of Cembrane production and named thereafter.
In the results presented in Table 3.1, the porous media is assumed to be uniform. In reality,
that is not the case and the much smaller particles and higher porosity of the coat will increase
the permeability compared to the substrate. Since the coat layer is the bottle-neck of the ﬂow,
the measured permeability is probably closer to the actual value of permeability in the coat
but is seen as representation of the membrane as a whole.
It is also a very crude assumption to say that the pores are perfect cylinders. In reality, the
microstructure is much more "chaotic" as shown in Figure 3.9
==PAGE:25==
18
Experiments
Figure 3.9: SEM picture of substrate microstructure. The frame is about is about 50x50 µm
Besides showing the microstructure, Figure 3.9 can also be used to estimate permeability of
the substrate by using the upscaling method "homogenization". It is beoynd the scope of this
thesis to argue for the theory and derivation of homogenization and upscaling. Instead, a Matlab
script for homogenization (MatHom) presented in an article by Andreassen and Andreasen is
utilized. However, before Figure 3.9 can be used an input, it has to be be processed to a binary
picture (no color variation) with black representing material and white representing void.
In Matlab the color distribution was mapped [0;1] where 0=white, 1=black and grey nuances
are anywhere in between.
A density ﬁlter as presented in [5] was used to smoothen color
distribution - see Figure 3.10b. The density ﬁlter was necessary to avoid "ﬂoating" pixels as
seen in Figure 3.10a.
Thereafter, an if-statement was used to deﬁned the photo in binary
black/white without greyscale.
(a) Figure 3.9 ﬁltered with if-
statement
(b)
Figure 3.9 ﬁltered with
density ﬁlter to prepare for if-
statement
(c) Figure 3.9 ﬁltered with if-
statement and density ﬁlter
Figure 3.10: Processed SEM-pictures of substrate microstructure to prepare for MatHom
Figure 3.10c is accepted as a binary representation of Figure 3.9 and used an input for MatHom
which assumes isotropic material. Using this method the permeability of the substrate is found
to be κsubstrate = 1.2·10−4. If the microstructure of the membrane was completely homogenous,
this method would probably yield good results. By looking at Figure 3.9, it is evident that
the 2D representation can not be used to represent the actual 3D structure of the membrane.
==PAGE:26==
Mechanical Measurements
19
As such, there is no way of knowing, if κsubstrate = 1.2 · 10−4 is actually representative of the
substrate permeability from these results.
3.4
Mechanical Measurements
Figure 3.11: Deﬁnition
of deﬂection
The open software "Tracker" was used to post-process the videos
made during tests. The barometer was kept in the frame, so that
the relationship between deﬂection (deﬁned Figure 3.11) and ap-
plied pressure could be establish. The ﬁnal goal of this section is to
obtain a value of Young’s modulus, E, which is necessary to calcu-
late deﬂection in numerical simulations.
As a ceramic material, SiC is very brittle and the relationship be-
tween applied pressure and deﬂection is assumed to be fully linear.
Excel was used to obtain a linear regression shown in Appendix A.
To ﬁnd E a Matlab script for 2D Mindlin Plate Theory (MPT) was
taken into use. It was developed by Niels Aage, DTU MEK for DTU
course 41560. The script can calculate deﬂection of a non-porous
solid plate and uniform cross section - no channels in cross section.
Therefore, the membrane geometry can not used directly as input to MPT.
In Mindlin theory, Moment of Inertia (MOI) is used to calculate the deﬂection[37]. The equa-
tion of MOI for a cross section with channels (IC) is not the same as the equation of MOI for
a geometry without channels (IOC).
IC = bt3
C
12 −nC
wCh3
C
12
(3.8)
INC = bt3
NC
12
(3.9)
In Equation (3.8) b is the width of the plate (145mm), tC is thickness of plate with channels
(thickness of membrane), nC is quantity of channels while hC and wC are height and width of
channel - respectively. The same logic of nomenclature applies to Equation (3.9), except the
subscript NC is an abbreviation for "No Channels".
Figure 3.12: tNC is the thickness input for MPT and tC is the actual thickness of the mem-
brane.
Equations (3.8) and (3.9) are put together to obtain tNC which is the height of a solid membrane
with MOI equal to that of the actual membrane.
INC = IC
bt3
NC
12
= bt3
C
12 −nC
wCh3
C
12
tNC =
3
r
t3
C −nC
wCh3
C
b
= 6.4mm
(3.10)
==PAGE:27==
20
Experiments
where tC = 6.5mm.
Figure 3.13: Plate is ﬁxed on red surfaces. Pressure is applied on green surface.
Figure 3.13 shows the physical problem that is solved in MPT which (among other things) uses
plate thickness and E as inputs. Diﬀerent values of E will be used as inputs to MPT. The
value of E that generates deﬂection closest to the experimental data will be regarded as the
eﬀective E.
Figure 3.14: Displacement-pressure relation of the membrane expressed by diﬀerent values for
E in the Mindlin plate theory, by Comsol using E = 8GPa and also displaying the experimental
data.
From Figure 3.14, E = 8GPa seems to produce the best results. Since MPT can not take the
cross section geometry into account, Comsol Solid Mechanics Module was used to verify the
determined value of E. In the Comsol, the problem is modeled in 3D as solid. The deﬂection
of MPT, Comsol and experimental data is compared at a pressure of 0.08Bar and presented in
Table 3.2
==PAGE:28==
Porosity Measurement
21
Experimental [mm]
MPT [mm]
Comsol [mm]
7.44
7.01
8.08
Table 3.2: Comparison of deﬂection, using the setup of Figure 3.1a and applied pressure of
0.08Bar
3.5
Porosity Measurement
Porosity is deﬁned as the relation between void volume, Vv, and bulk material volume Vb (solid
material skeleton + void [37]). By assuming the membrane consists solely of SiC; Vb = Vv+VSiC.
φ = Vv
Vb
=
Vv
Vv + VSiC
(3.11)
VSiC can be found by making sure the sample is completely dry, weighing the sample and using
the density of SiC, VSiC = mdry
ρSiC . An air gun was used to clean the sample before weighing.
To ﬁnd the volume of the voids, the sample was soaked in boiling demineralized water for ∼10
minutes and weighed once more, mwet. Placing the sample in boiling water, will ensure that
all air is removed from the pores. The increment in weight and density of demineralized water
can be used to ﬁnd Vv. applying this to Equation (3.11) yields;
φ =
mwet−mdry
ρw
mwet−mdry
ρw
+ mdry
ρSiC
(3.12)
The test was carried out by breaking oﬀsmall samples from seven membranes. As shown in
Table 3.3, the results are consistent and from here on the porosity is deﬁned as Φ = 43%.
Sample #
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
φ [%]
43.7
43.4
43.1
43.0
43.4
43.2
43.2
Table 3.3: Porosity measurements.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION
Based on the experimental data, it was decided to model the porous ﬂow by Darcy’s law,
Stokes’ ﬂow in the free channels and classic mechanics for the deﬂection without considering
Biot’s equation. These mathematical equations must be implemented numerical to perform
computer simulations. The focus is on implementing the equations of ﬂow.
4.1
Numerical Implementation - State of the Art
Darcy law is the most simple version of porous ﬂow and presented as a simple ﬁrst order Partial
Diﬀerential Equation (PDE). As such, Darcy’s law can not be used for no-slip conditions on
impermeable boundary and can not be used to model free-ﬂow to porous ﬂow interaction [30].
Brinkman added a second order PDE term in 1947 [11], which made Darcy’s law more suitable
for numerical applications [3, 30].
Darcy ﬂow can be solved by only using pressure as the
variable and post-process for velocity, but the accuracy is not very good. Therefore, it is more
popular to use mixed formulation in which pressure and velocity both acts as variables and are
solved simultaneously [32]. The mixed formulation is also used to solve Stokes.
In order to avoid instability, a mixed formulation must satisfy the Babuska-Brezzi or inf-sup
condition [23, 32]. This can either be done by using elements of diﬀerent order the pressure
and velocity or using stabilization schemes[23, 31, 32] . In 1986, Hughes et al. presented a
Pressure Stabilized Petrov Galerkin (PSPG) method enabling equal-order element for pressure
and velocity ﬁeld. Petrov-Galerkin is a version of Galerkin method usually used for numerical
ﬂuid mechanics and explained in many textbooks e.g. [13, 24]. Such textbooks will also explain
other stabilization methods such as Staggered Mesh Grid. Petrov-Galerkin can be used to
reduce the order PDE and introduce natural boundary condition (BC)’s by use of Integration
by Parts (IBP). The stabilization is introduced by altering the test function of the velocity ﬁeld
in the Petrov-Galerkin method.
In 2007 Masud combined Darcy and Stokes equations in a Darcy-Stokes elements and achieved
complete stability [31]. Prior to this Darcy had only been stable for certain combinations of
elements [32]. Masud argues solid-fuild interface conditions become redundant. The solid-ﬂuid
interaction is regularized by treating the entire domain with a single equation, in which a
variable ρ is used to determine porous or solid phase. This quality makes it very suitable for
optimization as done by [2006, Guest and Prévost].
Since the Darcy-Stokes element presented by Masud has been proven stable and ﬁts with the
chosen models, it will be used as reference for the implementation. The stability of Stokes is
achieved by work the work of Hughes et al.. For the individual implementations of Stokes and
Darcy the work of [1986,Hughes et al.] and [2007,Masud] will be used.
==PAGE:30==
Structural Scales
23
4.2
Structural Scales
Considering the membrane structure, there are two very distinct domains with regards to ﬂow.
There is the porous material in which water ﬂow in between particles on a microscopic scale.
Using NS on this scale is simply not feasible because it would require enormous amount of
computer power. Instead, the ﬂow can be modelled on a macroscopic scale, where the ﬂow
across the porous media is modelled by using averaged ﬂow properties. The permeability will
then act as a representation of the porous structure.
The other domain is the free ﬂow in the open channels of the membrane. Here, Navier-Stokes
becomes a more feasible solution in regards to computational power.
(a) Entire membrane - Megas-
cale
(b) Cross section - Macroscale
Single channel - Mesoscale
(c) Particles - Microscale
Figure 4.1: Deﬁnition of the four scales of the membrane
4.3
Introduction to Navier-Stokes
Navier-Stokes is a mathematical model that can be used to predict ﬂow patterns. Equation (4.1)
ensures conservation of momentum and Equation (4.12) ensures conservation of mass in carte-
sian coordinates (x, y, z). Both equations assume incompressible ﬂow with constant viscosity.
This section is highly based on [19, chap. 5]
ρ∂U
∂t
|{z}
variation
+ ρ (∇· U) U
|
{z
}
Inertiaforces
=
ρg
|{z}
InternalSource
−
∇p
|{z}
ExternalSource
+
µ∇2U
| {z }
V iscousforces
(4.1)
∇· U = 0
(4.2)
U = [u v w]T is the velocity ﬁeld of the ﬂuid, ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, µ is the dynamic
viscosity of the ﬂuid, p is the pressure and g is the gravitational acceleration.
The vector operator ∇contains the spacial derivatives of the domain and in three dimensions
it is deﬁned as ∇=
h
∂
∂x
∂
∂y
∂
∂z
iT
.
It is used in three diﬀerent vector operations in Navier-
Stokes equation, which are explained in Equations (4.3) to (4.5) by using an arbitrary vector
==PAGE:31==
24
Numerical Implementation
A = [X Y Z]T and arbitrary scalar W ;
∇· A = ∂X
∂x + ∂Y
∂y + ∂Z
∂z
(4.3)
∇W =
∂W
∂x
∂W
∂y
∂W
∂z
T
(4.4)
∇2A = ∂2X
∂x2 + ∂2Y
∂y2 + ∂2Z
∂z2
(4.5)
Using the deﬁnition of Equations (4.3) to (4.5) in Equations (4.1) and (4.12) yields four equa-
tions for a three dimensional problem;
ρ
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x + v∂u
∂y + w∂u
∂z

= ρgx −∂p
∂x + µ
 
∂2u
∂x2 + ∂2u
∂y2 + ∂2u
∂z2
!
(4.6)
ρ
∂v
∂t + u∂v
∂x + v∂v
∂y + w∂v
∂z

= ρgy −∂p
∂y + µ
 
∂2v
∂x2 + ∂2v
∂y2 + ∂2v
∂z2
!
(4.7)
ρ
∂w
∂t + u∂w
∂x + v∂w
∂y + w∂w
∂z

= ρgz −∂p
∂z + µ
 
∂2w
∂x2 + ∂2w
∂y2 + ∂2w
∂z2
!
(4.8)
∂u
∂x + ∂v
∂y + ∂w
∂z = 0
(4.9)
In practice, there is no real analytic solution to these equations due to a number of reasons;
• The four unknown variables all are coupled and must be solved simultaneously
• The equations are highly non-linear
• Second order PDEs
The complexity of equations can be reduced depending on the situation. For instance, certain
terms can be neglected for low Reynolds numbers. This becomes evident by looking at the
deﬁnition of Reynolds using dimensionless analysis in one direction [26];
Re = Inertiaforce
V iscousforce = ρu ∂u
∂x
µ ∂2u
∂x2
(4.10)
From Equation (4.10) it follows that, when Re << 1 the inertia forces are much smaller than
the viscous forces making the negligible. Further assuming, that ﬂow is not time dependent
and inner forces are negligible leads to Stokes’ equation of creeping ﬂow;
µ∇2U = ∇p
(4.11)
∇· U = 0
(4.12)
The means that the assumption that ﬂow in free channels are governed by Stokes’ ﬂow is quite
crude.
4.4
The Finite Element Method
To solve Stokes’ equation, numerical analysis must be used which in ﬂuid dynamics is called
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). There are three general methods; Finite Diﬀerence,
Finite Volume and Finite Element method. Other than stating that Finite Element Method
(FEM) is used in this thesis and generally preferred in part due to mixed formulations [10], the
diﬀerences between the methods are not elaborated.
The idea behind FEM is to divide the domain of interest into a ﬁnite number of element and
==PAGE:32==
The Finite Element Method
25
set up the governing equations for each element. A very simple example is seen in Figure 4.3
where a 2D domain is split into one element. Some arbitrary function f(x) (e.g. temperature)
takes value of f1 and f2 at opposite ends of the the design domain Ω. Here, a single element
is used to represent the actual domain using only two/three points. For most problems, the
number of elements are in the thousands.
f2
f1
(a) Arbitrary 2D design do-
main
consisting
of
inﬁnite
points
f1
f2
(b) 1D element with 2 nodal
points using linear interpola-
tion −
f1
f2
(c) 1D element with 3 nodal
points using quadratic interpo-
lation −
Figure 4.2: Design domain discretized by one element using 2 or 3 nodal to interpolate the
values between f1 and f1
The value in between nodal points are interpolated by shape functions. The amount of nodal
points in an element determines the order of the interpolation. For a 1D element, three points
are needed for quadratic interpolation and only two point for linear interpolation. Each nodal
point correspond to an equation in the global system and it is always of interest to keep the
amount of equations at a minimum.
(a) Bilinear Quadrilateral Q4 in 2D
(b) Quadratic Quadrilateral Q8 in 2D
(c) 8 node hexahedral element for linear inter-
polation in 3D
(d)
20 node hexahedral element for
quadratic interpolation in 3D
Figure 4.3: 2D and 3D elements for linear and quadratic interpolation
For a 1D element, the diﬀerence between quadratic and linear interpolation is 1 point, which
seems like a insigniﬁcant diﬀerence. However, depending on the amount of elements in the
global system it can lead to signiﬁcant increase in needed computational power. As Figure 4.3
shows, the diﬀerence in nodal point quantity required for linear and quadratic become larger
for higher-dimension elements.
==PAGE:33==
26
Numerical Implementation
(a) Q4 element with equal-order interpolation (b) Q4 and Q8 element without stabilization
Figure 4.4: Comparison of using equal-order interpolation or Q8/Q4 element for a stable
solution where ×=pressure d.o.f. and ◦=velocity d.o.f.
Looking at Equation (4.11) a combination of Q8/Q4 element would be needed to solve the prob-
lem, since pressure and velocity are not of same PDE order. However, using Petrov-Galerkin
and stabilization schemes can reduce the problem so that equal-order linear interpolation can be
used. Since membrane is to be modeled in three dimensions, it will be very beneﬁcial to make
use linear equal-order interpolations using Q4/Q4 elements instead of using Q8/Q4 elements.
4.4.1
Weak Form and System Matrix - Darcy
Darcy’s law in its’ most simple form will be used to model the ﬂow in porous domain using
mixed formulation, where both pressure ﬁeld and velocity ﬁeld are dependent variables. In
mixed formulation, stability is achieved through altering the test function of the weak form.
In this section, it is described how to determine the stabilized weak form. The procedure of
formulating the weak form in isoparametric Q4 elements is explained in Appendix B.
µ
κui + ∂P
xi
= 0
(4.13)
∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(4.14)
In Equation (4.13), pressure appears as a ﬁrst order PDE while velocity is not a PDE. It is
therefore expected to see large oscillations in velocity, if the weak form is not stabilized. The test
functions wi and q are used in traditional Petrov-Galerkin method in domain Ωwith boundaries
Π. To introduce stabilization, Equations (4.13) and (4.14) are formulated in residual form and
wi is substituted with ˜wi
Ru
i =
Z
Ω
˜wi
µ
κuidV +
Z
Ω
˜wi
∂P
∂xi
dV = 0
(4.15)
RP =
Z
Ω
q∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(4.16)
IBP is used on nass conservation with ˜wi = wi + τ

∂q
∂xi −µ
κwi

;
Ru
i =
Z
Ω
µ
κwiui dV +
Z
Ω
µ
κτ ∂q
∂xi
ui dV−
Z
Ω
µ
κ
2
τwiui dV + . . .
· · ·
Z
Ω
wi
∂P
xi
dV+
Z
Ω
τ ∂q
∂xi
∂P
∂xi
dV −
Z
Ω
τ µ
κwi
∂P
∂xi
dV = 0
(4.17)
RP = −
Z
Ω
∂q
∂xi
ui +
Z
Π
uini
|{z}
Assumed 0
dS = 0
(4.18)
==PAGE:34==
The Finite Element Method
27
In Equation (4.18), IBP introduces a natural BC, which is assumed 0. Enforcing this assumption
and using τ = 1
2
κ
µ yields the following deﬁnitions;
KDe =
Z
Ω
µ
κNuT NudV
AD,PSPGe =
Z
Ω
1
2
κ
µBP T BPdV
AD,MHe =
Z
Ω
−1
2NuT BPdV
GDe =
Z
Ω
NuTBPdV
LD,PSPGe =
Z
Ω
1
2BP T NudV
LD,MHe =
Z
Ω
−1
2
µ
κNuTNudV
The integrals must be formulated as sums before the deﬁnitions can be used in numerical
analysis. The procedure is described in Appendix B. The subscript e speciﬁes that the matrices
are elemente speciﬁc. Subscript D speciﬁes Darcy ﬂow. The global system is assembled as per
usual in FEM;
MD d =
"
KD + LD,MH
GD + AD,MH
−GT
D + LD,PSPG
AD,PSPG
# (
U
P
)
(4.19)
with K as the viscosity stiﬀness matrix, G is the pressure-velocity coupling matrix. L and A
are stabilization matrices. The subscript PSPG refers to terms ﬁrst presented by Hughes et al.
and MH refers to terms ﬁrst presented by Masud and Hughes. The velocity ﬁeld is U and the
pressure ﬁeld is P
The shape function of the velocity ﬁeld NU and the shape function of the pressure ﬁeld NP are
both linear.
4.4.2
Weak Form and System Matrix - Stokes
The same procedure will be used to derive the stabilized weak form of Stokes’ equation. Com-
paring to Darcy, it is now velocity ﬁeld that is of one order higher PDE than pressure ﬁeld. As
such, an unstable solution is expected to exhibit oscillation in pressure ﬁeld and not velocity
ﬁeld. To perform the derivation, Stokes’ ﬂow is formulated in tensor notation.
Ru
i =
Z
Ω
µ ˜wi
∂
∂xj
 
∂ui
∂xj
−∂uj
∂xi
!
dV −
Z
Ω
˜wi
∂p
∂xi
dV = 0
(4.20)
RP =
Z
Ω
q∂ui
∂xi
dV = 0
(4.21)
For Stokes, ˜wi = wi + τ ∂q
∂xi;
Ru
i =
Z
Ω
µi
∂
∂xj
 
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
!
|
{z
}
a
dV −
Z
Ω
wi
∂p
∂xi
dV . . .
· · ·
Z
Ω
µτ ∂q
∂xi
∂
∂xj
 
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
!
|
{z
}
b
dV −
Z
Ω
τ ∂q
∂xi
∂p
∂xi
dV = 0
(4.22)
RP =
Z
Ω
q∂ui
∂xi
dV = 0
(4.23)
==PAGE:35==
28
Numerical Implementation
IBP is performed on mass conservation and term a. Due to linear interpolation in elements,
the term b is zero. Equation (4.22) is multiplied with −1;
Ru
i =
Z
Ω
µ∂wi
∂xj
 
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
!
dV +
Z
Ω
wi
∂p
∂xi
dV +
Z
Ω
τ ∂q
∂xi
∂p
∂xi
dV −
Z
Π
wi
ti
|{z}
antag 0
dS = 0
(4.24)
RP = −
Z
Ω
∂q
∂xi
ui +
Z
Π
uini
|{z}
Assumed 0
dS = 0
(4.25)
where ti = σijni is normal surface traction. Once more, natural boundaries have been intro-
duced and matrices can be deﬁned;
KSe =
Z
Ω
µBuTTKBudV
GSe =
Z
Ω
NuTBPdV
AS,PSPGe =
Z
Ω
τBP T BPdV
where S speciﬁes Stokes’ ﬂow and τ = 2(nsd+1)h2
e
µ
. For square elements he is simply side length
and nsd is the number of spacial dimensions. The matrices are assembled in the system matrix
MS;
MS d =
"
KS
GS
−GT
S
AS,PSPG
# (
U
P
)
(4.26)
4.4.3
System Matrix - Darcy-Stokes
In many applications, it makes sense to model Darcy and Stokes together. Normally interface
boundaries would be necessary.
However, [2007 Masud] presents a mixed formulation of a
Darcy-Stokes element. It is argued that the natural occurrence of τ stabilizes the system and
regularizes the interface boundaries between the two domains.
MDSe = (1 −ρe)MSe + ρeMDe
(4.27)
ρe is the factor that determines which type of ﬂow is dominant. The element system matrix
of each element is determined from the local value of ρe before it is assembled in the global
system.
4.5
Test Problems
The numerical implementations of Darcy and Stokes must be validated through test problems.
Darcy and Stokes ﬂow will each be tested using two test problems. The ﬁrst problem will be
simple enough to allow for analytic comparison. Perturbation of wi is implemented in all test
problems, but it is not expected to make a diﬀerence for the simplest problem. The second
problem will be slightly more complicated. The idea is to invoke instability of pressure ﬁeld for
Stokes ﬂow and instability of Darcy velocity ﬁeld.
The weak form of Stokes, Darcy and Darcy-Stokes are implemented in Comsol using the "weak
PDE" module. Equations (4.17) and (4.18) can readily be implemented in Comsol. However,
Equations (4.24) and (4.25) is not intuitively implemented in the Comsol format. A vector/-
matrix notation of Stokes’ equation is presented in Appendix C which has a more suitable form
for Comsol implementation. Lastly, predeﬁned module in Comsol are used for validation of the
more complicated test problems. The following deﬁnitions will be used;
==PAGE:36==
Test Problems
29
• Comsol: Predeﬁned Comsol Module used to validate own implementation
• Comsol PDE: Weak form implementation of Equations (4.19), (4.26) and (4.27)
• Matlab: Implementation of Equations (4.19), (4.26) and (4.27) in Matlab
Solutions of Comsol-PDE and Matlab will be solved both with and without stabilization to
validate the implementation in small steps. That yields a total 5 diﬀerent solutions for each
problem.
In Comsol, elements are always set to linear interpolation and the elements are square formed,
since the implemented form of τ is limited to square elements. This is also true for the imple-
mentation in Matlab. Turbulence is omitted from implementations. The test problems will be
using dimensionless domains Ωwith boundary Π.
4.5.1
Darcy - Uniform Permeability
The ﬁrst problem used to validate Darcy ﬂow is a simple square with a pressure in- and outlet.
Slip conditions is used for the last two sides of the domain. as seen in Figure 4.5. The domain
is modelled with50x50 square elements.
(2,2)
X
Y
(0, 0)
u n = 0
P=0
u n = 0
P=1
κ
µ = 1
Figure 4.5: Square design domain with uniform properties used to validate implementation of
Darcy. In numerical solutions, it will be discretized by 50x50 elements.
Due to BCs, there will be no ﬂow in the y-direction and the x-direction velocity will be constant
in Ω. The analytic solution is simply:
⟨u⟩= −κ
µ∆P = −10 −1
2 −0 = 0.5
(4.28)
As it can be seen in Figure 4.6, the velocity ﬁeld in x-direction is constant at every point in
Ω. Pressure ﬁeld and velocity in y-direction are shown in Appendices D and F. The numerical
results are found are all identical to the analytic results which is shown in Table 4.1.
Implementation
Stable
Comsol-PDE
Comsol-PDE
Stable
Matlab
Matlab
Comsol
Analytical
⟨u⟩
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Table 4.1: Dimensionless study of Darcy using 50x50 elements with BC presented in Figure 4.5
Numerical solutions can be found in Appendix E.
==PAGE:37==
30
Numerical Implementation
Figure 4.6: Velocity in X-direction using stabilized formulation of Darcy ﬂow in Matlab
4.5.2
Darcy - Dual Permeability
The domain Ωis now split into Ω1 and Ω2 with separate values of permeability. The two
domains are both square and share the same center. Ωis modelled by 50x50 elements which
guarantees that nodal points are placed at the Ω1 −Ω2 interface.
(2,2)
X
Y
(0, 0)
(1.2,1.2)
(0.8, 0.8)
u n = 0
P=0
u n = 0
P=1
κ1
µ = 10−5
κ2
µ = 1
Figure 4.7: Square design domain with uniform properties used to validate implementation of
Darcy. In numerical solutions, it will be discretized by 50x50 elements
In Comsol-PDE and Comsol, two domains were designed and assigned diﬀerent values of κ.
Another solution could have been to have a single domain and use the "variables" function
with a spacial requirement to specify κ. Comsol’s Darcy’s Law module did not yield good
results when using this method - please see Appendix G. Therefore, the ﬁrst method of domain
distinction was used in Comsol and Comsol-PDE. In Matlab, κ was deﬁned using spacial
constraints.
==PAGE:38==
Test Problems
31
(a) Matlab-No stabilization
(b) Comsol PDE-No stabiliza-
tion
(c) Comsol
(d) Matlab-With stabilization (e)
ComsolPDE-With stabi-
lization
Figure 4.8: Velocity in x-direction using diﬀerent implementation tools with/without stabiliza-
tion
By looking at Figures 4.8a and 4.8b, it is clear to the see, that instability has been introduced
to the x-direction velocity ﬁeld. By comparing with Figures 4.8d and 4.8e, it is also evident that
stability has been successfully implemented - both in Comsol and Matlab. From Figure 4.8c, it
would seem as if, Comsol produces a stable velocity ﬁeld. The predeﬁned Comsol module for
Darcy ﬂow does not use the mixed formulation. Instead, only pressure is treated as a variable
and the velocity is post-processed which yields lower accuracy as seen in Figure 4.10b.
Ω1
Ω2
y=1
y=1
y=1
Figure 4.9: Data is extracted along red to better compare implementations and stability
To better compare methods of implementations, data is extracted from y = 1 - please see
Figure 4.9. The results are shown in Figure 4.10 and indicate a successfull implementation of
mixed formulation Darcy ﬂow. Furthermore, Figure 4.10b also shows that the implemented
formulation yields better results compared to Comsol’s predeﬁned module. From Figure 4.10a
it is clear that, the most unreliable results are produced from the mixed formulation without
perturbation of wi
==PAGE:39==
32
Numerical Implementation
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
X-axis
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Ux  at y=1 
10-6
COMSOL PDE
Matlab
COMSOL
(a) Without stabilization
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
X-axis
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Ux at y=1 
10-6
COMSOL PDE
Matlab
COMSOL
(b) With stabilization
Figure 4.10: Comparing velocity in x direction at y = 1 depending on implementation with-
/without stabilization
4.5.3
Stokes - Simple Channel Flow
The ﬁrst test problem for Stokes is also simple enough to obtain analytic results. The domain
is a 200x50 square element domain. A pressure inlet and pressure outlet are deﬁned at x = 0
and x = 4. The no-slip condition is used anywhere else along the boundaries. .
X
Y
(0, 0)
(4,1)
u = 0
P=0
u = 0
P=1
Ω, µ = 1
Figure 4.11: Rectangular domain Ωused to validate implementation of Stokes’ Flow
The problem is too simple to witness any oscillations and as such comparing velocity and
pressure ﬁelds become trivial. However, due to the constraint, the velocity is no longer constant
in the y-direction.
Figure 4.12: Velocity in x direction using stabilized formulation in Matlab. Data is extracted
from dashed line to compare with analytic solution
Any decent mathematical solver can be used to analytically solve the Stokes ﬂow illustrated in
Figure 4.11. It is a simple matter of solving a second order PDE with known initial condition.
==PAGE:40==
Test Problems
33
The results is a parabolic equation that express velocity in x-direction as function of y;
vx(y) = −y2
8 + y
8
It follows that analytically, the maximum velocity in x is max(vmax) = vx(0.5) = 0.03125.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
Ux
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
y-axis
Analytic
Numeric
X: 0.03125
Y: 0.5
Figure 4.13: Comparison of analytic and Matlab solution for simple channel Stokes ﬂow
The analytic solution was found using Maple and compared to all numeric solutions;
Implementation
Stable
Comsol-PDE
Comsol-PDE
Stable
Matlab
Matlab
Comsol
Analytical
max(ux)[−] · 10−2
3.1
3.1
3.1
3.1
3.1
3.1
Table 4.2: Dimensionless study of Stokes in a channel with no-slip conditions using 200x50
elements
==PAGE:41==
34
Numerical Implementation
4.5.4
Stokes - Complex Channel Flow
The design domain is altered to invoke oscillations in pressure. At this point, it is relevant to
mention, that predeﬁned modules in Comsol make use of Streamline Upwind Petrov Galerkin
(SUPG) stability scheme, which can result in diﬀerences solutions [36].
X
Y
(0, 0)
u = 0
u = 0
u = 0
P=0
u = 0
P=1
(1,0.5)
(4,1)
µ = 1
y=0.8
Figure 4.14: Rectangular domain Ωused to validate implementation of Stokes’ Flow
In Comsol, the mesh is very intuitive to create.
In Matlab, the mesh generator program
FlexStruct1 tool was used. The elements are squares of side length
4
200 = 0.0025
(a) Matlab-No stabilization
(b) Comsol PDE-No stabiliza-
tion
(c) Comsol
(d) Matlab-With stabilization (e) Comsol PDE-With stabi-
lization
Figure 4.15: Pressure ﬁeld using diﬀerent implementation tools with/without stabilization.
The pressure range of Figures 4.15a and 4.15b are chosen to make oscillations visible. The
pressure in the "blue corner" are much more extreme
By comparing pressure ﬁelds in Figures 4.15a and 4.15b it is evident that the two unstable
solutions are not identical. However, comparing Figures 4.15c to 4.15e it seems as if the stable
solutions are identical and also equal to the predeﬁned Comsol solution.
To further investigate, data at y = 0.8 (see Figure 4.14) is extracted and compared;
1Courtesy of Kim L. Nielsen DTU MEK - DTU course 41525
==PAGE:42==
Test Problems
35
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
X-axis 
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Pressure at y=0.8m
COMSOL PDE
Matlab
COMSOL
(a) Without stabilization
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
X-axis 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Pressure at y=0.8m
COMSOL PDE
Matlab
COMSOL
(b) With stabilization
Figure 4.16: Comparing pressure at y = 0.8 depending on implementation with/without sta-
bilization
Figure 4.16a clearly shows the diﬀerences in pressure ﬁeld. To discover the reason for this would
require more investigation into the individual implementations. However, since the stabilized
solutions are all equal, it was decided to proceed with both solutions. The velocity ﬁelds of both
stabiliezd and unstabilized solutions show no oscillations - please see Appendices K and M.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
X-axis 
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Ux at y=0.8
COMSOL PDE
Matlab
COMSOL
(a) Without stabilization
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
X-axis 
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Ux at y=0.8
COMSOL PDE
Matlab
COMSOL
(b) With stabilization
Figure 4.17:
Comparing velocity in x direction at y = 0.8 depending on implementation
with/without stabilization
==PAGE:43==
36
Numerical Implementation
4.5.5
Darcy Stokes - Complex Channel Flow
The complex channel ﬂow will also be used to test the Darcy-Stokes formulation. The narrow
end will be governed by Darcy by specifying a spacial requirement where ρe = 1 for x <
1. According to [2007,Masud], there is no need for interface boundaries in the Darcy-Stokes
formulation. However, without the Brinkman extension Darcy still does not support no-slip
conditions at the boundary, so BC’s are changed.
X
Y
(0, 0)
(1,0.5)
(4,1)
u n = 0
u = 0
u = 0
P=0
u n = 0
P=1
ρe = 0
ρe = 1
Figure 4.18: Domain Ωused to validate implementation of Stokes’ Flow with κ = 10−5 and
µ = 1
From Figure 4.19, there is a slight diﬀerence between solutions.
They all show a smooth
transition from the porous domain to the free stokes domain. With the new BC’s, the ﬂuid can
now ﬂow in x-direction at y = 1. This would also be a classic way of imposing a symmetry BC.
(a) Matlab
(b) Comsol-PDE
(c) Comsol
Figure 4.19: Velocity in X-direction of stabilized Darcy-Stokes ﬂow. The comsol module makes
use of Brinkman extension of Darcy
Once again, data is extracted from y = 0.8 to better compare solutions. The predeﬁned module
uses the Brinkman extension to Darcy in the "Free and Porous media" module. It is evident
from Figure 4.20 that there is a clear distinction between Darcy-Stokes and Brinkman-Stokes.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
X-axis
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
Ux at y=0.8
10-6
COMSOL PDE
Matlab
Comsol
(a) Full domain
0.9
1 1.04 1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
X-axis
9.85
9.9
9.95
10
10.05
Ux at y=0.8
10-6
COMSOL PDE
Matlab
Comsol
(b) Zoomed in at Porous-Free
ﬂow interaction
Figure 4.20: Comparing velocity in x-direction at y=0.8
The porous-free interface is placed at x = 1. The Darcy-Stokes implementations only decline
in magnitude of velocity, whereas the Brinkman-Stokes solution does not start decreasing until
==PAGE:44==
Test Problems
37
X = 1.04. As such, the interface between ﬂuid-solid is actually made smoother by the Darcy-
Stokes implementation.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
COMPARISON
The problem is no longer non-dimensional. A representative permeability is found from the
experimental data and the dynamic viscosity of water has a speciﬁc value. The pressure diﬀer-
ence is set to 0.2Bar which is what was used in the experiments add the reference volume ﬂow
Qref is also found in the experiments;
µ[Pa s] · 10−4
κ[m2] · 10−14
P1[Bar]
P2[Bar]
Qref[m3
s ] · 10−5
8.9
5.0
0.2
0
4.9
Table 5.1: Properties used to replicate experimental data
In a 3D model, the problem would be solved by applying pressure to all ﬁltration surface and
prescribing zero pressure at the membrane outlet as shown in Figure 5.1. The volume ﬂow can
be found by integration |U| = pU 2
x + U 2
y + U 2
w over the outlet surfaces.
Figure 5.1: Full 3D problem state for ﬁltration. 0Pa is prescribed at Red surfaces and 0.2Bar
at green surfaces.
The full problem would contain a huge amount of equations, since the implemented deﬁnition
of τ is limited to square elements and there are geometric details in the order 0.01mm. It results
in an unfeasible amount of element and with the available hardware, it was not even possible
to solve the problem.
==PAGE:46==
L as a Variable
39
5.1
L as a Variable
Since the full problem could not be solved, a diﬀerent approach was taken. A simpliﬁed cross
section was modeled. All geometrical dimensions were implemented with ±0.5mm precision as
shown in Table 5.2. Without the relaxation of geometrical dimensions, the mesh would become
much too ﬁne to solve.
Membrane
dimension
Thickness [mm]
Height [mm]
Length [mm]
Channel height [mm]
Channel width [mm]
Channel quantity [-]
6.5
146.5
L
2.5
2.5
41
Table 5.2: Relaxed dimensions for use in numerical model
The length of the modeled membrane, L, was varied and the ﬂow was ﬂow recorded. The idea
was to obtain a suitable regression that makes it possible to obtain full-model volume ﬂow by
using smaller representations. The mesh for L = 20 is shown in Figure 5.2
Figure 5.2: Mesh used to simulate model in 3D with L=20mm
As seen in Figure 5.2, the model is a complete block. The solid-ﬂuid distinction was made
by specifying spacial requirements for ρe. It was done that way to serve purposes; it better
prepares the model for topology optimization and Comsol had shown odd results, when deﬁning
multiple domains by use of multiples geometric structures.
Figure 5.3: Spacial requirements of ρe are used to specify porous and free ﬂow domains
Small values of L was used since the problem quickly became too large to be solved. Even using
L = 80 was unsolvable for the available hardware. The regression expression was obtained using
==PAGE:47==
40
Comparison
L [mm]
10
20
30
50
80
Flow 10−8[m3
s ]
1.27
1.35
1.52
1.86
N/A
Computing [s]
95
288
567
1149
N/A
Table 5.3: Results of varying L. L = 80 could not be solved
excel; Qexp1(L) = 2 · 10−5 m3
s + 10( −6)m3
s where L is measured in meters and the least square
value was R2 = 1. The results of Table 5.3 were used to extrapolate a volume ﬂow for L = 500.
Qexp1 = 1.10 · 10−5m3
s
Qexp1 is compared to the experimental data;
η1 = Qexp1
Qref
≈22%
This is not a very satisfying results so another attempt was made.
5.2
Single Channel
Another approach is to ﬁnd the volume ﬂow of a single channel and use that to scale up. To
reduce the problem even further, a symmetry BC is used at half the length a channel. The
problem deﬁnition can be seen in Figure 5.4
Figure 5.4: Problem deﬁnition by using single channel to reduce the full model. U n = 0 at
yellow yellow surface, P=0.2Bar at green surfaces and P=0.
The symmetry condition has been imposed by setting the normal velocity to zero at the sym-
metry surface. Again, the ρd has spacial requirement to determine which ﬂow governs. The
mesh can be seen in Figure 5.5
==PAGE:48==
Single Channel
41
Figure 5.5: Mesh used to simulate a single channel in 3D with L=20mm
The volume ﬂow through the outlet was found to be QC = 1.6 · 10−7 m3
s
by using a surface
integration. This value was multiplied with the quantity of outlets which is the quantity of
channel times 2. The ﬂow and pressure distribution can be seen in Figure 5.6.
Qexp2 = 1.31 · 10−5m3
s
Qexp2 is compared to the experimental data;
η2 = Qexp2
Qref
≈27%
This is also not a very satisfactory results.
However, η1 and η2 which could suggests that
way of reducing the model is correct, but the results are simply not in compliance with the
experimental results.
Figure 5.6: Pressure distribution and streamlines
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
FINAL REMARKS
6.1
Subgoal Assessment
In order to assess the project, the subgoals that were deﬁned in Chapter 1 are reviewed and
commented on.
Product and Process Description
□ Formulate hypothesis to what causes dewatering events to break membranes
By investigating the conditions of water treatment applications, it was possible to formulate a
hypothesis to what makes membrane break during dewatering.
Experiments
□ Design and build test setup to replicate dewatering event
□ Obtain ﬁltering and mechanical properties used as reference values for the numerical
models
□ Obtain phenomenological properties needed for implementations of mathematical
model.
A test setup was successfully built and the needed data could be acquired. It should be men-
tioned, that the measurements were not very precise. For instance, pressure was not measured
at the membrane but at the pump and the equipment was not very precise.
A representative Young’s modulus for an equivalent solid plate was found for the membrane.
With this value it was possible to compute a deﬂection in Comsol that very close to the mea-
sured value.
Numerical implementation
□ Implement Darcy’s
law in Matlab 2D
□ Implement Darcy’s
law in Comsol 2D
Implement Darcy’s
law in Comsol 3D
□ Implement
Stokes
equation in Matlab
2D
□ Implement
Stokes
equation in Comsol
2D
Implement
Stokes
equation in Comsol
3D
□ Implement
Darcy-
Stokes elements in
Matlab 2D
==PAGE:50==
Subgoal Assessment
43
□ Implement
Darcy-
Stokes elements in
Comsol 2D
□ Implement
Darcy-
Stokes elements in
Comsol 3D
Comparison to analytic solutions were made whenever possible and showed a perfect correla-
tion. In the unstable implementation of Stokes, diﬀerences between own implementations were
witnessed in the pressure ﬁeld oscillations. However, the solutions were identical after intro-
ducing stability by perturbation of the velocity test function.
The Darcy-Stokes element showed a smoother transition in the solid-porous interface when
comparing to the predeﬁned Comsol solution in which the Brinkman extension is used instead
of Darcy.
Extending the 2D Comsol to 3D is very trivial. Therefore, the 3D models of Stokes and Darcy
were omitted to spend time of more relevant matters.
Comparison
□Show that results coincide with experimental data
The numerical results could not replicate the experimental data. The numerical results only
showed about ≈25% of the measured ﬂow.
==PAGE:51==
44
Final Remarks
6.2
Conclusion
The numerical implementation has been validated by comparing the results of the test problem
to commercial software and analytic solutions. However, a good agreement between numeric
and experimental results was not found. The conclusion must be that either the numerical
models should have been chosen diﬀerently or the experimental results are inaccurate.
In Chapter 2 the microstructure of the membrane was discussed and it was obvious that it
is not homogeneous. In order to calculate the permeability, it was assumed that the material
is isotropic. Unidirectional ﬂow was also assumed in both the porous and free ﬂow domain.
Therefore, it is concluded that the experiments are the cause of the discrepancy between numeric
and experimental results. It would also be interesting to investigate, how it would inﬂuence the
results if the permeability of the substrate and the coat were found individually.
It must be concluded that the work presented in this thesis would be a good stepping stone
for future projects. The Young’s modulus of 8GPa can be used as a baseline for cross section
design optimization. The Darcy-Stokes elements were also chosen because it is a perfect ﬁt for
porous-free channel design optimization by use of topology optimization methods. As one of the
overlying goals was to prepare the model for design optimization, the numerical implementations
can also be viewed as a success even though the results do not comply with the experiments.
==PAGE:52==
APPENDICES
A
Mechanical Experiment
Pre-testing
Prior to deﬂection tests, the membrane is ﬁltering at the pump’s maximum capacity to make
sure that all pore are emptied for air and instead ﬁlled with water. This is done for 1-2 minutes.
Afterwards, the pump is set to 0.2Bar and when the ﬂow is stabilized, the ﬂow is read from
a ﬂow meter. Before mounting the membrane, the middle of the membrane should be located
and marked.
The air hose is inserted into the pressure bladder prior to putting the bladder into the water.
It is placed between the membrane and the steel frame. The pressure inside the bladder is
measured, and the barometer should be in the frame of the HD-camera to relate deﬂection with
pressure.
Testing
In the pre-testing phase, the membrane is already ﬁltering. Therefore the testing can begin
by starting the camera and slowly applying air to the bladder. The air ﬂow is controlled by
a pressure gauge and a valve. The pressure gauge is set to
0.5Bar which is still too much
pressure, if there was no valve. Therefore, the valve should be carefully and slowly opened.
The precision of the barometer is 0.01Bar and the pressure should at least stay at each level
for ∼5 seconds.
When the membrane breaks, the air valve must be closed immediately, so the bladder does not
rapidly inﬂate. The water hoses are disconnected and the setup is removed from the water and
excess water is removed before moving the setup to a dry ﬂoor for demounting of membrane
and mounting of a new membrane. The bladder should be completely emptied for air to make
it easier to put in place for the next test.
Post-testing
The footage of the test is processed in the open-software "Tracker". It can be used to measure
the deﬂection of the membrane and because the barometer is in the footage, the pressure can
be related to the deﬂection. In ﬁg. A.1 the red notation are length measurements and the blue
notation is the calibration measurement. The head of a M6 bolt is exactly 10mm across which
is a good basis for the calibration.
==PAGE:53==
46
Final Remarks
Figure A.1: Post-processing software Tracker
Since the material is ceramic, it is assumed that the entire strain-strain domain can be expressed
as linear and of the form y = ax + 0. This is used to get a linear expression of the center
displacement due to pressure applied to the entire surface. The test was carried out ﬁve times
but the second attempt was faulty. As it can be seen in Figure A.2, the results are quite similar
and the average over the four solution can with acceptable margins, express the expression of
all four tests.
Figure A.2: Results of experiments. The number 390 refers to a speciﬁc production batch
The barometer used in the tests was not very precise and even with no pressure applied it would
measure ∼0.06Bar. This is thought to be the reason for the oﬀ-set that is visible in Figure A.2.
However, the linear relation is assumed to be unaﬀected by this oﬀset, and therefore the oﬀset
is removed when comparing experimental and simulated results.
==PAGE:54==
Implementing Weak Form Numerically - Darcy
47
B
Implementing Weak Form Numerically - Darcy
This is a walkthrough of going from the weak form of stabilized Darcy to acquiring the numeric
system matrix. The guide lines are explained in any textbook concerning FEMe.g. [13]. The
element used is an isoparametric Q4 element. The derivation utilizes a 2D domain, but integral
are made over "Volumes" to exemplify that the exact same procedure would be valid for a 3D
domain. It is simply a matter of adding extra terms.
Conservation of Momentum
The equations are expressed in their weak form as derived in Section 4.4.1 in the domain Ω
with boundaries Π.
Z
Ω
µ
κ ˜wiui dV +
Z
Ω
˜wi
∂P
xi
dV = 0
Z
Ω
µ
κwiui dV +
Z
Ω
µ
κτ ∂q
∂xi
ui dV −
Z
Ω
µ
κ
2
τwiui dV + . . .
· · ·
Z
Ω
wi
∂P
xi
dV+
Z
Ω
τ ∂q
∂xi
∂P
∂xi
dV −
Z
Ω
τ µ
κwi
∂P
∂xi
dV = 0
with τ = 1
2
κ
µ
Z
Ω
µ
κwiui dV +
Z
Ω
1
2
∂q
∂xi
ui dV −
Z
Ω
1
2
µ
κwiui dV + . . .
· · ·
Z
Ω
wi
∂P
xi
dV+
Z
Ω
1
2
κ
µ
∂q
∂xi
∂P
∂xi
dV −
Z
Ω
1
2wi
∂P
∂xi
dV = 0
Pressure and velocity has been expressed as ﬁeld variables up until now. By looking an element
and using linear shape functions, it is possible to introduce nodal variables;
P
1x1 = N
1x4
P P
4x1 ∧
q
1x1 = N
1x4
P q
4x1
∧ui
2x1 = N
2x8
U U
8x1 ∧wi
2x1 = N
2x8
u w
8x1
where;
N P = [N1 N2 N3 N4] ∧N u =
"
N1
0
N2
0
N3
0
N4
0
0
N1
0
N2
0
N3
0
N4
#
Inserting the deﬁnition of the ﬁeld variables in terms of shape functions and nodal values along
with ∇=
h
∂
∂x1
∂
∂x2
iT
yields;
Z
Ωe
µ
κN u w N u U dV +
Z
Ωe
1
2∇N P q N u U dV −
Z
Ωe
1
2
µ
κN uw N u U dV + . . .
· · ·
Z
Ωe
N u w∇N P P dV +
Z
Ωe
1
2
κ
µ∇N P q ∇N P P dV −
Z
Ωe
1
2N u w ∇N P P dV = 0
Using B
2x4
P = ∇
2x1N
1x4
P =
"
∂N1
∂x1
∂N2
∂x1
∂N3
∂x1
∂N4
∂x1
∂N1
∂x2
∂N2
∂x2
∂N3
∂x2
∂N4
∂x2
#
yields;
Z
Ωe
µ
κNuT Nu
|
{z
}
Ke
dV U +
Z
Ωe
1
2BP T Nu
|
{z
}
LP SP Ge
dV U +
Z
Ωe
−1
2
µ
κNuTNu
|
{z
}
LMHe
dV U + . . .
(B.1)
· · ·
Z
Ωe
NuTBP
| {z }
Ge
dV P +
Z
Ωe
1
2
κ
µBP T BP
|
{z
}
AP Se
dV P +
Z
Ωe
−1
2NuT BP
|
{z
}
AMHe
dV P = 0
(B.2)
==PAGE:55==
48
Final Remarks
Mass Conservation
The same procedure is used to
Z
Ω
q∂u
xi
dV = 0
Using integration by parts yields;
Z
Ω
−∂q
xi
ui dV +
Z
Π
−quini dS = 0
Assuming that the normal velocity at the boundary is zero simpliﬁes the expression;
Z
Ω
−∂q
xi
ui dV = 0
By use of the same procedure as for the Darcy Velocity yields;
Z
Ωe
−BP T N U
|
{z
}
−GT
e
dV U = 0
(B.3)
Looking at the expression for Ge and this expression,
Joining equations
These equations can put together in matrix form for simpliﬁcation;
Me
12x12
de
12x1
=


Ke + LMHe
|
{z
}
8x8
Ge + AMHe
|
{z
}
8x4
−GT
e + LPSe
|
{z
}
4x8
APSe
|{z}
4x4





u
8x1
P
4x1



In the current form the local D.O.F.’s node distribution are deﬁned as in Figure B.1.
1,2,9
3,4,10
5,6,11
7,8,12
Velocity D.O.F.’s
Pressure D.O.F.
D.O.F. ordering: U=D.O.F(1:8)
D.O.F. ordering: P=D.O.F(9:12)
n1
n2
n3
n4
Figure B.1: Local D.O.F. and node ordering for any element
It can be an advantage to rearrange the distribution of D.O.F.’s in the global system, so that
n1 has D.O.F’s={1, 2, 3} and so forth. This can be done quite easily. Besides that, the global
system is put together as it is common in FEM.
==PAGE:56==
Implementing Weak Form Numerically - Darcy
49
Discretizing the integral
For the sake of simplicity, turning the integral into a discretized summation will only be done
for the mass conservation equation.
Z Z
−BP TN u dx dy
Instead of deﬁning the element in (x, y) space it can be deﬁned in (ξ, η) space. By use of a
Jacobian, J, the element can be mapped as a square with side length of two units and center
in (ξ = 0, η = 0).
Z 1
−1
Z 1
−1
−BP TN u|J| dξ dη
with |J| being the determinant of J;
J =
" P Ni,ξxi
P Ni,ξyi
P Ni,ηxi
P Ni,ηyi
#
The gradient of any given function φ can be transformed from (ξ, η) to (x, y) space using
J−1 = Γ;
(
φ,x
φ,y
)
=
"
Γ11
Γ12
Γ21
Γ22
# (
φ,ξ
φ,η
)
In order to get the gradient of the shape functions in the (x, y) space, BP is transformed;
"
N1,x
N2,x
N3,x
N4,x
N1,y
N2,y
N3,y
N4,y
#
=
"
Γ11
Γ12
Γ21
Γ22
# "
N1,ξ
N2,ξ
N3,ξ
N4,ξ
N1,η
N2,η
N3,η
N4,η
#
All there is left now is introduce Gaussian quadrature that turns the integral into a summation.
I =
Z 1
−1
Z 1
−1
φ(ξ, η) dξ dη =
X
i
X
j
WiWjφ(ξi, ηj)
The subscripts i, j are used to determine the amount of Gauss point in the two directions,
respectively. The weight function Wi is dependent on the amount of Gauss points. Since the
shape functions are linear i = j = 2, all weight functions equals 1. Four Gauss are used in the
summation. The Gauss points are placed at (ξ, η) =

±
q
1
3, ±
q
1
3

.
Z 1
−1
Z 1
−1
BP TN u|J| dξ dη =
X
i=1,2
X
j=1,2
B(ξi, ηj)P T Γ N(ξi, ηj)u |J|
Using the procedure of all terms of Equations (B.2) and (B.3) makes it possible to perform
numerical calculations for elements of with four nodes of arbitrary geometry.
==PAGE:57==
50
Final Remarks
C
Discrete Form of Stoke
Stokes’ equation formulated in Matrix/vector notation for easier implementation in Comsol.
µ∇2U = ∇p
∇· U = 0
⇓Use ˜w = w + τ∇q
[10]µw ∇2U −w ∇p+τ ∇q µ∇2U −τ∇p∇q = 0
q∇· U = 0
⇓
µ

w1
∂2u1
∂x2
1
w1
∂2u1
∂x2
2
w2
∂2u2
∂x2
1
w2
∂2u2
∂x2
2

−w ∇p −τ∇p∇q = 0
q∇· U = 0
⇓IBP
−µ
"
∂w1
∂x1
∂u1
∂x1
∂w1
∂x2
∂u1
∂x2
∂w2
∂x1
∂u2
∂x1
∂w2
∂x2
∂u2
∂x2
#
−p ∇w −τ∇p∇q = 0
−
∂q
x1
u1 + ∂q
x2
u2

= 0
⇓Multiply Momentum with −1
[10]µ
"
∂w1
∂x1
∂u1
∂x1
∂w1
∂x2
∂u1
∂x2
∂w2
∂x1
∂u2
∂x1
∂w2
∂x2
∂u2
∂x2
#
+ w ∇p + τ∇p∇q = 0
(C.1)
−
∂q
x1
u1 + ∂q
x2
u2

= 0
(C.2)
Equations (C.1) and (C.2) can readily be implemented in Comsol using the weak PDE module.
==PAGE:58==
Uniform Permeability Darcy - Pressure
51
D
Uniform Permeability Darcy - Pressure
(a) Matlab-No stabilization
(b) Comsol-No stabilization
(c) Comsol Darcy Flow Mod-
ule
(d) Matlab-With stabilization (e) Comsol-With stabilization
Figure D.1: The pressure[Pa] of diﬀerent implementations of Darcy are compared. Imple-
mentations with and without stabilization will be compared. The models have been implemented
in both Comsol and Matlab. Furthermore, Comsol Darcy Flow Module is used for comparison
which utilizes single-ﬁeld computation. The problem statement is illustrated in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:59==
52
Final Remarks
E
Uniform Permeability Darcy - Velocity in X
(a) Matlab-No stabilization
(b) Comsol-No stabilization
(c) Comsol Darcy Flow Mod-
ule
(d) Matlab-With stabilization (e) Comsol-With stabilization
Figure E.1: The velocity of diﬀerent implementations of Darcy are compared in the x-direction
[m/s]. Implementations with and without stabilization will be compared. The models have been
implemented in both Comsol and Matlab. Furthermore, Comsol Darcy Flow Module is used
for comparison which utilizes single-ﬁeld computation. The problem statement is illustrated in
Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:60==
Uniform Permeability Darcy - Velocity in Y
53
F
Uniform Permeability Darcy - Velocity in Y
(a) Matlab-No stabilization
(b) Comsol-No stabilization
(c) Comsol Darcy Flow Mod-
ule
(d) Matlab-With stabilization (e) Comsol-With stabilization
Figure F.1: The velocity of diﬀerent implementations of Darcy are compared in the y-direction
[m/s]. Implementations with and without stabilization will be compared. The models have been
implemented in both Comsol and Matlab. Furthermore, Comsol Darcy Flow Module is used
for comparison which utilizes single-ﬁeld computation. The problem statement is illustrated in
Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:61==
54
Final Remarks
G
Dual Permeability Darcy - Comsol Domain Variation
In this formulation, the design domains in Comsol, was deﬁne by using a single domain with
spacial constraints on permeability. As it can be seen Comsol own Module had a hard time
dealing with that, where the Comsol-PDE implementation shows better results.
(a) Velocity in x-direction according to Fig-
ure 4.7
(b) Velocity in y-direction according to Fig-
ure 4.7
Figure G.1: Comsol Darcy Law Module
==PAGE:62==
Dual Permeability Darcy - Pressure
55
H
Dual Permeability Darcy - Pressure
(a) Matlab-No stabilization
(b) Comsol-No stabilization
(c) Comsol Darcy Flow Mod-
ule
(d) Matlab-With stabilization (e) Comsol-With stabilization
Figure H.1: The pressure[Pa] of diﬀerent implementations of Darcy are compared. Imple-
mentations with and without stabilization will be compared. The models have been implemented
in both Comsol and Matlab. Furthermore, Comsol Darcy Flow Module is used for comparison
which utilizes single-ﬁeld computation. The problem statement is illustrated in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:63==
56
Final Remarks
I
Dual Permeability Darcy - Velocity in Y
(a) Matlab-No stabilization
(b) Comsol-No stabilization
(c) Comsol Darcy Flow Mod-
ule
(d) Matlab-With stabilization (e) Comsol-With stabilization
Figure I.1: The velocity of diﬀerent implementations of Darcy are compared in the y-direction
[m/s]. Implementations with and without stabilization will be compared. The models have been
implemented in both Comsol and Matlab. Furthermore, Comsol Darcy Flow Module is used
for comparison which utilizes single-ﬁeld computation. The problem statement is illustrated in
Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:64==
Complex Stokes - Velocity in X
57
J
Complex Stokes - Velocity in X
(a) Matlab-No stabilization
(b) Comsol-No stabilization
(c) Comsol Darcy Flow Mod-
ule
(d) Matlab-With stabilization (e) Comsol-With stabilization
Figure J.1: The velocity of diﬀerent implementations of Stokes are compared in the x-direction.
Implementations with and without stabilization will be compared. The models have been imple-
mented in both Comsol and Matlab. Furthermore, Comsol Creeping Flow Module is used for
comparison.. The problem statement is illustrated in Figure 4.11.
==PAGE:65==
58
Final Remarks
K
Complex Stokes - Velocity in Y
(a) Matlab-No stabilization
(b) Comsol-No stabilization
(c) Comsol Darcy Flow Mod-
ule
(d) Matlab-With stabilization (e) Comsol-With stabilization
Figure K.1:
The velocity of diﬀerent implementations of Stokes are compared in the y-
direction. Implementations with and without stabilization will be compared. The models have
been implemented in both Comsol and Matlab. Furthermore, Comsol Creeping Flow Module is
used for comparison.. The problem statement is illustrated in Figure 4.11.
==PAGE:66==
Complex Darcy Stokes - Velocity in Y
59
L
Complex Darcy Stokes - Velocity in Y
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure L.1: The velocity of diﬀerent implementations of Stokes are compared in the x-direction.
Implementations with stabilization will be compared. The models have been implemented in both
Comsol and Matlab. Furthermore, Comsol Creeping Flow Module is used for comparison.. The
problem statement is illustrated in Figure 4.18.
==PAGE:67==
60
Final Remarks
M
Complex Darcy Stokes - Pressure
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure M.1: The perssure of diﬀerent implementations of Stokes are compared. Implemen-
tations with stabilization will be compared. The models have been implemented in both Comsol
and Matlab. Furthermore, Comsol Creeping Flow Module is used for comparison.. The problem
statement is illustrated in Figure 4.18.
==PAGE:68==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1]
[2] Sh K Amin, HAM Abdallah, MH Roushdy, and SA El-Sherbiny. An overview of production
and development of ceramic membranes. International Journal of Applied Engineering
Research, 11(12):7708–7721, 2016.
[3] Casper Schousboe Andreasen.
Multiscale topology optimization of solid and ﬂuid
structures. Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2011.
[4] Erik Andreassen and Casper Schousboe Andreasen. How to determine composite material
properties using numerical homogenization. Computational Materials Science, 83:488–495,
2014.
[5] Erik Andreassen, Anders Clausen, Mattias Schevenels, Boyan S Lazarov, and Ole Sig-
mund. Eﬃcient topology optimization in matlab using 88 lines of code. Structural and
Multidisciplinary Optimization, 43(1):1–16, 2011.
[6] James G Berryman. Comparison of upscaling methods in poroelasticity and its general-
izations. Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 131(9):928–936, 2005.
[7] Maurice A Biot. General theory of three-dimensional consolidation. Journal of applied
physics, 12(2):155–164, 1941.
[8] Maurice A Biot. Theory of propagation of elastic waves in a ﬂuid-saturated porous solid.
The Journal of the acoustical Society of america, 28(2):168–191, 1956.
[9] Maurice A Biot. Mechanics of deformation and acoustic propagation in porous media.
Journal of applied physics, 33(4):1482–1498, 1962.
[10] COMSOL
Bjorn
Sjodin.
What’s
the
diﬀerence
between
fem,
fdm,
and
fvm?
https://www.machinedesign.com/fea-and-simulation/
what-s-difference-between-fem-fdm-and-fvm.
[11] HC Brinkman. A calculation of the viscous force exerted by a ﬂowing ﬂuid on a dense
swarm of particles. Flow, Turbulence and Combustion, 1(1):27, 1949.
[12] Meng Chen, Min Li, Ying Wang, Jin-Zhou Zhao, and Wen-Lian Xiao. The permeability
of fontainebleau sandstone to gases and liquids. Petroleum Science and Technology, 34(9):
845–852, 2016.
==PAGE:69==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13] Robert D Cook et al. Concepts and applications of ﬁnite element analysis. John wiley &
sons, 2002.
[14] Henry Darcy. Les fontaines publiques de la ville de Dijon: exposition et application...
Victor Dalmont, 1856.
[15] A Dybbs and RV Edwards. A new look at porous media ﬂuid mechanics—darcy to turbu-
lent. In Fundamentals of transport phenomena in porous media, pages 199–256. Springer,
1984.
[16] JP Feser, AK Prasad, and Suresh G Advani. Experimental characterization of in-plane
permeability of gas diﬀusion layers. Journal of power sources, 162(2):1226–1231, 2006.
[17] P Forchheimer. Wasserbewegung durch boden zvdi, 45. 1901.
[18] Robert Fox, Alan McDonald, Philip Pritchard, and JC Leylegian. Fluid mechanics. 8th.
1, 2011.
[19] Robert Fox, Alan McDonald, Philip Pritchard, and JC Leylegian. Fluid mechanics. 8th.
1, 2011.
[20] Aliasghar Ghadimkhani, Wen Zhang, and Taha Marhaba. Ceramic membrane defouling
(cleaning) by air nano bubbles. Chemosphere, 146:379–384, 2016.
[21] James K Guest and Jean H Prévost. Topology optimization of creeping ﬂuid ﬂows using a
darcy–stokes ﬁnite element. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
66(3):461–484, 2006.
[22] Bas Hofs, Julien Ogier, Dirk Vries, Erwin F Beerendonk, and Emile R Cornelissen. Com-
parison of ceramic and polymeric membrane permeability and fouling using surface water.
Separation and Puriﬁcation Technology, 79(3):365–374, 2011.
[23] Thomas JR Hughes, Leopoldo P Franca, and Marc Balestra. A new ﬁnite element formu-
lation for computational ﬂuid dynamics: V. circumventing the babuška-brezzi condition:
a stable petrov-galerkin formulation of the stokes problem accommodating equal-order
interpolations. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 59(1):85–99,
1986.
[24] Arieh Iserles. A ﬁrst course in the numerical analysis of diﬀerential equations. Number 44.
Cambridge university press, 2009.
[25] Mansour Issaoui and Lionel Limousy. Low-cost ceramic membranes: Synthesis, classiﬁca-
tions, and applications. Comptes Rendus Chimie, 2018.
[26] Pijush K Kundu, Ira M Cohen, and David R Dowling. Fluid mechanics [en línia], 2012.
[27] Junguo Liu, Hong Yang, Simon N Gosling, Matti Kummu, Martina Flörke, Stephan Pﬁster,
Naota Hanasaki, Yoshihide Wada, Xinxin Zhang, Chunmiao Zheng, et al. Water scarcity
assessments in the past, present, and future. Earth’s Future, 5(6):545–559, 2017.
[28] Hélène Loosveldt, Zoubeir Lafhaj, and Frédéric Skoczylas. Experimental study of gas and
liquid permeability of a mortar. Cement and Concrete Research, 32(9):1357–1363, 2002.
[29] Xianke Lu, Yuyuan Zhao, and David JC Dennis. Flow measurements in microporous media
using micro-particle image velocimetry. Physical Review Fluids, 3(10):104202, 2018.
==PAGE:70==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
[30] Eduard Marušić-Paloka, Igor Pažanin, and Sanja Marušić. Comparison between darcy and
brinkman laws in a fracture. Applied mathematics and computation, 218(14):7538–7545,
2012.
[31] Arif Masud. A stabilized mixed ﬁnite element method for darcy–stokes ﬂow. International
journal for numerical methods in ﬂuids, 54(6-8):665–681, 2007.
[32] Arif Masud and Thomas JR Hughes. A stabilized mixed ﬁnite element method for darcy
ﬂow.
Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering, 191(39-40):4341–4370,
2002.
[33] N Michailidis, F Stergioudi, H Omar, D Papadopoulos, and DN Tsipas. Experimental
and fem analysis of the material response of porous metals imposed to mechanical load-
ing. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 382(1-3):124–131,
2011.
[34] Eddy Ostarcevic, Joseph Jacangelo, Stephen Gray, and Marlene Cran. Current and emerg-
ing techniques for high-pressure membrane integrity testing. Membranes, 8(3):60, 2018.
[35] PMI.
Capillary ﬂow porometer - pmi master brochure.
https://www.pmiapp.com/
themes/pmiapp/brochure/PMI%20Master%20Brochure%20v1.1.pdf.
[36] Fabrice Schlegel. Understanding stabilization methods. https://www.comsol.com/blogs/
understanding-stabilization-methods/.
[37] Jan Sladek, Vladimir Sladek, M Gfrerer, and Martin Schanz.
Mindlin theory for the
bending of porous plates. Acta mechanica, 226(6):1909–1928, 2015.
[38] Kui Wang, Ahmed A Abdalla, Mohammad A Khaleel, Nidal Hilal, and Marwan K
Khraisheh. Mechanical properties of water desalination and wastewater treatment mem-
branes. Desalination, 401:190–205, 2017.
[39] Stephen Whitaker.
Flow in porous media i: A theoretical derivation of darcy’s law.
Transport in porous media, 1(1):3–25, 1986.
[40] CH Yew and PN Jogi. The determination of biot’s parameters for sandstones. Experimental
Mechanics, 18(5):167–172, 1978.
[41] Magdalena Zielińska and Maciej Galik. Use of ceramic membranes in a membrane ﬁltra-
tion supported by coagulation for the treatment of dairy wastewater. Water, Air, & Soil
Pollution, 228(5):173, 2017.
==PAGE:71==
