==PAGE:1==
䔀瘀愀氀甀愀琀椀渀最 琀栀攀 䌀漀渀挀攀瀀琀 愀渀搀 
嘀愀氀甀攀 漀昀 匀洀愀爀琀 䈀甀椀氀搀椀渀最猀 昀漀爀 
琀栀攀 䐀攀瘀攀氀漀瀀洀攀渀琀 漀昀 愀 匀洀愀爀琀攀爀 
倀爀漀挀甀爀攀洀攀渀琀 匀琀爀愀琀攀最礀
䴀愀猀琀攀爀ᤠ
猀 吀栀攀猀椀猀Ⰰ
 䘀攀戀爀甀愀爀礀 ㈀　㄀㤀
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
䔀瘀愀氀甀愀琀椀渀最 琀栀攀 䌀漀渀挀攀瀀琀 愀渀搀 
嘀愀氀甀攀 漀昀 匀洀愀爀琀 䈀甀椀氀搀椀渀最猀 昀漀爀 
琀栀攀 䐀攀瘀攀氀漀瀀洀攀渀琀 漀昀 愀 匀洀愀爀琀攀爀 
倀爀漀挀甀爀攀洀攀渀琀 匀琀爀愀琀攀最礀
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Evaluating the Concept and Value of Smart Buildings for the Development
of a Smarter Procurement Strategy
This report was prepared by:
Jacob Olsen
Supervisor(s):
Jan Karlshøj, Lector and Head of Section, DTU-BYG
Jesper Sten Christensen, Head of Knowledge & Innovation, Ramboll Danmark
DTU Civil Engineering
Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
August 2018 - February 2019
ECTS:
35
Education:
MSc
Field:
Civil Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is intentionally left blank. 
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The
project is credited to 35 ECTS points. The theme of the project was determined in col-
laboration between the author and the supervisors. However, small adjustments have
been made during the process in collaboration between the author and the supervisors.
I want to thank my supervisors Jan Karlshøj and Jesper Sten Christensen for many in-
spiring conversations enhancing the mutual knowledge and for their support through-
out the project period. Their experience in the built environment and curiosity have
played a big part in the ﬁndings in this thesis.
Also, I would like to thank colleagues from Ramboll, including a special thanks to
Alejandro Mata. His insights and ideas have been helping me achieving the ﬁndings
in this thesis. I would also like to dedicate a special thanks to Poul Ebbesen, senior
specialist at Ramboll, for introducing me to the facility management discipline and
the Danish Facility Management community (DFM).
I would also like to dedicate a special thanks to Ed Sullivan, editor of Building Operat-
ing Management magazine, for constant motivating me and for the guidance including
sharing his network of industrial connections with me.
Finally, I want to thank my family and friends for support and understanding during
the busy periods of the project. Especially my girlfriend, Marta Dławichowska, for
supporting me during the whole project and helping with the graphics in the report.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Vikash Kumar Soni and Andrei Cornel Dănet, for
the motivation, help and staying up late at the school with me.
Kgs. Lyngby February 1, 2019
Jacob Olsen (s123425)
I
==PAGE:8==
Abstract
The building industry is emerging towards the design and construction of a new type
of buildings called smart buildings.
Supplied and supported with a high content
of new digital smart technologies, the building is designed with the idea of being
able to operate intelligently, adapting, learning, connecting, communicating and be
sustainable.
“A smart building is a building that incorporates data collection, analysis, asset
control, and action to respond to deﬁned goals for a particular outcome. It
supports the potentials of emerging cutting-edge digital technologies to promote
an user-centric, sustainable, and continuously adaptable design for an
optimised high performance with a responsive environment that is attractive
and stimulating for the occupants.”
This deﬁnition reﬂects the current focus on the experience in a smart building which
can be characterised with a user-centric focus. The market evolution is going from
energy management and eﬃciency cost savings as seen in the Crystal Building towards
the harder-to-quantify business beneﬁts associated with occupant experience as seen
with the Edge and Yum Chinas new headquarter building. The value proposition of
the user-centric smart building is most commonly referenced by the JLL trademarked
3-30-300 rule.
The technological evolution is developing rapidly and is aﬀecting everybody. The
technology has been shaping a lot of the ideas for architects to create buildings that,
not so many years ago, were not imaginable and has been pushing the boundaries for
engineers. It is fundamental to understand that smart essentially is about creating
outcomes. The technology is only a tool for creating a particular outcome in smart
buildings. It is important to design for these technologies in the early design stages
consciously. Also to make sure that all stakeholders fully understand the challenges
with implementing smart solutions. Connecting the operation and the design phase
of a building with ICT agreements could potentially be the key for designing for a
smart building. If designers start to design for facility management requirements,
then the industry will be able to create a bridge in between the operation phase
and the design phase.
This process enables designing proper smart buildings but
requires collaboration to bring facility management forward as a key player along the
stakeholders involved during the procurement process.
II
==PAGE:9==
Danish Abstract
Byggebranchen er begyndt at designe og bygge af fremad mod en ny type bygninger
kaldet smart bygninger. Leveret og understøttet med et højt indhold af nye digitale
smarte teknologier, er bygningen designet med ideen om at kunne fungere intelligent,
tilpasse, lære, forbinde, kommunikere og være bæredygtig.
“En smart bygning er en bygning, der inkorporerer dataindsamling, analyse,
asset control og handling til at reagere på deﬁnerede mål for et bestemt resultat.
Den understøtter potentialerne i nye avancerede digitale teknologier til at
fremme et brugercentreret, bæredygtigt og kontinuerligt tilpasningsdesign for en
optimeret høj ydeevne med et responsivt miljø, der er attraktivt og stimulerende
for brugerne.”
Deﬁnitionen afspejler det nuværende fokus på oplevelsen i en smart bygning, der
kan karakteriseres med et brugercentreret fokus. Markedsudviklingen er gået fra en-
ergi management og eﬀektivitetsbesparelser som set i the Crystal Building mod de
vanskeligere at kvantiﬁcere forretningsmæssige fordele forbundet med brugeroplevelse
som set med the Edge and Yum Chinas nye hovedkvarter. Value proposition af den
brugercentrerede smart bygning henvises mest almindeligt til JLL-varemærket 3-30-
300-reglen.
Den teknologiske udvikling udvikler sig hurtigt og påvirker alle.
Teknologien har
formet mange ideer for arkitekter til at skabe bygninger, der ikke for mange år siden
var utænkelige, og har presset grænserne for ingeniører. Det er grundlæggende at
forstå, at smart hovedsagelig handler om at skabe resultater. Teknologien er kun et
værktøj til at skabe et bestemt resultat i smarte bygninger. Det er vigtigt at designe
for disse teknologier i de tidlige designfaser. Også for at sikre, at alle parter fuldt
ud forstår udfordringerne ved at implementere smarte løsninger. At forbinde drift-
og designfasen af en bygning med IKT-aftaler kunne potentielt være midlet til at
designe for en smart bygning. Hvis designerne begynder at design for krav til facility
management, vil branchen kunne skabe en bro mellem driftsfasen og designfasen.
Denne proces gør det muligt at designe smarte bygninger, men kræver samarbejde for
at bringe facility management frem som en nøglespiller sammen med de involverede
parter under procurementprocessen.
III
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
Danish Abstract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . III
Table of Contents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IV
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VI
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Delimitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Introduction to a Smart Building
3
2.1
Smart Buildings forming the Foundation of Smart Cities
. . . . . . . .
5
2.2
History of the Intelligent and Smart Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Master’s Thesis Projects about Smart Buildings . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Industrial Literature about Smart Buildings . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Smart Technologies in Smart Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
The Evolution of the Smart Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
19
3.1
Real Estates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Architects and Engineers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Facility Managers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Survey Deﬁnitions of a Smart Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Moving Towards a Smart Building Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Smart Building Credit Scores
32
4.1
Building Intelligence Quotient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Smart Readiness Indicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Case study 1: The Crystal Building, London . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Case study 2: The Edge, Amsterdam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
40
5.1
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.1
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.2
Green Lease Guide (GLG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.3
Facility Management Technical Company (FMT)
. . . . . . . .
43
5.1.4
Discounted Cashﬂow (DCF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Reaching Client Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
IV
==PAGE:11==
5.2.1
Description of Services - Building and Planning 2018
. . . . . .
49
5.2.2
Integrating Design and Operation Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
52
6.1
Sensors for HVAC systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1.1
IFC Sensor Design Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Smarter Asset Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Smart Buildings and BIM - The Digital Twin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Discussion
61
8
Conclusion
63
8.1
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Bibliography
73
Appendices
74
Appendix A - Project Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
Appendix B - Smart Building Deﬁnitions from Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Appendix C - Description of Services - Building and Planning . . . . . . . . 102
Appendix D - Research Article: Evaluating the Concept and Value of Smart
Buildings for the Development of a Smarter Procurement Strategy . . . 103
V
==PAGE:12==
List of Abbreviations
AEC -
Architecture, Enginnering, and Construction
AECO -
Architecture, Engineering, Construction, and Operation
BiG -
Building Intelligence Quotient
BIM -
Building Information Modelling
BMS -
Building Management System
BSRIA -
Building Services Research and Information Association
CABA -
Continental Automated Buildings Association
DFM -
Danish Facility Management community
FM -
Facility Management
HVAC -
Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
ICT -
Information and Communication Technology
IFC -
Industry Foundation Classes
IoT -
Internet of Things
KPI -
Key Performance Indicator
SRI -
Smart Readiness Indicator
SDG -
Sustainable Development Goal
PMV -
Predicted Mean Votes
PPD -
Predicted Percentage of Dissatisﬁed persons
VI
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is intentionally left blank. 
VII
==PAGE:14==
List of Figures
2.1
Changing the world with IBM’s Smarter Planet vision. (Source: author)
3
2.2
Interest over time in ’Smart City’ and ’Smart Building’ produced by
Google Trends. [31] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Smart city components. [73] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Intelligent Building KPIs proposed by Clement-Croome in 2013. [14]
.
7
2.5
Intelligent Building KPIs proposed by Cleement-Croome and Ghaﬀar-
ianhoseini in 2015. [29] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Europe’s Horizon 2020 Smart Building KPIs. [64] . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
Smart Building deﬁnitions (Source: author); BPIE [33], Smart Build-
ing Show London 2018 [37], EuroACE [22], WELL Building Institute
[27], Honeywell [38], Siemens [85], Vito & European Commission DG
Energy [100], Hurley Palmer Flatt [82] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.8
Key smart technology trends expected in future smart buildings. [107] .
14
2.9
The wise building pyramid. [56] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.10 History and evolution of the smart building eras. (Source: author) . . .
18
3.1
Internal stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry. (Source: author)
19
3.2
Market trends shaping the real estate strategy over the next three years.
[13] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
3-30-300 Rule™, developed by JLL. [48] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Adding 5D as behaviour. (Source: author) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Potentials and degree of implementation of digitisation areas within
FM. [21] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
The distribution of professional backgrounds in the survey. (Source:
author) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.7
Important factors shaping the real estate and facility management
strategies in the future. [107]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.8
Important factors shaping designers’ visions of a smart building based
on survey results in Appendix B. (Source: author) . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.9
A human centred innovation achieved by merging occupant needs, fea-
sible technology and economic viability. [41] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1
The evolution of sustainability. (Source: author) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Important factors shaping designers’ strategies in the future. (Source:
author) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Intelligent building criteria for HVAC with BiQ. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Three key areas of smart readiness in buildings proposed in SRI. [100] .
35
4.5
Ten domains structuring the SRI catalogue. [100] . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
VIII
==PAGE:15==
4.6
Eight impact scores in the SRI, example from "cooling control - demand
side". [101]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.7
Smart ventilation services at the highest functionality level. [100]
. . .
36
4.8
The Crystal Building LEED and BREEAM ratings. [86]
. . . . . . . .
37
5.1
The life-cycle phases of a building. [79] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Proposal for a smart building procurement to incorporate sustainability
and smart in buildings with key stakeholders in mind. (Source: author)
41
5.3
Checklist example from the Investas Green Lease Guide. [43] . . . . . .
43
5.4
Parallel process view of project requirements. [53] . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5
Smart building procurement strategy in a spiral containing the aspects
of building life cycle and stakeholders involvement. (Source: author) . .
46
5.6
A concept of "begin with the end" to bring the facility manager in play.
(Source: author)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.7
The Communication gap between designers, clients and users. [95] . . .
50
5.8
Proposal for implementing data for the operation phase in the ICT
requirements. (Source: author)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.1
Room air temperature control potentials by SRI. [101]
. . . . . . . . .
52
6.2
Indoor air quality feedback potentials by SRI. [101] . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Sensors related to HVAC in a smart building. (Source: author) . . . . .
54
6.4
Predeﬁned sensor types in IFC4.0 i.e. attribute deﬁnitions provided by
the enumeration IfcSensorTypeEnum . [8]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.5
Sensor types related to HVAC systems with speciﬁed Psets. [8] . . . . .
56
6.6
The evolution of smart buildings regarding asset management. [67]
. .
57
6.7
Illustration of the six dimensions of BIM. [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.8
The concept of the digital twin with building phases included. [16] . . .
60
IX
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is intentionally left blank. 
X
==PAGE:17==
Introduction
1
 Introduction
1.1
Scope of the Thesis
The scope of this study is to examine the concept of smart buildings in the Architec-
ture, Engineering, Construction, and Operation (AECO) industry. The research in
this paper was conducted based on a comprehensive review of relevant scientiﬁc pa-
pers, information available from the market, industry talks at various conferences and
interviews of professionals in the AECO industry. A survey was also conducted with
a total of 97 answers to get a perspective on how specialists personally deﬁne a smart
building to compare with scientiﬁc papers and market information. The research is
focusing on contributing to the discussion about the vision and potentials of smart
buildings and how this vision has been changing and evolving. The purpose of this
approach was to facilitate the gathering of state-of-the-art information about smart
building characteristics, trends, and frameworks with the aim of proposing a single
standard smart building deﬁnition.
Moreover, the research continued towards the study of smart credit metric systems
more speciﬁcally the parts related to ventilation to identify potentials for a smarter
ventilation system. Related to that, it will be proposed which sensors would be rele-
vant for a smarter ventilation system and how asset management will be essential to
design for smart buildings.
A strategy for procurement of smart buildings will be proposed with the aim of high-
lighting potentials and challenges with the collaboration of the stakeholders in the
building industry especially with the focus of bringing the facility management more
in focus and deﬁning critical requirements in the design and construction phase.
The motivation for this study was the participation in the AEC Global Teamwork
2018 at Stanford University. Our team proposed an intelligent, smart building that
had an interaction between people and technology to promote sustainability and oc-
cupant well-being. [96] The building design was inspired by the Crystal building in
London which has been examined further in depth as a case study in this thesis. Our
team found out that it was diﬃcult to formulate what it meant to have a smart build-
ing because there are disagreements from diﬀerent stakeholders of what constitutes a
smart building.
Page 1 of 110
==PAGE:18==
Introduction
The aim of this thesis is formulated in the following points:
1. Review state-of-the-art insights into the concept of smart buildings from the
industry and research literature and perceptions from specialists.
2. Analyse the evolution of smart buildings and trends.
3. Propose a smart building deﬁnition that include the expectations from key stake-
holders in the industry.
4. Evaluate the potentials of smart building metric systems for a smarter ventila-
tion system.
5. Propose a strategy and general framework for the procurement of smart build-
ings to highlight the potentials and challenges for key stakeholders to connect
the design and operational phase of a building.
6. Propose which sensors could contribute to the operation process of a smarter
ventilation system and identify which IFC4 property set for sensors could be
relevant.
The project schedule is attached in Appendix A - Project Management
1.2
Delimitation
The topic of smart buildings and smart technologies is broad, and it includes many
aspects from the stakeholders in the building industry including strategies, processes,
methodologies and design criteria in which can be analysed. There are many barriers
in the way buildings are procured today as expertise and knowledge of various stake-
holders often are siloed. A holistic procurement strategy of smart buildings will be
proposed in the thesis. The thesis try to tie a couple of the strands together related
to clients, real estate, designers and facility managers at a holistic level.
Evaluating the potentials from all engineering disciplines related to smart buildings
is too broad an area to examine in a thesis project, thus the subject of potentials for
a smarter ventilation system with sensors to improve indoor climate and energy costs
will be considered further in detail.
Page 2 of 110
==PAGE:19==
Introduction to a Smart Building
2
 Introduction to a Smart Building
The digital revolution has created new smart technologies that have changed the
way people live and interact with each other. [35] Smartphones allow people to reach
anyone in the world instantaneously, concepts like Airbnb and Uber has revolutionised
travels and accommodations, and contactless payment has made it faster and easier
to pay in stores. These technologies have created a frictionless lifestyle for modern
people, and are enabled by big data approaches and Internet of Things (IoT). [109]
Today the world is in the age of smart and IoT, but it gained traction in 2008 when
IBM launched the concept of the Smart Planet with the vision of making industries,
cities, and societies more productive and eﬃcient with the use of more intelligent and
smarter approaches. [39] The Smart Planet initiative shown in Figure 2.1 led IBM
to launch the Smart Cities campaign in 2009 with the goal of improving the quality
of life for citizens. The obvious next step was to consider smarter buildings and here
the vision was to reduce energy consumption and improve operational eﬃciency with
more intelligent systems and services. [39]
Figure 2.1: Changing the world with IBM’s Smarter Planet vision. (Source: author)
Today the building industry is moving towards buildings with more complex and
integrated systems which are characterised with the term of smart buildings. [92] The
market of peoples’ personal lives and smart buildings are starting to draw parallels.
Many forces are driving both markets such as eﬃciency, convenience, cost savings,
energy savings, communication, etc.
[13] It is expected that by 2020 one in ﬁve
buildings will be smart buildings supported by 50 billion connected devices with cloud-
based software and services worldwide. [60] The amount of IoT devices will continue
to grow and these will be applied to deliver smarter buildings. [60] Research shows
that the industry is moving towards smarter buildings, but the reality is that the
transition appears to be slow. [32] One reason could be that there is no consensus on
a smart building deﬁnition at the moment and the true potentials are not yet revealed
or quantiﬁed.
Page 3 of 110
==PAGE:20==
Introduction to a Smart Building
Reinhold Wieland, business development manager at the smart building consultancy
ﬁrm Connecting Buildings, has stated that
“There is a lack of deﬁnition on what a smart building is.”
—Reinhold Wieland, Business Development Manager, Connecting Buildings [12]
Researchers, specialists, and companies have tried to characterise the smart build-
ing with deﬁnitions and one remarkable building automation specialist to mention
is Ken Sinclair, Founder, publisher and owner of the online magazine Automated-
buildings.com. He was in 2016 appointed as top smart building inﬂuencer by KGS
Buildings [50] and his deﬁnition of a smart building is:
“A smart building is a building that "Looks" with rapidly evolving video
analytics, "Listens" with natural language interaction and learning, using the
personal assistants that are evolving as part of our edge-bots. Use our history
of "Feeling" temperature, humidity, occupancies etc. and best combine this all
with "Thinking" that will come from self-learning. Returning that "Mindful
Reaction" in the creation of an Anticipatory Humanistic Relationships.”
—Ken Sinclair, Founder, Publisher and Owner of Automatedbuildings.com [87]
He characterises a smart building as a sociotechnical system with smart and intelli-
gent behaviors that can respond to the occupants’ needs depending on big data and
artiﬁcial intelligence approaches, almost as a building from a sci-ﬁmovie that lives
with emotions and senses. In 1995, an American writer named Stewart Brand stated
that the buildings that thrive are those that can adapt to how people use them. [5]
“Age plus adaptability is what makes a building come to be loved. The building
learns from its occupants, and they learn from it.”
—Stewart Brand [5]
He characterises an attractive building as one that adapts and learns from the occu-
pants but also a building where the occupants learn from it. In a way is the deﬁnition
of a smart building from Ken Sinclair an advanced version of the attractive building
deﬁned by Stewart Brand. However, Stewart Brand also argues that the nature of
change in buildings is permanent and buildings are not designed for changes.
Page 4 of 110
==PAGE:21==
Introduction to a Smart Building
“All buildings are predictions. Predictions are wrong. Almost no buildings
adapt well, designed not to, constructed not to, budgeted and ﬁnanced not to,
maintained not to, regulated and taxed not to, even remodelled not to. But all
buildings except monuments adapt anyway because the usage in and around
them are changing constantly.”
—Stewart Brand [5]
The statements from Ken Sinclair and Stewart Brand shares the same vision of build-
ings being adaptable to new situations.
There is a range of deﬁnitions of smart
buildings in research and market literature and the next chapters have the purpose of
highlighting the evolution of the smart building.
2.1
Smart Buildings forming the Foundation of Smart Cities
To start with a broader perspective of smart buildings it is natural to look into the
infrastructure of where buildings are located, which is the city. There is a growing
interest from city planners, city leaders and governments to develop smart cities. This
is in a high degree a result of the IBM initiative and the cities’ role in the global cli-
mate battle to reduce carbon emissions and waste. [77] Furthermore, is globalisation
occurring in the world and it is expected that the world’s population is increasing
exponentially. [99] In the year 2050, the population of the world is expected to reach
9.8 billion, and at this time 68% of the world’s population is expected to be urban.
[99][98] To counter the challenges of space in future cities, it is necessary for gov-
ernments and city planners to design for smarter and more eﬃcient solutions. The
emerging interest in smart cities is also a result of the new sustainable development
goals (SDGs) adopted by all United Nations member states in 2015. [2] The SDG
number 11 is directly related to smart cities as it is a goal for innovative and sustain-
able cities to face the rapid urbanisation. [2] These governance trends contribute to
the increased interest of smart cities.
Figure 2.2: Interest over time in ’Smart City’ and ’Smart Building’ produced by Google
Trends. [31]
Page 5 of 110
==PAGE:22==
Introduction to a Smart Building
The graph in Figure 2.2 shows the interest of smart cities over time compared to smart
buildings. The numbers represent the search interest on Google with the highest point
in the chart for that area and the time, and it shows that there is more interest in
smart cities compared to smart buildings. This is interesting, as smart buildings are
a means to create a smart city among other aspects that are part of the vision of the
smart city which is shown in Figure 2.3. [28]
Figure 2.3: Smart city components. [73]
The framework of the smart city is supported by the idea that everything is connected.
[89] The vision of smart buildings’ roles in a smart city is to connect the buildings to
the infrastructure of the smart city through integration and connectivity to, e.g. the
smart city power grid or the smart water system. [89] Forbes Insights deﬁnes the role
of a smart building in the future smart cities as necessary building blocks. [28] By
this means that the smart buildings will create a scalable foundation for the creation
of smart cities. [28] To develop successful smart cities it is important to have the same
clariﬁcation of the concept of smart buildings as there is for smart cities.
2.2
History of the Intelligent and Smart Building
There has for a long time been confusion about the interchangeably used terms of
intelligent, smart and sustainable buildings. [30] Sustainable buildings have often been
characterised with their ability to comply with diﬀerent metric systems such as LEED,
BREEAM and WELL that covers environmental, social and economic dimensions of
sustainability. [30] The idea of an intelligent building goes back to 1984 where a new
generation of buildings was introduced in a New York Times article. [88]
Page 6 of 110
==PAGE:23==
Introduction to a Smart Building
“a new generation of buildings that almost think for themselves ... called
intelligent buildings.”
—New York Times [88]
Derek Clements-Croome was one of the ﬁrst researchers who looked into the framework
of the intelligent building. [18] In 1997 he deﬁned the intelligent buildings as a building
that can cope with social and technological changes, and that is adaptable to short-
term and long-term human needs. In 2013, Clements-Croome developed further on
the concept and framework of the intelligent building. [14] He described intelligent
buildings as having three main components where sustainability and green technology
were introduced, see Figure 2.4
Figure 2.4: Intelligent Building KPIs proposed by Clement-Croome in 2013. [14]
In 2015 Clements-Croome and Amirhosein Ghaﬀarianhoseini deﬁned the intelligent
building as a focal point embracing green, sustainable, smart and other related at-
tributes.
[29] The key performance indicators (KPIs) were very similar to those
Clements-Croome proposed in 2013, however, economic and cost eﬃciency were intro-
duced. Each KPI was speciﬁed in details to include which components that should be
considered in each KPI of the intelligent building, see Figure 2.5. According to their
deﬁnition of an intelligent building, smart was only one of the KPIs for the intelligent
building.
They expressed the potential of the intelligent building through digitisation of a liv-
ing environment and integrated technological facilities with embedded intelligence to
support real-time optimised functions of the building. These KPIs are related to the
deﬁnition of a smart building by Ken Sinclair with the ability to adapt to chang-
ing human needs and response to social and technological changes. The research by
Ghaﬀarianhoseini and Clements-Croome was a leap into the development of a vision
of developing highly responsive buildings with the aim to improve well-being, health,
and quality of life. [29] Other researchers have been focusing on the term smart in-
stead of intelligent buildings. In 1994 Stephen Drewer and David Gann characterised
the smart building entirely through the integration and implementation of emerging
Page 7 of 110
==PAGE:24==
Introduction to a Smart Building
Figure 2.5: Intelligent Building KPIs proposed by Cleement-Croome and Ghaﬀarianhoseini
in 2015. [29]
cutting-edge technologies. [19] In 2014 Buckman, Mayﬁeld and Beck deﬁned a smart
building through the ability to adapt to new situations within the areas of intelligence,
enterprise, control, materials, and design. [7] In this framework is intelligence only
one of the four components describing a smart building. Buckman, Mayﬁeld, and
Beck distinguished between the intelligent building and the smart building, through
the deﬁnitions that intelligent buildings are generally reactive and smart buildings
are adaptive. [7] The adjective intelligent has been often used instead of smart for
buildings and the literature research shows that these terms often have been used
interchangeably. [104]
Other research programs in smart buildings have later been established such as the
Horizon 2020 by the European Commissioning. Horizon 2020 is the biggest EU Re-
search and Innovation programme investing in innovation projects. One of the innova-
tion projects that the Horizon 2020 program has invested in is about smart buildings.
[24] The research project had the purpose of deﬁning a smart building to make it
possible to search for and identify innovation projects related to smart buildings in
the CORDIS database. [23] The European Commission proposed three KPIs as indi-
cators of smart in buildings, see Figure 2.6. [64]
These KPIs includes occupant interaction, energy eﬃciency, automatic optimisation,
and adaptability. These KPIs do not implicitly include environment and economics,
but the aspects are explicitly covered in the features of interacting with the grid and
the building’s ability to manage itself eﬃciently.
Page 8 of 110
==PAGE:25==
Introduction to a Smart Building
Figure 2.6: Europe’s Horizon 2020 Smart Building KPIs. [64]
The research shows that the concept of smart or intelligent buildings both have the
vision of incorporating adaptability with the idea that buildings should be acting
and interacting with users, so the users’ behaviours are aﬀecting the behaviour of the
building. [15] Environmental friendly practices have also been a signiﬁcant part of the
characterisation of smart or intelligent buildings especially with the focus on energy
eﬃciency.
2.2.1
Master’s Thesis Projects about Smart Buildings
Some university thesis projects have been looking into the conceptualisation and char-
acterisation of smart buildings. Cory Mosiman from the University of Colorado de-
ﬁned in his thesis that the essence of smart buildings is the ability to adapt to support
occupant activities eﬃciently throughout the building lifetime. [65] Cory considered
the adaptability in buildings through three categories:[65]
1. Adaptation to changes in the physical layout
2. Adaptation to user preferences and operational goals
3. Adaptation to grid requirements
The buildings ability to adapt to the occupants and the energy grid is consistent
with the KPIs proposed by Clements-Croome and Ghaﬀarianhoseini in 2015. [29]
However, here adaptability is also about changes in the physical layout. This requires
ﬂexibility in the infrastructure of the building which requires that it is designed for
in the early design phase. Another thesis project done by Bando Hano and Alfredo
Keitaro at Massachusetts Institute of Technology has been looking into the framework
of smart buildings. In this thesis, the framework was considered with three principal
characteristics which each contributes to a smart building: [36]
Page 9 of 110
==PAGE:26==
Introduction to a Smart Building
1. Smart: currently have installed one or more smart amenities that go beyond
sustainability and aim to improve the occupier experience.
2. Connected: buildings that provide the cutting-edge technology that let them
provide premium digital connectivity.
3. Green: buildings that use technology to make their operations more energy
eﬃcient.
The thesis suggests that the smartest building is the one who considers all three
characteristics and is proposing that the smartest building should be characterised
with the term "Green, Connected and Smart" buildings. [36] Eerika Janhunen from
Aalto Unversity School of Engineering also looked into the framework of a smart
building in her thesis. She did interviews with specialists and concluded based on the
research that a smart building could be deﬁned with the following characteristics: [46]
1. Interactive service, which communicates with its users and occupants.
2. Sustainability and energy eﬃciency issues.
3. Healthy indoor air as well as comfort.
4. Adaptability to the user needs.
Among the interviewees, Eerika concludes that the most important characteristic of
a smart building was recognised to be its adaptability to the user’s needs.
This
is consistent with the ﬁndings from Cory Mosiman [65], Bando Hano and Alfredo
Keitaro. Eerika proposed that a smart building’s ability to adapt should be based on
the ability of the building to: [46]
1. Independently provide an optimised indoor environment for its users.
2. Learn based on the user-speciﬁc data.
This only focuses on the adaptability to the occupants and describes a user-centric
building. This is consistent with Ken Sinclar’s characterisation of the building that
could sense the users’ needs and learn from these. [87] When considering the history
of the intelligent or smart building including these state-of-the-art thesis projects, it
indicates that the vision of the smart building today is emerging towards adaptability
to its occupants’ needs. All three thesis projects are concluding that there is not
a single standard deﬁnition of a smart building on the market. However, they all
acknowledge the importance of having one.
Page 10 of 110
==PAGE:27==
Introduction to a Smart Building
2.2.2
Industrial Literature about Smart Buildings
The consulting engineering group Ramboll is recognised with world lead expertise in
delivering smart buildings, especially in the high-rise scale. [66] High-rise and tall
buildings are infrastructures that rarely get demolished, thus it is crucial to meet
the challenges of creating solutions that stay viable and relevant over the life of the
building. Ramboll focuses on designing high-rise buildings as an infrastructure plat-
form and uses smart technologies to develop adaptive systems that can evolve to the
changing needs of the occupants. [63]
Ramboll deﬁnes a smart building as a building that can incorporate data collection,
control, and action. The building describes and analyses situations, and adapt based
on the available data for an optimised high-performance solution. [62]
Ramboll vision smart buildings as adaptable technology platforms with occupants
interacting with the building, supporting key trends of, e.g. sensors and IoT through
integration of design, mechanical and electrical systems, sustainability and manage-
ment consulting. [61] Ramboll also emphasises that the design of smart buildings are
not about technology but about creating outcomes and the technology is a tool for
creating a particular outcome. [61] To create an outcome for the users it is important
to know the users and one of the strategies used to meet these needs is to identify the
key users, understand the needs and pains and then map a user journey. [62] Knowing
the needs of the users early in the design phase will allow planning and designing of
the outcomes in user-centric design, thus cost-beneﬁt analysis can be done to ensure
the payback period is within the client expectations. [61]
Ramboll has a clear and short deﬁnition of a smart building, but other companies
have also made deﬁnitions of a smart building. There is a range of interpretations
as no single agreed deﬁnition is existing yet. Figure 2.7 lists some smart building
deﬁnitions from other key companies and organisations in the industry.
Page 11 of 110
==PAGE:28==
Introduction to a Smart Building
Figure 2.7: Smart Building deﬁnitions (Source: author); BPIE [33], Smart Building Show
London 2018 [37], EuroACE [22], WELL Building Institute [27], Honeywell [38], Siemens
[85], Vito & European Commission DG Energy [100], Hurley Palmer Flatt [82]
The deﬁnitions in Figure 2.7 are just a few of the smart buildings deﬁnitions that exist
on the market. The research shows that the deﬁnition of a smart building varies a lot
depending on which company or organisation it comes from, as the deﬁnitions often
Page 12 of 110
==PAGE:29==
Introduction to a Smart Building
are aﬀected by the values of the company or organisation and which areas they are
focusing on. The various companies and actors in the smart building industry tend to
ﬁt their perception of a smart building by inserting diﬀerent preferred outcomes into
the deﬁnitions, such as the Buildings Performance Institute Europe (BPIE) mainly
focuses on energy eﬃciency. [33] Multiple drivers are pushing the market towards
smarter buildings such as new smart technologies that are pushing the boundaries of
the potentials in diﬀerent areas but also pushing the expectations from the industry
and building occupants.
2.3
Smart Technologies in Smart Buildings
There are lots of technologies that go into what can be deﬁned as smart and some
are aimed at real estate and facilities managers others aimed at building users. Most
of the solutions rely on a variety of data capture devices such as IoT sensors which
essentially is a piece of kit that is capable of sending or receiving data in one way or
two-way communication. This communication allows the device to collect data and
information from its local context and communicate it to the cloud. The use of IoT
in buildings can be explained with three stages:
1. The ﬁrst stage is the idea of getting connectivity and processing capabilities into
the devices.
2. The second stage is collecting data. So once devices are connected, storage and
sensor capabilities within those can be added to make the devices aware of the
surrounding environment such as temperature, humidity, and air pollution.
3. The third stage is to compute. So IoT devices are generating a lot of data,
and this data can be analysed. The relevant stakeholder that seek outcomes of
implementing IoT in the building has to ﬁnd out what to do with the data and
how to process it.
There is a general consensus that the amount of data which smart buildings can deliver
should press to improve comfort conditions within buildings and improve occupant
well-being. [13] It is not just well-being that is supported as smart buildings can
also help provide diversity, accessibility, communication, and engagement which are
all the types of things that are important to people. [91] The use of mobile apps, for
example, to give citizens a voice and allow them to report issues to their local environ-
ment which helps individuals to be integrated who might otherwise have been isolated.
Verdantix is an independent research and consulting ﬁrm that focuses on innova-
tive technologies that optimise business operations such as smart building and smart
Page 13 of 110
==PAGE:30==
Introduction to a Smart Building
technologies. Verdantix has run detailed studies looking at diﬀerent technologies to
optimise facilities. [107] There are many kinds of emerging technologies in the build-
ing industry, and Verdantix predicts that the eight technologies in Figure 2.8 will be
part of the smart technologies that are included in the future smart buildings. [107]
Figure 2.8: Key smart technology trends expected in future smart buildings. [107]
It is expected to see future buildings have more digital signage and employees facing
mobile apps which have powers by location-based technologies. These technologies
will enable users to access services so they will be able to, e.g. book a room, report
maintenance requests or even access services from local businesses. Also, the emer-
gence of personal building controllers is expected in future smart buildings, and this
will enable users to adjust local building conditions such as lighting or temperature.
[107] That is an evolution on the traditional approach to managing buildings which
have been more centralised.
There are many visions on how the building management systems (BMS) will evolve
in the future, but one viable vision is that some of the functionality of the BMS is
going to move up into the cloud. [13] There will most likely still be some local con-
trol, e.g., some very critical of building measures such as security and ﬁre systems.
There will be a lot of the overall monitoring and management of systems such as heat-
ing, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) increasingly becoming cloud-based. [13]
Optimisation of space management is also a trend that is expected for facilities opti-
misation. Buildings in the future are expected to have more space utilisation sensors.
These may well be embedded within lighting systems, or they may be integrated else-
where in the building, e.g. with the use of CCTV cameras.
Page 14 of 110
==PAGE:31==
Introduction to a Smart Building
Also, equipment to take more embedded intelligence. The industry is already seeing
manufacturers such as Kone embedding sensors into their equipment to enable the
continuous monitoring of asset performance. [54] The use of sensors allows Kone to
optimise their business area and start informing maintenance programs and optimise
the control strategy for their elevators.
The technological evolution is having and will have a signiﬁcant impact on the building
industry and especially on building services. The smart technologies that Verdantix
expect to see in the future smart buildings are likely to change the way buildings
are managed and even the way they are designed. The interesting feature in smart
buildings is its ability to interact with the building occupants. The data and inputs
from the occupants can be combined with local data captured by IoT sensors such
as temperature, humidity, and air pollution. The technological evolution is already
having profound impacts on building services today, and the impacts are expected
to increase. [56][72][84] The Building Services Research and Information Association
(BSRIA) has developed a pyramid to illustrate how to reach a smarter and wiser
building, see Figure 2.9. BSRIA suggests that the existing smart buildings are still
at the lower stages of the pyramid, but the potential of reaching higher is possible as
the tools are already available on the market. [56]
Figure 2.9: The wise building pyramid. [56]
The pyramid in Figure 2.9 shows BSRIA’s interpretation of the degrees of smart in
buildings going from a ’dumb’ object to an object capable of interpreting information
and even to the extent of being connected and interacting with the wider world.
Moving up in the pyramid requires more integration and more intelligence, and the
last step is to connect buildings to the wider world, for example to smart city networks
Page 15 of 110
==PAGE:32==
Introduction to a Smart Building
and smart grids.
[56] The last step on the pyramid proves the point that smart
buildings are forming a foundation for smart cities.
The fundamental nature of smart technology is to use data. Data from the building
allows the operators and building owners to build more profound insights into how
the building is operating and they can start to improve the building through data-
driven decision support. Furthermore, begin to make baselines around the positions
of performance or eﬃciency, so if the eﬃciency starts to drift over time, it can be de-
tected. The potential for improved maintenance and fault detection is enormous, but
sensors also unlock a signiﬁcant potential for commissioning buildings, and this means
to tweak the building systems, so they work as expected when the building is handed
over. It also unlocks the potential for a more eﬃcient business in the continuous com-
missioning, i.e., to adjust the systems more frequently to obtain high-performance
solutions in buildings.
Given an example of air quality which is expected to be more often required by
occupants to ensure the air quality is of a certain standard. [55][105] The idea to
improve the air quality is to collect data from air quality sensors within and outside
the building and start to develop strategies around how the building occupants feel to
make a data-supported decision on the control strategies for the ventilation system. By
looking at time series data of air quality sensors, the facility management could begin
to see patterns in certain times from the day and detect when there are deviations,
e.g., in rush hour traﬃc outside and begin to understand relationships. The action
could be to reduce the amount of fresh air brought into the building during rush hour.
Also by starting to bring in weather data by bringing wind speed and wind direction
into the system to form a relationship of other buildings’ locations such as factories or
industrial sites. There are many possibilities in how to improve future buildings, and
the area of smart ventilation with sensors will be explored further in detail in chapter
six: Smarter Ventilation with Sensors.
2.4
The Evolution of the Smart Building
The design and expected performance of buildings have been changing in the past
decades, and one of the primary changes in the development of smart buildings has
been environmental sustainability. [58] Newly constructed buildings often took to
minimize their environmental impacts but also to score highly on diﬀerent types of
green building metric ratings including brands such as a LEED and BREAM. These
types of buildings were considered to be energy eﬃcient and smart buildings. There
has been a signiﬁcant focus on trying to maximize the energy eﬃciency of smart build-
ings, and for some people, a smart building is synonymous with an energy eﬃcient
Page 16 of 110
==PAGE:33==
Introduction to a Smart Building
building. [45] In fact, the deﬁnition of what constitutes a smart building by BPIE
is a building that is highly energy eﬃcient. [33] What is seen in this era marked by
environmental performance is that a green building rating has often measured the
success of development and it has shown that environmentally friendly practices are
good for business. [94] The industry has tried to push the boundaries of the sustain-
able side which has been the mentality shaping the visionary buildings over the past
two decades. [45]
An example of a high-rated sustainable building is the crystal building in London
which in 2012 positioned itself as the most sustainable building in the world with
ratings such as BREEAM Outstanding and LEED Platinum. [86]
Today a new era of smart buildings has come. Smart buildings are considering a much
more division. Along the side with environmental sustainability, are high-performance
buildings being designed to prioritise occupant experience and well-being in the hope
that it will boost work productivity and attract talents. [59] This is very much de-
velopments on previous visions of the era of environmental performance that pushed
for full operational eﬃciency, but this vision is now emerging and developing into one
that looks to promotes the experience of the building occupants. The new era that
the building industry is entering is well described by a phrase that sees things as it is
about making the building work for people.
A great example of a user-centric building is the food brand Yum China’s new corpo-
rate oﬃce building in Shanghai that house 1200 employees. [108] The building opened
in December 2017 and the CEO of Yum China has in a statement explained the design
approach of the new building.
“We started with the vision of creating a workplace where employees ’look
forward to Monday’. To achieve this vision, we focus on employee well-being
and have paid attention to key design features such as excellent air ﬁltration,
modern furniture, collaborative work spaces, ample connectivity for mobile
working, and contemporary lighting”
—Joey Wat [108]
The statement from this top-level CEO has no reference to sustainability or building
eﬃciency and the vision of the building becomes much more focus on the experience of
the occupants. Also seeing collaboration technologies for productivity and improving
occupant comfort and well-being as being high priorities. There is a lot of focus on
trying to reduce costs and operational costs in buildings, but the research shows that
Page 17 of 110
==PAGE:34==
Introduction to a Smart Building
it is necessary to understand that there is a need to make investments to create an
environment that is attractive to future tenants and occupants. The evolution of the
smart building is illustrated in Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: History and evolution of the smart building eras. (Source: author)
The future era of smart buildings and what will constitute a smart building is diﬃcult
to guess as technology and the ideas behind what makes a smart building is contin-
ually evolving. Trends show that buildings that are being designed now will start to
come online in the future. [107] Buildings and workplaces are emerging towards a be-
haviour of being responsive to occupants, thus being user-centric and not necessarily
tech-centric as seen earlier with the high energy eﬃciency and great environmental
performance buildings. [45]
The next chapter will focus on which potentials diﬀerent stakeholders identify with
smart buildings and will propose a smart building deﬁnition based on the research in
this chapter and the stakeholders’ expectations to the potentials of a smart building.
Page 18 of 110
==PAGE:35==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
3
 Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
Stakeholders in the building industry have diﬀerent ideas and visions of what smart
is, and the beneﬁts of the impacts of implementing smart technologies are considered
diﬀerently. But all the stakeholders have to amend their designs, approaches, and
deliveries of operation to reﬂect the shift in towards smarter buildings if they want
to stay competitive in the industry. The stakeholders that are involved in the smart
building industry are shown in Figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: Internal stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry. (Source: author)
This chapter provides insights into what stakeholders deﬁne as smart in buildings and
which potentials they expect to see. This chapter is based on talks and interviews with
stakeholders that have been engaged in this study, including state-of-the-art research
and market literature.
3.1
Real Estates
Verdantix has interviewed 303 diﬀerent leaders of real estate globally. [13] They made
sure that the leaders were involved in decisions related to real estate or the purchas-
ing of smart building technologies. The research found trends that are expected to
inﬂuence real estate strategies in the next years. The trends from the survey results
are shown in Figure 3.2.
The results of the survey showed a high interest in maximising space utilisation.
[107] High rents are becoming more often and especially in Europe, and this might
have had an inﬂuence on the results and could be an explanation for the interest in
strategic space management in the future. So after many years of looking to maximise
performance and energy within buildings, the new look of eﬃciency is about space
management. However, when space is reduced, so is associated costs such as energy
Page 19 of 110
==PAGE:36==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
Figure 3.2: Market trends shaping the real estate strategy over the next three years. [13]
and utilities. There has already been a lot of innovation from the technology landscape
regarding how organisations can improve the space management such as from sensor
vendors trying to get ﬂexibility into space usage through software solutions helping
ﬁrms to analyse this data. [84]
A trend in real estate is the continuing importance of systems such as LEED and
BREAM especially when it comes to brand awareness of buildings. [84][72] There is
an increasing focus on companies that are looking to either lease spaces in buildings
or create a particular brand reputation through buildings that are perceived as being
energy eﬃcient and environmentally sustainable. In regards of sustainability, it has
become a trend within real estate to look at facility optimisation for operations of
buildings with a major focus on energy eﬃciency and maintenance eﬃciency and
how to get the most performance for the best return on investment in their building
portfolio. [13]
Another trend is the idea of agile workforces, and this is the advent of more mobile
workforces who are not just stuck at a desk for all day long. This includes employees
participating in diﬀerent meetings and diﬀerent activity-based settings.
It is also
employees that are potentially working from home and a lot of this is being supported
by the use of the development of mobile technologies and their deployment within the
workspace. Along with the trend of agile workforces has co-working been a signiﬁcant
theme in real estate. [13] The co-working trend is about the success of where employees
work, and this is starting to change the idea of what a workplace is or what a workplace
can be. It is turning the workplace into a destination place where there are amenities
that make the occupants excited about being in the space.
This also goes along
with the most popular trend in real estate about a general focus on employee well-
being and productivity.
[13] In general, there is a major focus on improving the
Page 20 of 110
==PAGE:37==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
building occupant experience, whether it is with the usage of mobile applications or
local environmental control to help occupants feel more comfortable and be more
productive.
Well-being and comfort is a trend that the whole building industry is focusing more
about mainly by the popularity of standards such as WELL. Among the real estate
industry is the 3-30-300 Rule™becoming popular. [48] A rule of thumb is developed
by the company JLL and is illustrated in Figure 3.3. It has found its way into the
smart building industry as it can be used as a value proposition for smart buildings.
The metric in the 3-30-300 Rule™says that an organisation spends on an annual basis,
approximately three dollars per square foot on utility bills, thirty on the rent for space
and three hundred on employees through salaries. This means that well-being looks
to tap the three hundred dollar part of this equation as it is related to the employees’
payroll. If there is an impact on employees well-being and productivity, it can have
much more eﬀect on the organisation as a whole instead of focusing on things like
energy management which taps the three dollar part of this equation.
Figure 3.3: 3-30-300 Rule™, developed by JLL. [48]
The 3-30-300 model states that the greatest ﬁnancial savings come from increased
occupant productivity rather than decreased energy use.
As beneﬁcial as energy
savings are to an organisation’s bottom line, innovative user-centric smart investments
potentially deliver greater value. [93] Creating a smart building with the use of IoT
and sensor technology with a focus on improving utility cost is proven in most cases
to have a signiﬁcant impact on energy savings, which is important to the world and
to comply with initiatives such as the SDGs or the Paris Agreement. However, IoT
also have the potential of promoting the well-being of the occupants, thus the use
of sensors will have a profound eﬀect on buildings. This supports the prediction of
having one in ﬁve buildings as smart buildings supporting connected devices with
cloud-based software and services. [60]
Along the trend of more focus on comfort and well-being of occupants comes more
focus on minimising risk to business operations. Tenants are looking to provide the
best environment for the occupants to contribute to the whole organisation’s busi-
ness performance and achieving business objectives. Building owners start to make
investments in buildings to create attractive environments for future tenants and oc-
cupants. Tenants are having an increased focus on minimising employee turnover by
having buildings that provide the attractive services. That also ties into oﬃce de-
sign and designing workplaces that people want to be in and engage with. However,
Page 21 of 110
==PAGE:38==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
ultimately there needs to be an incentive for an investment in a smart building, i.e.
there needs to be a reason. Real estate is often concerned about the return of the
investment and a barrier to deploy IoT in buildings is the return of the investment.
Building owners need to see enough business cases on how IoT is going to impact the
bottom line before taking the risk of investing in it. Even with the 3-30-300 Rule™,
the beneﬁts have to be translated and quantiﬁed of what the technology does for the
productivity and how to measure it. The new era of smart buildings are promoting
user-centric buildings, but one of the challenges is proving the value of a user-centric
building as it becomes diﬃcult to measure and quantify occupant engagement and
happiness compared to an environmental performance where energy consumption of-
ten is measured.
3.2
Architects and Engineers
Architects have for a long time been trying to promote sustainability in their designs
with innovative solutions and solutions supporting the sustainability metric systems
such as LEED and BREEAM. Some architects and designers have also been trying to
ﬁnd the answer to design for the full lifetime of a building in diﬀerent ways. Architects
and engineers have become more aware of the building usage and how the building
will be used in the future and one thing that has been tried is to design for space of
ﬂexibility. A trend within architecture is to react to the idea of the ﬂexibility of space
utilisation, and one of the outcomes of this is the open oﬃce spaces where architects
and building owners also tried to solve the challenge of how to foster collaboration
and change. Through time, it has become something that is seen quite often. The
concept is also one of the popular trends within real estate as it is related to 3-30-300
rule™[48] which shows that the economy comes into the equation all the time.
Figure 3.4 is an illustration trying to describe how buildings can be seen in dimensions.
In a building project, there is a brieﬁng phase of where the idea of a building comes
up and this is typically documented in text documents. The designers are conceding
it and creating 2D drawings and 3D models to document the design and then the
construction industry realises it. Time which often refers to 4D reﬂects the lifetime
of a building. The new dimension that smart buildings add to this is the behaviour.
Occupants and buildings both have behaviours that need to be designed for, and
designers need to respond to this and ﬁnd ways to make the design adaptable if they
want to design smart buildings. The changes can be coming from e.g. outside and
inside, environment, people, economy which is essential aspects for buildings to be
attractive.
Page 22 of 110
==PAGE:39==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
Figure 3.4: Adding 5D as behaviour. (Source: author)
To make design respond to the challenge of time, then it needs to be designed in a
way where time is one of the barriers that can change the building itself as Stew-
art Brand described it. [5] This is where connectivity comes into the picture. Data
collected from IoT devices is not something static as information changes over time.
Some designers start to use IoT devices in their designs to be able to optimise their
systems. [84][72] The smart technology that most real estate companies invest in is
smart lighting systems, but optimisation of HVAC systems has also become popular
in recent years as HVAC systems account for most of the energy consumption in a
building over its lifetime. [13] More sensors are being placed throughout the workplace
in buildings today, and this enables more connectivity, more data and more analysis
of how buildings are being used and where the best opportunities are to improve the
performance. [3]
Architects have also been looking into new ways of promoting the health and well-
being of the building occupants by looking at nature. There are a wealth of solutions
in the nature that architects and designers try to convert into their design. One of the
principles is the concept of biomimicry which has gained traction within the previous
years. The idea is that people need nature to thrive, so architects are trying to inte-
grate nature into the built environment both indoor and outdoor. Research studies
have shown that incorporating nature in buildings improve creativity, increase the
ability to connect with others, enhance creativity and develop the ability to enhance
memories. [11] The vision is to design buildings that tease the occupants’ senses to
improve occupant well-being with e.g. natural daylight and having plants around in
the building.
The vision for most architects with e.g. biomimicry is to make occupants start using
their senses inside buildings which ultimately leads to occupants interacting with the
building. People could work like individual sensors sensing the local environment in
the building and be able to communicate with it to be an ecosystem facilitators pro-
moting thriving environments.
Page 23 of 110
==PAGE:40==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
Engineers are more focused on the building acting to the occupants with automation
and AI, so the building automatically adjust to the occupant needs through data
analytics of sensor data from the building itself. [3] To put the expectations from
architects and engineers into perspective, it is interesting to repeat what Stewart
Brand stated, that buildings are not designed for changes. [5] This is in many cases
correct when looking at the way buildings are designed today. Many buildings today
do not have opening windows at all and many of the opening windows that exist do not
work well with the indoor climate. Opening a window can have a signiﬁcant impact
on both the indoor climate quality and on the energy consumption to sustain the
designed indoor climate quality level. [25] It has become popular in modern design
to seal up windows and create perfect indoor climates with HVAC systems. This
system relies on the mechanical engineers’ capability to design functional systems,
but also the facility managers’ (FM) capability to make proper strategies for the
BMS. Research shows that the occupants want the possibility to adjust the indoor
climate by themselves, otherwise they will become unsatisﬁed with the building. [6]
This could also be a reason why real estate is focusing more on increased use of mobile
applications to counter these requirements from the occupants and to create a better
experience of the building. The idea is to provide the occupants with control over
their local environment with connected devices with a direct connection to services
and assets which could be mobile applications to control e.g. the HVAC, lighting or
even real-time bookings of spaces.
3.3
Facility Managers
The building operations and FM companies have the challenge of following the tsunami
of disruption in the smart building industry by looking at the emerging, cutting-edge
technologies in the extent of what is realistic for their building portfolio. The poten-
tials are huge when looking at an analysis of building data to eﬀectively maximise
operations and highlight problems that the FM might not be aware of. For example,
if high energy consumption is noticed in a building, then data can provide insights
in detecting the problem and that knowledge gives FM ideas in which changes that
have to be done in e.g. the control strategy. With the increased monitoring process
systems it will also be possible to pinpoint precisely where and when there is a prob-
lem. So all of this starts to ﬁt into what the industry might see more of which is a
smart maintenance contract that includes things like predictive maintenance to com-
pare performance against benchmark factors. These benchmarks can then be used
to identify which assets should be maintained leading to improved asset performance
and cost management, thus moving from planned maintenance ratings to preventive
and predictive maintenance ratings.
Page 24 of 110
==PAGE:41==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
The reality of FM using smart technologies is though very diﬀerent from how IT de-
velopment companies promote it. There are a lot of smart technologies and systems
that promise improved capabilities of managing buildings, but the implementation
of advanced systems lags. Most facility managers want to be sure that new systems
work as intended and can deliver the services FM has to provide. [21] The initiatives
that are promoted and are part of the real estate trends have to provide an outcome
for the overall organisation and it is part of the FM’s job to document the outcomes.
[21] Not every smart technology is tested enough and are not fully proven to have an
impact on the expected outcomes and this makes it diﬃcult for FM to rely on these
systems. [21] Most facility managers are not early adopters, mostly because they want
to be sure that all the bugs are worked out of the new systems and that the systems
can deliver on their promises. However, there is no doubt that new smart technologies
will have a major impact on FM in the future, especially within the data-gathering
and data-analyzing technologies. [21] In all buildings there have been investments in
services and systems applied, and it is often regarded that these systems are fully
functional, but that has been proven to be wrong in many cases of existing buildings.
Buildings today are stuﬀed with sensors, but data from these sensors is not always
collected and utilised. However, the expected outcomes of using this data seem to
have potentials for optimising the FM business but also the whole organisation in the
building.
The Danish facility management network (DFM) has divided the FM area into some
categories: [21]
1. Portfolio management - Administration of buildings.
2. Building operations - Operations to make it useful for the occupants.
3. Asset management - Administration of assets in the building.
4. Space management - In other terms areal administration.
5. Organisations service - Administration services such as canteen, mail etc.
6. Management - The management of the facility management organisation.
DFM has evaluated the degree of the use of diﬀerent potentials in the facility manage-
ment areas in Denmark, i.e. how often are the digital technologies used compared to
the potential. The evaluation is based on a general perspective of the Danish industry
and the degree of the use of an area in respect to the potential use. [21] The potentials
will vary over time depending on what is on the market, but Figure 3.5 shows how
the market is today.
Page 25 of 110
==PAGE:42==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
Figure 3.5: Potentials and degree of implementation of digitisation areas within FM. [21]
The order of the digitisation areas of processes, physical facilities and virtual facilities
in Figure 3.5 is not random. The processes are e.g. the FM system that supports
the process of maintaining a ventilation system.
The signiﬁcant potentials lie in
the optimisation of the operation processes if the organisation is not aware of the
real status of the performance of the systems.
[102] Many cases show that a lot
of existing BMS systems are not conﬁgured correctly. During the project, examples
have been presented during conversations and industry talks, such as fans rotating the
wrong way, so air was supplied in kitchen extractor hoods, ventilation systems cooling
during winter and heating during summer and even air terminals not connected to
any duct system. If the processes are not in place for the systems in the buildings,
then adding more smart technologies such as personal user controls will not have
any profound eﬀects and will not help FM to meet any organisational goals. [102]
However, in most cases sensors were the key to ﬁnd out that the BMS systems were
not fully functional. A step further down in Figure 3.5 are the pie charts. These
charts represent the evaluation of the FM areas and how the implementation of these
are utilised compared to the potential values. Figure 3.5 shows that there is a lot
of potential value in the area of sensor systems to optimise systems. Information
systems such as asset management is also one of the areas that has a huge potential
of being optimised and where there is a market that can be improved. Related to
smart technologies and smart buildings, it would be easier to consider and evaluate
the reality of the implementation of smart in buildings if the industry agreed on a
well-deﬁned characterisation and framework of a smart building.
Page 26 of 110
==PAGE:43==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
3.4
Survey Deﬁnitions of a Smart Building
The previous research shows that stakeholders in the industry have diﬀerent expec-
tations for the potentials of smart buildings. The study of smart building deﬁnitions
also showed many diﬀerent aspects, and many of these often reﬂected the values of
the company or organisation. During the project, a survey was conducted to gather
insights into how specialists personally deﬁne a smart building. A total of 97 answers
was collected mostly from the ﬁeld of architecture and engineering. The distribution
of professional areas in the survey is shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: The distribution of professional backgrounds in the survey. (Source: author)
The full data set from the survey is attached in Appendix B - Smart Building Deﬁni-
tions from Survey. A few deﬁnitions from the survey are highlighted in the following:
1. "Smart building is a "living” building that responsively reacts to behav-
ior and movement patterns of its occupants. The communication between the
building and the occupant is instant (Real-time). The data gathered by the
smart building is constantly used to improve its processes, performance, and
environmental impact." (Architect)
2. “A smart building incorporates technology from the very beginning of
the design phase through the life and end of life of the building. The
technology used should reduce emissions, reduce the need for constant mainte-
nance, and improve the experience for people in the building.” (Engineer)
3. "Smart Building is the evolution of our buildings to incorporate the technology
which allows us to connect building operations to control the experience
to the betterment of owners, managers occupants, and (eventually)
communities. To be "smart," a building must include not only the real-time
Page 27 of 110
==PAGE:44==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
controls for managing the physical building (and its grounds) but also for im-
proving the occupants’ experience. As smart building technology evolves
further, this will include a "smart connection" to its wider community;
while a smart building is now but a single node, in the future it will be an end-
point also connected to the further services of a smart city, town or county."
(Smart Building Expert)
4. "A smart building responds to various needs of occupants, operators, and clients
in a way that is mutually beneﬁcial and acceptable to all as per the needs and
wants of the involved parties. It is done using the past experiences (Data col-
lected), present situations(Current conditions) and future goals (Approxi-
mated forecast). A smart building should use its current resources to optimum
use and let the operators and client know of its limits. So, that when time needs
the building can evolve or grow like the intelligence of a human. A
smart building should be able to interact with others of its kind and share
knowledge (data and KPIs) and make better decisions as an individual and
as group(smart cities), just like humans. I see smart buildings as a Living
Machine that might not be smart from the beginning but strives to grow to
contribute to this sustainable world using its knowledge." Engineer
The deﬁnitions from the survey shows diﬀerent nuances of a smart building. The
analysis of the deﬁnitions resulted in Figure 3.8 with trends that designers expect
in smart buildings. Along with the survey results from Verdantix about real estate
and FM in Figure 3.7, a picture of the key stakeholders’ visions in the smart building
industry is represented.
Figure 3.7: Important factors shaping the real estate and facility management strategies in
the future. [107]
Page 28 of 110
==PAGE:45==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
Figure 3.8: Important factors shaping designers’ visions of a smart building based on
survey results in Appendix B. (Source: author)
The results show that designers have a signiﬁcant focus on automation and the imple-
mentation of IoT devices to improve indoor air quality, reduce energy consumption and
to interact with building occupants. Some also mention the connection to smart cities
and sustainability. Real estate is more focused on space utilisation than engineers,
but both industries acknowledge the importance of improving occupant well-being
and productivity. It is also interesting that the increased use of mobile applications
is becoming a vision from both industries. Thus a vision of building occupants being
more in control of their environment seems to emerge.
3.5
Moving Towards a Smart Building Deﬁnition
The research has formed a picture of how the industry deﬁnes smart buildings. From
a holistic point of view is the framework of a smart building based on its ability
to operate intelligently, adapting, learning, connecting, communicating and be sus-
tainable. An important factor is adaptability and this often requires the use of IoT
sensors acting with the building systems combined with an external control signal.
More important than ever is to future proof buildings. The building systems need to
be adaptable so they can accommodate e.g. new set points and it may even mean
smart city integration.
Smart is about creating outcomes and technology is a means to produce the outcomes
in these potentially highly eﬃcient buildings. Trends show that the focus is on how
the building occupants are experiencing the building. User-centric innovation is facil-
itated when humans, technology and business come together as illustrated in Figure
3.9. [41] The occupants deﬁne what they want, thus what is desirable to have in
the building which is why Ramboll uses the strategy of mapping a user journey in
the building. The FM and designers have to ﬁnd out what is feasible to design for.
However, the business economy needs to be part of the equation to make sure that
the solutions are viable to obtain the expected return of investment.
Page 29 of 110
==PAGE:46==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
Figure 3.9: A human centred innovation achieved by merging occupant needs, feasible
technology and economic viability. [41]
The research of the concept and expectations of smart buildings has lead the proposal
of a smart building deﬁnition.
“A smart building is a building that incorporates data collection, analysis, asset
control, and action to respond to deﬁned goals for a particular outcome. It
supports the potentials of emerging cutting-edge digital technologies to promote
an user-centric, sustainable, and continuously adaptable design for an
optimised high performance with a responsive environment that is attractive
and stimulating for the occupants.”
The deﬁnition is a further development of the deﬁnition from Ramboll supporting the
key trends and expectations of the stakeholders found in this research. The goal with
the proposed deﬁnition is to spur a discussion of a single standard deﬁnition of a smart
building sharing the expectations of all the stakeholders in the building industry.
Page 30 of 110
==PAGE:47==
Key Stakeholders in the Smart Building Industry
“I think that is a very solid deﬁnition. I think it reﬂects the current focus on
the experience in the building.”
—Casey Talon,
Research Director Energy at Navigant Research
‘Coming up with a single deﬁnition is challenging given the range of buildings
that are touted as ’smart’ and the fast changing market. I think your deﬁnition
covers many of the key elements.”
—Susan Clarke,
Principal Analyst at Verdantix
‘Your deﬁnition sounds very reasonable.”
—John Hatcher,
Editor of Smart Buildings Magazine at Turret Group
‘I think your deﬁnition is very good”
—Arto Kiviniemi,
Honorary Research Senior Fellow at University of Liverpool
Page 31 of 110
==PAGE:48==
Smart Building Credit Scores
4
 Smart Building Credit Scores
The approach to sustainability until about the 1980s can be characterised as intuitive
and highly inspired with thoughts of was the right thing to do to improve the quality
of people’s lives and the environment. The industry was inspired by people such as
Rachel Carson’s writing Silent Spring. [10] After the turn of the millennium in 1980,
metric systems started to be introduced such as BREEAM and LEED which were
measuring building performance and environmental performance. Thus this period
can be characterised as quantiﬁable. Also, documents like Our Common Future by
the World Commission on Environment and Development was published and it put
more focus on current issues of environment and with the purpose of developing and
formulate innovative and realistic action proposals to deal with environmental issues.
In recent years, the era of sustainability has evolved to be more holistic. Initiatives
and global goals such as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals and the
Paris Agreement have based on a more holistic view in the way that it was not just
an environmental view but a socio-economic view at the same time. Also systems
like WELL were introduced which looks at how people feel in buildings, but also the
standard of the Living Building Challenge which is also a holistic way of looking at
sustainability to visualise the ideal for the building industry. [42] The evolution shows
that sustainability has become a broader subject with more holistic approaches and
is illustrated in Figure 4.1
Figure 4.1: The evolution of sustainability. (Source: author)
Sustainability initiatives and approaches have aﬀected the mentality shaping buildings
over the past decades, and metric systems and labelling schemes have been tools to
create a pull from the market. [94] Sustainability certiﬁcates such as BREEAM and
LEED have set to push the boundaries of the sustainability in buildings, thus with the
desire to reduce the environmental footprint of buildings. Designers have used their
Page 32 of 110
==PAGE:49==
Smart Building Credit Scores
ability to design for these energy labelling schemes and sustainability certiﬁcates to
help them win business. [45] The metric systems have been spread widely in the world
and it has been proven that environmentally friendly and energy eﬃcient practices
stimulate a market demand thus are good for business to e.g. increase rents or sale
prices. [1] The market of smart buildings can possibly change the behaviour of people
as seen with sustainability. Smart building metric systems would potentially vali-
date the expected outcomes of smart buildings, thus it would be possible to stimulate
the market to bring more focus, more clarity and more competition regarding smart
buildings. [90] Currently existing smart building metric systems such as the Building
Intelligence Quotient is available for assessing intelligent and smart buildings. Other
initiatives such as the Smart Readiness Indicator by the European Commission Ser-
vices has been established to evaluate the smartness of buildings. During the survey
of the 97 industry specialists, it was also asked if certiﬁcations or metric systems were
needed for assessing smart building, as there is for green buildings.
Figure 4.2: Important factors shaping designers’ strategies in the future. (Source: author)
The survey results are shown in Figure 4.2 and it indicates, that designers would
like a certiﬁcation or a metric system for a smart building. The reason could be to
have a better framework for describing a smart building so it will be easier to identify
and design for it. However, some of the answers also highlighted that each building
is diﬀerent and guidelines on the level of instrumentation and the costs beneﬁt for
implementation would be far more beneﬁcial than a deﬁned ’one size ﬁts all’ certiﬁ-
cation. The goal with a certiﬁcation or a metric system is to have a transparent and
open building enabled rating for all buildings, which would be useful in the evalua-
tion of smart buildings but also used as benchmarks. [12] Regarding the evaluation
of smart it is worthwhile to mention the potentials discussed earlier in the chapter
about facility management. Credit scores can be a tool to deﬁne the smart building in
a more structured way to make it possible to evaluate the smartness within diﬀerent
areas, thus a way to identify the potentials.
Page 33 of 110
==PAGE:50==
Smart Building Credit Scores
This chapter will give insight in the Building Intelligence Quotient and the Smart
Readiness Indicator, related to the ventilation discipline. The purpose is to highlight
how each metric system evaluates a smart ventilation system.
4.1
Building Intelligence Quotient
The Building intelligence Quotient (BiQ) was proposed and developed by the Con-
tinental Automated Buildings Association (CABA). It is an assessment tool to help
the decision-making process by identifying potentials in facility operation areas to
make the building smarter by assessing the building’s ability to support intelligent
technologies. [49] The rating tool is a list of 315 "Yes/No" questions that result in a
report with benchmark rating which has the purpose of giving FM insights in where
potentials are in improving the building systems. The BiQ rating tool has three key
functions: [17]:
1. a means to evaluate and measure the ‘value’ of intelligent building performance.
2. a design guide for the integration of building intelligence in new building projects.
3. a building automation retroﬁt action plan tool.
The BiQ scores buildings like the certiﬁcations from BREEAM and LEED and the
diﬀerent ratings are silver, gold and platinum. [17] Concerning HVAC are some of the
points that BiQ ﬁnd intelligent and are grading shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Intelligent building criteria for HVAC with BiQ.
Page 34 of 110
==PAGE:51==
Smart Building Credit Scores
Figure 4.3 shows that BiQ evaluates HVAC systems based on the ability to monitor
the operational performance with sensors including adaptability with automatic ad-
justments that are connected with other systems and can respond to user interactions.
4.2
Smart Readiness Indicator
In 2018 a revised Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (EPBD) was published
and one of the main focus areas was to improve the realisation of the potential of
Smart Ready Technologies (SRT) in the building industry. [100] Thus a study team
was assigned in 2017 before the new EPBD was published, consisting of the compa-
nies VITO, Waide Strategic Eﬃciency, Ecofys and OFFIS under the supervision of
the European Union. [100] The team had the task of developing a Smart Readiness
Indicator (SRI) for rating the smart readiness of buildings. The ﬁrst technical study
ﬁnished in August 2018, and the ﬁnal report and end of the project is expected to
be done in July 2020. [100] The ﬁrst technical report is using the following deﬁnition
describing the smartness of a building.
“Smartness of a building refers to the ability of a building or its systems to sense, inter-
pret, communicate and actively respond in an eﬃcient manner to changing conditions
in relation the operation of technical building systems or the external environment
(including energy grids) and to demands from building occupants.” [100]
The deﬁnition supports the three mean readiness areas that the SRI is focusing on
which is shown in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Three key areas of smart readiness in buildings proposed in SRI. [100]
The SRI is considering ten main domains shown in Figure 4.5 of which has in total
112 services. [100]
Figure 4.5: Ten domains structuring the SRI catalogue. [100]
Page 35 of 110
==PAGE:52==
Smart Building Credit Scores
For every service, there is a functionality level ranging from level 0 to 4. Each level of
functionality brings more complexity to the systems. Beneﬁts are measured in eight
impact criteria, which are shown in Figure 4.6. A higher functionality level is assumed
to provide more beneﬁcial impacts to the occupants or the grid and energy.
Figure 4.6: Eight impact scores in the SRI, example from "cooling control - demand side".
[101]
Figure 4.7 illustrates the smart ready services with the highest functionality lev-
els related to ventilation systems. The main services that SRI evaluates regarding
ventilation systems are about airﬂow control, air temperature control and reporting
feedback information. At the highest functionality levels are monitoring of indoor air
quality, demand-based temperature and airﬂow control including automatic air ﬂow
or pressure control.
Figure 4.7: Smart ventilation services at the highest functionality level. [100]
The next chapters will look into two case studies of the Crystal Building in London
and The Edge in Amsterdam. The case studies will evaluate the smart features im-
plemented in the buildings regarding ventilation and compare it to the smart services
proposed in the SRI and BiQ.
Page 36 of 110
==PAGE:53==
Smart Building Credit Scores
4.3
Case study 1: The Crystal Building, London
The Crystal Building in London was designed by Siemens and opened in 2012. The
building was set to be a lighthouse example that would inspire other people to follow
the initiatives implemented in the building and would be able to scale this up on
a bigger scale.
[51] Half of the building is being used as an exhibition of smart
technologies implemented in the building including initiatives that Siemens is focusing
on regarding urban sustainability and smart technologies. [51]
The other half of the building is used for oﬃce space for Siemens’ global engineering.
The building is one of the most sustainable buildings in the world and has the highest
rates in the rating scores such as BREEAM Outstanding and LEED Platinum. [86]
Figure 4.8 shows the ratings in the diﬀerent categories and it shows that the building
scores low in the category of materials and resources in both certiﬁcates, but scores
high in the rest of the categories.
Figure 4.8: The Crystal Building LEED and BREEAM ratings. [86]
The building is collecting over 3500 data points from IoT sensors and devices including
data from an outdoor weather station on the building. [51] The indoor and outdoor
conditions are automatically monitored by the IoT sensors and the ventilation systems
are automatically adjusted to the most energy-eﬃcient ventilation mode for each part
of the building. [72] It also has the possibility to have natural ventilation by opening
windows on the facade when seasonally possible.
Other sensors in the building detect where people are, to direct the right amount of
fresh air onto their space. At least 12 litres of air are supplied per person per second
which is supplied either by natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation. [72] The
half of the building where oﬃces are located is divided into zones, each equipped with
sensors that detect how many people are in a room based on how much carbon dioxide
is being breathed out. This allows the system to avoid running fans in empty rooms
Page 37 of 110
==PAGE:54==
Smart Building Credit Scores
thus minimising the energy usage. Regarding energy performance monitoring is the
building able to measure energy consumption, thus enables consumption analyses and
comparison of its performance against other buildings across the world. [51]
The BMS is connected to the cloud thus allowing the building to be managed re-
motely from anywhere in the world. [72] The BMS monitors and adjust conditions
across the building and the information is shared on screens for the occupants and
the FM team. This allows the FM to identify improvement potentials and it increases
the transparency of the building performance.
All mechanical systems are linked to the BMS including heating, cooling and ventila-
tion, lights and blinds, sensors that detect occupancy levels and safety features. [72]
With information from these systems, the BMS automatically runs at peak eﬃciency,
but still allows individuals to set personal controls that adapt spaces to their prefer-
ences. [72]
Regarding the intelligent building score BiQ, is the Crystal able to comply with all
the aspects that are expected for an intelligent building as shown in Figure 4.3. Re-
garding the SRI is the Crystal also able to comply with the highest functionality levels
regarding smart ventilation as shown in Figure 4.7.
4.4
Case study 2: The Edge, Amsterdam
The Edge in Amsterdam was conceived by the developer OVG Real Estate in partner-
ship with Deloitte which is currently the primary tenant of the building. The building
opened in 2015 and received global recognition of being the smartest building in the
world. [52] The unique approach with designing this building was that the tenant,
Deloitte, was involved in the design process. The key to success for the building was
that Deloitte’s general philosophy with the Edge was that anything with a return on
investment of less than 10 years is worth a try. [76] Schneider Electric was able to
partner directly with the property developer OVG Real Estate, the primary tenant
Deloitte including the system integrator and other essential participants from the early
stages of the project. This ensured that the newest building automation technology
was available and could be integrated with all the emerging new technology in The
Edge. [84]
There are 28.000 sensors in the Edge. [76]. Sensors are implemented in the building
to monitor levels of CO2, and this information is used to automatically adjust the
intelligent BMS regarding the HVAC settings. Sensors are also used to measure the
occupancy of workstations. In the LED panels are sensors installed to measure mo-
Page 38 of 110
==PAGE:55==
Smart Building Credit Scores
tion, light, temperature, humidity, and air quality, all of which will be monitored by
FM. [76]
From the data are dashboards developed to allow FM to review and analyse the per-
formance, thus making information-based decisions to enhance building operations
and improve the experience of occupants. [52] The building operations are connected
to the cloud thus FM can manage building operations and energy use on-site or re-
motely to maintain optimal comfort for occupants. [84]
Occupants in the building can interact with the building systems via a smartphone
app. [76] No employee working in the oﬃce building has a ﬁxed desk, thus the smart-
phone app is a tool to assist the employee to ﬁnd an empty desk. However, the app
also knows the individual preferences of the employee, thus it will try to ﬁnd a spot
that ﬁts the preferences, but it also adjusts the local environment through tempera-
ture to adjust to the individual preferences. [76]
What is interesting with the Edge compared to the Crystal building is the focus on
agile workforces and space optimisation as the report from Verdantix also predicts as
being a focus point for smart buildings. [13] Also digital signage and employees facing
mobile apps are seen in both buildings including the intelligent building management
systems that are connected to the cloud allowing FM to control the systems remotely.
For both buildings are sensors a major part of the smart technologies to monitor the
current performance and local environment.
Page 39 of 110
==PAGE:56==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
5
 Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
The Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) has organised the building life-cycle
into some key stages of brief, designing, constructing, maintaining and operating,
which is shown in Figure 5.1. [79] Shortly presented is there a brief phase of where
the idea of a building comes up, a design phase where designers are conceding and
developing it, a construction phase where a contractor realises it, and then there is
the operation phase.
Figure 5.1: The life-cycle phases of a building. [79]
Collaboration between the stakeholders in a building project is essential to develop
a smart building with integrated systems that can adapt to the occupants’ needs.
However, this is not achievable easily with the current process of designing buildings,
because there are gaps in the communication and handover of information in the var-
ious phases. The current traditional method is not designed much for communication
and collaboration. It is more dependent on the contractual agreements. When the
construction phase is over, it is a tendency to accept that the evolution of the building
is done, but in reality, it is only the beginning, and that is why smart technologies
need to be thought of from the beginning. The smart building will only be able to
deliver the expected outcomes and beneﬁts that the market promises if the building
is speciﬁed, procured and commissioned properly. [52]
Chapter 2: Introduction to a Smart Building and Chapter 3: Key Stakeholders in the
Smart Building Industry served the purpose of understanding the market of smart
buildings, with an analysis of the current trends which is essential to do before launch-
ing a procurement process. [80] This chapter is conducted by a comprehensive pre-
sentation of the challenges and potentials related to the collaboration process between
stakeholders within the industry. The focus on the collaboration processes aims to
bring FM forward as a key player along the parties involved during the procurement
process. Following the understanding of the issues existing in the industry, a strat-
egy will be proposed to understand better the way in which the integration of key
stakeholders will be a driver to create smart buildings.
Page 40 of 110
==PAGE:57==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
5.1
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
The building owners and clients have the potential of taking the lead in creating a
valuable development of smart buildings and start demanding the integration of, e.g.
digital tools and ICT agreements with more focus on the operation phase for better
outcomes and smarter services. Instead of focusing on the short-term, the operation
and maintenance stages should be seen from the perspective of long-term planning
and therefore it can be argued that it is necessary to change the incentive structure in
the building value chain. Most building owners stand alone and isolated as the only
stakeholder with an obvious incentive to handle the operation in the design phase.
One of the issues is that the building owner has minimal opportunity to share the
necessary expenses with those who beneﬁt from the improvements. [68] In the case
with the Edge, the tenants partnered up with the building developer thus inﬂuenced
the design, but also shared the expenses for the implementation of innovative smart
solutions.
Figure 5.2: Proposal for a smart building procurement to incorporate sustainability and
smart in buildings with key stakeholders in mind. (Source: author)
The general purpose of a procurement process is to select the bidder that is best able
to deliver the services required by a client within the targeted budget. This often refers
to the capitalisation of the investment or the return on investment for real estate. [80]
A successful procurement process must include clear descriptions of the objectives
Page 41 of 110
==PAGE:58==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
and requirements from the client, only then other stakeholders will be able to design
for these. [80] During the conference "FM as digital change agent” the author of
this thesis a conversation was engaged with Flemming Bæk Engelhardt, CEO of the
real estate company Topdanmark Ejendom. The conversation had the topic of how
to incorporate sustainability and smart solutions in a building, and how to include
stakeholders collaboratively. The conversation resulted in the concept shown in Figure
5.2. Most companies in Denmark rent into buildings, and these companies start to
set requirements for building owners around their leases. The concept starts to create
a circle that starts with the needs of the tenants and occupants.
5.1.1
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
A clear vision with the concept of operations and expected outcomes from the building
has to be clearly stated by the client to create a smart building. In the planning
process of procurement, it is important to understand the objectives that reﬂect or
support the wider strategy of the organisation. [80] Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR) is about a company’s social responsibility towards e.g. environment, CO2 and
user comfort and this means that CSR is part of the company’s business strategy with
social initiatives that are to create social and economic value for customers, employees,
and potential shareholders. [78] This includes focusing on initiatives that contribute
to the social and environmental development of the society, including environment,
comfort, social conditions, and climate. The CSR is deﬁned by a client or company
and should be part of the requirements that are expected for the building.
Research shows that people today place far greater demands on a decent working
environment and sustainability when they want to be employed by a company. [40]
Furthermore are the expectations rising for smart technologies in the workplace. [13]
For organisations it is essential to focus on the workplaces if they want to keep on
attracting best of the talent. An attractive workplace environment may ultimately
mean whether a person will continue to work for a business. The increasing interest in
creating smart and sustainable buildings with a more people-centric focus rather than
engineering, construction, and technology-centric focus, has increased the awareness
of understanding the use of buildings in new and sustainable ways. [45]
5.1.2
Green Lease Guide (GLG)
The initiatives that are agreed in a dialogue with the customer must be written into
a lease contract. This means that a building must be able to explain into a lease
agreement, which inﬂuence it has on e.g. sustainability and user comfort or how it
supports the strategy of the organisation. This has to be documented to be able
to answer which initiatives have been agreed at a lease. It is important to specify
Page 42 of 110
==PAGE:59==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
the requirements with a clear language to make the evaluation easier when it comes
to contract management. For this, a Green Lease Guide (GLG) can be a help. A
GLG is a guide that gives instructions on how green initiatives are written into a
lease. A GLG can consist of checklists with strategies for green and social initiatives
that can be implemented in the building, and these actions are often referred to and
are consistent with sustainability standards such as LEED. [43] A section of the GLG
developed by Investas is shown in Figure 5.3 and this includes some of the aspects that
are expected in a smart building such as a comfortable, productive and healthy indoor
environment, but also things like reporting to tenants on base building environmental
performance. [43]
Figure 5.3: Checklist example from the Investas Green Lease Guide. [43]
The upcoming SRI proposes some smart ready technologies and services. These could
work as a guide for the clients to choose which services they want to have implemented
in their buildings, but the potential characteristics of a smart building from SRI could
also be implemented in a GLG.
5.1.3
Facility Management Technical Company (FMT)
To provide the solution as per the needs that have been written into a lease contract,
a Facilities Management Technical (FMT) company must provide a service and make
Page 43 of 110
==PAGE:60==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
these requirements a reality in the building. This means that a company rents into a
lease and professionals in an FMT discipline must ensure that the building can live
up to the lease contract. It is important that enough data is provided to allow any
FMT company to understand the requirements from the client. [80]
The operation of a building is, in general, a process of descriptions of what the client is
asking for and then agreements of the supplier that can provide services that support
the requirements. Facilities management works, amongst other tasks, with installa-
tions and measurements with consumption and optimisation to reduce energy con-
sumption in the building. About the reduction of energy consumption in a building,
it is worth mentioning Energy Service Companies (ESCO), which is a form of cooper-
ation to ensure the reduction of energy consumption. ESCO partners guarantee that
the agreed energy savings are real and can be documented, and compensate for the
lack of energy savings compared to the guaranteed energy savings. This has become
a trend in the green building industry and has become useful for securing building
performance and a step into green and smart buildings. [45] For this to happen, it is
important that designers and contractors give the building owner and FM the tools
and documentation to implement smart strategies. Smart building specialists and
FM need to be part of the early design stages to aﬀect the strategic development of
the smart building. [52] These stakeholders need to be able to inﬂuence the critical
requirements for the operation of the building. Thus a smart building strategy and a
brief containing these requirements must be incorporated early in the planning pro-
cess to design a smart building successfully. [52] The process does not end at the
handover stage of the building as the legacy must continue to create value in the
whole value chain. The speciﬁcations for the performance of the building changes,
user requirements evolve, even the purpose of the building might change. Smart vot-
ing with sensors will be important in this context to measure things like atmospheric
temperature and occupancy patterns.
5.1.4
Discounted Cashﬂow (DCF)
The main driver for real estate is the return on investment. Discounted cash ﬂow
(DCF) is where a real estate agent speaks about the capitalisation of the investment,
and this must yield a return before the building is considered attractive. If the ex-
pected return cannot be achieved, then it is not a good investment and the real estate
agent will not own the building. This goes back to the CSR, as the DCF focuses
on what interest ultimately comes to the real estate agent with the initiatives and
things that are implemented in the building, however, suppliers and tenants also have
a great inﬂuence on this. A solution might be viable with the right suppliers in the
procurement process.
Page 44 of 110
==PAGE:61==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
Smart buildings place greater demands on ﬂexibility and adaptability, the individual
user’s experience in the building and transparency of the building’s consumption. The
building industry could potentially be better able to deliver on the needs for smarter
buildings with the concept shown in Figure 5.2, and a possible extension of the Green
Lease Guide or a new Smart Lease Guide. Just as ESCO partners guarantee that
the agreed energy savings are real and can be documented, IoT sensors and the right
platforms for facility management will also be able to document and visualise that
the building’s behaviour and indoor air quality are guaranteed.
Going back to the life-cycle phases of a building shown in Figure 5.1 it is also important
to recognise the nature of changes in the requirements of the building through a
project. Dr. Arto Kiviniemi suggests in his Ph.D. thesis that the iterative nature of
the design process and the usually large number of changes during the process increase
the complexity of the problem. [53] He suggests that the process should be described
as partly parallel activities, including management of requirements through the whole
process and in several stages. The concept is shown in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Parallel process view of project requirements. [53]
His observation is that the current process could improve signiﬁcantly if the project
team could manage and update evolving requirements. [53] Requirements and expec-
tations in a project evolve during the design and construction phases and taking this
into account, the concept shown in Figure 5.2 evolves from a 2D graph to a 3D graph
including time, expectations and costs. As the expectations for the building evolve,
so do the costs. The concept is shown in Figure 5.5.
If the strings are tied together in this way and the building moves into this spiral,
then the strategy of the organisation for the client expressed in the CSR will be
integrated with the delivery that a facility manager must deliver. With the building
owner’s capitalisation of the investment as part of the spiral, the integration and
innovative initiatives proposed in the CSR can be obtained to a greater extent if
the right suppliers for FM are also involved. By including the key stakeholders in
the procurement process and considering the interaction between these, will give the
Page 45 of 110
==PAGE:62==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
Figure 5.5: Smart building procurement strategy in a spiral containing the aspects of
building life cycle and stakeholders involvement. (Source: author)
real estate the opportunity to get a better view of the return on investment, but
also provide the client a better chance to achieve the goals and requirements for the
building. The concept seems simple, but it contributes to an expanded dimension of
a holistic view of the challenges of procurement of smart and sustainable solutions
in buildings. The concept works for new buildings but also for retroﬁtting existing
buildings, which might be the smart buildings of tomorrow. In new buildings, it has to
be clear what the scope of the brief is. The big challenge is to avoid the temptation to
over-specify but also making sure that the buildings are not obsolete after handed over
to the operation phase. In existing buildings, the challenges are going to be integrating
new and old technology. In this case, the designers and facility management are not
starting with the same blank canvas as with new buildings, as there are constraints
with existing buildings that they need to work around. To properly pursue the concept
of procurement of smart solutions in buildings, the occupant experience of the building
should also be considered during the initial stages of new construction or major retroﬁt
projects. [57]
Page 46 of 110
==PAGE:63==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
5.2
Reaching Client Goals
When attending the Green Building Copenhagen 2018 conference, an conversation
was engaged with Michael H. Nielsen, Director of the Confederation of Danish In-
dustry (DI). The conversation was about the barriers in the phase shifts in the built
environment. He approved to include the following quote in this thesis:
“Data created in the planning and design phase of a building must be utilised
throughout the whole value chain so that it creates value both in the
construction phase and in the subsequent operational phase. Only then will we
get the full potential of digitisation and create value for the customers in the
building and construction sector!”
—Michael H. Nielsen, Director of the Confederation of Danish Industry (DI)
The building industry needs to understand the challenges with the loss of knowledge
and information in the handover of a project or when moving to a new phase. [20] One
of the problems is that during the design phase, designers ﬁll models with so much
information that is not relevant to the operating phase. [81] Equally important is to
understand the challenges of not specifying enough information about the operation
data in the design phase. Clements-Croome proposes that the causes of failure in
building design have been identiﬁed to be following: [15]
1. An inadequate brief and speciﬁcation
2. A genuine lack of data on certain aspects
3. Poor communication between the client and the design team, and between the
members of the design team themselves
4. Inadequate analysis or synthesis of solutions
5. Unpredictable quirks of human behaviour by users
6. Poor selection of equipment, inadequate installation or facilities management
Considering the principle “begin with the end in mind” seems to be an important
approach for building designs to achieve successful smart buildings. The concept is
shown in Figure 5.6. It will be diﬃcult, if not impossible, to reuse data from each
phase with inadequate briefs and poor communication between the stakeholders in-
volved. Generally, the problem is a lack of clear requirements for the implementation
of FM data requirements through the early stages of a project, and one of the biggest
challenges is to deﬁne the data requirements. [106] The role of FM could potentially
Page 47 of 110
==PAGE:64==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
be revolutionised in this era of smart buildings. During the project, it was common
to hear, at various smart building conferences, a saying that the typical good facility
manager is the one that the occupants never hear about, as this means the building
works as intended. In reality, the role of the FM is crucial for the operation phase
and it is expected that the future facility managers will be included in the early de-
sign process to participate with the design teams and represent the interests of the
building owner and future occupants. [69] If the traditional role of the FM of taking
over the already completed construction, continues then there is only a little range of
possibilities for the facility manager to inﬂuence the eﬃciency of the building. [69]
Figure 5.6: A concept of "begin with the end" to bring the facility manager in play.
(Source: author)
If the designers and building owners start thinking about operational data in the
design from the start, then it will be possible to bridge a connection between facility
management and smart buildings, thus enable design for the occupant experience.
This will be a step towards the era of smart buildings with a user-centric focus. [15]
Page 48 of 110
==PAGE:65==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
At the beginning of a project, the clients are doing contractual agreements with the
consultants, and these agreements could potentially include requirements for FM.
5.2.1
Description of Services - Building and Planning 2018
In the Danish building industry, many companies use the document template "De-
scription of Services - Building and Planning 2018" as an agreement between the
clients and designers to ensure services with the purpose of creating consistency in
the delivery of projects. The document is developed by the Danish Association of
Consulting Engineers (FRI) and the Danish Association of Architectural Firms. [97]
The document is not a mandatory requirement, but can optionally be used in building
projects as a requirement for diﬀerent services. The document works as a template
that follows the traditional phase model to deﬁne what services to expect in diﬀer-
ent phases. The industry has agreed to make this document, but it is published by
associations of designers which means that it is the designers that agree with other
designers in the industry, which services that can be delivered.
The Danish Association of Construction Clients (DACC) could potentially publish
a similar document template, so clients in the industry would start demanding to a
greater extent in what should be delivered in buildings. Today, it is limited what
clients set of requirements for the operation of the building in the digital delivery, so
the consultants often do not have rules or speciﬁc guidelines speciﬁed for the opera-
tion. [34] This means that it is typically up to the consultants to ﬁnd solutions for
the operation of the building. An essential system in buildings is the BMS, and the
conﬁguration of this system is highly dependent on the operation organisation and
function of the building. To get the operational needs in the project from the start,
the consultants need to engage in a dialogue with the client. However, if the case is
that the client who builds the building does not yet know the tenants for the building,
then it will be up to the designers’ good ideas for operation, and this will be reﬂected
in the design. In this case, it is only a hope that the operating organisation that
will house the building will be able to use it and that the building will support their
organisational strategy regarding CSR and user experience. In some cases, the oper-
ating organisation is known before the building is built and this gives the potential
to customise the design for their needs and expectations.
One of the challenges for the clients to demand new smart solutions for the opera-
tion of their buildings is that a lot of the new digital solutions are not tested enough
and the FM departments do not have the chance to approve the solutions before the
tender is delivered. [34] A section of the new "Description of Services - Building and
Planning 2018" related to the building operation phase is attached in Appendix C -
Page 49 of 110
==PAGE:66==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
Description of Services - Building and Planning. One of the sections in the document
is highlighted here, as it signiﬁcant for the operation of the building.
Section from Description of Services - Building and Planning 2018:
—1.1.2 Commissioning and operation[97]
The brief must contain the client’s speciﬁc requirements and wishes for the
commissioning of the building, testing of technical installations and
installations and operation.
This section is stating that the requirements of the operation of the building should be
considered early in the design process and the brief. This can potentially increase the
value creation for all stakeholders in the industry and be the key to design smarter
buildings.
In the future, revisions of the "Description of Services - Building and
Planning" or a potential document developed by DACC could include more focus on
smart solutions as part of the agreement.
5.2.2
Integrating Design and Operation Phase
Planning for FM data requirements in the design phase of a project can be diﬃcult for
the client as many stakeholders in the building industry often work in silos without
collaboration, thus the information is also stored in silos. This is often illustrated
as a gap between the communication between the client, consultants, and FM as
represented in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: The Communication gap between designers, clients and users. [95]
The loss of information and knowledge in the phase shifts argues for the importance
of thinking the operation data in the design phase. There are ICT deliveries such as
"Description of Services - Building and Planning" which starts to focus more on the
operation of buildings, but another initiative could be to look more into the FM data
Page 50 of 110
==PAGE:67==
Strategy for Smart Building Procurement
requirements that are speciﬁed in the FM databases and specify these in an ICT-
agreement. The problem is that the industry does not have accurate speciﬁcations
for information that has to be delivered for the operation and this makes it diﬃcult
for designers and contractors to provide useful information for the FM organisations.
[106] The gap between the operation phase and design phase of a building could
possibly be solved with the concept of implementing FM data requirements in an ICT
agreement. The concept is shown in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Proposal for implementing data for the operation phase in the ICT
requirements. (Source: author)
The concept is to specify in an ICT agreement the parameters that are needed for
the operation phase. The next chapter will focus on the areas of asset management
and sensor data to HVAC systems and which requirements could be included in an
ICT agreement. The reason why these two areas are chosen is based on the market
evaluation described earlier by DFM in Figure 3.5.
Page 51 of 110
==PAGE:68==
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
6
 Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
In general is the purpose of buildings to protect occupants from the outside weather
and so indoor climate comfort is one of the most important factors. IoT devices and
sensors can be a tool to collect data how occupants feel the best and to understand
the real complexity of indoor climate, but also be a tool to unlock a signiﬁcant po-
tential for commissioning buildings i.e. adjusting systems to work as intended. One
general problem in buildings today is the commissioning of the temperature that is
not working. [47] Povl Ole Fanger was a professor at The Technical University of
Denmark and he is well known for his research within the area of how the indoor cli-
mate aﬀects the building occupants. [26] Fanger’s Predicted Mean Votes (PMV) and
Predicted Percentage of Dissatisﬁed persons (PPD) model are equations that are ac-
cepted worldwide and are often used to evaluate the indoor climate of a building. [26]
Building occupants can be seen as a stochastic variable that disturbs the equations
and solutions predicted in the design for the indoor climate. This is because people are
complex and everybody has personal preferences and are aﬀected by diﬀerent things
such as outdoor weather. Equations and standards are static approaches to designing
for indoor climate, but research shows that a dynamic approach might be the way
to understand the true complexity of indoor climate comfort. [74] A combination
of qualitative inputs from occupants combined with quantitative measurements with
sensor data could be a way to contribute to equations to obtain the optimal indoor
climate. This potential is also identiﬁed in the SRI, see Figure 6.1, where user demand
in the air temperature is the highest functional level for room air temperature control.
[101]
Figure 6.1: Room air temperature control potentials by SRI. [101]
Designers are trying to create optimal solutions, but research shows that it is necessary
to give the occupants the possibility to adjust the indoor environment by themselves,
otherwise they will become unsatisﬁed with the building.
[6] Occupants are also
expected to become more aware of their local environment regarding indoor air quality
and thermal comfort. [105]
Page 52 of 110
==PAGE:69==
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
6.1
Sensors for HVAC systems
Many buildings today already have sensors installed, however, the data is in most
cases not utilised thus is not having any profound eﬀect on the building performance.
However, monitoring data gives many possibilities to get a view of how a system is
performing. Something as simple as the monitoring of temperature or ﬂow could be
of interest to evaluate the conﬁguration of the BMS. Figure 6.2 is a section from SRI
related to reporting information regarding indoor air quality. [101] Monitoring the
indoor air quality data has the potential of optimising well-being and health including
maintenance and fault prediction as it can work as a tool to evaluate the systems. The
FM organisation can get real-time actionable insight about the building and eventually
move from planned maintenance ratings to preventative maintenance ratings, but also
understand where things are happening with critical assets. This means to understand
where e.g. boilers, air conditioning units or fan coil units break down but also for
monitoring things like air ﬂows to track pressure gradient diﬀerences to catch a leak.
Figure 6.2: Indoor air quality feedback potentials by SRI. [101]
Sensors, in general, have a big potential of being an assistant tool to commissioning
buildings. One of the potentials with air quality sensors is to be able to guarantee
that the indoor climate is under certain contractual agreements i.e. through building
performance speciﬁcations. This would be a competitive edge and the industry would
be able to create more contracts in delivering a guaranteed indoor quality of certain
standards. Smart meters can be useful to monitor the energy consumption in e.g. on
ventilation units. It can be a tool to identify energy consumption that should not
occur. Newer existing buildings today have switches that can prolong the operation
of a ventilation unit for a speciﬁc zone. If one of these switches is broken, then it
can results in massive energy consumption, as the ventilation unit would run when it
should not. This could be detected by the FM without a smart meter, but sensors
create an excellent opportunity to identify problems like this. This example is just
about a switch, but in reality, there are many possible ways that an HVAC system
can be malfunctioning.
Page 53 of 110
==PAGE:70==
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
Smart occupancy sensors also have the potential to reduce energy consumption. If
systems are correctly managed, i.e. only ventilate when people are in the room, then
the energy consumption can be reduced for the building management. However, this
should not compromise other aspects such as air quality.
The market currently provides a variety of sensors and the accuracy of each product
can be discussed. [70] However, sensors are becoming cheaper and better. Figure 6.3
illustrates which sensors can be related to the HVAC system.
Figure 6.3: Sensors related to HVAC in a smart building. (Source: author)
With data from the building, it is possible to run comfort performance reports to
monitor key components in the HVAC system that may not be performing at 100
percent to enable a quick overview of the status. There are many possibilities to create
smarter HVAC system and sensors seem to be the ﬁrst step to get real insights in the
building performance. However, these sensors need to be designed for in the design
phases to create integrated systems and create relationships between the sensors and
systems.
Page 54 of 110
==PAGE:71==
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
6.1.1
IFC Sensor Design Parameters
Building Information Modelling (BIM) is today being applied to most building de-
signs in the Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) industry. Diﬀerent
software is used among disciplines in the AEC industry, so buildingSMART developed
a neutral exchange format called IFC to enable sharing of information regardless of
the use of software applications. [9] The newest release from buildingSMART is called
IFC4 and this version supports several aspects of sensors. The IFC entity IfcSensor is
used to represent an IFC model object. An IfcSensor object is classiﬁed by assigning a
predeﬁned sensor type, which is provided by the enumeration IfcSensorTypeEnum. [8]
In total, 23 diﬀerent sensor types are included in the IfcSensorTypeEnum enumeration
as seen in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Predeﬁned sensor types in IFC4.0 i.e. attribute deﬁnitions provided by the
enumeration IfcSensorTypeEnum . [8]
Figure 6.4 shows that IFC4 primarily supports sensor types related to building services
monitoring activities. In addition to sensor types, further sensor information can be
mapped into the IFC object model, such as information about coverage area and
set points. Such information is mapped using the IFC concept of property sets for
objects as deﬁned in Figure 6.5 for sensors related to HVAC systems.
Some IFC
property sets apply to all IfcSensor objects such as Pset_SensorTypeCommon and
Pset_SensorPHistory, while more speciﬁc sensor information is only applicable to
speciﬁc sensor types.
Page 55 of 110
==PAGE:72==
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
Figure 6.5: Sensor types related to HVAC systems with speciﬁed Psets. [8]
The parameters should be speciﬁed from the beginning of a project in e.g. an ICT
contract with the help from a FM organisation.
There should be more focus on
creating these requirements as sensors are becoming an important part of collecting
data from buildings to improve the operation of buildings. Speciﬁcations of these
IFC entities and Psets would allow the designers to know that the building should be
designed for sensors and possible more integrated systems.
Page 56 of 110
==PAGE:73==
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
6.2
Smarter Asset Management
Understanding how to get the most value of an asset in a building is the key to smarter
asset management. When considering asset management, then asset knowledge and
asset information should be in focus. Typically in the industry is the asset infor-
mation pledged late in the process and this often leads to extra work for designers,
contractors, and FM to ﬁnd out what the assets are and how they are working in the
building. The plan is to start earlier, do it properly and make sure it is good quality
when the project is handed over. The planning has to be done in collaboration with
the FM organisation and it should be done from the beginning of a project.
Implementing a smart building strategy with the FM organisation in mind will give
the owner and FM organisation the potential to increase the value of their real estate
portfolios. [67] In relation to the evolution of the smart building concept, the focus has
evolved from energy eﬃciency to asset management and portfolio returns as illustrated
in Figure 6.6. [67] There has been a lot of focus on energy eﬃciency in buildings and
this focus has led to new ways of ﬁnding eﬃciency potentials with the use of e.g.
IoT and sensors. [67] The new focus is rather on the outcomes that a smart building
can deliver and new ways of making the building adaptable through smarter asset
management.
Figure 6.6: The evolution of smart buildings regarding asset management. [67]
It is necessary to plan for a smart building from the early beginning of a project and
there has to be a focus on the expected outcomes. An asset can be many things, it
can be a duct, air terminal or the whole building seen as an asset. The word asset
is an object of organisational value, thus asset management is primarily a task of
managing the objects of organisational value and this value has to be deﬁned. Assets
need to be used correctly if they should work as an objective to the organisational
value and by bringing asset management and information management together gives
the possibility to align the organisation goals to address the management strategies.
This forms the basis of a smart building strategy.
In the building industry, there is often confusion about which information or how data
should be structured to work for the operation phase. BIM stands originally for build-
Page 57 of 110
==PAGE:74==
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
ing information modelling. However, another perspective of BIM would be to call it
better information management to optimise decisions. Essentially is BIM all about
assets and it is about improving the communication and creating shared understand-
ing about the assets. BIM is a method to optimise information management and to
make sure that stakeholders are sharing the same information. It is the coordination
with the change control around an object that allows more eﬃciency. Typically the
virtual objects will conform to the requirements, and the physical objects will conform
to the virtual object and if these are conﬁgured correctly, it starts to give value to
the FM organisation. As part of a smart building strategy, it is necessary to think
about the objectives for the building assets i.e. what is it that the smart building
should do. Once objectives are deﬁned and designed then it is possible to think the
data prerequisites for sensor types.
6.3
Smart Buildings and BIM - The Digital Twin
BIM is usually perceived as a completely diﬀerent subject than smart. The building
industry is excellent in creating silos, and with BIM and smart it seems to be done
again. The two digital technologies have developed quite diﬀerently and at diﬀerent
rates. BIM has been around since the 1980’s [75], and on the other hand, the whole
business of smart has developed much more recently and much more rapidly.
Richard Saxon propose that digital information for buildings comes in seven dimen-
sions. [83] The ﬁrst three dimensions are related to architects and engineers to deﬁne
and classify objects. The fourth is generally allocating to time data, the ﬁfth to cost
data, six to operation and maintenance data all of which are fundamental parts of the
concept of BIM as shown in Figure 6.7. The new thing that comes along, when smart
is considered, is not just data about the building, but it is data from the building.
The seventh dimension is about getting a view of what the building asset is doing and
how it is working. This means that the ﬁrst six dimensions describe data about the
building whereas the seventh dimension is data from the building monitored through,
e.g. sensors and analytics which increasingly help to commission and run the building
asset. [83]
Smart technologies are eﬀectively capable of keeping the commissioning stage of the
building going continuously. When the building is handed over, usually the systems
have been tried out and tested to the degree that satisﬁes the requirements for the
handover, but with smart technology that feedback continues and the ability to adjust
the building is one of its signiﬁcant eﬀects. The reason why smart is not suﬃcient by
itself is that if an FM organisation wants to operate a building eﬃciently, then it needs
Page 58 of 110
==PAGE:75==
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
Figure 6.7: Illustration of the six dimensions of BIM. [4]
to know all about it. Using BIM gives the opportunity to use, e.g. augmented reality
or virtual reality to see through walls and ceilings or to ﬁnd the valve in an HVAC
system that’s giving trouble. Most fundamentally the model forms a gateway to all
of the smart systems. This integration of information is one of the most intriguing
possibilities. It allows visualising the as-built building virtually, while immediately
call up the operating ﬂowing data from the systems itself. All of this can be connected
through a BIM common data environment where data is maintained in a structured
data storage allowing easy data exchange between systems. [103] The live ﬂowing
information gives real-time insights in the building, and this data can be analysed to
get insights in not only how is this building performing regarding energy and CO2,
but also how densely occupied it is and how successful is it supporting the business
proposition of the occupier.
The phrase that is used by the industry to describe this is the digital twin. BIM and
smart by themselves are useful, but together it constitutes the most of the makings of
what it’s called the digital twin. [103], In other words, a virtual double of the physical
building to reﬂect both its design and its operational state as illustrated in Figure 6.8.
This is how the seventh dimension of BIM diﬀers from the ﬁrst six, as it enables the
integration of all the information ﬂows from the building and the static information
about how the building is made. The application of artiﬁcial intelligence starts to
inﬂuence the vision for smart buildings as well as it has for voice assistants in e.g.
smartphones. The industry has visions about a building that says hello to the oc-
cupant in the morning, knows where the person is and has to do, does most of the
adjustments that are required without human intervention. [44]
Page 59 of 110
==PAGE:76==
Smarter Ventilation with Sensors
Figure 6.8: The concept of the digital twin with building phases included. [16]
The idea of the digital twin is that not only how a building is designed and built is
linked together but also how it is maintained and operated. This means a way to
optimise the supply of the services that are invested in the facilities. Also to look at
how people react to the services and how they use them so that the FM organisation
can learn from the use of the facilities and services. The FM organisations can start
learning from the data to tune the buildings and create high performances. Other
industries such as jet engines or Formula One racing cars are working as they tune
while they are in use. They are continuously commissioned and improved based on
what is happening at the moment and to how the actual performance is. [71]
The continuously commissioning opens up completely diﬀerent ways of providing
things, as the FM organisation can benchmark the actual performance of the fa-
cility and how the services can be improved, thus it can be asked to guarantee the
performance of the building. This can be seen in relation to the ESCO partners, which
guarantee energy savings in buildings. The digital twin has the power to transform
the approach to build, operate and use the building as the organisation can move
to deliver outcomes. This means that the facility manager can provide actual per-
formances from the occupying organisation or actual performances from the facility.
The most fundamental part of the digital twin is that it takes data from the physi-
cal building and analyses this data with the virtual model of the building to create
actionable information for the physical building.
Page 60 of 110
==PAGE:77==
Discussion
7
 Discussion
The smart building deﬁnition proposed in this thesis is based on literature studies of
scientiﬁc papers of intelligent and smart buildings, white papers about smart buildings
from companies and organisations in the market, industry talks at relevant conferences
in Denmark and London in the project period, including interviews and responses of
professionals of the AECO industry. The opinions and deﬁnitions were combined into
one single deﬁnition to reﬂect the vision of smart buildings.
The industry presents a variety of smart building deﬁnitions and most of these def-
initions are aﬀected by the company’s or organisation’s values. The goal with the
proposed deﬁnition is to start a discussion of a single standard deﬁnition of a smart
building sharing the expectations of all the stakeholders in the building industry. The
deﬁnition could potentially be a starting point for creating a direction for the smart
building development.
The industry will move towards smarter and more intelligent buildings and as peoples’
personal lives start to draw parallels with their professional lives, then smart buildings
will be seen more often in the workplaces as it is with smart homes. Creating new
smarter buildings can be a competitive edge for companies to promote commercial
beneﬁts such as getting more money for their leases with high-performance solutions.
This has been seen in the case with the Edge in Amsterdam which is characterised
by the smartest building in the world. This has created a lot of attention to the de-
veloper including the tenants of Deloitte, who requested the implementation of smart
technologies. The smart technologies that are put into buildings such as IoT and
sensors are advancing rapidly and this is starting to have a signiﬁcant impact on the
building industry and especially on building services. While most buildings today do
not go under the deﬁnition of a smart building, they are generally smarter than they
were a couple of years ago, and research progressions in this area contribute to the
continuous evolution of smarter buildings supporting sustainability and occupants.
One viable part of the vision of smart building is that it has to collect data from the
building through e.g. IoT and sensors.
The building industry is emerging towards an era of user-centric buildings. One of
the challenges with user-centric buildings is to prove the value as it becomes diﬃcult
to quantify and measure occupant engagement, productivity and happiness compared
to environmental performance with energy measurements. A key to the success of
creating a user-centric building with smart technologies is to include a user input for
the design from the beginning of the project. However, the ﬁrst step would be to
Page 61 of 110
==PAGE:78==
Discussion
design for FM, as the potentials lie in making the processes of systems work properly.
The research indicates that to be competitive in the smart building industry it is
necessary to keep up with the technology developments and strive to future proof
buildings with the evolution of technology, thus understanding what is happening in
the markets. Equally important is to have a smart strategy to address the key needs
of the business and organisation. Having a mission is going to be the driver for innova-
tion, thus a smart building strategy has to be followed. However, it is also important
to emphasise that the initiatives of smart solutions need to come from the building
owner and client as seen in the case with Yum China. These stakeholders are the ones
who pay for the solutions and without the money to implement the smart solution
no smart building can be constructed. The key to success for the Edge building was
that Deloitte’s general philosophy was that anything with a return on investment of
less than 10 years is worth a try. [76]
Page 62 of 110
==PAGE:79==
Conclusion
8
 Conclusion
This thesis presented an in-depth and state-of-the-art literature review and market
research regarding the concept of a smart building, resulting in a deﬁnition character-
ising the value proposition and expectations from key stakeholders. A lack of clarity
of what constitutes a smart building within the building industry will create confusion
rather than a direction, as companies and organisations start to embed their values
in the deﬁnitions.
A smart building is designed to deliver enhanced performance in areas of user-centric,
sustainable, and continuously adaptable design and supports organisational goals.
The evolution of smart buildings indicates that buildings are becoming a space that
is responsive to the users to promote a stimulating and attractive environment. To do
this, implementation of emerging cutting edge technologies supporting data collection,
analysis, asset control, and action allow optimised high performance of the buildings.
The ﬁndings show that the smart building is about outcomes and not just applying
technology. Thus it is buildings that are designed and delivered around clients wants
and needs by people who understand when technology is appropriate and can build
and operate these buildings. The design process should incorporate FM, building
occupants and owners from the early beginning of the project to derive speciﬁc re-
quirements for the organisation and occupants of what will be of most value to them
in the operation phase. A concept for a smarter procurement is proposed in the thesis,
which ties the strings together for key stakeholders to enable the successful delivery
of a smart building. Smart buildings increase the complexity thus making a smarter
procurement more important.
Smart technologies are revolutionising the way buildings can adapt to and optimise
the way occupants work and live. The idea of smart technologies is to create a seamless
experience of the building. Sensors have been proven to be a smart technology that is
a necessary part of a smart building to get real-time insights into the actual building
performance.
Sensors for a smarter ventilation system have been proposed based
on frameworks of smart building metric systems as BiQ and SRI including the case
studies of the Crystal Building and the Edge. The IFC entities have been identiﬁed
with associated property sets to enable designers to include these in the building
design phases.
Page 63 of 110
==PAGE:80==
Conclusion
8.1
Further Work
During the research review as well during the creation of the project, topics were
encountered which were out of the scope for this thesis. The following areas could be
of interest for further studies and research:
1. What is the possibility to use datasets in the design phase from existing smart
buildings? At some points, designers will be able to learn from the data and
apply it to other buildings to design for more sustainable and smarter buildings.
This could be through a tool or a process to simulate the building before it is even
built. A combination with virtual reality and simulation would be an excellent
opportunity for the building occupants to experience the building before it is
created.
2. Why are building owners buying building systems instead of leasing them?
Hence, considering smart buildings as a service rather than a product. Me-
chanical and electrical systems have got a relatively short life compared to the
rest of the building. Often they become obsolete long before it stops working.
Instead of buying these systems, it could be considered to lease them. Lease
lifts, lease toilets, lease lighting and bring it all together and have them go back
into the circular economy. The maker taking them back to recapture the key
materials.
3. How can building owners and clients retroﬁt existing buildings to become smarter?
According to reports, 60 percent of today’s buildings will still exist in 2050, so
existing buildings need to form a big part of the business area for smart build-
ings. Many of the existing buildings will be the smart buildings of tomorrow. In
existing buildings, there is also a great opportunity to make a trial installation
in a small part of the building before the systems are rolled out to the rest of
the building.
Page 64 of 110
==PAGE:81==
References
References
[1] Aamidor, J. (2018). 5 trends helping drive smart building adoption. [Online].
Available:
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/trends-drive-
smart-building-adoption-grid-edge#gs.qrEANEE. [16-08-2018].
[2] Adio-Moses, D. (2016). Smart city strategy and sustainable development goals
for building construction framework in lagos. In 5th International Conference on
Infrastructure Development in Africa.
[3] Aryal, A., Anselmo, F., and Becerik-Gerber, B. (2018). Smart iot desk for per-
sonalizing indoor environmental conditions. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on the Internet of Things, pp. 1–6.
[4] BIM6D (2015).
Scope of services.
[Online]. Available: http://bim6d.es/en/
scope/. [01-01-2019].
[5] Brand, S. (1995). How Buildings Learn - What Happens after They’re Built (2
ed.). Penguin Books.
[6] Brixen,
P.
(2018).
Fremtidens
ventilation
bliver
individuel.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.byg.dtu.dk/nyheder/nyhed?id=15A04343-EDB7-
4FF7-A032-4447E2758B6B&fbclid=IwAR048gmS_VufPJpGNZOFUddSd_-XES0t-
Z7i6ZSCjQcBLTCl1MNedFxXdNs. [24-12-2018].
[7] Buckman, A., Mayﬁeld, M., and Beck, S. (2014). What is a smart building? Smart
and Sustainable Built Environment 4(2), 92–109.
[8] BuildingSMART (2016). Ifc4 add2 - addendum 2 [oﬃcial]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.buildingsmart-tech.org/ifc/IFC4/Add2/html/. [20-01-2019].
[9] BuildingSMART (2019).
Ifc introduction.
[Online]. Available:
https://
www.buildingsmart.org/about/what-is-openbim/ifc-introduction/. [20-01-
2019].
[10] Carson, R. (2002). Silent Spring, Volume Reprint of 1967 version. Houghton
Miﬄin Harcourt.
[11] Chernikov, A., Storm, L. and Hutchins, G. (2018). Co-creating a new architec-
ture. Regenerators 1, 2–9.
[12] Church, G. (2018). The challenges of smart building for ﬂexible workspaces. [On-
line]. Available: https://allwork.space/2018/08/the-challenges-of-smart-
buildings-for-flexible-workspaces/. [04-12-2018].
Page 65 of 110
==PAGE:82==
References
[13] Clarke, S. and R. D’Arjuzon (2018). Smart Building Technology Global Survey
2018: Facilities Optimization Management Brands. Verdantix.
[14] Clements-Croome, D. (2013).
Intelligent Buildings: Design Management and
Operation. ICE Publishing.
[15] Clements-Croome, D. (2018). The role of feedback in building design 1980–2018
and onwards. Building Services Engineering Research and Technology 40, 1–8.
[16] cobuilder (2018). The ‘digital twin’ – a bridge between the physical and the
digital world.
[Online]. Available:
https://cobuilder.com/en/the-digital-
twin-a-bridge-between-the-physical-and-the-digital-world/?fbclid=
IwAR3Fv2Hex-q_KNPmiCNtHrDUrXgM-lOzAVUHJyx8IkDtLF-UrfpWdwFkTyQ. [02-01-
2019].
[17] David, K. (2008). Caba unveils enhanced building intelligence quotient. [Online].
Available: http://www.automatedbuildings.com/news/sep08/articles/caba/
080819112002katz.htm. [02-01-2019].
[18] Derek, T., and Clements-Croome, D. (1997). What do we mean by intelligent
buildings? Automation in Construction 6, 395–400.
[19] Dewer, G., and Gann, D. (1994). Smart buildings. Facilities 12, 19–24.
[20] Eastman, C., Teicholz, P., Sacks, R., and Liston, K (2011). BIM Handbook: A
Guide to Building Information Modeling For Owners. Wiley.
[21] Ebbesen, P., Andersen, G., Melchiorsen, L., Thorn, T., Ramskov, K. and Muss-
mann, A. (2018).
Facility Management som digital forandringsagent - Hvad vi
mener, du skal vide om transformation af FM i en digital tid. Dansk Facilities
Management netværk.
[22] EuroACE (2018). EuroACE Position Paper: Smart Buildings: Energy Eﬃciency
First! EuroACE.
[23] European Commission (2018a).
About cordis.
[Online]. Available: https://
cordis.europa.eu/about/en. [02-01-2018].
[24] European Commission (2018b).
What is horizon 2020?
[Online]. Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/what-horizon-2020. [19-
12-2018].
[25] Fabi, V., Andersen, R., Corgnati, S., and Olesen, B. (2012). Occupants’ window
opening behaviour: A literature review of factors inﬂuencing occupant behaviour
and models. In Building and Environment 58, pp. 188–189.
Page 66 of 110
==PAGE:83==
References
[26] Fanger, P. (1967). Calculation of thermal comfort: Introduction of a basic comfort
equation. In ASHRAE Transactions 73(2):III.4.1.
[27] Fedrizzi, R. (2017). Riding the second wave: From environmental sustainability
to human sustainability. [Online]. Available: https://www.wellcertified.com/
en/articles/riding-second-wave-environmental-sustainability-human-
sustainability. [09-01-2019].
[28] Forbes Insights (2018). The smart way to smart cities begins with buildings.
[Online]. Available: https://www.forbes.com/sites/insights-inteliot/2018/
10/24/smart-buildings-forming-the-foundation-of-smart-cities/. [14-12-
2018].
[29] Ghaﬀarianhoseini, A., AlWaer, H., Clements-Croome, D., et al. (2015). What
is an intelligent building? analysis of recent interpretations from an international
perspective. Architectural Science Review 5, 1–17.
[30] Ghaﬀarianhoseini, A., AlWaer, H., Clements-Croome, D., et al. (2017). Intelli-
gent or smart cities and buildings: a critical exposition and a way forward. Intelli-
gent Buildings International 10(2), 122–129.
[31] Google (2018).
Google trends, smart building vs. smart city.
[Online].
Available:
https://trends.google.dk/trends/explore?date=all&q=smart%
20building,Smart%20City. [04-12-2018].
[32] Groote, M., Volt, J., and Bean, F. (2017a). Is Europe ready for the Smart Building
Revolution? Buildings Performance Institute Europe (BPIE).
[33] Groote, M., Volt, J., and Bean, F. (2017b).
Smart buildings decoded.
[On-
line]. Available: http://bpie.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/PAPER-Smart-
buildings-decoded_05.pdf. [03-09-2018].
[34] Gullberg, D. (2018).
Digital aﬂevering, byggeri – hvad tænker du, når du
læser det?
[Online]. Available:
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/digital-
aflevering-byggeri-hvad-t%C3%A6nker-du-n%C3%A5r-l%C3%A6ser-det-
gullberg/. [06-01-2018].
[35] Guthrie, C. (2013). Smart technology and the moral life. Ethics & Behavior 23,
324–337.
[36] Hano, A. (2018). The incremental value of smart buildings upon eﬀective rents
and transaction prices. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Page 67 of 110
==PAGE:84==
References
[37] Hatcher, J. (2018).
Smart buildings show 2018.
[Online]. Available: https:
//www.smartbuildingsshow.com/. [09-01-2019].
[38] Honeywell (2015).
What is a smart building?
[Online]. Available:
https://www.honeywell.com/newsroom/news/2015/10/what-is-a-smart-
building-connected-buildings-honeywell. [09-01-2019].
[39] IBM (2018). Smarter planet. [Online]. Available: https://www.ibm.com/ibm/
history/ibm100/us/en/icons/smarterplanet/. [06-01-2018].
[40] Imperatori, B. (2017). Engagement and Disengagement at Work: What’s New,
pp. 5–18. Springer.
[41] Indo-German Smart Initiative (2017).
Integrated urban development and co-
production for indian cities. [Online]. Available: https://www.igsi.info/. [15-
01-2019].
[42] International Living Future Institute (2018). Imagine a building that answers
the question - what does good look like?
[Online]. Available: https://living-
future.org/lbc/basics/. [22-12-2018].
[43] Investas (2007). Green lease guide for commercial oﬃce tenants (2 ed.). Investas.
[44] ISSworldservicesTV (2017). How internet of things technology brings the work-
place into the future. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
_OD07apST-E. [05-01-2019].
[45] Jadhav, N. (2016). Green and Smart Building Trends., pp. 9–14. Springer Sin-
gapore.
[46] Janhunen, E. (2018). Real estate and construction sector investment logic on
smart buildings. Aalto University School of Engineering.
[47] Jassar, S., Liao, Z., and Zhao, L. (2009). Adaptive neuro-fuzzy based inferential
sensor model for estimating the average air temperature in space heating systems.
In Building and Environment 44, pp. 1609–1616.
[48] JLL
(2016).
A
surprising
way
to
cut
real
estate
costs.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.us.jll.com/en/trends-and-insights/workplace/a-
surprising-way-to-cut-real-estate-costs. [04-01-2018].
[49] Katz, D. and Keel, T. (2008). Caba’s intelligent building programs. In ACEEE
Summer Study on Energy Eﬃciency in Buildings.
Page 68 of 110
==PAGE:85==
References
[50] KGS Team (2016). Top 5 smart building inﬂuencers to follow. [Online]. Available:
https://www.kgsbuildings.com/blog/top-5-smart-building-influencers-
to-follow. [04-12-2018].
[51] Kiauk, J. (2016). The Crystal Exploring tomorrow’s cities today. Siemens AG.
[52] King, O. (2017).
Smart Working - Smart Buildings and the Future of Work.
UnWork.com Ltd.
[53] Kiviniemi, A. and Fischer, M. (2014). Requirements Management Interface to
Building Product Models. VTT Publications.
[54] KONE Corporation (2016). Kone joins forces with ibm for iot cloud services
and advanced analytics technologies. [Online]. Available: https://www.kone.com/
en/news-and-insights/releases/kone-joins-forces-with-ibm-for-iot-
cloud-services-and-advanced-analytics-technologies-2016-02-19.aspx.
[23-12-2018].
[55] Kumar, P., Skouloudis, A., Bell, M., et al. (2016). Real-time sensors for indoor air
monitoring and challenges ahead in deploying them to urban buildings. In Science
of The Total Environment, pp. 150–159.
[56] Lawson, H. (2018). Megatrends: Smart building technology. BSRIA 1, 27–30.
[57] Machinchich, T. (2018). The holistic view of a commercial building needs to
expand.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.navigantresearch.com/news-and-
views/the-holistic-view-of-a-commercial-building-needs-to-expand.
[02-01-2018].
[58] McCraven, M. (2017a).
Keeping up with the evolution of buildings part
2
–
buildings
of
today.
[Online].
Available:
https://blog.schneider-
electric.com/building-management/2017/06/21/keeping-evolution-
buildings-part-2-buildings-today/. [26-12-2018].
[59] McCraven, M. (2017b).
Keeping up with the evolution of buildings part
3 – buildings of the future.
[Online]. Available:
https://blog.schneider-
electric.com/building-management/2017/07/12/keeping-evolution-
buildings-part-3-buildings-future/. [26-12-2018].
[60] Memoori Smart Building Research (2015). Big Data for Smart Buildings 2015
to 2020". Memoori.
[61] Mills, S. (2018a).
Building smart and people-friendly.
[Online]. Available:
https://ramboll.com/ingenuity/building-smart-and-people-friendly. [02-
01-2018].
Page 69 of 110
==PAGE:86==
References
[62] Mills, S. (2018b).
Ctbuh 2018 international conference.
[Online]. Available:
http://global.ctbuh.org/resources/presentations/smart-buildings-as-
a-service-creating-adaptable-building-platforms.pdf. [14-12-2018].
[63] Mills, S. (2018c).
Smart buildings as a service – creating adaptable building
platforms. [Online]. Available: http://ctbuh2018.org/presentations/?paper_
id=265. [14-12-2018].
[64] Moseley, P. (2017). Eu support for innovation and market uptake in smart build-
ings under the horizon 2020 framework programme. Buildings 7(4), 3–12.
[65] Mosiman, C. (2018). Evaluating the Value of Intelligent Building Systems: a
Review and Case Study. Civil Engineering Graduate Theses & Dissertations.
[66] Murad, S., and Somerville, A. (2018). The rise of intelligent skyscrapers. [Online].
Available: https://ramboll.com/media/rgr/event-dubai. [02-01-2018].
[67] Navitas Capital (2018). Smart Buildings. Navitas Capital.
[68] Olesen, T., Larsen, M., Sørensen, K. and Fogemann, M. (2018).
Skyld
eller ansvar?
hvem er bannerfører for driftsøkonomien?
[Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.dk-gbc.dk/nyheder/seneste-nyt/building-green-messen-
i-koebenhavn-31-okt-1-nov-2018/. [02-01-2018].
[69] Pašek, J and Sojková, V. (2018). Facility management of smart buildings. Inter-
national Review of Applied Sciences and Engineering 9, 181–187.
[70] Petersen, J., Kristensen, J., Elarga, H., Andersen, R., and Midtstraum, A. (2018).
Accuracy and air temperature dependency of commercial low-cost ndir co2 sensors:
An experimental investigation. In Proceedings of Cobee2018, pp. 203–207.
[71] Phillips, M. (2017). How the digital twin will accelerate the fourth industrial rev-
olution. [Online]. Available: https://www.mclaren.com/appliedtechnologies/
lab/how-digital-twin-will-accelerate-fourth-industrial-revolution/.
[29-01-2019].
[72] Pires de Miranda, P., Loos, J., and Powell, M. (2014). The Crystal A landmark
building for Technology and Innovation. Booklink.
[73] Pjsankowska (2018). #14 what makes a smart city – european smart city charter
2017.
[Online]. Available: https://modelcityplus.com/2018/03/29/14-what-
makes-a-smart-city-european-smart-city-charter-2017/. [15-01-2019].
[74] Prado, A. and Joaquín, J. (2018).
Implementation of demand-driven HVAC
control based on personal comfort modeling. The Technical University of Denmark.
Page 70 of 110
==PAGE:87==
References
[75] Quirk, V. (2012). A brief history of bim. [Online]. Available: https://www.
archdaily.com/302490/a-brief-history-of-bim. [20-01-2019].
[76] Randall,
T.
(2015).
The
smartest
building
in
the
world.
[On-
line]. Available:
https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2015-the-edge-the-
worlds-greenest-building/. [01-01-2019].
[77] Realdania
(2017).
Nyt
samarbejde
mellem
innovationsfonden
og
real-
dania
skal
styrke
forskning
i
smart
buildings
og
smart
cities.
[On-
line]. Available:
https://realdania.dk/nyheder/seneste-nyt/2017/ti-nye-
erhvervsforskerstipendiater_07042017. [26-12-2018].
[78] Redlein, A. and Zobl, M. (2014). Contribution of facility management to sus-
tainability and coporate social responsibility. In ScieConf 2014.
[79] RIBA (2013). RIBA Plan of Work 2013 Overview. RIBA.
[80] RICS Facilities Management Professional Group Board (2018). Procurement of
facility management. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) and Inter-
national Facility Management Association (IFMA).
[81] Ridley, J. (2018). Digital twins are shaking the foundations of the property in-
dustry. [Online]. Available: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/digital-twins-
shaking-foundations-property-industry-joshua-ridley/. [06-01-2018].
[82] Roche, P. (2018).
Smart buildings.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.
hurleypalmerflatt.com/service/smart-buildings/. [18-12-2018].
[83] Saxon, R. (2018). Getting the dimensions of bim into focus. [Online]. Available:
http://www.bimplus.co.uk/people/getting-dimensions-bim-focus/. [01-01-
2019].
[84] Schneider Electric (2017).
Schneider electric helps make the edge “the
world’s most sustainable oﬃce building”. [Online]. Available: http://download.
schneider-electric.com/files?p_Doc_Ref=CSS-THE-EDGE-JUNE-15.
[02-01-
2019].
[85] Siemens (2013). Our Deﬁnition of a Smart Building. Siemens.
[86] Siemens (2016).
About the crystal.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.
thecrystal.org/about/. [23-12-2018].
[87] Sinclair, K. (2018). The future of building automation creating our new persona
"building emotion". [Online]. Available: https://ahr19.mapyourshow.com/7_0/
sessions/session-details.cfm?ScheduleID=131. [04-12-2018].
Page 71 of 110
==PAGE:88==
References
[88] Sinopoli, J. (2010). Smart Building Systems for Architects, Owners, and Builders.
Elsevier Inc.
[89] Skanska (2017).
Bygninger der kan tænke selv.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.skanska.dk/produkter-og-services/inspiration-og-
viden/artikler-til-inspiration/bygninger-der-kan-tanke-selv/.
[18-
12-2018].
[90] Smeenk, H. (2018). Smart buildings: Forming the foundation of smart cities.
[Online]. Available: http://www.smartbuildingsmagazine.com/features/the-
smart-way-to-smart-cities-begins-with-buildings. [14-12-2018].
[91] Smith, D., LaVelle, K., Lyons, M. and Silverstone, Y. (2016). Insights from the
accenture strategy 2016 u.s. college graduate employment study. Accenture 1, 2–6.
[92] State of Green (2015). Smart Buildings - Combining energy eﬃciency, ﬂexibility
and comfort, Volume 2. Think Denmark.
[93] Suhail, S. (2016).
Major takeaways from the 2017 intelligent buildings
conference.
[Online]. Available:
http://www.siebenenergy.com/blog/major-
takeaways-from-the-2017-intelligent-buildings-conference. [19-12-2018].
[94] Sürmeli-Anac, N., and Hermelink, A. (2018). The Smart Readiness Indicator: A
potential, forward-looking Energy Performance Certiﬁcate complement? Ecofys.
[95] Tang, L., Xia, L., Adkins, D. and Cheshmehzangi, A. (2013). Smart building
information modelling: The use of ann-cobie for hvac information capture and
exchanged. In CIB W78 2013: 30th International Conference Beijing.
[96] TeamCentral (2018).
Stanford aec global teamwork - central 2018 spring.
[Online]. Available: http://pbl.stanford.edu/AEC%20projects/Year%202017-
2018/Spring/Central%202018%20Spring.pdf. [04-12-2018].
[97] The Danish Association of Consulting Engineers and The Danish Association of
Architectural Firms (2018). Description of Services - Building and Planning 2018.
The Danish Association of Consulting Engineers and The Danish Association of
Architectural Firms.
[98] The World Bank (2018). Urban development. [Online]. Available: http://www.
worldbank.org/en/topic/urbandevelopment/overview. [03-09-2018].
[99] United Nations - Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs (2017).
World
population projected to reach 9.8 billion in 2050, and 11.2 billion in 2100. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/
world-population-prospects-2017.html. [19-08-2018].
Page 72 of 110
==PAGE:89==
References
[100] Verbeke S., Waide P., Bettgenhäuser K., Uslar M., Bogaert S. et al. (2018).
Support for setting up a Smart Readiness Indicator for buildings and related impact
assessment - Second progress report. VITO NV.
[101] VITO, Waide Strategic Eﬃciency, ECOFYS and OFFIS (2019).
Annex a -
service catalogue. [Online]. Available: https://smartreadinessindicator.eu/
1st-technical-study-outcome. [18-01-2019].
[102] Waide, P., Ure, J., Karagianni, N., Birling, G. and Bordass, B. (2014). The
scope for energy and CO2 savings in the EU through the use of building automation
technology. the European Copper Institute. Waide Strategic Eﬃciency Limited.
[103] Wewalaarachchi, B. and Cybernetic, E. (2018). Smart building opreations with
bim. In Autodesk University 2018, pp. 1–6.
[104] Wong, J., and Li, H. (2009). Development of intelligence analytic models for
integrated building management systems (ibms) in intelligent buildings. Intelligent
Buildings International 1(1), 5–22.
[105] World Green Building Council (2014). Health, Wellbeing & Productivity in Of-
ﬁces - The next chapter for green building. The World Green Building Council.
[106] Yalcinkaya, M. and Singh, V. (2014).
Building information modeling (bim)
for facilities management – literature review and future needs. Fukuda, S. et al.
(Eds), IFIP International Federation for Information Processing, PLM 2014, IFIP
AICT volume 442, 1–10.
[107] Yate, I. (2017). Global Real Estate, Energy & Facilities Survey 2017: Budgets,
Priorities & Tech Preferences. Verdantix.
[108] Yum China Holdings (2018).
New yum china building opens in shang-
hai.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/new-
yum-china-building-opens-in-shanghai-300573113.html. [14-12-2018].
[109] Zhao, W., Luo, X., Liu, H., Hua, K., and Luo, C. (2017). Scientiﬁc programming
towards a smart world. Scientiﬁc Programming 2017, 1–2.
Page 73 of 110
==PAGE:90==
Appendices
Appendices
Page 74 of 110
==PAGE:91==
Appendices
Appendix A - Project Management
A key to success is planning and management of time during the project period.
The ﬁnal project schedule is attached in this Appendix. The project schedule was
conducted from the beginning and was updated during the project.
Page 75 of 110
==PAGE:92==
Appendices
Page 76 of 110
==PAGE:93==
Appendices
Appendix B - Smart Building Deﬁnitions from Survey
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
Operational and energy eﬃciency focus leverag-
ing data analytics across multiple systems (eg
HVAC, lighting, and access controls)
Yes
Analyst
Consulting
A Smart building as the name implies is a space
which shows signs of intelligence.
It doesn’t
necessarily have to interact with occupants. It
is enough if a smart building resolves problems
by it-self on a daily basis (for example: mi-
croclimate, waste, temperature, security, power
use etc.). It gives an impression of existing con-
sciousness. If not of the building itself then at
least of the building’s designer.
Yes
Architect
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 77 of 110
==PAGE:94==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
First I would consider building it "smart": a
smart building should not contain habitation
for a single class, but should be able to provide
shelter for a large variety of (though not all)
people. Both luxury and simplicity should be
found, in varying degrees, across the housing of
the building’s envelope, since there is no stan-
dard family or individual. So, design for variety
using an array elements, do not design for no-
body in particular. Also, a smart building is
designed for change, because otherwise it will
have to be deconstructed or heavily altered dur-
ing its lifespan. To me, a smart building is seen
as one that provides it’s users with information
and is able to react when problems or changes
occur.
Concerning the information provided,
we should not hide water, heating and elec-
tricity meters, but explicitly show the measure-
ments to the inhabitants. "Wauw Paul, you’ve
only used 200 liters of water this month?" If one
gets confronted with his living cost, one has the
tendency to be economical. Now that’s what I
would call smart. A smart building has con-
trol loops in its infrastructure, instead of sim-
ple electronics. Nobody in the appartement?
Through smartphones or website the building
should be able to overrule current settings so
that lights and heating should be turned oﬀ.
Users that have an excessive consumption could
get a notiﬁcation. Wiﬁor landline not work-
ing? The building should permanently and au-
tonomously be testing its infrastructure and
send users and infrastructure companies a no-
tiﬁcation if it is failing.
Yes
Architect
Student
Page 78 of 110
==PAGE:95==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
En smart bygning ved at du er i den og kan
tilpasse sig efter behov - lys, farver, temper-
atur, døråbning osv.Der er indbygget sensorer
i bygningen og disse er koblet op til et større
system.Data fra bygningen bruges aktivt til at
optimere driften af den - rengøring, vagter, for-
brug osv.
Yes
Architect
Project
Manage-
ment
Smart Building is designed to be eco-friendly,
saving electricity and water. Modern building
will be constructed with high technology.
Yes
Biotechnology cosmetic
A smart building is designed and built with sus-
tainability in mind; it is as pragmatic as possi-
ble and has a slick design. The smart build-
ing integrates well into its surroundings (i.e.
not too high when rest of city has pretty ﬂat
buildings).
Most importantly, however, it is
sustainable during the construction as well as
afterwards in terms of e.g. water conservation,
airﬂow, ventilation, CO2 emission, recyclability
etc.
Yes
Business
Finance
A smart building is a building that is connected
to the internet and where you can pull out data
from many sensors and remotely control the
building.
Yes
Client
/
Owner
IOT
A Smart Building is one that incorporates an
appropriate resiliency (redundancy, reliability
and recoverability) strategy for intended use
and users of the building.
Yes
Client
/
Owner
Facility
Manage-
ment
Page 79 of 110
==PAGE:96==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A building that is capable of collect data of all
diﬀerence sources and suggest improvements.
For instance:- collection of rain water and the
necessity of water-system supply, - the fulﬁll-
ment of trash containers and the optimal fre-
quency of trash collection (of course, separa-
tion for each type), - heating system (adjust-
ment of the intensity of the heating according
to weather condition), - production of energy
from renewable sources (solar panels) and the
share it represents for the hole consumption of
the building,- smart lights for public spaces (fo-
cusing in indoor spaces, such as main hall, cor-
ridors, etc.) to avoid waste of energy with illu-
mination of areas that do not need to be illu-
minated
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Secure but still easily accessible, comfortable
and aesthetically pleasant while ecologically
friendly and not expensive, automated but
practical and digitally safe.
In a few words,
well designed according to current standards,
leaving room for further upgrades.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A smart building infuses wireless devices, sen-
sors and innovative technologies into the overall
function of the building to optimize or improve
personal well-being, comfort, and connection.
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 80 of 110
==PAGE:97==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
"Smart building" can relate to many aspects
and therms and also at many levels. A smart
building can relate to the control systems of a
building e.g. ventilation, lighting, heating sys-
tems etc. - that these are operated in a "smart"
way accordingly to the users (people) and/or
the energy consumption or similar aspects. A
smart building can also simply mean, that it
is designed smart - that it uses "natural re-
sources", e.g. placement, orientation, adjacent
buildings, sun etc. to be its own smart building
- or that it is designed in a smart way e.g. the
room distribution or walking patterns or simi-
lar.
No
Engineer
Research
a smart building is a building which is ﬂexibel
and which is easy to adjust to the residents.
It is meanwhile also a building which by it self
can addapt to the residents and change pattern
when new residents arrive or the present resi-
dent change behavior.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A smart building is a building that through
data, monitoring, and interactions with the
users can give the users the most optimal in-
door environment, while keeping the energy use
to a minimum. E.g. heating the building when
it is in use and lowering the temperature when
it is not and the same goes for the lighting.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 81 of 110
==PAGE:98==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
Building smart is to build with eﬀectiveness in
mind. This may refer to many diﬀerent param-
eters, including material consumption (struc-
tural, HVAC, etc.), energy consumption, lifecy-
cle costs (economic, environmental, etc. now,
during use and when no longer in use (e.g.
through reuse of materials)).Smart buildings
may however refer to a building containing
technologically advanced systems which may
be interacted with through e.g. IoT during its
time of use.
Maybe.
For
what
purpose?
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
a building which responds to the user’s needs,
in which objects will respond to the voice com-
mands.
a building which thanks to all these
traits is eﬃcient, sustainable and eco-friendly.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A smart building utilize IOT based automation
systems to become a single organism in the in-
frastructural, technological and environmental
framework of modern cities with the purpose of
improving quality of life.
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
-Knows when to turn on/oﬀsolar screens,
raise/decrease ventilation, temperature sen-
sors, CO2 sensors.
- All the systems in the
building works together to achieve the desired
indoor climate without person interference
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A building that can make your life easier and
better
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 82 of 110
==PAGE:99==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart building is a construction that have
a wide range of smart accessories connected
to wi-ﬁ. If you building can control the tem-
perature itself, if you can modify intensity and
colour of the lights and if you can control ev-
erything from your phone.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Smart building can sense dynamic changes in
the environment and responds to them by
adapting the indoor conditions to provide bet-
ter comfort with respect to suﬃcient illumina-
tion, indoor climate etc.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Smart buildings deliver services that make oc-
cupants productive at the lowest cost and en-
vironmental impact over the building lifecycle.
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Bæredygtigt, multifunktionalitet i bygnings-
dele, rentteknologi, CO2 neutral, kan gen-
bruges og forædles, ﬂeksible indretningsmu-
ligheder, energi neutralt, god indeklima og
vedligeholdsfri bygning der betjener, understøt-
ter og interagere med dennes bruger i deres be-
stræbelse efter meningsfuld liv med nul aftryk
på miljøet/verden.
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Smart buildings should be interactive and be
able to be encoded to personalize the behavior
of the smart technology.
Yes
Engineer
Energy plan-
ning
Page 83 of 110
==PAGE:100==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
Smart building: A building where the digital
footprint is managed as part of the asset.To
enable this, a buildings digital footprint are ex-
posed through a semantic onthology that makes
it possible to interact with the building from
two dimensions; 1. Static, meaning its anath-
omy in deﬁning structure and digital artifacts2.
Dynamic, meaning digital interfaces to interact
with the building when it is in use
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A building that learns from its internal and ex-
ternal environment and improves the way that
it operates to reduce it’s energy consumption
and provide a better environment for it’s occu-
pants.
No.
Each
building
is
diﬀerent and
guidelines
on the level
of
instru-
mentation
and the ben-
eﬁts/costs
for
imple-
mentation
would be far
more
bene-
ﬁcial than a
deﬁned ’one
size ﬁts all’
certiﬁcation.
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A building that prevents the user from in-
necessary spend of resources
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 84 of 110
==PAGE:101==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A building that autonomously adjust the room
environments (lights, temperature, humidity
etc..)
to be as the people inside it wants it,
whether its pleasant or energy eﬃcient or some-
thing else.
No
Engineer
Project
Manage-
ment
A smart building reacts to external factors like
light and heat and to internal factors like peo-
ple.
The reaction is automatic and intuitive
but can be overridden by people if necessary
Yes
Engineer
Controls
manufac-
turer
A smart building utilizes data and intelligence
for achieving objectives for the building’s func-
tions.
Objectives could for example consist
of requirements to indoor climate, energy ef-
ﬁciency, lighting or security and safety.
Maybe
Engineer
R&D
Smart building is a a home that incorporates
smart technology - such as automated systems
in order to keep everything under control much
more easier.
Yes
Engineer
Project
Manage-
ment
A smart building is a building in which the de-
viation of conditions from their equilibrium is
caused by the users, a smart building controls
and monitors the conditions in such a way that
they satisfy the user with the least burden on
environment and the building itself.
No
Engineer
acoustics
A smart building is built to best available stan-
dards (environmental, security, etc) and has el-
ements that can be controlled and regulated
through a central point, and/or remotely. Most
"smart" technology also has a self-learning as-
pect to it.
No
Engineer
Infrastructure
Page 85 of 110
==PAGE:102==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart building is one that utilises material
and geometry as eﬃciently as possible to resist
the loads of its lifespan.
No.
The
deﬁnition
and
certiﬁ-
cation
will
constantly
change
to
meet
new
meanings
of
client
comfront
and
user
feedback
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Smart Buildings use technology to gather and
synthesize operational data so that facility
managers can take action to make their build-
ings more energy eﬃcient and occupants more
comfortable and productive.
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 86 of 110
==PAGE:103==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
En Smart bygning er en bygning der tilgo-
deser og optimerer brugeroplevelsen gennem
døgnrytme og årsrytme, det er ikke en bygn-
ing der afskærer brugernes muligheder for eget
tilvalg f.eks temperatur ventilation, lys, men
en bygning der tilpasser sig brugerne og lærer
deres præferencer,
en smart bygning deler
også til helheden og skal også ses i sammen-
hæng med de omkringliggende bygninger, så
f.eks overskud af køle’/ varme kapacitet kan
komme andre tilgode, bygningen kan fortælle
via kognitive sensorsystemer omkring behov for
rengøring, og fordelingen af denne, på f.eks toi-
letter.
Man
kan
med
fordel
anvende
principper i
f.eks DGNB
i
dk.
og
følge
et
fastlagt mål,
men
selve
mærkningen
kan
give
valg der ikke
er
fordel
i
det
enkelte
projekt.
så
hellere
følge
prin-
cipper
en
certiﬁkater
Engineer
Facility
Manage-
ment
A building that communicates with its users or
reacts to user behaviour in order to maintain a
good indoor climate with low energy consump-
tion and possibly also controls access.
Yes
Engineer
University
A building that includes IoT technology (sen-
sors) which is customized for the individuals
that are in the building. The smart building
facilitates everyday life.
A smart building is
also contributing to a sustainable environment
since the MEP installations can be regulated
easy depending on the outdoor/indoor climate.
Furthermore the building is connected to wi-
ﬁwhich facilitates the monitoring and facility
management of the building.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 87 of 110
==PAGE:104==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
My deﬁnition of a smart building is to make
buildings more eﬃcient, sustainable, safer and
more comfortable for the users. To introduce
more automation and management systems so
the user can be a part of the experience of being
inside the building.
Yes, but dif-
ﬁcult to set a
deﬁnition on
when it is at
smart build-
ing.
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A smart building adapts. It adapts to its oc-
cupants & users, to the surrounding urban &
natural environment, to the changing time, etc.
Smart buildings use a number of new technolo-
gies to enhance traditional services & functions
of building such as space organisation, interior
environment control, etc.
Yes
Engineer
Software De-
velopment
A smart building can be optimised to suit its
occupant’s needs by monitoring the inputs and
habits of its occupants. This also means the
house’s system is aware of all interactions with
connected susbsystems, from the fridge, to the
pantry and the bathroom. A smart house will
use this data to help optimise the process ﬂows
happening inside it, based on its user’s moni-
tored behaviour and stated preferences. In a
sustainability sense, this also means a smart
house manages energy consumption, monitors
waste production and provides ongoing feed-
back on how the user can optimise their ex-
perience and minimise their carbon footprint.
Yes
Engineer
Sustainable
Energy
A smart building is a building that utilises dig-
ital networked technologies to solve a clients
problem domain.
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 88 of 110
==PAGE:105==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
An environment (eg a building) that adapts to
human needs in a fexible and sustainable man-
ner
We
need
a
standard for
smart build-
ings
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A smart building is one that uses its envelope
for more than weather protection, appearance
and safety, while being adaptable to tenant be-
havior and changing indoor/outdoor conditions
without comprimising its qualities and comfort.
No
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Professional Smart building conects all building
systems and are eqiped with single room con-
trol minimum co2 temp vav our lights blind etc
All needs to be integrated and working togeth-
erCa be using iot but in a well designed BMS
system would be more adequate for a profes-
sional building
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A smart building can adapt to users’ need.
Yes
Engineer
Education
One which can be controlled through change in
weather patterns, geological conditions, detect
earthquakes and natural disasters.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Dynamic Indoor comfort, attractive infrastruc-
ture
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Smart building should be able to adjust to the
weather.It should be sustainable in terms of en-
ergy. It should have plants to produce oxygen
required for people living in it. It should not
produce least waste possible
Yes
Engineer
Project
Manage-
ment
Page 89 of 110
==PAGE:106==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
The concept of Smart Building is very broad
and a 100% proper deﬁnition could not be of-
fered or settled. Can there actually exist smart
buildings?
Can the building as an object/
product/livable space be smart?
OrShould a
Smart Building be categorized based on the
appliances and technology within it e.g. sen-
sors for CO2, humidity etc.
or should it be
a building that adapts to present and future
needs e.g.
space ﬂexibility, modularity ap-
proach oﬀering easy solutions for change and
modiﬁcation?Only one deﬁniton describing ev-
erything might not be good enough to cover
the therms, however a classiﬁcation can be in-
strumented alowing users to create, deﬁne and
experiment their own perception of a smart
building.A smart building should be a blended
and emerged environment, composed of a per-
fect synergy between the built up space, the
technology used, the user friendly interaction
and the capability to surround the user with
the best solution to its needs. A smart facility
where the user is either totally detached from
the physical interaction with the space or a fa-
cility where the space recomends the user better
modifcation allowing for a better life quality.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
To me, a smart building is a building that
contains some automated (and most of the
time user-responsive) systems that facilitate
and optimize building management and oper-
ation.
The smart building is integrated in a
larger context, for example in the local energy
grid.
Yes
Engineer
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 90 of 110
==PAGE:107==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart building is a building that has technol-
ogy incorporated that enables it to serve and
work in concert with the economical owner of
the building, and all of the occupants of the
facility. The key is the provision of a safe, com-
fortable, and eﬀective facility for occupants to
perform their functions.
Yes
Entrepreneur Facility IT
Moderne.
Minimalistisk.
Åbent.
Fleksibelt
(og tilpasses de enkelte brugeres behov). Kom-
binerer rå og bløde materialer, så der opnås
synergi.
Yes
Finance
Marketing
Smart Buildings can learn Emotion by Looking,
Listening, Feeling, Thinking before returning a
mindful reaction in a Humanistic User Expe-
rience "UX". "Emotion" is the noun used to
describe the creation and depiction of a mind-
ful interactive relationship — the conversation
if you will — between the inhabitants and
their physical building. It is a virtual identity,
a feeling, a learning, an interactive piece, a vir-
tual brick-and-mortar that hosts the buildings’
emotion. A smart building is a building that
"Looks" with rapidly evolving video analytics,
"Listens" with natural language interaction
and learning, using the personal assistants
that are evolving as part of our edge-bots.
Use our history of "Feeling" temperature,
humidity, occupancies etc.
and best com-
bine this all with "Thinking" that will come
from self-learning.
Returning that "Mindful
Reaction" in the creation of an Anticipatory
Humanistic Relationships.Come an learn more
http://automatedbuildings.com/news/nov18/reviews/181018024801ahr.html
No
Founder
Owner
Editor
Media
Page 91 of 110
==PAGE:108==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
Smart Building is the evolution of our buildings
to incorporate the technology which allows us
to connect building operations to control the
experience to the betterment of owners, man-
agers occupants, and (eventually) communities.
To be "smart," a building must includes not
only the real-time controls for managing the
physical building (and its grounds) but also for
improving the occcupants’ experience.As smart
building technology evolves further, this will in-
clude a "smart connection" to its wider commu-
nity; while a smart building is now but a single
node, in the future it will be an end point also
connected to the further services of a smart city,
town or county.
Yes
Press
Press
Services Management system Autonomous Re-
newable energy Transformation
Yes
Project
Manager
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
En bygning der er smart.
Understøtter nu-
tid/fremtidens teknologier hvilket i øjeblikket
er IoT mv. Hvad der er smart i dag er ikke
smart i morgen, det er et ﬂydende koncept som
bygningen skal kunne tilpasse sig til.
Yes
Project
Manager
Project
Manage-
ment
Den smarte bygning er en vært og assistent,
som lærer sine brugeres adfærd og tilpasser sig
dem.
Med tiden overtager den ﬂere og ﬂere
af brugernes opgaver, tænder og slukker lyset,
søger for den rette temperatur, luftfugtighed
osv.
med lavest muligt energiforbrug.
Den
smarte bygning er altid omstillingsparat, aldrig
irriterende og konstant lærende.
Yes
Project
Manager
Project
Manage-
ment
Page 92 of 110
==PAGE:109==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart building is simple to work/live in, and
have technology features well balanced between
nice, need and costs. Technology features, e.g.
sustainability (low energy consumption; what if
a 100 year rain event etc.), simple operational
panels integrated for the everyday user to max-
imize what the building can do for you during
your occupancy in the building.
No
Project
Manager
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A smart building is deﬁned as a structure that
responds to the data gathered by its systems
be it technical or functional in an optimal way
that further enhances the structure’s purpose
automatically.
Yes
Project
Manager
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A building containing multiple IoT devices se-
curing services and automatic adjustments that
supports optimal conditions for the use of the
building.
Yes
Sociologist
Public it
Smart building, do I ﬁnd as automatedBuild-
ings, the less a individual has to do to make is
day go around the smarter the building is
No
Student
Telecom
A smart building provides with easy-access the
tenants to manage his energy consumptions
with accurate sensors and controllers, driving
him to an environmental friendly behaviour.
Yes
Student
DTU
A building able to predict, adapt and act in ac-
cordance with the user and environment’s be-
havior and needs.
No
Student
Electrical
engineering
A building which has several smart technologies
and an architectural cool design. The building
should ﬁt perfectly into its environment.
Yes
Student
Urban Plan-
ning
Page 93 of 110
==PAGE:110==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart building can tell you what you want
e.g. through your phone by telling you where is
a free meeting room or where to ﬁnd this and
that. Further, it has sensors measuring the in-
door climate so light, temperature etc. are ad-
justed to optimal conditions. As well does it
monitor when rooms are used and for what pur-
pose to see if spaces are used for the intended
purposes.
Yes
Student
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Smart building is a “Living” building that re-
sponsively reacts to behaviour and movement
patterns of its occupants.
The communica-
tion between the building and the occupant is
instant(Real-time). The data gathered by the
smart building is constantly used to improve
It’s processes, performance and environmental
impact.
Yes
Student (Ar-
chitect)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Smart buildings are ﬁrst of all eﬃcient build-
ings. They should be both functional and sus-
tainable. A smart building has a great building
envelope, and may use some additional energy
resources like solar energy or geothermal.
It
can also be very functional and equipped with
ﬁxtures which use artiﬁcial intelligence.
Yes
Student (Ar-
chitect)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A building that can adapt to users needs, that
can track and utilizes data to do that.
Yes
Student (Ar-
chitect)
Facility
Manage-
ment
A smart building is a building that immediately
adapts to current needs of its users- by chang-
ing lightning, airﬂow, moving doors, windows,
walls or communicating important information
like arriving guests or needed maintenance.
Yes
Student (Ar-
chitect)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 94 of 110
==PAGE:111==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
Buildings are a frame for our daily activities.
More and more, they start to interact being
alike to living organisms.
Smart Building is
equipped with technology and automation pro-
cess that helps a user of the building operate in
the most easy way (function) also suiting one’s
needs (indoor climate). Important for Smart
Buildings is UX so the technology and all of
the processes within the building are adjustable
and understood by the user.
Certiﬁcation
stands
for
given values.
It’s worth to
keep
them
in mind, but
signiﬁcant
is
to
keep
up the good
condition
and
param-
eters of the
building
after
it’s
been
built.
Ending
the
design phase
and
con-
struction
process
is
just
the
beginning of
building life
cycle.
Student (Ar-
chitect)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
For me, a smart building is a building that reg-
istrates and knows the users’ behaviours and in
diﬀerent ways works around this to create the
most optimal situation for the users, the owner
of the building and in general (eg. in relation
to sustainability).
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Design engi-
neering
A smart building is a building which can pre-
dict and respond to the residents’ need, oﬀer-
ing the utmost indoor environment comfort.
The arrangement and functions could be set-
tled based on its residents.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 95 of 110
==PAGE:112==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart building:- improves the life of the
inhabitants- is climate resilient and provides
low carbon emissions- is fully integrated with
the environment- has low cost of building and
maintainance- is beautiful and ergonomic
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Urban Plan-
ning
A smart building is answering two very im-
portant problems, which are :- "how can we
make the life of the inhabitants easier?"- "how
can use resources in the most eﬃcient way?"As
such, a smart building is here to make new con-
nections and acquire more data to optimize the
inhabitants’ comfort while considering sustain-
ability. This building needs to be smart to han-
dle all the new data available and to predict the
preferences of the inhabitants. In a nutshell, a
smart building is a building caring for its in-
habitants and the environment.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Electrical
A system of many various set of sensors which
collect data from the users accordingly, and the
collected data is being processed in the back-
end, so that depending on the data collected,
the electro-mechanic front-end can be put in
motion, namely ’answer’ as needed to the user.
The best part is that if AI is put into play,
the huge amount of data can open the path to
even more personalized ’answers’ towards the
user.
If we take the big picture and look at
all this combination of sensors, processing, data
and electro-mechanical systems, we get a smart
building.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Alt teknik - opvarmning/køling, ventilation, lys
etc. - regulerer sig selv i fht. aktuelle behov og
kan fjernstyres/kontrolleres vha.
eksempelvis
internettet.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 96 of 110
==PAGE:113==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
The management of the building which includes
several innovative technologies in order to im-
prove or optimize the indoor environment and
energy eﬃciency. It contributes to sustainabil-
ity of the building and gives occupants an op-
portunity to control the building through tech-
nological system and automatization.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Automation of the building, so control of fx
heat or light is controlled automatically, or/and
can be controlled via an app.
No
Student
(Engineer)
Student
A smart building is a building which optimises
itself in terms of energy, heat, light, devices,
etc. through local data collection and automa-
tion based on this data and on the inputs (such
as heating and lighting daily proﬁle of the dif-
ferent rooms) deﬁned by the inhabitants via
user interfaces. A smart building is energy ef-
ﬁcient: it should minimise energy consumption
and recover energy from other sources (espe-
cially for the heating system). It can be inte-
grated in a smart city for instance by commu-
nicating with other buildings.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Environmental
and
A building that is using sensors to assess its en-
vironments in diﬀerent aspects and able to act
respectively. It has an internal integrated IT
system, that is in charge of all the functions of
the building such as lights, heating, ventilation,
shades, sounds, lifts, water supply.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Project
Manage-
ment
A building that can process data to be more
eﬃcient and accommodating.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Student
Page 97 of 110
==PAGE:114==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart building is a building that can adapt
to the enviroment around it and the needs in-
side of it. A smart building is able to take ad-
vantage of the diﬀerent hours of the day and
provide the best enviroment for the wanted ac-
tivities.
This makes a smart building both
more comfortable, versatile and enviromental
friendly because works optimized compared to
regular buildings.
No
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
En smart bygning skal kunne adaptere sig
til alle forskellige scenarier der kan opstå når
den bruges.
Således opnås maksimal kom-
fort ved minimalt energiforbrug.
Adaptere
sig:
ventilation, lys, varme, solafskærmning,
osv.Energiforbrug: el, varme, gas osv.
En
smart
building
rating
som
energimær-
ket
er
en
bedre ide
Student
(Engineer)
Energi og in-
deklima
Smart or intelligent building is the one which
analyzes, executes and manages the environ-
ment inside the building as well as it’s connec-
tion to the other buildings, considering the en-
ergy eﬃciency, impact on surrounding environ-
ment and the user well being.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A smart building integrates technology and in-
teractions in both directions between the occu-
pants and the building. Well-being and envi-
ronmental factors should be at the forefront of
the systems intentions, not only in mitigating
negative eﬀects, but also adapting to the neg-
ative eﬀects we experience and will experience.
Technology solutions which gather and analyse
data should be kept to a minimum, where the
least amount of tech should collect as little data
as possible to have the most beneﬁcial eﬀect to
the occupant.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 98 of 110
==PAGE:115==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart city is a city area that uses digital
data collection to manage assets and resources
eﬃciently and intelligently for the beneﬁt of its
citizens. Same goes for smart buildings.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Urban Plan-
ning
A "Smart Building" is the one that can mea-
sure what is happening in it and reacting to
it to achieve users preferences. It should also
provide the users with useful information to im-
prove their actions.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Robotics
Smart building for me has two diﬀerent def-
initions:1:
During the construction phase of
which easier to handle ways of construction is
utilized2: During usage of the building, where
the building are able to monitor the enviroment
(CO2 levels, Heat, Cold, O2 levels etc.) and act
correspondently to counteract harmful environ-
ment for the users
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Smart building er bygninger, hvor der er in-
dbygget teknologi. Det kunne f.eks. være at
lyset automatisk tænder når man træder ind af
døren eller at temperaturen styres automatisk.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
biotechnology
Everything is accessible any time in the day
while using minimum resources.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Petroleum
A building that adapts to user-behaviour using
datacollection and machine learning, control-
ling inside climate and lights to optimize en-
ergy usage and makes interaction between user
and building seemless.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Project
Manage-
ment
Page 99 of 110
==PAGE:116==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart building incorporates technology from
the very beginning of the design phase through
the life and end of life of the building.
The
technology used should reduce emissions, re-
duce the need for constant maintenance, and
improve the experience for people in the build-
ing.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A building that responds to the sourounding
environment and adapts to it
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Based on my understanding and what I have
learned recently, a “smart building” collects and
combines information (examples) both within
and outside the building, ﬁts and trains some
speciﬁc features (e.g. occupancy, ventilation)
and aims to minimize its total cost (including
energy consumption, maintenance and life cycle
cost) and to improve user experience and com-
fort. Also, a “smart building” does not stand
alone. Instead, it shares and exchanges infor-
mation with other units within its network.
No
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
A smart building prepare an opportunity to be
a smart person/family
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 100 of 110
==PAGE:117==
Appendices
Submit your deﬁnition of a Smart Build-
ing
Is
a
cer-
tiﬁcation
needed?
Educational
back-
ground
Industry
A smart building responds to various needs of
occupants, operators and clients in a way that
is mutually beneﬁcial and acceptable to all as
per the needs and wants of the involved parties.
It is done using the past experiences (Data col-
lected), present situations(Current conditions)
and future goals (Approximated forecast). A
smart building should use its current resources
to optimum use and let the operators and client
know of its limits. So, that when time needs the
building can evolve or grow like the intelligence
of a human. A smart building should be able
to interact with others of its kind and share
knowledge (data and KPIs) and make better
decisions as an individual and as group(smart
cities), just like humans.
I see smart build-
ings as a Living Machine that might not be
smart from the beginning but strives to grow
to contribute to this sustainable world using
its knowledge.
Yes
Student
(Engineer)
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Con-
struction
(AEC)
Page 101 of 110
==PAGE:118==
Appendices
Appendix C - Description of Services - Building and Planning
This Appendix contains a section of building operation requirements from the "De-
sciption of Services - Building and Planning 2018". [97] The new document from
2018 is at the current time not released in English, thus the author has translated the
danish version.
Following terms are used and are deﬁned as part of the "Description of Services -
Building and Planning 2018".
1. Operation requirements after handover
(a) Operating requirements after delivery are understood to be speciﬁc require-
ments for the building’s operational condition or performance ability after
delivery and commissioning.
2. Operation and maintenance manual
(a) The operating and maintenance manual is designed to optimise and sys-
tematise the operation of buildings and building parts.
(b) The operation and maintenance manual describes operating activities and
inspection routines that are necessary for the property to function satis-
factorily after delivery to the client.
3. Operation, control and maintenance plan
(a) Concerning the ﬁre safety of construction and contains a description of
required control measures, organisation of operations, etc. cf. the building
regulations requirements for the installation or the building, depending on
the application.
Following extracts are from the chapter 1. Initial consultancy.
1.1.2 Commissioning and operation
The idea presentation must contain the client’s speciﬁc requirements and wishes for
the commissioning of the building, testing of technical installations and installations
and operation.
1.1.5 Economy
Indicates that the idea presentation must also contain an overall operating budget, as
well as an account of the client’s expectations for total and operating economy
Page 102 of 110
==PAGE:119==
Appendices
Following extract is from the chapter 3. Proposals.
3.2.2 Commissioning and operation
Requirements for preliminary examination, commissioning, delivery and commission-
ing, as well as for operation and maintenance manual are prepared in accordance with
the phase.
Following extract is from the chapter 5. Procurement project.
5.2 Commissioning and operation
The tender project must contain requirements for testing technical installations and
installations.
The tender project must contain requirements for preliminary examination, handing
over and lack of repair etc.
The tender project must contain requirements for the contractors’ submission of "as
completed" documentation and operating and maintenance manuals, etc.
The tender project must contain requirements for the contractors’ services in con-
nection with preparation of any operational, control and maintenance plan for the
construction.
Appendix D - Research Article: Evaluating the Concept and
Value of Smart Buildings for the Development of a Smarter
Procurement Strategy
A ﬁrst version draft of an article is included in this Appendix. The article proposes the
smart building deﬁnition including a strategy for smarter procurement of buildings
with the focus on smart buildings. The ﬁnal version of this article might be subject
to change when published.
Page 103 of 110
==PAGE:120==
1 INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Evolution of smart buildings 
The design and expected performance of buildings 
have been changing throughout history. Newly con-
structed buildings often try to minimize their environ-
mental impacts but also to score highly on different 
types of green building rates including certificates. 
Sustainable buildings have often been characterised 
with their ability to comply with different metric sys-
tems such as LEED, BREEAM and WELL that co-
vers environmental, social and economic dimensions 
of sustainability. [2]   These types of buildings are 
considered to be energy efficient and smart buildings. 
There has been a big focus on trying to maximize the 
energy efficiency of smart buildings and for some 
people, a smart building is synonymous with an en-
ergy efficient building. [3] In fact, the definition of 
what constitutes a smart building by BPIE is a build-
ing that is highly energy efficient. [4]  
What is seen in this era marked by environmental 
performance is that a green building rating has often 
measured the success of development and it has 
shown that environmentally friendly practices are 
good for business. The industry has tried to push the 
boundaries of the sustainable side which has been the 
mentality shaping the visionary buildings over the 
past two decades. [3]  
 
 
 
Today the building industry is entering a new era 
of smart buildings, which are considered as a much 
more division. Along the side with good environmen-
tal sustainability are high-performance buildings be-
ing designed to prioritise occupant experience and 
well-being in the hope that this will boost work 
productivity and attract talents. [5] These are devel-
opments on previous visions of the era of environ-
mental performance that pushed for full operational 
efficiency, but this vision is now emerging and devel-
oping into one that looks to promotes the experience 
of the building user. The new era that the building in-
dustry is entering is well described by a phrase that 
sees things as it is about making the building work for 
people. 
2 A SMART BUILDING DEFINITION 
2.1 Definitions of a Smart Building 
The research shows that stakeholders in the built 
environment have different expectations for the po-
tentials of smart buildings. Many of these definitions 
often reflect the values of the company or organisa-
tion. A survey has been conducted to gather insights 
in how architecture and engineering industries define 
as a smart building represented by the field of archi-
tecture and engineering.  The results are shown in 
Evaluating the Concept and Value of Smart Buildings for the 
Development of a Smarter Procurement Strategy 
J. Olsen 
Department of Civil engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
J. Karlshøj 
Head of Section DTU BYG, Department of Civil engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 
Denmark 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT:  The digital revolution has created new smart technologies like, smart phones, smart services, 
contactless payments, that have changed the way people live and interact with each other. [1] These technolo-
gies have created a frictionless lifestyle for the modern people. All these features and technologies are available 
because of big data approaches and Internet of Things (IoT). Today’s built environment is moving towards 
more complex and integrated systems. There are many forces that are driving both markets such as efficiency, 
convenience, cost savings, energy savings, communication etc. This research is focusing on a strategy for pro-
curement of smart buildings will be proposed with the aim of highlighting potentials and challenges with the 
collaboration of the stakeholders in the built environment especially with the focus of bringing the facility 
management more in focus and defining critical requirements in the design and construction phase. 
==PAGE:121==
Figure 1 with trends that designers expect in smart 
buildings.  
The diagram shows that designers have a signifi-
cant focus on automation and the implementation of 
IoT devices to improve indoor air quality, reduce en-
ergy consumption and to interact with building occu-
pants. Some also mention the connection to smart cit-
ies and sustainability. A new research by Verdantix 
states that real estate is more focused on space utili-
sation 
than 
engineers, 
but 
both 
industries 
acknowledge the importance of improving occupant 
well-being and productivity. The increased use of 
mobile applications is becoming a vision from both 
industries, thus a vision of building occupants being 
more in control of their environment seems to be 
emerging. 
2.2 Moving Towards a smart building definition 
From a holistic point of view is the framework of a 
smart building based on its ability to operate intelli-
gently, adapting, learning, connecting, communi-
cating and be sustainable. An important factor is 
adaptability, and this often requires the use of IoT 
sensors acting with the building systems combined 
with an external control signal. More important than 
ever is to future proof buildings. The building systems 
need to be adaptable so they can accommodate e.g. 
new set points and it may even mean smart city inte-
gration. Trends shows that the focus is on how the 
building occupants are experiencing the building. 
User-centred innovation is facilitated when humans, 
technology and business come together. [6] The users 
should define what they want, thus what is desirable 
to have in the building. The facility management and 
designers have to find out what is feasible to design 
for. However, the business economy needs to be part 
of the equation to make sure that the solutions are vi-
able to obtain the expected return of investment for 
real estate. 
2.3 A new Smart Building Definition 
A definition for smart buildings characterising the 
value proposition and expectations from key stake-
holders is necessary. A lack of clarity of what con-
stitutes a smart building will potentially create con-
fusion rather than a direction, as companies and 
organisations start to embed their own values in the 
definitions.  
Based on the literature studies of scientific papers, 
information available from the market, industry talks 
and interviews of professionals of the AECO indus-
try, a smart building definition is proposed: 
 
“A smart building is a building that incorporates 
data collection, analysis, asset control, and action to 
respond to defined goals for a particular outcome. It 
supports the potentials of emerging cutting-edge 
digital technologies to promote an user-centric, sus-
tainable, and continuously adaptable design for an 
optimised high performance with a responsive envi-
ronment that is attractive and stimulating for the oc-
cupants.” 
 
The goal with the proposed definition is to initiate 
a discussion of a single standard definition of a smart 
building sharing the expectations from all the stake-
holders in the building industry. 
3 STRATEGY FOR SMART BUILDING 
PROCUREMENT 
The Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) 
has organised the building life-cycle into some key 
stages of briefing, designing, constructing, maintain-
ing and operating, which is shown in Figure 2 [7] 
There is a shortly described brief phase of where the 
idea of a building comes up, a design phase where de-
signers are conceding and developing it, a construc-
tion phase where a contractor realises it, and these 
stages usually take a couple of years and the operation 
phase which is usually up to 50 to 100 hundreds of 
years. 
 
 
Figure 2 The life-cycle phases of a building [7] 
Collaboration between the stakeholders in a build-
ing project is essential to develop a smart building 
with integrated systems that can adapt to the occu-
pants’ needs, but this is not solvable easily with the 
current process of designing buildings. The current 
process is not prioritised for communication and col-
laboration, in fact it is designed more for contractual 
agreements.  
Smart building will only be able to deliver the ex-
pected outcomes and benefits that the market promise 
if the building is specified, procured and commis-
sioned properly. [8] 
The building owners and clients have the potential 
of taking the lead in creating a valuable development 
Figure 1 Research results from the survey. Source author. 
==PAGE:122==
of smart buildings and start demanding the integration 
of, e.g. digital tools and ICT agreements with more 
focus on the operation phase for better construction, 
smarter operation and better services for occupants. It 
is necessary to change the incentive structure in the 
building value chain to change the view of thinking 
in short-term of the operation and maintenance of 
buildings and instead focusing on long-term. Most 
building owners and clients stand alone and isolated 
as the only stakeholder with an obvious incentive to 
handle the operation in the design phase, and one of 
the issues is that the building owner and client have 
minimal opportunity to share the necessary expenses 
with those who benefit from the improvements. [9] 
The general purpose of a procurement process is to 
select the bidder that is best able to deliver the ser-
vices required by a client within the targeted budget 
which often refers to the capitalisation of the invest-
ment for real estate. [10] A successful procurement 
process must include clear descriptions of the objec-
tives of the goals and requirements from the client, 
only then all stakeholders will have a clear under-
standing of the requirements. [10]  
A concept of how to incorporate sustainability and 
smart solutions in a building and how to include 
stakeholders collaboratively starts to form a circle 
that starts with the needs of the clients. (Figure 3) 
 
3.1 Corporate Social responsibility (CSR) 
A clear vision with the concept of operations and 
expected outcomes from a building has to be clearly 
stated by the client to create a smart building. In the 
planning process of procurement, it is important to 
clearly understand the objectives that reflect or sup-
port the wider strategy of the organisation. [10] Cor-
porate Social Responsibility (CSR) is about a com-
pany’s social responsibility to e.g. environment, CO2 
and user comfort and this means that CSR is part of 
the company’s business strategy with social initia-
tives that are to create social and economic value for 
customers, employees, and potential shareholders. 
[11] This includes focussing on initiatives that con-
tribute to the sustainable development of society, in-
cluding; environment, comfort, social conditions, and 
climate. The CSR is defined by a company and should 
be part of the requirements that are expected for the 
building. 
Research shows that people today place far greater 
demands on a decent working environment and sus-
tainability when they want to be employed by a com-
pany. [12] Furthermore the expectations are rising for 
smart technologies in the workplaces. [13] 
For organisations it is essential to focus on the work-
places if they want to keep on attracting millennials 
and attract talent. An attractive workplace environ-
ment may ultimately mean whether a person will 
work for a business. The increasing interest in creat-
ing smart and sustainable buildings with a more peo-
ple-centric focus rather than engineering, construc-
tion, and technology-centric focus, has increased the 
awareness of understanding of the use of buildings in 
new ways and sustainable practices. [14] 
3.2 Green Lease Guide 
The initiatives that are agreed in a dialogue with the 
client must be written into a lease contract. This 
means that a building must be able to explain into a 
lease agreement, which influence it has on e.g. sus-
tainability and user comfort or how it supports the 
strategy of the organisation. This must be docu-
mented in order to be able to answer which initiatives 
have been agreed at a lease. It is important to specify 
the requirements in with a clear language to make the 
evaluation easier when it comes to contract manage-
ment. For this, a Green Lease Guide (GLG) can be a 
help. A GLG is a guide that gives instructions on how 
green initiatives are written into a lease. A GLG can 
consist of checklists with strategies for green and so-
cial initiatives that can be implemented in the build-
ing, and these actions are often referred to and con-
sistent with sustainability standards such as LEED. 
The GLG developed by Investas already includes 
some of the aspects that are expected to a smart build-
ing such as a comfortable, productive and healthy in-
door environment, but also things like reporting to 
tenants on base building environmental performance. 
[15] 
Figure 3 A Strategy for a smart building procurement to in-
corporate sustainability and smart in buildings with key stake-
holders in mind. (Source: author) 
==PAGE:123==
3.3 Facility Management Technical Company 
(FMT) 
In order to provide the solution to the needs that have 
been written into a lease contract, a Facilities Man-
agement Technical Company (FMT) must provide a 
service and make the requirements a reality in the 
building. This means that a company rents into a lease 
and professionals in an FMT discipline ensure that the 
building can live up to the lease contract. It is im-
portant that there is provided enough data to allow 
bidders to understand the requirements from the cli-
ent. [10] The operation of a building is, in general, a 
process of descriptions of what the client is asking for 
and agreements of the supplier that can provide ser-
vices that support these requirements. About the en-
ergy consumption reduction in a building, it is worth 
mentioning Energy Service COmpanies (ESCO), 
which is a form of cooperation to ensure the reduction 
of energy consumption. ESCO partners guarantee that 
the agreed energy savings are real and can be docu-
mented and compensate for the lack of energy savings 
compared to the guaranteed energy savings. This has 
become a trend in the green building industry and has 
become useful for securing building performance and 
a step into sustainable and smart buildings. [14]  
For this to happen, it is important that designers and 
contractors give the building owner and the facility 
management the tools and documentation to imple-
ment smart strategies. Smart building specialists and 
facility managers need to be part of the early design 
stages to affect the strategic development of the smart 
building. [8] These stakeholders need to be able to af-
fect the critical requirements for the operation of the 
building, thus a smart building strategy and a brief 
containing these requirements must be incorporated 
early in the planning process to successful design for 
a smart building. [8]  
The process does not end at the handover stage of 
the building as the legacy must continue to create 
value in the whole value chain. The specifications for 
the performance of the building changes, user re-
quirements change, even the purpose of the building 
might change. Smart voting with sensors will be im-
portant in this context to measure, e.g. atmosphere 
temperature and occupant patterns. 
3.4 Discussed cashflow (DCF) 
Discounted cash flow (DCF) is where a real estate 
agent speaks about the capitalization of the invest-
ment, and this must yield a return before the building 
is considered attractive. If the expected return cannot 
be achieved, then it is not a good investment. This 
goes back to the CSR, as the DCF focuses on what 
interest ultimately comes to the real estate agent with 
the initiatives and things that are implemented in the 
building, however, suppliers and tclients also have a 
great influence on this. A solution might be viable 
with the right suppliers in the procurement process. 
 Smart buildings place greater demands on flexibil-
ity and adaptability, the individual user’s experience 
in the building and transparency of the building’s 
consumption. The building industry would with the 
concept shown in Figure 3 and a possible extension 
of the Green Lease Guide or a new Smart Lease 
Guide, be able to deliver on the needs for smarter 
buildings. Just as ESCO partners guarantee that the 
agreed energy savings are real and can be docu-
mented, IoT sensors and the right platforms for facil-
ity management and occupants will also be able to 
document and visualize that the building’s consump-
tion and indoor air quality are guaranteed. 
Going to the life-cycle phases of a building it is also 
important to recognise the nature of changes in the 
requirements of the building through the design 
phase. Dr. Arto Kiviniemi suggests that the iterative 
nature of the design process and the usually large 
number of changes during the process increase the 
complexity of the problem. [16] He argues that the 
process should be described as partly parallel activi-
ties, including requirements management through the 
whole process and in several stages.  
Requirements and expectations in a project evolve 
during the design and construction phases. Taking 
this into account, the concept shown in figure 3 
evolves from a 2D graph to a 3D graph including 
time, expectations and costs. As the expectations for 
the building evolve, so do the costs. The concept is 
shown in figure 4. 
 
Figure 4 Smart building procurement strategy in a spiral 
containing the aspects of building life cycle and stakeholder’s 
involvement. (Source: author) 
==PAGE:124==
If the strings are tied together in this way and the 
building moves into this spiral, then the strategy of 
the organisation for the client expressed in the CSR 
will be integrated with the delivery that a facility 
manager must deliver. With the building owner’s cap-
italisation of the investment as part of the spiral, the 
integration and innovative initiatives proposed in the 
CSR can be obtained to a greater extent if the right 
suppliers for FM and clients are also involved.  
The concept seems simple, but it contributes to an 
expanded dimension of the challenges of procure-
ment of smart and sustainable solutions in buildings. 
The concept works for new buildings but also for ret-
rofitting existing buildings which might be the smart 
buildings of tomorrow. In new buildings, it has to be 
clear of what the scope of the brief is. The big chal-
lenge is to avoid the temptation to over-specify but 
also making sure that the buildings are not obsolete 
handed over to the operation phase.  
In existing buildings, the challenges are going to be 
integrating new and old technology. In this case, the 
designers and facility management are not starting 
with the same blank canvas as with new buildings, as 
there are constraints with existing buildings that 
they need to work around. 
To properly pursue the concept of procurement of 
smart solutions in buildings, the occupant experience 
of the building should be considered during the initial 
stages of new construction or major retrofit projects. 
[17] 
4 REACHING CLIENT GOALS 
“Data created in the planning and design phase of 
a building must be utilized throughout the whole 
value chain so that it creates value both in the con-
struction phase and in the subsequent operational 
phase. Only then will we get the full potential of dig-
itisation and create value for the customers in the 
building and construction sector!” 
—Michael H. Nielsen, Director of the Confederation 
of Danish Industry (DI) 
 
The built environment needs to understand the 
challenges with the loss of knowledge and infor-
mation in the handover of a project or when moving 
to a new phase. [18] One of the problems is that dur-
ing the design phase, designers fill models with so 
much information that is not relevant to the operating 
phase. [19] Equally important is to understand the 
challenges of not specifying enough information 
about the operation data in the design phase. Clem-
ents-Croome has recently published an article where 
the causes of failure in building design have been 
identified: [20] 
 
1. An inadequate brief and specification 
2. A genuine lack of data on certain aspects 
3. Poor communication between the client and the de-
sign team, and between the members of the design 
team themselves 
4. Inadequate analysis or synthesis of solutions 
5. Unpredictable quirks of human behaviour by users 
6. Poor selection of equipment, inadequate installa-
tion or facilities management 
 
Considering the principle “begin with the end in 
mind” seems to be an important approach for building 
designs to achieve successful smart buildings. The 
concept is shown in Figure 5. It will be difficult if not 
impossible to reuse data from each phase with inade-
quate briefs and poor communication between the 
stakeholders involved. [20] 
Generally, the problem is a lack of clear require-
ments for the implementation of FM data require-
ments through the early stages of a project, and one 
of the biggest challenges was to define the data re-
quirements. [21] The role of the facility managers 
could potentially be revolutionised in this era of smart 
buildings.  
The role of the facility manager is crucial for the 
operation phase and it is expected that the future fa-
cility managers will be included in the early design 
process to participate with the design teams and rep-
resent the interests of the building owner and future 
occupants. [12] If the traditional role of facility man-
ager, of just taking over the already completed con-
struction, continues then there is only a little range of 
possibilities for the facility manager to influence the 
efficiency of the building. [22] 
 
 
Figure 5  A concept of "begin with the end" to bring to 
bring the facility manager in play. (Source: author) 
==PAGE:125==
 
If designers and building owners start thinking 
about operational data in the design from the start, 
then it will be possible to make a connection to facil-
ity management and therefore smart buildings. By do-
ing this, it enables the designers to design for the real 
reason for building design, which is to design for peo-
ple. This will be a step towards the era of smart build-
ings with a user-centric focus. [20] 
 
4.1 Description of Services 
In the Danish built environment many companies 
use the document template "Description of Services - 
Building and Planning 2018" as an agreement be-
tween the clients and designers to ensure services 
with the purpose of creating consistency in the deliv-
ery of projects. The document is developed by the 
Danish Association of Consulting Engineers (FRI) 
ant the Danish Association of Architectural Firms. 
[23] The document is not a mandatory requirement 
but can optionally be used in building projects as a 
requirement for different services. The document 
works as a template that follows the traditional phase 
model, to define what services to expect in different 
phases.  
The Danish Association of Construction Clients 
(DACC) could potentially publish a similar document 
template, so clients in the industry would start de-
manding to a greater extent in what should be deliv-
ered in buildings for e.g. operation. Today, it is lim-
ited what clients set of requirements to the operation 
of the building in the digital delivery, so the consult-
ants often don’t have rules or specific guidelines 
specified by the client for the operation. [24]  
One of the challenges for the clients to demand new 
smart solutions for the operation of their buildings is 
that a lot of the new digital solutions are not tested 
enough and the facility management departments do 
not have the chance to approve the solutions before 
the tender is delivered.[24] A section of the new "De-
scription of Services - Building and Planning 2018" 
that is, as highlighted there, significant for the opera-
tion phase of the building. 
 
—1.1.2 Commissioning and operation [23] 
The brief must contain the client’s specific require-
ments and wishes for the commissioning of the build-
ing, testing of technical installations and installations 
and operation. 
 
This section is stating that the requirements of the 
operation of the building should be considered early 
in the design process and preferable in the brief. This 
can potentially increase the value creation for all 
stakeholders in the building industry and be the key 
to design smarter buildings. In the future, revisions of 
the "Description of Services - Building and Planning" 
or a potential document developed by DACC could 
include more focus on smart solutions as part of the 
agreement. 
5 CONCLUSION 
A smart building is designed to deliver enhanced 
performance in areas of user-centric, sustainable, and 
continuously adaptable design and supports organisa-
tional goals. The evolution of smart buildings indicate 
that buildings are becoming a space that is responsive 
to the users to promote a stimulating and attractive 
environment. To do this, emerging cutting-edge tech-
nologies supporting data collection, analysis, asset 
control, and action allow optimised high performance 
of the buildings. 
The findings show that the smart building is de-
signed and delivered around clients wants and needs 
by people who understand when technology is appro-
priate and are able to build and operate these build-
ings. This process should incorporate FM, building 
occupants and owners from the early beginning of the 
project to derive specific requirements for the organ-
isation and occupants of what will be of most value to 
them in the operation phase.  
Smart buildings increase the complexity of con-
struction with integrated systems, thus making a 
smarter procurement more important. 
6 REFERENCES 
[1] [23] F. Guthrie, C. (2013). Smart technology and the 
moral life. Ethics & Behavior 23, 324–337. 
[2] Ghaffarianhoseini, A., AlWaer, H., Clements-Croome, 
D., et al. (2017). Intelligent or smart cities and buildings: a crit-
ical exposition and a way forward. Intelligent Buildings Interna-
tional 10 (2), 122–129. 
[3] Jadhav, N. (2016a). Green and Smart Building Trends, pp. 
9–14. Springer Singapore. 
[4] Groote, Maarten De, J. V. and F. Bean (2017). Smart 
buildings decoded. [Online]. Available: http://bpie.eu/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2017/06/PAPER-Smart-buildings-de-
coded_05.pdf. [03-09-2018]. 
[5] McCraven, Mary (2017b). Keeping up with the evolution 
of buildings part 3 – buildings of the future. [Online]. Available: 
https://blog.schneider-electric.com/building-manage-
ment/2017/07/12/keeping-evolution-buildings-part-3-build-
ings-future/. [26-12-2018]. 
[6] Indo-German Smart Initiative (2017). Integrated urban 
development and co-production for indian cities. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.igsi.info/. [15-01-2019]. 
[7] RIBA (2013). RIBA Plan of Work 2013 Overview. RIBA. 
[8] King, O. (2017). Smart Working - Smart Buildings and 
the Future of Work. UnWork.com Ltd. 
==PAGE:126==
[9] Olesen, T., Larsen, M., Sørensen, K. and Fogemann, M. 
(2018). Skyld eller ansvar? hvem er bannerfører for driftsøko-
nomien? [Online]. Available: http://www.dk-gbc.dk/nyhe-
der/seneste-nyt/building-green-messen-i-koebenhavn-4-okt-1-
nov-2018/. [02-01-2018]. 
[10] RICS Facilities Management Professional Group Board 
(2018). Procurement of facility management. Royal Institution 
of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) and International Facility Man-
agement Association (IFMA). 
[11] Redlein, A. and Zobl, M. (2014). Contribution of facility 
management to sustainability and coporate social responsibility. 
In ScieConf 2014. 
[12] Imperatori, B. (2017). Engagement and Disengagement 
at Work: What’s New, pp. 5–18. Springer. 
[13] Clarke, S. and R. D’Arjuzon (2018). Smart Building 
Technology Global Survey 2018: Facilities Optimization Man-
agement Brands. Verdantix. 
[14] Jadhav, N. Y. (2016b). Green and Smart Building 
Trends. Springer Singapore. 
[15] Investas (2007). Green lease guide for commercial office 
tenants (2 ed.). Investas. 
 [16] Kiviniemi, A. and Fischer, M. (2014). Requirements 
Management Interface to Building Product Models. VTT Publi-
cations. 
[17] Machinchich, T. (2018). The holistic view of a commer-
cial 
building 
needs 
to 
expand. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.navigantresearch.com/news-and-views/the-holis-
tic-view-of-a-commercial-building-needs-to-expand. 
[02-01-
2018]. 
[18] Eastman, C., Teicholz, P., Sacks, R. and Liston, K 
(2011). BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building Information Mod-
eling For Owners. Wiley. 
[19] Ridley, J. (2018). Digital twins are shaking the founda-
tions 
of 
the 
property 
industry. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/digital-twinsshaking-founda-
tions-property-industry-joshua-ridley/. [06-01-2018]. 
[20] Clements-Croome, D. (2018). The role of feedback in 
building design 1980–2018 and onwards. Building Services En-
gineering Research and Technology 40, 1–8. 
 
[21] Yalcinkaya, M. and Singh, V. (2014). Building infor-
mation modeling (bim) for facilities management – literature re-
view and future needs. Fukuda, S. et al. (Eds), IFIP International 
Federation for Information Processing, PLM 2014, IFIP AICT 
volume 442, 1–10. 
[22] Pašek, J and Sojková, V (2018). Facility management of 
smart buildings. International Review of Applied Sciences and 
Engineering 9, 181–187. 
[23] The Danish Association of Consulting Engineers and 
The Danish Association of Architectural Firms (2018). Descrip-
tion of Services - Building and Planning 2018. The Danish As-
sociation of Consulting Engineers and The Danish Association 
of Architectural Firms. 
[24] Gullberg, D. (2018). Digital aflevering, byggeri – hvad 
tænker 
du, 
når 
du 
læser 
det? 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/digital-aflevering-byggeri-
hvad-t%C3%A6nker-du-n%C3%A5r-l%C3%A6ser-det-gull-
berg/. [06-01-2018]. 
 
