==PAGE:1==
Stochastic Volatility models
Master Thesis - An empirical analysis on the level of volatility spillover and
the volatility modelling of the commodity and equity markets following
markets shocks.
Malvina Reinhold
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis Stochastic Volatility models is to evaluate the presence
of volatility interactions between the commodity and the equity markets fol-
lowing market shocks.
The work has consisted of a pre-study, an empirical
analysis and discussion phase.
The evaluation has been done with diﬀerent
stochastic volatility models and associated tests; stochastic volatility analysis,
conditional correlation, a causality in variance test and a generalized impulse
response function. The evaluation was carried out on market data consisting of
market indices to represent both the equity market and the commodity market;
S&P 500 and GSCI. With the results of the diﬀerent tests, the conclusion is that
there does exist increased volatility and volatility spillover between the equity
and commodity markets around some of the chosen market shocks but not all.
Furthermore, both the magnitude and timing of the volatility spillover are not
uniform across the diﬀerent shocks. It is this result that could lend even more
insight into the dynamic of cross-market volatility. The test results were dis-
cussed considering the market events, the potential causes and the connection
to ﬁnancial risk.
The thesis was carried out with the collaboration of the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Formålet med afhandlingen Stokastiske volatilitetsmodeller er at vurdere til-
stedeværelsen af volatilitetsinteraktioner mellem råvaremarkedet og aktiemar-
kederne efter en markedschok. Arbejdet har bestod af en forundersøgelse, en
empirisk analyse og diskussionsfase. Evalueringen er udført med forskellige sto-
kastiske volatilitetsmodeller og tilhørende tests; stokastisk volatilitetsanalyse,
betinget korrelation, en variantprøve med årsagssammenhæng og en generalise-
ret impulsrespons funktion. Evalueringen blev udført på markedsdata, der består
af markedsindekser, der repræsenterer både aktiemarkedet og råvaremarkedet;
S&P 500 og GSCI. Med resultaterne af de forskellige tests konkluderes det, at
der eksisterer øget volatilitet og volatilitet spillover mellem aktie- og råvaremar-
kederne omkring nogle af de valgte marked chocks, men ikke alle. Endvidere
er både størrelsen og timingen af ﬂygtighedsspillet ikke ensartet på tværs af
de forskellige marked chocks. Det er dette resultat, der kunne give endnu mere
indsigt i dynamikken i volatiliteten på tværs af markederne. Testresultaterne
blev diskuteret i betragtning af markedshændelserne, de potentielle årsager og
sammenhængen med ﬁnansiel risiko.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
The need to evaluate ﬁnancial risk and the study of cross-market interactions
are topics that have been of increased interest as of lately.
Since stressed market situations and lack of thorough risk considerations are
tied into market interpretation and modelling, this thesis will take a closer look
at stochastic volatility models and evaluate the presence of volatility interac-
tions between the commodity and the equity markets following market shocks.
The evaluation will consider stochastic volatility models through volatility in-
terpretation, conditional covariance modelling, a causality in variance test and
a generalized impulse response function.
Lyngby, 25-January-2019
==PAGE:8==
vi
Malvina Reinhold
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the Danish Technical University for giving me the oppor-
tunity to learn about Mathematical Modelling, in particular my master thesis
supervisor Henrik Madsen who have helped me through this ﬁnal part of my
education.
I would also like to thank my family who have supported me through this whole
process.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.6
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.7
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Historical background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Volatility Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Financial Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Equity Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Commodity risk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Volatility Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
Market shocks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Model and test speciﬁcations
13
3.1
Variance modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
GARCH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.1.2
Stochastic Volatility model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
Stochastic Diﬀerential Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Covariance modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Multivariate GARCH models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
CCC-GARCH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.3
DCC-GARCH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Test for causality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.1
Causality test in conditional variance . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Impulse response function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.1
Generalized impulse response function . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.2
Vector Autoregressive model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Empirical Application
25
4.1
Data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.1
Identiﬁcation of market shocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Empirical ﬁndings from the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Result from variance modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Result from conditional covariance and causality in variance test
38
4.5
Result from impulse response function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Model Summary
51
6
Conclusion
53
A Appendix
57
A.1 SP GSCI components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.2 ACF & PACF for log return . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.3 Market shock dates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.4 VAR roots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.5 Data statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.6 Correlation matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Project plan
The purpose of this master thesis is to evaluate the presence of volatility interac-
tions between the commodity and the equity markets following market shocks.
Basic trading principles indicate that the value of a good is correlated to the
value of its base commodity. To evaluate the volatility spillover between the
two markets diﬀerent stochastic volatility models will be used.
The ﬁrst step of the project will be to collect data of stock returns. The stock
returns should represent both the equity and the commodity market. The sam-
ple size should be large enough to make a suﬃcient evaluation of the volatility
spillover. Then the task will be to ﬁnd and identify diﬀerent time episodes where
the markets show signiﬁcant shocks.
Getting familiar with diﬀerent stochastic volatility models will be important
to make robust modelling and estimations. To accomplish this, I will need to
describe, study, and compare various stochastic volatility models. The empirical
tests will be executed in the statistical computation program R. Once a good
volatility model is established, the covariance matrix will be modelled.
The
covariance matrices will be the starting point to perform the volatility spillover
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
tests. Based on an analysis of diﬀerent causality in covariance matrices, the
most suitable one will be used to calculate test statistics. Finally I will conduct
impulse response function testing and interpret whether there is a volatility
spillover between the diﬀerent markets.
The results of this research have the potential to build upon existing research
in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial mathematics, often used by quantitative traders.
1.2
Project evaluation
This project has been very interesting in terms of the understanding of stochastic
volatility models and their roll in evaluating volatility spillover between the
commodity and the equity markets and the connection to ﬁnancial risk. The
project evaluation is in the attachment Project Plan & Auto Evaluation.
1.3
Introduction
Very early into their foray into ﬁnancial markets, most investors learn the ﬁ-
nancial rule that a well-diversiﬁed portfolio incurs higher average returns and
lower portfolio risk than less diversiﬁed ones [1], [2], [3].
In terms of risk evaluation and ﬁnancial mathematics, Markowitz had a signiﬁ-
cant impact on modern portfolio selection as well as other risk related theories.
Markowitz used volatility as a proxy of the measurement of the risk [1]. He
argued that by evaluating the overall mean return and variance of the portfolio
rather than evaluating the risk and its return of individual stocks, the overall
return would be greater [4]. This theory has been called the "modern port-
folio theory" and is still used as one of the fundamental theories in ﬁnance.
Through this concept, adequate diversiﬁcation can successfully lower the risk of
a portfolio without sacriﬁcing the level of return [5] [6]
Investors look for portfolio diversiﬁcation in numerous ways; across various in-
dustries, geographic regions or even company sizes. Furthermore, the utilization
of several asset classes (such as sovereign and corporate debt or real estate as-
sets) in addition to equity provides an investor with increased diversiﬁcation.
The inclusion of commodity assets, a raw material or agricultural product that
can be transacted (i.e. oil, metals, agriculture products), in investment port-
folios has been a growing trend since the early 2000’s. This is evidenced by a
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Purpose
3
U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission report that stated the total value
of various commodity index related instruments purchased by institutional in-
vestors increased from nearly USD 15 billion in 2003 to at least USD 200 billion
in mid-2008 (CFTC 2008). This obscure inﬂux of capital into commodities is
chalked up to speculative traders entering the commodities market in response
to rising commodity prices. Commodity prices experienced fast increases during
the early 2000s as the accelerated growth in emerging markets (such as the BRIC
countries) powered demand upwards. Furthermore, questions around potential
supply limitations further increased prices [7]. Amidst all of the speculative
trading action, investors began to consider if there were underlying beneﬁts to
devoting a portion of their capital to commodities in the way of added portfolio
diversiﬁcation. This consideration has since become a topic of much research.
The remainder of this paper consists of a literature review which discusses the
correlation of equity and commodity markets as well as the concepts of eq-
uity risk and commodity risk. The literature review also discusses past research
around volatility dynamics. The literature review is followed by the model spec-
iﬁcation and methodology employed before the discussion turns to the results
and ﬁndings of the tests. The penultimate section contemplates the limitations
of this study while suggesting routes of further research before the paper is
concluded with ﬁnal comments.
1.4
Purpose
The purpose of this paper is to analyze the presence of volatility interactions
between the commodity and equity markets through the application of stochastic
volatility models. As mentioned above, this is a worthwhile route of research
due to its potential implications on portfolio diversiﬁcation across diﬀerent asset
classes.
1.5
Limitations
Limitations to this thesis is the moderate shortage of accessible data for the
commodity market. Studies relating to commodity markets have historically
had less signiﬁcance in ﬁnancial research compared to the equity market. One
explanation could be that the equity market, especially the chosen data sample
for this paper, often serves as a benchmark for the wider scope of ﬁnancial
markets. Another limitation could be the amount of documentation for some of
the selected tests and models. Some of the mathematical models employed in
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
this paper are relatively new and thus the amount of information and in-depth
discussion on the uses and complications of these models is still being explored.
Another limitation could be the selection of market shock date for the 2015
oil price changes. Unlike the other, later discussed market shocks, the 2015 oil
price changes did not have a signiﬁcant date of change, but rather a change over
a couple of quarters. This could limit the evaluation of pre and post market
shock.
1.6
Methodology
The study has taken place with collaboration with the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark.
The work for this master thesis has been divided into three parts; the pre-study,
the construction of the empirical analysis and the discussion and evaluation.
These sections have the intention of evaluating the hypothesis and carrying out
the purpose of the paper.
Through the pre-study and information gathering processes, the paper’s lit-
erature review was developed. In this section, an understanding of industry
dynamics is built and the various tests to be used in this paper are presented
and analyzed. In order to conduct some of the tests and applications, the paper
needed to introduce a handful of related and semi-related topics that the thesis
touches upon. This was done to add a layer of completeness in this study.
In the construction of the empirical analysis the aim was to evaluate diﬀerent
stochastic volatility models, the concept of conditional covariance, a causality in
variance test and a generalized impulse response function. The purpose of these
tests is to analyze the impact of a large market shock on various ﬁnancial en-
vironments. Furthermore, this paper also seeks to interpret how the stochastic
volatility models can contribute to the understanding of complex market inter-
actions and movements. When looking into models with stochastic volatility
model the GARCH model, the SV(1) linear model and the Heston model will
be considered. Introduction and discussion of these models takes place in the
Model Speciﬁcations chapter.
Following this, the study then seeks to gain further understanding of the interac-
tions between diﬀerent ﬁnancial markets during the uncertain periods following
a market shock by analyzing the presence of volatility spillover. To carry this
out the empirical analysis will evaluate the conditional correlation, modelled by
the DCC-GARCH model, as well as evaluating the causality in variance test.
==PAGE:17==
1.7 Hypothesis
5
Finally, the dynamics of market interactions following market shocks are further
analyzed by using the generalized impulse function.
The study concludes with the evaluation and discussion chapter. This section
ties the results of the empirical analysis with the theories of ﬁnancial risk by
discussing the implications of the quantitative results.
1.7
Hypothesis
The hypothesis of this thesis is grounded in a general understanding of ﬁnancial
market developments after the identiﬁed market shocks. Due to the signiﬁcant
amount entanglement between various ﬁnancial markets, the hypothesis of this
study is that a shock in one market will cause increased volatility in the other
market during the post-shock period. Furthermore, this paper hypothesizes that
there will be an increased volatility spillover across the two markets following a
market shock. The hypothesis also includes the expectation that the diﬀerent
stochastic volatility models being employed in this study will act as helpful tools
to analyse ﬁnancial risk.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
In the literature review a historical background of the topic will be covered,
as well as an elaboration of volatility dynamics, ﬁnancial risk and volatility
clustering.
2.1
Historical background
There are a large amount of empirical studies that have attempted to uncover
the level of correlation between equity and bonds versus commodity assets (this
is done to speak to the degree of success one could have in diversifying a port-
folio with the inclusion of commodities). The results of these studies have been
mixed, to say the least. One study conducted an in-sample and out-of-sample
analysis on the portfolio eﬀects resulting from adding commodities to a stock-
bond portfolio for commonly implemented asset strategies. The major ﬁnding
was that the attainable beneﬁts of the inclusion of commodities is minimal, and
ﬂuctuates widely depending on the commodity used and the time frame consid-
ered [8]. Lombardi and Ravazzolo developed a Bayesian Dynamic Conditional
Correlation model and ﬁnd that the inclusion of commodity assets increases the
volatility of their portfolio [9]. On the other hand, Chong and Miﬀre (2006)
showed that the conditional correlations between commodities and equity have
been decreasing through time, thus leading to an increasing beneﬁt of utilizing
==PAGE:20==
8
Literature Review
commodity assets to diversify a portfolio [10]. Additional studies have found
similar results, showing that commodities are valuable tools that aid an in-
vestor in the task of achieving diversiﬁcation [11]. Further research has shown
that the greatest impact of commodity diversiﬁcation comes during times when
increasing inﬂation is a cause for concern [12]. While existing literature around
the beneﬁt of utilizing commodity assets to increase diversiﬁcation has mixed
results, a recurring theme amongst the studies is they focus on the correlation
and co-movement of returns between equities and commodities. This study will
add to existing literature by focusing on the volatility interaction between equity
markets and commodity markets. This will be accomplished through an empir-
ical analysis of the presence (or lack thereof) of volatility and shock spillover
between the equity and commodity markets.
2.2
Volatility Dynamics
In the past decade, there has been an increased focus on the dynamics of volatil-
ity on asset returns. A large cause for this is due to the fact that ﬁnancial return
volatility exhibits clustering and extended memory, thus enhancing its level of
predictability. Additionally, volatility interactions between ﬁnancial markets is
a well-penetrated area of academic research, with particular focus on two diﬀer-
ent forms of volatility interactions; shock spillover and volatility spillover. To
summarize, shock spillover occurs when a random shock in one market transmits
itself to another market. Volatility spillover refers to potential causal relation-
ship between the volatility of various markets, as would be the case if a period
of high volatility in one market preceded a period of high volatility in another
market.
There is a wide amount of literature pertaining to the spillover of
volatility and shocks across markets, such as the study conducted by Fernandez
(2005) which used VAR and GARCH modeling methodologies to analyze the
spillover of the G7 countries major indices [13]. A number of other studies,
based in wavelet correlation analysis techniques, have found that volatility of
an equity market in one economy often has predicting power over the volatility
of another economy, thus furthering the hypothesis that there is strong linkage
between equity markets across global borders [14] [15] [16] [17]. While the lion’s
share of volatility interaction research has focused on equity markets across
diﬀerent geographies, the observation of spillover has been discovered between
various commodity markets [18] [19] as well as across equity and bond markets
[20]. There is, however, a noticeable gap in the amount of literature devoted to
the consideration of interaction of volatility between the equity and commodity
markets. We view this as an important study to undergo, largely considering
the fundamental dynamics that exist between equity and commodity markets,
which are discussed below.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Financial Risk
9
2.3
Financial Risk
Financial investors are faced with the diﬃcult task of identifying and managing
risk. Financial statement analysis, such as ratio analysis relating to leverage,
liquidity, proﬁtability and other quantiﬁable metrics, can provide investors with
a solid understanding of the inherent value of a ﬁrm and its assets [21] [22]. Fur-
thermore, investors often conduct in-depth analyses relating to the company’s
future ability to continue to generate desirable returns. This type of analysis
could consider a myriad of factors such as the company’s market positioning and
the trends aﬀecting supply and demand within the industry. However, there do
exist larger, broader risks that aﬀect entire ﬁnancial markets and are much more
diﬃcult to protect against. This type of risk, deﬁned as systematic equity risk,
will be the focus of this study, as we are focusing our analysis on whether com-
modity assets can act as a potential buﬀer towards the threat of systematic risk
in the equity markets.
2.3.1
Equity Risk
The systematic and comprehensive reach of equity risk creates an imposing
obstacle for investors to grapple, and its inherent presence to all market par-
ticipants make it unavoidable. In addition to being unavoidable, equity risk
is unpredictable and thus very dangerous to investors. Even highly diversiﬁed
indices, such as the SP500 index, prove to be vulnerable in times of systematic
shock and subsequent uncertainty. This was the case in March 2000, when the
index dropped by 50 percent in the wake of a bear market (Hill, 2011). His-
torically, a mixed assortment of factors have opened the lid on systematic risk
and sparked fear and uncertainty in the hearts of investors. These factors have
been political, as was the case with the June 2016 Brexit vote and, to a develop-
ing extent, the potential trade ware between the United States and China that
continues to unfold in mid 2018. Other periods of systematic turmoil in the
equity markets have been ignited by economic causes, such as signs of solvency
risk in the market (as was the case in the 2007 ﬁnancial crisis) or even war
[23]. In each of these scenarios, the elevated risk and increased volatility was
not concentrated to a speciﬁc industry or segment, but rather it was widespread
and systematic. In times of shock and uncertainty in the equity markets, are
commodity markets less volatile?
To explore this question, the analysis will consider two diﬀerent systematic
shocks in the equity market that lead to elevated volatility and increased un-
certainty; The Great Recession and the Brexit vote. These will be discussed in
section 2.4. Furthermore, a period of high volatility in the commodity market is
==PAGE:22==
10
Literature Review
also considered. The period of falling of oil prices in 2014 and 2015 serves this
purpose.
2.3.2
Commodity risk
It is noted that the process of analyzing the beneﬁts of diversifying a portfo-
lio with the addition of commodity assets through the consideration of equity
shocks does not give a complete picture of the dynamics that exist between
the two asset classes. To that end, the study will also attempt to analyze the
interaction of volatility between equity and commodity markets during periods
of heightened commodity risk. Commodity risk relates to increased volatility
within the commodity markets, and has several classiﬁcation.
Commodity risk can be divided into four types of risk; price risk, quantity risk,
cost risk and political and regulatory risk.
• Price risk, occurs due to movements in the prices of commodities caused
by macro-economic factors [24].
Producers and consumers of sectors such as mining, minerals, agricultural
and energy are most exposed to the price risk within the commodity risk
[24].
• Quantity risk is occurs due to changes in the supply of commodities [24].
A producer needs to make sure that he or she has enough of supply for
the needed demand. If too much supply were to be produced compared
to the considered lower amount of supply the producer would have to sell
the supply at a lower price to not lose all potential proﬁt. Hence, it is
important for the producer to be aware of the supply and demand of the
commodity to avoid the quantity risk. Quantity risk has the potential
to be adversely aﬀected by exogenous shocks that immediately throw the
supply and demand dynamics out of their current grove, shooting prices
either up or down.
• Cost risk which is not to be confused with the price risk. Cost risk arises
form the price diﬀerences in the costs that impact the business cost [24].
Cost of risk can arise due to various variables such as the cost to extract or
gather the raw material. Additionally, administrative costs and mitigation
cost, such as the cost when attempting to reduce risk through automated
machines or similar. The cost risk can also rise due to risk control costs.
For example, the cost of operational process used to reduce risk. Cost
risk can also occur in relation to transfer risk. The transfer risk reﬂects
the costs transferring risk oﬀto another party (i.e. insurance or hedging
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Volatility Clustering
11
contracts).
• Political and regulatory risk Political events such as elections, war and
legislative actions, are additional risks that have a direct impact on the
dynamics aﬀecting the prices of commodities. [25]. Regulatory risk arises
when laws and regulations impact the supply and demand equilibrium
(and thus the price) of a commodity, the way to extract a commodity or
adjust the amount of a commodity available (i.e. through limitations or
subsidies) [24].
2.4
Volatility Clustering
In the scope of this study, an important addition to consider is the concept of
volatility clustering. Volatility clustering, in simple terms, means that volatility
breeds further volatility. This was ﬁrst observed by Mandelbrot (1963), who
found that "large changes tended to be followed by large changes, of either sign,
and small changes tended to be followed by small changes" [26]. The concept of
volatility clustering has been identiﬁed and expanded upon in numerous studies
[27] [28] [29]. Due to volatility clustering, we believe the need to explore the
volatility and shock spillover between equity markets and commodity markets
is even all the more signiﬁcant.
2.4.1
Market shocks
With the concept of volatility spillover, the study will evaluate periods of time
where the equity risk and commodity risk are heightened. Periods of risks occur
when there are irregularities and uncertainties in the market, which mostly
occurs in times of increased volatility [30].
This study will consider a period of heightened risk to analyze the volatility
interaction between commodity and equity markets; the oil price shock of 2015,
Brexit and the Great Recession.
Between June 2014 and March 2015 the price of oil halved.
This was the
result of a shock in the supply of oil, brought upon by unexpected develop-
ments within the global market. During 2014, a supply and demand imbalance
was developing in the global market for oil, with additions to supply outpacing
demand growth. This can be clearly evidenced by 2014 oil production in the
United States reaching its highest ever annual growth level [31]. Due to this
==PAGE:24==
12
Literature Review
market dynamic, oil prices began to weaken. At this time, the Organization
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), a cartel made up of a handful
of major oil producing countries and historical dominant supplier of oil with
around 40% of the world’s crude oil [32], reacted by ﬂooding the market with
additional supply. This tactic was implemented in order to further lower the
price of oil and force other suppliers out of the market (as OPEC members often
have lower cost of extraction than other players)[33]. Market participants, both
corporate and ﬁnancial, were surprised by these developments and were unsure
as to what would happen next in the market. Thus, this period was marked
with increased volatility of oil prices, as uncertainty of the balance of supply and
demand in the market confounded both investors and market participants. As
oil is a global commodity that is used in a wide array of industries, movements
in the oil market are heard around the world.
The Great Recession, which began to snowball once Lehman Brothers, a global
banking giant, collapsed in September 2008. This lead to the worst recession in
80 years that required massive monetary and ﬁscal stimulus packages in order
to spare the global economy from a complete collapse [34]. In summary, a ma-
jor driver of this recession was the activities of ﬁnancial institutions. After the
turn of the 21st century, the popularity of mortgage backed securities (MBS)
was quickly rising. An MBS is a ﬁnancial-engineered investment product that
consists of very many mortgages (or auto-loans, credit card loans etc) that are
pooled together. This asset pool is then rated by a credit agency and, as is the
point of its engineering, the rating on the pool of assets is most often higher
than the ratings on the individual components. Many banks ﬁlled their balance
sheets with MBS products and when underlying components of these products
began to experience heavy defaults, banks suﬀered tremendously. This period
utterly destroyed the conﬁdence that people had in banks. Conﬁdence in the
ﬁnancial system was tarnished for an extended period of time, and volatility
persisted. This truly represented a systematic risk, as no part of the economy
escaped the wrath of the recession.
This study will also consider the Brexit vote of June 2016, in which the citizens
of Great Britain voted to leave the European Union. Globalization has positive
eﬀects on an economy, and ﬁnancial investors certainly recognize this [35], and
investors are equally weary of the potential negative eﬀects that protectionism
can have on an economy. Furthermore, the unexpected result of this vote ﬁlled
ﬁnancial markets with uncertainty around the future shape of the world econ-
omy, as no one could predict what would happen in Britain, Europe, or even
across the globe.
This uncertainty was systematic in nature, permeating all
segments and industries.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Model and test
speciﬁcations
The various models to be considered in this study will be employed in order
to understand the volatility behaviour and impacts on diﬀerent markets. The
models are the conditional volatility, the conditional covarience, a causality in
variance test and an impulse response function of the selected sample data.
3.1
Variance modelling
Modelling the conditional variance for ﬁnancial and economical cases can be use-
ful for pricing derivatives, calculating measures of risk, and forecasting. Market
data often show irregularities and does not have a constant variance. It has been
shown that the conditional variance is thus better captured with a time vary-
ing conditional variance model Data description. In this section three classes of
time-varying volatility models are presented; the generalized autoregressive con-
ditional heteroscedastic (GARCH) models, the stochastic volatility (SV) model
and the Standard Diﬀerential Equations (SDE). All three model classes have a
stochastic volatility component to capture the randomness of the data [36].
==PAGE:26==
14
Model and test speciﬁcations
3.1.1
GARCH
The Generalized Auto Regressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity (GARCH) model
developed from the more simple ARCH model was developed by Taylor in 1994
[37]. The ARCH model was ﬁrst developed by Engle 1982 and has since been
a major building stone for the development of ﬁnancial mathematics.
The
GARCH model is used to model the conditional volatility process both in the
ﬁnancial and economical sector, as well as many other ﬁelds [38].
Ever since then the ARCH model has been more popular to cover the conditional
heteroskedasticity in research, mainly due to the fact that many prior time
series and models have assumed a constant standard deviation amongst the
asset returns, the GARCH model has been a central component [39]. However,
the ARCH model have a non-constant random variance, which depend on past
residuals. The ARCH has proven to be suitable for modelling ﬁnancial returns
as it considers time-varying variance and volatility clustering.
The GARCH model has fewer estimated parameters compared to the ARCH
model and assume that the positive and negative error terms have asymmetric
eﬀect on the volatility ruppert.
The standard GARCH(p,q) can be expressed as:
Xt = σtϵt
(3.1)
σ2
t = ω +
q
X
i=1
αiX2
t−1 +
p
X
j=1
βjσ2
t−j
(3.2)
t = 1, 2..., T
(3.3)
where σ > 0, αi ≥0 and βj ≥0. σ2
t represent the variance of the return. ω is
the weighted long-run variance. {ϵ} is independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) [40]. If p = 0 then the equation eq:garch simply becomes an ARCH
model. For the GARCH model to be considered stationary, the condition of
(α + β) < 1 needs to be met [41]. The conditional variance of a GARCH(1,1)
model is is then follows an auto-regressive AR(1) model [36].
One of the the more outstanding features of the GARCH model is its conditional
variance’s capacity to capture both the lagged squared residuals and the lagged
conditional variance. Just as the ARCH model, the GARCH model also caters
for a time dependent variance of the time series. The GARCH model might be
sensitive during irregular jumps in the data, which can cause over estimation
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Variance modelling
15
of the volatility.
Another considerable downside with the GARCH model is
that it does not encounter for leverage eﬀect.
As previously mentioned the
GARCH model does not do well with irregular jumps of the historical data.
One might argue that it is better to then analyze a normalized data set where
the heteroskedastisy is reduced. The normalization can be done through:
Zt = Xt −µ
σt
, 1 ≤t ≤T
(3.4)
where σt follows the one from the GARCH model and the other parameters
estimated with the maximum likelihood estimate [42].
A univariate GARCH model has a GARCH process with Gaussian distributed
errors that meet some stationary conditions that can ensure that the process
has unconditional variance [43].
3.1.2
Stochastic Volatility model
The ﬁrst Stochastic Volatility (SV) model was developed by Taylor in 1982, even
though stochastic volatility had been introduced to the subject of economical
modelling by Clark in 1973 [44].
The SV models are similar to the GARCH model in the sense that they are both
have time varying volatility and capture the randomness in the time series. The
variance of the SV models is randomly distributed; follow a stochastic evalua-
tion. While the conditional variance in the GARCH model is a deterministic
function of the model parameters and the historical data [36]. A major diﬀer-
ence between the GARCH and the SV models is the fact that the return Xt
for the SV models is assumed to have its own time depending variance. Hence,
preventing the usual assumption of the homoskedasticy [45].
The standard SV model is deﬁned as
Xt = σϵX
t
ϵX
t ∼N(0, eht)
(3.5)
ht = σh + Φh(ht−1 −σh) + ϵh
t
ϵh
t ∼N(0, ω2
h)
(3.6)
where ϵX
t is a series of independent identically distributed random disturbances.
The parameters σh, Φh and XX are the mean or the level of log-variance, the
persistence of the log-variance and the volatility of the log-variance [46].
==PAGE:28==
16
Model and test speciﬁcations
eht is the random component of the volatility process and ω2
h is varience or
the random components of the volatility. The volatility ht follows a stationary
AR(1) process with |Φh| < 1 and an unconditional mean σh, which is also a
diﬀerence compared to the GARCH model. The starting value for the process
is h1 ∼N(σh, ω2
h/(1 −Φ2
h)). [47] [36] [48].
3.1.3
Stochastic Diﬀerential Equation
Stochastic Diﬀerential Equation (SDE) are used in many ﬁelds to calculate the
solution to a process or behaviour. The SDE naturally results in a stochastic
process. As is the case with other SV models, the SDE typically contains a
random white noise component. [49], [50].
When formulating a model deﬁnition for stock returns, Xt one can consider it
to be divided into two parts: A predictable part and a stochastic, unexpected
part. The predictable part is represented as the expected return of the stock
during the time period dt. The expected return is represented by µXdt. The
unexpected part that needs to be considered can be impacted by an assortment
of random inﬂuences, such as auxiliary markets or general dynamics of trading.
This unexpected part of a stock return is represented by σXtdWt.
The general deﬁnition of an SDE is then
dXt = µXtdt + σXtdWt
(3.7)
or
(3.8)
Xt
Xt
= µdt + σXtdWt
(3.9)
dWt represents a Wiener process, also call a Brownian motion process. The
equation eq:SDE2 refers to the rate of return of the price.
To solve the SDE in equation eq:SDE2 one can apply the Ito’s formula. Ito’s
formula and the calculus applied would then result in
lnXt = lnXt−1 +

µ −1
2σ2

dt + σϵ
√
dt
(3.10)
Xt = Xt−1e(µ−1
2 σ2)t+σϵ
√
t
(3.11)
The equation eq:SDE3 is the model for the future stock price called geometric
Brownian motion. In this case the volatility is assumed to be constant [50].
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Variance modelling
17
In order to make this a stochastic volatility model, the constant volatility piece
of the equation, σ, can be replaced with a function that captures the stock
returns’ volatility, ν.
dXt = µXtdt + √νtXtdWt
(3.12)
dνt = αν,tdt + βν,tdBt
(3.13)
where αν,t and βν,t are some functions of ν. dBt is correlated with the constant
correlation factor ρ [51].
Heston model
A popular SDE is the Heston model.
The Heston model was developed by
S. Heston in 1993 with the purpose of pricing options. Compared to the widely
used Black-Scholes option pricing model, the Heston model makes up for the
shortcomings of having an assumption of constant volatility [52], [51], [53], [54].
The Heston model show similarities with the general SDE version and is a two
dimensional SDE: equation eq:SDE4.
dXt = µXtdt + √νtXtdW X
t
(3.14)
νt = κ(θ −νt)dt + σν√νtdW ν
t
(3.15)
Just like the general SDE description, µ is the long term rate return, and θ is
the long term variance. The expected value of t tends to θ, then κ is the rate
at which νt reverts to θ. σν determines the volatility of νt, in other words, it
determines the volatility of the volatility model. To ensure that the volatility is
always positive the following condition needs to be met.
2κ > ν2
(3.16)
dW X
t
and dW ν
t are correlated Wiener processes with the correlation factor ρ. ρ
is a constant between [1, 1].
dW X
t dW ν
t = ρdt
(3.17)
[51], [53], [55], [54].
==PAGE:30==
18
Model and test speciﬁcations
3.2
Covariance modelling
The causality in variance test evaluates the conditional covariance between two
time series, hence the conditional covariance is needed to execute the test. The
conditional coverience for the indexes will be calculated based on the variance
from the univariet GARCH model. This section will then cover the basic ideas
behind multivariate GARCH models, the DCC-GARCH model used for the
causality in variance test and a brief explanation of how the covariance matrix
can be modelled.
3.2.1
Multivariate GARCH models
Due to the volatility clustering that occurs in assets returns, it is useful to model
the second order time varying moments. The GARCH(1,1) model has proved
to capture the second movement of the variance and is suﬃcient in modelling
the properties of the variance in a longer period [56].
By modelling the shocks in Xt by a GARCH(1,1) model, the model becomes
a multivariate GARCH model.
A multivariate GARCH model captures the
dependency of the diﬀerent asset returns in a portfolio, which is a beneﬁt for the
purpose of testing the causality in variance test. Hence, the use of a multivariate
GARCH model improves the analysis of risk occurred by the volatility spillover.
The multivariate GARCH is described as
Xt = H1/2
t
ϵt
(3.18)
where H1/2
t
, the matrix of conditional variances represents the notation of σt in
the notation of the GARCH model in section 3.1.1. Xt is a vector of returns
and ϵt a vector of the i.i.d error terms [56], [43].
There are diﬀerent types of multivariate GARCH models that can either de-
pend on the setup of the conditional variance H1/2
t
, or the modelling of the
conditional variances and correlations. Some examples of generalizations from
univariate to multivariate GARCH models are the VEC model (Bollerslev, En-
gle,
Wooldridge, 1988) and BEKK model. Both these models directly model
the covariance matrices.
An alternative method would be to model the conditional variance and the cor-
relations. Models with that method are referred to as conditional correlation
GARCH models (CC-GARCH). For these models, the covariance matrix Ht can
then be decomposed as
Ht = DtRtDt
(3.19)
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Covariance modelling
19
where Dt = diag(σ1t, ..., σnt) represents the conditional standard deviation and
Rt is the correlation matrix [56], [57].
3.2.2
CCC-GARCH
One multivariate GARCH model and a CC-GARCH model is the constant con-
ditional correlation GARCH model (CCC-GARCH). In the CCC-GARCH all
conditional correlation are constant and univariate GARCH models are used to
model the conditional variances. In the CCC-GARCH the coveriance matrix
Ht does not vary with time. In other words the conditional correlation does not
vary with time, hence Rt = R.
The shock process of Xt is modelled with a univariate GARCH model, like the
one in section 3.1.1. The conditional variance can then be described as
σ2
t = ω +
q
X
i=1
αiX2
t−i +
p
X
j=1
βjσ2
t−j
(3.20)
Rather than assuming to have the constant correlation matrix, R is could be
more interesting and beneﬁcial to have a time varying correlation matrix. A
trade of for the more correct model with the time varying correlation matrix,
would be the numerical simplicity that the CCC-GARCH model provides. The
complexity arises because the correlation matrix needs to be recalculated each
t. One way of dealing with this and a suggestion of Rt can be found in the
DCC-GARCH model, section 3.2.3 [56], [43].
3.2.3
DCC-GARCH
The dynamic conditional correlation (DCC) GARCH model was created by
Engle and Sheppard in 2001 and has the same set up as the CCC-GARCH model.
The signiﬁcant diﬀerence is that both Dt and Rt are time dependent. Again, for
the purpose of evaluating the volatility spillover, Xt represents the shocks from
asset returns. The elements of Dt, conditional standard deviation are modelled
as a univariate GARCH(1,1) model, see section 3.1.1. The other components of
the DCC-GARCH deﬁnition are like the CCC-GARCH and presented as:
==PAGE:32==
20
Model and test speciﬁcations
Xt = H1/2
t
ϵt
(3.21)
Ht = DtRtDt
(3.22)
The conditional correlation matrix Rt is obtained from the standardized resid-
uals of the error term ϵt. When determining Rt one must consider the Ht need
to be positive deﬁnite, as it is a covariance matrix. Then, due to their relation-
ship Rt must also be positive deﬁnite. Since Rt is a correlation matrix, all its
elements need to be less or equal to 1. To ensure the that these requirements
are ﬁlled Rt can be decomposed to
Rt = Q ∗−1
t
QtQ∗−1
t
(3.23)
Qt = (1 −a −b)Q + aϵt−1ϵT
t−1 + bQt−1
(3.24)
Q = Cov

ϵtϵT
t

= E

ϵtϵT
t

(3.25)
Q is the unconditional covariance matrix of the standardized errors ϵt and Q∗−1
t
is the diagonal matrix with the squared elements from Qt, they can be estimated
as
Q = 1
T ΣT
t=1ϵtϵT
t
(3.26)
Q∗−1
t
= diag(√q11, ..., √qmn)
(3.27)
a and b are scalars that should have the following properties: a > 0, b > 0 and
a + b < 1. In this paper only the DCC(1,1)-GARCH model will be used [56],
[43].
3.3
Test for causality
Economic studies and evaluations are often interested in testing for causality
between diﬀerent factors in diﬀerent scenarios. The evaluation of causality can
create a better foundation for analysis in the light of understanding an eco-
nomic environment and the dynamic of relationships between variables in an
environment. With a deeper, more robust understanding of an environment and
its components, strategic decisions are made with more conﬁdence. The ﬁelds
of economics and ﬁnance often test for causality across a plethora of factors.
Causality testing can help one understand how GDP movements are aﬀecting
consumption, how diﬀerent stock prices aﬀect other stock prices, or, as is the
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Test for causality
21
purpose of this paper, if there is any causality between the equity and commod-
ity markets.
The usage of causality in variance tests has increased since the 1980’s when Sim
criticized, the at the time, economic models used for evaluating the historical
movements of governmental spending and money. Sim’s work has contributed
with a great deal for the development of the causality in variance tests [58] [59].
In this study two methods will be employed to determine if there is a volatility
spillover between the equity and commodity markets; the causality in variance
test developed by Hafner and Herwartz and the generalized impulse response
function derived from a structural vector auto-regressive model (VAR) for both
the the pre- and post-shock time frames.
3.3.1
Causality test in conditional variance
Multiple tests to assess the volatility spillover between two time series has been
developed. In 1996 Cheung and Ng developed a causality in variance test, which
is based on cross-correlation functions (CCF) of standardized residuals obtained
from univariate GARCH estimations. A similar test was also presented by Hong
in 2001 [60].
Based on the Monte Carlo experiment and the evaluation carried out by Hafner
and Herwartz in 2006, the CCF test based on the Portmanteau test could suﬀer
from over-sizing in small and medium samples when the volatility processes
are leptokurtic. The Portmanteau test is a statistical test of the stated null-
hypothesis.
The Monte Carlo experiment carried out by Hafner and Herwartz indicates that
their test based on the Lagrange Multiplier (LM) proves to be more robust than
the CFF test and to be more useful for empirical illustrations. [60]. The take
on the causality in variance test illustrated by Hafner and Herwartz form 2006
(the approach was originally introduced by Lundbergh and Teräsvirta, 2002) is
based on estimating univariate GARCH models. The null hypothesis of non-
causality in variance between two time series, in this case market returns, can
be described as
H0 : Var(εit|F (j)
t−1) = Var(εit|Ft−1)
j = 1, ..., N,
i ̸= j
(3.28)
where F (j)
t
= Ft σ(εjτ, τ ≤t) and {εt ∈RN, t ∈N} and εit are the residuals
from the GARCH model. To test the null hypothesis, H0 the following model
==PAGE:34==
22
Model and test speciﬁcations
is considered:
εit = ξit
q
σ2
itgt,
gt = 1 + z′
jtφ
zjt =
 ε2
jt−1, σ2
jt−1
′
(3.29)
where the conditional variance is σ2
it = ωi + αiε2
i,t−1 + βiσ2
i,t−1 and the stan-
dardized residuals of the GARCH model is represented by ξit. In equation 5.2,
a suﬃcient condition to ensure the null hypothesis for non-causality in variance,
H0 : π = 0 for equation 5.1. The null hypothesis will be tested against the alter-
native hypothesis, H1 : π ̸= 0. The score of the Gaussian log-likelihood function
of εit is given by xit(ξ2
it −1)/2 where the derivatives is xit = σ−2
it (∂σ2
it/∂θi)
and θi = (ωi, αi, βi)′. To test the volatility transmission between two series, the
following LM test can be executed
λLM = 1
4T (
T
X
t=1
(ξ2
it −1)z′
jt)V (θi)−1(
T
X
t=1
(ξ2
it −1)zjt)
(3.30)
where
V (θi) = κ
4T (
T
X
t=1
zjtz′
jt −
T
X
t=1
zjtx′
it(
T
X
t=1
xitx′
it)−1
T
X
t=1
xitz′
jt)
(3.31)
κ = 1
T
T
X
t=1
 xi2
it −1
2
(3.32)
The static λLM can also be obtained from a regression analysis [61].
3.4
Impulse response function
When evaluating the volatility behaviour and spillover between two data sets
it is also useful to investigate how one market responds to a shock in the other
market. This type of investigation can be made with an impulse response func-
tion. In this paper, a generalized impulse function will be used for that purpose.
The generalized impulse function is derived from the moving average Vector Au-
toregressive (VAR) model.
3.4.1
Generalized impulse response function
Generalized impulse response functions (GIRFs) are calculated from the mov-
ing average representation of the VAR model, as the diﬀerence between the a
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Impulse response function
23
conditional and unconditional forecast, where the conditioning information set
is the shock to the j’th variable (koop et al (1996)) [62].
The GIRF can be deﬁned as
GIRF (i, t + h, δjt, Xt−1) = E
 ri
t+h|vj,t = δj,t, Xt−1

−E

rj
t+h|Xt−1

(3.33)
where h = 1, 2, ... is the forecasted horizon, i = 1, 2... are the amount of variables
and δj represents the shock in the jth variable in the VAR model. The deﬁnition
is further explained in section 3.4.2.
The GIRF can be calculated as
ψ(h)o
j = AhPej
(3.34)
ψ(h)g
j = u−1/2
j,j
AhΥej
(3.35)
Ah is a future coeﬃcient matrix from the moving average VAR calculation, P
is the lower-triangular Cholesky decomposition Υ. The vector ej has unity at
the jth position and zeros elsewhere and uj,j is the element of Υ [62].
Further detailed descriptions of the GIRF is available in other documentations
[63], [64].
3.4.2
Vector Autoregressive model
The Vector Autoregressive model (VAR) is a stochastic process model used to
model the relationship between multiple time series. And for the purpose of
this paper, a VAR model is used in order to model the relationship between
the volatilities of the commodity and equity markets.
The VAR models are
constructed so that that each variable is a linear function of its past lags of the
other variables [65].
The general VAR(p) is described as the following:
rt = A1rt−1 + ... + Apt −p + vt
(3.36)
where rt = (r1t, ..., rkt, ..., rKt) are endogenous variables or the lags, Ai are
(KxK) coeﬃcient matrices for i = 1,...,p and vt is a K-dimensional process with
E(vt) = 0 and time invariant positive deﬁnite covariance matrix E(vtvT
t ) =
P
v, in other words a white noise component, Υ. The diﬀerent vt can be either
correlated or non-correlated [66], [67].
==PAGE:36==
24
Model and test speciﬁcations
When the VAR is only considering the latest lag, the VAR(1) process can be
described as
rt = Art−1 + vt
(3.37)
which in the bivariate with no intercepts, rt = (r1t, r2t) can be deﬁned as
r1t =x + A11r1,t−1 + A12r2,t−1 + v1t
(3.38)
r2t =x + A21r1,t−1 + A22r2,t−1 + a2t
(3.39)
where the A is a matrix with the VAR coeﬃcients [66], [67].
The VAR provides the best results when the sample data is stationary. One way
of testing stationary is to evaluate the roots of the VAR model. The roots or
the eigenvalues can be obtained from the associated characteristic polynomial
that is derived from the function of yt [67], [56].
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Empirical Application
To analyze and verify the presence of volatility spillover between the commodity
market and the equity market, this paper will ﬁrst conduct a modelling of the
volatility processes of each respective market. The paper will examine diﬀerent
processes so as to model the volatility. This is done in order to build a solid
understanding of stochastic volatility models and, furthermore, how they can
play into the risk assessments for ﬁnancial institutions. Secondly, this paper
seeks to analyze whether there exists any volatility spillover between equity and
commodity markets through the construction of a causality in variance test.
Thirdly, this paper examines how the diﬀerent markets respond to a volatility
shock in the other market. This will be done with the use of an impulse response
function. Finally, the results will be evaluated and discussed for the purpose
of evaluating the diﬀerent ﬁnancial risks and their impact to the market and
ﬁnancial institutions, as well as understanding how markets interact in times of
uncertainty.
The empirical analysis has been carried out by considering data from histor-
ical samples. Tests and process simulations have been executed in the applica-
tion program R, with the signiﬁcant packages ccgarch, rmgarch, rugarch and
stochvol for the volatility processes, the causality in variance test, and the im-
pulse response function tests. The data samples used for the empirical study are
collected from Yahoo! Finance online stock data. Yahoo! Finance is a widely
used and considered a credible source of market information [68].
==PAGE:38==
26
Empirical Application
Other studies that have evaluated the volatility spillover between diﬀerent mar-
kets and sub-markets have undertaken their empirical evaluation in a similar
fashion. The diﬀerent studies have evaluated the selected samples’ data proper-
ties, the diﬀerent tests applied, the test statistics and results, as well as raising
an economic interpretation of the results [56, 60].
4.1
Data description
In order to analyze the existence of volatility interaction across various markets,
one needs to ﬁrst specify which data sets will be utilized as market proxies.
As a proxy for the equity market, the S&P 500 index is used. Due to the broad-
ness of the S&P 500, it is commonly used as a market proxy both in academia
and by investors [69] [70] [71]. Furthermore, as the S&P 500 is a capitalization-
weighted index composed of a wide range of stocks with representation across
diﬀerent industries and it has been widely used in economic and ﬁnancial re-
search. Due to these reasons it has been selected as a useful data set for this
analysis [72].
To proxy the commodity market, the S&P commodity index, GSCI, is utilized.
Similarly to the equity index, this index provides a broad-based look into com-
modity prices, providing a more holistic view of the commodity market. The
S&P GSCI Spot index for commodities and is a recognized and widely used for
general price movements and inﬂation in the economy. The S&P GSCI Spot
index consists of various types of commodities and has no restriction of how
many commodities can be placed in the index at a certain time. Currently,
it consists of 24 diﬀerent commodities and is commonly used as a benchmark
for commodity movements in the market [73], [74]. The composition of which
commodities are to be included in the index is re-evaluated on an annual ba-
sis. The 24 commodities can be found under Appendix A.1. Currently the S&P
GSCI has a breakdown between diﬀerent commodity sectors illustrated in ﬁgure
ﬁg:GSCIcomp.
The time period considered for the analysis is 2005-2018. The data set excludes
weekends. The exclusion of weekends does not impact the result of the data as
the mean, nor the variance are updated when a value is missing in the maximum-
likelihood estimation [75]. The diﬀerent dates to determine the pre- and post-
periods of the markets shocks are available in Appendix A.3.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Data description
27
Figure 4.1: 2018 sector composition of S&P GSCI in percentage CITE.
This study looks at daily opening prices. Daily data was chosen in order to gain
a granular view into volatility ﬂuctuations. But rather than using the opening
prices for modelling purposes, the log-return is employed as it is much more
useful for the purpose of this study. The log-return, Xt is deﬁned as follows:
Xt = logPt −logPt−1
(4.1)
= log
 Pt
Pt−1

(4.2)
= log

1 + Pt −Pt−1
Pt−1

(4.3)
where Pt is the price, α0 > 0, αi ≥0 for i = [1, q] and βj ≥0 for j = [1, p], and
1 ≤t ≤T.
The log-return provides normalized and time-consistent prices and, compared
to the Arithmetic rate of return, the log-return is then additive [40].
In ﬁgure 4.2 the diﬀerent behaviour of the opening prices and its equivalent
log-returns are illustrated. The eﬀect of the log-return normalization process is
==PAGE:40==
28
Empirical Application
very clear. The S&P GSCI tend to be more volatile than the S&P 500 for this
time period. This is to be expected, given that raw supply and demand is the
major driver of commodity prices.
The probability distribution and the normal Q-Q plot for both data sets are
presented in ﬁgure ﬁg:data2. Both of the S&P 500 and the GSCI data set tend
to show normal distribution. The Q-Q plot indicates that both the data sets
have heavy tails. Even though, considering the randomness nature of the data,
the Q-Q plot could be considered more or less normal.
4.1.1
Identiﬁcation of market shocks
As previously mentioned in section 2.4, the concept of volatility clustering is
based on the theory that volatility breeds further volatility. During a shock in
the ﬁnancial market, prices and trends tend to exhibit jagged spikes. In addition
to various macro-economic reasons, increased uncertainty in investor sentiment
causes the trends to change with signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations, which tends to evoke
further uncertainty in the minds of the market.
There have been numerous market shocks since 2005 that could have been used
to test for volatility spill-overs between the equity and the commodity market.
For the purpose of this paper, three volatility shocks were evaluated; two rooted
in the equity market and one in the commodity market. From the equity market
the recent global ﬁnancial crisis and the Brexit events were chosen. The date to
separate the pre- and post-crisis were respectively based on the dates when the
Lehman Brothers Bankruptcy occurred (2008-09-15) and the date Great Britain
oﬃcially voted to leave the European Union (2016-06-23). [76], [77].
For the commodity market, the extreme change in oil prices during 2015 will
be used. Based on the movements of the market prices and volatility of WTI
(West Texas Intermediate) one can see that the prices had their largest decrease
by the end of the second quarter of 2015. During the same time the volatility
increased [32] [33]. As evidenced by the movements in the data, the beginning
of August in 2015 is the point in time that will be used to split "pre-shock" and
"post-shock" periods. The nature of the volatility is shown in the Appendix
ﬁg:OPEC.
The volatility shocks chosen for this analysis are based on the overall impact
on the market as well as the following volatility clustering of the index prices.
As shown in ﬁgure 4.4, the volatility of of both the S&P 500 and the GSCI
index spike during the global ﬁnancial crisis in 2008. The GSCI showed more
sensitivity to the Brexit vote than the S&P 500 did. Even though, it is still
visible that the S&P 500 also had a market shock in relation to the Brexit
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Data description
29
Figure 4.2: Nature of data set.
==PAGE:42==
30
Empirical Application
Figure 4.3: Statistical properties of data.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Empirical ﬁndings from the data
31
event.
Figure 4.4: Volatility behavior of the data
For the purpose of the analysis, test statistics will be based on diﬀerent time
periods; pre- and post-market shocks. The purpose of the pre-market shock
is to obtain a normalized benchmark value of volatility behaviour. A diﬀerent
volatility spillover analysis between the oil and agricultural commodity market
used a time period as long as 29 years [60]. The GSCI data do not go further
back than 2005, hence this will be the possible starting point of the evaluation.
Diﬀerent time windows have been evaluated for this study; three years, two
years, one year, six months and one month before and after the estimated dates
for the market dates from section 2.4. Due to the relative large eﬀects in both
short and long term after the markets shocks, both will be considered. Similar
studies have evaluated short and long term data samples around market shocks,
hence the selected data samples [56], [60].
4.2
Empirical ﬁndings from the data
This section evaluates the statistical properties of the data samples. The tables
tab:stat1 and tab:stat2 in the Appendix contain the descriptive statistics of the
diﬀerent sub-periods for one month and two years before and after the crisis
time.
The means for both the equity and the commodity markets are relatively sta-
ble across all of the time windows. Considering the ﬁgure ﬁg:data3, one can
==PAGE:44==
32
Empirical Application
determine that around the three markets shocks; Great Recession in 2008-08,
Brexit in 2016-06 and Oil market shock in 2015-08, that the movements of the
prices become unstable, Appendix appendix:Dates. Hence, the impact of the
market shock is present and impacting both of the markets, leading to increased
volatility.
Looking at the data around the Great recession, the standard deviation in-
creased for both markets, which implies a volatility impact in both of these
markets.
The activity of S&P 500 during 2008 entailed much more volume
trading after the date for the market shock and a much higher market volatility,
mainly because market participants keep expecting high future volatility [78].
Regarding the commodity market, the oil and gas market ( 59% of the GSCI
index) prices fell tremendously, as expected when global demand falls so dras-
tically. The recovery of prices did did not seem to occur until later when gov-
ernments began to focus on stimulating the their economies through expansion
policies [79]. At ﬁrst glance, one can see that there is a degree of interaction
between these markets and that increased uncertainty in one might precipitate
volatility in the other. This will be analyzed with the selected models.
Around Brexit, the standard deviation has increased after the market shock for
S&P 500 in the one month time frame, and decreased during the two years.
The vice versa occurred for the GSCI. This could open the discussion around an
interesting thought; following a shock like Brexit (in which uncertainty of the
future increases while fundamentals are left unchanged), one can see increased
volatility in the short-term for the equity market and not so much in the com-
modity market. This might imply that equity markets are more prone to the
eﬀects of sentiment while commodities remain more driven by fundamentals.
Finally, looking at the statistics around the drastic change in oil prices in 2015,
the data in table tab:stat3 6M imply that both the markets’ standard deviation
increased after the market shock. After two years, S&P 500’s standard deviation
had increased, while the standard deviation decreased for GSCI. In the situation
of low oil prices, when there was uncertainty of demand and supply, the price
volatility was low. However, when the fear of lack of economic growth started
to fade more ﬁnancial activity occurred in the oil market and hence its volatility
[80].
When looking into the skewness and kurtosis, the purpose is to determine how
close the data set is to a normal distribution.
In relation to the SV model
evaluation it is useful to investigate the sub-periods as well as the previous
comments of the proﬁtability density and Q-Q plots. In the tables tab:stat1
and the ones in the Appendix , all the skewness scores are around zero, except
for for the post Brexit in S&P 500 where the skewness is around −1. This would
imply a longer left tail of the distribution. However, for the simplicity of this
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Empirical ﬁndings from the data
33
paper normal distribution will be assumed for all the data sets. Kurtosis on
the other hand measure the tail-heaviness of the distribution tail. A normal
distribution has a kurtosis of 3 and everything > 3 indicates that more data
sets are in the tails than what a normal distribution would have. All the longer
sub-data sets have a kurtosis of > 3. With more data points it is natural that
the spread of data points is wider, especially when referring to the whole data
set. However, a general observation is that the kurtosis is increasing after the
market shocks [81], [82].
The next step is to determine if there is any correlation between the markets
and if it the level of correlation varies over the diﬀerent time periods considered.
Table tab:corr illustrates the correlation values of two years prior and after mar-
ket shocks. It is evident that the correlation in the table tab:corr show increased
correlation between the markets in the periods after the Great Recession and
the Oil price shock, and a decrease after Brexit (all relative to their respective
pre-shock periods). In the Appendix appendix:corr the other correlation data
for the other time periods implies the same test statistics.
The above-mentioned correlation data might be partially explained when con-
sidering the scale of the three shocks that were analyzed. Both the Great Re-
cession and the Oil price shock were considered to have a global impact, while
the Brexit could have a greater impact on a more local markets. The Great
Recession gave a beating to many large US banks that had a global presence.
Thus, as these banks were negatively impacted and conﬁdence in them was
shattered, the eﬀects were felt around the world and a truly global contraction
occurred. Similarly, oil (and commodities in general), operates in a global mar-
ket and regional product diﬀerences are negligible. Oil is used in every corner
of the world, and thus its price movements are being felt everywhere. Thus,
when both of these shocks occurred, they had a global impact that left no one
unaﬀected. Maybe more interestingly, this preliminary view of the data does
lead one to wonder if equity markets are more prone to noise around investor
sentiment than the fundamental-driven commodity markets. If we consider the
Global ﬁnancial crisis and the oil price crisis, both of these shocks had dis-
rupted the fundamental dynamics of global markets. In the Global recession,
large banks that were crucial to the ﬁnancial system became incredibly vulner-
able, lending dried up immediately and economies faltered heavily. In the oil
price crisis, OPEC manipulated oil supply and thus altered the fundamentals
of the market. Dynamics in the market had changed, thus the market did not
react in the way OPEC had expected, which added to the crisis. The Brexit
shock, on the other hand, is a ﬁne example of a shock that produced uncertainty,
but did not disrupt any dynamics of global markets. Disruption was to come
in the future, of course, but the details and the extent of this disruption were
impossible to understand directly following the shock. Considering the level of
volatility during each of the three shocks, a theory can begin to bud. Follow-
==PAGE:46==
34
Empirical Application
Period
S&P 500
GSCI
The whole data sample (2005-2018)
Mean
0.6933
0.6934
Std. Dev.
0.0056
0.0037
Skewness
-0.3145
-0.5724
Kurtosis
15.0834
10.9630
The Great Recession (Pre-shock)
Mean
0.6943
0.6929
Std. Dev.
0.0071
0.0026
Skewness
0.0389
0.3694
Kurtosis
1.9864
2.8085
The Great Recession (Post-shock)
Mean
0.6925
0.6922
Std. Dev.
0.0070
0.0041
Skewness
-0.9064
-0.3937
Kurtosis
2.8439
2.8396
Brexit vote (Pre-shock)
Mean
0.6936
0.6932
Std. Dev.
0.0024
0.0032
Skewness
0.1531
0.4148
Kurtosis
3.4742
3.0312
Brexit vote (Post-shock)
Mean
0.6935
0.6934
Std. Dev.
0.0033
0.0027
Skewness
-1.1270
-0.2755
Kurtosis
9.9690
3.7971
Oil price shock (Pre-shock)
Mean
0.6937
0.6934
Std. Dev.
0.0034
0.0036
Skewness
-0.2469
0.3370
Kurtosis
2.7967
2.5508
Oil price shock (Post-shock)
Mean
0.6918
0.6930
Std. Dev.
0.0078
0.0029
Skewness
0.1178
-0.4438
Kurtosis
4.1879
2.5804
Table 4.1: Descriptive statistics for the 1 month before and after market shock
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Result from variance modelling
35
ing the two shocks with fundamental disruption, both markets became volatile.
In the Brexit-shock case, volatility in the equity market increased while it de-
creased in the commodity market (thus the lower correlation between the two).
This very well might suggest that the equity markets are more susceptible to
volatility during uncertainty, while commodity markets remain more resilient to
uncertainty and volatility only picks up when fundamentals are disrupted. It is
an interesting concept to be considered.
Time period
Correlation matrix
The whole data sample (2005-2018)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
GSCI
-0.0125
1
The Great Recession (Pre-shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
GSCI
0.0071
1
The Great Recession (Post-shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
GSCI
0.4328
1
Brexit vote (Pre-shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
GSCI
0.3367
1
Brexit vote (Post-shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
GSCI
0.2299
1
Oil price shock (Pre-shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
GSCI
0.1749
1
Oil price shock (Post-shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
GSCI
0.3824
1
Table 4.2: Correlation coeﬃcient for data sample with pre- and post-shock
periods of 1 month.
4.3
Result from variance modelling
In this section, the paper examines the volatility modelling through evaluation
of diﬀerent SV models. Stochastic volatility can be modeled in many diﬀerent
ways, but with the essence of capturing the randomness and behaviour of the
data.
==PAGE:48==
36
Empirical Application
The GARCH(1,1) model is widely used in ﬁnancial and economic forecasting
and serves as a benchmark model for many types of analysis. Compared to
other volatility models, the GARCH(1,1) is neither proven to be superior nor
to be under performing and is therefore a good baseline for the evaluation [83].
The GARCH(1,1) is deﬁned as
Xt = σtϵt
(4.4)
σ2
t = ω + αX2
t−1 + βσ2
t−j
(4.5)
t = 1, 2..., T
(4.6)
The R package ccgarch uses a maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) parameter
estimation for the calculation of the model.
Another stochastic volatility model is the standardized SV1 model as it is re-
ferred to here. The SV1 model has a log volatility that follows an AR(1) process
and is described in equation SV1 in section Stochastic Volatility model. The
estimation of the SV1 model is done by the R package stochvol that uses a
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling method [46].
The ﬁgure ﬁg:vol illustrate the volatility estimation based on the above ﬁtting
techniques for the GARCH model and SV1, compared to the sample data of S&P
500 two years before and after. Both models illustrate an accurate volatility
modelling for the data. As discussed in the model descriptions there are some
diﬀerences with the diﬀerent models, that would indicate.
The described Heston model has the advantages that is is angled towards op-
timising the solution. But when working with the Heston model one usually
evaluates the volatility surface and smile, which is used to calculate a speciﬁc
option price. This implied volatility might not be as suited for modelling volatil-
ity movements, but give a good understanding of assets returns and how the
volatility behaviour is taken into consideration for the option pricing. [84]
Both the GARCH model and the SV1 are good models to evaluate the volatilises
of market data and its stochastic component. However, due to the GARCH
model’s simplicity and ability to model the conditional covariance, it will be the
base for the estimation of the causality in variance test.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Result from variance modelling
37
Figure 4.5: Volatility modelling of the GARCH(1,1) and SV1 compared to the
sample data of S&P 500 of 2 years before and after the Great recession.
==PAGE:50==
38
Empirical Application
4.4
Result from conditional covariance and causal-
ity in variance test
The previous section determined and evaluated the volatility processes of the
equity and commodity returns.
To test the volatility spillover between the
commodity and equity market, the modelling of the conditional correlation and
a causality in variance test will be evaluated in this section.
Based on the arguments formed in section Test for causality, the Hafner and
Herwartz test for causality in variance is generally regarded to be suﬃciently
robust and will be used for the testing purposes of this paper.
The Hafner
and Herwartz test for causality in variance is based on the modelling of the
covariance matrix with the R function hh.test from the ccgarch package.
When estimating the conditional correlation between the two markets, the
GARCH is used to estimate the conditional volatility for each of the data sets.
Then the DCC-GARCH model is used to capture the dynamic conditional cor-
relation between the two. To do this, a multivariate GARCH is necessary, hence
using the DCC-GARCH DCCvlab.
The estimation of the GARCH is reﬂected in section Result from variance mod-
elling. The DCC-GACRCH estimation is done with the R package rmgarch. The
estimated coeﬃcients for the DCC-GARCH during the two years sub-period are
in the table tab:DCC. Evaluating the standard errors of the parameter ω, α, β
for the Great Recession, one can see that there are no signs of volatility spillover
in the pre market shock periods. However, that has changed in the post shock
periods. When looking at the results for the Brexit sub-periods, it is not evident
that there is either an increase or a decrease of the volatility spillover between
the commodity and equity market around the shock, since the standard errors
change in many directions. Looking into the 2015 oil crisis standard residuals,
there is a slight decrease in the post-shock result.
This might indicate that
there would be less of a volatility spillover between the equity and the commod-
ity market. However, it should be noted that evaluating the standard errors is
not alone a good estimate of the volatility spillover. It could emphasize results,
but should be considered with caution.
The results from the conditional covariance modelling are illustrated in the ﬁg-
ures ﬁg:CovDCC. It is evident that the conditional covariance is greater after
the Great Recession market shock. The conditional covariance is also greater
after the 2015 oil crisis, however it is smaller following the Brexit shock (relative
to the pre-shock period).
These results would conﬁrm that there is an increased impact between the com-
modity and equity market for the Great Recession and the 2015 Oil change.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Result from conditional covariance and causality in variance test
39
However, for Brexit it would indicate that the theory of the market shock hav-
ing an impact in terms of cross-market volatility spillover, would be rejected
since the covariance is smaller after the market shock.
These results further support the idea that equity markets are more sensitive to
shocks that increase uncertainty without (immediately) aﬀecting fundamentals.
This idea is further discussed throughout the paper.
The results from the causality test are presented in tables tab:HH1M, tab:HH6M,
tab:HH1Y, tab:HH2Y, and tab:HH3Y. Referring back to section 3.3 the causal-
ity in variance test aims to test the null-hypothesis; if there is no volatility
spillover.
The signiﬁcance level of 0.05 rejects the null-hypothesis.
In other
words, conﬁrming that there is a volatility spillover. [56].
Looking into the results, including the p-values, then for the Great recession the
causality in variance test there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the pre- and
post-period of one month. However, looking into the time periods of six months
and one year there are evidences of a volatility spillover before the crisis period,
but not after.
Interestingly, for the two and three years time periods there is no volatil-
ity spillover before the market shock, but after the crisis there is a volatility
spillover.
These results are aligned with the results of increased conditional
covariance after the market shock. Additionally, this testing provides more in-
formation regarding the timing of market-shock impacts. Considering the long-
term periods of two years and three years, the eﬀects of the Great Recession
were large and carried on for quite some time, keeping economies depressed and
markets uncertain for years. On the other hand, while market uncertainty and
signs of liquidity crunches had already crept into the markets months before
Lehman Brother’s went down, the period two and three years before this was
quite strong economically. Thus, one would expect that a massive, extended
shock such as the Global Recession would lead to increased volatility over sev-
eral years. The lack of volatility spillover in the post one month and six month
periods was surprising at ﬁrst, but it might be the case that equity markets were
sensitive to the shock at an earlier stage than the fundamental-driven commod-
ity markets. Thus, spillover does occur across the markets, but it does so with
a lag. This point can be further explained through the concepts of equity risk
and commodity risk. Equity risk can be represented by the standard deviation
of the market and thus when the level of volatility of the market is increasing,
it is representative that equity risk is also increasing. In times of rising equity
risk, investors may begin to search for alternative investments in parallel mar-
kets, such as the commodity market, if commodity risk is relatively lower. As
explained previously, commodity risk is based in fundamentals (quantity, cost)
==PAGE:52==
40
Empirical Application
Pre-shock
Post-shock
Estimate
Std. Error
Estimate
Std. Error
Great Recession
ωSP
0.000001
0.000002
0.000002
0.000003
ωGSCI
0.000001
0.00000
0.000002
0.000177
αSP
0.061420
0.030124
0.113925
0.035333
αGSCI
0.045457
0.016740
0.035503
0.860829
βSP
0.927124
0.034150
0.883451
0.030952
βGSCI
0.951480
0.020219
0.958923
0.936147
a1
0.022896
0.013158
0.017805
0.018245
b1
0.960042
0.016725
0.934756
0.051532
mshape
10.221922
2.814675
10.610896
9.311934
Brexit
ωSP
0.000004
0.000004
0.000002
0.000003
ωGSCI
0.000008
0.000003
0.000002
0.000002
αSP
0.177000
0.038907
0.233751
0.081576
αGSCI
0.087932
0.014259
0.030307
0.006325
βSP
0.765758
0.054422
0.707869
0.082208
βGSCI
0.881152
0.021455
0.944904
0.006689
a1
0.007476
0.007977
0.085418
0.056027
b1
0.979685
0.019373
0.000000
0.194973
mshape
9.284106
2.708271
6.910173
1.185675
2015 Oil change
ωSP
0.000006
0.000000
0.000000
0.000001
ωGSCI
0.000000
0.000005
0.000009
0.000002
αSP
0.141862
0.013853
0.021256
0.015410
αGSCI
0.045939
0.056294
0.091675
0.012245
βSP
0.715740
0.028300
0.975075
0.013251
βGSCI
0.952809
0.050140
0.857942
0.017204
a1
0.082042
0.057550
0.005940
0.005365
b1
0.566507
0.185884
0.987254
0.005459
mshape
8.310326
2.908959
7.493435
1.707509
Table 4.3: Variable estimates of the DCC-Model 2 years around the market
shocks.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Result from conditional covariance and causality in variance test
41
Figure 4.6: Conditional Covariance between S&P 500 and GSCI during 2 years
before and after the market shocks.
==PAGE:54==
42
Empirical Application
and thus may remain rather steady even in times of uncertainty. If, as in the
case of the Global recession, the market uncertainty came before fundamental
changes, one could thus state that rising equity risk preceded rising commodity
risk. Only when the fundamentals decay (such as during the global economic
downturn following the ﬁnancial crisis) does commodity risk rise.
Regarding the causality in variance results around Brexit, there are indications
on volatility spillover before the market shock, but not after for both the one
and six months periods. However, in the longer sub periods there are volatility
spillovers after the shock and none before. These results are in-line with those
from the covariance results in that there does not appear to be a signiﬁcant
amount of cross-market volatility between the equity and commodity markets
following this shock. The long-term period might not be as useful for interpre-
tation following Brexit, as while the vote did shock the market immediately, its
aﬀects were not lingering on market fundamentals (they most likely will when
the UK does leave the EU, but not directly after the vote) and thus the level of
inﬂuence of Brexit on cross-market volatility during this time might be weak or
barely-existent.
During the 2015 oil change there are only indications of volatility spillover dur-
ing both the 1 month pre- and post- periods, and during the six months before
the estimated market shock.
The presence of volatility spillover in the 1 month and 6 month pre periods
might be explained by the timing of the shock, and the trend of the oil prices.
Before the selected shock date, oil prices had been volatile and trending down-
wards. Meanwhile, equity markets remained robust, driven by an expanding
economy and cheap sources of credit. Due to this, one would expect speculative
commodity traders are looking for other sources to invest in, and this could
explain the increased volatility within the equity market in these periods. The
idea that volatility spillover increases during periods of trend-diﬀerentials be-
tween the two markets (ie one market is trending upwards while the other is
trending downwards) is an interesting one.
Market shock
Pre-shock period
Post-shock period
Great regression
14.1016 [0.0070]
13.9458 [0.0075]
Brexit
13.3614 [0.0096]
2.0337 [0.7296]
2015 Oil change
11.5005 [0.0215]
16.7259 [0.0022]
Table 4.4: Result for the causality in variance test with 1 month around de-
termined market shock date. Numbers in brackets are p-values
==PAGE:55==
4.5 Result from impulse response function
43
Market shock
Pre-shock period
Post-shock period
Great regression
23.4004 [0.0001]
6.8110 [0.1462]
Brexit
11.2248 [0.0242]
2.0337 [0.7295]
2015 Oil change
25.2865 [0.00004]
2.6263 [0.6222]
Table 4.5: Result for the causality in variance test with 6 months around
determined market shock date. Numbers in brackets are p-values
Market shock
Pre-shock period
Post-shock period
Great regression
21.1302 [0.0003]
6.6118 [0.1579]
Brexit
5.6518 [0.2267]
28.7933 [0.000009]
2015 Oil change
6.8605 [0.1434]
2.2577 [0.6885]
Table 4.6: Result for the causality in variance test with 1 year around deter-
mined market shock date. Numbers in brackets are p-values
Market shock
Pre-shock period
Post-shock period
Great regression
1.7001208 [0.7906957]
16.2698 [0.0027]
Brexit
7.1883 [0.1263]
10.6430 [0.0309]
2015 Oil change
1.9050 [0.7532]
4.1383 [0.3876]
Table 4.7: Result for the causality in variance test with 2 years around deter-
mined market shock date. Numbers in brackets are p-values
Market shock
Pre-shock period
Post-shock period
Great regression
7.1883 [0.1263]
10.6430 [0.0309]
Brexit
1.4856 [0.8292]
-
2015 Oil change
4.8500 [0.3030]
2.1151 [0.7146]
Table 4.8: Result for the causality in variance test with 3 years around deter-
mined market shock date. Numbers in brackets are p-values
4.5
Result from impulse response function
Evaluating an impulse response function can provide further insight into whether
a shock in one market would aﬀect another market. Through this test, we could
potential begin to gain a sense of direction in terms of the driver of cross-
market volatility. To test if one market responds to a shock in parallel market,
==PAGE:56==
44
Empirical Application
a generalized impulse response function derived from the VAR model have been
applied to the data. The test evaluated the three diﬀerent market shocks with
the R library vars [85].
Previous studies that investigated impulse response
function have used time frames of two weeks to six months. Therefore, this
study evaluates the time windows of one and six months prior to and after the
market shocks [60], [86], [87], [88].
In order to apply and calculate the VAR model the optimal lag length needs
to be determined. There are a various options to determine the optimal lag
length. Just like the study of volatility spillover between oil and agricultural
commodity market by Nazlioglu, Erdem and Saytas, this study uses the Schwarz
information criterion to determine the optimal lag length [60]. In general the
criterion indicates that the shorter lag length the more precis estimation. By
choosing the preferred information criterion, the lag length is optimized in the
estimation [89].
For the VAR function to be applied properly, stationary should be met. By eval-
uating if the roots from the VAR are within the unit circle, one can determine
if the VAR system is stationary [60]. The roots for the empirical application of
the VAR systems are presented in Appendix appendix:VARroots. The volatil-
ity behaviour of the log returns used for the impulse response functions, also
indicates a stationary behaviour. See ﬁgures ﬁg:Log1 and ﬁg:Log2 [67].
The graphs in ﬁgures ﬁg:IRpre1, ﬁg:IRpost1, ﬁg:IRpre2 and ﬁg:IRpost2. illus-
trate the results from the short term generalized impulse response functions
from an impulse rooted in both markets. The ﬁgures are showing the results for
the sub-periods of one and six months before and after the market shocks, for
impulses rooted in the equity market and in the commodity market.
The results from the generalized impulse response function are considered sig-
niﬁcant if the ant of the 5% conﬁdence bands do not straddle the zero line. The
conﬁdence intervals are based on ±2 standard errors (p =≤5). The y-axis in
the ﬁgures measures the magnitude of the response to the impulse and is scaled
based on standard deviations [90].
By examining the results for the response to a market shock from the equity mar-
ket to the commodity market in the pre-shock events period, in ﬁgure ﬁg:IRpre1,
it is evident that all of the scenarios are signiﬁcant. The results show that for
the six months pre-shock period, the conﬁdence bands straddle the zero line
for both Brexit and the 2015 oil change. These results are still interpreted as
signiﬁcant. In general terms one can say that there is a volatility spillover from
the equity market to the commodity market before the market shocks.
Considering the impulse response function from the equity market to the com-
modity market in the post-shock periods, all results seem to be signiﬁcant, as
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Result from impulse response function
45
exhibited in ﬁgure ﬁg:IRpost2. That being said, one can see that the test of
six months after the Great recession were situated in the insigniﬁcant range up
until almost a week after the event. It is worth noticing that the impulse level
goes down from 0.5 to 0.2 after the Great recession for the six months win-
dow, showing the impact of the shock having a lower impact on cross-market
volatility than what was exhibited in the pre-shock period.
Now to evaluate the if there is any volatility spillover from the commodity mar-
ket to the equity market, one has to look into ﬁgures ﬁg:IRpre2 and ﬁg:IRpost2.
In the pre-market shock periods there are signs of signiﬁcance before the Great
recession, none before Brexit and some during the six months before the 2015 oil
change. Considering the post crisis periods they are signiﬁcant after the Great
recession. There is none one month after Brexit or the 2015 oil change, but
there is just some signiﬁcance six months after the two.
The results of the impulse response function testing are very helpful in further
understanding the relationship of parallel markets, especially during times of
uncertainty.
From the test results one can conclude that there is a greater
impact of the equity markets to the commodity markets than vice-versa. This
further supports the idea that the equity market is more sensitive to the volatility
of investor sentiment than the commodity market.
We can also see that the Great recession exhibits the strongest signiﬁcant results,
with Brexit exhibiting the fewest.
Given the attributes of each shock (size,
aﬀects etc), this result is quite intuitive.
==PAGE:58==
46
Empirical Application
Figure 4.7: Generalized impulse response functions for pre-market shock periods
of 1 and 6 months. Response of equity to commodity market.
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Result from impulse response function
47
Figure 4.8: Generalized impulse response functions for post-market shock peri-
ods of 1 and 6 months. Response of equity to commodity market.
==PAGE:60==
48
Empirical Application
Figure 4.9: Generalized impulse response functions for pre-market shock periods
of 1 and 6 months. Response of commodity to equity market.
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Result from impulse response function
49
Figure 4.10: Generalized impulse response functions for post-market shock pe-
riods of 1 and 6 months. Response of commodity to equity market.
==PAGE:62==
50
Empirical Application
4.6
Future work
In contradictory to this study, other have not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant spillovers
between US equity indices and commodity assets [91]. Therefore, it would be
interesting to dig deeper into some more speciﬁc and further considerations.
As mentioned in section 1.5, the results for the 2015 oil price changes could be
due to the selected time of the market shock. A further analysis could have
chosen a market shock period, rater than a date, or looked into diﬀerent results
for diﬀerent dates during the year to ﬁnd a more suitable date selection.
Even though, the two and three years were the longest data samples, one could
argue longer data samples should be considered. For example the the market
volatility did not return to what it was before the great recession until after six
years after, Since there have not been six years after Brexit, that data sample
could not be considered for evaluating the commodity markets impact on the
equity market six years after. In future work one could go through and evaluate
diﬀerent data samples. Since the Brexit vote might be considered a local change
one could also look into diﬀerent local stocks to zoom into the aﬀects.
Regarding the assumption about normal distribution, one could consider other
data distributions to cater for the long and heavy tailed data
For further investigation of the volatility spillover one could also consider the
MSV model with Granger causality.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Model Summary
To understand the full picture of the empirical analysis, the stochastic volatil-
ity’s, the conditional correlation, the causality in variance test and the general-
ized impulse response function should be summarized.
• The data analysis indicated an increased standard deviation and hence a
volatility increased around the Great recession. Around Brexit one could
see a short term volatility increase in the equity market and a more long
term volatility increase in the commodity market. Looking at the 2015
oil change the volatility for the equity market increased after a more long
term period, while it decreased for the commodity market.
• When considering the skewness and kurtosis for all the sub-periods it
is worth considering that the data sample considered in the empirical
analysis included a relative large data set that has a stochastic volatility
behavior. Similar studies have also assumed normal distribution, but have
also considered other distributions.
• In the evaluation of the correlation between the equity and commodity
market it was evident that there was an increased correlation between the
two markets after the Great recession and the 2015 oil price change, and
a decrease of correlation after Brexit.
==PAGE:64==
52
Model Summary
• From the conditional covariance evaluation it s clear that it increased after
the Great recession and the 2015 oil price decline, and to be lower after
Brexit.
• The causality in variance test gave some mixed results of the pre and post
market shocks. For the Great recession the indication is that there were a
volatility spillover in the longer period after the market shock. Considering
Brexit there was some volatility spillover in longer periods before and after
the market event, but none directly after the market shock. For the 2015
oil price change there were not as many indications of volatility spillover,
except during the shorter periods before the estimated market event.
• The impulse response function generated mostly signiﬁcant results, both
prior to and after the market events, when the impulse came from the
equity market.
When evaluating the scenario when the impulse comes
from the commodity market, there was no direct signiﬁcance found around
Brexit.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This thesis has analyzed the presence of volatility interactions between the com-
modity and equity market. The analysis included evaluation and understanding
of stochastic volatility models and their usage for ﬁnancial risks evaluations.
The empirical application and discussion have revolved around the properties
and the correlation between the data samples, the conditional covariance, the
stochastic volatility behaviour, the Hafner and Herwartz causality in variance
test and the VAR model in order to conduct the generalized impulse response
function.
The three market shocks evaluated in this thesis are the Great recession, deter-
mined by the date of the bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers bank, the Brexit
vote and the change of oil prices during 2015. These market shocks were large,
cross-border and caused a major impact on investment ﬂows and economic sit-
uations, thus putting ﬁnancial markets under tremendous stress.
The general conclusion from the empirical application is that there does exist
volatility spillover between the equity and commodity markets during times of
economic shock. However, spillovers do not occur after every shock, nor is the
spillover uniform in size or timing under diﬀerent shock periods. The lack of
uniformity in volatility spillover provides even more insight into understanding
the relationship between various markets, although it requires that one dig into
the dynamics of the shocks that sparked volatility. If we consider the Global
==PAGE:66==
54
Conclusion
ﬁnancial crisis and following recession, we see that volatility spills over from the
equity market into the commodity market both before and after the selected date
of interest. Interestingly, the spillover occurred in the years following the crisis
and into the recession. With this knowledge, one can see that the equity market
began to experience increased volatility at earlier stage while the commodity
market remained resilient through periods of uncertainty but began to ﬂuctuate
once fundamental market dynamics began to have an eﬀect (once the economies
began to wane). The impulse response function results also add to this thought,
as the strength of the impact of the impulse on the commodity market was
strongest in this scenario of all three that were considered, which could be due
to the eﬀect that the recession had on market fundamentals.
The Brexit shock is an interesting one to consider as it was large and cross-
border, however it was nowhere close to the global scale that the other two shocks
were. Furthermore, both the Global recession and the oil price decrease scenarios
incurred direct fundamental economic changes. The Brexit shock lacked this
impact on economic fundamentals (at least for the time being), while it did
increase uncertainty and speculation. The test results show that no volatility
spillover occurs post-Brexit shock, as commodity markets see no real eﬀect.
Overall, the shock level of Brexit was pretty immaterial in scale when compared
to the other shocks considered.
The oil price decrease provided an opportunity to analyze a risk that was rooted
in the commodity markets. The test results show that there is volatility spillover
between the markets in the time before the selected date, and in the month after.
During these periods, oil prices were falling while the equity market remained
(relatively) more stable. The fall in oil prices was combined with a change in
market dynamics (OPEC ﬂooding the market with supply and other countries
developing extraction methods). Thus, it is plausible that investors shifted their
focus to the equity markets during this time, thus increasing volatility in the
equity market as well.
In summary, while the data and test results are far from uniform, there are
some key points to uncover. The equity market is sensitive to market uncer-
tainty while the commodity market is more resilient during times of uncertainty,
but volatility begins to show when there are changes to fundamental market dy-
namics. These results fall in line with the concepts of equity risk and commodity
risk. Equity risk (represented by the standard deviation of the market) is volatile
and can be impacted by investor sentiment while commodity risk has a stronger
basis in fundamentals of supply and demand.
This study have shown that there are signiﬁcant advantages of evaluating and
model stochastic volatility. Not only to estimate and predict the market, but
also to get a better holistic view of market and risk behaviours. Through this
==PAGE:67==
55
study, one can see that equity risk is more sensitive to market uncertainty, and
exhibits increases in volatility before commodity markets, which have a stronger
connection to fundamentals.
Understanding the relationship of cross-market
volatility is of importance to quantitative investors who need to understand
how each market will react in times of stress.
==PAGE:68==
56
Conclusion
==PAGE:69==
Appendix A
Appendix
==PAGE:70==
58
Appendix
A.1
SP GSCI components
Commodity
2018 RPDW 2018
Chicago Wheat
3.03%
Kansas Wheat
1.12%
Corn
4.98%
Soybeans
3.66%
Coﬀee
1.01%
Sugar
2.49%
Cocoa
0.36%
Cotton
1.59%
Live Cattle
2.22%
Feeder Cattle
4.06%
Lean Hogs
1.25%
WTI Crude Oil
24.70%
Brent Crude Oil
3.88%
Gas Oil
4.58%
Heating Oil
16.89%
RBOB Gasoline
4.63%
Natural Gas
3.90%
Aluminum
3.63%
LME Copper
4.43%
Lead
0.68%
Nickel
0.87%
Zinc
1.30%
Gold
4.21%
Silver
0.52%
If the composition of the commodities are divided in sectors the energy sector
would make up 58.5% of the average.
Agriculture would make up 18.25%,
livestock 7.53%, industrial metals at 10.91% and precious metals at 4.73%. The
breakdown is reviewed and reconstructed to ﬁnd an accurate balance on an
annual basis CITE.
==PAGE:71==
A.2 ACF & PACF for log return
59
A.2
ACF & PACF for log return
Figure A.1: ACF and PACF of the Log-return for S&P 500 and GSCI during
2005-2018.
==PAGE:72==
60
Appendix
A.3
Market shock dates
Crisis
Date
Description
Brexit
2016-06-23
Date of the English election of continued membership in EU
Great regression
2008-08-15
Date when Lehman Brothers went bankrupt
2015 Oil change
2015-08-01
Time when volatility of the oil prices were particularly large
Table A.1: Dates to determine when market shock occurred
Crisis
Pre-date
Post-date
Brexit
1 month
2016-05-24
2016-07-23
6 months
2015-12-26
2016-12-20
1 year
2015-06-24
2017-06-23
2 years
2014-06-24
2018-06-23
3 years
2013-06-24
NA
Great regression
1 month
2008-07-16
2008-09-14
6 months
2008-02-17
2009-02-11
1 year
2007-08-16
2009-08-15
2 years
2006-08-16
2010-08-15
3 years
2005-08-16
2011-08-15
2015 Oil change
1 month
2015-07-02
2015-08-31
6 months
2015-02-02
2016-01-28
1 year
2014-08-01
2016-07-31
2 years
2013-08-01
2017-07-31
3 years
2012-08-01
2018-07-31
Table A.2: Dates used to determine data set (with the daycount assumption of
30 days/ month and 365 days a year)
==PAGE:73==
A.4 VAR roots
61
A.4
VAR roots
Market shock
Time Period
Great Recession
Pre-shock 1M
1
0.7516
0.5566
0.5566
Post-shock 1M
1
0.09896
Pre-shock 6M
1
0.5738
0.1327
0.002296
Post-shock
0.9998
0.5293
0.1783
0.1783
Brexit
Pre-shock 1M
0.9998
0.6207
0.5056
0.5056
Post-shock 1M
1
0.4582
0.4582
0.3953
Pre-shock 6M
1
0.562
0.4198
0.4198
Post-shock 6M
1
0.09896
Oil crisis
Pre-shock 1M
1
0.02619
Post-shock 1M
1
0.5079
0.3796
0.3796
Pre-shock 6M
1
0.5552
0.3661
0.3661
Post-shock 6M
1
0.5079
0.3796
0.3796
Table A.3: Roots of the VAR functions used in the impulse response functions.
==PAGE:74==
62
Appendix
A.5
Data statistics
Period
S&P 500
GSCI
The whole data sample (2005-2018)
Mean
0.6933
0.6934
Std. Dev.
0.0056
0.0037
Skewness
-0.3145
-0.5724
Kurtosis
15.0834
10.9630
The Great Recession (Pre-shock)
Mean
0.6932
0.6932
Std. Dev.
0.0051
0.0028
Skewness
-0.1436
-0.8300
Kurtosis
4.6059
6.4994
The Great Recession (Post-shock)
Mean
0.6930
0.6937
Std. Dev.
0.0102
0.0034
Skewness
-0.1220
-0.0242
Kurtosis
7.9335
6.3913
Brexit vote (Pre-shock)
Mean
0.6932
0.6932
Std. Dev.
0.0042
0.0033
Skewness
-0.1454
-0.1652
Kurtosis
4.7050
6.4253
Brexit vote (Post-shock)
Mean
0.6934
0.6932
Std. Dev.
0.0033
0.0042
Skewness
-1.2396
-0.4075
Kurtosis
13.0234
15.6146
Oil price shock (Pre-shock)
Mean
0.6934
0.6933
Std. Dev.
0.0033
0.0030
Skewness
-0.2471
-0.0182
Kurtosis
3.8424
3.7468
Oil price shock (Post-shock)
Mean
0.6933
0.6932
Std. Dev.
0.0039
0.0042
Skewness
-0.4161
-0.4385
Kurtosis
6.8120
15.3037
Table A.4: Descriptive statistics for the 2 years before and after market shock
==PAGE:75==
A.5 Data statistics
63
Period
S&P 500
GSCI
The whole data sample (2005-2018)
Mean
0.6933
0.6934
Std. Dev.
0.0056
0.0037
Skewness
-0.3145
-0.5724
Kurtosis
15.0834
10.9630
The Great Recession (Pre-shock)
Mean
0.6930
0.6928
Std. Dev.
0.0064
0.0030
Skewness
0.4075
-0.7982
Kurtosis
3.7583
4.8814
The Great Recession (Post-shock)
Mean
0.6915
0.6934
Std. Dev.
0.0168
0.0027
Skewness
0.0897
-0.5815
Kurtosis
4.0718
4.4612
Brexit vote (Pre-shock)
Mean
0.6932
0.6936
Std. Dev.
0.0042
0.0036
Skewness
-0.0891
-0.5488
Kurtosis
3.4610
11.5580
Brexit vote (Post-shock)
Mean
0.6935
0.6934
Std. Dev.
0.0033
0.0027
Skewness
-1.1270
-0.2755
Kurtosis
9.9690
3.7971
Oil price shock (Pre-shock)
Mean
0.6933
0.6932
Std. Dev.
0.0033
0.0030
Skewness
-0.1620
0.3105
Kurtosis
2.9838
3.7482
Oil price shock (Post-shock)
Mean
0.6927
0.6935
Std. Dev.
0.0058
0.0033
Skewness
-0.0913
-0.3140
Kurtosis
3.8253
4.3098
Table A.5: Descriptive statistics for the 6 months before and after market shock
==PAGE:76==
64
Appendix
A.6
Correlation matrix
Time
pe-
riod
Correlation
matrix
1M
6M
1Y
3Y
GR* (Pre-
shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
1
GSCI
-0.2717
1
-0.1260
1
-0.0006
1
0.0142
1
GR*
(Post-
shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
1
1
1
GSCI
0.0865
1
0.5182
1
0.5182
1
0.3869
1
B*
(Pre-
shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
1
1
GSCI
0.3820
1
0.4382
1
0.4253
1
0.3054
1
B* (Post-
shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
1
1
1
GSCI
0.3222
1
0.3222
1
0.2798063
1
-
-
Oil* (Pre-
shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
1
1
1
GSCI
0.2320
1
0.1603
1
0.2079
1
0.2079
Oil*
(Post-
shock)
S&P 500
GSCI
S&P 500
1
1
1
1
GSCI
0.4975
1
0.4745
1
0.4483
1
0.3419
1
Table A.6: Correlation coeﬃcient for data sample with pre- and post-shock
periods of 2 years. GR* = Great Recession, B* = Brexit vote, Oil* = Oil shock
>
==PAGE:77==
65
[ backend=biber, style=numeric, sorting=ynt ]biblatex
==PAGE:78==
66
Bibliography
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1] R. Wigglesworth, “An abridged, illustrated history of volatility,” Financial
times, 2018.
[2] J. Lintner, “The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky invest-
ments in stock portfolios and capital budgets,” The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 1965.
[3] H. et al, “Gains from diversiﬁcation,” The Review of Economic Studies,
1977.
[4] H. M. S. Erdinç Akyıldırım, “A brief history of mathematics in ﬁnance,”
Borsa Istanbul Review, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 57–63, 2014.
[5] W. et al, “The eﬀect of diversiﬁcation on risk,” Financial Analysts Journal,
1971.
[6] L. Fisher, “Using modern portfolio theory to maintain an eﬃciently diver-
siﬁed portfolio,” Financial Analysts Journal, 1975.
[7] S. et al, “A global chill in commodity demand hits america’s heartland
in china and other emerging markets, growth is waning and demand for
the raw materials that drive the global economy has dried up,” New York
Times, 2015.
[8] B. et al, “Do commodities add value in multi-asset-portfolios? an out-of-
sample analysis for diﬀerent investment strategies,” Journal of Banking and
Finance, 2015.
[9] L. et al, “On the correlation between commodity and equity returns: Im-
plications for portfolio allocation,” Journal of Commodity Markets, 2016.
==PAGE:80==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] C. et al, “Conditional correlation and volatility in commodity futures and
traditional asset markets,” Journal of Alternative Investments, 2015.
[11] B. et al, “On the diversiﬁcation beneﬁts of commodities from the perspective
of euro investors,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 2012.
[12] C. et al, “Is now the time to add commodities to your portfolio?,” Journal
of Investing, 2010.
[13] V. Fernandez, “Time-scale decomposition of price transmission in interna-
tional markets,” Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 2005.
[14] R. et al, “International comovement of stock market returns: A wavelet
analysis,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 2009.
[15] M. et al, “International stock market indices comovements: A new look,”
Journal of Finance and Economics, 2012.
[16] S. Huang,
“Wavelet-based multi-resolution garch model for ﬁnancial
spillover eﬀects.,” Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, 2011.
[17] L. Baele, “Volatility spillover eﬀects in european equity markets,” The Jour-
nal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 2005.
[18] D. et al, “Speculation and volatility spillover in the crude oil and agricultural
commodity markets: A bayesian analysis,” Iowa State University Digital
Repository, 2011.
[19] W. et al, “Volatility spillover eﬀects and cross hedging in corn and crude
oil futures,” Journal of Futures Markets, 2011.
[20] D. et al, “Asymmetry in return and volatility spillover between equity and
bond markets in australia,” Paciﬁc Basin Finance Journal, 2010.
[21] S. Penman, “Financial statement analysis and security valuation,” Ohio
State University, 2001.
[22] J. Horrigan, “A short history of ﬁnancial ratio analysis,” Accounting Review,
1968.
[23] S. et al, “War and the world economy stock market reactions to international
conﬂicts,” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, 2006.
[24] D. VAIDYA, “Commodity Risk Management | Methods | Strategies,” Wall
street mojo.
[25] A. K. Z. A. Mian Sajid, Hassan Younus, “Impact of political events on stock
market returns: empirical evidence from Pakistan,” Emerald Insight.
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[26] B. Mandelbrot, “The variation of certain speculative prices,” Chicago Jour-
nals, 1963.
[27] G. et al, “A long memory property of stock market returns and a new
model,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 1993.
[28] D. et al, “Modeling volatility persistence of speculative returns: A new
approach,” Journal of Econometrics, 1996.
[29] R. Cont, “Volatility clustering in ﬁnancial markets: Empirical facts and
agent–based models,” Centre de Mathematiques appliquees, Ecole Polytech-
nique, 1996.
[30] P. O’Mahony, “Increased market volatility suggests risks are rising,” The
Irish times, 2018.
[31] H. et al, “The oil price shock of 2014,” ODI Assets, 2015.
[32] U. E. I. Administration, “What drives crude oil prices: Supply opec.”
[33] M. DiLallo, “What happened to oil prices in 2015?,” The motley fool, 2015.
[34] “The economist: The origins of the ﬁnancial crisis crash course.”
[35] L. Tedesco, “Emerging capital markets and globalization,” The World Bank,
2009.
[36] A. L. G. Joshua C.C. Chan , “Modeling energy price dynamics: Garch
versus stochastic volatility,” Energy Economics, vol. 54, p. 182–189, 2016.
[37] S. Taylor, “Modelling stochastic volatility:
a review and comparative
study,” Energy Economics, vol. 4, no. 2, p. 183–204, 1994.
[38] F. Black and M. Scholes, “The pricing of options and corporate liabilities,”
The Journal of Political Economy, vol. 81, no. 3, p. 637, 1973.
[39] F. Black and M. Scholes, “The pricing of options and corporate liabilities,”
The Journal of Political Economy, vol. 81, no. 3, p. 637, 1973.
[40] L. A. Hansen Peter R., “A forecast comparison of volatility models: does
anything beat a GARCH(1,1)?,” Journal of applied economics, no. 20,
pp. 873–889, 2005.
[41] C. Z. engfei Suna†, “How to apply garch model in risk management? model
diagnosis on garch innovations,”
[42] A. S. Jose Miguel Hernandez Lobato, Daniel Hernandez Lobato, “Time
series models for measuring market risk,” 2007.
==PAGE:82==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[43] E. Orskaug, “Multivariate dcc-garch model - with various error distribu-
tions,” 2009.
[44] G. Tang, “Discrete time stochastic volatility model,” 2009.
[45] G. Kastner, “Dealing with stochastic volatility in time series using the r
package stochvol,”
[46] G. Kastner, “Dealing with stochastic volatility in time series using the r
package stochvol,”
[47] S. Taylor, “Financial returns modeled by the product of two stochastic
processes - a study of daily sugar prices 1961-1979,” p. 203–226, 1982.
[48] E. R. Eric Ghysels, Andrew Harvey, “Stochastic volatility,” Cirano, 1995.
[49] Q. Team, “Stochastic diﬀerential equations,”
[50] A. Dmouj, “Stock price modelling: Theory and practice,” Vrije Universiteit,
2006.
[51] P. Karlsson, “The heston model, stochastic volatility and approximation,”
Vrije Universiteit.
[52] S. L. Heston, “A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility
with applications to bond and currency options,” The Review of Financial
Studies, vol. 6, pp. 327–343, 1993.
[53] J. CHEN, “Heston model,” Investopedia, 2018.
[54] L. Andersen, “Eﬃcient simulation of the heston stochastic volatility model,”
2007.
[55] S. Nowak, “Volatility smile, heston sabr,” Investopedia, 2012.
[56] A. Jatta, “Test for causality in conditional variance hafner and herwatz test
for causality,” 2015.
[57] W. Su and Y. Huang, “Comparison of multivariate garch models with ap-
plication to zero-coupon bond volatility,” 2010.
[58] C. A. Sims, “Macroeconomics and reality,” Econometrica, vol. 48, no. 1,
pp. 1–48, 1980.
[59] M. Thoma, “Christopher sims and tests for causality,” Economist’s View,
vol. 48, 2011.
[60] U. S. Saban Nazlioglu, Cumhur Erdem, “Volatility spillover between oil
and agricultural commodity markets,” Energy Economics, vol. 36, no. 1,
pp. 658–665, 2013.
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[61] H. H. Christian M. Hafner, “A lagrange multiplier test for causality in
varience,” Economic Letters, vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 137–141, 2006.
[62] K. Nyholm, “Generalised impulse response functions,” 2016.
[63] A. Warne, “Generalized impulse responses,” 2008.
[64] J.-L. Lin, “Teaching notes on impulse response function and structural var,”
2006.
[65] P. E. C. of Science, “Vector autoregressive models var(p) models,” 2018.
[66] P. E. C. of Science, “Vector autoregressive models for multivariate time
series,” pp. 383–426.
[67] F. Mohr, “An introduction to vector autoregression (var),” 2018.
[68] R. C. Fuhrmann, “Yahoo! ﬁnance vs. google ﬁnance: Which should you
use?,” Investopedia, 2018.
[69] K. et al, “The information value of bond ratings,” The Journal of Finance,
2000.
[70] W. et al, “Commercial bank risk; market, interest rate and foreign ex-
change,” Journal of Financial Research, 1994.
[71] B. et al, “Why stock trackers ﬂock to the sp 500.”
[72] B. Markets, “Spx quote - sp 500 index - bloomberg markets.”
[73] B. Markets, “Sp gsci index spot cme - bloomberg markets.”
[74] t. f. e. Wikipedia, “Sp gsci.”
[75] J. H. Henrik Madsen, “Modelling non-linear and non-stationary time series.”
Presentation from Advanced time series course at DTU.
[76] K. Amadeo, “2008 ﬁnancial crisis timeline.”
[77] E. Commission, “Brexit preparedness.”
[78] K. Manda, “Stock market volatility during the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis,” 2010.
[79] INVESTOPEDIA, “How did the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis aﬀect the oil and gas
sector?,” 2018.
[80] J. P. Robert McManmon, “Crude oil volatility decreases as prices rise from
early 2016 levels,” 2016.
[81] W. Kenton, “Normal distribution,” 2018.
==PAGE:84==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[82] B. McNeese, “Are the skewness and kurtosis useful statistics?,” 2016.
[83] S. Lyckeberg, “A forecast comparioson of volatility models: does anything
beat a garch(1,1)?,” Journal of applied econometrics, 2005.
[84] G. Kastner, “Dealing with stochastic volatility in time series using the r
package stochvol,” 2015.
[85] M. Y. Franz Mohr, Ulrich Gunter, “An introduction to vector autoregression
(var),” 2018.
[86] A. M. S. Guglielmo Maria Caporale, “Stock prices and monetary policy:
An impulse response analysis,” International Journal of Economics and
Financial Issues, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 701–709, 2013.
[87] T. Dimpﬂand R. Jung, “Financial market spillovers around the globe,”
Applied Financial Economics, vol. 22, 06 2011.
[88] S. S. S. S. Ralf Brüggemann, Markus Glaser, “Asymmetries in the stock
return - trading volume relation: A generalized impulse response approach,”
Applied Financial Economics, vol. 22, 2013.
[89] M. Y. Umidjon Abdullaev, Ulrich Gunter, “Var order selection,” 2008.
[90] J. L. S. D. A. S. Bradley T. Ewinga, Jamie Brown Kruseb, “Time series
analysis of wind speed using var and the generalized impulse response tech-
nique,” Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 95,
p. 209–219, 2007.
[91] B. Buyuksahin, M. Haigh, and M. A. Robe, “Commodities and equities:
Ever a ’market of one’?,” Journal of Alternative Investments, vol. 12, 11
2009.
