==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Content analysis of sustainability reports to
determine potential alignment between
organization profiles and SDG reporting
Mie Louise Elsborg Drejer (s124303)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone: +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Sustainable development has a righteous growing impact on most agendas around the
world. The United Nations (UN) presented the agenda, ”Transforming Our World:
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, adopted by all UN’s Member States
in 2015. The main focal point of this agenda is the 17 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), accomplished by 169 targets together with 243 indicators used to measure
the progress of sustainable development. This master thesis examines how organiza-
tions within the same industry, potentially can use others reporting on sustainable
activities to improve their own sustainable profile. The content analysis method was
used to determine a potential alignment between organization profiles, their business
practices and their SDG reporting. Three search terms (SDG, Sustainable Develop-
ment Goal and Global Goal) where used and 115 different reports submitted to the
Global Reporting Initiative where investigated.
The results show that when the frequency of the search terms was low, the SDG
reporting was often vague. The organizations often mentioned an overall contribution
to the SDGs, but not how they could achieve them individually. The total number
of search term occurrences differs depending on both sector and the organizations
investigated. However, a clear definition of which SDGs that are most in focus in
the different sectors where found. This means that the mentioning of the SDGs are
depending on an organizations business practices. Furthermore, some goals were very
low prioritized in all organizations. Overall it can be concluded that SDG reporting
within a specific sector can be used to determine alignment between organization
profiles, their business practices and their commitment to achieving the SDGs.
A successful implementation of the Agenda 2030 can change the perspective of
sustainable thinking within organizations. This thesis contributes to existing litera-
ture by having investigated the tendency of the SDGs within different organizations
in Europe. The results can be used to fill the gap between the existing tools, to mea-
sure sustainability practices, and implementation of a sustainable path in business
practices. The identified best practices of SDG reporting can be used as practical
contribution, by showing which elements of communication and visualization that are
required to create a good report. The major contribution to business is the connection
created between the goals relevant for a type of market and a certain type of sector
operating mainly on this market. Decisions makers can find the results of this thesis
relevant because it shows which sectors includes all SDGs in their business practices,
and which sectors that contributes very little to the achievement of the SDGs.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Sammenfatning
Bæredygtig udvikling har fået en mere fremtræden rolle på de fleste dagsordener rundt
omkring i verden. De Forenede Nationer (FN) har udgivet rapporten: ”Transforming
Our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, som blev underskrevet
af alle medlemslandene 2015. Dokumentet består af 17 verdensmål for bæredygtig
udvikling, understøttet af 169 delmål og 243 indikatorer, som har til formål at måle
den bæredygtige udvikling. Dette speciale afdækker hvordan organisationer inden
for samme industri potentielt kan udnytte hinandens rapportering vedrørende deres
bæredygtige aktiviteter, til forbedring af deres påvirkning på miljøet. En kvantitativ
indholdsanalyse er blevet brugt til at vurdere potentiel sammenhæng mellem organisa-
tionsprofiler, deres forretningspraksis og deres SDG-rapportering. Tre søgeord (SDG,
Sustainable Develpoment Goal og Global Goal) er blevet brugt til at kortlægge bru-
gen af SDGs i 115 rapporter fra forskellige organisationer.
Resultaterne viser at når hyppigheden af søgeordene var lav, var SDG rappor-
teringen ofte uklar.
Organisationerne i mange tilfælde udtryk for at de støttede
alle de 17 bæredygtighedsmål, men sjældent hvordan disse kan opnås enkeltvis. Det
samlede antal observationer af søgeordene viste sig at være afhængig af både sektor
og organisation.
Dog var der en tydelig tendens af,hvilke bæredygtighedsmål der
var mest i fokus i de forskellige sektorer. Det betyder at bæredygtighedsmålene er
afhængige af hvilket produkt eller service som en organisation eller en sektor udby-
der. Nogle af bæredygtighedsmålene er derudover mere prioriteret, end andre mål.
Det kan konkluderes at rapportering vedrørende SDGs kan anvendes til at finde en
sammenhæng mellem organisationsprofiler og deres engagement i at opfylde FN’s
bæredygtighedsmål.
En vellykket implementering af Agenda 2030 kan ændre den bæredygtige tankegang
i organisationer. Dette speciale bidrager til den eksisterende litteratur ved at have un-
dersøgt tendensen af forpligtelse i bæredygtighedsrapporter. Resultaterne kan bruges
til at understøtte eksisterende værktøjer, der kvantificerer bæredygtighedspraksis. De
rapporter der er defineret som ”best-practices” kan anvendes til at vise hvilke ele-
menter af kommunikation og visualisering, der er nødvendige for at skabe en god
rapport. Det væsentligste bidrag til erhvervslivet er sammenhængen mellem de mål,
der er relevante for en type marked og en bestemt type organisation. Det politiske
bidrag, bygger på fundet af hvilke sektorer der har tendens til at inkorporerer alle
bæredygtighedsmålene i deres aktiviteter, og hvilke sektorer der bidrager særligt til
implementering af Agenda 2030.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface and Acknowledgement
This master thesis was conducted at the department of Management Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark. It was fulfilled in the requirements for a master
degree in Industrial Engineering and Management with a specialization in Innovation
and Strategic Management. The thesis represents 30 ECTS points. The Danish title
is formulated as follows ”Indholdsanalyse af bæredygtighedsrapporter for vurdering
af potentiel sammenhæng mellem organisationsprofiler og SDG-rapportering”.
I would like to thank my supervisor, Francesco Rosati, Assistant Professor from
DTU Management Engineering for the support, patience and guidance.
I would like to thank my family for the patience they have showed me over the
years and the support they have given me in order to reach this point.
Kongens Lyngby, February 15, 2019
Mie Louise Elsborg Drejer (s124303)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Sammenfatning
iii
Preface and Acknowledgement
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
x
List of Abbreviations
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Sustainable Development Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Sustainable development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Corporate Social Responsibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Role of sustainability reporting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Implementation of the SDGs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Conceptual Framework
13
3.1
A content analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Global Reporting Initiative
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Data overview
19
4.1
Data characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
The data sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Research method
23
5.1
The method of content analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Computer software method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Results
31
6.1
Content analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Scope of mentioned SDGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Implementation of the SDGs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Discussion
43
8
Conclusion
55
8.1
Limitations and future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Bibliography
59
A Purpose of the SDGs
65
B Definition of organization types
67
C Data Overview
69
C.1 Accessible reports in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
C.2 Overview on complete data sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
D Coding Scheme
75
E Results
79
E.1
Length of reports counted in words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
E.2
Occurrences of search terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
E.3
Frequency and Scope of the SDGs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
E.4
Best-practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
UN’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
UN’s five P’s: People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnership . . . . .
3
2.1
The 5 steps of the SDG Compass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
The purpose of the first five SDGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1
Elements of a content analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
The journey of finding the final data sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Distribution of organization sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Distribution of organization types in the final data sample.
. . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Distribution of organization size compared to organization type . . . . . .
22
5.1
Illustration of coding structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.1
Distributing of the search terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Mentioning of SDG1 - SDG17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Visualization of the sectors commitment to the SDGs
. . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4
Amount of reports incorporating the SDGs individually . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.5
Top and bottom of mentioned SDGs within each sector
. . . . . . . . . .
37
6.6
Examples on how to highlight implemented SDGs
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.7
Examples on how to visualize connection between report topics and SDGs
40
6.8
Examples of using SDGs as reference points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.9
Examples of using tables to visualize SDGs implementation . . . . . . . .
42
6.10 Examples of using tables and figures to visualize SDGs implementation
.
42
7.1
The top mentioned SDGs throughout all sectors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2
The bottom mentioned SDGs throughout all sectors . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
3.1
Summary of the GRI Report list criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1
Number of reports suitable for the content analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
The final data sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1
Search terms of the content analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Types of information collected in the content analysis
. . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Comparison between NVivo and the content analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1
The different report lengths of each investigated sector . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Search term occurrences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.3
Frequency of search terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.4
Total mentioning of all 17 SDGs as a whole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.5
Assessment of report quality within each sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.1
Calculated mean of occurrence of all search terms and the SDGs . . . . .
44
7.2
Mean of the different types of report quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
C.1 Accessible reports in Europe divided into sections sorted alphabetical
. .
69
C.2 Final data sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
D.1 Coding rules of the content analysis conducted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
D.2 Coding manual of the content analysis conducted . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
E.1
Length of all investigated reports
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
E.2
Occurrences of the three search terms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
E.3
Number of search term occurrences for each investigated report . . . . . .
82
E.4
Mean, median and standard deviation of the sectors investigated . . . . .
87
E.5
Frequency of the three search terms for each report investigated
. . . . .
88
E.6
Percentage distribution of reports within each occurrence frequency interval 92
E.7
The total mentioning of each of the 17 SDGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
E.8
Mean frequency per report for each of the 17 SDGs . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
E.9
Sample only including reports defined as ”Good” or ”Very good” quality .
95
==PAGE:13==
List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
Agenda 2030
Transforming our world: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
CSR
Corporate Social Responsibility
GHG
Green House Gasses
MDG
Millenium Development Goal
MNE
Multinational Enterprises
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SME
Small-Medium Enterprises
TBL
Triple-Bottom-Line
UN
United Nations
UNGC
United Nations Global Compact
WBCSD
World Business Council for Sustainable Development
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
On 1st August, 2018 our civilization exhausted Earth’s ability to annually regener-
ate itself. The nature’s resource budget for an entire year had been used, with five
months remaining. This means that humanity is using the Earths natural resources
1.7 times faster than our planet’s ecosystems can regenerate (Earth Overshoot Day
2018). The Earth Overshoot Day is dated back to the early 1970’s and every year
the date keeps creeping up. The consequences includes deforestation, collapsing fish-
eries and fresh-water scarcity together with climate change and an increase in serious
wildfires and hurricanes.
The solution to the overuse of the includes us all, from
individuals to organizations - even governments around the world. This master thesis
will focus on how organizations, potentially can use others implementation of sustain-
ability into their reporting to improve their own influence and thus, becoming more
positive regarding the use of Earth’s natural resources. By looking at potential allies
and competitors, organizations within the same industry can learn where to allocate
resources to achieve a more sustainable profile.
1.1
Sustainable Development Goals
The United Nations (UN) proposed a set of eight development goals, which where
applied over the period 2000-2015.
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
where designed to raise awareness and concern regarding inevitable topics like poverty,
hunger, disease and environmental degradation. Even though there was a shortfall
in achievement of these goals there has still been a noticeable progress (Sachs 2012)
which led to an unanimous agreement that a new set of goals should continue when
the first 15-year period reached its end. ”Transforming Our World: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development” (Agenda 2030) was adopted by all UN’s Member States
in September 2015 (United Nations General Assembly 2015). The intention of this
universal agenda is to mainstream a vision of sustainable development and complete
what the MDGs did not achieve, by stimulating action in the period 2015-2030 in
areas of critical importance for humanity and the planet. The Agenda 2030 presents
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) consisting of 17 goals, presented in Fig-
ure 1.1, accomplished by 169 targets together with 243 indicators used to measure
the progress of sustainable development in the given time-period.
A collaborative partnership between countries are necessary to implement the
SDGs and shift the world onto a sustainable path. The goals and targets are inte-
grated and balance the three dimensions of sustainable development: the economic,
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: United Nations’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals (UN Department
of Global Communications 2019).
social and environmental. The focus of the Agenda 2030 can, according to the UN, be
divided into 5 areas: People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnerships. The people
area (SDG1, 2, 3, 4 and 5) concerns ending poverty and hunger in all its forms and
dimensions together with ensuring dignity and equality in a healthy environment.
The planet area (SDG6, 12, 13, 14 and 15) concerns the protection of the planet
trough sustainable consumption and production together with sustainably managing
its natural resources in order to support the needs of both current and future genera-
tions. The prosperity area (SDG7, 8, 9, 10 and 11) ensures prosperous and fulfilling
lives for all people. The peace area (SDG16) is about fostering inclusive societies free
from fear and violence: ”There can be no sustainable development without peace and
no peace without sustainable development” (United Nations General Assembly 2015
p. 6). The partnership area (SDG17) concerns the mobilization of means required
to implement the agenda trough the SDGs, based on a spirit of strengthened global
solidarity. Integration of the goals are described as of crucial importance in ensuring
that the purpose of the agenda is realized (United Nations General Assembly 2018).
Figure 1.2 summarize the UN’s five P’s.
The agenda is accepted by all countries in the UN and is defined as applicable to
all. The fulfillment of the agenda is a collective path including all kind of cooperation.
All countries, with the developed countries taking the lead, should work on imple-
menting the goals, both on national and global level. To achieve full implementation
it requires a global partnership. Engagement will bring together both governments,
the private sector and individuals. The primary responsibility of the governments, lies
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Sustainable Development Goals
3
Figure 1.2: UN’s five P’s: People, Planet, Prosperity, Peace and Partnership.
in making follow-ups and reviews at the national, regional and global level regarding
progress of implementation. To achieve the Agenda 2030 there is a need for orga-
nizations, of all sizes, to contribute to the sustainable thinking, and the continuous
cycle of sustainability reporting. Target 12.6 regarding sustainable consumption and
production patterns reads: ”Encourage companies, especially large and transnational
companies, to adopt sustainable practices and to integrate sustainability information
into their reporting cycle”. The associated indicator addresses the number of pub-
lished sustainability reports. In 2018 did 93% of the world’s 250 largest companies
(in terms of revenue) report on sustainability, together with three quarters of the top
100 companies in 49 countries (United Nations Secretary-General 2018). The state-
ment and the latest results of the indicator stresses the importance of commitment
and implementation of the SDGs.
This master thesis aims to develop a visual guideline for all types and sizes of
organizations, who have not yet focused, or have focused on very few SDGs in their
reporting. This is done by creating an overview on what goals has the highest rep-
resentation in a specific sector, together with some of the best practices across all
sectors investigated. This can help determine what type of focus is needed to enter
the sustainability playground and to potentially increase an organization’s market
position. Therefore this thesis could be used to help and encourage organizations to
begin their request for changing the world onto a sustainable path and fulfillment of
the Agenda 2030. The general awareness of the SDGs have increased significantly,
since the adoption of the agenda. Social media and a lot of different foundations and
organizations have made it their mission to translate the goals and their targets so
individuals have a chance to understand and help in the process of saving the planet.
This awareness has also created an increasing pressure on business and their trans-
parency regarding sustainability practices.
This leads to the overall purpose of this master thesis, which is to determine the
potential alignment between organization profiles and their SDG reporting for other
organizations to benefit.
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
1.2
Problem statement
The problem statement formulation of this master thesis has been established based on
the introduction and personal interests in the SDGs. The problem statement specifies
what core question is asked and answered throughout the thesis, aiming towards
concluding whether sustainability and annual reporting can help other organizations
achieve a more sustainable perspective. The core question examined is:
Can reporting on SDGs within a sector/industry be used to determine
alignment between organization profiles and their commitment of SDGs
into their business practices, and thus be used to support existing literature
regarding implementation of SDGs in organizations?
An organization profile is in this master thesis defined as the type of market the
specific organization operates in. This means what type of market they have their
main business practices in and what kind of product or service they provide to their
customers.
Chapter 2, presents a literature review followed by three research questions, that
are based on the knowledge acquired from the literature. The conceptual framework is
presented in Chapter 3 and includes an overview on how to conduct a content analysis
together with a detailed description of the Global Reporting Initiative list. Chapter 4
provides an overview of data characteristics and the final data sample. Chapter 5
describes the research method applied including the method of this content analysis,
a brief explanation of the used software program used a the concept of benchmarking.
Chapter 6 presents the results of the content analysis. The discussion of the results
is found in Chapter 7 and a conclusion is found in Chapter 8.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
Different aspects of sustainability, and the SDGs, are investigated, to create a foun-
dation of knowledge within the field of study which can be used in the process of
answering the problem statement.
Sustainability can be defined as the ability to
be maintained at a certain rate or level (Oxford Dictionaries 2018). Sustainability
can also be described as creating harmony and improving both current and future
potential of human needs (Global Footprints 2009). The aspects investigated in this
chapter are: Sustainable Development, Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), Role
of sustainability reporting and Implementation of the SDGs. The last part of the
chapter presents the established research questions.
2.1
Sustainable development
The World Commission on Environment and Development defined sustainable devel-
opment back in 1987 as: ”Sustainable development is development that meets the needs
of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs” (Brundtland 1987). A terminology that has later proved to be fundamental
to the perception of a sustainable society. The ”triple-bottom-line” (TBL) was one
of the first concepts to describe how companies, organizations and governments can
focus on three different, but important, aspects of a wealthy society. People, planet
and profit. The phrase was coined by John Elkington in 1994 (Elkington 2004) and
quickly gained recognition in the existing debate regarding the need for a more sus-
tainable perspective of the business industry. The concept of the phrase introduced
a broader perspective to create greater business value. The three pillars is guiding
principles for long-term development but needs to be well balanced between social eq-
uity, environmental protection and economic growth to achieve its full potential. To
achieve strong sustainable development in a society, there is a need for no trade-offs
between the economic, social and ecological aspects (Gupta and Vegelin 2016). The
2030 Agenda seeks to integrate the three dimensions of sustainable development in
an invisible and balanced concern (United Nations General Assembly 2015).
2.2
Corporate Social Responsibility
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and sustainability are discussed both as near
synonyms and as completely distinct concepts depending on the point of view (Strand,
Freeman, and Hockerts 2015). If observing the two concepts as completely distinct,
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Literature review
CSR focuses on social issues, while sustainability focuses on environmental issues. Ac-
cording to Hahn and Kühnen (2013) the starting point for considerations regarding
CSR reporting lies in the normative concepts of sustainability. This paper adopts
the definition of CSR by the European Commission in 2011: ”The responsibility of
enterprises for their impacts on society, to integrate social, environmental, ethical,
human rights and consumer concerns into their business operations and core strategy”.
This definition encourage sustainable thinking and decision making in organizations
and shows that CSR works in close relation to the TBL. The trend of mentioning
CSR and sustainable development in operations and strategies have increased, as or-
ganizations have begun to recognize the importance of these concepts. This has made
these concepts a major part of strategic development. Stakeholders’ (e.g. customers,
investors and governments) expectations of sustainability, and an increasing interest
regarding studying CSR practices has developed as well. A lot of researchers has
investigated and analyzed the content of corporate reports for disclosures in respect
to one or more categories of social, environmental and/or ethical matters. (Unerman
1999, Elkington 2004). The concept of CSR has introduced business policies that
considers environmental, social and financial impacts in decision making (Heizer and
Render 2014).
A corporate responsibility strategy should, according to Labuschagne, Brent, and
Van Erck (2005), be clear regarding sustainable business activities, as well as social
investments and programs. CSR focused projects should add to the overall sustain-
ability of the organizations, but not necessarily be a part of an organizations’ core
business or operational activities. A lot has happened since, and sustainable think-
ing today is even more integrated in organizations. CSR and sustainable thinking
is no longer only a heavily used investigation topic, but is also found in different or-
ganizations’ mission and value statements. The access of technology today provides
the stakeholders with the opportunity to constantly monitor an organization’s perfor-
mance. To accommodate the demand for increased transparency organizations have
begun to use a more open reporting strategy on the social and environmental impacts
of their activities and operations. Furthermore, are initiatives like the Global Report-
ing Initiative (GRI) and the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC) becoming more
outing in the perspective of CSR reporting (Chen and Bouvain 2008). By using these
reporting initiatives organizations can experience benefits such as improved corpo-
rate image and the possibility of expanding their network. An increased pressure on
organizations from different stakeholders to apply CSR management systems across
the supply chain has made a difference in the commitment to sustainable thinking.
The benefits of implementing these kind of system includes strong reputation and
long-term success (Govindan, Khodaverdi, and Jafarian 2013).
In general corporate sustainability has become known for having an impact on
organizations’ long-term success, and refers to the integration of financial profitability,
environmental protection and social responsibility into organizations’ core business
and activities or operations (Rosati and Faria 2018a). The classical perception of
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Role of sustainability reporting
7
corporate sustainability can, according to Rosati and Faria (2018a), be applied to
the concept of sustainable development at the business level as meeting the needs of
direct and indirect stakeholders, without compromising the ability to meet the needs
of future stakeholders. The Agenda 2030 and the achievement of the SDGs seeks to
inspire the integration of sustainable thinking in a wide range of geographical areas
worldwide.
2.3
Role of sustainability reporting
Sustainability reporting is the practice of reporting on economic, environmental
and/or social sustainability impacts, based on different activities and operations
within an organization. Looking at the role of sustainability reporting when investi-
gating the literature through time, an increase in the number of annual reports or
sustainability reports can be linked to an increase in expectations from all kinds of
stakeholders. With growing expectations towards organizational concern of social, en-
vironmental and ethical accountability comes growing expectation of execution and
communication (Unerman 1999).
Regarding reporting on sustainable operations or activities, the commitment from
organizations can depend on different aspects. E.g. the location of headquarters,
both when it comes to country and region, and the pressure from governments con-
nected to a country, region and municipalities. The commitment also often depends
on the legislations as well as expectations from society. In addition can the challenge
of implementing sustainable thinking and the SDGs, be influence by how countries
formalize their commitments and their ability to turn global challenges into national
issues. In their paper, Chen and Bouvain (2008) explains that their findings were
consistent with the fact that even with the increasing global CSR standardization,
significant national differences remained in the reporting of sustainability and CSR
(this paper included USA, UK, Australia and Germany). The difference in reporting
can depend on the views on role of business experienced in each country, together
with the sustainability pressure coming from stakeholders, thus having a critical in-
fluence on CSR reporting. Furthermore, the difference can be related to the political
agenda in each country. The paper concluded that the inclusion of CSR performance
depended on whether organizations were members of the UNGC or not, and in ad-
dition the issues reported were closely related to the areas addressed in the global
compact. This show that organizations has a tendency of only reporting on topics
that are required by stakeholders or other sustainability networks.
Elkington (2004) predicted how a comprehensive approach to sustainable devel-
opment and environmental protection would become a market challenge in the 21st
century. This statement is confirmed in the literature investigated, e.g. Hahn and
Kühnen (2013) describe how sustainability reporting has become an increasingly rele-
vant topic in business and academia since the late 1990s and the number of published
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Literature review
sustainability reports have increased. Furthermore, the prioritization of sustainability
reporting seemed to previously be low, due to lack of tools available to evaluate sus-
tainability performance within organizations. The number of published reports are
expected to change with the Agenda 2030, which was established to help organizations
with the evaluation and performance management of sustainability reporting. Orga-
nizations have shown an increased willingness to use more resources on environmental
management and communication tools, such as environmental labeling of products,
carbon disclosure projects and sustainability reporting (Govindan, Khodaverdi, and
Jafarian 2013).
The available sustainability reporting tools, helping organizations
becomming more transparent, have increased over the years and Siew (2015) refers
to several kinds of frameworks, e.g. GRI, and World Business Council for Sustain-
able Development (WBCSD). The tools are very useful to help organizations com-
municate their progress on meeting a sustainable agenda. A point of concern when
investigating literature from the MDGs-period is that several papers mentions lack of
standardization for comparability, organizations hiding their actual practices (green-
washing) and translation of sustainability goals into manageable activities. These
points of concerns should change when organizations seek to implement and achieve
the Agenda 2030.
Rosati and Faria (2018a) discuss the potential role of sustainability reporting in
the progress of integrating the SDGs into business. Reporting can have influences
on corporate actions and strategies and therefore have a positive impact on the inte-
gration of the SDGs. The paper claims that successful sustainability reporting can
be seen as an enabler of SDG actions, investments and strategies. But successful
sustainability reporting must consist of clear communication, visualization and mea-
suring of organizations effort towards sustainable development. In this perspective
SDG reporting may be used in the future as an advancement of classical sustainabil-
ity or annual reporting in an organization. Maas, Schaltegger, and Crutzen (2016)
studies the integration of sustainability assessment, management accounting and con-
trol, and reporting. They find that there is no approach that fits all. This confirms
that it is difficult for organizations to compare themselves to others within their in-
dustry or market. Organizations can use sustainability reporting strategically, but
they may need help with the use of the different existing reporting tools to become
true transition leaders towards sustainability. The SDGs provide a new framework
for reporting on sustainability and human development (Stafford-Smith et al. 2017).
But to achieve the SDGs, more investment is needed and annual reporting must be of
high quality together with being comparable. The literature is calling for a constant
flow of information together with implementation policies in line with reality and the
SDGs. To address this issue a compass was developed in 2015 by the GRI, UNGC,
and WBCSD to help organizations apply the SDGs. The SDG compass consist of five
steps shown in Figure 2.1 and was created to explain how the goals can affect busi-
ness, together with offering tools and knowledge to make sure sustainability becomes
a main part of business strategies (UNGC, GRI, and WBCSD 2016). The definition
of the five steps is briefly summarized below.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Role of sustainability reporting
9
Figure 2.1: The five steps of the SDG Compass (UNGC, GRI, and WBCSD 2016).
Step 1, understanding the SDGs is created to assist organizations in familiarizing
themselves with the goals. Step 2, defining priorities, is about defining and prioritizing
positive and negative impacts on the goals based on their current value chain. Step
3, setting goals, is critical to success and aligns organizational goals with the SDGs.
It helps organizations show their commitment to sustainable development. Step 4,
integrating sustainability into core business and increasingly engage in different part-
nerships across the value chain. Step 5, reporting and communicating, is the most
important step defined by the topic of this master thesis. This step is enabling organi-
zations to report sustainable development performance by using common indicators
together with encouraging organizations to build the SDGs into their communication.
Compared to the MDGs, the SDGs is a more explicit tool to solve sustainable
development challenges. The goals can be used by organizations to show how their
business can help sustainable development by maximizing positive impact at the same
time as minimizing the negative impact on the planet. The intention of the goals is cre-
ating an overall framework which can be used to communicate and report sustainable
development of an organization. The benefits includes future business opportunities,
enhancing value of corporate sustainability, strengthen stakeholder relations together
with using a common language and shared purpose (UNGC, GRI, and WBCSD 2016).
The SDGs and this compass can therefore very well be the missing tool called for by
earlier literature, in order to create a comparable environment regarding sustainable
development and sustainability reporting. But the success of the Agenda 2030 de-
pends heavily on collaboration among both governments, organizations and society.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Literature review
2.4
Implementation of the SDGs
In the early process of researching the SDGs, Persson, Weitz, and Nilsson (2016),
expresses how follow-up and reviews will become critical in ensuring the implemen-
tation of the SDGs and that more action is needed on a national level. Furthermore,
they conclude that to increase implementation effectiveness, there should be great
attention on nationally defined and internalized targets. Stevens and Kanie (2016)
describes the potential of the SDGs and how they can entail global sustainability
governance, but early implementation is crucial in understanding the potential. For
the goals to play a key role in sustainability the political vision at international level
must be reflected on a national and local level as well. Successful implementation of
the SDGs depends on a well defined connection between the goals and in which way
they are integrated into global society. There is furthermore a need for challenging
the concept of business-as-usual approach to growth, together with the fact that the
developed countries needs to give something up. According to Gupta and Vegelin
(2016) we need to lower the ’top’ in order to bring up the ’bottom’. The level of
possible implementation of the SDGs seems to be depending on the eyes viewing the
situation and the organization asked.
To achieve integrated implementation of the three dimensions of sustainable de-
velopment (people, planet and profit) collaboration is needed. Stafford-Smith et al.
(2017) demonstrates how interlinkages and interdependencies among goals needs at-
tention to implement and ultimately achieve the SDGs. This paper is concerned that
due each country having the responsibility for its own implementation it can results
in nations only choosing convenient goals to focus on and thereby fail to address some
of the goals that are found too hard to achieve. Hildebrandt (2016) also expresses a
concern, that when it comes to reporting on the different goals, together with their
indicators and targets, it can be easier for some countries and organizations to focus
on the goals which are easy to quantify, compared to the goals which are explained
more qualitative. This can distort the follow-up expected by the UN on the different
goals. There is a need for the recognition that achieving the goals provides positive
impact on both humans and the planet in the short and long term perspective. Prajal
Pradhan et al. (2017) describes successful implementation of the SDGs as a need for
focusing on societal transformation to break away from locked-in relationships - this is
together with the statement that a successful implementation is ”the only way forward
to address the global sustainability challenge of ensuring human well-being, economic
prosperity, and environmental protection”. The paper furthermore, indicates that a
strong foundation for successful implementation of the SDGs is based on a statistical
formulation of the trade-offs.
The Agenda 2030 has put a global attention to the roles of business in achieving
goals for sustainable development. The expectation and scale have not been seen
before and it requires a nontraditional establishment of partnerships to be achieved.
Structures and processes are in need of alignment to protect public interests (Florini
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Implementation of the SDGs
11
and Pauli 2018). Weitz et al. (2018) describes how key questions in the implemen-
tation addresses the interaction between the established SDGs. The paper challenge
previous studies regarding the interconnection between the goals and seeks to identify
targets that have the most and least positive influence together with identifying areas
which requires extra attention compared to the interlinkage between the goals. Mann
et al. (2018) defines the implementation success of the SDGs as three basic principles:
”Indivisibility – all goals need to be implemented; inclusion – all people shall benefit;
and acceleration – the need for actions that have multiple development dividends”. Ca-
iado et al. (2018) have made a literature-based review on potentials and constraints
in the implementation of the SDGs. The paper states that in the implementation
of the goals there is a need for challenging the concept of business-as-usual and a
need for new social movements to put pressure on political and economic powers. A
thing that is seen on a variety of social media, where people participates or engages
in different climate initiatives that focuses on the lack of political enforcement of sus-
tainability. Besides this, the paper presents a continuous cycle for the achievement
of the SDGs, where collaborative problem solving networks should connect as many
stakeholders as possible, as well as all industries and countries. The implementation
and monitoring of the SDGs should generate more cooperation in a more open and
transparent playing field. In the achievement of the SDGs, business can play a crit-
ical role (Rosati and Faria 2018b) and a transparent reporting policy can support
the planning, implementation, measuring, and communication of the SDGs. This
paper investigated the early adoption of the goals and identifies different organiza-
tional characteristics which can be related to a more smooth implementation of new
sustainability frameworks. In another paper Rosati and Faria (2018a) describes that
organizations worldwide can play a significant role in the advancement of the Agenda
2030, and the SDGs, but also that different institutional factors have an influence
on the commitment in addressing sustainability issues. The paper aims to support
decisions by ”developing a better understanding of key institutional factors positively
or negatively related to the integration of SDGs into corporate sustainability reports”.
This indicates that the topic of implementing the SDGs in organization strategies,
activities and processes is still under investigated.
When it comes to the availability of tools to implement the SDGs into organization,
processes and activities, the Agenda 2030, the GRI guidelines and the SDG Compass
can easily be found on their website. Besides this, other tools and frameworks already
exists to support organizations in implementing the SDGs, e.g.: ”Tests of Success for
the SDGs” (Stakeholder Forum for a Sustainable Future 2019), ”Indicators and a Mon-
itoring Framework for the Sustainable Development Goals” (Leadership Council of
Sustainable Development Solutions Network 2015), ”SDG Accelerator” (Industriens
Fond 2019) and ”SDG Industry Matrix” (UNGC 2015). In general a lot of infor-
mation is available at the ”Sustainable Development Goals: Knowledge Platform”
(Knowledge Platform 2019), including outcomes of sustainability conferences. The
GRI guidelines can be applied on all types of organizations and therefore on all kinds
of sectors and industries. The SDG Compass is primarily developed to be applied
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Literature review
on large enterprises, but is supposed to work as an inspiration for medium and small
enterprises as well. The Agenda 2030 is developed as a guideline for countries and gov-
ernments: ”All countries and all stakeholders, acting in collaborative partnership, will
implement this plan” United Nations General Assembly (2018). Specific indicators
and targets of the SDGs can be difficult to translate and implement in sustainability
strategies, activities or operations and can therefore be conducted as its own future
investigation. That being said, the overall purpose of the goals is easy to relate to.
The purpose of the first five goals are highlighted in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The purpose of the first five SDGs (United Nations General Assembly
2015, UN Department of Global Communications 2019).
When connecting these goals to a sustainability perspective it can be concluded
that all organizations can help with the ending of poverty, hunger and improve human
well-being of people of all ages e.g. by investing in different funds, aid organizations
or other types of NGO’s. Internally an organization can have a sustainability strategy
that promote quality education and lifelong learning for employees together with focus
on achieving gender equality among both employees, managers and board-members.
Overall are these five goals corresponding to the People in UN’s five P’s. The full
description of the purpose of each goal is found in Appendix A.
2.5
Research questions
Based on the literature review three research questions have been established to elab-
orate on the problem statement and creates the foundation for further examination
of this master thesis.
• Can the frequency of the search terms show any comprehensive picture of SDG
reporting in organizations?
• Is the mentioning of SDGs in the investigated reports depending on an organi-
zation’s profile?
• Can the investigated reports be used to define good practices of SDG imple-
mentation and sustainability reporting?
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Conceptual Framework
To determine potential alignment between sustainability reporting and organizational
profiles this thesis investigates a number of reports submitted to the Global Reporting
Initiative (GRI). This conceptual framework describes a general view on content
analysis followed by elaboration on some of the criteria defined by the GRI to give a
better fundamental starting point for designing a content analysis and choose a final
data sample in Chapter 5.
3.1
A content analysis
Content analysis is a research method that can be used for various forms of commu-
nication media, because it is suitable for creating a systematic overview of almost
any content including documents, movies and photographs. The method systemati-
cally evaluates the chosen media and can convert qualitative data into quantitative
data. The quantitative observations can be used to investigate patterns of content
and in addition, as a deeper level, qualitative methods can be used to investigate
meanings of the content. In parallel software programs are becoming more advanced,
and they are increasingly used in the content analysis method to automate the coding
of documents. Simple computational techniques can provide descriptive data such as,
occurrences, frequency and document lengths. Weber (1990) describes content analy-
sis as ”a research method that uses a set of procedures to make valid inferences from
text”. This means that the researcher tries to connect the message and the sender
or receiver with the context of the text. Weber (1990) elaborates on some advan-
tages that the content analysis method has, compared to other data-generating and
analysis methods. First, content analysis operates directly on texts or transcripts
of human communication, which is a central aspect of social interaction.
Second,
the best content analysis includes both qualitative and quantitative measurements.
Third, content analysis can be used to asses relationships between economic, social,
political and cultural change in a quantitatively way.
The main characteristics of content analysis is described in the literature as objec-
tive, systematic and quantitative. Every step of a content analysis should be carried
out on the basis of formulated rules and procedures. But even in the most mechanical
forms of content analysis the researcher has to make some kind of reasonable judg-
ment regarding the data characteristics. All decisions should support the researcher
in making complete objective observations, a factor which is difficult to eliminate but
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Conceptual Framework
should be minimized (Kassarjian 1977). The most well known test of objectivity is to
make sure that other researchers can follow same procedures with the same data sam-
ple and get similar conclusion. A good design of a content analysis should therefore
include detailed specifications about procedures and handling of data. Three different
starting-points for designing a content analysis are described by Krippendorff (2004):
Text-driven content analysis focuses on the availability of texts that should be able
to maintain and stimulate the interests of the researcher.
Method-driven content
analysis is based on the desire to investigate previously explored areas with already
known procedures. Problem-driven content analysis arises from questions about cur-
rent events or processes that the researcher believes can be answered by available
texts.
In the design of the content analysis, analytical constructs are needed, to explain
how the investigated media is connected to possible answers. These are created to
ensure that a content analysis does not violate known conditions surrounding the
text. Furthermore they make sure that other researchers can examine the procedures
used. Three ways of establishing analytical constructs are described by Krippendorff
(2004); Operationalizing knowledge is when the researcher is expected to have a mini-
mum of interest in the given text, e.g. who is the sender and receiver. This knowledge
creates the stable features surrounding the texts, but the conception regarding this
type of knowledge needs to be clear. Testing analytical constructs as hypotheses is
the traditional way to create a valid analytical construct is to test several mutually
exclusive hypotheses and afterwards let empirical evidence select the most suitable
hypothesis constructed. Developing a discriminant function is an iterative process.
The researcher can compare results from a content analysis to the context of the text
and use any inconsistencies to alter relevant parts of the analysis. This means that
the researcher converges the analysis towards the best possible solution.
Six elements needs to be considered when designing and conducting a content
analysis. Figure 3.1 illustrates the different aspects and they are subsequently elab-
orated based on knowledge achieved from ”Content Analysis: An Introduction to
Its Methodology” by Krippendorff (2004). The first four boxes in the figure can be
categorized as data creation, because they set the limitations for the final data sam-
ple, in order for it to become measurable. The last box are about finding the most
likely explanation for a set of observations and afterwards present the answer to the
problem formulated.
3.1.1
Unitizing
Unitizing makes sure the variables in the investigated media is systematized depend-
ing on the interests of the researcher. There is three different kinds of units when
conducting a content analysis: Sampling units is the small data sample which are
drawn from a larger pool of data, e.g. choosing to look at only sustainability reports
==PAGE:29==
3.1 A content analysis
15
Figure 3.1: Elements of a content analysis adapted from Krippendorff (2004).
from one continent or country. Another option is choosing all sustainability reports
ever published. When choosing sampling units they should be naturally separated as
included or excluded in the final analysis. Coding units are different, because they do
not need to be cohesive. The optimal choice is small recording units, because a sam-
ple unit can be difficult to analyze due to complexity and subjective understanding.
The size of the coding units depend on the wanted information, but the collection of
words search for should not be formulated so small that they no longer can provide
the needed information. Context units are based on the fact that very few words can
be fully understood without looking at the meaning of a whole sentence or sentences.
The sentences can therefore overlap and be depending on each other. Ideally context
units are defined as large as possible, still being meaningful, and as small as possible,
still being feasible. Overall when designing the content analysis the methods of unitiz-
ing should support the needed answers to the research questions. To achieve this the
productivity must be optimized without compromising on efficiency and reliability.
3.1.2
Sampling
Sampling is in general used to limit massive data pools and convert it into sub-
samples which are representative for all available units. When choosing to look at
sub-samples the results should show the same conclusions as if the whole pool of
data was investigated. Creating a sub-sample, can be difficult because a text can be
read on several levels (words, sentences, paragraphs, chapters, or whole publications).
==PAGE:30==
16
3 Conceptual Framework
A sampling plan can be used to minimize biases regarding the representative data
sample, and it is therefore not impossible to create a valid sampling unit for answering
a research question. If all possible sampling units in a data sample are investigated
no problems will occur. Many different sampling plans are described in the literature
but only two are elaborated; Relevance sampling and Census. These sampling plans
are used to determine the final data sample. Relevance sampling aims at selecting all
units that can contribute to answering the research questions. This form of sampling
is applied by systematical lowering the number of texts in the final data sample.
The discarded texts is therefore not defined as representative for the population.
Other sampling plans can be applied after the exclusion criteria have shrunk the
population to a manageable size. Census is when the data sample includes all possible
units. When doing this the researcher avoids making any decisions regarding inclusion
and exclusion in order to maintain a representative perspective on the data sample.
Furthermore, if the sample is manageable, this sampling plan makes sure that the
researcher does not need to expand or reduce the final data sample.
3.1.3
Coding
The instructions for a content analysis must be clear for it to be repeatable by any
researcher later in time. Four areas are recommended when creating a content anal-
ysis instruction: Qualification, Training and preparation, Cognitive procedures and
Administration of the records produced. Qualification makes sure that the researchers
background knowledge fit the topic of the investigation. Training and preparation is
based on coding not being a normal activity and the content analysis instructions
should therefore include additional instructions and learning about the research ques-
tions. This can also be a way to evaluate the written instructions of the content
analysis, to make sure that the outcome becomes similar every time it is conducted.
Cognitive procedures makes sure that researchers can record efficiently and reliable.
Two requirements can be applied to achieve this, 1) exhaustive makes sure that all
units are recorded, without exception and 2) mutually exclusive makes sure that no
recording is represented by two different data points. Administration of the records
produced can have various forms, but should include: indication of researcher, record-
ing instructions, kind of text recorded, serial number of recording and name of content
owner together with information about the organization. Researchers should in addi-
tion easily be able to record, verify and correct collected information.
3.1.4
Reducing
Reducing all the data collected by creating clever presentations together with summa-
rizing and simplifying data. When achieving a large amount of data the representa-
tions needs to be efficient. E.g. is a list of search terms and their frequencies a good
way to get an overview compared to a tabulation of all occurrences. As long as the
representation can be created without losing any information. Making an overview
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Global Reporting Initiative
17
on the data collection is relatively easy. The success of a content analysis depends on
the validity of analytical constructs illustrating inference. If the analytical constructs
are done well it becomes applicable to all kinds of texts and can even be passed from
one researcher to another. Reducing the data collected into a manageable sample is
very important, especially when looking at a large pool of data.
3.1.5
Abductive inferring and Narrating
Besides creating a feasible data sample, the design of a content analysis also consist of
inferring and narrating the observed data. Abductive inferring is what differs content
analysis from other investigations method, and is supported by analytical constructs
which are based on the researchers knowledge about the context. It is about finding
the most simple and likely explanation for a set of observations and the process of
finding the solution through reasoning. It connects the meaning between descriptive
media and the outside world, equivalent to the context of the media.
Narrating is how the researcher presents the answers to the research questions,
depending on the field of knowledge and discipline of the researcher. Overall it is
about presenting the results to other readers. In this master thesis the narrating will
include explanation and visualization of the results.
3.2
Global Reporting Initiative
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) is an independent organization that has pioneered
sustainability reporting since 1997 (GRI 2018(c)). This organization was established
to help companies, organizations and governments around the world to communicate,
both their positive and negative contributions to sustainable development. Together
with implementation and awareness. The core product of this organization is the
Sustainability Reporting Standards which is representing global best practice for re-
porting publicly on a range of economic, environmental and social impacts.
The GRI list consist of many different criteria of which only some will be tracked
and stored in this content analysis, but not necessarily used for anything else than
creating fundamental knowledge about investigated reports/organizations. For the
interested reader the ”Sustainability Disclosure Database; Data Legend” (GRI 2018a)
gives a detailed explanation of all the different data fields tracked and stored in
the initiative. The content analysis in this master thesis track and store following
criteria: Organization name and report title refers to legal name and title of the
submitted report. Country and region refers to the location of the headquarter of
the organization. The classification of the organizations is divided into 37 different
sectors and consists of several different industries, such as Energy, Financial Services
and Food & Beverage products. Type of organization is linked to whether it is a
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Conceptual Framework
private company, state-owned company, cooperative, subsidiary, public institution,
non-profit organization or partnership. Definition of the different organizations types
can be found in Appendix B. The size of a reporting organization is according to the
GRI Reporting List divided in three categories: Small Medium Enterprises (SME),
Multinational Enterprises (MNE) and Large Enterprise (Large). SMEs are classified
on the local regulations but if these are absent an EU definition will apply, and Large
and MNEs follows the EU definitions of size (GRI 2018a p. 6). Report type refers to
the version of the GRI Guidelines applied in the report. For this thesis the guidelines
refers to GRI-4, published in 2013 and valid until 30 June 2018 and GRI-standards
published in 2016, currently valid.
SDGs shows if the reporting organization has
indicated that the report addresses any of the UN SDGs. Table 3.1 gives a short
overview of the explained criteria.
Table 3.1: Summary of the GRI Report list criteria.
Criteria
Explanation
Organization name
Legal name of the organization
Size
Small Medium Enterprises (SME), Multinational En-
terprises (MNE) and large.
Organization type
Private company, state-owned company, cooperative,
subsidiary, public institution, non-profit organiza-
tion or partnership
Sector
Classification of the organization
Country
Placement of headquarters
Region
Regional placement of the organization
Report title
Title of sustainability report
Report type
GRI Guidelines applied in the report
SDGs
Indicates explicit reference to the UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) in the report
Which of the above criteria that has the highest influence on the chosen charac-
teristics for the data sample is elaborated in Section 4.1 and the final data sample is
presented in Section 4.2.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Data overview
This chapter first briefly describe the data ethics of the collected data used for the
content analysis. Next, a number of characteristics used to restrict the research area,
to create a realistic perspective for the comparison between organization profiles and
their SDG reporting. Lastly, this chapter presents the final data sample used for
further investigation.
Data ethics is about fulfilling the principles and values on which human rights and
personal data law are based. It is about honest and genuine transparency in data
management. The highest ethical standards must be upheld when collecting data
and the research plan must describe the measures that will be taken to protect the
participants involved (Danvers and Desai 2008). The data was collected by making
an inquiry with GRI which provided this content analysis with their full list over
reports submitted to their database. The analysis of the received data is therefore
based on reports submitted voluntarily by different organization. This means that
the reports are publicly available and the investigation will therefore not have any
negative impact on the investigated organization.
4.1
Data characteristics
Figure 4.1 shows the different steps elaborated in this section to reduce the complete
pool of data received from the GRI.
Figure 4.1: The journey of finding the final data sample.
The complete excel file received from the GRI contains all collected data points
presented in GRI’s Sustainability Disclosure Database for reports published from 1999
==PAGE:34==
20
4 Data overview
until 4th of July 2018. To asses the extent of reported SDGs in organizations, the
sample should only include reports submitted after the adoption of the Agenda 2030.
In addition to this the reports investigated should reflect the current state in the
organizations, which therefore sets a requirement for the date of submitting to be as
close to the investigation as possible. The list for 2018 will not be complete before the
deadline of this thesis, hence only the list from 2017 is taken into account. This gives
a total of 5798 reports, for which delimitation is necessary. A relevance sampling
plan is therefore used to examine the complete data pool to establish a number of
characteristics providing the basis for the chosen data sample.
The focus of this master thesis is on reported SDGs in different organizations, thus
will the first characteristic be applied to the complete list. This characteristic also
means that the data sample is limited to reports including information about GRI-4
and GRI-Standards (GRI 2018b). Table 4.1 shows the remaining number of reports
after first delimitation. The number of reports available for the content analysis is
reduced to 920, which makes this characteristic the one with the biggest impact.
Table 4.1: Number of reports suitable for the content analysis, divided into regions.
Africa
Asia
Europe
Latin America &
the Caribbean
Northern
America
Oceania
15
313
310
212
57
13
Specific organization type and size will not be considered when choosing reports
for the content analysis. This is due to the assumption that these two factors will not
interfere with the answers searched for, because both should be able to give a view
on which SDGs are implemented, in an organization, in a specific sector. The region
chosen should contain a sufficient amount of reports to make an adequate investiga-
tion, therefore the choice lays between the three regions with most accessible reports
(Asia, Europe and Latin America & the Caribbean). Europe was chosen, because the
knowledge field and interest of the researcher is more likely to be maintained during
the conduction of the content analysis.
Table C.1 in Appendix C.2 shows a full list of the different sectors in Europe. Due
to the amount of different sectors, an extra characteristic is added for the data sample.
Sectors suitable for further investigation must contain a minimum of nine reports from
different organizations. This characteristic is based on the time available to collect
data and examine reports. Furthermore the sector category Other is excluded from
the final data sample because it does not represent any specific industry or market.
Lastly, reports must be written in English and duplicates be removed.
This last
characteristic resulted in removal of 39 reports from the final data sample.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 The data sample
21
4.2
The data sample
Based on the characteristics established above the sectors selected for investigation
are shown in Table 4.2. The number of sectors has been limited to eight with 9-33
different reports within each sector, giving a total sample of 115 reports. The inves-
tigated sectors include: Automotive, Chemicals, Energy, Energy Utilities, Financial
Services, Food & Beverage Products (in tables: Food & Beverage), Real Estate and
Telecommunications.
Table 4.2: The final data sample, divided into sectors, sorted alphabetical. And
their percentage share in the sata sample.
Sector
Reports [n]
Percentage share [%]
Automotive
9
7.8
Chemicals
9
7.8
Energy
16
13.9
Energy Utilities
12
10.4
Financial Services
33
28.7
Food & Beverage
15
13.0
Real Estate
11
9.6
Telecommunications
10
8.7
Total
115
100
Figure 4.2: Distribution, measured in both numbers and percent, between the dif-
ferent organization sizes: Large Enterprises, Multinational Enterprises
and Small-Medium Enterprises.
Figure 4.2 indicates that the number of Large enterprises reporting on SDGs is
considerably bigger than for the Multinational and Small-medium sized enterprises.
Figure 4.3 shows that the number of private companies reporting on SDGs, are larger
than any other type of organization. The organization type ”Private company” repre-
sents 89% which leaves 11% to be divided amongst the rest of the organization types.
The only type of organization that is not represented is ”Non-profit organization”.
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Data overview
Figure 4.3: Distribution of organization types in the data sample. The data labels
shows type of organization in total number and the percentage share.
Figure 4.4, shows that the representation of private companies is larger with re-
gards to both Large, multinational and small-medium sized enterprises than for any
other type of organization included in the final data sample. This may be due to
large organizations and private companies having more resources (time and money)
to invest in reporting concerning sustainability aspects of its activities and operations.
Figure 4.4: Distribution of organization size, compared to organization type in the
final data sample. The data labels shows total amount of organization
which fits a certain organizational type and organizational size.
Because all reports within a chosen sector are examined, the final data sample
can be concluded representative for a certain type of industry in Europe. Because
most of the investigated organizations are defined as ”Private company” and ”Large
Enterprises” this master thesis will only look at sector difference. Table C.2 in Ap-
pendix C.2 is a complete list of the data sample including organization name, type
and size, together with country and sector.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Research method
First this chapter presents the coding scheme designed for the content analysis by
supervisor Francesco Rosati based on the paper ’Corporate social responsibility re-
porting: A comprehensive picture?’ by Bouten et al. (2011). Second the computer
software (NVivo) is presented, which was used to support the qualitative outcome of
the content analysis. Lastly, the concept of benchmarking as a method for using the
best practices as future guidelines for other organizations, is presented.
5.1
The method of content analysis
The starting point for developing the coding structure comes from the Agenda 2030
and the GRI Sustainability Reporting Guidelines (GRI 2019) described in Chapter 3.
This creates the foundation for designing a content analysis for examining organiza-
tions commitment to the SDGs. Both quantitative, and qualitative, methods will be
taken into account, to analyze patterns of the reports. This section elaborates on the
different elements in the content analysis coding schedule template.
5.1.1
Information about organizations
The information about the investigated reports includes general elements such as:
name, size, organization type, sector, country, region, title and the written language
of the report.
Furthermore it includes the GRI Content Index URL, report pdf
address and report html address, to the extent that it is possible to fill in these.
These elements are already completed when receiving the list from GRI. The really
interesting elements of information are listed below:
• Notes and comment on the quality of SDG reporting
• Motivation for SDG reporting
• Just mentions SDGs (0,1)
• Links SDGs with GRI or other sustainability initiatives (0,1)
• Describes SDG performance (0,1)
• Describes the company plans to reach the SDGs (0,1)
• Establishes KPIs to measure and improve SDG performance (0,1)
==PAGE:38==
24
5 Research method
Notes and comment on the quality refers to the researchers evaluation of the inves-
tigated report, which in this case is divided into poor, average, good and very good.
Motivation for SDG reporting, is also based on the researchers evaluation. These
two elements have a great impact on the quantitative aspect of the content analysis.
The bottom five types of information mentioned on the list has a quantitative aspect.
Each type of information is defined by quantifying the presence or absence of infor-
mation. If no information is found the output is zero and otherwise it is one. This
information enables the researcher to keep an overview of the investigated reports
during the process of conducting the content analysis. This makes decisions making
easier regarding out-smoking best practices among the investigated organizations and
sectors later in the process.
5.1.2
Coding schedule
The coding schedule has two dimensions 1) content, consisting of two different levels,
areas and items, and 2) type of information. The two dimensions are elaborated in the
following sections. First the researcher decides the area of disclosure searched for, see
Table 5.1, then decides on the item of disclosure (SDG1 - SDG17 or SDGs) and lastly
asses the type of information connected to the two levels of content, if any connection
is existing. The coding schedule is formed as a decision tree, which has the following
advantages: it helps clarify the meaning of categories to make them well defined and
reduces a large number of alternatives. Furthermore the decision tree prevents overlap
in meaning and unreliability. Lastly it helps researchers create a similar outcome of
recording, when it involves several dimensions of judgment (Krippendorff 2004). The
coding schedule for this content analysis is illustrated in Figure 5.1. The coding rules
and the coding manual, alongside the description of the individual rule or variable,
can be found in Table D.1 and Table D.2 in Appendix D.
5.1.3
Content
The content is divided into three areas listed in Table 5.1. Each area refers back to
the development goals presented in the Agenda 2030 and the choice of searching for
each area with a different composition of search terms, is due to these words being
the most common way to refer to the goals. This is thus done to make sure that the
content analysis provides the needed information. The item of disclosure is the same
and therefore not depending on the area searched for. This should give a broader
view on the use of SDGs in sustainability reporting.
Table 5.1: Search terms of the content analysis.
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
Global Goal
==PAGE:39==
5.1 The method of content analysis
25
Second level of the content defines whether the SDGs are referred to overall, or if
any specific goals are mentioned. The specific mentioning of goals can refer to one or
several different SDGs.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of coding structure, based on the paper by (Bouten et al.
2011). Note: abbreviations used in the figure ME: mention of SDGs,
GRI: Global Report Initiative, UNGC: United Nations Global Compact,
VG: visions and goals, BM: business model, MA: management approach,
PI: performance indicators, TA: targets specific to SDGs, CE: circular
economy, IN: innovation and PR: prioritization..
==PAGE:40==
26
5 Research method
5.1.4
Information type
The second dimension distinguishes between several kind of information types listed
in Table 5.2. The extra dimension of information should help the researcher determine
the connection between the search term, the different SDGs (items) and organizations’
profiles. The meaning of each information type is described below the table.
Table 5.2: Types of information collected in the content analysis.
Information type
Meaning
ME
Mention of SDGs
GRI
G4 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines
UNGC
United Nations Global Compact
VG
Vision and goals
BM
Business model
MA
Management approach
PI
Performance indicator
TA
Targets specific to SDGs
CE
Circular economy
IN
Innovation
PR
Prioritization
Mention of SDGs refers to whether the SDGs are mentioned or not and are most
likely to be positive, unless the search term is not existing in the report. G4 Guide-
lines shows if the organization has made any connection between the mentioned goals
and the G4 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines (GRI 2019), which were valid until
July 2018 and therefore applicable to the investigated reports. United Nations Global
Compact (UNGC), shows if the organization has made any connection between the
mentioned goals and the UNGC, which include human rights, labour, environment
and anti-corruption (United Nations Global Compact 2019). Vision and goals refers to
the connection between sustainability and the aims/values of the organization. Busi-
ness model is based on the business model canvas, by Ostwalder and Pigneur (2010),
to see if any of the nine building blocks are represented.
Management approach
defines whether the type of information provides disclosure on how the organization
addresses a given SDG, by describing the action or practice adopted to reach the goal.
Performance indicators reflects actual achievements regarding the given SDG by pro-
viding quantitative measures. Targets shows if any specific targets to the given SDG
are mentioned. Circular economy indicates whether the organization looks into any
kind of circular economy when mentioning the goals. Innovation indicates whether
the organization looks into any kind of innovation when mentioning the goals. Pri-
oritization shows if the organization makes any kind of prioritization when choosing
SDGs, not mentioning some goals is not defined as prioritization.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 The method of content analysis
27
Each type of information is defined by quantifying the presence or absence of
information. If no information is found the output is zero, and otherwise it is one.
If the information is found it will be followed by a text field, containing the sen-
tence(s) in which the information is found. When deciding on the item of disclosure
the researcher looks for additional information to determine possible presence of each
type of information, on the same page as the investigated search term occurred. Be-
sides this, some interpretation of each information type was needed to complete the
collected data. This meant that the type of information was not necessarily men-
tioned, but was enough if the information was indicated on the page. Furthermore
visualization and/or graphics were used to obtain the information.
5.1.5
Objectivity, reliability and validity
Because the design of the content analysis and the coding schedule is an existing
template, tested on other reports, submitted to the GRI Reporting list, it has been
labelled as objective, systematic and quantitative according to the literature in Chap-
ter 3. For the coding to be reliable it requires that the same sentences are coded in
the same way by each and every researcher (Milne and Adler 1998, p. 242). As the
content analysis was an existing template tested on sustainability reports by other
students from DTU (supervised by Francesco Rosati) it can be concluded that the
coding scheme is reliable and that the same outcome would be the case if other re-
searchers used the same template on the same data sample. According to Milne and
Adler (1998) coding reliability is ensured by making sure that other researchers can
conduct the same content analysis and get the same results. Furthermore, measure of
reliability can be achieved since the content analysis scheme is known from previous
experiments and studies. Due to the time constraint, it has not been possible to test
the content analysis through an independent party, which would have been the most
optimal way to make sure the results were reliable. Instead, the coding scheme was
tested on a number of reports submitted to GRI and the results where evaluated and
examined with Francesco Rosati before using the exact same method to make the
final collected data. The main parts of the coding scheme are based on a quantitative
perspective, the outcome is defined as one or zero, depending on presence or absence
of investigated search terms.
By using the Agenda 2030 as approach to this content analysis it adds directly
to the transparency and replicability, because other researchers are able to use the
same guidelines to determine the dimension of area and item. If a content analysis
only adopts measurement techniques (only captures words and numbers), ignoring
pictures/graphics/illustrations, it most likely results in an incomplete representation
(Unerman 1999).
Measurement techniques thus often result in less errors and in-
creased numerical accuracy and thereby a higher validity. This master thesis used
both aspects by searching for specific word(s) but then afterwards relating them with
types of information and graphics or pictures illustrating the goals.
==PAGE:42==
28
5 Research method
5.2
Computer software method
NVivo is a data analysis software, which can be used to store and organize all kinds
of data together with categorizing, analyzing and classifying it (NVivo 2019). NVivo
is used to asses the length of each report investigated counted in words (word-length)
together with double checking the number of search term occurrences. The advantage
of using both the software program and the content analysis method is based on the
need for both precise quantitative data and a qualitative analysis of the occurrences.
5.2.1
Text search query
The base for word searching query in NVivo is different from the content analy-
sis method. NVivo’s search function can be very specific, and the function ”exact
matches” is used. This means that the original formulated search terms had to be
altered. The search function in NVivo does not account for upper or lower case let-
ters, only the content of the word searched for. The list below shows the necessary
adjustments made to achieve same starting point as when using the content analysis
method.
• SDG, SDGs, SDG1, SDG2, SDG3, SDG4, SDG5, SDG6, SDG7, SDG8, SDG9,
SDG10, SDG11, SDG12, SDG13, SDG14, SDG15, SDG16, SDG17, sdgcompass
• Sustainable Development Goal, Sustainable Development Goals, Sustainability
Development Goal, Sustainability Development Goals
• Global Goal, ”Global Goals, ‘global goals’
When searching for the term ”SDG” a lot of add-on words where created to achieve
all occurrences from the collected data. The biggest change was ”sdgcompass” which
caused 39 missing occurrences in NVivo. The list also indicates a relatively radical
change in the original search term ”Sustainable Development Goal”, which is due
to spelling errors in some reports (14 occurrences in total). The collected data was
corrected because they add to the overall picture of how an organization can use
this search term in their reports to show commitment to the SDGs. Furthermore
occurrences referring to web pages or pdf’s deleted from the NVivo search (4 in total).
The consequence of the changes, or differences in the search terms, have been to look
through all reports again (compared to NVivo results) to add missing occurrences in
the final collection of data.
Table 5.3 shows the total number of occurrences compared to each search method,
together with the difference between the two methods, calculated in percent.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Benchmarking
29
Table 5.3: Comparison between NVivo and the content analysis, counted as occur-
rences and the difference measured in percent.
Search term
NVivo
[occurrences]
Content
analysis
[occurrences]
Difference
[%]
SDG
1516
1521
0.3%
Sustainable Development Goal
743
756
1.7%
Global Goal
53
52
-1.9%
”SDG” has a low difference in occurrence because it is a very specific search term,
and only five inconsistencies has occurred due to different spelling (SGD, 2 x SDG17*,
SDG7 and ‘SDGs’). ”Global Goal” also has a low percentage difference, and the one
difference is NVivo counting a reference to the global goals of the Paris Agreement.
For the search term ”Sustainable Development Goal” only one inconsistency occurred
due to different spelling (Sustainable Development Goals’). The rest of the differences
is caused by the software missing occurrences in figures, creative headlines or nontra-
ditional text types.
5.3
Benchmarking
Benchmarking is a method used for comparison between business processes and per-
formance, identifying best and worst practices. This method is important in today’s
world to maintain a market position, or entering a new type of market or industry.
In the context of sustainability reporting benchmarking can be used to identify best
practices of reporting within a specific industry or in another industry with similar
processes or activities. With the adoption of the SDGs, there are now global sustain-
ability benchmarks that can be applied across industries, allowing public and private
organizations to evaluate activities, strategies, and business outcomes. Progress to-
ward sustainability management, and the achievement of the SDGs can now be mea-
sured with specific indicators across diverse sectors (Sullivan, Thomas, and Rosano
2018). Some literature claims that the biggest challenge organizations face is to learn
how to fully utilize benchmarking, when it comes to the implementation of the SDGs,
together with achieving and maintaining sustainable operations (Khalili and Duecker
2013, Caiado et al. 2018).
The need for consistent rating and benchmarking tools to assess the environmen-
tal, social and economic aspect have increased over the years (Knoepfel 2001), and
the SDGs provide a globally legitimized benchmark with clear metrics for sustainable
development (Florini and Pauli 2018). Organizations can use the increasing demand,
from stakeholders, for information regarding business operations to compare, bench-
==PAGE:44==
30
5 Research method
mark and rank the performance of competing companies (Elkington 2004). Further-
more Elkington concludes that the GRI, build on TBL foundations, is one of the most
powerful symbols of this trend.
Benchmarking can be identified as a key market based learning tool. The charac-
teristics of benchmarking can be used to achieve sustainable competitive advantages,
due to the importance of seeing what has been done in the industry or organization
studied (Vorhies and Morgan 2005). The method looks at how others implement
positive sustainable processes or activities (or which SDGs are implemented success-
fully), and then formulate a sustainability strategy fitting one’s own organization.
Spendolini (1992) defines benchmarking as the continuous, systematic process for
evaluating products, services and work processes of organizations that are recognized
as representing best practices for the purpose of organization improvement.
Fur-
thermore, competitive benchmarking is defined as an external activity that involves
identification of the products, services and work practices of an organization’s direct
competitors. Pickering and Chambers (1991) describe benchmarking as an element
aimed at organizational learning and as an external perspective to search for per-
formance levels and practices of other organizations. Together with this the paper
describes how even an industry leader can gain from the process. In this perspective,
benchmarking can be used to develop competitive sustainability advantage. The type
of benchmarking needed, is depending on the circumstances and competitive bench-
marking is useful in strategy formulation because it provides an external perspective,
which is good because customers and other stakeholders compare organizations based
on its competitors. Organizations from the same industry face similar competitive
challenges because they operate on the same market (Panagiotou 2007). This means
that they also adopts a similar competitive behaviour. In the end this means that
they will borrow from each others’ characteristics to stay on top of the market, or
even stay market leaders.
Pedersen (2018) defines SDGs as great for business. He describes the goals as
the best long-term strategic framework ever put in front of business. Furthermore
the paper concludes, that if just half of what the SDGs suggests is materialized by
2030, the SDGs still represent the best long-term market guidance ever put in front of
business. However, to achieve the SDGs it requires most organizations doing things
differently and in many cases, do different things than they do today when is comes
to sustainability activities.
The achievement of the SDGs can be measured with
specific indicators across diverse sectors, and thus public and private organizations
have global sustainability benchmarks, that can be applied to evaluate their activities,
strategies, and business outcomes (Sullivan, Thomas, and Rosano 2018).
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Results
This chapter examines the results of the data collected in the content analysis. First,
the software program NVivo is used to asses the length of the reports, counted in
words (word-length). Next, the occurrences of the search terms are examined, fol-
lowed by the calculated frequency. Afterwards, the mentioning of SDGs is compared
to investigated sectors. Lastly, this chapter looks at the quality and best practices,
evaluated based on the subjective perspective of the researcher.
The processing of data creates a foundation for answering the problem formula-
tion and research questions, along with making the best possible utilization of the
collected data. To determine possible alignment between organization profiles, their
business practices and their reporting on the SDGs an investigation of the data col-
lection is necessary.
The investigated occurrences and length of the reports can
determine whether there is a connected between frequency and commitment to SDG
reporting.
The investigation of the specific mentioned SDGs can be used to find
potential correlation between organization profiles and their implementation of the
SDGs. Lastly, the examined best practices may help other organizations with the
visualization and communication of the SDGs addressed together with sustainable
operations and activities.
6.1
Content analysis
This section first provides an overview of report lengths together with the occurrences
of the three search terms. Afterwards, it compares frequency and word-length.
6.1.1
Length of reports
Table 6.1 shows the calculated word-length of each investigated sector when using
the computer software NVivo. A significant difference is seen in the maximum and
minimum length of the report within each sector. The largest mean length is found in
the sector Energy Utilities, and the shortest mean length is found in the sector Food
& Beverage Products. The longest report (Financial Services) is close to 93 times
longer than the shortest report (Food & Beverage Products), looking at all sectors.
The longest mean length (Energy Utilities) compared to the shortest mean length
(Food & Beverage Products) is approximately twice the length. The length of each
report is shown in Table E.1 in Appendix E.1.
==PAGE:46==
32
6 Results
Table 6.1: The minimum, maximum and mean length of investigated sector, counted
in total number of words, together with the total number of words for
each sector. The shortest and the longest report is marked in bold.
Sector
Min
[words]
Max
[words]
Reports
[n]
Total
[words]
Mean
[words]
Automotive
25,959
184,560
9
645,939
71,771
Chemicals
9,751
176,229
9
696,953
77,439
Energy
17,744
236,982
16
958,571
59,911
Energy Utilities
30,038
147,309
12
1,024,961
85,413
Financial Services
10,806
281,832
33
2,065,726
62,598
Food & Beverage
3,022
133,234
15
728,569
48,571
Real Estate
15,265
115,166
11
661,403
60,128
Telecommunications
28,403
119,458
10
589,497
58,950
6.1.2
Occurrences of search terms
The occurrences of the three search terms (SDG, Sustainable Development Goal and
Global Goal) together with the total number of occurrences is shown in Appendix
Table E.2. The percentage division of the three search terms are shown in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Total occurrences and percentage distribution between the three search
terms (SDG, Sustainable Development Goal and Global Goal) compared
to the total number of investigated reports.
The search term ”SDG” is mentioned most in all reports, then ”Sustainable De-
velopment Goal” and last ”Global Goal”. The search term ”SDG” is mentioned ap-
proximately twice as many times as ”Sustainable Development Goal” and close to
29.5 times more than ”Global Goal”. For a specific search term and its occurrences,
divided among all reports, see Table E.3 in Appendix E.2.
==PAGE:47==
6.1 Content analysis
33
Going deeper into the investigation of the search terms, and their occurrences,
Table 6.2 gives an overview of calculated total number of occurrences within each
sector and for all reports.
Table 6.2: Mean, median and standard deviation of all search term occurrences
divided into sectors and for the total number of investigated reports.
Furthermore the minimum and maximum number of occurrences in a
report, and for comparison the mean word-length for each sector.
Sector
Mean
Median
Standard
deviation
Min
Max
Mean
length
Automotive
25.4
23.0
19.3
2
67
71,771
Chemicals
30.6
15.0
26.3
11
82
77,439
Energy
17.0
14.0
12.8
2
47
59,911
Energy Utilities
28.0
9.5
50.6
1
185
85,413
Financial Services
14.8
12.0
11.9
1
53
62,598
Food & Beverage
25.8
14.0
41.0
0
170
48,571
Real Estate
7.7
5.0
5.2
2
18
60,128
Telecommunications
25.6
20.5
21.4
5
78
58,950
For all reports
20.3
13.0
26.9
0
185
64,101
The results indicates that the mean number of occurrences does not only depend
on the type of sector investigated, but also the different reports within each sector.
Comparing mean length of the reports and the mean number of occurrences, shows
that in the sector Real Estate the mean is only 7.7, while the mean length of the
reports is 60,000 words. While the mean in the sector Food & Beverage Products is
25.8 and the mean length is 48,500 words.
The difference between mean and median depends on the investigated sector, but
in all cases the mean number of occurrences is higher than the median. This indicates
that more reports, in all sectors, has a low total number of occurrences, compared
to the number of reports with a high number of occurrences. In the sector Energy
Utilities the mean occurrence is close to 3 times higher than the median, showing
that only a few reports, in this sector, has a high total number of occurrences.
The commitment of SDG reporting within each sector is very different, and based
on the minimum and maximum number of occurrences it can be seen that a high
variation occur in some sectors. The highest differences, measured in occurrences,
are 184 and 170 which indicates a high variation in the observations. The lowest
differences between minimum and maximum, measured in occurrences, is 16 which
indicates a low variation. The difference between minimum and maximum also has an
influence on the standard deviation and therefore the dispersion of the data collected.
==PAGE:48==
34
6 Results
Table E.4 gives an overview on the mean, median and standard deviation of the
sectors investigated divided amongst the three search terms.
6.1.3
Frequency of the search terms
A comparison between occurrences and the word-length (the frequency) is made using
the results from NVivo and the content analysis. Due to the report length of being
counted in words, the search term ”Sustainable Development Goal” is multiplied by
three and the search term ”Global Goal” is multiplied by two when calculating the
frequency per report. Table 6.3 gives an overview on the percentage amount of the
investigated reports which fits one of the occurrence frequency intervals. Table E.5
in Appendix E.3 shows the results for all organizations.
Table 6.3: Number of reports and the percentage distribution of reports within each
occurrence frequency interval.
Reports
>
1:1000
1:1000 -
1:10,000
1:10,000 -
1:100,000
1:100,000
>
Sector
[n]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
Automotive
9
2
22.2
6
66.7
1
11.1
0
0.0
Chemicals
9
2
22.2
7
77.8
0
0.0
0
0.0
Energy
16
5
31.3
9
56.3
2
12.5
0
0.0
Energy Utilities
12
2
16.7
7
58.3
3
25.0
0
0.0
Financial Services
33
9
27.3
20
60.6
4
12.1
0
0.0
Food & Beverage
15
7
46.7
6
40.0
1
6.7
1
6.7
Real Estate
11
1
9.1
8
72.7
2
18.2
0
0.0
Telecommunications
10
3
30.0
7
70.0
0
0.0
0
0.0
For all reports
115
31
27.0
70
60.9
13
11.3
1
0.9
Looking at the total occurrence frequency, all sectors has minimum one report
placed in the category ”>1:1000” words. For most sectors the majority of the reports
are placed in the frequency interval ”1:1000 - 1:10,000” words. Only the sector Food &
Beverage Products has one report placed in the frequency interval ”1:100,000” words.
This report is also the only one where none of the search terms occurred during the
content analysis. In the majority of all the reports investigated (87.9%) is the total
occurrence of the search terms above 1:10,000 words.
Half of the sectors, within
each frequency interval, has a percentage distribution above the total percentage
when looking at all the reports investigated. The individual numbers for the different
search terms are listed in Table E.6 in Appendix E.3, .
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Scope of mentioned SDGs
35
6.2
Scope of mentioned SDGs
This section first goes trough the mentioning of SDGs in general compared to sec-
tors and number of investigated reports. Afterwards this section compares how the
mentioning of the different SDGs (SDG1 - SDG17) is connected to a specific sector.
This can be used to define if a correlation exists between organization profiles and
mentioned SDGs. Table 6.4 shows the total mentioning of SDGs. This means that all
17 SDGs are mentioned or showed as a type of concept, framework, guideline, figure
and the like. This also includes when the SDGs are mentioned as being a part of
the Agenda 2030 or any other factual description of the goals (e.g. year and time of
adaption of the Agenda in the UN).
Table 6.4: Total mentioning of all 17 SDGs as a whole.
Sector
SUM
[occurrences]
Reports
[n]
Mean
[occurrences]
Automotive
96
9
10.7
Chemicals
153
9
17.0
Energy
155
16
9.7
Energy Utilities
232
12
19.3
Financial Services
333
33
10.3
Food & Beverage
176
15
11.7
Real Estate
37
11
3.4
Telecommunications
177
10
17.7
For all reports
1359
115
11.8
The mean mentioning of the SDGs as an overall concept is close to 12 times per
report looking at all the investigated reports. Looking at the sectors individually the
highest mean occurs in the sectors Chemicals, Energy Utilities and Telecommunica-
tions (17.0, 19.5 and 17.7 times). The lowest mean occurrence is 3.4 (Real Estate).
Table E.7 and Table E.8 in Appendix E.3 provides an overview on each of the goals
(SDG1 - SDG17), the total number of occurrences for each goal mentioned and their
mean occurrences within each sector.
Figure 6.2 visualize the mentioning of each SDG (SDG1 - SDG17), sorted from
high to low. The two SDGs mentioned most, overall are SDG8 (Decent work and
economic growth) and SDG12 (Responsible consumption and production). The two
goals mentioned the least are SDG2 (Zero hunger) and SDG14 (Life below water).
Figure 6.3 visualize of the commitment to the goals (SDG1 - SDG17). The ex-
amination is based on whether or not a specific SDG is mentioned in a report. This
is done to show the amount of commitment, among all sectors, by looking at which
goals that has been addressed individually.
==PAGE:50==
36
6 Results
Figure 6.2: Mentioning of the SDG1 - SDG17, sorted from high to low. Each field
is based on the values from Table E.8 in Appendix E.3.
Figure 6.3: The sectors commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals, calcu-
lated as percentage density. Green defines the highest value and red
define the lowest value, and all colors in between is a modulation.
==PAGE:51==
6.2 Scope of mentioned SDGs
37
The commitment to the SDGs as a concept and the individual goals therefore
differs from sector to sector. The sector Telecommunications shows commitment to
most of the SDGs, as individual goals, because at least 50% of the goals are incorpo-
rated or considered in the investigated report. For the sector Energy Utilities there
is the contrast of no reports considering more than 50% of the goals individually.
Figure 6.4 state that 26 of the investigated reports does not incorporate any of the
goals individually, only the concept as a whole. Even though the figure also shows
that 13 of the investigated reports does in fact look at all the 17 SDGs as individual
goals which needs to be achieved.
Figure 6.4: Amount of reports incorporating the Sustainable Development Goals
individually, the interval goes from 0 to 17 different goals.
Figure 6.3 highlights top and bottom commitment of the different SDGs, defined
separately for each sector. The differentiation is made to show which goals are mostly
addressed within each sector.
The pattern supports the claim, that each of the
investigated sectors commits themselves to some specific goals more than others.
Figure 6.5: Top and bottom percentage density of addressed SDGs within each
sector. Green defines top two values and red defines bottom two values.
==PAGE:52==
38
6 Results
6.3
Implementation of the SDGs
The implementation of the SDGs into reporting vary a lot, depending on both sectors
and specific organizations. Table 6.5 shows that the quality of the reports differs a lot.
This subjective assessment, regarding the quality of the investigated reports, is made
by the researcher during the conduction of the content analysis. See Section 5.1.1
(Information about organizations) in Chapter 5 (Research Method).
Table 6.5: Assessment of report quality within each sector, measured in percent.
Sector
Reports
[n]
Poor
[%]
Average
[%]
Good
[%]
Very good
[%]
Automotive
9
22.2
22.2
11.1
44.4
Chemicals
9
11.1
22.2
44.4
22.2
Energy
16
12.5
12.5
62.5
12.5
Energy Utilities
12
66.7
0.0
16.7
16.7
Financial Services
33
42.4
27.3
21.2
9.1
Food & Beverage
15
26.7
0.0
33.3
40.0
Real Estate
11
45.5
0.0
27.3
27.3
Telecommunications
10
30.0
0.0
40.0
30.0
For all reports
115
33.9
13.0
31.3
21.7
Based on Table 6.5 it can be seen that 47% of the reports have a quality evalu-
ated as ”Average” or lower. Especially the sector Energy Utilities has a large amount
of reports where the quality is defined as ”Poor”. Looking at the other end of the
specter, the sector Automotive has most reports placed in the quality category ”Very
good” while only 9% of the reports from the sector Financial Services are placed in
this category. The implementation of the SDGs and the commitment to report on
these seems to be depending on the sector. To examine what reports can be used
to show an example of good practice a new sample was established, consisting of 61
reports, all found in one of the two categories ”Good” or ”Very good” quality. In
Table E.9 Appendix E.4 is all organizations from the new sample listed.
The next section investigates the best practices of communicating the SDGs in the
new sample. The section is based on a subjective assessment regarding quality, moti-
vation and visualization of commitment to the SDGs made by the researcher during
the content analysis. The desired output is to establish whether any organizations
stands out, both on the information level and on the visualization perspective, when
communicating the SDGs to current and potential stakeholders, together with other
types of readers.
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Implementation of the SDGs
39
6.3.1
Best practices
To visualize the commitment to achieving the SDGs, an organization must find a sim-
ple way to show the reader or the stakeholder the main point of their sustainability
strategy. Common for most of the reports in the new sample are that they begin their
sustainability part, section or report with a figure showing all the 17 SDGs, which
gives the reader a foundation of knowledge. To improve the quality many organiza-
tions uses this figure to highlight the goals that are in focus in their sustainability
strategy, operations and activities. Examples are shown in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Examples on how to highlight implemented SDGs. (A) FrieslandCamp-
ina (2017) p. 13, (B) SEB (2017) p. 6, (C) Volvo Group (2017) p. 65,
(D) Rabobank (2017) p. 17 and (E) Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA)
(2017) p. 36.
From the examples in Figure 6.6 it is evident that the highlighting can be done
very differently, depending on the organization. Many organizations use the simple,
and probably most well known figure of the 17 goals and from this starting point
they highlight the goals in focus, see (A) and (B). Some organizations highlights the
specific goals in focus more clearly than others, and again some uses color-coding or
sizing to specify which type of impact they have on the different goals, see (C) and (D).
Another possibility is to take the well-known figure from the UN and re-arrange the
individual goals in a new way to visualize the desired message (E). All visualizations
are good, when it comes to communicating an organization’s impact on the SDGs.
==PAGE:54==
40
6 Results
Another way of communicating which SDGs is addressed, can be to align the
goals with specific topics of the report, in a stand-alone figure. This gives the reader
or stakeholder a possibility to get a quick overview on what can be expected when
reading the rest of the report. Aligning the goals with different sustainability topics
can be done with both less and more text explanation. Examples on how to visualize
connections between sustainability topics and the SDGs are shown in Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: Examples on how to visualize connection between sustainability report
topics and SDGs. (A) Allianz SE (2017) p. 12, (B) Fortum Värme
(2017) p. 5, (C) Iberdrola (2018) p. 14 and (D) Nokia Coreporation
(2017) p. 39.
An additional feature for the reports in the new sample, are their tendency to
show which goals are related to different subjects, by using small figures, throughout
the report. Figure 6.8 shows a range of possible ways of visualizing this. But the
common denominator for the reports in the new sample are that they make it easy for
the reader to make references and understand relevant goals. Connecting the goals
with the topics throughout the report is a good way to show few or several goals
that fits the topic. It is clever to use the SDGs as visual reference points during the
report so the reader does not have to go back to the first encounter when reading
through it. It gives a good and quick overview of the message and the considered
goals. Some organizations use a lot of small figures showing only few goals, where
some organizations starts every sustainability section with a figure including relevant
SDGs. Both ways helps support desired intentions.
==PAGE:55==
6.3 Implementation of the SDGs
41
Figure 6.8: Examples of using SDGs as reference points. (A) Alterfin (2017) p. 22,
(B) Crèdit Andorrà (2017) p. 37,(C) Enel (2017) p. 112, (D) Telefonica
(2017) p. 81, (E) BONDALTI (2017) p. 29 and (F) Nestlé (2017) p.
162.
Figure 6.9 shows different examples of using tables to visualize commitment to the
SDGs. Tables may appear very simple to the reader, but also very informative and
a good way of presenting a lot of numbers in a short amount of words. Furthermore
the use of tables is a good way to show the connection between the SDGs and other
sustainability initiatives, especially GRI-4, GRI-standards and the UNGC. When an
organization uses tables as communication media they are often huge and extends
over several pages to cover all desired topics. A few organizations tables are used as
the main communication source of the report or even as the only element of the report.
Small figures of the SDGs can be included in the tables if desired, see examples in
Figure 6.10. Tables are often placed in the end of reports, and in some cases refers
back to sections or pages earlier in the report. The amount of figures and text used to
describe commitment to the SDGs varies a lot depending on the sector investigated
and the individual organization.
==PAGE:56==
42
6 Results
Figure 6.9: Examples of using tables to visualize SDGs implementation. (A) Daim-
ler (2017) p. 113, (B) Credit Suisse (2017) p. 44 and (C) Commerzbank
(2017) p. 16.
Figure 6.10: Examples of using tables and figures to visualize SDGs implementation.
(A) COFIDES (2017) p. 12, (B) Nestlé (2017) p. 26, (C) BUNDU-
ELLE SAS (2017) p. 25 and (D) Iberdrola (2018) p. 18.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
Based on, the content analysis and the results presented in Chapter 6, this chapter
reflects and discuss the problem statement and the related research questions. Each
research question is discussed separately and lastly, an overall discussion regarding
the problem statement is conducted.
Can the frequency of the search terms show any comprehensive picture of
SDG reporting in organizations?
Comprehensive SDG reporting requires that frequency of the three search terms (SDG,
Sustainable Development Goal and Global Goal) are consistent with the quality of
the context of the search term disclosed. Looking at the length of the reports there
is little connection to the quality of SDG reporting. This can be due to the reports
submitted to the GRI being both annual and sustainability reports, or just ”add-on”
to existing reports. This means that the amount of space dedicated to sustainability
within each report differs, depending on the type of report submitted. This can also
distort the image of how many times a search term have been mentioned in relation to
the length of the report and the frequency. The search term ”Global Goal” occurs few
or none times in all reports and can therefore not be used to give a fulfilling answer
to the research question. The search term ”Sustainable Development Goal” is men-
tioned close to 6.5 times per report, while ”SDG” is mentioned around 13 times per
report. If summarizing all three search terms, they are mentioned approximately 20
times per report. This indicates that the framework of the SDGs is generally useful to
the organizations, with regards to communicating and visualizing the commitment to
the SDGs. This fits the literature, which express that execution and communication
of sustainability activities are becoming more important, as well as the willingness
to use more resources on environmental management (Unerman 1999, Rosati and
Faria 2018a and Govindan, Khodaverdi, and Jafarian 2013). However, the frequency
differs a lot depending on both sector and for the organizations individually which
can make it difficult to determine any general connection between the frequency and
comprehensive SDG reporting.
Table 7.1 shows that the percentage share of the 17 SDGs, as a concept or frame-
work compared to all search term occurrences, is at least 41%. Looking at all the
reports investigated more than half of the time a search term occur it is connected to
all the goals as a coherent concept. This means, based on occurrence frequency, that
it can be difficult to determine how much an organization really aims at achieving the
SDGs compared to the different search terms. Furthermore, when the search term
==PAGE:58==
44
7 Discussion
”SDG” is mentioned it is often connected to the term ”Sustainable Development Goal”
as it also functions as an abbreviation, and some reports uses both words every single
time there is an occurrence.
Table 7.1: Calculated mean of occurrence of all search terms and the times all the
SDGs, as a concept or framework, is mentioned. The table is a combina-
tion of Table 6.2 and Table 6.4 together with the calculated percentage
share of SDGs for all search terms.
Sector
Search terms
[occurrences]
SDGs
[occurrences]
Percentage share
[%]
Automotive
25.4
10.7
42.1
Chemicals
30.6
17.0
55.6
Energy
17.0
9.7
57.1
Energy Utilities
28.0
19.3
68.9
Financial Services
14.8
10.3
69.5
Food & Beverage
25.8
11.7
45.3
Real Estate
7.7
3.2
41.4
Telecommunications
25.6
17.7
69.1
For all reports
20.3
11.8
58.3
To determine if the frequency shows any comprehensive picture of an organizations
SDG reporting, it needs to be connected to the context of the search terms and the
overall quality of the report. Each time a search term occurred in the data collection,
it was connected to several types of information (see Section 5.1.4 in Chapter 5). The
information connected the occurrence to other sustainability initiatives, vision and
goals (VG), business model (BM), management approach (MA), performance indi-
cators (PI), SDG targets, circular economy (CE), innovation (IN) and prioritization
(PR). The results of the content analysis showed that this was very difficult to dis-
close despite the researcher including the context of pages and figures. Looking at the
frequency, the results in Table 6.3 shows the percentage distribution of all the reports
where the frequency of the search terms above 1:1000 words are 27%. A majority of
the reports were found in the occurrence frequency interval ”1:000 - 1:10,000” (60.9%).
The subjective assessment of quality of the reports shows that when the number of
occurrences is low, the quality of the report if often vague and the reporting on the
SDGs is low. Table 7.2 provides overview on the calculated mean occurrences of the
different types of report quality applied to the reports.
Stated in Table 6.5, 34% of the investigated reports have been defined as ”Poor”,
and the mean number of occurrences for this type of quality is only 6.6 (see Table 7.2).
In the category ”Very good” the mean occurrences is 42.6 per report which is more
than 6 times higher than the mean occurrences for the ”Poor” quality reports, and
twice as high as the mean number of occurrences for all the reports investigated. Ta-
ble 6.2 showed a high variation in observations in the sector Energy Utilities, and
==PAGE:59==
7 Discussion
45
Table 7.2: Mean of the different types of report quality, together with the number
of reports within each category.
Quality
Reports [n]
Mean [occurrences]
Poor
39
6.6
Average
15
15.9
Good
36
19.0
Very good
25
42.6
Table 6.5 shows that 67% of the investigated reports within this sector is defined
as of ”Poor” quality. Furthermore, the mean number of occurrences in the sector
Real Estate where 7.7 and the number of reports defined as of ”Poor” quality is 45%.
In none of these sectors are there reports in the category ”Average” quality. This
indicates that the quality of SDG reporting to some extent are connected to number
of occurrences in a report.
The measure of SDG-related operations and activities is based on word frequency
in the reports, and it can be argued that the frequency of the search terms occurrences
provides a good indication of the relative importance of the SDGs an organization
wishes to portray. But it may not equate with the importance attached to the issue
in actual implementation of the SDGs by the organization (Chen and Bouvain 2008).
The results and the discussion have showed that the frequency of the search terms
can be used to determine the quality of an organizations SDG reporting. But to
disclose whether the comprehensive picture is adequate, the occurrences needs to be
connected to one or more additional types of information and not be a stand-alone
concept.
Is the mentioning of SDGs in the investigated reports depending on an
organization’s profile?
Figure 6.3 in results provided an overview of how many of the SDGs where approached
within each sector. From there it can be seen that commitment to the SDGs as in-
dividual goals, compared to concept, differs a lot.
As seen in the literature, the
difference in commitment may be caused location of the headquarters of the organi-
zations together with laws, legislation and other expectations from the local society
(Chen and Bouvain 2008, Stafford-Smith et al. 2017).
The sector Telecommunications definitely stands out when is comes to approaching
most of the SDGs as individual goals. In the other end of the specter the sector Energy
Utilities shows least commitment to the SDGs as individual goals. To be able to look
at the sectors individually Figure 6.5 highlighted the top and bottom goals within
each sector depending on whether or not the goals were addressed. Together with
related information collected in the content analysis the top SDGs are compared to
organization profiles and business practices of each sector. The top goals are shown
==PAGE:60==
46
7 Discussion
in Figure 7.1, and the bottom goals are shown in Figure 7.2. The bottom goals are
examined individually, and only compared to certain sectors.
Figure 7.1: The top mentioned Sustainable Development Goals throughout all sec-
tors (UN Department of Global Communications 2019).
The top goals in the sector Automotive consist of SDG3, SDG11, SDG12 and
SDG13. The amount of reports addressing these goals are equivalent to either 67%
or 78%. The automotive sector primarily produces motorized vehicles. In the con-
tent analysis SDG3 where often connected to topics regarding well-being of employees,
mobility concepts, quality and vehicle safety. Reducing accidents involving vehicles
and improving health of employees fits well with the concern of good health and
well-being which is the main focus of this goal. Furthermore these aspects of the goal
fits with an expectation of the vehicle industry having focus on quality and safety of
drivers. SDG11 is connected to topics such as new mobility solutions, and production
of technology and digitization regarding community, customers and logistics. The
main focus of this goal is making cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. This
fits well with this type of industry, since they produce all kinds of vehicles, having a
major impact on the everyday lives of people all over the world. Furthermore, vehi-
cles have a big impact on making cities sustainable (use of fossil fuels and pollution).
SDG12 and SDG13 are often mentioned close to each other and connected to topics
such as, reducing material loss and closed recycling circuits, energy controls, fuel or
alternative consumption and reduction of CO2 emissions. The automotive industry
is one of the most well-known climate sinners, which supports the claim that these
goals fits this type of business practices. This sector only benefits from being trans-
parent about their operations, because they depend on their customers who have an
increased interest in pursuing green alternatives, such as cars running on electricity.
The top goals in the sector Chemicals consists of SDG7, SDG12 and SDG13. The
amount of reports addressing these goals are equivalent to 56%. The content analysis
shows that SDG7 is often connected to renewable energy projects, like reducing the
==PAGE:61==
7 Discussion
47
carbon footprint and energy consumption under production. As this sector produces
a wide range of chemicals (e.g. paint, performance coatings and agribusiness) the
focus of these goals really depends on the report investigated. Looking at the orga-
nizations that focus mostly on agribusiness and sustainable living this goal fits with
their business practices as it includes an increase of using renewable energy sources
for production. SDG12 is connected to topics such as waste facilities, work on nutri-
tion security with circular concepts, sustainable production in the terms of weight,
volume and/or packing materials. Sustainable production fits well with this type of
industry, because they produce different kinds of chemicals which potentially has a
huge impact on the environment. Reducing waste in the production of a product is
also common in organizations seeking to become more sustainable. SDG13 is mostly
connected to topics like reducing energy and GHG emissions and increasing the use
of renewable sources of energy. In general climate action is a good perspective when
producing different kinds of chemicals like in the agribusiness.
The top goals in the sector Energy consists of SDG8 and SDG13. The amount of re-
ports addressing these goals is equivalent to 75% and 81%, respectively. The content
analysis shows that SDG8 is connected to topics such as product safety, accessibility
and quality, employment health, safety and security.
Labour rights, training and
career programs. As this sector primarily consist of organizations in the oil and gas
industry this goal fits well with the assumption that they have a huge responsibility
to their employees regarding work place safety. Looking at the customers, they have
a huge quality and accessibility responsibility. SDG13 is often connected to topics
like innovation, research and technology, energy performance and carbon efficiency
together with social responsibility. In this industry there is a need for them report-
ing transparent about their activities as their products has a great influence on the
environment.
The top goals in the sector Energy Utilities consist of SDG7, SDG9 and SDG13.
The amount of reports addressing these goals are equivalent to 50%. The content
analysis shows that SDG7 is often connected to ensuring that there is a development
in renewable energy, optimizing energy networks, improving local power supply and
designing climate-friendly and sustainable supply of energy (reduce fossil fuels and
CO2 emissions), thereby creating better utility of electricity. As this sector primar-
ily consist of organizations that produce and/or supplies gas, electricity, renewable
energy and heat/water it makes sense that they aim at operating efficiently and inno-
vative. Furthermore, they focus on customers because they often sell both products
and services. SDG9 is connected to topics like providing healthier lives for people
of all ages, supporting establishment of sustainable and reliable infrastructure, in-
dustrialization and innovation. Furthermore it includes economic and financial value
creation, together with helping customer transits to renewable energy resources (e.g.
solar power). SDG13 is connected to topics such as helping customers reduce their
energy consumption and lower their CO2 emissions. Optimization of the entire en-
ergy chain (production, transmission, distribution, supply and end use), promote
==PAGE:62==
48
7 Discussion
improvement of energy efficiency across all types of activities (e.g. buildings, vehicles,
mobility), renewable technology, and improve energy efficiency. These two goals fits
well with the expected business practices of this sector as they provide energy services
to customers, and therefore it is important to promote innovation and technology es-
pecial when it comes to the development of renewable energy, which is very important
for the future. It is an important aspect of making an positive impact on the climate.
The top goals in the sector Financial Services consist of SDG8 and SDG13. The
amount of reports addressing these goals are equivalent to 67% and 58%. The con-
tent analysis shows that SDG8 is often connected to topics such as minimum wage,
customers, value creation and human rights. Furthermore, the topics include securing
peoples financial futures, creating shared value, promoting entrepreneurship and in-
novation, labour rights, safe and secure working together with restoring the power of
local farmers. As this sector consist mostly of banks, investors and pensions this goal
fits well with an assumption of these type of organizations has the possibility of using
resources (time and money) to invest in sustainable products. Furthermore, banks
and pensions organizations can have a positive impact on securing peoples financial
future. SDG13 is connected to topics like, low-carbon economy, conserving natural
resources, helping to preserve different kinds of trees and improve farmers’ yields,
taken less from the forest. Investing in solar powers and in general preserving the
environment. This goal also fits the industry well because investment organizations
are able to use their capital to invest in sustainable solutions that can help the climate.
The top goals in the sector Food & Beverage Products consist of SDG8 and SDG12.
The amount of reports addressing these goals are equivalent to 67% and 73%. The
content analysis shows that SDG8 is connected to a lot of different topics where the
main focus is sustainable food production and agriculture, health and safety of em-
ployees, economic growth and local communities, human rights, nutrition, health and
wellness. As this sector produces all kinds of foods and beverages (e.g. beer, coffee,
diary and vegetables) these topics fits well with their business practices. To create
sustainable products this industry often has to look at the whole supply chain, since
the process of the product produce needs to go trough many stages where several of
them includes people from all over the world. Looking at the agriculture a safe and
healthy work environment with a minimum of accidents fits well with the business
practices of this sectors. SDG12 is connected to topics such as efficient use of natural
resources, water efficiency, reducing waste generation (recycle and reuse), sustainable
packaging and reduce food loss. As this sector primarily has business practices like,
brewing, agriculture and distribution of products this goal fits well with the expected
business practices of this sector.
The top goals in the sector Real Estate consist of SDG7, SDG11, SDG12 and
SDG 13. The amount of reports addressing these goals are equivalent to either 73%
or 91%. The content analysis shows that SDG11 is connected to topics like aesthetics
with respect for public spaces, diversity of districts and customer health and safety.
==PAGE:63==
7 Discussion
49
As this sector primarily provides different kinds of buildings or property, these top-
ics fits well with the expected business practices. SDG7, SDG12 and SDG13 were
often mentioned close to each other and include topics like, resource efficiency, prod-
uct responsibility, waste, supplier assessments for labour practices, reduction of CO2
emissions and energy consumption. Many of these organizations sells newly build
properties which means that they need to focus on the whole supply chain under the
actual construction of the properties. Legislations are very depending on the location
of the construction site and needs to follow certain rule sets for the local government.
The top goals in the sector Telecommunications consists of SDG4, SDG8 and
SDG9. The amount of reports addressing these goals are equivalent to 100%. The
content analysis shows that SDG4 is often connected to topics such as quality educa-
tion, digitalizing and the promotion of innovative solutions for all sectors of society.
As this sector mostly includes organizations producing mobile phones or services this
goals fits well with the expected business practices of the organizations within this
sector. SDG8 is connected to topics like, ethical business practices, labor conditions,
suppliers and partners together with employee satisfaction, engagement, development
and health and safety of employees. These organizations does not often produce the
mobile phones they sell, therefore there is a need for focus on the whole supply chain
and its employees, which fits well with the overall purpose of this goal: providing de-
cent work for all. SDG9 includes topics like technology, digital inclusion and resilient
infrastructure, together with promoting sustainable industrialization. The organiza-
tions of this sector wants to improve peoples lives with technology.
==PAGE:64==
50
7 Discussion
Figure 7.2: The bottom mentioned Sustainable Development Goals throughout all
sectors (UN Department of Global Communications 2019).
Figure 7.2 is a visualization of the goals mentioned the least throughout all the
sectors investigated. The literature investigated expressed concern that some of the
goals would be more obvious than others when it came to implementation and mea-
suring of their impacts (Hildebrandt 2016 and Stafford-Smith et al. 2017) This has
proven to be the case for the investigated sectors, where most of the sectors show
clear reservations and prioritization about specific goals.
SDG1 and SDG2 deals with ending poverty in all its forms everywhere and end-
ing hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable
agriculture. These topics can be very difficult to incorporate in a business practice
if the main product of the organization is vehicles, real estate or energy. The low
mentioning may also be connected to the fact that the data sample only consists of
organizations with headquarters located in Europe, where hunger and poverty is not
an eye-catching problem. However, is it nice to see that more than half the organi-
zations in the sector Food & Beverage Products actually mentioned SDG2 in their
reporting, which means that some of them incorporate a responsible practice promot-
ing sustainable agriculture. SDG1 is mentioned in 42% and 70% of the reports in
the sectors Financial Services and Telecommunications, respectively. Together these
sectors has shed light on topics like ensuring that all people have equal rights to eco-
nomic resources, have access to basic services, ownership and control over land and
other forms of property, inheritance, natural resources, appropriate new technology
and financial services, including microfinance (target 1.4).
The main focus of SDG4 is ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and
promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. When looking at SDG4 the lowest
percentage of reports within a sector that address this goal is 25% (Energy Utilities).
==PAGE:65==
7 Discussion
51
This may be connected to the type of products that this industry sell, which mainly
include renewable energies and distribution of electricity. These products does not fit
well with the main focus of this goal because these organizations do not have business
practices directly connected to education. However, all sectors, could include prac-
tices that increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills, including
technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship
(target 4.4).
The main focus of SDG6 is ensuring availability and sustainable management of
water and sanitation for all. The percentage of reports addressing SDG6 is lowest for
the sectors Energy and Financial Services (25% and 15%). These goals being the least
popular within these sectors may be because the types of products these sectors sell
are not associated with the need for water management. The energy sector primarily
consist of gas and oil organizations, while the financial services mostly include banks.
The main focus of SDG10 is reducing inequality within and among countries. Only
11% of the organizations in the sector Chemicals addressed this goal. In general less
than 35% of the reports within each sector address this goal, with the only exception
of the sector Telecommunications. As this goal mostly focuses on whole countries it
can be difficult for organizations to implement it in their business practices. This
goal might be directed more to governments, municipalities and politicians as it can
be difficult to implement even in large organizations. However, some of the targets
within this goal should have a minimum of attention in all types of sectors and or-
ganizations as it address social, economic and political inclusion of all (target 10.2),
ensuring equal opportunity and reduce inequalities of outcome (target 10.3).
The main focus of SDG11 is making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe,
resilient and sustainable. When looking at SDG11 the lowest percentage of reports
within a sector that address this goal is 13% (Food & Beverage Products). This is
one of the two goals within this sector that has the lowest percentage mention, and if
it is connected to the products of this sector it fits well with the assumption that the
production of beer, coffee or vegetables have very little influence on making human
settlements resilient and sustainable.
The main focus of SDG14 is conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas
and marine resources. This goal where the least address in 6 out of the 8 investigated
sectors, and in most of these sectors less than 15% of the investigated reports address
this goal. The two sectors not excluded is Energy and Energy Utilities which may
focus more on this goal, since they provide products and services that includes the
promotion of renewable energies. Furthermore the sector Energy mainly produces gas
and oil, and as these kinds of facilities are often placed in the middle of oceans they
can have a potential huge impact on the environment. The rest of the sectors does
not produce products or provides services normally connected to concerns of the life
below water (or the use of oceans, seas and marine resources). This may be due to
==PAGE:66==
52
7 Discussion
location of headquarters and facilities of the sectors providing a product.
The main focus of SDG15 is about protecting the life on land (e.g. forest and
ecosystems). Automotive show least interest in SDG15. 11% (or just one) of the
investigated reports within this sector addressed this goal. As the production of vehi-
cles often does not include the need for sustainable management of forest, ecosystems
and the like it fits well with the assumption that this goals does not fit with their
business practices.
The main focus of SDG16 is about promoting peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development. Only 25% of the organizations in the sector Energy
Utilities addressed this goal and in most of the other sectors less than 40% of the
organizations address this goal. The success of this goal may be directed more at
governments, municipalities and politicians. The goal can furthermore be difficult to
implement in business practices, since it includes targets with focus on reducing all
forms of violence and related death rates everywhere (target 16.1) and public access
to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national leg-
islation and international agreements (target 16.10). However, some of the targets
can be address by creating different kinds of partnerships with organizations that can
help with the achievement of this goal.
The results and the discussion have showed that the mentioning of the SDGs in
the investigated sectors are at least depending on the market that the organization
operates in. In general all organizations should, no matter size, type and location
have focus on achieving SDG17: partnerships for the goals. But for 7 of the sectors
the percentage of reports addressing this goal is less than 54% which means that only
approximately half of the organizations within each sector address these specific goal.
To achieve the Agenda 2030 and the SDGs there is a need for improvement regarding
this goal and its purpose. As the literature have indicated, a successful implementa-
tion of the Agenda 2030 and the SDGs requires that all goals are implemented and
the interaction between the goals are prioritized (Mann et al. 2018, Weitz et al. 2018).
Furthermore, is it critical that the government uses resources on follow-ups and re-
views of the sustainable development (Persson, Weitz, and Nilsson 2016, Stevens and
Kanie 2016).
Can the investigated reports be used to define good practices of SDG im-
plementation and sustainability reporting?
The sample, existing of reports subjective defined as ”Good” or ”Very good” quality,
shows that the length and the frequency of the search terms does not necessary relate
to the quality of the report as a communication tool. However, the number of search
term occurrences needs to be tailored to the context and the desired message of the
organization. It is not enough to just mention one of the search terms. When the
number of total occurrences is very low (one or two), it is often only connected to
==PAGE:67==
7 Discussion
53
the Agenda 2030, the 17 goals, their overall purpose and their origin. It is nice to
give the reader a fundamental knowledge about the SDGs, but does not show any
commitment to achieving the them. In addition a ”the more the better”-policy does
not show anything about the quality of the reports investigated either. In all sectors
there are reports defined as either good or very good quality. Based on this it can be
assumed that these reports can potentially be used by other organization operating
in the same market, or with the same service. Competitive benchmarking on SDG
reporting, can therefore be use by other organizations to enter the sustainable play-
ground and the achievement of the Agenda 2030 and the SDGs. (Sullivan, Thomas,
and Rosano 2018, Florini and Pauli 2018, Vorhies and Morgan 2005).
Overall a lot of organizations describe their impact on the SDGs for the year in
which the report is published. Very few take their commitment to the next level and
establish and describe performance indicators (PIs) or Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs). This shows that most of the organizations investigated have a lack of long-
term perspective when it comes to implementing and achieving the SDGs. However,
the lack of long-term perspective can also be caused by the fact that the year ob-
served in the reports are often 2016 which is relatively close to the date the Agenda
2030 were adopted. This leaves a huge potential for achieving the SDGs in even more
organizations and sectors in the close future if competitive benchmarking becomes a
reality. However, some organizations might need to work on utilizing benchmarking
to achieve full potential of the SDGs (Khalili and Duecker 2013, Pickering and Cham-
bers 1991).
A good quality report does not necessary need to have a smart design and for-
matting, but good visualization will definitely help catch the eye and attention of the
reader. Annual or sustainability reports can be overwhelming to read, and therefore
the choice of colors and the balance between figures and tables are important. The
choices of an organizations’ communication and visualization elements needs to reflect
the overall essence of the organization to be reliable and appear valid. When look-
ing at the SDGs the best option, according to the researcher, is to keep the original
colors and logo or element of each goal presented in the report, to create the best
possible fundamental knowledge for the reader. But if an organization finds these col-
ors unfitting in the overall visualization of the report they can be changed to fit the
color-coding or formatting of the organization. However, it is recommended to follow
the official guidelines from the UN (UN Department of Global Communications 2019).
The best choice for visualizing and communicating what goals that are in focus
is to take a figure that provides overview on all 17 goals, and afterwards use other
elements to highlight specific goals. Furthermore it is recommended that the organiza-
tion show small sub-figures of the goals connected to the topics discussed throughout
the report, because it makes the reading more fluent and the message more clear to
the reader.
==PAGE:68==
54
7 Discussion
Can reporting on SDGs within a sector/industry be used to determine
alignment between organization profiles and their commitment of SDGs
into their business practices, and thus be used to support existing literature
regarding implementation of SDGs in organizations?
Based on the results and the discussion regarding the three research questions it can
be seen that the investigated reports within a sector shows alignment between specific
SDGs and the investigated sectors sustainable business practices. At the moment the
amount of goals addressed differs a lot within each sector and for each organization
investigated, but it is clear that there is an increase in the use of the SDGs as a
communication tool. The commitment of the SDGs also depends on the different
organizations and sectors investigated. E.g. the sector Telecommunications has the
highest percentage of reports addressing all 17 SDGs individually, while no reports
within the sector Energy Utilities address more than 50% of the SDGs individually.
Furthermore, a tendency in the occurrences of the search terms has shown that the
mean number of occurrences are higher for the reports defined as of ”Very good”
quality than for the reports defined as of ”Poor” quality.
These results and the discussion can be used to support the existing literature
regarding the implementation of SDGs in organizations. This is because the investi-
gation has showed that the Agenda 2030 and the SDGs just might be the tool the
literature have called for, when it comes to helping organizations measure their im-
pact on the environment (Pedersen 2018). Furthermore, the SDGs can be used in
the future as an advancement of classical sustainability reporting (Rosati and Faria
2018a).
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis, investigated whether the frequency of three search terms (SDG, Sustain-
able Development Goal and Global Goal) could show any comprehensive picture of
SDG reporting in organizations. A difference in the quality of the report depending
on the occurrences of the search terms where found. When the occurrence was low,
the SDG reporting was often vague, because the organization often just mentioned
an overall contribution to achieving the SDGs. However, there is no clear line that
defines when the number of occurrences is high enough for the quality to become
good. This can be based on the sample, consisting of only ”Good” or ”Very good”
quality reports, where the range of occurrences of search terms are 4-185 in total.
The mean number of occurrences where much higher for the range of reports defined
as ”Very good” quality and the range of reports defined as ”Poor” quality. The fre-
quency can be used to determine the quality of an organizations SDG reporting, but
to disclose whether the comprehensive picture is adequate, the occurrences needs to
be connected to one or more additional types of information and not be a stand-alone
concept.
The mentioning of the SDGs in the investigated sectors are clearly depending on
the organizational profile and their business practices. A clear definition of which
goals that are most in focus in all organizations where found. In addition some goals
are very low prioritized in all organizations. The tendency may be based on the loca-
tion of the headquarters of the organizations together with laws, legislation and other
expectations from the local society.
The investigation of the reports can be used to define good practices of SDG imple-
mentation and sustainability reporting. The difference in the quality of the reporting
shows that some organizations do a better job of communicating and visualizing their
commitment to the SDGs than others. The degree of comprehensive SDG reporting
depends on the sustainability agenda of the organization. It can furthermore be con-
cluded that the way of reporting on the SDGs vary a lot, and can differ between
sectors, countries and even between organizations operating on the same market or
providing the same services. Some elements are good to have incorporated in the
reporting to create an easy overview on sustainability practices and an organizations
commitment to achieving the SDGs.
It can be concluded that SDG reporting within a specific sector can be used to
determine alignment between organization profiles, their business practices and their
==PAGE:70==
56
8 Conclusion
commitment to achieving the SDGs. The investigation of the literature showed a
lack of tools or framework which could be used to measure sustainability operations
and activities, thus giving organizations the possibility to compare themselves with
other organizations. This can be changed with the Agenda 2030. A successful imple-
mentation can change the perspective of sustainable thinking within organizations,
municipalities and governments.
The academic contribution of this master thesis concerns the investigation of
which SDGs are addressed by different organizations operating in different sectors.
The literature examined expressed concerns regarding whether some of the SDGs
were more measurable than others (Stafford-Smith et al. 2017, Hildebrandt 2016)
which would lead to some organizations, governments and countries choosing only to
focus on the goals with easily quantitative targets and indicators. This thesis showed
that this concern where in fact true when looking at organizations in Europe. The
SDGs in focus within each sector where likely to be equal to expected business prac-
tices, and the goals least in focus addresses issues such as poverty and hunger, which
are not the most in eye-catching problem when looking at the countries in Europe. A
few of the sectors and organizations investigated, however, showed that it is possible
to connect the whole supply chain to a sustainable perspective and achievement of
the SDGs. This thesis contributes to the existing literature by having investigated
the tendency of the SDGs within different sectors and organizations in Europe. The
results can be used to fill the gap between the existing tools, to measure sustainability
practices, and implementation of a sustainable path in business practices, operations
and activities. This is done by creating focus on which goals that is naturally imple-
mented in specific organizations in Europe, and which goals that needs more focus
from the local governments or municipalities to be achieved.
The practical contribution of the thesis concerns the identification of the best
practices of SDG reporting in the investigated sectors. The elements of communica-
tion and visualization used both as examples in this thesis and found in the reports
are very useful. This includes an organizations’ supply chain, competitors and other
types of stakeholders. The elements can be used to get an overview on how to use sus-
tainability reporting as a strategic differentiation or just as an advantage in today’s
society where transparency becomes more and more important to all stakeholders.
Furthermore organizations with no or very few sustainable practices, can use the il-
luminated elements of good sustainability reporting established in this thesis to get
inspiration on which operations and activities that can be connected to the SDGs.
The major contribution to business is the connection created between the goals rele-
vant for a type of market and a certain type of sector operating mainly on this market.
Other organizations can use these first-movers when entering the cycle of good sus-
tainability reporting. This thesis contributes positively to businesses, because the
results showed that organizations can use competitive benchmarking in order to help
achieve the goals of the Agenda 2030. This means they can improve their own value
chain by looking at other business practices.
==PAGE:71==
8.1 Limitations and future work
57
The policy contribution of this master thesis can be to support the existing tools,
such as the SDG compass, with the measurement of progress in the achievement of
the Agenda 2030 and the SDGs. In general this master thesis found the framework
of the SDGs useful for organizations, governments and the like when they want to
contribute to a future sustainable path. This thesis showed that some sectors where
broader in the contribution of implementing each of the SDGs than others. This
included the sector Telecommunications were at least half of the reports reported
how they contributed to all the SDGs individually. This sector where the one with
the broadest perspective and could therefore be used by other organizations and
across sectors to see how to incorporate all the goals in a business practice.
8.1
Limitations and future work
This master thesis contributes to existing literature on the SDGs and SDG reporting.
However, there are still some limitations that must be taken into account. First, this
master thesis was based on only one type of communication, reports. Many orga-
nizations do not settle on written media but are likely to extend commitments to
all kinds of media including web-pages and social media. Secondly, this thesis only
investigated reports submitted to the GRI Reporting list, which may have created a
biased perspective.
Recommendations for future studies include a more detailed view on SDG re-
porting connected to internal organizational characteristics (size or type), location of
headquarters and local legislation. These studies includes a more qualitative exam-
ination of reports to show motivation for SDG reporting in different contexts. As
many organization submits different types of reports (e.g. annual or sustainability
reports) a future study could include the length of investigated reports compared to
the amount of the actual sustainability section(s) in the reports. An extension of this
thesis could include all sectors in Europe, or include the same sectors, but in different
regions. Both options could show a difference in the correlation between top/bottom
mentioned SDGs and geographical location of headquarters. Furthermore a future
study could include how organizations can translate the Agenda 2030 and the SDGs
in order to make them even more quantitative and easier to apply to business prac-
tices.
==PAGE:72==
58
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
Allianz SE (2017). Sustainability Report 2016: Embracing the future. url: http://database.
globalreporting.org/reports/46335/.
Alterfin (2017). Annual Report 2016. url: http : / / database . globalreporting . org /
reports/50014/.
BONDALTI (2017). CUF Sustainability Report 2016. url: http://database.globalreporting.
org/reports/48998/.
Bouten, Lies, Everaert, Patricia, Van Liedekerke, Luc, De Moor, Lieven, and Christiaens,
Johan (2011). “Corporate social responsibility reporting: A comprehensive picture?” In:
Accounting Forum 35.3, pp. 187–204. issn: 01559982. doi: 10.1016/j.accfor.2011.06.
007.
Brundtland, Gro H (1987). “Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on
Environment and Development”. In: United Nations Commission 4.1, p. 300. issn: 0748-
8009. doi: 10.1080/07488008808408783.
BUNDUELLE SAS (2017). Registration Document 2016-2017. url: http : / / database .
globalreporting.org/reports/57235/.
Caiado, Rodrigo Goyannes Gusmão, Filho, Walter Leal, Quelhas, Osvaldo Luiz Gonçalves,
Luiz de Mattos Nascimento, Daniel, and Ávila, Lucas Veigas (2018). “A Literature-Based
Review on Potentials and Constraints in the Implementation of the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.
jclepro.2018.07.102.
Chen, Stephen and Bouvain, Petra (2008). “Is corporate responsibility converging? a com-
parison of corporate responsibility reporting in the USA, UK, Australia, and Germany”.
In: Journal of Business Ethics 87.SUPPL. 1, pp. 299–317. issn: 01674544. doi: 10.1007/
s10551-008-9794-0.
COFIDES (2017). 2016 Sustainability Report. url: http://database.globalreporting.
org/reports/50292/.
Commerzbank (2017). GRI report of Commerzbank. url: http://database.globalreporting.
org/reports/50332/.
Crèdit Andorrà (2017). Corporate Social Responsibility Report 2016. url: http://database.
globalreporting.org/reports/49390/.
Credit Suisse (2017). Corporate Responsibility Report 2016. url: http://database.globalreporting.
org/reports/50026/.
Daimler (2017). Sustainability Report 2016. url: http://database.globalreporting.org/
reports/49283/.
Danvers, Emily and Desai, Riti (2008). Ethical considerations for data collection and re-
search tools. url: https://study.cardiffmet.ac.uk/AcSkills/Documents/Research/
Research_Ethics_elesson/page_22.htm (visited on 02/11/2019).
==PAGE:74==
60
Bibliography
Earth Overshoot Day (2018). Earth Overshoot Day 2018 is August 1. url: https : / /
www.overshootday.org/newsroom/press-release-july-2018-english/ (visited on
08/09/2018).
Elkington, John (2004). “Enter the triple bottom line”. In: The Triple Bottom Line: Does it
All Add Up. isbn: 9781849773348. doi: 10.4324/9781849773348.
Enel (2017). Seeding energies Sustainability Report 2016. url: http://database.globalreporting.
org/reports/48325/.
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) (2017). 2016 Sustainability Report. url: http://database.
globalreporting.org/reports/50630/.
Florini, Ann and Pauli, Markus (2018). “Collaborative governance for the Sustainable De-
velopment Goals”. In: Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies. issn: 20502680. doi: 10.1002/
app5.252.
Fortum Värme (2017). Sustainability 2016. url: http://database.globalreporting.org/
reports/56908/.
FrieslandCampina (2017). CSR Update 2016. url: http://database.globalreporting.
org/reports/49297/.
Global Footprints (2009). What is sustainability? url: http://www.globalfootprints.org/
sustainability/ (visited on 01/13/2019).
Govindan, Kannan, Khodaverdi, Roohollah, and Jafarian, Ahmad (2013). “A fuzzy multi
criteria approach for measuring sustainability performance of a supplier based on triple
bottom line approach”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 47, pp. 345–354. issn: 09596526.
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.04.014.
GRI (2018a). GRI’s Sustainability Disclosure Database: Data Legend. url: https://www.
globalreporting.org/resourcelibrary/GRI-Data-Legend-Sustainability-Disclosure-
Database-Profiling.pdf.
— (2018b). “Q&A: GRI database”.
— (2018[c]). About Global Reporting Initiative. url: https://www.globalreporting.org/
information/about-gri (visited on 08/14/2018).
— (2019). G4 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines. url: https://www2.globalreporting.
org/standards/g4/Pages/default.aspx (visited on 08/01/2019).
Gupta, Joyeeta and Vegelin, Courtney (2016). “Sustainable development goals and inclusive
development”. In: International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics
16.3, pp. 433–448. issn: 1567-9764. doi: 10.1007/s10784- 016- 9323- z. url: http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/s10784-016-9323-z.
Hahn, Rüdiger and Kühnen, Michael (2013). “Determinants of sustainability reporting: A
review of results, trends, theory, and opportunities in an expanding field of research”. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production 59, pp. 5–21. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.
2013.07.005. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.07.005.
Heizer, Jay and Render, Barry (2014). Operations Management: Sustainability and Supply
Chain Management. Eleventh Edition. PEARSON.
Hildebrandt, Steen (2016). Bæredygtig Global Udvikling - FN’s 17 verdensmål i et dansk
perspektiv. First Edition. Jurist- og Økonomiforvundets forlag.
Iberdrola (2018). Sustainability Report 2017. url: http://database.globalreporting.org/
reports/57220/.
Industriens Fond (2019). SDG ACCELERATOR. url: https://www.industriensfond.dk/
SDGaccelerator (visited on 01/24/2019).
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
61
Kassarjian, H. H. (1977). “Content Analysis in Consumer Research”. In: Journal of Consumer
Research 4.1, pp. 8–18. issn: 0093-5301. doi: 10.1086/208674.
Khalili, Nasrin R. and Duecker, Susanna (2013). “Application of multi-criteria decision anal-
ysis in design of sustainable environmental management system framework”. In: Journal
of Cleaner Production 47, pp. 188–198. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.
10.044. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.10.044.
Knoepfel, Ivo (2001). “Dow Jones Sustainability Group Index: A Global Benchmark for
Corporate Sustainability”. In: Corporate Environmental Strategy 8.1, pp. 6–15. issn:
10667938. doi: 10.1016/S1066-7938(00)00089-0.
Knowledge Platform (2019). Outcomes and frameworks. url: https://sustainabledevelopment.
un.org/frameworks (visited on 01/22/2019).
Krippendorff, Klaus (2004). Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology. Vol. 79,
p. 440. isbn: 0761915451. doi: 10.2307/2288384.
Labuschagne, Carin, Brent, Alan C., and Van Erck, Ron P G (2005). “Assessing the sustain-
ability performances of industries”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 13.4, pp. 373–385.
issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2003.10.007.
Leadership Council of Sustainable Development Solutions Network (2015). Indicators and a
Monitoring Framework for the Sustainable Development Goals. url: https://sustainabledevelopment
un.org/index.php?page=view&type=400&nr=2013&menu=35 (visited on 01/22/2019).
Maas, Karen, Schaltegger, Stefan, and Crutzen, Nathalie (2016). “Reprint of Advancing the
integration of corporate sustainability measurement, management and reporting”. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production 136, pp. 1–4. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.
2016.08.055. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.06.006.
Mann, Carsten, Garcia-Martin, Maria, Raymond, Christopher M., Shaw, Brian J., and
Plieninger, Tobias (2018). “The potential for integrated landscape management to fulfil
Europe’s commitments to the Sustainable Development Goals”. In: Landscape and Urban
Planning. issn: 01692046. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2018.04.017.
Milne, Markus J and Adler, Ralph W (1998). Exploring the reliability of social and environ-
mental disclosures content analysis. isbn: 0951357021043.
Nestlé (2017). Nestlé in society Creating Shared Value and meeting our commitments 2016.
url: http://database.globalreporting.org/reports/47554/.
Nokia Coreporation (2017). Nokia People &amp; Planet Report 2016. url: http://database.
globalreporting.org/reports/47611/.
NVivo (2019). What is NVivo. url: https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo/what-is-
nvivo (visited on 01/17/2019).
Ostwalder, Alexander and Pigneur, Yves (2010). Business Models Generation. Strategyzer.
Oxford Dictionaries (2018). Definition of Sustainability. url: https://en.oxforddictionaries.
com/definition/sustainability (visited on 12/29/2018).
Panagiotou, George (2007). “Reference theory: Strategic groups and competitive benchmark-
ing”. In: Management Decision 45.10, pp. 1595–1621. issn: 00251747. doi: 10.1108/
00251740710837988.
Pedersen, Claus Stig (2018). “The un Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a Great
Gift to Business!” In: Procedia CIRP. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2018.01.003.
Persson, Asa, Weitz, Nina, and Nilsson, Mäns (2016). Follow-up and Review of the Sustain-
able Development Goals: Alignment vs. Internalization. doi: 10.1111/reel.12150.
==PAGE:76==
62
Bibliography
Pickering, Ian M. and Chambers, Stuart (1991). “Competitive benchmarking: progress and
future development”. In: Computer Integrated Manufacturing Systems 4.2, pp. 98–102.
issn: 09515240. doi: 10.1016/0951-5240(91)90026-U.
Prajal Pradhan, Luís Costa, Diego Rybski, and Wolfgang Lucht and Jürgen P. Kropp (2017).
“A Systematic Study of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) Interactions”. In: IDW-
online. issn: 23284277. doi: 10.1002/eft2.266.
Rabobank (2017). Annual Report 2016. url: http://database.globalreporting.org/
reports/50817/.
Rosati, Francesco and Faria, Lourenço Galvão Diniz (2018a). “Addressing the Sustainable
Development Goals in sustainability reports: the association with institutional factors”.
In: Working Paper 213. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.12.107.
— (2018b). “Business contribution to the Sustainable Development Agenda: organizational
factors related to early adoption of SDG reporting”. In: Corporate Social Responsibility
and Environmental Management October 2018, pp. 1–10. issn: 15353958. doi: 10.1002/
csr.1705.
Sachs, Jeffrey D (2012). “From Millennium Development Goals to Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals”. In: The Lancet 379.9832, pp. 2206–2211. issn: 01406736. doi: 10.1016/
S0140- 6736(12)60685- 0. url: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0140673612606850.
SEB (2017). Sustainability report: How we create value for people, the business and the
environment. url: http://database.globalreporting.org/reports/49969/.
Siew, Renard Y.J. (2015). “A review of corporate sustainability reporting tools (SRTs)”. In:
Journal of Environmental Management 164, pp. 180–195. issn: 10958630. doi: 10.1016/
j.jenvman.2015.09.010. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.09.010.
Spendolini, Michael J. (1992). The Benchmarking Book. Amacon.
Stafford-Smith, Mark, Griggs, David, Gaffney, Owen, Ullah, Farooq, Reyers, Belinda, Kanie,
Norichika, Stigson, Bjorn, Shrivastava, Paul, Leach, Melissa, and O’Connell, Deborah
(2017). “Integration: the key to implementing the Sustainable Development Goals”. In:
Sustainability Science 12.6. issn: 18624057. doi: 10.1007/s11625-016-0383-3.
Stakeholder Forum for a Sustainable Future (2019). SDG Conceptual Framework. url:
https://sustainabledevelopment2015.org/sdg- conceptual- framework/ (visited
on 01/22/2019).
Stevens, Casey and Kanie, Norichika (2016). “The transformative potential of the Sustain-
able Development Goals (SDGs)”. In: International Environmental Agreements: Politics,
Law and Economics 16.3, pp. 393–396. issn: 15731553. doi: 10.1007/s10784-016-9324-
y.
Strand, Robert, Freeman, R. Edward, and Hockerts, Kai (2015). “Corporate Social Respon-
sibility and Sustainability in Scandinavia: An Overview”. In: Journal of Business Ethics.
issn: 15730697. doi: 10.1007/s10551-014-2224-6.
Sullivan, Kieran, Thomas, Sebastian, and Rosano, Michele (2018). “Using industrial ecol-
ogy and strategic management concepts to pursue the Sustainable Development Goals”.
In: Journal of Cleaner Production 174, pp. 237–246. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.
jclepro.2017.10.201. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.201.
Telefonica (2017). INTEGRATED REPORT 2016. url: http://database.globalreporting.
org/reports/55978/.
UN Department of Global Communications (2019). Sustainable Development Goals: Guide-
lines for the use of the SDG logo, including the colour wheel, and 17 icons. Tech. rep.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
63
url: https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/
SDG_Guidelines_January_2019.pdf.
Unerman, Jeffrey (1999). Methodological Issues - Reflections on quantification in corporate
social reporting content analysis, pp. 55–82. isbn: 0951357021043. doi: 10.1007/978-0-
387-32353-4{\_}4.
UNGC (2015). SDG Industry Matrix. url: https://www.unglobalcompact.org/library/
3111 (visited on 01/24/2019).
UNGC, GRI, and WBCSD (2016). “SDG Compass: The guide for business action on the
SDGs”. In:
United Nations General Assembly (2015). “Transforming our world: The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”. In: 1, pp. 1–5. issn: 0717-6163. doi: 10.1007/s13398-014-
0173-7.2.
— (2018). Preamble: Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
url: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld
(visited on 08/14/2018).
United Nations Global Compact, UNGC (2019). The Ten Principles of the UN Global Com-
pact. url: https://www.unglobalcompact.org/what- is- gc/mission/principles
(visited on 08/01/2019).
United Nations Secretary-General (2018). PROGRESS OF GOAL 12 IN 2018. url: https:
//sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg12 (visited on 12/29/2018).
Volvo Group (2017). Annual and Sustainability report: Driving prosperity through transport
solution. url: http://database.globalreporting.org/reports/49975/.
Vorhies, Douglas W and Morgan, Neil A (2005). “Benchmarking Marketing Capabilities
for Sustainable”. In: Journal of Marketing 69.January, pp. 80–94. issn: 1365-2060. doi:
10.3109/07853890.2010.530685.
Weber, Robert Philip (1990). Basic Content Analysis. Second Edition. Quantitative Appli-
cations in the Social Sciences. Sage University Paper.
Weitz, Nina, Carlsen, Henrik, Nilsson, Måns, and Skånberg, Kristian (2018). “Towards sys-
temic and contextual priority setting for implementing the 2030 agenda”. In: Sustainabil-
ity Science 13.2, pp. 531–548. issn: 18624057. doi: 10.1007/s11625-017-0470-0.
==PAGE:78==
64
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Purpose of the SDGs
The list below shows the overall purpose of the different Sustainable Development
Goals established by the United Nations in 2015 (United Nations General Assembly
2015).
• SDG 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere
• SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote
sustainable agriculture
• SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
• SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all
• SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
• SDG 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation
for all
• SDG 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy
for all
• SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for all
• SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable indus-
trialization and foster innovation
• SDG 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries
• SDG 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sus-
tainable
• SDG 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
• SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
• SDG 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development
==PAGE:80==
66
A Purpose of the SDGs
• SDG 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems,
sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land
degradation and halt biodiversity loss
• SDG 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels
• SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global
partnership for sustainable development
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX B
Definition of organization types
The list below shows the definition of the different organizations types, retrieved from
GRI 2018a p. 6.
• Private Company: A business organization owned either by a non-governmental
organization or by a number of stakeholders
• State-Owned Company: A legal entity created by a government in order to
undertake commercial activities on behalf of the owner government
• Cooperative: An organization jointly owned and democratically controlled by
the employees and/ or end-users of the good/ services produced to meet their
common needs
• Subsidiary: A company controlled by another company through the ownership
of 50% or more of the voting stock
• Public Institution: An administrative unit of government, including the munic-
ipal authority of a city
• Non-Profit Organization: Organization ran to further an ideal or goal, rather
than in the interests of profit; e.g., foundations, NGO
• Partnership: A formation of businesses and/ or individuals to advance their
business interests
==PAGE:82==
68
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX C
Data Overview
This appendix includes data regarding accessible reports in Europe and an overview
on the final data sample.
C.1
Accessible reports in Europe
Table C.1: Accessible reports in Europe divided into sections
sorted alphabetical.
Sector
Reports
[n]
Non English
or duplicates
[n]
Remaining
reports
[n]
Agriculture
2
1
1
Automotive
9
0
9
Aviation
4
0
4
Chemicals
10
1
9
Commercial Services
9
2
7
Conglomerates
8
1
7
Construction
11
3
8
Construction Materials
8
5
3
Consumer Durables
1
0
1
Energy
25
9
16
Energy Utilities
14
2
12
Equipment
5
0
5
Financial Services
45
12
33
Food & Beverage Products
22
7
15
Forest & Paper Products
6
1
5
Healthcare Products
7
1
6
Healthcare Services
2
2
0
Household & Personal Products
2
0
2
Logistics
9
4
5
Media
6
0
6
Metals Products
11
4
7
Mining
7
1
6
Non-Profit / Services
5
4
1
==PAGE:84==
70
C Data Overview
Other
17
8
9
Public Agency
1
0
1
Railroad
2
1
1
Real Estate
14
3
11
Retailers
10
3
7
Technology Hardware
4
1
3
Telecommunications
15
5
10
Textiles & Apparel
5
1
4
Tourism/Leisure
8
2
6
Toys
1
0
1
Waste Management
5
4
1
C.2
Overview on complete data sample
Table C.2: Final data sample, including sector, organization name, size
and type together with location of headquaters (country).
Sector
Name
Size
Type
Country
Automotive
Ad Plastik Group
MNE
Private
Croatia
Automotive
BMW Group
Large
Private
Germany
Automotive
Daimler
Large
Private
Germany
Automotive
Fiat Chrysler Auto-
mobile (FCA)
MNE
Private
Italy
Automotive
Gestamp
Large
Private
Spain
Automotive
PSA Peugeot Citroën
Large
Private
France
Automotive
Schaeffler Gruppe
Large
Private
Germany
Automotive
Volkswagen
Ak-
tiengesellschaft
Large
Private
Germany
Automotive
Volvo Group
MNE
Private
Sweden
Chemicals
Akzo Nobel NV
Large
Private
Netherlands
Chemicals
BASF SE
Large
Private
Germany
Chemicals
BONDALTI
Large
Private
Portugal
Chemicals
DSM
Large
Private
Netherlands
Chemicals
Evonik
Industries
AG
Large
Private
Germany
Chemicals
Arkema
MNE
Private
France
Chemicals
HEXPOL
MNE
Private
Sweden
Chemicals
Syngenta
MNE
Private
Switzerland
Chemicals
Covestro AG
Large
Private
Germany
Energy
BP
Large
Private
United
Kingdom
of Great Britain &
Northern Ireland
Energy
Eni S.P.A.
MNE
Private
Italy
==PAGE:85==
C.2 Overview on complete data sample
71
Energy
Fortum Värme
Large
Private
Sweden
Energy
Galp Energia
Large
Private
Portugal
Energy
Gazprom Neft
Large
Subsidiary
Russian
Federa-
tion
Energy
Hellenic Petroleum
Large
Private
Greece
Energy
INA Group
Large
Private
Croatia
Energy
Lukoil
MNE
Private
Russian
Federa-
tion
Energy
Lundin Petroleum
MNE
Private
Sweden
Energy
OK-Q8
MNE
Private
Sweden
Energy
OMV
MNE
Private
Austria
Energy
Premier Oil
Large
Private
United
Kingdom
of Great Britain &
Northern Ireland
Energy
Royal Dutch Shell
Large
Private
Netherlands
Energy
Saipem
Large
Private
Italy
Energy
TechnipFMC
Large
Private
France
Energy
TOTAL
MNE
Private
France
Energy Utilities
A2A spa
Large
Private
Italy
Energy Utilities
E.ON
Large
Private
Germany
Energy Utilities
EDP
Renovaveis,
S.A.
Large
Private
Spain
Energy Utilities
Enel
MNE
Private
Italy
Energy Utilities
Enexis
Large
Private
Netherlands
Energy Utilities
Iberdrola
Large
Private
Spain
Energy Utilities
Iren
Large
Private
Italy
Energy Utilities
REN
-
Redes
En-
ergéticas Nacionais
Large
Private
Portugal
Energy Utilities
Snam
Large
Private
Italy
Energy Utilities
TenneT
MNE
Private
Netherlands
Energy Utilities
Terna Group
Large
Private
Italy
Energy Utilities
Vattenfall
Large
Private
Sweden
Financial Services
Agence Française de
Développement
SME
State-owned
France
Financial Services
Alecta
Large
Cooperative
Sweden
Financial Services
Allianz SE
MNE
Private
Germany
Financial Services
Alterfin
SME
Private
Belgium
Financial Services
AMF
Large
Private
Sweden
Financial Services
ASN Bank
SME
Subsidiary
Netherlands
Financial Services
Bank
Zachodni
WBK
Large
Subsidiary
Poland
Financial Services
BANKIA
Large
Private
Spain
Financial Services
CaixaBank
MNE
Private
Spain
Financial Services
COFIDES
Large
State-owned
Spain
==PAGE:86==
72
C Data Overview
Financial Services
Commerzbank
MNE
Private
Germany
Financial Services
Crèdit Andorrà
Large
Private
Andorra
Financial Services
Credit Suisse
MNE
Private
Switzerland
Financial Services
Generali Group
MNE
Private
Italy
Financial Services
Handelsbanken
Large
Private
Sweden
Financial Services
ING Group
Large
Private
Netherlands
Financial Services
Intesa Sanpaolo
Large
Private
Italy
Financial Services
KBC Group
Large
Private
Belgium
Financial Services
NN Group
MNE
Private
Netherlands
Financial Services
Nordea Bank
Large
Private
Sweden
Financial Services
NWB Bank
Large
State-owned
Netherlands
Financial Services
Old Mutual PLC
Large
Private
United
Kingdom
of Great Britain &
Northern Ireland
Financial Services
Rabobank
Large
Private
Netherlands
Financial Services
SBAB
Large
State-owned
Sweden
Financial Services
SEB
Large
Private
Sweden
Financial Services
Sistema
Large
Private
Russian
Federa-
tion
Financial Services
Solidium Oy
MNE
State-owned
Finland
Financial Services
Sustainalytics
SME
Private
Netherlands
Financial Services
Swedish
Export
Credit
Corporation
(SEK)
Large
State-owned
Sweden
Financial Services
UBS
MNE
Private
Switzerland
Financial Services
Unicredit
Large
Private
Italy
Financial Services
Van Lanschot
Large
Private
Netherlands
Financial Services
Österreichische Kon-
trollbank
Large
Partnership
Austria
Food & Beverage
Anheuser-Busch
InBev
Large
Private
Belgium
Food & Beverage
BONDUELLE SAS
MNE
Private
France
Food & Beverage
Carlsberg Group
MNE
Private
Denmark
Food & Beverage
Emmi
MNE
Private
Switzerland
Food & Beverage
Ferrero International
Large
Private
Luxembourg
Food & Beverage
FrieslandCampina
MNE
Partnership
Netherlands
Food & Beverage
Frigoglass
MNE
Private
Greece
Food & Beverage
Heineken N.V.
MNE
Private
Netherlands
Food & Beverage
Lantmännen
Large
Cooperative
Sweden
Food & Beverage
Löfbergs
SME
Private
Sweden
Food & Beverage
Nestlé
MNE
Private
Switzerland
Food & Beverage
Palsgaard
SME
Private
Denmark
Food & Beverage
Paulig
Large
Private
Finland
Food & Beverage
Rémy Cointreau
MNE
Private
France
Food & Beverage
Unilever N.V.
MNE
Private
Netherlands
==PAGE:87==
C.2 Overview on complete data sample
73
Real Estate
alstria
office
REIT-
AG
Large
Private
Germany
Real Estate
Befimmo SA/NV
Large
Private
Belgium
Real Estate
Bonava
Large
Private
Sweden
Real Estate
Castellum
Large
Private
Sweden
Real Estate
Cofinimmo SA
Large
Private
Belgium
Real Estate
Covivio
Large
Private
France
Real Estate
intu properties plc
Large
Private
United
Kingdom
of Great Britain &
Northern Ireland
Real Estate
JM
Large
Private
Sweden
Real Estate
Kungsleden
Large
Private
Sweden
Real Estate
Sato Oyj
SME
Private
Finland
Real Estate
Specialfastigheter
Sverige
SME
Private
Sweden
Telecommunications
Ericsson
Large
Private
Sweden
Telecommunications
FASTWEB
Large
Private
Italy
Telecommunications
Hellenic Telecommu-
nications
Organiza-
tion S.A.
Large
Private
Greece
Telecommunications
Nokia Corporation
Large
Private
Finland
Telecommunications
Telefonica
Large
Private
Spain
Telecommunications
Telefónica
Deutsch-
land Holding
Large
Private
Germany
Telecommunications
Telekom
Albania
SHA
Large
Private
Albania
Telecommunications
Telia
MNE
Private
Sweden
Telecommunications
TIM
Large
Private
Italy
Telecommunications
Wind
Hellas
Telecommunication
Large
Private
Greece
==PAGE:88==
74
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX D
Coding Scheme
This appendix includes the coding rules and coding manual of the content analysis.
Table D.1: Coding rules of the content analysis conducted.
Rule
Description
Download all the
reports
Please download all the reports (also the ones that are not
written in English), and regularly save a backup (so, we are
sure not to lose data). At the end of the project, please send
me the whole material.
Analyze only re-
ports written in
English
Please analyze only reports written in English.
Search terms
The search terms to be searched for are: ”sdg”, ”sustainable
development goal”, ”global goal”
Report sentence
and comment
Every time you find an occurrence of one of the search terms
(i.e. ”sdg”, ”sustainable development goal”, ”global goal”), you
have to report the sentence where you find the term in the cell
corresponding to column F (“Sentence”) of the “coding sched-
ule” sheet. Next to it, you have to write your personal com-
ment on that occurrence and the meaning of it (possibly also
in relation with other near sentences, paragraphs or sections).
1 SDG - 1 code -
1 line
One SDG reporting corresponds to only one type of informa-
tion, and thus to only one code (i.e. one line of the ”content
analysis” sheet). One sentence can mention both, for example,
SDG1 and SDG2. In these cases, we need to code the informa-
tion included in that sentence using two codes (i.e. two lines):
one for SDG1, and one for SDG2. The content to be included
in the cell ”Sentence” should however be the same. That also
applies to tables.
Filling VG, MA,
PI in the same
code
Theoretically, it is possible to have one sentence talking about
one SDG included in both VG, MA, PI (and all the other red
columns in the ”content analysis” sheet). If so, only one code
should be generated with many different ”1” corresponding to
the cells referring to the columns VG, MA, PI, etc.
/
For reporting a column division, in case you find a sentence
divided into different columns (mostly related to SDG-GRI-
UNGC relationship tables).
==PAGE:90==
76
D Coding Scheme
Link
or
go
to
GRI website
If the provided links do not work, search for the organiza-
tion 2016 sustainability reports in the GRI database website
(http://database.globalreporting.org/)
Table D.2: Coding manual of the content analysis conducted.
Variable
Description
Code ID
ID of who performs the content analysis (e.g. MD_1, MD_2)
Organization
Name of the Organization
Search term
Term to be searched: sdg, sustainable development goal, global
goal
Term
occur-
rence(s)
Number of times this term appears in the document
Page(s)
Page where the SDG is mentioned
Sentence
Sentence where the SDG is mentioned (report it among ”brack-
ets”).
Comment
Personal comment, for example on how the organisation re-
ports on the SDG, what is its current performance, and if and
why it is important to include this code in the analysis
SDGs
1 if this code refers to overall SDGs, 0 otherwise
SDG1
1 if this code refers to SDG1, 0 otherwise
SDG2
1 if this code refers to SDG2, 0 otherwise
SDG3
1 if this code refers to SDG3, 0 otherwise
SDG4
1 if this code refers to SDG4, 0 otherwise
SDG5
1 if this code refers to SDG5, 0 otherwise
SDG6
1 if this code refers to SDG6, 0 otherwise
SDG7
1 if this code refers to SDG7, 0 otherwise
SDG8
1 if this code refers to SDG8, 0 otherwise
SDG9
1 if this code refers to SDG9, 0 otherwise
SDG10
1 if this code refers to SDG10, 0 otherwise
SDG11
1 if this code refers to SDG11, 0 otherwise
SDG12
1 if this code refers to SDG12, 0 otherwise
SDG13
1 if this code refers to SDG13, 0 otherwise
SDG14
1 if this code refers to SDG14, 0 otherwise
SDG15
1 if this code refers to SDG15, 0 otherwise
SDG16
1 if this code refers to SDG16, 0 otherwise
SDG17
1 if this code refers to SDG17, 0 otherwise
ME
1 if this code refers to a mention of the SDG, 0 otherwise
GRI
1 if this code refers to the link between the SDG and a GRI
element, 0 otherwise.
GRI(E)
Specify which GRI element is the SDG related to, if any
==PAGE:91==
D Coding Scheme
77
UNGC
1 if this code refers to the link between the SDG and an UNGC
principle, 0 otherwise.
UNGC(P)
Specify which UNGC principle is the SDG related to, if any
VG
1 if this code refer to the inclusion of the SDG into organisa-
tion’s vision, goals and strategy, 0 otherwise
VG(L)
List the organisation’s vision, goals or strategies related to the
SDG, if any
BM
1 if this code refer to the inclusion of the SDG into organisa-
tion’s business model, 0 otherwise
BM(L)
List the business model components that refer to the SDG, if
any
MA
1 if this code refer to the inclusion of the SDG into organisa-
tion’s management approach and activities, 0 otherwise
MA(L)
List the activities that refer to the SDG, if any
PI
1 if this code refer to the inclusion of the SDG into organisa-
tion’s performance indicators, 0 otherwise
PI(L)
List the performance indicators that refer to the SDG, if any
TA
1 if this code refer to the targets associated to the SDG, 0
otherwise
TA(L)
List the reported targets associated to the SDG, if any
CE
1 if this code refer to the inclusion of the SDG into organisa-
tion’s circular economy practices, 0 otherwise
CE(R)
List the circular economy ”R” (Recover, recycle, reuse, reduce)
that refer to the SDG and any other activity or interesting note,
if any
IN
1 if this code relate the SDG with innovation, 0 otherwise
IN(T)
List the type of innovation the SDG relate to (such as product,
process, organisational, business model (in this last case fill in
with ”1” also BM), or not specified, innovation)
PR
1 if this code refer to the prioritisation of what SDGs should
be integrated into the organisation, 0 otherwise
==PAGE:92==
78
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX E
Results
This appendix shows the results based on the content analysis.
E.1
Length of reports counted in words
Table E.1: Length of reports counted in words found by using
NVivo together with sector and name of organization.
Sector
Name
Length
[words]
Automotive
BMW Group
63,265
Automotive
Daimler
57,204
Automotive
Gestamp
42,278
Automotive
PSA Peugeot Citroën
184,560
Automotive
Schaeffler Gruppe
27,977
Automotive
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft
51,599
Automotive
Ad Plastik Group
25,959
Automotive
Fiat Chrysler Automobile (FCA)
81,049
Automotive
Volvo Group
112,048
Chemicals
Akzo Nobel NV
131,030
Chemicals
BASF SE
134,719
Chemicals
BONDALTI
9,751
Chemicals
DSM
114,555
Chemicals
Evonik Industries AG
52,156
Chemicals
Arkema
176,229
Chemicals
HEXPOL
22,319
Chemicals
Syngenta
34,920
Chemicals
Covestro AG
21,274
Energy
BP
29,505
Energy
Eni S.P.A.
17,923
Energy
Fortum Värme
36,411
Energy
Galp Energia
167,416
Energy
Gazprom Neft
57,903
Energy
Hellenic Petroleum
28,862
Energy
INA Group
102,704
==PAGE:94==
80
E Results
Energy
Lukoil
45,193
Energy
Lundin Petroleum
19,160
Energy
OK-Q8
17,744
Energy
OMV
29,422
Energy
Premier Oil
31,242
Energy
Royal Dutch Shell
42,978
Energy
Saipem
37,473
Energy
TechnipFMC
53,136
Energy
TOTAL
52,664
Energy Utilities
A2A spa
142,914
Energy Utilities
E.ON
99,471
Energy Utilities
EDP Renovaveis, S.A.
62,705
Energy Utilities
Enel
110,191
Energy Utilities
Enexis
76,238
Energy Utilities
Iberdrola
147,309
Energy Utilities
Iren
30,038
Energy Utilities
REN - Redes Energéticas Nacionais
63,759
Energy Utilities
Snam
74,276
Energy Utilities
TenneT
112,260
Energy Utilities
Terna Group
42,978
Energy Utilities
Vattenfall
37,473
Financial Services
Agence Française de Développement
32,803
Financial Services
Alecta
65,090
Financial Services
Allianz SE
31,694
Financial Services
Alterfin
10,806
Financial Services
AMF
14,507
Financial Services
ASN Bank
35,692
Financial Services
Bank Zachodni WBK
59,591
Financial Services
BANKIA
35,598
Financial Services
CaixaBank
16,835
Financial Services
COFIDES
11,666
Financial Services
Commerzbank
20,363
Financial Services
Crèdit Andorrà
22,110
Financial Services
Credit Suisse
27,376
Financial Services
Generali Group
30,315
Financial Services
Handelsbanken
36,980
Financial Services
ING Group
281,832
Financial Services
Intesa Sanpaolo
91,159
Financial Services
KBC Group
24,200
Financial Services
NN Group
49,185
Financial Services
Nordea Bank
21,898
==PAGE:95==
E.1 Length of reports counted in words
81
Financial Services
NWB Bank
56,059
Financial Services
Old Mutual PLC
12,075
Financial Services
Rabobank
238,252
Financial Services
SBAB
79,385
Financial Services
SEB
20,245
Financial Services
Sistema
67,967
Financial Services
Solidium Oy
28,983
Financial Services
Sustainalytics
11,108
Financial Services
Swedish Export Credit Corporation (SEK)
76,037
Financial Services
UBS
273,769
Financial Services
Unicredit
73,407
Financial Services
Van Lanschot
128,210
Financial Services
Österreichische Kontrollbank
80529
Food & Beverage
Anheuser-Busch InBev
13,771
Food & Beverage
BONDUELLE SAS
122,939
Food & Beverage
Carlsberg Group
23,894
Food & Beverage
Emmi
17,790
Food & Beverage
Ferrero International
67,781
Food & Beverage
FrieslandCampina
20,489
Food & Beverage
Frigoglass
15,998
Food & Beverage
Heineken N.V.
82,633
Food & Beverage
Lantmännen
83,476
Food & Beverage
Löfbergs
14,126
Food & Beverage
Nestlé
94,284
Food & Beverage
Palsgaard
18,431
Food & Beverage
Paulig
16,701
Food & Beverage
Rémy Cointreau
133,234
Food & Beverage
Unilever N.V.
3,022
Real Estate
alstria office REIT-AG
31,891
Real Estate
Befimmo SA/NV
115,166
Real Estate
Bonava
57,691
Real Estate
Castellum
101,351
Real Estate
Cofinimmo SA
64,319
Real Estate
Covivio
15,265
Real Estate
intu properties plc
17,664
Real Estate
JM
71,430
Real Estate
Kungsleden
58,161
Real Estate
Sato Oyj
64,430
Real Estate
Specialfastigheter Sverige
64,035
Telecommunications
Ericsson
37,883
Telecommunications
FASTWEB
40,391
==PAGE:96==
82
E Results
Telecommunications
Hellenic Telecommunications Organization S.A.
32,492
Telecommunications
Nokia Corporation
71,188
Telecommunications
Telefonica
44,318
Telecommunications
Telefónica Deutschland Holding
77,720
Telecommunications
Telekom Albania SHA
37,723
Telecommunications
Telia Company
119,458
Telecommunications
TIM
99,921
Telecommunications
Wind Hellas Telecommunication
28,403
E.2
Occurrences of search terms
Table E.2: Occurrences of the three search terms (SDG, Sustainable Development
Goal and Global Goal), divided into sectors. OCC: occurrences.
Sector
Name
SDG
[OCC]
Sustainable
Devel. Goal
[OCC]
Global
Goal
[OCC]
Reports
[n]
Automotive
174
52
3
229
9
Chemicals
195
670
10
275
9
Energy
155
111
6
272
16
Energy Utilities
250
83
3
336
12
Financial Services
286
192
12
489
33
Food & Beverage
257
118
12
387
15
Real Estate
42
37
5
84
11
Telecommunications
162
92
2
256
10
Total
1521
755
52
2328
115
Table E.3: Number of search term occurrences for each investigated
report and each of the three search terms (SDG, Sustainable
Development Goal and Global Goal) OCC: occurrences.
Sector
Name
SDG
[OCC]
Sustainable
Devel. Goal
[OCC]
Global
Goal
[OCC]
SUM
[OCC]
Automotive
BMW Group
15
8
0
23
Automotive
Daimler
61
6
0
67
Automotive
Gestamp
7
6
0
13
Automotive
PSA Peugeot Cit-
roën
1
1
0
2
Automotive
Schaeffler Gruppe
25
7
0
32
==PAGE:97==
E.2 Occurrences of search terms
83
Automotive
Volkswagen
Ak-
tiengesellschaft
20
8
0
28
Automotive
Ad Plastik Group
0
3
2
5
Automotive
Fiat Chrysler Au-
tomobiles (FCA)
35
8
1
44
Automotive
Volvo Group
10
5
0
15
Chemicals
Akzo Nobel NV
31
15
0
46
Chemicals
BASF SE
3
3
5
11
Chemicals
BONDALTI
13
3
0
16
Chemicals
DSM
55
11
3
69
Chemicals
Evonik Industries
AG
5
9
0
14
Chemicals
Evonik Industries
AG
5
9
0
14
Chemicals
Arkema
71
10
1
82
Chemicals
HEXPOL
2
9
0
11
Chemicals
Syngenta
9
5
1
15
Chemicals
Covestro AG
6
5
0
11
Energy
BP
0
3
1
4
Energy
Eni S.P.A.
3
2
0
5
Energy
Fortum Värme
18
9
0
27
Energy
Galp Energia
37
10
0
47
Energy
Gazprom Neft
2
9
0
11
Energy
Hellenic
Petroleum
15
16
0
31
Energy
INA Group
1
1
0
2
Energy
Lukoil
2
12
2
16
Energy
Lundin
Petroleum
15
4
1
20
Energy
OK-Q8
0
4
2
6
Energy
OMV
17
4
0
21
Energy
Premier Oil
26
10
0
36
Energy
Royal
Dutch
Shell
3
7
0
10
Energy
Saipem
6
16
0
22
Energy
TechnipFMC
0
2
0
2
Energy
TOTAL
10
2
0
12
Energy Utilities
A2A spa
3
2
0
5
Energy Utilities
E.ON
10
8
1
19
Energy Utilities
EDP Renovaveis,
S.A.
1
2
0
3
Energy Utilities
Enel
52
18
0
70
Energy Utilities
Enexis
0
1
0
1
Energy Utilities
Iberdrola
160
25
0
185
==PAGE:98==
84
E Results
Energy Utilities
Iren
1
3
0
4
Energy Utilities
REN
-
Redes
Energéticas
Nacionais
1
1
0
2
Energy Utilities
Snam
2
9
0
11
Energy Utilities
TenneT
4
3
1
8
Energy Utilities
Terna Group
12
3
0
15
Energy Utilities
Vattenfall
4
8
1
13
Financial Services
Agence Française
de
Développe-
ment
27
10
0
37
Financial Services
Alecta
1
8
0
9
Financial Services
Allianz SE
12
13
0
25
Financial Services
Alterfin
19
6
0
25
Financial Services
AMF
0
1
0
1
Financial Services
ASN Bank
4
4
0
8
Financial Services
Bank
Zachodni
WBK
1
8
0
9
Financial Services
BANKIA
1
4
1
6
Financial Services
CaixaBank
0
1
0
1
Financial Services
COFIDES
22
1
1
24
Financial Services
Commerzbank
13
0
0
13
Financial Services
Crèdit Andorrà
8
11
0
19
Financial Services
Credit Suisse
8
11
0
19
Financial Services
Generali Group
0
1
0
1
Financial Services
Handelsbanken
0
1
0
1
Financial Services
ING Group
2
8
0
10
Financial Services
Intesa Sanpaolo
12
14
0
26
Financial Services
KBC Group
7
2
0
9
Financial Services
NN Group
42
9
2
53
Financial Services
Nordea Bank
9
8
0
17
Financial Services
NWB Bank
11
4
0
15
Financial Services
Old Mutual PLC
3
2
0
5
Financial Services
Rabobank
30
5
0
35
Financial Services
SBAB
3
2
0
5
Financial Services
SEB
10
13
3
26
Financial Services
Sistema
3
8
1
12
Financial Services
Solidium Oy
1
1
0
2
Financial Services
Sustainalytics
4
1
0
5
Financial Services
Swedish
Export
Credit
Corpora-
tion (SEK)
4
9
1
14
Financial Services
UBS
6
2
0
8
Financial Services
Unicredit
0
5
1
6
Financial Services
Van Lanschot
13
12
0
25
==PAGE:99==
E.2 Occurrences of search terms
85
Financial Services
Österreichische
Kontrollbank
10
7
1
18
Food & Beverage
Anheuser-Busch
InBev
8
6
1
15
Food & Beverage
BONDUELLE
SAS
20
4
0
24
Food & Beverage
Carlsberg Group
27
4
3
34
Food & Beverage
Emmi
0
0
0
0
Food & Beverage
Ferrero
Interna-
tional
2
10
0
12
Food & Beverage
FrieslandCampina
25
13
0
38
Food & Beverage
Frigoglass
2
2
0
4
Food & Beverage
Heineken N.V.
10
5
0
15
Food & Beverage
Lantmännen
0
1
0
1
Food & Beverage
Löfbergs
6
0
5
11
Food & Beverage
Nestlé
113
57
0
170
Food & Beverage
Palsgaard
6
6
1
13
Food & Beverage
Paulig
0
1
0
1
Food & Beverage
Rémy Cointreau
37
8
2
47
Food & Beverage
Unilever N.V.
1
1
0
2
Real Estate
alstria
office
REIT-AG
9
2
0
11
Real Estate
Befimmo SA/NV
0
3
0
3
Real Estate
Bonava
0
4
0
4
Real Estate
Castellum
0
2
2
4
Real Estate
Cofinimmo SA
15
1
0
16
Real Estate
Covivio
14
4
0
18
Real Estate
intu
properties
plc
0
2
3
5
Real Estate
JM
0
8
0
8
Real Estate
Kungsleden
0
2
0
2
Real Estate
Sato Oyj
4
5
0
9
Real Estate
Specialfastigheter
Sverige
0
4
0
4
Telecommunications
Ericsson
0
1
0
1
Telecommunications
FASTWEB
37
8
2
47
Telecommunications
Hellenic Telecom-
munications
Organization
S.A.
1
1
0
2
Telecommunications
Nokia
Corpora-
tion
9
2
0
11
Telecommunications
Telefonica
0
3
0
3
==PAGE:100==
86
E Results
Telecommunications
Telefónica
Deutschland
Holding
0
4
0
4
Telecommunications
Telekom Albania
SHA
2
3
0
5
Telecommunications
Telia Company
9
14
0
23
Telecommunications
TIM
17
7
0
24
Telecommunications
Wind
Hellas
Telecommunica-
tion
3
14
0
17
==PAGE:101==
E.2 Occurrences of search terms
87
Table E.4: Mean, median and standard deviation of the three search terms examined individually. The table furthermore
shows the mean, median and standard deviation of all reports compared to the total number of occurrences
of each of the search terms.
Mean
Median
Standard deviation
Sector
SDG
Sustainable
Devel.
Goal
Global
Goal
SDG
Sustainable
Devel.
Goal
Global
Goal
SDG
Sustainable
Devel.
Goal
Global
Goal
Automotive
19.3
5.8
0.3
15.0
6.0
0.0
18.2
2.3
0.7
Chemicals
21.7
7.8
1.1
9.0
9.0
0.0
23.9
3.8
1.7
Energy
9.7
6.9
0.4
4.5
5.5
0.0
10.5
4.8
0.7
Energy Utilities
20.8
6.9
0.3
3.5
3.0
0.0
44.2
7.2
0.4
Financial Services
8.7
5.8
0.3
6.0
5.0
0.0
9.7
4.2
0.7
Food & Beverages
17.1
7.9
0.8
6.0
4.0
0.0
28.0
13.6
1.4
Real Estate
3.8
3.5
0.5
0.0
3.0
0.0
5.7
2.1
1.0
Telecommunications
16.2
9.2
0.2
6.0
10.0
0.0
19.9
5.5
0.6
For all reports
13.2
6.6
0.5
6.0
5.0
0.0
22.1
6.7
1.0
==PAGE:102==
88
E Results
E.3
Frequency and Scope of the SDGs
Table E.5: Occurrences of the three search terms (SDG, Sustainable
Development Goal and Global Goal) compared to to the
assessed length of each report investigated. Together with
the total number of occurrences compared to the length
total length of each sector.
Sector
Name
SDG
Sustainable
Devel. Goal
Global
Goal
For all
reports
Automotive
BMW Group
0.0002
0.0004
0.0000
0.0006
Automotive
Daimler
0.0011
0.0003
0.0000
0.0014
Automotive
Gestamp
0.0002
0.0004
0.0000
0.0006
Automotive
PSA Peugeot Cit-
roën
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Automotive
Schaeffler Gruppe
0.0009
0.0008
0.0000
0.0016
Automotive
Volkswagen
Ak-
tiengesellschaft
0.0004
0.0005
0.0000
0.0009
Automotive
Ad Plastik Group
0.0000
0.0003
0.0002
0.0005
Automotive
Fiat Chrysler Au-
tomobiles (FCA)
0.0004
0.0003
0.0000
0.0008
Automotive
Volvo Group
0.0001
0.0001
0.0000
0.0002
Chemicals
Akzo Nobel NV
0.0002
0.0003
0.0000
0.0006
Chemicals
BASF SE
0.0000
0.0001
0.0001
0.0002
Chemicals
BONDALTI
0.0013
0.0009
0.0000
0.0023
Chemicals
DSM
0.0005
0.0003
0.0001
0.0008
Chemicals
Evonik Industries
AG
0.0001
0.0005
0.0000
0.0006
Chemicals
Arkema
0.0004
0.0002
0.0000
0.0006
Chemicals
HEXPOL
0.0001
0.0012
0.0000
0.0013
Chemicals
Syngenta
0.0003
0.0004
0.0001
0.0007
Chemicals
Covestro AG
0.0003
0.0007
0.0000
0.0010
Energy
BP
0.0000
0.0003
0.0001
0.0004
Energy
Eni S.P.A.
0.0002
0.0003
0.0000
0.0005
Energy
Fortum Värme
0.0005
0.0007
0.0000
0.0012
Energy
Galp Energia
0.0002
0.0002
0.0000
0.0004
Energy
Gazprom Neft
0.0000
0.0005
0.0000
0.0005
Energy
Hellenic
Petroleum
0.0005
0.0017
0.0000
0.0022
Energy
INA Group
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Energy
Lukoil
0.0000
0.0008
0.0001
0.0009
Energy
Lundin
Petroleum
0.0008
0.0006
0.0001
0.0015
Energy
OK-Q8
0.0000
0.0007
0.0002
0.0009
Energy
OMV
0.0006
0.0004
0.0000
0.0010
==PAGE:103==
E.3 Frequency and Scope of the SDGs
89
Energy
Premier Oil
0.0008
0.0010
0.0000
0.0018
Energy
Royal
Dutch
Shell
0.0001
0.0005
0.0000
0.0006
Energy
Saipem
0.0002
0.0013
0.0000
0.0014
Energy
TechnipFMC
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Energy
TOTAL
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0001
Energy Utilities
A2A spa
0.0001
0.0001
0.0000
0.0002
Energy Utilities
E.ON
0.0002
0.0005
0.0000
0.0007
Energy Utilities
EDP Renovaveis,
S.A.
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Energy Utilities
Enel
0.0005
0.0005
0.0000
0.0011
Energy Utilities
Enexis
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Energy Utilities
Iberdrola
0.0015
0.0007
0.0000
0.0021
Energy Utilities
Iren
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Energy Utilities
REN
-
Redes
Energéticas
Nacionais
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Energy Utilities
Snam
0.0001
0.0009
0.0000
0.0010
Energy Utilities
TenneT
0.0001
0.0001
0.0000
0.0002
Energy Utilities
Terna Group
0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
0.0003
Energy Utilities
Vattenfall
0.0000
0.0002
0.0000
0.0003
Financial Services
Agence Française
de
Développe-
ment
0.0008
0.0009
0.0000
0.0017
Financial Services
Alecta
0.0000
0.0004
0.0000
0.0004
Financial Services
Allianz SE
0.0004
0.0012
0.0000
0.0016
Financial Services
Alterfin
0.0018
0.0017
0.0000
0.0034
Financial Services
AMF
0.0000
0.0002
0.0000
0.0002
Financial Services
ASN Bank
0.0001
0.0003
0.0000
0.0004
Financial Services
Bank
Zachodni
WBK
0.0000
0.0004
0.0000
0.0004
Financial Services
BANKIA
0.0000
0.0003
0.0001
0.0004
Financial Services
CaixaBank
0.0000
0.0002
0.0000
0.0002
Financial Services
COFIDES
0.0019
0.0003
0.0002
0.0023
Financial Services
Commerzbank
0.0006
0.0000
0.0000
0.0006
Financial Services
Crèdit Andorrà
0.0004
0.0015
0.0000
0.0019
Financial Services
Credit Suisse
0.0003
0.0012
0.0000
0.0015
Financial Services
Generali Group
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Financial Services
Handelsbanken
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Financial Services
ING Group
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Financial Services
Intesa Sanpaolo
0.0001
0.0005
0.0000
0.0006
Financial Services
KBC Group
0.0003
0.0002
0.0000
0.0005
Financial Services
NN Group
0.0009
0.0005
0.0001
0.0015
Financial Services
Nordea Bank
0.0004
0.0011
0.0000
0.0015
==PAGE:104==
90
E Results
Financial Services
NWB Bank
0.0002
0.0002
0.0000
0.0004
Financial Services
Old Mutual PLC
0.0002
0.0005
0.0000
0.0007
Financial Services
Rabobank
0.0001
0.0001
0.0000
0.0002
Financial Services
SBAB
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Financial Services
SEB
0.0005
0.0019
0.0003
0.0027
Financial Services
Sistema
(Pub-
lic
Joint-Stock
Financial
Corpo-
ration Sistema)
0.0000
0.0004
0.0000
0.0004
Financial Services
Solidium Oy
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Financial Services
Sustainalytics
0.0004
0.0003
0.0000
0.0006
Financial Services
Swedish
Export
Credit
Corpora-
tion (SEK)
0.0001
0.0004
0.0000
0.0004
Financial Services
UBS
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Financial Services
Unicredit
0.0000
0.0002
0.0000
0.0002
Financial Services
Van Lanschot
0.0001
0.0003
0.0000
0.0004
Financial Services
Österreichische
Kontrollbank
0.0001
0.0003
0.0000
0.0004
Food & Beverage
Anheuser-Busch
InBev
0.0006
0.0013
0.0001
0.0020
Food & Beverage
BONDUELLE
SAS
0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
0.0003
Food & Beverage
Carlsberg Group
0.0011
0.0005
0.0003
0.0019
Food & Beverage
Emmi
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Food & Beverage
Ferrero
Interna-
tional
0.0000
0.0004
0.0000
0.0005
Food & Beverage
FrieslandCampina
0.0012
0.0019
0.0000
0.0031
Food & Beverage
Frigoglass
0.0001
0.0004
0.0000
0.0005
Food & Beverage
Heineken N.V.
0.0001
0.0002
0.0000
0.0003
Food & Beverage
Lantmännen
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Food & Beverage
Löfbergs
0.0004
0.0000
0.0007
0.0011
Food & Beverage
Nestlé
0.0012
0.0018
0.0000
0.0030
Food & Beverage
Palsgaard
0.0003
0.0010
0.0001
0.0014
Food & Beverage
Paulig
0.0000
0.0002
0.0000
0.0002
Food & Beverage
Rémy Cointreau
0.0003
0.0002
0.0000
0.0005
Food & Beverage
Unilever N.V.
0.0003
0.0010
0.0000
0.0013
Real Estate
alstria
office
REIT-AG
0.0003
0.0002
0.0000
0.0005
Real Estate
Befimmo SA/NV
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Real Estate
Bonava
0.0000
0.0002
0.0000
0.0002
Real Estate
Castellum
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Real Estate
Cofinimmo SA
0.0002
0.0000
0.0000
0.0003
Real Estate
Covivio
0.0009
0.0008
0.0000
0.0017
==PAGE:105==
E.3 Frequency and Scope of the SDGs
91
Real Estate
intu
properties
plc
0.0000
0.0003
0.0003
0.0007
Real Estate
JM
0.0000
0.0004
0.0000
0.0004
Real Estate
Kungsleden
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0001
Real Estate
Sato Oyj
0.0001
0.0002
0.0000
0.0003
Real Estate
Specialfastigheter
Sverige
0.0000
0.0002
0.0000
0.0002
Telecommunications
Ericsson
0.0017
0.0010
0.0001
0.0028
Telecommunications
FASTWEB
0.0001
0.0001
0.0000
0.0002
Telecommunications
Hellenic Telecom-
munications
Organization
S.A.
0.0000
0.0006
0.0000
0.0006
Telecommunications
Nokia
Corpora-
tion
0.0003
0.0006
0.0000
0.0009
Telecommunications
Telefonica
0.0000
0.0011
0.0000
0.0011
Telecommunications
Telefónica
Deutschl
&
Holding
0.0005
0.0001
0.0000
0.0006
Telecommunications
Telekom Albania
SHA
0.0001
0.0002
0.0000
0.0003
Telecommunications
Telia Company
0.0001
0.0004
0.0000
0.0004
Telecommunications
TIM
0.0002
0.0002
0.0000
0.0004
Telecommunications
Wind
Hellas
Telecommunica-
tion
0.0001
0.0015
0.0000
0.0016
==PAGE:106==
92
E Results
Table E.6: The three search terms (SDG, Sustainable Development Goal and Global
Goal), number of reports and the percentage distribution of reports
within each occurrence frequency interval.
SDG
Reports
>
1:1000
1:1000 -
1:10,000
1:10,000 -
1:100,000
1:100,000
>
Sector
[n]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
Automotive
9
1
11.1
4
44.4
1
11.1
3
33.3
Chemicals
9
1
11.1
5
55.6
3
33.3
0
0.0
Energy
16
0
0.0
8
50.0
4
25.0
4
25.0
Energy Utilities
12
1
8.3
3
25.0
5
41.7
3
25.0
Financial Services
33
2
6.1
17
51.5
8
24.2
6
18.2
Food & Beverage
15
3
20.0
8
53.3
1
6.7
3
20.0
Real Estate
11
0
0.0
3
27.3
1
9.1
7
63.6
Telecommunications
10
1
10.0
4
40.0
4
40.0
1
10.0
For all reports
115
9
7.8
52
45.2
27
23.5
27
23.5
Sustainable Development Goal
Reports
>
1:1000
1:1000 -
1:10,000
1:10,000 -
1:100,000
1:100,000
>
Sector
[n]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
Automotive
9
0
0.0
8
88.9
1
11.1
0
0.0
Chemicals
9
1
11.1
7
77.8
1
11.1
0
0.0
Energy
16
2
12.5
12
75.0
2
12.5
0
0.0
Energy Utilities
12
0
0.0
9
75.0
3
25.0
0
0.0
Financial Services
33
6
18.2
20
60.6
6
18.2
1
3.0
Food & Beverage
15
3
20.0
8
53.3
2
13.3
2
13.3
Real Estate
11
0
0.0
8
72.7
3
27.3
0
0.0
Telecommunications
10
3
30.0
6
60.0
1
10.0
0
0.0
For all reports
115
15
13.0
78
67.8
19
16.5
3
2.6
Global Goal
Reports
>
1:1000
1:1000 -
1:10,000
1:10,000 -
1:100,000
1:100,000
>
Sector
[n]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
Automotive
9
0
0.0
1
11.1
1
11.1
7
77.8
Chemicals
9
0
0.0
0
0.0
4
44.4
5
55.6
Energy
16
0
0.0
2
12.5
2
12.5
12
75.0
Energy Utilities
12
0
0.0
0
0.0
3
25.0
9
75.0
Financial Services
33
0
0.0
2
6.1
6
18.2
25
75.8
Food & Beverage
15
0
0.0
4
26.7
1
6.7
10
66.7
Real Estate
11
0
0.0
1
9.1
1
9.1
9
81.8
Telecommuincation
10
0
0.0
1
10.0
0
0.0
9
90.0
For all reports
115
0
0.0
11
9.6
18
15.7
86
74.8
==PAGE:107==
E.3 Frequency and Scope of the SDGs
93
Table E.7: The total mentioning of each of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, divided into sectors.
SUM
Sector
S
D
G
1
S
D
G
2
S
D
G
3
S
D
G
4
S
D
G
5
S
D
G
6
S
D
G
7
S
D
G
8
S
D
G
9
S
D
G
10
S
D
G
11
S
D
G
12
S
D
G
13
S
D
G
14
S
D
G
15
S
D
G
16
S
D
G
17
Automotive
4
4
34
27
32
23
41
48
60
22
41
65
51
2
2
17
14
Chemicals
2
12
14
4
3
10
21
25
13
1
14
32
22
1
2
9
12
Energy
10
2
25
15
16
7
30
42
24
12
12
22
28
25
22
13
16
Energy Utilities
15
9
19
21
21
12
43
44
21
12
14
22
31
15
14
25
18
Financial Services
29
16
22
28
35
6
23
73
27
25
24
33
48
4
11
25
25
Food & Beverage
28
37
49
22
27
33
27
48
9
24
8
52
25
16
29
21
50
Real Estate
1
1
7
6
9
10
14
21
9
4
22
21
16
3
5
9
6
Telecommunications
9
5
19
22
18
8
13
30
29
11
21
19
26
6
7
21
14
==PAGE:108==
94
E Results
Table E.8: Mean frequency per report for each of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, divided into sectors.
Sector
S
D
G
1
S
D
G
2
S
D
G
3
S
D
G
4
S
D
G
5
S
D
G
6
S
D
G
7
S
D
G
8
S
D
G
9
S
D
G
10
S
D
G
11
S
D
G
12
S
D
G
13
S
D
G
14
S
D
G
15
S
D
G
16
S
D
G
17
Automotive
0.4
0.4
3.8
3.0
3.6
2.6
4.6
5.3
6.7
2.4
4.6
7.2
5.7
0.2
0.2
1.9
1.6
Chemicals
0.3
1.4
1.7
0.6
0.4
1.2
2.4
2.9
1.6
0.2
1.7
3.7
2.6
0.2
0.3
1.1
1.4
Energy
0.6
0.1
1.6
0.9
1.0
0.4
1.9
2.6
1.5
0.8
0.8
1.4
1.8
1.6
1.4
0.8
1.0
Energy Utilities
1.3
0.8
1.6
1.8
1.8
1.0
3.6
3.7
1.8
1.0
1.2
1.8
2.6
1.3
1.2
2.1
1.5
Financial Services
0.9
0.5
0.7
0.8
1.1
0.2
0.7
2.2
0.8
0.8
0.7
1.0
1.5
0.1
0.3
0.8
0.8
Food & Beverage
1.9
2.5
3.3
1.5
1.8
2.2
1.8
3.2
0.6
1.6
0.5
3.5
1.7
1.1
1.9
1.4
3.3
Real Estate
0.1
0.1
0.6
0.5
0.8
0.9
1.3
1.9
0.8
0.4
2.0
1.9
1.5
0.3
0.5
0.8
0.5
Telecommunications
0.9
0.5
1.9
2.2
1.8
0.8
1.3
3.0
2.9
1.1
2.1
1.9
2.6
0.6
0.7
2.1
1.4
For all reports
0.9
0.8
1.6
1.3
1.4
1.0
1.8
2.9
1.7
1.0
1.4
2.3
2.2
0.6
0.8
1.2
1.4
==PAGE:109==
E.4 Best-practices
95
E.4
Best-practices
Table E.9: Sample only including reports defined as ”Good” or ”Very
good” quality, including sector, name, organization size and
type together with location of headquarters (country).
Sector
Name
Size
Type
Country
Automotive
Volvo Group
MNE
Private
Sweden
Automotive
Fiat Chrysler Auto-
mobiles (FCA)
MNE
Private
Italy
Automotive
Daimler
Large
Private
Germany
Automotive
Volkswagen
Ak-
tiengesellschaft
Large
Private
Germany
Automotive
Gestamp
Large
Private
Spain
Chemicals
Arkema
MNE
Private
France
Chemicals
Akzo Nobel NV
Large
Private
Netherlands
Chemicals
Syngenta
MNE
Private
Switzerland
Chemicals
BONDALTI
Large
Private
Portugal
Chemicals
Covestro AG
Large
Subsidiary
Germany
Chemicals
DSM
Large
Private
Netherlands
Energy
Premier Oil
Large
Private
United
King-
dom of Great
Britain
and
Northern
Ireland
Energy
Saipem
Large
Private
Italy
Energy
Galp Energia
Large
Private
Portugal
Energy
Royal Dutch Shell
Large
Private
Netherlands
Energy
Fortum Värme
Large
Private
Sweden
Energy
Lukoil
MNE
Private
Russian
Fed-
eration
Energy
Eni S.P.A.
MNE
Private
Italy
Energy
Gazprom Neft
Large
Subsidiary
Russian
Fed-
eration
Energy
Lundin Petroleum
MNE
Private
Sweden
Energy
BP
Large
Private
United
King-
dom of Great
Britain
and
Northern
Ireland
Energy
OK-Q8
MNE
Private
Sweden
Energy
Hellenic Petroleum
Large
Private
Greece
Energy Utilities
Vattenfall
Large
State-owned
Sweden
Energy Utilities
Enel
MNE
Private
Italy
Energy Utilities
E.ON
Large
Private
Germany
==PAGE:110==
96
E Results
Energy Utilities
Iberdrola
Large
Private
Spain
Financial Services
NN Group
MNE
Private
Netherlands
Financial Services
COFIDES
Large
State-owned
Spain
Financial Services
Alterfin
SME
Private
Belgium
Financial Services
Rabobank
Large
Private
Netherlands
Financial Services
Credit Suisse
MNE
Private
Switzerland
Financial Services
Crèdit Andorrà
Large
Private
Andorra
Financial Services
Commerzbank
MNE
Private
Germany
Financial Services
KBC Group
Large
Private
Belgium
Financial Services
Agence Française de
Développement
SME
State-owned
France
Financial Services
Allianz SE
MNE
Private
Germany
Food & Beverage
Anheuser-Busch
InBev
Large
Private
Belgium
Food & Beverage
Palsgaard
SME
Private
Denmark
Food & Beverage
Heineken N.V.
MNE
Private
Netherlands
Food & Beverage
Ferrero International
Large
Private
Luxembourg
Food & Beverage
FrieslandCampina
MNE
Partnership
Netherlands
Food & Beverage
Frigoglass
MNE
Private
Greece
Food & Beverage
Nestlé
MNE
Private
Switzerland
Food & Beverage
Löfbergs
SME
Private
Sweden
Food & Beverage
BONDUELLE SAS
MNE
Private
France
Food & Beverage
Rémy Cointreau
MNE
Private
France
Food & Beverage
Carlsberg Group
MNE
Private
Denmark
Real Estate
Befimmo SA/NV
Large
Private
Belgium
Real Estate
Cofinimmo SA
Large
Private
Belgium
Real Estate
Sato Oyj
SME
Private
Finland
Real Estate
Bonava
Large
Private
Sweden
Real Estate
JM
Large
Private
Sweden
Real Estate
Covivio
Large
Private
France
Telecommunications
Telia Company
MNE
Private
Sweden
Telecommunications
Telefonica
Large
Private
Spain
Telecommunications
Nokia Corporation
Large
Private
Finland
Telecommunications
Hellenic Telecommu-
nications
Organiza-
tion S.A.
Large
Private
Greece
Telecommunications
Wind
Hellas
Telecommunication
Large
Private
Greece
Telecommunications
Ericsson
Large
Private
Sweden
Telecommunications
TIM
Large
Private
Italy
==PAGE:111==
==PAGE:112==
