==PAGE:1==
Assessment of absolute sustainability in the built environment 
 
 
Master’s thesis 
 
 
Pernille Krogh Ohms1 (s133740) & Camilla Marlene Ernst Andersen1 (s133757) 
1Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
25th of January 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
==PAGE:2==
 
 
  
ii 
Foreword 
This Master’s thesis was carried out from August 2018 to January 2019 by Pernille Krogh 
Ohms and Camilla Marlene Ernst Andersen. The purpose of this thesis is to graduate as 
Masters of Science in the field of Architectural Engineering from the Technical University of 
Denmark. It should be noted that all work has been shared equally between the two students.  
 
We would like to thank our supervisors Morten Ryberg, Morten Birkved, Freja Nygaard 
Rasmussen, Harpa Birgisdottir and Michael Hauschild for motivational and constructive 
guidance throughout the entire process. We would especially like to thank Morten Ryberg for 
always taking the time to meet us when we were panicking, had silly questions, and for 
inspiring discussions and thorough explanations. 
 
Finally, we are grateful for our family, partners, friends and roommates and the support and 
patience they have shown during the process of finishing our thesis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________  
 
____________________________ 
 Pernille Krogh Ohms 
 
 
 
 
Camilla Marlene Ernst Andersen 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
  
iii 
Opening statement from the authors 
In December 2018 the 24th Conference of the Parties (COP24) was held in Katowice, Poland. 
While the participating countries managed to settle on how to measure, report and verify their 
efforts towards the agreements made in Paris three years prior, it was not discussed if and 
how the countries will strive for even more ambitious targets. The current target levels for the 
world is set to 2 degrees of warming from pre-industrial levels, although the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) stress the importance of limiting the 
global temperature increase to 1.5˚C (Fiona Harvey, 2018). At the time of the agreement 
made in Paris, relative little scientific knowledge existed about the difference between 1.5˚C 
and 2˚C global warming, but since then a report has been released on the consequences of a 
temperature increase greater than 1.5˚C. The report highlights that political will is key for the 
implementation of solutions that both improve well-being and make it possible to limit global 
warming to 1.5˚C (IPCC Secratariat, 2018). 
  
The motivation for this Master’s thesis was found in the realisation that quantifying 
sustainability with relative measures is not suitable if we are to develop towards a world with 
a temperature increase of no more than 1.5˚C since pre-industrial level. While conventional 
Life Cycle Assessments are useful for comparative matters and for assessing eco-efficiency, 
they cannot indicate whether or not we stay within the safe operating space – i.e. whether our 
actions are enough. According to the Danish Transportation, Construction and Housing 
Authority buildings in Europe contribute to 20-30% of the most crucial damages made to the 
environment and 30% of waste generated in Denmark is connected to the built environment 
(Trafik og Byggestyrelsen, 2016).  
 
In Denmark, sustainability in buildings can be demonstrated by the achievement of a DGNB 
(Deutche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen) certification, in which the completion of a 
LCA accounts for 13% of the certification score (Denmark, 2016). Although all 
improvements matter, it is crucial to consider if we are improving enough, thus inspiring the 
need for measures of absolute sustainability. While the fact that human activities pose a risk 
to the state of the Earth System is not new (Meadows et al., 1972; Ryberg, 2018), the idea of 
coupling LCA with absolute measures is both new and, at this point, still an experimental 
approach. 10 years has passed since Rockström published the Planetary Boundaries-
framework and since then different attempts at incorporating this into LCA as both 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
  
iv 
characterisation, normalisation and weighting factors have been done. However, actually 
applying the developed methods to assess human activities relative to the Planetary 
Boundaries have only been done in few case studies and therefore calls for more work. This 
thesis seeks to continue the existing work of others in the field of absolute environmental 
sustainability assessments and to contribute to the understanding of how LCA can be coupled 
with absolute measures.  
 
This thesis is a study on assessing the level of absolute sustainability of six single family 
stand-alone dwellings using the two methods carrying capacity-based normalisation factors 
(CCnorm) and Planetary Boundary-based Life Cycle Impact Assessment (PB-LCIA). The first 
part of the study is an Article concerning the main methodological choices and conclusions of 
the study. The second part of the study (Supporting Information I to V) serves as supporting 
information to the Article. Hence, the Article is possible to read as an independent piece, 
whereas the Supporting Information should be read in connection with the Article.  
 
Following Supporting Information III, we have included a closing statement containing our 
final thought as a follow up to this opening statement.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
  
v
Abbreviations 
LCA   
 
Life Cycle Assessment  
LCIA   
 
Life Cycle Impact Assessment 
LCI  
 
 
Life Cycle Inventory 
EPD   
 
Environmental Product Declaration 
CCnorm  
 
Carrying capacity-based normalisation factors  
PB-LCIA  
 
Planetary Boundaries-based Life Cycle Impact Assessment  
SOS   
 
Safe Operating Space 
SoSOS  
 
Share of Safe Operating Space 
AD House   
 
Adaptable House 
IMF House    
Innovative Maintenance Free House 
Q House  
 
Quota House  
Ref House   
 
Reference House 
TMF House    
Traditional Maintenance Free House 
UP House  
 
Upcycle House  
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
1 
Assessment of absolute sustainability in the built environment 
Camilla Andersen1, Pernille Ohms1  
 
Supervisors: 
Freja Nygaard Rasmussen2, Harpa Birgisdottir2, Morten Birkved3, Michael Hauschild4 & 
Morten Ryberg4 
 
1Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
2The Danish Building Research Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark 
3Southern University of Denmark, Institute of Chemical Engineering, Biotechnology and 
Environmental Technology, Odense, Denmark 
 4Technical University of Denmark, Department of Management Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby, 
Denmark 
 
ABSTRACT 
The purpose of this study is to investigate absolute sustainability in the built environment, by 
assessing whether or not current approaches to building design, and thereby the consumption 
of resources and subsequent emissions, can be considered within the carrying capacity of the 
environment.  
Two methods for absolute environmental sustainability assessment were applied; one where 
the normalisation step was done with carrying capacity based-normalisation factors and one 
where characterisation of elementary flows was done with characterisation factors based on 
the Planetary Boundaries. A life cycle assessment (LCA) was conducted for six houses to 
quantify their environmental footprints. Finally, allocation principles were applied to 
determine the share of the safe operating space that a single family stand-alone dwelling 
should be assigned. This allows for an assessment of environmental impact of each house in 
an absolute perspective.  
In this study it is found that the approaches tested in the Quota House and Upcycle House, 
namely reducing the energy consumption and recycling and reuse of materials, have the 
greatest potential to reach an absolute sustainable level and that the two applied methods 
overall provide the same conclusions. However, the conclusions drawn from the analysis are 
found to be dependent of the applied allocation principle used to assign a share of the safe 
operating space. From this study it can be concluded that improvements in the current 
approach to sustainable building design are still needed to reach absolute sustainability in the 
built environment.  
 
==PAGE:7==
 
2 
KEYWORDS  
Environmental performance of buildings, absolute sustainability assessment, carrying 
capacity, Planetary Boundaries 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Today, there is enough evidence to ascertain a clear connection between human activities and 
changes in the Earth’s climate due to increasing concentrations of CO2, CH4, and other 
greenhouse gases (Steffen et al., 2004). The emission of greenhouse gases linked to human 
activities have increased since before the industrialisation and can be explained by a growth 
in both economy and population (IPCC et al., 2014). While the world population have 
increased more than 10-fold to 7.6 billion over the past three centuries, the rate of 
consumption has increased even more dramatically (Steffen et al., 2004). In fact, human 
activities have escalated so rapidly since the mid-20th century that the ecological stability of 
the 11,700-year-long period known as the Holocene is now threatened (Steffen et al., 2015). 
Concerns regarding the shift from the Holocene-state have led to efforts to quantify local, 
regional, and global thresholds that should be respected for the Earth to be able to maintain 
the, to humans, necessary ecosystem services (Bjørn et al., 2014). 
 
The building sector has a strong influence on total natural resource consumption and on the 
emissions released and is thus a crucial stakeholder when seeking to decrease the total 
resource consumption. Life cycle assessment (LCA) methods have been used for 
environmental evaluation in product development processes in other industries for a long 
time (Bjørn et al., 2018), although application to the building sector has increased in the 
recent years (Brejnrod et al., 2017).The comprehensive and systematic approach of LCA has 
led to an increasing interest in incorporating LCA methods into building construction 
decision making, as well as for evaluating and optimising construction processes (Cabeza et 
al., 2014). LCA is a relative environmental assessment framework and most often used in 
comparative assessments, i.e. to claim environmental superiority of one product over another, 
or in hotspot analysis’ to identify the main environmental impacts of a product’s life cycle 
(Brejnrod et al., 2017; Ryberg, 2018). Thus, LCA is particularly suitable as a tool for 
decision support (Hauschild, Rosenbaum and Olsen, 2018), but cannot be used to indicate if a 
product is truly sustainable (Ryberg, 2018). Hence, to tell if the Earth System processes are 
able to cope with the burdens of human activities, coupling LCA with absolute measures is 
necessary.  
==PAGE:8==
 
3 
In this study, two absolute measures are considered, namely the carrying capacity and the 
Planetary Boundaries of the Earth System. The carrying capacity of Earth System processes 
is defined as “the maximum sustained environmental intervention a natural system can 
withstand without experiencing negative changes in structure or functioning that are difficult 
or impossible to revert” (Bjørn and Hauschild, 2015). The carrying capacity expresses the 
environmental capacity of local, regional or global Earth System processes (Brejnrod et al., 
2017) and defines the boundary between sustainability and unsustainability (Bjørn and 
Hauschild, 2015). However, due to a lack of scientific knowledge about the nature of 
biophysical thresholds, uncertainty regarding how the actual systems behave, inherent 
feedback mechanisms and uncertainty in the amount of time a critical control variable may be 
exceeded, the defined carrying capacity is placed in a zone of uncertainty (see Figure 1) 
(Rockström et al., 2009). Bjørn and Hauschild (2015) defined the carrying capacity as the 
medium or average value, corresponding to a medium level of precaution whenever an 
uncertainty range or confidence interval was given for an identified threshold. To ensure that 
the carrying capacity of the Earth System is not exceeded, target levels, namely the Planetary 
Boundaries, have been defined in academia and are now commonly referred to by 
governments and industries (Ryberg, Owsianiak and Hauschild, 2018). The Planetary 
Boundaries were first launched in 2009 (Rockström et al., 2009) and are defined as the lower 
limit of the zone of uncertainty, corresponding to a high level of precaution. Thus, the 
Planetary Boundaries framework defines the safe operating space (SOS) for humanity for the 
area of protection known as the Holocene state of the Earth when the natural background 
level are accounted for (see Figure 1) (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Clavreul, et al., 2018). The full 
SOS (i.e. the Planetary Boundary or carrying capacity when the natural background level is 
subtracted) can be found in Supporting Information I, Section II.II and II.III.  
==PAGE:9==
 
4 
 
Figure 1 – The concept of Planetary Boundaries and carrying capacity framework for global 
Earth System processes. The green zone marks the safe operating space, the yellow zone the 
uncertainty and the red zone a high risk of critical change. The lines mark the Planetary 
Boundary (Rockström et al., 2009) located at the lower limit of the zone of uncertainty and 
the carrying capacity located as an average in the zone of uncertainty as defined by Bjørn 
and Hauschild (2015) 
 
This study seeks to investigate absolute sustainability of single family stand-alone dwellings 
and evaluate whether or not the current approaches to sustainable building design can be 
considered ‘truly sustainable’. To do so, two methodologies, carrying capacity-based 
normalisation factors (CCnorm) and Planetary Boundaries-based Life Cycle Impact 
Assessment (PB-LCIA), are applied to a case study of six single family stand-alone dwellings 
and a share of the global capacity of the environment is allocated to each dwelling. Finally, it 
is assessed whether or not our current approach to design of single family stand-alone 
dwellings is ambitious enough or should be reconsidered in order to be absolute sustainable 
according to the applied absolute environmental sustainability assessment methods. 
 
2 MATERIALS AND METHODS  
Absolute environmental sustainability assessments differ from traditional LCAs (which are, 
as described in Section 1, inherently a relative tool) by the incorporation of control variables 
and thresholds. To assess whether or not an activity can be regarded as being 
environmentally sustainable, its impact scores, i.e. the activity’s footprint, must be related to 
==PAGE:10==
 
5 
an absolute environmental sustainability threshold (Ryberg, 2018). Next, it is essential to 
define a relevant environmental boundary for the assessed activity and finally allocate a share 
of the boundary to the assessed activity. If the footprint of the activity is smaller than the 
allocated share of the relevant boundary, the activity can be regarded as absolute 
environmental sustainable (Ryberg, 2018). Further details on absolute environmental 
sustainability assessments can be found in Supporting Information I, Section II.I.  
 
2.1 The two applied methods  
Attempts to incorporate absolute sustainability in a LCA context has in the past been in the 
form of weighting factors. Hauschild, Wenzel and Alting (1998) presented carrying capacity-
based distance-to-target weighting factors and Tuomisto et al. (2012) attempted to adapt the 
Planetary Boundaries (Rockström et al., 2009) as weighting factors for eight impact 
categories. However, weighting has the disadvantage of allowing for tradeoffs between 
impact categories, hence it is possible to exceed the threshold for one impact category if 
others are sufficiently reduced (Bjørn and Hauschild, 2015).  
 
 
To avoid subjectivity, we applied two novel approaches for absolute sustainability 
assessment. Ryberg et al. (2018) have recently presented characterisation factors adapted to 
the Planetary Boundaries, thereby proposing a way of expressing impacts from a 
conventional LCA in the metrics of the Planetary Boundaries (Ryberg, Owsianiak, 
Richardson, et al., 2018). One of the main challenges of this adaptation is the fact that 
conventional LCIAs are integrated over a time period (e.g. the service life of a product) and 
thus the full life cycle impact cannot be measured in the current environment, rendering them 
unsuitable for determining if an environmental threshold is exceeded (Ryberg, Owsianiak, 
Richardson, et al., 2018). Hence, the time in which the impacts occur is important, as one 
pulse emission may lead to the ecosystem reaching its capacity at once, whereas the same 
emission occurring over long time may only occupy a small share of the capacity (Ryberg, 
2018). The capacity of each Earth System is inherently dynamic due to natural changes in the 
environment and to human interventions affecting the ecosystem temporarily or permanently 
(Bjørn and Hauschild, 2015). Hence, the carrying capacity of an ecosystem should ideally be 
assessed at any given point in time. Figure 2 shows that LCI modelling for the PB-LCIA 
framework can be compared to conventional LCI modelling, as the framework assumes that 
the elementary flows from all life cycle stages will occur in an “average” year, thereby 
continuously fulfilling the functional unit.  
==PAGE:11==
 
6 
 
 
Figure 2 - Difference between conventional LCA-study and PB-LCIA. The figure is adapted 
from Ryberg et al. (2018) and has been modified to fit the framework structure for building 
LCAs. 
 
Prior to the work by Ryberg et al. (2018), Bjørn and Hauschild (2015) proposed to use 
carrying capacity as an environmental sustainability reference in the normalisation step of 
LCAs. The work by Bjørn and Hauschild (2015) addresses the fact that “as common 
normalisation factors are solely based on activities within the technosphere they cannot be 
used to compare and aggregate the severity of different types of interventions in the 
ecosphere”. This motivation led to the development of European and global carrying 
capacity-based normalisation factors compatible with characterised indicator scores at 
midpoint-level for impact categories that link to the Area of Protection ”Natural 
Environment” (Bjørn and Hauschild, 2015). However, as the normalisation factors are not 
compliant with those of ILCD 2011 Midpoint+ (ILCD 2011), European Commission’s Joint 
Research Centre (Sala et al., 2016) translated the normalisation factors to be compliant with 
ILCD 2011 impact categories in order to facilitate the method to be used more widely. 
 
We applied the two methods to test the robustness of our conclusions. The goal was not to 
compare the results obtained from the two methods, as they are inherently not comparable (in 
some cases they do not consider the same impact categories and when they do consider the 
same impact categories, it is modelled differently in the two approaches), but to investigate 
whether the two methods support the same overall conclusion.  
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
7 
2.2 Allocating the safe operating space 
To investigate whether or not an activity can be considered absolute sustainable, it is 
necessary to determine if it occupies a larger share of the safe operating space than what it 
should be assigned. The subjects of consideration in this paper are all single family stand-
alone dwellings and it was therefore necessary to determine the share of the safe operating 
space (SoSOS) available to a building of this type, as the Planetary Boundaries and carrying 
capacity both indicate the SOS available in total. Allocating a share of the global limit to a 
smaller entity can be based on different principles such as maximising the utility of the global 
population (i.e. utilitarian based), seeking equality between all people (i.e. egalitarian based), 
or distributing relative to current contribution to environmental impact (i.e. acquired rights 
based) (Ryberg, Owsianiak and Hauschild, 2018).  
 
For this study we wished to apply different allocation principles as a way of testing the 
robustness of our assessment, as Ryberg et al. (2018) found that the choice of allocation 
principle has great influence on how big a share of the SOS a system occupies. We 
determined six combinations of allocation principles by utilising both egalitarian, utilitarian 
and acquired rights-based approaches. All allocation principles can be seen in Table 1. It 
should be noted that the allocation principles applied in this study only represent a selection 
of ways the safe operating space can be shared. They do not cover all possible ways of 
allocating the safe operating space, and others could be just as reasonable as the ones applied 
in this study.  
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
8 
Table 1 - Outline of the allocation principles applied in this study. The allocation shares, i.e. 
the share allocated to a single family stand-alone dwelling, are calculated by multiplying the 
fractions across each row. The calculated shares can be found in Supporting Information I, 
Section III.III. Further details on how the shares were calculated can be found in Supporting 
Information I, Section II.IV. 
 
Person share out of 
world share 
Household share out 
of person share 
Dwelling share out 
of household share 
Allocation principle 1 
(egalitarian + utilitarian) 
Equal per capita 
Final consumption 
expenditure 
Final consumption 
expenditure 
1
world!"! 
FCE!!
FCE!"#$%&
∙! 
FCE!"#
FCE!!  
Allocation principle 2 
(egalitarian + utilitarian) 
Equal per capita 
Time spent 
Final consumption 
expenditure 
1
world!"! 
H!"#$
H!"#$
∙! 
FCE!"#
FCE!!  
Allocation principle 3 
(egalitarian + acquired rights) 
Equal per capita 
Energy consumption 
Energy consumption 
1
world!"! 
E!!
E!"#$%&
∙! 
E!"#
E!!  
 
Household share out of world share 
Dwelling share out 
of household share 
Allocation principle 4 
(acquired rights + acquired 
rights) 
CO2 emissions 
Energy consumption 
CO2!!
CO2!"#$% 
E!"#
E!!  
Allocation principle 5 
(acquired rights + utilitarian) 
CO2 emissions 
Final consumption 
expenditure 
CO2!!
CO2!"#$% 
FCE!"#
FCE!!  
 
Dwelling share out of world share 
Allocation principle 6 
(utilitarian) 
Final consumption expenditure 
FCE!"#
FCE!"#$%
= FCE!!
FCE!"#$%
∙FCE!"#
FCE!!  
 
==PAGE:14==
 
9 
Where Popworld is the world population, FCEHH is the final consumption expenditure for a 
household, FCEperson is the final consumption expenditure for a person, FCEdwe is the final 
consumption expenditure for a dwelling, N is the number of persons in a household, Hhome is 
the hours spent at home, Hyear is the hours in a year, EHH is the energy consumption for a 
average household, Eperson is the energy consumption for one person, Edwe is the energy 
consumption for a dwelling, CO2HH is the CO2 emitted for an average household and 
CO2world is the CO2 emitted worldwide. All factors are considered on an annual basis. This 
study distinguishes between a household and dwelling. A person’s household includes all 
home-based activities and products, such as cooking, cleaning, relaxing, furniture etc., while 
dwelling refers to the building, and only the activities and products related to the building 
itself, i.e. paying rent, floorings, major appliances etc.  
 
To determine if the studied dwellings can be considered absolute sustainable we calculate the 
share that each dwelling occupies of the SoSOS, by applying the allocation share to the full 
SOS of either the Planetary Boundary or carrying capacity as shown in Equation 1 and 2:  
 
(1)    
!!"
!"!!"#$
!!! ∙ !"!!",! =
!!"
!"!!"#$
!"!#!! ≤1            (2)     
!!"
!!! ∙ !"!!!,!"#$%,! =
!!"
!"!#!! ≤1 
 
CIS
PB-LCIA is a characterised impact score calculated with Planetary Boundary-based 
characterisation factors developed by Ryberg (2018), and SOSPB,i is the full SOS of the 
Planetary Boundaries when considering an impact category, i (see Supporting Information I, 
Section II.II). CIS is the characterised impact score calculated using ILCD 2011 divided by 
SOSCC,world,i which is the full SOS when considering the global annual carrying capacities for 
an impact category, i, also noted as the carrying capacity-based normalisation factors (see 
Supporting Information I, Section II.III) (Brejnrod et al., 2017). ASi is the allocation shares 
calculated according to the allocation principles presented in Table 1. SoSOSi represents the 
share of the safe operating space of an impact category i allocated to a single family stand-
alone dwelling of the total SOS. If the share is less than 1, a dwelling can be considered 
within its SoSOS and therefore absolute sustainable.  
 
2.3 Case study 
In this study we investigated five houses known as the Mini CO2 Houses (for more details on 
the project see Supporting Information I, Section II.V) and compared these to a sixth house 
==PAGE:15==
 
10 
(referred to as the Reference House (Ref House)), which reflects standard Danish building 
practice in 2015 and serves as a benchmarking point in this study. The Mini CO2 Houses 
were designed to each reduce one known source of CO2 emissions in buildings to an extreme 
degree, i.e. one design parameter is highlighted and optimised while all other parameters are 
designed to simply comply with (at that point of time) current building regulations, enabling 
a comparison between the different parameters and showing the impact of different actions 
towards CO2 reductions. 
The first, Upcycle House (UP House), focuses on how recycling by adding value can save 
resources and decrease CO2 emissions during construction of buildings. The Innovative 
Maintenance-free House (IMF House) and the Traditional Maintenance-free House (TMF 
House) excel in two areas; maintenance and lifespan. The two houses differ by the choice of 
materials. TMF House is built from traditional materials that are known to have a long 
lifespan, while IMF House is built from new materials that are expected to have a long 
lifespan. Both houses have a theoretical lifespan of 150 years and a building envelope that 
does not require any maintenance during the first 50 years of use. The concept of the 
Adaptable House (AD House) is flexibility and variability during its lifespan. The house is 
made up of components that are possible to disassemble, providing the opportunity to expand 
the house without destroying existing and remaining components. The final house, Quota 
House (Q House) focuses on smart technology, the behaviour of the residents and their 
consumption patterns (Rasmussen and Birgisdóttir, 2013; Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2013a, 
2013b, 2014a, 2014b; Realdania Byg and Leth & Gori, 2014). 
All modelled systems contain parameters that are likely to change in the future, such as 
energy consumption, disposal routes, and energy mix. We identified five key characteristics 
of the buildings which current trends point towards as likely development paths in the coming 
years (Backhaus et al., 2011). Therefore, we defined 5 scenarios each representing a version 
of the future where one characteristic is highlighted. We modelled the change in each 
characteristic as a “positive” environmental development, i.e. contributing to a (expectedly) 
lower environmental impact than the current conditions (Base Scenario), thereby representing 
a more sustainable version of the future. Finally, we defined a sixth scenario where all 
characteristics are changed and thus represents a best case scenario for our planet. It should 
be noted that the characteristics from Scenario 1 to 5 are mutually exclusive and can be 
combined without conflicting assumptions.  
==PAGE:16==
 
11 
Table 2 – An outline of the scenarios assessed in this study are presented. In each scenario 
one characteristic of the buildings is addressed and the table expresses the modelled 
modifications. All improvements are based on the study by SPREAD Sustainable Lifestyles 
(Backhaus et al., 2011) and an extensive description of the scenarios can be found in 
Supporting Information I, Section II.VI. 
 
Characteristic modified 
How? 
Base Scenario 
Current conditions 
Current conditions 
Scenario 1 
Expansion  
Buildings are modelled without expansion, i.e. 
building area is decreased  
Scenario 2 
Energy and water consumption 
Energy and water use are decreased with 25% 
Scenario 3 
Energy mix 
Energy mix is modelled as projected for 2030 
Scenario 4 
Lifespan of materials 
Lifespan of all materials are doubled 
Scenario 5 
End of Life routes 
End of Life routes are shifted more towards 
recycling and reuse where applicable 
Scenario 6 
All of the above 
All of the above 
 
 
2.4 Life Cycle Assessment  
The LCAs of the six houses described in Section 2.3 was carried out following ISO 
14040:2006, ISO 14044:2006 and DS/EN 15978:2011 (Dansk Standard, 2006, 2008, 2012). 
In the following subsections a description of aspects relevant to the modelling process will be 
given.  
 
2.4.2 Scope definition 
In typical LCAs, defining the functional unit (FU) includes defining for how long the 
function is provided (Hauschild, Rosenbaum and Olsen, 2018). In this case, the duration 
would be the lifetime of the building (either 120 or 150 years). However, to reflect the 
framework described in Section 2.1 the inventory must express elementary flows as 
continuous constant input per unit of time rather than an input integrated over time (Ryberg, 
Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). The FU of the compared systems was defined as to 
==PAGE:17==
 
12 
annually house one family in a stand-alone dwelling in Denmark. It was assumed that the 
reference flow necessary to fulfil the FU is one Mini CO2 House. All modelled systems are 
located in Nyborg, Denmark. The life cycle inventory (LCI) data used to model the 
foreground system are representative for a Danish context, and parameters such as energy 
mix, energy consumption, and disposal routes were all modelled according to current 
conditions in Denmark. All systems were modelled using the software tool SimaPro 8.0 (PRé, 
2019) with the database ecoinvent 3.4 (Ecoinvent, 2019). Further details regarding scope 
definition can be found in Supporting Information I, Section II.VII.I.  
 
2.4.3 Life Cycle Inventory  
The data used to model the inventory were supplied by the Danish Building Research 
Institute and all inventories can be seen in Supporting Information IV. The provided data 
only cover building components, and all inventory data regarding Construction, Use, and End 
of Life were therefore based on either Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs), relevant 
literature, or assumptions. A full list of all assumptions regarding the construction of the 
inventories can be found in Supporting Information III.   
 
The uncertainty of the inventory was considered quantitatively by carrying out a Monte Carlo 
analysis. Uncertainties regarding assumptions were considered qualitatively. In addition, the 
sensitivity of the Base Scenario model was tested towards the changes made in Scenario 1-6. 
The relative change was calculated and used as a measure of sensitivity in the model. It was 
assumed that if the relative change is greater than 2% the model can be considered sensitive. 
Furthermore, a normalised sensitivity coefficient (Owsianiak et al., 2018) was calculated for 
a 10% change in district heating consumption, water consumption, energy for construction 
and the lifespan of the buildings (for further details, see Supporting Information I, Section 
II.VII.II). Since the normalised sensitivity coefficient represents the change in impact divided 
by the change in input and is thus a factor between 0 and 1, it was assumed that if the 
normalised sensitivity coefficient is greater than 0.5 for a single impact category, the 
parameter can be considered sensitive. Similarly, a parameter was seen as sensitive if the 
average of the sensitivity coefficients for all impact categories is greater than 0.3. Further 
details can be found in Supporting Information I, Section II.VII.II.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
13 
2.4.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA)  
Two different impact assessment methods were applied in this study. These are thoroughly 
described in Section 2.1. The impact coverage choice was based on a preliminary literature 
review carried out by the authors of this study (see Supporting Information II). The impact 
assessment of this study focuses on four impact categories from the LCIA-method ILCD 
2011, namely Climate change (kg CO2 eq), Marine eutrophication (kg N eq), Land use (kg C 
deficit), and Water resource depletion (m3 water eq) and five impact categories for the 
Planetary Boundary based LCIA-method developed by Ryberg et al. (2018), namely Climate 
change - energy imbalance (Wm-2), Climate change - CO2 concentration (ppm), Land system 
change - global (%), Biogeochemical flows - N (Tg N), and Freshwater use - global (km3). It 
was decided to include impact categories related to climate change, land use and water use as 
the preliminary literature review indicated that the latter two is relevant in studies concerning 
the built environment while the former is highly relevant in almost all studies, as climate 
change is a widely discussed topic in most political arenas. The impact categories related to 
nitrogen was included as they represent an important contributor to anthropogenic pressures 
that can have serious consequences for ecosystem functioning (Desmit et al., 2018). Further 
details regarding choice of impact coverage can be found in Supporting Information I, 
Section II.VII.III. 
 
3 RESULTS  
In order to make the results transparent and comparable to similar building studies, the 
characterised results obtained using ILCD 2011 are presented in Table 3.  
 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
14 
 
Table 3 - Characterised annual impact potential for each of the Mini CO2 houses for the 
Base Scenario using the LCIA method ILCD 2011. The lowest impact potential is marked in 
green, the highest in red. 
 a120 year service life 
b150 year service life 
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, 
IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
Impact category 
Refa 
UPa 
TMFb 
IMFb 
ADa 
Qa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1,73E+03 
1,78E+03 
1,62E+03 
1,49E+03 
2,17E+03 
1,38E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4,49E+00 
4,67E+00 
4,68E+00 
5,14E+00 
6,42E+00 
3,98E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
8,67E+03 
9,59E+03 
9,33E+03 
1,27E+04 
1,17E+04 
8,36E+03 
Water resource depletion  
[m3 water eq] 
3,33E+01 
3,27E+01 
3,26E+01 
3,31E+01 
4,56E+01 
2,47E+01 
 
From the results presented in Table 3, it is found that Q House has the lowest impact potential 
in the Base Scenario for 4 out of 4 of the selected impact categories, whereas AD House is 
found to have the highest impact potential for 3 out of 4 impact categories. It is found that the 
low environmental impact potential for Q House is due to a considerably lower energy and 
water consumption during the Use stage, whereas the high environmental impact potential for 
AD House is due to more materials being used when expanding the house several times 
during the service life. In general, it is found that the main contributor to the environmental 
impact potential is the Use stage in all impact categories except those related to nitrogen. For 
impact categories related to climate change and land use, the environmental impact emerges 
from the consumption of electricity and district heating in the use stage, whereas for the 
impact categories related to water use, the environmental impact is caused by the 
consumption of water during the Use stage. As a consequence of the consumption of water, a 
great amount of wastewater needs to be handled in the End of Life stage, which greatly affect 
the environmental impact in impact categories related to nitrogen (Marine eutrophication and 
Biogeochemical flows – N). For further details on the main contributors to the environmental 
impact, see Supporting Information I, Section III.II.   
 
==PAGE:20==
 
15 
The impact score relative to the allocated SoSOS for the six houses, the Base Scenario and 
the two methods are presented in Figure 3 and 4. The Figures show the range of which each 
house exceed the allocated SoSOS when considering the six different allocation principles 
and the inherent uncertainty of the model. 
 
 
Figure 3 - Impact potential relative to the allocated SoSOS for the Base Scenario for four 
impact categories, six different allocation principles and using the method CCnorm. The red 
line indicates the boundary, which means that if the impact score is above the line, hence 
above 1, the boundary is exceeded and vice versa. The error bars indicate the combined 
uncertainty of the model as well as the range in allocation principles, where the latter 
dominate the uncertainty. The results are shown on a logarithmic scale. For Water resource 
depletion the uncertainty range is only expressed from the mean to the upper limit of the 
confidence interval (97.5%) as the lower limit (2.5%) reaches a negative value, which can be 
misleading if presented on a logarithmic scale.  
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, 
IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
16 
 
 
Figure 4 - Impact potential relative to the allocated SoSOS for the Base Scenario for five 
impact categories, six different allocation principles and using the method PB-LCIA. The red 
line indicates the boundary, which means that if the impact score is above the line, hence 
above 1, the boundary is exceeded and vice versa. The error bars indicate the combined 
uncertainty of the model as well as the range in allocation principles, where the latter 
dominate the uncertainty. The results are shown on a logarithmic scale. For Land system 
change - global the uncertainty range is only expressed from the mean to the upper limit of 
the confidence interval (97.5%) as the lower limit (2.5%) reaches a negative value, which 
can be misleading if presented on a logarithmic scale. 
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, 
IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
(CC – Climate change) 
 
The results obtained using the method CCnorm show that the allocated share of carrying 
capacity is definitely exceeded for all Mini CO2 houses in 1 out of 4 impact categories and 
possibly exceeded in 3 out of 4 impact categories considered in our study (see Figure 3). As 
found, AD House has the greatest impact potential and exceeds the assigned share of the 
carrying capacity by averagely 700% across allocation principles for Climate change, 
whereas Q House exceeds the assigned share of carrying capacity by an average of 400% 
across allocation principles for Climate change. As for the impact category Marine 
eutrophication, Figure 3 shows that for most allocation principles the Mini CO2 Houses are 
likely to stay within the assigned share of carrying capacity. However, this depends on the 
uncertainty underlying in the model and on variation inherent in the allocation principles. 
Finally, present for both the impact category Land use and Water resource depletion is that 
the allocation principle determines whether or not the houses are within the assigned 
boundaries.  
==PAGE:22==
 
17 
The impact score relative to the allocated share of the Planetary Boundaries for all Mini CO2 
Houses and all examined impact categories using the PB-LCIA method are presented in 
Figure 4. AD House exceeds the assigned share of the Planetary Boundaries by an average of 
1900% across allocation principles for Climate change - energy imbalance. The house with 
the lowest potential impact, Q House, exceeds the boundaries by averagely 1200% across 
allocation principles for Climate change - energy imbalance, which is a considerable 
exceedance. Furthermore, the occupied SoSOS for the impact category Climate change - 
CO2 concentration is found to be somewhat similar to the occupied SoSOS for Climate 
change - energy imbalance. For the impact category Biogeochemical flows - N, the houses 
exceed the assigned share of the Planetary Boundaries, however for the impact category 
Land-system change - global, all houses is found to stay within the assigned share of the 
Planetary Boundaries irrespective of the uncertainty of the model and of the allocation 
principles. For the final impact category Freshwater use - global, it is found that the occupied 
SoSOS is highly dependent on the allocation principles and the uncertainty of the model. 
 
Since the presented results of the Base Scenario show that all houses exceed the assigned 
share of the carrying capacity and Planetary Boundary in most impact categories, it is 
relevant to investigate Scenario 6, which is the best case scenario. Thus, it is possible to state 
whether or not the impact potential of the houses in future scenarios will be low enough to be 
considered absolute sustainable. These results are presented in Figures 5 and 6. The results 
obtained for all scenarios can be seen in Supporting Information V and in Supporting 
Information I, Section III.I an analysis of how the houses perform across all scenarios can be 
found.  
 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
18 
 
Figure 5 - Impact potential relative to the allocated SoSOS for Scenario 6 for four impact 
categories, six different allocation principles and using the method CCnorm. The red line 
indicates the boundary, which means that if the impact score is above the line, hence above 1, 
the boundary is exceeded and vice versa. The error bars indicate the combined uncertainty of 
the model as well as the range in allocation principles, where the latter dominate the 
uncertainty. The results are shown on a logarithmic scale. For Water resource depletion the 
uncertainty range is only expressed from the mean to the upper limit of the confidence 
interval (97.5%) as the lower limit (2.5%) reaches a negative value, which can be misleading 
if presented on a logarithmic scale. 
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, 
IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
19 
 
Figure 6 - Impact potential relative to the allocated SoSOS for scenario 6 for five impact 
categories, six different allocation principles and using the method PB-LCIA.  
The red line indicates the boundary, which means that if the impact score is above the line, 
hence above 1, the boundary is exceeded and vice versa. The error bars indicate the 
combined uncertainty of the model as well as the range in allocation principles, where the 
latter dominate the uncertainty. The results are shown on a logarithmic scale. For Land 
system change - global the uncertainty range is only expressed from the mean to the upper 
limit of the confidence interval (97.5%) as the lower limit (2.5%) reaches a negative value, 
which can be misleading if presented on a logarithmic scale. 
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, 
IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
(CC – Climate change) 
 
In general, the results for Scenario 6 obtained using the method CCnorm show that the Mini 
CO2 Houses exceed the assigned share of the carrying capacity, however contrary to the Base 
Scenario the conclusion depends highly on the uncertainty in the model and the choice of 
allocation principle. For the impact category Climate change, Ref House is found to be the 
house with the highest impact score exceeding the assigned share by averagely 250% across 
allocation principles, whereas IMF House is found to have the lowest impact score and thus 
the house that comes closest to staying within the assigned share of the carrying capacity by 
an average of 150% across allocation principles. As for the remaining impact categories, 
whether or not the houses impact potential stay within the assigned share of the carrying 
capacity depends on the uncertainty of the model and allocation principles.  
 
The impact potentials for Scenario 6 obtained using the method PB-LCIA, is found to exceed 
the assigned share of the Planetary Boundaries for all houses in many of the impact 
categories. Again the conclusion is found to be highly dependent on the embedded 
==PAGE:25==
 
20 
uncertainty of the model and of the allocation principles. For Climate change - energy 
imbalance and CO2 concentration, IMF House is the house, which exceeds the assigned 
share of the Planetary Boundaries the most by averagely 800% across allocation principles. 
For the same impact categories, the house closest to stay within the assigned share of the 
Planetary Boundaries is UP House with an average of 550% across allocation principles. For 
the impact category Biogeochemical flows - N and Freshwater use - global, it is found that all 
Mini CO2 Houses exceed the assigned share to some degree depending on the embedded 
uncertainty. Contrary, for the impact category Land-system change - global, all houses is 
found to stay within the assigned share of the Planetary Boundaries. 
 
Although it was not the goal of this assignment to compare the results obtained from the two 
methods, it is relevant to consider how the magnitude of the impact potentials rank between 
the methods. As described in Supporting Information I, Section IV.I a comparison between 
the methods can be justified if the focus of protection can be compared. Therefore, Table 4 
shows the range in which the occupied SoSOS can be found for the houses for impact 
categories related to climate change. It can be seen that for the method PB-LCIA up to 
5500% of the SoSOS is occupied if AD House is considered and allocation principle 1 is 
applied, while for the method CCnorm only up to 2150% of the SoSOS is occupied if AD 
House is considered and allocation principle 1 is applied.  
 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
21 
 
Table 4 – The range in which the occupied SoSOS can be found for the houses considering 
impact categories related to climate change for both PB-LCIA and CCnorm. It should be noted 
that the inherent uncertainties of the model is not included in the reported values. 
(a) Minimum: Innovative Maintenance-free House, Scenario 6, allocation principle 6. 
Maximum: Adaptable House, Base Scenario, allocation principle 1.  
(b) Minimum: Upcycle House, Scenario 6, allocation principle 6. Maximum: Adaptable 
House, Base Scenario, allocation principle 1.  
 
Climate change 
Occupied SoSOS, CCnorm 
107-2148% (a) 
 
 
Climate change - energy 
imbalance 
Climate change - CO2 
concentration 
Occupied SoSOS, PB-LCIA 
276-5433% (b) 
282-5592% (b) 
 
Figure 7 presents an enlarged version of Figure 3 and 4 marking the different allocation 
principles allowing for better distinguishing between the allocation principles. 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
22 
 
 
 
Figure 7 - A: Enlarged version of Figure 3 for the impact category Climate change for the 
Base Scenario using CCnorm illustrating the difference in allocation principles. B: Enlarged 
version of Figure 4 for the impact category Climate change - energy imbalance for the Base 
Scenario using PB-LCIA illustrating the difference in allocation principles.  
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, 
IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
(CC – energy imbalance - Climate change – energy imbalance) 
 
Figure 7 show that allocation principle 1 allocate a 60% smaller SoSOS relative to allocation 
principle 2. Furthermore, it is found that allocation principle 2 and 4 provide similar results 
and likewise for allocation principle 3, 5 and 6. The difference between the allocation 
principle that allocate the lowest SoSOS (allocation principle 1) and the allocation principle, 
which allocate the greatest SoSOS (allocation principle 6), is found to be approx. 84%. 
Therefore, the choice of allocation principle is highly important and affects the results 
considerably.  
 
4 DISCUSSION  
4.1 Truly sustainable? 
For neither PB-LCIA nor CCnorm any house can be considered absolute sustainable in the 
Base Scenario, irrespective of which allocation principle is applied. In the Base Scenario, 
representing current conditions, no houses are within the SoSOS for impact categories related 
to climate change, indicating that even the best attempts at designing single family stand-
==PAGE:28==
 
23 
alone dwellings are insufficient. If Scenario 6 is considered, and CCnorm is applied as LCIA-
method it is possible that IMF House could be within the SoSOS for all impact categories and 
thereby absolute sustainable. However, this is only the case if the uncertainty of the model is 
taken into account. Contrarily, for PB-LCIA none of the houses can be considered absolute 
sustainable in Scenario 6, irrespective of the allocation principle and uncertainty of the 
model, thus calling for improvements in other parts of the modelled system. It should be 
noted that if a house is not within the SoSOS for all impact categories, it cannot be 
considered absolute sustainable, as the transgression of one Earth System process might push 
other Earth System processes towards reaching the threshold (Steffen et al., 2015). 
 
The results obtained in this study indicate that the architectural design of the houses has little 
impact on the houses’ ability to stay within the allocated SoSOS. From Section 3 it is evident 
that for the majority of the considered impact categories the houses either all stay within the 
SoSOS or all exceed the assigned share. Overall, consistency between the houses is seen for 
the impact categories Climate change and Land use for CCnorm and Climate change - energy 
imbalance, Climate change - CO2 concentration, Biogeochemical flows - N, and Land system 
change - global for PB-LCIA. In contrast, the impact categories Water resource depletion 
and Marine eutrophication for CCnorm and Freshwater use - global for PB-LCIA show a 
more varied performance of the houses.  
 
That being said, it is possible that the design of the houses can influence the environmental 
performance – hence there could be a direct link between environmental sustainability of 
buildings and building design. In this study it was found that UP House and Q House was 
consistently among the best performing houses. A common trait of the two houses is their 
size, UP House being the smallest (129 m2) and Q House only slightly larger (138 m2). 
Generally, it appears that the smallest houses (UP, Q and TMF) perform better than the larger 
houses (AD, IMF and Ref). In line with this, it was found that AD House, which is 
considerably larger than the other houses (160 m2), performs dramatically worse than e.g. UP 
House and Q House which is in line with the findings by Brejnrod et al. (2017) (for further 
details see Supporting Information I, Section IV.IV). Additionally, the superior performance 
of UP House and Q House indicate that choice of building components and operational 
energy- and water consumption has a notable influence on the environmental performance. 
The use of upcycled and recycled building components in UP House contribute to minimising 
both consumption of resources and energy for processing of raw materials. Similarly, the 
==PAGE:29==
 
24 
design of Q House, which encourages a reduced consumption of both energy and water 
during use, dramatically improves its environmental performance. This is supported by the 
sensitivity analysis, which found that the model was highly sensitive to changes of both 
parameters (for more details on the results of the sensitivity and uncertainty analysis, see 
Supporting Information I, Section III.IV). Furthermore, the results indicate that the structural 
system of wood in IMF House has a positive effect in climate change-related impact 
categories when impact assessment is done with ILCD 2011.  
 
4.2 Influence of methodology  
From the results presented in Section 3 it is evident that the choice of allocation principle has 
crucial influence on how large a SoSOS is occupied by the houses. Allocation principle 6 (i.e. 
utilitarian based by considering final consumption expenditure) allocate a greater SoSOS to 
the houses than the remaining allocation principles and thus more houses stay within the 
boundaries when this allocation principle is applied. This finding is in line with what has 
previously been established about the importance of the choice of allocation principle by both 
Sandin et al. (2015) and Ryberg et al. (2018). For the impact categories Land use, Water 
resource depletion, and Freshwater use - global, the choice of allocation principle determines 
whether or not a house is within the SoSOS. The definition of six varying allocation 
principles is an attempt at highlighting the uncertainty linked to the choice of allocation 
principle, but also an approach to a question without an answer - i.e. who has the right to 
impact the environment how much? It is a question, which cannot be answered without an 
ever-present bias depending on who replies.  
 
Sandin et al. (2015) considers the question as a matter of ethics, and attempts to answer the 
question by applying four common ethical principles. As has previously been argued by 
Brejnrod et al. (2017) there is no truly objective way to allocate the SOS to a building or any 
other service, as the allocation method always will be seen as more or less fair depending on 
the eyes of the beholder. While egalitarian approaches may seem fair given the implied 
equality of all individuals, it is not given that all people require the same share size of 
”ecological resource” to experience an equal degree of welfare (Ryberg, Owsianiak and 
Hauschild, 2018). As argued by Ryberg et al. (2018) people living in colder regions may 
require a larger SoSOS relative to people living in warmer regions because they would need 
energy for heating to experience the same degree of wellbeing. On the other hand, when 
considering allocation principles based on acquired rights there will be bias placed towards 
==PAGE:30==
 
25 
existing activities which currently has a high contribution to impacts, while activities that 
have a low contribution to impacts are assigned a smaller share (Ryberg, Owsianiak and 
Hauschild, 2018). 
 
Given the underlying theory of the two methods presented in Section 2.1, it was expected that 
when applying the PB-LCIA methodology a (relatively) larger SoSOS would be occupied by 
the houses, as the Planetary Boundaries are defined as “below” the carrying capacity of our 
planet (see Figure 1). In Section 3 the occupied SoSOS for impact categories related to 
climate change are considered for both methods and it can be seen that, as expected, the 
occupied SoSOS is substantially greater for the results obtained with PB-LCIA (see Table 4).  
However, as previously mentioned it is not possible to directly compare the results obtained 
with the two methods, due to a difference in Areas of Protection for the two methods 
(Ryberg, 2018). ILCD 2011 is concerned with the three Areas of Protection human health, 
natural environment and natural resources, whereas PB-LCIA only considers one - the 
Holocene-state of the Earth system in accordance with the Planetary Boundary framework 
(Ryberg et al., 2016).  
 
However, certain impact categories in PB-LCIA can - with some caution - be compared to 
those of ILCD 2011. Ryberg et al. (2018)(Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018) found 
that both Climate change - energy imbalance and Climate change - CO2 concentration (PB-
LCIA) had high coefficients of correlation with the impact category Climate change (ILCD 
2011). Others should preferably not be compared such as Land-system change - global (PB-
LCIA) and Land use (ILCD 2011) where low coefficients of correlation was found (Ryberg, 
Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). For further details regarding the correlation of impact 
categories, see Supporting Information I, Section IV.I.  
 
4.3 Limitations and recommendations 
One of the most relevant limitations in the modelling of the studied systems is the service life 
of the Mini CO2 Houses. Assuming a realistic service life for building components as well as 
the entire building was one of the main challenges when the inventories were compiled. It 
was decided to strive for consistency in the modelling and therefore all assumptions were 
based on theoretical estimates of service life made by the Danish Building Research Institute 
(Aagaard et al., 2013). The uncertainty of this parameter is indisputable but as any estimation 
could be just as true as the next, it was found to be an acceptable assumption. Additionally, 
==PAGE:31==
 
26 
this parameter is not only related to a high level of uncertainty, it will similarly be subject to a 
high degree of variability. Based on this it should be considered if a more accurate approach 
to modelling the service life of the building could be adopted. One possible alternative 
approach is a study by Østergaard et al. (2018), where the service life of buildings is 
determined by the choice of cladding materials, location and use type. Applying this 
approach would have meant modelling an individually estimated service life of each Mini 
CO2 House. This could potentially have made the modelled systems a more accurate 
representation of reality, but in this study it was decided to focus on consistency in the 
modelling approach and therefore it seemed more appropriate to model the service life equal 
for all houses. For a more details on the assumed service life of the Mini CO2 Houses see 
Supporting Information I, Section IV.III. Generally, enabling the comparison between the 
Mini CO2 Houses was a main source of assumptions in this study. In Supporting Information 
I, Section IV.II this matter is discussed further.   
 
As described in previous Sections it is clear that the choice of allocation principle has a 
determining effect on how much of the SoSOS is occupied. This is a challenge, as it is 
inherently a matter of ethics and therefore problematic to apply when an objective conclusion 
is strived for. Furthermore, the allocation principles are continuously outdated as the world 
population is steadily growing, thereby constantly decreasing the SoSOS available to each 
individual. According to the UN, the world population will exceed 11 billion in 2100 (United 
Nations and Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division, 2017), which 
will decrease the size of allocation principle 1, 2 and 3 drastically, thus inspiring the need for 
even more ambitious strategies. 
 
Even though Section 4.2 found that the conclusions are overall robust against the choice of 
LCIA method, it is relevant to consider if the two applied methodologies are really 
comparable. One inherent difference is that PB-LCIA and CCnorm has different points of 
departure in their framework definition. In CCnorm carrying capacities are adapted as 
normalisation factors to comply with the impact categories of ILCD 2011, whereas in PB-
LCIA characterisation factors are adapted to fit with the Planetary Boundaries. However, this 
topic has not been thoroughly investigated yet and possibly more work is required in this 
area.  
 
==PAGE:32==
 
27 
It was found that the largest reduction in environmental impact compared to the Base 
Scenario was achieved in Scenario 1 and Scenario 3, i.e. avoiding an expansion of the house, 
and lowering the energy consumption by implementing smart technologies and introducing 
positive nudging to alter the residents’ behaviour. Thus, it can be argued that the most 
important factors towards achieving absolute sustainability are floor area per person and 
energy consumption per square meter. This is in line with the findings of similar studies 
(Ramesh, Prakash and Shukla, 2010; Sharma et al., 2011; Brejnrod et al., 2017).  
 
It is however important to note that from the results obtained in this study, achieving absolute 
sustainability for single family stand-alone dwellings still appear to be out of reach if current 
practices are not changed. The results call for drastic action in areas such as composition of 
energy grid mix, choice of materials, disposal routes and way of living. It was found that all 
parameters considered in this study, which covers a wide range of aspects, had a notably 
positive influence on the results, albeit some less than others. It is however clear that 
improving in only one area will very likely not be sufficient to achieve absolute 
sustainability. The need for improvement should not only be considered by architects and 
designers, but with equal urgency by politicians, industry stakeholder and consumers alike. It 
is essential that achieving absolute sustainability is considered a common goal for both 
industrial stakeholders, policy makers as well as private individuals/consumers.   
 
5 CONCLUSION 
This study has presented an absolute sustainability assessment of six single family stand-
alone dwellings using two methodologies to quantify absolute sustainability. It is found that 
neither of the assessed houses can be considered within the boundaries of absolute 
sustainability. AD House, i.e. flexible area, is found to be the worst performing house across 
all impact categories, scenarios and allocation principles, whereas Q and UP House, i.e. 
reduced energy consumption and recycling and reuse of materials respectively, is found to be 
the best. However, when accounting for uncertainty of the LCI, there is not a markedly 
difference in the impact potential for Q and UP house. Thus, it is difficult to conclude which 
sustainability strategy of the two that has the greatest potential to reach absolute 
sustainability. Furthermore, the conclusions are found to be overall independent of the 
assessment method applied, however highly dependent on the choice of allocation principle. 
Conclusively, the current approach to sustainable building design of single family stand-alone 
dwellings is not found to be ambitious enough to reach absolute sustainability and in order to 
==PAGE:33==
 
28 
be absolute sustainable according to the applied absolute environmental sustainability 
assessment methods, all sustainability influencing factors should improve considerably. 
 
6 REFERENCES 
Aagaard, N.-J. et al. (2013) Levetider af bygningsdele ved vurdering af bæredygtighed og 
totaløkonomi, 1. doi: 10.1016/j.solmat.2010.06.021. 
Backhaus, J. et al. (2011) Sustainable lifestyles: Today’s facts & tomorrow’s trends. 
Available at: http://www.sustainable-
lifestyles.eu/fileadmin/images/content/D1.1_Baseline_Report.pdf. 
Bjørn, A. et al. (2014) ‘Chemical footprint method for improved communication of 
freshwater ecotoxicity impacts in the context of ecological limits’, Environmental Science 
and Technology, 48(22), pp. 13253–13262. doi: 10.1021/es503797d. 
Bjørn, A. et al. (2018) ‘Chapter 2: Main Characteristics of LCA’, in Life Cycle Assessment, 
Theory and Practice. 
Bjørn, A. and Hauschild, M. Z. (2015) ‘Introducing carrying capacity-based normalisation in 
LCA: framework and development of references at midpoint level’, International Journal of 
Life Cycle Assessment, 20(7), pp. 1005–1018. doi: 10.1007/s11367-015-0899-2. 
Brejnrod, K. N. et al. (2017) ‘The absolute environmental performance of buildings’, 
Building and Environment. Elsevier Ltd, 119, pp. 87–98. doi: 
10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.04.003. 
Cabeza, L. F. et al. (2014) ‘Life cycle assessment (LCA) and life cycle energy analysis 
(LCEA) of buildings and the building sector: A review’, Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews. Elsevier, 29, pp. 394–416. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2013.08.037. 
Dansk Standard (2006) ISO 14044: Miljøledelse - Livscyklusvurdering - Principper og 
struktur. Available at: https://webshop.ds.dk/da-dk/standard/ds-en-iso-140402006 (Accessed: 
22 January 2019). 
Dansk Standard (2008) ISO 14040: Miljøledelse - Livscyklusvurdering - Krav og vejledning. 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
29 
Dansk Standard (2012) DS/EN 15978: Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og anlæg – 
Vurdering af bygningers miljømæssige kvalitet – Beregningsmetode. 
Desmit, X. et al. (2018) ‘Reducing marine eutrophication may require a paradigmatic 
change’, Science of the Total Environment. The Authors, 635, pp. 1444–1466. doi: 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.181. 
Ecoinvent (2019) Ecoinvent version 3. Available at: https://www.ecoinvent.org/ (Accessed: 
11 January 2019). 
Hauschild, M., Wenzel, H. and Alting, L. (1998) Environmental assessment of products, 
Volume 2: Scientific Background. Chapman & Hall. Available at: 
https://www.springer.com/us/book/9780412808104 (Accessed: 19 December 2018). 
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K. and Olsen, S. I. (2018) Life Cycle Assessment, Theory 
and Practice. 
IPCC et al. (2014) Climate change 2014: Synthesis Report. doi: 
10.1017/CBO9781107415324. 
Østergaard, N. et al. (2018) ‘Data Driven Quantification of the Temporal Scope of Building 
LCAs’, Procedia CIRP. Elsevier B.V., 69(May), pp. 224–229. doi: 
10.1016/j.procir.2017.11.057. 
Owsianiak, M. et al. (2018) ‘Chapter 39: Illustrative Case Study: Life Cycle Assessment of 
Four Window Alternatives’, in Life Cycle Assessment, Theory and Practice. 
PRé (2019) SimaPro, the world’s leading sustainability software. Available at: 
https://www.pre-sustainability.com/sustainability-consulting/sustainable-practices/custom-
sustainability-software (Accessed: 11 January 2019). 
Ramesh, T., Prakash, R. and Shukla, K. (2010) ‘Life cycle energy analysis of buildings: an 
overview’, Energy and Buildings. 
Rasmussen, F. N. and Birgisdóttir, H. (2013) Livscyklusvurdering af MiniCO2-husene i 
Nyborg. 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
30 
Realdania Byg and Kleis, B. (2013a) Det Foranderlige Hus - Bygget til at bygge om. 
Available at: https://www.realdaniabyogbygklubben.dk/media/202375/dfh_web.pdf 
(Accessed: 27 August 2018). 
Realdania Byg and Kleis, B. (2013b) Upcycle House - genbrug fra inderst til yderst. 
Available at: 
https://www.realdaniabyogbygklubben.dk/media/188277/upcycle_huset_realdania_byg_web
__3_.pdf (Accessed: 27 August 2018). 
Realdania Byg and Kleis, B. (2014a) Det Vedligeholdelsesfrie Hus - fornyelse fortolker 
fortiden. Available at: 
https://www.realdaniabyogbygklubben.dk/media/232518/det_vedligeholdelsesfri_hus__forny
else.pdf (Accessed: 27 August 2018). 
Realdania Byg and Kleis, B. (2014b) Kvotehuset - sætter beboerne i spil. Available at: 
https://www.realdaniabyogbygklubben.dk/media/232524/kvotehuset.pdf (Accessed: 27 
August 2018). 
Realdania Byg and Leth & Gori (2014) De Vedligeholdelsesfri Huse - Traditionen, Det 
murede hus, evaluering af forsøgsprojekt. 
Rockström, J. et al. (2009) ‘Planetary Boundaries: Exploring the safe operating space for 
humanity’, Uma ética para quantos?, XXXIII(2), pp. 81–87. doi: 10.1007/s13398-014-0173-
7.2. 
Ryberg, M. et al. (2016) ‘Challenges in implementing a Planetary Boundaries based Life-
Cycle Impact Assessment methodology’, Journal of Cleaner Production. APA, 139, pp. 450–
459. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.08.074. 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Richardson, K., et al. (2018) ‘Development of a life-cycle 
impact assessment methodology linked to the Planetary Boundaries framework’, Ecological 
Indicators, 88(December), pp. 250–262. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.12.065. 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Clavreul, J., et al. (2018) ‘How to bring absolute 
sustainability into decision-making: An industry case study using a Planetary Boundary-
based methodology’, Science of The Total Environment. Elsevier, 634, pp. 1406–1416. doi: 
10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2018.04.075. 
==PAGE:36==
 
31 
Ryberg, M. W. (2018) ‘Putting life-cycle indicators on an absolute scale – Integrating 
Planetary Boundaries into Life- Cycle Assessment’, (May). 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M. and Hauschild, M. Z. (2018) ‘Review of principles for 
assigning shares of the safe operating space to anthropogenic activities for absolute 
sustainability assessments in an LCA-context’. 
Sala, S. et al. (2016) Global environmental impacts and planetary boundaries in LCA. doi: 
10.2788/64552. 
Sandin, G., Peters, G. M. and Svanström, M. (2015) ‘Using the planetary boundaries 
framework for setting impact-reduction targets in LCA contexts’, International Journal of 
Life Cycle Assessment, 20(12), pp. 1684–1700. doi: 10.1007/s11367-015-0984-6. 
Sharma, A. et al. (2011) ‘Life cycle assessment of buildings: a review’. 
Steffen, W. et al. (2004) Global Change and the Earth System. Available at: 
http://www.igbp.net/download/18.56b5e28e137d8d8c09380001694/1376383141875/Springe
rIGBPSynthesisSteffenetal2004_web.pdf (Accessed: 19 December 2018). 
Steffen, W. et al. (2015) ‘Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing 
planet’, Science, 348(6240), p. 1217–c. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa9629. 
Tuomisto, H. L. et al. (2012) ‘Exploring a safe operating approach to weighting in life cycle 
impact assessment - A case study of organic, conventional and integrated farming systems’, 
Journal of Cleaner Production. Elsevier Ltd, 37, pp. 147–153. doi: 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.06.025. 
United Nations and Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division (2017) 
World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables. 
Available at: https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/publications/files/wpp2017_keyfindings.pdf 
(Accessed: 20 December 2018). 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
1 
Assessment of absolute sustainability in the built environment 
 
 
Supporting Information I 
 
 
Pernille Krogh Ohms1 & Camilla Marlene Ernst Andersen1 
1Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
25th of January 2019 
 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
2 
Table of Content 
 
I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
p. 3 
II 
Methods and materials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
p. 4 
II.I 
Assessing absolute environmental sustainability 
 
 
 
p. 4 
II.II 
The Planetary Boundaries  
  
 
 
 
 
 
p. 5 
II.III 
Carrying capacity-based normalisation factors 
 
 
 
p. 6 
II.IV Basis for calculating the share of safe operating space 
 
 
p. 6 
II.V 
Mini CO2 House project 
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 11 
II.VI Defining the scenarios 
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 15 
II.VII Basis for the LCAs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 17 
II.VII.I Scope definition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 17 
II.VII.II Life Cycle Inventory  
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 20 
II.VII.III Life Cycle Impact Assessment 
 
 
 
 
          p. 30 
III 
Results  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 32 
III.I 
Comparison of results across scenarios 
 
 
 
          p. 32 
III.II 
Hot spot analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 36 
III.III CC and PB available to the buildings  
 
 
 
          p. 40 
III.IV Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis  
 
 
 
          p. 42 
IV 
Discussion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 55 
IV.I 
Comparing the methods 
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 55 
IV.II Enabling the comparison between the houses 
 
 
          p. 56 
IV.III Service life of the building and building materials   
 
          p. 57 
IV.IV Validating the results   
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 58 
V 
References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          p. 60 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
3 
I 
Introduction 
This document is a continuation of the study on assessing the level of absolute sustainability 
of six single family stand-alone dwellings using the two methods carrying capacity-based 
normalisation factors (CCnorm) and Planetary Boundary-based Life Cycle Impact Assessment 
(PB-LCIA).  
 
Supporting Information I elaborates the underlying methodology and methodological 
choices applied in the study thereby facilitating transparency of the study. Furthermore, 
results, not possible to include in the Article due to restrictions in length, are presented, 
analysed and discussed, hence including aspects of the study not covered in the Article.  
 
Supporting Information II is a preliminary study for a project course at the Technical 
University of Denmark conducted prior to this study, presented in its unaltered form - i.e. as 
it was when it was originally handed in.  
 
In addition to the Article, Supporting Information I and Supporting Information II, three other 
documents (Supporting Information III, IV, V) containing background information and 
further details have been produced. These include lists of assumptions (Supporting 
Information III), the life cycle inventory for all houses (Supporting Information IV) and the 
results for all houses, scenarios, methods, impact categories and allocation principles 
(Supporting Information V). Supporting Information IV and V are attached as Excel sheets.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
4 
II 
Methods and materials 
II.I 
Assessing absolute environmental sustainability 
Assessing absolute environmental sustainability requires two definitions; control variables 
and thresholds (Bjørn et al., 2016). Bjørn et al. (2016) define a control variable as “a 
numerical indicator of the structure and/or functioning of a natural system” and a threshold 
as “the maximum value of a control variable a natural system can withstand without 
experiencing negative changes in structure and/or functioning that are difficult or impossible 
to revert”. In both the Planetary Boundary and carrying capacity-framework control variables 
have been defined for the relevant Earth System processes. In the Planetary Boundary-
framework control variables are expressed through drivers, pressures, states, and impacts at 
both inventory, midpoint indicator, and endpoint indicator level. In Rockström et al. (2009) 
thresholds are defined as non-linear transitions in the functioning of coupled human-
environmental systems. A global threshold cannot be defined for all Earth System processes. 
In some cases, e.g. land-use change, a decline of key ecological functions may cause 
collapses in the system thereby generating feedbacks triggering or increasing the likelihood 
of crossing a global threshold in other processes (Rockström, W. Steffen, et al., 2009).  
  
In traditional LCAs environmental systems are represented as a linear function, where 
characterisation factors express change in impact per change in elementary flow (Ryberg, 
2018). However, when performing absolute sustainability assessments, the goal is to express 
absolute impact on the environment, where systems rarely exhibit a linear response function 
(Ryberg, 2018). Feedback mechanisms, both positive and negative, may lead to non-linear 
changes in the state of the environment and may push Earth Systems into alternative stable 
states (Scheffer and Carpenter, 2003; Ryberg, 2018).The critical transition from one stability 
domain to another when a threshold is crossed reflects an erosion of resilience of the Earth 
Systems (Lenton et al., 2008; Rockström, W. Steffen, et al., 2009). 
  
Boundaries – such as the Planetary Boundaries – differ from thresholds. They are values of 
the control variable determined by “us” defined at a distance from the threshold. This 
distance is defined by the willingness of the global community to accept a degree of risk, e.g. 
how close to a zone of uncertainty around a dangerous level or threshold do we dare go, 
and/or for how long can we temporarily transgress a boundary before a threshold is crossed ( 
(Rockström, W. Steffen, et al., 2009). The distance between the defined boundary and the 
actual threshold leaves room for a degree of uncertainty in the position of the threshold, but 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
5 
furthermore, it allows for timely action from society by the appearance of early warning signs 
(Rockström, W. Steffen, et al., 2009). 
 
II.II 
The Planetary Boundaries  
To assess absolute environmental sustainability it is necessary to define the size of the 
”room” below the boundary – i.e. the safe operating space (SOS). Ryberg et al. (2018) has 
defined the size of the SOS available for human activities as the value of the Planetary 
Boundary minus the ’natural background level’. The natural background level is the value of 
the control variable before human activities began affecting the Earth System process. Table 
1 shows the Planetary Boundaries (Rockström, W. Steffen, et al., 2009), the natural 
background level (Steffen et al., 2015) and available SOS (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Clavreul, et 
al., 2018). 
 
Table 1 - The full safe operating space estimated by Ryberg et al. (2018) from the Planetary 
Boundaries values and Natural background level (Steffen et al., 2015). The full safe 
operating space is used to calculate the available share of safe operating space for the 
houses.  
aRockström, W. Steffen, et al., 2009 
bSteffen et al., 2015 
cRyberg, Owsianiak, Clavreul, et al., 2018 
Impact category 
Unit 
Planetary 
Boundarya 
Natural 
background levelb 
Full safe 
operating spacec 
Climate change - energy imbalance 
Wm-2 
1 
0 
1 
Climate change - CO2 concentration 
ppm CO2 
350 
278 
72 
Stratospheric ozone depletion 
DU 
275 
290 
15 
Ocean acidification 
mol 
2.75 
3.44 
0.69 
Biogeochemical flows - P, regional 
Tg P yr-1 
26.2 
20 
6.2 
Biogeochemical flows - N, global 
Tg N yr-1 
62 
0 
62 
Land-system change - Global 
% 
75 
100 
25 
Land-system change - Boreal 
% 
85 
100 
15 
Land-system change - Tropic 
% 
85 
100 
15 
Land-system change - Temperate 
% 
50 
100 
50 
Freshwater use - Global 
km3 yr-1 
4000 
0 
4000 
Freshwater use - Basin dry 
- 
1 
0 
1 
Freshwater use - Basin semidry 
- 
1 
0 
1 
Freshwater use - Basin humid 
- 
1 
0 
1 
Atmospheric aerosol loading 
- 
0 
0.14 
0.11 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
6 
II.III Carrying capacity-based normalisation factors 
The set of normalisation factors proposed by Bjørn and Hauschild (2015) express a person’s 
annual share of the carrying capacity. As described in the Article, these normalisation factors 
are not compliant with those of ILCD 2011 Midpoint+ (ILCD 2011), and has therefore been 
translated to be compliant with ILCD 2011 impact categories (Sala et al., 2016). Table 2 
shows the normalisation factors in their translated form.  
 
Table 2 - Global normalisation factors compliant with ILCD 2011 impact categories 
translated by Sala et al. (2016).  
Impact category 
Unit 
ILCD compliant  
normalisation factora 
Climate change 
kg CO2 eq 
6.79E+12 
Ozone depletion 
kg CFC-11 eq 
5.38E+08 
Photochemical ozone formation 
kg NMVOC eq 
2.62E+10 
Acidification 
molc H+ eq 
9.99E+11 
Terrestrial eutrophication  
molc N eq 
6.12E+12 
Freshwater eutrophication 
kg P eq 
5.79E+09 
Marine eutrophication 
kg N eq 
2.00E+11 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
CTUe 
1.31E+14 
Land use 
kg C deficit 
1.37E+14 
Water resource depletion 
m3 water eq 
6.85E+11 
 
II.IV Basis for calculating the share of safe operating space 
The first step of downscaling the Planetary Boundaries is to identify the competing activities 
as determined by Bjørn et al. (2016) and next be able to determine the share of safe operating 
space (SoSOS) available to one dwelling. Ryberg (2018) identified the frequency with which 
different allocation principles (e.g. utilitarian, egalitarian and acquired rights-based) have 
previously been applied. It is clear that an egalitarian approach is a common way of sharing 
the SOS among competing activities (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Clavreul, et al., 2018). 
Furthermore, the review by Ryberg (2018) of studies, where a sharing of the SOS is done, 
finds that in country-scale studies it is common to apply a single stand-alone allocation 
principle, while a combination of two allocation principles is more common in sector and 
company scale studies (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Clavreul, et al., 2018). 
 
As described in the Article, six different allocation principles are applied in this study to test 
the robustness of our conclusion. In three out of six combinations we used an egalitarian 
approach (equal per capita) as a way of allocating a share to one person out of the global 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
7 
population. We then combined each of these three with a different second approach, two of 
these were utilitarian based, and one was acquired rights-based. In the latter case, where a 
acquired rights-based approach was applied, we assigned the share by considering current 
energy consumption of households.  
 
The two utilitarian approaches differ slightly. We considered the second step identified by 
Bjørn et al. (2016), which is to quantify the relative value of the studied activity or in other 
words what is the perceived value relative to the identified competing activities. When the 
SOS had been allocated to a per capita measure, we needed to identify the value of a dwelling 
to a person. We therefore needed to identify two levels of relative value - the value of a 
household to a person and the value of the dwelling out of the value of the household. A 
common way of quantifying value is to consider final consumption expenditure (FCE), i.e. 
how we spend our money. However, as a variation of this approach we argue a different way 
of quantifying the value of a household; time spent. How we spend our time is another way of 
expressing how we value elements of our life. Therefore, we estimated the number of hours 
spent at home each year as way of allocating a person’s share to household level. 
 
For two allocation principles we calculated the share allocated to the household by applying 
an acquired rights-principle by considering current CO2 emissions globally and for an 
average Danish household. We combined this with two approaches for calculating the share 
of the household allocated to the dwelling, FCE and energy use. Finally, we applied a strictly 
utilitarian approach by allocating a share to a dwelling by calculating the FCE related to a 
dwelling out of the current global FCE. How the allocation share is calculated according to 
the six allocation principles are shown in Equation 1 to 6.  
 
1      !!! =
1
!"!!"#$%
∙
!"!!!
!"!!"#$%&
∙!"!!"#
!"!!!
∙! 
 
2     !!! =
1
!"!!"#$%
∙!!!"#
!!"#$
∙!"!!"#
!"!!!
∙! 
 
3     !!! =
1
!"!!"#$%
∙
!!!
!!"#$%&
∙!!"#
!!!
∙! 
 
4     !!! =
!"2!!
!"2!"#$%
∙!!"#
!!!
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
8 
 
5     !!! =
!"2!!
!"2!"#$%
∙!"#!"#
!"#!!
 
 
6     !!! = !"!!"#
!"!!"#$%
= !"!!!
!"#!"#$%
∙!"!!"#
!"!!!
 
 
Where Popworld is the world population and was at the time of this study 7.63 billion people 
(United Nations and Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division, 2017), 
FCEHH is the final consumption expenditure for a household (HH), FCEperson is the final 
consumption expenditure for a person, FCEdwe is the final consumption expenditure for a 
dwelling, Hhome is the hours spent at home, Hyear is the hours in a year, EHH is the energy 
consumption for an average household, Eperson is the energy consumption for one person, Edwe 
is the energy consumption for a dwelling, CO2HH is the CO2 emitted for an average 
household and CO2world is the CO2 emitted worldwide. For these calculations we applied a 
value of 3.61E13 kg CO2-eq for CO2world and 15,100 kg CO2-eq for CO2HH (The World 
Bank, 2014a, 2014b). Finally, N is defined as the number of persons in a household. The 
residents of the Mini CO2 Houses have for this study been assumed to be two adults, one 
teenager and one child. Since not all residents are adults, they cannot be assumed to have the 
same abilities in terms consumption and should therefore not be counted equally to adults. 
We adopt the scale defined by Frostell et al. (2015) and count the first adult as 1, the second 
adult as 0.6, the first child as 0.52, and the second child as 0.42 - a total of 2.54 residents or 
consumer units.  
 
Final Consumption Expenditure  
For allocation principle 1, 2, 5 and 6 we apply FCE as a way of quantifying the relative value 
of a dwelling. For allocation principle 1 we adopted the approach described by Brejnrod et al. 
(2017), where the share of the person-equivalent allocated to the household was found as the 
share of GDP that the final consumption expenditures of households represent (Brejnrod et 
al., 2017). Brejnrod et al. (2017) identified this share as 57.1% based on EU-28 conditions in 
2013. Next, the share of the household allocated to the dwelling service was based on the 
classification of individual consumption by purpose (COICOP). Brejnrod et al. (2017), 
identified two COICOP categories related to a building’s life cycle expenses; CP04 - 
Housing, water, electricity, gas, and other fuels and CP05 - Furnishings, household 
equipment, and routine household maintenance, and estimated the share of household 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
9 
consumption allocated to the dwelling service as 19.7%. For allocation principle 2 and 5 we 
only adopted the last step of the approach, i.e. allocating the share of the household to the 
dwelling. 
 
For allocation principle 6 we allocated the SOS solely by FCE. We found the share allocated 
to the dwelling by dividing the FCE of an average Danish household (Eurostat, 2018) by 
world FCE (The World Bank, 2016). Next, we applied the last step of the approach described 
by Brejnrod et al. (2017) to allocate a share of the household to the dwelling.  
 
Time spent 
For allocation principle 2 we applied time spent as an alternative way of quantifying value. 
The share of the person-equivalent allocated to the household was estimated by calculating a 
rough number of hours spent at home per year. We assumed that an average Dane works 7.4 
hours per day (37 hours per week), 252 days per year, and sleeps 8 hours per night. A year 
consists of 8760 hours, and based on the aforementioned assumptions we spend 1864.8 hours 
at work and 2920.0 hours in bed. This leaves 3975.2 awake hours where we are not at work. 
For the sake of simplicity we assumed that half of these are spent at home relaxing, cooking, 
and cleaning, while the other half is spent outside of home travelling, exercising, and 
socialising. Adding this half to the number of hours spent sleeping gives a total of 4907.6 
hours or 56% of the total number of hours in a year spent at home.  
 
Energy consumption 
For allocation principle 3 and 4 we applied energy consumption as a way of allocating the 
SOS according to an acquired rights-principle. Based on data from Eurostat (Eurostat, 2016) 
we found that the total energy consumption of Sweden is 2.06E12 MJ, and divided this by the 
current population of Sweden (9.99 million people) to calculate the energy consumption per 
capita, Eperson. We based the allocation on data from the web-based environmental feedback 
tool EcoRunner, which is designed for Swedish households aiming at increasing the 
awareness of consumers (Frostell et al., 2015). EcoRunner has been designed to fit with the 
COICOP categories and divides household consumption into four main purpose categories; 
home and living - MP1, household purchases - MP2, leisure - MP3, and transports - MP4. It 
was assumed that the sum of all MPs corresponds to the total household energy consumption, 
EHH. The tool calculates the energy use associated with the consumption of products or 
services at household level. Dividing the total household energy consumption, EHH, from 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
10 
EcoRunner with energy consumption per capita, Eperson, gives the share of the person 
equivalent allocated to the household. We calculated this to be 49.9%.  
 
When calculating the share of the household allocated to the dwelling service we found that 
only Main Purpose 1 was relevant when considering energy use during a building life cycle. 
We calculated the share of energy consumption associated with Main Purpose 1 out of the 
total household energy consumption, i.e. the sum of energy consumption associated with 
Main Purpose 1-4. We found this share to be 56.2%. However, not all subcategories within 
Main Purpose 1 were found related to the energy consumption of the dwelling service. Table 
3 shows the share of subcategories that the energy consumption of the dwelling service is 
related to.  
 
Table 3 - Related subcategories of Main Purpose 1 and the share that each subcategory 
constitutes of the dwelling service. It was estimated that building operation account for 
38.5% of total electricity use (Aggerholm and Grau, 2014).  
Category 
Comments 
% of Main Category 
Share of Subcategory 
Allocated to the Dwelling 
CP04 - Housing, Water, Electricity, Gas and Other Fuels 
0451 Electricity 
All electricity used 
21% 
38.5% 
0452 Gas 
All gas used 
0.1% 
100% 
0453 Liquid fuels 
Domestic heating and 
lighting oils 
1.0% 
100% 
0454 Solid fuels 
Coal, coke, firewood and 
the like 
0.6% 
100% 
Heat energy 
District heating, incl. Hire 
of meters etc. 
9.7% 
100% 
Total of category to dwelling 
19.5% 
 
 
As can be seen in Table 3 we found the share of the subcategories related to the dwelling 
service as 19.5% of Main Purpose 1. Based on this the share of household consumption 
allocated to the dwelling service can be calculated as 
 
7     !!"#
!!!
=
!!"!
!!!!!
∙!!"#
!!"!
= 56.2% ∙19.5% = 10.95% 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
11 
In Equation 8 to 13 we calculated the allocation share for each allocation principle: 
 
8     !!! =
1
7.63!09 !"#$%&$ ∙0.571 ∙0.197 ∙2.54 !"#$%"&!" = 1.49! −11 
 
9     !!! =
1
7.63!09 !"#$%&$ ∙0.56 ∙0.197 ∙2.54 !"#$%"&'# = 3.74! −11 
 
10     !!! =
1
7.63!09 !"#$%&$ ∙0.499 ∙0.1095 ∙2.54 !"#$%"&'# = 7.30! −11 
 
11     !!! = 1.5!04 !" !"2 !".
3.61!13 !" !"2 !". ∙0.1095 = 4.57! −11 
 
12     !!! = 1.5!04 !" !"2 !".
3.61!13 !" !"2 !". ∙0.197 = 8.22! −11 
 
13     !!! = 2.6!04 !"#
5.62!13 !"# ∙0.197 = 9.20! −11 
 
The share that each house occupies of the allocated SOS (i.e. the SoSOS) can be determined 
by Equation 1 and 2 in the Article. 
 
II.V 
Mini CO2 House project 
In 2011 the Danish association Realdania initiated a project with the goal of investigating 
how CO2 emissions linked to the built environment can be reduced. From 2013 to 2014 five 
different houses were built as a part of this project. The houses were all single family stand-
alone dwellings with floor areas between 129 and 160 m2. Each house seeks to reduce CO2 
emissions linked to buildings and the built environment in different ways. In the following 
paragraphs the concept and key characteristics of each house will be introduced. 
 
Upcycle House  
Upcycle House (UP House) focuses on how recycling by adding value can save resources and 
decrease CO2 emissions during construction of buildings. Upcycling means that a product 
categorised as waste is reused in an optimal and refined manner (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 
2013b). The structural system of UP House is two reclaimed shipping containers. The 
containers have been placed at a distance apart to make the floor plan of the house more or 
less a square. The foundation consists of helical piers made of reclaimed steel. An old ice rink 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
12 
has been cut up to form the footing of the building and at the same time conceals the 
insulation; shredded styrofoam waste. The benefit of using helical piers is the fact that once 
the building is ready to be demolished the piers can easily be moved and reused in another 
location, thereby minimising use of scarce resources and CO2 emissions during production of 
new steel. The walls are insulated with paper wool made from Danish newspapers. The 
external cladding is corrugated aluminium sheets made from recycled soda cans while the 
internal cladding is gypsum boards containing 25% recycled gypsum and glue-free OSB 
boards. Internal flooring is slices of bottle corks, glue free OSB boards made from wood 
waste from furniture production and reclaimed bricks (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2013b). 
 
The Innovative Maintenance-free House  
The Innovative Maintenance-free House (IMF House) excels in two areas; maintenance and 
service life. It differs from the Traditional Maintenance-free House (TMF House) by the 
choice of materials. TMF House (described in the next paragraph) is built from traditional 
materials that are known to have a long service life, while IMF House is built from new 
materials that are expected to have a long service life (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014b). IMF 
House has a theoretical service life of 150 years and a building envelope that does not require 
any maintenance over the first 50 years of use (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014b). IMF House 
consists of 18 prefabricated wood elements assembled at a factory and later moved by truck 
to the building site. The choice of prefabricated elements has given IMF House several 
qualities that help ensure its long service life. The wood elements were assembled in a dry 
setting, which helped avoid condensation that could damage the structural system over time. 
Furthermore, the setting allowed a high level of precision which has ensured a quality of the 
assembled elements that could not have been achieved had the elements been assembled on-
site (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014b). Once finished, the elements can be assembled to form 
the house over the course of a few days. Generally, the prefabricated elements of IMF House 
help minimise waste and save valuable time during the construction process (Realdania Byg 
and Kleis, 2014b). 
 
IMF House is supported by a pile foundation that not only ensures good ventilation around 
the wooden structure, but also helps bring down the CO2 emissions from concrete 
production, as less concrete is required for pile foundations than for solid slab foundations. 
To protect the vulnerable wooden construction the entire building is layered with tiles made 
from recycled glass. Glass has a theoretically infinite service life, and will almost certainly 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
13 
outlive the building by several hundred years (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014b). The glass 
cladding has therefore been designed to be disassembled and reused in another location once 
IMF House is demolished. The cladding is offset 50 millimetres from the structural frame, 
and similar to the pile foundation this space helps ensure good ventilation of the building 
envelope. Potentially vulnerable elements, e.g. doors and windows, have been extruded back 
into the facade which provides them with an overhang that shields from rain and wind 
(Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014b). IMF House has no drain pipes or roof gutters, as these 
often require maintenance and replacements. Instead, the house is surrounded by a 
stormwater trench with inlaid gabions, which ensures that the risk of water damages to the 
structural system is minimised (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014b). 
  
The interior of IMF House is also focused on minimising the need for maintenance. Very few 
surfaces require repainting over time and generally materials that gain patina have been 
chosen over materials that will show unflattering signs of wear and tear. Finally, an important 
factor was the need for a timeless design and a high level of flexibility in the way the house 
can be used. This has been ensured by a minimalistic interior and the possibility to add 
interior walls if need be (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014b). 
  
The Traditional Maintenance-free House  
In this house the focus is on lowering maintenance and improving the service life using 
traditional materials that throughout centuries have demonstrated a long service life. The 
Traditional Maintenance-free House (TMF House) is designed to have a service life of at 
least 150 years, which is double or triple of a typical single-family house in Denmark 
(Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014a). In order to obtain this long service life the building design 
is based on what have been previously experienced on family houses located in Denmark. It 
is found that damages often occur where different kinds of materials are combined since 
materials move differently relative to each other (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014a). Hence, 
the focus when designing and constructing the TMF House have been to use the same kind of 
materials and thereby avoiding damages, resulting in a maintenance-free period of 50 years 
(Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014a). The building envelope is constructed of brickwork on the 
outside and blocks of brickwork, consisting of many cavities providing insulating properties, 
on the inside. By using these blocks of brickwork, classic types of insulation and the vapour 
barrier can be spared, resulting in a building envelope consisting of primarily one material, 
brickwork, which is quite simple to construct (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014a). As a side 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
14 
benefit, saving the insulation and the vapour barrier results in an healthy indoor climate 
improving the quality of life for the residents (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014a). Since 
cellulose fibres is well suited to transport humidity in the air, using this type of insulation 
obviates the use of a vapour barrier (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014a). 
  
In addition to the choice of material, the architectural design of the house is of great 
importance when trying to reduce the maintenance and improving the service life. For 
instance, the roof is designed to have a high pitch to eliminate water efficiently and reduce 
damages as well as having a wide overhang, which protects the building envelope from the 
weather. Moreover, the wide overhang prevents superheating in the summer, while still 
allowing sunlight in in the winter (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014a).  
  
The Adaptable House  
The concept of the Adaptable House (AD House) is flexibility and variability during its 
service life. This focus arises from the changing needs and requirements a typical Danish 
family will experience during a lifetime - couples move in together and have children, the 
children move out of home, couples get divorced and so on (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 
2013a). Studies show that when Danish families decide to move, two out of three Danish 
families move to a new home within the same municipality (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 
2013a). In other words, they do not move because of the location, but because of the 
functionalities of the house (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2013a). To cope with this issue, AD 
House is designed to accommodate the changing needs and to be adaptable during the service 
life. This is, among others, achieved by constructing the house of components that are 
possible to disassembly, providing the opportunity to expand the house without destroying 
existing and remaining components. Another detail that provides flexibility is that the 
exterior walls are the only ones that are load bearing. This enables the interior walls to be 
moved freely to create one, two, three or four rooms. In addition, the kitchen is constructed in 
a way, which facilitates different layouts of the floor plan. By installing sliding doors it is 
possible to shut off or open up to the adjoining rooms, the living room and the dining room, 
as desired (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2013a). If it, after all, turns out that the house does not 
fulfil the residents need, the AD House is prepared for an extension in ground floor and first 
floor by having a overhang and a balcony corresponding to the space of one room (Realdania 
Byg and Kleis, 2013a). By incorporating the changing needs into the design of the house, 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
15 
reconstructions and extensions can be avoided and the consumption of time, resources, 
materials, and hence CO2, can be reduced (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2013a). 
  
The Quota House  
The concept of the Quota House (Q House) is to focus on the behaviour of the residents and 
their consumption patterns, since these are important parameters when considering the 
environmental impact of a house. To help the residents change their consumption patterns 
towards a more sustainable way of living, the house is designed with different features. One 
feature is innovative technologies integrated in the house which monitors the consumption of 
electricity, water and heat, hence making the consumption pattern transparent (Realdania Byg 
and Kleis, 2014c). The consumption is measured against a quota, defined by the residents of 
the house, that sets an ambitious target for the amount of CO2 “allowed” to be emitted each 
month (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014c). To support the residents towards a more 
sustainable consumption pattern, a screen is installed in the central zone of the house making 
it easy and straightforward to read off information about the consumption pattern and 
compare this to the quota of the day or month (Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014c). If the quota 
is exceeded the house shuts down and a button placed beneath the screen allows the residents 
to activate the systems in the house again, increasing the residents’ awareness of the energy 
use.   
 
Finally, the architecture of the house also helps the residents to lower the consumption. The 
different functionalities of the house such as the kitchen, bedrooms and living room are 
carefully placed in respect to daylight, orientation of the sun and the need for privacy. In 
addition, features such as a covered outdoor space for drying clothes to save tumble drying 
and a pantry to save space in the refrigerator is integrated. These functionalities are possible 
to integrate in single-family dwellings and can help reduce the environmental impact 
(Realdania Byg and Kleis, 2014c). 
 
II.VI Defining the scenarios 
The six houses all focus on different sustainability initiatives in the building sector and to test 
which trend is the most effective way to reduce the environmental impact, six scenarios 
containing parameters that are likely to change in the future, such as energy consumption, 
disposal routes and energy mix, have been developed. All scenarios are derived from the 
Base Scenario, which represents the building industry and infrastructure as it is today. 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
16 
Scenario 1 addresses the need for expanding a house if the number of residents increases. 
According to a report by SPREAD Sustainable Lifestyles (Backhaus et al., 2011) one of the 
major trends in the European Union is shrinking household sizes and one of the opportunities 
for a more sustainable way of living is smaller living spaces, as more dense living can 
support a sustainable lifestyle more efficiently (Backhaus et al., 2011). If we assume that we 
as consumers in the future will be more aware of how our lifestyle choices impact the 
environment there is a good chance that people will choose a more compact way of living and 
avoid expanding their homes. We have therefore modelled a scenario where none of the 
houses are expanded during their lifetime.  
 
In Scenario 2 it is assumed that consumption of energy for heating, electricity, and water will 
decrease in the future. The trend shows that the focus on environmental aspects is growing in 
all aspects of our life and this naturally reflects in our way of living (Backhaus et al., 2011). 
According to a survey conducted by Eurobarometer, people in the EU-27 are increasingly 
seeking to reduce their energy and water consumption to approach a more sustainable way of 
living (Backhaus et al., 2011). Furthermore, buildings are designed to be more energy 
efficient and effective by introducing high insulation standards, airtight building envelopes 
and automatic ventilation with heat recovery (Backhaus et al., 2011). Thus, we have 
modelled Scenario 2 to reflect the trend of users and technology changing towards 
sustainable living. Scenario 3 addresses the development towards a greater share of 
renewable energy. Constantly, new technological innovations within the energy sector are 
developed in the effort to increase energy efficiency and support a sustainable development 
(Backhaus et al., 2011). Besides the energy sector developing towards a more sustainable 
pathway, local renewable energy technologies are installed in more and more small-scale 
households and businesses (Backhaus et al., 2011). To accommodate this development, 
Scenario 3 is modelled with a energy grid mix reflecting future conditions.  
 
In general, the focus on sustainable development within all aspects of the building sector is 
increasing. Scenario 4 addresses the inevitable aspect of the materials used for a building. 
Along with more and more people being concerned about saving resources (Backhaus et al., 
2011), the focus on using materials to save resources have increased. As the report by 
SPREAD Sustainable Lifestyles state: “...there is a growing awareness of the need for 
change and a growing willingness to invest in environmentally friendly materials.” 
(Backhaus et al., 2011). Architects are taught in innovative sustainable building design using 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
17 
recyclable materials with low maintenance and long service life and the concept of nearly-
zero or positive energy balance buildings are aimed for (Backhaus et al., 2011). As Scenario 
4 reflects this trend by prolonging the service life of the materials, Scenario 5 focuses on the 
materials and the disposal of these in the End of Life stage. One of the upcoming initiatives to 
reduce the environmental concerns regarding building materials is circular economy. The 
concept of circular economy is the idea of closed loops, where repair, reuse, remanufacturing, 
refurbishing and recycling are key aspects (Geissdoerfer et al., 2017) and thus closely linked 
to the disposal of materials. Scenario 5 reflects this trend by allowing for a greater share of 
materials recycled. Finally, as previously mentioned Scenario 6 combines Scenario 1 to 5 and 
reflects a best case scenario if all future trends are taken into account.  
 
II.VII Basis for the LCAs 
The following paragraphs present a more detailed version of the LCAs of this study. The 
paragraphs follow the overall structure of ISO 14040:2006, ISO 14044:2006 and DS/EN 
15978:2011 (Dansk Standard, 2006, 2008, 2012) covering the key elements of Goal and 
scope definition and Life cycle inventory.  
 
  
 
 
The LCA performed in this study is intended to assess the level of sustainability in the built 
environment. The LCA results will be used to determine if current building practices can be 
considered absolute sustainable. Furthermore, a comparison between different design 
strategies will be made to determine which strategy is the most efficient towards achieving 
sustainable single family stand-alone dwellings. The results of this study will be publicly 
disclosed as a step towards enlightening both the public, industry stakeholders and politicians 
on the importance of change in our current practices. The study is a part of a Master’s thesis 
at the Technical University of Denmark. All LCI data was supplied and originally collected 
by the Danish Building Research Institute. 
 
II.VII.I Scope definition 
The LCAs carried out in this study all have a cradle-to-grave scope. All life cycle stages are 
included and both LCI results and an impact assessment are presented.  
 
Reference flow 
As stated in the Article, the functional unit (FU) is defined as ”Annually house one family in 
a stand-alone dwelling in Denmark” and the reference flow necessary to fulfil the FU is 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
18 
assumed to be one Mini CO2 House. As can be seen from Table 4 the houses differ in terms 
of floor area and service life. However, as the FU is defined per year and all elementary flows 
therefore have been calculated to fit this, it is not necessary (nor mathematically relevant) to 
scale the service life of any of the houses to make them comparable.  
 
Table 4 - All Mini CO2 Houses and the respective areas as well as assumed service life. 
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, 
IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
 
Ref House 
UP House 
TMF House 
IMF House 
AD House 
Q House 
Lifetime 
150 years 
120 years 
150 years 
150 years 
120 years 
120 years 
Area 
150 m2 
129.2 m2 
136 m2 
156 m2 
160 m2 
138 m2 
 
LCI modelling and handling of multifunctional processes 
All multifunctional processes were handled by system expansion. However, recycling was 
modelled as cut-off and therefore no crediting from these processes are included. For all 
cases of recycling the necessary processes for preparing a product for the next life cycle 
system were included in this system, e.g. remelting of steel or plastic. For UP House the main 
part of the building components is reused or reclaimed products. These were modelled as 
having zero impact in the Product stage. A full overview of how building components in UP 
House were modelled can be found in Supporting Information III, Table 8.  
 
System boundaries 
Although this study is of a comparative nature it was not possible to exclude any processes 
even though they were modelled equally for all houses. As this is a study of absolute 
sustainability it is necessary to include all processes contributing to the total environmental 
impact of the system in order to achieve a true measure of how big a SoSOS is occupied by 
one building.  
==PAGE:55==
 
 
19 
 
Figure 1 - System boundaries for all modelled systems.  
 
As can be seen from Figure 1 the foreground system for all houses include all processes that 
was modelled based on primary data from the Danish Building Research Institute. The 
background system was modelled in SimaPro version 8.0 (SimaPro) (PRé, 2019) using 
average processes from the database ecoinvent version 3.4 (ecoinvent) (Ecoinvent, 2019).  
 
Geographical, time and technological scopes 
All modelled systems are located in Nyborg, Denmark. The LCI data used to model the 
foreground system is representative for a Danish context, and parameters such as energy mix, 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
20 
energy consumption, and disposal routes were all modelled according to current conditions in 
Denmark. The background system was modelled using average processes and represents a 
global context. The LCI data supplied by the Danish Building Research Institute was 
collected before the completion of the buildings around 2012-2013 and can reasonably be 
considered representative for current practices. Given the nature of absolute environmental 
sustainability assessments it is not problematic that the LCAs of this study reflect current 
practices, even though the service life of the houses extends 120-150 years into the future. 
While only one year is considered, it is assumed that the elementary flows from all life cycles 
associated with continuously fulfilling the functional unit will occur in an “average” year. 
This means that projecting the development of e.g. technologies or consumption into the 
future is not required, and should instead be handled by considering “what if”-scenarios 
where an average future year is considered (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
II.VII.II Life Cycle Inventory 
The different life cycle stages and the inherent assumptions made for these stages are 
presented in the following paragraphs. A comprehensive list of assumptions can be found in 
Supporting Information III, Table 1 to 9. 
 
Product stage 
The data provided by the Danish Building Research Institute are extensive and covers all 
building components for each Mini CO2 House. To model the inventories in SimaPro 
assumptions had to be made. Certain building components were given as a trademarked 
product and in these cases a unique component was modelled based on an EPD. Furthermore, 
it was not possible to find representative products in the ecoinvent database for all building 
components. In these cases, an assumption was made regarding a suitable alternative. A full 
list of how all building components were modelled in SimaPro can be found in Supporting 
Information III, Table 3 to 6. Further details regarding the modelling of the inventories can be 
found in Section II.VII.II.  
 
For UP House several of the building components are either “upcycled” - i.e. reclaimed waste 
- or recycled. All upcycled components were modelled as having zero impact. For recycled 
products where information on recycled content were available (e.g. EPDs) a customised 
process in SimaPro was created and assumed to be representative. If no details exist on the 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
21 
content or composition of the product they were modelled as the most common not-recycled 
alternative. For further information on this, see Supporting Information III, Table 3 to 6.  
 
 
 
 
 
Construction stage 
It was assumed that the construction of the houses will lead to some waste of the building 
components. This was accounted for in the Construction stage and a waste share between 0% 
and 10% was assumed for all components (Bossink and Brouwers, 1996). A list of assumed 
waste shares for all components can be found in Supporting Information III, Table 2. 
Furthermore, it was assumed that an amount of energy is needed to construct the houses. The 
amount of energy needed per square meter was based on a study by Cole (Cole, 1998). This 
study offers an estimated average for three types of structures; wood, steel and concrete. 
Based on the characteristics of the building components, each Mini CO2 House was 
classified as either a wooden structure, steel structure or concrete structure. These are very 
rough assumptions, as all houses contain more than one type of structure (e.g. concrete 
foundation, wooden structural system). Additionally, there is a risk that the values are 
outdated, as the study was published in 1998 and it is likely that technologies related to 
building construction have evolved since then. Therefore, the models were tested for 
sensitivity towards this parameter. More information on this can be found in Section III.IV.  
 
Table 5 - Amount of energy used for construction of one m2 house for each type of structural 
system. Each house is categorised below its type of structural system. 
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, 
IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
Wooden structural system 
Steel structural system 
Concrete structural system 
1.11 kWh/m2 
0.83 kWh/m2 
1.39 kWh/m2 
UP House 
IMF House 
AD House 
 
TMF House 
Q House 
Ref House 
 
 
 
Use stage 
According to DS/EN 15978:2011 only energy use related to operation of a building should be 
included in building LCAs - i.e. heating, domestic hot water supply, air conditioning, 
ventilation, lighting, and auxiliary energy used for pumps, control and automation (Dansk 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
22 
Standard, 2012). Therefore, energy use for all appliances that are not building related were 
excluded in the Use stage.  
 
The Use stage for all Mini CO2 Houses was based on report by the Alexandra Institute and 
MOE A/S (Rasmussen and Johannsen, 2016), in which the Q House is evaluated two years 
following finalisation of the project. The report presents electricity, water, heating, and 
domestic hot water readings for a year and compares these numbers with the estimated values 
for Q House and a standard house. Table 6 shows both the estimated and recorded values 
modified to fit with the scope of this study. The current residents of Q House is a couple with 
no children (Rasmussen and Johannsen, 2016) and it was therefore assumed that both their 
water and domestic hot water-consumption is half of what the family of four in this study 
would consume (hence, all water and domestic hot water-values have been multiplied by 
two). Additionally, only the contribution from lighting was included in the electricity 
consumption, omitting appliances and equipment as recommended by DS/EN 15978:2011. 
According to the report by the Alexandra Institute and MOE A/S lighting is estimated to 
account for 12% of the total electricity consumption (hence, only 12% of the total electricity 
consumption is reported in Table 6) (Rasmussen and Johannsen, 2016). 
 
Table 6 - The electricity, water, heat and district hot water consumption estimated and 
recorded for a standard house and the Quota House (Rasmussen and Johannsen, 2016) 
 
Standard house 
(estimated) 
Quota House 
(estimated) 
Quota House  
(recorded) 
Electricity [kWh] 
451.44 
311.28 
266.76 
Water [m3] 
170.00 
134.00 
174.00 
Heat [kWh] 
4278.00 
3528.00 
6153.00 
Domestic hot water  [kWh] 
3988.00 
3336.00 
2300.00 
 
Even though the recorded consumption data for Q House are considered more realistic than 
the estimated values, all Mini CO2 Houses were modelled with estimated energy and water 
consumption data. The reason behind this choice was that no recorded data exists for other 
houses than Q House, and comparing estimated data with recorded data would compromise 
the comparison of the systems, as ISO 14044 dictates that if systems are compared the data 
quality should be equally comparable (Dansk Standard, 2008). Therefore, as a result of 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
23 
shortcomings in terms of data availability, the energy and water consumption of all houses 
other than Q House was modelled as the standard house from Table 6. Energy for heating and 
lighting was assumed to be dependent on the floor area of each house.  
 
In the Base Scenario the energy grid mix was modelled as current conditions, by considering 
data from the Danish Energy Agency (Energistyrelsen, 2018b). Table 7 shows the shares of 
energy sources in 2018 and projected towards 2030 and shares of renewable energy for both 
years.   
 
Table 7 - Shares of energy sources in 2018 and predicted shares for 2030 as modelled 
(Energistyrelsen, 2018b) 
Coal 
Oil 
Natural gas 
Waste 
Renewable 
2018 
8.92% 
37.74% 
13.79% 
2.49% 
37.05% 
2030 
15.57% 
34.43% 
10.01% 
2.19% 
37.81% 
 
Wind 
Photovoltaics 
Fossil fuels 
Biomass 
Biofuels 
2018 
20.60% 
2.71% 
33.70% 
40.46% 
2.52% 
2030 
20.14% 
3.61% 
36.15% 
37.34% 
2.76% 
 
In SimaPro a process consisting of these shares of energy was modelled by assuming 
representative processes for each source of energy. A list of these can be found in Supporting 
Information III, Table 6.   
 
When considering Table 7 it is noteworthy that the share of renewable energy only increases 
with 0.76 pct. points from 2018 to 2030. The Danish Energy Agency predicts that the share 
of renewable energy will increase substantially until 2021, but after this point the share will 
decline towards 2030 (Energistyrelsen, 2018a). This decline can be explained by a substantial 
increase in energy consumption in the coming years combined with a lack of new renewable 
energy initiatives. The progress towards 2021 is driven by the construction of new wind 
farms both on- and offshore and a growing share of biomass energy. The increase in energy 
consumption is among others caused by an increasing demand from data centres in the 
coming years (Energistyrelsen, 2018a). Thus, the stagnating development of new initiatives 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
24 
combined with an increasing consumption will only lead to a small increase in the share of 
renewable energy.  
 
The district heating mix was similarly modelled as current conditions by considering data 
from the Danish Energy Agency (Energistyrelsen, 2018a). Table 8 shows the shares of 
district heating sources in 2018 and projected towards 2030. In SimaPro a process consisting 
of these shares of district heating sources was modelled by assuming representative processes 
for each source of heat. A list of these can be found in Supporting Information III, Table 7.  
 
Table 8 - Shares of district heating sources in 2018 and predicted shares for 2030 as 
modelled (Energistyrelsen, 2018b) 
Coal 
Natural gas 
Waste 
Biomass 
2018 
11.45% 
4.41% 
21.59% 
50.10% 
2030 
7.81% 
2.14% 
21.81% 
54.01% 
 
The service life of the individual building components were assumed according to 
estimations made by the Danish Building Research Institute (Aagaard et al., 2013). It was 
decided to model service lives as actual service life and a list of the assumed service lives can 
be found in Supporting Information III, Table 1 and IV. If the reference flow of a building 
component, needed to fulfil the FU, is greater than one - i.e. if the service life of a building 
component is shorter than the service life of the entire building - it was modelled as being 
replaced if it is accessible without disassembling other building components. This assumption 
was based on the fact that building components that are exposed to the environment (both 
indoor and outdoor) will be worn more and will therefore need replacement more often, while 
components that are protected in the structural system will not be as damaged by time. 
Furthermore, it was decided to be unlikely that replacements will be made in e.g. a 
foundation even though some building components have a service life shorter than the entire 
building. In accordance with DS/EN 15798 only a full number of replacements were 
modelled. In cases where a partial number of replacements were needed to cover the entire 
service life of the houses, the value obtained was rounded up (Dansk Standard, 2012).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
25 
Expansion 
The AD House was designed as flexible and, among other things, easy to expand if the 
residents suddenly require more space. Additionally, the expansion was designed in a way so 
that it is easy to disassemble, if the needs of the residents change and they can spare the extra 
space. The idea of this design is to minimise the amount of square meters and thereby reduce 
the need for heating and cooling. In other words, an expansion of this house is a key ability of 
the AD House. Therefore, if the houses were to be considered comparable it was necessary to 
compensate for this ability in all other models. For more details on this matter, see Section 
IV.II. As a consequence, an expansion of all houses were modelled. The expansion of the AD 
House is 55 m2 and the equivalent amount of building components to each of the other houses 
were therefore added, i.e. if considering Q House an extra 40.4% (55 m2 out of 136 m2) of all 
components were added to represent an extension of the original building.  
 
To assess the need for an expansion, changes in family size was assumed. It was assumed that 
a couple move into a house and after seven years the family has grown to include two 
children bringing the total number of residents to four persons. Next, it was assumed that the 
children live at home for 20 years and after this, the couple live in the house for an additional 
10 years without any children. If this cycle is repeated for 120 years, it amounts to four 
periods of seven years with two persons, three periods of 20 years with four persons, three 
periods of 10 years with two persons and one period of 2 years with 4 persons. The weighted 
average of residents over 120 years was therefore 3.03 residents. This meant that the 
consumption of water for operation and maintenance had to be modified with a factor 0.758 
(3.03 (weighted number of residents) out of 4 (maximum number of residents)) to account for 
the changing number of residents. It was only necessary to apply this factor to water 
consumption, as it was assumed that the need for heating and lighting would not be affected 
by the number of residents. 
 
It was assumed that the expansion added to AD House was designed and intended to be 
removed when the family size decreases. For all other houses, it was assumed that the 
expansion is a standard annex, which was assumed to be too inconvenient to remove once 
built. This means that when the first family living in the house adds an expansion, it remains 
for the entire service life of the building. As a result, the first seven years of the building’s 
service life there is no expansion, while for the last 113 years (143 years for IMF and TMF 
due to a service life of 150 years) there is an expansion, adding 55 m2 to the floor area (and 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
26 
thereby increasing the need for heating and lighting). This should give the AD House the 
intended benefit of shaping itself to the needs of the family and minimising the amount of 
square meters per person.    
 
End of Life 
All building components were considered waste at the end of the buildings’ life cycle and 
processed as such. Waste processing was modelled and the elementary flows for waste can be 
seen in the inventories in Supporting Information IV. As indicated by DS/EN 15798, all 
environmental loads (e.g. emissions) from waste disposal are considered part of the building 
life cycle, according to the “polluter pays” principle (Dansk Standard, 2012). However, as the 
systems were modelled with a cut-off principal, all potential benefits from utilisation of 
recycled in the next product system were not accounted for as crediting in this study. Waste 
fractions (incineration, landfill, recycling) were assumed for all building components and a 
complete list can be found in Supporting Information III, Table 2 and Supporting Information 
IV. It was assumed that the same amount of water consumed in the life cycle stage Use is 
treated as wastewater and was modelled as such.  
 
Transportation 
No transportation was modelled for any systems. All material-inputs were modelled as 
‘market for’-processes and therefore already include average transportation processes for the 
chosen geographical coverage.  
 
Basis for sensitivity and uncertainty analysis 
The aim of the sensitivity and uncertainty analysis is to identify the parameters that 
potentially have an influence on the LCIA results. These were identified as amount of 
building materials, energy amount for construction, energy amounts for use, service life of 
the building, service life of building materials, area of the houses, expansion/no expansion, 
energy mix, End of Life routes, choice of processes in model.  
 
In this study we applied an approach where we first seek to determine the model parameters 
that can be considered uncertain. If a model parameter is found to be uncertain we next 
investigated the sensitivity of said parameter. We considered uncertainty by applying both a 
quantitative and qualitative approach. In Table 9 we discuss the uncertainty of each model 
parameter qualitatively.  
==PAGE:63==
 
 
27 
Table 9 - Qualitative uncertainty analysis of the parameters of the inventory model and 
justification of why each parameter is considered uncertain. 
Parameter 
Uncertain? Comment 
Building material 
amounts 
No 
It was assumed that all data points of our model must have the same 
degree of uncertainty, as they were collected by one person over a limited 
period of time. Therefore, the approach and level of thoroughness with 
which the data was collected were assumed to be identical for all houses 
and all building components. Generally, the authors of this study have no 
reason to suspect that any particular material value has been reported or 
assumed wrongly.  
Energy consumption 
for construction 
Yes 
The amount of energy modelled for the construction phase of the LCA 
was based on a study by Cole (1998) where the amount of energy required 
for different types of structural types (wood, steel, concrete) was reported. 
While this source serves the purpose of providing an estimate of required 
energy for constructions quite well, the numbers provided in the study are 
very likely outdated as quite a bit of technological development can be 
said to have happened since 1998.  
Energy and water 
consumption for use 
Yes 
The modelled energy and water consumption for operation and 
maintenance of the houses was based on estimates made by experts 
retrieved from a report by Alexandra Institute and MOE (Rasmussen and 
Johannsen, 2016). As the modelled energy and water use does not reflect 
actual consumption data for the specific houses, the parameter was 
considered uncertain.  
Service life of 
building 
Yes 
The modelled service life of the buildings was highly uncertain. We chose 
to model an estimated service life of 120 years (150 years for IMF and 
TMF House), which reflects the suggestions made by the Danish Building 
Research Institute (Aagaard et al., 2013), but the “real” service life of a 
building might be affected by costs, aesthetics, and technical 
requirements.  
Area of houses 
No 
The actual areas of the houses are known, and were therefore not 
considered uncertain.  
Expansion/no 
expansion 
Yes 
As it was not possible to predict whether or not the houses are expanded 
during its service life, this parameter was considered highly uncertain.  
Energy mix 
Yes 
As previously described, the modelled energy mix for 2018 and 2030 was 
based on data from the Danish Energy Agency and thus considered 
representative for the case of today. However, as the energy mix during 
the service life of the houses was predicted to change in the future, the 
parameter was considered uncertain when considering the service life of 
the houses.  
Service life of 
building materials 
Yes 
The service life of the materials was based on the actual technical service 
life estimated by the Danish Building Research Institute (Aagaard et al., 
2013). Although this was considered expert knowledge, the parameter 
was considered uncertain due to the fact that it is not the “real” service 
life of the specific materials. 
End of Life routes 
Yes 
The End of Life routes were modelled based on literature reviews and 
expert judgement by the Danish Building Research Institute. However, as 
the specific End of Life routes for the materials were to some extent 
unknown, the parameter was considered uncertain.  
==PAGE:64==
 
 
28 
Choice of processes 
in model 
Yes 
The processes chosen in the model were based on literature such as EPD’s 
(Institut Bauen und Umwelt e.V., 2014, 2017b, 2017a; Earthsure, 2017; 
EPD Danmark, 2017; Bre Global Verified EPD, 2018), likely alternatives 
and the researchers best knowledge. As the choice of processes was 
restricted by the use of database, some assumptions were made and 
therefore the processes were considered an uncertain parameter.  
 
To test the uncertainty of the model, we performed a quantitative uncertainty analysis in 
SimaPro using Monte Carlo simulations. A lognormal distribution was assumed for two 
parameters, namely water use and energy for heating and the geometric standard deviation 
(GSD) were calculated using the numbers from Table 10.  
 
Table 10 - Average consumption of water and district heating valid for a typical Danish 
household. These were used to calculate the geometric standard deviation for the Monte 
Carlo analysis (Dansk vand og Spildevandsforening and DTU Miljø & Ressourcer, 2003; 
Gram-Hanssen and Rhiger Hansen, 2016)  
 
Average consumption of water 
[L/pers/day] 
Average consumption of heat 
[kWh/m2/yr] 
Min 
89 
34.8 
Max 
201 
107 
 
14     !"!!"#$% =
!"#!"#$%
!"#!"#$%
=
201
89 = 1.503 
 
15     !"!!!"# =
!"#!!"#
!"#!!"#
=
107
34.8 = 1.757 
 
Besides testing the model against uncertainty for the two parameters, a Monte Carlo analysis 
automatically includes the embedded uncertainty of all inventory data. Thus, the output of the 
Monte Carlo analysis is the combined influence of all uncertainties and not only the influence 
of the model in regards to the specific parameters (PRé, Goedkoop, Oele, Vieira, et al., 
2016). The Monte Carlo analysis was conducted for the Base Scenario and Scenario 6 for 
each house and each method in 10,000 simulations. The output of the Monte Carlo analysis is 
the 95% confidence interval within which we are confident the true value lies (PRé, 
Goedkoop, Oele, Leijting, et al., 2016). The results of the uncertainty analysis are presented 
in Section III.IV together with the actual results of our analysis for each house. 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
29 
Of the 10 parameters described in Table 9, eight parameters were found to be uncertain and 
therefore tested for sensitivity for all houses in the relevant scenario. Table 11 shows how 
each parameter is tested, for which houses, in which scenario.  
 
Table 11 - The eight parameters that were found to be uncertain listed together with a 
specification of how these were tested for sensitivity for which house and scenario. 
Parameter tested 
How? 
Which 
houses? 
In which scenario? 
Energy consumption for construction 
Normalised sensitivity 
coefficient 
All houses 
Base Scenario 
Energy and water consumption for 
operation and maintenance 
Normalised sensitivity 
coefficient  
 
and  
 
Relative difference for Base 
Scenario vs. Scenario 3 
All houses 
Base Scenario  
 
and 
 
Base 
Scenario/Scenario 3 
Service life of building 
Normalised sensitivity 
coefficient 
Quota House 
Base Scenario 
Expansion/no expansion 
Relative difference for Base 
Scenario vs. Scenario 1 
All houses 
Base 
Scenario/Scenario 1 
Energy mix 
Relative difference for Base 
Scenario vs. Scenario 2 
All houses 
Base 
Scenario/Scenario 2 
Service life of materials 
Relative difference for Base 
Scenario vs. Scenario 4 
All houses 
Base 
Scenario/Scenario 4 
End of Life routes 
Relative difference for Base 
Scenario vs. Scenario 5 
All houses 
Base 
Scenario/Scenario 5 
Choice of processes in model 
Relative difference 
Quota House 
Base Scenario  
 
A normalised sensitivity coefficient was calculated by perturbation of a parameter with 10% 
and next applying the following equation (Owsianiak et al., 2018): 
 
16     !! = ∆!"#$"#/!"#$"#
∆!"#$%/!"#$%
= ∆!/!
∆!/! 
 
… where ∆y is the change in impact score after the perturbation, y is the impact score before 
the perturbation, ∆x is the difference between the parameter before and after the perturbation 
and x is the parameter value before the perturbation. Where a normalised sensitivity 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
30 
coefficient cannot be calculated, the sensitivity of a parameter was tested by calculating the 
relative difference between before and after a change of the parameter.  
 
The parameters can be divided into four main groups depending on our confidence in the 
parameters (uncertainty) and their influence on the model (sensitivity): Low uncertainty and 
low sensitivity, high uncertainty and low sensitivity, low uncertainty and high sensitivity, and 
high uncertainty and high sensitivity. This is illustrated in Figure 2. If a parameter is found to 
be in the bottom left corner (low uncertainty and low sensitivity), we did not consider it 
further, as we are both very confident in the modelled value and in any case it has little 
influence on the results of the impact assessment. If a parameter was located in the bottom 
right corner (low uncertainty and high sensitivity), it was still not strictly necessary to 
consider the parameter further, as we are very confident in the modelled value, even though 
the parameter has great influence on the results. We similarly disregarded a parameter if it 
was found to be in the top left corner (high uncertainty and low sensitivity), because even 
though we are uncertain of the modelled value, we know that it in any case will not impact 
the results. However, if a parameter was found to be in the top right corner (high uncertainty 
and high sensitivity), we needed to consider the parameter further when interpreting the 
results obtained from the LCIA, as we have very little confidence in a modelled value that 
has great influence on the results.  
 
II.VII.III Life Cycle Impact Assessment 
As described in the Article, two different impact assessment methods were applied in this 
study. It was decided to limit the scope of the study and focus on a selection of impact 
categories, rather than attempt to cover aspects related to all categories. As this study 
considers 6 houses, 7 scenarios, 6 allocation principles and 2 methods, it was found 
reasonable to aim for limited impact coverage. However, the results for all impact categories 
can be found in Supporting Information V. The considered impact categories were chosen 
based on a preliminary study (see Supporting Information II).  
 
Based on a study by Khasreen et al. (2009) it was found that the choice of impact categories 
will in most cases depend on the goal of the study, data availability along with the 
significance of the impacts (Khasreen, Banfill and Menzies, 2009). The findings of Khasreen 
et al. (2009) indicated that the impact category global warming or climate change is highly 
relevant in most LCA studies, as it covers a global scale and furthermore it is a widely 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
31 
discussed topic in most political arenas. Furthermore, the Danish Building Research Institute 
has, as earlier mentioned, carried out an assessment of the CO2 reductions related to each 
house. Therefore, it was decided to include the category Climate change (kg CO2 eq.) for 
CCnorm and the categories Climate change - Energy imbalance (Wm-2) and Climate change - 
CO2 concentration (ppm) for PB-LCIA. Furthermore, it was decided to include impact 
categories that were found to be specifically relevant to the building industry, e.g. land use 
and water depletion. For CCnorm the impact categories Land use (kg C deficit) and Water 
resource depletion (m3 water eq.) were included and for PB-LCIA Land system change - 
Global (%) and Freshwater use - Global (km3) were included. Finally, even though 
eutrophication is not an environmental issue directly connected to the built environment, it 
does represent an important contributor to anthropogenic pressures on river inlets and coastal 
waters, with serious consequences for ecosystem functioning (Desmit et al., 2018). Therefore 
it was decided to include the impact categories Marine eutrophication (kg N eq) and 
Biogeochemical flows - N (Tg N).   
 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
32 
III 
Results  
In this section results obtained using CCnorm and PB-LCIA are presented. As not all results 
are relevant to the purpose of the Article, only results comparing the scenarios and the life 
cycle stages are presented in this Section. The remaining results for each house, method, 
scenario, impact category and allocation principle are presented in Supporting Information V.  
 
III.I 
Comparison of results across scenarios 
To examine the results further, the characterised results obtained from each scenario, house 
and impact categories were found. The results obtained using the two methods ILCD 2011 
and PB-LCIA are presented in Table 12 and 13, respectively.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
33
Table 12 - Comparison of scenarios for each house and impact category considered in this study. The results were obtained using the LCIA 
method ILCD 2011. 
 a120 year service life, b150 year service life.  
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – 
Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
  
  
Basis Scenario 
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 3 
Scenario 4 
Scenario 5 
Scenario 6 
Refa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.73E+03 
1.31E+03 
1.64E+03 
1.49E+03 
1.62E+03 
1.65E+03 
9.36E+02 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4.49E+00 
4.11E+00 
4.47E+00 
3.78E+00 
4.36E+00 
4.48E+00 
3.11E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
8.67E+03 
6.62E+03 
9.02E+03 
7.04E+03 
8.23E+03 
8.64E+03 
5.21E+03 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
3.33E+01 
2.79E+01 
3.21E+01 
2.44E+01 
3.35E+01 
3.33E+01 
2.03E+01 
UPa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.78E+03 
1.28E+03 
1.66E+03 
1.52E+03 
1.48E+03 
1.53E+03 
7.80E+02 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4.67E+00 
3.98E+00 
4.64E+00 
3.84E+00 
4.37E+00 
4.62E+00 
2.92E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
9.59E+03 
7.03E+03 
9.90E+03 
8.06E+03 
8.16E+03 
9.51E+03 
5.07E+03 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
3.27E+01 
2.74E+01 
3.16E+01 
2.45E+01 
3.27E+01 
3.28E+01 
2.00E+01 
TMFb 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.62E+03 
1.20E+03 
1.54E+03 
1.38E+03 
1.45E+03 
1.53E+03 
8.06E+02 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4.68E+00 
4.05E+00 
4.66E+00 
3.72E+00 
4.47E+00 
4.66E+00 
3.02E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
9.33E+03 
6.98E+03 
9.66E+03 
7.77E+03 
8.58E+03 
9.26E+03 
5.40E+03 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
3.26E+01 
2.77E+01 
3.15E+01 
2.46E+01 
3.27E+01 
3.26E+01 
2.02E+01 
IMFb 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.49E+03 
1.14E+03 
1.41E+03 
1.23E+03 
1.34E+03 
1.29E+03 
6.67E+02 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
5.14E+00 
4.43E+00 
5.13E+00 
4.16E+00 
4.81E+00 
5.13E+00 
3.29E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
1.27E+04 
9.66E+03 
1.31E+04 
1.10E+04 
1.11E+04 
1.27E+04 
7.36E+03 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
3.31E+01 
2.83E+01 
3.18E+01 
2.47E+01 
3.34E+01 
3.31E+01 
2.06E+01 
ADa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
2.17E+03 
1.20E+03 
2.06E+03 
1.84E+03 
2.11E+03 
2.05E+03 
8.86E+02 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
6.42E+00 
4.07E+00 
6.39E+00 
5.07E+00 
6.31E+00 
6.41E+00 
3.72E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
1.17E+04 
6.95E+03 
1.21E+04 
9.60E+03 
1.12E+04 
1.17E+04 
5.50E+03 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
4.56E+01 
2.83E+01 
4.41E+01 
3.42E+01 
4.57E+01 
4.56E+01 
2.47E+01 
Qa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.38E+03 
1.06E+03 
1.31E+03 
1.38E+03 
1.29E+03 
1.29E+03 
7.41E+02 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
3.98E+00 
4.05E+00 
3.97E+00 
3.96E+00 
3.88E+00 
3.96E+00 
3.08E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
8.36E+03 
6.28E+03 
8.65E+03 
8.36E+03 
7.86E+03 
8.32E+03 
5.07E+03 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
2.47E+01 
2.53E+01 
2.38E+01 
2.48E+01 
3.05E+01 
2.47E+01 
1.84E+01 
 
==PAGE:70==
 
34
 
Table 13 - Comparison of scenarios for each house and impact category considered in this study. The results were obtained using the LCIA 
method PB-LCIA. 
 a120 year service life, b150 year service life.  
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – 
Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) (CC - Climate change) 
  
  
Basis Scenario 
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 3 
Scenario 4 
Scenario 5 
Scenario 6 
Refa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
6.12E-10 
4.59E-10 
5.84E-10 
5.33E-10 
5.63E-10 
5.95E-10 
3.32E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
4.53E-08 
3.40E-08 
4.31E-08 
3.95E-08 
4.16E-08 
4.40E-08 
2.45E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
3.91E-08 
3.92E-08 
3.92E-08 
3.28E-08 
3.88E-08 
3.91E-08 
2.96E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
3.27E-13 
2.37E-13 
3.06E-13 
2.78E-13 
2.98E-13 
3.36E-13 
1.75E-13 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.63E-07 
1.53E-07 
1.63E-07 
1.23E-07 
1.63E-07 
1.63E-07 
1.15E-07 
UPa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
5.44E-10 
3.95E-10 
5.14E-10 
4.67E-10 
4.51E-10 
5.26E-10 
2.54E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
4.02E-08 
2.92E-08 
3.79E-08 
3.45E-08 
3.32E-08 
3.89E-08 
1.87E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
4.28E-08 
3.90E-08 
4.27E-08 
3.48E-08 
4.17E-08 
4.25E-08 
2.91E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
2.87E-13 
1.99E-13 
2.68E-13 
2.42E-13 
2.49E-13 
2.90E-13 
1.35E-13 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.62E-07 
1.53E-07 
1.62E-07 
1.22E-07 
1.62E-07 
1.62E-07 
1.14E-07 
TMFb 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
6.10E-10 
4.49E-10 
5.83E-10 
5.34E-10 
5.28E-10 
5.97E-10 
3.08E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
4.54E-08 
3.33E-08 
4.33E-08 
3.97E-08 
3.92E-08 
4.44E-08 
2.29E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
4.21E-08 
3.90E-08 
4.21E-08 
3.23E-08 
4.14E-08 
4.20E-08 
2.92E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
3.13E-13 
2.22E-13 
2.94E-13 
2.68E-13 
2.88E-13 
3.31E-13 
1.72E-13 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.61E-07 
1.53E-07 
1.60E-07 
1.21E-07 
1.60E-07 
1.61E-07 
1.15E-07 
IMFb 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
6.70E-10 
5.06E-10 
6.41E-10 
5.63E-10 
5.75E-10 
6.57E-10 
3.47E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
4.95E-08 
3.75E-08 
4.74E-08 
4.16E-08 
4.25E-08 
4.86E-08 
2.56E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
4.37E-08 
4.03E-08 
4.38E-08 
3.88E-08 
4.25E-08 
4.36E-08 
3.01E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
5.82E-13 
4.25E-13 
5.60E-13 
2.98E-13 
4.84E-13 
5.85E-13 
3.08E-13 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.63E-07 
1.55E-07 
1.63E-07 
1.63E-07 
1.62E-07 
1.63E-07 
1.16E-07 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
 
35
ADa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
8.08E-10 
4.50E-10 
7.72E-10 
7.00E-10 
7.71E-10 
7.77E-10 
3.33E-10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
5.99E-08 
3.33E-08 
5.71E-08 
5.20E-08 
5.71E-08 
5.75E-08 
2.46E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
5.91E-08 
3.91E-08 
5.91E-08 
4.51E-08 
5.87E-08 
5.90E-08 
3.78E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
5.55E-13 
3.54E-13 
5.26E-13 
4.89E-13 
4.77E-13 
5.58E-13 
2.42E-13 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
2.28E-07 
1.54E-07 
2.28E-07 
1.72E-07 
2.28E-07 
2.28E-07 
1.51E-07 
Qa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
5.36E-10 
4.01E-10 
5.14E-10 
5.36E-10 
4.95E-10 
5.28E-10 
3.03E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
3.98E-08 
2.98E-08 
3.81E-08 
3.98E-08 
3.67E-08 
3.92E-08 
2.24E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
3.44E-08 
4.01E-08 
3.44E-08 
3.41E-08 
3.45E-08 
3.44E-08 
3.03E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
4.08E-13 
2.89E-13 
3.94E-13 
4.08E-13 
3.36E-13 
4.19E-13 
2.14E-13 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.29E-07 
1.59E-07 
1.29E-07 
1.29E-07 
1.69E-07 
1.29E-07 
1.20E-07 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
36 
From Table 12 and 13 it is found that Scenario 6 (the scenario combining all other scenarios) 
is the best performing scenario for both methods and all houses irrespective of impact 
category. Hence, Scenario 6 is the ultimately best case scenario. In addition, Scenario 1 
(examining the environmental impact of the houses with no expansion) and Scenario 3 
(examining the environmental impact of the houses if the energy consumption is reduced by 
25%) are found to generate a low environmental impact across methods, houses and impact 
categories and thus are among the best performing scenarios. The results obtained using 
ILCD 2011 shows that Scenario 1 is the second best performing scenario in terms of 
environmental impact in 14 out of the 24 impact categories across houses, whereas Scenario 
3 is the second best performing scenario in 9 out of 24 impact categories considering all 
houses (see Table 12). To compare when using the PB-LCIA method, Scenario 1 performs 
second best in 21 out of 30 impact categories and considering all houses, whereas Scenario 3 
performs second best in 8 out of 30 impact categories (see Table 13).  
 
In addition, Table 12 and 13 show that when using the method ILCD 2011, the Base Scenario 
(i.e. current conditions) is the worst performing scenario in 11 out of 24 impact categories 
when considering all houses, whereas when using the PB-LCIA method the Base Scenario 
performs the worst in 16 out of 30 impact categories across houses. Thus, the Base Scenario 
is, as expected, the ultimately worst case scenario. However, considering the impact category 
Land use (ILCD 2011), Scenario 2 is found to have the highest impact potential for all houses 
and thus is the worst performing scenario for this impact category. Investigating this result 
further, it is found that the energy consumption in the Use stage is the main contributor to this 
impact category (see Table 14 and 15). As Scenario 2 considers the energy mix of 2030, the 
high impact potential in the impact category Land use could be to due the fact that, as 
previously described, the energy demand will increase in the near future (see Section 
II.VII.II) and thus more energy will be produced which requires more physical space than 
that of today’s. The results presented in Table 12 and 13 support the conclusion stated in the 
Article, namely that the strategies for sustainable design investigated in Scenario 1 and 3 are 
the most effective strategies to lower the environmental impact potential and developing 
towards a more sustainable building design of single family stand-alone dwellings.  
 
III.II Hot spot analysis 
To investigate the results further a hot spot analysis concerning the four life cycle stages were 
conducted. The results from this are presented in Table 14 and 15. 
==PAGE:73==
 
37
Table 14 - Comparison of life cycle stages for each house and impact category considered in this study. The results were obtained using the 
LCIA method ILCD 2011. 
 a120 year service life,  b150 year service life.  
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – 
Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) 
  
  
Product 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Refa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
17.61% 
0.85% 
68.95% 
12.59% 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
8.51% 
0.41% 
34.63% 
56.46% 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
10.66% 
0.54% 
86.27% 
2.53% 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
-0.41% 
0.18% 
112.22% 
-11.98% 
UPa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
4.72% 
0.17% 
51.15% 
43.96% 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4.46% 
0.21% 
33.90% 
61.42% 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
8.34% 
0.49% 
88.22% 
2.95% 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
1.25% 
0.18% 
112.21% 
-13.64% 
TMFb 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
11.35% 
0.40% 
66.11% 
22.14% 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
7.06% 
0.35% 
32.57% 
60.02% 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
13.63% 
0.82% 
82.26% 
3.29% 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
0.78% 
0.16% 
112.47% 
-13.42% 
IMFb 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
4.04% 
0.27% 
65.62% 
30.07% 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
9.20% 
0.53% 
36.36% 
53.91% 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
17.42% 
1.02% 
79.97% 
1.60% 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
-0.31% 
0.16% 
113.45% 
-13.30% 
ADa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
10.24% 
0.48% 
72.55% 
16.73% 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
5.21% 
0.23% 
33.18% 
61.38% 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
9.06% 
0.36% 
88.07% 
2.52% 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
-0.06% 
0.07% 
113.62% 
-13.63% 
Qa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
16.14% 
0.84% 
64.51% 
18.51% 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
11.06% 
0.56% 
31.97% 
56.41% 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
19.96% 
1.05% 
76.44% 
2.55% 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
-0.76% 
0.20% 
114.67% 
-14.10% 
==PAGE:74==
 
38
Table 15 - Comparison of life cycle stages for each house and impact category considered in this study. The results were obtained using the 
LCIA method PB-LCIA. 
 a120 year service life, b150 year service life.  
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – 
Adaptable House, Q – Quota House) (CC - Climate change) 
  
  
Product 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Refa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
19.90% 
0.97% 
70.55% 
8.57% 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
20.04% 
0.98% 
70.31% 
8.67% 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
3.31% 
0.15% 
12.12% 
84.42% 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
18.32% 
1.11% 
83.89% 
-3.32% 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
0.49% 
0.02% 
99.14% 
0.35% 
UPa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
10.63% 
0.52% 
76.39% 
12.46% 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
10.62% 
0.51% 
76.31% 
12.55% 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
2.01% 
0.08% 
11.24% 
86.67% 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
10.98% 
0.61% 
90.68% 
-2.27% 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
0.27% 
0.01% 
99.25% 
0.47% 
TMFb 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
17.71% 
0.87% 
70.17% 
11.25% 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
17.90% 
0.88% 
69.88% 
11.34% 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
2.58% 
0.12% 
10.78% 
86.52% 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
23.40% 
1.35% 
83.56% 
-8.31% 
Freshwater use - Global [km3]8 
0.29% 
0.01% 
99.28% 
0.42% 
IMFb 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
17.84% 
1.06% 
74.40% 
6.70% 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
17.95% 
1.07% 
74.24% 
6.73% 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
3.57% 
0.19% 
13.13% 
83.10% 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
27.74% 
1.46% 
71.70% 
-0.89% 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
0.84% 
0.04% 
98.74% 
0.39% 
ADa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
13.41% 
0.60% 
74.68% 
11.32% 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
13.51% 
0.60% 
74.44% 
11.45% 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
1.97% 
0.08% 
10.83% 
87.12% 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
14.24% 
0.44% 
85.61% 
-0.28% 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
0.37% 
0.01% 
99.22% 
0.39% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
39
Qa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
25.10% 
1.31% 
64.71% 
8.88% 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
25.23% 
1.31% 
64.51% 
8.95% 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
4.29% 
0.21% 
11.26% 
84.23% 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
26.83% 
1.49% 
75.35% 
-3.67% 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
0.76% 
0.04% 
98.80% 
0.40% 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
40 
From the results it is found that the Use stage is the largest contributor to the environmental 
impact irrespective of which house is considered. When examining the results obtained using 
the LCIA method ILCD 2011, the Use stage is found to have the largest environmental 
impact potential rendering it to be the main contributor to the environmental impact in 18 out 
of 24 impact categories across all houses (see Table 14). To compare, when using the PB-
LCIA method the Use stage is found to be the main contributor in 24 out of 30 impact 
categories across all houses (see Table 15). The large impact potential from the Use stage was 
expected, as the energy consumption is a continuous input and thus keeps adding up during 
the service life of the houses.  
 
Furthermore, the End of Life stage is found to be a large contributor to the environmental 
impact potential particularly in the impact categories Marine eutrophication (ILCD 2011), 
Climate change (ILCD 2011), Climate change - Energy imbalance (PB-LCIA), Climate 
change - CO2 concentration (PB-LCIA) and Biogeochemical flows - N (PB-LCIA). The large 
environmental impact in the End of Life stage emerges from materials being disposed of for 
municipal incineration contributing to impact categories related to climate change and from 
wastewater treatment highly contributing to the impact categories Marine eutrophication and 
Biogeochemical flows - N for all houses. In fact, treatment of wastewater constitutes for 53-
59% of the End of Life stage when considering ILCD 2011, all houses and 83-87% of the 
End of Life stage when considering PB-LCIA. However, as wastewater is a result of the Use 
stage and is a continuous input, this result was expected. Finally, as presented in Table 14 the 
Product stage is found to be the second largest contributor in 13 out of 24 impact categories 
when considering the method ILCD 2011 and in 19 out of 30 impact categories when 
considering the PB-LCIA method (see Table 15). Again, this result was expected and 
indicates that the Product stage as well as the Use stage is important to consider when seeking 
to reduce the environmental impact of single family stand-alone dwellings.  
 
III.III CC and PB available to the buildings 
To investigate if the Mini CO2 houses can be considered absolute sustainable, the available 
SoSOS to a single family house is estimated for each impact category. The SoSOS is 
estimated using six different allocation principles as described in Section II.IV. The shares 
presented in Table 16 and 17 represents the maximum annual impact potential that each of 
the Mini CO2 houses may occupy in order to stay within its share of carrying capacity and 
Planetary Boundaries of the Earth System. For example; regarding the impact category 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
41 
Climate change, the potential impact of each Mini CO2 house may not exceed the limit of 
101 kg CO2 eq/yr for allocation principle 1 in order to be absolute sustainable.  
 
Table 16 - Share of safe operating space for each allocation principle using the method 
carrying capacity-based normalisation factors.  
(SoSOS1 - Share of Safe Operating Space, principle 1, SoSOS2 - Share of Safe Operating 
Space, principle 2, SoSOS3 - Share of Safe Operating Space, principle 3, SoSOS4 - Share of 
Safe Operating Space, principle 4, SoSOS5 - Share of Safe Operating Space, principle 5, 
SoSOS6 - Share of Safe Operating Space, principle 6) 
Impact category 
Normalisation 
factorNR.CC 
SoSOS1 
SoSOS2 
SoSOS3 
SoSOS4 
SoSOS5 
SoSOS6 
Climate change 
[kg CO2 eq/yr] 
6.79E+12 
1.01E+02 
2.54E+02 
4.96E+02 
3.10E+02 
5.58E+02 
6.25E+02 
Marine 
eutrophication  
[kg N eq/yr] 
2.00E+11 
2.97E+00 
7.49E+00 
1.46E+01 
9.14E+00 
1.64E+01 
1.84E+01 
Land use  
[kg C deficit/yr] 
1.37E+14 
2.04E+03 
5.13E+03 
1.00E+04 
6.26E+03 
1.13E+04 
1.26E+04 
Water resource 
depletion  
[m3 water eq/yr] 
6.85E+11 
1.02E+01 
2.56E+01 
5.00E+01 
3.13E+01 
5.63E+01 
6.30E+01 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
42 
Table 17 - Share of safe operating space for each allocation principle using the method PB-
LCIA. 
(SoSOS1 - Share of Safe Operating Space, principle 1, SoSOS2 - Share of Safe Operating 
Space, principle 2, SoSOS3 - Share of Safe Operating Space, principle 3, SoSOS4 - Share of 
Safe Operating Space, principle 4, SoSOS5 - Share of Safe Operating Space, principle 5, 
SoSOS6 - Share of Safe Operating Space, principle 6) 
(CC - Climate change) 
Impact category 
BoundaryPB 
SoSOS1 
SoSOS2 
SoSOS3 
SoSOS4 
SoSOS5 
SoSOS6 
CC - Energy 
imbalance  
[Wm-2/yr] 
1 
1.49E-11 
3.74E-11 
7.30E-11 
4.57E-11 
8.22E-11 
9.20E-11 
CC - CO2 
concentration 
[ppm/yr] 
72 
1.07E-09 
2.70E-09 
5.26E-09 
3.29E-09 
5.92E-09 
6.62E-09 
Land-system change 
- Global [%/yr] 
25 
3.72E-10 
9.36E-10 
1.83E-09 
1.14E-09 
2.05E-09 
2.30E-09 
Biogeochemical 
flows - N  
[Tg N/yr] 
62 
9.22E-10 
2.32E-09 
4.53E-09 
2.83E-09 
5.10E-09 
5.70E-09 
Freshwater use - 
Global [km3/yr] 
4000 
5.95E-08 
1.50E-07 
2.92E-07 
1.83E-07 
3.29E-07 
3.68E-07 
 
III.IV Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis 
In this section the results of the uncertainty analysis are presented (see Table 18 and 19) and 
the main findings from the analysis stated. 
 
Table 18 - The impact potential for each house, the Base Scenario and Scenario 6 as well as 
the selected impact categories. The 2.5% and 97.5% percentile (marking the 95% confidence 
interval) obtained from the Monte Carlo analysis are listed. If the impact score lies outside 
the 95% confidence interval, the model is considered uncertain, and is marked in red. The 
table presents the results obtained using CCnorm.  
  
  
Base 
Scenario 
2.5% 
percentile 
97.5% 
percentile 
Base Scenario, Ref 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.73E+03 
1.41E+03 
2.06E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4.49E+00 
3.56E+00 
5.78E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
8.67E+03 
6.09E+03 
1.24E+04 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
3.33E+01 
-2.29E+02 
3.08E+02 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
43 
Scenario 6, Ref 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
9.36E+02 
7.51E+02 
1.13E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
3.11E+00 
3.65E+03 
7.40E+03 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
5.21E+03 
2.36E+00 
4.13E+00 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
2.03E+01 
-1.18E+02 
1.66E+02 
Base Scenario, UP 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.78E+03 
1.47E+03 
2.11E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4.67E+00 
3.64E+00 
6.08E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
9.59E+03 
7.02E+03 
1.30E+04 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
3.27E+01 
-2.11E+02 
2.72E+02 
Scenario 6, UP 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
7.80E+02 
6.18E+02 
9.48E+02 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
2.92E+00 
3.73E+03 
6.98E+03 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
5.07E+03 
2.17E+00 
3.93E+00 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
2.00E+01 
-1.01E+02 
1.37E+02 
Base Scenario, 
TMF 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.62E+03 
1.28E+03 
1.98E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4.68E+00 
3.64E+00 
6.08E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
9.33E+03 
6.76E+03 
1.30E+04 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
3.26E+01 
-2.10E+02 
2.59E+02 
Scenario 6, TMF 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
8.06E+02 
6.11E+02 
1.00E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
3.02E+00 
2.25E+00 
4.04E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
5.40E+03 
3.93E+03 
7.50E+03 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
2.02E+01 
-9.68E+01 
1.37E+02 
Base Scenario, 
IMF 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.49E+03 
8.91E+02 
1.95E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
5.14E+00 
4.11E+00 
6.56E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
1.27E+04 
9.22E+03 
1.76E+04 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
3.31E+01 
-2.68E+02 
3.56E+02 
Scenario 6, IMF 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
6.67E+02 
3.18E+02 
9.31E+02 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
3.29E+00 
2.52E+00 
4.35E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
7.36E+03 
5.35E+03 
1.01E+04 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
2.06E+01 
-1.34E+02 
1.97E+02 
Base Scenario, AD 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
2.17E+03 
1.75E+03 
2.58E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
6.42E+00 
5.17E+00 
8.02E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
1.17E+04 
8.33E+03 
1.61E+04 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
4.56E+01 
-2.81E+02 
3.89E+02 
Scenario 6, AD 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
8.86E+02 
6.72E+02 
1.07E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
3.72E+00 
2.74E+00 
5.07E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
5.50E+03 
3.91E+03 
7.72E+03 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
2.47E+01 
-1.16E+02 
1.82E+02 
Base Scenario, Q 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.38E+03 
1.01E+03 
1.68E+03 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
3.98E+00 
3.16E+00 
5.11E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
8.36E+03 
5.96E+03 
1.16E+04 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
2.47E+01 
-2.16E+02 
3.05E+02 
Scenario 6, Q 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
7.41E+02 
5.18E+02 
9.24E+02 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
3.08E+00 
2.32E+00 
4.12E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
5.07E+03 
3.66E+03 
6.99E+03 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
1.84E+01 
-1.25E+02 
1.83E+02 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
44 
Table 19 - The impact potential for each house, the Base Scenario and Scenario 6 as well as 
the selected impact categories. The 2.5% and 97.5% percentile (marking the 95% confidence 
interval) obtained from the Monte Carlo analysis are listed. If the impact score lies outside 
the 95% confidence interval, the model is considered uncertain, and is marked in red. The 
table presents the results obtained using PB-LCIA.  
  
  
Base 
Scenario 
2.5% 
percentile 
97.5% 
percentile 
Base Scenario, Ref 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
6.12E-10 
5.63E-10 
6.80E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
4.53E-08 
4.16E-08 
5.03E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
3.91E-08 
2.63E-08 
5.73E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
3.27E-13 
1.11E-07 
2.33E-07 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.63E-07 
-4.17E-11 
4.24E-11 
Scenario 6, Ref 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
3.32E-10 
3.07E-10 
3.67E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
2.45E-08 
2.27E-08 
2.71E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
2.96E-08 
1.91E-08 
4.45E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
1.75E-13 
7.63E-08 
1.66E-07 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.15E-07 
-2.60E-11 
2.51E-11 
Base Scenario, UP 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
5.44E-10 
4.99E-10 
6.06E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
4.02E-08 
3.68E-08 
4.49E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
4.28E-08 
2.85E-08 
6.28E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
2.87E-13 
-4.13E-11 
4.18E-11 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.62E-07 
1.11E-07 
2.31E-07 
Scenario 6, UP 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
2.54E-10 
2.32E-10 
2.83E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
1.87E-08 
1.71E-08 
2.08E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
2.91E-08 
1.85E-08 
4.37E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
1.35E-13 
-2.31E-11 
2.43E-11 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.14E-07 
7.52E-08 
1.67E-07 
Base Scenario, TMF 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
6.10E-10 
5.55E-10 
6.88E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
4.54E-08 
4.12E-08 
5.12E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
4.21E-08 
2.82E-08 
6.23E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
3.13E-13 
-3.89E-11 
3.98E-11 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.61E-07 
1.10E-07 
2.31E-07 
Scenario 6, TMF 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
3.08E-10 
2.82E-10 
3.43E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
2.29E-08 
2.09E-08 
2.55E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
2.92E-08 
1.88E-08 
4.38E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
1.72E-13 
-2.40E-11 
2.44E-11 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.15E-07 
7.63E-08 
1.66E-07 
Base Scenario, IMF 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
6.70E-10 
6.18E-10 
7.43E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
4.95E-08 
4.57E-08 
5.50E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
4.37E-08 
2.94E-08 
6.35E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
5.82E-13 
-4.67E-11 
4.87E-11 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.63E-07 
1.11E-07 
2.33E-07 
Scenario 6, IMF 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
3.47E-10 
3.21E-10 
3.82E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
2.56E-08 
2.37E-08 
2.82E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
3.01E-08 
1.95E-08 
4.50E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
3.08E-13 
-2.86E-11 
2.96E-11 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.16E-07 
7.68E-08 
1.68E-07 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
45 
Base Scenario, AD 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
8.08E-10 
7.51E-10 
8.83E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
5.99E-08 
5.56E-08 
6.55E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
5.91E-08 
4.14E-08 
8.38E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
5.55E-13 
-5.14E-11 
5.08E-11 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
2.28E-07 
1.69E-07 
3.01E-07 
Scenario 6, AD 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
3.33E-10 
3.07E-10 
3.65E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
2.46E-08 
2.27E-08 
2.70E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
3.78E-08 
2.39E-08 
5.73E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
2.42E-13 
-2.39E-11 
2.57E-11 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.51E-07 
1.00E-07 
2.22E-07 
Base Scenario, Q 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
5.36E-10 
4.96E-10 
5.93E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
3.98E-08 
3.68E-08 
4.40E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
3.44E-08 
2.32E-08 
5.07E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
4.08E-13 
8.86E-08 
1.84E-07 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.29E-07 
-3.41E-11 
3.44E-11 
Scenario 6, Q 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
3.03E-10 
2.80E-10 
3.31E-10 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
2.24E-08 
2.08E-08 
2.46E-08 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
3.03E-08 
1.92E-08 
4.60E-08 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
2.14E-13 
-2.16E-11 
2.15E-11 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.20E-07 
7.91E-08 
1.74E-07 
 
From Table 18 and 19 it is found that the impact score obtained from this study in general lies 
within the 95% confidence interval obtained through the Monte Carlo analysis. For CCnorm, 
44 out of 48 impact scores is within the 95% confidence interval and for PB-LCIA the count 
is 54 out of 60 impact scores. However, considering the method CCnorm, the impact potential 
of Ref House and UP House, Scenario 6 for the two impact categories Marine eutrophication 
and Land use lies outside the 95% confidence interval and thus the model is uncertain. The 
case is the same when considering the PB-LCIA method. The impact potential of Ref House 
for the Base Scenario and Scenario 6 lies outside the 95% confidence interval for the impact 
categories Land-system change - global and Freshwater use - global as well as the impact 
potential of Q House for the Base Scenario and the impact categories Land-system change - 
global and Freshwater use - global. As stated, most impact scores for the tested scenarios lies 
within the 95% confidence interval and thus the model is not considered uncertain to a 
reasonable degree. However, since 4 out of 48 impact scores (for CCnorm) and 6 out of 60 
impact scores (for PB-LCIA) are outside the 95% confidence interval the model represent 
some level of uncertainty. As the Monte Carlo analysis performed in SimaPro calculates the 
inherent uncertainty of the model and not the uncertainty of the model against one specific 
parameter, it is not possible to identify which parameter is uncertain. Thus, the model have 
not been optimised for uncertainty, but instead the uncertainty have been taken into account 
when interpreting the results.  
 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
46 
Sensitivity analysis 
In this section the results of the sensitivity analysis are presented. As previously described, 
the tested parameters are the energy use for construction (+10%), the consumption of water 
and heat during the Use stage (+10%) and the service life (+-10%) (see Table 20 and 21). In 
addition, Scenario 1 to 5 are tested relative to the Base Scenario as well as the relative change 
if using stone wool instead of glass wool as process for mineral wool. The relative change for 
these parameters are presented (see Table 22 and 23).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
47
Table 20 - The estimated normalised sensitivity coefficient for the parameters energy use for construction, the consumption of water, the 
consumption of heat and the service life for all houses for the Base Scenario. If the normalised sensitivity coefficient is above 0.5, the model is 
considered sensitive towards the parameter and thus marked in red. The table presents the results obtained using CCnorm.  
  
  
Energy for 
construction 
Consumption of 
water 
Consumption of 
energy for heating 
Service life  
+10% 
Service life  
-10% 
  
  
Normalised sensitivity coefficient 
Refa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.75E-03 
2.93E-02 
1.53E-01 
- 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
7.00E-04 
1.13E-02 
9.40E-02 
- 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
9.85E-04 
7.40E-03 
3.91E-01 
- 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
1.79E-03 
6.76E-01 
1.28E-01 
- 
- 
UPa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.40E-03 
7.73E-02 
1.33E-01 
- 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
5.56E-04 
6.08E-01 
8.10E-02 
- 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
7.36E-04 
2.57E-02 
3.17E-01 
- 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
1.51E-03 
5.46E-01 
1.16E-01 
- 
- 
TMFb 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.36E-03 
8.40E-02 
1.51E-01 
- 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4.87E-04 
5.97E-01 
8.32E-02 
- 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
6.65E-04 
2.61E-02 
3.36E-01 
- 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
1.33E-03 
5.43E-01 
1.20E-01 
- 
- 
IMFb 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
1.62E-03 
9.14E-02 
1.82E-01 
- 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
4.88E-04 
5.44E-01 
8.38E-02 
- 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
5.36E-04 
1.92E-02 
2.72E-01 
- 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
1.44E-03 
5.38E-01 
1.34E-01 
- 
- 
ADa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
7.38E-04 
8.85E-02 
1.43E-01 
- 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
2.60E-04 
6.17E-01 
7.75E-02 
- 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
3.88E-04 
2.94E-02 
3.42E-01 
- 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
6.96E-04 
5.51E-01 
1.10E-01 
- 
- 
Qa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
2.01E-03 
7.85E-02 
1.49E-01 
4.45E-01 
1.71E+00 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
7.24E-04 
5.60E-01 
8.22E-02 
6.94E-01 
1.44E+00 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
9.37E-04 
2.32E-02 
3.15E-01 
6.46E-01 
1.54E+00 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
2.21E-03 
5.71E-01 
1.33E-01 
1.00E+00 
1.13E+00 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
48
Table 21 - The estimated normalised sensitivity coefficient for the parameters energy use for construction, the consumption of water, the 
consumption of heat and the service life for all houses for the Base Scenario. If the normalised sensitivity coefficient is above 0.5, the model is 
considered sensitive towards the parameter and thus marked in red. The table presents the results obtained using PB-LCIA.  
  
  
Energy for 
construction 
Consumption of  
water 
Consumption of  
energy for heating 
Service life  
+10% 
Service life  
-10% 
  
  
Normalised sensitivity coefficient 
Refa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
1.71E-03 
2.78E-02 
1.41E-01 
- 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
1.68E-03 
2.76E-02 
1.42E-01 
- 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
2.20E-04 
7.19E-03 
2.94E-02 
- 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
3.14E-03 
1.20E-02 
6.95E-02 
- 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
2.46E-05 
9.86E-01 
2.22E-03 
- 
- 
UPa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
1.59E-03 
6.40E-02 
1.42E-01 
- 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
1.57E-03 
6.30E-02 
1.44E-01 
- 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
1.66E-04 
8.64E-01 
2.41E-02 
- 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
2.96E-03 
1.26E-02 
7.11E-02 
- 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
2.03E-05 
9.84E-01 
1.99E-03 
- 
- 
TMFb 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
1.25E-03 
5.63E-02 
1.31E-01 
- 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
1.22E-03 
5.51E-02 
1.31E-01 
- 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
1.49E-04 
8.67E-01 
2.52E-02 
- 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
2.38E-03 
1.14E-02 
6.70E-02 
- 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.81E-05 
9.85E-01 
2.07E-03 
- 
- 
IMFb 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
1.25E-03 
5.14E-02 
1.32E-01 
- 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
1.23E-03 
5.06E-02 
1.33E-01 
- 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
1.57E-04 
8.35E-01 
2.69E-02 
- 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
1.41E-03 
6.17E-03 
3.99E-02 
- 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
1.96E-05 
9.73E-01 
5.69E-03 
- 
- 
ADa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
6.90E-04 
6.03E-02 
1.26E-01 
- 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
6.76E-04 
5.92E-02 
1.27E-01 
- 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
7.76E-05 
8.75E-01 
2.30E-02 
- 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
9.84E-04 
9.12E-03 
4.83E-02 
- 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
9.63E-06 
9.82E-01 
1.86E-03 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
49
Qa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
1.79E-03 
5.11E-02 
1.25E-01 
4.37E-01 
1.73E+00 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
1.76E-03 
5.01E-02 
1.26E-01 
4.35E-01 
1.74E+00 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
2.29E-04 
8.44E-01 
2.59E-02 
8.30E-01 
1.28E+00 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
2.31E-03 
6.98E-03 
4.32E-02 
3.15E-01 
1.96E+00 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
2.87E-05 
9.78E-01 
2.17E-03 
9.42E-01 
1.20E+00 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
50 
Table 20 and 21 shows that the normalised sensitivity coefficient is below 0.5 for all houses 
and impact categories for the parameters energy use for construction, consumption of energy 
for heating and service life. The only parameter that the model are sensitive towards is the 
consumption of water during the Use stage. The normalised sensitivity coefficient is above 
0.5 for 11 out of 24 impact categories (Marine eutrophication and Water resource depletion) 
for CCnorm and 11 out of 30 impact categories (Biogeochemical flows - N and Freshwater use 
- global) for PB-LCIA. As a result, the model is considered sensitive against this parameter 
and thus the uncertainty of this parameter should be taken into account when interpreting the 
results.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
51
Table 22 - The estimated relative change between Scenario 1 to 5 and the Base Scenario. If the relative change is above 2%, the model is 
considered sensitive towards the scenario and marked in red. The table presents the results obained using CCnorm.  
  
  
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 3 
Scenario 4 
Scenario 5 
Processes 
  
  
Relative change 
Refa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
24.29% 
4.98% 
13.92% 
6.37% 
4.51% 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
8.38% 
0.41% 
15.75% 
2.84% 
0.21% 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
23.70% 
3.99% 
18.81% 
5.12% 
0.37% 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
16.26% 
3.63% 
26.48% 
0.84% 
0.00% 
- 
UPa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
28.16% 
6.51% 
14.72% 
17.06% 
14.17% 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
14.71% 
0.69% 
17.65% 
6.31% 
1.00% 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
26.64% 
3.31% 
15.89% 
14.89% 
0.77% 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
16.24% 
3.38% 
25.17% 
0.05% 
0.13% 
- 
TMFb 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
25.61% 
5.01% 
14.50% 
10.39% 
5.65% 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
13.47% 
0.36% 
20.49% 
4.45% 
0.37% 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
25.19% 
3.51% 
16.66% 
8.06% 
0.73% 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
15.11% 
3.50% 
24.69% 
0.17% 
0.00% 
- 
IMFb 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
23.04% 
5.40% 
16.97% 
9.69% 
13.42% 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
13.81% 
0.30% 
19.08% 
6.39% 
0.22% 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
24.08% 
2.74% 
13.13% 
13.01% 
0.08% 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
14.36% 
3.72% 
25.38% 
0.99% 
0.05% 
- 
ADa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
44.73% 
5.01% 
15.20% 
2.97% 
5.49% 
- 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
36.61% 
0.42% 
21.07% 
1.64% 
0.13% 
- 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
40.68% 
3.63% 
18.03% 
3.99% 
0.07% 
- 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
37.80% 
3.28% 
25.04% 
0.20% 
0.01% 
- 
Qa 
Climate change [kg CO2 eq] 
23.38% 
4.84% 
0.05% 
6.32% 
6.35% 
6.02% 
Marine eutrophication [kg N eq] 
1.89% 
0.24% 
0.58% 
2.49% 
0.46% 
3.44% 
Land use [kg C deficit] 
24.96% 
3.41% 
0.02% 
5.97% 
0.47% 
0.33% 
Water resource depletion [m3 water eq] 
2.11% 
3.96% 
0.15% 
23.23% 
0.02% 
1.21% 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
52
Table 23 - The estimated relative change between Scenario 1 to 5 and the Base Scenario. If the relative change is above 2%, the model is 
considered sensitive towards the scenario and marked in red. The table presents the results obained using PB-LCIA. 
  
  
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 3 
Scenario 4 
Scenario 5 
Processes 
  
  
Relative change 
Refa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
25.06% 
4.69% 
12.98% 
8.11% 
2.84% 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
25.06% 
4.83% 
12.90% 
8.16% 
2.92% 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
0.28% 
0.08% 
16.15% 
0.45% 
0.00% 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
27.61% 
6.46% 
15.03% 
8.79% 
2.70% 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
5.85% 
0.07% 
24.70% 
3.36% 
0.00% 
- 
UPa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
27.24% 
5.42% 
14.12% 
17.02% 
3.17% 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
27.23% 
5.58% 
14.06% 
17.23% 
3.24% 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
9.02% 
0.35% 
18.84% 
1.04% 
0.42% 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
30.46% 
6.53% 
15.41% 
13.19% 
1.20% 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
5.92% 
0.08% 
24.75% 
15.32% 
0.02% 
- 
TMFb 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
26.49% 
4.43% 
12.51% 
13.38% 
2.10% 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
26.50% 
4.54% 
12.36% 
13.54% 
2.15% 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
7.44% 
0.07% 
23.35% 
0.15% 
0.00% 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
29.13% 
6.25% 
14.56% 
7.93% 
5.76% 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
4.78% 
0.07% 
24.81% 
4.49% 
0.01% 
- 
IMFb 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
24.41% 
4.26% 
12.30% 
14.15% 
1.94% 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
24.40% 
4.39% 
12.22% 
14.20% 
1.99% 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
7.85% 
0.17% 
22.63% 
0.40% 
0.00% 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
26.84% 
3.74% 
8.61% 
16.80% 
0.51% 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
5.14% 
0.11% 
24.45% 
10.28% 
0.00% 
- 
ADa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
44.37% 
4.50% 
13.34% 
4.59% 
3.86% 
- 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
44.43% 
4.63% 
13.21% 
4.62% 
3.96% 
- 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
33.75% 
0.08% 
23.56% 
0.17% 
0.00% 
- 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
36.18% 
5.18% 
11.93% 
14.13% 
0.46% 
- 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
32.72% 
0.07% 
24.72% 
3.08% 
0.00% 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
53
Qa 
CC - Energy imbalance [Wm-2] 
25.18% 
4.16% 
0.03% 
7.72% 
1.51% 
5.11% 
CC - CO2 concentration [ppm] 
29.09% 
3.40% 
0.00% 
17.58% 
2.82% 
4.96% 
Biogeochemical flows - N [Tg N] 
25.21% 
4.27% 
0.03% 
7.79% 
1.55% 
1.39% 
Land-system change - Global [%] 
16.60% 
0.04% 
0.88% 
1.40% 
0.00% 
-9.20% 
Freshwater use - Global [km3] 
23.49% 
0.07% 
0.00% 
3.70% 
0.00% 
0.48% 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
54 
The sensitivity analysis of Scenario 1 to 5 presented in Table 22 and 23 show that the model 
is sensitive towards all parameters tested in the scenarios as all scenarios show a relative 
change above 2% for at least one impact category. However, the model is found to be 
particularly sensitive towards the changes in Scenario 1 and 3, as the relative change of 2% is 
exceeded in 23 out of 24 impact categories (CCnorm) and 29 out 30 impact categories (PB-
LCIA) for Scenario 1 and in 20 out of 24 impact categories (CCnorm) and 24 out of 30 impact 
categories (PB-LCIA) for Scenario 3. This support the conclusion stated in the Article, 
namely that no expansion (Scenario 1) and a reduced energy consumption (Section 3) are 
among the most effective strategies to reduce the environmental impact. In addition, the 
sensitivity analysis show that the model is sensitive to the choice of process for mineral wool 
i.e. modelling mineral wool as glass wool or stone wool. However, as this parameter 
represents a high level of variability, one process can be just-as-likely as the other.  
 
The combined uncertainty and sensitivity of all tested parameters are summarised in Figure 2. 
As previously stated, the parameters located in the upper right corner should be taken into 
account when interpreting the results, as these are the parameters, which are uncertain and 
sensitive and thus potentially could affect the results.  
 
Figure 2 - Combined uncertainty and sensitivity of each parameter tested quantitatively.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
55 
IV 
Discussion 
The following paragraphs elaborate on aspects of the Article that was found to require further 
explanation or discussion to be sufficiently covered. A more thorough discussion of when and 
how the methods may be compared is given, key uncertain assumptions is discussed and 
finally the results obtained are validated by comparing characterised results with similar 
studies of the Mini CO2 Houses.  
 
IV.I 
Comparing the methods 
Ryberg et al. (2018) investigated the possibility of comparing the impact categories of PB-
LCIA with those of ILCD 2011 by calculating Spearman rank and Pearson correlation 
coefficients. The former was done with absolute impact scores, and a low correlation 
coefficient indicates discrepancy between the rankings of unit processes, while the latter was 
done with ranked impact scores and a low correlation coefficient indicates discrepancy 
between magnitudes of the impact scores for the unit processes (Ryberg, Owsianiak, 
Richardson, et al., 2018).  
 
It was found that the impact categories Climate change (ILCD 2011) and Climate change - 
CO2 concentration (PB-LCIA) have a Pearson correlation coefficient of 1.00 and Spearman 
rank correlation coefficient of 0.99. The same coefficients of correlation were found for 
Climate change (ILCD 2011) and Climate change - Energy imbalance (PB-LCIA).  
For the impact categories Marine eutrophication (ILCD 2011) and Biogeochemical flows - N 
(PB-LCIA) the Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.97 and Spearman rank correlation 
coefficient is 0.95. Ryberg et al. (2018) argue that the two impact categories can reasonably 
be compared, as most LCIA methods consider nitrogen as the primary contributor to Marine 
eutrophication. The impact categories Land use (ILCD 2011) and Land-system change - 
global (PB-LCIA) have the lowest coefficients of correlation even though they both express 
land use. The Pearson correlation coefficient was found to be 0.27 and the Spearman rank 
correlation coefficient to be 0.85 (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). 
 
The high coefficients for the Spearman rank correlation analysis indicate that the methods 
generally give a similar estimate of which processes contribute most to the environmental 
burdens (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). The high correlation coefficients for 
impact categories related to climate change can be explained by a similar approach for 
deriving characterisation models for both methods (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
56 
2018). The low coefficients of correlation for the impact categories related to land use is due 
to a difference in the focus of protection. The PB-LCIA impact category Land-system change 
- Global only include transformation of forest area, while the ILCD 2011 impact category 
Land use include other changes as well (Laurent and Owsianiak, 2017). Generally, Ryberg  
(2018) concludes that a comparison can be justified if the focus of protection in existing LCA 
impact categories can be compared to those of the PB. However, it should be stressed that - 
as mentioned in the Article - the impact categories of the two methods cannot be matched 1:1 
as they differ in several areas (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). 
 
A relevant challenge for both methods is how to deal with spatial differentiation of the 
thresholds. The PBs are in many cases related to Earth System processes, which occur at 
local or regional scale, and does not have any known global thresholds. Of the PB-LCIA 
impact categories considered in this study two require spatially differentiation, namely 
Freshwater use and Land-system change. Without spatial differentiation it would be 
necessary to aggregate averages over regions, and this could mean overlooking an 
exceedance of regional thresholds (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). This has 
been solved in PB-LCIA by classifying e.g. freshwater basins into archetypes based on the 
aridity of the geographical area in which the river basins are located. Even though this 
classification ensures that water abundance in humid areas does not hide the exceedance of 
local thresholds in arid regions, it still leaves the risk that exceedance of local level thresholds 
are overlooked due to water abundance in other areas (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 
2018). Furthermore, although necessary, the modification of the impact categories weakens 
the link to the PB-framework and complicates relating the impact scores to the SOS.  
 
IV.II Enabling the comparison between the houses 
The main cause of assumptions in this study was the comparative aspect given by the defined 
scope. A main goal was to compare the performance of the five Mini CO2 Houses and to 
allow for this comparison it was necessary to ensure equality between the “service” supplied 
by the houses. This meant that if one house enabled a “service”, e.g. low maintenance, it was 
crucial to assess if and how this could be accounted for in the systems for the other houses. In 
most cases, this was solved by performing system expansion. It was attempted to give each 
house one key benefit, corresponding to their design strategy. UP House was modelled with 
fewer virgin materials, IMF House and TMF House was modelled with a longer service life, 
AD House was modelled with less square meters over the entire service (as it was assumed 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
57 
that the expansion was removed once it could be spared), and Q House was modelled with 
lower energy and water consumption. However, all benefits was assigned with a critical mind 
so as to not overestimate the potential of the design strategies. Both IMF House and TMF 
House has been designed to be “architecturally timeless”, UP House has been designed with 
recycled furniture, and in AD House the interior walls have a flexible location in the house. 
While all of these features are important, they were not found to be verifiable at this point and 
therefore not fair to include as benefits.  
 
Where a benefit was added to a parameter for a house it was attempted to make the remaining 
houses more or less fair within the same parameter. This meant that all houses except UP 
House are modelled with mainly virgin materials, all other houses except IMF and TMF have 
a service life of 120 years, to all houses except AD House a permanent expansion has been 
added (the expansion added AD House is removable), and all houses except Q House has a 
energy and water consumption reflecting a standard Danish single family stand-alone 
dwelling. Limiting the amount of variables between the comparisons was adopted to 
highlight the environmental impact potential of each design strategy as much as possible. 
 
Although the modelled systems for the houses all fulfil the defined functional unit, it is 
relevant to consider if they can actually be fairly compared. Dwellings are complex systems 
to model, and while the primary function is clear - provide a liveable space - a wide range of 
secondary functions exist and challenge the comparison. Even though a primitive cabin 
would fulfil the functional unit of housing one family, most people choose to live in 
comfortable modern houses even though they are more expensive and require more 
maintenance. Architectural design (appearance, size, floor layout) will affect whether or not a 
house is considered a suitable living option for many people and as this is inherently a matter 
of personal taste, how can two non-identical houses really be compared? In this study it was 
assumed that all houses were acceptable alternatives to one another and that the matter of 
personal taste in building design could be overlooked.  
 
IV.III Service life of the building and building materials  
As described in the Article, one of the main uncertainties of the modelled systems is the 
assumed service life of the building components. In the following the considerations behind 
the choice of modelling approach will be elaborated. The service life of building components 
can be considered in four ways: technical, functional, financial and aesthetic. Technical 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
58 
service life refers to the time from when the building component is installed in the building 
while still having the physical and technical ability to fulfil its intended function. Technical 
service life is determined by the external forces on the component and its ability to withstand 
such forces (Aagaard et al., 2013). Functional service life is defined as the time from when 
the building component is installed in the building until the original function of the 
component is no longer required (Aagaard et al., 2013). Financial service life is the time 
from when the building component is installed in the building until maintenance and 
replacements are no longer reasonable from a life cycle cost perspective (Aagaard et al., 
2013). Aesthetic service life describes the time from when the building component is installed 
in the building and while the aesthetic standard is maintained (Aagaard et al., 2013). 
 
The service lives of all building components were in this study modelled as technical. 
Furthermore, it was decided to allow the service life of the entire building to dictate the 
modelled service life for all building components not exposed to either wear and tear (indoor 
surfaces) or the elements (outdoor surfaces) as it was assumed that they would be either too 
complicated or expensive to replace. These assumptions allowed the choice of materials to 
influence the impact from maintenance of the building, thereby giving the maintenance-free 
houses their intended advantage. However, it can be argued that the three other types of 
service life definitions should have influenced the modelled service life as well. Financial 
service life was not considered, as it was found to be outside the scope of this study and 
functional- as well as aesthetic service life was found unsuitable for quantification, as it is 
inherently defined by socio-technical and psychological factors (Aagaard et al., 2013). 
 
IV.IV Validating the results  
Table 24 compares results from similar studies of the Mini CO2 Houses from the Danish 
Building Research Institute (Rasmussen and Birgisdóttir, 2013) and Brejnrod et al. (2017) 
with the results obtained in this study for the impact category Climate change (or global 
warming potential in the Ökobau-framework).  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
59 
Table 24 - Comparison of the characterised results obtained using ILCD 2011 for the Base 
Scenario to the results presented by the Danish Building Research Institute (Rasmussen and 
Birgisdóttir, 2013) and Brejnrod et al. (Brejnrod et al., 2017) for impact categories related to 
climate change. 
(Ref – Reference House, UP – Upcycle House, TMF – Traditional Maintenance-free House, 
IMF – Innovative Maintenance-free House, AD – Adaptable House, Q – Quota House)  
(GWP - Global Warming Potential) 
aRasmussen and Birgisdóttir, 2013 
bBrejnrod et al., 2017 
cThe results obtained from this study 
 
 
Ref 
House 
UP 
House 
TMF 
House 
IMF 
House 
AD 
House 
Q  
House 
SH 
Ökobaua 
GWP,  
[kg CO2-eq/yr] 
1259.7 
1320.7 
- 
- 
1232.2 
1368.7 
- 
CML 2001b 
Climate change  
[kg CO2-eq/yr] 
- 
1547.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1923.0 
ILCD 2011c 
Climate change  
[kg CO2-eq/yr] 
1726.7 
1778.8 
1616.5 
1486.2 
2173.9 
1378.5 
- 
 
It is clear that the results obtained in this study overall corresponds well with results obtained 
by others using different impact assessment methods. The greatest difference is AD House 
for which this study found an annual climate change impact of 2112.7 kg CO2-eq compared 
to the study by the Danish Building Research Institute (Rasmussen and Birgisdóttir, 2013) 
which only estimated 1231.2 kg CO2-eq annually. However, this difference can be explained 
by the fact that the latter does not include an expansion of the house, which has been 
modelled as occurring three times during the lifetime of the building in this study. 
Furthermore, the Reference House has a somewhat lower impact in the study by the Danish 
Building Research Institute (Rasmussen and Birgisdóttir, 2013) than in this study, and this 
can be explained by the fact that the data used to model in the inventory has been updated in 
the time period between the two studies.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
60 
V 
References 
 
Aagaard, N.-J. et al. (2013) Levetider af bygningsdele ved vurdering af bæredygtighed og 
totaløkonomi, 1. doi: 10.1016/j.solmat.2010.06.021. 
Aggerholm, S. and Grau, K. (2014) SBi-anvisning 213: Bygningers energibehov. Available 
at: https://www.statsbiblioteket.dk/au/#/search?query=recordID:%22sb_6144776%22. 
Backhaus, J. et al. (2011) Sustainable lifestyles: Today’s facts & tomorrow’s trends. 
Available at: http://www.sustainable-
lifestyles.eu/fileadmin/images/content/D1.1_Baseline_Report.pdf. 
Bjørn, A. et al. (2016) ‘A proposal to measure absolute environmental sustainability in life 
cycle assessment’, Ecological Indicators. Elsevier Ltd, 63, pp. 1–13. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.11.046. 
Bjørn, A. and Hauschild, M. Z. (2015) ‘Introducing carrying capacity-based normalisation in 
LCA: framework and development of references at midpoint level’, International Journal of 
Life Cycle Assessment, 20(7), pp. 1005–1018. doi: 10.1007/s11367-015-0899-2. 
Bossink, B. A. G. and Brouwers, H. J. H. (1996) ‘Construction Waste: Quantification and 
Source Evaluation’, Journal of Construction Engineering and Management. 
Bre Global Verified EPD (2018) EPD Kingspan. 
Brejnrod, K. N. et al. (2017) ‘The absolute environmental performance of buildings’, 
Building and Environment. Elsevier Ltd, 119, pp. 87–98. doi: 
10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.04.003. 
Cole, R. J. (1998) ‘Energy and greenhouse gas emissions associated with the construction of 
alternative structural systems’, Jane’s Defence Weekly, (APR). Available at: 
https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
80053171150&partnerID=40&md5=5730b04cf9e9e69212a96312480e7e1a. 
Dansk Standard (2006) ISO 14044: Miljøledelse - Livscyklusvurdering - Principper og 
struktur. Available at: https://webshop.ds.dk/da-dk/standard/ds-en-iso-140402006 (Accessed: 
22 January 2019). 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
61 
Dansk Standard (2008) ISO 14040: Miljøledelse - Livscyklusvurdering - Krav og vejledning. 
Dansk Standard (2012) DS/EN 15978: Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og anlæg – 
Vurdering af bygningers miljømæssige kvalitet – Beregningsmetode. 
Dansk vand og Spildevandsforening and DTU Miljø & Ressourcer (2003) Vandforbrug og 
forbrugsvariationer - Indledende undersøgelser. Available at: 
http://www2.er.dtu.dk/publications/fulltext/2004/MR2004-180.pdf (Accessed: 9 January 
2019). 
Desmit, X. et al. (2018) ‘Reducing marine eutrophication may require a paradigmatic 
change’, Science of the Total Environment. The Authors, 635, pp. 1444–1466. doi: 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.181. 
Earthsure (2017) EPD Richlite. 
Ecoinvent (2019) Ecoinvent version 3. Available at: https://www.ecoinvent.org/ (Accessed: 
11 January 2019). 
Energistyrelsen (2018a) Basisfremskrivning 2018, Energi- og klimafremskrivning til 2030 
under fravær af nye tiltag. Available at: 
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/basisfremskrivning_2018.pdf. 
Energistyrelsen (2018b) Basisfremskrivning 2018 - Figurer og Tabeller. 
EPD Danmark (2017) EPD Gamle Mursten. 
Eurostat (2016) Database - Eurostat. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/database 
(Accessed: 23 January 2019). 
Eurostat (2018) Final consumption expenditure of households, by consumption purpose - 
Eurostat. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-datasets/-/tec00134 
(Accessed: 23 January 2019). 
Frostell, B. M. et al. (2015) ‘Modeling both direct and indirect environmental load of 
purchase decisions: A web-based tool addressing household metabolism’, Environmental 
Modelling and Software, 71, pp. 138–147. doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2015.05.014. 
 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
62 
Geissdoerfer, M. et al. (2017) ‘The Circular Economy – A new sustainability paradigm?’, 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 143, pp. 757–768. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048. 
Gram-Hanssen, K. and Rhiger Hansen, A. (2016) Forskellen mellem målt og beregnet 
energiforbrug til opvarmning af parcelhuse. 
Institut Bauen und Umwelt e.V. (2014) EPD Technopor. 
Institut Bauen und Umwelt e.V. (2017a) EPD Heraklith homogeneous board. 
Institut Bauen und Umwelt e.V. (2017b) EPD Ytong. 
Khasreen, M. M., Banfill, P. F. G. and Menzies, G. F. (2009) ‘Life-cycle assessment and the 
environmental impact of buildings: A review’, Sustainability, 1(3), pp. 674–701. doi: 
10.3390/su1030674. 
Laurent, A. and Owsianiak, M. (2017) ‘Potentials and limitations of footprints for gauging 
environmental sustainability’, Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 25, pp. 20–
27. doi: 10.1016/j.cosust.2017.04.003. 
Lenton, T. M. et al. (2008) ‘Tipping elements in the Earth’s climate system’, Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 105(6), pp. 1786–1793. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0705414105. 
Owsianiak, M. et al. (2018) ‘Chapter 39: Illustrative Case Study: Life Cycle Assessment of 
Four Window Alternatives’, in Life Cycle Assessment, Theory and Practice. 
PRé, Goedkoop, M., Oele, M., Leijting, J., et al. (2016) Introduction to LCA with SimaPro. 
Available at: www.pre-sustainability.com (Accessed: 9 January 2019). 
PRé, Goedkoop, M., Oele, M., Vieira, M., et al. (2016) SimaPro Tutorial. Available at: 
www.pre-sustainability.com (Accessed: 9 January 2019). 
PRé (2019) SimaPro, the world’s leading sustainability software. Available at: 
https://www.pre-sustainability.com/sustainability-consulting/sustainable-practices/custom-
sustainability-software (Accessed: 11 January 2019). 
Rasmussen, F. N. and Birgisdóttir, H. (2013) Livscyklusvurdering af MiniCO2-husene i 
Nyborg. 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
63 
Rasmussen, M. K. and Johannsen, K. B. (2016) Kvotehuset: Midtvejsevaluering. 
Realdania Byg and Kleis, B. (2013a) Det Foranderlige Hus - Bygget til at bygge om. 
Available at: https://www.realdaniabyogbygklubben.dk/media/202375/dfh_web.pdf 
(Accessed: 27 August 2018). 
Realdania Byg and Kleis, B. (2013b) Upcycle House - genbrug fra inderst til yderst. 
Available at: 
https://www.realdaniabyogbygklubben.dk/media/188277/upcycle_huset_realdania_byg_web
__3_.pdf (Accessed: 27 August 2018). 
Realdania Byg and Kleis, B. (2014a) Det Vedligeholdelsesfri Hus - Murværk holder. 
Available at: 
https://www.realdaniabyogbygklubben.dk/media/232521/det_vedligeholdelsesfri_hus__tradit
ion.pdf (Accessed: 27 August 2018). 
Realdania Byg and Kleis, B. (2014b) Det Vedligeholdelsesfrie Hus - fornyelse fortolker 
fortiden. Available at: 
https://www.realdaniabyogbygklubben.dk/media/232518/det_vedligeholdelsesfri_hus__forny
else.pdf (Accessed: 27 August 2018). 
Realdania Byg and Kleis, B. (2014c) Kvotehuset - sætter beboerne i spil. Available at: 
https://www.realdaniabyogbygklubben.dk/media/232524/kvotehuset.pdf (Accessed: 27 
August 2018). 
Rockström, J., Steffen, W., et al. (2009) ‘Planetary Boundaries: Exploring the safe operating 
space for humanity’, Ecology and Society, XXXIII(2), pp. 81–87. doi: 10.1007/s13398-014-
0173-7.2. 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Richardson, K., et al. (2018) ‘Development of a life-cycle 
impact assessment methodology linked to the Planetary Boundaries framework’, Ecological 
Indicators, 88(December), pp. 250–262. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.12.065. 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Clavreul, J., et al. (2018) ‘How to bring absolute 
sustainability into decision-making: An industry case study using a Planetary Boundary-
based methodology’, Science of The Total Environment. Elsevier, 634, pp. 1406–1416. doi: 
10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2018.04.075. 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
64 
Ryberg, M. W. (2018) ‘Putting life-cycle indicators on an absolute scale – Integrating 
Planetary Boundaries into Life- Cycle Assessment’, (May). 
Scheffer, M. and Carpenter, S. R. (2003) ‘Catastrophic regime shifts in ecosystems: linking 
theory to observation’, Trends in Ecology & Evolution. Elsevier Current Trends, 18(12), pp. 
648–656. doi: 10.1016/J.TREE.2003.09.002. 
Steffen, W. et al. (2015) ‘Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing 
planet’, Science, 348(6240), p. 1217–c. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa9629. 
The World Bank (2014a) CO2 emissions (kt) - Data. Available at: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.ATM.CO2E.KT (Accessed: 23 January 2019). 
The World Bank (2014b) CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita) - Data. Available at: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.ATM.CO2E.PC?locations=DK&view=chart 
(Accessed: 23 January 2019). 
The World Bank (2016) Final consumption expenditure - Data. Available at: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NE.CON.TOTL.CD (Accessed: 23 January 2019). 
United Nations and Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division (2017) 
World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables. 
Available at: https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/publications/files/wpp2017_keyfindings.pdf 
(Accessed: 20 December 2018). 
 
==PAGE:101==
Assessment of absolute sustainability in the built environment 
 
 
Supporting Information II 
 
 
Pernille Krogh Ohms1 & Camilla Marlene Ernst Andersen1 
1Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
25th of January 2019 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
Reading guide 
A project course prior to this thesis was conducted in August 2018. Through this project, we sought 
to investigate the subject of absolute sustainability and to identify methodologies to quantify 
absolute sustainability. The study was conducted as a literature review where relevant literature 
regarding absolute sustainability were examined including the inevitable topics of carrying capacity 
of the Earth System and the Planetary Boundaries framework. Furthermore, 12 methodologies to 
assess the level of absolute sustainability were examined and of those, two methodologies were 
chosen to be applied in this Master thesis. This literature review resulted in a report briefly 
describing absolute sustainability and related methodologies as well as discussing pros and cons of 
each method when to be applied in a building context. This study is presented in the following and 
the methods identified as the most relevant were applied in the thesis.  
 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
 
 
 
Review and analysis  
of methods for absolute sustainability assessments 
 
By Camilla Andersen, s133757 and Pernille Ohms s133740 
24th of August 2018 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
1 Introduction 
This report is a preliminary study to create the basis for a master's thesis which will be conducted in 
the fall of 2018 in collaboration with the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis will 
treat the subject of absolute environmental sustainability in the building industry using the 
methodology of life cycle assessment (LCA). To support this, this study seeks to describe and 
investigate the basic principles in regards to absolute environmental sustainability including 
planetary boundaries and carrying capacity and to assess existing methods to quantify absolute 
environmental sustainability. These methods will briefly be described and some methods will be 
selected for further investigation and coupled with LCAs in the master’s thesis. Since one of the 
main goals in the master’s thesis will be to compare two methods, pros and cons of the methods 
investigated in this study will be discussed. Finally, the two methods with the most relevance to 
LCAs of buildings will be selected and applied in the master’s thesis.  
  
In addition, when conducting a life cycle assessment, one of the main tasks is to critically examine 
which impact categories are most relevant to the specific case. In this study, the focus is on the 
building industry, which is why one of the goals of this report is to evaluate which impact 
categories are the most relevant to include when performing LCAs on buildings.   
2 Absolute sustainability  
Along with an increasing interest in environmental sustainability of products and services the recent 
years have seen a growing use of life cycle assessment (LCA) and life cycle thinking in many 
industries as well as the public sector (Bjørn and Hauschild, 2015). However, LCA is inherently 
most suitable in comparative assessments. The methodology does not indicate how a product 
performs relative to a specific target, it can only reveal whether product “A” has a higher or lower 
environmental impact than product “B” (Brejnrod et al., 2017). This inspires the need for an 
“absolute” evaluation criteria which identifies the ability of the environment to cope with human 
activities. Various environmental indicators have been defined for global problems, but these are 
typically only used to compare relative performance and are rarely used to define good or bad 
performance above or below an absolute boundary (Nykvist et al., 2013). In the following 
paragraphs two different indicators of absolute sustainability will be presented and discussed.  
 
==PAGE:105==
2.1 Defining the planetary boundaries 
Over the past 10,000 years the Earth has remained within a stable domain known as the Holocene 
with only natural environment fluctuations (Rockström et al., 2009). Our planet’s resilience has 
kept it within a state where key Earth system processes can take place and until recently humans 
have not affected the functioning of the Earth system at a global scale (Rockström et al., 2009). The 
industrial revolution of the 18th and 19th century changed this. Human activities since then have 
increasingly influenced the Earth’s climate and ecosystems and this has caused the Earth to enter a 
new domain, the Anthropocene (Rockström et al., 2009). The fact that this change in domain is so 
clearly linked to human activities inspired the question posed by Rockström et al. in their 2009 
article: “What are the non-negotiable planetary preconditions that humanity needs to respect in 
order to avoid the risk of deleterious or even catastrophic environmental change at continental to 
global scale?”. This led to the concept of planetary boundaries which was first presented in 2009. 
Planetary boundaries mark a safe operating space for humanity with respect to the Earth’s system 
and in association with the planets biophysical subsystems and processes (Brejnrod et al., 2017). 
The planetary boundaries defined by Rockström et al. (2009) were - and still is - associated with a 
high level of uncertainty. As the planetary boundaries are interlinked, crossing one limit may 
drastically reduce the limit of other planetary boundaries, and this makes it almost impossible to 
predict cases of burden shifting between environmental indicators (Dao et al., 2015).  
  
The concept of planetary boundaries is one of the most recent attempts to quantify the carrying 
capacity of our planet at a global scale. Carrying capacity can be defined as the maximum sustained 
environmental intervention a natural system can withstand without experiencing negative changes 
in structure or functioning that are difficult or impossible to revert (Bjørn and Hauschild, 2015). 
Both carrying capacity and planetary boundaries can be defined as “limits” of our Earth system, not 
to be confused with policy targets such as Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) or with footprints such as carbon footprint and water footprint (Dao et 
al., 2015). The limit indicating carrying capacity of the Earth is not the same as the limit indicating 
planetary boundaries. The carrying capacity-limit is specific for each local system and it is therefore 
not possible to know the exact location of a global carrying capacity-limit as this will be affected by 
many local systems (Ryberg, 2018). This is expressed by a zone of uncertainty surrounding the 
unknown carrying capacity-limit. The planetary boundary, which relates to a global system, is 
==PAGE:106==
placed at the lower limit of the zone of uncertainty. This ensures that planetary boundaries 
effectively define the safe operating space for humanity (Ryberg, 2018).  
2.2 Sharing the safe operating space  
One limitation in the definition of the planetary boundaries is the lack of spatial differentiation. For 
example, for the land use boundary it is only stated that, globally, no more than 15% of ice-free 
land must be converted to cropland, but it is not specified which land would be more or less harmful 
to convert (Nykvist et al., 2013). This universal approach underlines the relevance of downscaling 
the planetary boundaries to a regional scale, or in other words perform an allocation of the “safe 
operating space”. Furthermore, the relevance of regional-scale boundaries is reinforced by an 
argument towards guaranteeing equity among all humans. However, allocating the world’s carrying 
capacity to countries or regions cannot be done in a truly objective way. Any allocation method can 
be perceived as subjective and thereby more or less fair depending on the eyes of the beholder 
(Brejnrod et al., 2017). Performing an allocation based on an egalitarian approach where the 
carrying capacity of the earth is equally distributed among each world citizen is a popular approach 
to the dilemma.  
  
Incorporating absolute sustainability in terms of planetary boundaries and carrying capacity into a 
LCA can be done by including one of the following three components: one is to develop 
characterization factors for impact assessment based on the carrying capacity of the Earth, another 
is to carry out a normalization by applying factors based on carrying capacity and finally, the share 
of the planetary boundaries occupied by the corresponding footprint can be used as a weighting 
factor (Brejnrod et al., 2017). Both approaches would affect the impact assessment step of the 
traditional LCA methodology where characterization and normalization should take place according 
to ISO 14040. In the following paragraphs 12 different methods that are all related to the 
quantification of absolute sustainability is investigated in terms of their relevance towards coupling 
LCA with absolute sustainability. Some of the methods are designed to be included in a step of a 
typical LCA, whereas some methods explain a whole new approach to life cycle assessment.  Some 
of the methods are designed to be included in a step of a typical LCA, whereas some methods 
explain a whole new approach to life cycle assessment.   
 
==PAGE:107==
3 Methods  
Method 1: Techno-Ecological Synergy Life Cycle Assessment (TES-LCA) 
The methodology Techno-Ecological Synergy Life Cycle Assessment (TES-LCA) is an approach 
presented by Liu and Bakshi (2018) in which each step of a conventional LCA is modified. As 
mentioned, a conventional LCA is relative and thus, to measure absolute environmental 
sustainability, a comparison between supply and demand of ecosystem services (ES) is needed (Liu 
and Bakshi, 2018). The TES framework includes the ES demanded by technological systems and 
the supply from the corresponding ecosystems. From this, the ecological exceedance of the 
corresponding carrying capacity of technological systems can be estimated. By combining TES 
with LCA, it is possible to measure the extent of absolute sustainability of a product, system or 
service and thereby help in decision making from a local to a global scale (Liu and Bakshi, 2018). 
The framework allows for two kinds of allocation principles, namely proportional allocation and 
avoided allocation, which differs in such a way that proportional allocation can provide local 
sustainability metrics, whereas avoided allocation assumes all activities to have identical 
sustainability metrics (Liu and Bakshi, 2018). 
  
Method 2: Emissions intensity based on emission allowances 
In Girod et al. (2013), the goal is to assess the required change in emission intensity to achieve 
global emission reduction goals. First, the future global consumption patterns are estimated and 
then the IPAT equation is used to estimate the related effects on GHG (Greenhouse Gas) emissions. 
IPAT is expressed as Impact = Population x Affluence x Technology (IPAT), where the Impact is 
in GHG emissions, Affluence in consumption per capita, Technology in emissions per unit of 
consumption for different consumption categories. The next step is to allocate the emissions to the 
different consumption categories in order to finally estimate the GHG intensity based on the 
emission allowances (Girod, Van Vuuren and Hertwich, 2013). By doing so, the emission intensity 
changes required to reach global emission goals can be found and then used in a decision-making 
processes and climate mitigation. The framework presented by Girod et al. focuses on global 
consumption levels and the five different consumption categories food, shelter, travel, goods and 
services (Girod, Van Vuuren and Hertwich, 2013).  
 
 
  
==PAGE:108==
Method 3: Carrying capacity-based normalization factors 
Bjørn et al. (2015) presents a framework that links carrying capacity of an ecosystem with impacts 
found in a LCA through development of carrying capacity-based normalization references. These 
carrying capacity-based normalization references is based on scientific thresholds identified in 
existing literature and is described in annual personal share of carrying capacity. Using these 
normalization references enables an assessment of absolute environmental sustainability on a local, 
regional or global scale. In Bjørn et al. (2015) average carrying capacity-based normalization 
references on a global scale (the world) and on a regional scale (Europe) is developed and the 
normalization references is developed for ten midpoint categories typically included in LCA and 
linked to the area of protection natural environment. These midpoint categories are climate change, 
ozone depletion, photochemical ozone formation, terrestrial acidification, terrestrial eutrophication, 
freshwater eutrophication, marine eutrophication, ecotoxicity, land use, and water depletion.   
  
Method 4: Planetary boundaries-based weighting factors 
In Tuomisto et al. (2012) a framework for the weighting step in a LCA, which is usually considered 
unreliable, uncertain and subjective, is presented. To cope with this subjectiveness and uncertainty, 
the framework is based on the nine planetary boundaries described by Rockström et al. (2009), 
namely climate change, rate of biodiversity loss, nitrogen cycle, phosphorus cycle, stratospheric 
ozone depletion, global freshwater use, and change in land use (Tuomisto et al., 2012). The 
planetary boundary for each category is used to develop the weighting factors by calculating the 
ratio between the current status of environmental impact and the estimated boundary (Tuomisto et 
al., 2012). By doing so, it is assumed that all impact categories are of equal importance. This is an 
important assumption, however it is consistent with the planetary boundary framework that gives 
the safe boundaries which it is necessary to stay within (Tuomisto et al., 2012). The weighting 
factors, the result of the impact before weighting and the normalization value, are then used to 
calculate the total weighted score for all impact categories (Tuomisto et al., 2012). 
  
Method 5: Biophysical Accounting  
In the study by Fanning and O’Neill (2016), indicators that measure the performance of high-
consuming nations are developed. A good or bad performance is in relation to the planetary 
boundaries framework and the defined safe boundaries. As Fanning and O’Neill (2016) explains, 
nations that performs well meets the conditions of a steady-state economy, which means having 
==PAGE:109==
non-growing physical stocks and flows. Fanning et al. develops 10 different indicators to describe 
the performance, which includes three indicators of aggregate resource consumption, three 
measures of physical stock and four measures of sustainable scale (Fanning and O’Neill, 2016). The 
four measures of sustainable scale are cumulative carbon footprint relative to carbon budget, 
nutrient use relative to biogeochemical boundaries, blue water consumption relative to monthly 
basin-level availability and land footprint relative to biocapacity (Fanning and O’Neill, 2016). In 
Fanning and O’Neill (2016), the framework is applied to two national scales and two sub-national 
scales and can be helpful in prioritizing environmental decision-making.   
  
Method 6: Footprint-boundary ESA (F-B ESA) 
Fang et al. (2015) presents an update of the footprint-boundary ESA (F-B ESA) framework. The 
aim with the updated framework is to show that the framework is applicable on a national level to 
allocate responsibility for environmental sustainability (Fang et al., 2015). The updated framework 
is based on the concept of planetary boundaries for three indicators, namely carbon emissions, 
water use and land use (Fang et al., 2015). These boundaries are allocated to 28 selected countries 
and the environmental footprint of these countries are compared (Fang et al., 2015). To measure the 
performance of the selected countries in regards to the planetary boundaries, two measures are 
developed. One, Environmental Sustainability Distance (ESD), refers to the difference between the 
footprint of a nation and the relevant safe boundary. If the difference, ESD, is above zero the 
country is considered unsustainable, since the footprint exceeds the safe boundary and vice versa 
(Fang et al., 2015). Another measure, ESR, refers to the ratio of the footprint of a country to a 
relevant safe boundary. As for the measure ESD, if the ratio, ESR, is above zero the country is 
considered unsustainable, since the footprint exceeds the safe boundary and vice versa (Fang et al., 
2015). 
  
Method 7: Safe and just space for humanity (SJS) 
The planetary boundaries framework was extended in 2012 by Raworth to feature indicators of 
social well-being. This framework is called “safe and just space for humanity” (SJS) and includes 
11 social dimensions in addition to the nine planetary boundaries. Since the main aim with this 
method is to help identify priority areas for action and to influence public policy on a national scale 
(Cole, Bailey and New, 2014), the goal presented in Cole, Bailey and New (2014) is to downscale 
the SJS framework to a national level and use it to measure the social and environmental 
==PAGE:110==
sustainability of South Africa. The safe boundaries for the 20 social and environmental indicators 
are based on data from national and international databases and reports, academic papers and expert 
judgement and the ratio between the footprint and the boundary is presented in two radar charts 
(Cole, Bailey and New, 2014). 
  
Method 8: Carrying capacity-based characterization factors  
Bjørn et al. (2016) presents a way of using carrying capacity as environmental sustainability 
reference in life cycle impact assessment models. This is a framework to integrate absolute 
environmental sustainability in LCAs and to express occupation of carrying capacity per kg 
emission for each impact category (Bjørn et al., 2016). To calculate the characterization factors, 
Bjørn et al. (2016) coupled carrying capacities with deposition factors from a global deposition 
mode. This is done by dividing conventional characterization factors such as the fate factor (FF), 
the effect factor (EF) and the exposure factor (XF) by carrying capacity for the LCA impact 
categories. By doing so new characterization factors can be used further in the LCA (Bjørn et al., 
2016). The framework is tested for the impact category terrestrial acidification and the study 
therefore covers the global scale. However, whether the framework applies to a local, regional or 
global scale depends on the spatial dimension of the LCA impact category.  
  
Method 9: Household-level Sustainability Transition (HST) 
This framework, presented by Laakso and Lettenmeier (2016), describes a way to transition towards 
sustainability on a household-level. The framework is based on the method Material Input Per unit 
of Service (MIPS), which can be used to indicate the use of material resources on a household level 
(Laakso and Lettenmeier, 2016). The Household-level Sustainability Transition (HST) expands the 
MIPS methodology by not only including the resource use but also including vision-development, 
conducting experiments, and learning and upscaling (Laakso and Lettenmeier, 2016). In this 
framework the resource use of households is measured on a micro level and tested towards a one-
planet resource use (Laakso and Lettenmeier, 2016). In (Laakso and Lettenmeier, 2016), the 
framework is tested on five households in Finland and different strategies for each household is 
developed by the users along with providers of services, products and infrastructures. It is clear that 
the spatial scale of this framework is on a local level, however if applied to a significant number of 
households it will reduce the global resource use (Laakso and Lettenmeier, 2016). 
  
==PAGE:111==
Method 10: Impact reduction targets in LCA context 
Sandin, Peters and Svanström (2015) presents a methodology to set impact-reduction targets for 
products using the global goals defined in the planetary boundaries framework. This methodology 
is meant to be integrated in a typical life cycle assessment (LCA) of products and thereby provide 
the opportunity to evaluate the potential for intervention to lower the environmental impact of the 
examined product (Sandin, Peters and Svanström, 2015). The framework consists of four steps, 
which is described in Sandin, Peters and Svanström (2015) thoroughly. First step is to identify the 
planetary boundaries that is relevant to the impact categories examined for the specific product. 
Next, to interpret global impact-reduction targets implied by planetary boundaries. Third, is to 
translate the planetary boundaries into reduction targets for the global market segment that the 
product belongs. Finally, the global market reduction targets are translated into production-specific 
reduction targets (Sandin, Peters and Svanström, 2015). This framework was tested on the Swedish 
clothing industry and in doing so (Sandin, Peters and Svanström, 2015) found that the outcome is 
strongly dependent on the allocation method used to allocate the allowed impact between regions. 
The outcome also greatly depends on the geographical scope, however (Sandin, Peters and 
Svanström, 2015) suggests that the framework can be applied to a global and regional scale.  
  
Method 11: Planetary Boundaries Life Cycle Impact Assessment (PB-LCIA) 
Ryberg et al. (2018) has developed a methodology, PB-LCIA, which allows for expressing 
environmental impacts indicators in metrics that correspond to the control variables in the planetary 
boundaries framework. This methodology enables a quantification of the environmental 
performance of products and technologies in relation to planetary boundaries (Ryberg et al., 2018). 
Ryberg et al. (2018) have developed characterization factors for direct use in the LCIA phase of a 
life cycle assessment (LCA) for 85 elementary flows, all recognized as dominant contributors to 
transgressing specific planetary boundaries. The motivation for developing such as methodology is 
the fact that environmental impacts in a conventional LCIA phase are integrated over time and do 
not describe a specific point in time. This makes LCIA results suitable for comparative purposes, 
but not for expressing changes in environmental states or flow rates (Ryberg et al., 2018). To 
accommodate for this difference, it is necessary to alter the way the functional unit (FU) is 
expressed. The PB-LCIA method allows for a quantification of the share of the “safe operating 
space” that human activities occupy.  
  
==PAGE:112==
Method 12: Planetary Boundaries Allowance (PBA’06) 
This framework, presented in Doka (2016), is based on planetary boundaries concept and is an 
update of the Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) method. It is called Planetary Boundaries 
Allowance (PBA) since it looks into the environmental impact of a personal consumption pattern 
and checks if this stays within the safe boundary (Doka, 2016). To do so, the global planetary 
boundaries need to be converted into a personal scale of per-capita-allowances (Doka, 2016). From 
this, Doka (2016) develops LCIA characterization factors for each planetary boundary, which 
describes whether or not the safe boundary is exceeded. The unit of these characterization factors is 
PBA per unit of environmental exchange and if this value is above 1, the per-capita annual 
allowance for each boundary is exceeded and the lifestyle is considered unsustainable (Doka, 2016). 
The characterization factors are based on the planetary boundaries and therefore only provide 
generic global characterization factors. This means that it cannot be used on a regional or local level 
(Doka, 2016).  
4 Discussion  
The previous paragraph investigates 12 different methods that were initially found to be linked to 
either planetary boundaries, absolute sustainability, carrying capacity, or life cycle assessments. The 
overall goal of this study is to implement absolute sustainability in life cycle assessment on 
buildings. We find that some of the methods are more relevant than others towards achieving this 
goal. Some methods, such as Method 6, 7 and 10, have a scope either too wide (Method 6 considers 
national scale) or too narrow (Method 7 considers humans, Method 10 considers products) which 
did not match our goal of evaluating at single-building level. Other methods, such as Method 1 and 
2, focus on impacts that did not match our goal of including the importance of the ecosphere 
(Method 1 focuses on the technosphere) or our goal of expanding the scope to several impact 
categories (Method 2 only focuses on GHG emissions). Finally, some methods, such as Method 4, 
were found to be too simple or more or less irrelevant to our goal as they only consider e.g. the 
weighting step of a LCA.  
  
Among the 12 methods described in the previous paragraph we found two methods highly relevant 
to our goal and two methods possibly relevant. The two methods we found to be the most relevant 
were Method 3 and Method 11. Method 3 calculates normalization factors based on carrying 
capacity, and thereby links the carrying capacity of an ecosystem with the impacts found in a LCA. 
==PAGE:113==
Method 11 calculates characterization factors (CFs) that enables a quantification of the 
environmental performance of products and technologies in relation to planetary boundaries. We 
find that it would be interesting to implement both methods in a LCA process to investigate the 
difference between incorporating absolute in sustainability in the form of CFs versus normalization 
factors. Additionally, we find that Method 8 and Method 9 could be interesting to include in our 
future work. Method 8 has the drawback that carrying capacity is expressed as acid deposition, 
which makes it impractical in a comparison with Method 11 as the planetary boundaries does not 
consider this impact category. The scope of Method 9 makes it somewhat relevant to the goal of our 
study. It focuses on the household-scale, but as it focuses more on the behavior of the user rather 
than the technical composition of a building it is not directly applicable in our investigation. 
However, we would like to keep the method in mind as one of the houses we will be investigating, 
is focused on user behavior more than the actual construction of the building.  
4.1 Choosing impact categories  
One of the goals of this initial investigation was to evaluate which impact categories are the most 
relevant to include when performing LCAs on buildings and the built environment. The choice of 
impact categories will in most cases depend on the goal of the study, data availability along with the 
significance of the impacts (Khasreen, Banfill and Menzies, 2009). Khasreen, Banfill and Menzies 
(2009) has carried out a literature review in which they investigate which impact categories are used 
in 25 LCA studies within the building sector in Europe and the USA over the past 15 years. They 
found that the most commonly used impacts were global warming, acidification, eutrophication, 
and ozone depletion. The studies cover several different types of LCAs related to the building 
sector, not all of them relevant to the context of our study. Of the 25 studies described by Khasreen, 
Banfill and Menzies (2009), three were found to be comparable in nature to our study. All three 
considers the impact category energy consumption and two out of the three consider the impacts 
categories global warming potential, photochemical ozone creation, water consumption, depletion 
of biotic resource, acidification, human toxicity, waste creation, eco-toxicity, and eutrophication. 
One of the three cases considers all the studied impact categories (Khasreen, Banfill and Menzies, 
2009).  
  
It is clear that choosing impact categories when performing LCAs on buildings is not a simple task. 
Even though Khasreen, Banfill and Menzies (2009) found that some impacts are considered more 
==PAGE:114==
often than others it is not certain that these categories necessarily are the most relevant nor correct 
to use. The fact that four impact categories are used more often that others might be caused by 
“habits” or “routines” within the LCA community, i.e. that these impact categories are the most 
“popular” to use. It is in no way certain that the four most common impacts will benefit us in 
achieving the goal of our study. Furthermore, the study by Khasreen, Banfill and Menzies (2009) 
does not include impacts such as land use, which has only recently been recognized as an impact 
category. Finally, the geographical scope of our study should be reflected in the choice of impact 
categories, as some impacts affect the environment on a global scale, some on a regional scale, and 
some on a local scale.  
  
At this early point in our study a suggestion towards choosing impact categories is still very 
uncertain and may change several times before the final choice is made. Generally, it seems that the 
impact category global warming or climate change is highly relevant in most LCA studies, it covers 
a global scale and furthermore it is a widely discussed topic in most political arenas. Additionally, 
we expect that impacts related to primary energy demand or energy consumption will be important 
when comparing housing types, especially when a temporal scope is included considering the 
possible change in energy mix over the coming years. Finally, we would suggest including 
categories such as land use, water consumption, and waste creation as these, to the best of our 
knowledge, could be related to the environmental impact of the building industry.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
5 Conclusions 
The goal of this study was to describe and investigate the basic principles in regards to absolute 
environmental sustainability including planetary boundaries and carrying capacity. Furthermore, we 
wished to assess existing methods to quantify absolute environmental sustainability. Based on the 
investigations carried out in the previous paragraphs we can conclude the following:  
  
·       There is a need for an absolute measure of sustainability that can be incorporated into life 
cycle assessments (LCA). 
·       Human activities has pushed the Earth out of its so far stable state, the Holocene, which 
raises the question of how far we can push our planet before catastrophic and possibly 
irreversible changes happen.  
·       Carrying capacity and planetary boundaries are two ways of defining the limits of our 
planet, but they do however not represent the same limit.  
·       It is highly relevant to consider a downscaling of the planetary boundaries, but this 
requires an allocation which can be difficult to perform while remaining objective.  
·       Absolute sustainability can be incorporated into LCA by the addition of one of three 
components: characterization factors, normalization factors or weighting factors.  
·       Method 3, carrying capacity-based normalization factors, and method 11, Planetary 
Boundaries Life Cycle Impact Assessment, were found to be the most relevant, since these 
methods represent two different steps in LCA which is comparable and used to assess 
absolute sustainability. 
·       It was found that method 8, carrying capacity-based characterization factors, and method 
9, Household-level Sustainability Transition, also could be relevant to include in LCAs of 
buildings.  
·       The most commonly used impacts is global warming, acidification, eutrophication, and 
ozone depletion. 
·       From studying LCAs of building, it was found that the impact categories global warming, 
energy consumption, land use, water consumption, and waste creation seems like the most 
relevant to include in a LCA of single-family houses.  
 
 
==PAGE:116==
 
6 Literature 
Bjørn, A. et al.(2016) ‘A proposal to measure absolute environmental sustainability in life cycle 
assessment’, Ecological Indicators. Elsevier Ltd, 63, pp. 1–13. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.11.046. 
  
Bjørn, A. and Hauschild, M. Z. (2015) Introducing carrying capacity-based normalisation in LCA: 
framework and development of references at midpoint level, International Journal of Life Cycle 
Assessment. doi: 10.1007/s11367-015-0899-2. 
  
Brejnrod, K. N. et al.(2017) ‘The absolute environmental performance of buildings’, Building and 
Environment. Elsevier Ltd, 119, pp. 87–98. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.04.003. 
  
Cole, M. J., Bailey, R. M. and New, M. G. (2014) ‘Tracking sustainable development with a 
national barometer for South Africa using a downscaled “safe and just space” framework’, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(42), pp. E4399–E4408. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1400985111. 
  
Dao, H. et al.(2015) ‘Environmental Limits and Swiss Footprints Based on Planetary Boundaries’, 
(May). 
  
Doka, G. (2016) ‘Combining life cycle inventory results with planetary boundaries: The Planetary 
Boundary Allowance impact assessment method, Update PBA’06’, (April). 
  
Fang, K. et al.(2015) ‘The environmental sustainability of nations: Benchmarking the carbon, water 
and land footprints against allocated planetary boundaries’, Sustainability (Switzerland), 7(8), pp. 
11285–11305. doi: 10.3390/su70811285. 
  
Fanning, A. L. and O’Neill, D. W. (2016) ‘Tracking resource use relative to planetary boundaries in 
a steady-state framework: A case study of Canada and Spain’, Ecological Indicators. Elsevier Ltd, 
69, pp. 836–849. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.04.034. 
  
==PAGE:117==
Girod, B., Van Vuuren, D. P. and Hertwich, E. G. (2013) ‘Global climate targets and future 
consumption level: An evaluation of the required GHG intensity’, Environmental Research Letters, 
8(1). doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/8/l/014016. 
  
Khasreen, M. M., Banfill, P. F. G. and Menzies, G. F. (2009) ‘Life-cycle assessment and the 
environmental impact of buildings: A review’, Sustainability, 1(3), pp. 674–701. doi: 
10.3390/su1030674. 
  
Liu, X. and Bakshi, B. R. (2018) ‘Ecosystem Services in Life Cycle Assessment while Encouraging 
Techno-Ecological Synergies’, Journal of Industrial Ecology, 00(0), pp. 1–14. doi: 
10.1111/jiec.12755. 
  
Laakso, S. and Lettenmeier, M. (2016) ‘Household-level transition methodology towards 
sustainable material footprints’, Journal of Cleaner Production. Elsevier Ltd, 132, pp. 184–191. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.03.009. 
  
Nykvist, B. et al.(2013) National Environmental Performance on Planetary Boundaries. doi: ISBN 
978-91-620-6576-8. 
  
Rockström, J. et al.(2009) ‘Planetary Boundaries: Exploring the safe operating space for humanity’, 
Uma ética para quantos?, XXXIII(2), pp. 81–87. doi: 10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2.  
  
Ryberg, M. W. et al.(2018) ‘Development of a life-cycle impact assessment methodology linked to 
the Planetary Boundaries framework’, Ecological Indicators, 88(December), pp. 250–262. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.12.065. 
  
Ryberg, M. W. (2018) Putting life-cycle indicators on an absolute scale – Integrating Planetary 
Boundaries into Life-Cycle Assessment. 
  
Sandin, G., Peters, G. M. and Svanström, M. (2015) ‘Using the planetary boundaries framework for 
setting impact-reduction targets in LCA contexts’, International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 
20(12), pp. 1684–1700. doi: 10.1007/s11367-015-0984-6. 
==PAGE:118==
  
Tuomisto, H. L. et al.(2012) ‘Exploring a safe operating approach to weighting in life cycle impact 
assessment - A case study of organic, conventional and integrated farming systems’, Journal of 
Cleaner Production. Elsevier Ltd, 37, pp. 147–153. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.06.025. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:119==
Assessment of absolute sustainability in the built environment 
 
 
Supporting Information III 
 
 
Pernille Krogh Ohms1 & Camilla Marlene Ernst Andersen1 
1Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
25th of January 2019 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:120==
Supporting Information III 
In the following, the materials and related assumed properties found necessary to model the 
inventory of the houses are presented. The section contains the following tables: 
 
• Table 1 - The modelled materials, respective service life and waste fraction for all 
houses and all materials.  
• Table 2 - The modelled materials and respective end of life fractions for all houses 
and all materials. It is marked in which scenarios the end of life fractions are used.  
• Table 3 - The materials and respective ecoinvent processes used to construct the 
inventory of the production stage in SimaPro.  
• Table 4 - The materials and respective ecoinvent processes used to construct the 
inventory of the end of life stage in SimaPro. 
• 
Table 5 - The materials and respective ecoinvent processes used to construct the 
inventory of the future end of life stage in SimaPro.  
• Table 6 - The processes used to construct the energy mix in SimaPro and the 
respective shares that each process constitutes.  
• Table 7 - The processes used to construct the district heating in SimaPro and the 
respective shares that each process constitutes.  
• Table 8 - The listed building components are components which are considered 
upcycled in Upcycle House. Hence, the building components are modelled as having 
zero impact. 
• Table 9 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, Ref House using 
the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
• Table 10 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, Ref House using 
the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
• Table 11 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, UP House using 
the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
• Table 12 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, UP House using 
the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
• Table 13 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, IMF House using 
the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
• 
Table 14 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, IMF House using 
the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
==PAGE:121==
• Table 15 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, TMF House using 
the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
• Table 16 – Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, TMF House 
using the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
• Table 17 – Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, AD House using 
the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
• Table 18 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, AD House using 
the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
• Table 19 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, Q House using 
the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
• Table 20 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, Q House using 
the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
Table 1 - The modelled materials, respective service life and waste fraction for all houses 
and all materials.  
 
Material name  
[-] 
Life span 
[yr] 
Waste 
[share] 
Acrylic sealant 
50 
0.02 
Aerated concrete (for wet rooms) 
80 
0.05 
Aerated concrete blocks 2 
80 
0.05 
Aerated concrete, inner wall 
100 
0.05 
Alu sheet, 0.7 mm 
60 
0.07 
Asphalt roofing 
20 
0.05 
Bitumen membrane 
150 
0.05 
Bricks 
120 
0.05 
Bricks (1800 kg/m3) 
120 
0.05 
Carpet 
30 
0.05 
Ceiling insulation 
50 
0.05 
Cement chipboard 
60 
0.07 
Chipboard 
60 
0.07 
Circulation pump 
40 
0 
Coated fibre cement boards 
60 
0.07 
Concrete 
120 
0.02 
Concrete C12 
120 
0.02 
Concrete C12-15 
120 
0.02 
Concrete tile 
120 
0.07 
Concrete. foundation 
120 
0.02 
Construction wood (pine) 
120 
0.05 
Data cable 
30 
0.05 
DE: 8.2.1 Ventilation system central with heat recovery 1.000 m3/h 
25 
0 
Electrical cable 
30 
0.05 
EPS 
50 
0.07 
EPS 15 kg/m3 
50 
0.07 
EPS 25 kg/m3 
50 
0.07 
EPS S80. floor 
50 
0.07 
EU: 1.1.01 Cement (CEM III) 
- 
- 
Expanded clay aggregate 
120 
0.02 
Fiber-cement board 2 
60 
0.07 
Fibreglass fabric 
30 
0.05 
Filler. gypsum 
40 
0.05 
Finish cement 
50 
0.05 
Floor heating tubes 
40 
0.02 
Frame 
50 
0 
Glass fabric 
30 
0.05 
Glazed tiles 
80 
0.07 
Gravel 
100 
0.02 
Gypsum board 
80 
0.07 
Hardwood. beech 
80 
0.05 
Hot water tank 
30 
0 
Kingspan Koolterm K3 
60 
0.05 
Leight weight bricks 
120 
0.05 
Middle insulation 
50 
0.05 
Mineral wool. facade 
50 
0.05 
Mineral wool. internal 
50 
0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
Material name [-] 
Life span 
[yr] 
Waste 
[share] 
Mortar 
120 
0.02 
Old bricks 
120 
0.05 
OSB 
30 
0.07 
Paint 2 
15 
0.05 
Paint, water based 
15 
0.05 
Pantile, monier 
100 
0.05 
Paper wool 
60 
0.02 
PE-PP fleece 2 
30 
0.05 
Pipe. steel 
60 
0.02 
Plaster, gypsum 
40 
0.05 
Plaster, gypsum/lime 
40 
0.05 
Plywood 
60 
0.07 
Polli-brick 
40 
0.02 
Radiator 
40 
0 
Radiator 2 
40 
0 
Reinforcing steel 
120 
0.05 
Richlite 
60 
0.07 
Rigid insulation 
50 
0.05 
Roof tiles 
60 
0.05 
Roofing membrane PE 
150 
0.05 
Roofing membrane slate 
80 
0.05 
Roofing membrane. underlay 
80 
0.05 
Roofing. concrete tiles 
60 
0.05 
Sanitary ceramics 
20 
0 
Silicone sealant 
50 
0.02 
Sill 
50 
0 
Single pane 
50 
0 
Stainless steel 
60 
0.05 
Steel profile, C-profile2 (0.79 kg/m) 
120 
0.05 
Steel profile, I profile. wood2 (5kg/m) 
120 
0.05 
Steel profile, U-profile 2 (4.5 kg/m) 
120 
0.05 
Steel profiles 
120 
0.05 
Steel sheets. cold rolled 
120 
0.07 
Techno-por 
80 
0.05 
Tempered glass 
150 
0.07 
Thermal window 
50 
0 
Thermal window, 2 layers 
50 
0 
Thermal window, 3 layers 
40 
0 
ThermoPlan. mono bricks 
120 
0.05 
Tile adhesive 
80 
0.05 
Tiles, non-glazed 
80 
0.07 
Trapeziodal profiled sheet 2 
60 
0.07 
UPM upcycle factor 
- 
- 
UPM, 61% paper 39% PP 
30 
0.05 
UPM2, 61% paper 39% PP 
30 
0.05 
Vapour barrier 
120 
0.05 
Vapour barrier PA 
120 
0.05 
Vapour barrier PE 
120 
0.05 
Ventilation pipe 2 
50 
0.02 
Ventilation system, vgv 1.000 m3/h 
25 
0 
Water pipe 
60 
0.02 
Wet room tiles 
80 
0.07 
Wind board 
80 
0.07 
==PAGE:124==
Material name [-] 
Life span 
[yr] 
Waste 
[share] 
Window frame 
50 
0 
Window frame, aluminium 
60 
0 
Window frame, composite 
40 
0 
Window frame, wood 
50 
0 
Window glass 
50 
0 
Window sill 
50 
0 
Wood (fir) 
40 
0.05 
Wood (fir) m3 
40 
0.05 
Wood wool board heraklith 
60 
0.07 
Wood. construction 
120 
0.05 
Wooden floor 
80 
0.05 
Ytong 2 
120 
0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
Table 2 - The modelled materials and respective end of life fractions for all houses and all 
materials. It is marked in which scenarios the end of life fractions are used.  
 
Material name 
[-] 
Incineration 
share 
Landfill 
share 
Recycling 
share 
Incineration 
share 
Landfill 
share 
Recycling 
share 
 
Valid for Base Scenario, Scenario 1, 2, 3 
and 4 
Valid for Scenario 5 and 6 
Acrylic sealant 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Aerated concrete 
(for wet rooms) 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Aerated concrete 
blocks 2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Aerated concrete. 
inner wall 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Alu sheet, 0.7 
mm 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Asphalt roofing 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Bitumen 
membrane 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Bricks 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Bricks (1800 
kg/m3) 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Carpet 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Ceiling insulation 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0.5 
Cement 
chipboard 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Chipboard 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Circulation pump 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Coated fibre 
cement boards 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Concrete 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Concrete C12 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Concrete C12-15 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Concrete tile 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Concrete, 
foundation 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Construction 
wood (pine) 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0.1 
0 
0.9 
Data cable 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
DE: 8.2.1 
Ventilation 
system central 
with heat 
recovery 1.000 
m3/h 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Electrical cable 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
EPS 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
EPS 15 kg/m3 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
EPS 25 kg/m3 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
EPS S80, floor 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
EU: 1.1.01 
Cement (CEM 
III) 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
==PAGE:126==
Material name 
[-] 
Incineration 
share 
Landfill 
share 
Recycling 
share 
Incineration 
share 
Landfill 
share 
Recycling 
share 
 
Valid for Base Scenario, Scenario 1, 2, 3 
and 4 
Valid for Scenario 5 and 6 
Expanded clay 
aggregate 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Fiber-cement 
board 2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Fibreglass fabric 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Filler, gypsum 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Finish cement 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Floor heating 
tubes 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Frame 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Glass fabric 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Glazed tiles 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Gravel 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Gypsum board 
0 
0.2 
0.8 
0 
0 
1 
Hardwood, beech 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0.1 
0 
0.9 
Hot water tank 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Kingspan 
Koolterm K3 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Leight weight 
bricks 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Middle insulation 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Mineral wool, 
facade 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0.5 
Mineral wool, 
internal 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0.5 
Mortar 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Old bricks 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
OSB 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Paint 2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Paint, water 
based 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Pantile, monier 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Paper wool 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
PE-PP fleece 2 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Pipe, steel 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Plaster, gypsum 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Plaster, 
gypsum/lime 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Plywood 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Polli-brick 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Radiator 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Radiator 2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Reinforcing steel 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Richlite 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Rigid insulation 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Roof tiles 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Roofing 
membrane PE 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Roofing 
membrane slate 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:127==
Material name 
[-] 
Incineration 
share 
Landfill 
share 
Recycling 
share 
Incineration 
share 
Landfill 
share 
Recycling 
share 
 
Valid for Base Scenario, Scenario 1, 2, 3 
and 4 
Valid for Scenario 5 and 6 
Roofing 
membrane, 
underlay 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Roofing, concrete 
tiles 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Sanitary ceramics 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Silicone sealant 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
Sill 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Single pane 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Stainless steel 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Steel profile. C-
profile2 (0.79 
kg/m) 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Steel profile, I 
profile, wood2 
(5kg/m) 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Steel profile, U-
profile 2 (4.5 
kg/m) 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Steel profiles 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Steel sheets, cold 
rolled 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Techno-por 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0.5 
Tempered glass 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Thermal window 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Thermal window, 
2 layers 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Thermal window, 
3 layers 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
ThermoPlan. 
mono bricks 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Tile adhesive 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Tiles, non-glazed 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Trapeziodal 
profiled sheet 2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
UPM upcycle 
factor 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
UPM, 61% paper 
39% PP 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
UPM2, 61% 
paper 39% PP 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Vapour barrier 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Vapour barrier 
PA 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Vapour barrier 
PE 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
Ventilation pipe 2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Ventilation 
system. vgv 
1.000 m3/h 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Water pipe 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Wet room tiles 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
==PAGE:128==
Material name 
[-] 
Incineration 
share 
Landfill 
share 
Recycling 
share 
Incineration 
share 
Landfill 
share 
Recycling 
share 
 
Valid for Base Scenario, Scenario 1, 2, 3 
and 4 
Valid for Scenario 5 and 6 
Wind board 
0 
0.2 
0.8 
0 
0 
1 
Window frame 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Window frame, 
alu 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Window frame, 
composite 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Window frame, 
wood 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0.1 
0 
0.9 
Window glass 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Window sill 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Wood (fir) 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0.1 
0 
0.9 
Wood (fir) m3 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0.1 
0 
0.9 
Wood wool board 
heraklith 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0.5 
0.5 
Wood, 
construction 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0.1 
0 
0.9 
Wooden floor 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0.1 
0 
0.9 
Ytong 2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
Table 3 - The materials and respective ecoinvent processes used to construct the inventory of 
the production stage in SimaPro.  
 
Material name  
Ecoinvent process 
Acrylic sealant 
Acrylic filler {GLO}|market for | cut-off, U 
Aerated concrete (for wet rooms) 
Autoclaved aerated concrete block {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Aerated concrete blocks 2 
Autoclaved aerated concrete block {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Aerated concrete, inner wall 
Autoclaved aerated concrete block {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Alu sheet, 0.7 mm 
Aluminium scrap, new {RER}|market for|cut-off, U 
Sheet rolling, aluminium {RER}|processing|cut-off, U 
Asphalt roofing 
Mastic asphalt {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Bitumen membrane 
Mastic asphalt {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Bricks 
Clay brick {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Bricks (1800 kg/m3) 
Clay brick {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Carpet 
Textile, woven cotten {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Ceiling insulation 
Glass wool mat {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Cement chipboard 
Particle board, cement bonded {RER}|market for|cut-off, U 
Chipboard 
Oriented Strand Board {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Circulation pump 
Pump, 40W {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Coated fibre cement boards 
Fibre cement facing tile, large format {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Concrete 
Concrete, 25 Mpa {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U 
(1% vol) Reinforcing steel {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U 
Concrete C12 
Concrete, 25 Mpa {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U 
(1% vol) Reinforcing steel {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U 
Concrete C12-15 
Concrete, 25 Mpa {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U 
(1% vol) Reinforcing steel {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U 
Concrete tile 
Concrete, 25 Mpa {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U 
Concrete, foundation 
Concrete, 25 Mpa {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U 
(1% vol) Reinforcing steel {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U 
Construction wood (pine) 
Sawnwood, lath, softwood, dried (u=19%), planed {GLO} | market for | 
cut-off, U 
Data cable 
Cable, unspecified {GLO} market for | cut-off, U 
DE: 8.2.1 Ventilation system 
central with heat recovery 1.000 
m3/h 
Ventilation system, decentralized, 6x120m3/h, polyethylene ducts 
{GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Electrical cable 
Cable, unspecified {GLO} market for | cut-off, U 
EPS 
Polystyrene foam slab for perimeter insulation {GLO}|market for|cut-off, 
U 
EPS 15 kg/m3 
Polystyrene foam slab for perimeter insulation {GLO}|market for|cut-off, 
U 
EPS 25 kg/m3 
Polystyrene foam slab for perimeter insulation {GLO}|market for|cut-off, 
U 
EPS S80, floor 
Polystyrene foam slab for perimeter insulation {GLO}|market for|cut-off, 
U 
EU: 1.1.01 Cement (CEM III) 
- 
Expanded clay aggregate 
Expanded clay {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U  
Fiber-cement board 2 
Fibre cement facing tile, large format {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Fibreglass fabric 
Glass fibre {GLO} market for|cut-off, U 
Filler, gypsum 
Lime mortar {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Finish cement 
Cement mortar {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Floor heating tubes 
Polyethylene terephthalate granulate amorphous {GLO}|market for|cut-
off, U 
Extrusion, plastic pipes {RER}|production|cut-off, U 
Frame 
- 
==PAGE:130==
Material name  
Ecoinvent process 
Glass fabric 
Glass fibre {GLO} market for|cut-off, U 
Glazed tiles 
Ceramic tile {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Gravel 
Gravel, crushed {RoW} market for gravel, crushed I cut-off U 
Gypsum board 
Gypsum plasterboard {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Hardwood, beech 
Sawnwood, hardwood, dried (u=20%), planed {RER}|market for|cut-off, 
U 
Hot water tank 
Hot water tank, 600L {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Kingspan Koolterm K3 
(75%) Phenolic resin {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
(16%) Foaming agent {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
(9%) Glass fibre {GLO} market for|cut-off, U 
Leight weight bricks 
Lightweight concrete block, expanded clay {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Middle insulation 
Polystyrene foam slab for perimeter insulation {GLO}|market for|cut-off, 
U 
Mineral wool, facade 
Glass wool mat {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Mineral wool, internal 
Glass wool mat {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Mortar 
Cement mortar {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Old bricks 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
OSB 
Oriented Strand Board {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Paint 2 
(60%) Alkyd paint, white, without solvent, in 60% solution state {GLO}| 
alkyd paint, white, without solvent, market for 60% solution state|cut-off, 
U 
(40%) White spirit {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Paint, water based 
(60%) Alkyd paint, white, without solvent, in 60% solution state {GLO}| 
alkyd paint, white, without solvent, market for 60% solution state|cut-off, 
U 
(40%) Tap water {Europe without Switzerland}|market for|cut-off, U 
Pantile, monier 
Roof tile {RER}|market for|cut-off, U 
Paper wool 
(85%) Paper, newsprint {Europe without Switzerland}|paper production, 
newsprint, recycled|cut-off, U 
(7%) Aluminium hydroxide {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
(5%) Boric acid, anhydrous, powder {RER}|production|cut-off, U 
(2%) Tap water {Europe without Switzerland}|market for|cut-off, U 
(1%) Borax, anhydrous, powder {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
PE-PP fleece 2 
Fleece, polyethylene {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Pipe, steel 
Chromium steel pipe {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Plaster, gypsum 
Lime mortar {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Plaster, gypsum/lime 
Lime mortar {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Plywood 
Plywood, for indoor use {RER}|market for|cut-off, U 
Polli-brick 
Polyethylene terephthalate granulate, bottle grade, recycled 
{RoW}|polyethylene terephthalate production granulate, bottle grade, 
reycled|cut-off, U 
Radiator 
Steel, low-alloyed {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Radiator 2 
Steel, low-alloyed {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Reinforcing steel 
Reinforcing steel {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Richlite 
(63%) Waster paper, sorted {GLO}|waste paper, sorted, recycled content 
cut-off|cut-off, U 
(37%) Phenolic resin {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Rigid insulation 
Polystyrene foam slab for perimeter insulation {GLO}|market for|cut-off, 
U 
Roof tiles 
Roof tile {RER}|market for|cut-off, U 
Roofing membrane PE 
- 
Roofing membrane slate 
Mastic asphalt {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Roofing membrane, underlay 
Mastic asphalt {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Roofing, concrete tiles 
Concrete roof tile {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Sanitary ceramics 
Sanitary ceramics {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
==PAGE:131==
Material name  
Ecoinvent process 
Silicone sealant 
Silicone product {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Sill 
- 
Single pane 
- 
Stainless steel 
Steel, chromium steel 18/8 {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Steel profile, C-profile2 (0,79 
kg/m) 
Steel, chromium steel 18/8 {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Steel profile, I profile, wood2 
(5kg/m) 
Steel, chromium steel 18/8 {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Steel profile, U-profile 2 (4,5 
kg/m) 
Steel, chromium steel 18/8 {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Steel profiles 
Steel, chromium steel 18/8 {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Steel sheets, cold rolled 
Steel, chromium steel 18/8 {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Techno-por 
Glass cullet, sorted {GLO}|glass cullet, sorted, recycled content|cut-off, 
U 
Tempered glass 
Flat glass, uncoated {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Tempering, flat glass {RER}|processing|cut-off, U 
Thermal window 
Glazing, double, U<1,1W/m2K {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Thermal window, 2 layers 
Glazing, double, U<1,1W/m2K {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Thermal window, 3 layers 
Glazing, triple, U<0,5W/m2K {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
ThermoPlan, mono bricks 
Clay brick {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Tile adhesive 
Adhesive mortar {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Tiles, non-glazed 
Ceramic tile {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Trapeziodal profiled sheet 2 
Aluminium, primary, ingot {IAI Area, EU27 & EFTA}|market for|cut-
off, U 
Sheet rolling, aluminium {RER}|processing|cut-off, U 
UPM upcycle factor 
- 
UPM, 61% paper 39% PP 
(61%) Saw dust, loose, wet, measured as dry mass {RoW}| sawing, 
hardwood |cut-off, U 
(39%) Polypropylene, granulate {GLO}|market for |cut-off, U 
UPM2, 61% paper 39% PP 
(61%) Saw dust, loose, wet, measured as dry mass {RoW}| sawing, 
hardwood |cut-off, U 
(39%) Polypropylene, granulate {GLO}|market for |cut-off, U 
Vapour barrier 
Nylon 6 {RER}|market for |cut-off, U 
Vapour barrier PA 
Nylon 6 {RER}|market for |cut-off, U 
Vapour barrier PE 
Nylon 6 {RER}|market for |cut-off, U 
Ventilation pipe 2 
Chromium steel pipe {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Ventilation system, vgv 1.000 m3/h 
Ventilation system, decentralized, 6x120m3/h, polyethylene ducts 
{GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Water pipe 
Chromium steel pipe {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Wet room tiles 
Ceramic tile {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Wind board 
Gypsum plasterboard {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Window frame 
Window frame, aluminium, u=1,6W/m2K {RER}|market for|cut-off, U 
Window frame, aluminium 
Window frame, aluminium, u=1,6W/m2K {RER}|market for|cut-off, U 
Window frame, composite 
Window frame, wood-metal, u=1,6W/m2K {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Window frame, wood 
Window frame, wood, u=1,5W/m2K {RER}|market for|cut-off, U 
Window glass 
Glazing, double, U<1,1W/m2K {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Window sill 
- 
Wood (fir) 
Sawnwood, lath, softwood, dried (u=19%), planed {GLO} | market for | 
cut-off, U 
Wood (fir) m3 
Sawnwood, lath, softwood, dried (u=19%), planed {GLO} | market for | 
cut-off, U 
Wood wool board heraklith 
Wood wool {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Wood, construction 
Sawnwood, lath, softwood, dried (u=19%), planed {GLO} | market for | 
cut-off, U 
 
 
==PAGE:132==
Material name  
Ecoinvent process 
Wooden floor 
Sawnwood, hardwood, dried (u=20%), planed {RER}|market for|cut-off, 
U 
Ytong 2 
Autoclaved aerated concrete block {GLO}|market for|cut-off, U 
Electricity, 2018 
Electricity, low voltage {DK} market for | Cut-off, U, 2018 (see Table 6) 
Electricity, 2030 
Electricity, low voltage {DK} market for | Cut-off, U, 2030 (see Table 6) 
Water 
Tap water {Europe without Switzerland} market for I cut-off, U 
District heating 
District heating (see Table 7) 
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:133==
Table 4 - The materials and respective ecoinvent processes used to construct the inventory of 
the end of life stage in SimaPro.  
 
Material name 
Ecoinvent process 
Acrylic sealant 
Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste 
polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
Aerated concrete (for wet rooms) 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Aerated concrete blocks 2 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Aerated concrete, inner wall 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Alu sheet, 0.7 mm 
Aluminium (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of aluminium I cut-off, 
U 
Asphalt roofing 
Waste bitumen sheet {RoW}|market for|cut-off, U 
Bitumen membrane 
Waste bitumen sheet {RoW}|market for|cut-off, U 
Bricks 
Waste brick {RoW}| market for waste brick I Cut-off, U 
Bricks (1800 kg/m3) 
Waste brick {RoW}| market for waste brick I Cut-off, U 
Carpet 
Waste textile, soiled {GLO}|market for|Cut-off, U 
Ceiling insulation 
Waste mineral wool, for final disposal {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste mineral wool, inert material, landfill I cut-off, U 
Cement chipboard 
Particle board, cement bonded, waste treatment 
Chipboard 
Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, untreated, 
municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
Circulation pump 
Electronics scrap from control unit {RER}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
Coated fibre cement boards 
Waste cement-fibre slab {CH}| treatment of, recycling I cut-off, U 
Concrete 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Concrete C12 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Concrete C12-15 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Concrete tile 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Concrete, foundation 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Construction wood (pine) 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Data cable 
Used cable {GLO}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
DE: 8.2.1 Ventilation system 
central with heat recovery 1.000 
m3/h 
Electronics scrap from control unit {RER}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
Electrical cable 
Used cable {GLO}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
EPS 
Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal incineration 
I Cut-off, U 
EPS 15 kg/m3 
Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal incineration 
I Cut-off, U 
EPS 25 kg/m3 
Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal incineration 
I Cut-off, U 
EPS S80, floor 
Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal incineration 
I Cut-off, U 
EU: 1.1.01 Cement (CEM III) 
- 
Expanded clay aggregate 
Waste brick {RoW}| market for waste brick I Cut-off, U 
Fiber-cement board 2 
Waste cement-fibre slab {CH}| treatment of, recycling I cut-off, U 
==PAGE:134==
Material name 
Ecoinvent process 
Fibreglass fabric 
Waste glass {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of waste glass, 
municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
Filler, gypsum 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Finish cement 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Floor heating tubes 
Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste 
polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
Frame 
- 
Glass fabric 
Waste glass {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of waste glass, 
municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
Glazed tiles 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Gravel 
- 
Gypsum board 
(80%) Waste gypsum plasterboard {CH}| treatment of, recycling I cut-
off, U 
(20%) Waste gypsum plasterboard {CH}| treatment of, landfill I cut-off, 
U 
Hardwood, beech 
- 
Hot water tank 
Electronics scrap from control unit {RER}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
Kingspan Koolterm K3 
Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal incineration 
I Cut-off, U 
Leight weight bricks 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Middle insulation 
Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal incineration 
I Cut-off, U 
Mineral wool, facade 
Waste mineral wool, for final disposal {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste mineral wool, inert material, landfill I cut-off, U 
Mineral wool, internal 
Waste mineral wool, for final disposal {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste mineral wool, inert material, landfill I cut-off, U 
Mortar 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Old bricks 
Waste brick {RoW}| market for waste brick I Cut-off, U 
OSB 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Paint 2 
Waste paint {Europe without Switzerland}|market for, waste paint|cut-
off, U 
Paint, water based 
Waste paint {Europe without Switzerland}|market for, waste paint|cut-
off, U 
Pantile, monier 
Waste brick {RoW}| market for waste brick I Cut-off, U 
Paper wool 
Waste graphical paper {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of waste 
graphical paper, municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
PE-PP fleece 2 
Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste 
polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
Pipe, steel 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Plaster, gypsum 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Plaster, gypsum/lime 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
 
 
==PAGE:135==
Material name 
Ecoinvent process 
Plywood 
Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, untreated, 
municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
Polli-brick 
Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste 
polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
Radiator 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Radiator 2 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Reinforcing steel 
Waste reinforcement steel {RoW}| treatment of waste reinforcement 
steel, recycling I cut-off, U 
Richlite 
Waste graphical paper {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of waste 
graphical paper, municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
Rigid insulation 
Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal incineration 
I Cut-off, U 
Roof tiles 
Waste brick {RoW}| market for waste brick I Cut-off, U 
Roofing membrane PE 
- 
Roofing membrane slate 
Waste bitumen sheet {RoW}|market for|cut-off, U 
Roofing membrane, underlay 
Waste bitumen sheet {RoW}|market for|cut-off, U 
Roofing, concrete tiles 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Sanitary ceramics 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Silicone sealant 
Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste 
polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
Sill 
- 
Single pane 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
Stainless steel 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel profile, C-profile2 (0,79 
kg/m) 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel profile, I profile, wood2 
(5kg/m) 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel profile, U-profile 2 (4,5 
kg/m) 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel profiles 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel sheets, cold rolled 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Techno-por 
Waste mineral wool, for final disposal {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste mineral wool, inert material, landfill I cut-off, U 
Tempered glass 
Tempered glass, waste treatment 
Thermal window 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
Thermal window, 2 layers 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
Thermal window, 3 layers 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
ThermoPlan, mono bricks 
Waste brick {RoW}| market for waste brick I Cut-off, U 
Tile adhesive 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Tiles, non-glazed 
Waste brick {RoW}| market for waste brick I Cut-off, U 
Trapeziodal profiled sheet 2 
Aluminium (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of aluminium I cut-off, 
U 
UPM upcycle factor 
- 
UPM, 61% paper 39% PP 
(61%) Waste graphical paper {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of 
waste graphical paper, municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
(39%) Waste polypropylene {RoW}|treatment of waste polypropylene, 
municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
 
 
==PAGE:136==
Material name 
Ecoinvent process 
UPM2, 61% paper 39% PP 
(61%) Waste graphical paper {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of 
waste graphical paper, municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
(39%) Waste polypropylene {RoW}|treatment of waste polypropylene, 
municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
Vapour barrier 
Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste 
polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
Vapour barrier PA 
Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste 
polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
Vapour barrier PE 
Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste 
polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
Ventilation pipe 2 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Ventilation system, vgv 1.000 m3/h 
Electronics scrap from control unit {RER}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
Water pipe 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Wet room tiles 
Waste brick {RoW}| market for waste brick I Cut-off, U 
Wind board 
(80%) Waste gypsum plasterboard {CH}| treatment of, recycling I cut-
off, U 
(20%) Waste gypsum plasterboard {CH}| treatment of, landfill I cut-off, 
U 
Window frame 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Window frame, alu 
Aluminium (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of aluminium I cut-off, 
U 
Window frame, composite 
Wood-metal window, waste 
Window frame, wood 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
 
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Window glass 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
Window sill 
- 
Wood (fir) 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Wood (fir) m3 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
  
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Wood wool board heraklith 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
  
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Wood, construction 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
  
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Wooden floor 
- 
Ytong 2 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland} treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Electricity 
- 
Water 
- 
District heating 
Wastewater, from residence {CH}| treatment of, capacity 1.1E10l/year | 
Cut-off, U 
 
==PAGE:137==
Table 5 - The materials and respective ecoinvent processes used to construct the inventory of 
the future end of life stage in SimaPro.  
 
Material name 
Ecoinvent process, future 
Acrylic sealant 
Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste 
polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
Aerated concrete (for wet rooms) 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Aerated concrete blocks 2 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Aerated concrete, inner wall 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Alu sheet, 0.7 mm 
Aluminium (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of aluminium I cut-off, 
U 
Asphalt roofing 
(50%) Waste bitumen sheet {RoW}|market for|cut-off, U 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO} recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
Bitumen membrane 
(50%) Waste bitumen sheet {RoW}|market for|cut-off, U 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO} recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
Bricks 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Bricks (1800 kg/m3) 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Carpet 
Waste textile, soiled {GLO}|market for|Cut-off, U 
Ceiling insulation 
(50%) Waste mineral wool, for final disposal {Europe without 
Switzerland} treatment of waste mineral wool, inert material, landfill I 
cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste mineral wool {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of 
waste mineral wool, recycling | cut-off, U 
Cement chipboard 
Particle board, cement bonded, waste treatment 
Chipboard 
Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, untreated, 
municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
Circulation pump 
Electronics scrap from control unit {RER}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
Coated fibre cement boards 
Waste cement-fibre slab {CH}| treatment of, recycling I cut-off, U 
Concrete 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Concrete C12 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Concrete C12-15 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Concrete tile 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Concrete, foundation 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Construction wood (pine) 
(10%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(90%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Data cable 
Used cable {GLO} treatment of I cut-off, U 
DE: 8.2.1 Ventilation system 
central with heat recovery 1.000 
m3/h 
Electronics scrap from control unit {RER}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
Electrical cable 
Used cable {GLO} treatment of I cut-off, U 
EPS 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
  
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
==PAGE:138==
Material name 
Ecoinvent process, future 
EPS 15 kg/m3 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
  
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
EPS 25 kg/m3 
  
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
EPS S80, floor 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
  
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
EU: 1.1.01 Cement (CEM III) 
- 
Expanded clay aggregate 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Fiber-cement board 2 
Waste cement-fibre slab {CH}| treatment of, recycling I cut-off, U 
Fibreglass fabric 
Waste glass {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of waste glass, 
municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
Filler, gypsum 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Finish cement 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Floor heating tubes 
(50%) Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland} treatment of 
waste polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO} | recycling of mixed 
plastics ı cut-off, U 
Frame 
- 
Glass fabric 
Waste glass {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of waste glass, 
municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
Glazed tiles 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Gravel 
- 
Gypsum board 
Waste gypsum plasterboard {CH}| treatment of, recycling I cut-off, U 
Hardwood, beech 
- 
Hot water tank 
Electronics scrap from control unit {RER}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
Kingspan Koolterm K3 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
Leight weight bricks 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Middle insulation 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
Mineral wool, facade 
(50%) Waste mineral wool, for final disposal {Europe without 
Switzerland} treatment of waste mineral wool, inert material, landfill I 
cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste mineral wool {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of 
waste mineral wool, recycling | cut-off, U 
Mineral wool, internal 
(50%) Waste mineral wool, for final disposal {Europe without 
Switzerland} treatment of waste mineral wool, inert material, landfill I 
cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste mineral wool {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of 
waste mineral wool, recycling | cut-off, U 
 
 
==PAGE:139==
Material name 
Ecoinvent process, future 
Mortar 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Old bricks 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
OSB 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Paint 2 
Waste paint {Europe without Switzerland}|market for, waste paint|cut-
off, U 
Paint, water based 
Waste paint {Europe without Switzerland}|market for, waste paint|cut-
off, U 
Pantile, monier 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Paper wool 
Waste graphical paper {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of waste 
graphical paper, municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
PE-PP fleece 2 
(50%) Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland} treatment of 
waste polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO} | recycling of mixed 
plastics ı cut-off, U 
Pipe, steel 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Plaster, gypsum 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Plaster, gypsum/lime 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Plywood 
(50%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(50%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Polli-brick 
(50%) Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland} treatment of 
waste polyethylene, municipal incineration I cut-off, U 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO} | recycling of mixed 
plastics ı cut-off, U 
Radiator 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Radiator 2 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Reinforcing steel 
Waste reinforcement steel {RoW}| treatment of waste reinforcement 
steel, recycling I cut-off, U 
Richlite 
Waste graphical paper {Europe without Switzerland}|treatment of waste 
graphical paper, municipal incineration|cut-off, U 
Rigid insulation 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}| treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
Roof tiles 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Roofing membrane PE 
- 
Roofing membrane slate 
(50%) Waste bitumen sheet {RoW}|market for|cut-off, U 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
Roofing membrane, underlay 
(50%) Waste bitumen sheet {RoW}|market for|cut-off, U 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
Roofing, concrete tiles 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Sanitary ceramics 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
 
 
==PAGE:140==
Material name 
Ecoinvent process, future 
Silicone sealant 
Municipal solid waste (waste scenario) {DK}| treatment of municipal 
solid waste, incineration I cut-off, U 
Sill 
- 
Single pane 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
Stainless steel 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel profile, C-profile2 (0,79 
kg/m) 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel profile, I profile, wood2 
(5kg/m) 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel profile, U-profile 2 (4,5 
kg/m) 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel profiles 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Steel sheets, cold rolled 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Techno-por 
(50%) Waste mineral wool, for final disposal {Europe without 
Switzerland} treatment of waste mineral wool, inert material, landfill I 
cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste mineral wool {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of 
waste mineral wool, recycling | cut-off, U 
Tempered glass 
Tempered glass, waste treatment 
Thermal window 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
Thermal window, 2 layers 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
Thermal window, 3 layers 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
ThermoPlan, mono bricks 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Tile adhesive 
Waste cement in concrete and mortar {Europe without Switzerland}| 
treatment of waste cement in concrete and mortar, collection for final 
disposal I cut-off, U 
Tiles, non-glazed 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Trapeziodal profiled sheet 2 
Aluminium (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of aluminium I cut-off, 
U 
UPM upcycle factor 
- 
UPM, 61% paper 39% PP 
Municipal solid waste (waste scenario) {DK}| treatment of municipal 
solid waste, incineration I cut-off, U 
UPM2, 61% paper 39% PP 
Municipal solid waste (waste scenario) {DK}| treatment of municipal 
solid waste, incineration I cut-off, U 
Vapour barrier 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO} recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}, treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
Vapour barrier PA 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO} recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}, treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
Vapour barrier PE 
(50%) Mixed plastics (waste treatment) {GLO} recycling of mixed 
plastics I cut-off, U 
(50%) Waste expanded polystyrene {RoW}, treatment of, municipal 
incineration I Cut-off, U 
Ventilation pipe 2 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Ventilation system, vgv 1.000 m3/h 
Electronics scrap from control unit {RER}| treatment of I cut-off, U 
Water pipe 
Steel scrap, sorted, pressed {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Wet room tiles 
Waste brick {GLO}| treatment of waste brick, recycling I Cut-off, U 
Wind board 
Waste gypsum plasterboard {CH}| treatment of, recycling I cut-off, U 
 
 
==PAGE:141==
Material name 
Ecoinvent process, future 
Window frame 
Aluminium (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of aluminium I cut-off, 
U 
Window frame, alu 
Aluminium (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of aluminium I cut-off, 
U 
Window frame, composite 
(10%) Aluminium (waste treatment) {GLO}| recycling of aluminium I 
cut-off, U 
(90%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Window frame, wood 
(10%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(90%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Window glass 
Waste glass sheet {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste glass 
sheet, sorting plant I Cut-off, U 
Window sill 
- 
Wood (fir) 
(10%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
  
(90%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Wood (fir) m3 
(10%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(90%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Wood wool board heraklith 
(10%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
  
(90%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Wood, construction 
(10%) Waste wood, untreated {RoW}| treatment of waste wood, 
untreated, municipal incineration |cut-off, U 
(90%) Wood chipping, industrial residual wood, stationary electric 
chipper {RER} | processing | Cut-off, U 
Wooden floor 
- 
Ytong 2 
Waste concrete, not reinforced {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment 
of waste concrete, not reinforced, recycling | cut-off, U 
Electricity 
- 
Water 
- 
District heating 
Wastewater, from residence {CH}| treatment of, capacity 1.1E10l/year | 
Cut-off, U 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:142==
Table 6 - The processes used to construct the energy mix in SimaPro and the respective 
shares that each process constitutes.  
  
2018 
2030 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Cut-off, U 
0,0156 
0,0087 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, oil | Cut-off, U 
0,1942 
0,1672 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | 
Cut-off, U 
0,0246 
0,0141 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | 
Cut-off, U 
0,0246 
0,0141 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, offshore | 
Cut-off, U 
0,0246 
0,0141 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | 
Cut-off, U 
0,0246 
0,0141 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| import from DE | Cut-off, U 
0,0299 
0,0578 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| import from NO | Cut-off, U 
0,0384 
0,0796 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| import from SE | Cut-off, U 
0,0403 
0,0846 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | 
Cut-off, U 
0,0149 
0,0055 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| heat and power co-generation, hard coal | Cut-off, U 
0,0947 
0,1508 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| heat and power co-generation, natural gas, combined 
cycle power plant, 400MW electrical | Cut-off, U 
0,0745 
0,0451 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| heat and power co-generation, natural gas, 
conventional power plant, 100MW electrical | Cut-off, U 
0,0745 
0,0451 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| heat and power co-generation, oil | Cut-off, U 
0,1942 
0,1672 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, 
state-of-the-art 2014 | Cut-off, U 
0,1304 
0,1318 
 
 
Table 7 - The processes used to construct the district heating in SimaPro and the respective 
shares that each process constitutes. 
  
2018 
2030 
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas {DK}| heat, from municipal waste 
incineration to generic market for heat district or industrial, other than natural gas | 
Cut-off, U 
0,2320 
0,2423 
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas {DK}| heat and power co-generation, 
wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Cut-off, U 
0,5171 
0,5642 
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas {DK}| heat and power co-generation, 
hard coal | Cut-off, U 
0,1306 
0,1023 
Heat, district or industrial, natural gas {DK}| heat and power co-generation, natural 
gas, conventional power plant, 100MW electrical | Cut-off, U 
0,0602 
0,0456 
Heat, district or industrial, natural gas {DK}| heat and power co-generation, natural 
gas, combined cycle power plant, 400MW electrical | Cut-off, U 
0,0602 
0,0456 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:143==
Table 8 - The listed building components are components which are considered upcycled in 
Upcycle House. Hence, the building components are modelled as having zero impact. 
 
Building components 
Material 
UP Screwpile 
Steel profiles 
UP Container 
Steel profiles 
UP EPS 
EPS S80, floor 
UP Wood boards 
Wood, construction 
UP Container 
Steel profiles 
UP Wood 
Wood, construction 
UP Wood 
Wood, construction 
UP Container 
Steel profiles 
UP Container 
Steel profiles 
UP Wood 
Wood, construction 
UP Door 
Wood (fir) 
UP Windowframe 
Window frame 
UP Wood 
Wood, construction 
Brick wall 
Old bricks 
Brick floor 
Old bricks 
Curtain wall 
Single pane 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:144==
Table 9 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, Ref House, Base Scenario 
using the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change   
1 
Expanded 
polystyrene  
Expanded 
polystyrene  
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Clinker production  
Electricity, oil  
Heat, hard coal  
Incineration, waste 
wood 
3 
Clay brick  
Electricity, wood 
chips  
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
Marine  
Eutrophication 
1 
Glass wool  
Glass wool 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
3 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Clinker production 
Land use 
1 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment facility 
2 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce/beech 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
3 
Gravel 
Gravel 
Wood chips 
Inert landfill 
Water resource 
depletion 
1 
Electricity 
Electricity, oil 
Tap water 
Electricity, oil 
2 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Electricity, oil 
Water 
3 
Sand 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Heat, hard coal 
Sand 
 
 
Table 10 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, Ref House, Base 
Scenario using the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change –  
Energy 
imbalance  
1 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
expanded 
polystyrene 
2 
Clinker production 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
3 
Clay brick 
Clay brick 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Clinker production 
Climate  
change –  
CO2 
concentration 
1 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
expanded 
polystyrene 
2 
Clinker production 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
3 
Clay brick 
Clay brick 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Clinker production 
Biogeochemical  
flows - N 
1 
Glass wool 
Glass wool 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
3 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
expanded 
polystyrene 
==PAGE:145==
Land-system  
change – Global 
1 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
2 
Softwood 
Softwood 
Softwood 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
3 
Pipeline, natural 
gas 
Pipeline, natural 
gas 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
Sanitary landfill 
Freshwater  
use – Global 
1 
Water 
Water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
2 
Tap water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
Water 
3 
Hard coal 
Hard coal 
Tap water 
Tap water 
 
 
 
==PAGE:146==
Table 11 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, UP House, Base 
Scenario using the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change   
1 
Paper, recycled 
OSB 
Heat, wood chips 
Incineration, wood 
2 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, paper 
3 
OSB 
Electricity, wood 
chips 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polypropylene 
Marine  
eutrophication 
1 
Glass 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Transport, ship 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, paper 
3 
Heat, hard coal 
Transport, ship 
Glass 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Land use 
1 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment facility 
2 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
3 
Softwood, pine 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Wood chips 
Inert landfill 
Water resource 
 depletion 
1 
Paper, recycled 
Electricity, oil 
Tap water 
Electricity, oil 
2 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Electricity, oil 
Water 
3 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, natural 
gas 
 
 
Table 12 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, UP House, Base 
Scenario using the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change –  
Energy 
imbalance  
1 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
polypropylene 
2 
Glass 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
3 
Paper, recycled 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Incineration, 
expanded 
polystyrene 
Climate  
change –  
CO2 
concentration 
1 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
propylene 
2 
Glass 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
3 
Paper, recycled 
Polypropylene 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Incineration, 
expanded 
polystyrene 
Biogeochemical  
flows - N 
1 
Glass 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Transport, ship 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, paper 
3 
Heat, hard coal 
Transport, ship 
Glass 
Incineration, wood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:147==
Land-system  
change – Global 
1 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
2 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
3 
Pipeline, natural 
gas 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
Pipeline, natural 
gas 
Freshwater  
use – Global 
1 
Water 
Water 
Tap water 
Water 
2 
Hard coal 
Tap water 
Tap water  
Tap water 
3 
Tap water 
Hard coal 
Tap water 
Water 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:148==
Table 13 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, IMF House, Base 
Scenario using the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change   
1 
Glass 
Glass 
Heat, wood chips 
Incineration, wood 
2 
Heat, hardwood 
chips 
Particle board, 
cement bonded 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
expanded 
polystyrene 
3 
Particle board, 
cement bonded 
Heat, hardwood 
chips 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
Marine  
eutrophication 
1 
Glass 
Glass 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Glass wool 
Glass wool 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, wood 
3 
Glass 
Particle board, 
cement bonded 
Glass 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Land use 
1 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Hardwood, beech 
Wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
3 
Hardwood, oak 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Hardwood, beech 
Inert landfill 
Water resource 
 depletion 
1 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, oil 
Tap water 
Electricity, oil 
2 
Water 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Electricity, oil 
Water 
3 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Urea  
Heat, hard coal 
Sewer grid 
 
 
Table 14 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, IMF House, Base 
Scenario using the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change –  
Energy imbalance  
1 
Glass 
Glass 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
expanded 
polystyrene 
2 
Particle board, 
cement bonded 
Particle board, 
cement bonded 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
3 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Clinker production 
Climate  
change –  
CO2 concentration 
1 
Glass 
Glass 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
expanded 
polystyrene 
2 
Particle board, 
cement bonded 
Particle board, 
cement bonded 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
3 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Clinker production 
Biogeochemical  
flows - N 
1 
Glass 
Glass 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Glass wool 
Particle board, 
cement bonded 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, wood 
3 
Glass 
Glass wool 
Glass 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
==PAGE:149==
Land-system  
change – Global 
1 
Softwood 
Softwood 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
2 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Softwood 
Pipeline, natural 
gas 
3 Land tenure, arable 
land 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
Freshwater  
use – Global 
1 
Water 
Water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
2 
Irrigation 
Irrigation 
Tap water 
Water 
3 
Water 
Water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:150==
Table 15 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, TMF House, Base 
Scenario using the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change   
1 
Clay brick 
Clay brick 
Heat, wood 
chips 
Incineration, 
wood 
2 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Heat, hardwood 
chips 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
bitumen sheet 
3 
Clay brick 
Polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, paper 
Marine  
eutrophication 
1 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Clay brick 
Clay brick 
Electricity, oil 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
3 
Transport, vehicle 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Incineration, 
bitumen sheet 
Land use 
1 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Hardwood, beech 
Wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Hardwood, beech 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Inert landfill 
3 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Wood chips 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Water resource 
 depletion 
1 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, oil 
Tap water 
Electricity, oil 
2 
Paper, recycled 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Electricity, oil 
Water 
3 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Gravel 
 
 
Table 16 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, TMF House, Base 
Scenario using the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change –  
Energy 
imbalance  
1 
Clay brick 
Clay brick 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
bitumen sheet 
2 
Clinker production 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
3 
Roof tile 
Clay brick 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
Climate  
change –  
CO2 
concentration 
1 
Clay brick 
Clay brick 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
bitumen sheet 
2 
Clinker production 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
3 
Roof tile 
Clay brick 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
Biogeochemical  
flows - N 
1 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Clay brick 
Clay brick 
Electricity, oil 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
3 
Transport, vehicle 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, paper 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:151==
Land-system  
change – Global 
1 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
2 
Softwood 
Softwood 
Softwood 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
3 
Pipeline, natural 
gas 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
Pipeline, natural 
gas 
Freshwater  
use – Global 
1 
Water 
Water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
2 
Tap water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
Water 
3 
Hard coal 
Hard coal 
Tap water 
Tap water 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:152==
Table 17 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, AD House, Base 
Scenario using the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change   
1 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Heat, wood chips 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
2 
Heat, hard coal 
Heat, hard coal 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, wood 
3 
Clinker production 
Clinker production 
Electricity, oil 
Wastewater 
treatment 
Marine  
eutrophication 
1 
Heat, hard coal 
Heat, hard coal 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
3 
Glass wool 
Glass wool 
Electricity, wood 
chips 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
Land use 
1 
Hardwood, beech 
Hardwood, beech 
Wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
3 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Hardwood, oak 
Wood chips 
Gravel 
Water resource 
 depletion 
1 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, oil 
Tap water 
Electricity, oil 
2 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Electricity, oil 
Water 
3 
Water 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Heat, hard coal 
Sand 
 
 
Table 18 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, AD House, Base 
Scenario using the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change –  
Energy 
imbalance  
1 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
2 
Heat, hard coal 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
bitumen sheet 
3 
Clinker production 
Clinker production 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
Climate  
change –  
CO2 
concentration 
1 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
2 
Heat, hard coal 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
bitumen sheet 
3 
Clinker production 
Clinker production 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Incineration, 
polyethylene 
Biogeochemical  
flows - N 
1 
Heat, hard coal 
Heat, hard coal 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
3 
Glass wool 
Glass wool 
Electricity, wood 
chips 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:153==
Land-system  
change – Global 
1 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
2 
Softwood 
Softwood 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
3 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Softwood 
Pipeline, natural 
gas 
Freshwater  
use – Global 
1 
Water 
Water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
2 
Tap water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
Water 
3 
Hard coal 
Water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
 
 
==PAGE:154==
Table 19 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, Q House, Base Scenario 
using the impact assessment method ILCD 2011. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change   
1 
Clay brick 
Clinker production 
Heat, wood chips 
Incineration, wood 
2 
Clinker production 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
bitumen sheet 
3 
Heat, hard coal 
Clay brick 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
Marine  
eutrophication 
1 
Glass wool 
Glass wool 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Electricity, oil 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
3 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Landfill, wood 
Land use 
1 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Hardwood 
Softwood, 
pine/spruce 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
3 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Hardwood, beech 
Wood chips 
Inert landfill 
Water resource 
 depletion 
1 
Electricity, oil 
Electricity, oil 
Tap water 
Electricity, oil 
2 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Heat, hard coal 
Water 
3 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, oil 
Gravel 
 
 
Table 20 - Top three contributing processes in each life cycle stage, Q House, Base Scenario 
using the impact assessment method PB-LCIA. 
  
 
Product stage 
Construction 
Use 
End of Life 
Climate  
change –  
Energy 
imbalance  
1 
Clay brick 
Clinker production 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
bitumen sheet 
2 
Clinker production 
Clay brick 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
3 
Heat, hard coal 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Clinker production 
Climate  
change –  
CO2 
concentration 
1 
Clay brick 
Clinker production 
Heat, hard coal 
Incineration, 
bitumen sheet 
2 
Clinker production 
Clay brick 
Electricity, oil 
Incineration, 
polystyrene 
3 
Heat, hard coal 
Expanded 
polystyrene 
Electricity, hard 
coal 
Clinker production 
Biogeochemical  
flows - N 
1 
Glass wool 
Glass wool 
Heat, wood chips 
Wastewater 
treatment 
2 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
Electricity, oil 
Diesel, burned in 
machine 
3 
Heat, hard coal 
Electricity, oil 
Heat, hard coal 
Wood sanitary 
landfill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:155==
Land-system  
change – Global 
1 
Softwood 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
2 
Onshore well, 
oil/gas 
Softwood 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Onshore petroleum 
field 
3 
Land tenure, arable 
land 
Pipeline, natural 
gas 
Softwood 
Slag landfill 
Freshwater  
use – Global 
1 
Water 
Water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
2 
Tap water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
Water 
3 
Water 
Water 
Tap water 
Tap water 
 
 
==PAGE:156==
 
i 
Closing statement from the authors 
This Master’s thesis sought to investigate the potential of two novel approaches incorporating 
absolute sustainability into the LCA-methodology by applying both to a case of Danish single 
family stand-alone dwellings i.e. the Mini CO2 Houses. One of the main goals of this report is to 
investigate the environmental potential of the design strategies demonstrated in the Mini CO2 
Houses, as well as evaluating the importance and potential of absolute environmental sustainability 
assessments as we strive to reduce our impact on the environment. While the chosen case was ideal 
for testing the two methods, it is important to note that the Mini CO2 Houses was designed to 
reduce CO2-emissions and does not cover all existing approaches to sustainable building design. 
The findings of this study emphasize the extent of the environmental challenges we are facing, and 
the results obtained with the two methods highlight the distance to the target. 
  
A key finding of this report was that every action counts. This has remained a constant topic 
throughout the process of writing this thesis. The Quota House serves as an example of how 
consumers gain a stronger sense of responsibility when considering the state of the environment. It 
is becoming increasingly clear that consumers have a part to play and hold the power to demand 
alternatives to traditional un-sustainable products and services. According to specialist in 
environmental psychology, Stine Emilie Fløe Dalby, climate change is the result of the greatest case 
of procrastination ever seen (Dalby, 2019). In a feature article in the Danish newspaper 
‘Information’ she accuses politicians and businesses of procrastinating when important actions need 
to be taken towards sustainable development. She claims that as long as politicians keep 
procrastinating, the state of the environment will remain a matter of individual consumer choices, 
instead of a shared motivation and commitment to actual actions and improvements (Dalby, 2019).  
  
As was the conclusion of this study, it is clear that both politicians, businesses and consumers all 
have a responsibility and every actor need to contribute if we are to change our current course 
towards a much warmer planet. The IPCC is clear on the matter; the window for limiting global 
warming to 1.5˚C is narrow – it will require that net global emissions of carbon dioxide is decreased 
with about 45 percent by 2030 – but it is achievable. To quote the IPCC Chair Hoesung Lee’s 
opening statement at COP24: “Every bit of warming matters, every year matters, every choice 
matters” (IPCC Secratariat, 2018). 
 
==PAGE:157==
 
ii 
References from opening and closing statement 
 
Dalby, S. E. F. (2019) Klimaforandringerne er resultatet af verdens største overspringshandling, 
Information. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.information.dk/debat/2019/01/klimaforandringerne-
resultatet-verdens-stoerste-
overspringshandling?fbclid=IwAR1ub9hDI2qMAJ01yrav1uqh_fNJvFGp21z7E3sLI7PnKYEttJ4V
uPfU66E (Accessed: 18 January 2019). 
Denmark, G. B. C. (2016) ‘Mini-guide til DGNB’, pp. 20–22. 
Fiona Harvey (2018) What was agreed at COP24 in Poland and why did it take so long?, The 
Guardian. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/dec/16/what-was-agreed-
at-cop24-in-poland-and-why-did-it-take-so-long (Accessed: 24 January 2019). 
IPCC Secratariat (2018) High-level segment of COP24 - Statement by IPCC Chair Hoesung Lee. 
doi: 10.1360/zd-2013-43-6-1064. 
Meadows, D. et al. (1972) Limits to growth. 
Ryberg, M. W. (2018) Putting life-cycle indicators on an absolute scale – Integrating Planetary 
Boundaries into Life-Cycle Assessment. 
Trafik 
og 
Byggestyrelsen 
(2016) 
Bæredygtigt 
byggeri. 
Available 
at: 
www.tbst.dk/DA/Byggeri/Baeredygtigt-byggeri.aspx (Accessed: 15 January 2019). 
 
