==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Integrating Machine Learning Into Meta-
heuristics
Mads Filbert, s152816
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
To solve large combinatorial optimization problems researchers within the field of
meta-heuristics have proposed a number of frameworks to generate good solutions.
Most of these meta-heuristics require the user to make design decisions such as param-
eter tuning, choice of sub-heuristics and choice of acceptance criteria. This process
requires expert knowledge and it can be time consuming. This project proposes a ma-
chine learning approach to automating some of the design choices for meta-heuristics.
The approach is two-fold; firstly a framework is proposed that can tune parameters of
meta-heuristics using a machine learning regression. Secondly a deep reinforcement
learning approach for training an acceptance criteria is proposed. The approaches
are integrated into the adaptive large neighbourhood search and are evaluated on
the capacitated vehicle routing problem. The framework for automatically tuning
parameters shows great potential when applied to the tuning of the temperature
control parameter for simulated annealing acceptance criteria and outperforms a con-
ventional approach. The deep reinforcement learning approach learned to accept all
solutions and needs further work to perform on the level of known acceptance criteria.
It would be interesting to perform further research into the integration of machine
learning and meta-heuristics and hopefully this project can work as inspiration for
the meta-heuristics community.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Study
5
2.1
Combining Meta-heuristics and Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Tuning Parameters for Meta-heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Acceptance Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem
9
3.1
Model Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
11
4.1
Choosing Destroy and Repair Heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Weight Update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Acceptance Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
A Classical Tuning Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.5
ALNS for CVRP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Random Forest Regression
17
5.1
Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Regression Trees
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.3
Random Forest Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6
Estimating Parameters Using Machine Learning
23
6.1
Estimating Temperature Control Parameter for SA Acceptance Crite-
ria for ALNS on CVRP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Deep Reinforcement Learning
27
7.1
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.2
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
7.3
Deep Q-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.4
Deep Q-Learning for Accepting Solutions in ALNS . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8
Experiments
43
8.1
Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2
Deep Reinforcement Learning Acceptance Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
9
Future Research
71
9.1
Parameter Tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
9.2
Deep Reinforcement Learning - acceptance criteria . . . . . . . . . . .
73
10 Conclusion
75
Bibliography
77
Appendix
83
Data and Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
80:20 split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Finding optimal solutions for combinatorial complex problems such as timetabling
and vehicle routing is a task that could improve the life of people and revenue of
companies around the world. For small instances of these problems solvers such as
Gurobi[Opt14] are able to find optimal solution. However, for large instances of these
problems it is infeasible for a conventional solver to solve the problem within a reason-
able amount of time. From the field of meta-heuristics, problem independent frame-
works such as Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure(GRASP)[FR95], Tabu
Search(TS)[GL98], Simulated Annealing(SA)[KGV83] and Adaptive Large Neigh-
bourhood Search(ALNS)[RP06b] have emerged in order to accommodate the short
comings of conventional solvers. These frameworks are in some cases able to find
optimal solutions or at least find good alternative solution within a feasible amount
of time. However, as the proposed methods are formulated as frameworks they need
design decisions made by the user in order to implement a finished algorithm. This
process can be very time consuming and requires expert knowledge. This project will
investigate two approaches using machine learning to ease some of the decisions made
by the user.
One of the design decisions is the choice of parameters for the meta-heuristics. Even
though these parameters have a great impact on the performance of a given meta-
heuristic, the tuning of the parameters are often performed by a trial-and-error ap-
proach which is very time consuming and requires an expert who can be biased in
the choices made[FS19]. Furthermore this approach often leads to a single parameter
setting that is used across all new unseen instances.
Another of these decisions is the choice and design of the acceptance criteria.
The meta-heuristic frameworks are typically based on some sort of search. A critical
part of this search is the acceptance criteria which chooses whether to accept or
decline a newly discovered solution. Santini, Ropke, and Hvattum [SRH18] showed
that the choice of acceptance criteria for ALNS can have a great impact on the
performance of the algorithm. The selection of the acceptance criteria is therefore of
great importance.
Figure 1.1 shows the performance of ALNS with SA acceptance criteria depending
on the choice of temperature control parameter. The figure depicts the performance
on two instances of the capacitated vehicle routing problems(CVRP). The figure indi-
cates that it is not possible to fit a simple function for estimating the best parameter
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
setting as the performance develops in different ways depending the instance. This
indicates there is some underlying structure that determines the development in per-
formance depending on the parameter setting. Over the last years, machine learning
methods have become very popular due to their ability of recognizing patterns in data.
It is therefore interesting to see if these methods can be used to find patterns in the
performance of meta-heuristics for instances of combinatorial optimization problems.
(a) Kelly - kelly05
(b) Uchoa - X-n237-k14
Figure 1.1: The gap compared to temperature control parameter
The use of machine learning in meta-heuristics in this project will be two-fold;
Firstly, a framework for tuning parameters using machine learning regression will be
proposed. To evaluate the performance of the framework, an implementation will
be made that uses a Random Forest(RF) regression to find the temperature control
parameter for SA acceptance criteria used in ALNS. The method will use previously
seen instances of the CVRP to quickly estimate a good parameter for new unseen
instances of CVRP. The CVRP is chosen as it is well studied problem and a range of
well known instances are available for training models and conducting experiments.
Furthermore an implementation of ALNS was already available leaving out the need
to implement it from the ground up.
The second approach will try to use the recent advances within deep reinforcement
learning to learn an acceptance criteria. Over the last couple of years researchers
have used deep neural networks to teach an agent how to act within combinatorial
large spaces. This has lead to results such as playing Atari games on the level of
humans[Mni+15] and beating the worlds best players in GO[Sil+16] and StarCraft
2[19]. The ability to make good decisions in a combinatorial large space is very rel-
evant to meta-heuristics and it could be used for applications such as e.g. choosing
destroy and repair methods for ALNS or dynamically changing the size of a TABU
list. In this project it will be used to learn an acceptance criteria for ALNS.
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
3
The project shows that by harnessing the power of machine learning it is possible
to improve the tuning of the temperature control parameter for ALNS making it
interesting to further investigate the proposed approach on other problems, meta-
heuristics and parameters. It also shows that learning an acceptance criteria using
deep reinforcement learning is a complex task that if not designed correctly will lead
to sub-optimal performance. However seeing the potential that deep reinforcement
learning has shown in other domains with combinatorial large spaces it is an approach
that should be further investigated.
==PAGE:10==
4
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Study
In order to know if this project has its justification in academia it is necessary to
research what related work has been done within the field of meta-heuristics and
machine learning.
2.1
Combining Meta-heuristics and Machine Learning
Most research done at this point combining machine learning and meta-heuristics
is focused on applying meta-heuristics in order to improve machine learning tech-
niques. Orsenigo and Vercellis [OV04] try to optimize the training of support vector
machines by formulating the training as a mixed-integer problem and solving it using
TS. Other approaches use meta-heuristics as a method for selecting hyper-parameters
for machine learning models. Wu et al. [Wu+07] use a genetic algorithm to optimize
the parameters and features for a logistic regression used for predicting bankruptcies,
while Pacheco, Casado, and Núñez [PCN09] use a TS for selecting the features for
used for a logistic regression.
There has been some proposals where machine learning is used to enhance meta-
heuristics. Some try to learn which meta-heuristic is best given an instance of a prob-
lem. Kanda et al. [Kan+11] propose to use a neural network to choose between TS,
GRASP, SA and an Genetic Algorithm(GA) for the travelling salesperson problem.
Others have tried to use machine learning to speed up meta-heuristics by estimating
the quality of a generated solution during a run. This way there is no need to calcu-
late the cost of a newly generated solution in each iteration and thereby the algorithm
becomes faster. Li, Burke, and Qu [LBQ11] use neural networks and logistic regres-
sion to evaluate the solution at each iteration of a hyper-heuristic search. Similarly
Zennaki and Ech-Cherif [ZE10] propose a framework where they use support vector
machines to estimate the quality of a solution in a given meta-heuristic.
There has also been proposals of tuning meta-heuristics using machine learning. Less-
mann, Caserta, and Arango [LCA11] use linear regression, support vector machines
and RF to estimate the parameters for particle swarm optimization.
The study
showed that the random forest approach had great potential in estimating good pa-
rameters. The benefit of this approach is that a parameter setting can be found for
==PAGE:12==
6
2 Literature Study
each unseen instance individually.
The downside is that in order to generate the
data used for training the models, each instance has to be run using a wide range of
parameter settings before hand.
2.2
Tuning Parameters for Meta-heuristics
It is widely agreed upon that the tuning of meta-heuristics is of great importance
for the performance of meta-heuristics and often researchers use more time on tuning
parameters than developing new methods[BK09, p. 33]. Even though this is the case,
no generally used best practices have been developed and it is often a neglected part
of papers how the algorithms were actually tuned[BK09, p. 35].
In many cases the tuning of parameters are performed by a trial-and-error approach[BK09,
p. 35]. This approach requires that a person tries out a range of parameters and then
evaluates them by hand. This is very time consuming and requires that the person
that tunes the model has domain knowledge of the problem and meta-heuristics.
Some papers have tried to introduce more formalized and automatic parameter tuning
approaches using the response surface i.e. how the performance of the meta-heuristic
changes with the parameter settings.
Using the response surface a search can be
performed to obtain a good parameter setting. Many of these approaches such as
Adenso-Diaz and Laguna [AL06] and Coy et al. [Coy+01] use a linear response sur-
face. Linear approximations of the response surfaces are however an over simplifica-
tion, which was seen by figure 1.1 in the introduction.
Another approach to tuning meta-heuristics are racing algorithms such as Hoeffd-
ing Race[MM94] and BRACE[Box76]. Racing algorithms are typically based upon
statistical testing of parameter settings. A range of parameter settings are defined
and are then raced against each other.
A race is a series of iterations where for
each iteration all parameter settings are tested on an instance. When there has been
enough iterations to show that with statistical evidence a parameter setting is infe-
rior to others this setting is eliminated and the race continues with the rest of the
parameter settings. Because each iteration does not contain all parameter settings,
this approach speeds up automatic parameter tuning.
In general these methods work well when a small training set can be found that
is representative of the general distribution of instances. The training set needs to
be small for these approaches to be feasible as the approaches would be slow for
very large training sets. Finding a small training set that is representative for the
general distribution of instances can be extremely difficult. To account for this Bi-
rattari and Kacprzyk [BK09] proposes a framework for tuning meta-heuristics. The
book is based on principles from machine learning. It introduces the use of classes
of instances which is a way of separating instances into classes of similar instances.
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Reinforcement Learning
7
Using a race the parameters should then be tuned on the classes of instances that
are the most likely to occur in the future. The race used for this tuning is called
F-race. Another approach is introduced by Hutter et al. [Hut+09] who proposes an
iterated local search termed ParamILS, where a number of instances are iteratively
sampled from the set of instances. The algorithm starts with a parameter setting
and then finds the best parameter setting in a defined neighbourhood of this setting.
This is then repeated for a number of iterations. These methods as well as almost all
proposed methods have the drawback that they only find a single parameter setting
that is to be used across all instances.
2.3
Reinforcement Learning
The use of reinforcement learning for meta-heuristics has been proposed a couple of
times in the literature. The most frequently seen applications is using reinforcement
learning to choose sub-heuristics. For adaptive large neighbourhood search Ropke and
Pisinger [RP06b] uses a type of reinforcement learning where rewards are given to sub-
heuristics depending on their performance. The better the performance the higher
the chance is that the sub-heuristic is chosen again. Santos et al. [San+14] proposes
a two-fold application of Q-learning. First of Q-learning is used for constructing an
initial solution and secondly a seperate Q-learning is used to select a local search in
a Reactive Search optimization. In another article Lima, Melo, and Neto [LMN08]
propose the use of Q-Learning to construct an initial solution for GRASP. To learn
how to construct a solution using Q-learning, the GRASP algorithm is run a number
of times where the Q-learning will learn which updates of the solutions are good and
which a bad. The experiences learned are then used to construct initial solutions in
future runs of grasp.
2.4
Acceptance Criteria
An acceptance criteria should be diverse enough to explore many different solutions
but also intense enough to converge towards minima[FS19]. However how to design
an acceptance criteria that has these properties is a difficult task.
There has been many proposals for acceptance criteria in meta-heuristics. The sim-
plest acceptance criteria that performs fairly well is Hill-Climbing(HC)[GK06, p. 283]
where a solution is only accepted if it is an improvement on the current solution. For
convex problems HC is guaranteed to find a global optimum, however for non-convex
problems HC easily converges to local minima. Other acceptance criteria have dif-
ferent approaches to try to diversify the search to avoid local minima. Dueck and
Scheuer [DS90] proposed Threshold Acceptance, where solutions are accepted if the
difference between the newly proposed solution and the current solution is smaller
than some threshold.
Thereby it is also allowed to accept worse solutions which
==PAGE:14==
8
2 Literature Study
diversifies the search. The threshold typically starts outs large such that the the algo-
rithm diversifies and becomes smaller in order to intensify. A similar approach is the
Record-to-Record travel proposed by Li, Golden, and Wasil [LGW07] where instead
of looking at the difference between the current solution and the new solution it is
the difference between the best seen solution and the newly proposed solution. A dis-
advantage of these acceptance criteria and acceptance criteria in general is that they
are difficult to design and they are based on what researchers have previously seen to
work well and can be biased by what the researchers believe of how a good acceptance
criteria should be. Furthermore most of them require tuning of parameters.
2.5
Summary
Many proposals have been made on how to tune parameters but no standard has
been accepted yet. Many of the proposals try to find an overall best setting that
in general performs well for all instances. However, the performance of a given pa-
rameter setting might vary greatly depending on the instance. One of the proposals
showed promising results in using machine learning techniques to estimate parameter
settings for each individual unseen instance. No general framework for tuning param-
eters using machine learning was found in the literature study.
No approaches were seen that investigates the use of deep reinforcement learning
in meta-heuristics. An acceptance criteria based upon deep reinforcement learning
would provide an alternative to the acceptance criteria that has the advantage of not
being biased by the belief of a researcher and that after training does not need the
setting of any parameters.
This paper can therefore contribute to the further advances within meta-heuristics.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Capacitated Vehicle
Routing Problem
The desired goal for the CVRP is to find a minimum cost of satisfying all demands
di for all customers i ∈N = {1, ..., n} with a set of k vehicles K = {1, ..., k} with
a maximum capacity Q departing from a depot. The CVRP is a NP-hard problem
and for large instances it is not possible to solve it using a conventional solver such
as Gurobi[Opt14] within a feasible amount of time.
3.1
Model Formulation
In order to better understand the problem it is useful to formulate it mathematically.
Using a directed graph G(V, E) where V = {0, ..., n} is the set of vertices consisting
of the depot and the customers where node 0 is the depot and E are the vertices
between the nodes in set V , the problem can be formulated using an integer linear
programming model:
==PAGE:16==
10
3 Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem
Z =
k
∑
r=0
n
∑
i=0
n
∑
j=0,i̸=j
cijxrij
(3.1)
s.t.
k
∑
r=0
n
∑
i=0,i̸=j
xrij = 1
∀j ∈V \ {0},
(3.2)
n
∑
j=0
xr0j = 1
∀r ∈K,
(3.3)
n
∑
i=0,i̸=j
xrij =
n
∑
i=0
xrji
∀j ∈V, ∀r ∈K,
(3.4)
n
∑
i=0
∑
j=1,i̸=j
djxrij ≤Q
∀r ∈K,
(3.5)
k
∑
r=1
∑
i∈S
∑
j∈S,i̸=j
xrij ≤|S| −1
∀S ⊆V \ {0}, S ̸= ∅,
(3.6)
xrij ∈{0, 1}
∀r ∈K, ∀i, j ∈V, i ̸= j
(3.7)
Looking into the formulation the objective function 3.1 minimizes the total cost where
cij is the cost of travelling from i to j and xrij is a binary variable indicating whether
vehicle r travels from i to j. Constraint 3.2 ensures that each customer is visited
exactly once. The model has two flow constraints 3.3 and 3.4. Constraint 3.3 ensures
that all vehicles depart from the depot while constraint 3.4 ensures that the number
of vehicles entering a node is the same number of vehicles that depart. In combina-
tion the flow constraints enforce the vehicles to return to the depot. The capacity
constraint 3.5 ensures that a vehicle does not carry more than its capacity. The sub
tour constraint 3.6 enforces that no cycles occurs other than returns to the depot.
Lastly, constraint 3.7 ensures integrality.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 4
Adaptive Large
Neighbourhood
Search
The ALNS[RP06b] is a heuristic that extends the Large Neighbourhood Search(LNS)[Sha98]
with a number of sub-heuristics. The sub-heuristics are a number of destroy methods
d ∈Ω−and repair methods r ∈Ω+ which are selected with a weighted probability
ρ−= (w1, ..., wn) and ρ+ = (w1, ..., wm). The main motivation behind adding these
sub-heuristics is to create a more general algorithm that can perform well on a range
of problems without having to pre-select the best repair or destroy method. The algo-
rithm works by generating an initial random solution and initializing the probabilities
of choosing the sub-heuristics to have equal probability. Hereafter parts of the initial
solution will be destroyed and then repaired resulting in a new solution. It is then
decided whether the solution should be accepted based on some acceptance criteria.
If the solution is accepted, the process will be repeated on the new solution. This
will be repeated until some termination criteria is reached. The termination criteria
is typically a predefined number of iterations or some time limit. The pseudocode
in algorithm 1 describes the ALNS. Line 1-4 initializes the algorithm. Line 5-15 is
the main loop. Line 6 and 7 is the generation of a new solution with the selected
destroy and repair methods. If the newly generated solution is accepted in line 8, line
9 sets the current solution to the newly generated solution. In line 11 it is checked
if the cost of the newly generated solution f(st) is better than the cost of the best
seen solution f(sb). If this is the case line 12 updates the best seen solution. Lastly,
the weights of ρ−and ρ+ are updated according to the performance of the chosen
sub-heuristics.
==PAGE:18==
12
4 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
Algorithm 1 ALNS
1: Generate feasible solution s
2: sb ←s
3: ρ−←(1, ..., 1)
4: ρ+ ←(1, ..., 1)
5: repeat
6:
select destroy and repair methods d ∈Ω−and r ∈Ω+ using ρ−and ρ+
7:
st ←r(d(s))
8:
if accept(st) then
9:
s ←st
10:
end if
11:
if f(st) < f(sb) then
12:
sb ←st
13:
end if
14:
update ρ+ and ρ−
15: until termination criteria
4.1
Choosing Destroy and Repair Heuristics
The destroy method d and repair method r are selected using a roulette wheel with
weights ρ−and ρ+ assigned to each of the heuristics. The probability ϕ−of selecting
a destroy heuristic j with weight wj is defined by equation 4.1. The equation states
that the higher weight wj of heuristic j relative to the total sum of weights in ρ−, the
higher the probability is that the heuristic is chosen.
ϕ−
j =
wj
∑
wi∈ρ−wi
(4.1)
Likewise equation, can be applied for finding the probability of selecting repair
method j.
ϕ+
j =
wj
∑
wi∈ρ+ wi
(4.2)
Ropke and Pisinger [RP06b] describe that the weights of the sub-heuristics are
updated online to reward the heuristics that perform well.
==PAGE:19==
4.2 Weight Update
13
4.2
Weight Update
After each iteration an update to the weights of the selected heuristics ρ+
a and ρ−
a
is performed based on the performance of the selected heuristics. A reward Ψ =
max(w1, w2, w3, w4) is selected where w1 ≥w2 ≥w3 ≥w4. For this project the
rewards in table 4.1 are used.
Table 4.1: Rewards for sub-heuristics
Reward
Description
0
If solution is not accepted
2
If solution is accepted
4
If solution is accepted and it is an improvement to current solution
10
If solution is accepted and it is a new overall best
Using Ψ the weights of ρ+
a and ρ−
a can be updated by equation 4.3 and 4.4
ρ+
a = λρ+
a + (1 −λ)Ψ
(4.3)
ρ−
a = λρ−
a + (1 −λ)Ψ
(4.4)
where λ ∈[0, 1] determines how much the latest iteration should impact the weight.
The smaller the size of λ the more responsive the update is to the latest performance
of a heuristic.
4.3
Acceptance Criteria
A wide range of acceptance criteria have been proposed for meta-heuristics. In this
project, the focus will be on SA acceptance criteria. SA acceptance criteria is chosen
as it in general performs well[SRH18] and the criteria can be simplified to only involve
a single parameter to tune.
4.3.1
Simulated Annealing
Simulated annealing(SA) is based on an analogy to annealing on metals. In metal-
lurgy, the probability of an increase in energy reduces as the temperature of the metal
decreases. This idea is used such that in the beginning of a run of the meta-heuristic
it is desired to be to be diverse i.e. with a high probability allow for a solution that
is worse than the current one to be accepted. The probability of accepting a solution
is determined by equation 4.5
P(s, st, T) = e
f(s)−f(st)
T
(4.5)
==PAGE:20==
14
4 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
where f(s) is the cost of the current solution, f(st) is the cost of the newly gener-
ated solution and T is the temperature. Equation 4.5 states that the probability of
accepting a solution is determined by how good a new solution is and the current
temperature T. The lower the temperature becomes the lower is the probability of
accepting a solution that is worse than the current one. The temperature is annealed
over time such that the probability of accepting a solution that is worse than the cur-
rent one becomes smaller and smaller. For this project the temperature is annealed
linearly down to 0. The pseudo-code in algorithm 2 shows how the SA acceptance
criteria is implemented.
Algorithm 2 Simulated Annealing Acceptance Criteria
1: if rand(0,1)< e
f(s)−f(st)
T
then
2:
s ←st
3: end if
4: anneal T
The cost f(s) depends on the formulation of the problem instance i.e.
some
instances might have very high costs while others have very small costs. Therefore
the temperature T has to be set according to the instance. Equation 4.6 can be used
to find a temperature for an instance.
T = z(1 −w)
ln(0.5)
(4.6)
The equation states how the temperature T should be set such that a solution that
is w percent worse than some reference solution z will be accepted with a probability
of 0.5. The reference solution used in this project is the initial solution. Equation
4.6 will be used to find the starting temperature and the parameter to tune in this
project will therefore be w which is termed the temperature control parameter.
4.4
A Classical Tuning Approach
One classical approach of tuning a meta-heuristic is to run the algorithm with a
setting h ∈H across a number of instances and then selecting the setting that on
average performs the best.
Instances will have a wide range of possible solution costs and a metric is there-
fore needed that generalizes across instances. The metric used in this project is the
gap[Sti18, p. 16]. The gap is calculated as the difference between a solution z found
with a given parameter setting and the best overall solution seen for that instance.
Due to the random nature of many meta-heuristics the gap will typically be averaged
over a number of runs N to get a more robust measure. The gap gives a good measure
==PAGE:21==
4.5 ALNS for CVRP
15
of how close to the best solution the algorithm comes on average. The gap for an
instance i with parameter setting h is defined by equation 4.7. Where zh(i) is the
solution cost obtained for instance i with parameter setting h and z∗(i) is the best
overall solution found for instance i.
gaph(i) = zh(i) −z∗(i)
z∗(i)
(4.7)
The mean gap for instance i with parameter setting h can thereby be found by
equation 4.8. Remember that zh(i) has some sort of randomness and will therefore
vary for each call. For the rest of this project the mean gap will simply be termed
the gap.
mean gaph(i) = 1
N
N
∑
j=0
zh(i) −z∗(i)
z∗(i)
(4.8)
The parameter setting hbest can thereby be found by equation 4.9, where I is the
set of instances used for tuning.
hbest = min
h∈H
1
|I|
|I|
∑
i=0
mean gaph(i)
(4.9)
This approach will hereafter be denoted minimum mean of gaps(MMG). This
method is very time consuming and furthermore it only chooses a single parameter
setting that is used across many instances. This parameter setting might on average
perform good, but in some cases it might be completely wrong.
4.5
ALNS for CVRP
The ALNS for CVRP used for this project is parallel as described by Ropke and
Santini [RS16]. The setup of the ALNS for CVRP will follow that of Santini, Ropke,
and Hvattum [SRH18] where the setup is described in greater detail in section 5.1.
The methods used for destroy are random removal[RP06a], relatedness removal[Sha98]
and history-based removal[RP06a]. The repair method used is regret repair[PR93].
To further improve the repaired solution, there will be a hill climbing in the 2-opt*
neighbourhood[Lap+00]. This will not occur on every repair but with a probability
p. For creating the initial solution, a route is created one at a time with its starting
point being that of a customer randomly removed from the set of customers. Here-
after, the algorithm will keep on adding customers to the route that increases the
cost of the route the least until the capacity of the vehicle on the route is reached.
This procedure continues until all customers have been added to a route.
==PAGE:22==
16
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 5
Random Forest
Regression
The framework proposed in this project for tuning parameters will use machine
learning regression.
For this project the type of regression used will be Random
Forests(RF)[Bre01].
5.1
Regression
In Machine Learning two types of problems are typically encountered; unsupervised
and supervised learning. In unsupervised learning, a data set is available of N training
observations of the form X = {x1, ..., xN} where xi is a row vector with p features that
can be both discrete and continuous. The desire is to find patterns in the data that
explains something about the data. An example could be clustering where the desire
is to find out which observations are similar. When new observations are obtained it
is then possible to say which cluster it belongs to. In supervised learning a data set
is available of N training observations of the form X × Y = {(x1, y1), ..., (xN, yN)}
where xi is a row vector with p features that can be both discrete and continuous and
yi is a label that can be either discrete or continuous. If yi is discrete it is termed
a classification problem and if yi is continuous it is termed a regression problem. In
this project desired labels are continuous and therefore it is a regression problem. In
supervised learning the goal is to find a mapping g : X →Y . This mapping is found
by training a model using the training observations. The model is typically trained
such that a set of parameters θ is found that minimizes the average loss C(θ) between
the estimation g(xi; θ) = ˆyi and the actual values y. The cost can thereby be defined
by equation 5.1
C(θ) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
L(yi, g(xi; θ))
(5.1)
==PAGE:24==
18
5 Random Forest Regression
Where L is some predefined loss function.The training of a model can therefore be
defined by the optimization problem in equation 5.2.
θtrained = min
θ
C(θ)
(5.2)
L can be defined in several ways with the most widely used being the squared error.
When using the squared error as loss function equation, 5.2 is known under the term
Mean Squared Error(MSE) as seen in equation 5.3 where ||yi −g(xi; θ)|| denotes the
euclidean distance between yi and g(xi; θ).
C(θ) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
||yi −g(xi; θ)||2
(5.3)
The MSE is a good measure of accuracy in estimation as it is non-negative and a
well trained model ensures that MSE is close to 0. The trained mapping can now be
used to estimate an output label for new observations for which a label is not known.
A type of supervised machine learning models that have grown popular over recent
years are ensemble models. Ensemble models are models that are made up of multi-
ple models in order to improve performance. One such ensemble model is RF which
makes use of classification or regression trees[Bre17] as its underlying models.
5.2
Regression Trees
The idea of regression trees is to split the training set X into smaller and smaller
intervals until a very simple model can be fit to the individual intervals. This results
in a tree structure where each node is a split and the leafs contain the simple model
fit for that interval. The simple model used for each interval I is a constant fitted to
the interval. Thereby θ in this case will be the position of the splits and the constant
fitted to the leafs. The cost of fitting the constant to the interval can be described
by the residual sum of squares(RSS) in equation 5.4, where yi are the observations in
interval I and ˆyI is the constant fitted to interval I
RSSI =
∑
i∈I
(yi −ˆyI)2
(5.4)
The training for interval I is performed by fitting a constant such that RSSI is
minimized using equation 5.5 which is the sample mean of interval I.
ˆyI = 1
|I|
∑
i∈I
yi
(5.5)
When a new observation is to be labelled you start at the root of the tree and
go down to the leaf by asking a series of questions at each node, e.g. is it a male or
female? Is the person under the age of 50? And so on. Thereby a regression tree is
also very easily interpreted and can give you information about the data.
==PAGE:25==
5.2 Regression Trees
19
5.2.1
Tree growing
For creating the regression tree, good splits has to be chosen. The observation can
not simply be split in the middle as this might lead to similar observations ending
up in different intervals. The procedure of selecting a good split simply investigates
all possible splits for a given interval and selects the split that minimizes equation
5.6, where RSSIleft and RSSIright are the RSS of the two intervals resulting from
the split.
RSSI = RSSIleft + RSSIright
(5.6)
An example of the possible splits and fitting a constant to the best split is shown
in figure 5.1.
(a) The possible splits
(b) The chosen split and the fitted constants
Figure 5.1: An example of the possible splits that can be chosen and the chosen split
source: DTU course 02583, fall 2017, lecture 8 slides
If the data has multiple features, the best split it chosen across all splits on
all features. This procedure is then repeated for the two resulting intervals until a
termination criteria is reached as shown by the pseudo-code in algorithm 3. Line 1-3
initializes the algorithm with the minimum interval size, the current interval being
the entire training set and setting the best seen RSS to a large value. Line 4-13 is the
procedure of finding the best split. Line 6-8 fits constants to the current splits and
finds the total RSS. Line 9-11 checks if the current RSS is lower than the best seen
RSSbest, in which case it updates the best split and RSSbest. In line 15 and 17 the
splits are performed and line 17 repeats the procedure on the two resulting intervals.
==PAGE:26==
20
5 Random Forest Regression
Algorithm 3 Tree-growing procedure
1: Select minimum interval size
2: interval ←entire range of X
3: RSSbest ←large value
4: for each feature do
5:
for each possible split in interval do
6:
ˆyleft = fit constant to intervalleft
7:
ˆyright = fit constant to intervalright
8:
RSS ←RSSleft + RSSright
9:
if RSS < RSSbest then
10:
RSSbest ←RSS
11:
Splitbest ←(feature, position)
12:
end if
13:
end for
14: end for
15: intervalleft ←observations lower than Splitbest
16: intervalright ←observations greater than Splitbest
17: save split and repeat Tree-growing procedure for intervalleft and intervalright
until termination criteria.
In general you grow the tree down to a predetermined minimum number of ob-
servations allowed in an interval and then you would prune the tree to decrease the
risk of overfitting the model. However, for the use as a part of RF regression the tree
will be grown as large as possible without pruning as the RF decreases the risk of
overfitting in itself[Bre01, p. ].
The interpretability of a regression tree makes it popular in medical sciences,
however, it has some drawbacks. First, finding the best depth of the tree is non-
trivial and has a great impact on the performance. Second, the model is not very
robust as updating the model with new data might completely change the structure
of the tree. To create a stronger model using regression trees they can be combined
together in a forest.
5.3
Random Forest Regression
A forest is grown by selecting a number of trees B that is to be grown. For each tree,
N observations are sampled from the training set X at random, i.e. they are drawn
with repetition such that some observations might occur more than once. For the
drawn sample, m < p features are selected at random and a split is created by the
same procedure as in the tree-growing algorithm for regression trees. The drawing
of features and the split creation is then repeated on the two resulting intervals until
a minimum size of the interval is reached. This results in an altered tree-growing
procedure described by the code in algorithm 4 and the forest growing procedure
==PAGE:27==
5.3 Random Forest Regression
21
code in algorithm 5.
For the Random Tree-growing Procedure, line 1 samples m
features. Line 2 finds the best split across the sample features in the same manner
as the standard tree-growing procedure. Line 3-5 splits the data and repeats the
procedure on the resulting intervals.
Algorithm 4 Random Tree-growing Procedure
1: features ←random sample m < p features
2: Splitbest ←Find best split across sampled features using RSS.
3: intervalleft ←observations lower than Splitbest
4: intervalright ←observations greater than Splitbest
5: Save split and repeat Random Tree-growing procedure for intervalleft and
intervalright until minimum number of nodes reached.
For the Forest-growing Procedure, line 1 initializes the number of trees to be used.
Line 2-4 grows the forest. Line 3 samples the data to be used and Line 4 grows a tree
by the Random Tree-growing procedure.
Algorithm 5 Forest-growing Procedure
1: Select number of trees B
2: for b=1 to B do
3:
sample ←Random Sample of size N from data
4:
Tb ←Random Tree-growing procedure on sample
5: end for
When a regression of a new observation xi is desired, the output of each tree is
evaluated and then the mean of these outputs is found to create the estimation. This
process can be summarized by equation 5.7, where Tb is regression tree b.
ˆyi = 1
B
B
∑
i=1
Tb(xi)
(5.7)
By introducing RF, a stronger regression model is obtained; but the interpretabil-
ity is lost. However, it is still possible to get a measurement of feature importance.
The feature importance for a single tree is found by calculating how much the MSE
decreases every time that feature has been chosen for the split, divided by the number
of times the feature has been used for a split. The feature importance for the forest
is then found by the mean of the feature importance across all trees.
5.3.1
Choosing the number of trees
As for selecting the best parameters for meta-heuristics, there is also a need to select
parameters for the model in machine learning. In machine learning, these parameters
==PAGE:28==
22
5 Random Forest Regression
that are set prior to training is termed hyper-parameters. The hyper-parameters for
Random Forest Regression is the number of trees in the forest B and the number of
features to sample for tree-growing. For this project the number of features sampled
is √p as this is the setting used by scikit-learn1, therefore only the number of trees
ard needed to be decided upon. The most common way of finding the best hyper-
parameter setting is to split the data set into three parts; a training set, a validation
set and a test set. This split is typically 60:20:20[Rip07, p. 354]. To choose the best
hyper-parameters a model is fitted to the training set for each setting. These models
are then evaluated on the validation set using the MSE. The simplest way of choosing
the hyper-parameter setting is to take the setting that minimizes MSE. However, if
the hyper-parameters with the lowest value is selected there is a risk that the model
is fitted really well only to the data in the training set and validation set but does
not generalize very well to new data. In this case the model is overfitted. On the
other hand it is not desired to use a hyper-parameter setting that is not accurate
enough and thereby has a large error in its estimations. In this case the model is
under-fitted. So a compromise has to be made between having a general model and
accurately estimated observations. Using this terminology it is apparent that MMG
will have a tendency to overfit as it will fit well to many instances in the training set
but might not fit well to the test set.
According to the inventor of random forests, it is however not possible to overfit
random forests[Bre01, p. 4]. Others have stated that random forest regression can
overfit when the data is noisy[Seg04]. For the proposed approach in this project, the
random forest should estimate the gap of instances given a parameter. The gap can
be noisy due to the stochasticity of meta-heuristics however, as it will be averaged
over a number of runs, it will be assumed that it is fairly unnoisy. In general, adding
more trees to the forest will result in better performance.
The improvement will
typically be very big in the beginning and then flatten out when a certain number
of trees is reached. So you could just choose a very large number of trees but the
bigger the forest the slower an estimation will become. Therefore, the number of trees
will be determined by choosing the number of trees where the improvement flattens
out and has stabilized. For this project the number of trees will be determined by
examining the graph from the parameter tuning and choosing the number of trees on
this background.
After the hyper-parameter setting is found the training data and validation data
is joined and a new model is trained on all the data such that it now a 80:20 split
between training and test data.
1https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.
RandomForestClassifier.html
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 6
Estimating Parameters
Using Machine
Learning
Using machine learning regression, a method can be developed to estimate parameter
settings for meta-heuristics. For each type of problem a set of features must be defined
that can describe each instance. Furthermore each observation should have a feature
for each parameter. The observation vector will thereby be in the form
xi = [feature1, ..., featurep, parameter1, ..., parametern]. For the output, the gap of
the given parameter setting will be used. Notice that this will lead to each instance
having multiple observations associated with it, i.e. one for each parameter setting.
In order to train the model, a data set must be created by running the meta-heuristic
for a set of parameter settings. Using the trained model a good parameter setting can
then be found for new instances by the gridsearch depicted in algorithm 6. Line 1-4
extracts features of the instance and initializes the search. P is the set of parameters
that are to be explored. Line 5-12 is the search. Line 6 creates the observation to
input to the chosen regression model. Line 7 does the estimation of the gap using the
chosen regression model. Line 8 checks if the estimated gap is lower than the best
estimation seen. If this is the case line 9 updates the best seen parameter and line 10
updates the best seen estimated gap. Line 13 returns the best estimated parameter.
The advantage of using this method for estimating the best parameter setting is
that it gives a fast estimate that is individual for the single instance. Furthermore
this approach has the advantage that the model only has to find the correct ordering
of the parameters.
This approach has the drawback that if you want to search a finer grid than the one
used to create the training data, you might not obtain good results. Therefore a fine
grid should be used to obtain the training data. This will however make the process
of creating the data set time consuming. Another approach could be to use the best
setting as the output. Thereby the parameter setting could be estimated directly.
However, for training this would result in only one observation being available per
instance i.e.
the observation seen for the best parameter setting.
This approach
==PAGE:30==
24
6 Estimating Parameters Using Machine Learning
Algorithm 6 Parameter Estimation
1: features ←extract features from instance
2: P ←set of parameter settings
3: gapbest ←initialize to large number
4: pbest ←Initialize pbest
5: for p ∈P do
6:
featurestemp ←append p to features
7:
gapestimated ←estimate gap for featurestemp with machine learning regres-
sion(e.g. RF)
8:
if gapestimated < gapbest then
9:
pbest ←p
10:
gapbest ←gapestimated
11:
end if
12: end for
13: return pbest
could also result in the model finding interpolations between parameter settings i.e.
the estimated parameter does not need to exactly be one of the parameters used to
create the training set. For this project the first approach was found more desirable
as it generated more data per instance.
6.1
Estimating Temperature Control Parameter for SA
Acceptance Criteria for ALNS on CVRP
The proposed framework can be applied to find the best temperature control param-
eter setting for SA acceptance criteria for ALNS on CVRP. In this project RF will
be used as the regression model.
6.1.0.1
Features
The features used to describe each instance is inspired by Kanda, Carvalho, Hruschka,
Soares, Brazdil[Kan+16].
The full list of features can be seen in table 6.1.
It is
apparent that many of the features are correlated e.g. the demand features. However
Random Forest, is robust to correlated features[THB18]. The centroid is defined as
the mean position of all the nodes the instance.
==PAGE:31==
6.1 Estimating Temperature Control Parameter for SA Acceptance Criteria for ALNS on CVRP
25
Table 6.1: Features used for estimating the gap of a given temperature control pa-
rameter
Name
Description
N
number of customers in instance
Q
Capacity of vehicles
K
minimum number of vehicles for a feasible solution
tot. demand
sum of demands for instance
min. demand
minimum demand
max. demand
max demand
mean. demand
mean demand across customers
std. dev. demand
standard deviation of demands
med. demand
median of demands
min. dist.
The minimal distance between two nodes
max. dist.
The maximum distance between two nodes
mean dist.
the mean distance between nodes.
std. dev. dist.
The standard deviation of distances
med. dist.
The median between distances
tot. dist.
The sum of distances between all nodes
mean dist. nn.
The mean of distances from each node to its nearest neighbour
min. dist. depot
minimum distance from a node to the depot
max. dist. depot
maximum distance from a node to the depot
mean. dist. depot
mean of distances to depot
std. dev. dist. depot
standard deviation of distances to depot
med. dist. depot
median distance to depot
min. dist. centroid
minimum distance from a to the centroid
max. dist. centroid
maximum distance from a node to the centroid
mean. dist. centroid
mean distances of nodes to the centroid
std. dev. dist. depot
standard deviation of distances from nodes to centroid
w
The temperature control parameter
6.1.0.2
Normalizing Distances and Demands
Depending on the type of CVRP instance there might be a difference in how the
distances between nodes and the demands have been scaled.
This might lead to
instances that are actually quite similar in structure having different values of their
features. An example could be an instance with demands ranging from 10 to 30 and
another one have demands ranging from 100 to 300. The ratios are the same, however
the demand features will deviate for the two instances. The same type of thinking
can be used for the distances. Therefore it is interesting to do a normalization for
each instance of its distances and demands.
The normalization used on the distances and demand will be min-max normaliza-
tion[HPK11, p. 114], which is defined by equation 6.1 where x′ is the scaled value, x
==PAGE:32==
26
6 Estimating Parameters Using Machine Learning
is the original value, min(x) is the minimum value across all values and max(x) is
the maximum value across all values.
x′ =
x −min(x)
max(x) −min(x)
(6.1)
An example for the distances is defined by equation 6.2, where distanceij is the
distance between node i and j and distance is the entire set of distances between
nodes. The same method can be applied to the demands.
distance′
ij =
distanceij −min(distance)
max(distance) −min(distance)
(6.2)
Notice that this makes the min. distance, max. distance, min. demand and max.
demand obsolete as these will become 0 and 1. Therefore these will not be features in
the normalized data set. All other features will be the same for the normalized data
set and the raw data set.
The RF approach using the raw data will be termed RF raw and the random
forest approach using the normalized data will be termed RF normalized.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 7
Deep Reinforcement
Learning
The theory behind deep reinforcement learning is pretty involved and a complete
description of the theory is beyond the scope of this project. For this project, an
introduction will be given that serves as background for understanding the suggested
approach for using deep reinforcement learning to learn an acceptance criteria. For
a deeper theoretical description see Sutton and Barto [SB18] and DeepMinds papers
on deep reinforcement learning[Dee19].
7.1
Reinforcement Learning
In order to create a good acceptance criteria it would be interesting to have a agent
that, given a state, can choose whether a solution should be accepted or declined. A
way of obtaining such an agent is through reinforcement learning. In reinforcement
learning the goal is to teach an agent a how to choose an action At at timestep t given
a state St in the space of states. As shown in figure 7.1 an agent in state St interacts
with the environment through an action At, for which it in return gets a reward Rt
and a transition to state St+1 ∈S. The reward tells the agent how good it was for
it to take action At. For the ease of notation, St will be denoted S and St+1 will be
denoted S′. At will be denoted A and At+1 will be denoted A′. Rt(St, At) will be
denoted R(S, A).
Figure 7.1:
An agent interacting with an environment source:
https://
towardsdatascience.com/reinforcement-learning-demystified-36c39c11ec14
==PAGE:34==
28
7 Deep Reinforcement Learning
The value of selecting an action A given state S can be described by the bellman
equation 7.1[SB18, p. 47]. The equation states that the value of selecting action A in
state S is the immediate reward R(A, S) of selecting A in state S and a discounted
cumulative reward of subsequently choosing the best action for each future state. The
Q-value could also be stochastic if the choice of action was not guaranteed to result
in a specific state. However, in the case of the acceptance criteria it is known that
the next state will either be the current solution or the newly constructed solution,
so the deterministic Q-value will suffice.
Q(S, A) = R(S, A) + γ max
A′ Q(S′, A′)
(7.1)
The optimal action can thereby be found by equation 7.2
π(S) = max
A
Q(S, A)
(7.2)
π is called the policy. The policy could also be stochastic, i.e. it could a probability
of choosing each action. One might notice that this is very similar to the way ALNS
chooses its destroy and repair methods. In order to actually use this it is necessary
to solve equation 7.1 such that the Q-values are known and can be used to determine
which action to take.
7.1.1
Q-Learning
There are many approaches to solving equation 7.1 where one of the most prominent is
Q-learning[SB18, p. 107]. Q-learning is an iterative algorithm that uses equation 7.3,
to update the Q-values to obtain the optimal Q-values Q∗(S, A). The equation states
that the Q-values are updated with the difference between what it is currently believed
the value should be R(S, A) + γ maxA′ Q(S′, A′) and what it actually currently is
Q(S, A). This difference is discounted using a learning rate α. A small α means very
little update is made while a large α means a big update. α should be chosen such
that the algorithm does not converge to slow, but also such that it does not converge
to a local minima.
Q(S, At) = Q(S, A) + α[R(S, A) + γ max
A′ Q(S′, A′) −Q(S, A)]
(7.3)
Algorithm 9 iteratively updates the Q-values of the states by interacting with
the environment. Each iteration in the algorithm is called an episode. An episode
consists of a number of steps and ends when some termination criteria is reached. To
represent the termination criteria, a terminal state is added for the algorithm to know
it has reached the end of an episode.
However, it is not always feasible to test all possible actions for all possible states
so a strategy is needed to find out which actions and states to explore. A simple
==PAGE:35==
7.1 Reinforcement Learning
29
approach would be to simply explore the actions that maximizes the Q-values this
might however lead the algorithm to converge to a local minima[Joh94]. Therefore
a strategy is needed that ensures that as many states as possible is explored but it
should also exploit good directions in the state space. One might notice that this
is the same concept as diversification and intensifaction from meta-heuristics. Many
proposals for exploration/exploitation strategies have been made.
The ϵ-greedy approach[SB18, p. 34] as depicted in algorithm 8 is probably the
most widely used exploration strategy implemented. A number p is randomly picked
in the range [0,1]; if this number is lower than some ϵ a random action will be chosen,
else the action that maximizes Q(S, A) will be chosen. ϵ will be annealed for each
step, such that the probability of choosing a random action decreases over time.
Algorithm 7 Select action ϵ-greedy
1: p ←random pick number in range [0,1]
2: A ←maxA Q(S, A)
3: if p < ϵ then
4:
A ←pick random action
5: end if
6: ϵ ←anneal ϵ
7: return A
However, this approach only selects the action that has the largest Q-value if it is
not randomly selected. There might be actions that have very similar Q-values but
this is not taken into account. The Boltzmann strategy[SB18, p. 43] makes up for
this by calculating a weighted probability for each action in each step based on the
Q-value. Equation 7.4 states that the probability of selecting an action A in state S
grows if Q(S, A) is large relative to the Q-values of the other actions. Furthermore, a
parameter ϵ controls the distribution of the probabilities. A large ϵ results in equally
distributed weights and thereby a lot of randomness, while a small ϵ will result in
the actions that have the largest Q-values having the largest probabilities of being
chosen. ϵ is annealed over time such that there is a lot of exploration in the beginning
and more exploitation towards the end. This approach is very similar to how ALNS
selects its destroy and repair methods.
The Boltzmann strategy ensures that if multiple actions have high Q-values they
have high chances of getting selected while actions with low Q-values have less chance.
P(S, A) =
eQ(S,A)/ϵ
∑
A∈actions eQ(S,A)/ϵ
(7.4)
==PAGE:36==
30
7 Deep Reinforcement Learning
Algorithm 8 Select action Boltzmann
1: w ←Calculate probabilities using equation 7.4
2: ϵ ←anneal ϵ
3: return A chosen by roulette wheel using w
Using these concepts the Q-learning algorithm 9 can be summarized.
Line 1
initializes the Q-values and line 2 sets the number of episodes.
Line 3-11 is the
training loop. Line 4 initializes the environment for the new episode and line 5 sets
the starting state as the current state. Line 6-11 executes the episode. In line 7 an
action is selected using an exploration strategy. Line 8 interacts with the environment
resulting in a reward R and a new state S′. Line 9 updates the Q-values using equation
7.3 and line 10 sets updates the current state.
Algorithm 9 Q-Learning
1: Initialize Q(S, A), for all S ∈States, A ∈actions and Q(terminal state)=0
2: episodes ←number of episodes
3: for each episode ∈episodes do
4:
Initialize Environment
5:
S ←starting state
6:
repeat
7:
A ←choose action using strategy(e.g. ϵ-greedy))
8:
R, S′ ←Interact with environment using A
9:
Q(S, A) ←Q(S, A) + α[R(S, A) + γ maxA′ Q(S′, A′) −Q(S, A)]
10:
S ←S′
11:
until terminal state reached
12: end for
If the number of episodes is large enough the algorithm is guaranteed to con-
verge[p. 60][SB18]. However, if the state-space is large the number of episodes needed
to converge will be infeasible. Furthermore, the most applied implementation of Q-
learning uses a table to represent the state-space. A large state-space can therefore
not be held in memory. Therefore an estimation of the Q-value must be obtained. A
way of estimating the Q-values is using a neural network(NN).
7.2
Neural Networks
Over the last couple of years NNs and especially deep neural networks(DNN) have
surfaced as the leading class of machine learning models due to their ability to scale
with large amounts of data[Ng17, p. 11], i.e. the more data available the better the
performance of the NN. A NN is a directed weighted graph where each vertice is
called a neuron.
==PAGE:37==
7.2 Neural Networks
31
7.2.1
Neurons
A neuron is a vertice in the directed weighted graph that given weights and inputs
computes an output. Figure 7.2 is an example of a neuron that takes three inputs
and computes an output.
Figure
7.2:
A
neuron
with
three
inputs
source:
http://
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap1.html
Each neuron has a vector of inputs x ∈Rn, a corresponding vector of weights
w ∈Rn and a bias b ∈R associated with it. The bias can be perceived as a measure
of how much influence a neuron has on the final output. If the bias is high the signal
from the neuron will be large and thereby influence the final output more than if the
bias was low. The output of the neuron is computed by equation 7.5, which can be
written in vectorized form as equation 7.6.
output =
n
∑
i
wixi + b
(7.5)
output = w · x + b
(7.6)
7.2.1.1
Activation functions
Equation 7.6 only allows for approximations of linear functions but the output will
often be non-linear. Therefore, a function f : Rn →R is introduced to each neuron
that converts the outputs by equation 7.7. This computation is called an activation
and the function is therefore called an activation function. This function makes it
possible to estimate non-linear functions.
output = f(w · x + b)
(7.7)
A wide range of activation functions has been proposed and sometimes people
even define their own activation functions based on domain knowledge about their
==PAGE:38==
32
7 Deep Reinforcement Learning
data. One of the most widely used activation functions which will also be used in this
project is the Rectified Linear Units(ReLu)[NH10] function defined by equation 7.8.
f(x) =
{
0
if x < 0
x
if x ≥0
(7.8)
In section 7.2.2.1 it will be seen that the gradient of the activation functions is
used for training the NN. The advantage of ReLu is that it has a constant gradient
which allows for fast training.
7.2.2
Architecture
A neural network is as depicted in figure 7.3 made up of many neurons and connections.
The leftmost layer is called the input layer. Each neuron in the input layer corresponds
to a feature of an observation. The rightmost layer is called the output layer, which
corresponds to the output for an observation. For the NN in the figure, the output-
layer consists of a single neuron, i.e. the network outputs a single value. A NN could
also have multiple outputs. Between the input and output layer are hidden layers. A
neural network with hidden layers is termed a DNN. Hidden layers are used to make
more complex models that can increase performance of the model estimations. In
general you need more layers the more complex the problem is. However, using too
many hidden layers might lead to overfitting. Hence designing the number of hidden
layers is hard and no best practice has been established yet. Using the mentioned
terminology, figure 7.3 is an example of a DNN that takes an input with 6 features,
has two hidden layers and produces a single output. Getting an estimation of ˆy from a
NN, the input is passed through each layer applying the operations of the neurons and
then outputting it into the next layer until the output layer. A NN that passes the
input forward in this way is termed a feedforward neural network. It is also possible
to have loops inside the network in which case it is a recurrent neural network(RNN).
RNNs are usually used for sequences as you can use the output of a previous seen
observation for the next observation in a sequence.
==PAGE:39==
7.2 Neural Networks
33
Figure
7.3:
Example
of
a
deep
neural
network
source:
http://
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap1.html#perceptrons
7.2.2.1
Gradient Descent
In the case of training a neural network, the parameter setting that has to be trained
is a vector θ = (w1, .., wn, b1, ..., bn) that minimizes the cost function in equation 5.1.
For finding the θ that minimizes the cost function, an algorithm known as gradient
descent[FHT01] will be used.
The intuition behind gradient descent is very similar to hill climbing or maybe
a more fitting analogy is that of a ball rolling down a hill into a valley. The ball is
released at a random point on the hill, then rolls down until a minimum is reached.
The starting point is a random initialization of θ1 and the slope of the hill is the
gradient ∇C from equation 7.9. Where C is the cost function from 5.1 and θi is the
parameters at iteration i.
∇C(θi) = ( ∂C
∂w1
, ..., ∂C
∂wn
, ∂C
∂b1
, ..., ∂C
∂bn
)
(7.9)
Now that the slope of the hill is known, θi can iteratively be updated by equation
7.10. Where η ∈R>0 is the amount that θi should be changed in the direction of the
slope. In order to ensure that the cost function is minimized η is negated. η is known
as the learning rate. η needs to be set such that it is small enough to not move past a
minima and large enough that the convergence to a minima is not to time consuming.
θi+1 = θi −η∇C(θi)
(7.10)
Sometimes gradient descent is implemented with an adaptive learning rate η that
changes depending on the progress of the algorithm. This is very much like diver-
sification and intensification from metaheuristics. One iteration of the algorithm is
termed an epoch. The algorithm continues to iterate until some convergence criteria
==PAGE:40==
34
7 Deep Reinforcement Learning
is reached. The convergence criteria could be a predefined number of epochs or when
the slope is close to zero.
Looking at the cost function in equation 5.1 it is apparent that for each iteration
in order to obtain ∇C(θi), it is necessary to evaluate each observation in the training
set. If the data set is very large, this will be very time consuming, especially if a large
amount of epochs is needed for the algorithm to converge. A variation of gradient de-
scent that is less computationally heavy is Stochastic Gradient Descent[K+52](SGD).
Instead of evaluating the slope with all observations in the training set SGD samples
a batch from the training data and thereby obtains an approximation of the slope.
This is naturally less accurate than pure gradient descent, however it has been seen
to work as well as gradient descent in most cases.
7.3
Deep Q-Learning
NNs can now be used to estimate Q-values using equation 7.11 where the Q-function
has been replaced by a neural network with trained parameters θ. A network that
estimates Q-values is termed a Deep Q-Network(DQN)[Mni+13].
Qnn(S, A; θ) ≈Q(S, A)
(7.11)
Like in conventional Q-learning it is not possible to explore all states and actions.
However by using NNs good estimation can be made for Q-values to states that are
similar to ones seen before.
In order to obtain good estimations of Q-Values, the network has to be trained in
a slightly different way than how it is trained in supervised learning.
7.3.1
Training
Training the DQN to obtain an estimation of Q-values is inspired by the Q-learning
algorithm.
The DQN will be initialized with a parameter setting θ, which is the
weights of the DQN in the first iteration. For training the network, an algorithm
can be developed that is inspired by Q-learning and is therefore termed Deep Q-
Learning. For each step, an action will be selected using the current DQN. Each
of these actions result in a tuple t = [S, A, R(A, S), S′] consisting of a state S, the
selected action A, the obtained reward R(S, A), and the resulting state S′. These
tuples are saved in a FIFO queue of size T termed replay memory. In order to use
this memory to train the DQN a loss function needs to be defined. In supervised
learning, the output was known before training started; however, this is not the case
in deep reinforcement learning, only the tuples from replay memory is known. Using
the theory from Q-learning a loss function for a tuple t = [S, A, R(A, S), S′] from
memory can be obtained by equation 7.12[Mni+13].
==PAGE:41==
7.3 Deep Q-Learning
35
Lt(θ) = [R(S, A) + γ max
A′ Qnn(S′, A′; θ) −Qnn(S, A; θ)]2
(7.12)
There is a big resemblance to the update equation 7.3 for Q-learning. Instead of
updating the Q-values with the difference between what is believed to be the true
Q-value and what is currently computed as the Q-value it is tried to minimize the
squared difference between the Q-value that is currently estimated Qnn(S, A; θ) and
what is currently believed to be the true Q-value [R(S, A) + γ maxA′ Qnn(S′, A′; θ)].
For training the DQN, the tuples saved to memory is used for gradient descent on
the cost function in equation 7.13.
C(θ) = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
Lt(θ)
(7.13)
This will result in a trained set of parameters θ that can be used to estimate
Q-values.
Stochastic gradient descent which is used in this project assumes that the samples are
independently and identically distributed[Mni+13]. This is not the case for data in
the memory as how the actions are selected and thereby which states are reached is
dependent on the estimated Q-values. To account for this Mnih et al. [Mni+13] pro-
posed to draw a batch B from memory instead of using the entire memory. The cost
function can thereby be described by equation 7.14 where B is the sampled batch.
C(θ) =
1
|B|
∑
t∈B
Lt(θ)
(7.14)
Furthermore Mnih et al. [Mni+13] showed that directly implementing 7.12 lead
to unstable training as this approach is prone to diverge from minima. Therefore, a
separate network to estimate Qnn(S′, A′; θ) was introduced. This network is initial-
ized to have weights θ−= θ, but will only be updated by some frequency. The second
network will be termed the target network while the first network will be termed the
policy network. Using this addition, the loss function in equation 7.15 is obtained.
Lt(θ, θ−) = [R(S, A) + γ max
A′ Qnn(S′, A′; θ−) −Qnn(S, A; θ)]2
(7.15)
The Deep Q-Learning algorithm is summarized by the code in algorithm 10. Line
1-7 initializes the training. Line 8 starts the training loop. Line 9 restarts the environ-
ment and line 10 starts the episode. Line 11-13 selects an action, interacts with the
environment and puts the resulting tuple onto memory. line 14 checks if the memory
is large enough to create a sample of size |B| if this is the case line 17 updates θ. Line
==PAGE:42==
36
7 Deep Reinforcement Learning
18 checks if the frequency for updating the target network update is reached in which
case line 19 updates θ−.
Algorithm 10 Deep Q-Learning
1: Initialize policy network with weights θ
2: Initialize target network with weights θ−
3: Initialize environment
4: |B| ←sample size
5: targetupdate ←set frequency of updating target network
6: memory ←Initialize replay memory with size T
7: episodes ←number of episodes
8: for each episode ∈episodes do
9:
S ←get initial state from environment
10:
repeat
11:
A ←choose action using some strategy(e.g. ϵ-greedy)
12:
R, S′ ←interact with environment using state S and action A
13:
Put (S, A, R, S′) to replay memory
14:
if |memory| > |B| then
15:
B ←sample batch from replay memory
16:
end if
17:
θ ←update θ using stochastic gradient descent on B
18:
if targetupdate then
19:
θ−←θ
20:
end if
21:
S ←S′
22:
until termination criteria
23: end for
24: return θ
==PAGE:43==
7.4 Deep Q-Learning for Accepting Solutions in ALNS
37
7.4
Deep Q-Learning for Accepting Solutions in ALNS
To implement DQN to learn an acceptance criteria, the ALNS has to be modified such
that it acts as the environment for the Deep Q-Learning algorithm. Furthermore,
some features have to be defined that can describe the current state of the ALNS
algorithm.
The approach will be to select a number of instances for training. Hereafter, a
Deep Q-Learning training will be started where one of the instances will be randomly
chosen and then used on an altered version of ALNS. In algorithm 11, the training
loop is described. Line 1-8 initializes the algorithm. Line 9-11 is the loop of episodes
where a random instance is chosen and used for an altered version of ALNS called
ALNSEpisode from algorithm 12.
Algorithm 11 Training Loop
1: Initialize policy network with weights θ
2: Initialize target network with weights θ−
3: Initialize environment
4: |B| ←sample size
5: targetupdate ←set frequency of updating target network
6: memory ←Initialize replay memory with size T
7: episodes ←number of episodes
8: Instances ←Select a number of instances for training
9: for i = 0 to episodes do
10:
Instance ←Random pick from Instances
11:
θ, θ−←run ALNSEpisode on Instance
12: end for
13: return θ
==PAGE:44==
38
7 Deep Reinforcement Learning
Algorithm 12 starts off by initializing the solution and extracting the features
of the solution in lines 1 and 2. Lines 3-8 are standard ALNS calls. In line 9, a
temporary state is created by extracting features from the temporary solution. A
temporary state has to be saved as the state might be discarded depending on the
action chosen. In line 10, it is selected whether the solution should be accepted or
not. If the solution is accepted line 12 and 13 updates the current solution and the
next state. Lines 14-16 are standard ALNS calls. If the solution is not accepted line
18 ensures that the next state is the same as the current one. Line 20-29 are the Deep
Q-learning updates. At last, line 31 returns the current weights of the DQNs.
Algorithm 12 ALNSEpisode
1: Generate feasible solution s for Instance
2: S ←extract state features from s
3: sb ←s
4: ρ−←(1, ..., 1)
5: ρ+ ←(1, ..., 1)
6: repeat
7:
select destroy and repair methods d ∈Ω−and r ∈Ω+ using ρ−and ρ+
8:
st ←r(d(s))
9:
Stemp ←extract state features from st
10:
A ←choose action using Boltzmann Strategy
11:
if A then
12:
s ←st
13:
S′ ←Stemp
14:
if f(st) < f(sb) then
15:
sb ←st
16:
end if
17:
else
18:
S′ ←S
19:
end if
20:
R ←reward for performing action A for state S
21:
put (S, A, R, S′) to replay memory
22:
if |memory| > |B| then
23:
B ←sample batch from replay memory
24:
end if
25:
θ ←update θ using stochastic gradient descent on B
26:
if targetupdate then
27:
θ−←θ
28:
end if
29:
S′ ←S
30: until termination criteria
31: return θ, θ−
==PAGE:45==
7.4 Deep Q-Learning for Accepting Solutions in ALNS
39
7.4.1
Features
The set of features that represents the state should both reflect the progress of ALNS
and the quality of the current solution. The four features shown in table 7.1 have
been chosen for this project.
Table 7.1: Features for representing a state
Name
Description
Iteration
Iteration number
Global Decrease Boolean
Boolean indicating whether the solution is better
than the global best objective
Local Decrease Boolean
Boolean indicating whether the solution is better
than the current objective.
Seen Before
Boolean indicating whether the solution has been
seen before
Originally, the idea was to have features that were similar to the ones used in
other acceptance criteria. To make it more general, the number of iterations would
have been a fraction of the total number of iterations, such that a multiple number
of iterations could have been used. The the features indicating whether a new so-
lution is better than the current one or global one was supposed to be a fraction.
This would have made the information available for the DQN similar to that of e.g.
SA. However there were complications in the implementation of the algorithm. The
algorithm was implemented with the ALNS part being in c++ and the DQN being
implemented in python3.6. The implementation proved difficult with the documen-
tation for embedding python in c++ being very sparse1. The result was that when
parsing floats to c++, they were rounded to 0. This could be worked around but due
to time constraint it was not possible to implement these workarounds.
There are a couple of drawbacks with the set of features in table 7.1. First off the
iteration count means it will only be able to be used for the number of iterations that
is used in training. Secondly, it can be seen that the size of the entire state space can
be described by equation 7.16.
|S| = N · 23
(7.16)
Where N is the number of iterations and 23 is the number of permutations with
repetition for the last three features. This is not very large which implies that states
that should actually be different might get the same representation of features. If the
features were continuous it would be possible to represent almost an infinite amount
of states. It would also be preferable to have some features that represented not only
the current iteration but a number of iterations, as one iteration is not that important
for the performance of ALNS. However, the complications in the implementation lead
to the features in table 7.1
1https://docs.python.org/3.6/extending/embedding.html
==PAGE:46==
40
7 Deep Reinforcement Learning
7.4.1.1
DQN Design
The design of the DQN should be tuned but the execution of the algorithm takes
a long time and the DQN is therefore designed by a rule of thumb of of having
the number of hidden neurons less than double the size of the input layer[Hea17].
Therefore the design is as depicted in table 7.2.
Table 7.2: Architecture of DQN
Layer
Size
input layer
4
hidden layer 1
4
hidden layer 2
2
output layer
2
Notice that the architecture has two neurons in its output layer. It is designed in
this way so only one forward pass need to be made for a state. Each neuron in the
output layer thereby represents a Q-value for a given action. Thereby an action can
be chosen by selecting the index of the neuron that outputs the highest Q-value.
7.4.1.2
Reward Function
The reward function is inspired by the rewards for updating weights for destroy and
repair methods from ALNS. The rewards can be seen in table 7.3.
Table 7.3: Rewards for the deep q-learning algorithm
Reward
Description
0
If solution is not accepted
2
If solution is accepted and it has not been seen before
4
If solution is accepted and it is an improvement to current solution
10
If solution is accepted and it is a new overall best
Designing the reward function is a real art and is often what makes or breaks Deep
Q-learning. As seen in table 7.3, the rewards is very similar to the features in the
state representation. This not optimal as it is expected that it will only learn a simple
mapping depending on the features for a state. Furthermore, these rewards are for
each state and not depending on the final outcome of ALNS. However, if a reward was
only given at the end of an episode, it takes a very long time to train as the network
would only get a signal from the cumulative reward of the future rewards. To account
for this you could change the setup such that the network does not make a decision
for every iteration but only once every x iteration such that the cumulative reward
==PAGE:47==
7.4 Deep Q-Learning for Accepting Solutions in ALNS
41
would be a stronger signal for the DQN. Another approach could be to determine
the reward dependent on how good the newly generated solution is compared to the
overall best seen solution found by e.g. SA. In this way rewards would be given if
the acceptance criteria comes closer to the best seen solution. Training the network
takes around 6 days and due to time constraints, these options were not investigated.
==PAGE:48==
42
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 8
Experiments
A number of experiments will be designed and conducted in order to evaluate the
performance of the proposed approaches.
8.1
Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
The instances used for the experiments on the proposed approaches for parameter
tuning are well known within the field of meta-heuristics and are shown in table 8.1
Table 8.1: CVRP data sets. Golden et al. data set will be termed Kelly, as the
instance files used had this naming, due to Kelly, J.P. being one of the co-authors
Name
#Instances
Uchoa et al. [Uch+17](Uchoa)
100
Li, Golden, and Wasil [LGW05](Li)
12
Golden et al. [Gol+98](Kelly)
20
Rochat and Taillard [RT95](Rochat and Taillard)
13
To create the data used for RF, an ALNS using 150000 iterations was used. For
each instance the ALNS had 25 reruns for each temperature control parameter. The
parameters were in the range [0.0, 0.2] with a step size of 0.01 i.e. 21 parameter set-
tings in total. It was run using Ropke and Santini [RS16] parallel version of ALNS
with 8 threads.
In order to get a hint of how the different approaches are going to perform, it is
interesting to take a look at the resulting data. In figure 8.1 the number of instances
in the data having a given temperature control parameter as its best setting is seen.
It can be seen that there is a large number of instances having 0.01 as the best tem-
perature control parameter. In figure 8.2, the ratio of instances for which a given
paramter was the best can be seen. It is visible that Uchoa, Kelly, Rochat and Tail-
lard has 0.01 as the best setting for a large portion of their instances while Li is more
spread out. Therefore, it is expected that MMG will perform fairly well and that the
way that the RF approaches could outperform it would be to find a good parameter
setting for the odd cases where 0.01 is not the best setting.
==PAGE:50==
44
8 Experiments
Figure 8.1: Number of instances where a given temperature control parameter w was
the best one seen
Figure 8.2: Ratio of best temperature control parameter w for each data set
==PAGE:51==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
45
Having a more thorough look into the performance of each temperature control
parameter table 8.2 shows the mean gap, the standard deviation σ and the minimum
and maximum gap for each parameter.
Again it is pretty clear that 0.01 is the
best setting overall as both the mean gap, the standard deviation in gap, and the
maximum gap outperforms all other temperature control parameters.
0.01 being
the best parameter indicates that it is good to allow for solutions that are only a
little worse than the reference solution. This means that often only better solutions
are accepted. However, using 0.00 as temperature control parameter, such that only
solutions that are as good as the reference solution with a probability of 0.5 is accepted,
is seen to be the worst possible parameter of the investigated ones. It might look
strange that the minimum gap is 0.00 for almost all parameter settings.
This is
probably due to one instance where ALNS is able to find the best seen solution every
time.
Table 8.2: Summary of performance for each temperature control parameter w. The
best performance for each metric is highlighted.
w
Mean gap
σ(gap)
minimum gap
maximum gap
0.00
3.49
1.77
0.34
7.85
0.01
1.34
1.05
0.00
4.60
0.02
1.70
1.36
0.00
5.68
0.03
1.89
1.48
0.00
5.70
0.04
2.01
1.54
0.00
6.33
0.05
2.07
1.61
0.00
6.34
0.06
2.14
1.62
0.00
6.50
0.07
2.24
1.65
0.00
6.26
0.08
2.24
1.64
0.00
6.35
0.09
2.32
1.66
0.00
6.48
0.10
2.34
1.65
0.00
6.43
0.11
2.40
1.68
0.00
6.49
0.12
2.44
1.66
0.00
6.42
0.13
2.47
1.64
0.00
6.18
0.14
2.51
1.68
0.00
6.41
0.15
2.53
1.66
0.00
6.30
0.16
2.55
1.65
0.00
6.15
0.17
2.58
1.66
0.00
6.27
0.18
2.61
1.66
0.00
6.24
0.19
2.65
1.68
0.00
6.34
0.20
2.66
1.67
0.00
6.41
The result also implies that a finer grid should have been applied around 0.01 in
order to get even more precise parameters. This would probably have diversified the
best parameter for each instance. A more diverse set of parameters would probably
==PAGE:52==
46
8 Experiments
lead to worse performance of MMG, while it is uncertain how the RF approaches
would be affected. However, if the RF approaches are able to outperform MMG with
the current data set, it will be a strong result as it outperforms MMG even though
many instances have 0.01 as its best setting.
Figure 8.3 shows the gap for all instances with their best parameter setting com-
pared to each feature of the instance for the normalized data. The normalized data
is chosen, because it makes it easier to interpret the structure of the instances. Each
plot in the figure represents one feature. The figure shows there is not really any
clear correlation between any of the features and how big the gap is. It can be seen
that a low gap can be obtained across the range of all features and that a high gap
is also seen across all features. Thereby, it must be a combination of features that
determines the size of the gap. Notice that the mean demand is almost 1 for some of
the instances. The maximum mean demand seen is 0.99. In this case, the demand
of every customer is almost the same with a few customers having another demand.
The same can be seen for the median demand. For the max. dist. depot there are
also many instances having 1 as the max. dist. depot. this is the case when the
depot is situated on the edge of the graph, and the maximum distance between two
nodes seen in an instance therefore includes the depot as one of the nodes. From the
graphs it is very hard to see any linear relationship between the features and the gaps
further adding to the argument of using a more complex model such as RF.
Figure 8.4 shows the best temperature control parameter for all instances com-
pared to each feature for the normalized data. Each plot in the figure represents
one feature. Again it is hard to see clear correlations for a single feature and the
best parameter setting to choose. There are however some features with intervals
where low temperature settings are preferred. Looking at max. dist. centroid a low
temperature control parameter seems to be the best choice when this feature grows
large. This indicates that for instances where there is some node that is located far
from the centroid a low temperature is preferred. The same can be seen in the std.
dev. dist. where a low parameter setting is preferred for larger standard deviation in
distance. However, it is also the case that for instances with small standard deviation
in distance a low parameter setting is preferred. This again indicates that for most
features there is no clear linear relationships to the temperature control parameter.
==PAGE:53==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
47
Figure 8.3: The graphs of each feature compared to the gap for the best temperature control parameter for each instance
==PAGE:54==
48
8 Experiments
Figure 8.4: The graphs of each feature compared to the best temperature control parameter for each instance
==PAGE:55==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
49
Figure 8.5 shows the relationship between the temperature control parameter and
the gap for four instances. The figure clearly shows a non-linear relationship between
the temperature and the gap, implying that other underlying structures are influenc-
ing the performance of the parameter settings. The four instances in the figure are
representative of four types of tendencies in the gap in relationship to the temperature
control parameter that has been observed in the data set.
(a) Kelly - kelly05
(b) Uchoa - X-n237-k14
(c) Uchoa - X-n242-k48
(d) Uchoa - X-n294-k50
Figure 8.5: The gap compared to temperature control parameter w.
Figure 8.5a represents the case where there is a steep decline in gap where after the
gap flattens out. Figure 8.5b shows the case where there is a steep decline and then
the gap increases gradually as the parameter increases. Figure 8.5c shows the case
where it is hard to identify any tendencies. There are three possible explanations to
why no tendencies can be identified. First off, too few reruns of ALNS has been made
such that the peaks and valleys of the graph is actually noise. Secondly, the grid of
parameters is not fine enough to precisely depict the development in the gap. Third
off, there might not be any tendencies in the gap that is defined by the temperature
==PAGE:56==
50
8 Experiments
control parameter. Figure 8.5d shows the case where there is a steep decline followed
by a steep increase in the gap whereafter the gap flattens out. It is expected that the
RF approach will perform well in case 8.5a, 8.5b and 8.5d where there are some clear
tendencies in the data. However in case 8.5c it is not expected that the model will
perform as there is no obvious tendencies to be seen.
8.1.1
Metrics for Evaluation
For evaluating the performance of the different tuning approaches four metrics are
defined. The first will be the MSE between the estimated gaps and the actual gaps for
each setting. MSE will only apply to the RF approaches as MMG does not estimate
a gap. The second metric will be the gap of the obtained parameter setting.
Third off, it is interesting to see how far the gap of the estimated parameter setting
is from the gap of the best parameter setting. To measure this, equation 8.1 calculates
the differences from the gap obtained for instance i by the parameter setting found
by tuning approach gapestimated temperature(i) and the best gap, gapbest(i) found for
instance i.
gap −loss(i) = gapestimated temperature(i) −gapbest(i)
(8.1)
To give an overall estimate of how well the tuning approach is performing across
instances the mean gap-loss(MGL) from equation 8.2 will be used, where I is the set
of instances in the test set.
mean gap −loss = 1
|I|
∑
i∈I
gap −loss(i)
(8.2)
The last metric is the rank of the found setting, where the approach will be given
0 if the found temperature is the best temperature, 1 if it is the next best and so on.
For evaluating the rank for an entire dataset the mean rank(MR), will be found.
8.1.2
Implementation
The ALNS used is the parallel version of Ropke and Santini [RS16] which is imple-
mented in c++. The data set is created using the DTU HPC1. The RF approach
for parameter tuning is implemented in python3.6. The random forest regression is
implemented using scikit-learn2. The experiments are run on a Ubuntu 16.04 laptop
with i7-7500U CPU 2.70GHz, wit 16gb DDR3 ram.
1https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/
2https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.
RandomForestRegressor.html
==PAGE:57==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
51
8.1.3
Evaluating Performance on a 80:20 Split
The first experiment is a classic machine learning setup where the four datasets are
combined into a single dataset and then shuffled and split into a training set having
80% of the data and a test set having 20% of the data. This split ratio is commonly
used in machine learning and is based on the Pareto Principle[PS27]. The principle
states that 80% of effects is caused by 20% of the causes.
Because there is more than one observation for each instance, it is ensured that
an instance can only occur in either the training or the test set. In order to make the
results more robust, ten different 80:20 splits will be created and the experiment will
be repeated on these. The mean and standard deviation σ of each metric will then
be found across all splits. The performance will be compared to MMG, which will
also use the entire training set for its estimation of the parameter setting.
A range of trees [1, 500] with a step size of 5 will be evaluated to find the number
of trees used for the RF. This tuning will only be performed on the first of the splits
and will then be used across all splits as an evaluation on one of the splits should be
general enough to fit across all splits. This procedure will be performed on both the
raw data set and the normalized data set.
==PAGE:58==
52
8 Experiments
8.1.3.1
Results
Table 8.3 shows the results of the different approaches and the gap for choosing the
best parameter setting for each instance.
The table shows that RF raw and RF
normalized perform almost equally good with RF raw having a small advantage over
RF normalized when it comes to gap, MGL and MRL. Furthermore, it shows that
the RF approaches are twice as good as MMG for MGL and almost twice as good
for MRL. The results for each run can be found in appendix 10. Furthermore, it can
be seen that the standard deviation of the RF approaches are lower than for MMG,
indicating they are more robust than MMG. A summary for each split can be found
in appendix 10.
Table 8.3: Performance of tuning approaches on 80:20 split across 10 different splits.
The highlighted values marks the best value for each metric.
Approach
Trees
MSE
σ(MSE)
Gap
σ(Gap)
MGL
σ(MGL)
MR
σ(MR)
RF raw
495
1.49
0.44
1.22
0.95
0.07
0.02
2.33
0.74
RF normalized
350
1.41
0.26
1.24
0.94
0.08
0.03
2.54
0.76
MMG
-
-
-
1.36
1.01
0.20
0.08
4.45
1.19
Best
-
-
-
1.14
1.01
-
-
-
-
Table 8.4 shows the temperature control parameter and the performance for each
instance in the first 80:20 split. From the table it can be seen that the approaches
often fail on the same instances. However, when the approaches fail the RF approach
generally finds a better alternative to the temperature than the MMG. This indicates
that the RF approach is more robust than the MMG approach. Tables for the rest
of the splits can be seen in appendix 10.
==PAGE:59==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
53
Table 8.4: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n237-k14
0.02
1
0.600849
0.521900
0.03
2
0.831025
0.406228
0.01
0
0.382198
0.01
0.382198
Uchoa - X-n242-k48
0.01
1
2.281550
1.878149
0.01
1
2.281550
2.443417
0.01
1
2.281550
0.05
2.255850
Uchoa - X-n936-k151
0.01
0
0.898120
2.533430
0.01
0
0.898120
1.571086
0.01
0
0.898120
0.01
0.898120
Uchoa - X-n270-k35
0.01
0
1.195830
1.585260
0.02
1
2.151760
0.857969
0.01
0
1.195830
0.01
1.195830
Uchoa - X-n548-k50
0.01
0
0.779802
2.442034
0.01
0
0.779802
2.553655
0.01
0
0.779802
0.01
0.779802
Uchoa - X-n261-k13
0.02
0
0.830623
0.642184
0.02
0
0.830623
1.016033
0.01
1
0.985547
0.02
0.830623
Uchoa - X-n294-k50
0.01
0
2.447770
2.848186
0.01
0
2.447770
2.468128
0.01
0
2.447770
0.01
2.447770
Uchoa - X-n251-k28
0.01
0
1.313290
0.661407
0.01
0
1.313290
0.938945
0.01
0
1.313290
0.01
1.313290
Uchoa - X-n275-k28
0.01
0
0.745788
0.828207
0.01
0
0.745788
0.698645
0.01
0
0.745788
0.01
0.745788
Uchoa - X-n449-k29
0.01
0
1.867470
1.636685
0.01
0
1.867470
1.613013
0.01
0
1.867470
0.01
1.867470
Uchoa - X-n247-k47
0.01
0
0.540488
2.114196
0.01
0
0.540488
2.152641
0.01
0
0.540488
0.01
0.540488
Uchoa - X-n143-k7
0.03
4
0.230157
0.411210
0.03
4
0.230157
0.485017
0.01
11
0.382662
0.04
0.148686
Uchoa - X-n655-k131
0.01
11
0.580279
2.597315
0.01
11
0.580279
1.494047
0.01
11
0.580279
0.08
0.483510
Uchoa - X-n153-k22
0.01
0
0.510269
2.596595
0.01
0
0.510269
0.800227
0.01
0
0.510269
0.01
0.510269
Uchoa - X-n344-k43
0.01
0
1.857240
2.093287
0.01
0
1.857240
1.408176
0.01
0
1.857240
0.01
1.857240
Uchoa - X-n359-k29
0.01
0
0.980569
1.119116
0.01
0
0.980569
1.313892
0.01
0
0.980569
0.01
0.980569
Uchoa - X-n331-k15
0.02
1
0.663094
1.483784
0.01
0
0.488400
0.912592
0.01
0
0.488400
0.01
0.488400
Uchoa - X-n233-k16
0.01
3
0.751559
2.012834
0.01
3
0.751559
1.236122
0.01
3
0.751559
0.02
0.451559
Uchoa - X-n214-k11
0.02
0
0.485851
0.682818
0.02
0
0.485851
0.632954
0.01
1
0.780595
0.02
0.485851
Taillard - tai100b
0.05
2
0.025375
0.229873
0.05
2
0.025375
0.181861
0.01
19
0.219407
0.02
0.011540
Taillard - tai150a
0.01
6
0.055276
2.022555
0.01
6
0.055276
1.118529
0.01
6
0.055276
0.02
0.000854
Taillard - tai150c
0.05
0
0.314179
0.138311
0.05
0
0.314179
0.349957
0.01
19
0.614455
0.05
0.314179
Taillard - tai385
0.01
0
0.448954
2.218856
0.01
0
0.448954
2.311123
0.01
0
0.448954
0.01
0.448954
Kelly - kelly07
0.03
0
0.008034
0.241053
0.03
0
0.008034
0.208560
0.01
17
0.755702
0.03
0.008034
Kelly - kelly05
0.07
1
0.151679
0.053753
0.07
1
0.151679
0.127159
0.01
19
0.463851
0.09
0.151677
Kelly - kelly09
0.03
2
2.389190
0.190036
0.03
2
2.389190
0.534591
0.01
0
1.098390
0.01
1.098390
Li - CVRP_L_31
0.06
0
1.034790
1.651211
0.06
0
1.034790
1.645550
0.01
19
3.692830
0.06
1.034790
Li - CVRP_L_32
0.06
0
1.335920
1.651211
0.06
0
1.335920
1.645550
0.01
10
2.734400
0.06
1.335920
Li - CVRP_L_22
0.02
2
0.313573
1.084354
0.04
3
0.360833
0.653313
0.01
1
0.295002
0.03
0.258299
Mean
1.17
0.88
1.38
1.24
0.92
1.16
4.75
1.03
0.80
==PAGE:60==
54
8 Experiments
It is interesting to see that even though the MSE is relatively high and that some
of the estimated gaps are off by a big margin, the RF approaches still perform well.
Figure 8.6 show plots of the actual gap and estimated gaps compared to the temper-
ature control parameter for some instances. Figures 8.6a and 8.6b show examples
where the RF makes pretty good estimations of the gap and captures the tendencies
in the data. Figures 8.6c and 8.6d show examples where the RF makes estimations
of the gap that are inaccurate but still is able to capture the tendencies of the data.
The reason for the RF having inaccurate estimations of the gap can be that there are
instances in the training set that have similar features and tendencies in the develop-
ment of the gap but where the gaps are of different size. This indicates that the model
does not contain the necessary features that is needed to differentiate the instances
or that there is no way of knowing what the gap is going to be for some instances.
Figures 8.6e and 8.6f show examples of instances with very complex tendencies in the
gap. In figure 8.6e, the model is not able to capture the structure of the data in any
way. The model believes that the instance is one of the cases where there is a quick
decline in the gap where after there is a quick incline in the gap. However, in figure
8.6f, the model is able to capture some the complex tendencies in the data. This
indicates that it should be a question of feeding the model with enough data for it to
differentiate the instances that have these complex tendencies in the gap from other
instances.
==PAGE:61==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
55
(a) Kelly - kelly05
(b) Uchoa - X-n294-k50
(c) Uchoa - X-n237-k14
(d) Uchoa - X-n247-k47
(e) Uchoa - X-n242-k48
(f) Uchoa - X-n586-k159
Figure 8.6: The actual gap vs.
the estimated gap for RF normalized.
The best
parameter setting and estimated parameter setting are marked at the lowest point of
each plot.
==PAGE:62==
56
8 Experiments
8.1.4
Varying Amount of Data for Training
In contrast to the evaluation approach in machine learning, the training set in meta-
heuristics is typically smaller than the test set. It is therefore interesting to see if the
RF approach performs well with a small training set. This will also give an indication
of the robustness of the model.
Using the first 80:20 split a smaller and smaller amount of data will be randomly
drawn from the training set and evaluated on the same test set. This is visualized in
figure 8.7, where it is illustrated that the test set in yellow is kept constant and the
training set in white is increasingly small. The white and the grey combined is the
entire data set from which a split of a given size will be drawn. The sizes of training
data investigated will be between 5% and 70% of the total data size with a step size
of 5%. For each size, 10 splits will be randomly drawn from the total training set and
the mean metrics will be calculated across these splits. This is also the reason that
75% is not investigated as the 5% difference from the total training set is not enough
to create 10 unique splits. For each size a range of trees [1, 500] with a step size of 5
will be evaluated on the first and the best setting will be selected.
Figure 8.7: Illustration of how the training set is reduced for each instance. The
white bar is how much of the data is used for training. The white and the grey bar
combined is the data from which the training sets are sampled. The yellow bar is the
test set that is constant.
==PAGE:63==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
57
8.1.4.1
Results
The results of varying the amount of training data is depicted in table 8.5 and visu-
alized in figure 8.8.
It can be seen that MMG performs equally no matter the size of the training data
and that it always chooses the same parameter setting as indicated by the standard
deviation of its MGL and MR being 0.00. RF raw and RF normalized outperforms
MMG when the size of the training set is greater than 40% of the total data. However,
on MR the RF approaches always outperforms MMG. Since MGL is still better for
MMG even though its MR is worse, this indicates that the best parameter setting is
significantly better than the second best and third best parameter setting for many
instances. It can also be seen that RF raw is a bit more robust than RF normalized
with its performance decreasing slightly less with smaller amounts of training data.
(a) MSE
(b) Gap
(c) MGL
(d) MR
Figure 8.8: Performance of approaches measured on different metrics. Each plot is a
different metric.
==PAGE:64==
58
8 Experiments
From table 8.5 it can be seen that the standard deviations across the metrics
increase significantly as the amount of data used for training decreases, indicating
that the performance of the RF depends a lot on which data is in the training set.
Therefore, if only a small amount of data is available, it is important that it is a good
representation of the general distribution of problem instances.
==PAGE:65==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
59
Table 8.5: Performance of each approach with varying proportion of the data being used for training
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
%
MSE
σ(MSE)
Gap
σ(Gap)
MGL
σ(MGL)
MR
σ(MR)
MSE
σ(MSE)
Gap
σ(Gap)
MGL
σ(MGL)
MR
σ(MR)
Gap
σ(Gap)
MGL
σ(MGL)
MR
σ(MR)
5
2.84
0.77
1.27
0.21
0.46
0.21
4.49
1.08
2.90
1.27
1.29
0.22
0.49
0.22
4.61
1.41
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
10
2.89
0.83
1.22
0.19
0.41
0.19
4.09
1.04
2.68
1.03
1.21
0.19
0.41
0.19
4.22
1.30
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
15
2.62
0.80
1.16
0.19
0.36
0.19
3.70
1.12
2.58
0.94
1.15
0.18
0.35
0.18
3.74
1.32
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
20
2.47
0.78
1.13
0.18
0.32
0.18
3.52
1.11
2.43
0.90
1.12
0.17
0.32
0.17
3.52
1.31
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
25
2.28
0.81
1.10
0.17
0.29
0.17
3.35
1.08
2.25
0.90
1.11
0.16
0.30
0.16
3.35
1.26
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
30
2.17
0.80
1.07
0.17
0.26
0.17
3.11
1.13
2.09
0.90
1.08
0.16
0.28
0.16
3.17
1.25
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
35
2.09
0.78
1.05
0.16
0.25
0.16
2.98
1.11
2.01
0.87
1.06
0.15
0.26
0.15
3.06
1.21
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
40
2.06
0.75
1.04
0.16
0.24
0.16
2.90
1.07
1.96
0.84
1.05
0.15
0.25
0.15
2.93
1.19
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
45
2.02
0.73
1.03
0.15
0.22
0.15
2.80
1.05
1.90
0.82
1.04
0.15
0.23
0.15
2.80
1.19
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
50
1.99
0.71
1.01
0.15
0.21
0.15
2.70
1.06
1.84
0.80
1.02
0.15
0.22
0.15
2.69
1.18
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
55
1.97
0.69
1.01
0.15
0.20
0.15
2.60
1.06
1.83
0.77
1.01
0.14
0.21
0.14
2.60
1.16
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
60
1.97
0.67
1.00
0.14
0.19
0.14
2.54
1.04
1.79
0.75
1.01
0.14
0.20
0.14
2.56
1.13
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
65
1.97
0.65
0.99
0.14
0.19
0.14
2.46
1.04
1.77
0.73
1.00
0.14
0.20
0.14
2.49
1.12
1.04
0.00
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
70
1.98
0.63
0.98
0.14
0.18
0.14
2.39
1.04
1.75
0.70
0.99
0.13
0.19
0.13
2.43
1.10
1.04
0.006
0.24
0.00
4.76
0.00
==PAGE:66==
60
8 Experiments
8.1.5
Unseen Types of Data
Taking a look into the different data sets it is apparent that the instances differ in
the way they are constructed.
Figure 8.9 shows examples from each of the data
sets. These examples are a good representation of the general approach being used
for constructing the instances in each data set. In figure 8.9a it can be seen that the
points are approximately equally distributed over the entire space and with the depot
randomly placed in the space. Figure 8.9b shows the customers being distributed in
concentric circles around the depot. Figure 8.9c is one example from Kelly where the
nodes are distributed in various ways, e.g. star shaped and rectangular, and the depot
randomly placed. The last data set seen in figure 8.9d has the depot placed in the
centre . It can be seen that the customers are placed in clusters, thereby representing
a very real scenario where many customers might be located in e.g. cities.
(a) Uchoa
(b) Li
(c) Kelly
(d) Rochat and Taillard
Figure 8.9: Examples of instances from the four different data sets. The blue dot
represents the depot and the red dots are the customers. source: http://vrp.atd-
lab.inf.puc-rio.br/index.php/en/
==PAGE:67==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
61
Other than having the customers distributed in different ways there might also be
a difference in the scale of distances and demands between the data sets. For these
reasons it is interesting to create a training set consisting of some of the data sets
and a test set of others.
To see how the approaches perform on this kind of difference in training data
and test data, a split will be made such that the training set consists of Uchoa and
Rochat and Taillard. The test set will consist of Li and Kelly. This split is chosen as
Uchoa and Rochat and Taillard, approximately are the most similar to each other and
thereby the difference between training set and test set will be large. Furthermore,
this split will be closest to the 80:20 ratio.
The best number of trees will be found in the range [1, 500] with a step size of 5
and the performance will then be evaluated using MSE, MGL and MR.
==PAGE:68==
62
8 Experiments
8.1.5.1
Results
Table 8.6 shows the performance of each approach. Notice that because there is only
one split, there is no standard deviation in MSE and the other standard deviation
metrics are the standard deviation from instance to instance and not across splits as
in table 8.3. From table 8.6 it is visible that using different types of data sets for
training and testing greatly decreases the performance of all three approaches. The
RF approaches still have a small advantage over MMG but not nearly as much as
with the 80:20 split. The table shows that the data with the normalized distances
performs better than the raw data. This indicates that the normalized data captures
the structure of the data and is not as reliant on the scaling used.
Approach
Trees
MSE
Gap
σ(Gap)
MGL
σ(GL)
MR
σ(R)
RF Raw
450
1.85
1.52
1.00
0.57
0.57
5.62
6.40
RF Normalized
385
1.89
1.48
1.01
0.52
0.58
5.56
6.45
MMG
-
-
1.60
0.98
0.65
0.85
7.28
8.44
Best
-
-
0.95
0.70
-
-
-
-
Table 8.6: Performance of different tuning approaches for the split between (Uchoa,
Taillard) and (Li, Kelly). The highlighted values mark the best seen value for each
metric.
Looking into the performance of the approaches on every instance in the test set
shown in table 8.7 it is seen that MMG actually finds the best parameter setting
more frequently than the RF approaches. However it is again seen that when the
approaches are not able to find the best temperature setting the RF approaches
suggest a much better alternative than the MMG approach.
==PAGE:69==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
63
Table 8.7: Performance on each instance for split between (Uchoa, Taillard) and (Kelly, Li)
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Kelly - kelly07
0.02
6
0.244322
0.794999
0.02
6
0.244322
0.769724
0.01
17
0.755702
0.03
0.008034
Kelly - kelly20
0.01
0
0.783109
1.329088
0.01
0
0.783109
1.473773
0.01
0
0.783109
0.01
0.783109
Kelly - kelly16
0.01
0
2.608730
1.674870
0.01
0
2.608730
1.780096
0.01
0
2.608730
0.01
2.608730
Kelly - kelly12
0.02
2
3.981710
0.817758
0.02
2
3.981710
0.768721
0.01
0
2.334060
0.01
2.334060
Kelly - kelly03
0.02
1
0.140613
0.797487
0.02
1
0.140613
0.770475
0.01
8
0.690100
0.03
0.091190
Kelly - kelly06
0.02
18
0.408397
0.665328
0.02
18
0.408397
0.711696
0.01
19
0.899527
0.05
0.015115
Kelly - kelly05
0.02
17
0.402004
0.531599
0.02
17
0.402004
0.650953
0.01
19
0.463851
0.09
0.151677
Kelly - kelly19
0.01
0
0.687159
1.271299
0.01
0
0.687159
1.456888
0.01
0
0.687159
0.01
0.687159
Kelly - kelly02
0.02
1
0.339817
0.796158
0.02
1
0.339817
0.751328
0.01
0
0.264099
0.01
0.264099
Kelly - kelly15
0.01
0
1.698120
1.674932
0.01
0
1.698120
1.757319
0.01
0
1.698120
0.01
1.698120
Kelly - kelly17
0.02
1
0.790821
0.590916
0.01
0
0.287796
0.737904
0.01
0
0.287796
0.01
0.287796
Kelly - kelly14
0.01
0
1.552310
1.565467
0.01
0
1.552310
1.822805
0.01
0
1.552310
0.01
1.552310
Kelly - kelly04
0.02
9
0.508263
0.803465
0.02
9
0.508263
0.787401
0.01
19
1.352340
0.04
0.135755
Kelly - kelly01
0.02
0
0.407002
0.516805
0.02
0
0.407002
0.570163
0.01
1
0.410184
0.02
0.407002
Kelly - kelly09
0.02
1
2.132060
0.582338
0.01
0
1.098390
0.670226
0.01
0
1.098390
0.01
1.098390
Kelly - kelly18
0.01
0
0.730506
1.281630
0.01
0
0.730506
1.453275
0.01
0
0.730506
0.01
0.730506
Kelly - kelly11
0.02
1
3.390340
0.823879
0.02
1
3.390340
0.764522
0.01
0
2.006870
0.01
2.006870
Kelly - kelly13
0.01
0
1.957940
1.539471
0.01
0
1.957940
1.867456
0.01
0
1.957940
0.01
1.957940
Kelly - kelly08
0.02
1
1.454100
0.793176
0.02
1
1.454100
0.770504
0.01
0
1.137250
0.01
1.137250
Kelly - kelly10
0.02
1
2.530440
0.835545
0.02
1
2.530440
0.760051
0.01
0
1.592650
0.01
1.592650
Li - CVRP_L_27
0.02
1
1.227630
0.793961
0.02
1
1.227630
0.796312
0.01
0
1.113860
0.01
1.113860
Li - CVRP_L_31
0.02
12
2.529880
0.713528
0.02
12
2.529880
0.829403
0.01
19
3.692830
0.06
1.034790
Li - CVRP_L_26
0.02
12
2.503640
0.734923
0.02
12
2.503640
0.810772
0.01
15
2.847420
0.08
1.024110
Li - CVRP_L_24
0.02
17
1.490070
0.729725
0.02
17
1.490070
0.806443
0.01
19
2.322170
0.09
0.454135
Li - CVRP_L_28
0.02
12
1.949410
0.703710
0.02
12
1.949410
0.811020
0.01
18
2.973850
0.08
0.990031
Li - CVRP_L_32
0.02
13
2.829880
0.715408
0.02
13
2.829880
0.834614
0.01
10
2.734400
0.06
1.335920
Li - CVRP_L_21
0.02
11
1.469340
0.799604
0.02
11
1.469340
0.792773
0.01
17
2.167840
0.05
0.450466
Li - CVRP_L_25
0.02
1
1.468400
0.794053
0.02
1
1.468400
0.789802
0.01
0
1.461780
0.01
1.461780
Li - CVRP_L_30
0.02
11
2.790540
0.717199
0.02
11
2.790540
0.818627
0.01
14
3.314770
0.06
1.607980
Li - CVRP_L_23
0.02
18
1.310760
0.791849
0.02
18
1.310760
0.794185
0.01
19
1.883030
0.11
0.156557
Li - CVRP_L_22
0.02
2
0.313573
0.793645
0.02
2
0.313573
0.775885
0.01
1
0.295002
0.03
0.258299
Li - CVRP_L_29
0.02
11
2.293580
0.723678
0.02
11
2.293580
0.816857
0.01
18
3.326510
0.05
1.110100
Mean
5.62
1.52
0.89
5.56
1.48
0.96
7.28
1.60
0.95
==PAGE:70==
64
8 Experiments
8.1.6
Feature Importance
In figure 8.3 it was not possible to see if any features had a bigger influence on the
gap than others. Therefore it is interesting to see if the RF approach identifies one
feature to be more important than others. To investigates this a RF will be trained
on all of the raw and normalized data respectively and the feature importances will
be calculated. Again the best number of trees will be found in the range [1, 500] with
a step size of 5.
8.1.6.1
Results
The feature importances are depicted in figure 8.10. The red bars show the mean
importance of each feature across all trees and the black lines are the standard de-
viation in the feature importance. For the normalized data, figure 8.10a shows how
the total demand is the most influencial feature followed by the standard deviation
of the demand. Hereafter follows the number of customers N and vehicles K. So, in
general, features that indicate the combinatorial size of the problem are important.
Furthermore, it can be seen that distance measures indicating the positioning of cus-
tomers in relation to the centroid and the depot has very low importance. This could
be the result of the normalization making the differences in the normalized distances
very small. However, the same tendencies is repeated in the raw data in figure 8.10b,
where again it is the features indicating the size of the instance that are the most
important. Therefore, it must be the features indicating combinatorial size of the
instances that has the greatest importance.
==PAGE:71==
8.1 Random Forest for Parameter Tuning
65
(a) Normalized data
(b) Raw data
Figure 8.10: Feature importances for RF approaches
==PAGE:72==
66
8 Experiments
8.2
Deep Reinforcement Learning Acceptance
Criteria
There are two parts of evaluating the Deep Reinforcement Learning acceptance cri-
teria.
First, the DQN has to be trained.
Hereafter, the trained DQN has to be
evaluated on instances that have not been used for training.
8.2.1
Implementation
The ALNS part of the implementation was based upon a single threaded version of
Ropke and Santini [RS16] which is implemented in c++. The code was altered to
call a DQN which was implemented in python3.6 using Pytorch v. 1.03.
8.2.2
Training
In order to train the DQN a number of parameters has to be set and a number of
instances need to be selected for training.
8.2.2.1
Parameters
The Deep Q-learning algorithm has many parameters that are to be tuned. However,
the algorithm takes a lot of time to perform and it is hard to do tuning without
actually running the algorithm. Therefore, the parameters chosen are inspired by
DeepMind[Mni+15] and are depicted in table 8.8.
Table 8.8: Deep Q-Learning parameter setting
Parameter
Setting
ALNS iterations
50000
episodes
500
batch size
1000
γ
0.9
ϵstart
5
ϵend
0.05
target update
10000
memory size
500000
8.2.2.2
Instances
The instances selected for training are taken from Uchoa. The instances are selected
such that they represent a wide range of sizes both for number of customers and
3https://pytorch.org/
==PAGE:73==
8.2 Deep Reinforcement Learning Acceptance Criteria
67
vehicles. The selected instances are X-n101-k25, X-n172-k51, X-n256-k16, X-n331-
k15, X-n469-k138, X-n685-k75, X-n957-k87 and X-n1001-k43.
8.2.3
Experiments
After training the model the trained DQN will be evaluated on the rest of the Uchoa
data set. The performance of the DQN will be compared to a SA and HC acceptance
criteria.
8.2.4
Results
Figure 8.11 shows the development of the objective function for each instance in the
set of instances used for training. The training took approximately 6 days. Notice
that each instance has a varying amount of runs, which is due to the instances being
drawn randomly at the start of each episode. The figure shows that for each run,
the algorithm performs a little better but then at the end the algorithm suddenly
becomes worse. To understand the reason for this development all possible states
where parsed through the DQN. This showed that the DQN had learned to accept all
possible states. In hindsight it is clear that that the DQN learns to accept all solutions
as the reward for not accepting a solution is 0 and 2 for accepting a solution that has
not been seen before. The rewards for obtaining new solutions that are globally best
are simply not big enough for the DQN to learn that it might be a good option to
not accept a solution. It was the hope that the reward function would ensure that
it sometimes would give a better longterm reward if a couple of solutions were not
accepted, but it was simply not designed in an appropriate way.
The reason that the objective actually becomes better for each episode in the be-
ginning, is because the Boltzmann strategy ensures that new solutions are sometimes
declined. Therefore as the DQN learns to accept all solutions and the training be-
comes less and less random it becomes an acceptance criteria that accepts all solution
and only once in a while declines a new one. At one point it then begins to accept to
many solutions as ϵ is annealed to a small enough value. Notice in figure 8.11 that
the DQN does not have exactly the same objective as accepting all solutions, this is
due to ϵ only being annealed to 0.05 and not 0. For the small instances the algorithm
actually comes close to simulated annealing and hill climbing at the end however for
the large instances it is nowhere near these two approaches.
Due to the fact that the DQN has learned to accept all states, the experiments
on other instances will not be performed as they would be trivial.
==PAGE:74==
68
8 Experiments
Figure 8.11: The development during the training of deep reinforcement acceptance criteria. The blue line shows the
objective function for each run. The orange line is a moving average over 20 runs. The purple line is the average objective
over 10 runs of ALNS that accepts all new solutions. The green line is the average objective of simulated annealing
acceptance with temperature control parameter w=0.01 over 10 runs. The red line is the average performance of hill
climbing acceptance over 10 runs.
==PAGE:75==
8.3 Summary
69
8.3
Summary
The experiments showed that the proposed framework using RF outperformed the
conventional tuning approach using MMG. It was seen that the RF approaches where
better at finding alternatives to the best parameter setting and therefore had a better
average performance. However, when the training set became to small it was seen
that MMG was a better choice of tuning approach.
It was also seen the the RF
approaches need the training data to be representative of the general distribution of
instances as the performance dropped significantly when the training data sets where
constructed in a different way than the test data set. In general the results indicated
a great potential for the use of machine learning to tune parameters.
For the deep reinforcement learning approach to work it was seen that the reward
function and the state representations must be very carefully designed in order for
the method to work properly. Furthermore the implementation was found to be very
difficult.
==PAGE:76==
70
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 9
Future Research
This project showed some promising results on the use of machine learning in meta-
heuristics and it would therefore be interesting to further investigate the use of ma-
chine learning within meta-heuristics.
9.1
Parameter Tuning
The use of machine learning for tuning parameters for meta-heuristics was only inves-
tigated on a single application. It could be interesting to investigate how the proposed
method performs on other types of problems such as the quadratic assignment project
or the timetabling problem. Furthermore, it would be interesting to investigate the
performance on parameters of other acceptance criteria or meta-heuristics such as the
size of the Tabu list for TS or the parameters for Record-To-Record travel.
9.1.1
Multiple Parameters
In this project only one parameter was investigated. More often than not there are
multiple parameters to tune; in this case, the parameter space grows and it becomes
a combinatorial optimization problem in itself to find the best parameter setting.
Therefore it would be even more useful in this case to have a fast and good estima-
tion of parameters.
For estimating multiple parameters, two approaches could be investigated.
First,
as proposed in section 6 the feature vector of the observation could be extended for
each extra parameter. However, this would lead to the data increasing exponentially
in size for each extra parameter. This data needs to be generated which would take
an extensive amount of time. The increase in amount of data would probably also
leads to random forests not being complex enough to scale with the amount of data.
Therefore, a deep neural network should be used for the regression instead of random
forests as deep neural networks scale better with more data[Ng17, p. 11]. Secondly,
the problem could be formulated as a multi-label regression problem with the best pa-
rameter setting used as output label. In this case the machine learning model would
directly output the parameter setting without having to do the search. However, in
==PAGE:78==
72
9 Future Research
this case again lot of instances are needed in order to have enough data to make good
estimations.
9.1.2
Newly Generated Instances and Finer Grid of Parameters
The ultimate goal would be to create a model that could function as a blackbox
which could work for tuning parameters for shipping out with optimization software.
Therefore a wide range of settings should be used for training the model. Further-
more, it was seen that many instances had the same setting as its best setting, so
testing should be done on instances that varied more in the best setting. In retro-
spective it would have been better to do a finer grid of temperatures around 0.01 as
many instances had this as their best parameter setting. This would probably have
diversified the best starting temperatures across more settings.
9.1.3
Search with Parameter Settings not in Range
It would be interesting to try out a search for parameters after training the model
on a set of parameters that where not in the training set. If this was successful, a
model could be trained on a small range of parameters and could then be used to find
a good parameter setting in a bigger space of parameters. Thereby it is not needed
to generate a training set with a very fine grid. However, if the range that is used
for the search is outside the training range of parameters, and not just a more fine
grained search within the range, another model than random forest should be used
as tree models in general are bad for extrapolation[LCZ07].
9.1.4
Using Setting as Output Label
Instead of using the gap as output label, the best parameter setting could be used
directly. Other than directly estimating the temperature, this approach would also
lead to the output not necessarily being one of the temperatures used for training but
possibly a better one.
9.1.5
Features
In order to further improve performance of the proposed and future approaches it is
relevant to investigate further features that can represent an CVRP instance. One
of the most interesting features to investigate is that of graph embeddings[HYL17].
A graph embedding is a way of representing a graph as a vector of a fixed size, no
matter the size of the graph. Thereby instead of using the features proposed in this
project the model could be fed with a representation of the graph for the instance
and use this as its features.
==PAGE:79==
9.2 Deep Reinforcement Learning - acceptance criteria
73
9.1.6
Other Regression Models
A wide range of machine learning models have been proposed for regression over the
years and many of them have shown good results. It might be possible to further
improve the estimation of parameter settings by using another model in the proposed
framework. Specifically NNs and gradient boosting[Che+15] would be interesting to
investigate.
9.1.7
Tuning on similar instances
It was seen that the performance of the MMG in general was pretty good. It could
therefore be interesting to create an approach that combines the powers of MMG
with machine learning. A possible way of achieving this would be to use a clustering
algorithm on the data. Using a clustering algorithm would make it possible to find
instances that are similar to each other and then use MMG on instances that are
similar to the instance for which a parameter tuning was desired.
9.2
Deep Reinforcement Learning - acceptance
criteria
The acceptance criteria learned using deep reinforcement learning in this project did
not perform well. However, a number of improvements can be made that might result
in a well performing acceptance criteria.
9.2.1
Optimizing Reward Function
It was seen that the reward function was not correctly designed. Therefore, further
design of the rewards should be done. The reward function should be designed such
that rewards are given depending of how well the final solution of the ALNS is. One
way of doing this could be to find the best seen solution for a given instance and give
a reward depending on how good a solution is compared to the best one.
9.2.2
Adding more Features
The features proposed in this project are not enough to give a good description of a
state. More features should be added and some of the features could be changed. First
off, the number of iterations should not be used directly as a feature as this restricts
the generalization of the learned acceptance criteria. Hereafter, a feature indicating
the difference between the current solution cost and the newly proposed solution
cost could be added. Similarly, a feature saying indicating the difference between
the best solution cost and the newly proposed solution cost.
Adding continuous
features results in the states that the features can represent grows almost infinitely.
==PAGE:80==
74
9 Future Research
Furthermore, it could be interesting to try out features that describe the graphs
created in an iteration. Proposals coming into mind is graph embeddings or hamming
distance[Ham50] between solutions.
9.2.3
Adding Context to States
It is likely that determining whether to accept or decline a solution should be deter-
mined based on multiple iterations of ALNS. Using state representations for multiple
iterations is also proposed by DeepMind for playing Atari games, where they append
multiple frames onto each other to give the network a sense of velocity and movement
of objects[Mni+15]. Another way of achieving this is to add recurrent layers(Loops)
to the DQN. This approach was used by researchers at Carnegie Mellon to teach a
DQN to play Doom[LC17].
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
This project proposed two different approaches of integrating machine learning into
meta-heuristics in order to enhance the performance of acceptance criteria.
First off, to handle the problem of parameter tuning an approach was developed
where a grid search using a machine learning was used to estimate paramters. An
implementation of the framework was implemented that used a Random Forest(RF)
regression to find the temperature control parameter for simulated annealing accep-
tance criteria for the adaptive large neighbourhood search(ALNS) used to solve the
capacitated vehicle routing problem(CVRP). Two different approaches of represent-
ing instances of CVRP were proposed. Firstly, a raw approach were the features
was extracted from the instances without any feature engineering and secondly a nor-
malized approach where the demands and distances were normalized using min-max
scaling. These approaches were termed RF raw and RF normalized. The proposed
methods were evaluated against a conventional parameter tuning approach where
the parameter leading to the minimum mean of gaps is chosen, this approach was
termed minimum mean of gaps(MMG). Four known data sets with CVRP instances
were used to create training and test data. Under an investigation of the data, it
was seen that a specific setting of 0.01 in general performed very well, even when
it was not the best setting. It was therefore expected that the MMG would have a
good performance. It was also found that the instances from the four data sets were
constructed in different ways resulting in different structures of the data and that it
was not possible for the human eye to see a correlation between a feature and the gap
or the best parameter.
Four metrics were used to evaluate the performance of the proposed approaches. First
off, the MSE of the regression. Secondly, the gap of a parameter setting. Thirdly, the
mean difference between the gap of the best seen parameter setting for an instance
and the gap of the parameter setting estimated by one of the methods was used;
this was termed mean gap loss(MGL). Lastly, the performance was evaluated using
the rank of the estimated temperature. A number of experiments were conducted.
First off, a classic machine learning experiment were performed where the data set of
known instances was split in a 80:20 split, with 80% training data and 20% test data.
This experiment was rerun 10 times to make the results more robust to potential
differences in a good and a bad splits. The results showed that the RF approaches
were twice as good as the MMG both in terms of MGL and rank. To evaluate the
==PAGE:82==
76
10 Conclusion
robustness of all the approaches, they were trained using a declining amount of data.
The result was that the RF approaches outperformed the MMG on gap-loss down to
the training set having 40% of total data and the test set being 20% of total data.
This experiment also showed that the RF approaches on average found better ranked
parameters, indicating that there was a big difference between the best parameter
setting and the succeeding parameter settings. If the instances had a more diverse
distribution of the best parameter setting, it was expected that the RF approaches
could become even more robust than the MMG approach. Hereafter, an experiment
was conducted to see how the structure of the instances affected the performance
of the approaches. For this, data from two of the original data sets were used for
training, while the two others were used for testing. The result was a great decline in
performance for all of the approaches with the RF normalized outperforming the other
approaches. This indicate that the normalized features were more robust to feature
scaling and better found the underlying structure of the instance for its estimations.
Lastly the importance of each feature was discussed based on the importance from
both RF raw and RF normalized. It was seen that primarily features indicating size
of the problem influenced estimations of the model.
The project subsequently proposed creating an entirely new acceptance criteria learned
by a Deep Q-Network(DQN). The DQN was to be trained by running ALNS for many
iterations on a selected set of CVRP instances. The training resulted in the DQN
learning to accept all solutions. The bad performance of the approach was suspected
to be caused by a wrongly designed reward function and an insufficient set of fea-
tures to represent a state. Further experiments where therefore not conducted on the
trained DQN as the results would be trivial.
Based on this work it can be seen that there is a great potential for using machine
learning for enhancing meta-heuristics. Especially the use of machine learning for
parameter tuning showed promise. However, the evaluation of the proposed methods
was evaluated very narrowly and further research must be conducted to underpin the
general application of the proposed method and to further improve performance. In
regards to the acceptance criteria learned using deep reinforcement learning it is a
very interesting concept and one that has great potential within problems with com-
binatorial large spaces even though the approach was not successful in this project.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[19]
StarCraft II-playing AI AlphaStar takes out pros undefeated. 2019. url:
%5Curl%7Bhttps://techcrunch.com/2019/01/24/starcraft- ii-
playing-ai-alphastar-takes-out-pros-undefeated/%7D.
[AL06]
Belarmino Adenso-Diaz and Manuel Laguna. “Fine-tuning of algorithms
using fractional experimental designs and local search”. In: Operations
research 54.1 (2006), pages 99–114.
[BK09]
Mauro Birattari and Janusz Kacprzyk. Tuning metaheuristics: a machine
learning perspective. Volume 197. Springer, 2009.
[Box76]
George EP Box. “Science and statistics”. In: Journal of the American
Statistical Association 71.356 (1976), pages 791–799.
[Bre01]
Leo Breiman. “Random forests”. In: Machine learning 45.1 (2001), pages 5–
32.
[Bre17]
Leo Breiman. Classification and regression trees. Routledge, 2017.
[Che+15]
Tianqi Chen et al. “Xgboost: extreme gradient boosting”. In: R package
version 0.4-2 (2015), pages 1–4.
[Coy+01]
Steven P Coy et al. “Using experimental design to find effective parameter
settings for heuristics”. In: Journal of Heuristics 7.1 (2001), pages 77–97.
[Dee19]
DeepMind. 2019. url: %5Curl%7Bhttps://deepmind.com/research/
publications/%7D.
[DS90]
Gunter Dueck and Tobias Scheuer. “Threshold accepting: a general pur-
pose optimization algorithm appearing superior to simulated annealing”.
In: Journal of computational physics 90.1 (1990), pages 161–175.
[FHT01]
Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. The elements of
statistical learning. Volume 1. 10. Springer series in statistics New York,
NY, USA: 2001.
[FR95]
Thomas A Feo and Mauricio GC Resende. “Greedy randomized adap-
tive search procedures”. In: Journal of global optimization 6.2 (1995),
pages 109–133.
[FS19]
Alberto Franzin and Thomas Stützle. “Revisiting simulated annealing:
A component-based analysis”. In: Computers & Operations Research 104
(2019), pages 191–206.
==PAGE:84==
78
Bibliography
[GK06]
Fred W Glover and Gary A Kochenberger. Handbook of metaheuristics.
Volume 57. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[GL98]
Fred Glover and Manuel Laguna. “Tabu search”. In: Handbook of combi-
natorial optimization. Springer, 1998, pages 2093–2229.
[Gol+98]
Bruce L Golden et al. “The impact of metaheuristics on solving the vehicle
routing problem: algorithms, problem sets, and computational results”. In:
Fleet management and logistics. Springer, 1998, pages 33–56.
[Ham50]
Richard W Hamming. “Error detecting and error correcting codes”. In:
Bell System technical journal 29.2 (1950), pages 147–160.
[Hea17]
Jeff Heaton. “The Number of Hidden Layers”. In: (2017). url: %5Curl%
7Bhttps://www.heatonresearch.com/2017/06/01/hidden-layers.
html%7D.
[HPK11]
Jiawei Han, Jian Pei, and Micheline Kamber. Data mining: concepts and
techniques. Elsevier, 2011.
[Hut+09]
Frank Hutter et al. “ParamILS: an automatic algorithm configuration
framework”. In: Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 36 (2009), pages 267–
306.
[HYL17]
William L Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. “Representation learn-
ing on graphs: Methods and applications”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.05584
(2017).
[Joh94]
George H John. “When the best move isn’t optimal: Q-learning with
exploration”. In: AAAI. Citeseer. 1994, page 1464.
[K+52]
Jack Kiefer, Jacob Wolfowitz, et al. “Stochastic estimation of the maxi-
mum of a regression function”. In: The Annals of Mathematical Statistics
23.3 (1952), pages 462–466.
[Kan+11]
Jorge Kanda et al. “Selection of algorithms to solve traveling salesman
problems using meta-learning 1”. In: International Journal of Hybrid In-
telligent Systems 8.3 (2011), pages 117–128.
[Kan+16]
Jorge Kanda et al. “Meta-learning to select the best meta-heuristic for the
Traveling Salesman Problem: A comparison of meta-features”. In: Neuro-
computing 205 (2016), pages 393–406.
[KGV83]
Scott Kirkpatrick, C Daniel Gelatt, and Mario P Vecchi. “Optimization
by simulated annealing”. In: science 220.4598 (1983), pages 671–680.
[Lap+00]
Gilbert Laporte et al. “Classical and modern heuristics for the vehicle
routing problem”. In: International transactions in operational research
7.4-5 (2000), pages 285–300.
[LBQ11]
Jingpeng Li, Edmund K Burke, and Rong Qu. “Integrating neural net-
works and logistic regression to underpin hyper-heuristic search”. In: Knowledge-
Based Systems 24.2 (2011), pages 322–330.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
79
[LC17]
Guillaume Lample and Devendra Singh Chaplot. “Playing FPS Games
with Deep Reinforcement Learning.” In: AAAI. 2017, pages 2140–2146.
[LCA11]
Stefan Lessmann, Marco Caserta, and Idel Montalvo Arango. “Tuning
metaheuristics: A data mining based approach for particle swarm opti-
mization”. In: Expert Systems with Applications 38.10 (2011), pages 12826–
12838.
[LCZ07]
Wei-Yin Loh, Chien-Wei Chen, and Wei Zheng. “Extrapolation errors in
linear model trees”. In: ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from
Data (TKDD) 1.2 (2007), page 6.
[LGW05]
Feiyue Li, Bruce Golden, and Edward Wasil. “Very large-scale vehicle
routing: new test problems, algorithms, and results”. In: Computers &
Operations Research 32.5 (2005), pages 1165–1179.
[LGW07]
Feiyue Li, Bruce Golden, and Edward Wasil. “A record-to-record travel
algorithm for solving the heterogeneous fleet vehicle routing problem”. In:
Computers & Operations Research 34.9 (2007), pages 2734–2742.
[LMN08]
Francisco Chagas de Lima, Jorge Dantas de Melo, and Adriao Duarte
Doria Neto. “Using the Q-learning algorithm in the constructive phase
of the GRASP and reactive GRASP metaheuristics”. In: Neural Net-
works, 2008. IJCNN 2008.(IEEE World Congress on Computational Intel-
ligence). IEEE International Joint Conference on. IEEE. 2008, pages 4169–
4176.
[MM94]
Oded Maron and Andrew W Moore. “Hoeffding races: Accelerating model
selection search for classification and function approximation”. In: Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems. 1994, pages 59–66.
[Mni+13]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 (2013).
[Mni+15]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning”. In: Nature 518.7540 (2015), page 529.
[Ng17]
Andrew Ng. Machine Learning Yearning. 2017.
[NH10]
Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Rectified linear units improve re-
stricted boltzmann machines”. In: Proceedings of the 27th international
conference on machine learning (ICML-10). 2010, pages 807–814.
[Opt14]
Gurobi Optimization. “Inc.,“Gurobi optimizer reference manual,” 2015”.
In: URL: http://www. gurobi. com (2014).
[OV04]
Carlotta Orsenigo and Carlo Vercellis. “Discrete support vector decision
trees via tabu search”. In: Computational statistics & data analysis 47.2
(2004), pages 311–322.
[PCN09]
Joaquı́n Pacheco, Silvia Casado, and Laura Núñez. “A variable selection
method based on Tabu search for logistic regression models”. In: European
Journal of Operational Research 199.2 (2009), pages 506–511.
==PAGE:86==
80
Bibliography
[PR93]
Jean-Yves Potvin and Jean-Marc Rousseau. “A parallel route building
algorithm for the vehicle routing and scheduling problem with time win-
dows”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 66.3 (1993), pages 331–
340.
[PS27]
Vilfredo Pareto and Ann S Schwier. Manual of political economy Tr. by
Ann S. Schwier. Macmillan, London, 1927.
[Rip07]
Brian D Ripley. Pattern recognition and neural networks. Cambridge uni-
versity press, 2007.
[RP06a]
Stefan Ropke and David Pisinger. “A unified heuristic for a large class of
vehicle routing problems with backhauls”. In: European Journal of Oper-
ational Research 171.3 (2006), pages 750–775.
[RP06b]
Stefan Ropke and David Pisinger. “An adaptive large neighborhood search
heuristic for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows”. In:
Transportation science 40.4 (2006), pages 455–472.
[RS16]
S Ropke and A Santini. “Parallel adaptive large neighbourhood search”.
In: Technical Report OR-16-11. DEI University of Bologna, 2016.
[RT95]
Yves Rochat and Éric D Taillard. “Probabilistic diversification and inten-
sification in local search for vehicle routing”. In: Journal of heuristics 1.1
(1995), pages 147–167.
[San+14]
João Paulo Queiroz dos Santos et al. “Reactive search strategies using
reinforcement learning, local search algorithms and variable neighborhood
search”. In: Expert Systems with Applications 41.10 (2014), pages 4939–
4949.
[SB18]
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An in-
troduction. MIT press, 2018.
[Seg04]
Mark R Segal. “Machine learning benchmarks and random forest regres-
sion”. In: (2004).
[Sha98]
Paul Shaw. “Using constraint programming and local search methods to
solve vehicle routing problems”. In: International conference on principles
and practice of constraint programming. Springer. 1998, pages 417–431.
[Sil+16]
David Silver et al. “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks
and tree search”. In: nature 529.7587 (2016), page 484.
[SRH18]
Alberto Santini, Stefan Ropke, and Lars Magnus Hvattum. “A compar-
ison of acceptance criteria for the adaptive large neighbourhood search
metaheuristic”. In: Journal of Heuristics 24.5 (2018), pages 783–815.
[Sti18]
Thomas Stidsen. 42137 Optimization using meta-heuristics F18, lecture
10. 2018.
[THB18]
Fabian Tomaschek, Peter Hendrix, and R Harald Baayen. “Strategies for
addressing collinearity in multivariate linguistic data”. In: Journal of Pho-
netics 71 (2018), pages 249–267.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
81
[Uch+17]
Eduardo Uchoa et al. “New benchmark instances for the capacitated vehi-
cle routing problem”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 257.3
(2017), pages 845–858.
[Wu+07]
Chih-Hung Wu et al. “A real-valued genetic algorithm to optimize the pa-
rameters of support vector machine for predicting bankruptcy”. In: Expert
systems with applications 32.2 (2007), pages 397–408.
[ZE10]
M Zennaki and A Ech-Cherif. “A new machine learning based approach
for tuning metaheuristics for the solution of hard combinatorial optimiza-
tion problems”. In: Journal of Applied Sciences(Faisalabad) 10.18 (2010),
pages 1991–2000.
==PAGE:88==
82
==PAGE:89==
Appendix
Data and Code
The data and code can be found at: https://drive.google.com/open?id=1ZbT2_
io-U-NPXr8VI-p6toGnZRL2CP5q
80:20 split
Summary for each split
==PAGE:90==
84
Appendix
Table 1: Performance of the tuning approaches to for each 80:20 split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Split
MSE
Gap
σ(Gap)
MGL
σ(GL)
MR
σ(R)
MSE
Gap
σ(Gap)
MGL
σ(GL)
MR
σ(R)
Gap
σ(Gap)
MGL
σ(GL)
MR
σ(R)
Gap
σ(Gap)
0
2.34
0.88
0.69
0.08
0.24
1.17
2.34
1.56
0.92
0.72
0.12
0.29
1.24
2.36
1.04
0.84
0.24
0.54
4.76
7.11
0.80
0.65
1
1.34
1.27
1.09
0.05
0.08
2.31
3.86
1.07
1.29
1.08
0.06
0.13
2.48
4.01
1.43
1.14
0.20
0.40
5.03
6.50
1.23
1.08
2
1.03
1.45
1.14
0.10
0.15
3.03
5.54
1.62
1.44
1.15
0.10
0.15
3.00
5.55
1.70
1.17
0.35
0.69
5.86
8.05
1.35
1.17
3
1.29
1.15
0.84
0.06
0.09
2.55
4.71
1.07
1.18
0.82
0.08
0.15
3.03
4.80
1.35
0.99
0.26
0.56
4.69
6.79
1.09
0.87
4
0.96
1.12
0.83
0.07
0.16
2.28
4.18
1.16
1.12
0.81
0.07
0.13
3.38
5.10
1.27
0.89
0.22
0.48
5.66
7.79
1.05
0.86
5
2.20
1.38
1.16
0.12
0.27
1.79
3.60
1.42
1.42
1.13
0.16
0.33
1.66
3.36
1.41
1.15
0.16
0.46
3.10
6.36
1.25
1.14
6
1.27
1.18
0.83
0.04
0.07
1.79
3.62
1.29
1.19
0.83
0.06
0.09
2.45
4.33
1.27
0.83
0.13
0.35
3.03
5.52
1.14
0.86
7
1.19
1.34
1.06
0.08
0.11
3.62
5.72
1.81
1.35
1.05
0.09
0.14
3.41
5.57
1.47
1.14
0.20
0.46
4.76
6.73
1.27
1.04
8
1.59
1.19
0.81
0.04
0.08
1.52
3.45
1.37
1.19
0.80
0.04
0.08
1.55
3.47
1.20
0.80
0.05
0.08
2.14
4.55
1.15
0.82
9
1.71
1.31
0.80
0.11
0.17
3.24
5.14
1.81
1.30
0.80
0.10
0.16
3.24
5.18
1.49
0.92
0.28
0.59
5.48
7.46
1.20
0.84
==PAGE:91==
80:20 split
85
Details for each split
==PAGE:92==
86
Appendix
Table 2: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n266-k58
0.01
0
3.241
1.874
0.01
0
3.241
1.842
0.01
0
3.241
0.01
3.241
Uchoa - X-n401-k29
0.01
0
1.695
2.119
0.01
0
1.695
2.193
0.01
0
1.695
0.01
1.695
Uchoa - X-n190-k8
0.01
0
0.233
0.690
0.01
0
0.233
0.727
0.01
0
0.233
0.01
0.233
Uchoa - X-n275-k28
0.01
0
0.746
1.201
0.01
0
0.746
1.377
0.01
0
0.746
0.01
0.746
Uchoa - X-n289-k60
0.01
0
3.391
1.619
0.01
0
3.391
1.948
0.01
0
3.391
0.01
3.391
Uchoa - X-n449-k29
0.01
0
1.867
1.920
0.01
0
1.867
2.316
0.01
0
1.867
0.01
1.867
Uchoa - X-n336-k84
0.01
8
4.439
1.517
0.01
8
4.439
1.709
0.01
8
4.439
0.10
4.119
Uchoa - X-n186-k15
0.02
1
0.532
0.478
0.02
1
0.532
0.405
0.01
0
0.393
0.01
0.393
Uchoa - X-n139-k10
0.08
3
0.361
0.081
0.03
4
0.367
0.205
0.01
10
0.521
0.05
0.331
Uchoa - X-n856-k95
0.01
11
1.130
1.966
0.01
11
1.130
1.978
0.01
11
1.130
0.06
0.991
Uchoa - X-n819-k171
0.01
7
0.927
2.254
0.01
7
0.927
1.870
0.01
7
0.927
0.06
0.768
Uchoa - X-n502-k39
0.01
0
0.727
1.394
0.01
0
0.727
1.511
0.01
0
0.727
0.01
0.727
Uchoa - X-n308-k13
0.01
8
1.103
0.930
0.01
8
1.103
1.070
0.01
8
1.103
0.02
0.939
Uchoa - X-n157-k13
0.01
0
0.200
0.495
0.01
0
0.200
0.417
0.01
0
0.200
0.01
0.200
Uchoa - X-n313-k71
0.01
0
2.275
1.878
0.01
0
2.275
1.945
0.01
0
2.275
0.01
2.275
Uchoa - X-n317-k53
0.01
0
1.155
0.702
0.01
0
1.155
0.978
0.01
0
1.155
0.01
1.155
Uchoa - X-n573-k30
0.01
0
0.509
1.390
0.01
0
0.509
1.693
0.01
0
0.509
0.01
0.509
Uchoa - X-n200-k36
0.01
15
0.933
1.940
0.01
15
0.933
1.661
0.01
15
0.933
0.00
0.818
Uchoa - X-n586-k159
0.01
0
1.275
1.240
0.01
0
1.275
1.197
0.01
0
1.275
0.01
1.275
Uchoa - X-n733-k159
0.01
1
1.511
2.223
0.01
1
1.511
2.011
0.01
1
1.511
0.10
1.478
Uchoa - X-n359-k29
0.01
0
0.981
1.509
0.01
0
0.981
1.624
0.01
0
0.981
0.01
0.981
Uchoa - X-n429-k61
0.01
0
3.326
2.378
0.01
0
3.326
2.042
0.01
0
3.326
0.01
3.326
Rochat and Taillard - tai100b
0.05
2
0.025
0.267
0.05
2
0.025
0.257
0.01
19
0.219
0.02
0.012
Rochat and Taillard - tai150d
0.05
6
0.357
0.156
0.05
6
0.357
0.119
0.01
16
0.742
0.09
0.197
Kelly - kelly03
0.04
2
0.152
0.411
0.01
8
0.690
1.146
0.01
8
0.690
0.03
0.091
Kelly - kelly05
0.08
3
0.162
0.089
0.07
1
0.152
0.192
0.01
19
0.464
0.09
0.152
Kelly - kelly18
0.01
0
0.731
0.956
0.01
0
0.731
0.971
0.01
0
0.731
0.01
0.731
Li - CVRP_L_32
0.06
0
1.336
1.261
0.06
0
1.336
1.240
0.01
10
2.734
0.06
1.336
Li - CVRP_L_30
0.06
0
1.608
1.268
0.06
0
1.608
1.263
0.01
14
3.315
0.06
1.608
Mean
2.31
1.27
1.24
2.48
1.29
1.30
5.03
1.43
1.22
==PAGE:93==
80:20 split
87
Table 3: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n134-k13
0.02
1
5.674e-01
0.290
0.02
1
5.674e-01
0.348
0.01
0
0.222
0.01
0.222
Uchoa - X-n298-k31
0.01
0
4.503e-01
1.749
0.01
0
4.503e-01
1.610
0.01
0
0.450
0.01
0.450
Uchoa - X-n384-k52
0.01
0
3.631e+00
1.898
0.01
0
3.631e+00
1.329
0.01
0
3.631
0.01
3.631
Uchoa - X-n401-k29
0.01
0
1.695e+00
2.295
0.01
0
1.695e+00
2.177
0.01
0
1.695
0.01
1.695
Uchoa - X-n411-k19
0.01
2
1.102e+00
1.209
0.01
2
1.102e+00
1.163
0.01
2
1.102
0.03
0.780
Uchoa - X-n336-k84
0.01
8
4.439e+00
2.335
0.01
8
4.439e+00
2.252
0.01
8
4.439
0.10
4.119
Uchoa - X-n641-k35
0.01
0
1.272e+00
2.241
0.01
0
1.272e+00
2.187
0.01
0
1.272
0.01
1.272
Uchoa - X-n322-k28
0.01
0
5.338e-01
1.870
0.01
0
5.338e-01
1.867
0.01
0
0.534
0.01
0.534
Uchoa - X-n129-k18
0.01
0
5.580e-01
0.807
0.01
0
5.580e-01
0.747
0.01
0
0.558
0.01
0.558
Uchoa - X-n110-k13
0.02
1
3.003e-01
0.257
0.02
1
3.003e-01
0.242
0.01
2
0.301
0.03
0.192
Uchoa - X-n223-k34
0.01
0
1.345e+00
1.801
0.01
0
1.345e+00
2.066
0.01
0
1.345
0.01
1.345
Uchoa - X-n351-k40
0.01
0
1.257e+00
1.895
0.01
0
1.257e+00
1.900
0.01
0
1.257
0.01
1.257
Uchoa - X-n536-k96
0.01
20
1.756e+00
2.275
0.01
20
1.756e+00
2.829
0.01
20
1.756
0.06
1.419
Uchoa - X-n200-k36
0.01
15
9.331e-01
1.899
0.01
15
9.331e-01
1.903
0.01
15
0.933
0.00
0.818
Uchoa - X-n586-k159
0.01
0
1.275e+00
1.460
0.01
0
1.275e+00
1.181
0.01
0
1.275
0.01
1.275
Uchoa - X-n172-k51
0.01
0
2.988e+00
2.071
0.01
0
2.988e+00
2.401
0.01
0
2.988
0.01
2.988
Uchoa - X-n491-k59
0.01
0
3.807e+00
2.363
0.01
0
3.807e+00
2.333
0.01
0
3.807
0.01
3.807
Uchoa - X-n733-k159
0.01
1
1.511e+00
2.060
0.01
1
1.511e+00
1.897
0.01
1
1.511
0.10
1.478
Uchoa - X-n429-k61
0.01
0
3.326e+00
1.888
0.01
0
3.326e+00
1.323
0.01
0
3.326
0.01
3.326
Rochat and Taillard - tai100a
0.04
1
3.126e-01
0.024
0.02
0
2.428e-01
0.300
0.01
11
0.384
0.02
0.243
Rochat and Taillard - tai100c
0.05
3
1.568e-04
0.084
0.05
3
1.568e-04
0.061
0.01
18
0.057
0.02
0.000
Kelly - kelly06
0.04
17
2.660e-01
0.169
0.04
17
2.660e-01
0.201
0.01
19
0.900
0.05
0.015
Kelly - kelly14
0.01
0
1.552e+00
1.966
0.01
0
1.552e+00
2.183
0.01
0
1.552
0.01
1.552
Kelly - kelly11
0.01
0
2.007e+00
2.029
0.01
0
2.007e+00
2.153
0.01
0
2.007
0.01
2.007
Kelly - kelly13
0.01
0
1.958e+00
1.716
0.01
0
1.958e+00
2.537
0.01
0
1.958
0.01
1.958
Li - CVRP_L_31
0.06
0
1.035e+00
1.535
0.06
0
1.035e+00
1.446
0.01
19
3.693
0.06
1.035
Li - CVRP_L_24
0.08
2
5.291e-01
1.172
0.08
2
5.291e-01
1.197
0.01
19
2.322
0.09
0.454
Li - CVRP_L_21
0.03
6
9.045e-01
0.980
0.03
6
9.045e-01
1.136
0.01
17
2.168
0.05
0.450
Li - CVRP_L_23
0.08
11
6.146e-01
1.166
0.08
11
6.146e-01
1.175
0.01
19
1.883
0.11
0.157
Mean
3.03
1.44
1.50
3.0
1.44
1.52
5.86
1.70
1.34
==PAGE:94==
88
Appendix
Table 4: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n266-k58
0.01
0
3.241
2.189
0.01
0
3.241
1.738
0.01
0
3.241
0.01
3.241
Uchoa - X-n548-k50
0.01
0
0.780
2.122
0.01
0
0.780
2.038
0.01
0
0.780
0.01
0.780
Uchoa - X-n251-k28
0.01
0
1.313
1.043
0.01
0
1.313
0.995
0.01
0
1.313
0.01
1.313
Uchoa - X-n148-k46
0.01
0
2.480
2.473
0.01
0
2.480
2.584
0.01
0
2.480
0.01
2.480
Uchoa - X-n303-k21
0.01
0
0.750
1.855
0.01
0
0.750
1.386
0.01
0
0.750
0.01
0.750
Uchoa - X-n247-k47
0.01
0
0.540
1.992
0.01
0
0.540
2.081
0.01
0
0.540
0.01
0.540
Uchoa - X-n837-k142
0.01
10
1.136
2.453
0.01
10
1.136
1.824
0.01
10
1.136
0.17
0.943
Uchoa - X-n186-k15
0.02
1
0.532
0.925
0.01
0
0.393
0.738
0.01
0
0.393
0.01
0.393
Uchoa - X-n139-k10
0.02
5
0.398
0.387
0.02
5
0.398
0.269
0.01
10
0.521
0.05
0.331
Uchoa - X-n655-k131
0.01
11
0.580
2.148
0.01
11
0.580
1.431
0.01
11
0.580
0.08
0.484
Uchoa - X-n204-k19
0.01
0
0.698
1.064
0.01
0
0.698
1.400
0.01
0
0.698
0.01
0.698
Uchoa - X-n351-k40
0.01
0
1.257
2.337
0.01
0
1.257
2.208
0.01
0
1.257
0.01
1.257
Uchoa - X-n627-k43
0.01
0
2.200
1.517
0.01
0
2.200
1.239
0.01
0
2.200
0.01
2.200
Uchoa - X-n957-k87
0.01
0
3.051
2.309
0.01
0
3.051
1.890
0.01
0
3.051
0.01
3.051
Uchoa - X-n359-k29
0.01
0
0.981
1.379
0.01
0
0.981
1.922
0.01
0
0.981
0.01
0.981
Uchoa - X-n115-k10
0.02
18
0.205
0.417
0.02
18
0.205
0.275
0.01
19
0.341
0.07
0.007
Rochat and Taillard - tai100a
0.05
3
0.323
0.113
0.03
5
0.337
0.112
0.01
11
0.384
0.02
0.243
Rochat and Taillard - tai385
0.01
0
0.449
1.925
0.01
0
0.449
2.100
0.01
0
0.449
0.01
0.449
Kelly - kelly03
0.04
2
0.152
0.525
0.01
8
0.690
1.205
0.01
8
0.690
0.03
0.091
Kelly - kelly05
0.06
15
0.221
0.075
0.05
14
0.220
0.139
0.01
19
0.464
0.09
0.152
Kelly - kelly02
0.03
2
0.383
0.566
0.05
6
0.637
0.333
0.01
0
0.264
0.01
0.264
Kelly - kelly15
0.01
0
1.698
2.943
0.01
0
1.698
2.796
0.01
0
1.698
0.01
1.698
Kelly - kelly14
0.01
0
1.552
2.697
0.01
0
1.552
2.635
0.01
0
1.552
0.01
1.552
Kelly - kelly11
0.01
0
2.007
2.316
0.01
0
2.007
2.480
0.01
0
2.007
0.01
2.007
Kelly - kelly13
0.01
0
1.958
2.593
0.01
0
1.958
2.558
0.01
0
1.958
0.01
1.958
Li - CVRP_L_26
0.09
3
1.387
0.822
0.05
5
1.426
1.072
0.01
15
2.847
0.08
1.024
Li - CVRP_L_28
0.05
3
1.193
1.006
0.05
3
1.193
1.293
0.01
18
2.974
0.08
0.990
Li - CVRP_L_30
0.06
0
1.608
1.244
0.06
0
1.608
1.239
0.01
14
3.315
0.06
1.608
Li - CVRP_L_22
0.01
1
0.295
1.132
0.04
3
0.361
0.877
0.01
1
0.295
0.03
0.258
Mean
2.55
1.15
1.53
3.03
1.17
1.47
4.68
1.35
1.09
==PAGE:95==
80:20 split
89
Table 5: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n670-k126
0.01
0
1.235
2.168
0.01
0
1.235
1.357
0.01
0
1.235
0.01
1.235e+00
Uchoa - X-n936-k151
0.01
0
0.898
1.779
0.01
0
0.898
3.030
0.01
0
0.898
0.01
8.981e-01
Uchoa - X-n384-k52
0.01
0
3.631
2.688
0.01
0
3.631
2.629
0.01
0
3.631
0.01
3.631e+00
Uchoa - X-n401-k29
0.01
0
1.695
2.436
0.01
0
1.695
2.294
0.01
0
1.695
0.01
1.695e+00
Uchoa - X-n280-k17
0.01
4
0.728
0.933
0.01
4
0.728
1.107
0.01
4
0.728
0.02
5.359e-01
Uchoa - X-n284-k15
0.02
1
1.541
0.725
0.01
0
0.881
0.833
0.01
0
0.881
0.01
8.812e-01
Uchoa - X-n895-k37
0.01
0
0.878
2.566
0.01
0
0.878
1.809
0.01
0
0.878
0.01
8.783e-01
Uchoa - X-n153-k22
0.01
0
0.510
0.736
0.01
0
0.510
0.739
0.01
0
0.510
0.01
5.103e-01
Uchoa - X-n200-k36
0.01
15
0.933
1.760
0.01
15
0.933
2.011
0.01
15
0.933
0.00
8.183e-01
Uchoa - X-n586-k159
0.01
0
1.275
1.306
0.18
6
1.350
1.229
0.01
0
1.275
0.01
1.275e+00
Uchoa - X-n195-k51
0.01
0
2.592
1.918
0.01
0
2.592
2.035
0.01
0
2.592
0.01
2.592e+00
Uchoa - X-n613-k62
0.01
0
1.982
2.665
0.01
0
1.982
3.383
0.01
0
1.982
0.01
1.982e+00
Uchoa - X-n228-k23
0.01
1
0.392
1.286
0.01
1
0.392
1.094
0.01
1
0.392
0.02
3.480e-01
Uchoa - X-n376-k94
0.01
15
0.582
1.749
0.01
15
0.582
0.822
0.01
15
0.582
0.00
4.992e-01
Rochat and Taillard - tai150a
0.01
6
0.055
0.680
0.01
6
0.055
0.953
0.01
6
0.055
0.02
8.543e-04
Rochat and Taillard - tai150c
0.05
0
0.314
0.126
0.03
13
0.483
0.343
0.01
19
0.614
0.05
3.142e-01
Rochat and Taillard - tai100d
0.05
3
0.381
0.115
0.02
14
0.528
0.327
0.01
19
0.737
0.08
3.341e-01
Rochat and Taillard - tai75c
0.02
0
0.000
0.112
0.02
0
0.000
0.329
0.01
19
0.017
0.02
0.000e+00
Rochat and Taillard - tai75d
0.02
1
0.000
0.192
0.03
2
0.000
0.094
0.01
0
0.000
0.01
0.000e+00
Rochat and Taillard - tai150d
0.05
6
0.357
0.174
0.02
4
0.336
0.297
0.01
16
0.742
0.09
1.965e-01
Kelly - kelly12
0.01
0
2.334
1.698
0.01
0
2.334
2.207
0.01
0
2.334
0.01
2.334e+00
Kelly - kelly14
0.01
0
1.552
2.023
0.01
0
1.552
2.583
0.01
0
1.552
0.01
1.552e+00
Kelly - kelly04
0.03
5
0.289
0.786
0.02
9
0.508
1.001
0.01
19
1.352
0.04
1.358e-01
Kelly - kelly09
0.01
0
1.098
1.516
0.01
0
1.098
1.387
0.01
0
1.098
0.01
1.098e+00
Kelly - kelly13
0.01
0
1.958
1.892
0.01
0
1.958
2.742
0.01
0
1.958
0.01
1.958e+00
Li - CVRP_L_27
0.01
0
1.114
0.883
0.01
0
1.114
1.289
0.01
0
1.114
0.01
1.114e+00
Li - CVRP_L_21
0.11
9
1.068
0.362
0.11
9
1.068
0.562
0.01
17
2.168
0.05
4.505e-01
Li - CVRP_L_25
0.01
0
1.462
0.844
0.01
0
1.462
1.109
0.01
0
1.462
0.01
1.462e+00
Li - CVRP_L_30
0.06
0
1.608
1.276
0.06
0
1.608
1.240
0.01
14
3.315
0.06
1.608e+00
Mean
2.27
1.11
1.28
3.37
1.11
1.40
5.65
1.26
1.04
==PAGE:96==
90
Appendix
Table 6: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n134-k13
0.01
0
0.222
0.460
0.05
4
1.377
0.021
0.01
0
0.222
0.01
0.222
Uchoa - X-n242-k48
0.02
9
2.445
1.301
0.01
1
2.282
1.666
0.01
1
2.282
0.05
2.256
Uchoa - X-n298-k31
0.01
0
0.450
1.394
0.01
0
0.450
1.713
0.01
0
0.450
0.01
0.450
Uchoa - X-n284-k15
0.02
1
1.541
0.526
0.02
1
1.541
0.720
0.01
0
0.881
0.01
0.881
Uchoa - X-n275-k28
0.01
0
0.746
0.997
0.01
0
0.746
1.551
0.01
0
0.746
0.01
0.746
Uchoa - X-n449-k29
0.01
0
1.867
1.673
0.01
0
1.867
2.134
0.01
0
1.867
0.01
1.867
Uchoa - X-n125-k30
0.01
0
2.569
1.448
0.01
0
2.569
1.541
0.01
0
2.569
0.01
2.569
Uchoa - X-n303-k21
0.01
0
0.750
2.401
0.01
0
0.750
1.658
0.01
0
0.750
0.01
0.750
Uchoa - X-n247-k47
0.01
0
0.540
1.899
0.01
0
0.540
1.925
0.01
0
0.540
0.01
0.540
Uchoa - X-n837-k142
0.01
10
1.136
1.155
0.01
10
1.136
1.415
0.01
10
1.136
0.17
0.943
Uchoa - X-n322-k28
0.01
0
0.534
1.829
0.01
0
0.534
2.054
0.01
0
0.534
0.01
0.534
Uchoa - X-n129-k18
0.01
0
0.558
1.657
0.01
0
0.558
1.802
0.01
0
0.558
0.01
0.558
Uchoa - X-n204-k19
0.01
0
0.698
1.739
0.01
0
0.698
1.753
0.01
0
0.698
0.01
0.698
Uchoa - X-n157-k13
0.01
0
0.200
0.436
0.02
1
0.305
0.295
0.01
0
0.200
0.01
0.200
Uchoa - X-n313-k71
0.01
0
2.275
1.568
0.01
0
2.275
2.752
0.01
0
2.275
0.01
2.275
Uchoa - X-n420-k130
0.01
0
4.534
1.538
0.01
0
4.534
1.943
0.01
0
4.534
0.01
4.534
Uchoa - X-n153-k22
0.01
0
0.510
2.256
0.01
0
0.510
1.399
0.01
0
0.510
0.01
0.510
Uchoa - X-n801-k40
0.01
0
2.129
1.573
0.01
0
2.129
1.025
0.01
0
2.129
0.01
2.129
Uchoa - X-n219-k73
0.01
7
0.770
1.038
0.01
7
0.770
0.961
0.01
7
0.770
0.19
0.706
Uchoa - X-n979-k58
0.01
0
3.405
2.771
0.01
0
3.405
2.391
0.01
0
3.405
0.01
3.405
Uchoa - X-n101-k25
0.01
0
0.931
2.361
0.01
0
0.931
1.529
0.01
0
0.931
0.01
0.931
Uchoa - X-n491-k59
0.01
0
3.807
1.645
0.01
0
3.807
2.370
0.01
0
3.807
0.01
3.807
Uchoa - X-n115-k10
0.03
14
0.052
0.346
0.03
14
0.052
0.113
0.01
19
0.341
0.07
0.007
Rochat and Taillard - tai150d
0.05
6
0.357
0.151
0.05
6
0.357
0.171
0.01
16
0.742
0.09
0.197
Kelly - kelly04
0.05
1
0.200
0.609
0.04
0
0.136
0.952
0.01
19
1.352
0.04
0.136
Kelly - kelly09
0.02
1
2.132
0.374
0.02
1
2.132
0.936
0.01
0
1.098
0.01
1.098
Kelly - kelly18
0.01
0
0.731
0.695
0.01
0
0.731
0.955
0.01
0
0.731
0.01
0.731
Kelly - kelly10
0.02
1
2.530
0.428
0.02
1
2.530
0.978
0.01
0
1.593
0.01
1.593
Li - CVRP_L_29
0.06
2
1.384
1.534
0.06
2
1.384
1.499
0.01
18
3.327
0.05
1.110
Mean
1.79
1.37
1.30
1.65
1.41
1.38
3.10
1.41
1.25
==PAGE:97==
80:20 split
91
Table 7: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n670-k126
0.01
0
1.235
1.778
0.01
0
1.235
1.944
0.01
0
1.235
0.01
1.235
Uchoa - X-n242-k48
0.01
1
2.282
1.328
0.01
1
2.282
1.746
0.01
1
2.282
0.05
2.256
Uchoa - X-n459-k26
0.01
0
1.450
2.101
0.01
0
1.450
1.321
0.01
0
1.450
0.01
1.450
Uchoa - X-n401-k29
0.01
0
1.695
2.948
0.01
0
1.695
1.723
0.01
0
1.695
0.01
1.695
Uchoa - X-n393-k38
0.01
0
1.300
2.387
0.01
0
1.300
1.727
0.01
0
1.300
0.01
1.300
Uchoa - X-n261-k13
0.01
1
0.986
1.890
0.01
1
0.986
1.069
0.01
1
0.986
0.02
0.831
Uchoa - X-n280-k17
0.01
4
0.728
1.266
0.01
4
0.728
1.861
0.01
4
0.728
0.02
0.536
Uchoa - X-n411-k19
0.02
1
0.797
1.298
0.01
2
1.102
0.974
0.01
2
1.102
0.03
0.780
Uchoa - X-n449-k29
0.01
0
1.867
3.117
0.01
0
1.867
2.377
0.01
0
1.867
0.01
1.867
Uchoa - X-n303-k21
0.01
0
0.750
2.385
0.01
0
0.750
1.769
0.01
0
0.750
0.01
0.750
Uchoa - X-n641-k35
0.01
0
1.272
1.563
0.01
0
1.272
1.495
0.01
0
1.272
0.01
1.272
Uchoa - X-n439-k37
0.01
0
0.589
1.097
0.01
0
0.589
1.712
0.01
0
0.589
0.01
0.589
Uchoa - X-n143-k7
0.01
11
0.383
0.735
0.01
11
0.383
0.744
0.01
11
0.383
0.04
0.149
Uchoa - X-n139-k10
0.07
2
0.351
0.191
0.03
4
0.367
0.269
0.01
10
0.521
0.05
0.331
Uchoa - X-n895-k37
0.01
0
0.878
2.274
0.01
0
0.878
2.186
0.01
0
0.878
0.01
0.878
Uchoa - X-n317-k53
0.01
0
1.155
1.056
0.01
0
1.155
1.064
0.01
0
1.155
0.01
1.155
Uchoa - X-n480-k70
0.01
8
1.248
2.231
0.01
8
1.248
1.695
0.01
8
1.248
0.06
1.053
Uchoa - X-n979-k58
0.01
0
3.405
2.597
0.01
0
3.405
2.650
0.01
0
3.405
0.01
3.405
Uchoa - X-n586-k159
0.01
0
1.275
1.505
0.02
15
1.418
1.390
0.01
0
1.275
0.01
1.275
Uchoa - X-n172-k51
0.01
0
2.988
1.178
0.01
0
2.988
1.734
0.01
0
2.988
0.01
2.988
Uchoa - X-n195-k51
0.01
0
2.592
1.574
0.01
0
2.592
1.486
0.01
0
2.592
0.01
2.592
Uchoa - X-n627-k43
0.01
0
2.200
2.283
0.01
0
2.200
1.532
0.01
0
2.200
0.01
2.200
Uchoa - X-n256-k16
0.01
0
0.204
1.156
0.01
0
0.204
1.285
0.01
0
0.204
0.01
0.204
Uchoa - X-n331-k15
0.01
0
0.488
1.272
0.01
0
0.488
0.983
0.01
0
0.488
0.01
0.488
Uchoa - X-n376-k94
0.01
15
0.582
1.788
0.01
15
0.582
1.218
0.01
15
0.582
0.00
0.499
Rochat and Taillard - tai150d
0.05
6
0.357
0.221
0.05
6
0.357
0.248
0.01
16
0.742
0.09
0.197
Kelly - kelly17
0.01
0
0.288
0.647
0.01
0
0.288
0.977
0.01
0
0.288
0.01
0.288
Li - CVRP_L_24
0.08
2
0.529
0.759
0.08
2
0.529
1.075
0.01
19
2.322
0.09
0.454
Li - CVRP_L_22
0.01
1
0.295
1.193
0.02
2
0.314
0.995
0.01
1
0.295
0.03
0.258
Mean
1.79
1.17
1.57
2.44
1.19
1.42
3.03
1.26
1.13
==PAGE:98==
92
Appendix
Table 8: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n266-k58
0.01
0
3.241
2.088
0.01
0
3.241
2.114
0.01
0
3.241
0.01
3.241
Uchoa - X-n237-k14
0.01
0
0.382
0.846
0.01
0
0.382
0.854
0.01
0
0.382
0.01
0.382
Uchoa - X-n384-k52
0.01
0
3.631
2.454
0.01
0
3.631
2.735
0.01
0
3.631
0.01
3.631
Uchoa - X-n548-k50
0.01
0
0.780
1.152
0.01
0
0.780
1.482
0.01
0
0.780
0.01
0.780
Uchoa - X-n303-k21
0.01
0
0.750
1.864
0.01
0
0.750
1.297
0.01
0
0.750
0.01
0.750
Uchoa - X-n247-k47
0.01
0
0.540
2.260
0.01
0
0.540
2.125
0.01
0
0.540
0.01
0.540
Uchoa - X-n837-k142
0.01
10
1.136
2.147
0.01
10
1.136
2.001
0.01
10
1.136
0.17
0.943
Uchoa - X-n513-k21
0.01
4
1.183
1.351
0.01
4
1.183
1.498
0.01
4
1.183
0.02
0.863
Uchoa - X-n336-k84
0.01
8
4.439
2.607
0.01
8
4.439
1.868
0.01
8
4.439
0.10
4.119
Uchoa - X-n856-k95
0.01
11
1.130
1.716
0.01
11
1.130
1.932
0.01
11
1.130
0.06
0.991
Uchoa - X-n469-k138
0.01
10
1.496
1.553
0.01
10
1.496
1.680
0.01
10
1.496
0.13
1.337
Uchoa - X-n895-k37
0.01
0
0.878
2.027
0.01
0
0.878
1.734
0.01
0
0.878
0.01
0.878
Uchoa - X-n153-k22
0.01
0
0.510
1.875
0.01
0
0.510
0.803
0.01
0
0.510
0.01
0.510
Uchoa - X-n351-k40
0.01
0
1.257
2.153
0.01
0
1.257
1.657
0.01
0
1.257
0.01
1.257
Uchoa - X-n979-k58
0.01
0
3.405
2.916
0.01
0
3.405
2.812
0.01
0
3.405
0.01
3.405
Uchoa - X-n536-k96
0.01
20
1.756
1.717
0.01
20
1.756
2.359
0.01
20
1.756
0.06
1.419
Uchoa - X-n106-k14
0.01
0
0.449
0.349
0.02
1
1.017
0.607
0.01
0
0.449
0.01
0.449
Uchoa - X-n200-k36
0.01
15
0.933
1.411
0.01
15
0.933
1.852
0.01
15
0.933
0.00
0.818
Uchoa - X-n586-k159
0.01
0
1.275
1.724
0.01
0
1.275
1.922
0.01
0
1.275
0.01
1.275
Uchoa - X-n733-k159
0.01
1
1.511
1.667
0.01
1
1.511
2.563
0.01
1
1.511
0.10
1.478
Uchoa - X-n331-k15
0.01
0
0.488
0.938
0.01
0
0.488
1.119
0.01
0
0.488
0.01
0.488
Uchoa - X-n524-k137
0.01
0
0.659
2.312
0.01
0
0.659
1.880
0.01
0
0.659
0.01
0.659
Rochat and Taillard - tai150b
0.09
6
0.334
0.243
0.05
0
0.126
0.240
0.01
8
0.339
0.05
0.126
Rochat and Taillard - tai100d
0.03
16
0.529
0.006
0.02
14
0.528
0.154
0.01
19
0.737
0.08
0.334
Rochat and Taillard - tai75d
0.02
1
0.000
0.230
0.03
2
0.000
0.100
0.01
0
0.000
0.01
0.000
Kelly - kelly13
0.01
0
1.958
1.815
0.01
0
1.958
1.778
0.01
0
1.958
0.01
1.958
Li - CVRP_L_28
0.05
3
1.193
1.300
0.05
3
1.193
1.269
0.01
18
2.974
0.08
0.990
Li - CVRP_L_25
0.01
0
1.462
1.065
0.01
0
1.462
1.009
0.01
0
1.462
0.01
1.462
Li - CVRP_L_30
0.06
0
1.608
1.260
0.06
0
1.608
1.249
0.01
14
3.315
0.06
1.608
Mean
3.62
1.34
1.55
3.41
1.35
1.54
4.75
1.46
1.26
==PAGE:99==
80:20 split
93
Table 9: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n367-k17
0.01
2
9.192e-01
0.888
0.01
2
0.919
1.027
0.01
2
0.919
0.02
0.724
Uchoa - X-n261-k13
0.02
0
8.306e-01
0.756
0.02
0
0.831
0.715
0.01
1
0.986
0.02
0.831
Uchoa - X-n294-k50
0.01
0
2.448e+00
2.450
0.01
0
2.448
2.255
0.01
0
2.448
0.01
2.448
Uchoa - X-n280-k17
0.01
4
7.278e-01
1.023
0.01
4
0.728
1.147
0.01
4
0.728
0.02
0.536
Uchoa - X-n561-k42
0.01
0
5.809e-01
2.314
0.01
0
0.581
1.776
0.01
0
0.581
0.01
0.581
Uchoa - X-n284-k15
0.01
0
8.812e-01
0.726
0.01
0
0.881
0.881
0.01
0
0.881
0.01
0.881
Uchoa - X-n275-k28
0.01
0
7.458e-01
1.296
0.01
0
0.746
1.265
0.01
0
0.746
0.01
0.746
Uchoa - X-n449-k29
0.01
0
1.867e+00
1.862
0.01
0
1.867
2.519
0.01
0
1.867
0.01
1.867
Uchoa - X-n469-k138
0.01
10
1.496e+00
2.894
0.01
10
1.496
2.652
0.01
10
1.496
0.13
1.337
Uchoa - X-n110-k13
0.03
0
1.916e-01
0.322
0.05
4
0.390
0.201
0.01
2
0.301
0.03
0.192
Uchoa - X-n502-k39
0.01
0
7.274e-01
1.455
0.01
0
0.727
1.369
0.01
0
0.727
0.01
0.727
Uchoa - X-n313-k71
0.01
0
2.275e+00
2.960
0.01
0
2.275
2.467
0.01
0
2.275
0.01
2.275
Uchoa - X-n801-k40
0.01
0
2.129e+00
1.323
0.01
0
2.129
1.300
0.01
0
2.129
0.01
2.129
Uchoa - X-n219-k73
0.01
7
7.704e-01
0.725
0.01
7
0.770
0.923
0.01
7
0.770
0.19
0.706
Uchoa - X-n573-k30
0.01
0
5.087e-01
1.626
0.01
0
0.509
1.800
0.01
0
0.509
0.01
0.509
Uchoa - X-n101-k25
0.01
0
9.314e-01
1.783
0.01
0
0.931
1.722
0.01
0
0.931
0.01
0.931
Uchoa - X-n200-k36
0.01
15
9.331e-01
2.204
0.01
15
0.933
1.847
0.01
15
0.933
0.00
0.818
Uchoa - X-n195-k51
0.01
0
2.592e+00
1.597
0.01
0
2.592
1.920
0.01
0
2.592
0.01
2.592
Uchoa - X-n256-k16
0.01
0
2.040e-01
1.500
0.01
0
0.204
1.511
0.01
0
0.204
0.01
0.204
Uchoa - X-n957-k87
0.01
0
3.051e+00
1.233
0.01
0
3.051
1.368
0.01
0
3.051
0.01
3.051
Uchoa - X-n331-k15
0.01
0
4.884e-01
0.783
0.01
0
0.488
0.795
0.01
0
0.488
0.01
0.488
Uchoa - X-n181-k23
0.01
0
5.774e-01
1.007
0.01
0
0.577
0.919
0.01
0
0.577
0.01
0.577
Uchoa - X-n524-k137
0.01
0
6.593e-01
2.066
0.01
0
0.659
2.170
0.01
0
0.659
0.01
0.659
Uchoa - X-n233-k16
0.01
3
7.516e-01
0.865
0.01
3
0.752
1.372
0.01
3
0.752
0.02
0.452
Uchoa - X-n716-k35
0.01
0
2.247e+00
2.550
0.01
0
2.247
2.539
0.01
0
2.247
0.01
2.247
Rochat and Taillard - tai100c
0.05
3
1.568e-04
0.290
0.02
0
0.000
0.332
0.01
18
0.057
0.02
0.000
Kelly - kelly12
0.01
0
2.334e+00
2.206
0.01
0
2.334
2.292
0.01
0
2.334
0.01
2.334
Kelly - kelly09
0.01
0
1.098e+00
0.714
0.01
0
1.098
0.848
0.01
0
1.098
0.01
1.098
Li - CVRP_L_25
0.01
0
1.462e+00
1.189
0.01
0
1.462
1.206
0.01
0
1.462
0.01
1.462
Mean
1.51
1.18
1.46
1.55
1.19
1.48
2.13
1.19
1.15
==PAGE:100==
94
Appendix
Table 10: Temperature control parameter and performance metrics for each approach on instances from a single train-
ing/test split
RF raw
RF normalized
MMG
Best
Instance
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
Est. Gap
w
Rank
Gap
w
Gap
Uchoa - X-n266-k58
0.01
0
3.241
1.945
0.01
0
3.241
1.881
0.01
0
3.241
0.01
3.241
Uchoa - X-n134-k13
0.03
2
0.773
0.165
0.02
1
0.567
0.211
0.01
0
0.222
0.01
0.222
Uchoa - X-n367-k17
0.01
2
0.919
0.780
0.02
0
0.724
0.777
0.01
2
0.919
0.02
0.724
Uchoa - X-n916-k207
0.17
2
0.904
1.108
0.01
3
0.916
1.702
0.01
3
0.916
0.20
0.878
Uchoa - X-n411-k19
0.01
2
1.102
1.374
0.01
2
1.102
1.815
0.01
2
1.102
0.03
0.780
Uchoa - X-n641-k35
0.01
0
1.272
2.122
0.01
0
1.272
2.119
0.01
0
1.272
0.01
1.272
Uchoa - X-n439-k37
0.01
0
0.589
0.890
0.01
0
0.589
1.159
0.01
0
0.589
0.01
0.589
Uchoa - X-n322-k28
0.01
0
0.534
2.117
0.01
0
0.534
2.302
0.01
0
0.534
0.01
0.534
Uchoa - X-n685-k75
0.01
0
2.440
3.007
0.01
0
2.440
3.024
0.01
0
2.440
0.01
2.440
Uchoa - X-n856-k95
0.01
11
1.130
0.994
0.01
11
1.130
1.075
0.01
11
1.130
0.06
0.991
Uchoa - X-n599-k92
0.01
11
1.556
2.986
0.01
11
1.556
2.834
0.01
11
1.556
0.02
1.315
Uchoa - X-n801-k40
0.01
0
2.129
0.805
0.01
0
2.129
0.830
0.01
0
2.129
0.01
2.129
Uchoa - X-n219-k73
0.01
7
0.770
1.038
0.01
7
0.770
1.291
0.01
7
0.770
0.19
0.706
Uchoa - X-n783-k48
0.01
0
2.424
2.505
0.01
0
2.424
2.621
0.01
0
2.424
0.01
2.424
Uchoa - X-n351-k40
0.01
0
1.257
1.786
0.01
0
1.257
1.761
0.01
0
1.257
0.01
1.257
Uchoa - X-n536-k96
0.01
20
1.756
2.317
0.01
20
1.756
2.325
0.01
20
1.756
0.06
1.419
Uchoa - X-n200-k36
0.01
15
0.933
1.897
0.01
15
0.933
1.661
0.01
15
0.933
0.00
0.818
Uchoa - X-n627-k43
0.01
0
2.200
1.711
0.01
0
2.200
1.407
0.01
0
2.200
0.01
2.200
Uchoa - X-n957-k87
0.01
0
3.051
0.951
0.01
0
3.051
0.964
0.01
0
3.051
0.01
3.051
Uchoa - X-n209-k16
0.01
0
0.625
0.715
0.01
0
0.625
0.787
0.01
0
0.625
0.01
0.625
Rochat and Taillard - tai150c
0.05
0
0.314
0.041
0.05
0
0.314
0.068
0.01
19
0.614
0.05
0.314
Rochat and Taillard - tai75d
0.05
4
0.000
0.091
0.02
1
0.000
0.206
0.01
0
0.000
0.01
0.000
Rochat and Taillard - tai150d
0.05
6
0.357
0.056
0.08
7
0.370
0.092
0.01
16
0.742
0.09
0.197
Kelly - kelly18
0.01
0
0.731
0.939
0.01
0
0.731
1.006
0.01
0
0.731
0.01
0.731
Kelly - kelly11
0.01
0
2.007
1.988
0.01
0
2.007
2.311
0.01
0
2.007
0.01
2.007
Li - CVRP_L_28
0.08
0
0.990
1.365
0.06
4
1.281
1.408
0.01
18
2.974
0.08
0.990
Li - CVRP_L_21
0.11
9
1.068
0.330
0.11
9
1.068
0.308
0.01
17
2.168
0.05
0.450
Li - CVRP_L_25
0.02
1
1.468
0.883
0.02
1
1.468
0.652
0.01
0
1.462
0.01
1.462
Li - CVRP_L_29
0.06
2
1.384
1.535
0.06
2
1.384
1.542
0.01
18
3.327
0.05
1.110
Mean
3.24
1.30
1.32
3.24
1.30
1.38
5.48
1.48
1.20
==PAGE:101==
==PAGE:102==
