==PAGE:1==
Implementation of an in-line
surface quality control station
for zero defect manufacturing
Jakub Brzosko (s161116)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 404
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tel (+45) 45 25 19 60
http://www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Goal of this Thesis was to design, create and verify a setup allowing
quality control of milled free-form geometries. After an analysys of the
possible solutions two main hardware components were selected: laser
scatterometer and robotic arm. The scatterometer called Optosurf OS
500-32 was utilized as a tool allowing fast, contactless and robust way
to assess surface roughness of measured object. The robotic arm used
within this project is Universal robot UR5. Having the scatterometer
mounted on the flange of 6 DOF robotic arm allows to execute measure-
ments following the geometry of measured part in 3 dimensions, while
assuring suitable orientation of the sensor and constant distance between
measured surface and the sensor.
Within this Thesis one can find description of how communication be-
tween the upper mentioned components can be established as well as
considerations regarding necessary software. Approaches exploited and
disregarded, as well as chosen one are described, analyzed and compared.
Finally, the performance of the assembled setup is tested by measuring
different components.
Results and measurement errors are discussed,
and possible future improvements are presented.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Mechanical Engineering
at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master’s degree in Materials and Manufacturing.
Kongens Lyngby, January 27, 2019
Jakub Brzosko (s161116)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my family for the love, values, and
education they have always given me. Without them, the life I now have,
would only be a dream.
“If you want to go quickly, go alone. If you want to go far, go together.”
I still have great majority of my journey ahead of me, but luckily I also
have a great companion. I wanted to thank Monika Ścibor for being by
my side, both in good and bad times. Let’s see where the road takes us.
This thesis would not have been possible without all the support and
trust given by society as a whole. I am grateful to DTU and the Kingdom
of Denmark for giving me the opportunity of being part of this incredible
and welcoming community.
I am grateful to all DTU professors for their magnificent involvement in
the education of their students and the informality of their relationships.
You are making DTU a special place.
In particular, a special thanks goes to my supervisors, Giuliano Bissacco
and Francesco Giuseppe Biondani. It is their merit, that last half a year
was not only valuable and developing, but also interesting.
Life would not be the same without friends. In this adventure through
Denmark, I have met many interesting personalities, from which I would
like to give a special mention to Manuel Montoya Catalá, Philip Wood,
and Ema Falamas, with whom I shared Board mandate at the association
BEST Copenhagen and lived stories not to be told to my children. Never
let the world change you.
And finally, last but by no means least, also to everyone who shared a
beer with me in the past few years. It’s been a wild ride.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Existing solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Hardware
16
2.1
Universal Robots UR5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Optosurf OS 500
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Divide and Conquer
34
3.1
Sub-problem identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Test components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Attaching the sensor to the robot . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4
Surface measurements acquiring and saving . . . . . . . .
42
3.5
Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and ex-
ecution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.6
Real position tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.7
Data streams synchronizing, connecting and plotting
. .
58
4
Discussion of results and errors
64
4.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
4.2
Curvature correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.3
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5
Future improvements and Conclusion
83
5.1
Future improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
5.2
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
Bibliography
88
A UR5 Datasheet
91
B Technical drawings of the Optosurf fixture
93
C Python code
98
D data_sniffer code
105
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Problem introduction
Precision manufacturing is huge industry nowadays. Number of pro-
cesses such as milling, turning, EDM milling, EDM wire cutting, pol-
ishing, grinding are combined into process chains which allow to obtain
parts with complex geometries and different surface finishing, formed
from variety of the materials. But as important as manufacturing pro-
cesses are, they rarely provide direct feedback on part quality. Number
of issues might emerge, for example in milling process: broken or worn
out mills, non optimal process parameters, misalignment issues or mate-
rial imperfections resulting in insufficient part quality. That is why it
is crucial to have proper Quality Assurance procedures in place, which
guarantee that manufactured components are measured and inspected
and fulfill the required tolerances and criteria.
One of the group of components that require superior surface finish
and geometrical stability are moulds for polymer injection. Some of the
moulds are used to manufacture hundreds of thousands, or even millions
copies of component, with each of them fulfilling desired tolerances. Ev-
ery imperfection in the tool itself is not only going to be replicated in
all the elements manufactured with the tool, but will also significantly
shorten mould life span. Those reason make moulds manufacturers pay
a lot of attention to the materials, manufacturing and QA processes that
they are using.
Injection moulds often features complex geometry, that makes them
both demanding to manufacture and inspect. Part of the high precision
surface inspection apparatus are only suitable for planar surfaces. Reli-
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Problem introduction
2
able measurement of complex free form surfaces is not trivial.
Another point to be kept in mind is measurement conditions. Many
of the commercially-available measurement devices require precisely tai-
lored environment conditions, such as humidity, temperature, cleanness
and lack of vibration. It means, that after manufacturing, the part needs
to undergo cleaning procedures after which has to be transported to ded-
icated space used for measuring. Such an approach takes time, money,
and delays discovery of eventual manufacturing issues, which may lead
to manufacturing bigger volume of the faulty components.
Last but not least, a lot of variables condition reliability and repeat-
ably of inspection/measurement process. Special equipment usually re-
quires trained staff and manual procedures that are prone to human error,
while automatic setups are often dedicated to a narrow range of parts,
not flexible and may have limited applicability.
Given all the upper-mentioned conditions it is not a surprise, that
every manufacturer accounts for certain amount of scrap parts, that are
highly probable to occur within the mould production line. Despite all
the limitations and issues, new, better and more flexible solutions appear
continuously, allowing for higher productivity and reliability. Unfortu-
nately, one can not find yet commercially available solution that can
reliably deal with complex and free form geometries. Great majority of
existing solutions are limited to planar and/or rotational geometries.
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Problem introduction
3
1.1.1
Surface roughness
Surface finishing can be characterized by means of roughness param-
eters.
Following the ASME B46.1 norm definitions of roughness and
waviness:
Roughness is irregularities inherent in the production process left by
the machining agent such as cutting, tearing, and surface fatigue.
Waviness is caused by machine or work deflections, vibrations, chat-
ter, and material strains; and the primary profile is caused by inaccura-
cies of the machine elements such as slide way errors and general machine
work piece fixtures.
The impact of the surface roughness in fields such as manufacturing,
engineering and science is significant, it is not surprising that a great and
continuous effort is put into understanding, measuring and controlling
the surface topography.
Surface roughness highly affect physical and
chemical behaviour of the surface, and change the way light is being
reflected.
It can also determine performance and lifetime expectancy
for variety of tools, parts and mechanisms, such as injections moulds,
gearboxes, bearings, threads etc.
1.1.2
Different roughness parameters
As surface roughness is of great interest within this project, it is impor-
tant to use and understand proper surface roughness parameters. Some
of the most important ones are explained below:
• Maximum profile peak height (Rp, Pp, Wp) Maximum profile peak
height indicates the point along the sampling length at which the
curve is highest.[2]
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Problem introduction
4
Figure 1.1:
Rp parameter visualization[2].
• Maximum profile valley depth (Rv, Pv, Wv) Maximum profile val-
ley depth indicates the point along the sampling length at which
the profile curve is lowest.[2]
Figure 1.2:
Rv parameter visualization[2].
• Maximum height of profile (Rz, Pz, Wz) Maximum height of the
profile indicates the absolute vertical distance between the Max-
imum profile peak height and the Maximum profile valley depth
along the sampling length. When dealing with roughness profile,
Rz is referred to as Maximum roughness while Wz is referred to as
Maximum waviness when dealing with waviness profile.[2]
==PAGE:12==
1.1 Problem introduction
5
Figure 1.3:
Rz parameter visualization[2].
• Total height of profile (Rt, Pt, Wt) Total height of profile is the
vertical distance between the Maximum profile peak height and the
Maximum profile valley depth along the evaluation length[2]
Figure 1.4:
Rt parameter visualization[2].
• Arithmetical mean height(Ra, Pa, Wa) Arithmetical mean height
indicates the average of the absolute value along the sampling
length. When dealing with the roughness profile, Ra is referred
to as Arithmetic mean roughness while Wa is referred to as Arith-
metic mean waviness for the waviness profile.[2]
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Problem introduction
6
Figure 1.5:
Ra parameter visualization[2].
• Root mean square deviation (Rq, Pq, Wq) Root mean square de-
viation indicates the root mean square along the sampling length.
For the roughness profile, Rq is referred to as Root-mean-square
roughness while Wq is referred to as Root-mean-square waviness
for the waviness profile.[2]
Figure 1.6:
Rq parameter visualization[2].
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Existing solutions
7
1.1.3
Gloss
When an object is illuminated with a light beam, the following phe-
nomena can happen[14]:
• The light can be absorbed within it (connected with human per-
ception of colour)
• The light transmitted through it (transparency, opacity)
• The light can be scattered within it (haze)
• The light can be reradiated with lower energy (e.g. fluorescence)
• The The light can be specularly reflected (gloss)
The gloss parameter is of interest for the mould manufacturers, as
gloss of the mould has a direct impact on the gloss of the manufactured
component. Quoting the International Lighting Vocabulary[1], gloss is:
”The mode of appearance by which reflected highlights of objects are
perceived as superimposed on the surface due to the directionally selective
properties of that surface.”
Gloss is not an easy parameter to be measured and quantified. ASTM
(American Society for Testing and Materials) defines a number of stan-
dards regarding gloss measurement[15], depending on a application, for
example there is ASTM E430 for polished metal surfaces, D523 −14 for
the specular gloss of nonmetallic specimens or ASTM D523 for a paint
industry.
1.2
Existing solutions
There are existing solutions, that allow to quantify the surface rough-
ness and gloss of the given sample. Unfortunately, all of the widely avail-
able and used measurement apparatus posses certain limitations, which
renders them not fully suitable for the needs of this project. Nevertheless,
one should acknowledge those and understand the working principle, as
those may be used for reference measurement.In the following chapter
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Existing solutions
8
some of the existing solutions will be shortly introduced along with the
explanation of their limitations
1.2.1
Scanning Probe Microscopy
Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) allows to ”see” surface of measured
sample with very high magnification, down to atom order of magnitude.
Usage of piezoelectric actuators allows to obtain such a high resolution
of movement. There are two ways to execute relative movement - either
with stationary tip and moving sample (see Figure 1.7) or with moving
tip and stationary sample (see Figure 1.8). The tip itself determines the
image that can be obtained.
All the SPM methods share certain disadvantages [32], such as:
• Low speed of measurement - high resolution of the measurement
limits operational speed significantly
• Small measurement area - piezoelectric actuator provide high reso-
lutions, but at a cost of low range of displacement
• Small vertical displacement - measured specimen can not vary sig-
nificantly in height
• SPM can only measure planar surfaces
• Requires strictly controlled distance between the tip and the sample
part.
==PAGE:16==
1.2 Existing solutions
9
Figure 1.7:
SPM with moving sample schematic image[19].
Figure 1.8:
SPM with moving tip schematic image[19].
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Existing solutions
10
1.2.2
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) is one of the types of SPM.
Unique feature is how the tip is interacting with measured sample. The
tip is positioned above the measured sample, but not touching it. Volt-
age difference is applied between the tip and the sample. Even though
classical physics says that electron can not bridge the potential barrier
between the tip and the sample, according to quantum mechanical in-
terpretations, electrons are able to tunnel with certain probability[4].
Tunnelling probability is dependant on the distance between the tip and
surface. Moving the tip over the surface changes the current flowing,
thus allowing to quantify the distance between the tip and the surface.
Knowing the lateral movement, it is then possible to reproduce the sur-
face geometry. Limitation for this method is, that the sample must be
conductive[5].
Figure 1.9:
STM working principle[19].
==PAGE:18==
1.2 Existing solutions
11
1.2.3
Atomic Force Microscopy
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) utilize cantilever with sharp tip, that
is bending due to atomic forces between a tip and measured sample.
Laser beam is projected on and reflected by the cantilever, onto laser
detector. While bending and twisting, the beam reflects the laser onto
different parts of the detector. Knowing which part of the detector is
active, it is possible to calculate the cantilever orientation, and follow-
ing, the surface topography[29]. There are different modes of operation
such as tapping mode, constant height mode, constant force mode etc,
allowing to better adjust the device performance to the given task[30].
This approach, in contrast with STM does not require sample to be con-
ductive.
Figure 1.10:
AFM working principle[19].
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Existing solutions
12
1.2.4
Optical microscopy
Optical microscopy is a type of microscopy that uses visible light, mir-
rors, lenses and other optical elements to magnify the view. Such type of
microscopes is the oldest known to humanity, with it’s beginning dated
for XVII century[7]. Modern microscopes often have built in cameras, al-
lowing to see live, digitized image on the computer. Additional software
can provide different functionalities such as contrast settings, distance
measurement, variety of filters, ability to save the acquisition etc. This
type of device provides purely 2D picture, and usually allows to observe
the measured object only from one direction.
Figure 1.11: Alicona Infinity Focus microscope[10].
==PAGE:20==
1.2 Existing solutions
13
1.2.5
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM) allows user to execute
series of 2D scans of the part, with different focus height, which then
can be stitched into 3D image using dedicated software [20]. It allows
very high vertical resolution - in the order of tens of nanometers - while
allowing relatively big measurement area - in the order of millimeters.
The method is contact-less and fast, but has increase in vertical resolu-
tion causes decrease in vertical measurement depth. Working distance is
also very small - even in the order of hundreds of microns - what limits
types of geometries that can be measured, and increases a risk of colli-
sion. Moreover, if the measured surface is tilted, it affects heavily the
measurements reliability. Using post-processing software allows to quan-
tify surface roughness. CLSM requires to be placed within a cleanroom,
with precise temperature control, and properly isolated from source of
vibrations. All the parts need to be properly cleaned from debris and
any substances that might cover the sample’s surface[23].
Figure 1.12:
CLSM working principle[22].
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Existing solutions
14
1.2.6
Glossmeter
Glossmeter is a device that allows measuring the gloss according to the
different standards. It includes a source of light, that is angled to the
measured surface and a sensor measuring reflected light. Variety of the
solutions exists, for example small hand-held devices or robust, industrial
designs. Majority of the solutions are suitable only for flat applications.
Figure 1.13:
Handheld glossmeter[13].
1.2.7
Limitations
All the methods are very limited in terms of working area, and measur-
ing range. Among upper mentioned methods only CMLS can deal with
real 3D geometries, and to a very limited extend. Last but not least,
all of the mentioned methods are spot measurement methods. None of
them can measure significant areas.
==PAGE:22==
1.3 Project description
15
1.3
Project description
This projects aims to create a setup, which would allow to assess sur-
face roughness of 3D milled components, such as moulds for plastic in-
jection. Measured parts dimensions are in a range of centimeters/ tens
of centimeters. Setup must be able to measure all the surfaces of given
parts, with equal performance in all 3 axis. It is crucial that the setup
will not be limited to flat surfaces, but can measure free-form geome-
tries. The setup should be fast enough to allow measurement of whole
mould within reasonable time. It is assumed, that for every part to be
measured, the CAD model will be available. The setup should include a
fixture for measured parts, to assure easy and reliable positioning of test
components. As an output, the setup should ideally provide an user with
a 3D map of the surface finishing, allowing easy understanding of the sur-
face parameters within the measured parts. It is also of great benefit if
setup could itself identify, or make it easier to identify for human oper-
ator, micro scratches on the part surface, as such scratches are hard to
be noticed while performing visual inspection. Despite small dimensions,
the impact of such imperfection on for example injection mould perfor-
mance is crucial, and the possibility of noticing and addressing them on
early stage of mould manufacturing could potentially provide significant
savings to the manufacturer.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Hardware
Third party hardware have been used within this Masters Thesis. A
number of technical issues and the chosen solutions could have been dif-
ferent, depending on the brand and model of the hardware used. It is
important to understand that the final performance of the setup, the way
it works and the obtained results are directly depending on the hardware
components. As it was not possible to perform tests of all the solutions
available on market, some pre-requirements were created, and solution
which seemed to fulfill them the best have been chosen.
As the scope of this project is complex it could have been addressed
in different manners. It can not be excluded, that more satisfying perfor-
mance could have been obtained if different sub-components were chosen.
2.1
Universal Robots UR5
One of the key functionalities that needed to be assured, in order
to make the project successful, is to be able to reach every point of
the measured geometry with the measurement device, while remaining
properly oriented. As one of the goals is to be able to work with fully
3D geometries, one needs to be able to assure position controlling in 6
degrees of freedom (DOF) - 3 linear and 3 rotational. If one would be
interested only in planar measurements, 3 DOF XYZ movement would
be enough. As it is not the case, robotic arm was chosen, as the easiest,
most flexible solution. Theoretically, one could also use a 6 Axis CNC
milling machine. Despite that, there is a number of advantages of using
the robotic arm:
• The working space of a CNC machine is significantly smaller than
==PAGE:24==
2.1 Universal Robots UR5
17
for the robotic arm.
• The milling machine time is far more expensive than the robot
time.
• One QA station consisting of the robot and a proper sensor can be
used for measuring the components from many CNCs. Equipping
every CNC with a measuring sensor would be more expensive.
• The robot is easier to communicate with.
2.1.1
Robotic arms introduction
Robotics arms are widely used in industry, due to the ease of inte-
gration, repeatability and possibility of continuous operation. There are
many possible ways to categorize and divide robotic arms, based on their
structure, number of DOF, type of tasks they can execute, type of drive
etc.[6]. Therefore, in order to narrow down selection of the devices, cer-
tain requirements were established:
• At least 6 DOF
• Working volume big enough to handle test components
• Powerful enough to handle chosen sensor with dedicated fixture
• Positioning accuracy of 100 microns or better
• Existing API, or other flexible way of operating the device.
• Built-in safety features.
Decision was made, to choose Universal Robot UR5.
This option
fulfills all the desired criteria, and was obtainable within project duration
and financial restrictions.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Universal Robots UR5
18
2.1.2
UR5
UR5 is a middle class solution among offered by Universal Robots. It is
capable of operating payload up to 5 kg, while maximum reach is 850 mm.
6 rotating joints allow desired positioning. The robot’s flange geometry
documentation is publicly available, and it allows the creation of custom
tools. A number of existing tools, fulfilling different functionalities such
as gripping tools, camera mountings, paint pistols etc. can be bought
from third-party suppliers.
Figure 2.1:
Universal Robot UR5[27].
The robot itself is just number of motors and encoders, with no
control or logic system.
That is why it is accompanied by a control
box, which is responsible for calculating the path of the robotic arm, mo-
tors rotation, communication over different protocols such as TCP/IP
or MODBUS, and interactions between a human and the machine. Con-
trol box is in fact a PC-class computer running linux distribution, with
dedicated software to operate the robot. There are normalized Ether-
==PAGE:26==
2.1 Universal Robots UR5
19
net and USB slots. Moreover, the control box has number of electrical
connections, such as :
• Safety I/O.
• Configurable I/O.
• General purpose I/O.
Those connections can be used to trigger external actions, to have the
robot reacting and responding to certain situations, control tools mounted
on robot and communicate with other devices. By default those pins op-
erate on 12V logic.
Figure 2.2:
Universal Robot Control Box with Teach pendant[27].
2.1.3
Teach pendant & Polyscope
The simplest way to control and program the robot is UR Teach pen-
dant. Teach pendant is in fact 12 inch touch screen attached to control
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Universal Robots UR5
20
box. When the system is turned on, operator can use the software called
”Polyscope” to move the robot, create programs, change robot configu-
rations etc. Universal Robot does not provide any software that could
be installed on an external PC in order to create and simulate robot
programs, but one can find some third party solutions.
Figure 2.3:
Universal Robot Teach pendant[27].
As Polyscope software has been used extensively within this project,
it is important to understand it’s basic concepts, possible modes of oper-
ation and functionalities provided.
By far the most useful feature is ”Move tool”. This part of the soft-
ware allows controlling the robot’s movement by hand. It is suitable for
quick movements, that does not require repeatibility or complex path.
Possible options available within the software are:
• Joint movement. In the lower right part of the screen one can see
and adjust angular rotation of every single joint of the robot.
==PAGE:28==
2.1 Universal Robots UR5
21
• Tool Center Point (TCP) movement. As usually one is not pri-
marily interested in joint positions, rather in position of tip of the
tool, the left part of the screen allows to move tool’s tip in XYZ
coordinates, relatively to origin point (by default robot base) as
well as tool rotation in 3 axis around TCP. It is an intuitive way
to roughly position the tool.
• Providing numerical values for XYZ coordinates, as well as RX,RY
and RZ. This approach allows obtaining precise positioning, at a
cost of the time.
Useful for precise aligning with the reference
points.
Figure 2.4: ”Move Tool” screen[27].
As robotic arms are mostly used to execute pre-programmed routine,
it is not a big suprise that Polyscope allows to create them. All the
basic functionalities of programming languages, such as for/while loops,
if-else statements are built within.
It also allows to create so called
waypoints, which are the points in space that robot reach one by one.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Universal Robots UR5
22
Such points usually reflect the desired positions of the robot, for example
the welding points positions, or the screws to be tightened. Moreover,
one can interact with IO ports, reading and writing digital signals, as
well as reacting to them. Last but not least, 3 basic ways of executing a
movement are available:
• MoveL - For a given starting and end point, the robot executes lin-
ear movement between them. Assures predictable tool path, and
minimalises a risk of collisions. On the other hand, speed of the
movement may rapidly change, what may cause temporary deflec-
tions or vibrations.
• MoveJ - For given starting and end point, the robot executes joints
movement. It means, that all the joints will rotate in parallel, ro-
tating to the desired position. This is the fastest type of movement,
but results in unpredictable positioning of robot TCP in between
end and starting point, increasing risk of collision.
• MoveP - The robot will maintain linear movement with constant
speed between given waypoints, but with circular blend. This type
of operation is particularly useful for tasks such as gluing, painting
etc. where uniform dispensing of substance is desired.
One can choose a way of motion that best fulfill desired task. As
shown on the picture below, the program has a tree-like structure, allow-
ing easy modifications and understanding. On the other hand, for bigger
programs which consist of big number of waypoints and instructions, it
is time consuming to create all of them using teaching pendant’s touch
screen.
==PAGE:30==
2.1 Universal Robots UR5
23
Figure 2.5: Program creation screen[27].
Last but not least, one can import .SCRIPT file to UR Control Box
over TCP/IP or using a flash drive, load it and execute using Polyscope.
Third party software allows to easily generate big and complex .SCRIPT
files, as this format is fully documented and opened to everyone. Such a
file can be easily started from Polyscope using the play button. It is also
possible to directly modify the .SCRIPT file from the teaching pendant,
but it is tedious and time-consuming process.
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Universal Robots UR5
24
Figure 2.6:
Example .SCRIPT file loaded[27].
Despite of the chosen mode of operation, one can amend movement
speed using a bar in the bottom part of the screen .
2.1.4
SCRIPT programming language
As SCRIPT language has been extensively used within this project,
basics of this language should be introduced[18]. Not all the capabilities
and intricacies can be covered here. For detailed information, one can
visit UR Robots website[27].
SCRIPT language belongs to a group of programming languages,
that instead of being compiled are interpreted command by command
while executed. Such an approach excludes the need to spend time for
compiling new program after every minor change, but might not neces-
sarily be the most optimal solution for complex computer programs.
In the beginning of the SCRIPT program one can set global variables,
such as speed and acceleration of linear movement, angular speed and
==PAGE:32==
2.2 Optosurf OS 500
25
acceleration or global blend radius. Such approach allows unified robot
performance, regardless of the structure of the code.
It is also possible to write custom functions, that can be executed
later on in the program body.
If there is a piece of code that is re-
peatably used within the program, it is beneficial to enclose it within a
separate function and refer to this function instead
There are plenty of pre-defined functions, that allow controlling par-
ticular aspects of robot, or monitor it’s parameters. Among most impor-
tant ones there are:
• movel/movej - both of those are used to execute movement from
current point to given location. As an argument, those functions
accept 6 coordinates of end point (X,Y,Z,RX,RY,RZ) as well as
desired acceleration and speed of movement.
• set_tcp - Allows to establish the TCP in relation to the robot’s
flange. As an argument, this function takes 6 coordinates of tool’s
tip (X,Y,Z,RX,RY,RZ).
• set_standard_digital_out - allows to set high or low state to one
of the robot ports. The arguments to be provided are the port
number and the desired logical state.
• get_standard_digital_in - allows to read the current state of the
robot’s digital port. The argument to be provided is the port num-
ber.
Meaningfully combining the upper-mentioned elements, one can cre-
ate the programs of decent complexity, and fulfill the desired functional-
ities.
2.2
Optosurf OS 500
While the robotic arm can reach out to different points on the measured
part’s surface, it is equally crucial to perform fast, reliable and robust
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Optosurf OS 500
26
measurements in those points.
This is the second major part of the
setup.
In a comparison to the methods presented in chapter 1.2 the
needed solution has to be easily mountable on the robotic arm, perform
a quick and reliable measurement, be non-susceptible to vibrations or
minor misalignment, contact-less and suitable for metal surfaces. Given
the upper-mentioned requirements it was decided to proceed with laser
scatterometer called ”Optosurf OS 500-32”
2.2.1
Laser scatterometry
A scatterometer is a measurement instrument that emits an electromag-
netic wave, which is then scattered by the tested surface. The electro-
magnetic wave reflected back is then collected and quantified.
Laser
scatterometry is subdivision of scatterometry, where a laser beam is uti-
lized. Using such a narrow spectrum of light brings the advantage of an
insensitivity to the background conditions: the light-receiving matrix is
tuned to react to exact laser wavelength, one can minimize the impact
of the surrounding noise[8].
The working principle of a laser scatterometer is shown below. The
laser beam goes through a lens, that focuses it on the measured surface.
The laser beam is then reflected and scattered in different directions, de-
pending on the surface topography, roughness and inclination. Scattered
and reflected beams go back through the lens and are projected on the
light-sensitive matrix. For every cell of the matrix, the light intensity is
measured[31]. Knowing the discrete distribution of light intensity, one
can approximate a full scattered distribution, which is usually a Gauss-
like curve. This process is repeated with high frequency, point by point.
==PAGE:34==
2.2 Optosurf OS 500
27
Figure 2.7:
Impact of surface type on measured outcome[24].
3 main numerical parameters can be extracted from e measurement:
• I value: Intensity of the back scattered light, represented by the
area under the outcome curve. It indicates if the surface is dark or
light.
• Aq value: Variance of the scattered light distribution. It is related
to the width of the outcome curve. It is sensitive to changes in the
surface roughness.
• M value. Position of the average of scattered light distribution. It
indicates tilt from a perfectly perpendicular surface. It allows to
measure tilt/curvature of the surface.
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Optosurf OS 500
28
Figure 2.8:
Impact of surface type on measured outcome[11].
This technology does not provide any information about surface topol-
ogy as such. It is possible to imagine the two surfaces with a different sur-
face topology, that would scatter the light in the same manner. Despite
that, this method posses certain advantages mentioned in the beginning
of this chapter, which still renders it useful for the desired application.
One just needs to be aware of the limitations of this method.
This
method can give some information regarding the gloss of the surface,
which, as mentioned is of interest in injection moulds.
2.2.2
Optosurf OS 500-32
Optosurf OS 500-32 is one of the products from a German company
called ”Optosurf GmbH”. The company offers different products with
==PAGE:36==
2.2 Optosurf OS 500
29
varying performance in terms of the laser spot size and the capture angle
of the scattered light. For device used within this project the laser spot
size respectively 0.9 mm in diameter while the capturing angle is 32◦. The
spot size determines the size of the area covered with one acquisition, if
the proper working distance is maintained. Capturing angle determines
the maximum angle of the back-scattered light that will reach the light-
sensitive array.
Figure 2.9:
Optosurf OS 500-32[11].
The chosen device has working distance of 5mm, with acceptable ver-
tical misalignment being +-1mm. Optosurf OS 500-32 can only perform
1D measurement as it uses only a single linear CCD array as a detector.
The array consist of 32 cells. It is crucial to be aware of the array posi-
tioning to place the device correctly against measured sample.
Despite the detector being linear array, laser spot projected on the
surface is a two-dimensional circle. Consequently, the scattered beam is
an ellipse, with a major axis length dependable on the varying roughness
of the surface in crosswise or lengthwise directions. Different manufac-
turing processes generate a surface that can be either homogeneous in
all the directions (EDM sinking) or vary significantly between crosswise
and lengthwise (milling).
The surface topography influences the way
scattered beam looks like.
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Optosurf OS 500
30
Figure 2.10:
Difference in scattered light distribution for different
manufacturing processes [25].
Sometimes it may be necessary to run number of pre-test to under-
stand the surface topography and orientation, in order to execute a reli-
able measurement.
==PAGE:38==
2.2 Optosurf OS 500
31
2.2.3
Optosurf500 Software
Of course, the sensor itself requires an accompanying software, that
allows to set up the sensor correctly and acquire the data.
Optosurf
Gmbh provides their native software, that utilizes SQL database for the
purpose of storing the acquired measurements. Within the software, one
can manipulate the sampling frequency, plot the acquired data, admin-
istrate previous measurements and do some data post-processing.
Figure 2.11:
Optosurf OS500 Software.
One of the key functionalities of the software is to provide user with
an opportunity to set up the correct measurement strategy. It is also
possible to start and stop the measurement, based on different signals
and conditions, both internal and external. One should comprehend all
the possibilities, to assure that the chosen testing approach provides the
best results possible.
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Optosurf OS 500
32
2.2.4
Measurements modes and triggers
3 modes of measurement are possible:
• Test dialog - In this mode the software shows live numerical values
for I,Aq,M parameters. It is useful for a quick and rough indication
for a new surface, or for example for orienting a new part with
unknown surface topography.
Figure 2.12:
Test mode of Optosurf Software.
• Single mode - Useful for a single part. It creates a separate en-
tity with unique Part index in the SQL database. For given time
boundaries, the sensor values are measured and displayed. Once
the measurement is done, average values, standard deviations etc.
are calculated.
• Batch mode - Useful for serial production. Allows to execute a
number of measurements on a number of parts. Every separate
part will be created in the database, but also values for whole
batch of products can be obtained. For example, one can easily
notice if the process parameters are exceeding tolerable values, or
if they are converging to a certain value.
Except for the mode of operation, the measurement’s beginning and
end can be triggered in a different ways:
• Start manually - via clicking the button in the software.
==PAGE:40==
2.2 Optosurf OS 500
33
• Timer Start - allows to set up a periodically recurring measurement,
lasting particular amount of time. Useful for the serial production
where the parts come out in strict time manner.
• Trigger the Start - the device has an input socket, which can recog-
nize high signal level and start a measurement based on that. The
signal has to come from an external source. This allows integra-
tion with for example PLC, vision system or other measurement
apparatus.
• Automatic Part Detection - it allows to set up a threshold value,
exceeding which will automatically start a measurement. It may
be useful if the parts are incoming in random time, and there is
significant difference between average Intensity value for the part
and the background.
One alternative way to operate the sensor is to use .DLL file that can
be obtained from the Optosurf GmbH. Using the upper-mentioned file,
one can write the programs allowing to interact with the sensor. This
way provides a wide variety of possibilities, but it requires some extra
effort and skills.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Divide and Conquer
In the previous chapter two main hardware components were intro-
duced, and their working principles, possibilities and limitations outlined.
One can notice, that both instruments offer variety of operating modes,
and it is not straightforward which combination would perform the best.
As the project’s goal, described in 1.3 is quite complex, it would be not
practical if not impossible to tackle the whole task at once. Therefore,
Divide and Conquer approach has been used, to separate the big problem
into smaller, manageable chunks, solve them one by one and in the end
reassemble into the final solution.
3.1
Sub-problem identification
Based on consultations with University employees with experience rel-
evant for the project, as well as on past experiences of the author, 6 main
tasks have been distinguished:
• Attaching the sensor to the robot - robust mechanical connection
between the sensor and robot need to be created, while occupying
as little space as possible, to lower possibility of collision.
• Surface measurements acquiring and saving - a strategy regarding
Optosurf measurement needs to be established. Output data need
to be made further available and processable.
• Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution -
for a given geometry, toolpath that will guide the sensor around it
needs to be created, and then executed.
==PAGE:42==
3.2 Test components
35
• Real position tracking - as the toolpath will consist out of discrete
points, the robot has to interpolate the path between them. There
is a need to extract real positions of the robot between generated
points. This will also allow to take into account positioning errors,
up to some degree.
• Data streams synchronizing,connecting and plotting - As the infor-
mation from Optosurf and from the robot are two separate sets,
there is a need to connect them into one, and make sure that the
measurement value is properly assigned to the position in which
it was taken.
It is also a fair assumption that some errors will
have to be filtered out, some interpolation undertaken etc. Last
but not least, there is a need to generate user-friendly 3D map of
measurements, that can be easily understood.
Those were only the major sub-tasks that were identified and out-
lined in the beginning.
Of course, a number of smaller bits emerged
while proceeding, and not all of them can be clearly assigned to one of
those 6 categories. Many approaches that were tested turned out not
to be the right ones, and ended up abandoned. In the following chapter
the whole journey that happened within this project will be explained,
equally including successes and failures, dead-ends and possibilities, so
reader can fully understand the decisions made as well as final outcome.
3.2
Test components
4 different test components were prepared in the beginning of the
project. 2 parts were created using EDM wire cutting[9], what assures
surface uniformity in all the directions. Furthermore, those two compo-
nents have geometry features of different radius to be able to investigate
curvature radius implications on measured values, as well as setup’s lim-
itations in terms of accessibility and curve tracking. Those two parts,
Convex and Concave are 2.5D components, and are presented below.
Some scratches were introduced to the surfaces of the parts due to mis-
handling. It is convenient though, as those scratches allow to compare
achieved values between untouched and scratched surface.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Test components
36
Figure 3.1:
Convex part.
Figure 3.2:
Concave part.
The third component is different than two upper-mentioned ones. It
is a flat brick. The top of the brick was milled. Different areas of the
top were milled with different parameters and directions, to see how the
Optosurf will quantify them. Moreover, some micro-scratches were in-
troduced on the surface. Width of such scratches is in the order of 50
==PAGE:44==
3.2 Test components
37
microns. Such micro-scratches are extremely hard to be observed with
the naked eye, but they are a serious problem for mould manufacturers,
as they ruin the aesthetic appearance of the moulded components, sig-
nificantly lower the lifetime and performance of the mould. It is of great
interest if the built setup could help to identify them.
Figure 3.3: Flat brick part.
The last test component was milled from the same type of brick as
the third one. The cavity milled in this component is a part of a sphere.
It was chosen in order to test how the setup will perform while following
fully 3D curvature. The component was milled in a spiral manner, what
should be visible while performing measurements.
Figure 3.4: Indent brick part.
The robot is mounted on a lab table. The lab table has threaded
holes, spaced like a square grid with 40 mm spacing. In order to allow
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Test components
38
repeatable and known positioning of the test components, 90-degrees
angled, L-shaped components with holes matching the threads on the
table was created. This component can be easily attached in any place on
the table. Using screws with conical interface guarantees self-centering,
coaxial positioning. The parts are always placed in the inner corner of
the L-shaped component.
Figure 3.5: The lab table.
==PAGE:46==
3.3 Attaching the sensor to the robot
39
Figure 3.6: L-shaped part.
3.3
Attaching the sensor to the robot
The very first task that needed to be addressed is how to mount Opto-
surf on the flange of UR5. Optosurf weights about 1 kg, is almost 200mm
long and has diameter of 70mm. The fixture needs to be stiff enough not
to bend even when high acceleration or vibrations would be applied.
Furthermore, the supplier do not provide any guidelines or best practice
about fixturing for the sensor. One fixture has been previously developed
for the purpose of mounting Optosurf on the spindle of CNC for different
project.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Attaching the sensor to the robot
40
Figure 3.7:
Old fixture for CNC mounting.
It was fortunate to have such a fixture for immediate tests, but this
fixture was far from suitable for the final solution. It’s main disadvan-
tage is a fact, that there is no mean to assure known and repeatable
positioning of the sensor within the fixture, as it can slide and rotate
against it, changing the total length. It is needed to guarantee proper
positioning, otherwise there is a risk of crashing the tool against the sur-
face of the measured part. Furthermore, loose wires sticking out of the
device should not be bent, as they are prone to fracture.
Learning the lesson from the old fixture, new iteration has been made.
First of all, the Optosurf sensor was replicated in the CAD software. As
Universal Robots provide technical drawings for the robot flange, it is
==PAGE:48==
3.3 Attaching the sensor to the robot
41
not a problem to design a tool fitting the robot flange properly.
Figure 3.8:
New fixture CAD model.
The new fixture is connected to the sensor in a way, that it will
assure a known total length.
Placing two connecting shafts as close
to the sensor as possible maximizes the range of geometries that can be
accessed. By tightening the ring around the Optosurf assures the rotation
around the instrument axis is prevented. The tool’s total length is 273
mm. Technical drawings for the fixture can be found in the Appendix B.
Once the drawings were completed and double checked, the parts for the
fixture were machined and tested. The fixture turned out to be stiff and
fitting both the sensor and the robot correctly.
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Surface measurements acquiring and saving
42
Figure 3.9:
New fixture.
3.4
Surface measurements acquiring
and saving
Once the tool is properly mounted on the robot, one can take a look
on how to start, stop and save measured values.
The first and the most intuitive approach was to use Optosurf OS500
Software and trigger the measurements by hand, but such an approach
lacks autonomy, repeatability and could not be used in a bigger scale.
The next idea tested was to utilize an automatic part detection fea-
ture. The automatic part detection feature triggers the sensor based on
threshold level on the intensity of the light reflected back to the sensor.
The lab table, on which the tested parts are positioned on, is black and
pretty rough. When measured, the intensity of the scattered light never
exceeded 100, while all the test components are way above this value.
This allows to use the value of 100 as the threshold to distinguish if the
sensor is pointed towards the part or the table. Although promising in
the beginning, after more tests it turns out that while tilting to achieve
the desired position, the sensor may go through low intensity values,
==PAGE:50==
3.4 Surface measurements acquiring and saving
43
which would stop the measurement. Such an issue turned out to cause
problems around the edges. Furthermore, proceeding with this approach,
one makes an assumption that no material with I value lower than 100
will ever be tested. It is not certain, and may cause problems in the
future.
The third attempt utilized external signal to trigger measurement.
UR Control Box has number of IO ports, and it is possible to use them
for starting and stopping Optosurf. With a laboratory power supply it
was tested that the Control Box can provide sufficient voltage and cur-
rent. It is possible to set the Optosurf up in a way, that as long as there
is high signal on the input, the measurement will go on. Low state will
stop the measurement. This approach seemed to give satisfying results,
while having no potential drawbacks.
Knowing how to start and stop the measurement, the question of
how to save it appeared. The Optosurf OS500 Software offers some func-
tionalities to administrate executed measurements. Among a number of
different options, there is one to export the chosen measurement/set of
measurements as an excel file. Unfortunately, even though there is an op-
tion to attach a time stamp, it is only a time stamp of the beginning of the
measurement, and only down to a single second. As Optosurf performs
up to 2000 measurement per second, 1 second of possible misalignment
is definitely not acceptable. Other possibilities had to be investigated.
As mentioned previously, Optosurf OS 500 utilizes SQL database
to store all the data.
Using one of freeware SQL clients, Optosurf
database has been accessed and investigated. As German language is
used in internal database’s naming, it took a moment to understand
the structure of the database, but eventually the mistery was solved.
”Chargeposmessung” table is the one responsible for storing the entries,
each being one measurement. Even though one of the columns is meant
for keeping time stamp, it is again precise only down to a single sec-
ond.
A simple SQL script was created and executed, converting the
data type in mentioned column to float and then forcing the column
to include milliseconds. Unfortunately, it turned out that this column
contains the time-stamp of when the data set was uploaded to the SQL
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Surface measurements acquiring and saving
44
database, not when the acquisition itself was taken. Moreover, the whole
data set consisting of all the single acquisitions taken within a particu-
lar measurement is uploaded to the database at once, meaning that all
the acquisitions have the same time stamp. In theory, having the time
stamp for the first or last measurement and knowing the frequency of
acquisitions should be enough to be able to reconstruct time for every
measurement. Sadly, there are two major issues which renders this ap-
proach not possible in reality:
• the delay between acquisition and upload to database is not know,
and might be varying.
• over long period of time, time stamp error will accumulate to un-
known values
Overall, the approach based on directly accessing the SQL database
also turned out not to provide a sufficiently high resolution of the time
stamp. Last possible approach was to utilize the .DLL file allowing direct
interfacing with the sensor.
On demand, Optosurf Gmbh can provide .DLL file, using which,
one can write his own code to connect to the sensor. Some documentation
on how to use the .DLL file is also provided. Basing on those information
and some example program codes, a C program named ”data_sniffer”
was written. The program is continuously fetching the values of I, Aq
and M from the sensor, adding the current time stamp of the computer
running the program and saving everything to the .txt file. It was decided
to use the time stamp in the format of a number of milliseconds since the
epoch, as it allows easy subtracting and calculating period between the
acquisitions. The sensor is connected to the computer via a USB port. In
order to make the communication efficient, the single acquisition is not
being sent. The device groups the measurements in sets, and then sends
the whole set at once. This mean, that the data_sniffer was getting 100
acquisitions at once. Experiment shown, that set of 100 new acquisitions
is received every 312 milliseconds, +-5ms which is a negligible variation.
An assumption was made, that the acquisitions are equally spaced over
time. Based on such assumption and the time stamp of the received
data set, the time stamp for every acquisition is calculated and assigned.
==PAGE:52==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
45
The created .txt file has four, coma-separated columns with data in such
order: I value, Aq value, M value, milliseconds since the epoch. This
format allows easy importing and post-processing of the measurements.
Full code is included as an Appendix D
It is worth mentioning that ”data_sniffer” will malfunction if the
computer’s CPU usage is high. It was noticed that when the CPU usage
exceeds 95% the data sets can arrive every 500-900 milliseconds, or even
the whole program can freeze.
As this is hard to compensate for, it
was always taken into consideration while using data_sniffer to keep the
CPU usage low.
3.5
Digital environment creation,
tool-path generation and
execution
In order to measure points on the surface of a given component, the Op-
tosurf sensor needs to be positioned normal to this points, in distance
of 5mm +-1mm. As it would be not practical and very time-consuming
to try to measure all point on the surface, measured surface should be
discretized. If one measures enough points spaced on the whole surface,
an interpolation can be made and the whole surface can be reconstructed
into a 3D map . This approach is somehow similar to CNC milling, where
number of way-points is generated, and a spindle consecutively reaches
them one by one.
As writing own engine for generating CAM tool path is topic for a whole
separate MsC Thesis[17], some existing solutions were investigated. For-
tunately, plenty of robotic CAM software exist already. After investi-
gating and comparing different offers, the software called RoboDk was
chosen because of:
• Compatibility with Universal Robots - all the UR products exist
within RoboDk database, allowing quick integration.
==PAGE:53==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
46
• Open environment - RoboDk is Python-based and allows writing
and executing custom Python scripts, which can be easily inte-
grated with the software.
• Built in features for surface following, which can be potentially
utilized for the purpose of this project.
• Low price - Academic License for universities can be obtained for
only 145 euro.
Once the software was downloaded and installed, a connection with
the real robot needed to be established. It has been decided to connect
the robot and PC using TCP/IP over Ethernet cable, as it is a fast and
easy solution. In order to do that, one first needs to assign the static IP
address to the Control Box (192.168.1.35 was chosen.)
Figure 3.10:
Static IP setting.
Once the robot is connected and configured, it’s time to set up a
RoboDK ”station”. The RoboDK station is a project file, which includes
all the robots and machines present in the working environment, their
==PAGE:54==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
47
relative positions in 3D, parameters, tools, parts etc. For the purpose of
testing the TCP/IP connection, just a single UR5 robot was imported
within the station.
Figure 3.11:
RoboDK station with UR5 imported.
Right-clicking on the robot and choosing ”Connect to robot” opens
a separate dialog window.
==PAGE:55==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
48
Figure 3.12:
”Connect to robot” dialog window.
One needs to input the IP address chosen for the robot.
Default
port is 30000. Clicking ”Connect” will establish a link with the robot,
allowing to fetch the robot’s real position, control the robot directly from
RoboDK, execute the programs created in RoboDK directly on the robot
and much more. ”Explore” button allows to access the Control Box via
FTP, if one has a suitable client installed. This is particularly useful
for uploading .SCRIPT files or adjusting Ubuntu system installed on the
robot.
As a custom robot tool has been created for the sake of this project,
it is needed to create a digital version of it for the purpose of a simulation.
Full 3D model of the fixture with Optosurf exists already. The tool’s
assembly can be imported as .STEP file to RoboDK, and then connected
with the robot’s flange. Finally, the Tool Center Point (TCP) can be set
and placed in relation to the flange coordinate system. Then, everything
can be saved as .tool file. Such a file will be automatically recognized
and properly placed on the robot flange if imported to RoboDK. It is
also required to set up a proper TCP position as well as the tool’s mass
in the robot’s Control Box. It allows intuitive operation using Teach
pendant, for example rotating around TCP, but is also required for the
robot to calculate proper forces and torques during the movement.
Once the proper connection is established and tool is included, one
==PAGE:56==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
49
should recreate robot’s surrounding in the digital version. It will make
it possible to generate the tool-paths for UR5, as well as protect against
collision in between the robot and it’s environment. Key features of the
setup are the table, the robot, the tool, positioning L-shape part and the
measured part.
Figure 3.13: Picture of the setup.
==PAGE:57==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
50
Figure 3.14:
The setup recreated in RoboDK.
A small, repeatable offset was found between the positioning values
achieved by the real robot and the digital one. The digital L-component
was shifted to accommodate for that. The proper position was deter-
mined experimentally. This solution assures that as long as a test part
is positioned against the L-component, it will be reached properly by
both digital and real robot.
Once both setups are fully and properly configured, one can move
to the topic of generating a proper tool-path. There is a number of pro-
cesses for which robotic arms are used - milling in soft materials, painting,
soldering, mounting screws, assembling etc. Among those, painting/glue
disposal processes are of most interest as they closely reflect the type of
motion required for the sensor - a motion in constant speed, with con-
stant distance from the surface, perpendicular, sharp corners of tool-path
being rounded, low acceleration. Under ”Examples” section of RoboDK
online documentation[26] one can find an example project of a robot
painting 3D surface, fulfilling the upper-mentioned requirements. Such
an example can be downloaded to analyze the underlying project struc-
==PAGE:58==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
51
ture.
After a number of attempts, the following algorithm has been cre-
ated, giving the best results for a tool-path generation:
1. Digitally align .STL/.STEP file of measured part with L-component.
Rotate to desired position.
2. Add a reference frame. Position it in a way, that XY plane of the
reference frame is laying just under the surface that needs to be
measured, and Z axis of the newly added reference frame is pointing
towards the surface. Only an area covered by both positive X and
Y values of this reference frame will be taken into account when
generating tool-path. In other words, Z axis of this reference frame
is one of the corners of the area that tool-path is generated for.
3. Import ”CurveSetupGUI_Stripes” Python script into the project.
This is a script created by RoboDK and can be found under Ro-
boDK/Library/Macros. Run the script.
4. In the pop-up window, choose the part that a tool-path should be
generated for. A new pop-up will appear.
5. The second pop-up allows to adjust parameters of the tool-path to
be generated. One can choose spacing in X and Y direction, size of
the area that the program should be generated for and operation
speed. The number of passes should be one. No changes regarding
other settings should be made. Once done, click ”Update”. Tool-
path is going to be generated.
What ”CurveSetupGUI_Stripes” script does, is generating grid of
points with chosen spacing, for a chosen area. The grid is generated on
the XY plane of the newly created reference frame, and then projected
towards positive Z direction, onto a surface. For every point intersecting
with the surface, normal in this point is calculated. Then, the tool-path
is generated, as series of moveL commands between the generated points,
with the tool orientation along the normal in the particular point. As
the movement is linear, the risk of crashing is minimized.
==PAGE:59==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
52
Figure 3.15:
Example of generated tool-path (green lines) with nor-
mal in every point(white lines).Spacing is 0,5 mm in X
direction and 10 mm in Y direction. Part of the sensor is
visible.
Once the tool-path is generated, a curve follow project is automati-
cally created. Within this subprogram one can adjust how the generated
tool-path should be executed by the robot.
==PAGE:60==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
53
Figure 3.16: Curve follow project window.
The proper set of points should be already selected. One should tick
off ”Approach/Retract on each curve”, as it will slow down the measure-
ment. ”Allow a tool Z rotation” should be set to 0, unless one wants
Optosurf to be able to rotate around it’s axis while performing the mea-
surement - this will position the sensor internal matrix randomly, giving
non-comparable results so should be avoided. ”Preferred joints for the
starting point” option allows to choose a starting position for the robot.
It is quite an important parameter. The starting position heavily affects
the configuration in which the robot will approach the tool-path, and will
try to execute it. Depending on this configuration, UR5 may be able to
==PAGE:61==
3.5 Digital environment creation, tool-path generation and execution
54
reach all the tool-path’s points or not, crash into itself or singularities[21]
may appear. It is important to run a simulation of the robot’s movement
with the collision detection to make sure, that the created program can
be executed without collision. If not, the initial configuration should be
modified. If it is still not feasible to reach all the points, the L-element
position should be changed, both in the reality and the simulation.
Once the desired performance is achieved in the simulation, it is
time to execute it on the real robot. If the connection with the robot was
set up properly, it is pretty straightforward. One needs to right-click the
program in the project tree and choose ”Run on robot” and then ”Run”.
UR5 should start executing the program, while the digital version should
reflect the current position of the robot. The movement speed can be
adjusted using the Teaching pendant.
The tests revealed an inconvenience. If the tool-path consists out of
big number of short movements, the robot starts vibrating. It is due to
the nature of moveL - the robot tries to accelerate between zero and the
desired speed for every small distance, and then from the speed to zero.
Repeating this will cause the whole robot to vibrate. There are two ways
to overcome this:
• If the part is 2.5D geometry, such as Convex (Fig. 3.1) and Concave
(Fig. 3.2) parts presented in the chapter 3.2, one can use just 2
points in the Y direction, as the linear movement between them
perfectly follows the curvature of the part.
• Eventually, one can just lower operational speed significantly, down
to a moment when the vibration stops. Such an approach signifi-
cantly slows down the setup performance.
In the theory it should be possible to use moveP instead of moveL,
as it should eliminate the problem of reoccurring acceleration and de-
celeration. Unfortunately, RoboDK as such does not provide such an
possibility, and attempts of contacting the company that created the
software were ignored, as well as attempts to set up a custom Python
script which would allow such functionality.
==PAGE:62==
3.6 Real position tracking
55
After performing the tests it was noticed, that even though while
following a flat surface, the robot executes the path correctly, while fol-
lowing curved surfaces some error appears. For example, for unknown
reason, while moving form point A to point B, which were only separated
in the X axis, the robot was also executing small transition in Y and Z.
Over the whole tool-path accumulation of small errors was escalating to
the error of couple of millimeters, that renders the acquisition useless.
Numerous attempts to identify a source of the error failed. Fortunately,
direct execution of the script from RoboDK is not the only possibility.
Different approaches were investigated. The new approach uses RoboDK
to generate .SCRIPT file on the local drive, then uploading the file via
FTP to the UR Control Box, and finally starting .SCRIPT from the
Teaching pendant.
Although the upper-mentioned approach requires
slightly more time, and has no live synchronization with the digital setup,
the desired tool-path is executed correctly. The software publisher has
been contacted regarding this issue, but without an effect.
Summing up, the satisfying algorithm for generating and executing
a robotic CAM tool-path for 3D geometries has been established. It is
not a one-click solution, and it requires some basic knowledge regarding
underlying mechanisms to operate it, but this method performed fine on
all the tested parts, and allows adjustments and flexibility satisfying for
a current application.
3.6
Real position tracking
As mentioned in the chapter 3.5 UR5 itself calculates the movement
between the two points of the tool-path, so movement speed and accel-
eration is not constant. Moreover, the simulation is not fully taking in
the consideration inertia of the sensor and the fixture mounted on the
robot. It means, that one can not reliably determine TCP position in a
function of time based on the simulation only. Knowledge of position in
every time stamp is required to be able to assign the measurement from
the Optosurf to XYZ position in which it took place.
==PAGE:63==
3.6 Real position tracking
56
The UR Control Box or Teaching pendant don’t have a build in func-
tionality that allows continuous measuring and storing of the current
TCP position. As shown in the chapter 2.4 it is possible to see the cur-
rent position of the robot on Teaching pendant, but without the option
to save it. As the Control Box is in fact a Ubuntu based PC, it should
be possible to modify the system, or execute some additional program
in order to store information about the robot position, but such an ap-
proach puts UR5 in jeopardy, as it directly alters the system which is
controlling the robot. Other methods were searched for.
As RoboDK can mimic the current robot position within the sim-
ulation, it means that there is a possibility of fetching UR5 position
over TCP/IP. A report written by Thomas Timm Andersen[3] examines
performance and possibilities of working with Universal Robot manipula-
tors. Within this report one can find information about different ways to
control/communicate with the robot. Some information are particularly
interesting from this project perspective:
• The UR robots internal controller runs at 125 Hz, evaluating one
instruction every 8 milliseconds. That is a limiting frequency for
controlling the robot, and exceeding this frequency while sending
commands will not increase performance.
• There is a number of existing drivers/libraries for different pro-
gramming languages that have all the basic functionalities needed
to control the robot already implemented. It eases development of
custom setups utilizing UR products.
• Even though internal controller runs at 125 Hz, it is not necessarily
true that one can interact with robot at that speed. Depending on
the driver chosen, reliably working frequency might even be half of
that. If one feeds commands faster than the robot can process it,
commands might be buffered, what can cause unexpected perfor-
mance. This needs to be taken into account. Last but not least,
delay of up to 200 ms is expected between sending the command
and executing it.
After the comparison of existing solutions, Python library called
”urx”[28] was chosen. It is a LGPL license library, meaning it can be
==PAGE:64==
3.6 Real position tracking
57
used free of charge. Furthermore, it is properly documented and number
of use cases can be found, making it easy to use. Python is also preferred
as this language is flexible, and offers big number of additional libraries
that might be useful for the future work such as plotting a 3D map.
Using urx library, a Python script was created. The script estab-
lishes communication with the robot, and in loop requests the current po-
sition of robot’s TCP. As frequency of requests is higher than frequency
of internal UR controller, for every response obtained it is checked if the
current response is different from the previous one. If so, it is stored
with the current time stamp. The time stamp format is in milliseconds
from epoch - the same as in data_sniffer program. It will allow easy
alignment of the data. The Python script will be creating a list of lists
containing XYZ position and the time stamp until it is stopped by the
user(ctrl+U). Separate function called ”CatchPositions()” fulfilling the
upper-mentioned functionality has been created. ”Flag” is not used in
the current version.
1 def CatchPositions():
2
i=0
3
p=[]
4
t=[]
5
k=[]
6
p.append(rob2.tcf_pose())
7
print(i, p[i])
8
while True:
9
try:
10
t=rob2.tcf_pose()
11
k=t.tolist()
12
if(k[0]!=(p[-1][0])):
13
k.pop(5)
14
k.pop(4)
15
k.pop(3)
16
millis = int(round(time.time() * 1000))
17
k.append(millis)
18
19
with open('flag.txt') as f:
20
flag = f.readline()
21
f.close()
22 #
k.append(flag)
==PAGE:65==
3.7 Data streams synchronizing, connecting and plotting
58
23
p.append(k)
24 #
print(i, p[i])
25
i=i+1
26
27
except KeyboardInterrupt:
28
print ("Cool")
29
p.pop(0)
30
break
31
return p
Listing 3.1: CatchPosition() function.
3.7
Data streams synchronizing,
connecting and plotting
Within this section lots of references to the created Python script will
be made. For convenience, referenced functions and pieces of code will be
presented within this chapter. Moreover, the whole script can be found
in Appendix C. All the standalone functions can be found there, as well
as the main script body.
When the two streams of data are obtained, the final step is to
sync them. As mentioned before, the goal is to create list of Optosurf
acquisitions with accompanying XYZ coordinates, and plot all of them
into one 3D map of surface measurements. The Python script responsi-
ble for this, is going to be explained step by step in this chapter.
First of all, it is necessary to establish connection with the robot.
IP was already assigned in chapter 3.5.After starting the connection with
the robot, a loop was created that waits for the first non-empty message
from the robot. It takes some time for the connection to be properly
established. Receiving first non-empty message means that the robot is
ready.
==PAGE:66==
3.7 Data streams synchronizing, connecting and plotting
59
1 from urx.urrtmon import URRTMonitor
2 rob2 = URRTMonitor("192.168.1.35")
3 rob2.start()
4 while (type(rob2.tcf_pose())==type(None)):
5
i=0
Listing 3.2: Connecting to the robot.
A reminder to start data_sniffer is displayed. Then, the operator can
choose whether to start a new acquisition of the robot positions (Catch-
Position()), or use a previous one. Once CatchPosition() is stopped, the
data_sniffer is stopped automatically.
Afterwards, the script asks whether to import new Optosurf mea-
surements. The data is fetched from .txt file to a Python list, to be
able to operate on it conveniently. Function ”ImportMeasurements()”
was created to execute this task. It is reading previously created .txt
file from it’s directory line by line, splits every line based on commas,
convert values between comas to numerical and assemble it into list of
lists. In the end final list is returned.
1 def ImportMeasurements():
2
text_file = open("C:\Thesis\optosurf\data_sniffer\
Measurement.txt", "r")
3
list1 = text_file.read().split('\n')
4
finallist = []
5
for x in list1:
6
list2 = x.split(",")
7
list3 = []
8
for item in list2:
9
list3.append(num(item))
10
finallist.append(list3)
11
return finallist
Listing 3.3: ImportMeasurements() function.
Before merging two data streams, an operator gets an option to
change ”Adjust” parameter. This parameter is responsible for shifting
data streams time stamp against each other. This issue is solved, and
such an option is left for test purpose. The parameter is in depth ex-
plained in the chapter 4.
==PAGE:67==
3.7 Data streams synchronizing, connecting and plotting
60
One of the key parts of the script is ”Merge()” function. This func-
tion takes two arguments: a list of robot positions and a list of Optosurf
measurements. Then, it iterates over the robot positions, and for every
recorded position it finds the first Optosurf measurement that happened
after this position, merges robot positon and Optosurf measurement into
one list and appends to outcome list of lists. As Optosurf measurements
happens around every 3ms, while the robot positions are acquired ev-
ery 8ms, some Optosurf measurements will remain unassigned. Despite
that,by adjusting the speed of the movement of the robot arm it is possi-
ble to achieve satisfying density of the outcome points , so this method
was proceed with. Moreover, Merge() script finds the maximum values
of I, Aq and maximum and minimum values of M. If no Optosurf mea-
surement can be found within 20 ms after particular robot position, this
position is disregarded and error counter is increased. Before returning
the final list of matched values, the function displays total number of
points created and number of errors. Usually, error does not exceed 1%.
1 def Merge(RobotPositions ,optosurf):
2
y=0
3
global maxIntensity
4
global maxAq
5
global minM
6
global maxM
7
global adjust
8
error=0
9
ToBePloted=[]
10
for x in RobotPositions:
11
CurrentTime=x[3]+adjust
12
while True:
13
t=[]
14
if(optosurf[y][3]-CurrentTime >20):
15
error=error+1
16
break
17
if (CurrentTime <=(optosurf[y][3])):
18
t.append(x[0])
19
t.append(x[1])
20
t.append(x[2])
21
t.append(x[3])
22
t.append(optosurf[y][0])
23
t.append(optosurf[y][1])
==PAGE:68==
3.7 Data streams synchronizing, connecting and plotting
61
24
t.append(optosurf[y][2])
25
t.append(optosurf[y][3])
26
ToBePloted.append(t)
27
28
if(maxIntensity <optosurf[y][1]):
29
maxIntensity=optosurf[y][1]
30
print("MaxIntensity:")
31
print(maxIntensity)
32
33
if(maxAq<optosurf[y][0]):
34
maxAq=optosurf[y][0]
35
print("maxAq")
36
print(maxAq)
37
38
if(maxM<optosurf[y][2]):
39
maxM=optosurf[y][2]
40
print("maxM")
41
print(maxM)
42
43
if(minM>optosurf[y][2]):
44
minM=optosurf[y][2]
45
print("minAq")
46
print(minM)
47
48 #
print(t)
49
y=y+1
50
break
51
else:
52
y=y+1
53 #
print (y)
54
print("Matched points")
55
print(len(ToBePloted))
56
print("Error")
57
print(error)
58
return ToBePloted
Listing 3.4: Merge() function.
Pre-last task is to separate the big list of merged values into a sepa-
rate data sets for I, Aq and M, as well as prepare those data sets to be
plotted properly. As mentioned in the project requirements, it is vital
that the outcome 3D map includes colours to be easily understandable.
It means, that the plot to be created is in fact 4 dimensional - X,Y,Z and
the value in this point. Number of python libraries such as matplotlib
==PAGE:69==
3.7 Data streams synchronizing, connecting and plotting
62
or plotly for graphs and plotting was tried out, but every attempt of
plotting 4D graph was unsuccessful. It is widely supported to use colour
as value indication on 3D graph, but it is usually indicating Z value.
Making colour of particular point independent of Z value, but directly
depending on the 4th set of values turned out not to be trivial.
Different approach was taken. Instead of using mathematical libraries,
library for graphical visualization of cloud of points was utilized. Open3D[33]
was chosen, as it is well documented, open source project that fulfills the
expectations. Open3D library operates on the number of 3d points cloud
formats, of which .PCD was chosen, as it is simple but flexible format,
which is also easy to generate and supports 32-bit colours.
3 separate .pcd files are generated after every acquisition, for I, Aq
and M values. In the beginning of each of them a preamble is created,
required by .pcd format. The preamble also includes information such as
number of points within the file, type of data etc. Then, XYZ points are
writen directly into the file, but I, Aq or M parameters are translated to
colour in decimal scale, based on a maximum value found while merging
the points. As all the parameter-to-colour and .pcd generating functions
are alike, only one of a kind will be shown.
1 def MToRGB(M):
2
global maxM
3
global minM
4
Mrange = abs(maxM-minM)
5
hue= 0.75-((M +abs(minM))/Mrange)*0.75
6
rgb= tuple(round(i * 255) for i in colorsys.hsv_to_rgb(
hue,1,1))
7
RGBint = (rgb[0]<<16) + (rgb[1]<<8) + rgb[2]
8
return RGBint
Listing 3.5: MToRGB() function. Translates M value to colour scale
in decimal.
As Open3D generates a proper map of measurements, last part is to
create a legend for colours. Unfortunately, Open3D does not support
such functionality, but previously mentioned matplotlib does. Legend()
function generates colour scale for every 3D map. Disadvantage is, that
==PAGE:70==
3.7 Data streams synchronizing, connecting and plotting
63
the legend is generated in a separate window.
1
print("Intensity plot")
2
Legend(maxIntensity ,0,"I")
3
pcd = read_point_cloud("measurement_I.pcd")
4
print(np.asarray(pcd.points))
5
draw_geometries([pcd])
6
print(colorsys.hsv_to_rgb(0,1,1)
)
Listing 3.6: Piece of code plotting 3D map of particular parameter
(Intensity in this case).
Summing up, three separate files are generated and saved after every
measurement - one for every measured value. All the three 3D maps
are plotted one by one, after previous map is closed. If the results are
satisfying, the .pcd files can be copied and saved elsewhere as the next
execution of the script will overwrite them.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion of results
and errors
Once the setup was configured and tested completely, the measure-
ments of the desired parts were executed. As introduced in the chapter
3.2, 4 parts were used to test the performance of the setup. As visible
on the pictures in chapter 3.2 the convex and concave parts used in the
test have some scratches and abrasions introduced on the surface. Such
imperfections would significantly lower the performance of a injection
mould, and need to be easily detectable by the setup.
The second type of the imperfections to be tested are micro-scratches.
Such scratches have width of around 40-50 microns and are very hard to
be seen with a blind eye. Such scratches are present on the top of the
test component 3, flat brick. Those defects would also affect the mold
lifetime and performance.
It is of great interest whether the created
setup can notice those.
4.1
Results
For every tested part the screen shots of I,Aq and M 3D maps are pre-
sented. It is worth reminding, that the Convex and Concave parts have
been manufactured with EDM wire cutting, while the two bricks were
milled. Therefore, the surface reflectivity and measured Intensity val-
ues are different between those two groups of components. Furthermore,
while the Concave and Convex parts are uniform in the terms of the sur-
face characteristics, the milled brick parts are strongly directional. All
the measurements were taken with 1mm/s velocity.
It should also be noted, that the sharp edges are not possible to be cor-
==PAGE:72==
4.1 Results
65
rectly measured. In some cases, the edges might have highest value of the
measured parameter, what changes the color scale, and bias the visual
appearance of the rest of the 3D map.
4.1.1
Convex
In this section, one can find the Convex part measurements. The spacing
between tool-path lines is 200 microns. All the scratches that are visible
on Fig 3.1 can be also clearly recognized on both Intensity and Aq 3D
maps. As visible on the M map, the positioning of the sensor was nearly
perfect throughout the tool-path. Only on the small radius curvatures
mispositioning of the sensor can be noticed. M value of 0 means perfect
positioning of the tool against the measured surface. The value of 10 is
maximal measurable displacement.
Figure 4.1:
Convex I values map.
==PAGE:73==
4.1 Results
66
Figure 4.2:
Convex Aq values map.
Figure 4.3:
Convex M values map.
==PAGE:74==
4.1 Results
67
Figure 4.4:
Close-up of M values for small radii.
4.1.2
Concave
Below, one can find the Concave part measurements. The spacing be-
tween tool-path lines is 200 microns. All the scratches that are visible
on Fig 3.2 can be also clearly recognized on both Intensity and Aq 3D
maps. Edges next to the small radius curvatures are again slightly off,
but the general positioning (M value) is satisfying.
==PAGE:75==
4.1 Results
68
Figure 4.5:
Concave I values map.
Figure 4.6:
Concave Aq values map.
==PAGE:76==
4.1 Results
69
Figure 4.7:
Concave M values map.
Figure 4.8:
Concave M values map for small radii.
4.1.3
Flat Brick
As mentioned already, the flat brick was milled with different process
parameters and milling directions within the area. It is clearly reflected
on the acquisition. Moreover, some micro-scratches with width in the
order of 50 microns have been introduced to the surface, as visible on
the Figure 4.11. Those scratches can be clearly visible on the Figure 4.10,
==PAGE:77==
4.1 Results
70
which is Aq 3D map for the flat brick. It means, that one of the core ex-
pectations regarding the setup, which was also the most demanding one,
is fulfilled! The M value in not plot, as it was the flat part measurement,
and The M value 3D map was nearly perfect, and not of interest.
Figure 4.9:
Flat brick Intensity values.
Figure 4.10:
Flat brick Aq values.
==PAGE:78==
4.1 Results
71
Figure 4.11: Micro-scratches on flat brick. Picture taken using an op-
tical microscope.
4.1.4
Indented Brick
The indented brick was designed in a way which will enforce a fully
3D movement of the TCP. The brick was milled in a spiral manner, what
is visible on the Aq values map. No scratches were introduced to this
brick.
==PAGE:79==
4.1 Results
72
Figure 4.12:
Indent brick Intensity values.
Figure 4.13:
Indent brick Aq values.
==PAGE:80==
4.2 Curvature correction
73
Figure 4.14:
Indent brick M values.
As expected, the milled parts have higher reflectivity parameters, and
therefore higher peak value of Intensity (2500) compared to EDM wire
cut (1000). Aq value is the one that highlights the scratches the most,
and works even for the micro-scratches. The setup also performs well in
terms of the curvature following. For the Convex and Concave parts M
value does not exceed 0,5. For the indented bricks there are peak values
around the edges, and also some misalignment in the cavity. It may be
caused by the spiral nature of the milling of this part, and should be
investigated more in depth.
4.2
Curvature correction
The analysis of the scattered light allows not only to assess the surface
roughness, but also to some extend asses the surface curvature in the the
direction of a light-sensing array. As the rough surface can scatter the
light, the curvature of the measured surface can have a similar effect. It
is of interest to be able to take the curvature effect into account to be
able to perform fully valuable measurement. One of the publication[16]
regarding that matter was co-written by the Optosurf representative,
and utilizes this particular device. Within the document, one can find
==PAGE:81==
4.2 Curvature correction
74
the formula that connects measured Intensity and Aq values with the
geometrical values of the spot size, the measured curvature radius and
the distance between the lens and the light detector. In the calculations
presented further in this chapter, the approximated equation was used.
This is an equation which is valid for a cylindrical sample with a uniform
surface.
Figure 4.15:
The formula for the curvature correction [16].
Variables used:
• D’ - Laser spot size, 0.9mm for used device
• Rzyl - Radius of curvature of the measured cylinder
• f’ - The distance between the lens and the light detector
• µ0x,u - Measured intensity of back scattered light
• µ2x,u(x0y0) - Measured Aq value
In the publication[16] the upper-mentioned formula was used to
correct for the curvature. The f’ value represents the distance between
the lens and the light-sensing matrix , and it is specific for the particular
hardware configuration. Unfortunately, particular value is not known. It
is unfortunately not possible to execute similar experiment, as all the
values are known, except for f’ value. It is possible though, to try to
calculate f’ value basing on measurements of the different radii of the
curvature. Such an experiment was undertaken.
==PAGE:82==
4.2 Curvature correction
75
The cylindrical samples with diameter of 20mm, 16mm, 12mm, 10mm,
8mm and 6mm were prepared. In order to compensate for the variations
of the surface of the samples, thin, cold-rolled metal foil was used. Before
the measurement, every sample was wrapped with the same piece of foil,
making sure that the same area is measured. Such an approach allows
neglecting the impact of the different surface topology.
For every sample, measurement along the cylinder axis is executed, while
making sure that the Optosurf is normal to the measured surface. All the
measurements has been executed in such a way, that the light-detecting
array is perpendicular to the cylinder axis and parallel to the cylinder
radius. Such a positioning maximizes the impact of the curvature and
the light intensity reaching the sensor. For every measurement, average
I and Aq values were calculated.
Two types of foil were used - high gloss and low gloss foil. Below the
outcomes of the measurements for both types of the material. Infinity
radius stands for measurement of flat foil:
Figure 4.16: Measured values and calculated f’ for low gloss material.
==PAGE:83==
4.2 Curvature correction
76
Figure 4.17:
Plot of Aq values for low gloss material.
Figure 4.18:
Plot of I values for low gloss material.
==PAGE:84==
4.2 Curvature correction
77
Figure 4.19:
Plot of f’ values for low gloss material.
Figure 4.20: Measured values and calculated f’ for high gloss material.
==PAGE:85==
4.2 Curvature correction
78
Figure 4.21:
Plot of Aq values for high gloss material.
Figure 4.22:
Plot of I values for high gloss material.
==PAGE:86==
4.3 Errors
79
Figure 4.23:
Plot of f’ values for high gloss material.
As one can notice, f’ value has a span from 2.8mm to 4.3 mm for
high gloss material with the average being 3.3mm and a span from 8mm
to 24 mm for low gloss material with the average being 15 mm. It is
worth mentioning, that Aq value is clearly dependant on the radius of
curvature, while I value seems not to be as heavily affected. Results
for the low gloss material seems to be less affected by the curvature
change. The average value of f’ varies significantly for the low and high
gloss material. One of the possible explanation is, that for the low gloss
material the effect of the curvature on the light distribution is negligible
compared with the contribution of the surface roughness.
As the executed set of measurement does not allow to reliably define
the f’ parameter, this matter should be further investigated.
One of
the possible approaches could be to execute similar tests on the number
of the other materials, to be able to compare against wider variety of
results. Secondly, one could simply try to obtain the exact value from
the manufacturer.
4.3
Errors
A number of factors contribute towards the total error of the setup’s
output. Among those, one can distinguish some major factors:
==PAGE:87==
4.3 Errors
80
• The robot positioning errors - UR claims that the robot positioning
accuracy is 100 microns. It means, that if the robot is ordered to go
to a point X, it will end up anywhere in a sphere with radius of 100
microns around this point. It is a significant amount, given that
the lines in the tool-path can be as close as 200 microns from each
other.
Even though the robot can calculate it’s position better
than 100 microns (looking at for example the Teaching pendant
one can see that there are three decimals in the XYZ positons), the
Control Box will assume that target is achieved, if the TCP will end
up within 100 micron radius. Second contribution from the robot
side is discretization of the movement.
The linear interpolation
between the given points will always simplify the curvature being
approximated.
• Optosurf errors - Optosurf working frequency in this project is
around 300Hz. It may be possible to achieve a higher frequency
of acquisition, as well as a better control of time-stamp per ac-
quisition if working closely with the original manufacturer.
As
Optosurf Gmbh turned out to be working on a very similar setup
in the same time frame, it is not of a big surprise that some ques-
tion asked throughout this project remained unanswered. Further-
more, as mentioned in the chapter 3.4, when the computer’s CPU
was subjected to a high load, the data sets were delayed. As the
data_sniffer can not compensate for that, in some acquisitions one
can see the lacking points in the lines building 3D map.
• Error of the path executed directly from RoboDK - as mentioned
in the chapter 3.5 the Convex and Concave tool-paths were signifi-
cantly off when executed from the PC directly. Despite contacting
RoboDK manufacturer, no solution for that has been provided. If
this issue could be solved, the setup would become quicker to start
and more flexible to operate. The picture below shows the mis-
alignment.
==PAGE:88==
4.3 Errors
81
Figure 4.24: Acquisition of robots positions when tool-path was exe-
cuted directly from RoboDK for Convex part .
• Shift between data streams - When the first 3D map was generated,
it was clearly visible that the two data streams are not aligned cor-
rectly. That is why ”Adjust ” parameter mentioned in the chapter
3.7 was established. An assumption was made based on the analy-
sis of the first 3D map, that the reason for the misalignment visible
in the picture below is a repeatable delay between obtaining the
data from Optosurf and obtaining the data from the robot. As
communication with the robot is more complex (additional oper-
ating system etc.) it was probable that the data from UR5 may
come later than from the scatterometer.
The adjust parameter
mentioned before is just an additional offset in milliseconds, added
to compensate for the delay.
It was established experimentally,
that the offset of 350 ms seems to even out the misalignment. All
the other pictures of the 3D maps presented within this chapter
take the correction into account.
==PAGE:89==
4.3 Errors
82
Figure 4.25: First 3D map of flat brick part, with no shift correction.
Even though some of the error sources have been recognized and
acknowledged, it is hard to calculate/estimate their direct impact on the
final 3D map. All the upper-mentioned sources of error (and probably
some more, not recognized issues) are tangled together. On the other
hand though, the tool, in the shape that it is now, serve the purpose
of an indication rather than precise quantitative measurement. It can
give the operator an idea about the condition of the particular area of
the measured component, or where the scratches are located. Then, the
operator can check again himself, knowing where and what is he looking
for.
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 5
Future improvements
and Conclusion
5.1
Future improvements
Throughout the majority of this thesis there were no commercially
available similar devices to compare against.
Shortly before the end
of this project, Optosurf Gmbh itself released ”Optobot” which is Op-
tosurf OS 500 mounted on a Mitsubishi Melfa manipulator robot. It
means that the idea and an approach presented within this thesis are
promising, as company professionally dealing with the laser scatterom-
etry independently decided to develop a similar setup, and now offers
it commercially[12]. It would be very interesting to discuss the techni-
cal solutions used in Optobot, as well as compare the performance, but
unfortunately it does not seem feasible within the time frame of this
Thesis.
==PAGE:91==
5.1 Future improvements
84
Figure 5.1: Optobot picture[12] .
The setup created within this project is a test/prototype one. There-
fore the performance is not flawless, and a number of potential improve-
ment points can be listed. Some of them are relatively cheap and easy to
implement, while others require a significant amount of time and effort
to be implemented. Of course, as mentioned in the Chapter 2 chosen
hardware components heavily define the setup performance and issues.
If other components were used, one could obtain a significantly different
results, and potential improvement points could have been also differ-
ent.
Among the setup enhancements that could be considered, one can in-
clude:
• MoveP - In order to get rid of the vibrations caused by the con-
tinuous acceleration and deceleration connected with a number of
==PAGE:92==
5.1 Future improvements
85
moveL commands, one could use moveP instead of moveL. It would
require a modification in RoboDK, or writing the custom Python
script allowing generation of tool-path in such a manner.
• Tool-path execution from RobodK - as mentioned already, if the
issue of the tool-path being shifted while executing directly from
RoboDK could be solved, it would shorten the time needed to set
up the measurement, and make it easier for the operator.
• New generation of UR robots - UR5e, being a representative of
newer generation of the UR robots offer better performance com-
paring to the UR5 robot. What is the most important from this
project point of view, the robot’s system runs on 500 Hz, not 125,
and the position accuracy is 30 microns instead of 100. Replacing
the robot used with the newer one would enhance the performance
of the setup.
• Rewriting data_sniffer - It may be possible to increase the fre-
quency of the sensor used, as well as make the connection with the
sensor more reliable, and improve the time-stamping procedure.
• Automatic identification of the scratches - The parts measured
within this Thesis were relatively small compared to the overall
working volume of the robot.
Therefore, one could find all the
scratches at a glance, as the scratches were not that small com-
pared with the part itself. If a big part 3D map was scaled to a
screen size, the scratches might be hard to notice. Therefore, devel-
oping some algorithm capable of recognizing and quantifying the
scratches might be of interest. It would be also useful for the mass
production.
• Legend - If the legend of colours could be built in the same window
as the 3D map itself, it would make the system more user-friendly.
• Mirror on Optosurf - Among the accessories offered by Optosurf
Gmbh, there is a small, 45°angled mirror to be mounted on the top
of the sensor. Such an extension allows measuring some difficult
geometries that otherwise can not be measured. A tool being the
sensor with such mirror, and the properly oriented TCP could be
==PAGE:93==
5.2 Conclusion
86
created as a .tool file, allowing the operator to switch easily be-
tween the sensor with and without the mirror, depending on the
requirements.
• Vibration cancelling fixture - Another possible way to address the
vibration issue would be building a fixture with a mechanical dumper,
that would suppress the vibration. Such an idea brings a risk of an
increased mispositioning though, and should be carefully analyzed
before implementing.
Those are the main improvement points that were recognized while
working on the setup. Of course, those are just examples and the spec-
trum of possible advancements is not limited to that list.
5.2
Conclusion
Goal of this Thesis was to design, build and test the setup as described
in chapter 1.3. The project was split into smaller tasks, which were then
analyzed and solved. Each of the task has been in depth described. Num-
ber of the different approaches was taken into account and tested, with
some of them being disregarded in the end. All the parts of the project
were then connected, into the one, fully functioning solution. The solu-
tion was then tested on the different components. Some flaws have been
noticed, and fixed. Last but not least, it was proved, that the setup is
capable of distinguishing the micro-scratches, as desired in the project
description. Potential sources of the errors, as well as the future improve-
ments have been discussed.
In today’s world the technology is a main driving force. It is not a
surprise, that a new methods, devices and solutions appear almost every
day. It was a great pleasure to be developing one of this emerging solu-
tions for the past six months. The setup created within this Thesis offers
some interesting possibilities that may provide a value to the particular
sector of the manufacturing industry, but it is highly possible that in the
near future new technologies will appear. For example 3D scanning is
==PAGE:94==
5.2 Conclusion
87
one of the rapidly expanding technologies, that might become a compe-
tition. Only the time will tell. Let the quote from Sir Arthur C. Clarke
summarize this Thesis:
Any sufficiently advanced technology is equivalent to magic.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
CIE Publication 17.4. International Lighting Vocabulary, Vienna,
1987.
[2]
Keyence Corporation of America. Introduction to Surface Rough-
ness [ISO 25178]. url: https://www.keyence.com/mykeyence/
?ptn=001#enqueteTop. (accessed: 04.12.2018).
[3]
Thomas Timm Andersen. “Optimizing the Universal Robots ROS
driver.” In: Technical University of Denmark, November 2015 ().
[4]
Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer. “Scanning tunneling microscopy
from birth to adolescence”. In: Rev. Mod. Phys. 59, 615 (1 July
1987).
[5]
H. Binnig G; Rohrer. “Scanning tunneling microscopy”. In: IBM
Journal of Research and Development; Armonk Vol. 44, Iss. 1/2,
(Jan/Mar 2000).
[6]
Jakub Brzosko. Design and implementation of mounting purpose
manipulator robot. AGH University of Science and Technology, Fac-
ulty of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics. 2016.
[7]
Brian J. Ford. Single lens. HarperCollins, 1985.
[8]
S. M. Gaspar et al. “Laser scatterometry for process characteriza-
tion”. In: AIP Conference Proceedings 227.1 (1991), pp. 54–55. doi:
10.1063/1.40622.
[9]
Hans R. Gerber. “Wire EDM”. In: Sme Tech Pap Ser Mr 976
(1976).
[10]
Alicona Gmbh. url: https : / / www . alicona . com / products /
infinitefocus/. (accessed: 10.01.2019).
==PAGE:96==
Bibliography
89
[11]
OptoSurf GmbH. Surface Mesurement System OS 500. OptoSurf
GmbH. 2014.
[12]
Optosurf Gmbh. url: https://www.optosurf.de/en/produkte-
2/optobot/. (accessed: 09.01.2019).
[13]
Zehntner GmbH. url: http : / / www . zehntner . com. (accessed:
12.01.2019).
[14]
Andrew R. Hanson. “Good Practice Guide for the Measurement of
Gloss”. In: National Physical Laboratory (2006).
[15]
ASTM International. “Standard Test Method for Specular Gloss”.
In: ASTM International (2014).
[16]
R. Brodmann J. Seewig G. Beichert. “Extraction of shape and
roughness using scattering light”. In: SPIE Europe Optical Metrol-
ogy (2009).
[17]
Young K.W. “Computer aided design and manufacture for filament
wound reinforced plastics”. MA thesis. 1987.
[18]
John Lapham. “RobotScript™: the introduction of a universal robot
programming language”. In: MCB UP Ltd (1999).
[19]
Seunghwan Lee. 41663 Nanotribology and Biotribology, Lecture 2.
[20]
Stephan Handschin Markus Krrenberger. “Visualization of Food
Structure by Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM)”. In:
LWT - Food Science and Technology, Volume 34, Issue 1, Pages
11-17 (February 2001).
[21]
J.-P. MERLET. Parallel Robots. Second Edition. Springer, 2006.
[22]
Olympus. Introduction to Confocal Microscopy. url: https://www.
olympus-lifescience.com/en/microscope-resource/primer/
techniques/confocal/confocalintro. (accessed: 04.12.2018).
[23]
F. Pedreschi* and J.M. Aguilera. “Some Changes in Potato Chips
During Frying Observed by Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy
(CLSM)”. In: Food Science and Technology International, Volume
8, Issue 4, pp. 197-201 (2002).
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
90
[24]
Bissacco Giuliano Pilny Lukas De Chiffre Leonardo. “Process mon-
itoring for intelligent manufacturing processes Methodology and
application to Robot Assisted Polishing”. In: Technical University
of Denmark ().
[25]
Oskar Gerstorfer Rainer Brodmann. “Optical roughness measuring
instrument for fine -machined surfaces”. In: Optical Engineering
24(3), 408 -413 (May /June 1985 ().
[26]
RoboDK. url: https://robodk.com/doc/en/Getting-Started.
html#Station. (accessed: 03.01.2019).
[27]
Universal Robots. url: https://www.universal-robots.com/
products/ur5-robot/. (accessed: 09.12.2018).
[28]
Olivier Roulet-Dubonnet. url: https://github.com/SintefManufacturing/
python-urx. (accessed: 06.01.2019).
[29]
Allison M.WhitedPaul S.-H.Park. “Atomic force microscopy: A mul-
tifaceted tool to study membrane proteins and their interactions
with ligands”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Biomem-
branes Volume 1838, Issue 1, Part A, January 2014, Pages 56-68
().
[30]
S.N.MagonovaV.ElingsaM.-H.Whangbo. “Phase imaging and stiff-
ness in tapping-mode atomic force microscopy”. In: Surface Science
Volume 375, Issues 2–3, Pages L385-L391 (1 April 1997).
[31]
Gary A. Peterson Susan M. Wilson. “Application of laser scat-
terometry to characterize phase shifting masks”. In: Proc.SPIE
1809 (1993).
[32]
Jian Xub Yuxuan Gonga and Relva C. Buchananc. “Surface Rough-
ness: A Review of its Measurement at Micro-/Nano-scale”. In: Phys-
ical Sciences Reviews (2017).
[33]
Qian-Yi Zhou, Jaesik Park, and Vladlen Koltun. “Open3D: A Mod-
ern Library for 3D Data Processing”. In: arXiv:1801.09847 (2018).
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIX A
UR5 Datasheet
==PAGE:99==
Technical details
UR5
Performance
Repeatability
Ambient temperature range
Power consumption
Collaboration operation
Specification
Payload
Reach
Degrees of freedom
Programming
Movement
Axis movement robot arm
Base
Shoulder
Elbow
Wrist 1
Wrist 2
Wrist 3
Typical tool
Features
IP classification
ISO Class Cleanroom
Noise
Robot mounting
I/O ports
I/O power supply in tool
Physical
Footprint
Materials
Tool connector type
Cable length robot arm
Weight with cable
±0.1 mm / ±0.0039 in (4 mils)	
0-50°	
Min 90W, Typical 150W, Max 325W	
15 advanced adjustable safety functions.  
TüV NORD Approved Safety Function
Tested in accordance with:  
EN ISO 13849:2008 PL d 	
5 kg / 11 lbs	
850 mm / 33.5 in	
6 rotating joints	
Polyscope graphical user interface on 12 inch  
touchscreen with mounting	
Working range	
Maximum speed
± 360°	
± 180°/Sec.
± 360°	
± 180°/Sec.
± 360°	
± 180°/Sec.
± 360°	
± 180°/Sec.
± 360°	
± 180°/Sec.
± 360°	
± 180°/Sec.
1 m/Sec. / 39.4 in/Sec.
IP54
5	
	
Any	
Digital in	
2
Digital out	
2
Analog in	
2
Analog out	
0
12 V/24 V 600 mA in tool	
Ø 149mm	
Aluminium, PP plastics	
M8	
6 m / 236 in	
18,4 kg / 40.6 lbs
CONTROL BOX
Features
IP classification
ISO Class Cleanroom
Noise
I/O ports
I/O power supply
Communication 
Power source
Physical
Control box size (WxHxD) 
Weight
Materials
TEACH PENDANT
Features
IP classification
Physical
Materials
Weight
Cable length
IP20
6
<65dB(A)
Digital in	
16	
Digital out	
16	
Analog in	
2	
Analog out	
2	
24V 2A		
TCP/IP 100Mbit, Modbus TCP, 
Profinet, EthernetIP 
100-240 VAC, 50-60 Hz
475mm x 423mm x 268mm /  
18.7 x 16.7 x 10.6 in 
15 kg / 33.1 lbs
Steel
IP20
Aluminium, PP		
1,5 kg / 3.3 lbs		
4,5 m / 177 in		
Ambient temperature range
0-50° 
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX B
Technical drawings of
the Optosurf fixture
==PAGE:101==
 
63 
 R37,50 
 16 
 106 
 
6,10 
 8 
 R6 
 4X
6,1 
 50 
 45° 
B
B
 10 
 6 
 2X45  
SECTION B-B
SCALE 1 : 1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
NARYS.
SPRAWDZ.
ZATWIER.
WYPROD.
Z.JAKOŚCI
CHYBA ŻE OKREŚLONO INACZEJ:
WYMIARY SĄ W MILIMETRACH
WYKOŃCZENIE POWIERZCHNI:
TOLERANCJE:
   LINIOWA:
   KĄTOWA:
WYKOŃCZENIE:
STĘP OSTRE
KRAWĘDZIE
IMIĘ I NAZWISKO
PODPIS
DATA
MATERIAŁ:
NIE SKALUJ RYSUNKU
POPRAWKA
TYTUŁ:
NR RYSUNKU
SKALA:1:2
ARKUSZ 1 Z 1
A4
WAGA: 
upper_flat
==PAGE:102==
 R35 
 R27 
 16 
 R6 
 
6,10 
 106 
 2 
 8 
 
5 
 12 
B
B
 R4 
 5 
 10 
 2X45  
SECTION B-B
SCALE 1 : 1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
NARYS.
SPRAWDZ.
ZATWIER.
WYPROD.
Z.JAKOŚCI
CHYBA ŻE OKREŚLONO INACZEJ:
WYMIARY SĄ W MILIMETRACH
WYKOŃCZENIE POWIERZCHNI:
TOLERANCJE:
   LINIOWA:
   KĄTOWA:
WYKOŃCZENIE:
STĘP OSTRE
KRAWĘDZIE
IMIĘ I NAZWISKO
PODPIS
DATA
MATERIAŁ:
NIE SKALUJ RYSUNKU
POPRAWKA
TYTUŁ:
NR RYSUNKU
SKALA:1:2
ARKUSZ 1 Z 1
A4
WAGA: 
lower_flat
==PAGE:103==
 12 
 10 
 
54 
 50 
 60 
 5° 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
NARYS.
SPRAWDZ.
ZATWIER.
WYPROD.
Z.JAKOŚCI
CHYBA ŻE OKREŚLONO INACZEJ:
WYMIARY SĄ W MILIMETRACH
WYKOŃCZENIE POWIERZCHNI:
TOLERANCJE:
   LINIOWA:
   KĄTOWA:
WYKOŃCZENIE:
STĘP OSTRE
KRAWĘDZIE
IMIĘ I NAZWISKO
PODPIS
DATA
MATERIAŁ:
NIE SKALUJ RYSUNKU
POPRAWKA
TYTUŁ:
NR RYSUNKU
SKALA:1:1
ARKUSZ 1 Z 1
A4
WAGA: 
fitting_ring
==PAGE:104==
 
16 
 220 
 20 
 M6 
 20 
 M6 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
NARYS.
SPRAWDZ.
ZATWIER.
WYPROD.
Z.JAKOŚCI
CHYBA ŻE OKREŚLONO INACZEJ:
WYMIARY SĄ W MILIMETRACH
WYKOŃCZENIE POWIERZCHNI:
TOLERANCJE:
   LINIOWA:
   KĄTOWA:
WYKOŃCZENIE:
STĘP OSTRE
KRAWĘDZIE
IMIĘ I NAZWISKO
PODPIS
DATA
MATERIAŁ:
NIE SKALUJ RYSUNKU
POPRAWKA
TYTUŁ:
NR RYSUNKU
SKALA:1:5
ARKUSZ 1 Z 1
A4
WAGA: 
stick
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX C
Python code
1 import urx
2 import numpy as np
3 from datetime import datetime
4 import time
5 import colorsys
6 import os
7 from open3d import *
8 import colorsys
9 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
10 import matplotlib as mpl
11
12 maxIntensity = 0
13 maxAq=0
14 maxM=-100
15 minM=100
16 adjust=350
17 def num(s):
18
try:
19
return int(s)
20
except ValueError:
21
return float(s)
22
23 def ImportMeasurements():
24
text_file = open("C:\Thesis\optosurf\data_sniffer\
Measurement.txt", "r")
25
list1 = text_file.read().split('\n')
26
finallist = []
27
for x in list1:
28
list2 = x.split(",")
29
list3 = []
30
for item in list2:
31
list3.append(num(item))
32
finallist.append(list3)
33
==PAGE:106==
C Python code
99
34
return finallist
35
36 def IntensityToRGB(intensity):
37
global maxIntensity
38
hue= 0.75-(intensity/maxIntensity)*0.75
39
rgb= tuple(round(i * 255) for i in colorsys.hsv_to_rgb(
hue,1,1))
40
RGBint = (rgb[0]<<16) + (rgb[1]<<8) + rgb[2]
41
return RGBint
42
43 def AqToRGB(Aq):
44
global maxAq
45
hue= 0.75-(Aq/maxAq)*0.75
46
rgb= tuple(round(i * 255) for i in colorsys.hsv_to_rgb(
hue,1,1))
47
RGBint = (rgb[0]<<16) + (rgb[1]<<8) + rgb[2]
48
return RGBint
49
50 def MToRGB(M):
51
global maxM
52
global minM
53
Mrange = abs(maxM-minM)
54
hue= 0.75-((M +abs(minM))/Mrange)*0.75
55
rgb= tuple(round(i * 255) for i in colorsys.hsv_to_rgb(
hue,1,1))
56
RGBint = (rgb[0]<<16) + (rgb[1]<<8) + rgb[2]
57
return RGBint
58
59 def Legend(maximum ,minimum ,units):
60
61
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(8, 1))
62
ax1 = fig.add_axes([0.05, 0.80, 0.9, 0.15])
63
cmap = mpl.cm.jet
64
norm = mpl.colors.Normalize(vmin=minimum , vmax=maximum)
65
cb1 = mpl.colorbar.ColorbarBase(ax1, cmap=cmap,norm=norm,
orientation='horizontal')
66
cb1.set_label(units)
67
fig.canvas.manager.show()
68
return True
69
70
71 def Merge(RobotPositions ,optosurf):
72
y=0
73
global maxIntensity
==PAGE:107==
C Python code
100
74
global maxAq
75
global minM
76
global maxM
77
global adjust
78
error=0
79
ToBePloted=[]
80
for x in RobotPositions:
81
CurrentTime=x[3]+adjust
82
while True:
83
t=[]
84
if(optosurf[y][3]-CurrentTime >20):
85
error=error+1
86
break
87
if (CurrentTime <=(optosurf[y][3])):
88
t.append(x[0])
89
t.append(x[1])
90
t.append(x[2])
91
t.append(x[3])
92
t.append(optosurf[y][0])
93
t.append(optosurf[y][1])
94
t.append(optosurf[y][2])
95
t.append(optosurf[y][3])
96
ToBePloted.append(t)
97
98
if(maxIntensity <optosurf[y][1]):
99
maxIntensity=optosurf[y][1]
100
print("MaxIntensity:")
101
print(maxIntensity)
102
103
if(maxAq<optosurf[y][0]):
104
maxAq=optosurf[y][0]
105
print("maxAq")
106
print(maxAq)
107
108
if(maxM<optosurf[y][2]):
109
maxM=optosurf[y][2]
110
print("maxM")
111
print(maxM)
112
113
if(minM>optosurf[y][2]):
114
minM=optosurf[y][2]
115
print("minAq")
116
print(minM)
117
==PAGE:108==
C Python code
101
118
y=y+1
119
break
120
else:
121
y=y+1
122
print("Matched points")
123
print(len(ToBePloted))
124
print("Error")
125
print(error)
126
return ToBePloted
127
128 def YesNo():
129
yes = {'yes','y', 'ye', ''}
130
no = {'no','n'}
131
132
choice = input().lower()
133
if choice in yes:
134
return True
135
elif choice in no:
136
return False
137
138 def CatchPositions():
139
i=0
140
p=[]
141
t=[]
142
k=[]
143
p.append(rob2.tcf_pose())
144
print(i, p[i])
145
while True:
146
try:
147
t=rob2.tcf_pose()
148
k=t.tolist()
149
if(k[0]!=(p[-1][0])):
150
k.pop(5)
151
k.pop(4)
152
k.pop(3)
153
millis = int(round(time.time() * 1000))
154
k.append(millis)
155
156
with open('flag.txt') as f:
157
flag = f.readline()
158
f.close()
159
p.append(k)
160
i=i+1
161
==PAGE:109==
C Python code
102
162
except KeyboardInterrupt:
163
print ("Cool")
164
p.pop(0)
165
break
166
return p
167
168 from urx.urrtmon import URRTMonitor
169 rob2 = URRTMonitor("192.168.1.35")
170 rob2.start()
171 while (type(rob2.tcf_pose())==type(None)):
172
i=0
173
174 print("Connected.Did you start optosurf??")
175 if(YesNo()==True):
176
print("OK")
177
178 print(" Moving robot?")
179 if(YesNo()==True):
180
RobotPositions=CatchPositions()
181
182 os.system('taskkill /f /im dataSniffer.exe')
183 print("Importing new Optosurf measurements?")
184
185 if(YesNo()==True):
186
OptosurfMeasurements=ImportMeasurements()
187
188 while True:
189
190
print("Change adjust?")
191
192
if(YesNo()==True):
193
adjust=input("What's new adjustment?")
194
adjust=int(adjust)
195
196
else:
197
break
198
199
print("Merging last Robot positions with Optosurf
measurements")
200
201
MergedList=Merge(RobotPositions ,OptosurfMeasurements)
202
203
204
print("Creating files")
==PAGE:110==
C Python code
103
205
#
Create ply file
206
with open('measurement_I.pcd', 'w') as filehandle:
207
208
print("VERSION .7\nFIELDS x y z rgb\nSIZE 4 4 4 4\
nTYPE F F F I\nCOUNT 1 1 1 1\nWIDTH %d\nHEIGHT 1\
nVIEWPOINT 0 0 0 1 0 0 0\nPOINTS %d\nDATA ascii" %
(len(MergedList),(len(MergedList))) , file=
filehandle)
209
for x in MergedList:
210
x[0]=round(x[0],5)
211
x[1]=round(x[1],5)
212
x[2]=round(x[2],5)
213
print(x[0],x[1],x[2],IntensityToRGB(x[5]), sep='
', file=filehandle)
214
215
with open('measurement_Aq.pcd', 'w') as filehandle:
216
217
print("VERSION .7\nFIELDS x y z rgb\nSIZE 4 4 4 4\
nTYPE F F F I\nCOUNT 1 1 1 1\nWIDTH %d\nHEIGHT 1\
nVIEWPOINT 0 0 0 1 0 0 0\nPOINTS %d\nDATA ascii" %
(len(MergedList),(len(MergedList))) , file=
filehandle)
218
for x in MergedList:
219
x[0]=round(x[0],5)
220
x[1]=round(x[1],5)
221
x[2]=round(x[2],5)
222
print(x[0],x[1],x[2],AqToRGB(x[4]), sep=' ', file
=filehandle)
223
224
with open('measurement_M.pcd', 'w') as filehandle:
225
226
print("VERSION .7\nFIELDS x y z rgb\nSIZE 4 4 4 4\
nTYPE F F F I\nCOUNT 1 1 1 1\nWIDTH %d\nHEIGHT 1\
nVIEWPOINT 0 0 0 1 0 0 0\nPOINTS %d\nDATA ascii" %
(len(MergedList),(len(MergedList))) , file=
filehandle)
227
for x in MergedList:
228
x[0]=round(x[0],5)
229
x[1]=round(x[1],5)
230
x[2]=round(x[2],5)
231
print(x[0],x[1],x[2],MToRGB(x[6]), sep=' ', file=
filehandle)
232
233
print("Intensity plot")
==PAGE:111==
C Python code
104
234
Legend(maxIntensity ,0,"I")
235
pcd = read_point_cloud("measurement_I.pcd")
236
print(np.asarray(pcd.points))
237
draw_geometries([pcd])
238
print(colorsys.hsv_to_rgb(0,1,1)
)
239
240
plt.close("all")
241
print("Aq plot")
242
Legend(maxAq ,0,"Aq")
243
pcd = read_point_cloud("measurement_Aq.pcd")
244
print(np.asarray(pcd.points))
245
draw_geometries([pcd])
246
print(colorsys.hsv_to_rgb(0,1,1)
)
247
248
plt.close("all")
249
print("M plot")
250
Legend(maxM,minM,"M")
251
pcd = read_point_cloud("measurement_M.pcd")
252
print(np.asarray(pcd.points))
253
draw_geometries([pcd])
254
print(colorsys.hsv_to_rgb(0,1,1)
)
255
256
plt.close("all")
257
258 print ("done")
Listing C.1: Whole Python script used within this thesis.
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX D
data_sniffer code
1 #include "stdafx.h"
2 #include <stdio.h>
3 #include <conio.h>
4 #include "OS500.h"
5 #include <time.h>
6 #include <windows.h>
7 #include <string.h>
8 #include <sys/timeb.h>
/* ftime, timeb (for timestamp in
millisecond) */
9
10 // Before making measurements , execute a dark measurement for
11 // each spot by calling the GetDark() function. Save the
returned
12 // values and provide them to the SetDark() function each
time
13 // you restart the application.
14 unsigned char dark[32];
15 bool finished;
16 char name[100];
17 struct timeb timer_msec;
18 long long int timestamp_msec;
19 long long int current_timestamp;
20 char ch;
21 int flag = 0;
22 FILE *f = fopen("Measurement.txt", "w");
23 void PrintMenu()
24 {
25
printf("\n");
26
printf("1 - Dark measurement\n");
27
printf("2 - Show test window\n");
28
printf("3 - Start measurements\n");
29
printf("4 - Exit\n");
30
printf("Selection: ");
31 }
==PAGE:113==
D data_sniffer code
106
32
33 int CurrentTime()
34 {
35
SYSTEMTIME t;
36
GetSystemTime(&t); // or GetLocalTime(&t)
37
printf("The system time is: %02d:%02d:%02d.%03d\n",t.wHour,
t.wMinute , t.wSecond , t.wMilliseconds);
38
fprintf(f, "Time: % 02d: % 02d : % 02d. % 03d\n",t.wHour, t
.wMinute , t.wSecond , t.wMilliseconds);
39
return 0;
40 }
41
42
43 // Measurements are returned here.
44 void __stdcall MeasurementCompleteCallback(HANDLE
SensorHandle , unsigned long Count)
45 {
46
unsigned long i;
47
TMeasurements *mes = new TMeasurements[Count];
48
49
50
int ErrC = GetMeasurements(SensorHandle , mes, Count,
sizeof(TMeasurements));
51
//printf("Count: %d", Count);
52
53
if (ErrC == OS500_ERROR_OK)
54
{
55
56
57
/* timestamp in millisecond. */
58
ftime(&timer_msec);
59
timestamp_msec = ((long long int) timer_msec.time) *
1000ll +(long long int) timer_msec.millitm;
60
printf("%lld milliseconds since epoch\n",
timestamp_msec);
61
//printf("\n");
62
for (i = 0; i < Count; i++)
63
{
64
current_timestamp = timestamp_msec + i * 3.12;
65
if (flag == 1)
66
fprintf(f,"\n");
67
68
fprintf(f, "%.2f, %d, %.2f, %lld", mes[i].Aq, mes[i].
I, mes[i].M,current_timestamp);
==PAGE:114==
D data_sniffer code
107
69
//printf("\n");
70
flag = 1;
71
}
72
}
73
74
else
75
{
76
printf("GetMeasurements failed; %d", ErrC);
77
}
78
79
80
delete [] mes;
81
finished = true;
82 }
83
84 // Errors are returned here.
85 void __stdcall MeasurementErrorCallback(HANDLE SensorHandle ,
unsigned short ErrorCode)
86 {
87
printf("[%d] Error: %d\n", SensorHandle , ErrorCode);
88 }
89
90 // Executes a dark measurement. Don't forget to
91 // attach the light trap to the sensor head before
92 // calling this function.
93 void DarkMeasurement(HANDLE SensorHandle)
94 {
95
int err;
96
97
err = GetDark(SensorHandle , dark, 32);
98
99
if (err == OS500_ERROR_OK)
100
{
101
// You should save the array somewhere to avoid having to
102
// execute a dark measurement each time the application
starts.
103
SetDark(SensorHandle , OS500_SPOT_1 , dark, 32);
104
} else
105
{
106
printf("GetDark failed\n");
107
}
108 }
109
110 // Shows the test window.
==PAGE:115==
D data_sniffer code
108
111 void TestWindow(HANDLE SensorHandle)
112 {
113
if (ShowTestWindow(SensorHandle) != OS500_ERROR_OK)
114
{
115
printf("ShowTestWindow failed\n");
116
}
117 }
118
119 // Starts the measurement. When the measurements are done,
120 // the callback function is called.
121 void StartMeasurement(HANDLE SensorHandle)
122 {
123
int ErrorCode;
124
finished = false;
125
ErrorCode = Start(SensorHandle);
126
if (ErrorCode == OS500_ERROR_OK)
127
{
128
//printf("Waiting for measurements...\n");
129
130
// loop for ever
131
while (!finished);
132
} else
133
{
134
printf("Start failed! %d\n", ErrorCode);
135
}
136 }
137
138 int _tmain(int argc, _TCHAR* argv[])
139 {
140
int i;
141
char c;
142
HANDLE SensorHandle;
143
144
// Set up the callback functions for communication with the
DLL.
145
if (SetMeasurementCompleteCallback(&
MeasurementCompleteCallback) != OS500_ERROR_OK)
146
{
147
printf("SetMeasurementCompleteCallback failed\n");
148
return -1;
149
}
150
151
if (SetMeasurementErrorCallback(&MeasurementErrorCallback)
!= OS500_ERROR_OK)
==PAGE:116==
D data_sniffer code
109
152
{
153
printf("SetMeasurementErrorCallback failed\n");
154
return -1;
155
}
156
157
// Establish a connection to the sensor.
158
printf("Connecting to sensor...\n");
159
160
SensorHandle = Connect();
161
if (SensorHandle == 0)
162
{
163
printf("Connect failed\n");
164
return -1;
165
}
166
167
// Set up the sensor:
168
// -Load dark measurement values.
169
// -Enable the spot you want to use (The first spot is
enabled on startup , sso this
170
//
is only needed for DuoSpot sensors).
171
172
// You would load your previously recorded dark
measurements (recorded by GetDark() function) instead.
173
for (i = 0; i < 32; i++)
174
{
175
dark[i] = i;
176
}
177
178
printf("Setting up sensor...\n");
179
180
if (SetDark(SensorHandle , OS500_SPOT_1 , dark, 32) !=
OS500_ERROR_OK)
181
{
182
printf("SetDark failed\n");
183
return -1;
184
}
185
186
if (EnableSpot(SensorHandle , OS500_SPOT_1) !=
OS500_ERROR_OK)
187
{
188
printf("EnableSpot failed\n");
189
return -1;
190
}
191
==PAGE:117==
D data_sniffer code
110
192
// Set up the measurement parameters.
193
// Values used for this example:
194
// -Measurements is triggered by sensor timer.
195
// -Measurement count: 100
196
// -Timer value: 2 ms
197
// -Timeout 1 s (should be at least 100 * 2 ms)
198
if (SetTriggerMode(SensorHandle , OS500_TRIGGERMODE_TIMER)
!= OS500_ERROR_OK)
199
{
200
printf("SetTriggerMode failed\n");
201
return -1;
202
}
203
204
if (SetMeasurementCount(SensorHandle , 100) !=
OS500_ERROR_OK)
205
{
206
printf("SetMeasurementCount failed\n");
207
return -1;
208
}
209
210
if (SetTimerValue(SensorHandle , 2) != OS500_ERROR_OK)
211
{
212
printf("SetTimerValue failed\n");
213
return -1;
214
}
215
if (SetTimeout(SensorHandle , 1000) != OS500_ERROR_OK)
216
{
217
printf("SetTimeout failed\n");
218
return -1;
219
}
220
// As there are no recorded dark measurements that are
available in this example ,
221
// you always have to execute the menu option 1 - dark
measurement before making
222
// any measurements.
223
for (;;)
224
{
225
c = '3';
226
fflush(stdin);
227
switch (c)
228
{
229
case '1':
230
DarkMeasurement(SensorHandle);
231
break;
==PAGE:118==
D data_sniffer code
111
232
case '2':
233
TestWindow(SensorHandle);
234
break;
235
case '3':
236
{
237
flag = 0;
238
f = fopen("Measurement.txt", "a");
239
while (!(kbhit()))
240
{
241
StartMeasurement(SensorHandle);
242
}
243
fclose(f);
244
break;
245
}
246
case '4':
247
fclose(f);
248
return 0;
249
break;
250
default:
251
break;
252
}
253
}
254
return 0;
255 }
Listing D.1: Whole data_sniffer program code.
==PAGE:119==
==PAGE:120==
