==PAGE:1==
Scalable Nearest Neighbour
Search in High Dimensions
Alexander Kvist Andreasen
Kongens Lyngby
M.Sc. February 11, 2019
Supervisors: Inge Li Gørtz & Philip Bille
Extern Supervisor: John Madsen, Milestone Systems A/S
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis seeks to design, implement and test algorithms and techniques for
creating a scalable data structure that support the approximate nearest neigh-
bour query on high dimensional vectors. Locality sensitive hashing is initially
examined with the two hash families hyperplane and cross-polytype and are
compared to median rank aggregation. A new data structure is proposed based
on locality sensitive hashing and k-means clustering, where each cluster is self-
contained locality sensitive hashing solution. These solutions are then imple-
mented with a database in order to test scalability on big datasets.
The proposed solution together with the locality sensitive hashing are evaluated
and tested for quality and eﬃciency on three diﬀerent datasets. Additionally
is a dynamic test performed, that simulates a real-world scenario.
The new
solution achieves better recall and is more eﬃcient than the standard locality
sensitive hashing solution, but uses more time on insertion.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Summary
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Video Management and Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Similarity Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Nearest Neighbour Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Curse of Dimensionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Related Works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Motivation and Thesis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.1
Thesis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4.2
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Preliminaries
11
2.1
Distance Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Locality Sensitive Hashing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Ampliﬁcation of a LSH Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Design
15
3.1
Speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Locality Sensitive Hashing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Hyperplane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Cross-Polytype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Clustering Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Concept and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.2
Cluster Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.3
Solution Extensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.4
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:6==
iv
CONTENTS
4
Implementation
47
4.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.1
Database Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.1
Code Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.2
Database Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Results
57
5.1
Parameter Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.1.1
LSH Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.1.2
Clustering Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2
Static Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2.1
SIFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2.2
Glove
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.2.3
Milestone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.3
Dynamic Benchmarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6
Discussion
69
6.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.2
LSH Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.3
Clustering Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.4
Database Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7
Conclusions and Future Work
75
7.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A Results
77
B Program Conﬁgurations
85
B.1
Command Line Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.2
Conﬁguration ﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
C Log File
89
Bibliography
91
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Video surveillance is an ever growing area of interest and are rapidly becoming
an integrated part of society. A usual view is to consider video surveillance as a
mean to monitor people for crime prevention and solving, but video surveillance
are used on a far wider scale. Music festivals and football stadiums utilise the
technology for crowd management analysis in order to identify and respond
to situations before they become incidents.
It is used to monitor transport
infrastructure and provide intelligence to motorists and authorities alike about
the current traﬃc situation.
While undertaking a crime investigation or monitoring trespassers on private
property, would it be beneﬁcial if it was possible to follow and identify individ-
uals as the move by multiple cameras. In this thesis, we focus on the search
associated with such a recognition of individuals on camera footage. The camera
footage has been through a machine learning model, that assigns each individual
a unique vector. It is then our goal to answer whether individuals with similar
vectors have appeared on other cameras.
The forthcoming sections elaborates on the problem domain and introduces
the nearest neighbour search. The standard solutions to this search query are
presented and the diﬃculties in regard to this domain are established.
The
chapter concludes with a related works section that ties into the motivation
behind this thesis.
==PAGE:8==
2
Introduction
1.1
Video Management and Object Detection
Milestone Systems A/S1 has developed a video management system (VMS)
which, among other, are capable of collecting and recording video from cameras
and other devices. The video are stored on a storage device for a ﬁnite time
period and the VMS provides an interface where the video can be viewed live
or played back from previous recordings.
An experimental feature of the VMS is identifying objects live in the video feed,
e.g. cars, number plates or people, and then store this information in addition to
the video. The incentive is that it would be fairly simple to count the number of
said object in a given time frame, but also provide the possibility of searching for
similar objects without having to watch the entire recording. For example, could
a suspicious individual had been caught on one camera, where the VMS operator
could be interested in exploring whether the individual also were present in
videos of other cameras. This of course requires that the identiﬁed objects are
distinguishable and classiﬁed, such that some kind of similarity measure can be
established between objects.
In practice, the VMS utilises a machine learning model, which is pre-trained
to detect particular objects in frames of a video (images). For each object the
machine learning model returns a high dimensional vector, which is a numerical
assessment describing that particular object. The size of the vectors can vary
and depends on the used model, but usually a high dimensional vector can be of
hundredths to thousands dimensions. In addition to recognising and classifying
objects in images, is it also a goal of the model to produce vectors that are
somewhat similar, if the objects recognised are similar. This then establishes
the groundwork of using the vectors as a measure for ﬁnding similar objects in
videos. An illustration of this process can be seen in Figure 1.1.
These vectors, together with the classiﬁcation, timestamps, camera and possible
other descriptors, are stored as metadata in a separate metadata database with
a reference to the corresponding video frame.
For retrieving this metadata
eﬃciently, the VMS utilises an Index server, where all metadata are indexed.
The server has multiple plugins that support the usual data types, e.g. ﬂoats,
strings, integers, enumerations etc., but indexing schemes are not normal for
metadata on the form of high dimensional vectors. At least not the form that
support similarity queries.
1https://www.milestonesys.com/
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Similarity Search
3
p1 =(x1,1, x1,2, ... , x1,d) 
p2 =(x2,1, x2,2, ... , x2,d) 
p3 =(x3,1, x3,2, ... , x3,d) 
p4 =(x4,1, x4,2, ... , x4,d) 
p5 =(x5,1, x5,2, ... , x5,d) 
p6 =(x6,1, x6,2, ... , x6,d)
Figure 1.1: The machine learning model identiﬁes and classiﬁes people in an
image and then returns a vector describing each identiﬁed person.
On this image, the model was not able to identify everybody, as
only 6 of 10 people yielded vectors.
Furthermore, is it a legal requirement in many countries, that recorded video
from surveillance cameras only are allowed to be stored for a limited period
time, e.g. 30 days in Denmark [11]. This does not only concern the videos, but
also the stored metadata. Thus, the indexing scheme must be highly dynamic
allowing both insertion and deletion continuously over time. Lastly, does the
VMS support hundredths of cameras, which all run at multiple frames per sec-
ond. Hence the amount of identiﬁed objects and thus the number of descriptor
vectors could be very large. It is therefore a motivated area of research, to ﬁnd
an adequate indexing scheme that is both scalable, highly dynamic and supports
similarity search.
1.2
Similarity Search
Similarity search is a general term used for a number of problems that, all at
their core, are about searching for similar objects. One example is the range
reporting problem, which is a typical operation in a relational database. Here
the purpose is to retrieve all records where a value of a ﬁeld is between certain
boundaries. This can be extended to multiple ﬁelds and thus becomes a multi-
dimensional problem, where all the returned records are similar in regard to the
chosen ﬁeld boundaries. The concept of similarity is, as in this example, often
intuitive, but for our purpose we need an explicit deﬁnition of what it means
to be similar. This deﬁnition will be given formally in section 2.1, but for now
we say that two vectors or points are similar if the euclidean distance between
them is short.
==PAGE:10==
4
Introduction
1.2.1
Nearest Neighbour Search
The particular similarity search problem that is considered in this thesis, is the
nearest neighbour problem (NN). This is an optimisation problem, where given a
set of points S in space M and a query point q ∈M, ﬁnd the most similar points
of q in S. Here M is the d-dimensional euclidean space, Rd. A generalisation of
this problem is the k-Nearest Neighbour (k-NN) problem, where the goal is to
return the k nearest points of q in S. An example can be seen in Figure 1.2.
The NN problem is also called the post-oﬃce problem, best match ﬁle search-
ing problem, vector quantization encoder, the light-bulb problem, etc. The many
names are due to the problem not only being relevant for image object descrip-
tors, but for a wide range of applications, namely data compression, information
retrieval, pattern recognition, statistics, data analysis and databases [3][30]. For
example is the k-NN algorithm a classiﬁcation and regression used in machine
learning.
q
p2
p1
p3
p4
p5
q
p2
p1
p3
p4
p5
Figure 1.2: Left: 2-dimensional example of the k-Nearest Neighbour search
with query point q, k = 5 and the found neighbours p1, . . . , p5.
Right: Approximate k-Nearest Neighbour search, where the two
points p4 and p5 were found instead the two closer points.
A naive brute force solution to the k-NN problem would be to calculate the
distance D(p, q) for every point p ∈S to q and choose the k points where D(p, q)
is minimum. Here D is the distance function belonging to M. This distance
calculation over all points naturally has the time complexity of O(|S|), which
is unfeasible for big data sets. To circumvent this issue, the k-NN problem is
relaxed, such that we accept approximate nearest neighbours. This will improve
the time and space complexities of the algorithms, but at the cost of having no
guarantee of returning the nearest neighbours anymore. Formally, we accept
a point p′ if it is a c-approximate nearest neighbour. That is we require that
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Similarity Search
5
D(p′, q) ≤cD(p, q), where p is an actual nearest neighbour and the approximate
factor c ≥1. In other words, an algorithm is allowed to return neighbours that
are within distance c times the distance from p to q.
It is then the goal of
the algorithm to bound this constant to a value as close to 1 as possible in
order to approach the standard k-NN. See Figure 1.2 for an example, where the
inner ring is D(p, q) and the outer ring cD(p, q). For some practical cases are an
approximate nearest neighbour almost or just as good as a real nearest neighbour
[15] and with a good similarity measure and an appropriate approximation factor
will the approximate neighbours likely be close to the real nearest neighbours
[14].
1.2.2
Curse of Dimensionality
As stated in the previous section, is the k-NN problem relaxed in order to get
algorithms that are faster and cheaper. This is not the whole truth though,
since there are algorithms that solves the problem in sub-linear time, but all of
these algorithms have issues when the dimension of the data increases. Often
referred to as the curse of dimensionality. In theory and in practice do solutions
to NN based on space partitioning degrade to a linear search for suﬃciently high
dimensions [30][14]. The relaxation is therefore also performed to oppose this
issue. We will now consider a number of classical solutions to the standard NN
problem in the Euclidean space to exhibit this.
Predecessor Problem
The 1-dimensional version of the NN problem is the predecessor problem. Here
the goal is to ﬁnd the previous (nearest) numerical value for some given query
value.
Sub-linear solutions exist to this problem, which uses O(n) or O(U)
space and yields O(log log U) query time, where n is the data size and U is the
universe size. Two noteworthy data structures are van Emde Boas Trees [28]
and Y-Fast Tries [31]. These are very good complexities, but the solutions are
not applicable for higher dimensions.
Point Location Problem
In two dimensions the problem can be captured by the Voronoi diagram used in
computational geometry, see Figure 1.3. Here the goal is to partition the plane
into n cells, one associated with each point, and where each cell corresponds to
the area closest to its point compared to other points. Given a query point, one
then needs to determine which cell contains the query point. This is called the
point location problem and has multiple solutions with O(n) space and O(log n)
query time, e.g. persistent binary trees [26]. The K-Means algorithm, which is
described in section 3.3.2, actually produces a Voronoi tessellation (diagram) in
arbitrary dimensions.
==PAGE:12==
6
Introduction
Figure 1.3: Voronoi diagram with 20 points. Each cell occupy the area that
is closer to its own point than any other point.
k-d Tree
Another solution to the two-dimensional problem is the k-d (k-dimensional) tree
[8], which uses O(n) space and provides queries of O(log n) time on average.
As the name implies it also is applicable in higher dimensions, but given the
dimension k and the data size n, then it requires n ≫2k. This is because of the
way the k-d tree is built and structured; it’s a binary tree, where every internal
node symbolises a hyperplane that splits the space into two sub spaces along
one dimension. Points on the left of the split are found in the left subtree and
points on the right in the other subtree. Each subtree is then split in another
dimension until all points remain in their own subspace. The problems with
high dimensions is that the number of subspaces grows exponentially with k, so
in high dimensions many subspaces would not contain any points and the query
would require extensive search on the binary tree.
R-Tree
Similar results are obtained with the R-Tree and its variants (R* tree, R+ tree,
X-tree etc.), which has been used in spatiotemporal databases, multimedia
databases as well as in data warehouses [20]. This is a result of the R-Tree
being a hierarchical data structure based on the B+-tree and using (potential
overlapping) bounding boxes surrounding its objects (Points or other spatial
structures). In contrast to the k-d tree are the bounding boxes only surround-
ing the objects and not consisting of an entire subspace. In the end the R-Tree
still suﬀers the same problems as the k-d tree due to the spatial partitioning.
Dimensionality Reduction
Since the high dimensionality is introduced as such a deal-breaker for these algo-
rithms and examples, the natural question would be to ask why dimensionality
reduction algorithms not are used to address this. The answer is that it could
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Related Works
7
be used, and it many cases should be, but it always depends on the dataset.
Some datasets might have very sparse vectors or have multiple correlated ran-
dom variables and in these cases the dimension of the data can be reduced
without loss of information. Other data sets might not have these properties,
but dimensionality reduction might still be usable but at a loss of information.
The loss of information might be insigniﬁcant or the performance gained might
outweigh the downsides, but this is something that is depended on the data set,
the dimensionality reduction used and the criteria of the results. Dimensionality
reduction is in itself a big area of research with many widely used algorithms,
e.g. principal component analysis and factor analysis, and is out of the scope of
this thesis.
1.3
Related Works
In academia, a signiﬁcant amount of work has been done on the k-NN problem.
We here mention some of the more prominent recent solutions to the problem.
It should be noticed that not all of algorithms have been bounded in query
time and approximation factor, which makes theoretical direct comparison a bit
hard. These solutions should therefore be evaluated with caution.
Z-order approximate k-NN
In the database domain most solutions are proposing a new index structure or
a change to the database engine in order to support the query, but a method
for supporting this query directly in a relational database with primitive SQL
is proposed [32]. The idea is to crate α diﬀerent sets of data points by adding
α diﬀerent random vectors. A z-order curve is then created on each set, which
reduces the problem to 1 dimension and binary search can be applied. With α =
O(1), n being the data size and B being the block size, the method guarantees an
expected constant factor approximate k-NN result with O(logf
n
B + k
B ) number
of page accesses and O(n) space. The method suﬀers in cases with d > 10 due
to the dimensionality reduction of the z-curve.
Median Rank Aggregation
Another database focused solution uses median rank aggregation to solve the
approximate k-NN problem [13]. Here the points are sorted in d lists, one for
each dimension. Given a query point q and a candidate set C = ∅, pointers
to each predecessor and successor of q in each list are identiﬁed. Now the idea
is to add predecessors and successors to C and count the frequency fp of each
added point p. When fp ≥1
2d, p is chosen as an approximate nearest neighbour.
The pointers to predecessors and successors are moved away from q in each list
continuously in order to add more elements to C until k neighbours are found.
==PAGE:14==
8
Introduction
The query has expected probe depth (that is number of unique points added
to C) of O(n1−2/(d+2)) and the data structure uses O(n) space, where n is the
number of points. The authors show great recall > 0.9 and probe depth < 0.1
even on data with d > 100, but given their theoretical bound on the probe depth
this seems unlikely.
k-Means k-NN
As stated earlier is the k-NN algorithm a widely used machine learning classi-
ﬁcation, which at its core still solves the (exact) k-NN problem, which is also
interesting to consider. An algorithm has been proposed, which uses k-Means
on the data set to partition it into clusters and using triangle inequality to de-
termine which clusters to query [29]. Initially the data is clustered with k-Means
and the points are sorted in descending order for each cluster according to their
distance pi −cj to their centre cj. Given a query point q, the distance to each
cluster centre q −cj is calculated. Now for each point pi in the closest cluster,
check that dmax ≤q−cj −pi−cj, where dmax is the largest distance of current k
nearest neighbours. The real distance di is then calculated and if di < dmax then
pi is added as a neighbour. When the inequality dmax ≤q −cj −pi −cj is false,
we stop inspecting the cluster since the points are sorted. We then continue
with the next cluster etc. The solution uses O(n) space and O(d√n log dn + n)
query time, which is slightly better than the worst case. Since this should be
used as a classiﬁer are the data structure only supposed to be built once with
no insertions and deletions considered.
Locality Sensitive Hashing The most popular solution in recent approximate
NN research is clearly locality sensitive hashing (LSH) [16][14]. Here the notion
is to create a hash function family, where points that are similar in a metric
space are hashed to similar hash values. The points are then hashed to buckets
in a hash table and it is then possible with a query point q to use the same hash
function and obtain a bucket. This bucket should then hold the points that
are similar to q. The authors here propose a hash family where points ﬁrst are
projected to the Hamming cube. Now a number of bits are chosen uniformly at
random of the projected points, which are now binary vectors. These bits are
concatenated and make out the hash value. It is then possible to create more
hash functions by choosing new bits. The solution uses sub-quadratic space of n
and query time sublinear of n and polynomial of d, the exact measures depend
on multiple variables. Other noticeable hash families include hyperplane LSH
[10] and cross-prototype LSH [4].
Linear Space approximate k-NN with LSH
Since the aforementioned LSH solutions use sub-quadratic space, a new linear
space solution has been proposed [6]. Given a LSH family of functions in the
Euclidean or Hamming space, the points are projected to the Hamming cube
with d ≤log n, where n is the number of points and d is the dimension. The
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Motivation and Thesis Objectives
9
points are then bucketed with binary strings as keys obtained with the projec-
tion. The authors study both the Hyperplane LSH family and the LSH family
of projections to random lines. The algorithm uses O(dn) space and promises
sublinear query time with c > 1, where c is the approximation factor. Their re-
sults are slower than standard LSH, but uses less space, which shows the classic
trade-oﬀbetween space and time.
NV-Tree
The last technique examined is a disk-based data structure called the Nearest
Vector-Tree (NV-Tree) [17][18]. The idea is that the points are projected to a
1-dimensional line, which are then partitioned into overlapping sub-partitions.
Each sub-partition then project its points into a new 1-dimensional line and
performs the same portioning. With multiple layers of projection and partition-
ing is the ﬁnalised data structure a tree, where all the points are found in the
leaf nodes. It is then possible with a query point to search through the tree and
perform the same projection at each level in order to determine which leaf node
should be inspected. This data structure has been used in practice on up to a
1 billion points with recall rate up to 80% and with query time less than 70 ms
pr returned neighbour. A theoretical analysis of the indexing is missing though.
1.4
Motivation and Thesis Objectives
The data structures examined above mainly focus on building the data struc-
ture with a ﬁnite set of data and then querying them with multiple nearest
neighbour queries.
The space eﬃciency of the data structure and the recall
and time eﬃciency of the query are then measured and used as benchmarks. A
less researched topic is the eﬃciency of nearest neighbour queries under highly
dynamic data. This would therefore be an interesting area to explore. Addition-
ally, is it only the NV-Tree that addresses scalability in high dimensions and can
be used as an indexing scheme in a database, where the other solutions are not
as concerned with data structures that cannot ﬁt entirely into memory. Hence
other methodologies for obtaining scalability would be interesting to develop
and try out, potentially comparing them with the established NV-tree.
This thesis explores algorithms and techniques for creating a scalable data struc-
ture that supports the approximate nearest neighbour query on high dimensional
vectors. The purpose is that the created data structure could be used as an in-
dex scheme in a metadata database as a part of Milestone System’s VMS. We
use a locality sensitive hashing and clustering based solution as our approach for
a scalable data structure. The idea is to subdivide the vectors dynamically into
partitions with clustering and use locality sensitive hashing on each partition,
==PAGE:16==
10
Introduction
with the potential of subdividing the partitions further if needed. Consequently
attempting to obtain both a scalable and dynamic solution.
1.4.1
Thesis Objectives
The initial objective of this thesis is to survey existing algorithms for nearest
neighbour search, which is already partly demonstrated by the previous related
works section. The next objective is to implement and compare selected state-of-
the-art algorithms and from this experience design our own algorithms. Lastly, is
it an objective to create a prototype of these new algorithms, where the eﬃciency
is evaluated and analysed from both at theoretical and practical perspective.
The prototype created of the new algorithms is required, in addition to the k-
nearest-neighbour query, to support operations for single vector insertion and
deletion, as well as batch insertion and deletion. The single vector operations are
prototypes for continues stream operations and the batch operations resembles
immediate batches of the same operation, e.g. delete all vectors with a times-
tamp older than 30 days. These operations are all required to be performed in
sub-linear time complexity, due to the expected large quantity of data.
The algorithms should be analysed theoretically in regard to time complexity
and space complexity and should be tested practically by measuring time in
both static and dynamic settings. Lastly should the algorithms also be tested
on recall and inspection rate, which are measures for the quality of results.
1.4.2
Thesis Structure
The next chapter presents the preliminaries, where several underlying concepts
are introduced that are used extensively throughout the rest of the thesis. The
following chapters presents the theory, design and implementation of the chosen
solutions, as well the results obtained testing these. This is followed up with
a discussion of the results and solutions.
The thesis is completed with the
conclusions and future works.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Preliminaries
Before we go into detail about the solutions we have designed are preliminaries
required. We will ﬁrst go over the used distance functions and thereafter present
the theoretical background on locality sensitive hashing.
2.1
Distance Functions
It is important to emphasise and formalise, what metric are applied to the the
set of data, since distance and similarity between two points can vary greatly
with diﬀerent metrics. We will in this thesis use the term distance function,
when referring to the function d : X ×X →R, that describes the distance in the
metric space, here X is a set. d should map to non-negative values, be symmetric
and support the triangle inequality. Furthermore should d = 0 indicate that the
arguments are identical and a greater values away from 0 should imply a greater
distance between the arguments. The similarity function s : X × X →[0, 1]
demonstrates the similarity, where 1 means that the arguments are identical
and 0 implies that they are as dissimilar as possible in the metric space. The
similarity can be derived from the distance function given two vectors p and q:
similarity = s(p, q) =
1
1 + d(p, q)
==PAGE:18==
12
Preliminaries
The ﬁrst distance function considered is the Euclidean distance, which given
two vectors A, B ∈Rd are deﬁned as:
euclidean distance =
v
u
u
t
d
X
i=1
(Ai −Bi)2
The distance ranges from 0 to ∞and is a measure for the length of the line
between the two vectors.
In addition to the Euclidean distance are we also
considering the cosine similarity, which given two vectors A, B ∈Rd are deﬁned
as:
similarity = cos(θ) = A · B
A B =
Pd
i=1 AiBi
qPd
i=1 A2
i
qPd
i=1 B2
i
Here neither A or B are allowed to be the null vector. The similarity ranges
from -1 when the angle between the vectors are 180°, over 0 where the vectors
are orthogonal, to 1 where the angle between the vectors are 0°. This is not a
proper distance metric however since it does not satisfy the triangle inequality.
Hence, it is necessary to normalise the cosine similarity and calculate the angular
distance:
angular distance = cos−1(cosine similarity)
π
This distance satisﬁes the triangle inequality and is bounded between 0 and
1, where 0 is when the vectors are the same and 1 is when they are exactly
opposite. This distance function therefore indicate the angle between vectors
and thus ignore the length of the vectors. It is especially a good measure when
points are distributed on the unit sphere, where all distances are 1.
2.2
Locality Sensitive Hashing
Locality sensitive hashing (LSH) covers over families of hash functions that
hashes similar entities to the same hash values. Let H be such a family of hash
functions, which maps Rd to some discrete universe U, e.g. {0, 1}k, k ∈N. Two
arbitrary points p, q ∈R are then called a candidate pair if h(p) = h(q), where
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Locality Sensitive Hashing
13
h is chosen uniformly at random from H. There are 3 conditions for H to be
considered as being locality sensitive [23]:
1. The functions of H must have a higher probability of making close pairs
candidate pairs than distant pairs.
2. The functions of H must be statistically independent, such that it is pos-
sible to use the product rule for independent events and estimate the
probability of multiple combined hash functions.
3. The functions of H must be eﬃcient in the sense that they are able to
identify candidate pairs in time much less than the time it takes to check
all pairs.
Formally, the family H is called (R, cR, P1, P2)-sensitive
• if d(p, q) ≤R then PrH[h(p) = h(q)] ≥P1
• if d(p, q) ≥cR then PrH[h(p) = h(q)] ≤P2
Here c > 1, the probabilities P1 > P2, R is a distance and d is a distance
function from the previous section. Figure 2.1 depicts the expected probability
for a (R, cR, P1, P2)-sensitive hash family declaring a pair of points a candidate
pair. The parameter c is what quantiﬁes what is close and what is distant. In
relevance to the approximate-NN problem is R the distance of the neighbours
we want, cR is the distance to neighbours we tolerate getting and above cR
is what we try to avoid. Notice that there is no deﬁnition of the probability
between the distances R and cR. It is possible to choose c close to 1 which will
narrow the gap, but this will typically result in P1 and P2 being close as well.
2.2.1
Ampliﬁcation of a LSH Family
We will now see that it is possible to increase the gap between P1 and P2 while
R and cR are ﬁxed.
We will call this procedure ampliﬁcation.
The idea is
to choose multiple hash functions from H and concatenate them in two ways,
which creates a new hash family H′. Given the parameters k and L we choose
L functions gj(q) = (h1,j(q), . . . , hk,j(q)), where hi,j with 1 ≤i ≤k and 1 ≤
j ≤L are chosen independently and uniformly at random from H. This why it
was required in our deﬁnition of locality sensitive families to have statistically
independent hash functions. This construct is a new hash function that is part
==PAGE:20==
14
Preliminaries
P2
cR
d(p, q)
R
P1
Pr[h(p) = h(q)]
Figure 2.1: The expected probability for a (R, cR, P1, P2)-sensitive hash func-
tion.
of a the hash family H′. It is possible to create further independent constructs
of similar fashion from H with the same technique and these constructs are what
makes up H′.
Given a single function gj two points are now only a candidate pair if hi,j(p) =
hi,j(q)) for all i = 1, 2, . . . , k, which lowers the probability of distant pairs being
candidate pairs more than it lowers the probability of close pairs being candidate
pairs. The probabilities P1 and P2 are now ampliﬁed to P k
1 and P k
2 . Furthermore
are two points considered a candidate pair if gj(p) = gj(q) for one of j =
1, 2, . . . , L, which increases the probability of close pairs being candidate pairs
more than it increases the probability of distant pairs being candidate pairs.
The probabilities are now ampliﬁed further to 1 −(1 −P k
1 )L and 1 −(1 −P k
2 )L.
We now say that H′ is a (R, cR, 1 −(1 −P k
1 )L, 1 −(1 −P k
2 )L)-sensitive family.
By choosing k and L judiciously is it possible to create hash functions, where
close pairs with high probability are hashed to the same bucket while distant
pairs only are hashed to the same bucket with a low probability. The ampliﬁca-
tion does not come without a cost, since both k and L increase the number of
hash functions used, which increases both the time and space requirements. In
general, is it always possible to choose k and L to get space O(n1+ρ) and query
time O(nρ), where ρ = ln(1/P1)/ ln(1/P2) [16].
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Design
We will now present and examine the diﬀerent solutions that we have chosen for
the scalable k-Nearest neighbour problem. Initially, we selected locality sensitive
hashing together with median rank aggregation as our two base solutions. LSH
is used widely to solve NN problems and it is therefore interesting to examine
whether it is feasible under our extended requirements as well. Median rank
aggregation is relatively simple technique that uses less space than LSH, which
could be a baseline for the LSH. The two solutions were compared to each other
as memory-based implementations, where it was clear that the median rank
aggregation struggled with the high dimensionality. Based on this knowledge,
did we propose a new solution based on LSH, but with potential improvements
where LSH usually falls short.
The following section go into detail of the input format and what operations are
required for our solutions. The next section presents the ﬁrst solution, based
on locality sensitive hashing, where the two hashing schemes hyperplane and
cross-polytype are discussed.
Finally we propose our own solution based on
clustering.
==PAGE:22==
16
Design
3.1
Speciﬁcations
Before a solution can be proposed do we need to specify the requirements. We
have to recall that the motivation behind this solution is to provide an indexing
scheme, that allows the k-NN query, and where data are descriptions of an
object in a video. Even though this seem very implementation-focused is it still
necessary to establish now, since the operations of the solution depend on the
input format. A data entry, referred to as a data point, is a tuple and include
the following elements:
• ID: Unique identiﬁer, usually a string.
• Coordinates: d-dimensional vector of ﬂoating point numbers that repre-
sents a point in the euclidean space.
• Timestamp: The timestamp of the recorded object.
• Metadata: Additional data of the data entry, which are not key for the
operations.
We will sometimes say point or vector in the design of our solutions, this refers
to the coordinates of a data point. The metadata component of the data point
could for example be a camera identiﬁer, an object type or a classiﬁcation con-
ﬁdence. These are all interesting properties, which could be interesting to use
as ﬁlters in a k-NN query, but this has been deemed outside of the scope. Such
a ﬁlter could always be applied after the k-NN query and with a large enough
k could numerous results still be available after the ﬁlter.
The required operations include insertion, where it should be possible to insert
a single or multiple data points into the data structure. Additionally, it includes
deletion where given either an ID or multiple IDs, the data points with those
IDs should be removed from the data structure.
The insertion and deletion
operations concerning multiple points are called a batch operation. The last
operation to support is the k-NN query, where provided with a point (only
coordinates) and k, returns the k nearest data points.
We are throughout this thesis going to use Big-O notation to classify our algo-
rithms and data structures in regards to space requirement and running time.
The input to our algorithms are points, the space complexity of our data struc-
tures are therefore founded on points as the input size grows. As example would
an array of n points of dimension d have a complexity of O(n) and not O(dn).
The running time on the other hand is measured in fundamental operations,
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Locality Sensitive Hashing
17
e.g. calculation of the dot products of a vector with n vectors of dimension d
would yield the time complexity of O(dn) and not O(n). The reasoning behind
this diﬀerentiation is that we wish to thoroughly express the inﬂuence the di-
mensionality of the data has on the running times, where it is intuitive that the
space requirement grows linear with the dimensionality.
3.2
Locality Sensitive Hashing
As stated in section 1.3 is the purpose of LSH to have a hash family that hashes
similar points with a high probability to the same buckets, while dissimilar
points are hashed together with a low probability. This feature is the core of
our ﬁrst considered solution. We ﬁrst describe the solution with an arbitrary
hash family, since the overall solution is the same even if the locality sensitive
hash family is replaced. Afterwards are two hash families, hyperplane and cross-
polytype, presented and analysed.
Solution Outline
The concept of the solution is to use L diﬀerent locality sensitive hash functions,
as was outlined in section 2.2, for hashing the points. We save the data points
and save the hash tables for each hash function. We can then with a k-NN query
hash the query point with the same hash functions and lookup which points that
hashed to the same buckets. These points are called candidates and the set of
candidates is denoted C. Most likely is |C| > k so we have to perform a linear
scan in order to obtain the nearest neighbours among C. The k-NN query can
be found as pseudocode in algorithm 2.
Data Structure
The data structure consists of a hash table P that stores all data points, where
the key is the id of a data point and the value is the data point itself. An array
H contains L diﬀerent hash functions from the applied hash family. Lastly, do
we have an array T of L hash tables, one corresponding to each hash function,
where hashes are used as keys and pointers to data points are the stored values.
The values are thus arrays of data point pointers, since multiple points can
hash to the same hash value. Ideally, would the L hash tables use the locality
sensitive hash functions as their internal hash functions, but then the hash table
would not really be a normal1 hash table anymore, which would be confusing.
We have therefore chosen to use this notation, in the end both schemes have
the same theoretical complexities.
1By normal hash table we mean a hash table with a hash function that provides a uniform
distribution of hash values.
==PAGE:24==
18
Design
Algorithm 1 Locality Sensitive Hashing insertion and deletion
1: function InsertPoint(p, P, T , H)
2:
P[p.id] = p
3:
for i = 0; i < Size(T ); i++ do
4:
hi = H[i]
5:
hash = hi(p.coord)
6:
if T [i][hash] not exists then
7:
T [i][hash] = [ ]
8:
T [i][hash] ←□p
9: function DeletePoint(id, P, T , H)
10:
p = P[id]
11:
for i = 0; i < Size(T ); i++ do
12:
hi = H[i]
13:
hash = hi(p.coord)
14:
b = T [i][hash]
15:
remove p in b
16:
remove p from P
Updates
The insertion (and deletion) is outlined in algorithm 1, where p is the inserted
data point. P, T and H are also speciﬁed as input in order to indicate that
they exist. First the data point is inserted into the hash table P. Then, for
each hash function hi in H is the hash calculated of p and this is used as key to
the appropriate hash table in T , where a pointer to p is appended. If this is the
ﬁrst point that hashes to this hash value is the array created before the pointer
is appended. Notice, that we use the symbol ←□for appending to an array in
our pseudocode.
The deletion, given a data point id, is very similar to the insertion. Initially
the to be deleted data point p is retrieved from P using the id. Then, for each
hash function hi in H is the hash calculated of p and this is used as key to the
appropriate hash table in T , where the bucket b is retrieved. The array b is then
searched for pointers to p, which if found are removed. Finally is the key-value
pair containing p removed from P. In order to perform batch insertion and
deletion, would one only have to call the appropriate function for each point in
the batch.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Locality Sensitive Hashing
19
k-NN Query
The k-Nearest Neighbour query takes a query point q and integer k as input,
and can be found as pseudocode in algorithm 2. Initially, if |P| ≤k then all the
point in the data structure is returned and we are done. Otherwise, we have an
empty set C, meant for the found candidates. Now, for each hash function hi
in H is the hash calculated of q and this is used as key to the appropriate hash
table in T , where the bucket b is retrieved. All the pointers in b are then added
to C. A linear scan is performed on the candidates in order to determine the
nearest neighbours, which are then returned. In the linear scan is N a max-heap,
where the distances to q are the keys and the preliminary neighbours are the
values. N therefore always contains the k neighbours closest to q with the most
distant neighbour as the root. We then iterate over all the candidates in C and
update N appropriately. In the end N contains the exact nearest neighbours.
The algorithm guarantees to return |P| neighbours when |P| ≤k, but there is
no real guarantee that the algorithm will return k neighbours otherwise, that
is the case if |P| > k and |C| < k. In the sections for the hash families are we
presenting multi-probing, which is a scheme that can improve upon this.
Algorithm 2 Locality Sensitive Hashing k-Nearest Neighbour Query
1: function k-NearestNeighbours(q, k, P, T , H)
2:
if |P| ≤k then
3:
Return all values of P
4:
C = ∅
5:
for i = 0; i < Size(T ); i++ do
6:
hi = H[i]
7:
hash = hi(q)
8:
b = T [i][hash]
9:
for p ∈b : C ←□p
10:
N = LinearScan(q, k, C)
11:
Return N
12: function LinearScan(q, k, C)
13:
distmax = ∞
14:
N = ∅
15:
for i = 0; i < Size(C); i++ do
16:
dist = d(q, C[i])
17:
if dist < distmax || Size(N) < k then
18:
if Size(N) ≥k then
19:
N.deleteMax()
20:
N[dist] = C[i]
21:
distmax = N.readMax()
22:
Return N
==PAGE:26==
20
Design
Analysis
The hash table P stores all the data points and therefore uses O(n) space,
where n is the number of points inserted into the data structure. Additionally,
does each of the L hash tables contain a pointer to each data point, which uses
O(nL) space. The array H is L long and contains the data required for each hash
function h, whose size is dependent on the locality-sensitive hash family. Hence
the space complexity is O(L(n+h)). The reasoning behind not interpreting L as
a constant, is that L usually is chosen dependently on n in order to guarantee
a high recall, as mentioned in section 2.2.1. The choice of L (and j) will be
discussed in the section of hyperplane LSH.
For the k-NN query are we in the case of |P| ≤k returning the values of P, which
is done in O(k) time. Alternatively, are we iterating over the L hash tables and
hashing the query point which takes O(Lt) time, where t is the hashing time.
A linear scan over the candidates C is performed, where the distance between
each candidate and q is calculated, which takes O(d) time for both angular and
euclidean distance. Additionally, is the max of the heap deleted C times in
worst case, which thus uses O(|C| log k) time, since the heap contains at most k
points. This gives us the query time complexity of O(Lt + d|C| + |C| log k + k).
The size of C depends on both L, the hash family and n, we will clarify this
when we examine the hash families. In worst case is C = n, which provides
O(dn) query time, if we assume that Lt ≤n.
During insertion is the point p inserted into P in average O(1) time and we
iterate over the L hash tables, hash p in t time and insert a pointer of p in average
O(1) into each hash table. The time complexity of a single insert operation is
therefore on average O(Lt) with worst case insertion time of O(nLt), in the case
where a hash table uses worst case insertion time and where n is the number of
already inserted points in the data structure.
We now consider deletion. The to be deleted point p is retrieved from P in
average O(1) time and we iterate over the L hash tables and hash p in t time.
The removal of p from the retrieved bucket b is a linear search on the elements
in b. As with the query are the expected number of elements in b not trivial.
The overall deletion time complexity is thus O(L(t + |b|)).
All of these operations are fairly simple and make up the the idea of nearest
neighbour search with LSH. The two hash families that we are about to examine
are meant to be used with the angular distance, since they both are partitioning
the space around origin.
That is they are meant for the data lying on the
euclidean unit sphere. According to [24] should it still be viable to use the hash
families, even if the data does not satisfy this property.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Locality Sensitive Hashing
21
3.2.1
Hyperplane
The ﬁrst locality-sensitive hash family that we are considering is based around
the idea of partitioning the space with random hyperplanes and is thus called
hyperplane LSH. The hash family was introduced in [14][10] and has been one
of the most applied LSH families in practical solutions since the concept is fairly
simple, examples include [25][27][7].
p
v0
P0
q
(a)
p2
p1
p3
h1
h2
h3
h4
h5
(b)
Figure 3.1: (a) The two points p, q are divided by the hyperplane P0, which
has a normal vector v0. (b) 3 points p1, p2 and p3 in the plane
where hyperplane LSH has been applied with 5 hyperplanes. The
hyperplanes all have their normal vectors to the right of where
their identiﬁer is and the identiﬁer is always at the top. p1 thus
has the hash 00000, p2 has the hash 00001 and p3 has the hash
01111.
Suppose that we have two vectors p, q ∈Rd and that they deﬁne a plane Ppq.
The angle between the vectors on Ppq is exactly θ, which we used to calculate the
angular distance in 2.1. Now we choose a hyperplane P0 uniformly at random
that goes through origin and will intersect Ppq as a line. A normal vector of
P0 is v0 and by choosing a hyperplane we actually choose the vector v0. P0 is
then made up by all the points whose dot product with v0 is 0. Let us say that
the line of P0 on Ppq is between the two points, where p is on the left and q on
the right of P0. This can be seen on ﬁgure 3.1a. Now, if v0 was chosen such
that it extends to the right from P0, then the dot product v0.p is negative and
==PAGE:28==
22
Design
the dot product v0.q is positive. On the other hand, if v0 chosen such that it
extended in the opposite direction, then the dot product v0.p is positive and the
dot product v0.q is negative. Another possibility would be, that both p and q
where on the same side of P0, then their dot products with v0 would either both
be negative or positive.
The sign of the dot product with v0 therefore indicates what side of the hy-
perplane a point lies on and has successfully split the space into two equal
partitions. Since the hyperplane was chosen at random and the angle between
p and q is θ, then the probability of P0 being between the points is θ/π and the
probability of it not being must be 1 −θ/π. Close points therefore has a higher
probability to be on the same side of the hyperplane and far points has a low
possibility of being on the same side. Our hash family H then consists of choos-
ing the vectors vj uniformly at random, which represents the uniformly random
hyperplanes Pj. We say that H is a (d1, d2, (π −d1)/π, (π −d2)/π)-sensitive
family, where d1 and d2 are the angles for close and fair points.
Apliﬁcation
We can amplify this hash family as described in 2.2 by choosing multiple hyper-
planes. The created hash value is then formed by calculating the dot product
for every normal vector, where if the dot product is positive then we mark a 1
and if its negative we mark a 0. The hash algorithm can be seen in algorithm
3, where H is an array containing the normal vectors deﬁning the hyperplanes.
In the case where the dot product is 0 does the algorithm mark a 0. We could
also mark a 1 or have randomly chosen among 0 and 1.
Algorithm 3 Hyperplane Hashing
1: function HyperplaneHash(point, H)
2:
hash = [ ]
3:
for i = 0; i < Size(H); i++ do
4:
hash ←□point.H[i] > 0
5:
Return hash
An example can be seen on ﬁgure 3.1b, where there are 3 points p1, p2, p3 and
5 hyperplanes. p1 and p2 has almost identical hash values with the exception
of the last bit due to h5 being in between the points. p3 has a very dissimilar
hash, with 3 bits diﬀerence to p2 and 4 bits diﬀerence to p1. It is therefore
approximated that p1 and p2 are fairly close to each other, p3 is relatively
further away but close to p2 than p1, which all are true.
With the deﬁnition of a hash family is it now possible to determine what the
parameters L and j (we used k in preliminaries, but use j from now on) should
be. Recall that H is a (d1, d2, (π −d1)/π, (π −d2)/π)-sensitive family, let us for
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Locality Sensitive Hashing
23
example have d1 = 1
4π and d2 = 1
2π, which give us P1 = 0.75 of close pairs and
P2 = 0.5 of far pairs. In order to have O(1) query time should the probability of
pairs we tolerate be 1/n, thus 0.5j ∼1/n. The probability of near pairs is then
0.75j, which corresponds to 1/n0.42. It is now possible to boost the probability
with L = n0.42 hash functions in order to obtain 0.99 probability for close pairs.
Let n = 1, 000, 000 then L ≈331 which is quite much, imagine if we had made
d1 and d2 closer then we would have required even more tables. The parameters
L and j are thus not insigniﬁcant.
Algorithm 4 Hyperplane LSH Multi Probing
1: function k-NNHyperplaneMultiProbe(q, k, j, p, P, T , H)
2:
if |P| ≤k then
3:
Return all values of P
4:
levels = ProbeLevels(j, p, T )
5:
C = ∅
6:
probes = 0
7:
for l = 0; l ≤levels; l++ do
8:
for i = 0; i < Size(T ); i++ do
9:
hi = H[i]
10:
hash = hi(q)
11:
Bitmask = { l 1 bits followed by j −l 0 bits }
12:
for m = 0; m <
 j
l

; m++ do
13:
hashprobe = Flip bits in hash according to bitmask
14:
b = T [i][hashprobe]
15:
for point ∈b : C ←□point
16:
Permutate bitmask into next permutation
17:
probes++
18:
if probes ≥p then
19:
Break all loops
20:
N = LinearScan(q, k, C)
21:
Return N
22: function ProbeLevels(j, p, T )
23:
level = 0, probes = 0
24:
while probes < p do
25:
level++
26:
probes += Size(T ) ∗
 j
level

27:
Return level
==PAGE:30==
24
Design
Multi Probing
The ampliﬁcation of a hash family provided better probabilities, but came with
the downside that we require more hash functions. Especially ampliﬁcation with
multiple hash tables (the parameter L) is expensive, since all data points (or
pointers thereof) has to be stored L times. To overcome this drawback, has it
been proposed [19] to use few hash tables, but where we probe multiple buckets
instead of using a large number of hash tables, where we only probe one bucket
in each table. The idea behind this concept is, that if the neighbours that we
want are not hashed to the exact bucket that we are probing, then it might have
been hashed with a high probability to a bucket that is close.
The question then goes, what do we mean by close? The original authors pro-
posed a solution based on the query vector q, where they calculated the proba-
bility of the neighbours falling into nearby buckets. Each hash function in their
locality-sensitive hash family hashed to some i ∈Z, where they used L hash
tables each with j hash functions to create their hashes. They then calculated
for each hash function how close q was to hash to the value i ∈{−1, +1}, which
gave them 2j scores for each hash table. The scores are sorted over all the hash
tables, such that the best candidate of probes for containing neighbours have
the lowest scores. It is then possible to probe the hash table with a permu-
tation achieved by permuting the original hash with the change that provided
the lowest score, since this would have the highest probability to contain neigh-
bours. This process can be repeated by going down the sorted list of scores and
permuting the corresponding hashes. The authors also provided a solution to
permute the hashes further if more probes where required.
It is not directly possible to apply the the same approach on hyperplane LSH,
since each hash function maps to {0, 1}, but it is still based around considering
all the j hash functions over all the L hash tables. The algorithm can be seen
in algorithm 4. The notion is that the neighbours with a high probability would
be in a bucket with a hash where only a single bit is oﬀ. In contrast to the other
solution is there no ordering of the probes, we just probe with hashes where
one bit is changed in arbitrary order. There are Lj such probes. In case more
probes are needed, then we probe with hashes where two bits are changed at a
time. There are L
 j
2

such probes, in general are there L
 j
l

probes where l is
the number of ﬂipped bits.
Speciﬁcally, the algorithm ﬁrst checks if |P| ≤k as with the normal query and
then it computes levels which follows the reasoning above. q is the query point,
k is the number of neighbours, p is the number of probes and j is the hash
length, that is the number of hash functions per hash table. For each level l and
for each hash function is the exact hash calculated of q and a bitmask with l
ones and j −l trailing zeros is created. This is followed by using the bitmask
on the hash, where bits are ﬂipped according to the mask. The appropriate
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Locality Sensitive Hashing
25
hash table is probed with the permuted hash and all the points in the retrieved
bucket is added to the candidate set C. The bitmask is the permuted into the
next permutation after which a new probe is created with the new bitmask over
the original hash. This continues until all the permutations have been applied,
where upon the next hash table or level is continued. When all the probes has
been applied is a linear scan performed as in algorithm 2, the result of this is
the result. When l = 0 is the bitmask only zeros and therefore are the exact
hashes also used in the probing and counts towards the probes.
It would be possible to improve the probing by creating an ordering of the probes
as in the ﬁrst examined solution. One would, for each hash function, calculate
the angle θP between the query point q and the hyperplane P. With the normal
vector v is θP calculated by θP = |θv −π/2|, where θv is the angle between v
and q which is trivial to calculate. It would then be possible to order all the
angles and achieve an ordering of the probes.
Analysis
In the LSH analysis section did we state the space complexity depends on hash
function space requirement h. The hyperplane LSH solution uses L hash tables
with j hyperplanes, where each hyperplane is a vector. Thus the space complex-
ity for hyperplane LSH is O(L(n + j)). Just as with L is j chosen dependent on
n as we saw above, but usually n ≫j so in this case is the space bound O(Ln).
We stated in the analysis of the k-NN LSH query that the time complexity was
O(Lt + d|C| + |C| log k + k). t was here the hashing time, which in hyperplane
LSH equals to j dot products between vectors of length d and thus t = jd. If
we assume that the n points on average are distributed equally over all buckets,
must a single bucket hold n/2j points. The size of the candidate set |C| is then
at average Ln/2j. We then have that the average k-NN query with hyperplane
LSH is bounded by O(dLj + dLn/2j + Ln/2j log k + k).
If we assume that
d > log k, which is fair since usually k < 1000 and d > 10, then we can reduce
the bound to O(dL(j + n/2j) + k). If the assumption of the buckets do not
hold, then in worst case all points are in the same bucket and we have O(dLn)
running time.
The multi-probe k-NN query returns the values of P if |P| ≤k in O(k) time.
Alternatively, the probe levels is calculated which at most have j iterations.
Then we iterate over the levels (bounded by j) and the hash tables (L) and
hash the query point (t = jd) which takes O(dLj2) time. The inner loop runs
in total at most p times, since all loops are stopped if the number of probes are
found, and the operations here are all assumed to run in constant time. Finally,
is the linear scan performed, where the candidate set now is given by pn/2j,
since we retrieved candidates from p buckets. All in all does this give us the
time complexity of O(dLj2 + p + dpn/2j + pn/2j log k + k). We can reduce this
==PAGE:32==
26
Design
since p < pn/2j and we assume dpn/2j > pn/2j log k as before, this gives us
the bound O(dLj2 + dpn/2j + k). If our assumption of the buckets do not hold,
then in worst case all points are in the same bucket and we have O(dpn) running
time.
Given the deﬁnition of t and the bucket size |b| above, is the average insertion
complexity O(dLj) and the average deletion complexity O(L(dj + n/2j)). In
worst case is the insertion and deletion time O(Ln), should the used hash table
use worst lookup time, or in the deletion case if all points were in the same
bucket.
3.2.2
Cross-Polytype
The next locality-sensitive hash family that we are considering is focused on
making random rotations and ﬁtting it onto the d-dimensional cross-polytype,
which gives it the name cross-polytype LSH. The hash family was introduced
in [4] and has not been applied as much as hyperplane LSH. We are only aware
of the FALCONN library [25] that implements it. On the theoretical side does
it use a transformation, which they cannot prove works as intended, but they
state that they have better results than with hyperplane LSH.
Suppose we have a point p ∈Rd and let e1, e2, . . . , e2d be the signed standard
basis vectors. The coordinates of each ei is then all zeroes except of one coordi-
nate which is either +1 or −1. The d-dimensional cross-polytype is the convex
hull of e1, e2, . . . , e2d. In two dimensions would this be a square with its corners
along each axis and in three dimensions would it be an octahedron. Now let
S ∈Rd × Rd be a random rotation matrix, we then hash p by rotating it with
S and ﬁnding the closest point in the cross-polytype to Sv. Considering there
are 2d points in the cross-polytype is the hash function mapping points into
integers in the interval [0, 2d], the function mapping is thus dependent on the
dimensionality of the data, in contrast to the hyperplane LSH.
The space requirement and the time complexity of applying the rotation S to
p uses O(d2). This is unfeasible for solutions in high dimensions, the authors
therefore propose as pseudo-random rotation scheme instead that uses O(d log d)
time. The scheme is a linear transformation p 7→HD3HD2HD1p, where H is
the Hadamard transform and Di for i ∈{1, 2, 3} is a random diagonal matrix
of only ±1 coordinates. The Hadamard transformation is deterministic, which
is why the random ±1 diagonal matrix is required.
This is what makes it
possible to create multiple hash functions, since it provides the random element,
essentially all it does is ﬂipping random signs on p. The proof of this linear
transformation being equivalent to a rotation is what is missing. Furthermore
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Locality Sensitive Hashing
27
is it unclear why the transformation should have 3 iterations, they simply state
that by empiric knowledge 2 is too little and 3 is enough.
The motivation behind this scheme is that close pairs will be closer to the same
standard basis vector after the rotation with a higher probability than far pairs.
The hash family consists of choosing the three diagonal matrices of only ±1
coordinates at random, since the Hadamard transformation is deterministic. A
downside with this hash family is that the Hadamard transformation requires
that the input is a power of 2, it can therefore be necessary to pad p with zeros
until its a power of 2 before the linear transformation is applied. By intuition
should this not be a problem since all the points are rotated equally into a
higher dimensional space, but it does mean that the mapped interval is [0, 2d′]
where d′ is the next power of 2 given d. As with the hyperplane LSH is it also
possible to amplify the hash family by choosing multiple hash functions. Each
hash function then contributes with mapping the point into [0, 2d′], these values
are then concatenated to produce the hash. The hash scheme can be seen in
algorithm 5, where H is an array containing 3 matrices for each hash function
used in the hash table. The matrices are the ±1 diagonal matrices.
Algorithm 5 Cross-polytype Hashing
1: function CrossPolytypeHash(point, H)
2:
hash = [ ]
3:
d′ = next power of 2 of Dimension(point)
4:
Resize point to d′ by padding with 0
5:
for i = 0; i < Size(H); i++ do
6:
V = H[i]
7:
for j = 0; j < Size(V ); j++ do
8:
point = V [j]point
9:
Fast Walsh–Hadamard transform on point
10:
Save j of arg maxj∈d′ |xj|, where xj is the jth coordinate of point
11:
if point[j] < 0 then j = d′ + j
12:
hash ←□j as binary
13:
Return hash
A visual example can be seen on ﬁgure 3.2, where we have two points p1 and
p2 in the plane. The points have been independently rotated randomly 2 times,
where the p1 is closest to the signed standard basis vectors e1 and e4 and p2 is
closest to e2 and e4. The hash of p1 would in this case with two hash functions
be 14 and the hash of p2 would be 24.
Since the hash family has the dependency on the dimensionality is it not as
easy to set the number of hash buckets, as for the hyperplane family.
Here
one just added another hyperplane and the number of buckets were doubled.
==PAGE:34==
28
Design
p2
p1
e2
e1
e4
e3
p2
p1
Figure 3.2: Two diﬀerent rotations of the points p1 and p2 in the plane, where
they at the bottom both at closest to the signed basis vector e4,
but on the top are the closest to diﬀerent signed basis vectors. The
solid lines are the axes and the dotted lines are the boundaries of
the areas the signed basis vectors occupy.
For the cross-polytype hash family is one hash function increasing the number
of buckets by a factor 2d′. The ampliﬁcation of multiple hash functions per
hash table is thus more substantial and should be chosen more carefully. For
example if the dimension d = 300, then 2d′ = 1024. By using one hash function
per hash table would yield 1024 buckets and using two functions would yield
2d′2 ≈1.000.000 buckets, which is a substantial diﬀerence.
It can therefore
be hard to tune the cross-polytype hash family if the dimensionality and the
desired bucket number does not match. The authors of the hash family does
not consider this issue, but they propose to only consider some of the points in
the cross-polytype should the dimensionality be too big. This way it is possible
to reduce the mapped interval and ﬁne tune the overall number of buckets with
multiple hash functions.
Multi Probing
As with the hyperplane LSH is it possible to perform multi probing, where we
probe multiple buckets in each hash table that are close to the bucket obtained
with the exact hash. Normally the hash value of the hash function is given
by h = arg maxi∈d′ |xi|, so for a single hash function the natural hashes to
use as probes would be the second greatest coordinate, then the third greatest
coordinate etc. Again we consider all j hash functions over all L hash tables, so
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Locality Sensitive Hashing
29
in this case we sort the d′ −1 coordinates over all j and L in decreasing order. It
is important that we ﬁnd the diﬀerence between the greatest coordinate of that
hash function and the other considered coordinate, such that the distances are
relative. Otherwise a hash function where all the coordinates are large would
have its coordinates chosen ﬁrst, before any other hash function, even though
the relative distance was smaller. Probes are then created by going down the
sorted list and modifying the appropriate exact hash with the coordinate for the
appropriate hash table. We are then able to create up to d′jL diﬀerent probes.
There could be cases where a better candidate for a probe would be changing
the value for multiple hash functions, but this is not considered in this solution.
Algorithm 6 Cross-polytype LSH Multi Probing
1: function k-NNCrossPolytypeMultiProbe(q, k, p, P, T , H)
2:
if |P| ≤k then
3:
Return all values of P
4:
N = ∅
5:
E = [ ]
6:
d′ = next power of 2 of Dimension(point)
7:
Resize q to d′ by padding with 0
8:
for i = 0; i < Size(H); i++ do
9:
hash = [ ]
10:
for j = 0; j < Size(H[i]); j++ do
11:
qrot = H[i][j](q)
12:
Save l of arg maxl∈d′ |xl|, where xl is the lth coordinate of qrot
13:
absmax = |qrot[l]|
14:
for m = 0; m < d′; m++ do
15:
val = absmax −|qrot[m]|
16:
N[val] = (i, j, m)
17:
hash ←□l as binary
18:
E ←□hash
19:
C = ∅
20:
for i = 0; i < p && N ̸= ∅; i++ do
21:
(hashTable, hashFunc, idx) = N.popMax()
22:
hashexact = E[hashTable]
23:
hashprobe = Modify hashFunc of hashexact with idx as binary
24:
b = T [hashTable][hashprobe]
25:
for point ∈b : C ←□point
26:
N = LinearScan(q, k, C)
27:
Return N
The multi-probing scheme can be seen in algorithm 6, where the query point
q, the number of neighbours k and the number of probes p is given as input.
Additionally is T the array containing the L hash tables, H is the array con-
==PAGE:36==
30
Design
taining the hash functions for each hash table, and P is the hash table with
all the points. First we check |P| ≤k and if it is the case, then we return the
values of P and are done. Otherwise, q is resized to a power of 2 by padding
with zeroes. E is an array meant to hold the computed hashes for each hash
table and N is a min-heap. We then iterate over H, which is of length L and
where each element is an arrays of j hash functions. We then iterate over each
hash function and compute the rotated query point qrot. This is followed by
ﬁnding the coordinate l of qrot with the highest absolute value absmax. We now
iterate over each coordinate in qrot, where the diﬀerence to absmax is found and
used as the key in the heap N. The value is a tuple consisting of the hash table
number i, the hash function number j and the index of qrot m. l is then saved
as binary in the hash and when this has been done for all hash functions is the
hash appended to the arrary E. N now contain all the d′jL diﬀerent probes,
sorted by the distance to the greatest coordinate in their rotation. We now pop
the min from N and by using the stored tuple is it possible to retrieve the exact
hash value for the corresponding hash table and modifying it with the probe.
We then probe the hash table with the probe and append all the points in the
bucket to C. This is done until we have used all our probes or we have hit p.
Finally is the linear scan performed on the candidate set in order to ﬁnd the k
neighbours.
Analysis
The space complexity of the cross-polytype LSH is O(L(n + j)) like the hyper-
plane LSH, because the solution uses L hash tables with j ×3 ±1 vectors. Again
we have that n ≫j, such that the reduced bound is O(Ln).
The time complexity of the k-NN query is a little diﬀerent than the hyperplane.
Recall that the LSH complexity was given by O(Lt+d|C|+|C| log k +k), where
t is the hashing time and C is the candidate set. The hash function consists of
3 iterations of ﬁrst multiplying two vectors of dimension d′ together and then
performing the fast Walsh-Hadamard transformation, which takes O(d′ log d′)
time. Furthermore is the expected number of points in a bucket now n/(2d′)j, so
the candidates size is assumed Ln/(2d′)j. This gives us the time complexity of
O(Ljd′ log d′ +dLn/(2d′)j +Ln/(2d′)j log k +k). Like before can we reduce this
to O(Ljd′ log d′ + dLn/(2d′)j) + k if we assume dLn/(2d′)j > Ln/(2d′)j log k.
In worst case where all points are in the same bucket do we have O(Ljd′ log d′ +
dLn) running time.
Additionally, is the insertion complexity O(Ljd′ log d′) and the average deletion
complexity is O(L(jd′ log d′ + n/(2d′)j)).
In worst case is the insertion and
deletion time O(Ln), should the used hash table use worst lookup time, or in
the deletion case if all points were in the same bucket.
The multi-probe k-NN query returns the values of P if |P| ≤k in O(k) time.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Clustering Solution
31
Alternatively, q is resized to d′ in constant time and we start iterating over the
L hash tables and then the j hash functions. Now the hash function is applied
to q in O(d′ log d′) time, the max coordinate is found in O(d′) time and inner
loop runs in O(d′) time. We then pop the min element from the heap at most
p times, which takes O(p log |N|) time, where |N| = Ljd′. Lastly is the linear
scan perfomed on the candidate set which we know from the hyperplane LSH
takes O(dpn/2j + pn/2j log k) time. All in all do we get the time bounded by
O(Ljd′ log d′+p log(Ljd′)+dpn/2j +pn/2j log k+k). Again we can assume that
dpn/2j > pn/2j log k, but otherwise it is not really reducible without making
big assumptions, which gives O(Ljd′ log d′ + p log(Ljd′) + dpn/2j + k). If our
assumption of the buckets do not hold, then in worst case all points are in the
same bucket and we have O(Ljd′ log d′ + p log(Ljd′) + dpn) running time.
3.3
Clustering Solution
We now propose our own solution to the dynamic and scalable k-NN problem.
The solution uses a combination of LSH and clustering to partition the euclidean
space of points. The next section goes into detail about the motivation and
overall concept of the solution.
This is followed by a section on clustering,
where the chosen clustering algorithm K-Means is introduced. We then present
a couple of extensions to the solution, including a multi-cluster query, cluster
lifetime monitoring and cluster size evaluation. Finally, the solution is analysed.
3.3.1
Concept and Motivation
It is evident from the analysis of the LSH that the k-NN query time is depended
on the number of hash tables L, hash functions per hash table j and number
of points inserted n. The partitioning of the points with LSH achieves that the
query runs in average sublinear time in n, which was our main criteria, but the
solution has some serious problems with scalability, which we also require. The
parameters L and j has to be established initially to create the hash functions
and cannot be modiﬁed afterwards without creating new hash functions and
rehashing all n points in the data structure. One therefore chooses L and j
by either knowing the number of total points beforehand or by a sophisticated
guess.
Let j = 14 be a chosen parameter for the hyperplane LSH, which gives b = 214 =
16384 buckets per hash table. If n is small in comparison to b, then even with
at large L will it be hard to ﬁnd a substantial number neighbours. Let n = 4000
==PAGE:38==
32
Design
then we expect 1/4 points per bucket at average, which would the normal k-
NN query would yield 5 candidates with L = 20.
One would have to set a
high number of probes in order to retrieve a satisfying number of candidates.
Likewise could it be a problem if n is too big in comparison to the number of
buckets, then the candidate set could be very large and the query time would
approach linear time. In a normal hash table (not locality-sensitive) are a load
factor l =
n
b often used to establish whether the current size is adequate or
should be reduced or increased. In Java does the implementation of HashMap
use l = 0.75 as the default, before the number of buckets are doubled and the
data structure is rebuilt [21]. The same approach could clearly be applied for
the hyperplane LSH solution, where j was increased by one with a given load
factor and adjusting L appropriately. It would then be possible to amortise over
the operations to still get good theoretical query times. In practice is it very
expensive to rebuilt the entire data structure, since all points has to be hashed
L times. Furthermore, if n is big then the rebuilding might cause unavailability
for a considerable amount, which could be a problem for the user.
We are
therefore interested, in addition to the scalability, in creating a solution with
more ﬂexibility, that does not require full rebuilding of the data structure.
Another potential problem that we have hinted at, is in cases where the data
is skewed. The authors of the FALCONN library [25], which implements LSH,
suggest that one should calculate the mean amongst all points and then use
this mean as centre for the LSH. This works in the oﬀ-line problem, but is
not a solution for the on-line problem that we are dealing with. A potential
extension to the dynamic LSH discussed above, would be to calculate the mean
before increasing or decreasing the data structure, which would still provide the
same time complexities. We therefore also prefer that our solution could handle
skewed data, such that queries in these cases still function in acceptable time.
Solution Outline
The design of the solution is to use a clustering algorithm on the data points
in order to obtain a set of clusters. The LSH solution is then applied on each
cluster, such that it corresponds to having multiple individual LSH solutions
of approximately same size.
The same locality-sensitive hash family is used
for each cluster, but new functions are chosen for each cluster from the family.
Initially, we only have a single cluster, which corresponds to the LSH solution.
When a certain threshold, denoted split threshold (correlates to the load factor),
is reached then the clustering algorithm is applied to split the data into multiple
clusters. All the points have to be rehashed and belong to a particular cluster,
the old initial cluster is no more. When new data points are inserted into the
data structure are they added to the nearest clusters under the given distance
function. If a cluster reaches the split threshold, then that cluster is split by
applying the clustering algorithm on its data points, just like with the ﬁrst
cluster.
In the case where the data structure is shrinking, does the clusters
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Clustering Solution
33
also have a merge threshold that dictates when the cluster has too few data
points. When this happens is its nearest neighbouring cluster found and the
two clusters are merged. That is, the clustering algorithm is applied on the
union of data points and either one or two clusters are created depending on
the total number of points over the two clusters. The data points now belong
to these two clusters.
C2
C1
C2
C1
C2
C3
C1
Figure 3.3: Initially we have two clusters C1 and C2 with 4 data points each.
Then 7 data points are inserted, which results in C1 reaching its
split threshold, indicated by red. C1 is then split into new clusters.
A beneﬁt of using the LSH solution on the individual clusters is, that we can
establish the number of hash tables and hash functions for a given hash family
beforehand accordingly to the split and merge thresholds.
Besides the ﬁrst
cluster, will all other clusters be of size between these thresholds, which ensures
that the hash tables are never overﬁlled or being empty and wasting space. We
now have obtained a data structure that scales with the data size and where
only a subset of the data points need to be rehashed when the data structure
expands or shrinks. Furthermore does it allow concentration of clusters in areas
of the space where there are concentration of points, since it is not required that
the clusters partition the space equally. It is partitioned according to where the
points are. A step-wise example that summarise this can be seen on ﬁgure 3.3.
Data Structure
The data structure consists of a hash table G that stores all the clusters, where
the key is an identiﬁer and the value is the cluster itself. Each cluster consist of
a complete LSH data structure, that is the hash table P containing the points,
the array H containing L hash functions and the array T containing the L hash
==PAGE:40==
34
Design
tables for data point pointers. Furthermore does a cluster in addition to the
identiﬁer also store its centre. Lastly, do we also have a hash table D that has
an entry for each data point, where the key is the data point identiﬁer and the
value is its corresponding cluster identiﬁer.
Algorithm 7 Clustering solution insertion
1: function InsertPoint(p, G, D)
2:
distmin = ∞
3:
C = ∅
4:
for Cluster c ∈G do
5:
dist = d(p, c.centre)
6:
if dist < distmin then
7:
distmin = dist
8:
C = c
9:
D[p.id] = C.id
10:
C.insert(p)
11:
if Size(C) ≥tsplit then
12:
SplitCluster(C, G, D)
13: function SplitCluster(C, G, D)
14:
Gnew = Clustering(C)
15:
for Point p ∈C do
16:
distmin = ∞
17:
Cnew = ∅
18:
for Cluster c ∈Gnew do
19:
dist = d(p, c.centre)
20:
if dist < distmin then
21:
distmin = dist
22:
Cnew = c
23:
D[p.id] = Cnew.id
24:
Cnew.insert(p)
25:
Delete C
26:
Add Gnew to G
Updates
Insertion takes a data point p as input together with the hash tables G and
D. The insertion is outlined in algorithm 7. We iterate over the clusters in
G and denote the closest cluster to p for C. It is then registered in D that p
belong to C and p is inserted into C. This insertion follows the same insertion in
algorithm 1 for LSH. In the case where number of points in C is greater than the
split threshold tsplit is the cluster split. This involves performing a clustering
algorithm on the points of C, which provide a new list of empty clusters Gnew.
For every point p in C do we ﬁnd the closest cluster Cnew among Gnew and
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Clustering Solution
35
update D with the id of Cnew as well as inserting p into Cnew. Finally is C
deleted and Gnew is added to the other clusters. Batch insertion is resolved
by ﬁrst ﬁnding the closest cluster for each point and then performing a batch
insertion on each cluster where all the points that was closest to that cluster are
inserted. Afterwards are each cluster checked for whether it should be split.
Algorithm 8 Clustering solution deletion
1: function DeletePoint(id, G, D)
2:
C = D[id]
3:
C.deletePoint(id)
4:
remove entry id from D
5:
if Size(C) ≤tmerge then
6:
MergeCluster(C, G, D)
7: function MergeCluster(C, G, D)
8:
distmin = ∞
9:
N = ∅
10:
for Cluster c ∈G −C do
11:
dist = d(C.centre, c.centre)
12:
if dist < distmin then
13:
distmin = dist
14:
N = c
15:
Gnew = Clustering(C, N)
16:
for Point p ∈C ∪N do
17:
distmin = ∞
18:
Cnew = ∅
19:
for Cluster c ∈Gnew do
20:
dist = d(p, c.centre)
21:
if dist < distmin then
22:
distmin = dist
23:
Cnew = c
24:
D[p.id] = Cnew.id
25:
Cnew.insert(p)
26:
Delete C and N
27:
Add Gnew to G
Deletion takes a data point id as input together with the hash tables G and D.
The algorithm can be found as pseudocode in algorithm 8. First, we look up
the cluster C, which the data point with id belongs to. The data point is then
deleted from that cluster by calling the deletion on the cluster, this corresponds
to the deletion from the LSH. The entry is also deleted from D and ﬁnally is it
checked whether C should be merged. If this is the case, then the nearest cluster
N of C is found and the clustering algorithm is applied on the union of their
==PAGE:42==
36
Design
points. Either one or two new empty clusters are returned in the list Gnew, after
which all points of N and C are assigned to the new clusters. Lastly are the
old clusters deleted and the new clusters are added to the hash table clusters.
Batch deletion is performed by looking up the clusters for all the to be deleted
points and then performing a batch deletion on each cluster with corresponding
ids. Every cluster is then checked afterwards whether it should be merged.
k-NN Query
The k-NN query takes a query point q and an integer k as input. There is
no pseudocode provided, since it is fairly simple. The closest cluster to q is
identiﬁed and then the cluster is queried for k-NN as it was demonstrated in
the LSH k-NN query. The result of the LSH query of the cluster is the result of
this query.
3.3.2
Cluster Analysis
The clustering solution has now been presented including the data structure and
certain queries. A particular part of the solution is still missing though and that
is the clustering algorithm itself. The LSH solution was designed such that the
overall concept was the same, no matter what locality-sensitive hash family was
applied. The same is applicable for the clustering solution, where the overall
design is the same, but the clustering algorithm determines how the clusters are
partitioned. We will therefore start by analysing what characteristics that are
important in a clustering algorithm for our problem.
Clustering and clustering analysis is the task of grouping objects together, such
that objects in the same group are more similar than objects from other groups.
In our case are the objects points in the euclidean space and the similarity
is deﬁned by the applied distance function. The groups of objects are often
denoted clusters and they can be overlapping (soft clustering) or discrete (hard
clustering).
For our solution are we interested in a hard clustering algorithm, where each
point is only a member of one cluster, since we only want to insert it into
one LSH scheme. If we consider the two LSH families that we have examined,
are they both meant for the angular distance, where the space is partitioned
spherically around origin. It would therefore make sense to choose an clustering
algorithm that created spherical clusters. If one is using another type of LSH
with our solution, would it perhaps not be a reasonable property, but it could
be that one would prefer another spatial structure. Additionally do we require
that the clustering algorithm runs at most in linear time, since it an algorithm
that will be applied fairly often on a large number of points.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Clustering Solution
37
One popular group of clustering algorithms is the hierarchical clustering [23],
that directly utilise the distance between the objects as its measure for whether
two objects should be in the same cluster. An example is the single-linkage
clustering, where all points are considered a cluster initially. The two clusters
with lowest distance are then merged into a new single cluster with the mean
as centre. This merging is performed repeatedly until the desired number of
clusters is reached.
This often produces a clustering where dense areas are
clustered together and where outliers (single points far away form dense areas)
are considered their own cluster. The form of the clusters are not guaranteed to
have any particular shape, since points are grouped together as long as they are
close to each other, so they could be in a line or a circle if those provided the
lowest distances. Furthermore is the running time of these algorithms usually
between O(n2) and O(n3) which is far to slow for our purpose.
Another popular group of algorithms are the density based clustering, which
are focused on creating clusters over dense areas. The formed clusters will often
look like the ones from the hierarchical clustering, but usually runs faster. One
particular algorithm is DBSCAN [12], that clusters points iteratively together as
long as they satisfy some density threshold, which could be that points are only
added to a cluster if it has certain number of points in a given radius belonging
to that cluster. The algorithm runs in average O(n log n) time and worst case
O(n2) time, which is closer to what we require, but still not there. The form of
the created clusters also have the same problems as the hierarchical clustering.
k-means
The ﬁnal choice of algorithm landed on k-means [23], which is part of group
of algorithms that are centroid-based, also called partition clustering. Here the
concept is that we choose k random points initially as our starting cluster centres
and then assign each remaining point to the cluster whose centre is closest. The
mean of each cluster is then computed by calculating the mean of all the points
assigned to each cluster. These means are then the new cluster centres and all
points are then assigned to the nearest cluster again. This is again followed by
calculating the mean for each cluster etc. These two steps continues either to
an equilibrium is reached or a predetermined number of iterations are reached.
This completes the algorithm, where the space is partitioned into k clusters that
embeds a Voronoi tessellation in d dimensions, as mentioned in section 1.2.2.
A nice property of the clustering is that all points are assigned to the cluster
which are closest, which are along the same lines we inserted points into our
data structure. The points might no be spread around the centres as sphere as
we desired, but at least the centres are the means of the clusters and thus we can
expect, that the points are roughly distributed around the centres. Furthermore,
does the algorithm run in linear time, since we exactly inspect each point once
in each iteration. This holds as long as there has been set a ﬁxed number of
iterations beforehand.
==PAGE:44==
38
Design
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3.4: (a) Initial 3 random centres are chosen indicated by the triangles.
(b) All points are added to the closest centre. (c) The centres are
moved according to the mean of points. (d) Points are added to
closest centre. (e) Centres moved. (f) Points added to centres.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Clustering Solution
39
An example of the algorithm with k = 3 clusters in the plane can be seen on
diagram 3.4. Notice how the centres are moved substantially from (b) to (c) in
comparison to when they are moved from (d) to (e). The biggest changes to
the clusters are in the ﬁrst iterations, then changes become more subtle. The
number of iterations therefore deﬁne how rough or ﬁne we allow the partitioning
to be in comparison to the equilibrium.
The k-means algorithm is a heuristic algorithm to an optimisation problem,
where the goal is to ﬁnd k clusters and assign all objects to the nearest cluster
centre, such that squared distance is minimised. This is a NP-complete problem
[1], however the algorithm is eﬃcient at converging towards a local optimum.
The quality of this optimum can vary and is greatly dependent on the initial
chosen random k cluster centres. It can often be necessary to rerun the whole
algorithm multiple times in order to achieve a good partitioning.
A mean to this problem is to choose the initial centres more deliberate, which
is the core of the k-means++ algorithm [5]. Here we only choose the ﬁrst cluster
centre c uniformly at random. Then, for each point x do we calculate d(x, c),
which is the distance to c. The next centre is chosen at random using a weighted
probability distribution, where x is chosen with a probability proportional to
d(x, c)2. We now calculate d(x, c) for all points again, but where both clusters
are considered and the smallest distance is chosen.
The next centre is then
chosen with these probabilities. This continues until we have chosen all k initial
centres, that can be used as input to the normal k-means algorithm.
This
algorithm accomplishes to spread out the initial centres, which often results in
better and quicker optimums.
3.3.3
Solution Extensions
Multi Cluster k-NN
The k-NN query is fairly simple, since given the query point q, the algorithm
ﬁnds the nearest cluster and then queries that cluster with the LSH k-NN. On
ﬁgure 3.5 are the points in the plane partitioned into 6 clusters C1, . . . , C6, each
with their distinct colour. The query point q is indicated by the yellow square
and is located such that it is closest to C3. The k-NN algorithm would therefore
query C3 for the neighbours, which might be good if k < 10, however if k is
greater, then points in the other clusters are far closer to q then the remaining
points from C3. The yellow circle around q illustrates the neighbourhood of q,
where both points from C1 and C4 also are close to q.
==PAGE:46==
40
Design
In order to address this issue do we propose a multi-cluster k-NN, where instead
of only querying a single cluster, we query a speciﬁc number of clusters. The
technique is inspired by the multi-bucket queries from LSH. Given c number
of clusters to query and p probes, query the c closest clusters to q by dividing
p amongst the clusters. Each cluster then uses its multi-bucket k-NN query
with the provided number of probes. The probes are not divided evenly, but
distributed such that the closest cluster receives more probes than a cluster
further away. More precisely are the probes pci of cluster ci deﬁned as follows:
inv =
c
X
i=1
1
d(ci, q)
pci =
1
d(ci, q)
p
inv
The inverse sum of distances inv is computed and the number of probes for each
cluster pci is obtained by calculating its share of the probes given these inverse
distances. The clusters thus receives probes proportional to their distance to q in
proportion to the other cluster distances. The motivation behind this technique
is that clusters closer to q would have a higher probability to contain neighbours
than clusters further away and thus should be probed more.
C1
C2
C3
C5
C6
C4
q
Figure 3.5: 6 clusters in the plane with points partitioned according to the
cluster centre colours. The yellow square indicates the query point
q and and the yellow circle show where the neighbours would be
found around q.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Clustering Solution
41
Cluster Lifetime Monitoring
It has been a recurring property of the solution to allow scalability and dynam-
icity. Insertions and deletions has been introduced together with cluster splits
and merges for allowing these properties, but if the dynamicity is high for single
cluster do we have an issue. Let us consider the situation where a cluster is cre-
ated and over a period of time has points been inserted into it and deleted from
it. Neither the split threshold nor the merge threshold is reached at any point.
The points that made up the cluster initially and determined the cluster centre
are now perhaps been replaced by new points. These points belong to cluster
because it was the closest at insertion time, but the cluster centre might not be
the real mean of the points. The LSH families we have applied both prefers the
points being distributed around the centre in sphere, but if the cluster is not the
mean of the points anymore, could this aﬀect the hashing quality in a negative
way.
The extension to the solution is a simple variable l added to each cluster rep-
resenting its lifetime. Initially l = 0 and with each point inserted or deleted
from the cluster is l incremented by one. We then introduce a lifetime threshold
L that determines when a cluster should be reviewed. If l > L the review is
performed, which consists of calculating the mean µ of the points and compar-
ing it with the current centre c. Now the distance d(µ, c) is computed and if
this is greater than some parameter D, then we set µ as the new centre and
rehash all points in the cluster according to this centre. Otherwise we deem
c a reasonable enough centre and reset l = 0.
We have considered whether
D should be dynamically chosen depending on some variation property in the
cluster, for example considering the average distance of the points to the centre
in comparison to d(µ, c), but neither this nor other properties seemed a good
measure. Thus we ended up with this parameter instead.
Cluster Size Evaluation
The last proposed extension to the clustering solution is only in the design phase
and has not been fully implemented in the developed data structure. Nonethe-
less is it still something we have worked on and deserves to be mentioned. The
motivation is that the solution sometimes reach a state, where points are in a
diﬀerent cluster than the one that is closest. This is something that can happen
while splitting, merging or recentering (changing centre due to lifetime review)
and occurs in the same two circumstances for all three operations. When a new
cluster is created from an old cluster, is it possible that the centre is further away
for a point than before and that point now is closer to another cluster centre.
Likewise is it possible that the new cluster centre is closer to points in another
cluster than their own cluster centre. When these operations are executed are
the points of the old cluster(s) only distributed amongst the new cluster(s)
which leads to the ﬁrst scenario. Correspondingly are points of other clusters
not considered while performing these operations and creating new clusters.
==PAGE:48==
42
Design
Figure 3.6 shows such a splitting example. Initially there are two clusters where
the points belong to the closest one and the background colouring outlines
whichever centre is closest. In 3.6c is the cluster C2 split into two new clus-
ters, where the points are assigned to the closest cluster between those two,
indicated by the tessellation. However 3.6d outlines the actual closest centre,
where p1 clearly is closer to C2 but still belongs to C1. Likewise does p2 belong
to C2, but is actually closer to C1. When new points are inserted into the data
structure is it possible that a point is inserted into the narrow gap between p1
and C1 that belongs to C2 and now the solution is in a state of overlapping
clusters.
C2
C1
(a)
C1
C2
(b)
C1
C2
C3
p1
p2
(c)
C1
C2
C3
p1
p2
(d)
Figure 3.6: (a) Initial 2 clusters with triangles as centres and the background
colours outlining the nearest cluster centre. (b) Points are inserted
into C2.
(c) C2 has been split and the area has been divided
accordingly with the two centres. (d) The actual outline of the
nearest cluster centre, notice p1 belongs to C1 but is closer to C2.
The extension does not directly prevent the overlapping of clusters, but attempts
to reduce it. The main concept is that we monitor the average distance from the
points to their centre as well the standard deviation on this distance. Should
the standard deviation of one cluster be very diﬀerent to the rest, would we
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Clustering Solution
43
inspect the cluster and decide whether it should be recentered or merged. There
might be situations where it is legal for a cluster to have high distance standard
deviation compared to the other clusters, since some clusters could be small
concentrated areas where other cluster could stretch out over bigger sparse areas.
It is possible to keep the summed distance Cd and the sum of square distances
Csd in the cluster C and use these to calculate the standard deviation without
having to inspect any points. The standard deviation is calculated as such:
σ =
r
Csd
Csize
−
 Cd
Csize
2
Here Csize is the number of points in the cluster. The values are just updated
whenever a point is inserted or deleted from the cluster.
3.3.4
Analysis
The solutions consists of the hash table G that stores the clusters, where each
cluster is an LSH solution that takes up O(L(n + h)) space, where n is the
number of points inserted into that cluster. We saw in our analysis on the two
hash families that L and h had to be set according to the expected number of
points in the solution, but by creating clusters of predetermined size, can we
assume the parameters to be constants. Each data point is only inserted into
one cluster, so G takes up linear space. The table D has an entry for each point
and thus also uses linear space, the overall space requirement is thus O(n).
As with the bucket size from the LSH analysis, do we need to make some as-
sumptions on the number of clusters. The assumption is that the points are
distributed among n/( 1
2tsplit) = 2n/tsplit clusters, because in best case do we
have n/tsplit clusters, but this is rarely the case and depend on the number of
clusters a split creates. In worst case could we have many almost empty clusters,
since the k-means algorithm do not have any guarantees of creating clusters of
certain size. In this case could there be n −tsplit + 1 clusters with one point
and one cluster with tsplit −1 points. It is evident that the number of clusters
are linear (both in worst and best case) with the number of points, but it is
now also clear that the number of clusters in worst case could approach n. As a
compromise between best and worst case is it assumed in the analysis that the
clusters are half-full.
When inserting points into the solution are we iterating over the clusters in
order to ﬁnd the closest one, which as we learned is in linear time. This involves
==PAGE:50==
44
Design
calculating the distance, which takes O(d) time. The point is then inserted into
the cluster, which we know takes O(Lt) average time from the LSH analysis,
but L is here assumed a constant. The remaining actions take constant time,
thus the time complexity of insertion is O(dn + t).
It happens that the cluster becomes too big and needs to be split. This involves
ﬁrst applying the clustering algorithm k-means which takes O(nc) time, where
nc is the number of points in the cluster that is being split. Furthermore does
it involve iterating over the nc points and calculating the distance to each new
cluster centre in order to ﬁnd the closest. This is done O(d) time since the
number of clusters that is split to is constant and not bounded by n. The point
is then inserted into that cluster in O(t) time and the entry in D is updated
in average constant time. Lastly is the old cluster deleted, which should take
constant time, since it does not contain any points anymore. Overall is the time
complexity of a split O(nc(d + t)). In the hash families we considered is t ≤d,
but we still choose to keep it in case another LSH family is applied. Normally
would one want to amortise the complexity of a split over multiple inserts, but
since we have no guarantee that a split will not occur again immediately due to
bad clustering, is this not possible. The time complexity is already bounded by
n so it does not change the time complexity since n ≥nc.
The deletion works by ﬁrst looking up the cluster of the point to be deleted,
which is done in average constant time. The point is then deleted from the
cluster which takes O(L(t + |b|)) according to the LSH analysis, but here L is
constant and |b| is dependent on the number of points in the cluster 2n/tsplit.
The expected size of b is assumed to be constant, because we can always choose
the parameters L and j such that the average bucket size is constant according
to tsplit without considering n. This was not possible in LSH since L and j had
to be set accordingly to n to achieve constant time. This then gives us the time
complexity of O(t). In worst case where all points in the cluster are in the same
bucket is the query bounded by O(t + 2n/tsplit) and if the cluster average does
not hold is it O(t + n).
When as cluster needs to be merged, is the closest cluster ﬁrst identiﬁed which
is worst case O(n) time. Then the clustering is performed which is also done
in linear time. This is followed by iterating over each point and ﬁnding the
closest amongst the new clusters (1 or 2), inserting the point into that cluster
and updating the entry in D. These actions take O(nc(t + d)) time. Lastly is
the old clusters deleted in constant time and the new clusters are added to G.
The overall time complexity of a merge is then O(n + nc(t + d)).
For the normal k-NN query are we iterating over all the clusters in order to
ﬁnd the closest which takes linear time as we learned above. We then query the
found cluster with the LSH k-NN query, which takes O(Lt+d|C|+|C| log k+k)
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Clustering Solution
45
time. It is safe to say that |C| ≤n and k ≤n and we assume d|C| > |C| log k,
this gives us the total time complexity of O(t + dn).
The multi cluster k-NN also iterates over all the clusters to ﬁnd the closest
clusters to probe. If we build a min-heap on the clusters with the distance to q
as key and retrieve the c minimum elements, where c is the number of clusters
to probe, does this take O(c log n+dn) time. The dn is the building of the heap
and the calculation of the each distance. This is followed by calculating the
inverse distance sum and the number of probes for each cluster which is done
in linear time. Lastly is the multi-probe k-NN query of each cluster queried,
which should take either O(dLj2 + dpnc/2j + k) or O(Ljd′ log d′ + p log(Ljd′) +
dpnc/2j + k) depending on whether it is hyperplane or cross-polytype LSH.
We did not make a general multi-probe query for LSH that we can use, so we
consider both families. nc is the number of points per cluster, which we assumed
to be 2n/tsplit, additionally are L and j assumed constant. Additionally did
nc/2j come from the average bucket size, which we in the deletion above now
consider constant. This gives us the two bounds O(d + dp + k) and O(d′ log d′ +
p log(d′) + dp + k).
Here dp ≥d, d′ log d′ ≤dp and p log(d′) ≤dp, which
gives us the same bound for both queries O(dp + k). This query is performed
for each cluster we wish to probe c which gives us the overall time bound of
O(c log n + dn + c(dp + k)). In worst case is c all clusters, which is bounded by
n, we can then reduce the bound to O(n log n + ndp + kn).
Even though the queries are not bounded by sublinear n, will we see that the
running times of the implementation are still very fast, since the number of
clusters usually are much less than the number of points. The complexity should
still not be ignored, since it is a potential weakness of the solution.
==PAGE:52==
46
Design
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Implementation
This chapter goes into detail about the program that has been developed in
order to test the designed solutions in practice. The ﬁrst chapter explains what
have been developed, how we designed it and describes the choices we have made
during development. The next section goes more into detail about how the code
is structured and how the solutions utilise the database. The chapter concludes
with a short section, where we describe how we tested our program.
4.1
Design
We have developed a program in C++17 of the designed solutions that serves two
purposes. First, it demonstrates the practicality of the solutions and allow us
to compare the solutions to each other with diﬀerent requirements and settings.
This means that the program both contain an implementation of the solutions
and a framework for testing them. Secondly, is the implementation designed
with the purpose of being used as an indexing scheme in a database. Modularity
of the implementation has therefore also been a focus, such that the testing
framework along with unneeded features can be removed. C++ was chosen as the
programming language in order to allow low level optimisation and more control
with the algorithms and data structures. This was the author’s ﬁrst big project
==PAGE:54==
48
Implementation
in C++, which might be reﬂected in some inconsistencies in the code (e.g. the use
of raw pointers, smart pointers and references is not consistent), nevertheless
has the code been refactored multiple times, which has let to an acceptable ﬁnal
quality. The code has been very thoroughly commented in order to let potential
future users have any easier time understanding the diﬀerent aspects. With the
description of the implementation in this chapter together with the thorough
code comments, should it be possible to continue development on the code or
at least retrieve parts that are relevant in another context.
This is not the ﬁrst program implementing solutions to the k-NN problem, nu-
merous other projects has been conducted on this topic which has lead to imple-
mentations. Worth mentioning are FALCONN [25], which is an implementation
of hyperplane and cross-polytype LSH in C++ that is really fast, but only runs
in memory and expects the whole data set to be given in order to choose the
best parameters. A real-world applied example is Annoy [9] used by Spotify to
make music recommendations to users. It is an indexing scheme in C++ that
uses random projections for multiple distance functions and is optimised for
memory usage, but also allows saving the indices to disk.
We will now examine the diﬀerent implemented features in our program, which
can be condensed to the following:
• Memory based solutions:
– Linear
– Medrank
– Hyperplane LSH
– Cross-Polytype LSH
• Database based solutions:
– Linear
– Hyperplane LSH
– Cross-Polytype LSH
– Clustering
• Little Endian and CSV style input
• Conﬁguration ﬁle and command line support
• Saving and loading of database solutions
• Logging support
• Truth table support
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Design
49
Memory Solutions
Initially, the memory based solutions were developed in order to have something
to show that worked and where it was possible to establish how the diﬀerent
solutions performed compared to one another.
The implementation of these
memory based solutions follow the solutions described in the design chapter,
where the data structures and algorithms are implemented with the C++ equiv-
alents. The ﬁrst version of the program had a feature, where it was possible to
run multiple solutions one after another and compare the results with the linear
search. Here it became evident that the Medrank solution performed very bad
when the dimensionality became 30+ (Often inspected all points and was slower
than linear search) and was therefore dismissed in the next solution iteration.
This is of course not that surprising with the theoretical worst case running time
it had, even though the original authors had good results in higher dimensions.
Database Solutions
In order to fully test the scalability of the solutions were multiple database
based solutions developed as well. The concept was to store the data points in
the data base as well as the hash values from the LSH and clustering solutions
in order to minimise memory usage. This of course comes with a great time
increase, since all operations now have to go through an database layer, but it
allows us to work on much larger data sets.
Input Formats
In the beginning were the solution only tested and compared on synthetic data
sets, where the data and queries were created from a random uniform distribu-
tion. This contributes to highly chaotic data, which can be interesting to test
on, but usually do real data sets have some sort of densities and patterns and
not be completely random. We have therefore tested on multiple data sets as
well and created parsers for data following the CSV format, that is delimiter
separated ﬁles, and the SIFT [2] format, which uses Little Endian.
Execution Options
The program is run from the command line, where it is possible to provide op-
tions specifying the desired type of solution to use and associated parameters. In
order to make it easier to run the program, especially when performing multiple
tests, is it also possible to use a conﬁguration ﬁle. Here more parameters are
available and it provides a good overview of what is tested. The possible com-
mand line arguments can be seen in appendix B.1 and an example conﬁguration
ﬁle can be found in appendix B.2.
Saving and Loading
While testing the diﬀerent LSH and the clustering solutions, did it become clear
that it often was desired to run queries with diﬀerent numbers of probes in order
to achieve reasonable results. The implementation at this works such that an
==PAGE:56==
50
Implementation
input ﬁle was read, all the data point was inserted into the data structure of
the solution, followed by performing a number of k-NN queries on the solution.
When the queries were done, did the program exit and all the used memory
was released, hash functions etc. inclusive. The database still contained the
hashes and data points, but it would be impossible to use them without the
hash functions, which was now gone. We therefore implemented the feature of
choosing to save the solution, which results in all the hash functions and other
solution speciﬁc variables to be saved. This allows one to create a solution,
insert data points into it, test it with some queries, save it and come back to it
at some later point and continue using it.
Logging
Another feature that was desired when testing was some mechanism to follow
the solutions while inserting, deleting etc.
and not just writing to standard
output. We thus created a logger as a separate thread, which main thread could
supply with messages on a queue. The logger writes to ﬁle if one is speciﬁed in
the conﬁguration ﬁle, otherwise it writes to standard out. The logger is mostly
used to log the time takes to perform diﬀerent operations, e.g. parsing data or
performing a k-NN query. An example of a log ﬁle can be found in appendix C.
Truth Tables
The previous mentioned logger also allowed the creation of truth tables, which
is an output format of the program that list all the k neighbours of all the
performed queries right after one another.
When combined with the linear
solution is the output the exact neighbours to the provided k-NN queries. A
feature in the program is that it is then possible to provide the truth table
ﬁle, which is then used to calculate the recall for the speciﬁed queries of that
solution.
4.1.1
Database Analysis
The database chosen is a MongoDB, which is a document-oriented database. In
contrast to the tables of a traditional relational database management system,
does the database have collections, that contain documents. These corresponds
to records in a table, but are considerably diﬀerent. A document consist of a
number of key-value pairs and the interesting property is that documents in
the collection do not need to contain the same types of key-value pairs nor the
same number, they are entirely self-contained. Additionally can the value of a
key-value pair be an array of some type, which we will utilise later. Lastly is it
possible to create an index on a key in the collection, all documents with that
key are then part of the index.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Structure
51
We also considered to use a key-value database, but it was not trivial to ﬁnd one
that was not in-memory, had a documented C++ driver and had a community /
open source version. The choice landed on MongoDB since it is well documented
and provided a C++ driver. We chose not to use a relational database, since we
are only storing data points and hashes and the relationship among these is a
little excessive to use a whole relational database for.
4.2
Structure
The overall structure of the developed program can be seen on ﬁgure 4.1, where
all the boxes are classes unless they are marked as interfaces. At the bottom are 4
namespaces also shown, these are not classes, but simply a collection of functions
under the same name. Lastly, the bounding boxes group the relevant classes
together and the describe their relationships. Most of the classes implements
interfaces that dictates what functions that they should provide, which has
streamlined the overall design. It is also fairly simple to create a new hashing
scheme or search scheme, one simply has to implement the relevant interface
and update the controller. Furthermore are the search schemes independent, it
is possible to delete all but one and still have working program, they same is
valid for the hashing schemes. The controller has to updated, which is the only
downside.
4.2.1
Code Structure
To start with the basics is Point the class representation of a data point, that
contains the id and the coordinates and otherwise provide a few member func-
tions. The coordinates are saved as doubles (64 bits), which in retrospect could
without a problem have been ﬂoat (32 bits). The two distance function classes
represents the corresponding euclidean and angular distance and implements
the DistanceMetric interface. These classes naturally have member functions
for computing the distance between two points.
The SearchScheme interface dictates that the classes that implements it, has to
provide insertion, deletion and the k-NN query. It is implemented by the classes
LSH, MedRank and NaiveSearch, which are the memory based solutions that
stores their data internally in data structures as described in the design section.
Additionally does the LSH have an object that implements the HashScheme inter-
face, which is the representation of a LSH hash family. Both HyperplaneHash
and CrossPolytypeHash implements this interface and has to provide functions
==PAGE:58==
52
Implementation
«interface» 
SearchScheme
«interface» 
DBSearchScheme
NaiveSearch
LSH
MedRank
NaiveDBSearch
LSHDB
ClusteredSearch
«interface» 
HashScheme
CrossPolytypeHash
HyperplaneHash
«interface» 
ClusteringScheme
KMeans
«interface» 
DatabaseInterface
MongoDBInterface
«interface» 
VectorParser
CSVParser
SIFTParser
«interface» 
GroundTruthParser
CSVTruthParser
SIFTTruthParser
ConﬁgParser
DeleteParser
Cluster
Point
«interface» 
DistanceMetric
EuclideanDistance
CosineDistance
Timer
PointCursor
Parsers
Data Sructures
Miscellaneous
Search Schemes 
Hashing Schemes
Database Interfaces
Distance Functions
Clustering Schemes 
Logging
Global
Controller
CommandLine
Namespaces
Figure 4.1: Shows all the interfaces and classes with bounding boxes that cate-
gorise them. Furthermore are the 4 used namespaces also included
at the bottom, these are not classes.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Structure
53
for hashing a point and for creating probes. It is therefore the hash scheme that
own all the hash functions over all the hash tables, but they do not contain the
hash tables themselves. These are stored in the LSH search scheme.
The interface DBSearchScheme implements the SearchScheme interface and are
used by the solutions that use a database for storing their data.
In addi-
tion to aforementioned functions, is it also required that the database solu-
tions implement batch insertion and deletion.
This is important since it is
much faster to insert a big chunk of data into database, than inserting it piece
by piece.
The classes that implements this interface is the NaiveDBSearch,
the LSHDB and the ClusteredSearch.
These solutions store most of their
data in the database instead of in memory, we will in the Database Structure
section specify what exactly.
The solutions communicate with the database
through the DatabaseInterface, where numerous functions are available. The
MongoDBInterface implements this interface and uses the MongoDB C++ driver
to communicate with the MongoDB.
The ClusteredSearch is the most complicated of the search schemes and in
addition to all the required functions, also has functions for splitting, merging
and creating clusters. A cluster is represented by the class of same name and
implements functions for inserting and deleting points as well as performing a
k-NN query on the cluster. Just as the LSH does the cluster have an associated
hash scheme, that stores the hash functions for the cluster, but unlike LSH
does the hash scheme use the centre of the cluster as its basis for doing the
hashing instead of origin. The cluster is also using the database interface to
save its points and hashes in the database. In addition to clusters, does the
ClusteredSearch also have an associated ClusteringScheme. This is a simple
interface that only contain one function and that is performing a clustering.
This interface is implemented by KMeans, which also contain the algorithm for
k-Means++.
In addition to all these solutions do we also have multiple parsers. The VectorParser
is an interface for reading data ﬁles and creating points of the data.
The
CSVParser and SIFTParser implements this interface and both use a ﬁlestream
to read chunks of the data ﬁle at a time and keep track of what has been parsed.
The GroundTruthParser and the clasess that implents the interface are used
for parsing the ground truth tables used for calculating the recall of a k-NN
query. Lastly, the ConfigParser is used for parsing the conﬁguration ﬁle and
the DeleteParser is used to read data that should be deleted. The last parser
is only used in the dynamic testing, which we will present in section 5.3.
The Timer is a simple class for measuring time in the program, which is used to
log the time of the diﬀerent operations. The PointCursor class is a helper class
for iterating over the points in one or multiple clusters, retrieving the poitns
==PAGE:60==
54
Implementation
from the database in chunks as they are needed.
Besides all these classes and interfaces does the program also make use of a
number of namespaces. Firstly the logger remains in its own namespace, where
it is possible to start it as a separate thread, stop it and put messages for
it on a queue. Additionally, is there a Global namespace which is where the
conﬁgurations parsed from the ConfigParser remains. The diﬀerent classes and
functions then use the parameters from this namespace to complete their job.
Furtermore do we have the namespace CommandLine which contains functions
for reading the input provided to the program as well setting parameters in
Global if no conﬁguration ﬁle is provided. Lastly, do we have the Controller
namespace that contains functions for the ﬂow and control of the program.
Here are the functions for choosing the correct search scheme, creating the
database connection, inserting data into search schemes, performing the k-NN
searches, comparing the results with truth tables etc. These are the functions
that have been created to test the created solutions and therefore serve both as
a framework to testing, as well as a demonstration to how the diﬀerent solutions
can be used.
There are two important ﬁles which has not been mentioned and those are the
main ﬁle and the iterative main ﬁle. The main ﬁle contains the main function,
from where the program begins and reads the command line arguments and
fowards them to the controller. The iterative main is an alternative to main,
that has been created to perform the dynamic benchmarks, where points are
inserted and deleted in the search schemes. More on this in section 5.3.
4.2.2
Database Structure
We have attempted to make the structure in database as simple as possible.
The collections created and used by each solution can be seen on ﬁgure 4.2.
The linear search uses a single collection, where each document is a data point
consisting of an id and an array with the coordinates. There is created a hashed
index on the id, such that the points can be deleted in theoretical average
constant time. When performing a k-NN query, does the solution simply retrieve
a block of the points at a time in order to ﬁnd the k nearest neighbours.
The LSH solution uses the same collection as the linear solution to store the
points themselves. Additionally does it have a collection, where each document
is a hash. That is, the document contains the id of the data point and a hash
value with the hash table number preﬁxed (zero preﬁxed if necessary e.g. 7 →07
if L < 100). There is therefore L documents in the collection for each hashed
data point. An index is created on the hashes, such that it is fast to search based
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Structure
55
Cluster3
id: string
coord: double[ ]
Cluster2
id: string
coord: double[ ]
PointColl
id: string
coord: double[ ]
Cluster3hash
id: string
hash: string
Cluster2hash
id: string
hash: string
hashColl
id: string
hash: string
Cluster1hash
id: string
hash: string
Cluster1
id: string
coord: double[ ]
PointColl
id: string
cluster: string
Clustering Solution
Linear Solution
LSH Solution
LinearCollection
id: string
coord: double[ ]
Figure 4.2: Here are the collections showed for the 3 database solutions.
on the hashes. Notice that it is only the points and hashes that are saved, the
hash functions still remain in memory. An insertion involves inserting the point
into the PointColl as a document and inserting the L hash documents into the
hashColl. A deletion is performed by deleting the point by id in PointColl
and deleting the hashes in hashCool by searching for the hashes and id in that
order, to apply the index. Lastly is the k-NN query performed by returning all
documents matching the provided hashes, these are the candidate data points.
In contrast to the other solutions, does the clustering solution not have a single
collection with all the points. Instead, the points are distributed over multiple
collections; Cluster1, Cluster2 etc. one for each cluster. Additionally, does
each cluster also have a Cluster1hash collection, where the hashes of the points
for that cluster is stored like in the LSH solution. The solution has one overall
collection PointColl, where there is a document for each data point stating
its id and the cluster id of the cluster it belongs to.
There are indexes on
the collections as for the LSH solution and there is and index on the id of
the PointColl collection. An insertion is then done by inserting an entry into
PointColl and inserting into the appropriate cluster collections. A deletion is
performed by retrieving the correct cluster of the point from PointColl and
then deleting as in the LSH solution for the appropriate cluster. Finally is a
k-NN query perfomed by querying multiple cluster hash collections with hashes
and return the documents as the candidate set.
When a solution is saved is there created a collection with the solution name
provided in the conﬁguration ﬁle. There are then inserted a document for the
solution with all the associated variable and a document for the hash scheme
==PAGE:62==
56
Implementation
if it is a LSH solution. If it is a clustering solution, then there is created a
document for the overall solution, a document for each cluster and a document
for each hash scheme, that is one for each cluster. This collection can then be
used to reload a solution and continue with it.
4.3
Testing
In order to ensure that the implementation is correct has a number initiatives
been applied.
Initially, were the memory based solutions tested by creating
random uniform data and querying the solutions with random queries.
By
creating a linear scan solution was it possible to create a baseline, which the
other solutions could be compared against and where it was possible to see
if something was oﬀ.
The results was printed to standard output, where it
was possible to see the queries and results. After a while was the random data
replaced by the glove data set, which is based on vector representations of words
and where similar words have similar vectors. The results of the queries now
become more human readable, since it made sense that the query "memories"
would return words like "remembering", "moments", "forgotten" etc.
With the inclusion of the database based solutions was it now also possible
to look at the data in the database and verify that data was saved correctly.
This was used intensively to ensure that the save and load functions worked
correctly and that hashes was formed correctly, since it was possible to see the
hash values directly. The Milestone dataset and the SIFT dataset were also
introduced, where SIFT came with its own truth tables. This allowed us to
verify that own linear scan algorithm worked correctly as well as comparing
solutions on recall. The Milestone dataset came with images corresponding to
the vectors, which made it possible to visually verify whether the results were
correct. Lastly did the introduction of the logger make it very easy to follow
the ﬂow of the algorithms and notice if anything was wrong.
All in all has there not been used any unit tests or applied any test tools to
ensure correctness, but with the amount of indirect and manual testing that has
been done, do we believe that most errors have been corrected.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Results
This chapter presents the results we have made in our project. All tests in the
following sections has been conducted on a desktop PC with an 3.29GHz AMD
Ryzen 1700 Eight-Core processor and with 16GB of RAM. Both the program
and the MongoDB database shared processing and memory resources.
The
MongoDB database was located on its own SSD drive and the data sets was
saved on an HDD. The developed program has been compiled with the highest
optimisation with the MSVC compiler using C++17.
The ﬁrst section contains the results obtained during parameter optimisation for
respectively the LSH and clustering solution. The following section shows the
static benchmarks on 3 diﬀerent data sets, where one is provided by Milestone
Systems A/S. The last section presents the dynamic benchmarks.
5.1
Parameter Optimisation
Here we perform parameter optimisation in order to determine what the param-
eters should be for the next tests. These are not exhaustive since there are many
parameters and the tests take a long time to run, so a full exhaustive search is
unachivable, but was preferred given more time. Each test only contain a few
number of test cases, which is enough to get an indication of the eﬀect of the
==PAGE:64==
58
Results
parameters, but not entirely enough to determine if there are any interconnected
properties.
Evaluation of a solution requires a deﬁnition of what a good result is. Since
the purpose of the project is to provide the nearest neighbour search, would the
quality of the search be important. The quality of a nearest neighbour search
is usually measured by the recall, which is given by:
Recall =
True Positives
True Positives + False Negatives
Furthermore is it also interesting to look at the percentage of points inspected,
namely the candidates, since this tells us how eﬃcient the solution is. Addition-
ally, should the solutions be scalable. It is therefore important that the query
time and the update times are reasonable. These parameters are thus chosen
for the quality evaluation and will be used throughout the rest of the chapter.
5.1.1
LSH Solution
We have run 5 diﬀerent tests with the hyperplane LSH solution on a ﬁxed
number of 200,000 points from the Glove dataset. For each test case has there
been run a 1000 k-NN queries with k = 500, so the recall, candidates and search
time are the averages over these 1000 queries. The insertion time is the average
insert time per point and the points are only inserted once per tast case.
The ﬁrst test can be seen on table 5.1 and was about changing the seed used for
creating the hash functions in order to determine its eﬀect. This is important,
because if the seed has a great impact on the quality, then either it has to be
chosen carefully in each test or we will have to work with a greater uncertainty
margin. As it can be seen in the table is there a variation in the recall from 5.89
to 6.76, which is a reasonable margin.
Seed
Hash
length
Hash
tables
Pro-
bes
Recall
Candi-
dates
Search
Time (s)
Insert
Time (s)
123335
16
20
340
5.8926%
0.9766%
0.194570
0.000539
56198465
16
20
340
6.7622%
1.0679%
0.210962
0.000595
62598
16
20
340
6.2814%
1.0399%
0.210518
0.000544
737859
16
20
340
6.4702%
1.0647%
0.226596
0.000595
Table 5.1: Table showing the eﬀect the seed has on the the recall. candidates
examined. search time and insertion time.
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Parameter Optimisation
59
The next test, as seen in table 5.2, focused on changing the number of probes
used in the multi-probe k-NN. It is clear that the increase of probes increases
the number of candidates inspected, the query time and the recall. This makes
sense, since more probes mean that we get more candidates to inspect, which
requires more time compare. The recall increases with the candidates, but are
not increasing as much. The candidates also increase less than we increased
the number of probes. This also makes sense, since the candidates are the set
unique points, but the probes are split out over the 20 hash tables and would
therefore ﬁnd many of the same points. The probing thus works as a way to
boost the recall, but at the cost of increased search time.
Hash
length
Hash
tables
Pro-
bes
Neigh-
bours
Recall
Candi-
dates
Search
Time (s)
Insert
Time (s)
16
20
20
500
1.1852%
0.1244%
0.028766
0.000539
16
20
100
500
2.3190%
0.3277%
0.064859
0.000539
16
20
340
500
5.8926%
0.9766%
0.194570
0.000539
16
20
1000
500
11.1516%
2.4875%
0.507930
0.000539
16
20
1500
500
15.1602%
3.6733%
0.783736
0.000539
16
20
2420
500
22.1384%
5.8509%
1.194858
0.000539
Table 5.2: Table showing the eﬀect the number of probes has on the recall.
candidates examined. search time and insertion time.
The remaining tests can be found in table A.1 in appendix A. Here we tested
the eﬀect of changing the hash length, that is the number of hash functions
or hyperplanes. As expected does this inﬂuence the granularity of the search,
where a low hash length causes a single probe to return many candidates and a
high hash length return few candidates per probe. This parameter therefore has
to be set in accordance to the expected data size and the acceptable granularity.
We also tested with diﬀerent numbers of k in the k-NN query. The search time
and candidates are the same, since we are not changing anything about how
candidates are obtained. The recall is increasing though, which indicates that
its easier to ﬁnd the closer neighbours than those further way.
Lastly did we test the eﬀect of changing the number of hash tables L. Since the
number of probes are kept constant are these spread over more and more tables,
which results in the candidates and search time only increasing marginally. It is
clear that we ﬁnd more correct neighbours with more hash tables, but in order
to double the recall did we have to increase the number of hash tables by 20
fold. This is very costly on the insertion, since more and more hashes has to be
calculated and saved.
==PAGE:66==
60
Results
5.1.2
Clustering Solution
We also examined some of the parameters of the clustering solution. We carried
out 3 tests with the hyperplane clustering solution on a ﬁxed number fo 1,000,000
points from the SIFT dataset. For each test case has there been run a 100 k-NN
queries with k = 1000 and as before are the recall, candidates and search time
averages over all queries. The insert time is the average insertion time per point
in that test case. We also monitored the time it took to perform a split into new
clusters, written as the cluster time. This is also an average over the splits that
occurred during the insertion. Lastly did we also monitor the number of splits,
written as cluster splits. Some of the parameters are left out on the next tables
due to space on the page, but they can all be found in table A.2 in appendix A.
Probes
Queried
Clusters
Recall
Candidates
Search
Time (s)
8000
1
36.8750%
0.39366%
0.261846
8000
3
49.1130%
0.51550%
0.331312
8000
5
46.7970%
0.54700%
0.352261
8000
8
42.8140%
0.57864%
0.379554
8000
15
36.0890%
0.62369%
0.412414
Table 5.3: Table showing the eﬀect of changing the number of queried clusters
when performing the multi-cluster k-NN query.
The ﬁrst test can be seen in table 5.3 and involved changing the number of
queried clusters in the multi-cluster k-NN query. The solution consisted of 49
clusters with a split threshold of 50,000.
Notice that the number of probes
has been kept constant, so the probes are distributed over more clusters as the
number increases. It is interesting that the candidates increases, but the recall
does not follow this increase. The highest recall is found at 3 clusters, which
indicates that it is only necessary to query a few clusters even when the cluster
number is as big as 49.
The next test can be seen on table 5.4 and was about changing the number of
iterations of k-means in the clustering algorithm used when splitting. The only
noticeable impact is that the time it takes to cluster increases, which naturally
increases the insert time.
The last test can be seen on table 5.5 and here we changed the number of clusters
that were created when a cluster was split, the so called split size. The number
of candidates, the recall and the search time are all roughly remaining at the
same values. The number of splits performed during the insertion decreases
though, when the split size increases. The overall cluster time increases, but
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Static Benchmarks
61
K-Means
iterations
Recall
Candi-
dates
Search
time (s)
Insert
time (s)
Cluster
time (s)
Cluster
splits
3
22.4690%
0.19902%
0.104668
0.001148
138.8624
5
6
21.8360%
0.21323%
0.114035
0.001113
160.0496
4
10
24.4610%
0.23680%
0.125514
0.001245
195.8274
4
15
22.3140%
0.20567%
0.117584
0.001426
234.0199
4
20
22.3590%
0.20304%
0.120191
0.001605
277.9795
4
30
22.3750%
0.21268%
0.115730
0.001809
330.0762
4
Table 5.4: Table showing the eﬀect of changing the number of iterations in the
k-Mean algorithm as part of the clustering.
Split
size
Recall
Candi-
dates
Search
time (s)
Insert
time (s)
Cluster
time (s)
Cluster
splits
2
26.8790%
0.32813%
0.170043
0.001460
142.8083
7
3
27.0550%
0.28647%
0.153269
0.001070
151.9009
4
5
22.9830%
0.22273%
0.115643
0.001099
160.9425
4
6
26.9680%
0.30141%
0.159794
0.000810
175.6524
2
8
27.9540%
0.34346%
0.171019
0.000636
187.9181
1
10
25.2040%
0.26673%
0.152654
0.000704
223.6204
1
Table 5.5: Table showing the eﬀect of changing the number of clusters that
are created when a cluster split is performed.
since there are less splits does the average insert time decrease. It therefore
looks like there are is no downside in splitting into many clusters, but this is
only a half truth, since it will result in many almost empty clusters. This could
be an issue if the solution also encountered many deletions, which there are none
of in this example.
5.2
Static Benchmarks
In this section are we comparing the database solutions on 3 datasets, namely
the Glove [22], SIFT [2] and Milestone datasets. The reason this section is called
static benchmarks is because the benchmarks are obtained by inserting a speciﬁc
number of points into the solutions and then querying them in order to monitor
their performance. In the next section are we looking at a more dynamic test
case.
GloVe is an unsupervised learning algorithm that has been trained for creating
==PAGE:68==
62
Results
vector representations of words. The vectors are created such that words that
have an underlying relationship are closer together. The vectors are in Rd with
d = 300, but by observation are most values in the interval [−1; 1]. The size of
the dataset is 2,196,017 vectors.
The SIFT dataset consists of 1 billion (but we are at most using 2 million) vectors
of dimension 128. These are image descriptors created with a feature detection
algorithm over 1 million images. The vectors are in the interval [0; 255], but
by observation are most values close to 0. We have normalised the dataset to
[−0.25; 1.75[ in order to obtain negative as well. We ﬁrst tried to normalise it
to [−1; 1[, but then almost all values where negative, which would considerably
hurt the LSH solution, since only a portion of the space around origin would
be used.
We ended up with the previously mentioned normalisation as this
provided the best results.
Lastly, do we have the Milestone dataset which were provided to us by Milestone
A/S and actually consists of 6 diﬀerent dataset, which can be seen in table 5.6.
The data is obtained as described in section 1.1. The vectors are of dimension
128 and are in the interval [−1; 1]. They have already been dimensionality
reduced and normalised for us.
Dataset
Size
camera1
132752
camera2
138812
camera3
165931
camera4
891982
camera5
682354
camera6
2907374
Table 5.6: Table showing the 6 datasets provided by Milestone Systems A/S
with their speciﬁed size (number of data points).
We have done our hardest to make both the LSH and clustering solution equally
eﬃcient as well as attempted to pick the best parameters in order to make a fair
comparison. It will never be a completely fair since further optimisation could
be made to the code and more ﬁne tuned parameters could be chosen, but we
still believe that our tests are representative.
In order to make fair comparisons have we tried to either cap the average candi-
dates returned to 5% or the average search time to 1 second. This should allow
use to compare the solutions on how eﬃcient they are on their candidates and
query time in regards to the obtained recall. For most test cases have we run
the test multiple times with diﬀerent parameters to reach these caps as well as
boosted the results by using more probes.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Static Benchmarks
63
5.2.1
SIFT
The results of the SIFT tests can be seen in table 5.7. We carried out 2 tests on
this dataset, one on 1 million points and one on 2 million points. In both tests
are the clustering solutions inspecting considerable less candidates than the LSH
solutions and at the same time obtaining better recall. For all solutions are the
recall worse on the bigger data than on smaller data. Lastly, did we notice while
running the tests, that the candidates for the LSH solutions varied greatly for
query to query. On the 2 million test for the cross-polytype LSH did one query
inspect 0.01% and another 8%, which might be an idication the normalisation
still are causing problems for the solution. The same variation was not observed
on the clustering solutions.
Dataset
Search Scheme
Recall
Candidates
Search
Time (s)
Insert
Time (s)
SIFT 1M
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
41.005055
0.000054
SIFT 1M
Hyperplane LSH
43.5040%
1.8473%
0.948999
0.000757
SIFT 1M
CrossPolytype LSH
52.2670%
1.9440%
1.050468
0.000917
SIFT 1M
Hyperplane Clustering
69.5955%
1.6312%
0.87418
0.001311
SIFT 1M
CrossPolytype Clustering
76.1695%
1.5173%
0.83088
0.001493
SIFT 2M
Linear
99.9800%
100.0000%
104.084175
0.000055
SIFT 2M
Hyperplane LSH
31.1975%
0.5925%
1.531623
0.001758
SIFT 2M
CrossPolytype LSH
39.1570%
0.9335%
1.936426
0.001865
SIFT 2M
Hyperplane Clustering
40.9790%
0.2620%
0.948181
0.001748
SIFT 2M
CrossPolytype Clustering
48.5965%
0.2249%
0.980225
0.002069
Table 5.7: Table showing the benchmarks of the SIFT datasets.
==PAGE:70==
64
Results
5.2.2
Glove
The results for the Glove tests can be seen in table 5.8. Here we also carried out
2 tests, one on 1 million points and one on the whole dataset of 2,196,017 points.
The ﬁrst thing to notice is that the recall are quite lower on this dataset than
the former for all solutions. The cross-polytype LSH seems to out-perform the
hyperplane LSH in both tests and the same is valid for the two clustering solu-
tions. Overall is the cross-polytype clustering solution obtaining the best recall
based on the lowest number of inspected candidates. The downside is that it
uses the longest time inserting points, where the LSH solutions are considerably
faster.
Dataset
Search Scheme
Recall
Candidates
Search
Time (s)
Insert
Time (s)
Glove 1M
Linear
99.8000%
100.0000%
106.049095
0.000143
Glove 1M
Hyperplane LSH
10.9842%
0.6020%
1.013308
0.001135
Glove 1M
CrossPolytype LSH
25.3880%
0.7195%
1.251321
0.001656
Glove 1M
Hyperplane Clustering
22.1920%
0.8583%
1.061219
0.002288
Glove 1M
CrossPolytype Clustering
25.7100%
0.4539%
0.980282
0.003235
Glove Full
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
1238.872579
0.000145
Glove Full
Hyperplane LSH
6.8870%
0.0500%
1.249839
0.002861
Glove Full
CrossPolytype LSH
12.4270%
0.0767%
1.140333
0.003451
Glove Full
Hyperplane Clustering
11.3920%
0.1281%
0.949722
0.003521
Glove Full
CrossPolytype Clustering
18.4200%
0.1042%
0.958473
0.005017
Table 5.8: Table showing the benchmarks of the Glove datasets.
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Static Benchmarks
65
5.2.3
Milestone
Finally we have the results of the Milestone datasets, which can be seen in table
5.9. We did not run tests on the camera1 dataset since it was very similar in size
in comparison to camera2. The results of camera2 and camera4 can be found
in the full table in A.3. We had a hard time determining the right parameters
for the LSH on the camera6 dataset, which is why their search time is 6 and
10 seconds respectively. For all the solutions does the insertion time increase
as the data size increases. In the ﬁrst tests are the solutions very similar, but
in the second test are the clustering solutions considerably better. In the last
test does the cross-polytype solution achieve the same recall as the hyperplane
LSH solution, even though it inspected over 4 times more points. Otherwise is
it hard to conclude anything on the last test.
Dataset
Search Scheme
Recall
Candidates
Search
Time (s)
Insert
Time (s)
camera3
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
5.776933
0.000062
camera3
Hyperplane LSH
86.3300%
4.9009%
0.418412
0.000778
camera3
CrossPolytype LSH
91.4970%
5.3283%
0.468091
0.000880
camera3
Hyperplane Clustering
89.9200%
4.8037%
0.400181
0.001561
camera3
CrossPolytype Clustering
96.2620%
5.0923%
0.469357
0.001724
camera5
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
27.452236
0.000065
camera5
Hyperplane LSH
78.4580%
2.9555%
1.010982
0.000908
camera5
CrossPolytype LSH
82.7250%
2.3830%
0.842526
0.001146
camera5
Hyperplane Clustering
90.4080%
2.9766%
1.037960
0.001688
camera5
CrossPolytype Clustering
93.6910%
2.4828%
0.845919
0.001877
camera6
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
173.020653
0.000065
camera6
Hyperplane LSH
64.4670%
0.9029%
6.860769
0.001514
camera6
CrossPolytype LSH
79.0110%
1.1557%
10.006461
0.001617
camera6
Hyperplane Clustering
33.0390%
0.0752%
0.693282
0.001985
camera6
CrossPolytype Clustering
67.4650%
0.2076%
0.970853
0.002296
Table 5.9: Table showing the benchmarks of the Milestone datasets.
==PAGE:72==
66
Results
5.3
Dynamic Benchmarks
In addition to performing traditional static tests have we also carried out a
dynamic test. The motivation is, that in a real-world scenario are we not only
inserting a speciﬁc number of points and performing queries, instead would we
insert and delete points continuously over time. The solutions should therefore
be able to provide good results with changing data without having to change
parameters and restart the solution.
Figure 5.1: The average recall of the 4 database solutions over the 9 operations
in the dynamic test.
The test consisted of 9 steps, where each step was an insertion or deletion
operation of multiple points. The list of operations together with the raw data
can be found in table A.4 in appendix A. After each operation is 30 k-NN queries
run with k = 500 and we then monitor the same evaluation parameters as in
the static tests. The inserted and deleted points are deterministic, that is the
same points are inserted and deleted in the same order for all solutions. The
ﬁgures 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 show the summarised results of these queries over the
dynamic test.
By looking at the recall is it interesting to notice that the recall decreases for
all solutions whenever there are a deletion, that is operation 2, 4, 5, 8 and 9.
Through the test does the LSH solutions have better recall, but this is mainly
due to them inspecting far more candidates than the clustering solutions, as can
be seen on candidates ﬁgure. Notice how the clustering solutions decrease the
percentage of candidates inspected when the big insertion of a million points
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Dynamic Benchmarks
67
are performed in operation 6. The LSH still inspect roughly the same percent-
age, which leads to tremendously higher search times, which is conﬁrmed on
the search time ﬁgure. Also the clustering solutions increase in search time as
the data increases, they just increase less than the LSH solutions. The cross-
polytype clustering solution is achieving roughly the same recall as the LSH
solutions, but are inspecting diﬀerent percentages of candidates depending of
the data size, where the LSH solutions are inspecting almost the same per-
centage of candidates in order to maintain their recall. This shows that the
clustering solution are inspecting better candidates.
Figure 5.2: The average candidates inspected by the 4 database solutions over
the 9 operations in the dynamic test.
Figure 5.3: The average search time of the 4 database solutions over the 9
operations in the dynamic test.
==PAGE:74==
68
Results
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This chapter is used to reﬂect on the designed and implemented solutions and
the results obtained testing these. Additionally are some of the challenges faced
during the project also discussed. First, we discuss the results we presented
in the previous section and then we focus on the LSH and clustering solutions
respectively.
6.1
Results
Based on the static benchmarks is it clear that the cross-polytype LSH provides
better recall than the hyperplane LSH. The same relationship applies for the
cross-polytype clustering and hyperplane clustering. In most cases does both
clustering algorithms provide better recall than the LSH solutions, but in some
cases are the cross-polytype LSH as good as the hyperplane clustering or slightly
better. It seems like the candidates that clustering solutions inspect have higher
probability of being close neighbours than the candidates of the LSH solutions,
since the former systematically inspects fewer candidates. The downside of the
clustering solutions are that the insertion time is longer.
It looks from the results as if the solutions becomes less eﬀective with the increase
of data. Take the SIFT test for example, on the 1M dataset did the hyperplane
==PAGE:76==
70
Discussion
clustering inspect 1.63% ≈16, 000 candidates. On the 2M dataset did it inspect
0.262% ≈5, 000 candidates, but uses approximately the same amount of time.
It is not a clustering based problem, since it also aﬀects the LSH solution. Our
guess is that it is the database operation that takes more time with the increase
in data.
In the dynamic tests was the recall decreasing every time a deletion operation
was performed. We have not found any reason to this, but suspect it might have
something to do with the deletion of the hash values in the database. More on
this later in the section. Also in the dynamic test does it look like the clustering
solutions inspect candidates which have a higher probability of being neighbours
than the LSH solutions. Furthermore are the LSH solutions roughly maintaining
their percentage of inspected candidates throughout the test, where the cluster-
ing solutions are adjusting their percentage more accordingly with the number
of points. This results in the LSH having more varied search times than the
clustering solutions with the shifting number of points. The clustering solutions
are also varying in search time more than what we would have preferred. The
dynamic benchmarks are only based on a single test. More and longer tests
should be performed to get a better picture of how the solutions perform under
these conditions.
It is not evident why the algorithms perform so bad on the Glove dataset. It
could be the greater dimensionality, since non of the other datasets are of di-
mension 300, but only 128. It is also possible that the dataset is more uniformly
distributed, since it then will be harder to determine which neighbours are close.
This is an inept feature or curse of the LSH; it hashes close pairs together, but
if the neighbours are not actually close, then the probability of obtaining the
neighbours might be small and we might end up with many false positives.
We can be certain of that the data is not skewed, since the clustering solution
adapts its centres according to the density in dataset as splits are done, which
would have solved this. In the general case will the clustering theoretically per-
form better on skewed data than the LSH, since it cannot change centre during
exectution.
There are some serious issues with insertion and deletion in both the LSH and
clustering solutions, but not the linear solution. In the dynamic test did this be-
come very clear, since the insertion time increased with the number of points for
both solutions. We did a test where we inserted just under 7 million points into
the clustering solution and monitored the insertion time into the clusters, this
can be seen on ﬁgure A.1, and monitored the insertion time into the PointColl
collection that has an entry for each point, this can be seen on ﬁgure A.2. The
insertion into the clusters, includes the computation of hashes and the database
insertions. On these ﬁgures are it evident that the insertion time is worsening,
but also becomes more varied. We suspect the reason to why the insertion of
==PAGE:77==
6.2 LSH Solution
71
points into clusters takes more time, is due to the number of clusters increasing
and thus the number of batch insertions into the database becomes fewer and
each contains less points. This is not the whole truth since the insertion time for
point references also increases and this is always inserted in one database query.
Thus we consider it being due to either bad indexing or the database reading
and writing data to disk and this ﬁrst becoming an issue as the data cannot
remain in memory for the database. This issue is the main reason to we did not
make any tests on larger datasets, since it becomes very time consuming.
The deletion also took longer time with more points and was often 10 times
slower than the insertion. Here we are fairly sure that this is due to bad hash
deletion queries, where the MongoDB engine has a hard time utilising the index
on the hashes eﬀectively with the query we have written. This is not the entire
problem, since it would still suﬀer from the same as the insertion, but it explains
why the deletion is worse than the insertion. The bad query might also be the
reason to why the solutions are performing worse right after a deletion as seen
in the dynamic test.
6.2
LSH Solution
A recurring problem with the LSH solution is that the locality sensitive families
that we have chosen are meant for the angular distance, where points are lying
on the unit sphere. We claimed that it still would be feasible to use in the
euclidean space that we are working with, as long as we normalised the data
to be all around origin. From the results does it seem, that our claim holds,
since we have obtained some acceptable results. There are problems with both
hash families though and that is if the query point is close to origin. Here the
neighbours might be close using the euclidean distance, but might have a great
angular distance. This issue is relayed to the clustering solution, where the same
problem occurs if a query point is close to a cluster centre.
We did not parallelize any part of our implementation with exception of the
logger. The place that could beneﬁt the most from this would be the hashing,
where it would be possible to either split the points up for diﬀerent threads to
process or the hash functions. Some of our early debugging showed that 40% of
the insert time was used on calculating hashes of the LSH solutions.
==PAGE:78==
72
Discussion
6.3
Clustering Solution
After all tests had been run did we ﬁnd an error in the implementation for the
clustering solution when calculating the candidates, which are used through-
out the results as a parameter for evaluation.
The candidates computed by
the solution was the sum of candidates for each cluster and not joined unique
candidates as in the LSH solution. The candidate measure of the solution has
therefore been an overestimation, since the same candidate could be found in
multiple clusters. Thus the real candidates percentages would clearly have been
smaller, which only highlights that the solution has its strength in inspecting
the right candidates. We did not have the time to redo all the tests, since it
takes a considerable amount of time, so instead we mention the issue here.
During the dynamic test of the clustering solutions was the lifetime threshold
only hit once in each solution. We had set the parameter D = 5 as the limit
for when the cluster centre should be moved, which in retrospect is very high
when the points are in the interval [−1, 1]. In the cross-polytype clustering was
the distance between the current centre and new centre 0.102, which is not very
much. It is hard to determine what this parameter should be and whether it
actually is an issue. We will have to conduct further dynamic tests to determine
this.
We used a great time analysing the clustering solution and came to the conclu-
sion that most of the queries were bounded in O(n) due to search of nearest
cluster and no guarantees of the number of clusters. In the test mentioned ear-
lier, where we inserted just under 7 million points into the hyperplane clustering
solution, did we also monitor the time it took to ﬁnd the nearest cluster while
inserting based on the number of clusters. This can be seen on ﬁgure A.3. It is
clear that the time increases linearly with the number of clusters, but even with
the 60 clusters is time insigniﬁcant in comparison to what it takes to insert the
19531 into the clusters.
It was mentioned in the introduction in section 1.1, that it was a legal require-
ment to delete the data after a certain amount of time. We have not touched
upon this since then and this is mainly due to the fact that none of the datasets
we used had associated timestamps. It would not be hard to extent the solu-
tion to also allow deletion based on time. Theoretically could we add another
data structure using linear space, where the points were sorted in time and al-
lowed the predecessor query. In practice would one add the timestamp to the
PointColl collection in the solutions and create an index on it. This way would
it be possible to query for points based on the timestamp relatively fast based
on the index data structure.
==PAGE:79==
6.4 Database Issues
73
We did not discuss memory usage much in this thesis, since most data is kept
in memory. The memory usage depends mostly on the DBQueryRealSize pa-
rameter sat in the conﬁguration ﬁle, since it decided how many bytes of data
should be parsed and inserted into the database solution at time and how many
bytes should be retrieved at a time when performing clustering. The byte size
is then converted into the corresponding number of points depending on the
dimension of the data. There is one problem with the clustering solution and
that is k-means++. In order to decide an initial cluster centre are we calculating
the the distance of all points (in the cluster that is being split) as these are used
in our weighted probability distribution. We therefore has to keep the distance
of all points in memory while running the algorithm, which showed up as spike
in memory. This an issue with the solution that could be solved by not using
k-means++. Another solution would be to not use all points in the distribution
but just a representative amount, this would be worse than normal k-means++
but could be better than nothing.
6.4
Database Issues
We used hashed indexes on the collections since it should work as a hash function
and provide average constant lookup time while using the index. MongoDB also
provides standard indexes based on b-trees, which could have been interesting
to use and see if it changed anything. On the collection containing hashes, did
we only create an index on the hashes, we might have achieved better results
by creating a compound index on both the hash and point id.
While working with MongoDB and the way the database structure is designed,
did we encounter problems with limits MongoDB has on the document sizes.
This lead to some unfortunate crashes while running the dynamic test. When
searching for documents is one supposed to create a ﬁlter document describing
the requirements of the search. This ﬁlter would become very big in our deletion
since it would include all the hashes over all the points deleted in the batch.
By choosing a lower DBQueryRealSize in the conﬁguration ﬁle was it possible
to reduce the size. The unfortunate consequence is that insertion and deletion
now requires more queries to the database which is a bit slower. It is usually
faster to put as much in one query and let the database handle it than making
many small queries to the same collections.
==PAGE:80==
74
Discussion
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 7
Conclusions and Future
Work
7.1
Conclusions
In this thesis, the purpose was to survey, implement and test algorithms and
techniques for creating a scalable data structure that support the approximate
nearest neighbour query on high dimensional vectors.
A survey was conducted on the state-of-the-art solutions for the approximate
nearest neighbour problem, where locality sensitive hashing together with me-
dian rank aggregation was chosen as initial interesting solutions to test. These
was implemented as memory-based solutions, where it became evident that the
median rank aggregation struggled with high dimensions. Two locality sensi-
tive hash families were introduced and implemented, namely hyperplane and
cross-polytype.
We then proposed the clustering solution based on this experience, where the
space was partitioned into clusters using the k-means algorithm. These indi-
vidual clusters were self-contained locality sensitive hashing solutions that took
advantage of the beneﬁcial properties that locality sensitive hashing provided.
The clustering solution together with the locality sensitive hashing solution were
==PAGE:82==
76
Conclusions and Future Work
then implemented and integrated with a database. This allowed the use of big-
ger datasets and thus testing better for scalability. The solutions was tested
statically on 3 datasets, where the cross-polytype hash family provided better
results than the hyperplane hash family on the chosen quality parameters. The
clustering solutions also yielded better results than the locality sensitive hashing
solution in the majority of the tests, but required longer insertion time. Addi-
tionally was a dynamic test conducted, where both solutions had a varied query
time as the data size changed, but the clustering algorithm was less extreme.
There are multiple scalability issues with the solutions, that we suspect are due
to database problems. This includes insertions and deletions taking more time
as the data increases, as well as the nearest neighbour queries being less eﬀective
as the data increases. The clustering solution suﬀers of bad theoretical bounds,
where the queries in worst case take linear time. Lastly, are there a problem
with the memory usage of the clustering solution, since it uses k-means++ that
requires all distances of the points in the cluster to be stored in memory while
the algorithm runs. We suggested a solution to this issue in the discussion.
We can conclude, that the proposed solution succeed in achieving good results
for the approximate nearest neighbour problem in high dimensions. The solu-
tion has its issues with scalability, but can be used as groundwork for future
development.
We also believe that the implementation could be used as an
indexing scheme for metadata.
7.2
Future Work
A natural extension to the clustering solution would be to implement the cluster
size evaluation discussed in section 3.3.3. It would be interesting to test whether
we are attempting to solve a non-issue or the cluster size evaluation actually has
an impact on the quality.
The splitting of a cluster is expensive.
The iterations with k-means require
multiple reads of all points in the split cluster, which is a serious bottleneck in
the clustering solution. An algorithm called Mini batch k-means proposes that
it is good enough to only base the clustering on a subset of the points that then
can represent the entire data set. We already saw that the number of iterations
in k-means did not have a great eﬀect on the quality, so it might be possible to
achieve the same quality using this algorithm but with more iterations.
It would be interesting to test other locality sensitive hashing families, preferably
some that are meant for the euclidean space. [23] proposes such a family.
==PAGE:83==
Appendix A
Results
Table A.1 shows 4 diﬀerent tests performed with the hyperplane LSH solution on
200,000 points from the Glove dataset. The tests are divided by the lines. The
ﬁrst test involved changing the probe number, the second focused on changing
the hash length, in the third test was the number of neighbours to ﬁnd changed,
and the ﬁnal test focused on changing the number of hash tables.
Table A.2 shows 3 diﬀerent tests performed with the clustering solution on 1
million points from the SIFT dataset. The tests are divided by the lines. In the
ﬁrst test was the number of queried clusters changed in the multi-cluster k-NN
query from 1 to 15, the second test changed the number of iterations performed
in the k-Means clustering, and the last test changed the number of clusters that
was created in a split. In the ﬁrst test was the split threshold set to 50,000 and
the number of probes to 8000, where in the other two tests the threshold was
200,000 and 400 probes.
Table A.3 contain the benchmarks achieved with the diﬀerent solutions on all
the Milestone data sets.
Table A.4 contains the benchmarks achieved in the dynamic tests, where mul-
tiple insertion and deletion operations was performed on the solutions. After
each operation is 30 k-NN queries run with k = 500.
==PAGE:84==
78
Results
The diagrams A.1, A.2 and A.3 shows the time it takes to ﬁnd the nearest cluster,
insert point references and inserting the points into the respective clusters for
19531 points at a time.
Hash
length
Hash
tables
Pro-
bes
Neigh-
bours
Recall
Candi-
dates
Search
Time (s)
Insert
Time (s)
16
20
20
500
1.1852%
0.1244%
0.028766
0.000539
16
20
100
500
2.3190%
0.3277%
0.064859
0.000539
16
20
340
500
5.8926%
0.9766%
0.194570
0.000539
16
20
1000
500
11.1516%
2.4875%
0.507930
0.000539
16
20
1500
500
15.1602%
3.6733%
0.783736
0.000539
16
20
2420
500
22.1384%
5.8509%
1.194858
0.000539
12
20
340
500
34.9882%
12.5313%
3.210949
0.000578
14
20
340
500
15.2326%
3.7032%
0.761926
0.000607
18
20
340
500
2.9038%
0.2996%
0.069666
0.000627
20
20
340
500
1.3984%
0.0882%
0.024514
0.000629
22
20
340
500
0.7722%
0.0270%
0.008977
0.000588
16
20
340
1000
5.5008%
1.0679%
0.224279
0.000556
16
20
340
400
7.1743%
1.0679%
0.201942
0.000556
16
20
340
300
7.7717%
1.0679%
0.204990
0.000556
16
20
340
100
10.2400%
1.0679%
0.200719
0.000556
16
20
340
50
12.0720%
1.0679%
0.200241
0.000556
16
20
340
20
14.5900%
1.0679%
0.193510
0.000556
16
10
340
500
5.8814%
1.0616%
0.205778
0.000339
16
30
340
500
6.9564%
1.0901%
0.215913
0.000754
16
40
340
500
7.1720%
1.1238%
0.230162
0.001023
16
50
340
500
7.3852%
1.1553%
0.231522
0.001255
16
100
340
500
8.4026%
1.3086%
0.263093
0.002578
16
200
340
500
10.2768%
1.6069%
0.322695
0.005714
Table A.1: Table showing the diﬀerent parameter tests performed on the LSH
solution with 200,000 points from the Glove dataset.
==PAGE:85==
79
K-Means
iterations
Split
size
Queried
clusters
Recall
Candi-
dates
Search
time (s)
Insert
time (s)
Cluster
time (s)
Cluster
splits
10
4
1
36.8750%
0.39366%
0.261846
0.001295
50.6487
16
10
4
3
49.1130%
0.51550%
0.331312
0.001295
50.6487
16
10
4
5
46.7970%
0.54700%
0.352261
0.001295
50.6487
16
10
4
8
42.8140%
0.57864%
0.379554
0.001295
50.6487
16
10
4
15
36.0890%
0.62369%
0.412414
0.001295
50.6487
16
3
4
3
22.4690%
0.19902%
0.104668
0.001148
138.8624
5
6
4
3
21.8360%
0.21323%
0.114035
0.001113
160.0496
4
10
4
3
24.4610%
0.23680%
0.125514
0.001245
195.8274
4
15
4
3
22.3140%
0.20567%
0.117584
0.001426
234.0199
4
20
4
3
22.3590%
0.20304%
0.120191
0.001605
277.9795
4
30
4
3
22.3750%
0.21268%
0.115730
0.001809
330.0762
4
5
2
3
26.8790%
0.32813%
0.170043
0.001460
142.8083
7
5
3
3
27.0550%
0.28647%
0.153269
0.001070
151.9009
4
5
5
3
22.9830%
0.22273%
0.115643
0.001099
160.9425
4
5
6
3
26.9680%
0.30141%
0.159794
0.000810
175.6524
2
5
8
3
27.9540%
0.34346%
0.171019
0.000636
187.9181
1
5
10
3
25.2040%
0.26673%
0.152654
0.000704
223.6204
1
Table A.2: Table showing the diﬀerent parameter tests performed on the clus-
tering solution with 1 million points from the SIFT dataset. The
reason why there are 16 cluster splits in the ﬁrst test is due to the
split threshold that was set to 50.000. where it is 200.000 in the
two other tests.
==PAGE:86==
80
Results
Dataset
Search Scheme
Recall
Candidates
Search
Time (s)
Insert
Time (s)
camera2
Linear
99.9980%
100.0000%
4.838700
0.000060
camera2
Hyperplane LSH
78.0140%
4.5488%
0.320283
0.000786
camera2
CrossPolytype LSH
83.5400%
4.8791%
0.336387
0.000862
camera2
Hyperplane Clustering
85.6250%
4.9795%
0.346845
0.001695
camera2
CrossPolytype Clustering
89.8540%
3.7596%
0.288358
0.001896
camera3
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
5.776933
0.000062
camera3
Hyperplane LSH
86.3300%
4.9009%
0.418412
0.000778
camera3
CrossPolytype LSH
91.4970%
5.3283%
0.468091
0.000880
camera3
Hyperplane Clustering
89.9200%
4.8037%
0.400181
0.001561
camera3
CrossPolytype Clustering
96.2620%
5.0923%
0.469357
0.001724
camera4
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
37.511044
0.000065
camera4
Hyperplane LSH
80.8650%
4.1359%
2.016463
0.000924
camera4
CrossPolytype LSH
95.8810%
10.3071%
5.477668
0.001099
camera4
Hyperplane Clustering
85.5550%
1.5318%
0.729047
0.001429
camera4
CrossPolytype Clustering
90.2670%
1.4362%
0.732883
0.001837
camera5
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
27.452236
0.000065
camera5
Hyperplane LSH
78.4580%
2.9555%
1.010982
0.000908
camera5
CrossPolytype LSH
82.7250%
2.3830%
0.842526
0.001146
camera5
Hyperplane Clustering
90.4080%
2.9766%
1.037960
0.001688
camera5
CrossPolytype Clustering
93.6910%
2.4828%
0.845919
0.001877
camera6
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
173.020653
0.000065
camera6
Hyperplane LSH
64.4670%
0.9029%
6.860769
0.001514
camera6
CrossPolytype LSH
79.0110%
1.1557%
10.006461
0.001617
camera6
Hyperplane Clustering
33.0390%
0.0752%
0.693282
0.001985
camera6
CrossPolytype Clustering
67.4650%
0.2076%
0.970853
0.002296
Table A.3: Table showing benchmarks for all of the Milestone datasets.
==PAGE:87==
81
Operation
Search Scheme
Recall
Candidates
Search
Time (s)
Insertion
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
14.764312
350.000
Hyperplane LSH
83.8400%
3.7931%
0.648633
CrossPolytype LSH
90.0800%
3.8470%
0.700056
Hyperplane Clustering
62.1200%
1.0211%
0.183501
CrossPolytype Clustering
83.6733%
1.6970%
0.321547
Deletion
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
10.401929
80.000
Hyperplane LSH
81.5400%
3.7911%
0.494423
CrossPolytype LSH
88.4467%
3.8460%
0.530509
Hyperplane Clustering
58.1267%
1.0233%
0.139414
CrossPolytype Clustering
81.9867%
1.7480%
0.255129
Insertion
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
26.842054
300.000
Hyperplane LSH
83.6333%
3.3062%
0.923341
CrossPolytype LSH
89.4533%
3.3875%
1.001601
Hyperplane Clustering
61.8867%
0.9039%
0.257246
CrossPolytype Clustering
81.2667%
1.2460%
0.381128
Deletion
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
21.774316
100.000
Hyperplane LSH
76.9467%
3.0800%
0.705267
CrossPolytype LSH
84.8800%
3.1296%
0.755018
Hyperplane Clustering
52.4067%
0.8384%
0.195242
CrossPolytype Clustering
74.0933%
1.1340%
0.284197
Deletion
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
6.599943
300.000
Hyperplane LSH
71.8733%
3.3005%
0.276955
CrossPolytype LSH
80.6400%
3.3838%
0.300617
Hyperplane Clustering
44.2000%
0.9027%
0.084755
CrossPolytype Clustering
76.8867%
1.7768%
0.179286
Insertion
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
81.400066
1.000.000
Hyperplane LSH
81.5133%
3.0592%
2.545645
CrossPolytype LSH
88.2667%
3.0915%
2.532181
Hyperplane Clustering
48.6000%
0.3448%
0.890670
CrossPolytype Clustering
78.2933%
0.6625%
1.094474
Insertion
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
102.882596
200.000
Hyperplane LSH
81.8667%
2.9880%
2.693477
CrossPolytype LSH
88.5200%
3.0324%
2.982437
Hyperplane Clustering
49.5067%
0.3289%
1.042537
CrossPolytype Clustering
78.4133%
0.6041%
1.353510
Deletion
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
61.862096
400.000
Hyperplane LSH
77.7200%
2.8885%
1.953220
CrossPolytype LSH
86.0800%
2.9366%
2.277967
Hyperplane Clustering
42.6467%
0.3093%
0.552185
CrossPolytype Clustering
74.3133%
0.5756%
0.800588
Deletion
Linear
100.0000%
100.0000%
1.000000
200.000
Hyperplane LSH
76.8467%
2.9856%
1.192977
CrossPolytype LSH
85.3200%
3.0304%
1.308359
Hyperplane Clustering
41.7067%
0.3278%
0.265495
CrossPolytype Clustering
73.7000%
0.6295%
0.535241
Table A.4: Table showing the benchmarks with dynamic data.
After each
operation in the left column has 30 k-NN queries with k = 500
been run.
==PAGE:88==
82
Results
Figure A.1: The time it takes to insert 19531 points into their respective clus-
ters, including calculating hashes and inserting into the databse,
as a plot of the number of points already in the database.
Figure A.2: The time it takes to insert 19531 points into the PointColl col-
lection in the database as a plot of the number of points already
in the solution.
==PAGE:89==
83
Figure A.3: The time it takes to ﬁnd the nearest cluster for a block of 19531
points dependent on the number of clusters in the solution.
==PAGE:90==
84
Results
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B
Program Conﬁgurations
B.1
Command Line Options
The following shows the diﬀerent command line options that are available when
running the program.
ScalableNearestNeighborSearch.exe [options]
Options available are:
-c config-file
: use config file for setting paramters,
all other command-line options are ignored if this option is set.
FYI: It is possible to provide more options using a config file
-d distance-metric
: use distance-metric when comparing vectors
Options are Euclidean and Cosine
--dimension=N
: generated / parsed points are of dimension N
-g
: generate uniformly distributed data.
Default if no input file is provided
-h hashScheme
: apply the provided hash scheme. Options are
hyperplane (or HP) and crosspolytype (or CP)
--help
: display this help and exit
--nodb
: do not use a database for storing data
--points=N
: limit the generated data to N points
or limit the parsed data to N points, otherwise all points are parsed
==PAGE:92==
86
Program Conﬁgurations
-s searchScheme
: apply the provided search scheme. Options are
Cluster, LSH, MedRank (no DB solution) and Linear.
--seed=N
: use seed N for LSH, clustering and/or when generating data/queries
Options when parsing data are:
-i input-file
: use the file content as data source
--delimter='C'
: use char C as delimter when parsing data from input file,
default is comma ','
Options for queries are:
--neighbors=N
: queries return the N nearest neighbors
--query-num=N
: generate N number of random queries
-q query-file
: use a file with a point on each line as the queries
reads entire file unless --query-num is set to limit number of quries
B.2
Conﬁguration ﬁle
The following is an example of a conﬁguration ﬁle for the developed program.
The conﬁguration ﬁle is showed with all possible options, also those which are
not used, e.g. SaveName. The ﬁle is a concrete example for running a clustering
solution on the the camera6 Milestone data set.
# Solution
SearchScheme=Cluster
# Cluster, LSH, Medrank, Linear
HashScheme=CrossPolytype
# Hyperplane, CrossPolytype
ClusteringScheme=KMeans
# KMeans
DistanceMetric=Euclidean
# Euclidean, Cosine
# Data
GenerateData=False
# True for generating random uniform data
Seed=12856485
# Seed for hash function / clustering
Dimension=128
# Dimension of generaed or parsed data
DataSize=0
# 0 for all points in file
# Queries
QueryNum=30
# 0 for all queries in file
NeighborNum=500
==PAGE:93==
B.2 Conﬁguration ﬁle
87
# Locality Sensitive Hashing
HashLength=16
HashTableNum=40
LSHProbes=500
# Clustering
KMeansIterations=5
ClusterSplitThreshold=100000
ClusterMergeThreshold=12500
ClusterSplitSize=4
# The number of new clusters in a split
ClusterUpdateThreshold=200000
# Lifetime of cluster
ClusterCenterReviewDiff=5.0
# Centre difference for changing centre
ClustersQueried=3
# Database: General
UseDatabase=True
# Database solution or memory solution
DatabaseType=MongoDB
DatabaseName=Test
DatabaseURI=mongodb://localhost:27017
DBQueryRealSize=10000000
# Bytes pr. insertion / retrievel into/from DB
# Database: Saving & Loading
SaveSolution=False
LoadSolution=False
SaveName=Solution
# Input & Output
DataParserType=CSVParser
# CSVParser, SIFTParser
QueryParserType=CSVParser
# CSVParser, SIFTParser
TruthParserType=CSVParser
# CSVParser, SIFTParser
DataFilePath=...\Data\Milestone\Vectors\camera6.csv
QueryFilePath=...\Data\Milestone\Vectors\camera6_queries.txt
TruthFilePath=...\Data\Milestone\Vectors\camera6_truth.txt
LogFilePath=...\Data\Milestone\Vectors\Dynamic.log
CSVFileDelimiter=','
# Verbosity
ResultLogging=NoLogging
# NoLogging, NormalFormat, TruthFormat
==PAGE:94==
88
Program Conﬁgurations
==PAGE:95==
Appendix C
Log File
The following are diﬀerent log snippets from the benchmark test of the hyper-
plane clustering on the camera4 data set from Milestone. The . . . indicate a
jump in the log ﬁle. The snippets consist of the initial parsing and insertion,
the splitting of a cluster, ﬁnishing the parsing and insertion and beginning the
k-NN search, the results of the search and start of the truth table comparison,
and ﬁnally the truth table results and the end of the log ﬁle.
Connected succesfully to database
Database connection took: 0,003658
Starting parsing/generation of data and insertion into database searchscheme
Data block size is: 19531 points
Parsing of data block took: 1,209870
Finding nearest cluster for each point in block
Finding nearest cluster for each point in block took: 0,004928
Starting to insert points into clusters
Inserting points into clusters took: 15,081924
Starting to insert point references
Point reference insertion took: 0,237653
Starting to check whether clusters should be split or reviewed
Checked whether the clusters should be split or reviewed in: 0,000013
Insertion of data block took: 15,324674
...
==PAGE:96==
90
Log File
Starting to check whether clusters should be split or reviewed
Splitting of cluster is started
K-Means++ has been initialized
K-Means++ took: 13,204943
K-Means clustering without K-Means++ took: 21,401442, Averege iteration time: 4,280288
K-Means clustering fineshed with total time: 34,606400
Start creation of 4 new clusters
Creation of new clusters took: 0,260435
Insertion into new clusters is started
Insertion into new clusters took: 102,085346
Starting deletion of old cluster
Deletion of old cluster took: 0,097891
Splitting of cluster took: 137,085674
Checked whether the clusters should be split or reviewed in: 137,085695
...
Parsed data size: 891982
Total parsing of data took: 61,284385
Average parse time pr point: 0,000069
Total insertion of data took: 1274,630172
Average insertion time pr point: 0,001429
Starting query parsing/generation
Parsed number of queries: 200
Parsing of queries took: 0,040508
Starting nearest neighbor search
Query: 1545245884227_10,jpg, Search time: 0,734039, Candidates: 0,763580%
Query: 1545245902627_16,jpg, Search time: 1,461647, Candidates: 1,354960%
Query: 1545245904627_10,jpg, Search time: 0,631147, Candidates: 0,519405%
...
Query: 1545251089749_16,jpg, Search time: 0,262296, Candidates: 0,542836%
Query: 1545251130789_0,jpg, Search time: 0,232928, Candidates: 0,350792%
Average candidates inspected: 0,596672%
Total search took: 72,815383
Average search time: 0,364077
Query: 1545245884227_10,jpg, Recall: 71,600000%
Query: 1545245902627_16,jpg, Recall: 55,400000%
Query: 1545245904627_10,jpg, Recall: 14,200000%
...
Query: 1545251089749_16,jpg, Recall: 89,800000%
Query: 1545251130789_0,jpg, Recall: 94,600000%
Average recall: 64,833000%
Execution was succesful
Total execution time is: 1412,707094
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1] D. Aloise, A. Deshpande, P. Hansen, and P. Popat. Np-hardness of eu-
clidean sum-of-squares clustering. Machine Learning, 75(2):245–248, 2009.
[2] L. Amsaleg and H. Jégou.
Datasets for approximate nearest neighbor
search. http://corpus-texmex.irisa.fr/, September 2010. [Online; ac-
cessed 08-February-2019].
[3] A. Andoni. Nearest Neighbor Search: the Old, the New, and the Impossible.
PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2009.
[4] A. Andoni, P. Indyk, T. Laarhoven, I. Razenshteyn, and L. Schmidt. Prac-
tical and optimal lsh for angular distance. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
[5] D. Arthur and S. Vassilvitskii. K-means++: The advantages of careful seed-
ing. Proceedings of the Annual Acm-siam Symposium on Discrete Algo-
rithms, 07-09-:1027–1035, 2007.
[6] G. Avarikioti, I. Z. Emiris, I. Psarros, and G. Samaras.
Practical
linear-space approximate near neighbors in high dimension.
CoRR,
abs/1612.07405, 2016.
[7] M. Aytekin.
Locality Sensitive Hashing for Apache Spark.
https://
github.com/marufaytekin/lsh-spark, December 2018. [Online; accessed
29-Janurary-2019].
[8] J. L. Bentley. Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative
searching. Commun Acm, 18(9):509–517, 1975.
==PAGE:98==
92
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] E. Bernhardsson.
Annoy (Approximate Nearest Neighbors Oh Yeah).
https://github.com/spotify/annoy,
2018.
[Online;
accessed
08-
February-2019].
[10] M. S. Charikar. Similarity estimation techniques from rounding algorithms.
Conference Proceedings of the Annual Acm Symposium on Theory of Com-
puting, pages 380–388, 2002.
[11] Datatilsynet.
Tv-overvågning.
https://www.datatilsynet.dk/emner/
overvaagning-og-sporing/tv-overvaagning, 2019.
[Online; accessed
19-Janurary-2019].
[12] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu.
A density-based algo-
rithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. Kdd-96
Proceedings. Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 226–31, 226–231, 1996.
[13] R. Fagin, R. Kumar, and D. Sivakumar. Eﬃcient similarity search and
classiﬁcation via rank aggregation. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM SIG-
MOD international conference on on Management of data - SIGMOD ’03,
page 301, 2003.
[14] A. Gionis, P. Indyk, and R. Motwani. Similarity Search in High Dimensions
via Hashing. VLDB ’99 Proceedings of the 25th International Conference
on Very Large Data Bases, 99(1):518–529, 1999.
[15] S. Har-Peled, P. Indyk, and R. Motwani. Approximate Nearest Neighbor:
Towards Removing the Curse of Dimensionality.
Theory of Computing,
8(1):321–350, 2012.
[16] P. Indyk and R. Motwani. Approximate nearest neighbors: towards remov-
ing the curse of dimensionality. Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual Acm
Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 604–13, 604–613, 1998.
[17] H. Lejsek, F. H. Ásmundsson, B. Þ. Jónsson, and L. Amsaleg. NV-tree:
An eﬃcient disk-based index for approximate search in very large high-
dimensional collections. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence, 31(5):869–883, 2009.
[18] H. Lejsek, B. Þ. Jónsson, and L. Amsaleg. NV-Tree: Nearest Neighbors at
the Billion Scale. Proceedings of the International Conference on Multime-
dia Retrieval (ICMR), pages 54:1–54:8, 2011.
[19] Q. Lv, W. Josephson, Z. Wang, M. Charikar, and K. Li. Multi-probe lsh:
Eﬃcient indexing for high-dimensional similarity search. 33rd International
Conference on Very Large Data Bases, Vldb 2007 - Conference Proceedings,
pages 950–961, 2007.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
93
[20] Y. Manolopoulos. R-Trees: Theory and Applications, R-Trees. Springer
London, 2006.
[21] Oracle.
Java HashMap Documentation.
https://docs.oracle.com/
javase/10/docs/api/java/util/HashMap.html, 2018. [Online; accessed
02-February-2019].
[22] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning.
GloVe: Global Vectors
for Word Representation. https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/,
October 2015. [Online; accessed 11-February-2019].
[23] A. Rajaraman, J. D. Ullman, and J. Leskovec. Mining of Massive Datasets.
Cambridge University Press, second edition, 2014.
[24] I. Razenshteyn and L. Schmidt.
LSH Families.
https://github.com/
FALCONN-LIB/FALCONN/wiki/LSH-Families, December 2015. [Online; ac-
cessed 28-Janurary-2019].
[25] I. Razenshteyn and L. Schmidt. FALCONN - FAst Lookups of Cosine and
Other Nearest Neighbors. https://github.com/FALCONN-LIB/FALCONN,
June 2018. [Online; accessed 29-Janurary-2019].
[26] N. SARNAK and R. TARJAN.
Planar point location using persistent
search trees. Communications of the Acm, 29(7):669–679, 1986.
[27] J. Six. TarsosLSH – Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) in Java. https:
//github.com/JorenSix/TarsosLSH, May 2017.
[Online; accessed 29-
Janurary-2019].
[28] P. van Emde Boas. Preserving order in a forest in less than logarithmic
time. 16th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs
1975), pages 75–84, 1975.
[29] X. Wang. A fast exact k-nearest neighbors algorithm for high dimensional
search using k-means clustering and triangle inequality. 2011 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (ijcnn), pages 1293–1299, 2011.
[30] R. Weber, H.-J. Schek, and S. Blott.
A quantitative analysis and per-
formance study for similarity-search methods in high-dimensional spaces.
Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth International Conference on Very-large
Databases, pages 194–205, 1998.
[31] D. E. Willard.
Log-logarithmic worst-case range queries are possible in
space Θ(N). Computer Compacts, 1(4):212, 1983.
[32] B. Yao, F. Li, and P. Kumar. K nearest neighbor queries and KNN-joins in
large relational databases (almost) for free. In Proceedings - International
Conference on Data Engineering, pages 4–15. IEEE, 2010.
