==PAGE:1==
Author: 
Ida Kastbjerg Steffensen (s134399) 
March 2019 
 
Supervisors: 
Nils Olsen 
Anna Naemi Willer  
The dynamics of the polar ionospheric 
electrojet determined using ground  
magnetic data from Greenland  
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The objective of this thesis is to show that the dynamics of the polar ionospheric electro-
jets (PEJs) can be determined from a latitudinal chain of ground-based magnetometers.
The dynamics investigated are the latitudinal boundaries and current strength of the
PEJs. As the PEJs cause variations in the geomagnetic field, they can be measured
in the polar regions using ground-based magnetometers on the west coast of Greenland
and the data are provided by DTU Space.
Two methods to estimate the dynamics are implemented, tested and compared and
the methods are the magnetic field signature (MFS) method and the line current model
(LCM) method. The MFS method estimates the locations of the PEJs from the mag-
netic variations in the H and Z components and the LCM method solves an inverse
problem to estimate the current strength and current profile of a PEJ based on the
same magnetic components. It is found that both methods provide reliable estimates
of the PEJ boundaries during westward and eastward PEJs and substorms. The LCM
method was validated by comparing the estimated spatial and temporal current densi-
ties with a synthetic dataset. Furthermore, the LCM method provided estimates of the
current strength that yielded a correlation with the AE index on 0.8 for June 2015. Util-
ising magnetic data from an Antarctica magnetometer chain provided by Virginia Tech
a case study was performed using both methods and it was found that the dynamics are
similar to those estimated above Greenland. It is concluded that the MFS and LCM
methods are promising tools to use when investigating the dynamics of the PEJs.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Nils Olsen and Anna Naemi Willer for their guid-
ance, remarks and engagement throughout the learning process of the thesis work. The
division of geomagnetism at DTU Space has provided a relaxed and welcoming envi-
ronment that I have enjoyed during the thesis. And a big thank you to my boyfriend,
family and friends who have supported me during my education.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Table of contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Earth’s magnetic field and its interactions with the solar wind
3
2.1
Sources of Earth’s magnetic field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Polar ionospheric electric currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Data
13
3.1
West coast Greenland magnetometer chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Antarctic 40 degree magnetic meridian chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Synthetic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Mathematical modelling of the polar electrojets
21
4.1
Detection of the polar electrojet boundaries with the magnetic field sig-
nature method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Detection of the polar electrojet boundaries and strength with the line
current model method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Results and discussion
33
5.1
Polar electrojet boundaries from the magnetic field signature method
. .
33
5.2
Polar electrojet boundaries from the line current model method
. . . . .
37
5.3
Comparison of the polar electrojet boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Validation of the line current model method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5
Case study: Antarctica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Conclusions and future outlooks
55
Bibliography
57
A Determine regularization parameter α2
59
B Quiet level plots
67
B.1 H component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B.2 Z component
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C Quiet level plots for case study
73
==PAGE:8==
vi
Table of contents
C.1 Greenland stations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C.2 Antarctica stations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
D Magnetic field signature code
81
E Line current model code
83
E.1
Regularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
E.2
LCM method algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The northern and southern lights are visible phenomena in the polar areas and often re-
ferred to as the polar lights or the aurora borealis and aurora australis. The polar lights
are a visualisation of the interaction between the solar wind and Earth’s protecting mag-
netosphere. The polar lights are present in the area of the ionosphere which is known
as the auroral oval. A picture of the auroral ovals in both hemispheres are displayed
in Figure 1.1. The auroral ovals will expand equatorward during disturbed times and
will be located in the skies above Greenland and Antarctica during quiet times. In the
auroral ovals charged particles carry a horizontal current known as the polar ionospheric
electrojets (PEJs). The PEJs have large variations in both a temporal and spatial scale
making it difficult to describe and predict the PEJs and hence the occurrence of the
polar lights.
Besides being a beautiful phenomenon the PEJs can have more severe consequences
such as disturbing technological systems on Earth and in space. In space it will influence
the technological systems and drag on low-altitude satellites, on ground it affects e.g. di-
rectional drilling and the electrical grid. A better understanding of the dynamics of the
PEJs will improve the possibilities to produce reliable forecasts of the PEJs and correct
for the effect in the different affected systems. The auroral tourism industry would also
benefit from improved now-castings and forecastings of the PEJs since it would provide
the optimal time and location for polar light observations.
Johnsen (2013) has developed an online real-time PEJ alert and tracking system
based on 14 flux-gate magnetometers spaced in latitudes covering 59◦N to 79◦N. The
tracker is called AFFECTS and estimates the latitudinal location of the PEJs by access-
ing the magnetic field signatures of the changing magnetic field in near realtime. Johnsen
(2013) showed that the locations of the PEJs were successfully estimated by this method.
Additionally, Olsen (1996) proposed a method to estimate the strength and location of
the PEJs and the method was successfully applied by Aakjær et al. (2016) on Swarm
data and by Vennerstrom and Moretto (2013) on CHAMP data. The method presented
by Johnsen (2013) will be referred to as the magnetic field signature (MFS) method and
the method by Olsen (1996) as the line current model (LCM) method.
The PEJs flow in an east-west direction which produces a latitudinal magnetic field
signature that can be measured on ground or in space. This project will use magnetic
data from ground-based magnetometers along the west coast of Greenland operated
by DTU Space to show that informations such as the latitudinal location and current
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
strength of the PEJs can be estimated around Greenland with a 1 minute resolution. The
MFS and LCM methods will be utilised on the magnetic data to estimate the latitudinal
locations of the auroral boundaries and the location of where the PEJs are strongest, the
results will be compared and tested for reliability. Furthermore, the LCM method will
be applied on the magnetic data to estimate the latitudinal current profile and current
strength of the PEJs and the results will be validated by comparing them with the AE
index and a synthetic dataset from the AMPS model (Laundal, Finlay, et al., 2018).
The project will also contain a case study covering the period from the 26th of January
2018 until the 10th of February 2018. The case study will access similar data from an
Antarctica magnetic chain operated by Virginia Tech and will investigate the temporal
dynamics of the Southern Hemispheric PEJs and compare the dynamics with the North-
ern Hemispheric PEJ dynamics.
The thesis is divided into chapters where Chapter 2 gives a short introduction about
the Earth’s magnetic field and a description of the theoretical background for the PEJs.
Chapter 3 introduces the data from the Greenland stations, Antarctica stations, pre-
processing of the data and a short introduction to the synthetic dataset. Chapter 4
gives a description of the MFS and LCM methods. Chapter 5 includes the results and a
discussion of the analysis performed. Chapter 6 concludes the findings in the study and
discuss future work.
Figure 1.1:
The left image is a picture of the southern auroral oval seen from
the Dynamic Explorer 1 on the 14th of March 1989. The bright lights seen on the
edges of the globe is due to sunlight. The right image is a re-mapping of the left
image to the Northern Hemisphere. The picture is reprinted from University of
Iowa (2018).
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Earth’s magnetic field and
its interactions with the solar
wind
Earth’s magnetic field consists of internal and external contributions that form a com-
plicated magnetic field line system. This chapter will briefly introduce the geomagnetic
elements and the different sources of the magnetic field in Section 2.1 and the polar
ionospheric electric currents that are due to the interaction between the magnetic field
system and the solar wind in Section 2.2.
2.1
Sources of Earth’s magnetic field
Earth’s magnetic field also known as the geomagnetic field extents from the core of the
Earth and out in to space. The magnetic field is generated internally in Earth’s core and
crust and externally from ionospheric and magnetospheric currents. These contributions
to the geomagnetic field are all illustrated graphically in Figure 2.1. The geomagnetic
field on Earth’s surface varies with strength from around 25.000 nT at Equator and up
to 65.000 nT in the polar regions (Olsen and Stolle, 2012). The geomagnetic field in the
Southern Hemisphere will be negative due to the field going out of the Earth. A more
detailed introduction of the sources will be given in Section 2.1.2 and 2.1.3.
Earth’s magnetic environment is also affected by a magnetic field outside the mag-
netosphere known as the Interplanetary Magnetic Field (IMF). The IMF is the Sun’s
magnetic field that is carried out into the interplanetary space by the solar wind. The
solar wind is a plasma in which the magnetic field is said to be frozen in.
Smaller
magnetic perturbations from other planetary object also contributes to the IMF. The
magnetosphere protects the Earth from being directly hit by the solar wind particles.
This protection is the foundation for the magnetospheric and ionospheric dynamics.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Earth’s magnetic field and its interactions with the solar wind
Figure 2.1:
Schematic representation of the sources contributing to the Earth’s
magnetic field. The figure is reprinted from Olsen and Stolle (2012).
2.1.1
The geomagnetic elements
The magnetic field is a three-dimensional vector field denoted B. The vector field can
be described by three independent elements X, Y and Z. X point towards geographic
north, Y towards geographic east and Z is pointing vertically down. In total there are
7 geomagnetic elements as illustrated in Figure 2.2. The seven elements are related as
H =
√
X2 + Y 2
F =
√
X2 + Y 2 + Z2
X = H cos D
Y = H sin D
(2.1)
Z = F sin I = H tan I
tan D = Y
X
tan I = Z
H
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Sources of Earth’s magnetic field
5
X, Y and Z are Cartesian components in a local Cartesian coordinate system (Campbell,
2003). The SI unit for B is Tesla, but in practice it is common to use nT where 1 nT =
10−9 T.
D
I
H
Y
X
Z
F
Down
Geographic
north
Magnetic
north
Geographic
east
Field line
direction
Figure 2.2:
Graphical definition of the geomagnetic elements.
The example
is from the Northern Hemisphere where the total field line F is inclined into the
Earth.
2.1.2
Internal sources
Core field
The largest contribution to the geomagnetic field is the dynamo action in Earth’s core
which accounts for more than 95% of the total field (Olsen and Stolle, 2012). The fluid
core has a much higher temperature than the Curie temperature, hence the fluid core
can not contain a permanent magnetization. Instead, the core field is generated by a
self-sustaining geodynamo taking place in the fluid core at a depth of 2900 to 5150 km.
The core field is only slowly evolving in time and the core field model CHAOS-6 can
describe the core field and its changes (Finlay et al., 2016).
Crustal field
The crustal field accounts for around 3% of the observed magnetic field at Earth’s
surface. The crust is defined to be the upper 5-30 km of the Earth. The crustal field
consist of two contributions: Remanent and induced magnetism in magnetised material.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Earth’s magnetic field and its interactions with the solar wind
Remanent magnetisation is present in ferromagnetic materials which have cooled below
the Curie temperature and maintained the magnetisation induced by the ambient field
at that time. The ferromagnetic materials are the heart of paleomagnetism since these
materials can provide information of how the ambient magnetic field once were.
The induced magnetisation takes place in diamagnetic and paramagnetic materials when
an ambient field is present, hence the induced magnetisation follows the variations in
the ambient field. Materials can only be magnetised if the temperature is below the
Curie temperature. Changes in the crustal field will primarily occur with the formation
of new rock in spreading zones and are mainly on a spatial scale.
2.1.3
External sources
Magnetospheric currents
The magnetosphere is protecting the Earth from the solar wind by deflecting the solar
wind around the terrestrial field. The boundary between the terrestrial field and the so-
lar wind is called the magnetopause. The pressure from the solar wind on the terrestrial
field compresses the field on the dayside and on the nightside it stretches out the field
into the magnetotail.
The magnetospheric currents are caused by charge separation where positive ions and
negative electrons are forced to move in opposite directions. The main magnetospheric
current systems given in Figure 2.3 are the Chapman-Ferraro currents flowing on the
dayside magnetopause, the tail-currents on the nightside connecting the magnetopause
current of the magnetotail and the ring current in the equatorial plane. Another signifi-
cant concept is the field aligned currents (FACs) which connect the magnetosphere with
the ionosphere (Baumjohann and Nakamura, 2015).
In general, the temporal changes in the magnetospheric currents are on a much shorter
time scale than the core field changes.
Ionospheric currents
The ionosphere extends from 90 km and up to 1000 km above the Earth’s surface. Figure
2.1 shows that the ionosphere consist of two regions: The E-region and the F-region. The
focus will be on the E-region which only extends 90-120 km above Earth’s surface. There
are three governing ionospheric current systems taking place in the E-region: Equatorial
electrojet near the magnetic equator, Sq currents in the dayside mid-latitudes and PEJs
within the auroral ovals. The PEJs and the auroral ovals will be explained in further
detail in Section 2.2. The ionospheric current strength is dependent on the ionospheric
conductivity which changes with daytime and season and this will be elaborated in
Section 2.2.3. The temporal changes in the ionospheric currents are daily and hourly
variations. The daily variations are caused by the solar radiation during day and the
absence of it during night. The hourly variations are lasting around 1-3 hours and these
variations are known as the PEJs.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Sources of Earth’s magnetic field
7
Figure 2.3:
The magnetospheric current systems:
Magnetopause current
(Chapman-Ferraro currents), neutral sheet current (tail-currents), ring currents
and the FACs. The figure is reprinted from Baumjohann and Nakamura (2015).
Secondary induced currents
The mantle is the section between the Earth’s outer core and the crust. The mantle
contributes with a varying magnetic field to the total terrestrial field. The temperatures
in the mantle exceeds the materials Curie temperature and it can therefore not be mag-
netised. Furthermore, there is no dynamo effect taking place since the mantle is solid.
Instead, the magnetic field variations are induced by secondary, electromagnetic currents
in the electrically conducting mantle. The process is as follows: the ionospheric currents
induce a time-varying magnetic field which induces a current in the mantle, which is op-
positely directed to the ionospheric currents. As a consequence a time-varying resulting
magnetic field is induced in the mantle that contributes to the total terrestrial field. A
schematic representation of the ionospheric and secondary induced currents are shown
in Figure 2.4.
The ionospheric currents and thus the secondary induced currents are changing with
time due to changes in the solar wind. The ionospheric currents will be enhanced during
disturbed times, hence the resulting secondary magnetic field will be enhanced and
contribute more during these times. Therefore, the induced currents are an important
factor to consider when investigating the magnetic field variations from ground. For
measurements performed by satellites the contribution from secondary induced currents
in Earth’s mantle will be small.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Earth’s magnetic field and its interactions with the solar wind
J 
J 
Ionospheric current loop
Secondary induced current
Equator 
N 
B 
B 
Figure 2.4:
Ionospheric current loops and the associated secondary induced
current loop in the Northern Hemisphere. The red arrows indicates the resulting
magnetic field B.
2.2
Polar ionospheric electric currents
The ionospheric current system is connected to the magnetosphere by FACs with the
result that the electrodynamics in the E-region at high-latitudes are governed by the
dynamics of the magnetosphere to a certain extent. The magnetosphere interacts with
the solar wind and this initiates a convective system in the high-latitudes of the magne-
tosphere and consequently in the ionosphere. The convecting systems will be elaborated
in this section and an introduction to the PEJs will be given.
2.2.1
Dungey cycle and reconnection
Convection is taking place in the magnetosphere when the solar wind and the magne-
tosphere interacts. The entire convection system is known as the Dungey cycle and a
schematic representation is given in Figure 2.5. When the IMF has a northward directed
magnetic field it will be deflected around the terrestrial field and when the IMF is south-
ward directed as in Figure 2.5 step (a) it will reconnect with the northward terrestrial
field in the dayside magnetopause step (b). This reconnection results in two open field
lines, each with a connection to the Earth’s field and the other stretching out into the
solar wind. The solar wind will transport these field lines across the polar caps (c-e)
dragging the magnetospheric and ionospheric field lines along into the nightside region
where the field lines will be stretched into the magnetotail. In the nightside a reconnec-
tion takes place again (f) where the two halves meet and reconnect, leaving an again
closed terrestrial field line and an open solar wind field line (g). This convecting flow is
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Polar ionospheric electric currents
9
closed when the closed terrestrial field lines in the nightside moves Earthward and back
into the dayside, maintaining the dayside magnetic field seen in step 6-7 (Baumjohann
and Nakamura, 2015; Prölss, 2004). The Dungey cycle takes place in both the dawn and
dusk sector in both hemispheres and the trajectory of the field lines in the dusk sector
are shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.5:
Schematic representation of the Dungey cycle through 7 positions.
Reprinted from Prölss (2004)
2.2.2
Polar ionospheric electrojets
The convective system has an ionospheric footprint in the dusk sector as shown in Figure
2.6 where the numbers are referring to the numbers given in Figure 2.5. The footprint
moves to the nightside following the solar wind in both the dawn and the dusk sectors.
After the reconnection has taken place the footprints move sunward again in both dusk
and dawn. This creates a two-cell convection pattern inside the auroral oval (Baumjo-
hann and Nakamura, 2015). Collisions between the charged particles in the E-region of
the ionosphere results in charge separation and thereby in currents. A current will flow
along the footprint from the Dungey cycle due to the E × B drift and will be oppositely
directed the convection flow. This current is called a Hall current. The Hall current
will flow within the auroral oval as sketched in Figure 2.7 and is what we until now
has referred to as the PEJ. Two more currents and their directions are presented in the
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Earth’s magnetic field and its interactions with the solar wind
Figure 2.6: Ionospheric footprint for the dusk sector in the polar oval as a result
of the Dungey. Reprinted from Prölss (2004).
sketch: The Pedersen currents and the Birkeland currents which are also known as the
FACs. The FACs follow the magnetic field lines and marks the auroral oval boundaries.
The poleward boundary of the auroral oval is named region 1 currents and the equator-
ward currents region 2. This is due to the different regions the FACs connects with in
the magnetosphere but this will not be explained in greater detail in this project, see
Prölss (2004). The current system in the Southern Hemisphere is identical to the system
presented in Figure 2.7.
In the two-cell convection pattern in the auroral oval two Hall currents are flowing
from noon to midnight in respectively the dawn and the dusk sector. These currents are
Figure 2.7: The horizontal distribution of the electric currents in the ionosphere
given in magnetic local time. NP is the northern geomagnetic pole. The Birkeland
current/FAC directions are indicated by a cross and a dot: cross is inward and dot
is outward. Figure is reprinted from Prölss (2004).
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Polar ionospheric electric currents
11
named the westward and the eastward PEJs and are aligned in an east-west direction
along lines of constant magnetic latitude. The westward PEJ is present in the dawn
sector at 0-12 MLT (magnetic local time) and the eastward PEJ in the dusk sector
at 12-24 MLT. These two PEJs are also called the convection PEJs since they are a
consequence of the convection pattern presented as the Dungey cycle.
The directions of the two electrojets with respect to MLT are sketched in Figure
2.8.
The PEJs are assumed to flow in an altitude of 115 km above Earth’s surface
(Olsen, 1996). Furthermore, these currents are inducing a strong magnetic disturbance
at ground level which changes with time.
The changes in the PEJs and hence the
magnetic disturbances are dependent on the direction of the IMF and the strength of
the solar wind. Disturbed conditions are when reconnection takes place and this can
result in the auroral ovals moving equatorward and during very disturbed conditions it
will result in the possibility for polar lights observations in Denmark.
Figure 2.8: Left: Direction of the PEJs in the dusk and dawn sector. Right: Di-
rection of magnetospheric substorms in the midnight sector. The figure is inspired
by Baumjohann and Nakamura (2015).
2.2.3
Seasonal dependence
The ionospheric conductivity is important for the strength of the PEJs. Conductivity is
a measure of a materials ability to conduct an electric current. With an increase in the
ionospheric conductivity the PEJs will have stronger currents whereas a decrease will
lead to weaker PEJs. The ionospheric conductivity is dependent on two sources: particle
precipitation and solar radiation. Particle precipitation is controlled by the direction of
the IMF and occurs when the field lines are open and the solar particles can precipitate
into the ionosphere. With an increase of charged particles the conductivity increases
and the strength of the PEJs will increase. This effect can be observed around equinox
where the direction of the Earth increases the changes for the IMF and Earth’s magnetic
field to reconnect and hence having an increased particle precipitation during this period.
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Earth’s magnetic field and its interactions with the solar wind
The solar radiation is also known as the solar extreme ultraviolet radiation (EUV).
The EUV adds energy to the ionosphere and increases the conductivity. The solar EUV
is only present during daytime and a daily variation in the current strength can therefore
occur. In winter the conductivity is suppressed due to the absence of solar EUV.
As the conductivity is varying with season this leads to an interhemispheric asym-
metry. During winter in the Northern Hemisphere it will be dark and the solar EUV
contribution will be absent, whereas it will be summer in the Southern Hemisphere
where the presence of the solar EUV will increase the conductivity. It is expected that
the strength of the PEJs will be increased in the hemisphere with summer.
2.2.4
Substorms
Magnetospheric substorms take place in the midnight sector and enhance the westward
current flow in the ionosphere as presented graphically in Figure 2.8. Magnetospheric
substorms will be referred to as substorms. In the Dungey cycle (see Figure 2.5 step
(f)) it is shown that the terrestrial field lines reconnect again but it is not all field lines
that reconnects instantaneous in the magnetospheric tail. Instead the magnetic flux
density builds up in the tail until these field lines suddenly reconnects and a burst of
magnetic energy is released. The build up of magnetic flux density in the tail last for
around 30-60 minutes. Hereafter, the reconnection takes place. The burst of magnetic
energy affects the magnetospheric and ionospheric currents and the effects lasts around
1-2 hours. During a substorm event an increase in the ionospheric conductance will take
place due to a stronger particle precipitation in the polar areas and the northern lights
will brighten up (Baumjohann and Nakamura, 2015).
2.2.5
AE index
There are a number of magnetic indices describing the magnetic activity in the ionosphere
and magnetosphere. The three most commonly used are: Kp, Dst and AE. Kp provides
a measure for the magnetic activity on a global scale. The Dst index monitors the
strength of the ring-current in the magnetosphere.
Finally, the AE-index monitors
the global auroral electrojet activity.
The index is based on measurements from 12
auroral observatories located in the Northern Hemisphere at 65◦−70◦latitude and
evenly spaced in longitude. The index is defined by determining the upper and lower
envelopes, which are named AU and AL, and represents respectively the maximum
eastward and maximum westward electrojet.
These individual measurements of the
auroral PEJ activities are combined as AE = AU −AL. Hence, AE is a measure of the
total maximum auroral electrojet activity. The AE index is provided by WDGC (2018)
and can be used as an indicator of the level of activity in the ionosphere. However, it
can not be used to determine the strength and location of the auroral electrojets.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Data
Chapter 3 introduces the data used in this project. The main data source is the west
coast Greenland magnetometer chain which will be presented in Section 3.1. Further-
more, the Antarctica 40 degree magnetic meridian chain will be used for a case study
and is presented in Section 3.2. The magnetic measurements performed at the Green-
land and Antarctica stations contains the total magnetic field where only the ionospheric
contribution is interesting for the purpose here hence the data is preprocessed to obtain
the ionospheric contribution and the steps needed are introduced in Section 3.3. Section
3.4 introduces a synthetic dataset that will be used to validate the LCM method.
3.1
West coast Greenland magnetometer
chain
DTU Space operates a number of ground stations in Greenland, Faroe Islands and
Denmark. The ground stations are the Danish FGE 3-axis linear-core fluxgate mag-
netometers which measures the magnetic field continuously. Along the west coast of
Greenland there are operated 10 variometer stations and 3 geomagnetic observatories.
The west coast stations are known as the west coast chain and the locations of the mag-
netometers are placed on a map of Greenland in Figure 3.1 and specified in Table 3.1.
Here it is seen that the magnetometers are evenly spread between geographic latitudes
from 61.16◦N to 77.47◦N. The FGE magnetometers have a 1 Hz sampling rate since 2002
and are optimized for 1 minute mean data. The FGE magnetometers are set up such
that the sensor axes are oriented along local magnetic north (H), local magnetic east (E)
and vertically down (Z) and the magnetic measurements are performed in these three
directions (DTU Space, 2018).
The measured magnetic field is the sum of all magnetic field sources: the core field,
magnetospheric field, induced field, remanent fields and the ionospheric field. The west
coast chain stations are located along approximately the same QD longitude, hence the
measurements along the coast are taken at approximately the same time and a time
correction can therefore be avoided. Though, the west coast chain provides a long time
series of data, only data from 2018 will be used in developing the methods and presented
as results in this project. Furthermore, data from June 2015 will be used to validate the
LCM method. The H and Z components with a 1-minute resolution will be used.
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Data
Figure 3.1: Map showing the locations of the magnetometers operated by DTU
Space along the west coast of Greenland. Figure is reprinted from DTU Space
(2018)
Table 3.1: List of the Greenland based magnetometers used in this project. The
geodetic coordinates and the operational information were acquired at DTU Space
(2018). The QD geomagnetic coordinates are determined from the geodetic coor-
dinates using the procedure from Section 3.3.1.
Geodetic (WGS84)
Quasi-Dipole
Operation
geomagnetic
from
Station
Lat [◦]
Long [◦]
Lat [◦]
Long [◦]
[mm/yy]
Qaanaaq (THL)
77.47
290.77
84.08
26.86
01/82
Thule Air Base (TAB)
76.54
291.18
83.22
25.30
07/13
Savissivik (SVS)
76.02
294.90
82.34
30.80
08/83
Kullorsuaq (KUV)
74.57
302.82
80.01
39.80
07/82
Upernavik (UPN)
72.78
303.85
78.21
38.53
04/82
Uummannaq (UMQ)
70.68
307.87
75.62
41.11
09/82
Qeqertarsuaq (GDH)
69.25
306.47
74.45
38.13
01/82
Attu (ATU)
67.93
306.43
73.17
37.07
06/85
Kangerlussuaq (STF)
67.02
309.28
71.80
39.76
08/82
Maniitsoq (SKT)
65.42
307.10
70.57
36.30
06/86
Nuuk (GHB)
64.17
308.27
69.11
37.00
11/81
Paamiut (FHB)
62.00
310.32
66.50
38.29
11/81
Narsarsuaq (NAQ)
61.16
314.56
64.81
42.38
01/82
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Antarctic 40 degree magnetic meridian chain
15
3.2
Antarctic 40 degree magnetic meridian
chain
Virginia Tech operates 6 low-powered fluxgate magnetometers in Antarctica with the
names PG1-PG6 (Clauer et al., 2014). These stations are magnetically conjugate to the
geomagnetic stations along the west coast of Greenland. The locations of the conjugating
stations are plotted in Figure 3.2. The magnetometers at Antarctica are solar-driven
which means that data are only available during the Southern Hemispheric summer.
The sampling rate is 1 second and the geomagnetic variations are given in the three
components: N, E and Z. The data can be accessed at the Virginia Tech MIST webapge,
(MIST, 2018). Further information about the stations and the data can be found in
Clauer et al. (2014).
The Antarctica Chain data will be used for a case study for the period from the 26th of
January 2018 until 10th of February 2018. During this period PG4 was not functioning.
Figure 3.2:
Map of the Antarctic 40 degree magnetic meridian chain marked
in red. The magnetic conjugate locations in Greenland are marked in green. The
Figure is reprinted from MIST (2018).
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Data
3.3
Data preprocessing
This section contains a short description of the coordinate system in which the results
will be presented. Furthermore, it will be described how the ionospheric contribution is
isolated from the observed magnetic fields.
3.3.1
QD coordinate system
There exist a number of different coordinate systems suitable to use in different situa-
tions. As this study is focused on high latitudes of the Earth and the ionospheric currents
a coordinate system should be chosen accordingly to this. Laundal and Gjerloev (2014)
argues that a modified apex quasi dipole (QD) coordinate system is appropriate when
working with ground magnetometer data and ionospheric currents. Laundal and Gjer-
loev (2014) provides a description of the conversion between the geodetic system and a
QD coordinate system. The results in this thesis will without any further arguments be
given in the QD coordinate system.
3.3.2
Removal of core and magnetospheric field
sources
For an analysis of the ionospheric currents it is only of interest to analyse the magnetic
field variations related to these currents. The ionospheric contribution to the magnetic
field variations will be addressed as the residual magnetic field denoted δB and is deter-
mined as
δB = Bobs −B0 −Bmag −BQL
(3.1)
Where Bobs is the observed field at the ground magnetic stations, B0 is the core field
contribution and Bmag is the magnetospheric contribution. BQL is a quiet level correc-
tion and will be described in Section 3.3.3.
The time-varying core field contribution is well described by the CHAOS-6 model (Finlay
et al., 2016) and this model is used to remove the core field signal B0. The magneto-
spheric contribution Bmag is estimated by CHAOS-6 and the RC-index (ring current
index). The corrections are determined separately for each station and time stamp (1-
min resolution) to account for the different core and magnetospheric field contributions
associated with different spatial and temporal locations. The project will be focusing
on the two magnetic components H and Z and these will contain the residual magnetic
field in respectively the horizontal and vertical directions.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Data preprocessing
17
3.3.3
Removal of quiet levels
The quiet level correction BQL is applied to ensure that only the magnetic field vari-
ations due to the PEJs are left. The quiet level correction should remove the signals
due to remanent magnetized rocks close to the stations and the daily variations in the
ionosphere. The ionospheric quiet levels are determined by analysing one year of data
and identifying the quiet time intervals during the period. The activity in the iono-
sphere is increased during the day because of the solar radiation, therefore, the quiet
level correction is based on intervals during the night. In practice night is defined to be
between 20-04 MLT and divided into 2 hour intervals. An interval is defined as a quiet
time interval when the peak to peak difference is less than 25 nT. The limit 25 nT is
chosen to get enough quiet time intervals but still ensure that the ionospheric condition
can be said to be quiet. Also, the quiet time intervals are found after the removal of the
core and magnetospheric contributions.
The quiet time intervals are then plotted as in Figure 3.3 and a robust linear fit
is determined for each component and station. A linear fit is assumed to sufficiently
describe the quiet level which can then be removed from the data.
The rest of the
stations quiet level plots can be found in Appendix B. The plots show that during
summer there are an increased level of activity resulting in a smaller number of quiet
times. Furthermore, it is seen that the signals are not stationary which can be due to
small movements of the stations and drifts in the instruments.
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, NAQ, Number of quiet time intervals = 378
data
fit = 0.070805t+-571.7529
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
600
605
610
615
620
625
630
635
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, NAQ, Number of quiet time intervals = 378
data
fit = -0.039628t+880.8551
Figure 3.3:
Example of quiet levels determined from the quiet time intervals for
one year of data for the station NAQ. The data span is from the 1st October 2017
to 30th of September 2018.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Data
3.3.4
Preprocessing of case study data
The case study will include data from both the Antarctica and Greenland stations and
to make them comparable it will be necessary to perform the same data preprocessing on
both data sets. The case study is only including data from 16 days which is not enough
to estimate stable quiet levels as introduced in Section 3.3.3. Instead, a Huber weighted
robust mean, BHuber, is determined for each station and component. The corrections
for the case study are then
δB = Bobs −B0 −Bmag −BHuber
(3.2)
The corrections B0 and Bmag are determined as described previously. The quiet levels
for respectively the Greenland and Antarctica stations are presented in Figure 3.4 and
3.5 and the rest of the plots can be found in Appendix C.
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: NAQ
Data
Huber weighted mean = -102.6954
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: NAQ
Data
Huber weighted mean = 618.2195
Figure 3.4: Example of quiet levels determined for the case study using a Huber
weighted mean on data from Greenland.
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-1500
-1400
-1300
-1200
-1100
-1000
-900
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: pg0
Data
Huber weighted mean = -1114.3806
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-700
-650
-600
-550
-500
-450
-400
-350
-300
-250
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: Station = pg0
Data
Huber weighted mean = -419.4602
Figure 3.5: Example of quiet levels determined for the case study using a Huber
weighted mean on data from Antarctica.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Synthetic data
19
3.4
Synthetic data
Laundal, Finlay, et al. (2018) have developed a global model of the ionospheric current
system which is determined from magnetic measurements from the CHAMP and Swarm
satellites. The model is distributed as an open-source Python code and is known as
AMPS (Average Magnetic field and Polar current System). The model provides the
ionospheric current values and the magnetic field variations associated with the currents
at any location. The model inputs are the solar wind speed, interplanetary magnetic
field, dipole tilt angle and the F10.7 index of solar flux. It will be evaluated for the
month June 2015 to obtain a synthetic data set that can be used to validate the LCM
method. The synthetic data set will consist of the modelled residual magnetic field at the
Greenland ground station locations and of the modelled horizontal ionospheric current
densities.
==PAGE:28==
20
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Mathematical modelling of
the polar electrojets
The chapter introduces the magnetic field signature (MFS) method and the line current
model (LCM) method. The MFS method utilises geomagnetic measurements in order
to identify the boundaries of the auroral ovals and the locations of where the PEJs
are strongest. The LCM method estimates the PEJ current profile from geomagnetic
measurements and determines the auroral boundaries and location of the PEJ from this.
Section 4.1 introduces the MFS method and how it is implemented and Section 4.2
introduces the LCM method. Both methods are not dependent on past or future data
and can therefore be used at all times as long as the preprocessed data are available.
4.1
Detection of the polar electrojet
boundaries with the magnetic field
signature method
The MFS method is inspired by Johnsen (2013) who determined the boundaries of
the auroral oval from a magnetometer chain operated by Tromsø Geophysical Obser-
vatory (TGO) on Svalbard and along the coast of Norway.
The study has lead to
a near real-time auroral alert and tracking system which can be accessed at http:
//fox.phys.uit.no/AFFECTS/ (Accessed: 17-02-2019). The method make use of the
connection between the PEJs and the auroral oval both which are aligned in an east-west
direction. A latitudinal magnetic signature is obtained by having a chain of magnetome-
ters located in approximately the same magnetic longitude. The latitudinal magnetic
signature of a PEJ can be used to identify its position and the edges of the auroral oval.
The same method will be implemented to analyse data from the west coast Greenland
magnetometer chain to identify the latitudinal locations of the PEJs. The goal is to de-
velop an algorithm that can identify the auroral oval boundaries in the cases of eastward
PEJs, westward PEJs and substorms. The algorithm is based on the theory presented
in Section 2.2.2. The magnetic field signatures will be different in respectively the dawn
(00-12 MLT) and dusk (12-24 MLT) sector and for the Southern and Northern Hemi-
==PAGE:30==
22
4 Mathematical modelling of the polar electrojets
spheres as sketched with the ionospheric currents and ground magnetic field signatures
in Figure 4.1. Note that a substorm will have the same magnetic field signature as a west-
ward electrojet. The poleward and equatorward edges of the auroral oval are identified
as either the maximum or minimum of the magnetic field variation of the Z component
and are indicated by respectively a red vertical line for a poleward boundary and the
equatorward boundary as a green vertical line. The location of the PEJ is identified as
the maximum or minimum of the H component and is indicated by a black dashed line.
The illustrations in Figure 4.1 presents the expected scenario where the magnetic field
variations in Z are opposite in the two hemispheres and the variations in H are identical.
The algorithm is implemented in Matlab and can be found in Appendix D. The data
source is the 1 minute resolution preprocessed H and Z components introduced in Chap-
ter 3. The algorithm uses the MLT from the station Qeqertarsuaq to determine if the
given time is in the dusk or dawn sector, hereafter, it is locating the expected signatures
illustrated in Figure 4.1. MLT is approximately 2.5 hours behind UT time. The three
most northern stations in Greenland, see locations in Figure 3.1, are not included in this
analysis since the auroral oval is normally not occurring that far north. A quiet time is
defined as when the maximum absolute value of H reaches values less than 75 nT as it
is done in Johnsen (2013). The reason for this is that signatures below 75 nT can be
dominated by leftover contributions from other magnetic sources and uncertainties in
the data preprocessing. The auroral oval edges are not determined during quiet times
where the signatures can be dominated by noise. An approximate location of the PEJ is
still found during quiet times by determining the latitudinal location for the maximum
or minimum value in the H component.
During the period 18-06 MLT the algorithm is searching for substorms. A substorm
is identified by checking if the magnetic field signature for a substorm is more intense in
the data than an eastward electrojet. If it is identified as a substorm then the auroral
oval edges and electrojet location are adjusted to this scenario. The algorithm is tested
and the results of how it performs will be presented and discussed in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Detection of the polar electrojet boundaries with the magnetic field signature method
23
Westward PEJ
Eastward PEJ
Ic
B
N
Ic
B
N
(a) Line current and magnetic field directions in the ionosphere.
0
60
65
70
75
80
H
Z
Latitude
Magnetic ﬁeld variation
0
60
65
70
75
80
H
Z
Latitude
Magnetic ﬁeld variation
(b) Magnetic field signature observed on the ground in the Northern Hemisphere.
0
60
65
70
75
80
H
Z
Latitude
Magnetic ﬁeld variation
0
60
65
70
75
80
H
Z
Latitude
Magnetic ﬁeld variation
(c) Magnetic field signature observed on the ground in the Southern Hemisphere.
Figure 4.1:
Illustration of the ionospheric current directions and the magnetic
field signatures observed on ground for the two hemispheres in the dawn (left) and
dusk (right) sectors. The green line indicates the equatorward edge and the red
line the poleward edge of the auroral oval. The black dashed line indicates the
location of the polar electrojets. The current directions are indicated by a cross
and a dot: cross is inward and dot is outward.
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Mathematical modelling of the polar electrojets
4.2
Detection of the polar electrojet
boundaries and strength with the line
current model method
The line current model was first presented by Olsen (1996) making it possible to estimate
the ionospheric current strengths above the polar regions. The model enables one to
study both location and strength of the PEJs. It takes advantage of the fact that the
electric currents are confined to areas with a high conductivity. For altitudes above
300 km the electric currents are almost only present in the direction along the lines
of geomagnetic main field B0 due to the conductivity being much larger parallel to
B0.
These currents are also known as FACs and will not contribute with magnetic
field variations. In the ionospheric E-region the conductivity perpendicular to the main
field has considerable values which allows for horizontal currents (Olsen, 1996). The
horizontal currents will lead to magnetic field changes which can be measured at ground
based stations. The data source are the residual field components H and Z determined in
Chapter 3. This section will present the LCM geometry, the magnetic field contribution
from a single line current, how the secondary induced currents are handled and the
theory behind the model regularization and finally how the dynamics of the PEJs are
determined.
4.2.1
Geometry
The PEJ currents are modelled using the LCM method (Olsen, 1996). The LCM is
based on a series of infinite line currents placed at a constant altitude of 115 km above
the Earth and separated by ∆= 111 km which corresponds to 1◦in the given altitude.
h = −115 km is negative because the measurements are performed below the ionospheric
line currents, whereas d is positive because the measurements are performed above the
secondary induced line currents. The line currents are modelled in an east-west direction.
Figure 4.2 illustrates the geometry of the line current model. The subscript c refers to
the latitudinal location of the line current and the subscript g refers to the latitudinal
ground station location.
4.2.2
Contribution from a single line current
The magnetic field contribution from a single infinite long wire carrying an electric
current of strength Ic can be estimated using Ampère’s law as stated below
I
δB · s = µ0Ic
(4.1)
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Detection of the polar electrojet boundaries and strength with the line current model method
25
Induced line currents
Ionospheric line currents 
Main ﬁeld B0 
h = 115 km 
z = 250 km 
1 deg = 111km
Nearest point to pole
xc
xg
E-layer
Ground
Crust 
 
Mantle 
d = 615 km 
Mirror line 
Figure 4.2: Geometry of the line current model with the ionospheric and induced
currents line currents illustrated. The figure is inspired by Olsen (1996).
Where µ0 is the permeability of free space.
In this case we want to determine the
magnetic field at a distance r from the current wire and the equation can be written as
δB2πr = µ0Ic
(4.2)
A description of the equations are given in Griffiths (2014). The radius of the current
loop is
√
h2 + x2 which is derived from the geometry in Figure 4.3 and the field can be
expressed as
δB = µ0Ic
2π
1
√
h2 + x2
(4.3)
where h is a constant and x is the latitudinal location difference given as x = xg−xc. The
radial and horizontal components are determined by trigonometry, consulting Figure 4.3
H = δB cos θ = µ0Ic
2π
1
√
h2 + x2 ·
h
√
h2 + x2 = µ0
2π
h
x2 + h2Ic
(4.4)
Z = δB cos ϕ = µ0Ic
2π
1
√
h2 + x2 ·
x
√
h2 + x2 = µ0
2π
x
x2 + h2Ic
(4.5)
where µ0
2π = 200 nT km/kA. The observations of the magnetic field are performed below
the ionospheric currents and the distance h will consequently be negative in the calcula-
tions. The variations in the components H and Z given in units of nT and the current
strengths Ic in units of kA. For further reference these equations describe the situation
where induced currents are included in the model.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Mathematical modelling of the polar electrojets
 
θ
 
θ
ϕ
ϕ
Ionosphere
Ground
Z
H
δB
h
x = xg-xc
+
h2
x2
‾
‾
‾‾‾‾‾
√
xg
xc
Figure 4.3:
Geometry of the contribution from one line current.
xg and xc
are the QD latitudinal coordinates for respectively the ground stations and the
ionospheric line currents.
4.2.3
Removing the secondary induced currents
In general the residual H and Z components from Equations 4.4 and 4.5 should only
contain the signal from the PEJs but as mentioned in Section 2.1 a time-varying field
will induce a mirror current in the mantle known as the secondary induced currents.
The secondary induced currents are also present in the data and by not taking it into
account the modelled current profiles will be a sum of the ionospheric currents and the
secondary induced currents. A description of how these can be removed from the current
profile can be found below.
The secondary induced line currents are mirror currents of same size and oppositely
directed the ionospheric currents. The ionospheric currents are mirrored in the electri-
cally conducting mantle of the Earth in a mirror line. The secondary induced currents
are modelled by replacing the true conductivity distribution in the mantle replaced by
a conducting half-space starting at a depth of z = 250 km (Olsen, 1996). Above the
half-space there is a perfect insulator. The mirror plane is placed at depth z hence the
secondary induced currents are flowing in depth d = 2 · z + h in an opposite direction
(Untiedt and Baumjohann, 1993). The secondary induced currents are therefore placed
in a depth of d = 615 km as illustrated in Figure 4.2. The induced currents are included
in the model by adding an additional term with opposite sign and different radius as
follows here
δB = µ0
2π
(
1
√
h2 + x2 −
1
√
d2 + x2
)
Ic
(4.6)
The measurement are performed above the secondary induced currents and the radius
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Detection of the polar electrojet boundaries and strength with the line current model method
27
d is therefore positive in the calculation. The magnetic components are then
H = δB cos θ = µ0
2π
(
h
x2 + h2 −
d
x2 + d2
)
Ic
(4.7)
Z = δB cos ϕ = µ0
2π
(
x
x2 + h2 −
x
x2 + d2
)
Ic
(4.8)
For further reference these equations will be used when the model is mentioned to be
without induced currents because these equations remove the approximated contribution
from the secondary induced currents.
A schematic presentation of the interaction between the magnetic field contributions
from the ionospheric and secondary induced currents are presented in Figure 4.4. Here
it can be seen that the secondary induced currents enhances the H component and the
Z component is weakened. The same enhancement and weakening are expected then
the inverse problem is solved using Equation 4.7 and 4.8.
4.2.4
Estimating the total ionospheric current
The total disturbance in the magnetic field caused by a series of line currents can be
expressed in matrix form
dobs = Gm
(4.9)
Ic
B
N
Iind
B
Ground
H
Z
Z
Z
Z
Figure 4.4:
Schematic representation of the magnetic field component contribu-
tions at three locations from a ionospheric line current (red) and from a secondary
induced line current (green).
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Mathematical modelling of the polar electrojets
where dobs is a data vector containing observations of the residual field, m is a vector
containing the individual line current strengths Ic and G is the design matrix expressing
the relation between dobs and m. The total current is estimated using a joint inversion,
which means that both H and Z and their associated design matrices are used. Then
the problem is stated as
dobs =
[
H
Z
]
=
[
GH
GZ
]
m
(4.10)
and the length of dobs becomes 2N. The design matrix G has size 2N × M and is
described by the following expression with induced currents
(GH)g,c = µ0
2π
h
x2 + h2
(4.11)
(GZ)g,c = µ0
2π
x
x2 + h2
(4.12)
and the following expression when the situation is without induced currents
(GH)g,c = µ0
2π
(
h
x2 + h2 −
d
x2 + d2
)
(4.13)
(GZ)g,c = µ0
2π
(
x
x2 + h2 −
x
x2 + d2
)
(4.14)
The line currents are separated by 1◦and are placed in the latitude interval of 55◦to
85◦which gives m the length M = 31. The problem is solved doing a joint inversion
which means that the problem is solved using a combination of H and Z each with the
length 13 due to the fact that 13 stations are used in the project. The data vector d will
therefore have the length N = 26 and the design matrix G has the size 26 × 31. The
individual line currents can be determined by solving an inverse problem using model
regularization. The theory and approach to this will follow in Section 4.2.5.
From individual line currents, Ic, the sheet current density can be estimated as
I(xc) =
Ic
111 km
(4.15)
The 111 km are the distance between the individual line currents. Furthermore, the
total line current strength can be estimated by taking the sum of all the individual line
currents.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Detection of the polar electrojet boundaries and strength with the line current model method
29
4.2.5
Model regularization
A discrete linear forward problem is given as follows
d = Gm
(4.16)
The equation is recognized as the one being introduced in Equation 4.10 and is known
as a forward problem. In a forward problem a mathematical model parameter m is
constructed, and the physical model are given in G. This makes it possible to make
a prediction of the observations d. An inverse problem is the estimate of the model
parameters m from a set of observed data d.
Inverse problems are used when the
physical properties of interest can not be measured directly as e.g. the interior of the
Earth or the Sun or as in this case estimating the ionospheric current strength. The
discrete linear inverse problem can then be written as
m = G−1d
(4.17)
In the following m will be referred to as the model parameters, d as the data and G as
the design matrix.
The data vector d consists of N observations, and there are M model parameters
to estimate. The design matrix G has the dimensions N × M. Only when M = N
is it possible to determine one unique solution to the inverse problem if the data are
independent. When there are more data than model parameters (N > M) the prob-
lem is said to be overdetermined and in the case of more model parameters than data
(N < M) the problem is underdetermined. The underdetermined problems will have an
infinite number of solutions and the overdetermined problems will in principle not have
a solution. This project contains only underdetermined problems since 26 < 31, hence
the other situations will not be further elaborated.
Underdetermined inverse problems often possess a null space, are non-unique and
ill-conditioned. In these cases the inverse problem can be solved by using regularization
which is a method of adding additional constraints to the problem (Aster et al., 2013).
The constraints will help find the most probable set of model parameters. The desired
properties for the model is to be smooth and the data misfit between the observed and
predicted data should be minimized. The regularization approach is found by minimizing
the objective function ϕ in which the first term is a norm measuring the data misfit
(least squares), the second term is a norm measuring the model properties and α2 is a
regularization parameter that controls the trade-off between fitting the data and having
the desired model properties. The objective function is defined as
min ϕ(m) = (d −Gm)T(d −Gm) + α2mTm
(4.18)
To find the model m that minimizes ϕ(m), we set ∂ϕ/∂m = 0, and obtains the following
expression
m = (GTG + α2I)−1GTd
(4.19)
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Mathematical modelling of the polar electrojets
where I is an identity matrix. This solution is known as the 0th order Tikhonov regular-
ized least squares solution or as the damped least squares solution. α2 is the regulariza-
tion parameter or dampening factor and it balances model complexity and data misfit.
When α2 →0 the model complexity will increase and the solution will go towards an
unregularized simple least squares where non-physical noise will be interpreted and the
data misfit will be small. On the other hand if α2 →∞the model complexity will
decrease and can lead to a model where the desired signal is suppressed and the data
misfit increase (Aster et al., 2013). α2 can therefore be called a trade-off parameter and
should be estimated for each new case. One method to estimate α2 is to use an L-curve.
A L-curve is found by plotting the model norm ||m||2 and the data misfit ||Gm −d||2
on a log-log scale, see sketch in Figure 4.5. α2 is chosen as the value that provides the
solution in or closest to the corner of the L-curve (Hansen, 1992). However, the regu-
larization method requires an assumption about a Gaussian error-distribution. If the
errors are distributed differently it might be necessary to determine a robust solution
instead.
The regularization parameter α2 should be chosen with care such that the noise is
dampened but the physical signal is preserved. Selecting α2 is not straightforward and
the L-curves, corresponding models and data predictions can be found in Appendix A
and the stepwise approach to how the final choice of α2 was made. The approach and
results from Appendix A will be recapped here.
The choice of α2 can be difficult when working with real data since the choice depends
on the number of observations and the regularization method. An approach to determine
α2 is to use the presented L-curve method. The L-curve method was tested and it did not
α2
α2
α2
Small 
Large
Solution
Model norm ||m||
Data misﬁt ||d-Gm||
Figure 4.5:
Schematic representation of a L-curve. The red dot indicates the
corner of the L-curve. This is the solution when using regularization.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Detection of the polar electrojet boundaries and strength with the line current model method
31
provide a satisfying estimate of α2 since the resulting current profiles showed unwanted
oscillations. Therefore, the α2 value was increased and tested for several values and the
final choice was made by visual inspection. α = 4 was found to provide a satisfying
current profile and data fit for a varying number of observations. Therefore, a fixed
α2 value is chosen for this project.
α2 could be increased even more to obtain an
even smoother current profile but the result might be that the physical signal will be
dampened too much.
4.2.6
Detecting the PEJ locations
With all the fundamentals set it is possible to solve the inverse problem with Equation
4.19 and obtain the latitudinal ionospheric current profiles. The 0th order Tikhonov
regularization is solved using the algorithm attached in Appendix E.1 and the dynamics
are determined by the algorithm in Appendix E.2. The algorithm is not including the
latitudes spanning 80◦−85◦in the analysis of the auroral oval edges and the PEJs
locations since these latitudes are associated with the polar cap currents and the auroral
oval does not usually reach this far north.
In theory the polar ionospheric currents
will be zero outside the auroral oval but in practice the transition is smooth and in
the algorithm the current edges are set to be at a limit threshold of 100 A/km, which
is presented schematically in Figure 4.6. The location of the PEJs are the absolute
maximum latitudinal location of the current profile. Furthermore, the conditions are set
to be quiet when the absolute maximum of the current profile is below the quiet time
threshold on 100 A/km. Substorms are meant to have the same current profile as an
westward electrojet and they are identified by checking if it is true that the absolute
minimum of the current profile is smaller than the absolute maximum of the profile.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Mathematical modelling of the polar electrojets
0
60
65
70
75
80
H
Z
Latitude
Westward PEJ
Magnetic ﬁeld variation [nT]
0
60
65
70
75
80
H
Z
Latitude
Eastward PEJ
Magnetic ﬁeld variation [nT]
0
60
65
70
75
80
Latitude
Current density [A/km]
-100 
0
60
65
70
75
80
Latitude
Current density [A/km]
100
Figure 4.6:
Illustration of the magnetic field signatures and the corresponding
PEJ current profiles. The threshold is 100 A/km which is used to identify the
auroral oval edges. West is defined as positive for the currents.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Results and discussion
In the following sections the results will be presented and discussed. In Section 5.1
the MFS method is tested and it is illustrated how it is functioning.
Hereafter, in
Section 5.2 the LCM method will be tested and illustrated. Following this in Section
5.3 will be a comparison of the auroral boundary latitude locations identified with the
two methods and their performance will be evaluated. In Section 5.4 the PEJ current
profiles are estimated from the LCM method and these results will be compared with
similar synthetic data and the AE index. Last, in Section 5.5 the results from the case
study with data from Antarctica will be presented and the interhemispheric correlation
will be assessed.
5.1
Polar electrojet boundaries from the
magnetic field signature method
The MFS method was presented in Section 4.1. The aim of this method is to identify the
auroral oval boundaries and the PEJ location in case of either an eastward, westward or
substorm electrojet. The residual magnetic field is not interpolated between the stations
and the latitudinal locations can therefore only be at the station locations.
The algorithm in Appendix D has been tested and some examples of how it works
in different situations will be presented in this section. Figure 5.1 provides examples
of the identification of the three types of electrojets. The equatorward edge of the au-
roral oval is indicated by a vertical green line, the poleward edge by a vertical red line
and the black stippled line is the location where the PEJ is at a maximum. Figure
5.1(a) presents a time with an eastward PEJ where the three locations are determined
according to what was expected from the schematic magnetic field signatures in Section
4.1. In Figure 5.1(b) the westward PEJ locations are also determined as expected. The
event in Figure 5.1(c) is occurring at 22.30 MLT and since it is in the dusk sector it is
therefore a candidate to be an eastward PEJ. By closer inspection it is noticed that the
signature in H is mostly negative and the Z component signature is placed around this
drop. Therefore, by visual inspection this would be classified as a substorm and it is seen
that the algorithm also identifies it this way. This example proves that it is important
to include the substorms in the analysis because these can be occurring often. The three
examples in Figure 5.1 are good examples on how the signatures ideally should appear
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Results and discussion
for an easy analysis and since this is not always the case other examples will follow.
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
Magnetic field variation [nT]
15-Feb-2018 17:00:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
(a) Eastward PEJ
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Magnetic field variation [nT]
05-Feb-2018 08:49:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
(b) Westward PEJ
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Magnetic field variation [nT]
02-Feb-2018 01:19:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
(c) Substorm
Figure 5.1:
Example of the three different types of PEJs with the locations
determined using the MFS method.
During disturbed conditions the auroral oval will shift equatorward and leave the
area with data coverage from the Greenland magnetometer chain. Two examples of this
situation are presented in Figure 5.2 both of these are westward PEJs. The left plot
shows that the H component has only started increasing towards 0 and the equatorward
edge is set to be at the most southern station even though it is most certainly even more
south. In the right image the H component might still be decreasing at the southern
station and both the equatorward edge and the PEJ locations is set to be at this location.
Therefore, it will occur that the equatorward edge can not be determined successfully.
It is much more rare that the poleward edge shift more south than the station NAQ and
therefore this boundary is still well described during changing conditions. To obtain the
full dynamics of the PEJs it would be necessary to extent the magnetometer chain in
the equatorward direction but this would require the magnetometers to be placed in or
on the water.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Polar electrojet boundaries from the magnetic field signature method
35
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
Magnetic field variation [nT]
17-Feb-2018 05:20:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
Magnetic field variation [nT]
19-Feb-2018 02:10:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
Figure 5.2:
Examples of how the equatorward edge and PEJ location are iden-
tified when they are South of NAQ using the MFS method.
Other situations that need to be considered are the quiet times which are defined as
when the maximum absolute value of H is below 75 nT. Two examples of how quiet time
profiles can look like are given in Figure 5.3. In the left plot there is a clear signature
for an eastward electrojet and with that the locations could still have been determined
even though it is quiet. The situation in the right plot is even more quiet and it can be
discussed whether the locations can be determined here. The algorithm works by first
identifying the minimum of H which in this case could be identified at two locations by
visual inspection. With the PEJ location being as it is then the signature in Z could
also be determined and it would be a westward electrojet. If the location of the PEJ
were identified at the equatorward station then the associated auroral edges would have
been misplaced. The variations in the signatures can be due to the data preprocessing
which can introduce some noise in the H and Z components. The data preprocessing
uses a constant for removing the quiet levels and this approach can result in too much
or too little signal is removed at some time stamps. Summing up, it is necessary to
have a definition of quiet times so the noise in the signatures are not interpreted as
a physical phenomena. If the quiet time threshold should be at the present 75 nT or
possibly lower or higher requires more tests where a lot of magnetic field signatures and
different thresholds are accessed. With the current threshold on 75 nT the number of
times where noise are interpreted should be limited.
The last example is presented in Figure 5.4. This example illustrates that a lack
of data points and unclear data can prevent the algorithm and visual inspection in
recognizing the locations of the auroral oval and PEJ. This example is not a quiet time
and it would therefore be included in further analysis as a valid result.
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Results and discussion
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-50
0
50
Magnetic field variation [nT]
01-Feb-2018 22:39:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Magnetic field variation [nT]
02-Feb-2018 05:29:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
Figure 5.3:
Two examples of how the magnetic field signature can appear like
during quiet times using the MFS method.
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Magnetic field variation [nT]
23-Feb-2018 05:10:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
Figure 5.4:
Example of a time stamp where there is a lack of data and the rest
is noisy using the MFS method.
An improvement would be to develop a classification system and systematically note
which PEJs the algorithm identifies correctly compared with a classification performed
by visual inspection. This would provide a statistical overview of the general performance
of the algorithm and a good foundation to conclude how well the algorithm is performing.
But for now it has been shown that the MFS method can identify the dynamics of
the PEJs in most cases. The exceptions are when the PEJs are south of Greenland,
during some quiet conditions and in the few cases where there are data gaps and the
rest of the data contains noise. The latitudinal resolution is crude due to only having
13 stations along the entire west coast of Greenland but it gives an idea of the PEJ
dynamics. An advantage is that when the preprocessed data is available the dynamics
can be determined at each individual time which makes it possible to use in real time
applications.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Polar electrojet boundaries from the line current model method
37
5.2
Polar electrojet boundaries from the line
current model method
The LCM method was presented in Section 4.2 and the algorithms can be found in Ap-
pendix E. The goal when utilising the method is to first estimate the ionospheric current
profiles and from this identify the auroral oval boundaries and the PEJ location in case
of either an eastward, westward or substorm electrojet. The resolution of this method
is 1◦between 55◦−85◦latitude according to the chosen model geometry. The model
is said to be with induced currents when the induced currents are part of the profile
and it is based on the design matrices in Section 4.2.2. When the model is without
induced currents the model should only contain the PEJ current signal and is based on
the design matrices in Section 4.2.3. It will be seen in the following plots that the two
estimated models respectively with and without induced currents provides almost identi-
cal current profiles and therefore the locations are only determined from the model with
induced currents. The results in this section will include the estimated models with and
without induced currents in the top panel and the lower panel will contain the observed
data from which the models are estimated together with the data predictions from the
estimated models. The data, estimated model and predicted data has to be interpreted
together to judge how the estimate of the model parameters are compared to the given
data.
The algorithm has been tested on many different situations and a few examples of
how it is performing will follow here. Figure 5.5 provides examples of how the estimated
current profiles can appear for respectively an eastward and westward PEJ. The east-
ward electrojet in Figure 5.5(a) has a smooth current profile in the lower latitudes and
the three locations are identified reasonably. For the latitudes above 75◦the profile
becomes unstable and the current density is fluctuating around 100 A/km which might
be due to the polar cap currents. In the interesting area up to 75◦latitude the current
profiles with and without induced currents are close to identical. The data prediction
with the induced currents are smaller than the actual data which is caused by the reg-
ularization. As for the data prediction without induced currents the Z component is
smaller than the observed data and this is expected because of the design matrix used.
The predicted H without induced currents provides a good estimate of the data. The
same observations can be made on the westward electrojet in Figure 5.5(b) when the
profile is smooth up until 70◦latitude and up after this it is more unstable. The data
predictions with and without induced currents are smaller than the data which is as
expected. Furthermore, the model estimates without induced currents are in general
lower which is due to the induced currents being removed from the total current.
The example presented in Figure 5.6 is clearly a substorm and the locations are deter-
mined with respect to this. The current model represents the big decrease in H around
70◦and the change in the Z component appearing within a narrow area. It is noticed
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Results and discussion
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-200
-100
0
100
200
Current density [A/km]
22-Feb-2018 18:00:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H observed
H predicted with
H predicted without
Z observed
Z predicted with
Z predicted without
(a) Eastward electrojet
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-100
0
100
Current density [A/km]
02-May-2018 09:10:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-100
-50
0
50
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H observed
H predicted with
H predicted without
Z observed
Z predicted with
Z predicted without
(b) Westward electrojet
Figure 5.5:
Examples of the PEJ current estimates and associated data predic-
tion for an eastward and a westward electrojet using the LCM method.
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Polar electrojet boundaries from the line current model method
39
that the data prediction in general are smaller and more crude than the observations
and this can be explained with the regularization that is performed. The regularization
dampens the ionospheric currents (model complexity) and when the damped model is
used to predict the data, the currents will naturally be smaller. If α2 was increased it
could get rid of the oscillations in the higher latitudes but the interesting ionospheric
currents might be dampened too much. If α2 is decreased then the data prediction would
improve and the estimated currents would be less damped but it would result in a wrong
model of the currents as presented in Appendix A where different α2 were tested.
As mentioned previously the auroral oval can shift to latitudes south of Greenland
and the LCM method is catching some of this signal in the current profiles as seen in
Figure 5.7. It shows that the H component is still decreasing at the southern station
which indicates that part of the PEJ is south of Greenland. The current estimates south
of Greenland are not based on data. Therefore, the width of the current profiles and
the strength might not be correctly modelled, but it still visualises that the location is
equatorward. The model approaches 0 in areas where there are no data coverage.
Below a threshold of 100 A/km the auroral oval edges are not determined and these
situations are referred to as quiet times. Figure 5.8 presents two examples of how the
current profiles can appear close to a quiet time. For the top two figures it is seen that
the current profile is smooth and has a clear peak where the PEJ is expected to be
located. The auroral oval is estimated to be rather narrow in this example due to the
limit threshold on 100 A/km and it could be considered if the threshold from which the
edges are determined should be adjusted accordingly to different levels of disturbance.
Furthermore, the data prediction appears to be rather good. For the lower example in
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-200
0
200
400
600
800
Current density [A/km]
06-May-2018 22:10:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-400
-200
0
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H observed
H predicted with
H predicted without
Z observed
Z predicted with
Z predicted without
Figure 5.6:
Examples of the PEJ current estimates and associated data predic-
tion for a substorm using the LCM method.
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Results and discussion
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-200
0
200
400
600
Current density [A/km]
08-May-2018 05:20:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-400
-200
0
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H observed
H predicted with
H predicted without
Z observed
Z predicted with
Z predicted without
Figure 5.7:
Example of a current profile estimate south of NAQ using the LCM
method.
Figure 5.8 it is observed that H is decreasing and Z are increasing at the most southern
latitude and this influences the estimated current model which are peaking south of
the magnetic stations. The rest of the current profile is rather unstable and it is not
clear from visual inspection of both the magnetic field variations and the current profiles
where the auroral oval is located. LCM suggests a location south of Greenland which
is possible but the low magnetic field variations in Greenland suggests that it is just a
model error. The data prediction is far off from the observed data which suggests that
the estimated current model is not correct. It can therefore be discussed if the quiet
level threshold should be increased such that this kind of example are not analysed or
the threshold should be kept as it is. The present threshold is sufficient as it is for the
purpose in this project.
Figure 5.9 presents an example where the auroral oval is estimated to cover from
57◦to 76◦latitude. By inspecting the current profile it can be discussed if a poleward
boundary is more realistic around 71◦but since the profile with induced currents does
not get below the limit threshold at this point then the edge is estimated at a location
further north. Furthermore, the equatorward edge is located far to the south which
might not be the actual case but it is difficult to know. This example shows that the
method is not perfect and the boundaries are sometimes located at what might be wrong
locations. It can be necessary to test if the threshold for boundaries on 100 A/km should
be adjusted accordingly to the level of disturbance in the analysed period.
The models obtained from solving an inverse problem are often evaluated by perform-
ing a residual analysis. A residual analysis accesses the residuals between the observed
data and the predicted data to test if there are any trends in the residuals and to see if
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Polar electrojet boundaries from the line current model method
41
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-50
0
50
100
150
Current density [A/km]
05-May-2018 01:10:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H observed
H predicted with
H predicted without
Z observed
Z predicted with
Z predicted without
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-100
-50
0
50
100
Current density [A/km]
07-May-2018 07:20:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-20
0
20
40
60
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H observed
H predicted with
H predicted without
Z observed
Z predicted with
Z predicted without
Figure 5.8:
Examples of PEJ current profiles during almost quiet times using
the LCM method.
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Results and discussion
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-200
0
200
400
600
Current density [A/km]
17-Feb-2018 06:00:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-200
0
200
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H observed
H predicted with
H predicted without
Z observed
Z predicted with
Z predicted without
Figure 5.9:
Example of a situation where the auroral oval might have been
estimated too wide using the LCM method.
the residuals are normally distributed. The data predictions presented in this sections
were in general lower than the observed data and this means that the residuals would
show a trend due to the dampening of the model estimates. The models are estimated
based on a limited number of data points which in general makes the models, data pre-
dictions and residuals difficult to interpret. A detailed residual analysis would help to
interpret if the estimated models are good but with only 13 residuals available for each
component it would not provide a useful result. Instead, the models are interpreted as
being sensible because the data prediction is not completely different from the observed
data.
Testing of the algorithm would benefit from the same classification system as the
MFS algorithm to improve the possibilities to interpret the actual performance of the
algorithm. For now it has been shown that the LCM method can provide an estimate
of the ionospheric current density and from this the auroral edges and PEJ location can
be estimated. The method can identify the locations in the three different electrojet
configurations. There are exceptions during quiet times and with some unclear current
density profiles where the method does not provide correct results. In the inverse problem
the regularization parameter was set to a fixed value of α2 = 4. For the purpose in this
project it is good enough with a fixed value because it provides an estimate of the
ionospheric currents and proves that this method is feasible. The estimated current
strength will be accessed later in this chapter and this can provide a better idea if the
model is over- or underestimated.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Comparison of the polar electrojet boundaries
43
5.3
Comparison of the polar electrojet
boundaries
Results from the MFS and LCM methods were presented in Section 5.1 and 5.2 and it
was seen that they worked as intended. It would be interesting to see check if the loca-
tion estimates from the two methods are correlating and thereby support the use of the
methods to estimate the dynamics of the PEJs. The two methods will first be compared
for one time stamp and hereafter time series will be presented where the methods are
compared in different seasons.
Figure 5.10 presents a situation where both methods provides reasonable estimates
of the locations. The equatorward boundaries and the PEJ locations are determined to
be almost identical for the two methods where the small difference is in the resolution of
the methods. The poleward boundary are estimated with a little difference in latitude.
This example shows that the two methods can provide comparable results. The same
comparison are performed for all the data in three different months and the results will
be presented in the following time series.
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-200
0
200
400
600
800
Current density [A/km]
15-Mar-2018 23:20:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-400
-200
0
200
Field variation [nT ]
H
Z
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
Figure 5.10: Comparison of the auroral oval edges and PEJ location determined
from the LCM (top) and MFS (bottom) methods.
In Figure 5.11 the boundaries are compared and each plot contains respectively the
poleward edge, PEJ location and equatorward edge and the correlation between the
different location estimates. Both methods estimates the PEJ location in all situations
but the auroral oval edges are not determined during quiet times which explains the
missing data in these plots.
In July the conductivity in the ionosphere is increased
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Results and discussion
and this should lead to more intense PEJs and a fewer number of quiet times. For
the poleward edge the correlation is relatively high being 0.82. The poleward edge was
previously found to be the easiest to determine for the two methods due to its northern
location. Therefore, the poleward edge compares well with a high correlation. During
July the auroral oval equatorward edge will often be south of Greenland and becomes
difficult to locate and this is indicated by a lower correlation.
The PEJ location is
determined every minute and the correlation in July is 0.65 which is relatively low
compared to the one from the poleward edge. But, it has been presented in the previous
two sections that the two methods are not perfect and in some cases they will provide
a wrong estimate of the location and these failures are part of what is recorded here.
Furthermore, the general trends of the two methods follows quiet well with smaller offset
in latitude. In general there are less locations determined from the MFS method because
the threshold for quiet times is set rather high compared to the quiet time threshold for
the LCM method.
60
65
70
75
QD latitude [deg]
PEJ location, Correlation = 0.65325
MFS
LCM
04
09
14
19
24
29
Days after 1st of July 2018
60
65
70
75
QD latitude [deg]
Equatorward boundary, Correlation = 0.68518
MFS
LCM
68
70
72
74
76
78
QD latitude [deg]
Poleward boundary, Correlation = 0.81706
MFS
LCM
Figure 5.11:
Comparison of the poleward and equatorward boundaries and
the PEJ locations for July 2018 estimated from the MFS method and the LCM
method.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Comparison of the polar electrojet boundaries
45
On the 20th of March 2018 it was equinox which places the Earth in such an orien-
tation where reconnection is more likely to take place and therefore the occurrence of
PEJs are more likely. The time series for March 2018 are presented in Figure 5.12. The
data density in the poleward and equatorward edge seems more dense in the period for
the 14th until the 28th of March which is around equinox and this might be caused by
the higher chances for reconnection. The poleward edge correlation is smaller than for
July and a cause for this could be the the relatively low number of data points from the
two methods available at the same time. Otherwise the same observations as was made
for July can be observed here.
60
65
70
75
QD latitude [deg]
PEJ location, Correlation = 0.69125
MFS
LCM
04
09
14
19
24
29
Days after 1st of March 2018
60
65
70
75
QD latitude [deg]
Equatorward boundary, Correlation = 0.63076
MFS
LCM
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
QD latitude [deg]
Poleward boundary, Correlation = 0.60535
MFS
LCM
Figure 5.12:
Comparison of the poleward and equatorward boundaries and the
PEJ locations for March 2018 estimated from the MFS method and the LCM
method.
The last example is for January 2018 and it is presented in Figure 5.13. During Jan-
uary the ionospheric conductivity is lower and the PEJs will be rare and weaker and this
can be seen for the auroral oval edges as the correlation is relatively high but it is based
on very few data points. The PEJ location has a correlation on 0.71 and the course
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Results and discussion
of the time series are following each other nicely. It appears like the MFS method in
general locates the PEJ a bit more north than the LCM method. One explanation could
be that the low resolution of the MFS method causes the PEJ location to be estimated
a bit more north than with the LCM method where there is a higher resolution.
In all three examples it is evident that there are daily variations which occurs because
of Earth’s tilt and rotation and both methods catch this signal with comparable ampli-
tudes. With the three examples listed in this section it is evident that the two methods
correlate and it shows that both methods can be used to determine the locations of the
auroral edges and the PEJs.
65
70
75
QD latitude [deg]
PEJ location, Correlation = 0.70949
MFS
LCM
04
09
14
19
24
29
Days after 1st of January 2018
60
65
70
75
QD latitude [deg]
Equatorward boundary, Correlation = 0.78659
MFS
LCM
68
70
72
74
76
78
QD latitude [deg]
Poleward boundary, Correlation = 0.76648
MFS
LCM
Figure 5.13:
Comparison of the poleward and equatorward boundaries and the
PEJ locations for January 2018 estimated from the MFS method and the LCM
method.
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Validation of the line current model method
47
5.4
Validation of the line current model
method
This section will seek to validate the LCM method and its results by comparing the PEJ
current strengths with respectively the AE index and the synthetic data set presented in
Section 3.4. The synthetic data set contains the magnetic field variations and the polar
ionospheric currents for June 2015 and the validation will be performed for that period.
Figure 5.14 presents the AE index and the calculated total current strength for June
2015. It is important to note that the AE index is not the correct answer but rather
a guideline for what can be expected as will be explained here: The AE index is deter-
mined from stations spread out in the polar area and presents the state of the ionosphere
in the entire polar region whereas the Greenland stations only represent a small part
of this area. Therefore, there can be features in the AE index that are not measured
in the Greenland data and there can be local phenomena above Greenland that is not
detected in the AE index. The AE index is an expression of the state of the ionosphere
and if there is great resemblance between the estimated currents and the AE index then
the LCM method is supported. It is observed in Figure 5.14 that the current strength
and the AE index have the same progression and specially during disturbed times the
oscillations corresponds. The curves matches especially well around day 8, 17 and 23
and in the period for day 2-7 and 20-22 the periods are quiet and the curves are not
showing exactly the same. Overall the correlation between the PEJ current strength
and the AE index is 0.8 which indicates a considerable likeliness and it can be validated
that the current strength estimates are reasonable and compares well with the measured
activity level in the polar region.
Figure 5.15 includes the same time series of the AE index as in Figure 5.14 and the
three last plots are temporal and spatial images of the 1 dimensional PEJ current den-
05
10
15
20
25
30
Days after 1st of June 2015
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Total current I [kA]
0
500
1000
AE [nT]
Correlation = 0.7988
Figure 5.14:
The AE index compared with the total PEJ current strength
estimated by the LCM method from Greenland data.
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Results and discussion
sity from different data sources. It should be noted that the synthetic PEJ currents in
d) are only given at the Greenland station locations which gives a lower resolution and
a coverage only down to 65◦QD latitude. The synthetic data can be used to validate
the LCM method by comparing the synthetic ionospheric currents in (d) and calculated
ionospheric currents from the synthetic magnetic field variation data in (c). The LCM
method is used to estimate the ionospheric currents from the synthetic magnetic data
and the result compares well with the actual synthetic ionospheric currents. When the
estimates in (c) are compared with the data in (d) it is seen that the currents in (c) are
almost identical to the currents in (d). This result validates the LCM method because
it manages to provide a correct estimate of the synthetic ionospheric currents.
On the 23rd of June a high activity level is present in the AE index and an associated
high current density is present in all three representation of the current density with al-
most identical current densities. During this period the auroral oval are estimated to the
south compared with the rest of the time series. During the quiet times in day 2-6 the
current directions and densities are identical for the three types of data. In general, there
are more features in the estimates based on real data than with the synthetic data sets
and this is expected since the synthetic data is based on a model in which the features
often will be smoothed. In b) and c) fluctuations are present north of 80◦latitude and
these are attributed to the polar cap currents which are not described with the LCM
method and will not be discussed further. Another feature present in b) and c) is a clear
boundary at 65◦QD latitude where the last equatorward station is located. The features
estimated around the boundary are in general continued down to 55◦which shows that
the LCM method can not provide estimates of the line currents in areas without data
coverage. Consulting the entire period of June 2015 the three different PEJ current
densities estimated corresponds in both location, time and strength. This supports the
earlier validation of the LCM method to estimate the current strength within the area
with data coverage.
The LCM method has been proven to provide reasonable estimates of the PEJ cur-
rent strength and satisfying estimates of the auroral oval edges and the PEJ locations.
The LCM method is based on a fixed regularization parameter (α2 = 4) and for the
purpose of proving that the methods works using a constant has been satisfying. The
method could be improved by adding a dynamic choice of α2 for each individual time
to obtain a more precise estimate of the PEJ currents for each given situation. Such a
dynamic choice would require a detailed investigation of methods to estimate α2 because
the most common methods was not successful for this particular problem.
Another improvement that both the MFS and the LCM methods could benefit from
is more data because the existing 13 stations scattered between 65◦−85◦QD latitude
provides a coarse resolution. If the data resolution could be improved along the west
coast of Greenland the methods would be able to provide a more precise estimate of
the auroral oval edges. A further improvement would be new stations south of NAQ
which would imply magnetometers being placed on the water or on the ocean floor.
==PAGE:57==
5.5 Case study: Antarctica
49
The magnetic signals are dampened in water and that would pose a problem for ocean
floor magnetometers which might not be a feasible idea. The extra data south of NAQ
would provide more knowledge of the PEJ dynamics during disturbed conditions which
is scarcely described with the present data. Furthermore, an addition of stations would
make the inverse problem overdetermined and perhaps the L-curve could be used to
estimate α2 and the PEJ currents could be estimated more precisely.
0
500
1000
AE [nT]
a)
b)
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-500
0
500
I [A/km]
c)
05
10
15
20
25
30
Days after 1st of June 2015
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-500
0
500
I [A/km]
d)
05
10
15
20
25
30
Days after 1st of June 2015
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-500
0
500
I [A/km]
Figure 5.15:
a) AE index. b) Ionospheric current density calculated with LCM
from Greenland data. c) Ionospheric current density calculated with LCM from
the synthetic magnetic field variation data. d) Ionospheric current density from
the synthetic data. West is defined as the positive direction.
5.5
Case study: Antarctica
The results in the previous sections has proven that both the MFS method and the LCM
method can detect the boundaries for the PEJs and the LCM method provides estimates
of the PEJ current strengths. The PEJ phenomena in the two hemispheres are in theory
the same and it would be interesting to apply the method on data from the Antarctica
chain and compare the results with the conjugate stations in Greenland to see if they
compare in real life too. Since the stations are conjugate it would be expected that the
same events with the approximate same strength will be observed in both hemispheres.
First, H and Z will be compared for each pair of conjugate stations to test if the
measured magnetic field corresponds in size and events. From Section 4.1 it is known
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Results and discussion
that the expected magnetic field signatures in the H component are expected to be
identical and for the Z component the signatures should be in opposite directions for
the two hemispheres. Figure 5.16 presents the H component for the pair of conjugating
stations. For GHB/PG5, ATU/PG3 and GDH/PG2 the H component signatures are
very much alike but with bigger signatures for PG5, PG3 and PG2. For KUV/PG0
the signatures are less alike which can be caused by the polar cap current or the more
poleward latitudes where the PEJ is not that often located during winter as is the case
with KUV. The conjugating pair UPN/PG1 do not have comparable signatures for the
H component. The signatures for UPN agrees with the signatures in its surrounding
stations KUV and GDH and therefore the data from UPN is considered to be correct.
The signatures for PG1 does not agree with its surrounding stations and at some times
the signature is opposite of what is expected which indicates that something is wrong
with the data. The PG1 station is the oldest and with a location on the ice, what is seen
here, is probably that the station has tilted during the years resulting in the measured
field in the H direction might contain some of the radial field causing wrong signatures
in H. The following results will not make use of the H component from PG1 since it
is clearly not correct. In general, it is observed that the signatures are higher for the
Antarctica stations which is due to the measurements being taken during the Southern
Hemispheric summer which causes a higher level of conductivity and a corresponding
lower conductivity in the Northern Hemispheric winter.
In Figure 5.17 the Z component signatures are compared and again the signatures
from the Antarctica stations are bigger. Furthermore, it is observed that the directions
Figure 5.16:
Plot of the H component where the conjugate stations are com-
pared.
==PAGE:59==
5.5 Case study: Antarctica
51
of the Z component field signature are in opposite directions as expected for an inter-
hemispheric comparison. It is clear that a lot of the same features are presented in both
data sets. The Z signatures for the conjugating pair UPN/PG1 agrees very well here
compared to the case with the H component. With PG1 being tilted the Z component
will contain some signal from the other directions, but since the Z component in the
polar areas a much larger than H the additional signal will not be visible in Z and this
component can easily be used in following analysis. Figure 5.16 and 5.17 have proven
that the conjugate stations provides very identical magnetic field signatures which most
likely means that it is the same PEJ events that are depicted. The results indicates that
if the MFS and LCM methods where applied to the conjugate stations then the outcome
would be comparable locations and PEJ current strengths which will be the next step
to check.
The MFS method is applied on the Greenland and Antarctica stations in Figure
5.18 and the boundaries and location of the PEJ have been located. The Antarctica
QD latitudes have been plotted as the absolute latitude values so the Greenland and
Antarctica results can be easily compared. The locations are almost identical with the
only difference being that the stations are not located at the exact same latitudes and
therefore the identified locations are shifted a bit. The disadvantage with the Antarctica
chain are that only a few stations exist resulting in a low coverage which prevents a
detailed analysis of the locations especially during disturbed conditions. Therefore, a
more detailed comparison of the locations will not be provided because in most cases
the Antarctica chain is too sparse to provide an expressive result.
Figure 5.17: Plot of the Z component where the conjugate stations are compared.
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Results and discussion
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
-300
-200
-100
0
100
Field variation [nT]
Greenland: 10-Feb-2018 10:50:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
QD latitude [deg]
-300
-200
-100
0
100
Field variation [nT]
Antarctica: 10-Feb-2018 10:50:30 UT
H
Z
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
Figure 5.18:
The MFS method applied on the same time for both Greenland
and Antarctica which results in the boundaries being identified in approximately
the same QD latitude.
The magnetic field variations and the results calculated with the LCM method are
presented in Figure 5.19. The interesting magnetic field variations from the Greenland
stations are spanning from 65◦to 83◦QD latitude and the Antarctica stations are only
covering this area from 70◦QD latitude and up. Therefore, a lot of information is not
contained in the Antarctica data set and it influences the current estimate which is pre-
sented in the same figure. The Antarctica based estimate of the PEJ current profile is
narrow which is caused by the small amount of data and it results in a narrow estimate
of the PEJ boundaries. In contrast the Greenland current density profile is covering the
interesting area and the boundaries are estimated more reasonable. The LCM method
to estimate the PEJ boundaries in the Southern Hemisphere will only be feasible when
the auroral oval is located right above the Antarctica stations.
Another way to compare the conjugate stations is by estimating the current strength
from each data set. In these calculations only the conjugate station data as presented
in Figure 5.16 and 5.17 are used. A time series for the current strength in the case
study period is plotted in Figure 5.20. The two current profiles have peaks in the same
locations and are in general identical, though the Antarctica current estimates are being
higher which are associated with the Southern Hemispheric summer. The correlation is
0.72 which is high when taking the seasonal effect into account and it is almost certain
that the same events are happening in the two hemispheres.
==PAGE:61==
5.5 Case study: Antarctica
53
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-200
0
200
400
Current density
[A/km]
Greenland: 30-Jan-2018 04:10:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-200
0
200
400
Current density
[A/km]
Antarctica: 30-Jan-2018 04:10:30 UT
m with
m without
PEJ
Equatorward
Poleward
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-200
-100
0
100
Field variation
[nT]
H Greenland
H Antarctica
Z Greenland
Z Antarctica
Figure 5.19:
The LCM method applied on the same time for both Greenland
and Antarctica conjugating stations. The bottom panel presents the data from the
Greenland and Antarctica stations.
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Current strength [kA]
Correlation = 0.71614
Antarctica
Greenland
Figure 5.20:
Comparison of the total current estimates from Antarctica and
Greenland.
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Results and discussion
The last result is presented in Figure 5.21 and it is a spatial and temporal analysis
of the current density estimated from the Greenland stations (only the conjugating
stations) and Antarctica stations and it is compared with the AE index which is from
the Northern Hemisphere. In general the time period is quiet which is indicated by
the AE index. The 31st of January and the 5th of February are active periods which
are mirrored with increased current densities in both the Greenland and Antarctica
panel. The Greenland panel is consistent with daily variations and smooth transitions.
The Antarctica panel is more inconsistent with abrupt changes in the current densities
but still visible daily variations and approximately same size of densities at the same
times. The Antarctica current density panel is not really giving much information and
the reason for the abrupt changes could be data errors resulting in unstable model
estimates.
0
200
400
AE [nT]
60
70
80
QD latitude [deg]
-500
0
500
I [A/km]
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
60
70
80
QD latitude [deg]
-500
0
500
I [A/km]
Figure 5.21: Top: AE index. Middle: Current density estimated from the Green-
land stations. Bottom: Current density estimated from the Antarctica stations.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions and future
outlooks
It has been shown that it is possible to estimate the dynamics of the PEJs, hereunder
the latitudinal locations and the PEJ current strengths by using the MFS and LCM
methods during westward and eastward PEJs and substorms. The MFS method pro-
vides reasonable and reliable estimates of the auroral boundary latitudinal locations and
of the maximum strength location over the Greenland area. The LCM method provides
estimates of the PEJ current profiles from which the PEJ latitudinal locations and total
current strength can be determined. The correlation of the boundary estimates between
the two methods were relatively high when taking the sparse data availability into ac-
count which proves that both methods are eligible. The correlation between the methods
were highest during January and lowest during July which means the locations are more
difficult to estimate during summer and therefore the seasonal variations influences the
correlation as well. The number of times the methods were actually evaluated during
one month was limited due to the high number of quiet times.
The LCM method was validated by applying it on the synthetic AMPS data to es-
timate the current profiles from synthetic magnetic field signatures and compare the
estimated model with the associated synthetic PEJ current profiles. It was found that
the LCM method dampens the model complexity and hereunder the currents but still
provides reasonable estimates of these. After the validation of the LCM method the
temporal and spatial current profiles were calculated and they compared well with the
synthetic AMPS data and the AE index. The correlation between the AE index and
the total PEJ current strength for June 2018 was found to be 0.8 which supports the
validation of the method.
The methods were found to perform equally well on estimating the PEJ locations.
The advantage of the MFS method is that it is simple to use and the disadvantage is the
sparse resolution. The LCM method estimated both the PEJ locations and the PEJ cur-
rent strengths and with a resolution of 1◦which is clearly an advantage. A disadvantage
is the requirement to solve an inverse problem which requires more assumptions and
the results have shown that the current strength is damped in the solution. Therefore,
depending on the requirements to the solution either method can be used or they can
be combined for a better location estimate.
With both methods providing the desired results the study was extended to include
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Conclusions and future outlooks
a case study where magnetic data from Greenland and Antarctica were compared. The
case study was performed for a period of 16 days where it was seen that the magnetic field
components were showing the same events. It was found that the data coverage in the
Antarctica region is too sparse to perform a detailed study of the Southern Hemispheric
auroral oval and its dynamics. There were some consistency between the estimated total
current strengths for each hemisphere which suggests that in fact the same disturbances
are present on both hemispheres. Furthermore, it was clear from the case study that
the summer season produces stronger ionospheric currents due to increased conductivity.
For future perspectives can be mentioned the development of a real-time model and
gaining a better understanding of the PEJ dynamics at Greenland and Antarctica, both
ideas are elaborated here. With the methods set and tested it would be interesting to de-
termine the dynamics of the PEJs from real-time magnetic data with the perspective to
use it for a now-casting of the polar light occurrence in Greenland. A now-casting of the
polar lights would be a fun addition to the auroral tourism industry in Greenland and
for the possible Aurora Center in Ilulissat. For the now-casting to be feasible it would
require a fine tuning of the LCM method by optimizing the choice of the regularization
parameter α2. And further investigations of the quiet time threshold in the MFS method
could be performed to test if the method could be applied on more situations. The data
preprocessing should also be developed to work in real time by making a running ap-
proximation of the core field contributions, the magnetospheric field contributions and
the quiet levels. Furthermore, a higher density of magnetometers on the west coast of
Greenland would provide a base for more precise determinations of the PEJ dynamics
and be the foundation for future analysis of the entire polar current system.
Furthermore, the case study analysis proved that the polar regions in the two hemi-
spheres are exposed to the same disturbances which suggest that if the conditions on
Greenland are well described then it would be possible to extrapolate the conditions in
the Antarctica region. This would require a detailed study of the Greenland/Antarctica
state of the ionosphere to understand the coupling needed to transform the knowledge
to the Antarctica area.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
Aakjær, Cecilie Drost, Nils Olsen, and Christopher C. Finlay (2016). “Determining polar
ionospheric electrojet currents from Swarm satellite constellation magnetic data”. In:
Earth, Planets and Space 68. doi: 10.1186/s40623-016-0509-y.
Aster, Richard C., Brian Borchers, and Clifford H. Thurber (2013). Parameter estimation
and inverse problems. Academic Press. doi: 10.1016/C2009-0-61134-X.
Baumjohann, W. and R. Nakamura (2015). Magnetospheric Contributions to the Ter-
restrial Magnetic Field. Volume 5. Elsevier B.V., pages 79–90. doi: 10.1016/B978-
0-444-53802-4.00097-X.
Campbell, Wallace H. (2003). Introduction to Geomagnetic Fields: Second Edition. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Clauer, C. R., H. Kim, K. Deshpande, Z. Xu, D. Weimer, S. Musko, G. Crowley, C.
Fish, R. Nealy, T. E. Humphreys, J. A. Bhatti, and A. J. Ridley (2014). “An
autonomous adaptive low-power instrument platform (AAL-PIP) for remote high-
latitude geospace data collection”. In: Geoscientific Instrumentation, Methods and
Data Systems 3.2, pages 211–227. issn: 2193-0864. doi: 10.5194/gi-3-211-2014.
DTU Space (2018). Magnetic ground stations. http://www.space.dtu.dk/English/
Research/Scientific_data_and_models/Magnetic_Ground_Stations.aspx.
Accessed: 27-02-2019.
Finlay, C. C., Nils Olsen, Stavros Kotsiaros, Nicolas Gillet, and Lars Tøffner-Clausen
(2016). “Recent geomagnetic secular variation from Swarm and ground observatories
as estimated in the CHAOS-6 geomagnetic field model”. In: Earth, Planets and Space
68.1, pages 1–18. doi: 10.1186/s40623-016-0486-1.
Griffiths, David J. (2014). Introduction to Electrodynamics. 4th. Pearson.
Hansen, Per Christian (1992). “Analysis of Discrete Ill-Posed Problems by Means of the
L-Curve”. In: SIAM Review 34.4, pages 561–580. doi: 10.1137/1034115.
Johnsen, Magnar Gullikstad (2013). “Real-time determination and monitoring of the
auroral electrojet boundaries”. In: Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate 3,
A28. doi: 10.1051/swsc/2013050.
Laundal, K. M., C. C. Finlay, Nils Olsen, and J. P. Reistad (May 2018). “Solar Wind
and Seasonal Influence on Ionospheric Currents From Swarm and CHAMP Measure-
==PAGE:66==
58
Bibliography
ments”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics 123.5, pages 4402–4429.
doi: 10.1029/2018JA025387.
Laundal, K. M. and J. W. Gjerloev (2014). “What is the appropriate coordinate sys-
tem for magnetometer data when analyzing ionospheric currents?” In: Journal of
Geophysical Research: Space Physics 119.10, pages 8637–8647. issn: 21699402. doi:
10.1002/2014JA020484.
MIST (2018). The Magnetosphere- Ionosphere Science Team (MIST), part of Space
Physics Research Group at Virginia Tech. http://mist.nianet.org/. Accessed:
14-12-2018.
Olsen, Nils (1996). “A new tool for determining ionospheric currents from magnetic
satellite data”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 23.24, pages 3635–3638. doi: 10.
1029/96GL02896.
Olsen, Nils and Claudia Stolle (2012). “Satellite Geomagnetism”. In: Annual Review of
Earth and Planetary Sciences 40.1, pages 441–465. doi: 10.1146/annurev-earth-
042711-105540.
Prölss, Gerd W. (2004). Physics of the Earth’s Space Environment: An Introduction. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-97123-5.
University of Iowa (2018). Dynamics Explorer 1 Photo Gallery. http : / / www - pi .
physics.uiowa.edu/sai/gallery/. Accessed: 17-12-2018.
Untiedt, J. and W. Baumjohann (1993). “Studies of polar current systems using the IMS
Scandinavian magnetometer array”. In: Space Science Reviews 63.3-4, pages 245–390.
doi: 10.1007/BF00750770.
Vennerstrom, S. and T. Moretto (2013). “Monitoring auroral electrojets with satellite
data”. In: Space Weather 11.9, pages 509–519. doi: 10.1002/swe.20090.
WDGC (2018). World Data Center for Geomagnetism, Kyoto University AE index ser-
vice. http://wdc.kugi.kyoto-u.ac.jp/aedir/index.html. Accessed: 18-11-2018.
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Determine regularization
parameter α2
This appendix documents the steps taken to determine the regularization parameter α2
which will be used when performing the damped least squares model regularization. The
choice of α2 will be illustrated for two different times: 10th of January 2018 where data
from all stations were available and the 31st of March 2018 where only data from 11
stations were available. In total 26 and 22 data points respectively were available on
which the inversion will be based. Furthermore, the first example is during disturbed
conditions and the second is during quiet conditions. Preferably the model estimates
should not be oscillating since the ionospheric currents that are being modelled are
believed to be smooth. In general α2 should always be determined again when using a
new physical model, another dataset or number of data. Based on the two examples it
will be tested if it is possible to determine a fixed α2 that is suitable for both situations.
Furthermore, it will be tested if the fixed α2 can be applied in the situation where the
induced currents are accounted for and when they are not. The appendix will include a
summary and the final decision of α2 at the end.
10th of January 2018
As introduced in Section 4.2.5 a common method to estimate α2 is to use a L-curve which
is based on the model parameters obtained using the damped least squares solution
(Aster et al., 2013). When the induced currents are included in the estimated model
parameters the design matrix is the one presented in Section 4.2.2 and when the model
is said to be without induced currents then the design matrix from Section 4.2.3 is used.
The ’knee’ of the L-curves will be determined as the point with the maximum curvature.
The L-curves for these two situations are presented in Figure A.1 and it is seen that the
L-curves have the expected L shape and α2 are determined as the knee of the curve. The
α2 values will then be used to estimate the model parameters and the data predictions
from the model parameters.
α2 = 0.012 was found to be the optimal value for the situation where the induced
currents are included in the model estimates. The model estimates and data predictions
is plotted in Figure A.2. Here it is observed that the model estimates have unwanted
oscillations with α2 = 0.012 which results in a high model complexity and the data
prediction is resultantly good. If α2 is increased it should decrease the model complex-
==PAGE:68==
60
A Determine regularization parameter α2
101
102
103
data misfit norm ||r|| [nT]
102
103
104
model norm ||m|| [kA]
15-Jan-2018 00:30:30 UT
L-curve
2=0.012389
150
200
250
300
350 400 450
data misfit norm ||r|| [nT]
102
103
104
model norm ||m|| [kA]
15-Jan-2018 00:30:30 UT
L-curve
2=0.019356
Figure A.1:
L-curves for the 10th of January 2018 at 18:30:30. Left: With
induced currents.
Right: Without induced currents.
The red dots marks the
location of the α2.
ity which provides a more smooth model estimate. With α2 = 1 there are still small
oscillations in the model estimate and the regularization parameter should be increased
even more. With α = 4 we get a smooth model estimate and a data prediction that is
not completely off, hence this is believed to be a suitable estimate for a situation with
all stations available and the induced currents included in the model estimate. α2 could
be increased even further but this will dampen the modelled currents even further which
can not be justified.
As for the case where the induced currents are not included the regularization param-
eter was found to be α2 = 0.019 and the associated model estimates and data predictions
are presented in Figure A.3. Again it is seen that the model estimates are oscillating
too much and an increase of α2 is necessary. The choice of α2 = 4 is suitable in this sit-
uation too because the model is smooth and the data prediction is good. It is necessary
to remember that the data predictions for the H component will strengthen and the Z
component will decrease in the case where the induced currents are not included which
explains why the data prediction for Z is not that good.
==PAGE:69==
A Determine regularization parameter α2
61
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Current density [A/km]
2=0.012389
2 = 1
2 = 2
2 = 4
2 = 6
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
Field variation [nT]
H observed
Z observed
2 =0.012389
2 = 2
2 = 4
2 = 6
Figure A.2:
Upper: The model estimates with induced currents included from
the α2 found from the L-curve and other suitable values. Lower: The data predic-
tions calculated from the model estimates. The solid lines are the data predictions
of H and the stippled lines are the data predictions of Z.
==PAGE:70==
62
A Determine regularization parameter α2
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-6000
-4000
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000
Current density [A/km]
2=0.019356
2 = 1
2 = 2
2 = 4
2 = 6
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
Field variation [nT]
H observed
Z observed
2 =0.019356
2 = 2
2 = 4
2 = 6
Figure A.3:
Upper: The model estimates without induced currents from the α2
found from the L-curve and other suitable values. Lower: The data predictions
calculated from the model estimates. The solid lines are the data predictions of H
and the stippled lines are the data predictions of Z.
==PAGE:71==
A Determine regularization parameter α2
63
31st of March 2018
This example includes the same results as before: L-curve, model estimates and data
prediction for the situation with and without induced currents. The L-curves are pre-
sented in Figure A.4 where it is seen that the L-curve is reasonable and an α2 = 0.068
can be estimated in the knee of the curve. As for the situation without induced currents
the curve never forms a L and the estimated value for α2 can not be justified.
10-1
100
101
102
data misfit norm ||r|| [nT]
101
102
103
model norm ||m|| [kA]
31-Mar-2018 22:30:30 UT
L-curve
2=0.067524
10-1
100
101
102
data misfit norm ||r|| [nT]
101
102
103
model norm ||m|| [kA]
31-Mar-2018 22:30:30 UT
L-curve
2=9.1462
Figure A.4: L-curves for the 31st of March 2018 at 18:30:30. Left: With induced
currents. Right: Without induced currents. The red dots marks the location of
α2.
The model estimates and data predictions with induced currents are seen in Figure
A.5. With the found α2 = 0.068 the model estimate is oscillating and therefore α2 is
increased. Again a choice of α2 = 4 is found reasonable due to the model estimate
curve and the data prediction. The model estimate is still having oscillations with this
regularization parameter but increasing the parameter even more will remove more of
the signal and this might not support the real physical situation modelled.
The case without induced currents and where α2 = 9.1 are presented in Figure
A.6. With α2 = 9.1 there is an underestimation of the model parameters and the data
prediction is not good. Again α2 = 4 provides a good model and a satisfying data
prediction, specially when it is taken into account that the Z component is weakened.
==PAGE:72==
64
A Determine regularization parameter α2
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
Current density [A/km]
2=0.067524
2 = 1
2 = 2
2 = 4
2 = 6
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Field variation [nT]
H observed
Z observed
2 =0.067524
2 = 2
2 = 4
2 = 6
Figure A.5:
Upper: The model estimates with induced currents included from
the α2 found from the L-curve and other suitable values. Lower: The data predic-
tions calculated from the model estimates. The solid lines are the data predictions
of H and the stippled lines are the data predictions of Z.
==PAGE:73==
A Determine regularization parameter α2
65
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
Current density [A/km]
2=9.1462
2 = 1
2 = 2
2 = 4
2 = 6
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
QD latitude [deg]
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Field variation [nT]
H observed
Z observed
2 =9.1462
2 = 2
2 = 4
2 = 6
Figure A.6:
Upper: The model estimates without induced currents from the α2
found from the L-curve and other suitable values. Lower: The data predictions
calculated from the model estimates. The solid lines are the data predictions of H
and the stippled lines are the data predictions of Z.
==PAGE:74==
66
A Determine regularization parameter α2
Summary
Both examples are underdetermined and it is shown that the L-curve method is not
applicable for this problem. SVD and GCV have been tested and will not be documented
since these methods did not provide anything useful either. The method I ended up using
was visual inspection of the model parameters and the data prediction. It has been found
that α2 = 4 provides a stable model estimation without dampening the model too much
and still manages to predict the data for a changing number of data points and with
and without the induced currents. Furthermore, α2 = 4 works on both disturbed and
quiet times.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX B
Quiet level plots
B.1
H component
==PAGE:76==
68
B Quiet level plots
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, FHB, Number of quiet time intervals = 254
data
fit = 0.0018625t+73.4734
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
220
230
240
250
260
270
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, GHB, Number of quiet time intervals = 133
data
fit = 0.08367t+-312.9125
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
400
410
420
430
440
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, SKT, Number of quiet time intervals = 115
data
fit = 0.088159t+-163.8208
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
170
180
190
200
210
220
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, STF, Number of quiet time intervals = 96
data
fit = 0.1002t+-472.7417
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
685
690
695
700
705
710
715
720
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, ATU, Number of quiet time intervals = 147
data
fit = 0.017593t+586.2362
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
565
570
575
580
585
590
595
600
605
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, GDH, Number of quiet time intervals = 200
data
fit = 0.059145t+186.4655
==PAGE:77==
B.1 H component
69
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
390
400
410
420
430
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, UMQ, Number of quiet time intervals = 227
data
fit = 0.072955t+-80.3393
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
800
810
820
830
840
850
860
870
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, UPN, Number of quiet time intervals = 404
data
fit = 0.10388t+124.872
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, KUV, Number of quiet time intervals = 372
data
fit = 0.0042282t+147.8718
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, SVS, Number of quiet time intervals = 571
data
fit = 0.027864t+-105.7684
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, TAB, Number of quiet time intervals = 577
data
fit = 0.063233t+-301.3541
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H-component, THL, Number of quiet time intervals = 598
data
fit = 0.053687t+-348.9797
Figure B.1: Example of quiet levels determined from one year of data for station
2-13. The data span is 1st of October 2017 to 30th of September 2018.
==PAGE:78==
70
B Quiet level plots
B.2
Z component
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
240
245
250
255
260
265
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, FHB, Number of quiet time intervals = 254
data
fit = -0.025742t+423.3241
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
510
515
520
525
530
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, GHB, Number of quiet time intervals = 133
data
fit = -0.024907t+684.1608
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
410
420
430
440
450
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, SKT, Number of quiet time intervals = 115
data
fit = 0.087516t+-156.5185
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
255
260
265
270
275
280
285
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, STF, Number of quiet time intervals = 96
data
fit = -0.047735t+589.2712
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
365
370
375
380
385
390
395
400
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, ATU, Number of quiet time intervals = 147
data
fit = 0.0042763t+358.6287
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
970
980
990
1000
1010
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, GDH, Number of quiet time intervals = 200
data
fit = -0.014009t+1080.2123
==PAGE:79==
B.2 Z component
71
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
290
300
310
320
330
340
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, UMQ, Number of quiet time intervals = 227
data
fit = -0.033269t+539.9991
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
280
300
320
340
360
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, UPN, Number of quiet time intervals = 404
data
fit = -0.02735t+491.9846
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, KUV, Number of quiet time intervals = 372
data
fit = -0.025983t+546.5732
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, SVS, Number of quiet time intervals = 571
data
fit = -0.041108t+653.604
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, TAB, Number of quiet time intervals = 577
data
fit = -0.033825t+540.9358
Nov-2017
Dec-2017
Feb-2018
Mar-2018
May-2018
Jul-2018
Aug-2018
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z-component, THL, Number of quiet time intervals = 598
data
fit = -0.044468t+606.9844
Figure B.2: Example of quiet levels determined from one year of data for station
2-13. The data span is 1st of October 2017 to 30th of September 2018.
==PAGE:80==
72
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C
Quiet level plots for case
study
C.1
Greenland stations
C.1.1
H component
==PAGE:82==
74
C Quiet level plots for case study
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: FHB
Data
Huber weighted mean = 92.2142
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: GHB
Data
Huber weighted mean = 242.8728
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: SKT
Data
Huber weighted mean = 416.4294
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: STF
Data
Huber weighted mean = 187.2572
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: ATU
Data
Huber weighted mean = 699.5899
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: GDH
Data
Huber weighted mean = 571.3834
==PAGE:83==
C.1 Greenland stations
75
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: UMQ
Data
Huber weighted mean = 395.8766
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
400
500
600
700
800
900
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: UPN
Data
Huber weighted mean = 802.0069
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: KUV
Data
Huber weighted mean = 167.1858
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: SVS
Data
Huber weighted mean = 72.3732
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-50
0
50
100
150
200
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: TAB
Data
Huber weighted mean = 105.6933
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: THL
Data
Huber weighted mean = -5.9503
Figure C.1: Quiet levels for the H component determined for the case study
using a Huber weighted mean of data from the Greenland stations.
==PAGE:84==
76
C Quiet level plots for case study
C.1.2
Z component
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: FHB
Data
Huber weighted mean = 251.9937
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
200
300
400
500
600
700
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: GHB
Data
Huber weighted mean = 512.1527
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: SKT
Data
Huber weighted mean = 410.9504
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: STF
Data
Huber weighted mean = 269.3485
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: ATU
Data
Huber weighted mean = 380.2585
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: GDH
Data
Huber weighted mean = 982.8914
==PAGE:85==
C.1 Greenland stations
77
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: UMQ
Data
Huber weighted mean = 322.4898
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: UPN
Data
Huber weighted mean = 307.0704
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
300
350
400
450
500
550
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: KUV
Data
Huber weighted mean = 373.4011
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
320
340
360
380
400
420
440
460
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: SVS
Data
Huber weighted mean = 377.0287
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
280
300
320
340
360
380
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: TAB
Data
Huber weighted mean = 314.1944
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: THL
Data
Huber weighted mean = 311.5361
Figure C.2: Quiet levels for the Z component determined for the case study using
a Huber weighted mean of data from the Greenland stations.
==PAGE:86==
78
C Quiet level plots for case study
C.2
Antarctica stations
C.2.1
H component
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-1.6
-1.595
-1.59
-1.585
-1.58
-1.575
-1.57
-1.565
Magnetic field variation [nT]
104
H: pg1
Data
Huber weighted mean = -15818.6419
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: pg2
Data
Huber weighted mean = -12.7377
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-700
-600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: pg3
Data
Huber weighted mean = -271.3562
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-1200
-1100
-1000
-900
-800
-700
-600
Magnetic field variation [nT]
H: pg5
Data
Huber weighted mean = -847.8612
Figure C.3: Quiet levels for the H component determined for the case study
using a Huber weighted mean of data from the Antarctica stations.
==PAGE:87==
C.2 Antarctica stations
79
C.2.2
Z component
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
5.175
5.18
5.185
5.19
5.195
5.2
5.205
5.21
5.215
Magnetic field variation [nT]
104
Z: Station = pg1
Data
Huber weighted mean = 51976.2774
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: Station = pg2
Data
Huber weighted mean = 278.8964
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-550
-500
-450
-400
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: Station = pg3
Data
Huber weighted mean = -306.2577
26-Jan
28-Jan
30-Jan
01-Feb
03-Feb
05-Feb
07-Feb
09-Feb
11-Feb
-2000
-1950
-1900
-1850
-1800
-1750
-1700
-1650
-1600
-1550
Magnetic field variation [nT]
Z: Station = pg5
Data
Huber weighted mean = -1755.5783
Figure C.4: Quiet levels for the Z component determined for the case study using
a Huber weighted mean of data from the Antarctica stations.
==PAGE:88==
80
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX D
Magnetic field signature
code
1
function
[ l_lim ,
u_lim , max_H] = oval_boundary_MFS(H, Z ,
t_local , t_UT)
2 %Function
to
determine
the poleward and equatorial
edges
of
the
3 %auroral
oval and the
l a t i t u d i n a l
l o ca t i o n
of
the
polar
e l e c t r o j e t
in
the
4 %Northern Hemisphere
5
6 %%%Input :
7 % H:
vector
of
the
horizontal
f i e l d
8 % Z :
Vector
of
the downward
f i e l d
9 % t_local :
Magnetic
l o c a l
time
10 % t_UT: Time in UT
11
12 %%%Output :
13 % l_lim :
Equatorward boundary index
( lower
edge )
14 % u_lim :
Poleward boundary index
( upper edge )
15 % max_H:
Location
of
the
e l e c t r o j e t ,
where
|H|
i s max between boundaries
16
17 %% Latitudinal
constraint
18 %The e l e c t r o j e t
boundaries
are assumed not to be north
of 80 deg QD lat ,
19 %hence the
l a s t
three
s t a t i o n s
i s
not
considered
in
the
a n a l y s i s
20
21
t = t_local ( : ) ;
22 H = H(1 :end -3) ;
23
Z = Z(1 :end -3) ;
24
25 %% Determine
auroral
boundaries and the
e l e c t r o j e t
lo ca ti on
between
boundaries
26
27 %Quiet
times
28
i f max( abs (H) )<75
29
disp ( [ ' |H|<75 nT at
date :
' ,
datestr (t_UT+730486) ] )
30
l_lim = NaN;
31
u_lim = NaN;
32
i f
t (7)>=12
33
[ ￿, max_H] = max( abs (H) ) ; %Location
of
e l e c t r o j e t
can
s t i l l
be
determined
34
e l s e
35
[ ￿, max_H] = min(H) ;
36
end
==PAGE:90==
82
D Magnetic field signature code
37
38 %Eastward
e l e c t r o j e t
conditions :
39
e l s e i f
t (7) >= 12
40
[ ￿, max_H] = max(H) ;
41
[ ￿,
l_lim ] = max(Z ( 1 :max_H) ) ;
42
[ ￿, u_lim ] = min(Z(max_H:end ) ) ;
43
u_lim = u_lim + max_H- 1 ;
44
45 %Westward
e l e c t r o j e t
conditions :
46
e l s e i f
t (7) < 12
47
[ ￿, max_H] = min(H) ;
48
[ ￿,
l_lim ] = min(Z ( 1 :max_H) ) ;
49
[ ￿, u_lim ] = max(Z(max_H:end ) ) ;
50
u_lim = u_lim + max_H- 1 ;
51
end
52
53 %Substorm
conditions :
54
i f
￿isnan ( l_lim )
55
i f max( abs (H) )>75 && t (7) >18 && (Z( l_lim )<max(Z)
| |
(Z( u_lim )>min(Z) )
)
56
[ ￿, max_H] = min(H) ;
57
[ ￿,
l_lim ] = min(Z ( 1 :max_H) ) ;
58
[ ￿, u_lim ] = max(Z(max_H:end ) ) ;
59
u_lim = u_lim + max_H- 1 ;
60
end
61
end
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX E
Line current model code
E.1
Regularization
1
function
[Gx, Gz, Gx_ind , Gz_ind , m, m_ind ,
index ] = tikhonov_reg (QD_lat ,
H, Z , alpha )
2 %Function
to
c a l c u l a t e
the 0th
order Tikhonov
r e g u l a r i z a t i o n
to
determine
3 %the
ionospheric
current
strengths
4
5 %%%Input :
6 % QD_lat :
Quasi - Dipole
l a t i t u d e
fo r
the
s t a t i o n s
7 % H:
vector
of
the
horizontal
f i e l d
8 % Z :
Vector
of
the downward
f i e l d
9 % alpha :
Regularization
parameter alpha ^2
10
11 %%%Output :
12 % Gx:
Data kernel
matrix
fo r
the H component
13 % Gz :
Data kernel
matrix
fo r
the Z component
14 % Gx_ind :
Data kernel
matrix
for
the H component when the
induced
currents
15 % are removed
16 % Gz_ind :
Data kernel
matrix
for
the H component when the
induced
currents
17 % are removed
18 % m:
Model parameters
( the
ionospheric
currents )
19 % m_ind :
Model parameters
( the
ionospheric
currents ) when the
induced
20 % currents
are removed
21
22
23 %% I n i t i a l i z e
24
x_c = 5 5 : 1 : 8 5 ; %Current
l o c a t i o n s
25
x_s = QD_lat ;
%Quasi - Dipole
l a t i t u d e
26
27 % Set up the data
kernel
matrices
28
h = -115/111;
29
hi = (115+250+250) /111;
30
31
fo r k = 1: length (x_c)
32
dx = x_s
- x_c(k) ;
33
34
%With induced
currents
35
Gx1 ( : , k) = 200/111∗h . / ( dx .^2 + h .^2) ;
36
Gz1 ( : , k) = 200/111∗dx . / ( dx .^2 + h .^2) ;
37
==PAGE:92==
84
E Line current model code
38
%The induced
currents
are removed
39
Gx_ind1 ( : , k) = 200/111∗(h . / ( dx .^2 + h .^2) - hi . / ( dx .^2 + hi .^2) ) ;
40
Gz_ind1 ( : , k) = 200/111∗(dx . / ( dx .^2 + h .^2) -dx . / ( dx .^2 + hi .^2) ) ;
41
end
42
43 %% 0th
order Tikhonov
r e g u l a r i z a t i o n
44
45 %Remove points
with NaN
46
index = ￿isnan (H) ;
47
48
Bx = H( index ) ;
49
Bz = Z( index ) ;
50 B = [Bx; Bz ] ;
51
52
Gx = Gx1( index , : ) ;
53
Gz = Gz1( index , : ) ;
54 G = [Gx; Gz ] ;
55
56
Gx_ind = Gx_ind1( index , : ) ;
57
Gz_ind = Gz_ind1( index , : ) ;
58
G_ind = [ Gx_ind ; Gz_ind ] ;
59
60 %Performing
the
r e g u l a r i z a t i o n
61
I = eye ( length (x_c) ) ;
62
63 m = (G'∗G+alpha ∗I ) \G'∗B;
64
m_ind = (G_ind '∗G_ind+alpha ∗I ) \G_ind '∗B;
E.2
LCM method algorithm
1
function
[ l_lim ,
u_lim , max_H] = lcm_boundary (m,
t_local )
2 %Function
to
find
boundaries
of
the
auroral
oval and the
lo ca ti on
of
the
e l e c t r o j e t s
3 %from the
current
p r o f i l e
determined from the
l i n e
current
method. This
4 %s c r i p t
i s
fo r
the Northern Hemisphere
5
6 %%%Input :
7 % m:
vector
of
the model parameters from the
inverse
solution
8 % t_local :
Magnetic
l o c a l
time
9
10 %%%Output :
11 % l_lim :
Equatorward boundary index
( lower
edge )
12 % u_lim :
Poleward boundary index
( upper edge )
13 % max_H:
Location
of
the
e l e c t r o j e t ,
where
|H|
i s max between boundaries
14
15
16 %% Latitudinal
constraint
17 %The e l e c t r o j e t
boundaries
are assumed not to be north
of 80 deg QD lat ,
==PAGE:93==
E.2 LCM method algorithm
85
18 %hence the
l a s t
6 model parameters
are
not
included
in
t h i s
a n a l y s i s
19
20
t = t_local ( : ) ;
21 MLT = t (7) ; %Magnetic
l o c a l
time
22 m = m(1 :end -6) ;
23
24 %%
25
26
i f MLT > 18 && abs (min(m) )<abs (max(m) ) %Substorm
27
m = m;
28
e l s e i f MLT >= 12 %Eastward
e l e c t r o j e t
29
m = -m;
30
e l s e i f MLT < 12 %Westward
e l e c t r o j e t
31
m = m;
32
end
33
34
[ ￿, max_H] = max(m) ;
35
36 %I d e n t i f y
the
boundaries
37
l_lim = find ( f l i p u d (m( 1 :max_H) ) <100 ,1 ,
' f i r s t ' ) ;
38
l_lim = max_H- l_lim +1;
39
u_lim = find (m(max_H:end ) <100, 1 ,
' f i r s t ' ) ;
40
u_lim = u_lim + max_H- 1 ;
41
42
i f
isempty ( u_lim )
43
u_lim=NaN;
44
end
45
46
i f
isempty ( l_lim )
47
l_lim=NaN;
48
end
49
i f max( abs (m) )<100
50
l_lim = NaN;
51
u_lim = NaN;
52
end
==PAGE:94==
86
==PAGE:95==
DTU Space 
Technical University of Denmark  
 
Elektrovej building 328 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
 
www.space.dtu.dk 
 
 
