==PAGE:1==
Optimisation of ﬂeet size and vessel mix for
the operation and maintenance of oﬀshore
wind farms
Georgia Evangelia Tsoumpa
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Management Engineering
Produktionstorvet,
Building 426,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the last decade, the installed capacity of oﬀshore wind farms has increased rapidly in northern
Europe. Due to high wind resources and space availability, the installation of oﬀshore wind farms
is considered an ever more eﬃcient source of energy and the aim is to increase the installed ca-
pacity even more in the years to come. Such investment though requires careful planning for the
installation, but most importantly for the operational period of the wind farm. The Operation and
Maintenance costs of a wind farm account for almost 25% of its total life-cycle cost. It is, thus,
crucial for the wind farm operator to reduce this cost in order for oﬀshore wind farms to become
a competitive alternative.
One of the largest cost components is the chartering of the vessels and the helicopters used in
the ﬂeet assigned to the O&M processes. Therefore, composing the appropriate ﬂeet is of great
importance for a cost eﬃcient planning.
Within the scope of this study, vessels will only be
considered as part of the ﬂeet. The decision to be made is aﬀected by various uncertain factors,
such as the prevailing weather conditions over the planning horizon, the fault occurrence and the
vessel spot market prices.
The aim of this thesis will be to determine the best conﬁguration of the ﬂeet depending on the
site’s characteristics. This will be achieved by formulating a stochastic model that will provide
the optimal ﬂeet size and vessel mix for a given oﬀshore farm, by taking into consideration the
uncertainties mentioned above. The objective of this model will be to minimise the cost of the
vessel ﬂeet that will be able to execute all (or most) maintenance activities.
The computational study performed considers diﬀerent planning horizons and various wind farm
sizes, while at the same time the model is run for diﬀerent scenario inputs. The model is able to
solve the vast majority of the problem instances within the time limits set and provide acceptable
optimality gaps. An analysis is then performed on the expected value of perfect information and
the value of the stochastic solution, followed by an out of sample testing of the results proposed.
The results of the aforementioned analyses show that the solution proposed by the stochastic model
performs better, on average, compared to the deterministic model. This result proves that this
model can be used as a decision support tool to assist in the decision making process. At the
same time, it is shown that a detailed planning can be performed for larger time horizons without
ignoring the uncertainty of the parameters mentioned above. Finally, considering the extent of this
problem, suggestions for further work are presented at the end of this report.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Management Engineering in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering. The degree specialisation is Management and
Analysis of Operations at the department of Management Engineering.
This thesis has been
written in cooperation with Ørsted and its aim is the development of a decision support tool for
the creation of a more cost eﬀective ﬂeet conﬁguration for the operation and maintenance activities
for oﬀshore wind farms.
Lyngby, 22-February-2019
Georgia Evangelia Tsoumpa
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
To my father Giorgos.
I would ﬁrst like to thank my thesis supervisors, Associate Professor Dario Pacino and Postdoc
Daniela Guericke at DTU. They were always there when I had questions or had to deal with
troubling issues on my work. Michael Berliner Pedersen who provided me extensive personal and
professional guidance and steered me in the right direction whenever he thought I needed it. It
would be impossible for me to keep a clear mind and focus without their help.
I express my
gratitude to all of them, for their patience, valuable input and understanding throughout this
process.
I would like to thank all the kind people at Ørsted for providing me with useful insights and
important data, especially Neil MacDougall and Jørgen Møller Nielsen. Thank you for having me
in the company and allowing me to learn more about the processes and operations of such large
organisation.
I owe a big thank you to my boyfriend Vasilis, for all his love and support. Sharing your per-
sonal opinion and academic knowledge with me, while helping me overcome any drawbacks meant
everything to me. I would not be here without your help.
Τέλος, θα ήθελα να πω ενα τεράστιο ευχαριστώ στην μητέρα μου, Κλειώ, την αδερφή μου, Μαρίνα, τη
θεία μου, Κατερίνα, τον θείο μου, Σταύρο και τον φανταστικό παππού μου Μανώλη. Σας ευχαριστώ
για την υποστήριξη καθ΄όλη τη διάρκεια των σπουδών μου και για το κουράγιο και τη χαρά που μου
δίνετε πάντοτε. Σας αγαπώ. I am also grateful to my friends who have encouraged me in my new
beginnings and who are always there to lift me up when I need them.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Problem Description
6
2.1
General Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
On the maintenance of oﬀshore wind farms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Preventive maintenance activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Corrective maintenance activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Lead time for corrective activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Logistics Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Vessel accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Vessel chartering strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Weather conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.2
Fault Occurrences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.3
Vessel spot prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Proposed solution method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Mathematical Model
16
3.1
Data input and handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Time-buckets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
48-hour time buckets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.3
Time-window for PM activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Mathematical Model Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Computational Study
25
4.1
Scenario generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.1
Fault scenarios’ generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.2
Fault scenarios’ reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
4.1.3
Weather scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.4
Vessel spot market price scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Input Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.1
KPIs proposed for the evaluation of the solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.2
Results and analysis of the base case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Business Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4.1
Vessel v1.5 selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4.2
Second stage decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4.3
Spot market prices and uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4.4
Projection for future improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.5
Diﬀerent wind farm sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.6
1-day time-bucket
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
The value of information and the stochastic solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5.1
Expected Value of Perfect Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5.2
Value of the stochastic solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5.3
Determining the expected value of the uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5.4
Value of stochastic program implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5.5
Solution Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.5.6
Model Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5.7
Model Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Conclusions and future work
49
5.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A Complete model
52
B Additional ﬁgures
55
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter presents the motivation behind this study, along with an overview of the research to
date in the ﬁeld of ﬂeet size and mix problems.
1.1
Motivation
In the last decade, the installed capacity of oﬀshore wind farms has increased rapidly in northern
Europe and the goals set for the future sound equally promising.
The aim is to increase the
power produced by renewable energy sources. More speciﬁcally, the European Commission has
created a set of binding legislation to ensure the EU meets its climate and energy targets for the
coming years. Speciﬁc goals of how the energy map should look like in the coming decades are set.
Based on the goal for 2020, also known as 20-20-20, it is expected, among others, that 20% of the
energy produced in EU is a product of renewable energy sources. This target is raised to 27% for
2030 [European Commission, 2009]. In order for the aforementioned targets to be reached, energy
producers have to invest in a cost eﬃcient way in renewable energy sources.
Due to high wind resources and space availability, oﬀshore wind energy is considered an ever more
eﬃcient source of energy, with the installation of oﬀshore wind farms continuously moving further
from shore into deeper waters, because of the better prevailing weather conditions. The oﬀshore
wind power installed by 2025 is expected to be around 40GW, from which 10GW are far-oﬀshore at
a distance greater than 70km [Katsouris and Savenije, 2017], as illustrated in Figure 1.1. However,
this investment comes with a high cost, with its largest components being the installation process
cost and the cost of acquiring and transporting the necessary materials.
One of the largest elements of the life-cycle cost, following the initial investment for the installation
of the wind farm, is the operation and maintenance (O&M) cost, even though oﬀshore wind farms
are operated at very low marginal cost [Gundegjerde et al., 2015]. The aforementioned O&M cost
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
Figure 1.1: Cumulative European oﬀshore wind energy capacity installed yearly [Katsouris and
Savenije, 2017].
is found to be as much as 20-25% of the total life-cycle cost of the oﬀshore wind turbines. This is
due to the fact that the turbines installed oﬀshore are more sensitive to faults compared to their
onshore counterpart, due to the rough environment they are operating in. This inevitably aﬀects
the levelised cost of energy largely over the lifetime of the oﬀshore wind farm. For oﬀshore wind
farms to become a competitive alternative to conventional power producers, a reduction of that
cost is considered crucial.
For the O&M planning of oﬀshore wind farms, diﬀerent types of vessels and helicopters are used
depending, among others, on the distance from the shore, the type of the fault to be repaired and
the prevailing weather conditions in the area. The availability and price of the chartering contracts
found in the market also have a large impact on the decision making process regarding the ﬂeet
composition. In the scope of this project though, only vessels will be considered in the decision
process, since weather data, such as visibility and daylight, are more diﬃcult to obtain and are,
thus, considered beyond the scope of this thesis.
A selection of the appropriate ﬂeet size and vessel mix is of great importance for an eﬀective plan-
ning, since the cost of the vessels and the infrastructure used to support such activities contributes
highly to the cost of the operational phase of a wind farm [Stålhane et al., 2016]. Therefore, in
order to minimise this cost, it is essential to maintain an optimal, or near optimal, ﬂeet.
The ﬂeet assigned to the O&M of an oﬀshore wind farm should be able to perform all of the
maintenance activities and react instantly to any faults that might cause the halt of a turbine. It
can be easily understood that a non functioning turbine imposes a loss to the yield of the wind
farm. This loss carries a cost of lost opportunity by the power not produced during the downtime
of the turbine. It is therefore of utmost importance for the operator of the wind farm to be able
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Literature Review
3
to attend to any turbine stoppage in a fast and eﬀective way in order to reduce the downtime
and, subsequently, keep the yield of the wind farm on a high level. This requires a high response
time which can only be achieved by an eﬃciently built vessel ﬂeet and a carefully planned service
schedule.
The decision regarding the ﬂeet size and mix for the O&M of an oﬀshore wind farm is immediately
aﬀected by all the parameters mentioned previously. As with most strategic problems, the initial
conﬁguration will have to perform properly over the planning horizon. This requires that correct
predictions regarding the future values of the parameters aﬀecting the conﬁguration of the ﬂeet are
made. Predicting such volatile values like the weather conditions or the market state can be proven
to be a complex process. This is why diﬀerent possible outcomes must be taken into consideration
when building such a decision tool, allowing for a higher degree of ﬂexibility in the ﬁnal decision.
The aim of this thesis will be to determine the best conﬁguration of the ﬂeet depending on the
site’s characteristics. This will be achieved by formulating a mathematical model that will provide
the optimal ﬂeet size and vessel mix for a given oﬀshore farm. This model will be a stochastic
model that will initially take into consideration the weather uncertainty, which is the major factor
that limits the site accessibility and therefore causes delays in the repair of the turbines aﬀected by
faults. Wind speed, wave heights and other weather-related factors determine whether an operation
can be executed or not, while, at the same time, wind speed inﬂuences the power production of
the wind farm.
Currently most companies use simulation tools to deﬁne and analyse the cost of the O&M activities,
with the optimisation models having a limited role in the decision making process [Halvorsen-Weare
et al., 2013]. The aim is to see whether any results can be obtained after solving a stochastic
optimisation model for such a large scale problem.
1.2
Literature Review
The literature relevant to the use of stochastic programming for addressing the ﬂeet size and mix
problem is presented in this section.
Oﬀshore wind is a relatively new industry which has been rapidly expanding within the last decade.
The research regarding the FSMP used for the operation and maintenance of an oﬀshore wind farm
is mostly inspired from similar problems faced in the gas and oil industry. The use of mathematical
models to support the decision making process in this ﬁeld had been limited, while the majority
of the models presented did not take into consideration the uncertainties involved. The current
study will attempt to examine the use of a stochastic model for the FSMP.
A deterministic ﬂeet size and mix problem for the operation and maintenance activities of an
oﬀshore wind farm is presented in [Halvorsen-Weare et al., 2013]. Due to the deterministic nature
of the model all uncertain parameters, such as the fault occurrences, the weather and the electricity
price, are considered known. The objective of the model formulated is to execute all or most of
the activities in the lowest cost. The planning horizon considered in the model is one year split in
24-hour periods. The model formulated manages to solve various problem instances in a relatively
good time. These instances include 1-3 wind farms with a total of 20-600 wind turbines. The
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
authors’ conclusion is that the deterministic model that has been formulated formulated can be
used to address the problem in reality, since it can be run for many diﬀerent realisations of the
known uncertainties. If the change observed in the results is marginal, then the solution can be
considered optimal and applicable to a real-life instance. Nevertheless, the need for a stochastic
modelling approach is expressed in the conclusions of the report.
Following the conclusions of their previous research ([Halvorsen-Weare et al., 2013]), the authors
extended the problem to its stochastic equivalent in [Gundegjerde et al., 2015]. A three-stage
stochastic programming model is proposed, considering uncertainties regarding the vessel spot
market prices, wind turbine failures, weather conditions and the electricity price. To the author’s
knowledge this research is the ﬁrst attempt to include stochastic modelling to the ﬂeet size and
mix problem for the O&M of an oﬀshore wind farm. The objective remains the same as in the
deterministic model presented in their previous paper.
Diﬀerent vessel and damage types are
considered in this model implementation, while at the same time decisions regarding the onshore
bases are taken. The ﬁrst and second stage decisions are regarding the ﬂeet size and mix, whereas
in the last stage the decisions are being utilised based on the scenarios. The planning horizon
considered in this model is once again 1 year divided into 360 periods. The model is tested for up
to 36 scenarios and the maximum amount of turbines considered is 400.
In their paper, [Dalgic et al., 2015] present a complete methodology for tackling both the strategic
and operational part of the O&M of an oﬀshore wind farm. In their research they developed a
time domain Monte-Carlo simulation approach, in which analysis of environmental conditions (wind
speed, wave height and wave period), operational analysis of transportation systems, investigation
of failures (type and frequency) and simulation of repairs is included. The aim of the methodology
developed in this paper is the cost-eﬃcient operation of the ﬂeet assigned to the O&M of an oﬀshore
wind farm, in order to support the daily maintenance activities, while at the same time keep the
production at high levels. A large number of simulations were run in order to cover all possible
future outcomes of the uncertainties considered.
If the average results converge to a common
approach then this is the ﬁnal decision extracted, while the variability across simulations provides
a measure of uncertainty.
The vessel ﬂeet size and mix problem is also presented in [Stålhane et al., 2016] as a long term
planning problem. A two-stage stochastic model is proposed in this research with the uncertainties
considering the weather conditions and wind turbine failures. The objective of the model is to
determine the optimal ﬂeet of O&M vessels to support activities at one or more oﬀshore wind
farms. The whole 25 year lifespan of the oﬀshore wind farm is taken into consideration, with a
total of 100 periods being considered, each with a duration of 3 months. It is the only model
found when reviewing the related literature that assumes that all the activities scheduled need to
be performed, while most of the models dealing with this problem allow for minor modiﬁcations.
The authors of this model present a very interesting approach to the downtime calculation over
the wind farm’s lifetime. A total of 50 scenarios and up to 300 turbines were tested in this model,
with the authors suggesting that their model indicates that the larger the wind farm grows, the less
important the uncertainties become, reducing, in such a way, the value of the stochastic solution.
The ﬂeet composition problem is also addressed in [Gutierrez-Alcoba et al., 2017], where a stochas-
tic two-stage model is suggested. The ﬁrst stage of the model represents the tactical part of the
decision making process, where the amount of vessels acquired is decided, while the second part
represents the operational part of the O&M process and the ﬂeet is used for the optimisation of the
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Literature Review
5
schedule, once the uncertainties are realised. Uncertainties are considered regarding the weather
conditions and the wind turbine failure occurrences, even though it is assumed that the weather
conditions do not limit the accessibility to the wind farm under discussion. This model considers
125 wind turbines and a planning horizon of one year, where every day consists of two 12-hour
shifts. The model is tested for 1-3 scenarios and 90-365 periods in the planning horizon. The
model formulated performs poorly for larger planning horizons for the full set of scenarios, while a
question, regarding the way in which the model will perform more eﬃciently with a larger amount
of scenarios, is set as future work.
An approach using metaheuristics for the FSMP is presented in [Halvorsen-Weare et al., 2017]. In
this paper a metaheuristic solution method is introduced, aiming at determining a cost-eﬃcient ves-
sel ﬂeet for the support of the maintenance tasks at an oﬀshore wind farm. The method formulated
takes into consideration the uncertainty of the weather conditions and the fault occurrences, while
a simulation evaluates all possible solutions. The metaheuristic solution method that this paper
proposes is based on the two-stage stochastic programming model described in [Halvorsen-Weare
et al., 2016]. Firstly, it constructs an initial feasible solution for the problem and then improves
it by performing a version of tabu search. A computational study showed that the methodology
proposed can generate cost-eﬃcient vessel ﬂeet compositions with a small computational time.
From the previous research presented in regards to this problem, the need to use uncertainty infor-
mation in the models formulated is evident. The uncertainties that lie in these problems are very
large and can not be ignored during the decision making process. Formulating a stochastic model,
though, can be a hard process, since such problems are more diﬃcult to formulate and structure
compared to deterministic optimisation models. Their complexity increases by the amount of sce-
narios considered, while at the same time the precision of the results often requires a high number
of scenarios. Nevertheless, this thesis aims to formulate a stochastic optimisation model that will
be able to tackle the FSM problem, taking into consideration most of the parameters aﬀecting the
decision to be taken.
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Problem Description
This chapter deﬁnes the problem that this project is aiming to address. A detailed description
of the O&M processes considered in this thesis is presented, together with the challenges faced
during the O&M planning. Furthermore, the uncertainties that the decision maker has to face and
that are considered within the scope of this thesis, are described. Finally, the method proposed to
address this problem is presented in mathematical notation.
2.1
General Overview
The problem this thesis is aiming to address is a strategic problem, where a decision regarding the
vessel ﬂeet size and mix for the O&M of an oﬀshore wind farm needs to be taken. This decision is
inﬂuenced by the values of certain parameters like the size of the wind farm, the prevailing weather
conditions and the operator’s O&M strategy, i.e. the way the yearly service is performed and the
way faults are dealt with. The priorities set during the O&M planning and how tasks are being
organised play a decisive role in the ﬂeet composition.
The vessel ﬂeet size and mix problem (FSMP) is a complex problem to be addressed, considering
the variety of options provided by the market, such as diﬀerent vessel types and contracts of various
lease durations. The O&M processes contribute to almost 25% of the total life-cycle cost of an
oﬀshore wind farm, with the cost of vessels being an important component of the total O&M cost.
It is, therefore, of great importance to ﬁnd cost-eﬃcient ways of conﬁguring and maintaining a
vessel ﬂeet that will perform the preventive and corrective maintenance activities eﬀectively at a
as low as possible cost.
The objective of the model to be built is to decide the number and type of vessels required to
execute all, or most of, the maintenance activities of an oﬀshore wind farm over a given planning
horizon. This decision will be made taking into consideration the total cost of these activities and
==PAGE:15==
2.2 On the maintenance of oﬀshore wind farms
7
the leasing of the vessels.
2.2
On the maintenance of oﬀshore wind farms
An understanding of all tasks performed at a wind farm is considered important for the reader. In
this section all types of signiﬁcant activities performed at wind farm are described in detail.
The maintenance activities to be performed in a wind farm can be split into two main groups:
Preventive maintenance activities, (PM) and corrective maintenance activities, (CM). The driving
force behind any type of O&M strategy is the installed turbine’s type. Let us assume two diﬀerent
oﬀshore turbine technologies, SWT 3.6 (G4) and SWT 6.0 (D6).
They are two characteristic
examples of two diﬀerent technologies used in wind turbine manufacturing, the main diﬀerence
between them being that the ﬁrst one has a gearbox while the second one uses a direct drive
technology. This diﬀerence in design has a large impact on the maintenance needs of these turbine
types. Direct drive technology has been praised for its design, which is less complex than gearbox
technology, leading to easier operations and maintenance. At the same time, the multiple wheels
and bearings in a gearbox suﬀer tremendous stress because of wind turbulence and any defect in a
single component can bring the turbine to a halt. This makes the gearbox the highest-maintenance
part of a turbine. Gearboxes in oﬀshore turbines, which face higher wind speeds, are even more
vulnerable than those in onshore turbines. It is therefore obvious that diﬀerent turbine types have
diﬀerent maintenance needs and call for diﬀerent maintenance strategies.
2.2.1
Preventive maintenance activities
Preventive maintenance (PM) activities are performed in order to prolong the lifetime of the
turbine as a whole or of its components and to prevent possible failures that might occur otherwise
[Besnard et al., 2009] [Gundegjerde et al., 2015]. Such operations include visual inspections, oil
sampling, re-tightening of the bolts and changes of consumables, such as greasing, lubrication and
oil ﬁlters. The frequency of the PM activities depends on the wind farm operator’s strategy and
the type of the wind turbines installed.
Preventive maintenance is divided into to main categories [Obdam et al., 2008]:
• Calendar based maintenance, based on ﬁxed time intervals, or a ﬁxed number of operating
hours;
• Condition based maintenance, based on the actual health of the system.
Within the scope of this thesis it is assumed that these two categories are combined in one and are
therefore considered the same.
==PAGE:16==
8
Problem Description
2.2.2
Corrective maintenance activities
Corrective maintenance (CM) activities are performed after failures occur. Their aim is to restore
a component to the pre-failure state, meaning it will be able to perform its required functions
[Besnard et al., 2013]. A breakdown can happen for a number of diﬀerent reasons and the fre-
quency at which they happen will vary depending on the turbine manufacturer and model and the
environment in which they are installed. Corrective maintenance is also referred to as unscheduled
service.
A failure occurrence will lead to the stoppage of a turbine’s operation until the fault has been
repaired. This stoppage will impose a cost of lost opportunity which originates from the loss of
revenue from electricity production, lost due to the fault. This is why the ﬂeet assigned to the
O&M should be designed keeping in mind the fast response time needed to keep the downtime to
the minimum level possible.
Within the framework of this thesis only minor repairs and technical problems are considered,
which do not require heavy equipment transport or heavy crane operations. This type of repairs
include operations, such as electrical system repairs, electronic control, sensor and hydraulic system
repairs [Lazakis et al., 2013]. Activities that require lifting capacity or the use of jack-up vessels,
such as gear box or blade failures, are not considered since their planning is not a part of the initial
daily conﬁguration. Extra vessels are chartered in when major components fail, meaning that
these failures are handled almost independently of the daily O&M planning. In reality though,
technicians from the sites are used during these failure repairs, meaning that these actions are
not entirely independent. This exchange of technicians is considered out of scope for this thesis
and is therefore ignored, leading to the assumption that major and minor component repairs and
replacements can be perfectly separated.
2.2.3
Lead time for corrective activities
As seen in Figure 2.1, the lead time of a corrective maintenance activity can be split into three
diﬀerent components. Firstly, the time spent in logistics, which in many cases will be the largest
component, since it represents the time needed to order or ﬁnd and transport all the components
necessary, so that the repair activities can begin. Secondly, the time spent waiting for the right
weather conditions and vessel availability that will allow the dispatching of a vessel. The primary
factors that inﬂuence the value of this component are the vessel speciﬁcations, e.g. the safety limit
for the wave height under which the vessels can travel, and the amount of vessels available in the
ﬂeet when the fault occurs. The last component is the travel and repair time, which are dependent
on the distance of the oﬀshore wind farm from shore, the vessel speed and the fault type, i.e. time
needed to repair.
Within the scope of this thesis the downtime caused by the time spent in the logistics is not
accounted for. It is assumed that any spare parts and equipment needed to repair a damage are
readily available at the onshore base of the wind farm. Therefore, the downtime calculated in this
model only includes the time that passes waiting for a weather window that will allow access to
the wind farm and for an available vessel to attend to the fault.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Logistics Planning
9
Figure 2.1: Downtime components and factors inﬂuencing them [Gundegjerde and Halvorsen,
2012].
2.3
Logistics Planning
All repair activities, except from remote resets, require an access system than can bring technicians
on the wind turbine structure. When considering wind farms that are close to shore this mean is
usually a medium-sized vessel, such as crew transfer vessels (CTVs), while for wind farms further
oﬀshore, helicopters and larger vessels with the ability to stay oﬀshore for more than one day, like
service operation vessels (SOVs), are required.
Within the framework of this thesis the only vessel types that will be considered are CTVs since in
the case of minor repairs, such as the ones considered in this instance, vessels for minor component
maintenance are utilised in the operations [Lazakis et al., 2013].
CTVs are proven to be the
workforce of the oﬀshore industry, because they are a cost eﬃcient option for near shore wind
farms. They have emerged as a specialist area, for transporting wind farm technicians and other
personnel out to site on a daily basis.
They are usually monohulls or aluminium catamarans
accommodating up to 12 passengers [4COﬀshore, 2017].
2.3.1
Vessel accessibility
Once a CTV reaches the turbine the technicians need to disembark and access the turbine. To
do so safely, the vessel needs to be stabilised against the turbine. This is achieved by creating
frictional contact between the vessel’s specially shaped bow with fender and the foundation in
order to eliminate vessel’s movements, commonly known as the ’bump and jump’ method. Along
with the technicians, vessels carry the spare parts and the equipment necessary to operate on the
turbine. The spare parts are lifted to the turbine by using the built-in davit crane [Katsouris and
Savenije, 2017]. This process increases the fuel consumption compared to the regular travelling
time of the vessel but this extra cost is not considered in the model.
At this point it should be noted that the key characteristic of a vessel is the accessibility it provides.
Accessibility is primarily described by the signiﬁcant wave height. Other relevant environmental
==PAGE:18==
10
Problem Description
Jan-Mar
Apr-Jun
Jul-Sep
Oct-Dec
Seasons (-)
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Accessibility (hours)
v1.3
v1.5
v1.8
Figure 2.2: Box plots of the seasonal accessibility of the vessels. The box extends from the lower
(Q25) to upper (Q75) quartile values of the data, with a line at the median. The lower
whisker extends to (Q1 - 1.5·IQRa) and the upper whisker extends to (Q3 + 1.5· IQR),
to show the range of the data. The outliers are depicted with ’x’.
ainterquartile range = Q75-Q25
conditions, like wind speed and direction, wave direction and period and current speed and direction
also aﬀect the accessibility of the vessel to the wind farm. For example, if the waves are directed
in a way that the vessel is struck on its sides it can easily be assumed that they will impact the
stability of the vessel, even at lower wave heights. For the sake of simplicity these added factors
are ignored when calculating the vessel accessibility in the model and only the wave height is
considered.
The CTVs considered in this study are categorised by their operational limits on wave height.
After consulting experts in the ﬁeld, it is decided that three types of vessels will be taken into
consideration: vessel type 1 (v1.3) with a wave height limitation of 1.3m, vessel type 2 (v1.5) with
a wave height limitation of 1.5m and vessel type 3 (v1.8) with a wave height limitation of 1.8m,
all of which have an accommodating capacity of 12 passengers. This nomenclature will be used
further in this report when referring to the diﬀerent vessel types. It is worth mentioning that the
wave limits mentioned above are nominal values given by the manufacturers of the vessels. The
analysis performed is based on the assumption that these nominal values are also correct and that
these vessels are in the market long enough for this assumption to be deducted.
It is considered interesting to see how these limitations aﬀect the accessibility of the vessels to the
wind farm under discussion. Vessels operate on 12-hour shifts on a daily basis from 06:00 to 18:00
and, in order to access the wind farm and operate there, the wave height needs to be below the
operational limit for the whole duration of the shift.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Logistics Planning
11
Realistic hourly values of wind speed and wave height are generated, covering a span of 15 years
between 1997-2011.
The data are then split based on seasons and the average days of vessel
accessibility are calculated and presented in Figure 2.2 based on 12-hour shifts. In this case, only
complete 12-hour shifts are considered, even though it could be useful to allow for a later start or
an earlier ﬁnish to a shift, when weather conditions allow. For example, if the wave height is not
exceeding the limit after 07:00 then the shift should be allowed to start and continue for 11 hours.
The accessibility increase mentioned above is calculated, on a yearly basis, for all the years for which
a weather data set is provided and the results are shown in Figure 2.3 where shifts lasting less
than 12h are allowed. The maximum possible daily shift duration is used to calculate the increased
accessibility when considering shorter shifts. The lower limit for the allowed shift duration is set
to be 8 hours; due to the travelling time needed between the wind farm and the shore it would not
be eﬃcient if shorter shifts were allowed.
The average value of the yearly accessibility to the wind farm with any vessel is calculated as a
percentage of the total working hours (travelling and repairing) to the maximum working hours if
there was no bound from the weather conditions. The values calculated for both shift possibilities
are presented in Table 2.1.
v1.3
v1.5
v1.8
Vessel type
2250
2500
2750
3000
3250
3500
3750
Accessibility (hours)
12h
8-12h
Figure 2.3: Box plots of the yearly accessibility of the vessels based on the shift duration. The
box extends from the lower (Q25) to upper (Q75) quartile values of the data, with
each line denoting the median. The lower whisker extends to (Q1 - 1.5·IQR) and
the upper whisker extends to (Q3 + 1.5· IQR), to show the range of the data. The
outliers are depicted with ’x’.
2.3.2
Vessel chartering strategies
A wide range of power options is available when building the ﬂeet for the O&M of an oﬀshore
wind farm. In most of the cases, vessels are leased under long term contracts, a strategy that
==PAGE:20==
12
Problem Description
Vessel Type
Wave Height (m)
Accessibility (12h)
Accessibility (8-12h)
v1.3
1.3
57.64%
64.25%
v1.5
1.5
64.32%
70.59%
v1.8
1.8
73.22%
78.78%
Table 2.1: Vessel type accessibility percentage to the oﬀshore wind farm on a yearly basis, for
various shift durations.
is risk averse. The wind farm operators usually try to avoid chartering in short term leases, but
this strategy is not always easy to follow, since there are cases where extra campaign vessels are
necessary for performing all the activities. There is, therefore, the possibility of chartering in a
vessel on a short term contract or, in extreme cases, even on daily contracts on the spot market,
even though this strategy is considered risky and costly.
All types of leases have potential advantages and disadvantages. Some of them are most eﬀec-
tive from the daily chartering cost perspective, while other contract types, which might be more
expensive, allow for higher ﬂeet ﬂexibility. After consulting experts in the ﬁeld, it is estimated
that the daily cost of the vessel is decreased by 25% every time the duration of the contract is
doubled. Another factor that aﬀects the price is the number of vessels that are meant to be leased.
Following the wholesale’s logic, the more vessels being chartered in, the cheaper the daily cost will
be for the operator. This factor can not be considered though in the model formulated, but it is
mentioned for the sake of thoroughness. It should also be noted that in this problem there is no
consideration regarding the depreciation of the vessel price. This cost is included in the leasing
contract and does not aﬀect the operator.
The balance between the advantages and disadvantages is not distinct and this is why various
decision making systems have been created to help the operators make optimal, or close to optimal,
decisions.
2.4
Uncertainties
Addressing the optimal vessel ﬂeet size and mix problem for the O&M of an oﬀshore wind farm
is complex, since it is a problem highly dependent on uncertain factors. Similar to most real-life
problems, the optimal decision is aﬀected by the values of parameters that can not be determined
in advance.
The uncertainty factors considered in this case are the prevailing weather conditions in the oﬀshore
wind farm area, the fault occurrences and the vessel spot market prices. Firstly, weather conditions,
such as the wind speed and wave height, impact various parameters, like the wind production and
the accessibility to the wind farm, which are key driving factors of the decision regarding the ﬂeet
conﬁguration. Secondly, the fault occurrences form the ’demand’ of the model in terms of how
frequently the ﬂeet should be able to respond to faults. Finally, the vessel spot market prices
ﬂuctuate depending on the season, the vessel type and contract type, thus aﬀecting when the
decision should be made.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Uncertainties
13
Most of the stochastic models built for this problem also consider the electricity price as an uncer-
tainty. Within the framework of this thesis, though, the electricity price considered is the subsidy
value, since the aim is to disconnect the decision from the trading aspect of the wind industry. A
counterargument to this would be the post-subsidy period of the wind farm, where the operator is
paid for the produced energy with the electricity market price. In this case a power purchase agree-
ment (PPA), with a ﬁxed electricity price, can be signed between the operator and a buyer. The
risk of the uncertain electricity price, under such an agreement, is removed and a ﬁxed electricity
price can again be considered.
2.4.1
Weather conditions
The prevailing weather conditions in the area play a key role when deciding the optimal vessel
ﬂeet size. The values of the wind speed and wave height aﬀect the accessibility to the wind farm,
since all vessels must operate within their safety limits. Furthermore, the wind speed value aﬀects
the power production of the wind farm. It is assumed that the wind turbines have a rated power
of 3.6 MW. More advanced and higher performing turbines have entered the market since the
SWT 3.6 launching, but at the same time almost a thousand turbines of this type are installed,
which characterises them as the ﬂagship of the oﬀshore wind industry, thus justifying their use in
the model.
The relationship between the power production and the wind speed is shown in Figure 2.4, where
an approximation of the normalised power curve of this wind turbine type is presented. Power is
generated from a turbine after the wind speed crosses the cut-in threshold of 3ms−1 for the turbine
under discussion and no power is generated after the safety limit of the cut-out speed, 25ms−1, is
exceeded. Rated power is generated within the interval of rated and cut-out wind speed.
For the sake of completeness, it should be pointed out that the wind direction is not taken into
consideration when working with the wind speed values. This, combined with the fact that the
layout of the wind farm is not considered either, leads to the assumption that the wake eﬀects
are not studied in the model and therefore the normalised power production, Pp, of the wind
turbines at any given period, p, is assumed identical for all NT turbines. Therefore, the total
power production, PFp, of the wind farm, at any given period, is calculated by:
PFp = NT · Pp · Pnom
p ∈P
(2.1)
where Pnom is the nominal power of the wind turbines considered.
2.4.2
Fault Occurrences
The number and timing of the fault occurrences of an oﬀshore wind farm is highly uncertain. A
vessel ﬂeet dedicated to the O&M of an oﬀshore wind farm should be designed in such a way that
a reasonable availability of the wind farm is guaranteed. The ﬂeet should be ﬂexible and able to
respond to faults promptly, no matter when they happen, while, at the same time, adhering to the
service schedule of the wind farm.
==PAGE:22==
14
Problem Description
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Wind Speed (m/s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalised power (-)
Steady wind power curve
Figure 2.4: Power curve of the Siemens 3.6MW wind turbine [Woodmead Energy Services, 2011].
When a fault occurs in a turbine an alarm is raised notifying the wind farm operator that a
component is not functioning properly; such alarms might regard temperature rises or increased
pressure on hydraulic systems. The usual strategy followed by the operators is to initially try
to reset the turbine remotely once the alarm is raised. This action prevents the O&M teams of
unnecessary visits to the wind farms, since a large number of the alarms raised come as a result
of malfunctioning measurements of the instruments installed. These faults are not accounted for,
because no trip to the wind turbine is needed, when a reset can be performed remotely. After a
certain amount of consecutive remotely reset alarms, the operators can decide to send a team to
inspect a persisting fault.
2.4.3
Vessel spot prices
The cost of a leasing contract depends on the vessel spot market prices at the time of contracting.
This price is dependent on the vessel type to be leased, the duration of the contract and the
amount of vessels to be leased by the operator. Speciﬁc vessel types can be chartered in close to
the maintenance execution period and the price the operator will have to pay if deciding to lease
a vessel at this stage is the spot market price, which is known to be uncertain.
The decision that needs to be made is whether all vessels should be chartered in in advance or
whether it is proﬁtable to wait until a later stage, with a combination of the above strategies being
certainly allowed. Depending on the market behaviour -decrease or increase of the prices- any
decision can be proven proﬁtable [Gundegjerde and Halvorsen, 2012].
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Proposed solution method
15
2.5
Proposed solution method
The method chosen to address this problem is a two-stage stochastic modelling program. A de-
scription of the general formulation of such problems follows.
The ﬁrst stage of the problem consists of a decision making process, where there is no complete
information provided for the parameters considered uncertain. During this stage, decisions need to
be taken before complete knowledge of the parameters is available. These decisions apply to every
scenario used for the model implementation and are called ﬁrst stage decisions, usually denoted x.
In this problem, these decisions are the initial conﬁguration of the ﬂeet before any uncertainty is
revealed.
At the second stage, all relevant information regarding the uncertain parameters, called ξ, is
realised.
At this stage, corrective actions are applied to every scenario realisation separately.
These actions are the second stage decision variables and are usually called y. The second stage
variables in this problem are the extra vessels chartered in in every scenario after the realisation
of the uncertain parameters.
The deterministic equivalent of a two-stage stochastic model is the most commonly used in practical
applications and it is described below :
min z = cT x +
X
ω∈Ω
πωq(ω)T y(ω)
s.t.
Ax = b
T(ω)x + W(ω)y(ω) = h(ω)
∀ω ∈Ω
x ≥0
y(ω) ≥0
∀ω ∈Ω
where,
x
: the ﬁrst stage decision variables;
y
: the second stage decision variables;
ω
: the ﬁnite set of uncertainty scenarios;
πω
: the probability of scenario ω;
T, W, h, q
: random vectors of uncertain data.
The model complexity is expected to increase as the amount of scenarios increase, but this for-
mulation allows for the uncertainty information to be used in the decision making process. All
possible outcomes with their respective probabilities are considered when solving the deterministic
equivalent problem.
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3
Mathematical Model
In this chapter the mathematical model formulated will be presented and explained. Firstly, the
reasoning behind the choice of the period duration is presented, while the sets, parameters and
variables necessary to formulate the model are analysed afterwards, along with the presentation of
the mathematical formulation.
3.1
Data input and handling
In this section the necessary information regarding the division of the periods in the model is
presented. Due to computational issues, since the model scales proportionally to the amount of
periods, this is not a straightforward decision. The rationale behind the ﬁnal choice is presented
below.
3.1.1
Time-buckets
The planning horizon chosen for the base case of the model is 2 years, due to the fact that the
majority of the contracts for vessel chartering have a duration of 2 years. On most of the previous
works addressing the same or similar problems, the planning horizon is split into a certain amount
of periods called time-buckets and are deﬁned as a time increment or interval used in planning,
scheduling, and reporting. Based on the relevant literature, the planning horizon is usually split
into 24-hour periods, which in the case of a 2-year planning horizon, translates to 730 periods. A
deterministic model would probably be able to handle such values without any diﬃculties, but the
stochastic nature of the model implemented within the framework of this thesis means that it scales
much faster than a deterministic one. Every increase on the amount of scenarios translates to the
creation of another set of second stage variables and an analogous increase in the constraints.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Data input and handling
17
For the above reason, the duration of each time-bucket is increased, to reduce the amount of periods
used as input to the model, while at the same time allowing for correct day-to-day calculations. By
achieving a good balance between size and detail, the model becomes more ﬂexible to extensions,
e.g. longer planning horizons, and extra constraints.
Initially, the time horizon is split into time-buckets of 168 hours, i.e. 1 week. This choice, even
though greatly simplifying the model, does not allow for accurate calculations of the crucial values
that need to be inspected on a daily basis, the most signiﬁcant being the downtime caused by
the wind turbine failures. In order to calculate this value, information like the amount of faults
and corrections performed on a daily level need to be known. Therefore, considering weekly time-
buckets does not allow for accurate calculations. This is due to the fact that, even though the
cumulative values of crucial data, such as amount of faults, days of access, failures corrected, etc.,
might be known, the day-to-day distribution of these values will remain unknown, making the
calculation of the downtime almost impossible.
As a result, it is deemed necessary to ﬁnd a new way of achieving the periods’ reduction. The idea
is to split the planning horizon into 48-hour periods, i.e. 2 days. This will be further analysed in
the following section.
3.1.2
48-hour time buckets
In this section the methodology followed to implement the chosen time-bucket size is described. It
is important to note that the downtime calculation to be performed in this section is only regard-
ing the faults and their waiting time. The downtime inﬂicted during any repair or maintenance
operation is not considered in this calculation, since it is counted separately in the model.
In order to calculate the downtime, the amount of faults the period starts with, Ne, and the amount
of faults repaired during the period, Nf, need to be known. The timing of the fault corrections
during the 2-day period is also important to be known, since the downtime is double if the fault is
repaired on the second day of the period instead of the ﬁrst. Three diﬀerent values are therefore
important, Nf, which represents the total amount of faults repaired during the whole period, Nf1,
the amount of faults repaired after the ﬁrst day and Nf2, the amount of faults repaired on the
second day. It is assumed that the occurrence of the faults within one period is known in the
beginning of this period.
The main factor aﬀecting the ability to repair faults in a given day is the weather conditions
prevailing in the area and most importantly the wave height. Based on this factor, a day can be
characterised as accessible or not accessible. During the pre-processing stage and based on this
observation, a parameter is assigned to every period, deﬁning the pattern of the accessibility of the
days within it. This parameter is called β and is presented in Table 3.1. Depending on the pattern
b that ﬁts every period p, the value of the status parameter βp,k is either 0 or 1. As can be easily
understood, only one of the four possible options per period will be 1.
Only one vessel type will be assumed when presenting the downtime calculation method in this
part of the report. It is assumed that the fault occurrence is realised at the beginning of the
period, as mentioned previously, while the repair is realised in the beginning of the day the fault
was repaired. That means that if a fault is repaired on the ﬁrst day of the period, the downtime
==PAGE:26==
18
Mathematical Model
Status
Downtime
Day 1
Day2
00
Ne · 48
Not accessible
Not accessible
01
Ne · 24 + (Ne −Nf) · 24
Not accessible
Accessible
10
(Ne −Nf) · 48
Accessible
Not accessible
11
(Ne −Nf1) · 24 + (Ne −Nf1 −Nf2) · 24
Accessible
Accessible
.
Table 3.1: 48-hour time buckets, represented by parameter β, and downtime calculations based
on them.
caused by this fault is 0 hours, since the operational part of the O&M is not known in the model
and the downtime caused until the repair (time in transport and repair time) is calculated by
separately by another variable, introduced in section 3.2.
The way the downtime is calculated using this method is shown concisely in Table 3.1. It should
be noted that Ne includes both faults that are realised in the current period and faults that
were backlogged from previous periods. The calculations presented are used in the model when
calculating the total downtime.
3.1.3
Time-window for PM activities
Not performing the PM activities does not impose any immediate cost to the O&M processes of
the wind farm. This is not the case on a long term basis though, since by not performing the
maintenance activities, the risk of a turbine failing and causing extra cost some time in the future
is increasing. This observation needs to be reﬂected in the model, because, otherwise, the model
will choose to not perform any PM, since by doing so the objective will increase.
Adding a hard constraint to the model and forcing it to perform all of the PM activities is not a
recommended tactic, because, in general, hard constraints can lead to infeasibility or, in this case,
force the model to make decisions regarding the leasing of vessels that otherwise might not be
proﬁtable. This is why a penalty is imposed when a PM activity is not executed. A time-window
H is introduced, allowing for a PM activity scheduled for time t to be executed at t ± H. If the
activity is not executed within this given time-window, it is considered not done and is therefore
penalised in the objective. There will also be a downtime cost during the time the preventive
maintenance operation is executed, due to lost power production when turbines are shut down.
3.2
Mathematical Model Description
In this section the sets, parameters, scalars and variables needed to formulate the model are initially
described. Before the mathematical model is presented, a brief explanation of how the scenarios
are depicted in the model is given.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Mathematical Model Description
19
Sets
P
: set of periods in the planning horizon;
L
: set of leasing types;
Ls
: set of short term leasing types;
V
: set of vessel types;
A
: set of activity types to be performed;
PA
: set of periods in which vessels can be leased for the 1st stage variables, for which PA ⊆P
must hold;
PA2
: set of periods in which vessels can be leased for the 2nd stage variables, for which PA ⊆P
must hold;
B
: set of status states for periods’ daily accessibility: {’00’,’01’,’10’,’11’};
SD
: set of fault scenarios;
SR
: set of spot market rates’ levels scenarios;
SW
: set of weather scenarios.
Parameters
CF
v,l
: ﬁxed cost of leasing vessel v ∈V under lease type l ∈L;
Chour
v
: hourly cost of operating vessel v ∈V ;
CP
i
: penalty cost imposed for not performing one activity of type i ∈A;
dl
: duration of the lease of type l ∈L;
T A
i
: duration of every activity type i ∈A;
C
: the total amount of vessels that the onshore base can accommodate;
DAp,sw,v
: amount of days in period p ∈P that vessel v ∈V can operate on the wind farm in
weather scenario sw ∈SW ;
βp,v,sw,b
: 1 if the status of period p ∈P, vessel v ∈V in weather scenario sw ∈SW is b ∈B, 0
otherwise. P
b∈B βp,v,sw,b=1 must hold;
Np,sd,i
: number of activities of type i ∈A to be performed in period p ∈P and scenario
sd ∈SD;
αsr
: the percentage of increase or decrease observed on the vessel spot market prices in
scenario sr ∈SR;
Pp,sw
: normalised power output of period p ∈P in scenario sw ∈SW , based on the rated
power of the turbine;
πsw
: probability of scenario sw ∈SW ;
πsd
: probability of scenario sd ∈SD;
πsr
: probability of scenario sr ∈SR.
==PAGE:28==
20
Mathematical Model
Scalars
Cel
: electricity price (subsidy value);
T s
: shift duration in hours, reduced by the amount of time needed to travel from and to the
wind farm;
Pnom
: nominal power of the wind turbines considered;
H
: half the time-window’s length;
npar
: amount of activities that can be executed in parallel once a vessel is dispatched.
Variables
1st stage variables
xv,l,p ∈Z+
: the amount of vessels of type v ∈V leased under contract l ∈L in period
p ∈PA;
2nd stage variables
yv,l,p,sw,sd,sr ∈Z+
: the amount of vessels of type v ∈V leased under contract l ∈Ls in period
p ∈PA2 and scenarios sw ∈SW , sr ∈SR and sd ∈SD ;
tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr ∈R+
: the time spent by vessel v ∈V for activity type i ∈A in period p ∈P and
scenarios sw ∈SW , sr ∈SR and sd ∈SD;
up,sw,sd,sr ∈R+
: the amount of corrective maintenance activities left unattended in period
p ∈P and scenarios sw ∈SW , sr ∈SR and sd ∈SD;
Iv,p,sw,sd,sr ∈R+
: the amount of vessels of type v ∈V in the ﬂeet in period p ∈P and scenarios
sw ∈SW , sr ∈SR and sd ∈SD;
n2v,p,sw,sd,sr ∈R+
: the amount of faults repaired on the second day of period p ∈P from vessel
v ∈V in scenarios sw ∈SW , sr ∈SR and sd ∈SD ;
dtp,sw,sd,sr ∈R+
: the downtime causeed from faults in period p ∈P and scenarios sw ∈SW ,
sr ∈SR and sd ∈SD.
lp,sw,sd,sr ∈R+
: the amount of PM activities scheduled for period p ∈P that were not
performed within the time window deﬁned.
Comments regarding the sets, parameters and variables
The scenarios are built on three diﬀerent uncertainties:
SW - prevailing weather conditions in the area (NSW elements)
SD - fault occurrences (NSD elements)
SR - spot market price level (NSR elements)
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Mathematical Model Description
21
Combining the above scenarios into a new set S = SW ×SD×SR will end up in |S|= |SW |·|SD|·|SR|
scenario combinations that should be considered when solving the model. The pair (sw, sd, sr)
used to deﬁne this combination could easily be substituted with a new set S of all the possible
combinations. It is decided to keep the initial formulation, though, so that the diﬀerentiation of
the parameters based on the uncertainties is clear when reading the model.
Regarding the variables chosen to represent the activities not performed (u, l) it should be noted
that, based on the current assumptions, it is only interesting to know the backlogging of CM
activities over the periods, since they are the only ones aﬀecting the downtime.
Complete model
The objective is to minimise the cost of acquiring the vessels, the cost of sailing to the wind farm
and performing O&M activities, along with the cost of the downtime imposed by the faults and the
delay in the response time. The objective also includes the penalty cost mentioned in the previous
section for the preventive maintenance activities not performed within their given time windows.
The total cost depicted in the objective can be split in ﬁve diﬀerent components as seen in (3.1):
min
 Cst1 + Cst2 + CPPM + CH
CM,PM + CDT

(3.1)
Every diﬀerent cost component of (3.1) is going to be analysed below.
Cst1 =
X
v∈V
X
l∈L
X
p∈PA
cF
v,l · xv,l,p
(3.2)
Cst2 =
X
v∈V
X
l∈Ls
X
p∈PA2
X
sw∈SW
X
sd∈SD
X
sr∈SR
πsr · πsw · πsd · CF
v,l · yv,l,p,sw,sd,sr
(3.3)
Equations (3.2) and (3.3) represent the cost of leasing vessels in the ﬁrst and the second stage of
the model respectively. Equation (3.3) is summing over all the chartering in decisions made at the
second stage and is calculating a weighted average of the total cost imposed by them.
CPPM =
X
p∈P
X
sw∈SW
X
sd∈SD
X
sr∈SR
X
i=′PM′
πsr · πsw · πsd · CP
i · lp,sw,sd,sr
(3.4)
Equation (3.4) represents the penalty cost of not performing PM activities. It only considers all
the activities not performed within a given time window expanding around the time they were
initially scheduled. Only PM activities are considered in this calculation because the cost inﬂicted
by the late or non performance of CM activities is accounted for in the calculation of the total
downtime cost.
CH
CM,PM =
X
v∈V
X
i∈A
X
p∈P
X
sw∈SW
X
sd∈SD
X
sr∈SR
πsr · πsw · πsd ·

Chour
v
+ Cel · Pp,swPnom

· tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr
(3.5)
CDT =
X
p∈P
X
sw∈SW
X
sd∈SD
X
sr∈SR
πsr · πsw · πsd · Cel · Pp,sw · Pnom · dtp,sw,sd,sr
(3.6)
The ﬁrst term of equation (3.5) represents the hourly cost of operating the vessel during the PM
and CM activities. This cost mostly reﬂects the fuel cost that the operators have to pay in order
==PAGE:30==
22
Mathematical Model
to dispatch vessels from their base and sail to the wind farm. The second term of equation (3.5)
and equation (3.6) calculate the cost of lost opportunity. By this term, the production loss during
the hours the turbines were not operating is deﬁned. The stoppage of a turbine’s operation can
either be unplanned, when a turbine stops working because a fault occurred, or planned, when the
turbine is turned oﬀfor the crew to access it and perform maintenance tasks.
The loss calculated in equation (3.5) includes the working hours dedicated to both PM and CM.
Regarding the CM activities, variable t calculates the actual working hours spent on ﬁxing the
fault once the technicians access the turbine.
The constraints of the model are presented below:
s.t.
Iv,p,sw,sd,sr =
X
l∈L
X
p1∈PA|(p1≤p)∧(dl+p1−1≥p)
xv,l,p1 +
X
l∈Ls
X
p1∈PA2|(p1≤p)∧(dl+p1−1≥p)
yv,l,p1,sw,sd,sr
∀p ∈P, v ∈V, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(3.7)
Constraint (3.7) calculates the amount of vessels that are available on any given period and scenario.
This inventory variable I is scenario dependent, since the second stage decision variables allow for
scenario speciﬁc modiﬁcations in the ﬂeet, which of course impact the total amount of vessels
available in every scenario. For a vessel to be counted in the inventory of a period it should be
chartered in at any period previous to the current and the duration of the lease should cover the
period in discussion. These two conditions are described in the conditional summation used in
constraint (3.7).
X
v∈V
Iv,p,sw,sd,sr ≤C
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(3.8)
Constraint (3.8) limits the total amount of vessels, irregardless of their type, that can be assigned
to the onshore base.
X
i∈A
tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr ≤npar·Iv,p,sw,sd,sr·DAp,sw,v·T s
∀p ∈P, v ∈V, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR (3.9)
Constraint (3.9) limits the amount of time that can be spent by a given vessel type on any kind of
activity based on the limitations set by the weather and the amount of vessels that are available.
At the same time it allows for multiple teams to work in parallel once the vessel is dispatched.
Safety reasons dictate that the teams should each consist of more than one person and that a vessel
is not allowed to have more than 4 teams working simultaneously.
X
i∈A
tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
≤npar ·Iv,p,sw,sd,sr ·DAp,sw,v
∀p ∈P, v ∈V, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR (3.10)
Constraint (3.10) complements constraint (3.9), since it imposes a limit on the amount of activities
that can be performed in a period taking into consideration the available days, the shift duration
and the safety limit on the amount of activities that can be performed in parallel. It is deemed
necessary to add this additional constraint, because both of the limitations imposed by constraints
(3.9) and (3.10) need to be respected for the problem to correspond to the reality.
Let us assume an example of one vessel and a period where both of the days allow for a dispatch
of the vessels and the shift duration T s is equal to 7 hours, after subtracting the travelling time.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Mathematical Model Description
23
Considering that a corrective activity lasts a total of 4 hours on average, the total amount of CM
activities that constraint (3.9) allows is:
npar · I · DA · T s
T A
i
= 14 activities
(3.11)
But when considering the total amount of activities that can be performed based on the safety
limit set previously, the amount, based on the previous data, drops to 8 activities for the whole
period. It is either the available time or the amount of activities that impose a lower limit and this
is the one that needs to be respected. It is assumed that one team can perform only one activity
per shift, since picking up a team and moving it to another turbine is a time consuming process,
due to the safety procedures that need to be followed before starting the activities. It should be
noted that the travelling time between the turbines is not accounted in this model.
P
v∈V tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
≥Ni,p,sd + u(p−1),sw,sd,sr −up,sw,sd,sr
∀sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM, p ∈P \ {1}
(3.12)
P
v∈V tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
≥Ni,p,sd −up,sw,sd,sr
∀sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM, p ∈{1} (3.13)
Constraints (3.12) and (3.13) deﬁne the backlogging of CM tasks that are brought in from previous
periods to the following ones. These constraints describe that the activities moved to the next
period’s schedule are larger or equal to the faults that occurred in the current period plus what
was left from previous periods minus the amount of activities that was executed within this period.
The value of the LHS in this constraint is drawn to its lower limit of equality to the RHS because
the problem is a minimisation problem and backlogging of activities means higher cost in the
objective.
P
v∈V
P
p1∈P|p1≤p+min{H,|P|−p} tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
+
X
p1∈P|p1≤p
lp1,sw,sd,sr ≥
X
p1∈P|p1≤p
Np,sd,i
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = PM
(3.14)
Constraint (3.14) calculates the amount of PM tasks not performed within the given time window.
Once the time window passes, the PM activities not performed are considered incomplete and are
penalised in the objective. A ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) approach is assumed to be followed in the
operational scheduling, meaning that the PM activities that have been in the queue the longest are
prioritised over the new ones. The ﬁrst factor of the constraint is a conditional summation that
calculates the cumulative amount of PM activities performed until the end of the time window of
period p ∈P. The condition used for the summation veriﬁes that its factors stay within the given
periods’ limits.
lp,sw,sd,sr ≤Ni,p,sd
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = PM
(3.15)
Constraint (3.15) limits variable l to the amount of activities actually planned for period p. Con-
straint (3.14) deﬁnes a cumulative way of calculating the amount of PM activities not performed
and for obtaining the correct value constraint (3.15) is necessary.
==PAGE:32==
24
Mathematical Model
dtp,sw,sd,sr ≥48 ·

Ni,p,sd + up−1,sw,sd,sr −
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
· βp,v,sw,′11′

−24 ·
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
· βp,v,sw,′01′

+ 24 ·
"X
v∈V
n2v,p1,sw,sd,sr · βp,v,sw,′11′
#
∀p ∈P \ {1}, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM
(3.16)
Constraint (3.16) presents the calculation of the downtime for every period, as shown previously
based on the status of the period under discussion (’00’,’01’,’10’,’11’). The faults backlogged from
previous periods are also considered in the amount of faults entering this period. The logic behind
this constraint is that the total downtime is equal to the worst case scenario i.e.
48 hours of
downtime for every fault that is revealed at the beginning of every period, minus the downtime
saved for all the faults that were repaired. The downtime saved depends heavily on the β parameter
characterising the respective period.
dtp,sw,sd,sr ≥48 ·

Ni,p,sd −
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
· βp,v,sw,′11′

−24 ·
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
· βp,v,sw,′01′

+ 24 ·
"X
v∈V
n2v,p1,sw,sd,sr · βp,v,sw,′11′
#
∀p ∈{1}, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM
(3.17)
Constraint (3.17) is presented as well, for the sake of completeness.
n2v,p,sw,sd,sr =
tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
−npar · Iv,p,,sw,sd,sr

· βp,v,sw,′11′
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM
(3.18)
Constraint (3.18) deﬁnes the amount of activities performed on the second day of a period, in
which vessels have access to the wind farm on both days. Available days should be exploited to
their maximum, because, otherwise, unnecessary downtime cost is imposed on the objective.
x ∈Z+
∀v ∈V, l ∈L, p ∈PA
(3.19)
y ∈Z+
∀v ∈V, l ∈Ls, p ∈PA2, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(3.20)
I, n2 ∈R+
∀v ∈V, p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(3.21)
t ∈R+
∀p ∈P, i ∈A, v ∈V, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(3.22)
dt, u, l ∈R+
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(3.23)
Constraints (3.19) - (3.23) deﬁne the type of the variables. Only the amount of vessels that are
chartered in, x and y, are set to be integer values and therefore variable I will also be integer,
due to its direct dependence from variables x and y. The amount of activities backlogged or not
performed does not need to be an integer value, because fractions of activities can be performed
at a given time and afterwards the technicians can be brought back to complete the rest of the
activity not performed. The same is true for all variables describing the time spent on tasks or the
downtime; it is easily understood that these values are real numbers.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Computational Study
This chapter presents the complete study performed in this thesis. Firstly, the generation and
the handling of the input data is presented. Afterwards, the results extracted from the model are
presented with the use of KPIs and various business cases are tested. Finally, the value of the
stochastic solution is calculated by using speciﬁc indices described later on in this chapter.
4.1
Scenario generation
It is not possible to work with a continuum of possible outcomes of the future, so this continuum
needs to be discretised and several scenarios, s, can be created each with a probability of πs.
When formulating a stochastic model it is very important to follow a proper method to generate
the scenarios that are going to be used as inputs to the model. In this section the methodology
followed to generate the scenarios for the uncertain values is described.
4.1.1
Fault scenarios’ generation
As in most repairable systems, the initial and decommissioning phase of an oﬀshore wind turbine’s
life time is characterised by more faults than what will occur throughout the mid-life-cycle, due to
possible installation errors or the component deterioration. During the middle part of the turbine’s
lifetime the failure rate reduces, reaching an almost stable state. This can be graphically described
by what is most commonly known as a bathtub curve, shown in Figure 4.1.
Within the scope of this thesis, the initial and ﬁnal part of the wind farm’s lifetime is not considered
and the faults occur at a standard lower rate. This corresponds to the operator’s point of view,
because they are responsible for the O&M activities after the original equipment manufacturer
(OEM) warranty expires, which is usually 5 years after the wind farm’s construction. This means
==PAGE:34==
26
Computational Study
Figure 4.1: The bathtub curve of a repairable system, describing the amount of faults occurring
over the lifetime of a turbine [Carroll et al., 2015].
that the manufacturer is usually responsible to deal with any failures that might occur in the early
stages of a turbines life-cycle.
In probability theory and statistics, the Poisson distribution is a discrete probability distribution
that expresses the probability of a given number of events occurring in a ﬁxed interval of time or
space if these events occur with a known constant rate and independently of the time since the
last event [Frank A. Haight, 1967].
It can be assumed that faults occur in exponentially distributed time distances, with µα being the
mean time between fault occurrences and u a randomly generated variable,uniformly distributed
between 0 and 1, u ∼U[0, 1]. Then for every scenario, Ω, that is generated, random variables are
sampled, which deﬁne the intervals between fault occurrences. The process stops once the total
amount of expected faults, I, or the limit of the imposed planning horizon, T, is reached. The
scenario generation from a distribution process is described below in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Scenario generation from distributions for Ωscenarios, as seen in [Conejo et al.,
2010]
Data: µα, T, Ω
Result: N Scenarios generated
ω ←1
Ai,ω ←T
while ω ≤Ωdo
t ←1
i ←1
do
Randomly draw u ∼U[0, 1]
α ←round(−µαln(u))
t ←t + α
Ai,ω ←t
i ←i + 1
while t ≤T and i ≤I;
ω ←ω + 1
end
An average of 4 minor failures per turbine per year is assumed with the distribution within seasons
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Scenario generation
27
being presented in Table 4.1 [Besnard et al., 2013].
Season
Amount of minor failures
Winter
1.2
Spring
0.8
Summer
0.8
Autumn
1.2
Table 4.1: Seasonal distribution of faults for minor faults [Besnard et al., 2013]
4.1.2
Fault scenarios’ reduction
In order to obtain a set of characteristic scenarios, a large number of scenarios needs to be generated
using the technique mentioned above, and afterwards reduce them to a lower number using various
scenario reduction techniques.
For the scenarios generated for this problem, clustering algorithms are used for their reduction.
Clustering algorithms divide the set of the generated scenarios into groups (clusters) in which
the scenarios show a high degree of similarity. The scenarios belonging to diﬀerent groups are as
dissimilar as possible [Kaufmann and Rousseeuw, 1990].
The clusters generated are characterised by centroids and the scenarios belonging to each cluster
are represented by the cluster’s centroid. The centroid-based clustering algorithm that is chosen
for this problem is called partitioning around medoids (PAM), where the centroids chosen belong
to the original data set. The PAM algorithm is described in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Partition around medoids, as seen in [Reynolds et al., 2006]
Data: k number of clusters desired,
D all data points
Result: k data points from D are greedily selected as medoids M
D ←D/M
while new medoids found do
Assign each d ∈D to the closest m ∈M and calculate distance
for each medoid m do
Select new medoid m′ from all data points d assigned to m that reduces the overall distance
if new medoid m′ found then
Swap m and m′
end
end
The distance measure used in this case is the euclidean distance. Every scenario corresponds to
one data point in the original data set of multiple scenarios.
After performing the clustering method the new probabilities corresponding to each scenario are
calculated. The probability of the medoids is equal to the sum of the probabilities of the scenarios
==PAGE:36==
28
Computational Study
belonging in this cluster. In this case, all the scenarios are generated using the method described
and are therefore equiprobable.
An example of reduced fault scenarios is illustrated in Figure 4.2. The faults presented correspond
to a small wind farm of 25 turbines over the course of 1 year.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Faults
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Days
Scenario 0
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Figure 4.2: Distribution of faults over 1 year at a small wind farm of 25 turbines for four diﬀerent
scenarios.
4.1.3
Weather scenarios
There are many methods to generate weather forecasts but most of them carry information only for
short or medium time horizons. In this case the planning horizon is 2 years, since it is a strategic
decision problem. That means that any sophisticated forecast method would not add any extra
information regarding the weather behaviour. More sophisticated and precise forecasts would be
necessary if this was an operational planning problem, where weather conditions need to be known
in great detail for the planning to be feasible.
Having 15 consecutive years of realistic weather data allows for the creation of 14 diﬀerent 2-year
time series of data. A combination of these time series is then used as a set of scenarios for the
weather conditions.
4.1.4
Vessel spot market price scenarios
Three possible outcomes are assumed for the spot rates at the second stage. The ﬁrst one assumes
that the prices at the second stage are reduced by 60% compared to the prices at the ﬁrst stage,
the second one assumes no change in the prices, while the third one assumes an increase of 60%
compared to the prices at the ﬁrst stage [Gundegjerde and Halvorsen, 2012]. The above scenarios
remain the same for all vessel types.
The probability and characteristics of each scenario are
presented in Table 4.2.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Input Data
29
Scenario
Deviation from 1st stage
Probability
High
+ 60%
25%
Medium
+ 0%
50%
Low
- 60%
25%
Table 4.2: The scenarios considered for the spot market price uncertain variability with their
respective probability. The scenarios are diﬀerentiated based on the deviation from
the market price at the ﬁrst stage. [Gundegjerde and Halvorsen, 2012].
4.2
Input Data
In this section the various data used as an input to the model will be presented.
Weather dependent parameters
Once the scenarios are generated, the average value of the wind speed and wave height for every
period of the model is calculated.
These values are then used to calculate all of the weather
dependent parameters used in the model, such as the status of the period, the average production
of the wind farm and the amount of available sailing days.
Amount of PM activities
Based on data obtained from the wind farm operator, the total duration of preventive maintenance
to be performed per turbine per year is approximately 81 hours. These hours are equally distributed
within the time horizon, since the time windows set would not allow for a stricter schedule.
Penalty Costs
The penalties are used as a method to force the model to perform the PM activities planned over the
planning horizon. If large penalty values are imposed to the model, numerical issues might rise that
can lead to undesirable results, such as slow performance, wrong answers or inconsistent behaviour.
If a penalty term represents an undesirable decision, it’s best to use an accurate estimate of the
costs of that undesirable alternative [Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2018]. A lot of eﬀort is currently
being put by the industry into calculating the precise cost of not performing a PM activity. Such
a value is hard to estimate, since the actual value of the PM activities can not be known. In this
model it is decided that this penalty has to be slightly larger than the daily cost of chartering
in the most expensive CTV. This choice prevents the model from not performing a PM activity,
because a vessel is not available and only allows for such decisions when no other option exists.
4.3
Results
In this section the numerical results of the base case will presented in this section. The base case
of this analysis plans for a wind farm with 100 wind turbines, over a time horizon of 2 years and
takes into consideration a combination of 72 scenarios. At ﬁrst, the solution will be analysed and
the diﬀerent indicators that determine the value of the stochastic solution will be presented.
==PAGE:38==
30
Computational Study
4.3.1
KPIs proposed for the evaluation of the solution
A description of the solution value for the base case is presented in this part of the report. An
analysis is performed on the output of the model based on various key performance indicators
(KPIs) that are going to be described.
Problem speciﬁc KPIs were built to help understand the solution and how eﬃcient it is. At the
same time the values obtained by the KPI analysis indicate whether the results can be applied in
real-life cases. The list of the KPIs generated for this problem follows:
Vessel utilisation
The average utilisation of vessel type v ∈V .
This value is calculated as a percentage of the
total amount of time that the vessel is used to perform any type of activities. This percentage is
calculated using as a basis both the total amount of time available in the planning horizon and the
total amount of time available based on the reduced accessibility, due to rough weather conditions;
Vessel sharing between tasks
The total average percentage of activities of type i ∈A performed by vessel v ∈V . This KPI will
show if a speciﬁc type of vessel us used to perform a certain activity;
Task sharing between vessels
The total average percentage of activities that vessel v ∈V performed that are of type i ∈A. By
calculating this the vessel’s contribution to the tasks’ completion is estimated;
Average waiting time
The average waiting time before technicians visit the turbine to repair a failure. This index includes
the amount of hours needed to repair the failure and the travelling time to the turbine;
Wind speed threshold
The average wind speed at the wind farm, at which the model performs PM activities;
Production based availability
The average production based availability (PBA) of the wind farm.
This value calculates the
total amount of power produced as a percentage of the ideal power production if no interruption
occurred. This value is calculated for the diﬀerent type of activities, as two indices, PM based
PBA and CM based PBA, along with the value of the total PBA, including both PM and CM
losses.
The average values mentioned above are calculated using the probabilities of the scenarios consid-
ered to solve the base case. These scenarios are a combination of all the uncertainties, where each
scenario represents a diﬀerent realisation of them all. The KPIs, therefore, represent the weighted
average of the results they are describing.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Results
31
4.3.2
Results and analysis of the base case
The solution provided from the model suggests that two vessels are needed: 1 vessel of type v1.3
and 1 more of type v1.8, both of which will be chartered in in the beginning of the planning horizon
under a long-term contract of 2 years.
The expected values of the KPIs described above are presented in Table 4.3. As expected, the
utilisation of the selected vessels is higher for the smaller and cheaper vessel (v1.3), which mostly
performes PM activities, due to its lower dispatching and travelling expenses. Vessel v1.8 is utililsed
to perform most of the CM activities, due to its ability to travel in a harsher environment.
No vessel of type v1.5 is chosen as a ﬁrst stage decision and such a vessel is, therefore, not considered
in the conﬁguration of the ﬂeet. This does not mean though that there is no scenario where such
a vessel is chosen at a second stage, even though it may be for a reduced amount of time. This
is the reason why v1.5 has a share on the total average performance of PM and CM activities in
KPI3, which, despite being very limited, can not be ignored and has to be reported.
The results of Table 4.3 represent the expected values of the KPIs deﬁned. For some of these
indicators it is interesting to see how such a result is formed. Figures 4.4 and 4.5 present the
weighted histograms of the losses forming the PBA and the waiting time across the scenarios. The
KPIs are calculated independently for every scenario and the weight of every value corresponds to
the probability of the scenario occurring.
The average waiting time KPI calculates the time between failure and repair, as mentioned previ-
ously, it includes the travelling time and the duration of the corrective activity. These two values
are considered ﬁxed for all CM activities and they impose an increase of 6.5 hours. The overall
waiting time is 17.83 hours from failure to the reparation of the turbine, as shown in Table 4.3.
Figure 4.5 shows that the model aims towards reducing the waiting time of the scenarios with the
highest probability, while the scenarios with a high waiting time have very low probability of being
realised.
In Figure 4.4 it can be seen that the model is focusing on reducing the losses on scenarios char-
acterised by a higher probability. The outliers of the distribution correspond to scenarios with a
very low probability of occurring. The total losses are inﬂuenced by the downtime inﬂicted by the
failures, since they are much higher than the downtime caused due to preventive tasks. The timing
of the PM activities is controlled by the model through the time windows added, and is therefore
chosen in such a way that will minimise the production losses. On the contrary, the losses that
occur due to failures can not be entirely controlled and the downtime can increase signiﬁcantly
if certain factors apply, such as low vessel availability due to weather or capacity. This is seen
in Figure 4.4, where the spread of the values is large and quite diﬀerentiated between scenarios,
but still the solution the model proposes manages to reduce the losses in the vast majority of the
scenarios, as seen in the histogram, which is more shifted to the left.
The behaviour mentioned above is clearly seen in Figure 4.3, where both input data and model
results are presented for a certain period of time. The ﬁrst subplot shows the amount of days that
each vessel can access the wind farm in every period, while the second subplot shows the average
power production in every time bucket. Information regarding only v1.3 and v1.8 is presented, since
these are the only vessels chosen by the model in the 1st stage. In the 3rd subplot of this ﬁgure
==PAGE:40==
32
Computational Study
it is clear that the PM activities are performed when power production levels are low, so that the
production losses are reduced to the minimum amount possible. As stated previously, the time
windows deﬁned for the execution of the preventive tasks are allowing for a higher ﬂexibility, to
allow for such planning. Contrarily, any delay in the execution of the CM activities imposes a cost
on the operator, because lost production from a halted turbine is costly, thus making its immediate
repair necessary. This is depicted in the 4th subplot of Figure 4.3, in which corrective activities
are executed immediately, once the weather allows. A diﬀerent example with reduced wind farm
accessibility is presented as comparison in Figure B.2.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Periods
0
1
2
Access days
v1.3
v1.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Periods
0.0
0.5
Power production
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Periods
0
5
PM activities
v1.3
v1.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Periods
0
1
2
CM activities
v1
v3
Figure 4.3: Example of model decisions for 15 periods. The amount of access days, along with the
average power production within those periods are shown in the ﬁrst two subplots.
The model decisions regarding the execution of preventive and corrective maintenance
tasks from the respective vessels, are shown in the last two subplots.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Results
33
Preventive maintenance losses (%)
0.0
0.1
0.2
Probability (-)
Corrective maintenance losses (%)
0.0
0.1
0.2
Probability (-)
1
2
3
4
5
Total losses (%)
0.0
0.1
0.2
Probability (-)
Figure 4.4: Weighted histogram of the total power losses their components, from corrective and
preventive maintenance activities.
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Waiting time (hours)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Probability (-)
Waiting time bins
Figure 4.5: Weighted histogram of the average waiting time, for all scenarios in the base case.
==PAGE:42==
34
Computational Study
Indicator
Parameters
Value
Vessel Utilisation
v1.3
Total
51.07%
Available
90.9%
v1.5
Total
-
Available
-
v1.8
Total
45.8%
Available
73.34%
Vessel sharing between tasks
v1.3
PM
72.33%
CM
27.47%
v1.5
PM
-
CM
-
v1.8
PM
50.73%
CM
49.27%
Task sharing between vessels
PM
v1.3
62.33%
v1.5
0.92%
v1.8
36.75%
CM
v1.3
25.44%
v1.5
0.89%
v1.8
73.67%
Average response time
17.83(hours)
Wind speed threshold for PM
5.28 (ms−1)
PBA
PM
99.07%
CM
96.65%
Total
95.73%
Table 4.3: Expected values of KPIs for the base case of 72 scenarios and 2 years planning horizon.
4.4
Business Cases
Various future projections can be considered when using a strategic model to plan for a long time
horizon. In this section, assumptions are made regarding the future state of the industry and
the eﬀect any possible changes might have in the model’s decision. Finally, a discussion on the
selected time bucket length is included along with an explanation of the recourse decisions’ role in
the various scenarios.
4.4.1
Vessel v1.5 selection
As stated previously, the model chooses to ignore vessel v1.5, even though one could assume that
as a medium-sized and medium-priced vessel, the chances of it being chosen are higher. Such a
decision informs the decision maker that the extra accessibility that v1.5 provides is not worth its
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Business Cases
35
extra price. A business case is presented in this section, where a sensitivity analysis is performed
regarding the price of vessel v1.5, in order for it to be a part of the ﬂeet conﬁguration.
It is expected that if the price of v1.5 is equal to that of v1.3, vessel v1.5 will be chosen, since it
will provide higher accessibility for the same amount of money. It should be noted here that the
operating costs remained the same, because they are dependent on the vessel type. By performing
binary search, diﬀerent values are tried out, varying between the current v1.3 and v1.5 prices. The
nature of the problem is such, that allows for such a method to be applied.
There will be a
threshold for the price of v1.5, between the current prices of v1.3 and v1.5, that once is crossed, the
selection of v1.5 against v1.3 will be optimal. After applying this method, it is calculated that for
v1.5 to be a proﬁtable choice, the price of it should not be above 12-13% of the price of v1.3.
4.4.2
Second stage decisions
In stochastic programming, the recourse decisions made at the second stage are taken based on the
information obtained once the uncertainties are revealed. The frequency with which decisions are
taken at the second stage provide information regarding the eﬃciency of the 1st stage decisions,
which apply to all scenarios. They can also be an indication of how often corrective actions will
be needed, once the decision is applied in real life. The weighted average of the percentage of
time over the whole planning horizon in recourse decisions were applied is presented in Table 4.4.
Various spot market price variabilities are considered and the evolution of the percentages over
them is presented.
Vessel type
±60% (base case)
±30%
±10%
+100%
v1.3
7.13
4.07
3.28
0.53
v1.5
4.45
4.35
4.57
0.53
v1.8
20.26
18.54
17.16
0.00
Table 4.4: Weighted average of the percentage of time over the planning horizon, in which recourse
decision were applied.
The percentages were calculated for many possible market
states, diﬀerentiated by their price variability, for 100 WT and 72 scenarios.
From the base case results presented above, it is seen that the choice regarding vessel types v1.3
and v1.5 is suﬃcient, since for the vast majority of the periods no added vessels are used. On the
contrary, vessels v1.8 are chartered in more often, mostly because the extra accessibility this vessel
type provides is worth the increased price.
Furthermore, since the model takes into consideration the uncertainty of the spot market price,
it is willing to charter in extra vessels in the scenarios, where the spot market price is reduced
compared to this of the ﬁrst stage. This is clearly seen when the variability of the spot market
prices is changed. As seen in the 2nd and 3rd column of table 4.4, the model does not use extra
vessels as often as in the base case, since they are no longer found in such low prices. The model is
therefore, more willing to pay extra on downtime or penalties. For these two cases the same initial
ﬂeet composition is proposed as the base case described previously.
In the last column of the table a separate test is performed. It is assumed that the market price
does not deviate as previously, but is always more expensive compared to today’s market. The
==PAGE:44==
36
Computational Study
conﬁguration of the ﬂeet is then modiﬁed and 2 vessels of type v1.8 are chosen, while extra chartering
of vessels is rarely occurring over the scenarios. This is the expected reaction of the model to this
change of input. An extent analysis on the eﬀect the spot market price uncertain factor has in the
ﬁnal decision is performed in subsection 4.4.3.
4.4.3
Spot market prices and uncertainty
It is noticed that once the uncertainty regarding the levels of the spot market prices is added, the
structure of the decisions of the model changes. The initial implementation of the model includes a
penalty price for any decision made on the second stage regarding the leasing of any extra vessels.
These two approaches, in reality, represent two diﬀerent ﬂeet conﬁguration strategies.
Firstly, when the uncertainty of the spot market prices is not included in the model and an increased
price, introduced as a penalty, is assumed for the leasing of vessels at the second stage, the decisions
made are more risk averse. This is due to the fact that the ﬂeet is built in the ﬁrst stage and most
of the important decisions are taken here and now, since it will be too expensive to perform any
modiﬁcations at a later stage. However, this does not prevent the model from chartering these
extra vessels, if needed.
The approach mentioned previously leads to the model proposing an initial ﬂeet conﬁguration of
2 vessels of type v1.8, a suggestion more robust than the proposal of the base case model, since
a larger vessel v1.8 is used to substitute vessel v1.3, which is the smallest vessel choice considered
for the ﬂeet. The vessel proposed is expected to provide higher accessibility to the wind farm
compared to any other vessel available for chartering.
However, if the spot market price scenarios found in the literature are incorporated in the model,
the penalty at the second stage is only imposed on the scenarios with a higher contract price
compared to the prices assumed at the ﬁrst stage. The model is, therefore, allowing for decisions
that carry a higher risk at the ﬁrst stage, since, after the realisation of the spot market price
uncertainty, some scenarios might allow for larger modiﬁcations on the ﬂeet at the second stage.
The ﬁrst approach is considered relevant when a decision about the ﬁnal ﬂeet size needs to be taken
here and now. This decision can be veriﬁed by the various simulation tools that are developed
from the operators to support the decision making process. The second approach would be more
relevant if realistic market price data and its seasonal variation were available, allowing for more
realistic scenarios to be developed. The assumption of a global ﬁxed increase or decrease rate of
the market prices is not very practical, since the prices ﬂuctuate based on the demand and the
periods of the year. For example, during summer time, the prices of the vessels increase because the
demand is higher due to the improved weather conditions. The values used in this implementation
are obtained from [Gundegjerde and Halvorsen, 2012], however, further research is necessary for
the creation of more realistic scenarios.
Finally, either one of the previous methods can be applied if the operator’s strategy is to be
considered. Both choices are possible, while the model can be easily modiﬁed to accommodate for
any of these change.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Business Cases
37
4.4.4
Projection for future improvements
For the business cases analysed in literature and in the industry, the amount of faults per turbine
per year is assumed to be equal to 4, all of which require turbine visits in order to be repaired.
As it is mentioned in the problem description, a lot of alarms raised to notify for a turbine failure
can be resolved by a manual or automatic reset of the turbine and therefore not requiring a visit
to the turbine.
Since the oﬀshore wind industry is evolving rapidly, the manufacturers are developing and im-
proving the products, leading to lower failure rates, while at the same time the operators develop
tools that will allow for the implementation of more eﬀective O&M strategies. It is, hence, fair
to assume a reduced amount of faults as a projection for the future and an eﬃcient enough O&M
strategy that will allow for less visits to the wind farm. It is reasonable to expect that this amount
can be reduced by 50% and it will, thus be of interest to examine the model’s output if 2 visits
per turbine per year are considered.
As the KPIs calculated for the base case depict, the model produces results that are conservative.
For this reason, it comes as no surprise that even when a reduction in the number of faults requiring
a visit is considered, the conﬁguration of the ﬂeet proposed by the model remains the same. This
is due to the fact that the reduction in the workload is not as radical as one would expect. The
highest amount of man-hours on a turbine is spent on PM activities and it is these that need to be
reduced. This could happen by a more eﬃcient bundling of the activities which would, possibly,
lead to a reduction of the amount of visits the technicians should pay to every wind farm.
After running a binary search algorithm for the base case, the minimum reduction in the PM
activities that is required for the reduction of the ﬂeet is found to be around 23% of the current
values, while the rest of the parameters remain the same. If such a reduction is achieved, the model
suggests that only one vessel of type v1.8 is enough for performing the O&M activities. It should
be noted that this percentage is calculated with the given vessel costs and PM tasks and it is not
representative of every case. The binary search can be applied in this problem, since the amount
of vessels needed is proportional to the amount of man-hours planned and once the threshold is
crossed, then the optimal number of vessels will be reduced by at least one, for any amount of PM
activities scheduled.
4.4.5
Diﬀerent wind farm sizes
The model can provide a solution for the problem examined irregardless of the wind farm size.
Various sizes are tested and the results proposed are presented in Table 4.5 for every vessel type.
As observed in this table, the main pattern remains the same over all test cases. The price assigned
to vessel v1.5 is too high for it to be chosen and instead, the model chooses to charter in vessel v1.8,
a higher performing and most expensive vessel, at least for the ﬁrst 4 iterations for a wind farm of
125-200 turbines. In the last iteration for 225 turbines the same pattern is followed and the model
decides to charter in one more large vessel to handle this increase on the amount of wind turbines.
The execution time and the optimality gaps are not mentioned in this subsection, since the amount
of the turbines does not aﬀect the size or the complexity of the model. All of the tests were run
==PAGE:46==
38
Computational Study
with a time limit of 3600 hours and all converged to a solution with an optimality gap less than
1.0%.
Nturbines
v1.3
v1.5
v1.8
Amount
Contract
Amount
Contract
Amount
Contract
100
1
2 years
0
-
1
2 years
125
1
2 years
0
-
2
2 years
150
1
2 years
0
-
2
2 years
175
1
2 years
0
-
2
2 years
200
1
2 years
0
-
2
2 years
225
1
2 years
0
-
3
2 years
Table 4.5: Vessel ﬂeet conﬁguration for various test cases with diﬀerent wind farm sizes, for 72
scenarios and a 2-year time horizon.
4.4.6
1-day time-bucket
One might argue that once the division to time-buckets is performed on a two-day level, it can
easily be reduced to a one-day level. Such a modiﬁcation to the model is tested by changing the
input parameters and aggregating them to the new time-bucket size, while at the same time the
respective constraints are adapted to this change. Constraints (3.16) and (3.17) are replaced with
constraints (4.1) and (4.2), respectively. Once again, both of the constraints are presented for the
sake of completeness.
dtp,sw,sd,sr ≥24 ·

Ni,p,sd + up−1,sw,sd,sr −
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i

∀p ∈P \ {1}, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM
(4.1)
dtp,sw,sd,sr ≥24 ·

Ni,p,sd −
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i

∀p ∈{1}, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM
(4.2)
The ﬁrst attempt to run the model for a planning horizon of 2 years and a total of 72 scenarios
fails, since the solver does not manage to produce any feasible solution before the time limit of
3600 sec is reached. Afterwards, the same model is tested again, reducing the amount of scenarios
to 60. This time the model manages to produce a feasible solution within the given time limit, but
with an optimality gap of 25.6%, while, when tested for 30 scenarios the gap is 11.6%
Based on the previous outcomes, it is decided that the use of 2-day time-buckets is more than
suﬃcient, since it provides accurate results, veriﬁed by the industry, by using less computational
power and time. It should be noted that the 1-day time-bucket model could barely perform for
the basic time horizon of 2 years. It is apparent, therefore, that if it gets tested for longer time
horizons it will perform even worse. However, the model implemented is able to handle larger time
horizons, as seen later on in section 4.5.6.
==PAGE:47==
4.5 The value of information and the stochastic solution
39
The model implemented in this project can solve various cases with longer planning horizons or an
increased amount of scenarios. This is an indicator that there is, possibly, still room for changes
and extensions in the model, even though the extent of these modiﬁcations can not be calculated.
This is a sign that the 2-day time-bucket model is a good choice for the problem addressed.
4.5
The value of information and the stochastic solution
Stochastic models are known for being demanding on a computational level. Formulating and
solving a stochastic model, usually, requires more eﬀort than a deterministic model. It is highly
relevant to examine whether it is actually necessary to formulate a stochastic model or whether a
deterministic approach would be suﬃcient for a problem like the one tackled within this study.
Two indices have been deﬁned for the evaluation of the value of the stochastic solution. The ﬁrst
one is the value of the stochastic solution (VSS) and the second one is the expected value of perfect
information (EVPI). Before presenting these indices it is important to know that there are three
diﬀerent solution approaches for a problem with uncertain parameters [Birge and Louveaux, 2011].
Wait-and-see
In this approach each scenario is solved individually. The solutions obtained are based on the fact
that every uncertainty is considered resolved and thus this approach does not correspond to reality,
since the decisions should be made here-and-now before the uncertainty is resolved. At the same
time, a set of solutions is obtained, instead of one implementable solution. This approach results
in the expected value of the wait-and-see (WS) approach.
Expected value
In this approach the expected values of all the uncertain parameters are calculated and the problem
is solved using these values. By doing so, no type of uncertainty is examined. Uncertainty is a
reality though that should be considered in the decision making process. This is why the value
obtained from this process is subsequently ﬁxed to the 1st stage of the stochastic model, allowing
for second stage decisions to be chosen optimally. The result obtained from this approach is called
expectation of the expected value (EEV) solution, while the approach is referred to as expected
value problem (EV).
Recourse Solution
In this approach all the available information regarding the uncertainties is used. All scenarios
are included in the model in order to get the optimal expected value for the scenarios. In a two-
stage stochastic model, like the one formulated in this thesis, the decisions made in the ﬁrst stage
apply to all scenarios unchanged, while the recourse (second-stage) decisions are taken once the
uncertainty is resolved. The result of this approach is called the expected value of the recourse
problem (RP) solution.
The analysis to follow is regarding a minimisation problem and thus the formulas used to explain
the indices mentioned above are presented based on that.
==PAGE:48==
40
Computational Study
4.5.1
Expected Value of Perfect Information
The expected value of perfect information (EVPI) is deﬁned as the maximum amount a decision
maker would be willing to pay in order to gain access to detailed and accurate information about
the future and eliminate any uncertainty [Birge and Louveaux, 2011]. In this case, this would
translate to how much money the wind farm operator is willing to pay a forecaster or a team of
experts to gain insights on the weather, faults or market state.
To calculate the EVPI, both the RP and the WS values need to be known. For a minimisation
problem it is given that:
EV PI = RP −WS
(4.3)
The value of the EVPI is an indication of the eﬀort that is worth putting in trying to reduce the
uncertainties that exist in the problem. An EVPI with a large value is a suggestion that a lot of
money, in this case, can be saved by trying to obtain perfect information and an indication that
the stakeholders should be willing to pay up to this amount to reduce the current uncertainty. For
all stochastic problems the following must hold:
EV PI ≥0
(4.4)
and given that the problem is a minimisation problem:
WS ≤RP
(4.5)
4.5.2
Value of the stochastic solution
In order to calculate the value of the stochastic solution, both EEV and RP need to be known. The
value of the stochastic solution (VSS) measures the value of using a stochastic approach instead
of a deterministic approach. The result indicates the performance of the stochastic decision taken
when the expected value of the uncertainties is considered. This is achieved by ﬁxing this decision
to the ﬁrst stage variables and then evaluating it by re-running the model and seeing the amount
of any extra decisions that need to be taken at the second stage to reduce the cost.
The value of the stochastic solution of a minimisation problem is given by:
V SS = EEV −RP
(4.6)
and for all stochastic problems the following must hold:
V SS ≥0
(4.7)
Given that the problem is a minimisation problem:
RP ≤EEV
(4.8)
If this does not hold, the RP is not the optimal solution since the expected value solution is feasible
for the stochastic model and could therefore be chosen as a better solution to the stochastic problem.
In general for a minimisation problem the following property holds:
WS ≤RP ≤EEV
(4.9)
while for a maximisation problem, the direction of property (4.9) changes.
==PAGE:49==
4.5 The value of information and the stochastic solution
41
4.5.3
Determining the expected value of the uncertainties
To calculate the EEV value the expected value of the uncertainties considered in the model needs
to be calculated. In this section the methodology used to extract these values will be presented.
Weather scenarios
For the generation of the expected value of the weather scenarios, the initial raw data regarding
the wind speed and wave height are used. As mentioned before, a realistic time series of 15 years
is provided, from which 14 2-year scenarios are generated. Six of these are used for the stochastic
model and the rest are kept for out-of-sample calculations.
The average of these scenarios is,
therefore, calculated and used as an expected value for the weather scenarios. All the weather
dependent parameters are afterwards calculated based on that expected value.
Fault Occurrences
The existing input regarding the fault occurrences consists of |SD| scenarios for the amount of fault
occurrences in a given period, each assigned with a probability πsd. Calculating the expected value
using these two parameters could lead to a non-integer amount of faults for the EV scenario. This
is why a diﬀerent approach is followed. The methodology used to generate the fault occurrence
scenarios is described previously. The second part of the scenario generation process consists of
a procedure described as scenario reduction, where a clustering algorithm is used to reduce the
amount of scenarios, using already existing medoids. This is why it is decided to re-use this method
and reduce the amount of scenarios to 1 and import this as the EEV for the fault occurrence. The
output of this method is a scenario existing in the initial set of generated scenarios, which represents
an actual instance, where the values are integer and therefore no rounding is necessary, while at
the same time the value of this scenario is the most representative of the initial set.
Vessel spot market price
By calculating the expected value of the level of the spot market rates, it is shown that no deviation
should be considered between the spot market prices and the market prices when the here-and-now
decisions are made.
4.5.4
Value of stochastic program implementation
The model is tested using diﬀerent amounts of scenarios as input, as shown in Table 4.6 and
graphically in Figure B.1. The behaviour described in property (4.9) holds for all of them. At the
same time for all instances tested, both the EVPI and the VSS have values larger than zero, which
is in accordance to properties (4.4) and (4.7).
EVPI
The cost components of every individual scenario when the WS and RP approaches are applied
in solving the base case, are presented in Figure 4.6. Starting from the top row and moving from
left to right the plots represent the total cost, the downtime cost, the cost of leasing vessels at the
==PAGE:50==
42
Computational Study
Nscen
WS
EEV
RP
EVPI
VSS
12
10.26
11.27
10.85
0.59
0.41
24
11.15
12.33
11.87
0.71
0.46
36
12.07
13.37
12.91
0.83
0.46
48
11.77
12.57
12.46
0.69
0.10
60
11.58
12.35
12.27
0.68
0.08
72
11.31
12.13
12.01
0.70
0.11
Table 4.6: Expected values of the WS, EEV and RP along with the VSS and EVPI values derived
for every test case for various scenario inputs. All units are in million monetary units.
1st stage, the cost of leasing vessels at the 2nd stage, the hourly cost of operating the vessels and
the penalty imposed for not performing the PM activities within the given time windows. The
conﬁguration proposed for every individual scenario is considered not worth mentioning.
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Total (mil. mu)
RP
WS
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
4
6
8
10
Downtime (mil. mu)
RP
WS
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
0
2
4
6
1st stage (mil. mu)
RP
WS
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
0
1
2
3
2nd stage (mil. mu)
RP
WS
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
Operating (mil. mu)
RP
WS
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Penalties (mil. mu)
RP
WS
Figure 4.6: The value of the objective function and all of its components for all scenario in-
stances, when running the recourse and the wait-and-see problem. Looking at the
plots row-wise from left to right, the total cost, the downtime cost, the cost of leasing
vessels at the 1st stage, the cost of leasing vessels at the 2nd stage, the hourly cost of
operating the vessels and the penalty imposed for not performing the PM activities
are illustrated.
==PAGE:51==
4.5 The value of information and the stochastic solution
43
Obviously, when solving the deterministic equivalent of a problem to optimality, considering that
all the uncertainties are resolved, the optimal solution will be better than or equal to the stochastic
solution. Based on the above observation, the total cost of each individual scenario is lower when
using the WS method, as seen in the top left subplot and in more detail in Table 4.6.
At the same time, it is clear that the decisions made at the ﬁrst and the second stage of the
WS problem are much more volatile compared to the decisions made when solving the recourse
stochastic problem. This is mostly due to the uncertainty in the vessel spot market price levels.
As mentioned earlier, three scenarios are assumed regarding the market levels at the second stage,
with one of them being a lot cheaper than the level of the market at the ﬁrst stage. This is why
the wait-and-see solution displays these periodical ﬂuctuations on the 1st and 2nd stage decisions.
However, the recourse problem formulates a more stable strategy which, in most of the cases, calls
for less recourse decisions, as seen in the respective plot in Figure 4.6.
This is the essence of the stochastic optimisation, making decisions here-and-now, which are appli-
cable to any future scenario realisation, forming in this way, a common strategy for addressing the
uncertainties. This common decision, though, aims for the reduction of the average cost, which
does not necessarily mean an improved solution for every scenario individually. This is why higher
penalty costs are observed in the solution of the recourse problem. The model decides that it is
more proﬁtable for the overall strategy to allow for some of the PM activities to not be performed,
instead of chartering in extra vessels. This is not true for the WS problem, because every problem
is solved individually, therefore the aim is to reduce the cost locally without considering the overall
optimisation.
Value of the stochastic solution
The cost components of every individual scenario when the EV and RP approaches are applied
in solving the base case, are presented in Figure 4.7 and the plots follow the same logic as in
Figure 4.6. The conﬁguration proposed for the base case from the EV problem includes 1 vessel
of type v1.3 for the ﬁrst year of the planning horizon and 1 vessel of type v1.8 for both years. The
EEV solution provides an insight into how this conﬁguration would perform, on average, if applied.
In the top right plot it can be observed that the expected value solution leads to a higher total cost
in the vast majority of the scenarios used in the base case, leading to an EEV value higher than
the objective of the recourse problem. This behaviour proves that the stochastic model actually
works and adds value to the process. The overall expected values of the objective are presented in
Table 4.6.
The 1st stage, in both cases, remains the same for all scenarios, as expected, since the variables in
that stage are the same in all scenarios. Additionally, it can be observed that the total cost of the
1st stage in the recourse problem is higher than that of the expected value’s approach, showing
that, when considering all possible scenario realisations, the model tends to take more conservative
choices.
The cost imposed by leasing vessels at the second stage is once again drastically reduced in the
recourse problem compared to the expected value method. Such a behaviour is observed, even
more heavily in the wait-and-see method. Reducing the decisions taken at a later stage is a highly
==PAGE:52==
44
Computational Study
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
10
12
14
16
18
Total (mil. mu)
RP
EV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
4
6
8
10
Downtime (mil. mu)
RP
EV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
1st stage (mil. mu)
RP
EV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
0
1
2
3
2nd stage (mil. mu)
RP
EV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
1.5
2.0
2.5
Operating (mil. mu)
RP
EV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Penalties (mil. mu)
RP
EV
Figure 4.7: The value of the objective function and all of its components for all scenario instances,
when running the recourse and the expected value problem.
appreciated behaviour that the operators are aiming to achieve. Continuously modifying the ﬂeet
is a time consuming practice that imposes high cost. Furthermore, the vessel market is a volatile
market which is easily aﬀected by many factors, like the period of the year in which a buyer aims
to lease a vessel. As mentioned earlier, during summer time the vessel demand increases rapidly,
possibly leading to a heavily reduced availability, making chartering in vessels impossible. It is,
therefore, understood that the planning can not be heavily based on vessels bought at a later stage.
Instead, the initial ﬂeet should be able to handle the O&M adequately, while the vessels leased at
a second stage should play a supplementary role in the planning.
Finally, the decision made based on the expected value of the uncertainty appears to be cheaper
when looking at the ﬁrst stage decisions. This is not the case though since, when it comes to
applying this decision on all of the scenarios, the implications are heavy. This leads to an EEV
value higher than the RP. The value of the VSS as shown in ﬁgure 4.7 is presented in table 4.6.
==PAGE:53==
4.5 The value of information and the stochastic solution
45
4.5.5
Solution Robustness
When solving any problem of this type the robustness of the solution proposed needs to be val-
idated. There are many ways to validate a solution or force the model to take a more robust
decision which will not allow for extreme scenarios to have dramatic eﬀects on the cost objective.
Considering the KPIs presented above, the model already is considered rather conservative, and,
as a result, there is no need to put more eﬀort in proposing a more risk-averse solution.
The most relevant robustness check for this model is an analysis regarding the performance of the
solution on random scenario realisations, that were not considered in the decision making process.
Out of sample test
A very important aspect that needs to be tested, in order to verify the robustness of the model, is
the out of sample (OOS) testing. In order to perform this test a new set of scenarios is generated
for the uncertainties, set2, and let us call the decisions made from the base case recourse problem
RP1, while the set of uncertain parameters used for the base case will be referred as set1. The set
of scenarios used for the OOS testing use the same 3 market-state scenarios as previously, since
there is no information about a diﬀerent market state. Diﬀerent scenarios regarding the faults
are generated using the method described in section 4.1, while scenarios from the original weather
data set, that were not considered in the RP, are used as an input. The total amount of scenarios
tested using this approach is 72.
The OOS process requires the model to be re-run using as an input the new set of uncertainty
scenarios and ﬁxing the ﬁrst stage decision variables to these of RP1. By doing so, a solution that
is derived for a diﬀerent uncertainty data set, is applied to various scenario realisations that are not
considered when RP1 is calculated. This will provide an indication of how the ﬂeet will perform if
the outcome of the uncertainties is not included in the input of the initial problem.
The next step is to take the solution of the expected value problem for set1 and ﬁx it to the ﬁrst
stage variables of the OOS. Then the model is run and a set of objective values is generated,
displaying the performance of the EV solution for out of sample realisations. By following this
process the value of the stochastic solution compared to the expected value solution on an out of
sample set is calculated. On average the solution provided by the stochastic problem performs
better than the EV problem leading to lower costs for the scenarios tested by the out of sample
method. Assuming all the scenarios as equiprobable, the stochastic solution provides results that
are reduced by D = 0.195 mil. m.u. compared to the EV solution, derived from equation (4.10).
D = ObjectiveEV −ObjectiveRP = 11.557 −11.362 = 0.195 mil. m.u.
(4.10)
This is seen in Figure 4.8, where the probability density function (PDF) of the objective values
over the 72 scenarios tested is plotted. This ﬁgure shows the improvement achieved by using the
recourse program to address this problem in comparison to the expected value. The PDF using
the RP1 solution is shifted more to the left compared to the one using the EV solution, while
it is also more concentrated to the central values. The values that are obtained during the out
of sample testing with the EV solution applied, allow for higher costs to occur compared to the
results obtained when the RP1 solution is used.
==PAGE:54==
46
Computational Study
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Objective value (mil. m.u.)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Probability (-)
OOS-RP
OOS-EV
Figure 4.8: The probability density function of the objective values obtained from the out of
sample testing; a comparison between the values extracted with ﬁxed ﬁrst stage
variables from the stochastic problem (OOS-RP) and the expected value problem
(OOS-EV).
Figure 4.9 presents the objective values and their diﬀerent components as calculated from the
process described above. It is observed that the cost of leasing boats at the second stage when
the EV solution is applied is much higher compared to the stochastic problem’s solution. This,
combined with the positive value of the stochastic solution presented above, depicts that the model
provides solutions that are applicable in most cases, even when they are not considered in the initial
set of uncertainties.
4.5.6
Model Performance
It is very important to see how the model scales across diﬀerent inputs. The amount of scenarios,
as well as the length of the planning horizon, are two very important parameters that deﬁne the
model’s performance. It is decided to test the performance of the model for diﬀerent values of the
aforementioned parameters. The results are presented in Tables 4.7 and 4.8 that follow, while a
time limit of 3600 sec (1-hour) is set for all the test cases.
The model behaves as expected based on the results presented in these two tables. The larger the
model grows, the harder it is to solve it, as seen by the evolution of the optimality gap over the test
cases. The model grows larger when the time horizon expands or when the amount of scenarios
considered is increased. This growth is observed in both the variables and the constraints, making
the model harder to solve.
For the test cases of Table 4.7 that are able to converge to an optimality gap less than 5%, the
majority chose the same conﬁguration of the ﬂeet. One vessel v1.3 and a second v1.8 are chosen to
be leased in the beginning of the planning period for the whole planning horizon. The reason why
no vessel of type v1.5 is chosen is explained previously and still holds, since the data used for the
==PAGE:55==
4.5 The value of information and the stochastic solution
47
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
10
12
14
Total (mil. mu)
OOS-RP
OOS-EV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
4
6
8
Downtime (mil. mu)
OOS-RP
OOS-EV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
1st stage (mil. mu)
OOS-RP
OOS-EV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
0
1
2
2nd stage (mil. mu)
OOS-RP
OOS-EEV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
Operating (mil. mu)
OOS-RP
OOS-EV
0
20
40
60
Scenarios
0.0
0.1
0.2
Penalties (mil. mu)
OOS-RP
OOS-EV
Figure 4.9: The value of the objective function and all of its components for all scenario instances,
when tested for out-of-sample cases, with ﬁxed ﬁrst stage variables from the stochastic
problem (OOS-RP) and the expected value problem (OOS-EV).
testing are the same as the base case’s.
The ﬁrst test case though provides a solution where no vessel is acquired at the ﬁrst stage. This is
because only one weather scenario is considered in the ﬁrst test case and the scenarios only vary in
respect to fault occurrences and spot market state. As a result, this combination does not provide
suﬃcient input for the stochastic model to start performing the way it should.
The models presented as test cases in Table 4.8, consider diﬀerent contract types, for which the
leasing duration is at maximum equal to the length of the respective time horizon. All of the
models that are solved with an optimality gap less than 5%, choose the same combination of
vessels as previously under the longest leasing contracts. This is the expected outcome; leasing
two vessels of diﬀerent type as the basic conﬁguration and, if the situation calls for it, paying extra
for chartering additional vessels at some point within the planning horizon. The model does not
manage to produce any feasible solution when the time horizon increases to 5 years.
==PAGE:56==
48
Computational Study
No. of scenarios
Gap (%)
Time
Time to <5%
Pre-solve time
12
0
533
42
13.45
24
0.20
3601.35
166
26.88
36
0.41
3600.28
853
67.69
48
0.74
3601.38
1134
64.37
60
1.29
3601.94
1090
83.84
72
1.26
3601.15
1198
118.18
84
1.49
3600.93
2332
162.64
Table 4.7: Solution statistics for various test cases with diﬀerent number of scenarios for a 2-year
planning horizon. If not stated otherwise, the values are given in seconds.
Planning horizon (years)
Gap (%)
Time
Time to <5%
Pre-solve time
1
0.65
3600.58
166
18.14
2
1.29
3601.94
1090
83.84
3
3.83
3620.63
2025
290.75
4
4.17
3622
1637
674.23
5
-
-
-
-
Table 4.8: Solution statistics for various test cases with diﬀerent planning horizons for 60 scenar-
ios. If not stated otherwise, the values are given in seconds.
4.5.7
Model Implementation
The stochastic model formulated is implemented using the Gurobi Optimizer [Gurobi Optimization,
LLC, 2018], a commercial optimisation solver. The model was run on a computer with an Intel
Core i7-7500 CPU 2.9GHz and 8GB RAM under Windows 10-64bit.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Conclusions and future work
The conclusions derived from this project, as well as any future work proposed are presented in
this chapter. Within the scope of this thesis certain aspects of the problem are considered, while
diﬀerent sub-problems are simpliﬁed, because they are considered too broad to be analysed. It
is considered important, though, that all the simpliﬁcations are presented, in order to identify
possible improvements potentials that can be considered for future work.
5.1
Conclusions
In this section the conclusions that are derived from the implementation of the model for this
speciﬁc problem are presented. Information regarding any assumptions that are made and how
they might aﬀect any real-life implementation of the model are also described.
Value of the model
The model presented in this project proposes a conﬁguration for the ﬂeet size and mix for the
O&M processes of an oﬀshore wind farm. It provides an input for the decision maker that is more
than just speculations or educated expert guesses. It is an initial estimate, which can be further
tested by using it as an input in simulation models.
As shown in the result analysis, the model can provide output irregardless of the size of the wind
farm, since the amount of the turbines installed only aﬀects the amount of work that needs to
be performed. This input is generated in the pre-processing of the data and has no eﬀect in the
model or its scaling. The model runs within an accepted amount of time and with an acceptable
optimality gap, allowing for various problem versions to be tried out, based on the user’s input
data.
==PAGE:58==
50
Conclusions and future work
The results that the stochastic model provides perform better than the expected value problem and
provide a more robust proposal regarding the ﬂeet composition. It is a common approach to average
any type of uncertainty before proceeding with the model formulation. Such a methodology is not
necessarily bad, but at the same time does not take into consideration the uncertain nature of the
problem. This is the fundamental diﬀerence between this approach and the stochastic program; the
ﬁrst one uses all available information regarding the uncertainty before the solution process begins,
while the latter proposes a solution by using all available knowledge regarding the uncertainty.
Stochastic Model Result
In a two-stage stochastic model the uncertainties are all realised at once. That means that all infor-
mation regarding the weather conditions, fault occurrences and spot market prices are available at
the beginning of the second stage for every scenario. This indicates that perfect information about
the future is available at the beginning of the planning horizon. As it can be easily understood,
such knowledge can not be considered realistic. Being informed about uncertain parameters two
years in advance is considered impossible in real-life instances. Nevertheless, in the worst case the
model generates a lower bound on the amount of vessels needed to perform the activities. The
eﬃciency of the solution proposed by the model can also be veriﬁed, by using it as an input to one
of the various simulation tools build for the FMS problem for the operation and maintenance of
an oﬀshore wind farm.
This situation can be solved if the model is reformulated as a multiple stage stochastic program,
where the knowledge regarding the uncertainties is realised gradually at the beginning of every
stage. Such approach would be very interesting as en extension to the work presented in this
project.
5.2
Future work
Information Sources
Data availability regarding the O&M processes of an oﬀshore wind farm is still a major challenge
for the logistics management. To improve the decision making process and create eﬀective decision
support tools the gap between the expert’s knowledge and the quantitative techniques needs to
be seen through. Field data are not always available for processing and the subjective judgement
of an expert should not always trusted, so a combination of the knowledge these to sources oﬀer
would be the ideal starting point for a decision making process.
Price setting
Three diﬀerent vessel types are considered in this implementation, as already stated above. When
the model is run with the current vessel price input, it proposes the use of only two vessel types.
Even though this seems like a useful input, in reality it might not be. Questions may arise regarding
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Future work
51
the market’s reaction, in case all operators realised that this vessel is not worth chartering in. Due
to the reduced demand, its value would decrease, because everyone would try to charter in vessels
of other types. At some point, this vessel’s price will drop so much, that its use would become
proﬁtable again. The implementation of such a game theoretic approach could be the focus of
future work.
Value of preventive maintenance tasks
One of the main challenges faced in this project was the valuation of the preventive maintenance
tasks and the amount that should be set as a penalty for the non-completion. Within the scope of
this thesis, it was decided that the execution of the PM activities should be considered a priority
and failure to perform them should impose a cost. It is not veriﬁed (by the industry),though,
that this tactic is the optimal. An accurate representation or method to calculate the value of
the PM activities will be a very beneﬁcial input for this model or for future models regarding the
optimisation of the O&M processes of an oﬀshore wind farm.
Operational Planning
This model is based on the assumption that the operational short-term planning of the O&M pro-
cesses is working eﬃciently enough to allow for an eﬀective long-term planning. A full availability
of the technicians and the spare parts is considered for this planning. This is not the case, though,
in many cases, since extra waiting time can be caused by delays in these sectors. This reduced
availability should be taken into consideration for a possible future extension of the model or as
follow-up work.
Furthermore, the accessibility of a wind farm is calculated based on 12-hour windows, as explained
in subsection 2.3.1. This reduces the actual availability, because it forces a strict limit which, in
most of the cases, does not correspond to the reality, as smaller time windows are acceptable in
the operational planning. This realisation has to be considered in future extensions of the model.
==PAGE:60==
Appendix A
Complete model
The complete model is presented here.
min
 Cst1 + Cst2 + CPPM + CH
CM,PM + CDT

(A.1)
Cst1 =
X
v∈V
X
l∈L
X
p∈PA
cF
v,l · xv,l,p
(A.2)
Cst2 =
X
v∈V
X
l∈Ls
X
p∈PA2
X
sw∈SW
X
sd∈SD
X
sr∈SR
πsr · πsw · πsd · CF
v,l · yv,l,p,sw,sd,sr
(A.3)
CPPM =
X
p∈P
X
sw∈SW
X
sd∈SD
X
sr∈SR
X
i=′PM′
πsr · πsw · πsd · CP
i · lp,sw,sd,sr
(A.4)
CH
CM,PM =
X
v∈V
X
i∈A
X
p∈P
X
sw∈SW
X
sd∈SD
X
sr∈SR
πsr · πsw · πsd ·

Chour
v
+ Cel · Pp,swPnom

· tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr
(A.5)
CDT =
X
p∈P
X
sw∈SW
X
sd∈SD
X
sr∈SR
πsr · πsw · πsd · Cel · Pp,sw · Pnom · dtp,sw,sd,sr
(A.6)
s.t.
Iv,p,sw,sd,sr =
X
l∈L
X
p1∈PA|(p1≤p)∧(dl+p1−1≥p)
xv,l,p1 +
X
l∈Ls
X
p1∈PA2|(p1≤p)∧(dl+p1−1≥p)
yv,l,p1,sw,sd,sr
==PAGE:61==
53
∀p ∈P, v ∈V, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(A.7)
X
v∈V
Iv,p,sw,sd,sr ≤C
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(A.8)
X
i∈A
tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr ≤npar·Iv,p,sw,sd,sr·DAp,sw,v·T s
∀p ∈P, v ∈V, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR (A.9)
X
i∈A
tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
≤npar ·Iv,p,sw,sd,sr ·DAp,sw,v
∀p ∈P, v ∈V, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR (A.10)
P
v∈V tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
≥Ni,p,sd + u(p−1),sw,sd,sr −up,sw,sd,sr
∀sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM, p ∈P \ {1}
(A.11)
P
v∈V tv,i,p,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
≥Ni,p,sd −up,sw,sd,sr
∀sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM, p ∈{1} (A.12)
P
v∈V
P
p1∈P|p1≤p+min{H,|P|−p} tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
+
X
p1∈P|p1≤p
lp1,sw,sd,sr ≥
X
p1∈P|p1≤p
Np,sd,i
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = PM
(A.13)
lp,sw,sd,sr ≤Ni,p,sd
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = PM
(A.14)
dtp,sw,sd,sr ≥48 ·

Ni,p,sd + up−1,sw,sd,sr −
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
· βp,v,sw,′11′

−24 ·
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
· βp,v,sw,′01′

+ 24 ·
"X
v∈V
n2v,p1,sw,sd,sr · βp,v,sw,′11′
#
∀p ∈P \ {1}, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM
(A.15)
dtp,sw,sd,sr ≥48 ·

Ni,p,sd −
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
· βp,v,sw,′11′

==PAGE:62==
54
Complete model
−24 ·
P
v∈V tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
· βp,v,sw,′01′

+ 24 ·
"X
v∈V
n2v,p1,sw,sd,sr · βp,v,sw,′11′
#
∀p ∈{1}, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM
(A.16)
n2v,p,sw,sd,sr =
tv,i,p1,sw,sd,sr
T A
i
−npar · Iv,p,,sw,sd,sr

· βp,v,sw,′11′
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR, i = CM
(A.17)
x ∈Z+
∀v ∈V, l ∈L, p ∈PA
(A.18)
y ∈Z+
∀v ∈V, l ∈L, p ∈PA2, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(A.19)
I, n2 ∈R+
∀v ∈V, p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(A.20)
t ∈R+
∀p ∈P, i ∈A, v ∈V, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(A.21)
dt, u, l ∈R+
∀p ∈P, sw ∈SW , sd ∈SD, sr ∈SR
(A.22)
==PAGE:63==
Appendix B
Additional ﬁgures
12
24
36
48
60
72
Amount of scenarios
10.5
11.0
11.5
12.0
12.5
13.0
13.5
Expected value (mil. mu)
EEV
WS
RP
Figure B.1: The expectation of the expected value, the wait and see solution and the recourse
problem solution over various amount of scenarios.
==PAGE:64==
56
Additional ﬁgures
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Periods
0
1
2
Access days
v1.3
v1.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Periods
0.0
0.5
1.0
Power production
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Periods
0
5
PM activities
v1.3
v1.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Periods
0
1
2
CM activities
v1.3
v1.8
Figure B.2: Example of model decisions for a bad case of 15 periods, in respect to the accessibility
of the vessels to the wind farm. The amount of access days, along with the average
power production within those periods, are shown in the ﬁrst two subplots. The
model decisions regarding the execution of preventive and corrective maintenance
tasks from the respective vessels, are shown in the last two subplots.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[4COﬀshore, 2017] 4COﬀshore (2017). An introduction to crew transfer vessels. https://www.
4coffshore.com/news/an-introduction-to-crew-transfer-vessels-aid2.html. Accessed:
2019-1-12.
[Besnard et al., 2013] Besnard, F., Fischer, K., and Tjernberg, L. B. (2013).
A model for the
optimization of the maintenance support organization for oﬀshore wind farms. IEEE TRANS-
ACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 4, NO. 2, 4.
[Besnard et al., 2009] Besnard, F., Patriksson, M., Strömberg, A. B., Wojciechowski, A., and
Bertling, L. (2009). An optimization framework for opportunistic maintenance of oﬀshore wind
power system. IEEE Bucharest Power Tech Conference, 1-5.
[Birge and Louveaux, 2011] Birge, J. R. and Louveaux, F. (2011). Introduction to Stochastic Pro-
gramming. Springer, New York.
[Carroll et al., 2015] Carroll, J., McDonald, A., Martin, O. B., McMillan, D., and Bakhshi, R.
(2015). Oﬀshore wind turbine sub-assembly failure rates through time. Wind Energy, 19:1107–
1119.
[Conejo et al., 2010] Conejo, A. J., Carrión, M., and Morales, J. M. (2010).
Decision Making
Under Uncertainty in Electricity Markets. Springer, New York.
[Dalgic et al., 2015] Dalgic, Y., Lazakisa, I., Dinwoodie, I., McMillan, D., and Revie, M. (2015).
Advanced logistics planning for oﬀshore wind farm operation and maintenance activities. Ocean
Engineering, 101:211–226.
[European Commission, 2009] European Commission (2009). Climate strategies & targets. https:
//ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies_en.
[Frank A. Haight, 1967] Frank A. Haight (1967).
Handbook of the Poisson Distribution.
John
Wiley & Sons, New York.
[Gundegjerde and Halvorsen, 2012] Gundegjerde, C. and Halvorsen, I. B. (2012). Vessel ﬂeet size
and mix for maintenance of oﬀshore wind farms. A stochastic approach. Master’s thesis, Nor-
wegian University of Science and Technology.
==PAGE:66==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Gundegjerde et al., 2015] Gundegjerde, C., Halvorsen, I. B., Halvorsen-Weare, E. E., Hvattum,
L. M., and Nonås, L. M. (2015). A stochastic ﬂeet size and mix model for maintenance operations
at oﬀshore wind farms. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 52:74–92.
[Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2018] Gurobi Optimization, LLC (2018). Gurobi optimizer reference
manual. http://www.gurobi.com.
[Gutierrez-Alcoba et al., 2017] Gutierrez-Alcoba, A., Ortega, G., Halvorsen-Weare, E. E., Hen-
drix, E. M., and Haugland, D. (2017). A model for optimal ﬂeet composition for vessels for
oﬀshore wind farm maintenance. Procedia Computer Science, 108:1512–1521.
[Halvorsen-Weare et al., 2013] Halvorsen-Weare, E. E., Gundegjerde, C., Halvorsen, I. B., Hvat-
tum, L. M., and Nonås, L. M. (2013). Vessel ﬂeet analysis for maintenance operations at oﬀshore
wind farms. Energy Procedia, 35:167–176.
[Halvorsen-Weare et al., 2017] Halvorsen-Weare, E. E., Norstad, I., Stålhane, M., and Nonås,
L. M. (2017).
A metaheuristic solution method for optimizing vessel ﬂeet size and mix for
maintenance operations at oﬀshore wind farms under uncertainty. Energy Procedia, 137:531–
538.
[Halvorsen-Weare et al., 2016] Halvorsen-Weare, E. E., Stålhane, M., and Nonås, L. M. (2016).
A decision support system for vessel ﬂeet analysis for maintenance operations at oﬀshore
wind farms. Working paper, published online: https://www.sintef.no/projectweb/marwind/
publications/.
[Katsouris and Savenije, 2017] Katsouris, G. and Savenije, L. (2017). Oﬀshore wind access 2017.
ECN: E-series.
[Kaufmann and Rousseeuw, 1990] Kaufmann, L. and Rousseeuw, P. J. (1990). Finding Groups In
Data: An introduction to cluster analysis. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.
[Lazakis et al., 2013] Lazakis, I., Turan, O., and Dalgic, Y. (2013). Vessel charter rate estimation
for oﬀshore wind O&M activities. Developments in Maritime Transportation and Exploitation
of Sea Resources, 2:899–907.
[Obdam et al., 2008] Obdam, T., Rademakers, L., and andPeter Eecen, H. B. (2008). Estimating
costs of operation & maintenance for oﬀshore wind farms. European Wind Energy Conference
and Exhibition, 6:3309–3317.
[Reynolds et al., 2006] Reynolds, A. P., Richards, G., de La Iglesia, B., and Rayward-Smith, V. J.
(2006). Clustering rules: A comparison of partitioning and hierarchical clustering algorithms.
Journal of Mathematical Modelling and Algorithms, Science Direct, 5:475–504.
[Stålhane et al., 2016] Stålhane, M., Vefsnmo, H., Halvorsen-Weare, E. E., Hvattum, L. M., and
Nonås, L. M. (2016). Vessel ﬂeet optimization for maintenance operations at oﬀshore wind farms
under uncertainty. Science Direct, 94:357–366.
[Woodmead Energy Services, 2011] Woodmead Energy Services (2011).
Wind turbine plan-
ning application 12 month wind data/generation estimates ﬁnal analysis.
https://
woodmeadenergyservices.com/renewable-energy/wind-turbine-planning-applicatio.
