==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Application of dynamic risk assessment as an
alternative method for estimation of the
evacuation safety level of a complex building
Author:
Alexandru Rădulescu
Student Number:
s162291
Supervisor:
Assoc. Prof. Frank Markert
Sunday 3rd March, 2019
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark and the
partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the study line "Fire Safety Engineering". The
project is credited to 35 ECTS points and was conducted between September, 2018 and
March, 2019 under the supervision of Associate Professor Frank Markert.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my supervisor Professor Frank
Markert for oﬀering me a master project within the ﬁelds that I am especially interested
in: building ﬁre safety, ﬁre dynamics and probabilistic modelling. I would like to thank
him for allowing me the freedom to develop this study towards the areas I considered the
most relevant, for encouraging me to be critical about my ﬁndings and for his mentorship
and feedback throughout the duration of the whole project.
As this thesis concludes years of schooling, from primary to high school and
university, I would also like to thank all the great and inspiring teachers I have had the
pleasure of being taught by, both in Denmark and in Romania, as well.
Last, but certainly not least, I would like to express my gratitude to all my family
that supported me through the years of study and of course, they made possible my stay
in Denmark.
Alexandru Rădulescu
Kongens Lyngby, March 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Security of health and life of the occupants in case of a ﬁre hazard is one of the
main goals of a ﬁre safety engineer. Frequently, this is achieved by assuring the possibility
of a safe evacuation from the building before the sundry eﬀects of the ﬁre cause harm on
the occupants. [29]
In order to maintain the required safety level, as a part of a holistic ﬁre safety
approach, performance-based engineering methods have been deployed and supported by
ﬁre risk assessments. Yet, the numerical simulations carried out as a part of performance-
based analysis are built on both, deterministic and probabilistic input parameters, sub-
jected to major uncertainties. These uncertainties may become unrecognized or neglected
during design, while trying to overcome them can lead to costly and unnecessary overes-
timated degree of safety predicted through this design approach [34].
Within this thesis a methodology is developed so that to assess the level of safety
during emergency evacuation and to quantify the ﬁre risk to life, by accounting for the
variability and uncertainty in the design parameters of a ﬁre safety analysis. Starting from
the deﬁnition of risk and its relationship with reliability of ﬁre safety barriers, a simple
event tree analysis of a ﬁre scenario occurring in a complex building (chosen as study case)
is initially showcased, all with the intention of highlighting the shortcomings of the current
risk analysis methods. It is shown that uncertainties sources are diverse, ranging from
variables that are built into the analytical tools and methods, unpredictability in human
behavior and reaction in case of ﬁre emergency, uncertainties associated with criteria and
values selected for assessing tenability conditions, to variations of the operational and
performance reliability of ﬁre protection measures [37].
Based on the ﬁndings, an alternative approach is constructed, by collecting into
a single simulation model the various uncertain parameters and assigning to each of them
suitable individual probability distributions that can reﬂect their innate variability. This
sort of probabilistic data is used as input parameters, while the processes of interest for ﬁre
protection practitioners are treated as deterministic. By means of Discrete Event Simula-
tion method [56], the physical phenomena (ignition, heat radiation, combustion products
development) and the real technological processes (detection, warning, suppression, evac-
uation) are simulated in their natural order, enabling the dynamic interactions that are
assumed to exist in between them in a real situation. In order to capture the whole range
of possible outputs expected from a ﬁre event, Monte Carlo procedure [56] is applied,
involving 5000 repeated random sampling of the inputs, followed by the corresponding
simulation iterations. This analysis is performed on the same study case building, and
the results shows the overall distribution of the evacuation safety level values achieved for
==PAGE:6==
the 5000 generated ﬁre scenarios. As each scenario is developed on diﬀerent probability
of failure of safety barriers, the associated ﬁre risk can be subsequently assessed. Also,
the deterministic parameters governing the ﬁre development and the evacuation process
are readily accessible for any scenario of interest.
Additionally, diﬀerent ﬁre safety barriers (i.e. sprinkler system) are subsequently
included into the model, allowing for a comparison of their quantitative eﬀect on the ﬁ-
nal evacuation safety level. As a last sub-research matter, animations are introduced,
illustrating the process of choosing egress routes starting from random locations inside
the study case building. This strengthens the clearness and logic of the developed algo-
rithms and may serve, as well, as a communication and validation channel between system
analysts and domain experts. [57]
Thus, the proposed methodology provides an alternative way for handling risk-
informed and performance-based life safety design throughout a transparent, veriﬁable
and ready to be used in practice framework.
==PAGE:7==
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
Abstract
List of Figures
List of Tables
Nomenclature
1
Introduction
1
1.1
What is ﬁre risk assessment?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
What is a simulation?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Application of probability theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Purpose of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Critical conditions in case of ﬁre
7
2.1
Calculation of Available Safe Egress Time (ASET) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Fire development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Calculation of Required Safe Egress Time (RSET) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Classical Approach
21
3.1
Use of the building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Possible ﬁre scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Probabilistic risk assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Dynamic Approach
36
4.1
Variables inﬂuencing ﬁre development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Variables inﬂuencing evacuation process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Method implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:9==
5
Results and discussion
64
5.1
’Model 1’ evacuation safety level analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
’Model 2’ evacuation safety level analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Conclusions
81
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
References
84
Appendix A Appendix: Overall assumptions
88
Appendix B Appendix: Fire compartments characteristics
90
Appendix C Appendix: ASET and RSET evaluation-
classical approach
91
Appendix D Appendix: Scenario 3 - ASET and RSET
controlled by ﬁre safety systems
103
Appendix E Appendix: Fire growth rate data
115
Appendix F Appendix: Average smoke potential data
116
Appendix G Appendix: Sample of Matlab programming code
implemented for RSET evaluation
117
Appendix H Appendix: Entities generation and
veriﬁcation script
120
Appendix I
Appendix: Scenario’3046’ individual ESL spreadsheet
121
Appendix J
Appendix: Results- Model 2
130
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
1
Typical ﬁre development curve- adapted from [8] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2
Schematic representation of evacuation times- adapted from [1]
. . . . . .
18
3
Building 303A - inside red contour- extracted from [25] . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Building 303A - ﬂoor plan and compartment numbering . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Scenario 1 - ﬁre location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Compartment 10 dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Scenario 3 - ﬁre location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
8
Fire safety barriers modelled within an event tree- adapted from [29] . . . .
31
9
Event tree for situation 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
10
Event tree for situation 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
11
Frequency histogram of ﬁre growth rate data samples
. . . . . . . . . . . .
41
12
Frequency histogram of average smoke potential data samples . . . . . . . .
43
13
Sprinkler eﬀectiveness deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
14
XY plane and compartment dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
15
Compartment C1 and 8 occupants randomly located
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
16
Fire blocking exit1 and redistribution of egress paths . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
17
Fire blocking exit2 and redistribution of egress paths . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
18
Pre-movement time characterized by diﬀerent distributions- adapted from
[54] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
19
Inter-relations of the model components- adapted from [56] . . . . . . . . .
59
20
Entity generator block
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
21
Output switch block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
22
Server block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
23
Entity terminator block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
24
Graphical representation of ﬁre location distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
25
’Model 1’: ESL distribution for all scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:11==
26
Compartment 1: ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
27
Compartment 2: ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
28
Compartment 3: ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
29
Compartment 4: ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
30
Compartment 5: ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
31
Compartment 6: ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
32
Deterministic parameters, ASET and individual RSET for scenario ’3046’
71
33
Compartment 7: ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
34
Compartment 8: Evacuation safety levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
35
Compartment 9: ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
36
Compartment 10: ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
37
Model 1: smoke spread - ESL and consequences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
38
Compartment 7 and 10 comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
39
’Model 2’: ESL distribution for all scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
40
’Model 2’: compartment 6- ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
41
’Model 2’: smoke spread - ESL and consequences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
42
Simulation stop time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
43
Veriﬁcation.m script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
44
’Model 2’: compartment 1- ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
45
’Model 2’: compartment 2- ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
46
’Model 2’: compartment 3- ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
47
’Model 2’: compartment 4- ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
48
’Model 2’: compartment 5- ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
49
’Model 2’: compartment 7- ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
50
’Model 2’: compartment 8- ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
51
’Model 2’: compartment 9- ESL and consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
52
’Model 2’: compartment 10- ESL and consequences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
1
Combustible material 1 speciﬁc characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2
Combustible material 2 speciﬁc characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Scenarios and calculated time (in seconds) to tenability criteria realization
28
4
Dynamic risk assessment variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Number of occupants in each compartment triangular distributed
. . . . .
51
6
Number of ﬁres per compartment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
Symbols
Roman symbol
Unit
Description
A
m2
compartment area
Ci
-
expected number of consequences for scenario i
Cp.air
kJ/kg · K
air speciﬁc heat
CCO
kg/m3
concentration of CO
D0
pers/m2
occupant density
Fa
pers/min
actual ﬂow
Fs
pers/min/m
speciﬁc ﬂow
h
m
compartment height
kb
-
conversion factor
LCt50
g · min/m3
lethal exposure dose
ls
m
stair length
ltr
m
length of horizontal travel
mp
kg/s
plume mass ﬂow
N
-
number of occupants
OD
db/m
optical density
Pi
-
probability of an individual ﬁre scenario i to occur
˙Q
kW
heat release rate
s
m/min
speed of travel
ss
m/min
speed of travel on stairs
S0
db/m
material average smoke potential
t458
s
time when the hot gas reaches the temperature 458K
tCO
s
time for carbon monoxide gas to reach the tenability limit
tda (or tw)
s
time for detection and alarms providing
tque (or tq)
s
time for queuing in front of the exit door
trd
s
time for reaction and decision
tSLH
s
time for smoke to reach the level ’z’
tt
s
time for travel
tvis
s
time for visibility to be impaired
Tg
K
hot gas maximum admissible temperature
V
m3
compartment volume
V1
m3
volume of upper layer of smoke
we
m
eﬀective door width
yCO
g/g
yield of carbon monoxide
Z
m
admissible smoke layer height
==PAGE:14==
Greek symbol
Unit
Description
α
kW/s2
ﬁre growth rate
αloss
-
coeﬃcient of heat loss through enclosure boundaries
∆E
J
energy release
∆Hair
kJ/kg
lower heat of combustion of air
µCO
g/mol
molecular weight of carbon monoxide
ρair
kg/m3
air density
Abbreviations
ABA
Automatic ﬁre detection and warning system
ASET
Available Safe Egress Time
DES
Discrete Event Simulation
ESL
Evacuation safety level
ETA
Event Tree Analysis
FED
Fractional Eﬀective Dose
PPM
Part per million
RSET
Required Safe Egress Time
==PAGE:15==
==PAGE:16==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
1
Introduction
1.1
What is ﬁre risk assessment?
Certain levels of ﬁre risks to the occupants and property are implied in each ﬁre safety
design, as none existing protection measure is thoroughly eﬀective. There will always
be a residual risk. The assessment of these levels of ﬁre risks that are provided to the
occupants and property in a performance-based ﬁre safety design is the subject of ﬁre risk
assessment. Because ﬁres can occur in a building in more than one way, the most com-
prehensive risk assessment will include all probable unwanted ﬁre scenarios and analyze
their consequences. Hence risk assessment can be expressed by incorporating the sum of
expected individual risks of all single ﬁre scenarios. [1]
Expected risk to life =
X
i
Pi · Ci
(1)
In the equation 1, Pi represents the probability of an individual ﬁre scenario
to occur, Ci denotes to the expected number of consequences for the ﬁre scenario i.
The expected risk to life is the sum of all scenarios i, having the risk Pi · Ci, and can
also be referred to as the composite risk of a complex system. Therefore, in order to
evaluate and analyze it, one should address certain problems: the determination of the
sequence of undesirable events that can transform the hazard into actual damage along
with consideration of the probability of these sequences, and the evaluation of the possible
consequences of each of these sequences [2].
Undoubtedly, ﬁre risk assessment is not as simplistic as this basic multiplication
looks like. One needs to keep in mind that in order for a potential source of damage to
evolve to actual undesired consequences, it should break some safety barriers in the shape
of ﬁre protection measures. For example, within a facility there are usually installed active
ﬁre protection equipments which should provide early warnings to the occupants in case
of emergency and guide them towards a safe place before the ﬁre grows. There can also
be in place ﬁre protection systems used to control the development of a ﬁre hazard and
to prevent it from spreading to other parts of a building. Passive ﬁre protections, such as
use of ﬁre resistant materials, sectioning of building ﬂoor plans and compartmentalization
are some other types of safety barriers that can restrict the spread of ﬁre to the rest of
the building. Ultimately, the action of the ﬁre department can be seen as a ﬁre safety
barrier, as well. These are only a few examples why ﬁre risk assessment involves the use
of diﬀerent scenarios that are actually constructed as a function of the success and/or the
failure of these ﬁre protection measures in order to assess the expected level of risk.
Page 1 / 132
1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:17==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Hence, the estimation of risk to life value depends on the probability of failure
of some (or all) of the ﬁre protection measures, or as mentioned before, barriers. For
example, if hypothetically, there are no safety barriers at all, there is no protection.
Therefore, the probability that the ﬁre scenario will cause any damage is 100%, or 1.
While if, for example, there are four independent ﬁre safety barriers and each of them
has an assumed probability of failure of 0.3, the chance of failure of all four is 0.3* 0.3*
0.3* 0.3. Then, the chances to happen a ﬁre scenario that can produce damages (or harm
to the occupants), when all these barriers are broken, is 0.0081. It is apparent that the
lower are the individual probabilities of failure of protection measures, the lower is the
probability of the ﬁre scenario to appear. In a gross sense, the ﬁre risk assessment is
governed by the number of protection measures that are set in place, but also by how
reliable and eﬀective these ﬁre protection measures are. [1]
Subsequently, ﬁre risk assessments refers to more than the analysis of the risk to life. It
comprehends also the assessment of the loss of property, loss of business and so on, as a
result of ﬁres. Similar equations can be expressed for the other losses too.
From qualitative point of view, ﬁre risk means making the association between
the source of damage and its possibility to transform from a potential hazardous condition
to actual undesired consequences. Hence, a qualitative assessment is only deployed in
order to obtain a quick perspective of the potential ﬁre risks in a building and to consider
various ﬁre protection measures to minimize these risks. [2]
Translating the previous statement from qualitative to quantitative, ﬁre risk
analysis is an assessment involving numerical quantiﬁcation of both the probability of
occurrence of a ﬁre hazard (scenario), and the corresponding consequences of that hazard.
The risk value is then given by the multiplication of the numerical values of probability
and the expected consequence. The cumulative sum of the risk values from all probable
ﬁre scenarios gives an overall quantitative risk assessment. [2] In general, hierarchical tree
analysis can be elaborated so that this type of analysis may be performed. Because it
involves a pre-speciﬁed source of hazard (which in this case is the ﬁre ignition) followed by
the construction of a logic ramiﬁcation for various scenarios subsequent to the initiation
of a ﬁre, the event tree analysis (ETA) will be found a satisfactory method to perform
quantitative risk assessments. Details and examples of the construction of event trees will
be further seen in section 3.3.
Page 2 / 132
1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:18==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
1.2
What is a simulation?
By simulation one can understand the science of building models, starting from appropri-
ate input data and parameters, in order to predict outcomes and evaluate alternatives for
the purpose of making decisions. In classical thinking, real-world systems could be mod-
eled through diﬀerent types of simulations: discrete event, continuous and Monte Carlo.
Though in current thinking and work, these lines are becoming less distinct. [3]
Discrete event simulations (DES) are based on mathematical or logical mod-
els of physical systems, characterized by changes of state due to events occurrence. The
nature of the state change and the simulated time at which the transformation happens
requires accurate description. This simulation method has application in areas as manu-
facturing processes, capacity planning, scheduling, supply chains, inventory management,
capital investment decision making, network simulators. [3]
In contrast to DES, continuous simulations are directly picturing the system
changes at every time step. The simulation is not translating from one state changing
event to another, as in the case of discrete simulation, but from one simulated time step to
another. Having as fundamental principle that the state of the system at any given time
can be described by the rate of change of particular variables, the continuous simulation
procedure resembles the numerical methods developed for ordinary diﬀerential equations
solution. Therefore, the area of application of continuous simulations is spread, basically
covering any phenomenon that can be represented by diﬀerential equations. [56]
The presented types of simulations can be both applied in ﬁre science. For exam-
ple, a continuous simulation model can describe the chemical processes in the development
of combustion compounds or it can describe the physical processes that govern the ﬂow of
heat. While for strategies used to plan the evacuation of the building or the ﬁre ﬁghting
action, the discrete simulations are found more appropriate. [56]
As DES will be seen to be a very useful tool for the purpose of the thesis, one
should know that programming languages involving this method must meet some re-
quirements, such as: possibilities to generate random numbers to represent uncertainty,
processing capability so that objects can be created, manipulated, and deleted, provide
descriptive summary of model behavior by statistical analysis routines, provide the pre-
sentation of potentially large reams of data in an eﬀective way for decision making. [3]
Monte Carlo simulation or the "method of repetitive trials" has its name as
given by John van Neumann and Stanislaw M. Ulam to reﬂect its gambling similarity. [3]
It is also known as a procedure when "a situation in which a diﬃcult non-probabilistic
problem is solved through the invention of a stochastic process that satisﬁes the relations
Page 3 / 132
1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:19==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
of the deterministic problem" [3]. By its nature, Monte Carlo approach has a vast ap-
plicability: physical sciences, engineering, climate change, computational biology, applied
statistics, artiﬁcial intelligence for games, search and rescue, ﬁnance and many others. It
is also seen to be one of the only methods in reliability and availability analysis that can
lead to solutions for complex multi-dimensional stochastic modelling problems. Its basic
principle consists of drawing a random sample of the uncertain input parameters of the
model and computing the output for each sampled value. Thus, statistically manipulation
of the resulting sample of values is obtained. [59]
1.3
Application of probability theory
As it will be further observed, many principles from probabilistic modelling and theory will
have application on this study. A classical and acknowledged interpretation of probability
is the empirical frequentist one which deﬁnes probability as the relative frequency of occur-
rence of an experiment outcome, when the number of experiment repetitions approaches
inﬁnity [2]. The objectiﬁcation of this sentence is very well known and understood as
being the fraction of the number of outcomes of interest from the total number of possible
outcomes of an experiment.
Nevertheless, in this paper, it will be preferred to refer to probability from
axiomatic, subjectivist point of view, rather than frequentist. This means assigning prob-
ability values as degrees of belief, or degrees of conﬁdence of an assessor with respect to
the occurrence of an event. Hence, probability assignment represents the numerical en-
coding of a state of knowledge of the assessor about a certain event, rather than the event
exact empirical property. The so obtained probability cannot be classiﬁed as ’wrong’ or
’right’, because it is a process of obeying to the axioms and laws of probability in order to
quantify the assessor’s internal state, its level of knowledge and information with respect
to the event at a given point in time. Therefore, the value of the probability can obvi-
ously change in time, as the assessor gains additional information and experimental data.
This corresponds with Bayesian deﬁnition of probability which suggests an update of the
known prior probability value of an event to a posterior value of probability, so that to
reﬂect the new acquired information. [2]
For a given set of model parameters, the performance of an engineered system
can be assessed. The basic random variables are deﬁned as the system parameters that
represent the available knowledge as well as the associated uncertainty in the considered
model. These uncertainties may origin in diﬀerent sources as physical, statistical or even
model uncertainty [4]. As an example of statistical uncertainty, which arises from not
enough statistical information is the number of occupants inside the building - it is known
Page 4 / 132
1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:20==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
that during weekly class hours the number of occupants can reach up to building maxi-
mum potential, but no statistics are done in relation to whether every building section is
being fully occupied at a given time. Another example one can consider, it may be the
uncertainties associated with idealized mathematical descriptions used sometimes in or-
der to approximate the actual physical phenomena related to ﬁre development (e.g. heat
radiation, plume rise). These are only a few examples of the many system parameters
that will be modeled as random variables along this project.
A very general representation of these uncertain quantities, frequently imple-
mented in modern methods of reliability and risk analysis, is obtained by having them
modeled as random variables following given probability distribution functions [6]. The
parameters of these distributions will be correspondingly estimated on the basis of statis-
tical data found in the literature or engineering judgement.
A continuous random variable is a random variable that can take on any value
in its deﬁnition interval and it is of particular importance in risk and reliability analyses
area. It is often used when one needs to asses the time to failure of a component, the
probability that the component survives up to a certain time without any failures, or even
the probability that it fails in a certain interval of time, assuming that it survived with no
failures up to the beginning of interval. Such parameters are determined by monitoring the
probability and cumulative density function of a so-called hazard function [6]. This is
of relevance for this study, as diﬀerent references concerning the reliability and availability
of active ﬁre safety systems will be introduced.
Another example where theory of probability will play its part is when investi-
gating the probability of a ﬁre inside a particular type of building in a certain amount
of years. It is appropriate to assume that the frequency of a ﬁre occurrence is likely to
follow a Poisson distribution [5]. Also for illustrating the probability distribution of
occurrence of an event is related to situations having only two possible, mutually exclu-
sive outcomes: a sprinkler system succeeding or not to control a ﬁre can be modeled by a
binomial distribution [5].
Though, it is to be observed that for diﬀerent actions there will be assumed some
diﬀerent theoretical distributions and it is well known that it is not often easy to derive
the functional form of the probability distribution underpinning a given process. For this
reason, an assumed probability distribution may be veriﬁed, in the light of the available
statistical data, using certain tests known as goodness of ﬁt tests [6].
This short introduction of the basic principles underlying the main subjects of
the thesis was necessary in order to allow for an anticipation of the objective of the
research.
Page 5 / 132
1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:21==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
1.4
Purpose of the thesis
"The ﬁre safety community needs to begin to move forward from discussing a set
of issues and concerns relating to uncertainty in ﬁre protection engineering to agreeing as
a community on practical steps to execute an uncertainty analysis." [58] (Notarianni,2016)
The statement unveils a real concern in the ﬁre safety community and it can be
considered the motto and the starting point of this study. As it was remarked, there are
no commercial techniques that can handle both ﬁre scenarios variable uncertainties and
branch probability involved in a typical risk analysis [7], therefore the thesis purposes to
come up with a numerical method that can address this problem. The work will not have
as goal to give a ﬁnal verdict related to the degree of ﬁre safety for a considered building,
but more likely, the goal is to create a modern, up-to-date framework, a tool for ﬁre safety
engineers and practitioners, through which the evacuation safety level can be evaluated
and predicted within conﬁdence limits formulated in probabilistic terms.
Thus, an alternative way for handling risk-informed and performance-based life
safety design will be envisioned throughout this study and its application will be showcased
in a real life ﬁre protection engineering situation. As anticipated, the method called Dis-
crete Event Simulation, who gained its popularity over the last decades in areas concerning
scheduling, resource allocation, capacity planning, manufacturing processes by exploring
fundamental questions such as latency, utilization and bottlenecks will be used to develop
credible simulations of the evacuation process in case of a ﬁre emergency. By means of
this method, it is intended to be constructed a time-dependent analytic modelling of the
ﬁre and smoke spread related phenomena (ignition, heat radiation, combustion products
development) and the real technological processes (detection, warning, suppression, evac-
uation), so that the natural order of this operations and the dynamic interactions that
are assumed to exist in between them in a real situation can be simulated. In the same
time, as the investigation may evolve to a complex multi-dimensional stochastic model-
ing matter, a Monte Carlo procedure comprising successive reiterations of the simulation
model will be seen to be yielding the problem solution.
Finally, starting from the ambition that the engineers are not just using tools,
but help create new ones, as well, it can be assumed that the expectation from this
project is to make use of an experimental vehicle built on some complex subjects, such as
mathematical/ logic modeling, Boolean algebra, probability theory, risk and consequence
modeling in order to pave a new way towards a credible and actual holistic approach in
ﬁre risk assessment.
Page 6 / 132
1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:22==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
2
Critical conditions in case of ﬁre
This section aims to explain the methods for assessing the life safety hazards
during ﬁre and to describe the eﬀects of smoke, heat and other toxic compounds on oc-
cupants. One should use with caution this notion and keep in mind that the eﬀect of
ﬁre environments on humans is an exceptionally diﬃcult subject to quantify, especially
as harm can be psychological, physiological or physical [8]. Hereinafter, it will be dis-
cussed what is considered to be important in relation to escape and survival during and
immediately after exposure to ﬁres. Since the development of ﬁre hazards is time based,
then the focus parameter of this investigation is the time when conditions in a building
section are considered untenable. Untenable conditions refers to the predicted moment in
time during a ﬁre when the occupants are likely to be unable to save themselves or the
exposure to smoke, heat or toxic eﬄuent can cause injury or death.
Therefor, the main objective of a life safety design should be to provide to the
building occupants an acceptable level of safety from ﬁre. This consideration is globally
accepted for a life safety design, as it is also stated in ISO 13387 [9] : “ Should a ﬁre
occur in which occupants are exposed to ﬁre eﬄuent and/or heat, the objective of the ﬁre
safety engineering strategy is to ensure that such exposure does not signiﬁcantly impede or
prevent the safe escape (if required) of essentially all occupants, without their experiencing
or developing serious health eﬀects”.
From an engineering design point of view, there can be distinguished some dif-
ferent approaches towards ﬁre safety in buildings, depending on the system under design
and on the envisioned ﬁre scenarios [10]:
• Design for no exposure to heat or smoke for worst-case ﬁre scenarios.
• Design for some degree of exposure, for certain ﬁre scenarios, but prove that the
amount of exposure would be insuﬃcient to signiﬁcantly impair escape or result in
signiﬁcant injury, or death.
• Design such that for a few envisaged scenarios there is a risk of deaths, but using
a probabilistic risk assessment demonstrate that the risk is acceptable from a code-
compliant design.
This is also the sort of design that will be evaluated during
this study case. For such models, conditions are rapidly becoming life threatening
from the point of view of exposure to hot, dense, irritant smoke impairing escape
capability or leading to incapacitation. Analysis of such scenarios aims to evaluate
the likelihood of occupants being able to escape prior to untenable conditions.
However, a quantiﬁcation of what was earlier referred to as life threatening con-
ditions needs to be introduced in the shape of so-called tenability criteria. They represent
Page 7 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:23==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
a numerical estimation of the life hazard of a scenario when ﬁre growth models are used.
Therefor, by these criteria, solutions for measuring the time for life-threatening conditions
to develop are being set up. Generally, the main concern of a tenability analysis will be
the eﬀect on the occupants located inside the building or its escape routes produced by
one or more of the following phenomena [8]:
• exposure to convective heat;
• exposure to radiant heat;
• exposure to toxic (narcotic, irritant) gases;
• visibility through a smoke layer.
Thermal eﬀects are evaluated based upon occupant exposures to heated gases
or ﬂame. High levels of convective heat may cause skin pain and hyperthermia. The
severity of aﬀection varies function of the person’s clothing and activity in the moment
of exposure, but also function of the moisture content of the ﬁre gases. With respect to
this matter, critical temperature for exposure to convective heat should be smaller than
60◦C, for a maximum exposure time of 30 minutes in a 100% saturated air environment,
according to the tenability criterion [8].
Radiant heat eﬀect can be considered to be cumulative with convective ex-
posure consequence. It causes erythema, partial skin burn and eventually not only full
thickness skin burns, but also respiratory tract burns. Tenability criterion for radiant heat
exposure dictates a lower than 2.5kW
m2 level of radiant heat ﬂux, corresponding to a tem-
perature in the hot upper layer of 458K [11]-assuming that both the emissivity from the
hot gas layer and the view factor from a point to the centre of the ﬂoor are one. Higher
levels of heat ﬂux associated with an exposure time longer than 5 minutes represent a
immediate threat to occupants life safety.
On the other hand, ﬁre resultant compounds form a highly complex mixture
of vapours, liquid and solid smoke particulates containing hundreds of substances, many of
them being exceedingly toxic. The type of toxic substances resulted in ﬁres and their yields
depend on the composition of the burning materials and the decomposition conditions.
The toxic eﬀects of exposure is also inﬂuenced by the concentration at which diﬀerent
substances produce a poisonous eﬀect and by the complex interaction between diﬀerent
chemical compounds. As it was previously explained, an important consideration will
be paid to those toxic hazards that can inﬂuence the survival during and immediately
after exposure, or burden the safe escape by causing reduced decision-making capacity
and impaired motor activity. Eventually, inhalation of toxic combustion products can
lead to loss of consciousness or death, by depraving the brain tissues of oxygen.
For
Page 8 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:24==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
some forms of incapacitation, particularly partial asphyxia such as that produced by
exposure to environments containing low oxygen concentration or carbon monoxide, the
modern human biology studies indicate well-deﬁned endpoints of functional impairment.
Among the most common narcotic gases produced during combustion there are included:
carbon monoxide (CO), hydrogen cyanide (HCN), carbon dioxide (CO2) and for them
the tenability limits are further expressed in the form of the lethal dose that can lead to
incapacitation for an approximate exposure period of 5 minutes* [10],[13]:
• CO > 5000ppm;
• HCN > 150ppm;
• CO2 > 40000ppm or 7% per volume;
• O2 < 13%.
*exposure to any of the listed narcotic gases for more than 5 minutes will lead to
incapacitation, but these limits should be used with caution, as they may be subjective
for vulnerable members of population. Exposure to these gases in such concentration for
30 minutes will cause death.
In practice, a more comprehensive method to assess the eﬀect of toxic combustion
products is to perform a Fractional Eﬀective Dose analysis which takes into account the
cumulative eﬀect of exposure to multiple narcotic gases [12]. The FED dimensionless
value can be approximated using the following formula :
FED =
Pn
i=1 Ci∆ti
LCt50
(2)
*where ∆ti is the time interval, expressed in minutes;
Ci is the mass concentration of material burned at the end of time interval,
expressed in
g
m3 and LCt50 is the lethal exposure dose from test data in g·min
m3 .
The tenability criteria used to check that smoke is not life threatening, dictates
maximum values of Fractional Eﬀective Dose in between 0.1 to 0.3 [13].
Visibility distance is a very important part of tenability analysis, as well. It
reﬂects the ability of occupants to escape through building spaces or to locate escape routes
and exits. As smoke production during ﬁre produces irritancy to eyes and respiratory tract
which goes hand in hand with visual obscuration and decrease of ﬂow speed, resulting
eventually in inability to escape or to ﬁnd a safe place. Visibility through smoke depends
on its optical density, the type of smoke and the characteristics of the target object to be
Page 9 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:25==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
viewed. For this reason, appropriate planning of the escape routes (illuminated exit signs,
ﬂoor level markings, lighting) is of uttermost importance in ﬁre safety design [8].
Since this criterion is based upon smoke density, illumination, and distance, from
numerically point of view, it translates in an estimation of the distance at which occupants
can read exit signs or distinguish exit paths through smoke:
• it should be minimum 5 meters, in case of ﬁre cells <150m2
⇒optical density < 2dB
m ;
• it should be minimum 10 meters, in case of ﬁre cells >150m2
⇒optical density < 1dB
m .
Flashover can be seen as a critical condition as it represents the sudden tran-
sition from a localized ﬁre to combustion of all exposed fuel surfaces within an enclosure,
provided that there is adequate ventilation and suﬃcient heat is released such that all
combustibles within the enclosure are involved [14]. This phenomena is uncontrollable
within the means of occupants and may be better understood by quantifying the situa-
tions under which it can occur:
• a minimum heat ﬂux at ﬂoor level of 20kW
m2 ;
• a minimum burning rate of 40-80 g
s;
• a critical ceiling temperature, around 600◦C ;
• emergence of ﬂames from opening;
• thermal instability (between rate of heat release and heat losses) [14].
It is undoubtedly that ﬂashover occurrence gives the occupants no chance to
survive and under no circumstances should they be present in the compartment at the
time when a ﬁre may reach this stage. Anyway, ﬂashover is nothing else but a consequence
of ﬁre following its course, developing and growing. Therefore, if the building design is
performed such that to respect the previously described tenability criteria, the occupants
should have been evacuated by the time of ﬂashover.
As a conclusion, tenability analysis serves to determine the impact of a ﬁre sce-
nario on the building’ occupants life safety. It is considered that the acceptance criteria
are fulﬁlled if none of the persons is aﬀected by the previously described critical condi-
tions. The technical understanding of these concepts and ready to be used in ﬁre risk
assessment and performance-based ﬁre protection design is that the time for any of the
critical conditions to occur should be larger than the time for occupants to reach safety
(ASET>RSET).
Page 10 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:26==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
2.1
Calculation of Available Safe Egress Time (ASET)
The basic principles used to calculate the environmental conditions due to a ﬁre
in a compartment are the conservation of mass, energy, and momentum. The application
of the conservation laws will lead to a series of diﬀerential equations. By making certain
assumptions about the energy and mass transfer in and out of the compartment bound-
aries, the laws of mass and energy conservation can result in a relatively complete set of
equations. Analytically solutions can be derived by using results from experiments and a
number of limiting approximations. Such solutions have generated numerous expressions,
which may be used to predict a variety of environmental factors in a ﬁre room. Following
next, it will be explained how it was made of analytically derived formulas to predict the
times of occurrence of the previously deﬁned critical conditions. [15]
The parameter ASET signiﬁes the time from the ignition start up to the moment
when conditions become untenable to occupants such that they are no longer able to escape
without assistance. The main factors aﬀecting occupants safety evacuation in case of a
ﬁre are the ones described in the previous section, meaning the height of the smoke layer,
visibility, temperature, and toxicity.
The evaluation of the available safe egress time is a performance based veriﬁca-
tion and it was chosen to be performed by assessing and comparing: the time for smoke
ﬁlling the compartment up to a certain admissible height, the time for smoke to impair
evacuation due to low visibility, the time for radiant heat to reach tenability criterion and
the time for carbon monoxide to reach the maximum concentration limits, as described
in the previous section. These times will be evaluated without introducing computational
ﬂuid dynamics analysis of the considered compartment ﬁre, but by setting up mathemat-
ical models of the physical phenomena, as it will be further explained.
Critical time for smoke ﬁlling
The development of the layer of smoke in an enclosure ﬁre is usually described
by a two-zone model. Through this idealized model, one can imagine the interior space
divided into two layers of gas with spatially uniform properties, while the discontinuity
between the upper zone containing the hot smoke and the lower zone containing the cold
air is located at the same height everywhere in the enclosure. The hot upper volume of
smoke is just the consequence of the natural smoke ﬁlling in conﬁned spaces, assuming
that all the compartment openings are closed, so that the smoke ﬂow is not inﬂuenced
by the outside environment. It is important to deﬁne a height level to which the hot
layer of smoke can descend without posing an immediate threat to occupants safety. This
level is usually accepted as z=1.6m + 0.1* h and is called admissible smoke layer height.
Page 11 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:27==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Applying mass conservation of the volume, the corresponding time for smoke to reach this
level can be assessed as follows [16]:
tSLH =


"
z
h
 −2
3
−1
#
· 5A
2 · kb · α
1
3 · h
2
3


3
5
(3)
*where A is the compartment area, expressed in m2;
h is the compartment height, z is the smoke layer height, both expressed in meters;
α is the ﬁre growth rate, expressed in kW
s2 ;
kb is called conversion factor and can be calculated as kb = 0.21
ρg

ρ2
∞g
cpT∞
1/3
Literature suggests an estimation for kb of 0.064 [16], even though, as it can be
seen, it is dependent on the gas density, so it varies with temperature development.
Critical time for visibility
The ability of light to propagate through a given medium is inﬂuenced by the
optical density of that environment. As during a ﬁre, the interior visibility of an enclosure
will be progressively obscured by the development of smoke, a quantiﬁcation of the optical
density, OD, inside of a compartment subjected to ﬁre conditions is necessary. Equation
4, as suggested in [17], shows a way to compute the optical density, with respect to
combustible materials smoke potential properties and the ﬁre compartment dimensions.
OD =
1
ρair · ∆Hair
· S0 · ∆E
V
(4)
*where ρair = 1.2 kg
m3 is the air density at 20◦C and at atmospheric pressure of 1atm;
∆Hair = 3000kJ
kg is air lower heat of combustion of air; [17]
S0 is material average smoke potential, expressed in dB
m ;
V is the compartment volume, expressed in m3;
∆E is the energy release, which for a non constant ﬁre (αt2 ﬁre), it can be
evaluated as ∆E =
R
α · t2 = α
3 · t3 ;
α is the ﬁre growth rate, expressed in kW
s2 .
Consequently, by setting the smoke optical density in the compartment to the
Page 12 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:28==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
maximum limit accepted by the tenability criterion, the time for the visibility to be
impaired can be extracted from equation 4:
tvis =
3
r
OD · 3V · ∆Hair · ρair
S0 · α
(5)
Critical time for heat radiation
As mentioned before the maximum admissible ﬂux of radiated heat of 2.5kW
m2
corresponds to a temperature in the hot layer of gas of 458K. Hence, for addressing this
problem it is considered acceptable to investigate the time when the resulted hot gas
will reach this elevated temperature. The following equation, derived from [11] gives an
estimation of the average temperature of smoke situated upper than the admissible layer
of smoke, z:
1 −Ta
Tg
=
Q
3
2 · αloss
3√α · ρair · Cp.air · Ta · V · (1 −z
h)
(6)
From equation 6 it can be subsequently derived, for a non steady ﬁre (αt2 ﬁre),
the time for the temperature to reach 458K:
t458 =
v
u
u
u
t

(1−Ta
Tg )·3√α·ρair·Cp.air·Ta·V ·(1−z
h)
αloss
 2
3
α
(7)
*where: Ta is the initial ambient temperature, considered as 293.15K;
Tg is the hot gas maximum admissible temperature of 458K;
α is the ﬁre growth rate, expressed in kW
s2 ;
air density, ρair = 1.2 kg
m3;
air speciﬁc heat, Cp.air = 1 kJ
kg·K;
h is the compartment height, z is the smoke layer height, both expressed in meters;
V is total volume of the compartment, expressed in m3;
αloss is the coeﬃcient of heat loss through enclosure boundaries (concrete walls),
set up to 0.4, similar as in [11].
Observation: this approach was preferred, as it conservatively assumes that there
is no heat loss due to mass ﬂowing out through openings (windows). This can be valid
simply because windows may be closed at the time of ﬁre, or in case of large compartments,
signiﬁcant time may pass until the hot layer of smoke will decrease to the opening height.
Page 13 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:29==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Critical time for toxicity
Estimating toxic hazard of combustion gases in a ﬁre compartment is of great
importance, being actually one of the tenability criterion a ﬁre safety engineer should
verify. In order to determine the previously explained eﬀects of toxic ﬁre products it
is necessary to determine the basic parameters required to quantify exposure. To allow
an estimation of this type of hazard, one should assess the amount of the toxic product
produced per unit fuel burned, i.e. the species yield. Once the yield is known, the next
step is to verify what is the necessary amount of time for the product of combustion to
reach a certain concentration in the ﬁre gases.
For this study, it has been chosen to analyze the development of carbon monoxide
concentration as a consequence of ﬁre ignition in a compartment. The reason for choosing
carbon monoxide is that this gas is always present in ﬁres, often at high concentrations
and after exposure it remains in the human blood in the form of carboxyhemoglobin.
Also, studies of ﬁre victims lead to the suggestion that carbon monoxide intoxication is
likely to be the major ultimate cause of death in most ﬁres [19]. A strong evidence for
that conclusion was the high levels of carboxyhemoglobin discovered in the blood of ﬁre
survivors or fatalities, meaning that of all the toxic resulted gases, CO was inhaled in a
very signiﬁcant quantity.
The development of species can be related to the total mass ﬂowing upward, at
a certain height, within the plume boundaries, called the plume mass. It was preferred to
assess initially the plume mass ﬂow using Zukowski plume equations [15]:
mp
kg
s

= 0.21 ·

ρ2
air · g
Cp.air · Tair
 1
3
· Q
1
3 · z
5
3
(8)
Consequently the concentration of carbon monoxide, reached in a given time after
ﬁre ignition and at a certain compartment height (it was chosen to verify this criterion
at the same admissible smoke layer height, z) is obtained by inserting in the previous
equation the yield of the carbon monoxide, the expected volume occupied by the gas and
the unknown time variable:
CCO
 kg
m3

= 0.21 ·

ρ2
air · g
Cp.air · Tair
 1
3
· Q
1
3 · z
5
3 · yCO · 1
Vg
· t
(9)
By equating the so obtained concentration with the maximum admissible con-
centration of CO, as given by the tenability criterion in section 2, one can derive the time
Page 14 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:30==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
for the toxic gas to arrive to the maximum limit, as presented in equation 10:
tCO =
"
Vg · CCO.max
0.21 ·

ρ2
air·g
Cp.air·Tair
 1
3
· α
1
3 · z
5
3 · yCO
# 5
3
(10)
*where: air density, ρair = 1.2 kg
m3;
air speciﬁc heat, Cp.air = 1 kJ
kg·K;
gravitational acceleration, g = 9.81 m
s2
Tair is the initial ambient temperature, considered as 293.15K;
yCO represents the yield of carbon monoxide.
Vg is volume of the upper layer of smoke, expressed in m3;
CCO.max represents the maximum limit of CO concentration. It should be ob-
served that a transformation from the given value in PPM to kg
m3 needs to be done. With
respect to this, guidance from [18] is used.
Similar procedure can be performed in order to determine the time to reach the
maximum admissible concentration of any other narcotic gas.
Finally, which of the conditions, i.e. visibility, smoke, heat, toxicity is ﬁrst re-
alized depends on the combustible material characteristics, the convective and radiative
heat losses from the plume or the hot layer to the boundaries and as well on the dimen-
sions of the enclosure. After checking the possible time of occurrence for the previously
introduced critical conditions, it will be obviously chosen the minimum between them as
the design available safe egress time.
2.2
Fire development
For a complete understanding of the notions introduced in the previous chapter,
the considered ﬁre development model, together with the reasons for choosing it, and the
consequent assumptions need to be detailed.
When the objective is to facilitate the escape of the occupants and therefore the
time frame is relatively short (most often around couple of minutes), the most suitable
characterization of the ﬁre development is generally in terms of energy release rate vs.
time. This is actually a consequence of the fact that the rate at which energy is released
in a compartment ﬁre is the one controlling to a considerable extent the environmental
eﬀects of the ﬁre, such as the plume ﬂow, the hot gas temperature, and the rate of descent
Page 15 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:31==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
of the hot gas layer [15]. When describing an enclosure ﬁre in terms of the development
of the released energy rate, the ﬁre development can be divided into diﬀerent phases
accordingly: ignition, growth, ﬂashover, steady state, decay.
Incipient phase can take from few seconds up to several days, as long as it
involves small amount of energy and the form of heat transfer is not radiation.
It is
usually of little threat and it can be easily terminated by the occupants if the small
amount of heating and smoke produced in this stage are being detected. Otherwise it
will be followed by the ignition of the combustible material and the development of a self-
sustaining combustion reaction. Growth stage follows the start of ﬂaming combustion,
as the ﬁre develops and spreads across the fuel surfaces, increasing its area of burning
and the released heat. Understanding of the ﬁre growth behaviour is very important, as
the initial risk to life safety is due to the heat and smoke produced during this stage.
It is fundamental that the occupants will evacuate the building during this part of ﬁre
development and before a possible ﬂashover occurs or before the ﬁre to become fully
developed, which is why this study will focus on the development of the ﬁre during the
non steady, growing phase. Flashover is the transition from the growth period to the
fully developed stage in ﬁre development and is characterized by the sudden transition
from a localized ﬁre to combustion of all exposed fuel surfaces within an enclosure. As it
was explained before in the Critical conditions in case of ﬁre chapter, it is not possible
for the occupants to survive a ﬁre after ﬂashover because of the high temperatures and
high concentrations of toxic resultant combustion products. An important observation is
that ﬂashover will not necessarily always occur-e.g. in a large compartment, it may be
possible that not all the combustible items to be ﬂaming at the same time due to the
room size. During fully developed phase, the ﬁre has grown to its maximum rate of
released energy and the combustion is in a steady state. This stage is of most importance
for structural ﬁre safety and property protection design. The decay stage follows after a
period of fully developed burning, when the fuel has been partially consumed. The ﬁre
intensity will decrease in this stage up to when the sustained burning can no longer be
maintained. The idealized ﬁre development curve as a function of the heat release rate
and time, along with the presented ﬁre stages can be seen in ﬁgure 1. [8]
The simplest assessment of the released energy during the non steady phase of
a ﬁre is given by the t-squared design ﬁre model where the heat release rate is assumed
to be proportional to the square of time, and a coeﬃcient that can take diﬀerent values,
depending on the burning material, denoting diﬀerent growth rates of the ﬁre [1]. Hence,
the t-squared ﬁre is expressed as:
˙Q = αt2.
(11)
Page 16 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:32==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 1: Typical ﬁre development curve- adapted from [8]
T-squared ﬁres are simple heat release rate curves. They do not produce all the
ﬁre characteristics that one may use in a ﬁre safety designs or ﬁre risk assessments [1], but
it is considered they give suﬃcient information about the time-dependent ﬁre characteris-
tics necessary for this investigation, such as development of temperature, smoke, CO and
CO2 concentrations and mass ﬂow rates in the compartment of ﬁre origin. Additionally,
as outlined in [8] and [20], t2 ﬁre is a reasonable approximation of the ﬁre growth in order
for decisions to be made about ﬁre safety.
Another assumption that lead to development of the equations from the previous
chapter (eq.3, eq.5, eq.6, eq.10) is that during the growth stage, the conditions in the ﬁre
compartment are derived from a two zone model approximation. The air in the lower
layer is considered to be clear and close to ambient temperature in the early stages of ﬁre.
The plume above the ﬁre carries combustion products and hot gases, leading to a quick
temperature rise in the upper layer. After reaching the ceiling, the hot ﬂow of gases will
travel radially away from ﬁre, gradually ﬁlling up the compartment volume.
An important remark is that it was considered to be more conservative to rely
on the hypothesis that there will always be suﬃcient existing combustible materials in
the ﬁre compartment, hence the progress to critical conditions will be independent of the
mass of the combustible materials. This is in a very good agreement with the assumption
of a fuel-controlled ﬁre, since after ignition and during the initial growth stage, there is
suﬃcient oxygen available for combustion and the development of the ﬁre entirely depends
on the characteristics and availability of the fuel. Additionally, because occupants are
expected to evacuate the compartment during ﬁre growth phase, fresh air will enter the
room through the evacuation open door, resulting in a combustion which would not be
deprived of oxygen, hence ﬁre will not become ventilation-controlled during this stage.
Page 17 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:33==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
2.3
Calculation of Required Safe Egress Time (RSET)
The required safe egress time is understood as the necessary amount of time for
the occupants in order to reach a protected area, therefor RSET is strongly related to
processes by which occupants escape. It can be accepted thus as the cumulative eﬀect of
several factors: detection and provision of alarms, response to warnings (also called the
pre-movement process- inﬂuenced by the occupant proﬁle, such as age, physical ability,
population density and especially by the people’s reaction and decision behaviour such as
seeking information, collecting belongings, choosing an exit), actual travel toward an exit
or a safe place and queuing process on corridors or in front of emergency exit doors.[1]
The latter is likewise aﬀected by some parameters, among which the reliability of the
design of escape routes, exit numbers and their width, but also the physiological and
psychological behavioural consequence of occupants being exposed to heat and smoke
on their escape.
Technically, RSET is represented by the cumulative time of all the
aforementioned processes, as described in equation 12. [1]
RSET = tda + trd + tt + tque
(12)
Further, the assessment of each of these values will be explicitly described and
their schematic succession can be observed in ﬁgure 2.
Figure 2: Schematic representation of evacuation times- adapted from [1]
Page 18 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:34==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
The time for detection and alarm, tda is considered to be the amount of time
that it takes for the automatic detection system to detect the ﬁre and play a warning
recorded message, so that the occupants will be informed that an emergency is occurring.
It is set according to the usage category of the building section and the existing ﬁre
safety installations. [1] By introducing physical models for diﬀerent ﬁre scenarios, this
amount can be evaluated. For the ﬁrst part of this study, a constant average estimation
of the ﬁre detectors response time is preferred, as it is widely accepted and recommended
by technical guidelines [21], [22]. Based on the type of ﬁre detectors units existing in
the building, it is considered that lag in between ﬁre detection and sounding the alarm
message is zero.
Once the warning was sounded, the pre-movement stage commence. During
this stage people assess the information they’ve been given and make a decision whether
to take any action or to wait for further cues. Pre-movement time can be diﬀerent from
one occupant to another, even if they are located within the same enclosure. The reason
for that is because there are involved many human processes, such as perception of haz-
ard, cognition of hazard, decision to avoid, availability to avoid, which are all subjected
to individual subjectivity. Therefore, when estimating the reaction and decision time, one
should take into account some factors: building parameters (occupancy type, ﬂoor plan
layout and dimensions and exits location, warning system and related ﬁre safety proce-
dures, active ﬁre protection systems) and occupants status (their density and location in
the building, their activities before the emergency, characteristics of the individuals (age,
gender, physical and mental ability), the group relationships and responsibilities) [9].
Also any minimum (but undesirable) interaction with ﬁre, such as sight of smoke or
ﬂames, or possible exposure to heat or combustion eﬄuents, it is very likely to produce
an immediate occupants decision to evacuate, drastically decreasing the pre-movement
period [8]. Hence, the time for people to respond and decide, trd is not an explicit value,
its range varies function of several elements. Though, despite this complexity, based on
observational data showing the mean and variation of pre-movement times, some constant
values can be attributed for this process duration in diﬀerent given contexts [21], [22].
Travel time, tt is relating the open path distance to be crossed by the occupants
to reach a place of relative safety to the time until the environment is likely to become
life threatening due to smoke and ﬁre.
The open path is the route traversed by the
occupants while escaping until they exit the building or enter a safe place. The speed of
travel depends on the type of occupancy, people density inside of the compartment, and
whether they are traversing an horizontal plan or inclined plan (such as stairs). Eventually,
the travel time is derived by dividing the length of the path to be covered to the speciﬁc
occupant speed. [1]
Page 19 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:35==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Queuing time, tque, needs to be considered as well. On their way to a safe place,
occupants will eventually need to traverse some narrower boundaries of the compartment,
such as corridors or doors. This will implicitly diminish the speed of their travel, increase
the people density in the respective area and create possible bottlenecks, resulting in some
time lagging due to queuing. In order to assess this time, one needs to consider the actual
ﬂow of people passing through these sorts of restrictions per minute of evacuation. The
actual ﬂow is determined as the product between the eﬀective width of the boundary layer
(stairs, corridors), the occupants speed of travel and the corresponding population density
(in this case, this is the density of people passing through a doorway, which is way larger
than the people density inside a compartment, so the two terms should not be confused).
[8], [23]
Page 20 / 132
2. CRITICAL CONDITIONS IN CASE OF FIRE
==PAGE:36==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
3
Classical Approach
Study case description
In this section a real case complex building is introduced and its evacuation
safety level will be investigated by means of a quantitative ﬁre risk to life analysis. It will
be demonstrated how this kind of investigation is performed aided by classical event trees
models and frequency versus consequences curves. Later in the project, the output of this
risk assessment will be compared with the dynamic analysis results.
3.1
Use of the building
The chosen building for this investigation can be identiﬁed as "building 303A"
which is part of DTU campus in Kongens Lyngby. It is seen as a complex building as it
covers more than 3000m2, incorporating auditoriums, reading rooms and computer rooms,
a large open space in the form of a central lobby and an interior open garden. Thanks to
DTU Campus Service department the access to the building site and to the ﬂoor plans was
granted as well, but complete speciﬁcations about ﬁre safety measures were not shared,
therefor along the project, some assumptions with respect to building’ ﬁre safety aspect
were considered, together with some idealizations of the ﬂoor plan. As mentioned, the
facility is part of Denmark Technical University and its location can be seen in ﬁgure 3
below:
Figure 3: Building 303A - inside red contour- extracted from [25]
Page 21 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:37==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
The normal access to the building is possible from two lateral sides, while emer-
gency exits are placed on all its sides, as it can be observed on the ﬂoor plan in ﬁgure
4. Fireﬁghters and emergency trucks intervention is eased on eastern part of the building
through Asmussens Allé and access to the available street water hydrants.
Figure 4: Building 303A - ﬂoor plan and compartment numbering
One thing that should also be noted in ﬁgure 4 is the numbering of the rooms
from C1 to C10, which will be consistent along the project. The inner garden hasn’t
received any numbering as the access to it is restricted, so it will we excluded from any
further ﬁre safety analysis. Each compartment dimensions can be found in Appendix
B. It is considered that every of the noted rooms represents a ﬁre compartment itself,
having the capability of preventing the ﬁre from spreading to the other compartments
within the required time for evacuation. By a ﬁre compartment one should understand an
independent ﬁre-resisting unit which, by means of load-bearing building elements rated
as REI 60 1 or non-load-bearing building elements rated as EI 60, is isolated from the
adjacent spaces of the building [27].
Regarding the use of this facility, it is considered that the whole building 303A
is intended for students activities and use only. Therefor the comprised building sections
1According to European standard EN 13501-2 [26] a product is classiﬁed as REI 60 if it has proven
load bearing capacity, integrity and insulation for at least 60 minutes
Page 22 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:38==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
are assumed to be in use during day time, while hosting large amount of occupants, from
a minimum of 50 occupants in a small auditorium to a maximum of 500 occupants in the
large open space (later considerations will be introduced for taking into account rush hours
and the hours with less occupancy). It is, of course, not expected that most of the people
that occupy the building sections are familiar with the escape routes and contingency
procedures, however they are able to evacuate by themselves to a safe place in case of
emergency. Keeping in mind this assumptions, it can be considered that all the building
sections fall into usage category number 3 2. The purpose of attributing a certain usage
category is to correlate the ﬁre safety measures with the use of the building and to the
risk for the occupants of being exposed to ﬁre.
Regarding ﬁre safety active measures, during this investigation it is assumed that
at least the following equipment are installed according to building regulations [27], as
their presence will inﬂuence both the RSET and ASET, and their reliability will be later
discussed.
• Automatic ﬁre detection system (ABA): has the possibility to detect a ﬁre
in its initial phase and subsequently to send an alarm to the emergency services.
Detectors are placed all through the building and once activated, they will trigger
the other ﬁre safety installations [27].
• Automatic warning system: is one which is connected to the automatic ﬁre
detection system and it cautions the occupants of the building in the event of ﬁre.
It is a necessary installation as there are building sections accommodating more
than 150 possible occupants and as it is recommended for usage category 3, acoustic
signals as spoken messages or recorded tape shall be sounded in case of emergency
[27].
• Automatic smoke ventilation system: is also activated by the automatic ﬁre
detection system if the case. It has the role of increasing the available safe egress
time by extracting the hot toxic smoke and keeping the smoke layer height at an
acceptable level. It is a mandatory ﬁre safety installation for ﬁre sections larger than
1000m2 if no sprinkler system is installed. It is assumed that vents are located in all
the compartments at ceiling level and the necessary ﬂow of fresh air is considered
that will be supplied through room openings [27].
• Escape route lighting are also used in order to ensure that occupants from any
point inside the building section are able to see a luminescent directional guide to an
2According to building regulations [27] "Usage category 3 comprises building sections for daily occu-
pancy by large numbers of people, in which the people who occupy the building section are not necessarily
familiar with the escape routes from the building section but are capable of taking themselves unaided to
a place of safety."
Page 23 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:39==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
escape path or a lit sign at exit doors. They help decreasing the decision and travel
time during evacuation by helping people to orientate themselves in and decide their
way along the egress route, especially if they are not familiar with the building [27].
• Fire hose reels are a must in case of ﬁre section areas larger than 600m2, as it is
the current case. Together with hand-held extinguishers, they are intended to
be used also by the occupants that do not necessarily have any ﬁre extinguishing
qualiﬁcations in order to ﬁght a ﬁre in its early stage [27].
Other active ﬁre safety measures may be found necessary after a primary analysis of the
building evacuation safety level. If it will be the case, suggestions for additional measures
will be made at a later stage of the project.
3.2
Possible ﬁre scenarios
Fire scenarios depends on the number of permutations that can be constructed
based on the existing combustible materials within the compartment, the selection of the
design ﬁre, the amount of population spread in the building, the ﬁre protection measures
that are in place, hence all the ﬁre related events that may be anticipated. The proper
construction of ﬁre scenarios and the proper analysis of their output, however, are the key
to a credible ﬁre risk assessment [1].
First scenario envisions a possible ﬁre in compartment 10. As an observation,
all the compartments, except from compartment 6 which is the large open space centered
positioned (according to the considered notations), are approximately similar in terms of
dimensions, number of exits and escape routes, number of occupants or type of combustible
materials, all of them being student auditoriums or class rooms. Hence the choice of
compartment 10 is purely arbitrary.
It is than assumed that a chair may catch ﬁre in the auditorium uppermost row,
positioning can be seen in ﬁgure 5, leading to a ﬁre that may block the occupants safe
egress through the closest door. Therefore, all the occupants, no matter their location
in the compartment, will have to travel downstairs the auditorium and evacuate directly
to the outside of the building by means of the 1m wide single door. Since regulations
[21] indicate an occupant density for higher education facilities of maximum 0.5pers
m2 , an
amount of 60 occupants are assumed to be present in the ﬁre compartment at the moment
of ﬁre ignition. As the dimensions of the compartment are not too large, the time for
occupants to react and decide to begin the evacuation will be considered 45s. Given also
that an automatic detection system is in place, this choice for the pre-movement time is
in accordance with regulations [21], [22], that say it can be considered less than 1 min in
Page 24 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:40==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 5: Scenario 1 - ﬁre location
this given situation. In order for the last person to evacuate, which will be conservatively
assumed to be located on the furthest away place from the available ﬁre exit, the occupant
will have to travel 11m on the auditorium stairs (100mm riser step height and 300mm
step width) and 8m of horizontal travel. Regarding the queuing time, one should keep in
mind also the 150mm doors boundaries, therefore a 0.7m door eﬀective width needs to be
considered in the calculations.
Regarding the ﬁre characteristics, as said before, the combustible material is
considered a chair that may burn with a fast rate. Building regulations [21] , [27] suggest
for this category of buildings that ﬁre design should be veriﬁed using fast ﬁre growth rates
of 0.047kW
s2 . The material combustion properties of interest for evaluating the possible
critical conditions due to ﬁre are listed in the table below, together with the diﬀerent
literature sources they have been extracted from:
Table 1: Combustible material 1 speciﬁc characteristics
α
kW
s2

S0[dB/m]
yCO[g/g]
0.047
49.5 [17]
0.0063 [24]
Page 25 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:41==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
An important remark to be considered when evaluating the time for visibility to
be impaired due to smoke is that the compartment is used as an auditorium, so the total
volume of air should be obtained by subtracting from the volume of the parallelepipedic
compartment, the volume of the space underneath the stairs ﬂoor. Figure 6 illustrates
this remark together with the room dimensions.
Figure 6: Compartment 10 dimensions
Likewise, when addressing the other three critical conditions criteria, in order to
be on the conservative side of the design, one should consider the time for smoke ﬁlling
from the point of view of the occupant standing on the last row, hence the room height
and the smoke layer height should correspond to this location.
Second scenario envisions a possible ﬁre in the large open space, compartment
6.
It is assumed that a ﬁre can start in the middle of this compartment, next to a
notice wooden board, fully packed with newspapers, posters, advertising and other paper
materials stacked up nearby. The materials responsible for combustion and causing the
smoke production and the burning resultants are a mixture of wood, paper and plastics.
Though, in the calculation there is only considered the ﬁrst material ignited: wood. The
material combustion properties of interest for evaluating the possible critical conditions
due to ﬁre are listed in the table 2, together with the diﬀerent literature sources they have
been extracted from :
Table 2: Combustible material 2 speciﬁc characteristics
α
kW
s2

S0[dB/m]
yCO[g/g]
0.012
74.3 [17]
0.005 [24]
A number of 250 occupants are assumed to be present in the compartment when
the ﬁre will start. Due to the large dimensions of the compartment, a much larger time will
be required for the ABA system to detect the ﬁre and play a recorded warning message for
the occupants to evacuate. According to building regulations [21], [27], 2min are suggested
Page 26 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:42==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
as a detection and warning time and 1min for people to react and begin the process of
evacuation. The longest distance a person may need to cover in order to reach a ﬁre exit
is considered to be 28m. Additionally, occupants will need to travel the 2.75m length of
stairs positioned at the entrance of the building. The stairs and the doors are considered
places that may create possible bottlenecks due to the fact that large amount of people
are expected to travel these small areas, resulting an increased assumed people density in
the stairs of 1.5pers
m2 and 2pers
m2 density in front of the exit doors.
Third scenario proposes the same compartment and the same combustible
load as second scenario, but a ﬁre developing with a fast growth rate (α = 0.047kW
s2 ) in a
diﬀerent location inside the building. It is then conceived a scenario where the same notice
board and paper materials are placed close to one of the building entrances, as in ﬁgure
7. In this way, if they are ignited, the ﬁre will block four of the exit doors, resulting that
occupants will only be able to use the remaining four exit doors, placed on the opposite
side of the building.
Figure 7: Scenario 3 - ﬁre location
To add even more severity to this scenario, it is assumed that the establishment
is used up to its maximum capacity in terms of accommodating occupants, due to some
festivity organized inside the open space of the building. For this reason a double number
of occupants, compared to the previous scenario are expected to be present within the
Page 27 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:43==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
large ﬁre compartment, summing up to a total of 500 persons.
For this scenario, an
occupant may need to travel a way more longer distance so that to reach a safe place.
In order for the last person to evacuate, he will need to traverse approximately 48m of
horizontal travel and 2.75m length of stairs (150mm riser step height). The occupant
will face also the queuing process on the stairs, where a much larger density of persons is
expected 2.5pers
m2 and in front of the exit doors, almost a crush of population 3pers
m2 .
Scenarios overview and results
The described scenarios are considered to be representative for possible ﬁres that
may occur within the study case considered building. Hereinafter, a brief of the envisioned
scenarios is once again presented and the obtained results are summarized in table 3.
Scenario 1 considers one of the worst case that may happen in a student audi-
torium: a fast ﬁre igniting during daily operation of the facility, while the compartment
is fully occupied with students. Fire being close to the main exit of the room, it will force
all people to evacuate by means of one exit door. Scenario 2, on the other hand, shifts
the investigation from classrooms to building open space lobby, describing a typical ﬁre
that may occur inhere. A wooden board fully packed with paper materials ignites with
a medium growth rate, while the space is assumed to be also on a normal daily usage,
where students can meet, relax, have lunch or study. Scenario 3 envisions a more severe
situation that may happen in the building’s lobby: during an university fair where 500
people are present, the same board with paper materials is placed at the entrance of the
building and rapidly catches ﬁre blocking four of the main exits. The presented cases have
been transposed into digits and by means of time-dependent modelling of ﬁre and smoke
spread, occupant evacuation and ﬁre detection system response, as described in section
2.1 and 2.3, the consequences of the chosen ﬁre scenarios were evaluated in detail and
they can be seen in Appendix C.
Table 3: Scenarios and calculated time (in seconds) to tenability criteria realization
scenario
location
combustible
tvis
tSLH
t458
tCO
ASET
RSET
ESL
1
compartment 10
chair & cushions
162
158
210
154
154
128
1.2
2
compartment 6
board & paper
363
574
528
623
363
218
1.66
3
compartment 6
board & paper
230
437
335
474
230
296
0.78
Note: the obtained numbers are resulted under the assumption that the ﬁre is
able to develop in a compartment, without being controlled or restrained by the action of
active protection systems (i.e. automatic ﬁre ventilation system).
Page 28 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:44==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Before drawing any conclusion about the ﬁre safety of this building, it is worth
to be reminded that the predominant method in deterministic Danish performance-based
designs resumes to the evaluation of the Evacuation Safety Level (ESL) given in terms of
the Available Safe Egress Time (ASET) and the Required Safe Egress Time (RSET), as
seen in equation 13:
ESL = ASET
RSET
(13)
This method, despite it being extensively used, it has been the subject of contro-
versy. Excessive focus on achieving an acceptable ESL may lead the ﬁre safety engineers
to neglect or not to foresee some scenarios uncertainties or parameters variation related
to ﬁre development or to behaviour of people during emergency situations [28].
It is thus observed that in the case of the ﬁrst two envisioned scenarios the
available time is larger than the required time for a safe evacuation, hence an acceptable
safety level is achieved. So, in an ordinary auditorium with a normal daily occupancy, not
even a fast growing ﬁre blocking one of the exits may cause any expected consequences.
Also for the central open space, a medium growing ﬁre positioned in the middle of the
compartment, will not induce any risk to the occupants, as outlined by the scenario 2
results. On the other hand, the conditions envisioned in the third scenario may pose more
adversity. An evacuation safety level equal to 0.78, can result in roughly 111 occupants
being exposed to critical conditions, as it is shown in the calculations in Appendix C. This
is the possible outcome of a fast ﬁre developing near one of the building entrances, during
an event held in this building which implicates large amount of people. It is though a
sort of hazard that may happen during the lifetime of a building and the involved risk for
this scenario will be analyzed in the next chapter, where the eﬀect of the automatic ﬁre
ventilation system and its reliability will be introduced, as well.
Page 29 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:45==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
3.3
Probabilistic risk assessment
As mentioned before, a way to analyse the full picture of the built environment
safety is to proceed the previously deterministic performance based approach with a risk
based approach considering the dimension of probability of ﬁre occurrence. With this
scope, event tree analysis, which has been also used in the nuclear power industry, chemical
process industry or maritime industry [2], has been found suitable to be implemented in
the risk assessment of the considered study case building ﬁre safety.
Event tree analysis is a tool deployed to investigate the development of various
accidents or hazards with several possible scenarios and the consequences following the
unwanted event, assuming that diﬀerent life safety barriers are in place. A branch in the
tree represents a sequence of events, and the probability for that sequence is equal to the
product of all event probabilities on the branch [2]. This further goes to quantifying the
total ﬁre risk to life of the considered scenario, with the aid of the previously explained
equation 1:
Expected risk to life =
X
i
Pi · Ci
The relationship is similar to the earlier general discussion on risk analysis chap-
ter 1.1, but in this case, ’i’ represents the number of the scenario branch and the summa-
tion indicates the total risk from multiple branches scenario. A nearly inﬁnite number of
branches can be theoretically developed, to account for every slight variation in a ﬁre sce-
nario. In order to avoid overly complicated systems, conservative assumptions are chosen,
so that event branches to act as an envelope, including as many sub-scenarios as possible
[29]. With that thought in mind, in practice, performance based assessment presumes
evaluating an ’worst case scenario’, so that design is conservative.
Brieﬂy, the method will be developed for scenario 3 and probabilities and fre-
quencies for system components will be applied. Before proceeding to actual event tree
construction, one may note also the necessary steps in order to perform this analysis, as
indicated below [30]:
• identiﬁcation of the accident scenario- already agreed that ﬁre scenario number 3 is
a type of hazard the may appear during the building lifetime;
• appraisal of the safety barriers that are installed so that to mitigate the consequences
of ﬁre- this will include the possibility that the building personnel will proceed any
manual ﬁre suppression action, the reliability of the automatic ﬁre detection system
and the probability if the automatic ﬁre ventilation system to work and to control
the smoke layer. One additional ﬁre barrier to be considered during this analysis is
the sprinkler system. Even though the building is not equipped with this system, it
Page 30 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:46==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
will be investigated how this can improve the level of ﬁre safety;
• identiﬁcation of the sequence of the eﬀects of the safety barriers. The active ﬁre
protection installations have indeed an eﬀect on the ﬁnal Available Safe Egress Time
and Required Safe Egress Time. Up to now, in chapter 3.2 there were presented the
results of the ﬁre scenarios under the assumption that the ﬁre is able to develop in
a compartment, without being controlled or restrained by the action of automatic
ventilation system or the possible sprinkler system. Now, considering that these
two systems have a serious impact on ﬁre growth rate, smoke potential and carbon
monoxide yield, the new times for tenability conditions to be reached will be derived
and the detailed calculations can be seen in Appendix D.
• evaluation of the consequences of each scenario- based on the previously introduced
assumption and the new ASET and REST computation (detailed in Appendix D),
the possible number of people exposed to critical conditions will be estimated.
• assessment of the probability of each accident scenario. This will include, both the
identiﬁcation of the probability of a ﬁre occurrence inside the speciﬁed building and
the probability for the diﬀerent ﬁre safety barriers to work as they are intended
to. Diﬀerent values for the probability of failure of system components were found
across literature, but as mentioned before, aiming to foresee the worst case scenario,
in this part of the project it will be used the lowest reliability of the ﬁre active
installations.
Further, a very simpliﬁed example of modeling the ﬁre protection barriers within
an event tree, considering their possible failure is depicted in ﬁgure 8.
Figure 8: Fire safety barriers modelled within an event tree- adapted from [29]
Looking at the horizontal direction, the individual tree branches signify cut sets
of the considered system and they can be seen as multiple parallel sub-systems. One should
also note that the probabilities on a branch are conditional probabilities and thus due to
the safety barriers interdependencies, the sub-system components cannot be interchanged
Page 31 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:47==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
within the even tree. Whilst in the vertical direction, since the route through the event
tree is a random process, governed by the ﬁre safety barriers malfunction probabilities,
the scenarios ensemble can be assumed to form an uncorrelated series system [29].
As mentioned before, part of this probabilistic approach is to identify the prob-
ability of ﬁre to happen in this building. Generally, in order to calculate the likelihood of
ﬁre occurring in a speciﬁc area of a building due to a particular ignition source, the num-
ber of such sources present in that building area and the building exposing duration to
the existing potential ﬁre sources have to be considered. As an exempliﬁcation, hereunder
several potential ﬁre sources which can be considered as risk factors [31]:
−Mechanical abrasion or friction used as a technological process can generate heat or
sparks. The probability of ﬁre burst in this case depends on the machines number
in the production area and on the operating time of the equipment.
−Electrical appliances can also generate heat and sparks in particular conditions.
The chances of ﬁre to start depends on the electrical appliances number and on the
duration they are active.
−Humans can also generate accidental ﬁres. A very common ﬁre start possibility is
related to smoking behavior, by careless disposal of smoking materials. In this case
the factors which should be taken into consideration in ﬁre start probability calculus
are the number of smokers, the number of cigarettes smoked, etc.
Ideally, the absolute value of the probability of ﬁre start due to a certain source can be
estimated by carrying out a large scale investigation so that to relate the number of ﬁres
due to this distinct source to the total number of such sources in the group of buildings and
the exposing duration of the buildings to this ignition risk [31]. In practice, the value of the
probability of ﬁre start may be approximated as the frequency of ﬁre ignition. Statistical
studies showed that the annual ﬁre frequency, corresponding to a certain type of building
occupancy can be assessed as a function of the total ﬂoor area of the construction, as
shown in the equation 14 [32]:
F(A) = a · Ab
(14)
*where ’a’ is a statistically-based constant on the correlation between the frequency distri-
bution of buildings involved in ﬁres according to their size and the corresponding distribu-
tion of buildings at risk;
’b’ is a constant that accounts for the increase in the value of the probability for
an increase in the building size [32].
If for example, an equal to unity ’b’ value would be chosen, that would imply
that the probability of ﬁre starting is directly proportional to the size of the building and
Page 32 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:48==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
consequently meaning that the risk of ﬁre to break out is the same in all the parts of the
built environment. That is not valid because diﬀerent ﬁre loads and sources of ignition
are present in various parts of the building, so ’b’ should be a less than unit parameter.
Knowing that the ﬂoor area of the study case building is 2714.6m2 and that literature
gives the following estimations: a = 0.0002 and b = 0.75 for schools and universities [33],
one could use the equation 14 to assess the possible ﬁre frequency (or the probability for
ﬁre to start in the considered facility) as 0.075 ﬁres per year.
As explained before, event trees were constructed, for a ’situation 1’ considering
the eﬀect of the exiting ﬁre safety active measures (see ﬁgure 9) and for a ’situation 2’
considering that, additionally, a sprinkler system would be set in to place (see ﬁgure 10).
Figure 9: Event tree for situation 1
An important remark is that the probabilities calculated in ﬁgure 9 and ﬁgure 10
are conditional probabilities, meaning that the tree branches components (or the safety
barriers) cannot be interchanged within the event tree due to their interdependencies.
More precisely, they follow a logical and chronological order: detection will be only ac-
tivated if no manual suppression succeeds; ﬁre ventilation system can only be triggered
by the automatic detection system and it will not start if the ﬁre is not detected by the
ABA system. On the other hand, sprinkler system does not depend on the detection, nor
the ventilation system; as it can be seen from the event tree, the sprinkler system might
work, no matter what the state of the other systems is.
Page 33 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:49==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 10: Event tree for situation 2
It may now be established the total risk to life corresponding to each of the two
situations, by summing up the individual risk of the event tree branches. Consequently,
if as a probability of ﬁre to start is used the possible ﬁre frequency of 0.075 ﬁres per year,
as explained before, then the risk assessment can be summarized as below:
• ’situation 1’ : existing ﬁre safety installations
total risk = P
i Pi · Ci = 84.26 persons
total risk per year = 0.075 · P
i Pi · Ci = 6.32 persons per year
Therefore 6.32 persons per year may be exposed to critical conditions, if a ﬁre would
take place as envisioned in scenario 3 (described in detail previously in chapter 3.2).
• ’situation 2’: existing ﬁre safety installations and a possible sprinkler system
total risk = P
i Pi · Ci = 8.52 persons
total risk per year = 0.075 · P
i Pi · Ci = 0.64 persons per year
In this case, 0.64 persons per year may be exposed to critical conditions, if a ﬁre
would take place as envisioned in scenario 3. It is hence a large improvement in
terms of building ﬁre safety, as installing a sprinkler system may reduce the total
risk to occupants safety approximately 10 times, according to the presented compu-
tations. A decision for the implementation of a sprinkler system should be based on
Page 34 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:50==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
both comparing the risk proﬁle with the Danish acceptance curves and on cost con-
siderations. This is not though the purpose of this study; so far it was demonstrated
that by combining probabilistic performance-based scenario investigation with the
analytic simulation tools, in a method that is commonly referred to as probabilistic
risk assessment, valuable quantiﬁcation of the level of risk to life can be achieved.
Note: Diﬀerent literature sources have been consulted in order to obtain a higher
degree of conﬁdence for the chosen probabilities of failure for the considered ﬁre safety
barriers. For this reason, one may observe:
• probability of ﬁre to be noticed by the inhabitants and them to succeed extinguishing
it- sources: [5], [39];
• probability that automatic ﬁre detection system works as intended- sources: [5],
[29], [31], [48], [51];
• probability that automatic smoke ventilation system works and controls the ﬁre-
sources: [29], [46];
• probability that sprinkler system works and controls the ﬁre- sources: [5], [31], [43],
[47], [48], [49].
The same bibliography sources and critical engineering judgement were employed in order
to decide upon the eﬀect of safety barriers on the parameters governing the ﬁre develop-
ment and the ones inﬂuencing the occupants evacuation.
Nevertheless, one should notice that there is still an open debate in the scientiﬁc world
[31] on the associative eﬀect of the sprinkler system and the ﬁre ventilation system. It is
believed that the sprayed water from the activated sprinklers can produce air currents that
may counter the outﬂow from the vents and consequently transport combustion products
to the ﬂoor. It is also shown the possibility that smoke may become less buoyant, posing
the risk of smoke-logging the compartment. Another perspective of the problem is that
the early opening of the vents might cool down the sprinklers sensors, aﬀecting hence
their water demand and their capacity to control the ﬁre. In any case, if the dominant
objective is life safety, it is suggested that the ﬁre ventilation system should operate before
a sprinkler, in the initial stage of a ﬁre [31]. In the current study, it is assumed that the
work together of the ventilation and sprinkler system will have a positive eﬀect, greatly
reducing the ﬁre development.
Page 35 / 132
3. CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:51==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
4
Dynamic Approach
Fire risk assessment approaches have been deployed in order to support the per-
formance based designs and as a proof for this statement stays the work on the previous
chapter. However, there is a particular concern in Danish building industry that overes-
timated levels of risk are predicted through the ﬁre performance based approach, leading
to costly and unnecessary degree of safety [34]. One may think this concern has solid
reasons and in order to claim its veracity and to support the need for a diﬀerent approach
in ﬁre risk analysis, it’s suggested a closer look on the risk assessment performed in the
previous chapter and its possible shortcomings:
• Considering for example, the outcome of the quantitative risk analysis: it is easy to
notice that the results are based on the likelihood of ﬁre occurring inside the exam-
ined building. But the implemented formula for derivation of this probability refers
to the total ﬂoor area of the building (meaning all of the 10 compartments) and
does not accurately predict the probability of a ﬁre to take place in the investigated
compartment 6. Therefore, adjustments have to be made, so that to compensate
the overestimated chances for a ﬁre to happen in this speciﬁc compartment of the
building. Additionally, scientiﬁc studies have found that ﬁre occurrences diﬀer as
a function of the time of the day, day of the week, month, season [35]- and so, at-
tention have to be accorded to this matter, as well. On top of that, recent research
has pointed out that even though the design codes and regulations to be used by
engineers in probabilistic risk assessment of the ﬁre are based on collections of data
from real structures subjected to real ﬁres, these databases are decades old (devel-
oped between 1966 and 1987) and as such they bring an extra level of uncertainty
about their validity by using them in the nowadays context [36].
• Besides the frequency of a ﬁre and its location within the building, one may also
question the factors that lead to a ﬁre risk analysis, in the ﬁrst place: ASET and
RSET. People evacuating a building in case of emergency is an innately stochastic
process that should not be immediately represented by a single value picked from
a population [28]. Instead there is a distribution- or an analysis of various prob-
ability density functions describing the randomness of diﬀerent variables that are
inﬂuencing the process of evacuation, such as: occupant load- since the building is
used for teaching activities for students, the number of occupants varies with time
of the day, day of the week, month of the year, or at cases special events; occupant
distribution- not all the compartments are necessarily occupied at full capacity all
the time, it may be that at some point in time a larger distribution of occupants is
expected in an auditorium, or in a study room, or some other time in the main lobby.
Page 36 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:52==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Considering now the times included in the RSET: the time until ﬁre is detected and
warning system is activated is suggested by building regulations to be treated as a
constant- but, in reality, can any piece of mechanical device be so accurate that no
matter what triggers it, the alarm will be sound in exactly 2 minutes? It cannot.
There will always be variations, sometimes on the conservative side, other times
on the less conservative side, but they have to be taken into account through a
distribution; the time used by the occupants to react to the alarm and to decide
commencing the evacuation (or the pre-movement time) is also suggested equal to
a ﬁxed value function of the building usage category- but this implies that persons
encountering ﬁre or ﬁre alarms, after they assess the situation in a precise amount
of time, they mobilize themselves and perform the evacuation in a robotic manner.
As this assumption ignores the variations in capabilities and physical condition of
occupants involved in a ﬁre, the pre-movement time will be much better described
by the aid of a probability density function. Also, an important factor inﬂuencing
the evacuation and especially the pre-movement associated activities is related to
the training and knowledge of occupants or of building personnel in relation to ﬁre
and emergency procedures. Properly instructed personnel (teachers, in this case)
may respond much faster and eﬃciently to a ﬁre alarm, hence reducing the time
for the other occupants (students, in this case) necessary to react and decide to
evacuate.
• In regards to the development of ﬁre into life threatening conditions for occupants,
according to the formulas described in chapter 2.1, the major governing factors are
dependent on: the combustible materials (ﬁre growth rate, smoke potential, carbon
monoxide yield) and the existing ﬁre protection active systems (alarm, ventilation
and possible sprinklers system). By looking at the characteristics of the combustible
materials involved in the envisioned ﬁre scenarios from chapter 3.2, it will be ob-
served that they have also been chosen so that to ﬁt into the philosophy of ’worst
ﬁre scenario’. Though the complex mixtures of possible fuels and the arrangement
of diﬀerent materials in a compartment may not necessarily lead to a ﬁre governed
by the most ﬂammable, or the most sooty, or the most toxic product generated.
It will be considered more realistic if the varieties in the combustibles properties
will be covered by diﬀerent distributions, according the possible materials present
in the ﬁre compartment. Concerning ﬁre safety installations, their reliability was
considered also in the risk analysis in chapter 3.3, but as it was explained there,
in order to obtain a very conservative result, the highest probability of failure of
each individual system was chosen. In reality, their reliability could be much larger,
therefore a rational approximation would be to express it part of a domain of safety.
The same reasoning goes for the probability of ﬁre ﬁghting (and suppressing) by
Page 37 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:53==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
the occupants- if they have basic ﬁre safety education there are higher chances they
may succeed extinguishing a small ﬁre by themselves.
As presented above, there may be many types of uncertainties that went unrec-
ognized or ignored in a classical ﬁre risk assessment. These may include uncertainties
in variables that are built into analytical tools and methods, unpredictability in human
behavior and reaction in case of emergency and uncertainties associated with criteria and
values selected for assessing acceptability [37]. These sort of variables have a big inﬂuence
on the ﬁnal evacuation safety level and the ones that were selected for a more thorough
investigation are listed below:
Table 4: Dynamic risk assessment variables
ASET
ﬁre growth rate, α
average smoke potential, S0
carbon monoxide yield, yCO
reliability of ﬁre ventilation system
operational reliability of sprinkler system
performance reliability of sprinkler system
probability of ﬁre to be manually extinguished
RSET
ignition point of the ﬁre inside the building
number of occupants present in the building
location of the occupant(s) inside the building (or compartment)
density of occupants in front of the exit doors during evacuation
reliability of ﬁre detection and alarm system
pre-movement time
probability that the personnel has ﬁre safety training
The starting point of this approach in ﬁre risk assessment is to represent prob-
abilistically by individual distributions the natural variability from each of these input
parameters. When all relevant probability distributions are collected into a single model,
the outcome should capture a range of possible outputs to be expected from a ﬁre event.
To further increase the conﬁdence of the result, repeated random sampling (Monte Carlo
simulation) will be executed, hence the dynamic state of the approach. Only then the ﬁre
hazard can be “predicted within limits of conﬁdence expressed in probabilistic terms” [38].
Page 38 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:54==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
4.1
Variables inﬂuencing ﬁre development
Fire growth rate
One of the key parameter for people and goods safety when designing a building
and setting the adequate ﬁre protection measures is the ﬁre growth rate (α value) in
the room of ignition initiation. Nevertheless, accurate modelling of this parameter is an
extremely complex matter, being also the area of recent research studies ([42], [43]), as it
will be observed. Primarily, ﬁre growth rate depends on a series of factors related to the
nature of the burning objects materials, having diﬀerent heat output release capacities
and in today’s practice it is broadly accepted to belong to slow, medium, fast or ultra fast
category. Hence, the general understanding and implications in the design activity are:
– A faster ﬁre growth rate can lead to shorter available safe egress time, which can
have as a consequence longer RSET than ASET, thus people endangered;
– Additional consequence for faster ﬁre growth rate is less time for ﬁre service inter-
vention which, besides occupants life safety endangered may cause property losses,
as well;
– Faster ﬁre growth rate than initially designed can cause poor result of the ﬁre pro-
tection systems (i.e., sprinklers and smoke management system can be ineﬃcient if
ﬁre is too large upon ignition.)
When choosing a ﬁre growth rate, one may know that the given values are based on de-
terministic models correlated with experimental data obtained from several ﬁre tests of
materials heat output determination. Still, experimental data are not available for com-
plete variety of combustibles or materials arrangements which are practically used and due
to this, uncertainties may arrive. Moreover, it is known that experimental data obtained
in controlled laboratory conditions are most likely diﬀerent from the real ﬁre conditions
and parameters, where the arrangement and orientation of the combustible materials in
the ﬁre compartment, proximity of other objects, walls or openings, dimensions of the
rooms and ventilation conditions have a critical inﬂuence on the ﬁre growth rate [31].
Therefore, predicting this parameter involves complex interrelations between
multiple factors and it is believed that a single ﬁre growth curve cannot describe the
actual samples of ﬁre ignition which may occur in a given building compartment [39].
One may think that a huge amount of experiments covering diﬀerent fuels or materi-
als assemblies would be needed in order to overcome this shortcoming, but that is not
practically reasonable or eﬃcient. Instead, implementing a statistical approach and deﬁn-
ing a distribution function governed by several known ﬁre growth rates of the existing
combustible materials could conduct to a very rational choice of this parameter value.
Page 39 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:55==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
A review of literature and experimental test reports has been conducted so as to
achieve a larger perspective of any accepted probability density functions suitable to be
used when describing the rate of ﬁre growth behaviour. The ﬁndings are presented below:
• Holborn [39] investigated a sample of data over a ﬁve year period extracted from
London Fire Brigade’s real ﬁre library. Aiming to produce necessary information for
probabilistic risk assessment area, the distribution of ﬁre sizes, ﬁre growth rates and
times between events that occur in building ﬁres were analyzed. It was observed
that these parameter values were reasonably well approximated by the log-normal
distribution.
• Huang [40] performed a probabilistic modelling of the smoke ﬁlling in large spaces
were probability density function was used to describe the randomness of some of
the uncertain factors in the smoke ﬁlling process. The log-normal distribution for
ﬁre growth rate was also found suitable for use.
• Ramachandran [41] suggested a statistical model to estimate the ﬁre growth rate
based on data samples extracted from ﬁre brigades reports of ﬁres in industrial build-
ings. It was demonstrated that this parameter can be estimated using a logarithmic
regression model of the considered data.
• Nilsson [42] studied a method to obtain distributions of ﬁre growth rates for diﬀerent
kind of buildings. The data was extracted from Swedish ﬁre statistics and from
calorimetry tests and ﬁtted also a log-normal distribution. The study showed that
ﬁnding the actual distribution of ﬁre growth rates enables the design to be done
towards a well deﬁned probability target.
• Albrecht [29] analyzed in his dissertation a performance based study case of a stan-
dard assembly building and introduced a distribution of ﬁre growth rate based on
data from controlled laboratory ﬁre tests on furniture materials. He found suitable
a Gumbel left-skewed distribution.
• Nystedt [43] had, among other ﬁndings in this paper, pointed out that a fast ﬁre
growth rate corresponds to a 92nd percentile in a distribution constructed with data
extracted from upholstered furniture ﬁre tests.
Some additional literature sources may be found so that to endorse the idea
of representing the ﬁre growth rate as distribution, but the ones the were listed above
are considered a strong support in order to further consider the α-value as log-normally
distributed. Moreover, a small database has been created as can be seen in Appendix E,
comprising the α-values assigned to diﬀerent materials that were considered they may be
present in a ﬁre compartment belonging to the study case building.
Page 40 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:56==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Note: the values presented in the database in Appendix E were found in the
existing documentation and published experimental test reports ([15], [39], [41], [42]) and
are subjected to a degree of uncertainty and subjectivity. Though, it is assumed that
statistically meaningful distributions may still be obtained, because a suﬃcient quantity
of data is available over the group of samples.
The collected data served afterwards to compute statistical central measure
(mean, x) and dispersion measure (standard deviation, s) of the natural logarithm of
the ﬁre growth rate, resulting : x = −4.037 and s = 0.9771
By ’mean’ one should understand:
x = 1
n
n
X
i=1
ˆxi
(15)
By ’standard deviation’ one should understand:
s =
v
u
u
t
 
1
n
n
X
i=1
(ˆxi −x)2
!
(16)
*where: ˆx is a vector containing the data set.
Once those two parameters have been associated to characterize the distribution, Monte
Carlo simulation techniques can be used to perform 10000 iterations in Simulink software,
and a graphical representation of the samples frequency histogram is shown in ﬁgure 11.
The total number of equal width bins is 100, but for the sake of representation only the
ones containing relevant amount of data were captured in ﬁgure 11.
Figure 11: Frequency histogram of ﬁre growth rate data samples
Page 41 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:57==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
It can be observed that the ﬁre growth rate distribution is positive skewed (or
right skewed) with the majority of data in the (0.01, 0.048) interval suggesting that the
expected ﬁre growth rate will mostly vary from medium to fast rate, as it is expected for
the usage category of the building. There are also an important part of the specimens
located in the area less than 0.01, meaning that a slow ﬁre is also very probable and
consideration have to be given to that, as well. Also, an important remark is that there
will always be a discrepancy in between the statistical formulation of the distribution
and the physical parameter, due to the fact that log-normal distribution range is from 0
to +∞. This implies that physically impossible samples (e.g. α-value equal 1) may be
generated (even though very improbable). To avoid this, later in the general model, an
upper boundary equal to 0.07 (which is the ﬁre growth rate for ﬂammable liquid ﬁres [42])
will be taken into account when referring to this distribution.
Average smoke potential
Acting in several ways, but perhaps the most dangerous one being the obscura-
tion of escape means through consequent reduction of visibility, the production of smoke
during ﬁres is an important cause for casualties. In order to quantify the eﬀect of smoke
production, one needs to assess the relation between obscuration and visibility (which was
already discussed in chapter 2.1 when critical time to visibility was presented) and the
quantity of smoke that can be generated due to diﬀerent combustibles burning (which
is the topic to be investigated during this section). The latter is of course a material
dependent parameter and is accepted and referred to as average smoke potential.
Observation: there are a great variety of terms that may be used to describe a
certain phenomena and so it is in the case of smoke production. It was preferred to be
used dB
m which relates the optical density with the unit length. Due to that, the average
smoke potential values were chosen and extracted from a single source ([17]), avoiding so,
any possible uncertainties or mistakes arriving from units converting.
Aiming to emphasizes the possible sources of uncertainties in the values and
origin of this parameter, a similar approach as for the previous analysis of ﬁre growth rate
will be carried out, derived from the same starting points:
• The available data for smoke potential is obtained from experimental test reports;
still, values are not available for complete variety of combustibles or materials ar-
rangements that may be present in the room;
• Experimental data obtained in controlled laboratory conditions are most likely dif-
ferent from the real ﬁre conditions;
Page 42 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:58==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
• Normally a ﬁre is a combination of diﬀerent materials, each having diﬀerent smoke
potentials. Even if a certain material has a high smoke potential, the total amount
of smoke generated during ﬁre will somehow be "levelled" out by some of the other
materials less sooty.
Hence it is not very realistic to consider only the characteristics of one burning material
(usually the ﬁrst ignited), instead deﬁning a distribution as a function of several known
smoke potential of the combustible materials present in the ﬁre compartment could con-
duct to a very rational choice of this parameter value. Another database has been created
and it can be observed in Appendix F, including the average smoke potential values as-
signed to diﬀerent materials. Indication from [17] suggested that the extracted data could
ﬁt a normal (Gaussian) distribution and then mean (using equation 15) and standard de-
viation (using equation 16) of the data were evaluated, resulting: x = 63.26 and s = 37.14
Knowing the mean and the standard deviation, 10000 iterations of the algorithm
of random normal distributed numbers are performed in Matlab software, resulting the
samples frequency histogram, as shown in ﬁgure 12.
Figure 12: Frequency histogram of average smoke potential data samples
As it can be observed from ﬁgure 12 the majority of data is expected to be
generated in the interval (30,90), which is fair, considering that the lower limit of this
interval coincide with the smoke potential of the least sooty solid fuels (e.g. wood). It is
though a very important remark that any continuous distribution will range from -∞to
+∞, therefore there exists the chance that physically impossible values to be sampled (e.g.
negative smoke potential). To avoid this, in the general model, the normal distribution for
average smoke potential will be lower bounded to 30 and upper bounded to 300 (higher
values than this corresponds to extremely sooty materials, as plastics or oil [17]).
Page 43 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:59==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Carbon monoxide yield
The estimation of toxic gas emissions generated from ﬁres is especially relevant
for evacuation modelling, when occupants may be exposed to combustion products. There-
fore, to provide an eﬃcient ﬁre escape design, any ﬁre engineer must count on reliable ﬁre
species yield input.
Currently, and as could have been observed in the analysis performed in the
’Classical Approach’ chapter, only constant yield values are used in ﬁre development
models. However, various ﬁre species yields are highly inﬂuenced by the type and the state
of the fuel, its pyrolysis rate, the combustion conditions and the chemical and physical
interactions with the surrounding environments that are all expected to metamorphose
even during growth stage of the ﬁre. Deploying constant yield values for toxic compounds
in a ﬁre simulation may either under-estimate or over-estimate the production of species
to be used in evacuation design [44].
This leads of course to the same reasoning as described for the other ﬁre param-
eters (growth rate, smoke potential), concluding that the value for carbon monoxide yield
in well-ventilated conditions should be described by a distribution and not by a single
value corresponding to a single material. In order to construct the distribution function,
several sources: [15], [24], [29], [44] were consulted so that values for diﬀerent materials
to be extracted. Due to limited amount of relevant data found, it was decided to use a
uniform distribution from a minimum value of 0.001 to a maximum value of 0.0065.
The choice for investigating only the carbon monoxide among the produced toxic
gases was argued in section 2.1, while the well-ventilated condition assumption was ex-
plained in section 2.2.
Reliability of ﬁre ventilation system
Venting represents the actively attempt to remove the hot smoke and gases from
the upper part of an enclosure ﬁre and to introduce fresh air into lower part. With the view
of releasing the ﬁre gases, this process involves changing of pressure conditions through
natural convection by means of openings (that might also upper accidentally) or by means
powered extract and/or inlet. It can be assumed that the ﬁre ventilation system have an
impact on the ﬁre development inside a building, accordingly its main objectives are [45]:
• mitigate the occurrence of untenable conditions by removing the smoke and hot
gases from the ﬁre compartment and keeping the smoke layer above the occupied
level;
• ease the ﬁre ﬁghting operations and enable them to penetrate to the ﬁre scene;
Page 44 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:60==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
• reduce the damage to property goods due to the thermal load.
The actual design of this ﬁre safety installation is not the concern of this study,
but the extent to which the objectives mentioned above are satisﬁed is of interest. The
measure of a system objectives fulﬁllment is called eﬀectiveness or reliability. As it was
revealed by ﬁre safety installations investigations [46], in the case of ﬁre ventilation equip-
ment, the reliability may greatly vary from one system to another due to diﬀerent equip-
ment parts failures :
- opening device springs weakened;
- inertia in moving parts of an opening device;
- a ﬁxed lock (e.g. tapped when painted);
- wrong placement of steel ﬁttings;
- rusty handles for outside operation;
- swallowed frame tree locks.
or due to human errors such as:
- reparation or installation done wrong;
- transport safety devices not having been taken down after delivery;
- insuﬃcient control and maintenance.
Considering so many possible sources of fault, one may expect variations in the
reliability of a ventilation installation. Giving the limited amount of data in this concern
reported in the literature and the signiﬁcant biases in the values range, it was decided
to represent the probability of this system to work as a triangular distribution, having a
minimum as low as 67%, a most frequent value of 90% and a maximum of 95%. System
probability to work or to fail related data were extracted from diﬀerent sources: [29], [46],
in order to arrive to a distribution function.
Reliability of sprinkler system
In the context of reliability of ﬁre safety systems, there may be accepted two
branches including operational and performance reliability. Operational reliability repre-
sents the probability that the protection system, when needed, will function as designed
for. This kind of estimation does not take into account the chances that system may not
be suited to overcome the ﬁre hazard in the building, it is only a measure of the com-
ponent operability. In order to acquire some additional information about the likelihood
of the ﬁre conditions are within the prescribed design of the protection system, perfor-
mance reliability can be addressed. This one is deﬁned as the degree of adequacy of a ﬁre
safety system to perform successfully under certain ﬁre conditions. Therefore the data
Page 45 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:61==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
for performance reliability is mostly obtained from actual ﬁre events estimations of how
well systems executed their design task [49]. These two measures combined, as shown in
ﬁgure 13, is of particular interest for sprinkler system in order to draw conclusions about
its eﬀectiveness.
Figure 13: Sprinkler eﬀectiveness deﬁnition
As for any active protection system, the eﬀectiveness may vary from one sprinkler
system to another and from one type of building category to another. The sprinklers
reliability may be tainted by diﬀerent factors having diﬀerent probabilities to happen,
such as: lack of maintenance, system component damaged, system shut oﬀ, inappropriate
system for type of ﬁre, manual intervention defeated system, not enough released water or
the water did not reach ﬁre [47]. A literature research ([5], [31], [43], [47], [48], [49]), with
the most up-to-date data having priority in selection, concluded the following estimations:
• operational reliability is expected in between 87% and 94%;
• performance reliability is expected in between 94% and 98%;
Both of them will be modelled as uniform distributions in between the minimum and the
maximum given values.
Also, statistics have shown that there are good chances that a ﬁre may not pro-
duce enough heat so that to activate the sprinkler system [31], resulting the ﬁre being
self-extinguished, extinguished by ﬁrst-aid means or not developing to untenable condi-
tions before occupants evacuation. Given the considered modelling input data, the way
to quantify this scenario, is by looking at the ﬁre growth rate. It will be considered that
if the sampled ﬁre growth rate is less than 0.012 kW
s2 (less than a medium rate of growth),
the sprinkler system will not be activated. Also, it is important to be reminded that
the sprinkler system both detects the ﬁre and actively participates in the ﬁre ﬁghting,
therefore its action will not depend on the operating state of the automatic ﬁre detectors.
Observation: as it was mentioned in chapter 3.1 describing the building environ-
ment, a sprinkler system is not install in this facility, but similar to the analysis performed
in chapter 3.3, an investigation will be performed, aiming to compare the risk to life if a
sprinkler system would be in place.
Page 46 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:62==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Probability of occupants extinguishing the ﬁre
When discussing variables that may have an impact on the ﬁre development, one
may consider the case when the occupants attempt some ﬁre-ﬁghting actions. The rate
of success for people to suppress the ﬁre by sundry means or by any ﬁrst-aid method is
of course dependent on their previous training with ﬁre safety, the availability and the
distance to any ﬁre-ﬁghting equipment (i.e. extinguishers), the size of the ﬁre and most
importantly the time after ignition when the ﬁre was discovered by occupants. In this
sense, a study using data from ﬁre investigations was consulted [39], showing that 12% of
ﬁres in higher educational facilities were discovered at ignition, while 50% of them were
discovered in the ﬁrsts 5 minutes.
There exists though the chance that even discovered soon after ignition, it may
be too late for persons in the room of ignition origin to proceed to any ﬁre ﬁghting due to
the size or severity of the ﬁre. As the whole modeling concept is based on the assumption
of ’suﬃcient’ combustible materials in the ﬁre room, the only way to quantify the size of
the ﬁre in the simulation, is by considering its growth rate. Therefore it is assumed that
only slow ﬁres contained to ﬁrst ignited item, having a growth rate less than 0.006kW
s2 ,
have a chance to be manually extinguished if discovered immediately after ignition.
Statistical data related to manual intervention of people on an enclosure ﬁre can
only be extracted from real ﬁre case and is exposed to a large degree of subjectivity. For
example, there may be ﬁres successfully extinguished in-house by the occupants and never
reported to the authorities; there may be situations where occupants tried to extinguish
the ignited items, but even if not succeeded, the ﬁre brigade can be expected to have
suppressed such ﬁres much quicker. Eventually, regarding the probability of success of
manual ﬁre-ﬁghting considered in this study, it was chosen to be represented also by a
uniform distribution. The minimum chances of occupants succeeding to extinguish by
themselves the ﬁre is set to 0% and maximum probability to 43%, as indicated in [5].
Page 47 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:63==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
4.2
Variables inﬂuencing evacuation process
Among the variables that manage the process of occupants evacuation there are
also parameters that do not have a single value for a particular condition, nor they cannot
be easily associated with a certain probability of occurrence. For a given state, these
sort of parameters can take on an inﬁnity of random values, introducing in the model
an uncertainty very diﬃcult to be addressed [1]. In some cases these random parameters
may exceptionally give rise to certain statistical correlations, but in this project, the ﬁre
ignition point inside the building and the location of occupants inside the given compart-
ment will be considered two random variables. Discrete values of these two parameters
may not be directly assumed because of the great amount of possible variations and the
lack of probability association, therefore considering them as random, may be a good
representation of the reality.
Ignition point of the ﬁre
It was explained at the beginning of the chapter 4 that the estimated probability
of ﬁre inside the building is not the same as the probability of a ﬁre ignition in a particular
location of the building. With this thought in mind, it will be further shown how the
assumption that ignition point can be any point inside the building was integrated in the
modelling part.
Considering once again the layout of the building ﬂoor, a system of axes X and
Y may be attached to it, as in ﬁgure 14. Knowing the total length of the building of
55.4m and width of 49m, assigning a value for the ﬁre location parameter is just a matter
of generating an uniform random number in the interval (0, 55.4) - the X axis and an
uniform random number in the interval (0, 49) - the Y axis. In this way, a pair (x, y) will
be created, representing a pure arbitrarily deﬁned point of ﬁre ignition on the building
ﬂoor plan surface.
Next step may be to examine in which building compartment the ﬁre ignition is
located. This is a very signiﬁcant check as the dimensions of the enclosure will directly
inﬂuence the ﬁre development and they are an important input in the tenability criterion
calculation and in the occupant egress simulation. To locate the ﬁre compartment, the
generated (x,y) coordinates are simply compared with each room geometrical boundaries
in XY-plane.
Then, it will be primarily checked the development of possible critical
conditions in the corresponding ﬁre compartment and afterwards, if the ﬁre control safety
systems are not working, it will be considered the spread of smoke and compounds from
the ignition room to the other compartments.
Page 48 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:64==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 14: XY plane and compartment dimensions
Reminder: the inner garden is not considered part of the ﬁre safety strategy, as
the access to it is restricted. If by any chance, the generated ﬁre ignition coordinates are
found to be in that area, a loop in the simulation model will allow the re-generation of
new coordinates for ﬁre.
After having clariﬁed the importance of locating the ﬁre within the building, one
may also need to know the impact of the positioning of ﬁre inside a certain compartment.
As attributing a random location to this parameter includes also possible ﬁres in the
egress path or near the exit areas, thus obstructing the safe evacuation of people. Due to
this reason, special attention will be given to the process of egress route selection, as it
will be later shown.
Page 49 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:65==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Number of occupants inside the building
When choosing the number of occupants, in the ’Classical Approach’ it was con-
sidered 0.5pers
m2 as the maximum density of people in an educational building, according to
Danish buildings guidelines [21]. Starting from that and knowing the corresponding areas
of the compartments, the number of occupants was assigned for diﬀerent ﬁre scenario.
But this involved, as stated many times before, the idea of the worst case scenario, when
the whole building is fully packed with inhabitants at the time of ﬁre ignition. This is
considered another one of the factors that may lead to an over-estimation of the actual
ﬁre risk.
On the other hand, in this ’Dynamic Approach’ it is aimed to foresee various
degrees of occupancy level of the building, when a ﬁre might happen. It was accepted
from the very beginning that the facility serves an educational purpose, hence not being
in use during night time, but during day time, the number of occupants may vary, as well.
For example, at the hours of morning and of afternoon, high occupancy rate is expected
for the classrooms and auditoriums and less occupancy rate in the central lobby. Later,
during noontime, a rush hour can be identiﬁed in the central lobby, as students will ﬁnish
their morning course and may exit the classrooms towards building main hall. In the late
afternoon, one may anticipate very few occupants in the classrooms, and few occupants in
the central lobby, which may still serve as a place for leisure and reading; during the same
time, the computer rooms (or study rooms) might accommodate larger amount of people
than the rest of the day. This example of routine in term of occupancy degree, may be
expected to happen all through the academic year round. Eventually, a maximum peak
in the amount of occupants present in the auditoriums should be considered during the
exams period, or in the case of special events held in the building main hall. Consequently,
based on this sort of judgement, on the average number of students enrolled in DTU
classes, on the average density of occupants expected in an educational facility and of
course with respect to potential peaks, the number of occupants in each compartment
was decided and presented in table 5.
In the absence of any relevant statistics, the
triangular distribution was considered suitable to ﬁt the data because it allows for the
decision- maker’s subjective viewpoints to be easily turned into parameter estimates, in
the form of minimum, maximum and most likely values [50].
Page 50 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:66==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Table 5: Number of occupants in each compartment triangular distributed
number of occupants
minimum
most likely
maximum
compartment 1
20
45
60
compartment 2
10
30
50
compartment 3
10
35
60
compartment 4
10
30
50
compartment 5
20
45
60
compartment 6
50
125
500
compartment 7
30
55
70
compartment 8
45
75
105
compartment 9
30
55
70
compartment 10
30
55
70
Location of the occupants
As described at the beginning of section 4.2, part of the currently developed
method consists in assigning random locations also for the people inside the building.
Once the compartment of ﬁre ignition was established as explained, the matter lies now
in the creation of locations for the occupants inside of this room. As each compartment
boundaries can be represented in XY plane through a minimum and maximum value on
X-axis and a minimum and a maximum value on Y-axis, these coordinates can serve in
this instance as parameters for the uniform distribution of a new generated pair of (x,y)
values, representing in fact the coordinates of the occupant inside the ﬁre compartment.
An identical procedure, using an uniform distribution described by the same parameters
shall be repeated in a loop until every each of the occupants has a random location assigned
to itself. One may observe in Appendix B, besides the compartments dimensions, also the
real intervals where locations of the occupants may be generated using system of axes.
Having approached the problem in this way brings a substantial beneﬁt: it is
not anymore in the hands of the engineer to decide a location of the occupant that he
considers it might be critical. From now, by means of ’Dynamic method’, the time of
evacuation will be assessed for each particular occupant, based on his location inside the
compartment, on the distance to the nearest exit, on the ﬂow conditions he may encounter
Page 51 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:67==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
on his way out (such as facing a queue at the exit door), on his individual speed of travel
(inﬂuenced by factors such as traveling on the stairs or traveling on a horizontal surface),
on his own ability to react and decide to evacuate (individual pre-movement time- as it
will be later described).
Regarding the location of the occupants inside the compartment, it will be exem-
pliﬁed how the algorithm of choosing the egress path operates in diﬀerent situations. Let
us consider compartment C1 and observe ﬁgure 15 containing diﬀerent random possible
locations of the occupants and the chosen ways towards exit.
Figure 15: Compartment C1 and 8 occupants randomly located
So, the zoom-in into the layout of compartment C1, in ﬁgure 15, reveals the
following: 8 green points representing randomly assigned locations of occupants and a
dashed blue line signifying an imaginary cut through the half of the compartment. This
cut line is important, as it is considered to be placed at relatively equal distances to the exit
doors- thus, it is assumed that people positioned on the left side of this line will evacuate
through a door, while those positioned on the right side of this line will go to the other
door. Besides this assumption, the algorithm implemented to compute the travel distance
to the exit doors, conservatively assumes that the occupants movement trajectory tracks
straight lines and right angles, following the perimeter of the compartment, as depicted
in the ﬁgure 15 through the dashed green lines.
Page 52 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:68==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Also, an important observation is related to the location of ﬁre ignition in the
compartment. As explained in the ’Ignition point of the ﬁre’ sub-chapter, attributing a
random positioning for the ﬁre might cause obstructing the egress path. With respect to
this situation, the process of evacuation route selection will be adapted. Figure 16 and
ﬁgure 17 depict two situations, where a possible ﬁre may block the exit doors and how
this will change the selection of evacuation routes. For a better understanding the same
8 occupants randomly seated (as shown previously in ﬁgure 15) will be considered.
Figure 16: Fire blocking exit1 and redistribution of egress paths
Figure 16 shows that a ﬁre located in the immediate area of the exit door will
make the use of it impossible for safe evacuation. Therefore the occupants "6", "7" and
"8" will need to change the initial egress route and evacuate the ﬁre compartment by
means of the other remaining exit door.
This will have the following implications: a
larger travel distance for some of the occupants (increased travel time), a larger density
of people in front of the available exit door (increased queuing time) and a larger number
of occupants (all of them, in this case) using the same exit door (increased queuing time).
Figure 17 shows a similar situation, but with a ﬁre located close to a diﬀerent exit door.
In this case, for the occupants "1", "2", "3", "4" and "5" the egress route will need to be
adjusted and thus will lead to similar implications.
Page 53 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:69==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 17: Fire blocking exit2 and redistribution of egress paths
The same reasoning was involved for every each of the 10 building compartments
and programmed into Matlab language. One can observe in Appendix G a sample of the
programming code implemented for people evacuation and how the presented assumptions
where integrated, together with additional explanations.
Also, to further ease the understanding and the logic of the developed algorithm,
some basic 2D HTML animations will be available so that to illustrate the process of
choosing egress routes starting from a random location inside the building.
Population density in front of the exit doors
One of the disadvantages of ’Hydraulic ﬂow model’ used to simulate the evacua-
tion of people is that the designer cannot assess with precision the density of occupants in
narrower places of the compartment during evacuation. These places, such as corridors,
stairs, doors pose the danger of creating a bottleneck to the ﬂow of people, drastically in-
creasing the required time to reach safety. In the ’Classical Approach’ part of this study,
a constant value for the occupant density in front of exit door was selected, according
to the type of occupancy. This meant that no matter if the person arrives at the door
Page 54 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:70==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
ﬁrst, or second, or last, he will face a queue- which is not realistic. Of course, only a
part of the occupants, those arriving later than the ﬁrsts might queue at the exit door.
A time dependent simulation of the hydraulic ﬂow of people would picture the best the
evacuation process, but that is not possible by the current means of this method. Instead,
in the ’Dynamic approach’, the occupant density in front of doors will be described by
an uniform distribution having as parameters a minimum and a maximum value. In this
way, by random, some occupants will wait a shorter time, other a much longer time before
passing through the exit door.
For example, in the case previously visualized in ﬁgure 15, the people density in
front of exit doors is modelled by a uniform distribution with the parameters: minimum
= 0.75pers
m2 which corresponds for a very good speed of travel through opening, hence small
queuing time and maximum = 1.75pers
m2 . When switching to the cases in ﬁgure 16 and
in ﬁgure 17, when all occupants are expected to evacuate through the same door, the
maximum parameter of the distribution is increased to 2.25pers
m2 .
Reliability of automatic ﬁre detection and warning system
Fire detectors do not actively contribute to ﬁre ﬁghting, but they take part in
notifying the occupants about the possible danger when the ﬁre is detected in its early
stage. This way, it may be possible the early commencement of manual ﬁre suppression (if
the case) or the consequent evacuation of the building. This is of particular importance in
large compartments (as compartment 6)- if the detection equipment works, detects the ﬁre
and consequently sound and alarm message, it will severely decrease the time for people to
react and decide to begin the evacuation. On the other hand, in the rest of compartments,
which are open spaced and their surface is relatively small (100m2 - 250m2), it is assumed
that it will not be the detectors system the one that discover the ﬁre initially, but the
occupants. For this reason, no matter if the ﬁre detection system works or not, in the
smaller compartments case, the detection time and the pre-movement time from equation
12, will coincide. This means that equation 12 will be re-written accordingly:
• for all the compartments, except compartment 6;
RSET = trd + tt + tque
(17)
• for compartment 6 - if the detection system works
RSET = tda + trd + tt + tque
(18)
where tda will be set equal to 2 minutes.
Page 55 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:71==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Therefore, even if the time for detection and alarm is of interest only in compartment 6,
while the system may be required to operate only in a proportion of ﬁres, those that are
not discovered ﬁrst by the occupants, the equipment must be reliable and available to
function anytime if a ﬁre takes place. But that is not always the case, any system may
fail, as shown before, either to operate or to properly perform its intended task. Among
the most frequent types of detectors operational failures are: power surges, power failure,
mechanical damage or abuse, malfunction due to accumulation of dirt and dust, while
the most common factors inﬂuencing the performance of this system are related to: the
position of the ﬁre with respect to the location of detector head, the rate of ﬁre growth,
the amount of heat or smoke biased by environmental conditions or by ventilation regime.
Accounting for this sort of variety and uncertainty in the ﬁre safety systems
reliability from probabilistic point of view is, naturally, one of the goals of the proposed
approach. The literature review ([5], [29], [31], [48], [51]) revealed values in the interval
79% to 95% for the reliability of automatic ﬁre detection systems. No statistical correlation
in between the found data was seen, therefore uniform distribution was considered once
again suited in order to model the probability of this system to operate.
Note: even if the detectors do not directly participate in ﬁre-ﬁghting, they do
it indirectly. Once turned on, the ﬁre detection system will trigger the ﬁre ventilation
system on, so the link in between the two systems can be seen as a causality relationship.
Pre-movement time
The pre-movement activity, representing the action that occupants usually take
before their movement to a safe place in case of emergency, as described in section 2.3,
is one of the most important variable that will ultimately inﬂuence the end result of
the evacuation process. The longer it takes to start the evacuation, the higher will be
the risk of injury and death from ﬁre or combustion products. A precise quantiﬁcation
of pre-movement actions duration is impossible to achieve, due to many human factors
involved in this process. In order to get a better understanding of the unpredictability
of this process and the sources of time delays, some examples of human behaviour and
actions observed in diﬀerent contingency situations (usually ﬁre drills, but even from real
ﬁre cases [52]) are further introduced.
• Perception and cognition of the hazard are not always straightforward. Occupants
may engage into an investigative behaviour, such as seeking further information to
determine the source, veracity or relevance of a ﬁre alarm or the ﬁre cues. [8], [22]
• In some cases, occupants may continue carrying out their current activities, before
considering evacuating. For example, in industrial environments, people may ﬁrst
Page 56 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:72==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
decide to execute stoppage of machinery or of the production processes (or they
must (!) do that in order to avoid secondary accidents), while, in an institutional
framework, occupants may decide to secure some money or some documents before
deciding to evacuate. [8], [22]
• There are some other occupant actions associated to pre-movement process that
are responsible for substantial evacuation delays, such as putting on warm clothing,
gathering important belongings or collecting diﬀerent objects they are attached to
(keys, wallets, electronic devices). [52]
• Also it was revealed that decision to evacuate is a group behaviour and sometimes
people are hesitant to be the ﬁrst person starting to leave. Likewise, if occupants do
not know each other, a longer delay in their reaction may be expected. Neverthe-
less, it is likely that this reluctance to proceed to evacuate can be reduced if some
authority personnel are present or people with speciﬁc training, who can initiate
and guide the evacuation process. [8], [53]
• Occupants usually prefer a familiar route rather than an unfamiliar one. On the
other hand, if they are not accustomed with the building layout or the evacuation
strategy, one may need longer time to reﬂect upon determining the most appropriate
exit route and its availability. [53]
• During this part of the evacuation process, it is also possible that occupants may
involve in ﬁrst ﬁre-ﬁghting activities (which may or may not be successful), alerting
the others or calling the ﬁre service department. [8], [22]
In conclusion, pre-movement is a stage that may last anywhere in the range of
a few seconds to several minutes, crucially relying on human behaviour in ﬁre emergency
situations. This means taking into account the fact that individuals "are not athletes
waiting for the starter’s signal", so a certain time before people understand they need
to move anywhere and an even further time before they decide about going towards the
exit should be considered. For this reason, it is considered improper to reduce the pre-
movement time to an explicit value for all the occupants, when this is actually a stochastic
distribution [28]. Previous studies agree with this approach and log-normal [22], Weibull
[54] or normal [55] probability distributions were previously used in order to describe this
process.
In the current approach, the triangular distribution was found once again suitable
to predict the pre-movement time, allowing for the decision-maker’s subjective viewpoints
to be turned into parameter estimates, in the form of minimum, maximum and most likely
values. Two cases shall be accounted for, in function of the ﬁre origin compartment:
Page 57 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:73==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
• for compartments (1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,10): as it was explained in a previous assumption,
due to the smaller size of the compartment, it will be the occupants who will notice
the ﬁre ﬁrst, by direct sight of smoke or ﬂames. In this case the chosen parame-
ters for the pre-movement time distribution are: minimum= 60s, most likely= 75s,
maximum= 90s;
• for compartment 6: is is known that the ﬁre detection in this large compartment de-
pends on the automatic detection and warning system. Once the ﬁre alarm sounded,
it is considered that occupants will react and decide to evacuate in: minimum= 60s,
most likely= 75s, maximum= 90s.
On the other hand, if the detection system
will not work, the reaction and decision time for compartment 6 occupants will be
increased to: minimum= 180s, most likely= 210s, maximum= 240s.
Figure 18: Pre-movement time characterized by diﬀerent distributions- adapted from [54]
It has been mentioned that the presence and the action of personnel with speciﬁc
training can have a beneﬁcial impact on occupants reaction in case of emergency. In the
study case, as the building serves as an educational facility, it is assumed that there is
50% probability that the academics stuﬀhave received prior instruction on the ﬁre safety
procedures. Therefore, if a ﬁre happens and a professor who received basic training in
emergency situations is present in the room, it is assumed that his implication in the
evacuation process can reduce occupants pre-movement time with one third.
Page 58 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:74==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
4.3
Method implementation
All the previously presented aspects obviously need to be introduced in a com-
puter simulation.
It was decided that by means of Discrete Event Simulation (DES)
method [56] to be developed a time-dependent analytic model of the ﬁre and smoke
spread related phenomena (ignition, heat radiation, combustion products development)
and the real technological processes (detection, warning, suppression, evacuation), so that
the natural sequence of these operations and the dynamic interactions that are assumed
to exist in between them in a real situation can be simulated. A graphical representation
of the processes underlying the developed simulation model can be seen in ﬁgure 19.
Figure 19: Inter-relations of the model components- adapted from [56]
Page 59 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:75==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Various DES software products exist on the market. For this case study, the
Simulink package from MathWorks is used to model the system under investigation. The
software provides a wide library of blocks including queues, servers, switches that enable
the proper system modelling. Being part of MathWorks products, its academic license
is covered by DTU and moreover plenty of help and tutorials can be found on Matlab
support forums.
Discrete event simulation models consists of several elements (or blocks), having
similar terminology in the programming languages. Blocks represent actions or operations
and they are connected in between, forming the activity ﬂow of the system. They can
create information, similar to a source, or they can receive information, process it or
modify it and ﬁnally, transmit it further to the other blocks [56]. In the created simulation
model, one can observe 4 types of blocks:
• entity generator block: is the central unit of the model having the role of creating
the ﬁre incident and assigning to it important information in the form of attributes.
These attributes represent the unique speciﬁc properties of a generated ﬁre scenario-
they are the previously discussed uncertainties and variables to whom individual
probability distributions are now assigned, as it can be veriﬁed in the ’Event actions’
tab of the entity generator block. While, in the ’Entity type’ tab, there can be seen
the following 26 entity attributes:
– ﬁre_loc= the compartment in which the ﬁre hazard is generated;
– x_ﬁre= x coordinate of ﬁre location in XOY plane;
– y_ﬁre= y coordinate of ﬁre location in XOY plane;
– occupants_c1..occupants_c10= the number of occupants inside each compart-
ment from 1 to 10;
– detection= the state of the ﬁre detection system. It could be 1 if it is working
or 2 if it is not;
– sprinkler= the state of the sprinkler system (operational reliability). It could
be 1 if it is working or 2 if it is not;
– vent= the state of the ﬁre ventilation system. It could be 1 if it is working or
2 if it is not;
– manual= the state of manual suppression. It could be 1 if succeeded or 2 if
not;
– sprinkler2= the success of sprinkler system action (performance reliability). It
could be 1 if succeeded or 2 if not;
– alpha= the ﬁre growth rate;
Page 60 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:76==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
– S_0= the smoke average potential;
– y_C0= the carbon monoxide yield;
– P_det= the probability that the ﬁre detection system works;
– P_ven= the probability that the ﬁre ventilation system works;
– P_spr= the operational probability of sprinkler system;
– P_spr2= the performance probability of sprinkler system;
– P_man= the probability of manual suppression to succeed.
Figure 20: Entity generator block
• output switch block: performs a veriﬁcation of the received data. Once the entity
left the generator block, its attributes are saved and they can be accessed at any
time, during simulation. The output switch block performs the check, based on the
entity attributes. There are 6 of this type of block used in the simulation, performing
successive data veriﬁcation: check if the ﬁre is manually extinguished, check if the
ﬁre is detected by the automatic detection system, check if the ventilation system
works, check if the sprinkler system works, check if the sprinkler system manages to
control the ﬁre, check in which compartment the ﬁre is located.
Figure 21: Output switch block
Page 61 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:77==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
• entity server blocks: usually serve entities as they arrive, by storing them for a
length of time, called service time. In the current case, though, server blocks were
used for a hybrid purpose. They were utilized as elements where the entity data was
processed by diﬀerent Matlab functions as follows: evaluation of ASET, evaluation
of RSET, writing to ﬁle the results of the computations, as it can be observed in
the ’Main’ tab of the server block.
Figure 22: Server block
• entity terminator block: signiﬁes the end of the simulation process by accepting
and destroying the received entities.
Figure 23: Entity terminator block
In the same time, as the investigation comprehends a complex multi-dimensional
stochastic modelling matter, a Monte Carlo procedure needs to be developed, comprising
successive reiterations of the simulation model. In order to capture the whole range of
possible outputs expected from a ﬁre event and Monte Carlo technique to yield to a
solution, 5000 repeated random sampling of the inputs, followed by the corresponding
simulation iterations were completed. This means 5000 generated ﬁre scenarios, hence
5000 generated entities via Simulink. The way to translate that into programming is the
following (explanatory screenshots in Appendix H):
• choose an entity generation period of 100000 time units. The chosen period is large
because the execution time of one simulation iteration is large. It is not desired to
generate another entity, while the simulation processes the previous entity.
• choose a simulation stop time of 500000000 time units.
In this way, an entity (or a ﬁre scenario) is generated every 100000 time units and the
simulation stops after 500000000 time units, resulting in 5000 entities generated at the
end of the simulation run. These numbers can be, of course, adjusted if a diﬀerent number
of scenarios is desired.
Page 62 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:78==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
When iterations ﬁnish, one may observe 6 text ﬁles created in the Matlab execution path:
• ’tester12.txt’ contains data related to every occupant in the room of ﬁre origin in
every generated ﬁre scenario; ESL.txt contains a summary of these scenarios;
• ’spreadto6.txt’ contains data for every occupant in compartment 6 in every scenario
of ﬁre spread from the origin room to compartment 6; ’ESLspreadto6.txt’ contains
a summary of these scenarios;
• ’spreadfrom6.txt’ contains data for every occupant in smaller compartments in every
scenario of ﬁre spread from compartment 6 to smaller compartments; ’ESLspread-
from6.txt’ contains a summary of these scenarios;
Nevertheless, these ﬁles comprise enormous sets of raw data which can be very
diﬃcult to operate it, for a user that is not familiar with the developed programming.
Trying to help the user to work with this data, an additional Matlab script was created,
called ’veriﬁcation.m’ -it can be observed in Appendix H. This script will be seen to
be very eﬃcient later, as it can access and extract data related to a single scenario of
interest, which needs further analysis. After further post-processing of the thus obtained
information, the results of the simulations are being introduced and discussed in the next
chapter.
Note: Running the simulation with 5000 iterations may take up to several hours
(2-3), function of the operating system.
Page 63 / 132
4. DYNAMIC APPROACH
==PAGE:79==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
5
Results and discussion
Once every single presented idea was transformed into programming language
and set up into Simulink, 5000 iterations of the model were completed. This means that
5000 diﬀerent ﬁre scenarios were simulated according to the given input.
One should know that two models were created, with the only diﬀerence in be-
tween them being the fact that one model (hereinafter referred to as ’model 1’) incorpo-
rates the existing ﬁre safety active measures, while the other model (hereinafter referred
to as ’model 2’) includes an additional sprinkler system ﬁtted for the whole building.
Therefore, the discussion of the results will be later divided into two sections, accordingly.
The ﬁrst output investigated was the location of the ignition, meaning to which
compartment the ﬁre was attributed during the simulations. This gives some valuable
information because, as explained before, the considered formula for ﬁre hazards frequency
does not take into account the chances of a ﬁre to happen in a speciﬁc compartment of
the building. Assessing the fraction of ﬁres per compartment out of the total number of
incidents (as shown in table 6) and knowing the probability of ﬁre start in this particular
building (0.075 ﬁres/ year), one can consider the result of their product as the probability
of ﬁre burst in the analyzed compartment.
Table 6: Number of ﬁres per compartment
Compartment
Number of
ﬁres
Fraction from
total
Probability of ﬁre start
in this compartment / year
1
322
0.0644
0.00483
2
246
0.0492
0.00369
3
305
0.061
0.004575
4
264
0.0528
0.00396
5
299
0.0598
0.004485
6
1940
0.388
0.0291
7
323
0.0646
0.004845
8
445
0.089
0.006675
9
313
0.0626
0.004695
10
378
0.0756
0.00567
manually
extinguished
165
0.033
0.002475
Total
5000
Page 64 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:80==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Data presented in table 6 may be graphically observed in ﬁgure 24, showing the
distribution of the total amount of generated ﬁres among the building compartments.
Since, the procedure of assigning a ﬁre position involves a uniform distribution, it is
expected that the number of incidents per compartment to be proportional to the area of
the compartment.
Figure 24: Graphical representation of ﬁre location distribution
5.1
’Model 1’ evacuation safety level analysis
Due to the fact that the developed method can, for a given ﬁre scenario, assess
each occupant individual time for evacuation (RSET), one may, of course, address the
evacuation safety level factor for each occupant. It was decided though, that the repre-
sentative ESL of a certain ﬁre scenario to be the minimum of the individual ESL values
of each occupant.
In ﬁgure 25 a representation of the overall distribution of evacuation safety levels
of all the generated scenarios is depicted, with respect to ESL=1 line, considered the
accepted level of safety. It is readily to observe that a large population of data is placed
above this line - in fact 93.77%, of the scenarios are positioned on this safe side. In order
to ﬁnd the source of a not acceptable degree of the evacuation safety level for the rest
of 6.23% scenarios, every compartment will be considered separately, having thereby the
chance to additionally investigate potential consequences and corresponding risk levels.
Page 65 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:81==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 25: ’Model 1’: ESL distribution for all scenarios
Compartment 1
In ﬁgure 26 are shown the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each
individual scenario that may happen in compartment 1. It can be observed that in 9 out
of 322 scenarios people may be exposed to critical conditions. The scenario ’3921’ gives
the minimum ESL equal to 0.716 and the corresponding consequences are 27.
Figure 26: Compartment 1: ESL and consequences
Page 66 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:82==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Additionally, extracting the probabilities that the scenario ’3921’ has been built
on, the level of risk can be estimated as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.00483
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.735
Probability that automatic detection system works:
0.791
Probability that ﬁre ventilation system works:
0.752
Consequences:
27
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.057
Compartment 2
Figure 27 shows the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each indi-
vidual scenario that may happen in compartment 2. It can be observed that in 7 out of
246 scenarios people may be exposed to critical conditions. The scenario ’3357’ gives the
minimum ESL equal to 0.916 and the corresponding consequences are 3.
Figure 27: Compartment 2: ESL and consequences
Additionally, extracting the probabilities that the scenario ’3357’ has been built
on, the level of risk can be estimated as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.00369
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.798
Probability that automatic detection system works:
0.797
Probability that ﬁre ventilation system works:
0.849
Consequences:
3
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.006
Page 67 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:83==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Compartment 3
Figure 28 shows the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each indi-
vidual scenario that may happen in compartment 3. It can be observed that in 3 out of
305 scenarios people may be exposed to critical conditions. The scenario ’3652’ gives the
minimum ESL equal to 0.886 and the corresponding consequences are 12.
Figure 28: Compartment 3: ESL and consequences
Additionally, extracting the probabilities that the scenario ’3652’ has been built
on, the level of risk can be estimated as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.004575
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.675
Probability that automatic detection system works:
0.836
Probability that ﬁre ventilation system works:
0.78
Consequences:
12
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.024
Compartment 4
Figure 29 shows the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each indi-
vidual scenario that may happen in compartment 4. It can be observed that in 2 out of
264 scenarios people may be exposed to critical conditions. The scenario ’1453’ gives the
minimum ESL equal to 0.923 and the corresponding consequences are 3.
Page 68 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:84==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 29: Compartment 4: ESL and consequences
Additionally, extracting the probabilities that the scenario ’1453’ has been built
on, the level of risk can be estimated as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.00396
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.606
Probability that automatic detection system does not work:
0.199
Consequences:
3
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.0014
Compartment 5
Figure 30 shows the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each indi-
vidual scenario that may happen in compartment 5. It can be observed that in 15 out of
299 scenarios people may be exposed to critical conditions. The scenario ’4778’ gives the
minimum ESL equal to 0.806 and the corresponding consequences are 22.
Figure 30: Compartment 5: ESL and consequences
Page 69 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:85==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Additionally, extracting the probabilities that the scenario ’4778’ has been built
on, the level of risk can be estimated as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.004485
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.779
Probability that automatic detection system works:
0.806
Probability that ﬁre ventilation system works:
0.924
Consequences:
22
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.057
Compartment 6
Figure 31 shows the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each indi-
vidual scenario that may happen in compartment 6. It is obviously that this compartment
will register the most ﬁre incidents and the most scenarios resulting into possible casual-
ties, due tot its large area and large supposed number of occupants. It can be observed
that in 221 out of 1940 scenarios people may be exposed to critical conditions. Also, due
the fact that the number of occupants in the compartment is diﬀerent for every simula-
tion, it may be possible that the scenario with the smallest ESL does not coincide with
the scenario with the largest number of consequences. Therefore, the simulated scenario
number ’1167’ gives the minimum ESL equal to 0.598 and the corresponding consequences
are 295, while the scenario ’3046’ has a maximum number of possible consequences of 352
and the corresponding evacuation safety level of 0.785.
Figure 31: Compartment 6: ESL and consequences
Page 70 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:86==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
The risk can be estimated based on the probabilities that the scenario ’1167’ has
been built on, as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.0291
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.657
Probability that detection system does not work:
0.0.064
Consequences:
295
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.36
While the level of risk associated to scenario ’3046’ is:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.0291
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.692
Probability that automatic detection system works:
0.79
Probability that ventilation system does not work:
0.142
Consequences:
352
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.795
Besides the presented probabilistic parameters, one can access at any point the
generated deterministic values that stand behind the ASET/RSET computation. A simple
call of the ’veriﬁcation.m’ Matlab function, having as input the desired scenario number
will return all the deterministic parameters necessary for the evacuation safety level anal-
ysis (such as x and y coordinates of the ﬁre, growth rate, smoke potential, yield of carbon
monoxide, number of occupants, x and y coordinates of each occupant inside the compart-
ment, individual pre-movement time, horizontal travel to exit time, travel time on stairs,
time for queuing at the door). This sort of data representation is obviously extensive and
due to paper size limitations, only the case with the most consequences (’3046’) will be
added to this document (seen in Appendix I). Figure 32 shows a sample data extracted
from Appendix I.
Figure 32: Deterministic parameters, ASET and individual RSET for scenario ’3046’
Page 71 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:87==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Compartment 7
Figure 33 shows the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each indi-
vidual scenario that may happen in compartment 7. It can be observed that in 7 out of
323 scenarios, people may be exposed to critical conditions. The scenario ’4478’ gives the
minimum ESL equal to 0.719 and the corresponding consequences are 42.
Figure 33: Compartment 7: ESL and consequences
Extracting the probabilities that the scenario ’4478’ has been built on, the level
of risk can be estimated as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.004845
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.614
Probability that automatic detection system does not works
0.066
Consequences:
42
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.008
Compartment 8
Figure 34 shows the evacuation safety levels for each individual scenario that
may happen in compartment 8. It can be observed that none of the 445 generated ﬁre
scenarios would lead to a degree of evacuation safety beneath acceptable level, hence there
are no expected consequences. Apparently, not even a situation when ﬁre may block some
evacuation path or door, or when the automatic ﬁre detection and ﬁre ventilation system
are not reliable would not cause any danger for the safe egress of the occupants from this
compartment. This can be thanks to the large number of exit doors of this compartment.
Page 72 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:88==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 34: Compartment 8: Evacuation safety levels
Compartment 9
Figure 35 shows the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each indi-
vidual scenario that may happen in compartment 9. It can be observed that in 4 out of
313 scenarios people may be exposed to critical conditions. The scenario ’3082’ gives the
minimum ESL equal to 0.838 and the corresponding consequences are 10.
Figure 35: Compartment 9: ESL and consequences
Page 73 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:89==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Additionally, extracting the probabilities that the scenario ’3082’ has been built
on, the level of risk can be estimated as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.004695
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.772
Probability that automatic detection system works:
0.829
Probability that ﬁre ventilation system does not work:
0.244
Consequences:
10
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.007
Compartment 10
Figure 36 shows the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each indi-
vidual scenario that may happen in compartment 10. It can be observed that in 33 out
of 378 scenarios people may be exposed to critical conditions. The scenario ’2227’ gives
the minimum ESL equal to 0.751 and the corresponding consequences are 31.
Figure 36: Compartment 10: ESL and consequences
Additionally, extracting the probabilities that the scenario ’3082’ has been built
on, the level of risk can be estimated as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.00567
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.59
Probability that automatic detection system works:
0.91
Probability that ﬁre ventilation system works:
0.876
Consequences:
31
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.083
Page 74 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:90==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Smoke spread from origin room to compartment 6
The spread of ﬁre is also accounted for during this study.
It is investigated
the situation when, from one of the smaller compartments (1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,10) the smoke
would spread to compartment 6 through the open door in between them. Two cases may
be considered: if the ﬁre in the smaller compartment is detected in its incipient phase
and the alarm is sounded, the occupants will start the evacuation also from compartment
6 even before the smoke will begin to spread from the origin compartment. This only
means that in the assessment of ASET for the new aﬀected compartment, it should be
included also the time for the smoke layer to reach the door height in the room of ﬁre
origin, before starting to spread. The other situation is when the automatic ﬁre detectors
do not discover the ﬁre in the room of origin. In this case, ASET should be computed for
compartment 6, without taking into account the time when smoke reaches door height in
the smaller compartment.
Note: it is assumed that ﬁre (smoke) spread through open door is only possible
if the active protection systems (ventilation system and/or sprinkler system for model 2)
used to control the ﬁre are not working.
Figure 37 shows the distribution of the evacuation safety levels and number of
people endangered per scenario in compartment 6, as a consequence of smoke spread from
room of ﬁre origin to this compartment. Out of 5000 initially generated ﬁres, 2894 were
situated in the smaller compartments.
Out of these 2894, in 2115 ventilation system
worked, hence is considered that ﬁre was conﬁned to the room of origin. The rest of 779
are cases when the ﬁre may have spread from initial compartment (1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,10) to
compartment 6. In ﬁgure 37, the 779 ﬁre scenarios can be observed and compared against
the ESL=1 line. 83 ﬁres lead to ESL values smaller than 1, while the maximum number
of consequences is 215 in case of scenario ’453’, with a corresponding ESL of 0.766.
Figure 37: Model 1: smoke spread - ESL and consequences
Page 75 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:91==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Examining the presented results, it may be concluded the following:
• For the smaller compartments, except compartment 10, the probability of ﬁre to
develop into life threatening conditions before all the occupants safely manage to
evacuate lies in the interval 0-2.9%. All the ﬁre scenarios that result in possible
casualties have a common feature: the ﬁre position blocks an exit door. Neverthe-
less, the corresponding level of risk for the most severe generated ﬁre hazards were
estimated to a maximum of 0.057 consequences per year, with the respect to the
probability of ﬁre ignition and reliability of active safety measures. This minor levels
of risk can be easily mitigated by a slight increase in the exit doors width, so that
time of queuing to be further decreased.
• For compartment 10, 8.7% of scenarios, meaning 33 scenarios out of 378 produced
an unsafe level of evacuation safety. This may raise some suspicion concerning the
consistency of the model, giving the similarity in between compartments geometry.
But the explanation comes across and actually increase the conﬁdence in the sim-
ulation procedure: if comparing compartment 10 with compartment 7, once again
displayed in ﬁgure 38, very much similarity in between their dimensions can be ob-
served. The problem arises when a ﬁre blocks the bottom door, hence redirecting
the ﬂow of people towards the other two doors. But in case of compartment 10,
one of those two doors is assumed unavailable, while in case of compartment 7 the
ﬂow of people can still be divided by two. From here, a larger time for occupants
to queue at the doors in some of the scenarios generated in compartment 10, hence
a larger proportion of them involving consequences.
Figure 38: Compartment 7 and 10 comparison
Page 76 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:92==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
• In compartment 6, on the other hand, 11.4% of the envisioned scenarios result in
ASET smaller than RSET situation, therefore it concentrates most of the ﬁre risk.
But having all the model inputs laid down in the form of probability density func-
tions, the expected output cannot be a single value anymore, but a range of possible
outcomes that may be resulted from a ﬁre hazard. This is why the application of the
equation 1 (risk to life = P
i Pi ∗Ci) is limited in this context, so a direct compari-
son with the ’Classical approach’ is not very relevant. Nevertheless, the previously
computed risk value of 0.795 consequences per year is just an indicative measure of
the risk associated to the most severe simulated scenario, the one positioned on the
peak of the outcome distribution.
• Regarding the relationship between ESL value and the number of consequences: as
a reminder, in the ’Classical Approach’, knowing the time for all the occupants to
safely evacuate (RSET) and the time for the critical conditions to occur (ASET)
allows for a simple cross-multiplication in order to determine to number of occupants
that are not able to evacuate before ﬁre developed to untenable conditions, hence:
consequences = no. of occupants - no. of occupants · ASET
RSET
But in ’Dynamic Approach’, that relationship is seen to be no longer valid. Instead,
as pointed out before, the method itself allows for a direct counting of the number
of consequences, by comparing, for each occupant, its individual time to arrive to a
safe place to the time for ﬁre conditions to be life threatening.
Page 77 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:93==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
5.2
’Model 2’ evacuation safety level analysis
As explained at the beginning of section 5, the only diﬀerence between ’model 1’
and ’model 2’ is the integration of the sprinkler system into the simulation software and
programming all the adjacent implications.
Regarding the distribution of ﬁre incidents per compartment, it was shown that
the procedure of assigning a ﬁre position involves a uniform distribution, whose parameters
are real numbers representing the geometrical boundaries of the rooms. Therefore, it is
expected that if an inﬁnite number of simulations are being run, the corresponding fraction
of ﬁres per compartment will converge to a constant value. Hence, it is assumed that the
probability of ﬁre to start in a certain compartment is the same as calculated in table 6.
After having completed also 5000 iterations of ’model 2’, the representation
of the overall distribution of evacuation safety levels of all the generated scenarios was
constructed with respect to the ESL=1 line, as can be seen in ﬁgure 39. Out of 5000
ﬁre scenarios, 140 ﬁres were manually extinguished by the occupants and from the rest of
4860, only 35 ﬁres may lead to possible consequences due to untenable conditions during
evacuation. This is also easy to notice from ﬁgure 39, as most of the data is spread above
ESL=1 line - in fact, 99.28% of the scenarios are positioned on this safe side. The largest
part of the remaining 0.72% scenarios which produced a value for the evacuation safety
level lower than 1 are scenarios with a ﬁre originating in compartment 6. For this reason,
ESL and consequences number for ﬁre incidents located in compartment 6 will be further
analyzed, while values for each of the rest individual compartment can be seen in ﬁgures
from Appendix J.
Figure 39: ’Model 2’: ESL distribution for all scenarios
Page 78 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:94==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Compartment 6
Figure 40 shows the evacuation safety levels and the consequences for each sce-
nario of ﬁre developing in compartment 6. It can be observed that in 24 out of 1912
scenarios, people may be exposed to critical conditions. In the scenario ’4526’, it can be
expected the maximum number of consequences to 342 and the corresponding ESL equal
to 0.815.
Figure 40: ’Model 2’: compartment 6- ESL and consequences
Extracting the probabilities that the scenario ’4526’ has been built on, the level
of risk can be estimated as follows:
Probability of ﬁre start in this compartment:
0.0291
Probability of ﬁre not to be manually extinguished:
0.665
Probability that automatic detection system works:
0.811
Probability that ﬁre ventilation system works:
0.756
Probability that ﬁre sprinkler system does not work:
0.09
Consequences:
342
Risk [possible consequences per year]:
0.365
Smoke spread from origin room to compartment 6
In ’model 2’ the same premises for smoke spread are considered as in ’model 1’.
Figure 41 shows the distribution of the evacuation safety levels and number of people
endangered per scenario in compartment 6, as a consequence of smoke spread from room
of ﬁre origin to this compartment. Out of 5000 initially generated ﬁres, 2948 were situated
in the smaller compartments. Out of these 2948, in 2589 scenarios it is considered that
Page 79 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:95==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
ﬁre was conﬁned to the room of origin, due to the action of the ﬁre ventilation system
and/or the sprinkler system. The rest of 359 are cases when the ﬁre may have spread
from initial compartment (1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,10) to compartment 6. In ﬁgure 41, the 359
ﬁre scenarios may be observed and compared against the ESL=1 line. 16 ﬁres lead to
ESL values smaller than 1, while the maximum number of consequences is 169 in case of
scenario ’110’, with a corresponding ESL of 0.769.
Figure 41: ’Model 2’: smoke spread - ESL and consequences
Page 80 / 132
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
==PAGE:96==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
6
Conclusions
"The ﬁre safety community needs to begin to move forward from discussing a set
of issues and concerns relating to uncertainty in ﬁre protection engineering to agreeing as
a community on practical steps to execute an uncertainty analysis." [58] (Notarianni,2016)
Trying to come up with an answer for this problem, the study demonstrates a
proposed methodology to handle the variability and uncertainty in ﬁre scenarios from
quantitatively point of view. Not aiming to give a verdict related to the degree of ﬁre
safety for the considered building itself, but more likely, the goal is to create a modern,
up-to-date framework, a tool for ﬁre safety engineers and practitioners. Thus, an alterna-
tive way for handling risk-informed and performance-based life safety design is envisioned
and its application is shown in a real life ﬁre protection engineering situation. The need
for a new approach is also demonstrated as a part of the project, where the shortcom-
ings of a performed quantitative risk analysis are being brought to attention in chapter
4, by highlighting that major uncertainties that might be neglected. It is shown that
uncertainties sources are diverse, ranging from variables that are built into the analytical
tools and methods, unpredictability in human behavior and reaction in case of ﬁre emer-
gency, uncertainties associated with criteria and values selected for assessing tenability
conditions, to variations of the reliability of ﬁre protection measures [37]. The ﬁndings
were grouped into factors that are related to ﬁre development (ﬁre growth rate, average
smoke potential, carbon monoxide yield, reliability of ﬁre ventilation system, operational
and performance reliability of sprinkler system, probability of ﬁre to be manually extin-
guished) and factors related to evacuation process (ignition point of the ﬁre inside the
building, number of occupants present in the building, location of the occupant(s) inside
the ﬁre compartment, density of occupants in front of the exit doors during evacuation,
reliability of ﬁre detection and alarm system, occupants pre-movement time, probability
that the personnel has ﬁre safety training) and they represent the starting point of the
new approach. The common feature of these parameters is that they all have a stochastic
or probabilistic basis. This observation lead to the idea of deploying a Monte Carlo simu-
lation, one of the very few methods that can yield solutions for complex multi-dimensional
stochastic modeling problems [59]. After extensive documentation about the presented
various uncertain parameters, they have all been collected into a single model and indi-
vidual probability distributions that can reﬂect their innate variability were attributed to
them, as described in chapter 4.1 and 4.2. Using this probabilistic parameters as input
data, a simulation model of the physical phenomena (ignition, heat radiation, combustion
products development) and the real technological processes (detection, warning, suppres-
sion, evacuation) is then constructed by means of Discrete Event Simulation method, in
order to predict the evacuation safety level in case of a ﬁre hazard as an outcome.
Page 81 / 132
6. CONCLUSIONS
==PAGE:97==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
The correctness of the algorithm logic and the trustworthiness of the considered
assumptions are ultimately strengthened by the simulations results. Hence, chapter 5 and
5.1 demonstrates the problem of evaluating the limits of the evacuation safety, together
with the assessment of the corresponding risk. It is shown that the method can generate
and evaluate thousands of scenarios, while the more scenarios are generated and random
sampling of the inputs are repeated, the higher the degree of conﬁdence of the Monte
Carlo procedure. Also, for helping the users to handle the enormous amount of produced
data and for having the chance to prove the results, ’veriﬁcation.m’ Matlab function was
additionally created, as explained in chapter 4.3, so that the easy access is possible to
any scenario’ deterministic parameters governing the ﬁre development and the evacuation
process. This can fundamentally help at the validation of the implemented framework:
investigating the outcome of the created algorithms for special input sets, for which the
output can be analytically determined.
Chapter 5.2 proposes supplementary ﬁre safety barriers (i.e. sprinkler system) to
be subsequently included into the model, allowing for a comparison of their quantitative
eﬀect on the ﬁnal evacuation safety level: if without sprinkler system 6.23% of the 5000
simulated ﬁre scenarios were evaluated with evacuation safety level lower than 1, the
addition of the sprinklers resulted in only 0.78% of the scenarios being evaluated with a
sub-unitary ESL value.
As a last sub-research matter, animations are introduced, illustrating the process
of choosing egress routes starting from random locations inside the study case building.
This strengthens the clearness and logic of the developed algorithms and may serve, as
well, as a communication and validation channel between system analysts and domain
experts. [57]
6.1
Future work
The whole study is structured based on three areas of civil engineering: buildings
ﬁre safety, ﬁre dynamics and probabilistic modelling.
Therefore, any future work or
thoughts to be considered can start in any of these ﬁelds:
• Fire safety
– One may consider as future work the ﬁre spread from compartment 6 to the
rest of the compartments. Even though this is already implemented in the
programming part, it may raise some questions, such as: can the ﬁre spread
from such a big compartment to all of the small compartments? If so, under
which assumptions? Will it happen in a short time, so that to impede the
Page 82 / 132
6. CONCLUSIONS
==PAGE:98==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
occupants evacuation from the small compartments?
– Also, to be considered is the probability of ﬁre spread from one room to another
through compartmentalization walls, ventilation system, or by other means.
– The impact of the ﬁre active safety systems (ventilation system and/or sprinkler
system) on the ﬁre development was chosen by engineering judgement and
supported by some documentation ([31], [43], [46]). Still, some critical thinking
may be reconsidered for this aspect.
• Fire dynamics
– So far, the ﬁre was assumed to develop following an α · t2 curve, so a growing
ﬁre, based on the reasoning explained in section 2.2. One may think it is of
interest to further develop the model for a steady ﬁre (and update the equations
for reaching tenability criteria), as well.
• Probabilistic modelling
– From this point of view, one may argue about the chosen distributions from
chapter 4.1. Are them suited for the data found? Literature may say they
are, and references have been given with respect to this matter. But there
are probabilistic methods, called goodness of ﬁt tests, deployed to verify the
appropriateness of the selected probability distribution and of the estimated
parameters (such as the Chi-Square test or the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test) [4].
– Perform a sensitivity analysis to evaluate the relationship between the uncer-
tainty in the input data and the ﬁnal results. This consists into introducing
a slight variation into the range of some of the input values and determine to
which extent this changes the model results. For example, if changing the oper-
ational reliability limits of the sprinkler system- how will the ESL be aﬀected?
[56]
Page 83 / 132
6. CONCLUSIONS
==PAGE:99==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
References
[1] David Yung, Principles of Fire Risk Assessment in Buildings, Yung and Associates
Inc., Canada, 2008
[2] Enrico Zio, An introduction to the basics reliability and risk analysis, World Scientiﬁc
Publishing Co, 2007
[3] M. C. Albrecht, Introduction to Discrete Event Simulation, 2010
[4] Michael Havbro Faber, Statistics and Probability Theory- In Pursuit of Engineering
Decision Support, 2012
[5] Ramachandran G., Charters D., Quantitative Risk Assessment in Fire Safety - Rout-
ledge, 2011.
[6] R.E. Melchers, Structural Reliability Analysis and Prediction - 2nd edn. Wiley, 1999
[7] Håkan Frantzich, Health Care Application of Quantitative Fire Risk Analysis- SFPE
Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering, Fifth edition, 2016
[8] M. Spearpoint, Fire Engineering Design Guide- Third Edition, 2008
[9] ISO/TR 13387 Fire safety engineering Part 8: Life Safety—Occupant behaviour, lo-
cation and condition
[10] David A. Purser and Jamie L. McAllister, Assessment of Hazards to Occupants from
Smoke, Toxic Gases, and Heat- SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering, Fifth
edition, 2016
[11] Michael Delichatsios, Tenability conditions and ﬁlling times for ﬁres in large spaces-
Fire Safety Journal 39, 2004
[12] John H. Klote, Smoke Control - SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering,
Fifth edition, 2016
[13] ISO 13344:2015 Estimation of the lethal toxic potency of ﬁre eﬄuents
[14] Poon, L.S., Predicting Time Of Flashover. AOFST 3 , 1988
[15] Björn Karlsson, James G. Quintiere, Enclosure Fire- CRC Press,2000
[16] H. Bengtsson, Formula Finder - Fire Safety Engineering, Polyteknisk Forlag, 2014
[17] Bjarne Paulsen Husted, Optical smoke units and smoke potential of diﬀerent products,
Danish Institute of Fire and Security Technology, 2004
Page 84 / 132
REFERENCES
==PAGE:100==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
[18] Terrie K. Boguski, Understanding Units of Measurement- Center for Hazardous Sub-
stance Research, Kansas State University, 2006
[19] David A. Purser, Combustion Toxicity- SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engi-
neering, Fifth edition, 2016
[20] Nelson HE., An engineering analysis of the early stages of ﬁre development—the ﬁre
at the Du Pont Plaza hotel and casino December 31 1986. - US National Bureau of
Standards, 1987
[21] Byggecentrum, Eksempelsamling om brandsikring af byggeri, 2012
[22] Zuccaro T., Fire safety engineering concerning evacuation from buildings - European
Guideline, CFPA Europe, 2009
[23] R. Bukowski, J. Tubbs, Egress concepts and design approaches - SFPE Handbook of
Fire Protection Engineering, Fifth edition, 2016
[24] Stefan Särdqvist, Initial Fires- RHR, Smoke Production and CO Generation from
Single Items and Room Fire Tests, Lund University, 1998
[25] Google Maps, extracted on 31.12.2018 from:
https://www.google.com/maps/
place/DTU+Building+303/@55.785008,12.518044,629m/data=!3m1!1e3!4m5!
3m4!1s0x46524e7ccb5e8633:0x79802939c5deff09!8m2!3d55.785008!4d12.
5202327
[26] EN 13501-2 : 2016, Fire classiﬁcation of construction products and building elements
- Part 2: Classiﬁcation using data from ﬁre resistance tests, excluding ventilation
services
[27] Carsten Falk Hansen, Executive Order on the Publication of the Danish Building
Regulations 2015 (BR15) -The Danish Transport and Construction Agency, 2015
[28] Babrauskas Vytenis, Fleming Joseph M., and Don Russell, B. RSET/ASET, a ﬂawed
concept for ﬁre safety assessment- Fire and Materials, 2010
[29] Cornelius Albrecht, A risk-informed and performance-based life safety concept in case
of ﬁre - Institut für Baustoﬀe, Massivbau und Brandschutz (IBMB), 2012
[30] Rausand M., Risk Assessment — Theory, Methods and Applications. -Wiley, 2011
[31] Rasbash D., Ramachandran G., Kandola B., Watts J., Law M., Evaluation of Fire
Safety - Wiley, 2004
[32] Ramachandran G., Statistical methods in risk evaluation-Fire Safety Journal, 1980
Page 85 / 132
REFERENCES
==PAGE:101==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
[33] BS PD 7974-7:2003, Application of ﬁre safety engineering principles to the design of
buildings. Probabilistic risk assessment
[34] Hede M. B. Comparative evaluation of prescriptive, performance-based and risk-based
ﬁre safety in an oﬃce building - Master thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2011
[35] Rahikainen J., Keski-Rahkonen O. Statistical determination of ignition frequency of
structural ﬁres in diﬀerent premises in Finland. -Fire Technology, 2004
[36] Manes M., Rush D., A Critical Evaluation of BS PD 7974-7 Structural Fire Response
Data Based on USA Fire Statistics- School of Engineering, University of Edinburgh,
2018
[37] Brian J. M., David C., Peter J.,Matthew S., Building Fire Risk Analysis - SFPE
Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering, Fifth edition, 2016
[38] Ramachandran G., Stochastic Models of Fire Growth - SFPE Handbook of Fire Pro-
tection Engineering, Third Edition, 2002
[39] Holborn P.G., Nolan P.F., Golt J., An analysis of ﬁre sizes, ﬁre growth rates and
times between events using data from ﬁre investigations - Fire Safety Journal 39, 2004
[40] Huang D., Zhu G-q., Pan R-l., Probabilistic Model of Smoke Filling in Large Spaces
- 8th International Conference on Fire Science, 2017
[41] Ramachandran G., Exponential Model of Fire Growth- Fire Research Station, 1986
[42] Nilsson M., Johansson N., Van Hees P., A New Method for Quantifying Fire Growth
Rates Using Statistical and Empirical Data – Applied to Determine the Eﬀect of Arson-
International Association for Fire Safety Science, 2014
[43] Nystedt F., Verifying Fire Safety Design in Sprinklered Buildings- Lund University,
2011
[44] Hou J.Y-P., Distribution Curves for Interior Furnishings on CO2, CO, HCN, Soot
and Heat of Combustion - master thesis at University of Canterbury Christchurch,
2011
[45] Svensson S., Fire Ventilation - Swedish Rescue Services Agency, 2005
[46] Gordonova P., Smoke and Fire Gases Venting in Large Industrial Spaces and Stores
- Lund University, 2004
[47] Hall J.R., U.S. Experience with Sprinklers and other Fire Extinguishing Equipment
- National Fire Protection Association, Fire Analysis and Research Division, 2010
Page 86 / 132
REFERENCES
==PAGE:102==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
[48] Bukowski R.W., Budnick E.K., Estimates of the Operational Reliability of Fire Pro-
tection Systems, 2002
[49] Nystedt F., Risk-Informed Fire Safety Design of Structures - Lund University, 2018
[50] Stein W.E., Keblis M.F., A new method to simulate the triangular distribution -
Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 2008
[51] Barry T.F., Risk-Informed Industrial Fire Protection Engineering - SFPE Handbook
of Fire Protection Engineering, Fifth edition, 2016
[52] Bode N.W.F., Codling E.A., Exploring Determinants of Pre-movement Delays in a
Virtual Crowd Evacuation Experiment - Fire Technology, 2018
[53] Hallberg G., Evacuation of Buildings - Practice Makes Safety - Fire Safety Science-
Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium, 1988
[54] Y. Zeng, W. Song, F. Huo, X. Wei - Eﬀect of Weibull Distributed Pre-movement
Time on Evacuation, State Key Laboratory of Fire Science, University of Science and
Technology of China, 2017
[55] Guanquan C., Jinhua S. The Eﬀect of Pre-movement Time and Occupant Density on
Evacuation Time - Journal of Fire Sciences, 2006
[56] William G.B. Phillips, Rita F. Fahy, revised by Douglas K. Beller, Computer Simu-
lation for Fire Risk Analysis - SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering, Fifth
edition, 2016
[57] Duijm Nijs Jan, Kozin Igor, Markert Frank - Oﬀshore Platform Hydrocarbon Risk
Assessment – OPHRA: Feasibility, DTU Management Engineering, 2014
[58] Notarianni K.A., Parry G.W., Uncertainty - SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection
Engineering, Fifth edition, 2016
[59] Enrico Zion, Computational Methods for Reliability and Risk Analysis, World Scien-
tiﬁc Publishing Co, 2009
Page 87 / 132
REFERENCES
==PAGE:103==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
A
Appendix: Overall assumptions
As any engineering study, this simulation tries to replicate the reality as accurate
as possible, but considerations have to be accounted for the modeling limitations. Hence,
some idealizations of the real life need to be introduced, though. They have been speciﬁed
at every step of this process, yet a summary of the most important assumptions considered
along the project is presented below:
• The ﬂoor plan is an idealized version of the one in building 303A, but it does not
entirely depicts the real one.
• The development of the design ﬁre is chosen to be represented by a non-steady,
t-squared ﬁre model. It was shown that this can reproduce a good approximation
of the real ﬁre growth phase, when the evacuation of the occupants should take
place. Chapter 2.2 introduces the use of some other assumptions, as well, describing
ﬁre behaviour and development, such as: "suﬃcient" combustible materials in the
compartment, fuel-controlled (well ventilated) ﬁre, two-zone model approximation.
• Fire growth rate, average smoke potential, carbon monoxide yield are the necessary
fuel parameters for the investigation of time dependent tenability criterion set.
• If the automatic smoke ventilation and the sprinkler system are both working, their
operation will reduce the factors governing ﬁre developing, as follows:
– ﬁre growth rate reduces to 33% of its value;
– smoke potential reduces to 33% of its value;
– carbon monoxide yield reduces to 33% of its value;
• if only sprinkler system is working, its operation will reduce the factors governing
ﬁre developing, as follows:
– ﬁre growth rate reduces to 50% of its value;
– smoke potential reduces to 50% of its value;
– carbon monoxide yield reduces to 50% of its value;
• if ﬁre ventilation system is working but the sprinkler system does not, its operation
will have the following eﬀect:
– ﬁre growth rate increases to 120% of its value;
– smoke potential reduces to 60% of its value;
– carbon monoxide yield reduces to 60% of its value;
Page 88 / 132
A. APPENDIX: OVERALL ASSUMPTIONS
==PAGE:104==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
• In the smaller compartments (1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,10), it is believed that occupants will
discover the ﬁre before the automatic detection system, by direct sight of the smoke
or ﬂames. For this reason, the time for the ABA system to detect the ﬁre and
sound the warning massage will not be considered when evaluating the RSET in the
compartment of ﬁre origin.
• In the ’Classical Approach’ part, it is assumed that knowing the time for all the
occupants to safely evacuate (RSET) and the time for the critical conditions to occur
(ASET) allows for a simple cross-multiplication in order to determine to number of
occupants that are not able to evacuate before ﬁre developed to untenable conditions,
hence:
consequences = no. of occupants - no. of occupants · ASET
RSET .
• In the ’Dynamic Approach’ part, ﬁre and smoke spread from smaller compartments
(1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,10) to compartment 6 is accounted for, if and only if none of the
active systems to control the ﬁre are not working (ventilation, sprinklers).
• Even though ﬁre location is randomly generated in any point of the ﬂoor surface, it is
assumed that no corner or wall ﬁre will happen so that to fasten the ﬁre development
or to modify in any way the chosen design ﬁre.
Page 89 / 132
A. APPENDIX: OVERALL ASSUMPTIONS
==PAGE:105==
length 
[m]
width 
[m]
max. Height 
[m]
min. Height 
[m]
exit doors X 
width [m]
coordinates
code 
abreviation
l
w
h1
h
w
x,y
C1 - 
auditorium
14
12
5,65
4,03
1 x 1m
1 x 1.8m
x: (1, 12)
y: (1, 12.5)
C2
14
10
5,65
5,65
2 x 1m
1 x 1.8m
x: (12, 22)
y: (1, 12)
C3
14
11,6
5,65
5,65
3 x 1m
1 x 1.8m
x: (22, 33.6)
y: (1, 12.5)
C4
14
10
5,65
5,65
2 x 1m
1 x 1.8m
x: (33.6, 43.6)
y: (1, 12)
C5 - 
auditorium
14
11,8
5,65
4,03
1 x 1m
1 x 1.8m
x: (43.6, 55.4)
y: (1, 12.5)
C6
21
55,4
3,75
3,75
8 x 2.4m
x: (1, 55.4)
y: (14, 35)
C7 - 
auditorium
14
11,8
5,65
4,03
2 x 1m
1 x 1.8m
x: (1, 11.8)
y: (35, 49)
C9 - 
auditorium
14
18,8
5,65
4,03
4 x 1m
2 x 1.8m
x: (11.8, 30.6)
y: (35, 49)
C9 - 
auditorium
14
11,8
5,65
4,03
2 x 1m
1 x 1.8m
x: (30.6, 42.4)
y: (35, 49)
C10 - 
auditorium
14
13
5,65
4,03
1 x 1m
1 x 1.8m
x: (42.4, 55.4)
y: (35, 49)
*if the compartment is not an auditorium, than the minimum and the maximum height are equal
*coordinates column does not refer to the exact location of the compartment within the 
floor plan, it is more an indication of the interval where possible locations of the occupants
can be generated  inside the corresponding compartment 
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
B
Appendix: Fire compartments characteristics
Page 90 / 132
B. APPENDIX: FIRE COMPARTMENTS CHARACTERISTICS
==PAGE:106==
Scenario 1-  ASET computation
INPUT :
growth rate: fast
α
0.047

[kW/s2]
smoke potential
S0
49.5

[dB/m]
combustible 
characteristics:
yield of carbon monoxide
yCO
0.0063

[g/g] 
air density
ρair
1.2

[kg/m3]
air specific heat
Cp.air
1

[kJ/(kg*K)]
air lower heat of combustion
ΔHair
3000

[kJ/kg]
compartment 
characteristics:
area of the room
A
13 14


[m2]
max height of the room
h1
5.65

[m]
min height of the room
h
4.03

[m]
volume of the room 
V
A h1

h1
h

(
) 11

1
2

13


912.47


[m3]
time to critical conditions due to visibility
choose D/L=1 (area>150)
tvis
3
1
3V ρair

ΔHair

S0 α


161.8


[sec]
smoke layer height, with respect to
the minimum height of the room
z
1.6
0.1 h


2.003


[m]
time to critical conditions due to SLH
conversion factor
kb
0.064

tSLH
z
h


2

3
1







5
A
2kb α
1
3

h
2
3













3
5
158.02


[sec]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
C
Appendix: ASET and RSET evaluation-
classical approach
Page 91 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:107==
ambient temperature:
Ta
293.15

[K] 
temperature of the hot gas
according to radiation criterion
Tg
458

[K] 
coefficient of radiated heat loss
αloss
0.4

time to hot gas critical
temperature T=458K
tT458
1
Ta
Tg







3

α ρair

Cp.air

Ta

V

1
z
h




αloss






2
3
α
210.091


[sec]
volume of the upper layer of smoke:
V1
A h
z

(
)

368.914


[m3]
compartment maximum concentration 
of carbon monoxide
CCO
5700

[PPM] 
molecular weight of carbon monoxide
μCO
12
16

28


[g/mol] 
volume of a mole of gas at atmospheric
pressure (1atm=101325Pa) and at ambient
temperature (20°C=293.15K) : V = (RT/ P)
8.3144598 293.15

101325
0.02406

[m3/mol]
concentration transformation from
PPM to kg/m^3 according to [17]
CCO.max
1
0.02406
μCO

CCO 10
9



6.633
10
3




[kg/m3]
time to critical 
CO concentration
tCO
V1 CCO.max

0.21
ρair
2 9.81

Cp.air Ta





1
3

z
5
3

α
1
3

yCO













3
5
154


[sec]
ASET
min tvis tSLH

tT458

tCO



60
2.567


[minutes]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 92 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:108==
RSET computation
N
60

[occupants]
number of occupants
person density
D0
N
A
0.33


[pers/m2]
 premovement time
 (reaction/decision time)
tprm
45
60
0.75


[minutes]
ls
11

[m]
stairs length
ks
51.8
300
100

89.72


 travel factor for stairs
Assume people density on the stairs
1 pers/m^2
D0
1

[pers/m2]
speed of travel on stairs
ss
min 72.83 ks 1
0.266 D0








65.855


[m/min]
travel time for stairs
tts
ls
ss
0.167


[minutes]
length of horizontal travel
ltr
8

[m]
horizontal travel factor
kt
84

speed of travel
s
min 72.83 kt 1
0.266 D0








61.656


[m/min]
horizontal travel time
tth
ltr
s
0.13


[minutes]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 93 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:109==
 total travel time
tt
tth
tts

0.297


[minutes]
W
1

[m]
door width
effective width
We
W
2 0.15


0.7


[m]
Assume people density in front of doors
2 pers/m^2
D0
2

[pers/m2]
speed of travel
s
min 72.83 kt 1
0.266 D0








39.312


[m/min]
specific flow 
Fs
s D0

78.624


[pers/min/m]
actual flow
Fa
Fs We

55.037


[pers/min]
 queuing time
tq
N
Fa
1.09


[minutes]
 total time
RSET
tprm
tt

tq

2.137


[minutes]
Evacuation safety level
ESL
ASET
RSET
1.2012


Consequences 
C
0

[occupants]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 94 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:110==
Scenario 2 -  ASET computation
INPUT :
growth rate: medium
α
0.012

[kW/s2]
smoke potential
S0
74.3

[dB/m]
combustible 
characteristics:
yield of carbon monoxide
yCO
0.005

[g/g] 
air density
ρair
1.2

[kg/m3]
air specific heat
Cp.air
1

[kJ/(kg*K)]
compartment 
characteristics:
area of the room
A
1050

[m2]
height of the room
h
3.75

[m]
volume of the room 
V
A h

3.938
103



[m3]
time to critical conditions due to visibility
choose D/L=1 (area>150)
tvis
3
1
3V ρair

ΔHair

S0 α


362.653


[sec]
smoke layer height
z
1.6
0.1 h


1.975


[m]
time to critical conditions due to SLH
tSLH
z
h


2

3
1







5
A
2kb α
1
3

h
2
3













3
5
573.497


[sec]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 95 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:111==
ambient temperature:
Ta
293.15

[K] 
temperature of the hot gas
according to radiation criterion
Tg
458

[K] 
coefficient of radiated heat loss
αloss
0.4

time to hot gas critical
temperature T=458K
tT458
1
Ta
Tg







3

α ρair

Cp.air

Ta

V

1
z
h




αloss






2
3
α
528.349


[sec]
volume of the upper layer of smoke:
V1
A h
z

(
)

1.864
103



[m3]
compartment maximum concentration 
of carbon monoxide
CCO
5700

[PPM] 
molecular weight of carbon monoxide
μCO
12
16

28


[g/mol] 
volume of a mole of gas at atmospheric
pressure (1atm=101325Pa) and at ambient
temperature (20°C=293.15K) : V = (RT/ P)
8.3144598 293.15

101325
0.02406

[m3/mol]
concentration transformation from
PPM to kg/m^3 according to [17]
CCO.max
1
0.02406
μCO

CCO 10
9



6.633
10
3




[kg/m3]
time to critical 
CO concentration
tCO
V1 CCO.max

0.21
ρair
2 9.81

Cp.air Ta





1
3

z
5
3

α
1
3

yCO













3
5
623.1


[sec]
ASET
min tvis tSLH

tT458

tCO



60
6.044


[minutes]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 96 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:112==
RSET computation
N
250

[occupants]
number of occupants
person density
D0
N
A
0.238


[pers/m2]
detection and warning time
tw
2

[minutes]
reaction and decision time
trd
1

[minutes]
 premovement time
 (warning+ reaction/decision time)
tprm
tw
trd

3


[minutes]
horizontal travel length
ltr
28

[m]
horizontal travel factor
kt
84

s
min 72.83 kt 1
0.266 D0








72.83


[m/min]
speed of travel
 horizontal travel time
tt1
ltr
s
0.384


[minutes]
ls
2.75

[m]
stairs length
ks
51.8
300
150

73.256


 travel factor for stairs
Assume people density on the stairs
1.5 pers/m^2
D0
1.5

[pers/m2]
speed of travel on stairs
ss
min 72.83 ks 1
0.266 D0








44.027


[m/min]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 97 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:113==
travel time for stairs
tt2
ls
ss
0.062


[minutes]
 total travel time
tt
tt1
tt2

0.447


[minutes]
door width
W
2.4

[m]
effective width
We
W
2 0.15


2.1


[m]
Assume people density in front of doors
2 pers/m^2
D0
2

[pers/m2]
speed of travel
s
min 72.83 kt 1
0.266 D0








39.312


[m/min]
specific flow 
Fs
s D0

78.624


[pers/min/m]
actual flow
Fa
Fs We

165.11


[pers/min]
 queuing time
(considdering there are
8 emergency exits)
tq
N
8
Fa
0.189


[minutes]
 total time
RSET
tprm
tt

tq

3.636


[minutes]
Evacuation safety level
ESL
ASET
RSET
1.6622


Consequences 
C
0

[occupants]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 98 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:114==
Scenario 3 -  ASET computation
INPUT :
growth rate: fast
α
0.047

[kW/s2]
smoke potential
S0
74.3

[dB/m]
combustible 
characteristics:
yield of carbon monoxide
yCO
0.005

[g/g] 
air density
ρair
1.2

[kg/m3]
air specific heat
Cp.air
1

[kJ/(kg*K)]
compartment 
characteristics:
area of the room
A
1050

[m2]
height of the room
h
3.75

[m]
volume of the room 
V
A h

3.938
103



[m3]
time to critical conditions due to visibility
choose D/L=1 (area>150)
tvis
3
1
3V ρair

ΔHair

S0 α


230.066


[sec]
smoke layer height
z
1.6
0.1 h


1.975


[m]
time to critical conditions due to SLH
tSLH
z
h


2

3
1







5
A
2kb α
1
3

h
2
3













3
5
436.463


[sec]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 99 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:115==
ambient temperature:
Ta
293.15

[K] 
temperature of the hot gas
according to radiation criterion
Tg
458

[K] 
coefficient of radiated heat loss
αloss
0.4

time to hot gas critical
temperature T=458K
tT458
1
Ta
Tg







3

α ρair

Cp.air

Ta

V

1
z
h




αloss






2
3
α
335.183


[sec]
volume of the upper layer of smoke:
V1
A h
z

(
)

1.864
103



[m3]
compartment maximum concentration 
of carbon monoxide
CCO
5700

[PPM] 
molecular weight of carbon monoxide
μCO
12
16

28


[g/mol] 
volume of a mole of gas at atmospheric
pressure (1atm=101325Pa) and at ambient
temperature (20°C=293.15K) : V = (RT/ P)
8.3144598 293.15

101325
0.02406

[m3/mol]
concentration transformation from
PPM to kg/m^3 according to [17]
CCO.max
1
0.02406
μCO

CCO 10
9



6.633
10
3




[kg/m3]
time to critical 
CO concentration
tCO
V1 CCO.max

0.21
ρair
2 9.81

Cp.air Ta





1
3

z
5
3

α
1
3

yCO













3
5
474.2


[sec]
ASET
min tvis tSLH

tT458

tCO



60
3.834


[minutes]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 100 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:116==
RSET computation
N
500

[occupants]
number of occupants
detection and warning time
tw
2

[minutes]
reaction and decision time
trd
1

[minutes]
 premovement time
 (warning+ reaction/decision time)
tprm
tw
trd

3


[minutes]
horizontal travel length
ltr
48

[m]
person density
D0
N
A
0.476


[pers/m2]
horizontal travel factor
kt
84

s
min 72.83 kt 1
0.266 D0








72.83


[m/min]
speed of travel
horizontal travel time
tt1
ltr
s
0.659


[minutes]
stairs length
ls
2.75

[m]
 travel factor for stairs
ks
51.8
300
150

73.256


Assume people density on the stairs
2.5 pers/m^2
D0
2.5

[pers/m2]
speed of travel on stairs
ss
min 72.83 ks 1
0.266 D0








24.541


[m/min]
travel time for stairs
tt2
ls
ss
0.112


[minutes]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 101 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:117==
 total travel time
tt
tt1
tt2

0.771


[minutes]
W
2.4

[m]
door width
effective width
We
W
2 0.15


2.1


[m]
Assume people density in front of doors
3 pers/m^2
D0
3

[pers/m2]
speed of travel
s
min 72.83 kt 1
0.266 D0








16.968


[m/min]
specific flow 
Fs
s D0

50.904


[pers/min/m]
actual flow
Fa
Fs We

106.898


[pers/min]
 queuing time
only 4 doors
available
tq
N
4
Fa
1.169


[minutes]
 total time
RSET
tprm
tt

tq

4.94


[minutes]
Evacuation safety level
ESL
ASET
RSET
0.7761


Consequences 
C
N
N ESL


111.936


C
112

[occupants]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 102 / 132
C. APPENDIX: ASET AND RSET EVALUATION-
CLASSICAL APPROACH
==PAGE:118==
Scenario 3 -  ASET computation
 case1 : detection not working/ ventilation not working / sprinkler not working
/increased pre-movement time
INPUT :
growth rate: fast
α
0.047

[kW/s2]
smoke potential
S0
74.3

[dB/m]
combustible 
characteristics:
yield of carbon monoxide
yCO
0.005

[g/g] 
air lower 
heat of combustion
ΔHair
3000

[kJ/kg]
air density
ρair
1.2

[kg/m3]
air specific heat
Cp.air
1

[kJ/(kg*K)]
compartment 
characteristics:
area of the room
A
1050

[m2]
height of the room
h
3.75

[m]
volume of the room 
V
A h

3.938
103



[m3]
time to critical conditions due to visibility
choose D/L=1 (area>150)
tvis
3
1
3V ρair

ΔHair

S0 α


230.066


[sec]
smoke layer height
z
1.6
0.1 h


1.975


[m]
time to critical conditions due to SLH
conversion factor
kb
0.064

tSLH
z
h


2

3
1







5

A
2kb α
1
3

h
2
3













3
5
436.463


[sec]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
D
Appendix: Scenario 3 - ASET and RSET
controlled by ﬁre safety systems
Page 103 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:119==
ambient temperature:
Ta
293.15

[K] 
temperature of the hot gas
according to radiation criterion
Tg
458

[K] 
coefficient of radiated heat loss
αloss
0.4

time to hot gas critical
temperature T=458K
tT458
1
Ta
Tg





3

α ρair

Cp.air

Ta

V

1
z
h




αloss






2
3
α
335.183


[sec]
volume of the upper layer of smoke:
V1
A
h
z

(
)

1.864
103



[m3]
compartment maximum concentration 
of carbon monoxide
CCO
5700

[PPM] 
molecular weight of carbon monoxide
μCO
12
16

28


[g/mol] 
volume of a mole of gas at atmospheric
pressure (1atm=101325Pa) and at ambient
temperature (20°C=293.15K) : V = (RT/ P)
8.3144598
293.15

101325
0.02406

[m3/mol]
concentration transformation from
PPM to kg/m^3 according to [17]
CCO.max
1
0.02406
μCO

CCO 10
9



6.633
10
3




[kg/m3]
time to critical 
CO concentration
tCO
V1 CCO.max

0.21
ρair
2 9.81

Cp.air Ta





1
3

z
5
3

α
1
3

yCO











3
5
474.2


[sec]
ASET
min tvis tSLH

tT458

tCO



60
3.834


[minutes]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 104 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:120==
RSET computation
N
500

[occupants]
number of occupants
detection and warning time
tw
0

[minutes]
reaction and decision time
trd
3.5

[minutes]
 premovement time
 (warning+ reaction/decision time)
tprm
tw
trd

3.5


[minutes]
horizontal travel length
ltr
48

[m]
person density
D0
N
A
0.476


[pers/m2]
horizontal travel factor
kt
84

s
min 72.83 kt
1
0.266
D0








72.83


[m/min]
speed of travel
horizontal travel time
tt1
ltr
s
0.659


[minutes]
stairs length
ls
2.75

[m]
 travel factor for stairs
ks
51.8
300
150

73.256


Assume people density on the stairs
2.5 pers/m^2
D0
2.5

[pers/m2]
speed of travel on stairs
ss
min 72.83 ks
1
0.266
D0








24.541


[m/min]
travel time for stairs
tt2
ls
ss
0.112


[minutes]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 105 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:121==
 total travel time
tt
tt1
tt2

0.771


[minutes]
W
2.4

[m]
door width
effective width
We
W
2
0.15


2.1


[m]
Assume people density in front of doors
3 pers/m^2
D0
3

[pers/m2]
speed of travel
s
min 72.83 kt
1
0.266
D0








16.968


[m/min]
specific flow 
Fs
s D0

50.904


[pers/min/m]
actual flow
Fa
Fs We

106.898


[pers/min]
 queuing time
only 4 doors
available
tq
N
4
Fa
1.169


[minutes]
 total time
RSET
tprm
tt

tq

5.44


[minutes]
Evacuation safety level
ESL
ASET
RSET
0.7048


Consequences 
C
N
N ESL


147.6


C
148

[occupants]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 106 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:122==
Scenario 3 -  ASET computation
 case2 : ventilation working/ reduced smoke potential and yield to 60%
/ increased fire growth to 120%  /no sprinklers
INPUT :
growth rate: fast
α
1.2 0.047


[kW/s2]
smoke potential
S0
0.6 74.3


[dB/m]
combustible 
characteristics:
yield of carbon monoxide
yCO
0.6 0.005


[g/g] 
air lower 
heat of combustion
ΔHair
3000

[kJ/kg]
air density
ρair
1.2

[kg/m3]
air specific heat
Cp.air
1

[kJ/(kg*K)]
compartment 
characteristics:
area of the room
A
1050

[m2]
height of the room
h
3.75

[m]
volume of the room 
V
A h

3.938
103



[m3]
time to critical conditions due to visibility
choose D/L=1 (area>150)
tvis
3
1
3V ρair

ΔHair

S0 α


256.69


[sec]
smoke layer height
z
1.6
0.1 h


1.975


[m]
time to critical conditions due to SLH
conversion factor
kb
0.064

tSLH
z
h


2

3
1







5

A
2kb α
1
3

h
2
3













3
5
420.834


[sec]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 107 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:123==
ambient temperature:
Ta
293.15

[K] 
temperature of the hot gas
according to radiation criterion
Tg
458

[K] 
coefficient of radiated heat loss
αloss
0.4

time to hot gas critical
temperature T=458K
tT458
1
Ta
Tg





3

α ρair

Cp.air

Ta

V

1
z
h




αloss






2
3
α
315.419


[sec]
volume of the upper layer of smoke:
V1
A
h
z

(
)

1.864
103



[m3]
compartment maximum concentration 
of carbon monoxide
CCO
5700

[PPM] 
molecular weight of carbon monoxide
μCO
12
16

28


[g/mol] 
volume of a mole of gas at atmospheric
pressure (1atm=101325Pa) and at ambient
temperature (20°C=293.15K) : V = (RT/ P)
8.3144598
293.15

101325
0.02406

[m3/mol]
concentration transformation from
PPM to kg/m^3 according to [17]
CCO.max
1
0.02406
μCO

CCO 10
9



6.633
10
3




[kg/m3]
time to critical 
CO concentration
tCO
V1 CCO.max

0.21
ρair
2 9.81

Cp.air Ta





1
3

z
5
3

α
1
3

yCO











3
5
621.2


[sec]
ASET
min tvis tSLH

tT458

tCO



60
4.278


[minutes]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 108 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:124==
RSET computation
N
500

[occupants]
number of occupants
detection and warning time
tw
2

[minutes]
reaction and decision time
trd
1

[minutes]
 premovement time
 (warning+ reaction/decision time)
tprm
tw
trd

3


[minutes]
horizontal travel length
ltr
48

[m]
person density
D0
N
A
0.476


[pers/m2]
horizontal travel factor
kt
84

s
min 72.83 kt
1
0.266
D0








72.83


[m/min]
speed of travel
horizontal travel time
tt1
ltr
s
0.659


[minutes]
stairs length
ls
2.75

[m]
 travel factor for stairs
ks
51.8
300
150

73.256


Assume people density on the stairs
2.5 pers/m^2
D0
2.5

[pers/m2]
speed of travel on stairs
ss
min 72.83 ks
1
0.266
D0








24.541


[m/min]
travel time for stairs
tt2
ls
ss
0.112


[minutes]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 109 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:125==
 total travel time
tt
tt1
tt2

0.771


[minutes]
W
2.4

[m]
door width
effective width
We
W
2
0.15


2.1


[m]
Assume people density in front of doors
3 pers/m^2
D0
3

[pers/m2]
speed of travel
s
min 72.83 kt
1
0.266
D0








16.968


[m/min]
specific flow 
Fs
s D0

50.904


[pers/min/m]
actual flow
Fa
Fs We

106.898


[pers/min]
 queuing time
only 4 doors
available
tq
N
4
Fa
1.169


[minutes]
 total time
RSET
tprm
tt

tq

4.94


[minutes]
Evacuation safety level
ESL
ASET
RSET
0.8659


Consequences 
C
N
N ESL


67


C
67

[occupants]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 110 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:126==
Scenario 3 -  ASET computation
 case3 : ventilation+ sprinkler working/ reduces fire growth rate,smoke
potential, yield to 33%
INPUT :
growth rate: fast
α
0.33 0.047


[kW/s2]
smoke potential
S0
0.33 74.3


[dB/m]
combustible 
characteristics:
yield of carbon monoxide
yCO
0.33 0.005


[g/g] 
air lower 
heat of combustion
ΔHair
3000

[kJ/kg]
air density
ρair
1.2

[kg/m3]
air specific heat
Cp.air
1

[kJ/(kg*K)]
compartment 
characteristics:
area of the room
A
1050

[m2]
height of the room
h
3.75

[m]
volume of the room 
V
A h

3.938
103



[m3]
time to critical conditions due to visibility
choose D/L=1 (area>150)
tvis
3
1
3V ρair

ΔHair

S0 α


481.774


[sec]
smoke layer height
z
1.6
0.1 h


1.975


[m]
time to critical conditions due to SLH
conversion factor
kb
0.064

tSLH
z
h


2

3
1







5

A
2kb α
1
3

h
2
3













3
5
544.809


[sec]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 111 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:127==
ambient temperature:
Ta
293.15

[K] 
temperature of the hot gas
according to radiation criterion
Tg
458

[K] 
coefficient of radiated heat loss
αloss
0.4

time to hot gas critical
temperature T=458K
tT458
1
Ta
Tg





3

α ρair

Cp.air

Ta

V

1
z
h




αloss






2
3
α
485.04


[sec]
volume of the upper layer of smoke:
V1
A
h
z

(
)

1.864
103



[m3]
compartment maximum concentration 
of carbon monoxide
CCO
5700

[PPM] 
molecular weight of carbon monoxide
μCO
12
16

28


[g/mol] 
volume of a mole of gas at atmospheric
pressure (1atm=101325Pa) and at ambient
temperature (20°C=293.15K) : V = (RT/ P)
8.3144598
293.15

101325
0.02406

[m3/mol]
concentration transformation from
PPM to kg/m^3 according to [17]
CCO.max
1
0.02406
μCO

CCO 10
9



6.633
10
3




[kg/m3]
time to critical 
CO concentration
tCO
V1 CCO.max

0.21
ρair
2 9.81

Cp.air Ta





1
3

z
5
3

α
1
3

yCO











3
5
1151.3


[sec]
ASET
min tvis tSLH

tT458

tCO



60
8.03


[minutes]
ESL
ASET
RSET
1.6253


Consequences 
C
0

[occupants]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 112 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:128==
Scenario 3 -  ASET computation
 case4 : sprinkler working/ reduces fire growth rate,smoke potential,yield to 50% 
/ventilation not working
INPUT :
growth rate: fast
α
0.5 0.047


[kW/s2]
smoke potential
S0
0.5 74.3


[dB/m]
combustible 
characteristics:
yield of carbon monoxide
yCO
0.5 0.005


[g/g] 
air lower 
heat of combustion
ΔHair
3000

[kJ/kg]
air density
ρair
1.2

[kg/m3]
air specific heat
Cp.air
1

[kJ/(kg*K)]
compartment 
characteristics:
area of the room
A
1050

[m2]
height of the room
h
3.75

[m]
volume of the room 
V
A h

3.938
103



[m3]
time to critical conditions due to visibility
choose D/L=1 (area>150)
tvis
3
1
3V ρair

ΔHair

S0 α


365.207


[sec]
smoke layer height
z
1.6
0.1 h


1.975


[m]
time to critical conditions due to SLH
conversion factor
kb
0.064

tSLH
z
h


2

3
1







5

A
2kb α
1
3

h
2
3













3
5
501.364


[sec]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 113 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:129==
ambient temperature:
Ta
293.15

[K] 
temperature of the hot gas
according to radiation criterion
Tg
458

[K] 
coefficient of radiated heat loss
αloss
0.4

time to hot gas critical
temperature T=458K
tT458
1
Ta
Tg





3

α ρair

Cp.air

Ta

V

1
z
h




αloss






2
3
α
422.304


[sec]
volume of the upper layer of smoke:
V1
A
h
z

(
)

1.864
103



[m3]
compartment maximum concentration 
of carbon monoxide
CCO
5700

[PPM] 
molecular weight of carbon monoxide
μCO
12
16

28


[g/mol] 
volume of a mole of gas at atmospheric
pressure (1atm=101325Pa) and at ambient
temperature (20°C=293.15K) : V = (RT/ P)
8.3144598
293.15

101325
0.02406

[m3/mol]
concentration transformation from
PPM to kg/m^3 according to [17]
CCO.max
1
0.02406
μCO

CCO 10
9



6.633
10
3




[kg/m3]
time to critical 
CO concentration
tCO
V1 CCO.max

0.21
ρair
2 9.81

Cp.air Ta





1
3

z
5
3

α
1
3

yCO











3
5
825.7


[sec]
ASET
min tvis tSLH

tT458

tCO



60
6.087


[minutes]
ESL
ASET
RSET
1.232


Consequences 
C
0

[occupants]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 114 / 132
D. APPENDIX: SCENARIO 3 - ASET AND RSET
CONTROLLED BY FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS
==PAGE:130==
Sample 
no.
Fire growth 
rate, α 
(kW/s2)
LN (α)
1
Light bulbs, fluorescent lamp  [36]
0,005
-5,29832
2
Trash in container  [36]
0,015
-4,19971
3
Furnishing and decorations  [36]
0,012
-4,42285
4*
Flammable liquids*   [33],[36]
0,07
-2,65926
5
Office curtains, duvets [33]
0,031
-3,47377
6
Upholstered furniture [33]
0,012
-4,42285
7
TV, hi-fi, etc [33]
0,01
-4,60517
8
Textiles, clothing [35]
0,032
-3,44202
9
Timber, furniture, etc. [35]
0,03
-3,50656
10
Paper, printing and publishing [35]
0,023
-3,77226
11
Food, drink [35]
0,02
-3,91202
12
Packaging, carton [35]
0,01
-4,60517
13
Other electrical equipment [35]
0,043
-3,14656
14
Chair F33 [14]
0,0066
-5,02069
15
Chair F21 [14]
0,0344
-3,3697
16
Chair F26 [14]
0,0264
-3,63439
17
Chair, back metal frame, foam cushions  [14]
0,0365
-3,31044
18
Easy chair C07  [14]
0,0344
-3,3697
19
Mail bags, filled, 1.5m high  [14]
0,0292
-3,53359
20
Mattress and box spring, 62.4 kg  [14]
0,000872
-7,04472
mean=
-4,037
standard deviation=
0,9771
*this value was chosen for all flammable liquid fires, except them in
large storage areas, according to  [33] and  [36]
Sample description
(first material ignited)
The mean and standard deviation for the natural logarithm of the above 
fire growth rates are:
according to data extracted from [14] [33] [35] [36]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
E
Appendix: Fire growth rate data
Page 115 / 132
E. APPENDIX: FIRE GROWTH RATE DATA
==PAGE:131==
Sample 
no.
Average optical 
smoke potential 
(dB/m)
1
Curtains Y7-10
13.98
2
Boards, Laminate faced panels
16.46
3
Boards, Gypsum plaster
25.15
4
Chairs, 2-cushion mock-up chairs Y52-77
25.68
5
Boards, Mineral wool O5-11
27.47
6
Boards, Particle boards O4-21
30.64
7
Boards, Particle boards O4-23
33.62
8
Boards, Plywood O3-20
35.03
9
Boards, Expanded plastics O6-22
35.5
10
Chairs, 2-cushion mock-up chairs Y52-78
40.24
11
Boards, Fibre boards O4-10
42
12
Chairs, 2-cushion mock-up chairs Y52-76
47.56
13
Sofa Y54-10
48.56
14
Chairs, 2-cushion mock-up chairs Y52-55
49.5
15
Sofa Y54-13
53.36
16
Boards, Laminate faced panels O6-11
54.99
17
Sofa Y54-18
55.24
18
Boards, Gypsum plaster O1-11
55.71
19
Chairs, 2-cushion mock-up chairs Y52-56
60.75
20
Chairs, 2-cushion mock-up chairs Y52-88
70.01
21
Boards, Particle boards O4-20
74.38
22
Boards, Laminate faced panels O6-13
100.38
23
Sofa Y54-12
102.8
24
Television set Y1-20
112.79
25
Chairs, Stackable Y50-11
117.09
26
Chairs, 2-cushion mock-up chairs Y52-73
124.62
27
Chairs, 2-cushion mock-up chairs Y52-79
126.61
28
Sofa Y54-19
127.06
29
Boards, Stell sheets O2-10
127.37
mean=
63.26
standard deviation=
37.14
Sample description
according to data extracted from [16]
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
F
Appendix: Average smoke potential data
Page 116 / 132
F. APPENDIX: AVERAGE SMOKE POTENTIAL DATA
==PAGE:132==
 
 
 
 
 
This part of the programming code extracted from Simulink/Matlab illustrates how the 
RSET is computed for every occupant in compartment 1. Similar approach was integrated 
for all the compartments, with respect to their particular dimensions and position in 
the considered XY-plane. 
 
%repeat for every occupant 
for i=1 : entity.occupants_c1 
     
%generation of uniform random locations of the occupants    
N = zeros(1,1); 
N(:) = rand(1); 
% Pattern: Uniform distribution 
% m: Minimum, M: Maximum 
m = 1, M = 12; 
x_occ = m + (M - m) * N;      
     
N = zeros(1,1); 
N(:) = rand(1); 
% Pattern: Uniform distribution 
% m: Minimum, M: Maximum 
m = 1, M = 12.5; 
y_occ = m + (M - m) * N;  
 
%check if the fire blocks any door, and compute the consequent travel distance 
%computation of horizontal travel distance to neareast exit, dist 
%computation of vertical travel (stairs) distance to neareast exit, dist_s 
%additionally, in this if condition, the time for queing can be assessed as it will be 
%verified if all the people evacuate through the same door or not 
dist_x=0; 
dist_y=0; 
dist_s=0; 
 
%check if fire blocks exit1 
if (entity.x_fire>9)&&(entity.y_fire<5) 
    dist_s=x_occ; 
    dist_x=7; 
    dist_y=14-y_occ; 
     
    %door width, w 
    w=1.8; %[m] 
    %effective door width, we 
    we=w-2*0.15; %[m] 
    %people density in front of doors, D1, as uniform dist between 0.75 to 2.25 
    N = zeros(1,1); 
    N(:) = rand(1); 
    % Pattern: Uniform distribution 
    % m: Minimum, M: Maximum 
    m = 0.75, M = 2.25; 
    D1 = m + (M - m) * N;  
    %speed of travel through opening, s1 
    s1=min(72.83,84*(1-0.266*D1)); %[m/mmin] 
    %specific flow, Fs 
    Fs=s1*D1; %[pers/min/m] 
    %actual flow, Fa 
    Fa=Fs*we;  %[pers/min] 
    %queing time at the doors, tq 
    tq=entity.occupants_c1/Fa*60; %[s]    
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
G
Appendix: Sample of Matlab programming code
implemented for RSET evaluation
Page 117 / 132
G. APPENDIX: SAMPLE OF MATLAB PROGRAMMING CODE
IMPLEMENTED FOR RSET EVALUATION
==PAGE:133==
%check if fire blocks exit2    
elseif entity.y_fire>12.5 
        dist_s=12-x_occ; 
        dist_y=y_occ; 
        %door width, w 
        w=1; %[m] 
        %effective door width, we 
        we=w-2*0.15; %[m] 
       %people density in front of doors, D1, as uniform dist between 0.75 to 2.25 
        N = zeros(1,1); 
        N(:) = rand(1); 
        % Pattern: Uniform distribution 
        % m: Minimum, M: Maximum 
        m = 0.75, M = 2.25; 
        D1 = m + (M - m) * N;  
        %speed of travel through opening, s1 
        s1=min(72.83,84*(1-0.266*D1)); %[m/mmin] 
        %specific flow, Fs 
        Fs=s1*D1; %[pers/min/m] 
        %actual flow, Fa 
        Fa=Fs*we;  %[pers/min] 
        %queing time at the doors, tq 
        tq=entity.occupants_c1/Fa*60; %[s]     
   
%check which exit is closer for the occupant         
elseif x_occ<5.5 
            dist_s=x_occ; 
            dist_x=7; 
            dist_y=14-y_occ; 
             
            %door width, w 
            w=1.8; %[m] 
            %effective door width, we 
            we=w-2*0.15; %[m] 
      %people density in front of doors, D1, as uniform dist between 0.75 to 1.75 
            N = zeros(1,1); 
            N(:) = rand(1); 
            % Pattern: Uniform distribution 
            % m: Minimum, M: Maximum 
            m = 0.75, M = 1.75; 
            D1 = m + (M - m) * N;  
            %speed of travel through opening, s1 
            s1=min(72.83,84*(1-0.266*D1)); %[m/mmin] 
            %specific flow, Fs 
            Fs=s1*D1; %[pers/min/m] 
            %actual flow, Fa 
            Fa=Fs*we;  %[pers/min] 
        %queing time at the doors, tq 
        %considering each pair of doors will receive half of the occupants number 
        %as in this case fire is not blocking any exit 
            tq=entity.occupants_c1/2/Fa*60; %[s] 
                               
        else dist_s=12-x_occ; 
            dist_y=y_occ; 
             
            %door width, w 
            w=1; %[m] 
            %effective door width, we 
            we=w-2*0.15; %[m] 
       %people density in front of doors, D1, as uniform dist between 0.75 to 1.75 
            N = zeros(1,1); 
            N(:) = rand(1); 
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 118 / 132
G. APPENDIX: SAMPLE OF MATLAB PROGRAMMING CODE
IMPLEMENTED FOR RSET EVALUATION
==PAGE:134==
            % Pattern: Uniform distribution 
            % m: Minimum, M: Maximum 
            m = 0.75, M = 1.75; 
            D1 = m + (M - m) * N;  
            %speed of travel through opening, s1 
            s1=min(72.83,84*(1-0.266*D1)); %[m/mmin] 
            %specific flow, Fs 
            Fs=s1*D1; %[pers/min/m] 
            %actual flow, Fa 
            Fa=Fs*we;  %[pers/min] 
         %queing time at the doors, tq 
         %considering each pair of doors will receive half of the occupants number 
         %as in this case fire is not blocking any exit 
            tq=entity.occupants_c1/2/Fa*60; %[s]  
                     
end 
dist=dist_x+dist_y;   
   
%detection and warning time, tw 
tw=0; %[s] 
 
%reaction and decision time, trd 
%generated as a triangular ditributed  
%with min/mostlikely/max= 60/75/90 seconds 
a = 60; m = 75; b = 90; 
pd = makedist('Triangular',a,m,b);     
T = zeros(1,1); 
T(:)= random(pd,1,1); %[s] 
trd=T; %[s] 
 
%check if the building personnel is instructed how to behave in case of emergency(P=50%) 
%if it is, that will reduce the reaction and decision time 
x = zeros(1,1); 
x(:) = rand(1); 
if x<=0.5 
  trd=2/3*trd; 
end 
 
%travel factor stairs 
ks=51.8*(270/100)^(1/2); 
%person density on the stairs, Ds, as uniform dist between 0.5 to 1.25 
N = zeros(1,1); 
N(:) = rand(1); 
% Pattern: Uniform distribution 
% m: Minimum, M: Maximum 
m = 0.5, M = 1.25; 
Ds = m + (M - m) * N;  
 
%speed of stairs travel, ss 
ss=min(72.83,ks*(1-0.266*Ds)); %[m/mmin] 
%travel time stairs, ts 
ts=dist_s/ss*60; %[s] 
 
%person density in the compartment, D0 
D0=entity.occupants_c1/A; %[pers/m^2] 
%speed of horizontal travel, s 
s=min(72.83,84*(1-0.266*D0)); %[m/mmin] 
%travel time, tt 
tt=dist/s*60; %[s] 
 
RSET=tw+trd+tt+ts+tq; %[s] 
 
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 119 / 132
G. APPENDIX: SAMPLE OF MATLAB PROGRAMMING CODE
IMPLEMENTED FOR RSET EVALUATION
==PAGE:135==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
H
Appendix: Entities generation and
veriﬁcation script
Figure 42: Simulation stop time
Figure 43: Veriﬁcation.m script
Page 120 / 132
H. APPENDIX: ENTITIES GENERATION AND
VERIFICATION SCRIPT
==PAGE:136==
fire
ASET
RSET
no. x_fire
y_fire
room
alpha
S0
yCO
t_SLH
t_vis
t_458
t_CO
ASET
OCC_no
x_occ
y_occ
tRD
tt
ts
tq
RSET
ESL
1
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
20.295
14.239
85.965
23.196
2.66
25.116
256.936 0.785199
2
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.334
23.875
73.78
9.961
2.756
22.927
229.424 0.879359
3
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
13.899
20.681
45.09
12.62
2.944
18.423
199.076 1.013412
4
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
28.912
27.386
81.884
21.233
3.009
23.258
249.384 0.808977
5
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
11.929
19.66
67.624
11.838
2.853
22.59
224.904 0.897032
6
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
16.258
33.806
50.284
19.084
2.695
22.533
214.596
0.94012
7
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.022
20.469
73.236
6.763
0
18.877
218.876 0.921737
8
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.051
18.741
49.917
22.582
2.855
28.332
223.686 0.901916
9
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
41.913
25.671
46.181
9.111
2.711
18.594
196.596 1.026196
10
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.209
32.695
48.436
10.039
0
19.192
197.668 1.020631
11
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
42.424
29.935
48.167
12.202
3.015
20.273
203.656 0.990621
12
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
32.786
20.5
75.254
18.96
3.27
19.801
237.285 0.850227
13
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
35.648
30.482
63.228
18.234
2.902
22.355
226.719
0.88985
14
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.234
16.42
51.89
12.066
2.679
20.345
206.98 0.974713
15
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
42.58
17.444
74.987
13.409
3.352
20.539
232.286 0.868524
16
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
32.358
20.996
63.001
18.903
2.73
20.192
224.826 0.897343
17
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
30.952
28.305
76.314
20.31
3.133
26.688
246.444 0.818628
18
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
26.397
33.678
51.835
27.331
3.045
22.585
224.795 0.897467
19
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
32.906
33.868
70.691
23.283
3.109
18.392
235.475 0.856762
20
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
51.255
23.358
70.97
3.367
0
27.614
221.952 0.908962
21
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
29.604
27.379
78.899
20.658
2.799
23.957
246.313 0.819064
22
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.271
29.988
48.728
22.54
3.225
20.851
215.343 0.936859
23
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
12.671
18.984
46.136
13.005
3.327
18.656
201.125 1.003088
24
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
44.35
26.485
70.223
7.773
2.74
21.697
222.434 0.906993
25
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
41.064
25.512
73.014
9.679
2.763
22.174
227.629 0.886293
26
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.275
26.645
67.456
18.676
2.734
18.835
227.7 0.886017
27
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.458
27.727
40.64
16.945
2.721
23.619
203.925 0.989315
28
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
4.424
28.036
73.774
6.557
0
18.371
218.703 0.922466
29
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
26.953
26.756
73.31
22.086
2.795
20.928
239.12 0.843702
30
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
43.884
16.681
52.552
12.963
3.282
21.027
209.824 0.961501
31
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
13.513
22.983
76.478
10.406
2.996
25.568
235.447 0.856864
32
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
11.652
26.767
75.02
9.49
2.631
23.633
230.773 0.874218
33
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.37
20.142
66.119
6.746
0
20.056
212.921 0.947516
34
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
51.894
17.486
52.623
7.678
0
26.145
206.446 0.977234
35
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
4.456
24.491
40.763
3.678
0
28.26
192.702 1.046933
36
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
36.51
19.512
71.835
16.706
2.826
28.505
239.871
0.84106
37
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
46.97
19.676
46.841
7.953
2.996
19.41
197.201 1.023048
38
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
41.334
17.609
62.075
14.299
2.721
23.406
222.501
0.90672
39
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
12.137
15.303
45.335
15.599
2.969
24.154
208.057 0.969667
40
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
5.723
17.805
75.781
8.253
3.114
19.622
226.77
0.88965
41
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.026
29.056
51.2
13.453
3.008
20.336
207.997 0.969947
42
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.373
33.698
48.021
12.873
2.605
19.368
202.867 0.994474
43
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
43.028
25.507
65.006
8.056
2.878
23.892
219.832 0.917728
44
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.44
31.124
52.417
22.23
2.62
23.249
220.516 0.914881
45
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
38.894
28.746
53.952
14.13
3.36
19.781
211.224 0.955128
46
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
41.521
17.829
50.402
13.964
3.362
21.243
208.971 0.965426
47
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
35.66
26.08
78.595
14.599
2.605
19.246
235.046 0.858326
48
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
39.379
24.53
47.666
10.258
2.863
21.044
201.831 0.999579
49
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
20.036
21.147
45.048
17.292
3.019
18.434
203.792
0.98996
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
I
Appendix: Scenario’3046’ individual ESL spreadsheet
Page 121 / 132 I. APPENDIX: SCENARIO’3046’ INDIVIDUAL ESL SPREADSHEET
==PAGE:137==
fire
ASET
RSET
no. x_fire
y_fire
room
alpha
S0
yCO
t_SLH
t_vis
t_458
t_CO
ASET
OCC_no
x_occ
y_occ
tRD
tt
ts
tq
RSET
ESL
50
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
7.422
19.384
50.421
8.352
2.871
22.74
204.383 0.987098
51
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
23.488
33.656
75.778
24.916
2.662
20.028
243.384 0.828921
52
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.146
29.078
74.997
20.787
3.323
21.622
240.73 0.838059
53
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.531
31.61
51.932
22.442
2.603
21.043
218.02 0.925355
54
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
38.678
17.957
53.782
16.2
3.351
18.686
212.019 0.951547
55
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
8.584
27.672
77.984
7.707
2.654
26.116
234.461 0.860467
56
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
28.424
30.748
43.292
24.405
2.844
18.662
209.203 0.964355
57
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
17.541
34.38
53.946
20.613
2.989
22.534
220.082 0.916686
58
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
49.237
19.388
50.805
8.3
0
22.187
201.293
1.00225
59
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
10.505
31.243
51.533
12.232
2.787
19.945
206.498 0.976988
60
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
32.464
29.604
78.126
20.134
2.729
18.66
239.649
0.84184
61
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
29.58
34.533
73.902
26.571
3.229
22.503
246.205 0.819423
62
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
10.697
28.066
73.241
9.773
3.343
18.898
225.254 0.895638
63
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.507
20.886
80.98
21.19
3.252
19.515
244.937 0.823665
64
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.489
14.956
43.745
9.913
0
18.755
192.413 1.048505
65
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.949
16.298
52.564
22.862
2.926
28.052
226.403 0.891092
66
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
29.214
28.732
72.098
22.094
2.992
20.719
237.903 0.848018
67
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.93
22.048
74.953
15.638
3.364
21.861
235.816 0.855523
68
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
46.041
29.533
81.55
8.891
2.759
23.761
236.961 0.851389
69
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.466
22.345
73.157
6.993
2.811
22.29
225.252 0.895646
70
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
41.756
20.747
82.536
11.367
3.172
18.451
235.525
0.85658
71
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
9.019
14.589
71.048
13.618
2.619
21.253
228.538 0.882768
72
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.476
30.348
48.375
6.858
0
19.05
194.282 1.038418
73
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
16.357
25.357
82.354
12.205
3.167
22.246
239.972 0.840706
74
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
12.94
30.839
84.603
13.906
2.919
20.373
241.8 0.834351
75
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.363
28.706
70.116
19.911
2.755
24.211
236.994
0.85127
76
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.54
28.786
78.482
5.623
0
20.095
224.2 0.899848
77
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
15.127
18.845
50.842
15.144
3.238
19.76
208.984 0.965366
78
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.693
22.176
82.804
16.008
3.095
19.512
241.419 0.835667
79
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
39.056
23.367
48.804
11.433
3.009
18.44
201.686 1.000297
80
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
33.895
32.452
77.833
21.301
2.679
19.116
240.93 0.837364
81
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
3.753
31.848
81.224
9.145
0
18.852
229.221 0.880138
82
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.476
24.499
66.143
3.069
0
20.583
209.795 0.961634
83
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
19.018
18.521
47.868
18.616
3.179
25.622
215.285 0.937111
84
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
39.73
25.788
67.875
11.005
3.32
19.607
221.807 0.909557
85
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
13.485
22.805
87.602
10.528
3.192
18.437
239.759 0.841453
86
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.379
18.799
74.516
7.844
0
28.467
230.827 0.874014
87
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
52.261
19.223
69.028
5.944
0
23.758
218.731 0.922348
88
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
10.865
34.057
64.222
14.847
2.728
19.498
221.295 0.911661
89
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
23.708
31.643
64.851
23.44
3.147
23.077
234.515 0.860269
90
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.428
14.358
71.632
25.138
2.651
19.438
238.859 0.844624
91
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.509
30.328
70.631
16.575
3.164
23.23
233.599 0.863642
92
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.926
26.546
85.594
10.644
2.604
23.719
242.56 0.831736
93
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
39.451
33.717
79.962
17.767
3.226
24.212
245.168 0.822889
94
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
48.185
24.769
75.043
3.2
2.823
18.997
220.062 0.916769
95
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
7.088
23.665
83.578
4.55
3.371
18.53
230.029 0.877046
96
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
10.052
33.925
52.88
14.068
3.283
19.111
209.341 0.963719
97
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
7.04
24.214
53.249
4.059
2.927
22.708
202.943 0.994102
98
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
51.359
23.059
67.521
3.528
0
19.203
210.251 0.959548
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 122 / 132 I. APPENDIX: SCENARIO’3046’ INDIVIDUAL ESL SPREADSHEET
==PAGE:138==
fire
ASET
RSET
no. x_fire
y_fire
room
alpha
S0
yCO
t_SLH
t_vis
t_458
t_CO
ASET
OCC_no
x_occ
y_occ
tRD
tt
ts
tq
RSET
ESL
99
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
41.246
30.106
51.991
13.313
3.131
23.679
212.114 0.951121
100
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
47.389
14.65
44.681
11.749
2.901
19.433
198.764 1.015003
101
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
9.088
25.793
75.267
6.575
2.706
20.546
225.093 0.896278
102
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
6.15
16.239
46.713
9.896
2.934
26.381
205.924 0.979711
103
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
52.156
22.434
45.356
3.386
0
18.597
187.338 1.076909
104
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
3.193
25.718
80.15
3.634
0
21.801
225.585 0.894324
105
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
1.871
24.449
66.338
1.583
0
22.13
210.051 0.960462
106
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.407
18.282
58.366
21.923
3.152
18.725
222.166 0.908087
107
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.915
31.402
58.432
14.654
2.816
28.023
223.924 0.900957
108
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.153
26.379
51.659
3.321
0
21.173
196.153 1.028513
109
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
23.744
18.062
51.426
22.888
3.221
19.46
216.995 0.929726
110
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
43.946
29.2
44.397
10.342
3.219
25.675
203.633 0.990733
111
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.245
25.93
71.025
10.697
3.188
19.271
224.181 0.899925
112
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.111
26.407
51.553
7.082
2.876
18.689
200.2 1.007722
113
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.053
16.54
83.274
19.453
3.068
19.433
245.229 0.822684
114
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.251
17.17
79.932
22.393
2.685
25.071
250.081 0.806723
115
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.013
34.453
75.156
9.858
0
24.077
229.091 0.880637
116
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
27.969
31.827
72.54
25.669
2.828
20.268
241.306 0.836059
117
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
38.626
34.626
74.247
19.196
2.874
22.18
238.497 0.845906
118
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.404
33.646
49.685
23.191
2.757
25.32
220.953 0.913072
119
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
52.831
23.034
48.619
2.336
0
20.635
191.59 1.053009
120
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.479
32.031
71.192
25.218
3.026
18.677
238.114 0.847266
121
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.828
26.633
75.979
15.74
3.103
18.94
233.762
0.86304
122
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
10.57
24.256
78.938
6.933
3.045
27.255
236.171 0.854237
123
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
49.026
22.238
72.614
4.149
2.814
27.578
227.155 0.888142
124
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.464
20.721
54.807
19.642
2.845
18.733
216.027 0.933893
125
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.919
19.116
77.261
20.814
2.935
18.742
239.753 0.841474
126
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
48.493
14.262
68.611
11.159
2.843
23.249
225.862 0.893227
127
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
46.197
17.89
52.449
10.062
2.626
26.412
211.549 0.953661
128
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
43.14
27.042
42.507
9.229
2.66
19.588
193.983 1.040019
129
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
48.593
15.677
76.941
9.911
2.979
19.27
229.1 0.880602
130
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.928
28.354
71.953
16.792
2.953
19.95
231.648 0.870916
131
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
9.132
18.723
83.311
10.305
3.002
22.092
238.71 0.845151
132
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
15.283
30.945
74.828
15.923
2.863
18.405
232.019 0.869524
133
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.915
17.935
46.478
23.957
2.799
18.428
211.662 0.953152
134
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
23.496
15.43
53.199
24.852
3.037
19.017
220.104 0.916594
135
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
3.518
26.569
81.492
4.603
0
20.129
226.224 0.891798
136
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
44.131
30.379
68.261
11.161
2.733
19.971
222.125 0.908254
137
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.023
17.535
75.108
22.855
2.837
23.929
244.728 0.824368
138
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
27.061
25.659
81.085
21.336
2.793
18.817
244.031 0.826723
139
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
4.744
34.231
49.012
11.925
0
18.594
199.531 1.011101
140
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.694
30.892
71.415
21.161
3.26
28.387
244.222 0.826076
141
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
54.158
20.061
73.814
3.692
0
19.326
216.832 0.930425
142
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
42.529
16.879
82.578
13.916
2.864
26.053
245.411 0.822074
143
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
28.472
17.403
78.246
25.065
2.98
20.714
247.005 0.816769
144
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
43.91
33.531
71.123
13.94
3.281
18.833
227.176
0.88806
145
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.349
33.379
50.157
21.692
3.292
23.879
219.02
0.92113
146
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
48.503
33.88
50.027
10.444
2.697
20.543
203.711 0.990354
147
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
7.591
34.926
51.283
12.866
2.664
20.005
206.818 0.975476
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 123 / 132 I. APPENDIX: SCENARIO’3046’ INDIVIDUAL ESL SPREADSHEET
==PAGE:139==
fire
ASET
RSET
no. x_fire
y_fire
room
alpha
S0
yCO
t_SLH
t_vis
t_458
t_CO
ASET
OCC_no
x_occ
y_occ
tRD
tt
ts
tq
RSET
ESL
148
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.894
18.559
71.501
23.426
2.627
24.396
241.949 0.833837
149
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
8.167
24.53
77.262
4.776
3.061
20.595
225.693 0.893896
150
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
27.626
32.252
51.011
26.301
3.136
20.355
220.804 0.913688
151
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
26.036
32.737
80.435
26.258
2.793
18.477
247.963 0.813613
152
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
35.377
31.297
63.481
19.13
3.369
19.744
225.723 0.893777
153
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
51.322
24.797
49.041
2.616
0
20.342
191.999 1.050766
154
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
9.137
22.514
46.913
7.187
2.687
19.154
195.941 1.029626
155
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
5.827
30.405
84.066
7.688
3.182
20.827
235.763 0.855715
156
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
6.979
23.667
65.603
4.459
3.056
24.491
217.61 0.927099
157
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
52.174
33.461
69.203
9.052
0
20.071
218.326 0.924059
158
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.52
32.184
46.826
24.554
2.601
18.922
212.903 0.947596
159
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
20.607
26.987
72.292
17.049
3.155
27.303
239.798 0.841316
160
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
23.973
25.169
67.528
18.324
2.627
18.631
227.11 0.888318
161
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
39.233
22.023
81.077
12.394
2.75
20.457
236.678 0.852407
162
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
33.31
17.292
86.224
21.171
2.693
20.071
250.159 0.806471
163
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
44.333
30.832
53.841
11.368
3.113
19.979
208.301 0.968531
164
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.922
29.678
68.91
20.348
3.257
20.459
232.973 0.865963
165
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
47.021
33.893
45.747
11.675
2.744
20.476
200.642 1.005502
166
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.004
14.429
44.066
20.486
2.61
18.528
205.691 0.980821
167
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
30.49
16.028
80.887
24.535
2.79
18.465
246.677 0.817855
168
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.494
19.192
71.557
17.632
2.611
24.271
236.072 0.854595
169
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
17.789
25.299
54.364
13.336
2.683
19.05
209.432 0.963301
170
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
36.122
20.665
69.323
16.076
2.998
20.447
228.844 0.881587
171
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
20.906
26.886
79.455
17.212
2.655
19.702
239.025 0.844037
172
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
44.899
19.704
55.551
9.636
2.927
26.608
214.721 0.939573
173
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
53.787
17.574
53.197
6.046
0
23.971
203.214 0.992776
174
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.716
25.161
66.711
16.457
3.275
18.581
225.025 0.896549
175
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
9.544
33.162
44.987
13.022
2.756
20.733
201.497 1.001236
176
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
51.538
23.694
55.905
2.857
0
19.918
198.68 1.015432
177
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
54.162
19.002
79.331
4.561
0
18.783
222.675 0.906011
178
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.996
23.519
84.215
14.48
2.75
26.1
247.546 0.814984
179
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
1.347
25.806
72.097
2.186
0
19.967
214.249 0.941643
180
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
6.556
30.828
40.923
8.638
3.168
19.804
192.532 1.047857
181
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
29.026
20.148
52.747
22.347
2.876
18.577
216.548 0.931646
182
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.096
15.474
50.681
25.31
2.765
23.162
221.918 0.909102
183
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.183
31.957
46.613
24.913
2.688
21.401
215.615 0.935677
184
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.169
18.431
68.141
22.934
3.047
19.499
233.621 0.863561
185
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.423
25.586
55.42
6.149
2.945
21.042
205.556 0.981465
186
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.874
32.986
77.56
20.935
2.934
18.64
240.069 0.840367
187
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
15.419
19.588
68.677
14.772
2.801
19.596
225.845 0.893294
188
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.756
17.165
83.297
11.022
2.86
18.623
235.802 0.855574
189
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.653
19.827
46.22
6.035
0
19.773
192.028 1.050607
190
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.302
15.009
69.218
22.235
2.904
20.191
234.548 0.860148
191
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.686
32.352
70.483
18.097
3.076
19.182
230.838 0.873972
192
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.877
25.775
48.807
10.049
3.005
20.63
202.491 0.996321
193
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
9.071
32.345
44.846
11.959
2.75
18.817
198.372 1.017008
194
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.949
26.559
76.73
4.126
0
18.67
219.526 0.919007
195
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.361
20.318
49.522
21.537
2.769
19.051
212.879 0.947703
196
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.132
31.42
80.599
9.053
0
22.894
232.546 0.867553
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 124 / 132 I. APPENDIX: SCENARIO’3046’ INDIVIDUAL ESL SPREADSHEET
==PAGE:140==
fire
ASET
RSET
no. x_fire
y_fire
room
alpha
S0
yCO
t_SLH
t_vis
t_458
t_CO
ASET
OCC_no
x_occ
y_occ
tRD
tt
ts
tq
RSET
ESL
197
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
30.703
16.811
51.582
23.715
2.883
26.473
224.652 0.898038
198
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
27.065
27.484
46.332
22.836
2.908
19.306
211.382 0.954414
199
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
12.397
32.364
78.356
14.715
3.129
20.883
237.083 0.850951
200
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.334
25.152
48.726
2.46
0
19.537
190.723 1.057796
201
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.378
26.147
48.522
3.316
0
21.375
193.213 1.044164
202
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
1.849
24.938
52.558
1.884
0
25.584
200.026 1.008599
203
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.348
22.526
84.528
17.237
2.791
23.364
247.919 0.813758
204
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
46.91
22.964
75.549
5.294
2.611
20.118
223.572 0.902376
205
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
33.721
27.354
73.868
17.245
2.947
19.12
233.18 0.865194
206
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
27.859
16.437
69.052
26.366
2.796
26.627
244.841 0.823988
207
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.03
22.846
47.996
4.798
0
27.164
199.958 1.008942
208
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.178
33.595
51.127
24.481
2.662
19.194
217.464 0.927721
209
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
14.948
15.158
43.424
18.034
2.982
20.222
204.662 0.985752
210
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
28.112
33.418
73.061
26.862
2.895
22.166
244.984 0.823507
211
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
17.916
28.26
54.729
15.88
2.741
19.317
212.669 0.948638
212
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
48.402
17.651
84.068
8.442
2.827
20.383
235.72 0.855871
213
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
11.486
23.313
51.911
8.463
3.279
20.836
204.489 0.986586
214
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
44.299
16.955
50.498
12.395
2.824
19.316
205.034 0.983964
215
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
30.193
21.606
80.048
20.185
3.33
19.738
243.301 0.829203
216
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
33.185
30.387
49.638
20.186
3.18
23.239
216.243
0.93296
217
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
7.088
17.563
72.532
9.577
3.062
18.434
223.606 0.902239
218
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
39.705
28.253
73.805
13.056
3.324
19.425
229.611 0.878643
219
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
26.779
14.967
58.176
27.937
3.209
22.136
231.458 0.871631
220
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.186
19.607
51.016
16.071
2.764
23.629
213.48 0.945035
221
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
8.722
22.207
76.533
7.098
2.872
19.955
226.457
0.89088
222
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.361
30.169
73.973
7.833
0
19.11
220.916 0.913225
223
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
38.3
22.676
73.423
12.624
3.028
19.381
228.456 0.883085
224
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.84
28.336
72.339
16.705
3.166
18.441
230.65 0.874685
225
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
11.272
26.543
50.413
8.992
2.802
18.408
200.615 1.005638
226
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
3.304
15.917
58.593
9.793
0
19.029
207.415 0.972668
227
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
3.781
34.349
46.79
11.229
0
22.485
200.504 1.006194
228
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
35.225
30.074
72.336
18.247
3.068
18.774
232.425 0.868005
229
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
17.029
25.424
51.274
12.814
3.072
20.927
208.087 0.969527
230
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
52.746
19.393
81.569
5.405
0
18.929
225.903 0.893065
231
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
23.517
29.989
57.22
21.919
2.726
24.337
226.203
0.89188
232
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
52.496
26.41
41.307
2.978
0
19.838
184.122 1.095719
233
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
5.285
17.945
69.365
7.777
3.334
19.067
219.543 0.918936
234
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.471
19.344
69.533
23.255
3.311
19.98
236.079
0.85457
235
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
54.071
25.53
52.867
0.955
0
22.585
196.407 1.027183
236
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
51.906
29.492
56.502
6.003
0
27.057
209.561 0.962708
237
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
4.069
19.952
72.52
7.099
0
23.628
223.247
0.90369
238
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
17.794
21.745
81.649
14.952
2.88
21.219
240.699 0.838167
239
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
20.467
21.982
49.907
16.959
2.955
21.534
211.354 0.954541
240
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.643
21.802
76.551
18.9
2.766
20.338
238.555
0.8457
241
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
12.796
21.388
85.155
11.129
3.222
20.911
240.416 0.839154
242
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.777
33.365
80.545
23.267
2.966
22.194
248.972 0.810316
243
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
3.921
31.014
74.229
8.597
0
23.5
226.326 0.891396
244
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
44.823
16.96
71.874
11.959
2.679
23.628
230.14 0.876623
245
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
5.891
33.724
68.718
10.475
3.214
21.317
223.724 0.901763
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 125 / 132 I. APPENDIX: SCENARIO’3046’ INDIVIDUAL ESL SPREADSHEET
==PAGE:141==
fire
ASET
RSET
no. x_fire
y_fire
room
alpha
S0
yCO
t_SLH
t_vis
t_458
t_CO
ASET
OCC_no
x_occ
y_occ
tRD
tt
ts
tq
RSET
ESL
246
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.914
27.215
72.989
20.785
2.727
19.913
236.414 0.853359
247
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
26.521
16.873
82.468
26.155
3.199
24.522
256.345
0.78701
248
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.997
23.594
76.784
14.42
2.928
19.004
233.136 0.865358
249
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.904
14.107
76.642
25.454
3.221
25.874
251.191 0.803158
250
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
42.389
14.564
51.167
15.939
3.365
27.043
217.514 0.927508
251
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
33.766
23.097
77.777
16.013
2.969
23.528
240.286 0.839608
252
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
4.633
16.353
78.48
10.528
0
19.32
228.328
0.88358
253
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.38
28.06
69.253
21.041
2.826
27.446
240.567 0.838627
254
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
16.992
26.843
53.861
13.951
2.67
19.469
209.951 0.960919
255
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
4.11
21.748
50.54
5.653
0
18.705
194.897 1.035142
256
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.66
14.835
75.969
19.612
2.668
19.694
237.943 0.847875
257
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.134
31.338
75.328
21.891
2.736
19.792
239.747 0.841495
258
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.972
27.292
82.311
19.248
2.944
25.867
250.369 0.805795
259
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.484
24.358
70.977
11.911
2.714
21.373
226.975 0.888847
260
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
20.21
30.809
51.489
19.87
2.792
19.44
213.592 0.944539
261
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
39.647
23.122
47.184
11.148
3.07
23.44
204.841 0.984891
262
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
30.806
24.746
76.142
17.498
2.772
28.485
244.897 0.823799
263
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
20.391
16.691
72.982
21.255
2.877
18.834
235.949 0.855041
264
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
5.327
27.714
85.672
5.059
3.35
21.46
235.54 0.856525
265
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
1.755
20.192
79.56
4.995
0
28.16
232.715 0.866923
266
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
6.688
18.965
73.057
8.092
2.674
22.039
225.862 0.893227
267
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
36.359
25.967
72.755
13.929
2.662
21.29
230.637 0.874734
268
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
48.314
19.257
46.051
7.191
3.351
28.603
205.196 0.983187
269
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
11.226
18.691
78.369
12.057
2.786
19.02
232.233 0.868722
270
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
4.619
26.382
73.609
5.356
0
27.955
226.92 0.889062
271
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.135
20.054
50.443
16.626
3.116
21.827
212.012 0.951578
272
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
49.682
28.081
50.555
6.672
0
26.706
203.933 0.989276
273
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
23.011
15.545
65.245
24.357
2.694
21.294
233.59 0.863676
274
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
42.024
25.089
77.173
8.539
3.334
21.585
230.631 0.874757
275
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.287
30.336
40.665
23.663
3.351
20.216
207.894 0.970427
276
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
23.318
15.091
51.934
24.984
3.086
18.739
218.743 0.922297
277
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
35.697
16.051
79.108
20.227
3.369
18.943
241.648 0.834876
278
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
12.586
34.967
42.905
17.015
2.621
18.778
201.319 1.002121
279
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
49.731
28.936
65.861
7.336
0
20.615
213.813 0.943563
280
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
8.812
27.366
51.112
7.643
2.626
21.1
202.482 0.996365
281
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
27.52
17.835
70.856
25.494
2.719
19.143
238.212 0.846918
282
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
33.1
32.519
44.392
22.012
2.802
19.047
208.253 0.968754
283
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
5.203
16.873
48.243
8.592
3.306
19.748
199.89 1.009285
284
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.671
32.794
47.457
9.74
0
20.654
197.85 1.019692
285
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
47.693
30.852
47.005
8.617
2.995
19.776
198.392 1.016906
286
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.481
24.707
51.142
18.361
3.258
20.166
212.927 0.947489
287
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
28.339
30.281
48.656
24.091
3.263
21.997
218.006 0.925415
288
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
6.507
29.082
71.449
7.158
3.005
20.243
221.855
0.90936
289
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
49.38
33.588
80.868
11.458
0
26.136
238.462
0.84603
290
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.357
24.256
49.219
9.628
2.748
18.952
200.547 1.005979
291
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
28.628
27.498
76.314
21.56
3.287
18.525
239.685 0.841713
292
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.326
15.116
77.108
26.618
3.127
23.191
250.045 0.806839
293
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
26.17
32.281
46.49
25.993
3.006
18.948
214.438 0.940813
294
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
44.075
19.392
72.111
10.573
3.012
18.381
224.077 0.900342
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 126 / 132 I. APPENDIX: SCENARIO’3046’ INDIVIDUAL ESL SPREADSHEET
==PAGE:142==
fire
ASET
RSET
no. x_fire
y_fire
room
alpha
S0
yCO
t_SLH
t_vis
t_458
t_CO
ASET
OCC_no
x_occ
y_occ
tRD
tt
ts
tq
RSET
ESL
295
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
33.419
26.245
74.202
16.58
3.339
26.888
241.009 0.837089
296
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
7.129
16.998
43.672
10.076
3.135
22.493
199.376 1.011887
297
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.551
23.865
67.982
17.125
3.11
18.78
226.997 0.888761
298
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
36.594
21.16
80.003
15.279
3.309
25.967
244.559 0.824938
299
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
35.761
34.463
50.765
21.421
3.127
19.578
214.891 0.938829
300
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
29.999
34.242
70.215
25.986
2.616
19.785
238.603
0.84553
301
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
13.036
25.617
80.141
9.682
2.783
18.852
231.458 0.871631
302
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.092
25.151
49.534
12.653
3.203
19.008
204.398 0.987025
303
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
15.892
32.738
41.829
17.902
2.904
19.998
202.633 0.995623
304
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
36.751
33.829
52.415
20.083
3.281
18.996
214.776 0.939332
305
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
47.816
29.253
64.882
7.198
2.791
20.046
214.917 0.938716
306
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.624
24.079
45.134
16.184
3.08
25.571
209.968 0.960842
307
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
16.247
26.053
80.499
12.687
3.182
22.382
238.75 0.845009
308
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
5.609
33.112
76.035
9.738
2.791
23.717
232.283 0.868535
309
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
3.65
20.369
70.076
6.41
0
18.839
215.325 0.936937
310
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
11.802
17.829
74.378
13.242
3.131
25.473
236.224 0.854045
311
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.554
26.199
51.7
6.545
3
19.618
200.862 1.004401
312
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
30.625
28.566
52.863
20.795
2.797
25.924
222.378 0.907221
313
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
51.759
34.611
74.713
10.34
0
23.752
228.805 0.881738
314
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.059
15.349
50.499
26.207
3.118
19.864
219.688
0.91833
315
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
43.131
21.755
51.061
9.404
3.22
18.846
202.531 0.996124
316
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
8.733
21.614
58.331
7.595
3.301
19.088
208.315 0.968466
317
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
9.751
31.307
43.313
11.664
2.959
18.885
196.822 1.025018
318
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
24.076
18.946
47.903
22.433
3.174
19.046
212.557 0.949138
319
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
26.734
32.245
51.108
26.428
2.841
23.427
223.804 0.901441
320
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
14.753
31.115
40.952
15.626
2.607
21.096
200.282
1.00731
321
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
30.283
29.779
46.492
22.076
2.679
20.06
211.307 0.954753
322
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
20.782
25.018
52.533
15.57
3.146
23.442
214.692
0.9397
323
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
27.904
16.298
75.767
26.443
3.117
23.808
249.135 0.809786
324
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.73
14.23
52.323
24.995
2.647
23.725
223.69
0.9019
325
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
19.745
21.395
68.597
16.848
2.758
20.245
228.448 0.883116
326
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.849
26.879
51.898
13.453
3.045
24.401
212.797 0.948068
327
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.818
27.286
81.806
11.343
2.63
23.448
239.227 0.843325
328
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
47.356
25.398
77.624
4.401
3.325
26.416
231.766 0.870473
329
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.764
28.649
82.834
19.924
2.849
23.31
248.917 0.810495
330
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
33.253
16.569
75.664
21.813
2.823
19.7
240 0.840608
331
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.21
30.022
69.673
19.041
2.78
19.317
230.811 0.874074
332
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
10.875
19.993
77.317
10.695
3.103
20.11
231.225 0.872509
333
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.292
17.833
43.338
10.854
2.979
23.683
200.854 1.004441
334
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
44.235
15.943
55.304
13.281
2.724
22.312
213.622 0.944406
335
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.674
19.171
74.882
13.556
2.679
20.936
232.053 0.869396
336
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
46.841
27.198
51.946
6.308
2.813
19.847
200.914 1.004141
337
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.412
20.345
43.91
22.382
2.982
19.86
209.133 0.964678
338
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
48.677
20.537
45.26
5.838
3.323
24.179
198.6 1.015841
339
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
15.372
20.394
58.724
14.069
2.834
18.622
214.248 0.941647
340
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.021
17.82
46.815
8.946
0
19.582
195.343 1.032778
341
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
13.796
14.998
47.708
17.216
2.648
24.966
212.539 0.949219
342
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
50.284
14.303
51.46
11.626
0
18.782
201.869 0.999391
343
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.735
19.976
47.054
17.184
3.076
21.696
209.011 0.965241
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 127 / 132 I. APPENDIX: SCENARIO’3046’ INDIVIDUAL ESL SPREADSHEET
==PAGE:143==
fire
ASET
RSET
no. x_fire
y_fire
room
alpha
S0
yCO
t_SLH
t_vis
t_458
t_CO
ASET
OCC_no
x_occ
y_occ
tRD
tt
ts
tq
RSET
ESL
344
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.52
21.486
83.605
19.059
2.994
18.756
244.415 0.825424
345
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.741
25.781
53
17.813
3.305
18.385
212.502 0.949384
346
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
51.36
22.462
85.734
4.019
0
19.432
229.185 0.880276
347
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.665
31.746
70.089
25.136
3.285
18.373
236.884 0.851666
348
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.342
24.836
52.524
9.716
3.099
18.372
203.712 0.990349
349
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
27.51
29.602
71.915
24.214
2.694
18.956
237.778 0.848464
350
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
53.929
27.723
68.236
2.878
0
26.647
217.762 0.926452
351
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
36.296
26.826
55.312
14.689
3.256
24.977
218.235 0.924444
352
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
9.436
22.21
45.973
7.683
2.854
18.676
195.187 1.033604
353
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
20.131
19.07
49.231
19.081
2.708
20.049
211.069
0.95583
354
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.249
33.533
57.11
21.901
2.786
19.023
220.82 0.913622
355
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.65
33.876
46.364
21.853
2.984
25.111
216.312 0.932662
356
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
34.406
21.536
74.378
16.772
2.649
19.722
233.521 0.863931
357
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
29.902
25.126
46.207
18.556
2.922
20.778
208.464 0.967774
358
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
15.186
23.584
73.037
11.288
3.036
20.888
228.249 0.883886
359
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.421
23.159
49.784
3.099
0
21.598
194.481 1.037356
360
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
41.797
16.529
54.918
14.807
3.25
19.627
212.603 0.948933
361
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.061
20.708
53.943
15.266
3.038
21.888
214.135 0.942144
362
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.436
18.897
81.191
23.595
2.857
18.492
246.134 0.819659
363
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.645
28.3
78.045
5.31
0
19.908
223.262 0.903629
364
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.035
23.734
46.254
16.807
2.848
25.508
211.416 0.954261
365
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
31.613
32.335
81.892
23.085
2.688
19.152
246.817 0.817391
366
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
26.997
25.302
47.242
20.924
3.255
18.614
210.035 0.960535
367
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
54.192
27.555
48.905
2.524
0
19.634
191.063 1.055913
368
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.505
22.468
57.879
14.942
3.34
18.433
214.594 0.940129
369
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
2.133
31.946
62.546
7.892
0
18.95
209.388 0.963503
370
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.708
26.293
76.486
10.615
3.048
18.781
228.93 0.881256
371
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
43.545
28.778
77.143
10.325
3.237
19.042
229.747 0.878122
372
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.26
32.386
69.4
16.004
3.123
22.273
230.8 0.874116
373
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
42.64
29.605
51.463
11.752
2.625
25.153
210.993 0.956174
374
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.084
23.189
49.714
6.613
2.824
28.584
207.735
0.97117
375
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.224
22.558
50.268
7.018
3.058
23.666
204.01 0.988903
376
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.004
18.609
49.341
20.18
2.991
19.124
211.637 0.953264
377
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
53.934
29.877
67.409
4.649
0
19.32
211.378 0.954432
378
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
9.802
22.271
72.763
7.934
2.878
24.828
228.403
0.88329
379
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.804
29.738
49.488
15.845
2.85
18.457
206.64 0.976316
380
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.269
23.287
51.334
12.97
3.072
22.724
210.1 0.960238
381
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
12.435
18.775
54.689
12.984
2.991
18.889
209.553 0.962745
382
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
16.73
31.977
51.762
17.966
3.048
20.637
213.413 0.945331
383
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
25.123
15.19
50.452
26.39
2.784
25.156
224.782 0.897518
384
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
27.65
14.439
80.604
28.185
3.025
24.479
256.293 0.787169
385
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
13.948
33.095
73.131
16.595
3.345
24.269
237.34 0.850029
386
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
30.507
25.913
53.928
18.706
2.606
28.037
223.277 0.903568
387
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
15.768
31.894
52.42
17.104
3.048
18.409
210.98 0.956233
388
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
18.704
17.234
62.675
19.418
2.687
22.909
227.69 0.886056
389
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.941
32.008
50.7
23.108
2.888
24.664
221.36 0.911393
390
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
37.938
30.939
71.711
16.725
3.178
24.988
236.601 0.852684
391
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
42.249
23.557
47.793
8.645
3.273
21.902
201.613
1.00066
392
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
11.232
31.045
52.413
12.668
2.68
26.712
214.473 0.940659
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 128 / 132 I. APPENDIX: SCENARIO’3046’ INDIVIDUAL ESL SPREADSHEET
==PAGE:144==
fire
ASET
RSET
no. x_fire
y_fire
room
alpha
S0
yCO
t_SLH
t_vis
t_458
t_CO
ASET
OCC_no
x_occ
y_occ
tRD
tt
ts
tq
RSET
ESL
393
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.365
30.568
49.779
10.301
2.89
18.815
201.785 0.999807
394
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
28.529
15.792
54.305
26.346
3.127
21.782
225.56 0.894423
395
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
45.89
30.429
81.437
9.754
2.726
18.942
232.859 0.866387
396
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
43.484
26.244
54.421
8.288
2.732
26.849
212.29 0.950332
397
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
51.31
17.886
84.406
7.83
0
19.342
231.577 0.871183
398
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
38.08
32.437
58.786
17.842
2.887
18.453
217.968 0.925576
399
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
13.173
24.757
49.398
9.087
3.084
19.714
201.283
1.0023
400
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.493
31.293
72.757
21.326
3.131
18.513
235.726
0.85585
401
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.157
24.38
73.558
15.552
3.262
19.628
232.001 0.869591
402
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
22.287
33.074
80.289
23.447
2.943
20.131
246.811 0.817411
403
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
21.137
30.781
72.488
20.61
3.226
26.895
243.219 0.829483
404
20.054
27.797
6
0.044
119.114
0.005
446.407
201.746
344
464.103
201.746
404
40.322
24.941
74.26
9.819
2.75
27.807
234.637 0.859822
404
352
0.785
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Page 129 / 132 I. APPENDIX: SCENARIO’3046’ INDIVIDUAL ESL SPREADSHEET
==PAGE:145==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
J
Appendix: Results- Model 2
Figure 44: ’Model 2’: compartment 1- ESL and consequences
Figure 45: ’Model 2’: compartment 2- ESL and consequences
Figure 46: ’Model 2’: compartment 3- ESL and consequences
Page 130 / 132
J. APPENDIX: RESULTS- MODEL 2
==PAGE:146==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 47: ’Model 2’: compartment 4- ESL and consequences
Figure 48: ’Model 2’: compartment 5- ESL and consequences
Figure 49: ’Model 2’: compartment 7- ESL and consequences
Page 131 / 132
J. APPENDIX: RESULTS- MODEL 2
==PAGE:147==
Alexandru Rădulescu - s162291
Figure 50: ’Model 2’: compartment 8- ESL and consequences
Figure 51: ’Model 2’: compartment 9- ESL and consequences
Figure 52: ’Model 2’: compartment 10- ESL and consequences
Page 132 / 132
J. APPENDIX: RESULTS- MODEL 2
