==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Digital Media Engineering
Designing and developing educational soft-
ware for physics learning with Augmented
Reality technologies and design principles
Marios Lokas (s161384)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Augmented Reality (AR) is a technology that has received a lot of attention during
recent years. Advancements in this field, in both hardware and software, gives the
possibility for researching its effects on different fields and discovering its affordances.
In this project, we are concerned with the use of AR for educational purposes and
focus mainly on AR’s ability to visualize phenomena in AR space which cannot be
seen normally. We also want to see if AR is an interesting learning technology for
students, who in these ages tend to be familiar with other AR applications, like AR
games.
Multiple AR technologies have been taken into account for development: AR
stages, which are sizable setups for large crowds, head-mounted displays (HMDs)
that are worn on the head and handheld mobile devices that are portable and can be
used anywhere. Research into AR in education has pointed out that handheld devices
are an appropriate AR hardware solution, easy to come by and fulfil all needs for AR
implementation. Taking into account time constraints, availability, advantages and
disadvantages of each hardware and ease of testing, we chose to implement an AR
learning technology with Unity3D and Android AR-enabled devices. For this kind of
AR hardware, it was possible through research to identify recommended guidelines or
principles of implementing an AR learning technology, in the form of recommended
interactions, information presentation, feature implementation and guided navigation.
This project’s design was done in collaboration with a physics and math teacher,
Diana Popescu, who teaches at Ordrup Gymnasium in Charlottenlund. There was
a particular focus into including the users as much as possible in the design and
development process, as well as receiving frequent feedback on design choices, both
from Diana, her students and external testers. In the role of co-designer and content
expert, Diana guided the design choices regarding the student’s experience with this
learning technology, as well as giving feedback on initial prototypes and later on,
implemented features. The design and development process produced an Android AR
application, with the purpose of playing with Newton’s laws of motion and attraction
and provide a visual understanding for them.
3 testing sessions were held at Ordrup Gymnasium, with varying results. One
distinct difference all sessions had was the students’ personal conditions; different
hours of the day and deadlines for school work exerted a difference in their motivation
for testing, as well as in the written feedback they gave. While the conditions for
testing were not ideal, a number of students showed an interest in playing with the
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
application. The 2nd testing session’s feedback also showed that the students wished
to spend more time playing with this technology. Diana’s overall view on this app was
positive and she encourages the use of AR technology for learning in the classroom.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a Master’s degree in Digital Media Engineering. This thesis’ supervisor is
Helle Rootzén, DTU.
Kongens Lyngby, February 22, 2019
Scan by Easy Scanner
Marios Lokas (s161384)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This thesis could not have been prepared without the support of many people. A
special thanks goes to my supervisor Helle for guiding this project and helping with
constant feedback on my process. I must also thank Diana Popescu and her students
for spending their precious time in helping with the application design, as well as for
their concise and critical feedback. For helping me with reaching out to people, as
well as assisting with the ideation process, I would like to thank my mentor Ricki Mae
Melchior. All the people whom I held discussions with, including my peers from the
LearnT course and the 2 professors from DTU Physics, were a great help and I would
like to send my thanks to them too. A final thanks to my friend Emma who helped
me keep my stress levels in check and my motivation going during this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Glossary
AR
Augmented Reality
AV
Augmented Virtuality
BMC
Business Model Canvas
DOF
Degrees of freedom
GO
Gameobject
HCI
Human-Computer Interaction
HMDs
Head-Mounted Displays
IDE
Integrated Development Environment
SDK
Software Development Kit
UI
User Interface
VR
Virtual Reality
XR
Cross Reality
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Glossary
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Report layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Introduction to Augmented Reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Learning and Learning theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Educational Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Project design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Augmented Reality
15
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
History of Augmented Reality Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Augmented Reality in Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Educational Augmented Reality design principles and patterns
. . . .
20
2.6
Augmented Reality in-depth analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.7
Augmented Reality libraries and frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.8
AR Application examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Design and Development Log
31
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Phase 1: Project motivation and research into Augmented Reality and
education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Phase 2: Deciding on a teaching subject and developing functional
prototypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Phase 3: Application development and feedback sessions . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4
Project Implementation
57
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2
Chosen development tool: Unity3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3
Introduction to development with Unity3D
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.4
Developing Augmented Reality applications with Unity3D . . . . . . .
65
4.5
Additional tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.6
Final project development and code analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5
User tests
91
5.1
Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.2
Ethical matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.3
1st testing session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.4
2nd testing session
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
5.5
3rd testing session
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5.6
Teacher’s overall feedback and notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
6
Conclusions and Future work
105
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
6.2
Closing Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
A Appendix A: Final project screenshots
111
A.1 Version 0.1 screenshots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
A.2 Version 0.2 screenshots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
A.3 Version 0.3 screenshots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
A.4 Version 0.4 screenshots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
B Appendix B: Questionnaire and consent form for user tests
127
C Appendix C: Photos from the 2nd testing session
131
D Appendix D: Resources and assets used in development
133
Bibliography
135
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Learning is an action that all living beings do.
A unit that learns acquires new
knowledge for their environment or changes their existing perception of it.
With
people, the majority of learning occurs during the time they attend school; in this
period, people acquire information in large amounts and continue this way until they
finish primary and secondary education. The average person spends a substantial
part of her life in this state of rapid knowledge receiving. However, learning occurs
consciously and unconsciously even after an individual finishes education. It’s part of
human nature; we constantly evolve to adapt to external changes to our environment.
In the classroom, it has been observed that students have different learning styles,
which translates to many different ways in which they can learn. During the early
stages of life, humans have been observed to learn through playing games. Through
these games, they learn social behaviour, dealing with their emotions, how to think
and how to speak. In school and later stages of life, people learn by being taught
by others. Traditional teaching is usually a form of knowledge presentation or direct
instruction (e.g. following a set number of steps to produce a result) that follows
discussions and sometimes, applying this knowledge to other problems. An active
form of learning has emerged the past 20 years, according to which knowledge is
conveyed with forms other than presentation, and where the learner takes control of
their learning herself1. One of these forms is educational games, which can be aided
by Digital Media technologies to produce new and interesting ways of teaching. Using
these educational games for learning is considered an active learning approach where
students are learning by doing [29].
The context in which learning occurs is formally called a learning environment2.
The term refers to different parameters or rules that form the learning context; for
example, the interaction between students and teachers, the physical space that learn-
ing occurs in (classroom), the diversity that the environment can have according to
culture etc. Learning environments have always been present, however research on
how to design and develop one has made their definition more general as well as
adding the above rules to it. The term is commonly used as an alternative to class.
With the advent of the digital age, using technology inside the learning space has
become very common. Technology has great potential as a learning assistant; it offers
students new ways to collaborate and share information, the ability to quickly locate
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_learning
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_environment
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
resources and the means to learn in different ways. Technology also makes teachers
have different roles inside the classroom; among others, they can have the role of
technical advisor, coach or content expert. These facts about technology align well
with the active approach to learning that has been appearing in recent years. The acts
of students locating information and sharing it with each other, as well as teachers
becoming more like coaches or advisors, suggests a learning space where students are
more active participants than passive observers. Therefore, it can be seen that there
is an important link between technology and the desired active form of learning that
educators want in their classrooms.
Research has identified the importance of technology in education and has defined
the term e-learning3, which refers to all forms of technology-assisted learning for
education.
Applications of technology in the classroom can be of different forms.
They can be enabling, e.g. assisting with a specific part of teaching, or they can be
an active, important component of the teaching process. Examples of technology-
enabling teaching are:
• Instead of describing a phenomenon or process, showing a video of it in the
classroom.
• Using a discussion forum or an online platform to post messages and announce-
ments regarding class activities.
• Utilizing video conference to teach groups of students in different locations at
the same time.
• Playing educational games or using educational applications as a means to en-
hance learning.
Educational technologies are not only enabling. A core component of them is the
interaction that exists between computer and user, which is extensively studied by the
field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI). Interaction intuitively promotes active
learning as it allows students to act on their own on a situation and see the result. It
also enables them to form their own experiences which in turn could promote deeper
learning. This means that an interactive technological design in education has the
potential for stronger and deeper learning. This notion inspired this thesis project
to seek a technology that offers an appropriate amount of interaction and see how it
can be applied in an educational context.
The most common advanced technology used in education is the computer, with
its vast array of capabilities and fast computing power.
The computer also gives
access to custom designed educational software, tailored to the situation and learning
objectives. This custom designed software can be found all over the internet and can
easily be used by students and teachers alike. Some examples of educational software
are PhET Interactive simulations, Legends of Learning or Walter Fendt.
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-learning_(theory)
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
3
Augmented Reality (AR) has been identified as a technology with a lot of poten-
tials, especially due to the availability of mobile devices to virtually anyone and the
continuous research done in developing better AR hardware. AR refers to applica-
tions, systems and software that enhance a view of the real world with content in
a way that enhances the perception of the world; this perception can be additional
context-sensitive information presentation, improved entertainment, enhanced every-
day activities, facilitated work tasks etc. AR can be applied to educational content
in multiple ways; for example, by including location-sensitive information with an
educational purpose [16]. An additional advantage of AR can be understood by the
inclusion of content in the view; this content can vary, and most commonly is 3D or
2D graphics. It can, therefore, be understood that AR has a potential for learning
problems where visualizing objects or phenomena is the required solution for better
understanding.
This thesis project draws ideas from the above, to form a learning design that uses
AR technology to teach students a specific subject. Our aim is to explore in what
ways AR is helpful in learning, locating its advantages and disadvantages through the
development of an AR learning application that can be used by students to learn a
specific skill or deepen their understanding of a subject they were already taught. As
a part of this project, an AR learning app was designed and developed with the goal
of playing with physics concepts and ideas in AR space. An example of the developed
app can be seen in figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: ”Newton’s laws in AR” application.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.1
Report layout
The remaining chapter is structured as such: we first give a small intro to AR, we
talk about learning and learning theories and the importance of educational games.
We also identify a problem area where AR can be applied, in a realistic scenario that
involves students. The end of this chapter talks about this project’s design, which
includes the methodology we followed and the core ideas that were used during the
thesis.
In Chapter 2 we present and analyze AR in depth, including technical details
for the interested reader and historical information.
The affordances of AR as a
technology in education are also discussed.
In Chapter 3 the reader can see how the design process evolved throughout the du-
ration of the project, discussions and feedback that happened throughout the project
and our personal observations on each. The reader will also be able to see our choices
in the design and their results during user testing.
The development done during this thesis is presented in Chapter 4, including the
chosen tools, the code structure and screenshots from the applications’ environment.
In this Chapter, the reader can get an overview of the application’s development,
which includes the libraries used for enabling AR and the choice of hardware. It
can also be used as basic guidelines for anyone interested in getting started with AR
development with the chosen tools. Furthermore, the reader can understand why
development took place with these tools and see some of the limitations that this
project had regarding software and hardware resources.
In Chapter 5, we describe the user test sessions that were held with students from
the defined target group and the important observations that came out of it. The
reader can see here how the testing phase took place and specific observations that
came out of testing with the target group.
Finally, Chapter 6 discusses the main points that came out of this work. We also
discuss what could have been done better or different and plan the next steps for this
project.
1.2
Introduction to Augmented Reality
The general definition of AR is an experience of the real-world with enhanced senses
by using computer-generated information4. The enhancement can be visual, auditory,
haptic or rarely olfactory. The information provided can, therefore, be graphics (3D
models, pictures, video or floating text), sounds (notifications, speech assistance) or
vibrations through a haptic feedback device. This enhancement is context-sensitive;
where there is meaning to do so, the additional information appears. For example,
using a haptic glove to hit a virtual object will, in turn, return the force’s reaction
feedback to the user’s hand.
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augmented_reality
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Introduction to Augmented Reality
5
Should we sort the human senses by order of importance, we can see that AR
that relates to the visual channel is the most prominent and has the best potential
for developing interesting applications. We use our sight to move, read and learn, as
well as work. Visual AR deals with enhancing the real-world view, which in turn can
be captured by using a camera. It can then be passed to a computing system for
analysis and displaying the additional information. Note that AR can use the visual
channel as its input, but enhance another sense, if there is meaning to do so.
Depending on the quality if implementation, AR can be a truly immersive ex-
perience. Visual AR can add a virtual object in front of a person’s view, with it
appearing to be a part of the actual environment. This can, in turn, make up for
stimulating experiences which can be used for many different purposes, like entertain-
ment, games, personal assistance or marketing. An example of an AR entertainment
game is displayed in figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: An example of AR. Closeup of a person playing Pokemon GO. Taken
from Marc Bruxelle/Shutterstock.com
In this report, we focus specifically on visual AR, the enhancement of one’s view
of the world. To implement AR some kind of technology is required, one that allows
for both taking in the real world’s current context and displaying information. In
figure 1.2 we can see that a mobile handheld device is used. Modern mobiles can
satisfy the needs for visual AR, are cheap and available to most people. There are
of course other devices that can implement AR, ranging from huge setups like AR
stages5 to AR glasses and head-mounted devices.
5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pepper%27s_ghost
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
AR is an impressive technology that receives substantial focus from companies and
the technological community. The notion of AR has been around for many years, but
only recently different examples have appeared, examples that showcase the multitude
of capabilities. These examples have triggered the authors’ interest and inspired this
thesis. We, therefore, wanted to explore the effect this technology might have on
different aspects, see how people react to it and find the benefit that it can have into
people’s lives.
1.3
Learning and Learning theories
While learning is something all organisms do, human beings are probably the only ones
who are particularly concerned with efficient, deep learning. Teachers, the people who
are responsible about education at a person’s most important age, constantly struggle
with their routines of presenting knowledge to students in meaningful ways, aiming
for better retention and application of knowledge to different contexts. The teaching
process usually follows the same steps: first, the teacher presents the knowledge, using
the proper tools and forms to ensure that students have understood the material, and
can remember it when needed. The next steps are to train with the concepts learned
by solving related problems. The student here is called to analyze the problem, apply
the knowledge and reach a conclusion. The last stage of the teaching process involves
eliciting knowledge synthesis, where students are called to use the knowledge attained
in combination with other principles or knowledge parts in order to solve a problem.
The solution achieved is a unique construct, manufactured by linking the abstract
relations of different parts. Critical thinking can also be considered a part of this
stage, where it is required by the learner to criticize situations and ideas, using both
factual information and internal representations.
These steps presented are a translation of the learning objectives in the cognitive
domain, presented by Dr Benjamin Bloom [5] in 1956.
These learning objectives
are individually split into six stages of increased complexity, according to Bloom: 1)
Retention, 2)Comprehension, 3)Application, 4)Analysis, 5)Evaluation and 6)Creation.
Reaching the final level is the ideal goal for a teacher and her students, however, the
increased level of complexity makes it harder to climb up the steps of this pyramid.
Teachers employ different tools for each step, where each is appropriate and most
effective.
The way students absorb, process and retain knowledge is described by educational
psychology’s distinct learning theories6. There are 3 important learning theories that
describe the process for optimal teaching: Behaviorism, Cognitivism and Construc-
tivism.
• In Behaviorism, the goal of the teacher is to induce a specific behaviour in the
student, which is usually the required retention of knowledge. The theory of
6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_theory_(education)#Educational_psychology
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Learning and Learning theories
7
Behaviorism assumes that a human being’s behaviour is a direct consequence of
external stimuli, as well as their history of being exposed to external stimuli7.
Behaviourists employ positive reinforcement when trying to create specific asso-
ciations in the students’ minds, and can also punish unwanted behaviour. It’s
also common to use cues during teaching to trigger the appropriate response.
Behaviorism can be applied for specific purposes during teaching, but it is ac-
cepted that this principle falls short when it comes to teaching higher level skills
like problem-solving or critical thinking [24].
• In Cognitivism the main idea is to study how a person processes information
in the mind. This involves how the person receives the information, organizes
and stores it as well as how the mind retrieves it. Cognitivism gives weight
to the mental structures that are formed when knowledge is presented and
comprehended and aims at optimizing this process. Common ways cognitivism
is used is proper information representation (e.g. by organizing information
into meaningful steps) and using methods into the teaching process to help
with storing and recalling information(e.g.
graphs and visual representation
of concepts, visual aids)8. Like Behaviorism, Cognitivism also gives emphasis
to practice and corrective feedback. Compared to Behaviorism, Cognitivism is
considered to be a more appropriate approach to teaching higher order skills
like problem-solving.
• In Constructivism, it is believed that each mind has its own representation of
the world, and should be encouraged to create its own meaning.
Therefore
this learning theory emphasizes on giving learners ways of creating their own
understanding of concepts, instead of retrieving intact packages of knowledge
structures.
There are three prerequisites for applying Constructivism: prac-
tice by being active, be presented with the knowledge and the proper context
[10]. A teacher who applies Constructivism essentially teaches how to construct
meaning and how to monitor this process. The teaher must also emphasize col-
laboration between learners and information sharing between them, in order for
them to arrive at a shared understanding [7].
An initial look into these learning theories in this order gives the idea of increas-
ing effectiveness and deeper learning, but also of increased complexity.
Referring
back to Bloom’s taxonomy, it appears that Behaviorism and Cognitivism are more
appropriate for the initial learning objectives up to knowledge application, while Con-
structivism aligns better with analyzing, evaluating and creating knowledge. The
integration of a strategy based on specific learning theory in the teaching process
requires that the teacher understands the cognitive difficulty of the task and the pro-
ficiency of the students [10]. We can deduce from these that all learning theories are
optimal ways of teaching but on specific parts of teaching.
7https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behaviorism
8https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gugvpoU2Ewo
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
1.4
Educational Games
Game-based learning is a common approach to learning, one that disguises learning
tasks as goals inside an interactive game world. Learning by playing has an ideal
benefit: it allows the student to mentally depart from the seemingly boring class-
room into an exciting process that also satisfies the curriculums learning objectives.
Educational games are surprisingly intricate design works, integrating strategies from
educational psychology. A good example of an educational game is the DragonBox
12+ [25], an Android game application used for teaching algebraic concepts. It has
long been viewed by some that playing a game triggers cognitive processes that make
for deeper learning [23]. It can also be considered that using games to teach promotes
active learning and a learning-by-doing approach [29].
AR games have equally good educating potential, through the visualization and
interaction they offer. Multiplayer AR games are a good example of games focused on
increasing student collaboration [14], something that aligns well with the principles
of constructivism. They can also have a discovery factor [16], which is a good way to
capture the students’ interest. An example design of an AR game is one where the
teacher (as a game master) creates and adds 3D content in the platform, and then
links it to a specific location (location-based AR). The students then interact with
the content when they move close to the location, in the form of a discovery-based
AR game. With tools like AR, games and coding, it is possible to imagine a model
of schooling that departs from its behaviorist past9.
1.5
Problem formulation
Physics is a subject taught at an elementary, high school and undergraduate level.
Physics explain natural phenomena that occur in the real world and often utilize
mathematics and algebra to do so. Therefore, Physics is a cross-disciplinary subject
that explains the nature of the world; other than the difficulty that this multidis-
ciplinary nature introduces, there is a need for visualizing the phenomena that are
explained, in order to give a visual experience to the students. For example, applying
a force to a spherical object and estimating the result requires knowing the mass of
the object, the direction of the force, how gravity will affect the sphere while it trav-
els, how is friction calculated and how it affects the sphere’s velocity, as well as the
formulas for calculating all these values. It is also required for students to understand
direction vectors.
Some phenomena in physics cannot be shown or visualized easily. Teachers usu-
ally utilize physical experiments using one’s own body or learning simulations10. A
distinctly identified example lies in the Newtonian mechanics chapter and deals with
Newton’s laws of motion11.
9https://harvardmagazine.com/2015/03/computing-in-the-classroom
10https://phet.colorado.edu/
11https://www.grc.nasa.gov/www/k-12/airplane/newton.html
==PAGE:21==
1.5 Problem formulation
9
• In the 1st law of motion, Newton states that ”Every object will persist in its
state of rest or uniform motion in a straight line unless it’s forced to change
that state by external forces”.
• In the 2nd law, it is stated that when an object has constant mass, the force F
applied on it equals its mass m times acceleration a, F = m ∗a.
• The 3rd law states that for every action or force, ”there is an equal and opposite
reaction”.
The parameters for giving an introduction to these 3 laws, which are the lack of
gravity and air friction, cannot be easily achieved in Earth. Therefore teachers often
explain these laws verbally, or with physical experiments.
An example of that is
hitting the surface of the table with one’s hand and understanding that the pain felt
is the reaction that accompanies the force applied to the surface, which is explained
by Newton’s 3rd law of motion. An experiment when Newton’s laws apply but are not
immediately apparent is one where a person releases of a piece of paper and another
object at the same time from the same height, which demonstrates the presence of air
friction as an external force in Newton’s 1st law. Learning simulations for the chapter
of motion exist12, but the majority is 2D simulations.
Another part of physics that suffers from the lack of visualization is Newton’s law
of universal gravitation13. This law states that ”every particle in the universe that
has mass attracts every other particle with a force F, which is directly proportional
to the product of their masses m1 and m2, and inversely proportional to the square
of the distance r between their masses’ centres 14, so F = G ∗m1∗m2
r2
, where G is the
gravitational constant. The problem with visualizing the universal attraction is that
masses on Earth are too small to cause any observable attraction. This is why most
explanations and simulations on this involve planetary bodies.
We can therefore conclude that the current tools or methods for teaching physics
concepts like Newton’s laws lack in visualization.
With physical experiments the
conditions for proper showcasing are not always achievable, and with computer sim-
ulations realism is not always guaranteed, due to the 2D nature of the simulations.
1.5.1
Problem owners
Newton’s laws of motion are taught at a high school level.
In the Danish school
system, they are taught at Physics A level. Students studying physics at A level
are the first identified target group that deal with the problem. Students who take
Physics at this level generally also take math, so they are exposed to the required
algebraic concepts for learning Newton’s laws of motion and gravitation.
12https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/category/physics/motion
13https://www.physicsclassroom.com/class/circles/Lesson-3/Newton-s-Law-of-Universal-
Gravitation
14https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton%27s_law_of_universal_gravitation
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Introduction
The second target group that deals with this problem are physics teachers. All
teachers seek easier and better ways of teaching students. In the case of the above
problem, teachers can always give their students a better, deeper understanding by
using some form of visualization.
1.5.2
Contributions
Technology is often used in education with the purpose of enhancing it. A recent
technological field that has known a lot of research and development is AR, which
is an enhanced view of the real world paired with virtual content. Research in AR
goes into both hardware and software; new, sophisticated hardware for viewing AR is
being engineered, while the affordances of AR are being explored as its being used for
different purposes, including marketing, entertainment and education purposes. We
would like to explore AR and its capabilities by answering the following questions:
• Can a physics problem or concept be understood better and deeper by
the students when it is visualized in AR?
• Is it possible that the students who use an AR learning app can benefit
in some way, e.g. by becoming active in their learning process?
• Does having game elements in an AR learning app benefit the students
in some way?
• Can the AR aspect of a learning app inspire students to try it, in
hopes of seeking something new and interesting?
1.6
Project design
The project started with a chosen technology to be applied as well as an initial
learning difficulty. At first, both were quite general and most of my assumptions
were based on intuition. After the second phase of the project concluded (see section
3.3 Deciding on a teaching subject and developing functional prototypes), where I
showcased prototypes and decided on the learning difficulty, the students’ difficulty
was better defined.
With feedback from physics teachers, the following was identified as difficult points
in learning physics:
1. Newtons laws of motion are usually explained orally in class, and examples made
by the teacher rely on using the board or conducting simple experiments with
one’s body. Explaining the laws sometimes requires simplified systems (e.g. no
air friction, lack of gravity) which might cause confusion when real experiments
are conducted.
==PAGE:23==
1.6 Project design
11
2. Newtons laws of universal gravitation can be observed better in planetary bodies
and cannot be simulated when the objects masses are small.
3. Direction of forces like gravity or gravitational attraction can sometimes be
forgotten when conducting experiments as they cannot be constantly felt, or
rather we are used to them.
The technology for the project has been chosen according to research done in
AR, which is better explained in Chapter 2. Parameters such as development time,
availability, ease of use have been considered, and therefore I chose to use handheld
AR-enabled mobile phones for developing my learning application. For more explana-
tion on the benefits, check sections 2.3 ”History of Augmented Reality Technology”,
as well as sections 4.3.1 and 4.4 about developing AR applications with Unity.
With my supervisor’s help, the following goals were defined for the project:
• A confirmation that the learning difficulty exists and is an actual problem that
is worth researching: This is usually done by studying related literature, but
most often it has to be confirmed by people who are a part of the study group.
This is an important step when doing a user-centred design and is decisive for
the effectiveness of the result. In this case, I started with an intuitive learning
difficulty and after discussions with physics teachers ended up with the problem
stated above.
• Seeing in what ways this difficulty has been handled so far: The chosen technol-
ogy has to impose an unfair advantage over the already existing solutions. An
example of teaching Newtons 3rd law in class is hitting a table with one’s hand
and feeling the force/pain in your hand. Practical examples such as this are
good opportunities for learning. There are many more systems that this law
can be observed, so we count on the ubiquity and visualization prowess of AR.
• Explore the ways the chosen technology is available and find the optimal one:
In the AR section the reader can see that there are many ways to implement
AR, and all are hardware specific.
Therefore the chosen one has to enable
the learning situation as much as possible. Its disadvantages must also not be
crippling but manageable. Since we need a basic implementation of AR without
advanced features, short development time and easy availability I chose mobile
AR.
• Confirm through previous research that this technology is a possible match for
educational purposes: Multiple works on educational AR have been made. The
reader should refer to section 2.4 Augmented Reality in Education.
• See how technology and learning difficulty can be married in a flawless way:
This goal takes time and it always requires prototyping and feedback sessions.
Throughout the course of this project, multiple prototypes were made, show-
cased and discussed. The observations on the prototypes have more value when
==PAGE:24==
12
1 Introduction
they come from tests in the target group, but some initial feedback can also
be acquired from unrelated test subjects. The best way to achieve this goal is
to involve the users in the design process. For this, I frequently reached out
to teachers related to the learning difficulty and held multiple discussions and
prototype testing sessions with them.
• Calculate expected time and resources and make a timeline to keep the project
properly scoped: This project lasted for almost 6 months, during which design-
ing, development and testing had to happen. Some AR technologies or testing
methods would create lengthy phases that risk getting a result out of the project.
It later proved that arranging tests were difficult due to the projects time con-
straints but also because of the teachers and students schedules. Therefore I
began relatively early in the project to seek out testers. The first phase of this
project lasted more than expected due to having to consider two different AR
technologies, but at least one month of final application development happened
as well as one month for testing and drawing conclusions.
1.6.1
Project design as a business idea
The aforementioned goals and their titles closely resemble the Business Model Canvas
(BMC) that is frequently used for planning new ideas. During this project, I was
prompted by my supervisor to tackle the project like a business idea and use this
template to set up a structure and confirm how solid the idea is. The BMC presented
in figure 1.3 is the polished form of other canvases stating similar ideas, that were
frequently presented and discussed during the project.
Creating the BMC is helpful in other ways than just designing or presenting.
Filling in the Key Activities and Key Metrics sections helped me think how I should
measure any learning made by the students after they use the app, and how to choose
the correct AR development library. For example, most of my initial prototypes were
developed with a deprecated AR package, while the final app used the latest supported
AR package for Unity. I made this change because I wanted the application to have
the best support for running into multiple device types. In the same fashion, filling
the Cost structure section pointed out that I require more than one AR-enabled
device so that multiple students can test at the same time and more feedback can be
acquired. It is also helpful to think about how an app like this can have revenue, as
we are considering to take this project further after this Master’s programme.
1.6.2
Project design by doing user-centred design and validation
The goals defined above contain some points that align with the way User-centered
design processes work. For example, in order to properly adapt the technology to this
scenario, I mentioned that multiple prototypes need to be developed iteratively. In
the same manner, confirming that the learning difficulty exists requires the designer
to study her users and their unique requirements. It also involves finding the reasons
==PAGE:25==
1.6 Project design
13
The Business Model Canvas
Designed by: Strategyzer AG
The makers of Business Model Generation and Strategyzer
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this license, visit:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street, Suite 300, San Francisco, California, 94105, USA.
strategyzer.com
Revenue Streams
Customer Segments
Value Propositions
Key Activities
Key Partners
Cost Structure
Customer Relationships
Designed by:
Date:
Version:
Designed for:
Channels
Key Resources
Interested physics 
teachers
Students discussing with 
other students
Learning websites and 
social media
High school students at 
physics level B
Physics teachers at high 
school level
Visits and showcases of 
the software at schools
Augmented Reality 
technology gives 
students a new and 
unique way to learn by 
visualizing physics 
concepts in AR space
An AR learning app that 
gives a new and 
interesting way to 
review the knowledge 
students acquire, which 
in turn has potential to 
make them more active 
in their learning process
Developers with 
knowledge about AR 
implementation and user 
experience
AR-enabled hardware
AR libraries and 
frameworks
Research into AR to 
estimate suitability 
according to users' needs, 
development time and 
ease of use
An established 
partnership with an 
educator, to co-design 
and provide feedback 
Contracts with schools and academies, fee per user
Funding
Coding and 3D content creation
Teacher consultations and feedback sessions
Purchase AR-enabled devices for showcasing and testing
The developers behind 
the AR-enabling libraries 
and frameworks
Teachers who support the 
project by providing 
feedback and test subjects
Hight school students
Marios Lokas
2/5/2019
Figure 1.3: Business model canvas for an Augmented Reality learning application.
they might have to use your product. The steps commonly made for user-centred
design are:
1. Context of use: This step requires user identification and parameters like the
users’ requirements, reasons and environment they might use the product in.
2. Requirements specification: Here the designer defines the resources needed for
product development, as well as set important goals for the product. Initial
validation can be done by storyboard creation or paper prototyping.
3. Design and development: An iterative step that involves designing and creating
prototypes.
4. Product evaluation: Evaluation of the developed prototypes by the users pro-
vides the designer with valuable information on the products specifications.
Steps 3 and 4 are iteratively done and each round is expected to produce a better
product that more closely satisfies the users’ profiles. This theory was chosen as the
main guidance process for the later parts of this project.
==PAGE:26==
14
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2
Augmented Reality
2.1
Introduction
In this chapter, AR is discussed and analyzed in depth. We define AR and name what
differentiates it from other similar technologies. We take a look in AR implementa-
tions that exist currently and also talk about the roots of the technology. We also
give a small explanation of the underlying algorithms and systems that are needed to
implement AR, as well as common tools for the interested developer. This Chapter
expands upon [18] and adds a new level in AR, that of educational AR.
Sections 2.2 Definition, 2.3 History of Augmented Reality Technology
and 2.8 AR Application examples are addressed to the interested reader without
requiring a developer background and give an overview of AR. Sections 2.6 Aug-
mented Reality in-depth analysis and 2.7 Augmented Reality libraries and
frameworks provide information for people interested in understanding how AR is
implemented, as well as for those looking for common tools to develop their own appli-
cations. Section 2.4 Augmented Reality in Education gives an overview of how
AR is used in an educational context, and section 2.5 Educational Augmented Re-
ality design principles and patterns is addressed to readers who want to discover
what principles and guidelines are available for creating AR learning technologies.
2.2
Definition
Augmented, Virtual and Mixed reality are commonly used terms in Digital Media
technologies. While all three refer to the application of specific rules for developing
software and hardware, there are rules that separate them. Milgram [21] has pre-
sented the reality-virtuality continuum which graphically separates AR, VR and MR
in a line between a completely real and a completely virtual environment (figure 2.1).
AR refers to a view of the real world environment, where additional information of
various types appears. This information can be graphics like 3D objects, sound or
video. The augmented part in AR comes from the idea that real-world elements be-
come supplemented with additional information, therefore becoming augmented. In
Milgram’s continuum, we can see that AR is placed more near the Real Environ-
ment side of the continuum, because in his definition real and virtual content do not
necessarily interact with each other, or the level of interaction is limited.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Augmented Reality
Figure 2.1: Milgrams Mixed Reality continuum.
In the opposite side of the continuum, the term Augmented Virtuality (AV) can
be seen, which is essentially the inverse of AR. In AV, real-world objects are overlaid
on virtual environments, achieving a new level of immersion. An example of AV can
be constructing a 3D model of a person who is viewed from multiple cameras and
projecting the result inside a 3D environment, with the end result being projected
into a monitor.
Mixed Reality (MR) refers to applications and systems that have a more inter-
twined supplementing of information to the real world view. The main difference (or
improvement) with AR here is that the content that is overlaid into is both anchored
and can interact with the real world objects. According to the figure, MRs defini-
tion encompasses everything between reality and virtuality, including AR. However,
interaction between and virtual objects not only is difficult to measure (or even com-
prehend at times) but it also depends on the design of each individual application.
These definitions are still not set in stone, with even Microsoft (the creator of Hololens
AR glasses) not taking part in the debate1.
On the further right of the continuum lies the virtual environment, which repre-
sents Virtual Reality (VR) systems and applications. VR traditionally refers to sim-
ulated, alternative worlds created entirely with computer-generated content, where
the user is given the ability to interact inside these worlds. The keyword for VR is the
amount of immersion experienced, and immersion can be used to evaluate the success
of a VR experience. VR can also refer to any immersive experience, independently of
whether virtual content is used or not. While not present in the continuum, another
term for these kinds of applications has been presented and recently been used, even
more, namely Cross Reality (XR). XR is more of an umbrella term for the entire
continuum, that extends reality and virtuality into a combined, online environment
of virtual and augmented worlds, where a number of different sensors are used.
AR, VR and MR each offer comparable degrees of immersion and with the right
design, all three are applicable in an educational setting. The appropriateness of each
for education depends on the design; considering how VR is implemented, designing
e.g.
a VR learning environment must account for indoors learning and minimal
1https://www.foundry.com/industries/virtual-reality/vr-mr-ar-confused
==PAGE:29==
2.3 History of Augmented Reality Technology
17
required movement from the students. Opposed to that, an AR learning environment
can include an exploratory factor, requiring students to move around in a space
trying to locate context-related information. Finally, an AR learning environment
with interaction involved (MR) can have students solving puzzles in an AR world
that is adapted to their real environment.
2.3
History of Augmented Reality Technology
The idea of AR has been conceived many decades ago. Historically the first AR ap-
plication was the Sketchpad by Sutherland [28] in 1964. Upcoming AR applications
after the Sketchpad were not limited to simple proof-of-concept, with Furness design-
ing a system for pilot training [12]. Another pioneering AR system was the Touring
Machine [11], the first 3D AR outdoor system capable of the user. years technology
has advanced to the point where it enabled the development of more advanced and
interesting systems for AR, specifically through advancements in tracking algorithms,
display and interaction software and hardware.
Mobile phones that came out the past 10 years or so are AR-enabled, because of
different reasons. One is the addition of accelerometer, magnetometer and gyroscope,
also called inertial sensors, which are used to give information for the devices posi-
tion and rotation in space. Coupled with the standard camera, a handheld device
becomes a unit capable of moving in space while having a view of the world around
it. The image recognition algorithms that enable AR have been, as a general rule,
computationally expensive, until computational power in handheld devices advanced
enough to enable these algorithms to run in real-time.
Mobile phones have not been explicitly designed with AR in mind, and therefore
the AR experience they offer is adequate for certain designs but not perfect for all.
There is also the limitation that requires the user holding them with one or two
hands. Sutherland has imagined an AR world where the device that enables it is as
less intrusive as possible. Many head-mounted devices (HMDs) have since appeared,
all resembling in design a pair of glasses; examples are the Microsoft Hololens, Google
Glass2 and the recently launched Magic Leap One3. So far, HMDs have not been able
to even adequately solve the three challenges of AR: the technology is not capable
of handling the huge amounts of data that need to be processed every frame, which
results in a limited field of view. Additionally, the UI has to be implemented with the
fairly limited ways of input (Hololens has only a few gestures and voice commands).
Finally, HMDs are big in size, which can cause fatigue after prolonged use, not to
mention their inelegant design which would hinder most users from using it in public
spaces.
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Glass
3https://www.magicleap.com/magic-leap-one
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Augmented Reality
2.4
Augmented Reality in Education
AR is a technology with powerful visualization ability. Visualizing abstract concepts
can give students an understanding that they normally can’t get just from reading.
Also, a virtual object in AR can be viewed from different angles; by giving this ability
to students new learning situations can be created. Also, the novelty of AR has the
power to capture a student’s interest and trigger engagement in their learning.
In figure 2.2, the use of an AR book can be seen. Coupling reading with AR is a
good way to introduce interesting breaks to studying and give the chance to review
some of the things learned so far. It can also prove an enjoying process for students
at early ages.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: AR book examples. (a) HDBC AR Book and (b) AR 4Draw, a children’s
book demo app.
2.4.1
Affordances of Augmented Reality in education
AR has potential as a technology in a field where rapid information transfer is impor-
tant [31]. VR also has a lot of potential for visualization and learning in ubiquitous
environments [27] but AR, as it is currently more accessible to students (due to AR-
enabled smartphones) can possibly achieve more in the ways of deeper and better
learning. From a specific point of view both technologies are comparably accessible,
as VR headsets have become relatively cheap (see Google Cardboard4), however the
requirements for VR with mobile devices requires a set of specific steps (starting the
VR app, placing the device in the headset and so on). According to this, AR has an
easier setup (only starting the app plus any tracking required) and is also available
directly on most recent devices.
AR has the potential for the following contributions in teaching and learning
environments:
• The use of virtual content can be more engaging and motivation can be greater
for students.
4https://vr.google.com/cardboard/
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Augmented Reality in Education
19
• It gives students the ability to explore the teaching material (in 3D form) from
different angles when there is meaning to do so.
• Through AR students can explore subjects where a real-world experience is
hard/impossible to have, e.g. in astronomy, environmental studies, chemistry,
physics etc.
• It can enhance collaboration between students, with the appropriate design
choices.
• It promotes creativity and imagination through the visualization of content, as
opposed to teaching with little to no visualization.
• AR learning environments offer an authentic, customized, personalized learning
experience.
• AR learning environments encourage students to take control of their own learn-
ing in their own way.
At the same time, AR applications need to solve some challenges to become effective
learning technologies. Some common challenges are:
• Users frequently are not comfortable due to having to use HMDs.
• HMDs are usually very expensive.
• Due to sensitivity to lighting and room conditions, AR applications experience
common device and software failures.
• Complex design choices need to be made for the usage of AR to be meaningful,
according to the teaching method and material.
• Application of AR in schools is usually accompanied by constraints schools or
resistance from teachers [30].
• Designing an AR app needs to take into account possible cognitive overloading
which can happen when e.g. it presents a lot of information or is hard to use.
• AR educational tasks usually require students to concurrently navigate in space,
manipulate the device and solve problems.
This can prove hard for certain
students of earlier ages.
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Augmented Reality
2.5
Educational Augmented Reality design principles
and patterns
M. Dunleavy [8] has identified 3 design principles for AR learning software: 1) Enable
and Challenge, 2) Drive by gamified story and 3)See the unseen.
Enable and then Challenge is a design principle for countering the frequent cog-
nitive overload that students experience when using an AR app.
It dictates that
the level of complexity in the app should start low and slowly progress as the game
expands. This will give the student the ability to adapt to the application’s relatively
high demands of cognition level for proper use. Dunleavy uses an AR game called
Dino Dig5 as an example of this principle. In this game, the designers combated
cognitive overload by ensuring the game’s challenge slowly progresses alongside the
user, that text is replaced by audio and videos are used as guides in the app.
Drive by gamified story counts on raising the quality of the experience with a
narrative element that puts the student in the role of an investigator set to collect
information from different places in their environment. Gamification elements such
as score or game over situations alongside an immersive story can be really engaging
elements for an AR app and assist the completion of the learning objectives [8].
See the Unseen is an AR principle that leverages visual AR capabilities for dis-
playing information that is not there. This is essentially the addition of visual AR,
alongside location-based AR for displaying meaningful information. Dunleavy spec-
ifies that the mobile device becomes a lens, through which students can see the en-
vironment in a new way [8]. His argument also states that the mobile device should
not be seen as a screen, as this might get the student fixated on the screen instead
of the real world view. Split views and persistent on-screen text are common pitfalls
that related back to this argument.
During development, we adhered to these principles, to most of our ability. It has
been seen that during the project’s application iterations, the more the application
included elements according to these 3 rules the better the response by students was.
This project was also aided by taking into account Interaction and Design patterns
for AR learning apps and games, presented and analyzed below.
2.5.1
Interaction and design patterns for AR learning
Emmerich in his work [9] presented specific patterns that can be used as guidelines
when designing AR learning apps and games. In his work, it is also stated that every
pattern employed must be flexible and end-user oriented [4], which is the case with
all patterns presented.
In the first level of design, the Interaction patterns are presented.
These pat-
terns are a first indication of how an AR app usually allows for interaction with the
environment.
5http://www.playfreshair.com/
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Educational Augmented Reality design principles and patterns
21
• Point of Interest (POI): This pattern dictates that information is received by
the user when they manually move to a predefined location, specified by GPS
coordinates. The information is used to augment their environment.
• Heads-up display (HUD): According to this pattern, information is not anchored
in space but is constantly seen on screen. This interaction choice can be used
for short messages.
• Tricorder: This pattern dictates that an app can scan the environment and
augment the presence of a physical object with virtual elements.
Its name
derives from the fictional Star Trek universe6.
• Holochess: Opposite from the Tricorder pattern, entirely virtual objects are
anchored in the 3D world and viewed by the camera.
• X-Ray vision: Seeing beneath object surfaces, essentially overlaying information
that allows viewing the inside of an object. An example of this is seeing the
organs inside a person’s body [22].
[9] also presents Design patterns.
These patterns are very user-oriented and aim
to enhance the experience, as well as avoid common pitfalls. They can be grouped
in the following categories: Directional, Environmental, Input, Non-visual feedback,
Media-related and Multi-user patterns.
Directional patterns concern the users location and view.
• The Directed Gaze pattern dictates that the app should direct the users’ atten-
tion to a specific object or point using e.g. a UI cue.
• The Directed Movement pattern requires the user to move to a specific location
in space before information can be received or interaction can happen.
Both these patterns can be implemented using e.g. UI elements like icons or arrows
that point to the specific point in space the user needs to look or move to. In the
case where a lot of UI elements are displayed, filtering is required to avoid cluttering
the screen. The system also needs to be aware of where the object to gaze to-location
to move to is, therefore some kind of persistent tracking for the device’s location is
required.
Environmental patterns deal with the environment the users consume the app, be
it a room, a public space or outdoors. The general idea is dealing with the constraints
the environment places upon the system design
• Environmental Adaptation (EA): The AR experience should be able to play in
any environment.
• Environmental Independence (EI): The designers must reduce interaction with
the environment to make the game function under any conditions.
6https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tricorder
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Augmented Reality
• Environmental Requirements (ER): The designers can make the requirements
the game environment explicit to the users.
The EA and EI patterns both have ups and downs: an adaptable system requiring
additional constraints in the design process and therefore presenting different users
with different experiences. On the other hand, an independent system reduces the
value of the AR experience but makes the user experience more predictable. AR
developer frameworks solve the technological requirements of these design choices
easily, by enabling horizontal and vertical plane detection that can be utilized to place
the virtual elements, or just simple 3 DOF movement using e.g. the device’s gyroscope.
In the case where neither of these patterns is applicable, designers can make use of
the ER pattern, combining the pros from both the above approaches but possibly
requiring the users to make changes to their environments. An additional concern of
the environmental design is the POIs, which are ways to provide information to the
users based on their location, usually a geographical point when they get in range.
AR devices usually have geo-location awareness, but designers must also take note of
sensor inaccuracy or overlapping POIs.
Input-related patterns dictate the way users interact inside the app. Ways users
can interact with the app are through Gaze, which is the direction the user looks at,
either through a handheld device or an HMD.
• A Gaze Cursor pattern implements a Gaze mechanic in the app, usually a mark
at the centre of the display which highlights virtual or real objects when they
are overlaid by it.
• A Gaze POI pattern utilizes the Gaze cursor to trigger behaviors or events when
the cursor detects the object, for example, either highlighting it or displaying
information about it.
• A Voice command pattern gives the user a new way of giving input to the app
without his hands.
The Microsoft Hololens toolkit7 (Holotoolkit) Unity package employs the Gaze POI
pattern frequently to make the user aware of the centre of her view. Hololens utilizes
the Air Tap and Bloom gestures8 which correspond to the respective click and Win-
dows button in Windows OS. Standard voice commands (e.g. ”Take a picture”) can
be also be used for almost any action, as long as the command intuitively corresponds
to the action. Gestures and voice commands can make an AR app more immersive
and intuitive, however special care is needed. Gesture recognition and hand tracking
may be more appropriate when the user’s hands are free, which is not usually the
case when developing handheld AR systems, as well as being computationally expen-
sive and complex to implement. Also, using voice commands is not always feasible
depending on the user’s environment.
7https://github.com/Microsoft/MixedRealityToolkit-Unity
8https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-reality/gestures
==PAGE:35==
2.6 Augmented Reality in-depth analysis
23
In the non-visual feedback category, patterns help designers decide on events that
happen and when they should happen.
• The Haptic Feedback pattern allows users to touch virtual objects and receive
feedback through different channels, like vibrations.
• The Auto Play pattern will make the game respond to passive input by the user.
This could be triggering events like pausing and resuming only when the user
looks at an object.
According to the Haptic Feedback pattern, users may respond better to feedback that
is not visual: device vibration or audio events are examples of this. The Auto Play
design pattern helps increase immersion, as it triggers AR events without the user’s
input, and can also be used to e.g. avoid injury or inform the user of device failing
events, for example when losing device tracking information.
Media-related patterns are ways to control the amount of information displayed
to the users.
• The Information Filtering patterns states that information should be filtered
according to factors like distance to a specific object, angle it is viewed or how
relevant the information is in regards to the game’s timeline (e.g. the game’s
levels).
• The Obscured Information Visualization pattern says that the user should have
an understanding of their AR environment at all times, even when objects are
hidden behind walls.
• The Shared Pointer pattern is concerned with the users in shared AR environ-
ments and the communication between them. It states that the Gaze cursors
of a user should be visible by others, or allow users to mark the environment.
It was mentioned in the Directed Movement patterns that the number of UI elements
displayed must be controlled to avoid clutter. Displaying information is a standard
way of making the user aware of what they can do in the AR world, however, it is
very easy to overload the screen.
The Shared Pointer pattern relates to multi-user AR environments. When all
coexisting users are aware of each other’s actions, they can communicate their actions
or intentions in the world. Shared AR experiences can easily be implemented using
Unity and the ARKit package9.
2.6
Augmented Reality in-depth analysis
AR applications vary in software implementation. The Sketchpad was a very primitive
example, offering a limited amount of interaction and rendering. Peppers Ghost stages
9https://developer.apple.com/documentation/arkit/creating_a_multiuser_ar_experience
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Augmented Reality
combine real view and 3D rendering but have almost no interaction between the real
and the virtual world. Opposed to that IKEA Place is an advanced system with
multiple capabilities, including rendering in real-time, plane detection and device
location awareness. These 3 examples imply that AR applications, through the years
have changed and evolved to the point where certain standards need to be fulfilled.
Nowadays, AR implementations must generally satisfy three rules [1]:
1. The application must combine real-world view and virtual elements: Being able
to see virtual content in combination with physical objects, in certain physical
spaces or special environmental conditions is the definition of AR. In most
cases, conditions for entertainment and/or education are generated through
this combination and a certain level of immersion is achieved.
2. The virtual elements are registered in real-world space: The idea of anchoring
virtual content to real objects is unique and has been enabled by research in
the field of Computer Vision. The term Registration stems from this field and
describes the ability to project the virtual object with a certain position and ro-
tation (collectively called pose) in space. AR-enabled devices, using accelerom-
eter, magnetometer, gyroscope and Computer Vision algorithms are capable of
fulfilling this rule for AR, by:
• Knowing their position and rotation at all times, from a reference point in
time (usually taken when the application starts).
• Approximating the distance of the virtual content to the camera.
• Calculating the new pose of the anchor during each new frame, in a process
called tracking.
3. Virtual elements are interactive in real time: Interaction is an important factor
in immersive experiences. The user should in almost all cases have the ability
to cause a change in the AR environment and see the result.
Educational
AR experiences can increase student motivation and interest, and when the
experience is coupled with proper interaction the result has the potential of
making the student more active in their learning process.
The combination and interaction requirements are more straightforward to do
than the world-space registration part. This process is divided in 4 separate steps:
camera calibration, registration, tracking and composition:
1. In the camera calibration step, the physical camera, if it exists (and in the form
it exists), has to be matched to the virtual camera that displays the content.
This requires the calculation of 2 sets of camera parameters, called internal
and external. The internal camera parameters determine the projection of the
virtual scene onto the targeted physical, while the external parameters deter-
mine the position and orientation of the physical camera. Depending on the
AR system, e.g. if the scene is static or if a physical camera is used or not, the
calibration step can be done in other ways.
==PAGE:37==
2.6 Augmented Reality in-depth analysis
25
2. Information from the camera calibration and tracking step are used to create the
alignment between the physical and virtual world, in a process called registration.
This information comprises of the camera’s pose as well as the position of the
physical worlds reference point and is constantly updated each frame, as the
camera usually moves.
3. During the tracking step the target’s reference point is approximated according
to a computer vision method and the information is fed back to the registration
step to correctly re-align the 2 worlds.
4. Composition refers to the rendering of the 3D content on the physical world. In
mobile phones, this is done directly on the phone’s display, f.x. by rendering
content on top of the view provided by the camera, but in other AR systems
it can vary; for see-through optical displays, the content is displayed on the
see-through glass, as a ghost, while the glass also allows seeing the real world.
There is also the ability to render the content directly on the viewer’s retina
[13].
In the tracking step, the current frame, taken directly as RGB or YUV coordinates
from the camera feed, is analyzed through a computer vision algorithm. The approxi-
mation mentioned above is a process that acquires information by analyzing multiple
frames and detecting differences/similarities between them. Here, image and signal
analysis algorithms can be applied to the image frames, allowing the process to infer
information about what it sees. Information from images is usually acquired by apply-
ing Feature Point Extraction algorithms, with the most effective and commonly used
algorithms being SHIFT [19] or SURF [2]. Through this feature point estimation,
two important operations can be achieved, namely plane detection and visible light
estimation.
1. In plane detection10, the feature points that are detected in a frame and remain
in subsequent ones, but only offset according to the information acquired by the
inertial sensors, can be considered static. Static feature points like that usually
can be found on unchangeable physical environment, where it can be reliably
reported that a horizontal or vertical plane exists. Furthermore, the distance of
the plane to the camera can be approximated by the change in pixel intensity
according to the camera’s movement. This whole process gives the AR system
the ability to reliably place content in a position in AR space that accurately
matches the ground or a table in the real world. Apples ARKit and Google’s
ARCore libraries allow developers to detect both horizontal and vertical planes
in the real world space.
2. In light estimation, the pixels in the image are analyzed to infer the current
light conditions in the environment. Light estimation is less functional than
10https://blog.markdaws.net/arkit-by-example-part-2-plane-detection-visualization-
10f05876d53
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Augmented Reality
plane detection, but it allows a more realistic rendering of the 3D content under
different light conditions which enhances the experience and immersion factor.
Specific conditions can facilitate plane detection. A good lit environment gives better
quality to the images analyzed and larger differences between pixels, therefore the
algorithms have more feature points to work with. Surfaces with textures that present
large differences also have more feature points to extract; on the other hand, clean
solid colour surfaces like desks usually make it hard to do plane detection. Finally,
quick camera movements produce blurry images, who are not suited for good feature
extraction.
(a) Mapped environment with good distinct
features.
(b) Solid-coloured desk with few features de-
tected.
Figure 2.3: (a) Good and (b) bad plane detection conditions.
==PAGE:39==
2.7 Augmented Reality libraries and frameworks
27
2.7
Augmented Reality libraries and frameworks
The above functionalities utilize complex, hard-to-implement algorithms and opera-
tions. Fortunately, with AR becoming more and more prominent as a technology,
developers were given the necessary tools to quickly implement all those function-
alities. One of the oldest libraries that became publicly available to developers is
ARToolkit11, a project that started as early as 1999. A well-known platform for cre-
ating AR is also Wikitude12, providing its own SDK and limiting coding required for
building a basic AR app.
The go-to platform for many years has been Vuforia13, making it very easy for de-
velopers to upload their own images in their website, do the feature extraction process
online and receive a database of ready-to-detect images for their apps. Additional
functionalities are 3D object detection, environment detection and image tracking.
Vuforia has been bundled with the Unity Engine since version 2017.2 and integrating
it into a game became as easy as a few clicks. One of its most recent features is called
Vuforia Fusion, developed explicitly for having a combined development platform ca-
pable of building for different devices. Vuforia Fusion integrates with other libraries
for the ability to cover the plethora of devices that are AR enabled, as well as provide
some of the capabilities that are not available through Vuforia itself. The currently
available features that Vuforia borrows from other packages are plane detection (only
ground), 6 DOF device tracking and advanced image tracking.
The two libraries that are integrated in Vuforia Fusion are ARKit14 and ARCore15.
Each is developed for the leading mobile phone brands, iPhone and Android devices.
An important functionality provided by these two libraries is plane detection, the
ability to detect solid planes in the real world, both horizontal and vertical, without
the use of markers. This capability is only offered by ARKit and ARCore and is
provided by Vuforia through their integration. Developers that build a handheld app
with Unity usually target both iPhone and Android. Due to that, there have been
attempts to have an AR interface that can ease the development process for both
targets, using ARKit and ARCore for the respective target. Unity Technologies has
shown great interest in providing all the features of ARKit and ARCore to developers
without needing to switch between packages, and due to that Unity developers have
worked extensively to provide a unifying package for mobile AR developers.
2.8
AR Application examples
With all the available tools for developers mentioned above, and also due to the rapid
plugin development for tools like Unity, many different examples of AR applications
11http://artoolkit.sourceforge.net/
12https://www.wikitude.com/
13https://www.vuforia.com/
14https://developer.apple.com/arkit/
15https://developers.google.com/ar/discover/
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Augmented Reality
are emerging. AR apps are generally developed for marketing, entertainment and
education, but recently utility AR apps are also appearing. Figure 2.4 shows examples
of interesting AR apps and AR games.
A great example of the utility AR can provide is the IKEA Place app16, a utility
app for visualization of the placement of furniture in the users home.
Similarly,
the MeasureKit17, an AR ruler app for iOS devices, is also a great example that
fully utilizes the capabilities of world understanding provided by ARKit, providing
functionality like measuring length and size of objects, the distance of a point to
your camera, the angle of corners etc.
In a different context, two AR apps were
also developed in response to an earthquake that hit the city of Christchurch in New
Zealand [17]. The first, called CCDU AR, used image tracking from a book to display
how the city of Christchurch would look after being rebuilt, while the second, called
CityViewAR, used GPS data to show the real, full-sized buildings on site before they
were built. These 2 apps, along IKEA Place, are good examples of the capabilities of
AR as well as the direction of AR and the problems it can solve.
AR also has the possibility of developing games with interesting elements.
A
notable example is the game prototype called LevelHead18,19, where the entire game
world is superimposed on a cube in front of a camera. In more mainstream gaming,
there are notable examples like AR Defender20, a classic tower defence game played
using a tablet pointed at a table, as well as the popular game Pokemon GO21. There
are also apps that use AR components in them as secondary features(e.g. Snapchat
filters).
16https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ikea-place/id1279244498?mt=8
17https://measurekit.com/
18https://julianoliver.com/levelhead/
19https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dsb76pva4s4
20https://www.ign.com/wikis/ar-defender-2/
21https://www.pokemongo.com/en-us/
==PAGE:41==
2.8 AR Application examples
29
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.4: AR application examples: (a) LevelHead (b) AR Defender 2 (c) Mea-
sureKit (d) IKEA Place
21Images in figure 2.4 taken from AndroidAuthority, ICreateMagazine, Kotaku, Julian Oliver’s
LevelHead.
==PAGE:42==
30
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Design and
Development Log
3.1
Introduction
In this chapter, I present and analyze my design choices as they changed throughout
the course of the project. In other words, this chapter represents a log of the entire
project, which I broke down into separate phases. This section is addressed to those
who would like to know how the project started and how it evolved after discussions,
feedback and iterating on the ideas. The interested reader will be able to observe
this project’s progress as it evolved from start to finish, and get insight into my
methodology. This chapter’s tone is informal.
3.2
Phase 1: Project motivation and research into
Augmented Reality and education
The two core ideas the project started with were 1) utilizing visual AR and developing
an AR application and 2) developing educational software and using the correct design
principles to model it. The choice of using AR as the main technology was made
by my personal preference and my previous/current experience.
However, I have
not explored the case of AR educational software before, and this aligned with my
supervisor’s area of expertise and interests.
A supplemental idea when the project began was also using game design principles
in education. Later on, I researched the benefits of educational games, and I also drew
ideas for AR game design principles from [9], which I included in the project’s code.
Research into AR for education has brought to my attention multiple works as
well as modelling guidelines, which provided a base for my research and designs. An
example of AR software I came across was the Environmental Detectives app by
Klopfer [16], which highlighted the affordances of AR in education. As I realized that
research on AR exists and can back up my interest, I was invigorated and motivated
for picking up this particular subject.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Design and Development Log
As I studied AR, I also began reading on educational principles and learning
theories, after recommendations.
Designing a learning environment requires basic
knowledge of learning theories, as well as 1) when to apply which one and 2) when is
one prefered over the other. While reading on these I formed certain observations on
the design of my learning technology and realized, for starters, which pitfalls to avoid
during design. An example of a pitfall in the design is showing a lot of information
on the UI, therefore creating a cognitive overload for the user. Learning theories also
helped to form a general idea about which students my technology should target; for
example, while constructivism sounds an ideal choice for deep learning in students, it
also requires a certain cognitive level. Navigating through an AR app also requires
students to have advanced to a specific cognitive level, enough to not get confused
from the complex handling and the different forms of information displayed [30]. This
underlines that a more advanced and deeper AR learning system would require older
students to be correctly evaluated.
I began to realize the potential AR has for educational software and proceeded to
research for appropriate application areas, while I considered fields where games have
been previously used or have potential, and also fields where visualization is required
and done in some way. To this, I added my personal interest and learning difficulty
of Linear Algebra and vector math, which I had to use many times for my study and
work.
It is important to mention that many of the ideas for the design of my thesis
came to be after discussions I had with peers from a course I attended, as part of my
supervision. This course, called Digital Learning Technology and Entrepreneurship by
LearnT, DTU, has been helpful in more ways than one, and the most important one
was the regular weekly discussions and feedback on my design choices. Wherever in
the remainder of this report peers are mentioned, it refers to fellow classmates that
also attended this course.
3.2.1
Research Areas
Previous research on AR in education identifies multiple ways to use it in a meaning-
ful way for teaching. One reasonable example is architecture and civil engineering,
aligning with the direction of object modelling in AR [31]. Students in these fields
can potentially use AR to practice developing architectural plans and model the con-
struction of buildings in 3D before it happens. Subsequently, they could test what
they create and visualize their presence in the actual environment. AR can also help
in visualizing utility lines, underground pipes and power lines. An example idea I
considered for AR in architecture is creating or porting 3D models in an AR app,
anchoring them to a real-world location (e.g. a football field or a construction area)
where there is enough space to move around and physically navigating inside them
as if they were real. This could potentially be used in other areas where visualiza-
tion along with reality would have meaning, e.g. 3D modelling or product design. A
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Phase 1: Project motivation and research into Augmented Reality and education
33
great example of this is IKEA Place app1 which allows customers to see how specific
furniture would fit in their homes.
The visualizing abilities of AR can also be realized in subjects that are taught
in school.
Math and specifically linear algebra is a subject where visualization is
commonly used to transfer knowledge from paper to reality, inside the classroom.
Specifically, in vector math, the board is commonly used to teach vectors in space,
as well as operations between them (e.g. cross product). Linear algebra has been
identified as a hard-to-teach subject for multiple reasons [26], and it gets especially
hard when the knowledge needs to be transferred from the 2-dimensional board to
the 3-dimensional world. A possible application of AR to linear algebra teaching was
therefore considered, one that would focus on visualizing vectors and the products of
vector operations with emphasis on the 3D world.
Linear algebra terms and definitions also appear in Physics, specifically in the
Mechanics chapter, which is dealing with the motion of objects. Velocity, acceleration,
gravity etc. are common terms which are represented with vectors when studying
physics and when solving motion problems. On paper, these are easily described, but
in reality, some have to be imagined. Discussions I had with peers have highlighted
the fact that vector math appears frequently in the mechanics chapter in physics and
therefore physics is an application area that should be considered for visualization.
While not related to the mechanics chapter, AR has been applied to physics education
before, in the electricity and circuits chapter [14]. In this work, the importance of
AR collaborative learning is also highlighted and studied.
3.2.2
Prototyping and initial feedback
A project usually starts with a raw, not fleshed-out idea. Designing one from scratch
involves ways to describe this idea to others and receive feedback. This design loop
of idea presentation, feedback and re-iteration are commonly done in design and
engineering. What I needed was a way to show what I mean to others, and make
them understand to a certain extent what I mean. There are multiple ways to rapidly
prototype and show ideas while avoiding extra time into coding.
In my case, I started with paper prototyping. Most ideas can quickly be described
on paper, in a storyboard form. For some people, AR is a new concept and there-
fore these prototypes could be enough to evaluate some initial questions, e.g. if the
hardware is suitable for a learning environment or how will students use it in class or
at home. Furthermore, these drawings can easily inspire discussions and new ideas,
which might also be their only purpose.
1https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ikea-place/id1279244498?mt=8
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Design and Development Log
Figure 3.1: Drawing an expected application flow in storyboard style.
These drawings were presented to my peers enrolled in the LearnT course, during
planned feedback sessions. Feedback was generic; the drawings gave my peers an
idea of what I wanted to do, mostly by reminding them about AR and that it allows
for viewing anchored virtual content. At this point, I was not able to validate if
vectors are a suitable subject to teach with AR, but some of the feedback highlighted
the importance of new interesting technology such as AR in education. One of the
best observations here was that, if the application asks the students to stand up and
generally move to learn, it could potentially motivate the student because it adds
physical movement to the learning process.
3.2.3
Initial considered technology: The 4D box
At the start of the project, another piece of AR technology was considered to be used.
While I had previous knowledge of AR in handhelds, I also investigated the use of
AR stages in education. AR stages make use of holograms to display virtual content
next to real, which is a direct extension from old performance techniques that use
mirrors to create an AR illusion. These stages have one very important advantage:
they do not require the use of any device by the viewer, be it AR glasses or a mobile
device. This particular benefit has inspired the idea of an AR classroom that is very
similar to a stage but has the ability to be viewed from many geographical places at
once, in a remote, collaborative learning environment. It also gives the educational
benefit enhancing learning with AR content. This technology has been available and
was considered to be used for this project, through a short-term partnership with
Kulturværftet in Elsinore, Denmark, where it is frequently used for AR performances.
Developing content for this stage is also done in Unity.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Phase 2: Deciding on a teaching subject and developing functional prototypes
35
At the time of writing this, AR handheld hardware technology has not advanced
enough to outdo this benefit of the AR stage. Given the current cost of AR glasses and
AR-enabled mobiles, it looks like a one-time set up of an AR stage is less costly, faster
to implement and maintain, and less prone to errors in the middle of the lesson than
having different devices for each student. The scenario of multiple AR glasses that
look at the same 3D AR content also carries the risk of desynchronization and battery
failures and requires the technician to be able to handle multiple device failures at one
time, which is not feasible. For example, in the case of one failure, the entire lesson
would have to pause until the device has been synced again. One research carried on
video conferencing with the use of handheld devices reported a lot of time in setting
up the lesson, and frequent pausing because of device failure [3]. However, the setup
required the devices to be constantly in use.
The setup of a learning environment with this stage requires a lot of set up time,
given the size of the stage. However, it can be understood that only one device needs
to be started beforehand, and there is no setup time; students can just walk in and
be seated, and then the lesson can start.
While this advantage gives reason to consider the use of the AR stage, there
is also one very important limitation to it: whoever is standing on the stage and
is interacting with the content has no means to see the virtual content. This is the
main reason why AR stages are used in performances, where the entire process can be
choreographed. The same cannot be done for teaching, which is a very unpredictable
process and requires the teacher to know what she is doing. If we agree that this
limitation counterbalances the aforementioned benefit, then we can achieve the same
result with a simple screen.
This technology was, therefore, put aside, with the
thought of using it as part of a learning process but only for viewing content.
3.3
Phase 2: Deciding on a teaching subject and
developing functional prototypes
Most of the feedback I got from discussions on the initial phase has been positive,
especially on the suitability of the technology. Starting with linear algebra and vectors
as a main subject to teach, I began creating some actual functional prototypes using
Unity and one of the available libraries for AR. These prototypes served as a start
for deciding on the actual learning problem my learning technology would solve, and
also inspired new ideas for the project design.
As mentioned above, vectors are used frequently in motion physics. During feed-
back sessions, a peer mentioned that teaching vectors can be done through solving
physics problems, where velocity, forces and collisions can be ideally be presented in
AR space, possible by playing a physics game. Later during this phase, the physics
teacher that takes part in this project, Diana, also confirmed that she regularly uses
physics problems to teach her students about vectors in space.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Design and Development Log
3.3.1
Prototype 1: Basic coordinate system displaying in AR space
There is a multitude of available AR libraries and frameworks, as is mentioned in
another chapter. Even though I began developing in Unity I still had to choose be-
tween 4 different libraries for AR, where 2 were device-specific (iOS or Android). This
prototype helped to decide on which device I should use. I also took into consider-
ation which device (and therefore package) will provide the quickest developing and
debugging time.
Given the device availability constraints by DTU, the development and building
time and previous experience I started with using an experimental package called
ARInterface2. This seemed the optimal choice at the time given that ARInterface
allowed building for both iOS and Android, and testing inside Unity’s environment,
which saved me the time cost of having to build into the device every time I needed
to test a small change.
Being experimental, this package presented some coding
difficulties but was good enough for this stage. Using an Android device provided by
DTU I quickly made a prototype to show in class, which you can see in figure 3.2.
In Linear Algebra it is common to draw Cartesian coordinate systems, even in 3D.
Here, my purpose was to see if there was some kind of extra learning value in seeing
the coordinate system and a vector in actual AR space. For this, the interaction was
limited and the prototype only allowed for viewing the Cartesian coordinate system.
Multiple feedback was received from testing this initial prototype. An important
thing I noticed during tests was that people had trouble creating the starting con-
2https://github.com/Unity-Technologies/experimental-ARInterface
Figure 3.2: Prototype 1: Simple Cartesian coordinate system in AR
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Phase 2: Deciding on a teaching subject and developing functional prototypes
37
ditions for anchoring content to space. Due to the nature of AR, feature point and
plane detection need certain conditions to happen and also requires moving the de-
vice around while rotating it, something that not everyone who tested this did. In a
specific case where I did not showcase myself how to detect a plane first, one person
was holding the camera almost 10 centimetres away from a surface, which is too close
for detection to happen and no planes could be found. This highlighted the impor-
tance of guiding the user through messages or notifications while trying to trigger the
necessary conditions for starting the application.
While this was a very basic prototype, this was enough to make my peers, in
the role of initial testers, understand how an AR application or game would work.
It inspired discussion on what exactly could be prototyped, and most ideas from
peers seemed to adhere more to a physics simulation in the form of a game. At this
point, I was researching the difficulties of teaching linear algebra and I was focused on
identifying a learning difficulty related to vectors and matrix operations; these ideas
required me to shift my focus to a different subject. As I started considering this
change I came to realize that the options for designing a simulation game for physics
are more, in regards to 3D content, game mechanics and also in giving the ability
for the user to seeing the unseen[1]. Linear Algebra is more abstract as a subject
[15][6], therefore simulations that resemble more standard math problems are easier
to produce. As I wanted to also focus a bit on games in education, I made a turn
in my project and began researching possible learning difficulties in physics that can
be aided. A few notable statements and ideas that were born from these feedback
sessions were:
• In physics problems, when for example calculating the net force on an object,
it can be hard to visualize the result on paper.
• Students can sometimes forget that there are forces constantly applied on ob-
jects, like how gravity is always applied and friction constantly when there is
movement.
• There are certain examples in physics where the direction of forces is hard to
grasp and counter-intuitive, an example being the centrifugal force. I could
potentially solve a problem by using AR visualization for these problems.
• An example where the user can draw force vectors on an object in AR, and
then apply all of them at the same time could have value in teaching how the
net force is calculated.
Using this feedback I moved to the next prototype for next weeks testing session.
This time I used the ideas of applying forces and seeing the net result on an object.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Design and Development Log
3.3.2
Prototype 2: Applying forces on an AR sphere and seeing
the result
This prototype focused more on giving some small interaction to the user.
After
locating the plane and placing the object in real space, the user would first draw
force vectors in X and Y axis and then see the sum of the vectors, as it would be
when both forces are applied to it at the same time. After this, the user can press the
done button to actually see the resulting force applied to the sphere. Following some
usability tests and discussions with peers, initial users responded much better to the
new interaction in the prototype. One person mentioned that this can more easily
turn into a game, e.g. making the user launch balls into a hoop, with the challenge
of finding the right vector combination to launch them to the right direction. Other
feedback included ways of turning this into a problem that makes students think about
the different parameters of a physics problem: what would happen if we had different
balls with different mass or different values of gravity. It was also mentioned that it
would be helpful if the user could see the magnitude of the vector while adjusting
it, which is the amount of force applied on each axis, as well as having a pause or
slow-time function in the game. This functionality would be useful to observe the
state of the forces on the sphere at specific points during its trajectory. More in the
mindset of game mechanics, some of the testers asked how easy it would be to change
the direction the sphere is launched towards.
All of the feedback for this prototype was very helpful and highlighted the fact that
there is potential. However, in addition to this feedback from peers I was prompted
Figure 3.3: Prototype 2: Net force applied on an object
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Phase 2: Deciding on a teaching subject and developing functional prototypes
39
by my supervisor to answer an important question: Can the student/user understand
that they are learning an important, valuable skill by playing this simulation game?.
This question was saved as an important note and was, later on, addressed multiple
times during discussions.
3.3.3
Feedback and discussions with DTU physics professors
At this point, the project design was not entirely complete.
My prototypes were
based on intuition and testers that were not part of the target group. These ideas
lacked feedback from the actual targeted users, as well as having located an actual
problem or learning difficulty around physics and vectors.
In order to adhere to
the user-centred design principle, I contacted a few physics professors from DTU in
order to show my prototypes and prompt some ideation and discussion. Specifically,
I contacted the course responsible for introductory physics and related courses at 1st
year Bachelor programmes in DTU’s Physics department. Out of all contacts, two
professors offered to meet and discuss. My first contact was Carsten Knudsen3, who
teaches the course 10018 Physics 1 at DTU Physics department. After showcasing
my second prototype to him, discussion centred around a specific part of Mechanics
that talks about fictitious (also called pseudo) forces, with the core idea of showing
simulations of these in AR space. These forces are 4 in total and are the following:
• Rectilinear acceleration.
• Coriolis force.
• Centrifugal force.
• Euler force.
These forces exist in nature but only as a product of other forces, and only when
specific conditions apply.
Carsten added to that that while they are fictitious in
nature, we understand them and feel them more compared to e.g. gravity because
gravity is a force that people feel constantly and therefore are used to. I was able to
observe the learning difficulty of this physics chapter during a visit to an experimenta-
rium held in DTU Physics building for 1st-year bachelor students, after being invited
by Carsten. This experimentarium involved large apparatuses build specifically for
showing each of these forces and how to understand their presence. Observing the
students and teaching assistants I noticed a few interesting things: the blackboard
was used alongside playing with the apparatuses to describe the systems, as well as
frequent questions regarding where the centre of the mass is located (on the appara-
tuses). One notable observation was that students and teacher assistants used the
right-hand rule while placing their hands near the centre of mass in an attempt to
visualize the direction of the force. This happened because calculating these forces
3https://www.dtu.dk/service/telefonbog/person?id=3949&tab=1
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Design and Development Log
direction uses the cross product between vectors, which points to a direction that is
perpendicular to both vectors multiplied. Carsten has also talked about the neces-
sity of force direction visualization with these kinds of problems. Therefore I began
considering this learning difficulty as the main problem to tackle.
Brian Seger4, the other contact who is also from DTU Physics and also responsible
for 10018 Physics 1, gave feedback on my project during a small discussion we had. He
noted the same problem with force visualization in physics problems, and also stated
that students attend these different physics classes in order to experiment physically.
He noted that a computer can be used for the same purpose but computers tend to be
distracting and computer physics simulations suffer from cognitive overload problems.
Out of these two meetings, I have come to understand that the visualization of
force direction is important in physics education. Solving an actual problem with
AR technology definitely seemed like the go-to idea for my project at the time. I
followed this feedback with some research into a way to use AR to visualize fictitious
forces. As it is, Unity’s (and other game engines’) underlying physics engine does
not calculate specifics parts of physics like the pseudo-forces. To solve this problem I
would have to simulate the experiment myself, which would involve baking hard-coded
simulations where interaction would happen where I, the designer, would dictate it to
be. Therefore the interaction allowed by a possible AR app that simulates fictitious
forces would most likely set the student’s role as an observer for the most part. While I
had faith in my coding skills, simulating experiments like the Bike Wheel Gyroscope5
or similar ones that are commonly used for these purposes would also involve 3D
modelling alongside writing complex code.
I expected that this project direction
would take too long to implement and test and possibly exceed the project’s time
limits, therefore I decided to pursue again another direction. However, one cannot
pass by the fact that this is an actual learning difficulty with the opportunity for
interesting and more effective learning.
To conclude, it appears that even at the university level, there are spots in a
learning process where AR visualization can be useful. I have identified some specific
ones related to fictitious forces, and have observed the ways modern education teaches
this. In combination with that, we are aware that the general design of educational
AR couples the physical movement element in part (by inducing movement through
holding the device and moving around in space) and also the app usually covers the
whole screen and diminishes distractions that could be caused in front of a computer.
Furthermore, in section 2.5 about AR Design Principles, it is stated that an AR
application can also have a cognitive overload in the information it presents and
specific design solutions can help alleviate this. These observations support the idea
that AR has a potential for physics education and gives a basis for designing effective
AR learning technologies.
Furthermore, seeing that physics teachers tend to use
actual physical experiments that involve movement and interaction gave me insight
into their teaching process.
4https://www.dtu.dk/service/telefonbog/person?id=66673&tab=2&qt=dtupublicationquery
5https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8H98BgRzpOM
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Phase 2: Deciding on a teaching subject and developing functional prototypes
41
3.3.4
3rd prototype and feedback from a physics teacher
The next prototype aimed at adding features to the previous basic implementation,
which were based on feedback both from peers and the physics professors. The feed-
back I got from my peers mentioned that students tend to forget that gravity is
constant and always applied. Carsten’s feedback also included a special mentioning
to gravity, as it being a force that we are used to. For this prototype, I used the same
sphere-net force idea, with a few new features:
• The environment was made to look like the user navigates along the surface of
Mars.
• The vectors were replaced with two cylinders that are ”dragged” in the opposite
direction of the force applied, in the same way, that the pinball machine uses a
spring-loaded rod (called the plunger) to launch the ball.
• Vector lines were added on the sphere to show the direction and magnitude of
gravity and the sphere’s velocity.
• A Gaze Cursor was added that displays the sphere’s mass and velocity value
when gazed at (Gaze POI design pattern).
• The ability to pause game time was added as an extra, to allow time for the
user to observe the sphere’s behaviour.
These new features aimed at making this prototype have more game and simulation-
like elements as well as see how the user reacts to this newly added environment. The
main purpose of this added environment is to make the user think ”What would the
ball’s expected trajectory be” or ”How far will the ball fly”, but while realizing that
gravity will have a different value and the sphere will travel longer than if the same
happened on Earth. While the pinball-like feature was not exactly well designed or
bug-free, the rest of the newly added features were utilizing the AR Design patterns
(see section 2.5) early in this process, to see any particular user reaction. The new
prototype’s look can be seen in figure 3.4. Alongside this prototype’s development
I was reaching out to other possible physics teachers from the selected target group,
in hopes of locating someone who might be interested in being a co-designer for my
AR application, and that could possibly arrange testing sessions with some students.
I was fortunate enough to get an answer from a high school teacher that teaches
math and physics at the required level as my target group, and that was interested
in discussing this project a bit. I, therefore, arranged a small meeting with her in
order to show prototypes 2 and 3 and hold a learning-related discussion. The teacher,
Diana Popescu, is teaching at a high school level at Ordrup Gymnasium in the Greater
Copenhagen Area.
This meeting was particularly important for multiple reasons: other than it being
the very first showcasing of my application to a person directly related to my targeted
users, she also has a lot of experience with utilizing applications in the classroom to
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Design and Development Log
Figure 3.4: Prototype 3: Net force on a sphere with new environment
teach physics. We had an extended discussion on the 2 prototypes that I created
so far, as well as taking a look at what physics learning software already exists and
what she utilizes in the classroom. I was also able to understand a student’s everyday
schedule much better, as the standards have substantially changed since I was in high
school. Some valuable insight and important points I got out of the discussion are
the following:
• Technology is much more integrated into the classroom in Denmark; all students
use laptops inside the classroom.
• Small applets like the ones from PhET6 are frequently used to aid physics and
math teaching.
• High school students also have to prepare a thesis project on a subject that can
also be one they are not normally taught in their curriculum (like the fictitious
forces).
• Since there has been a change in the Danish curriculum, at the moment students
use e-books while the normal books are being written.
• Since math and physics are closely related, it’s common for the same teacher
to teach both. Also, when physics are taught, teachers expect that all related
math concepts are already taught and understood.
6https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/category/physics/motion
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Phase 2: Deciding on a teaching subject and developing functional prototypes
43
After using the prototypes, Diana gained an idea of what could be possible with
this kind of technology. Starting with my initial idea about teaching vector math,
the following possible problems and solutions were brainstormed, related to math,
physics and educational AR games:
• Developing AR pool game to teach vectors and collisions: The main idea would
be for the students to see the trajectory of the launched cue ball, the direction
of the bouncing balls etc.
• Creating an AR simulation game for solving students’ miss-conceptions with
electricity and currents: One of Diana’s identified learning difficulties is the
fact that students think electrons in a current move at extremely fast speeds,
while the opposite is actually true. This idea was inspired by a work on teaching
students about electrical currents with an AR application called AR Circuit7
[14]. The additional benefits of having safe experiments and no risk of damaged
equipment of this work were also discussed and highlighted.
• A simulation that thoroughly explains the energy transformation process: One
of Diana’s identified learning difficulties was the energy chain as a whole; while
her students understood that energy undergoes transformation to reach the
last destination (e.g.
electrical energy into a light bulb), they had trouble
with understanding that this electrical energy might have been chemical energy
before (e.g. coal) and through multiple transformations reach its final state.
• An AR immersing simulation game that teaches students about Newton’s laws
of motion and universal gravitation: While the discussion revolved around the
visualization capabilities of AR, Diana noted that she teaches Newton’s laws
of motion8 with little actual visualization examples.
The reason for that is,
different conditions apply to the normal environment that diverts student’s
focus on them. An example of that can be seen in the 1st law of motion: An
object will continue it’s uniform motion in a straight line unless other forces are
applied to it, but gravity and air friction will prevent the ’uniform’ parameter
from being true on earth. Combining this notion with the 3rd prototype, a
possible AR solution for an actual simulation example of the 1st law is applying
a force on the sphere floating in space, where there is neither gravity nor air
friction. This would make the sphere travel endlessly without changing direction
or velocity, therefore showing an actual visualization of Newton’s 1st law. As an
additional focus point, the feeling of being in space can also be used to explain
Newton’s law of universal gravitation, where any two bodies attract each other
based on the distance between them as well as their masses.
Out of the points discussed above, we picked Newton’s laws as the main learning
difficulty to target with this application. The benefits of this choice were clear: de-
velopment process would be straightforward, the required environment is easy to add
7https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OBPF-rG3ICY
8https://www.grc.nasa.gov/www/k-12/airplane/newton.html
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Design and Development Log
in Unity without any 3D modelling and the different experiment parameters (gravity,
mass, amount of applied force) can be manipulated easily inside Unity. Something
else that influenced this choice was also the possibility of doing actual user tests with
the right conditions: two of Diana’s classes were scheduled to reach the related physics
chapter at a date before this project’s deadline, which allowed for testing during the
appropriate time in their curriculum, as well as giving me enough time to develop the
required mechanics and hold early feedback sessions with Diana. We agreed to hold
a testing session the 25th of January and possibly one more next week the 31st, with
students at the proper physics level in high school, which is A level.
3.4
Phase 3: Application development and feedback
sessions
This 3rd phase began by discussing with Diana about how the application can work.
We used as a basis the 1st and 2nd prototype, as well as an online example of teaching
Newton’s 3rd law9. An example of this simulation game can be seen in figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Online game related to Newton’s 3rd law of motion.
This example focuses on problem solving related to Newton’s 2nd and 3rd law,
which requires applying the formulas to guess the expected outcome. The important
points from this discussions follow:
• The simulation includes collisions to teaching the 3rd law, which is part of the
A level of physics curriculum. This is probably too advanced for the level the
students that are taught Newton’s laws are at.
• The 3rd law is concerned with what happens only on the specific object that
is studied, and not on the entire system.
It, therefore, needs more a more
simplistic approach, otherwise, it might mix questions about the rest of the
objects or the collisions between them.
9https://games.legendsoflearning.com/games/WyJnYW1lcyIsNTEyXQ==
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Phase 3: Application development and feedback sessions
45
• Explaining the theory about Newton’s laws is not required, as the students are
expected to have studied it and know it. The point of an application is to have
students practice with it and not to read theory from it.
• There are too many questions included in the simulation. According to Diana,
more than 3-4 questions will make the students bored and inclined to stop
playing.
• Explaining the 3rd law is usually done with physical experiments. The easiest
way to understand it is to use one’s own hand or palm to hit a table, and
feel the reaction to the force you hit it with. Likewise, letting a ball fall on a
table and seeing it bounce back is also a good example, except that during the
explanation we don’t care about the table.
• The application has a lot of terminology in English and that might be confusing
for the students.
At the same time, Diana advised against translating the
application to Danish, the argument is that ’the students should be able to
explain the phenomena in their own words’.
• Students have not been taught about acceleration at this point, but they have
an idea of what it is.
• It’s more important to understand the feeling of what action and reaction are
than making calculations. According to this, qualitative questions are much
more important than quantitative ones. Questions like ’what will happen once
a specific object hits a wall’ inspire discussions and ask for reasoning to each
answer.
• It’s better to simplify systems to explain Newton’s laws; for example, in space,
there is no air friction or gravity, therefore it’s easier to see how all 3 laws affect
an object, as one does not have to think about these additional parameters.
• An interesting feature that the application has is pausing a bit before a collision
happens and asking questions. We can potentially develop something similar
to this.
• An important functional problem appeared as Diana used my prototypes: the
application was running into landscape mode, therefore she had to hold it with
both hands to use it. This made it easy to either block the camera with her
fingers or accidentally press on the Recent apps button which interrupts the
experience and additionally causes the application to stop tracking and lose
positional information.
Additionally to the laws of motion, Diana advised here to also try and show Newton’s
law of Universal gravitation, to include a visual understanding of this phenomenon too.
Her idea here is that a simulation here will give a better possibility for the students
to play around with two objects. To proceed further, we arranged a meeting January
==PAGE:58==
46
3 Design and Development Log
the 8th, where I would show her how the application had progressed according to the
above feedback.
3.4.1
First application version and feedback session
Up until the 8th of January I started on the final application’s code using the ideas
we had so far. You can see the application’s look and feel in figures 3.6, A.2, A.1 and
A.4 in Appendix A.
Figure 3.6: Final Project version 0.1: Force direction and space environment.
This version aligned more with the feedback from the previous session’s feedback.
Added to that, I added some basic functionality for pausing and resuming the game,
similar to what the example that was discussed in the previous section did. The small
catch here was that in AR I only need to pause specific objects in the scene, without
interrupting the device’s tracking.
This feature is discussed more in the Project
Implementation section.
The gameplay started with the required plane detection
part. It’s worth mentioning here that for the final application I used a different AR
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Phase 3: Application development and feedback sessions
47
package as well as a newer Unity version with better AR support. The point of this
was that I no longer needed quick development time but better AR support and fewer
bugs. It can be seen in figure A.2 that the mesh for the surface detection is different
than the one in the initial prototypes, as well it being a polygon of adjustable size
instead of a constant rectangle like before. When the surface is detected, the user has
to point the AR gaze in the middle of the screen to a surface and press start to place
the sphere to that point. More about this Hit Testing can be read in section 4.4.2
The ’playing’ part in this app was essentially applying a force to the sphere and
seeing the result. The user could rotate the sphere, change the force applied to it and
launch it to which direction it was looking at.
The new features plus the way challenges are posed in the form of questions
received positive feedback from Diana. The direction the force is applied was also
extensively discussed, as it originated from the net-force prototype. The idea about
it was that it should not make the student think about net-force calculation as it
might mix Linear Algebra inside. The starting screens were deemed a little confusing
as they were leftover code that didn’t work, and the explanation about how to play
was not enough to make the player understand how to detect surfaces. In its entirety,
though, this version was a step in the right direction.
For the rest of the developing time, we decided that I focus more on the chal-
lenges part. Diana suggested that I implement 4 challenges, with each one providing
visualization for one of the 4 Newton’s laws that were pointed out before. To this,
I added that we retain the AR feeling with a challenge that includes gravity retains
the camera’s rendering of the real world.
1. The first challenge needs to make the student think about the 1st law. The
student needs to use the controls to apply a force to an object in space, and
observe the outcome while keeping in mind that there is no air friction or gravity
in space.
2. The second challenge is more aligned as a counterpart to the first, reminding
the student that the ideal conditions do not exist on Earth. This challenge also
would bring back the camera’s rendering returning the user back to the AR
feeling. This can be seen in figure A.4 and was already implemented prior to
this feedback session.
3. The third challenge would focus on the 2nd law, but it should avoid making
the student calculate using formulas. Instead, Diana suggested that we keep it
visual by placing two objects of notably different masses and have the student
apply the same force on both of them. What this challenge is trying to elicit is
that the student will comprehend that the 2nd law’s formula can be manipulated
to point out that the resulting velocity or acceleration is inversely correlated with
the object’s mass.
4. The 4th challenge would focus on the 3rd law of motion. This challenge would
attempt to give a visualization of action and reaction by asking the student to
==PAGE:60==
48
3 Design and Development Log
launch the sphere towards an object with a bigger mass and question her as to
what will happen on collision to the sphere.
5. The final challenge would be a direct visual representation of the law of Universal
gravitation. In order to give a proper representation, we require objects with
a high enough mass for the law to actually apply with a distinctive result.
Therefore this challenge will ask the student to adjust the position between two
planetary bodies and observe what happens to the vector of the gravitational
attraction on each one. This challenge also asks the student to understand that
the universal gravitation formula can be manipulated to show that the force of
attraction between two objects depends on the distance between them, and that
the attraction one body feels also depends on the other body’s mass.
The application continued using this feedback as a guide for further development.
3.4.2
Second version and feedback before 1st user test.
The features that were discussed in the previous section were all developed before a
final feedback session with Diana on the 24th of January. The following were added
to the app’s functionality until this point:
• Challenges for the 2nd and 3rd law of motion.
• A challenge for Newton’s law of universal gravitation.
• A more elaborate How to Play explanation that also shows a video of what the
user has to do to locate a surface.
• Updated starting screen that allows for playing with either Newton’s laws of
motion or the law of universal gravitation.
• Updated UI that shows what each visible vector represents (direction of force,
acceleration/velocity and force of attraction).
• UI that appears only when the user adjusts the force applied to the sphere.
This operation was added while keeping in mind the Media-related patterns
discussed in section 2.4 Augmented Reality in Education.
The application’s new look can be observed in figures 3.7, A.6, A.7, A.8 and A.9 in
Appendix A.
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Phase 3: Application development and feedback sessions
49
Figure 3.7: Final Project version 0.2: Updated starting screen and how-to-play in-
structions.
==PAGE:62==
50
3 Design and Development Log
Diana was happy with the changes as all of the discussed points were covered by
the new challenges that were added in the application. While she was substantially
focused on the app’s content, I was paying extra attention to the ease of use as well as
the implementation of AR design principles. A few bugs and implementation issues
were discussed during this feedback round:
• In the universal gravitation challenge, each planetary body had an anchored
header above it which displayed the current value of the force attraction each
planet had (figure A.9). Diana asked that this is removed as it can pose ques-
tions about how it was calculated, which will deter the students from the main
focus.
• The 2nd challenge that happens on Earth does not use the detected surfaces as
ground, but an invisible plane I placed beneath it. If the sphere was launched
too far then gravity would cause it to fall endlessly. We concluded that it was
not beneficial to the simulation to use the detected surfaces as the ground for the
sphere and so I fixed this problem by increasing the size of the invisible plane.
The only drawback to this solution was that the sphere would sometimes float
in places where there was no real ground.
• Noticing that Diana had sometimes had trouble locating where the main object
of interest was in the scene, I added a small UI helping arrow that points to
the object’s position when it is not on screen. This quick feature was a nice
addition and it complied with the Directed Gaze AR design pattern and the
media-related pattern about filtering excessive UI information.
• It is imperative that an AR learning app attempts to physically move the stu-
dent to enhance learning, as they can feel more grounded into reality when
they move through the environment [30]. It is also important that they do so
in order for the camera to ’see’ more of the environment and locate surfaces
faster. I added a small timer to the surface detection phase, and when it runs
out, a message prompting the user to stand up and look around appears. This
message appears provided that no surfaces were found until then.
• In order to solve the 1st challenge the student would only need to launch the
sphere into space and observe the outcome. A small implementation issue in the
code required the user to fire it twice before the Next Challenge button would
appear. I added a small proximity on the sphere to trigger the Next Challenge
button when it gets far enough to fix this issue.
• It can be seen in figure A.8 that once the sphere collides with the asteroid, the
simulation is paused and a pop-up message appears, posing a question. Diana
noted that while the message repeats what was earlier already asked by the app,
it’s also a bad idea to pause the ’fun’ factor while it happens. Her reasoning
was sound so I removed the message on collision functionality.
==PAGE:63==
3.4 Phase 3: Application development and feedback sessions
51
3.4.3
Third application version before 1st user tests and feedback
The application the day before had the small fixes mentioned in the previous section,
the most important of which can be seen in figure 3.8. Most of the points that were
discussed with Diana in the previous section were about removing information, which
was fast to do.
The 1st user test took place the 25th of January 2019 at Ordrup Gymnasium. A
thorough analysis of the test can be found in the Project Implementation and User
tests section. What will be discussed here is specific feedback that triggered a new
iteration of the application and therefore a new version.
Some of the students had a specific question that arose from playing through the
challenges: What will be the relationship of the acceleration vector and the force vector
if more than one force is applied to the sphere?
We saw this as a nice opportunity to add a new challenge in time for the next user
test session. This was also the main idea of the initial prototypes but was simplified
for the more recent iterations. We held a discussion after the tests with Diana, where
we planned what the additional challenge should be as well as what small things can
be made better for next time:
• When there is no gravity or air resistance, the force vector and the acceleration
vector will have the same direction but possibly different magnitude. When
there are two forces applied, then the students need to understand that the
direction of the net force is directly related to the magnitude of each force as
well as the angle between them. In a 2D example, the students would be asked
to use the parallelogram law for vector addition. As Diana pointed out, at this
level, the students haven’t been taught that so the net force example would be
outside of their knowledge. However, we could simplify the challenge by having
two perpendicular forces of the same magnitude applied on a sphere; it is then
easy to deduce that the net force would have a direction of 45°. This challenge
would then try to answer the above question by informing the students that
they need to find the net force’ direction first.
• Some feedback from students focused on the usability of the device. There were
a few who reported that they had trouble getting the application to start by
finding a plane, had to restart or couldn’t find the sphere. I also noticed that
a few were using the To Main Menu button after only the 1st challenge. An
easy and quick fix to this behaviour is to not make that button visible unless
the user specifically wants to exit the app.
• Some students reported that they still had trouble playing the game, due to
holding the phone the wrong way or not enough explanation about the game. I
took this feedback as a prompt to add some better explanations in the game’s
starting screen.
• A very specific and rare bug would happen because of invisible planes being
placed under the spheres in each challenge. This happened because their specific
==PAGE:64==
52
3 Design and Development Log
Figure 3.8: Final Project version 0.3: Quick fixes and helping messages.
==PAGE:65==
3.4 Phase 3: Application development and feedback sessions
53
placement would randomly cause a collision between the plane and the sphere
making the sphere fly on its own. These planes were only needed if there was
gravity present in the scene, and that was only required in one challenge. I
cleaned these planes from the scene before the next iteration.
• I also noticed that after the 1st challenge some students would press on the
Continue button before they finished reading the question.
I could easily
circumvent this by adding a small helper function to display these messages
even after they have been skipped.
An external tester that I showed the application to later the same day pointed out
that the instructions video was not bright enough and slightly unprofessional, as it
was taken in my room.
3.4.4
Final application version before 2nd and 3rd user tests
The application had already progressed enough before it was shown to students for
the 1st time. Therefore, there were not too many bugs or serious problems to address.
However, as I mentioned before, students had problems playing with the application,
because of lack of guidance, something that was fixed for the next iteration. This
version included the following new features and changes:
• A new challenge was added, one that addresses the students’ question related to
the net force direction and resulting acceleration direction. The new challenge
can be seen in figure 3.9.
• The To Main Menu button was integrated into a new Pause Menu that is
accessible from a question mark button. Pausing the game this way also pauses
physics in the game and displays the last question or prompt the user was asked.
This feature can be seen in figure A.12.
• A brighter video showing surface detection was added. Alongside this, a new
screen showing how to play the simulation was added. Both these features can
be seen in figure A.11.
3.4.5
Final user tests and feedback discussion with the physics
teacher
The 2nd and 3rd testing sessions took place on the 31st of January 2019 at Ordrup
gymnasium. The class that tested the application was different than the previous
one this time. The user tests are discussed extensively in chapter 5 User tests. In
short, the application’s feedback was positive, but the testing session could have been
executed in a better way. Following the tests, I held a discussion with Diana where we
talked more in-depth about the application and its potential, as well as the outcomes
==PAGE:66==
54
3 Design and Development Log
Figure 3.9: Final Project version 0.4: Net force challenge in space.
==PAGE:67==
3.5 Conclusion
55
of the user tests. This discussion was very informative for me, and it concluded the
activities done for this thesis.
3.5
Conclusion
In this chapter, I gave a thorough analysis of the purpose of this thesis, the design
process and methodology and my actions for bringing this project to the end.
I
started by considering what I can do, what I want to teach and to who. This problem
definition helped me to settle on which technology and tools I have to use and began
on seeking out my users, in order to include them in the design process. In sections
3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 I thoroughly described all my design actions for the biggest part of
the project. The way this project was co-designed and included the users can also be
seen in this section.
The user-centred design process is not an easy one. Without the user’s feedback,
the designer has to guess what they need which will result in poor learning software.
Since this is educational software, usability tests are usually not enough; the students’
learning has to be assessed in some way too.
This creates a case where multiple
assessments need to be made, both by collecting quantitative and qualitative data
from the users and combining them in a meaningful way.
The perfect experiment is not always achievable, as time constraints usually re-
quire fast actions and rapid prototyping. It falls to the engineer’s shoulders to deduce
when the situation demands something ’quick and dirty’ and when a more thorough
user analysis must be made. Fortunately, there are multiple prototyping ways that
can save time from the development process. Ultimately, knowing how to design and
develop a product is a skill that is polished with experience.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4
Project
Implementation
4.1
Introduction
This section will present the development that I did during the course of this project.
The reader will be able to see the tools that I used for the application’s development,
the applications code and learn about specific issues and barriers that I encountered
during development. This section assumes that the reader has some basic program-
ming skills and also a little experience with the chosen tools. In sections 4.2 and 4.3
we talk about the chosen platform for this app. Readers here will receive a small intro
into the platform and get information on how to develop apps with it. Furthermore,
they get an overview of how to set up a scene, which tools to include and how to
build their scene into a device. Section 4.4 describes how to set up an AR project.
Section 4.6 describes the code and the scene set up for this project’s final applica-
tion. Unity’s vocabulary contains the terms Gameobject (GO) and scene, functions,
scripts and events, editor components and editor variables. This chapter’s tone
is informal.
4.2
Chosen development tool: Unity3D
For the development of this project, Unity3D (or simply Unity) was chosen as the
main tool. Unity is a platform originally made for game development but has been
used for making all sorts of interactive content, simulations and especially application
prototyping. This section describes how development with Unity is typically done,
the advantages of using it for this project as well as in-depth analysis on how to
implement an AR application with various functionality with this tool.
Unity Technologies regularly releases new versions with bug fixes and new features.
For this project’s prototypes, I used version 2018.1.6f1, while for the final application
I switched to version 2018.3.0f2 due to better AR support and compatibility with
the ARFoundation package.
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Project Implementation
Figure 4.1: Unity3D environment: Scene view, game view, hierarchy and inspector.
4.3
Introduction to development with Unity3D
The development process is done in an easy and intuitive way with Unity. The cur-
rent virtual environment is created in what is called a scene inside the platform. An
application might have one or many scenes; an example of scenes are the different
levels a game might have, where each one might need to be set up with a different
environment. Inside each scene, all entities are represented by GOs. This includes
elements of the environment, like trees, rocks or avatars, but also things like the cam-
era, light sources, particle effects or the UI. The camera is one of the most important
components in a scene, as it provides the player with the game view. Each different
GO can have a combination of components attached to it, which modify its purpose
and behaviour. Some examples of GOs follow:
• A ball that can be moved or kicked in the scene would have a Collider component
that is in the form of a sphere, as well as a Rigidbody component that would
ensure gravity and other forces can be applied to the sphere. A ball with these
two components will collide with other objects in the scene, and would also
constantly fall down, simulating the behaviour of e.g. a football in the real
world. At the same time, the form of football is achieved by inserting a Mesh
Renderer component to it, which is modelled in an external program and is
made to look like a football.
• A second example of a GO in a scene is the camera.
The camera usually
has no physical appearance and doesn’t collide with anything, but has other
parameters, like how narrow or wide the field of view should be or how far can
it see. All these can be tweaked through the Camera component.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Introduction to development with Unity3D
59
GOs are a very convenient representation of the entities in a scene. With the
use of the available components a developer can easily introduce elements of a real
environment to them. However, applications and games usually include some form
of input by the user/player; pressing the forward or up arrow on the keypad would
traditionally make the player avatar move forward, and pressing the Space key would
make him jump. These can be introduced into the game by attaching behavioural
scripts onto GOs. In Unity, these are called Monobehaviour scripts.
These scripts allow developers to attach behaviours to GOs that must act on
some input. The most basic behavior a Monobehaviour script exposes is the Start
and Update functions.
• The Start function is commonly used for initialization purposes and is called
once when the scene starts. If, for example, our script needs a reference to
another object’s component, then the Start function is a common place to set
up the reference.
• The Update function represents the behaviour of a GO and is called once each
frame. This means that Update is called as much as 60 times every second. If
an object needs to listen for an event, like the player pressing a button, the
Update function is where the code for that behaviour should be.
To explain this better, in the player example described above, the player GO needs
to jump when Space is pressed and move forward when the up arrow is pressed on
the keyboard. To translate this behaviour to code, we need to apply a small amount
of force to the front direction each frame the up arrow is pressed, as well as apply
a large enough force to the up direction when space is pressed. A players behaviour
script, in this case, would run every frame, be attached to the Player GO and look
like this:
1 /**
2 * Add force example
3 **/
4 public class Example : Monobehavior
5 {
6
private Rigidody _rigidbody;
7
void Start()
8
{
9
_rigidbody = this.GetComponent <Rigidbody >();
10
}
11
12
void Update()
13
{
14
if (Input.GetKeyDown(KeyCode.UpArrow))
15
{
16
_rigidbody.AddForce(new Vector3(0,0,1f));
17
}
18
19
if (Input.GetKeyDown(KeyCode.Space))
20
{
21
_rigidbody.AddForce(new Vector3(0,10f,0));
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Project Implementation
22
}
23
}
24 }
Listing 4.1: Monobehaviour example
Of course, the result of the object’s movement is directly dependent on the object’s
mass, which is a parameter that the user can set up in the editor. On a side note,
while this example would work and is the beginner’s way of introducing functionality,
it can make for inaccurate movement and collisions1. An easy fix to this is to move the
entire functionality to another function, called FixedUpdate which runs every physics
update frame (which can be multiple times during a normal frame).
Once some functionality has been implemented through code to the scene, Unity
allows for immediately checking the result and how the scene would look by simply
pressing the Play button and testing. Being able to almost immediately test the result
of the code written is another great advantage. The result can also very quickly be
tested on a device by building the complete game into a file and moved to the targeted
platform e.g. installed on an Android device, run as a Windows application etc.
4.3.1
Reasons for choosing Unity3D
Unity offers many different components that expose the common functionalities found
in games. Furthermore, it has become one of the best platforms for game development
in the world, which in turn means there is a lot of information and help to be found
online about it. Other than this, there are other reasons why I chose this engine for
development, which is presented below.
Ease of use: Demonstrated by the small example above, Unity is very easy and
does not require advanced programming skills to produce something working. The
majority of the functionality a game or an application requires can be introduced with
simple drag-and-drop and slight parameter tweaking. When more complex behaviour
is required, the Monobehaviour class pattern proves versatile. A common need in cod-
ing games is executing commands when certain events happen, and Monobehaviour
permits developers to run simple commands when these events trigger. Examples of
events are:
• When objects collide with each other, which also involves the first frame they
do, the last, all the frames during which they touch etc.
• When the game starts (Start function).
• If the entity is no longer visible by the game camera.
• When the scene ends, when the entity is enabled, disabled or destroyed.
• Every frame the underlying physics engine does calculations.
1https://answers.unity.com/questions/567934/rigidbody-addforce-in-update.html
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Introduction to development with Unity3D
61
• If the user clicks an entity with the mouse, be it an object or a part of the UI.
An example of a useful event in AR development, and specifically in plane detection,
is the event called planeAdded. In this project’s code, I was able to provide guided
messages to the user based on whether this event was fired or not. Knowing when
and if the user is actually looking around, and has or has not detected a plane gives
me the opportunity to help guide her with targeted functionality.
Knowing when these events happen in the games life cycle and being able to write
functionality for them proves very convenient for rapidly introducing mechanics into
the game. To the extent of my knowledge, most engines expose similar functionality.
In Unity, though, developers program in Javascript and C# . While both are very
good and commonly used, C# is a powerful high-level language with a lot of online
documentation and many helpful features. Its also a personal favourite of mine, and
I have worked extensively with it for many years. Finally, while Unity and C# are
tools I have experience with, there is much more depth to them; I, therefore, chose
both in order to become more proficient with them.
Platform capabilities and community: One important capability Unity has is being
able to build for different platforms. The list of platforms is quite extensive, with
all the common platforms available, e.g. Android, iOS, Mac and Windows, but also
for hardware like Playstation Vita and Playstation 4, Microsoft Hololens, HTC Vive
for VR etc. If the target platform is the same as the development OS, then Unity
usually builds an executable that can be run directly. When it comes to building
for another device, it usually depends on the device type, but for some Unity allows
quick deployment, e.g. for Android, Unity can specify the location of the Android
SDK and detect a plugged-in device to directly install the application.
Naturally, an application that runs on different platforms needs adjustments, espe-
cially when it comes how the user interacts with the game. Unity also has support for
cross-platform input; this minimizes the required adjustments for specific platforms
that are needed with only a few components.
Unity also implements the Unity asset store2 inside the platform. The asset store
is an online shop for anything that can be used directly in a game; this involves 3D
models, plugins for extra functionality, additional components written by developers,
graphical UI that introduce visual programming, and pretty much anything that can
make developing easier. Many of these assets are given away for free. This, along
with the Standard Assets packages already provided with the tool enables developers
that can’t necessarily model or code to produce working applications. Since the asset
store is implemented inside the platform, and the assets are made for Unity, adding
them to a project and using them is streamlined and happens with a few clicks.
AR Support: Since Unity can build for the common AR platforms (Android, iOS,
Hololens), developers are focusing on creating plugins in Unity for the common li-
braries for each device (ARCore for Android, ARKit for iOS, Holotoolkit for Hololens,
Vuforia for all three). Thus a tendency exists for AR development with Unity, and
2https://assetstore.unity.com/
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Project Implementation
it is natural that developers and designers look ahead. In the case that their applica-
tion needs to be ported to other hardware, the platform with the most multi-platform
support and a plethora of plugins would be the most appropriate to work with.
I mentioned before how components in Unity work.
Enabling AR in Unity is
equally easy and the pipeline is broken down to a few basic steps, which most of the
time are simply adding components to objects in Unity’s environment. For simply
using the camera to detect already known images the Vuforia library can be utilized.
Vuforia comes bundled with Unity since Unity version 2017.23 and is implemented
just by adding one component in the scenes current main camera. The image needs to
be pre-analyzed, but that is an automated process that can be done inside the Vuforia
Developer portal. Vuforia has compatibility with Android, iOS and Hololens4.
ARKit and ARCore have libraries that can be drag-and-dropped inside Unity to
enable 6 DOF camera movement. One component is needed on the camera for ren-
dering the cameras feed as the background and doing the necessary image processing.
Additional components can be used for visualizing the detected planes and the fea-
ture points that are detected. It is worth noting that an experimental system for
simulating AR movement inside Unity has also been developed, which also ensures
the whether ARKit or ARCore will be used (depending on the target device), called
ARInterface5. This system, called ARInterface has been used to create some of the
early prototypes for this project with fast results.
Finally, the AR support that Unity gets to know is highlighted by the Package
Manager feature and the XR packages that are available through it. The XR packages
are Unity Technologies in-house project, created as a parent project to ARInterface
and with the purpose of reliably building AR functionality for iOS and Android with-
out the developers updating the components themselves. The AR package, called
ARFoundation, internally uses ARKit and ARCore when needed and streamlines
the building process, the same way ARInterface does it. However, it is more opti-
mized, and the developers behind it have switched their focus from ARInterface to
ARFoundation, which is the main reason why I switched to this package for the final
application development. This is another example as to why Unity slowly becomes
the leading platform for AR development6.
Other reasons: Through the start and course of this project multiple choices have
been made, and some ideas have also been dropped. Unity has appeared as the top
choice in all stages of the project. At early stages the idea of using an AR-enabled
physical scene used for performances was considered, which also utilized Unity for all
development; using a Hololens device has also been considered as a way to circumvent
some limitations of the AR-enabled stage, where again the Holotoolkit plugin for
Unity could have been used. Creating an AR game was also included in the project’s
3https://library.vuforia.com/articles/Training/getting-started-with-vuforia-in-
unity.html
4https://library.vuforia.com/articles/Solution/Vuforia-Supported-Versions
5https://github.com/Unity-Technologies/experimental-ARInterface
6https://unity.com/solutions/mobile-ar
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Introduction to development with Unity3D
63
design (at that point in the project) and is of course one of the most popular uses of
the engine.
4.3.2
Building and testing for Android and iOS
Unity conveniently allows for building for both of these popular platforms. Usually,
the developer only needs to develop content and interaction inside the editor, and
then build for each respective platform. A few things that need to be taken into
account when building for mobile Android and iOS devices are:
• Platform-specific packages will probably produce errors when the target plat-
form is switched from Android to iOS and vice-versa. If the developer requires
a package that does not allow for multi-platform building, then a whole new
Unity project needs to be created.
• Interaction on devices is done by detecting Touch input. The developer can
write code for dummy testing inside the editor by replacing touches with mouse
clicks, but that creates additional redundant coding. A brilliant way to omit
all that is to use Unity Remote7 a mobile application which casts the editor’s
game view to a plugged-in device, and transfers all common mobile functionality
back to the editor. This includes touches, accelerometer and gyroscope input
data and others. This application is available for both iOS and Android and
substantially cuts down on development time.
• The developer needs to take the mobile’s resolution and screen dimensions when
designing the UI and game. The screen mode (portrait or landscape) needs to
be decided on too.
4.3.3
Building for Android
Using Unity to build for Android is streamlined and surprisingly easy to do. The de-
veloper needs to follow a few specific initialization steps and then the process becomes
’plug-n-play’:
1. The Android SDK8 needs to be installed.
2. Inside the Unity editor, the SDK’s install location must be filed in the External
tools options in Preferences. The computer also requires Java9 installed.
3. The device requires Developer Options to be enabled. In most devices, this
is done by locating the device’s build number and tapping on it a few times.
4. USB debugging mode has to be enabled in the Developer options.
7https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/UnityRemote5.html
8https://developer.android.com/studio/
9https://www.java.com/en/download/
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Project Implementation
5. The device must be plugged in the computer and detected by the SDK. This
can be checked by running the command adb.exe devices in the command line,
as it is shown in figure 4.2. If the device appears with a unique identifier at the
list, then it’s ready to be built on. Sometimes the USB mode has to be changed
to Charging via USB for the device to be visible.
6. Unity needs to have its target platform set to Android.
7. Inside Unity, selecting Build Settings shows the last important settings. If the
plugged device is visible in the Run Device option then the setup has finished.
Note that the Build System option has to change to Gradle specifically for
using the package ARFoundation in the project.
8. Selecting Build And Run will build the application and immediately deploy
it to the device.
Figure 4.2: Ensuring that the device is located by the Android SDK.
After the steps 1-7 have been made, building to your device is simply plugging it in
and selecting Build And Run. The simplicity of this procedure is why I chose to
use Android devices for this project. A very thorough explanation for building for
Android with Unity is available online10.
4.3.4
Building for iOS
While preparing for the tests I took note of what devices the students are used to
use. While there isn’t a huge difference between Android and iPhone, it was a fact
that most of the students used Mac and iPhones, therefore were much more used to
10https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/android-BuildProcess.html
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Developing Augmented Reality applications with Unity3D
65
iOS. Due to this, I also considered building for iPhone. The building process for iOS
is described below:
1. The process requires a Mac computer, the application Xcode11 and an iPhone
device.
2. XCode, Apple’s developer tool, has to be set up in advance.
This requires
the developer to have a developer account, a signing certificate and multiple
provisioning profiles which are issued to the developer’s account. Provisioning
profiles have an expiration date. For a more thorough explanation of Apple’s
code signing process, see 12.
3. Once Unity has iOS as target platform and Build And Run is selected, Unity
prepares an XCode project from the Unity core project.
4. Opening this project with XCode will show all the code signing options, as well
as versioning number and application name that were copied over from Unity’s
settings.
5. Clicking on the Run button will package the application and install it to the
device that’s plugged in. The device also needs to trust the selected developer
account that is used to sign the application.
This process has many additional steps that can add to the developer’s time and are
simply not really required when developing test applications. That doesn’t mean that
the building process for iPhones is flawed; these security layers ensure safety and that
the application cannot be tampered with.
4.4
Developing Augmented Reality applications with
Unity3D
In another chapter, the multitude of AR development tools was presented. Some
are standalone tools and platforms (e.g. Wikitude) and others are implemented and
provided as libraries that can be imported in a project. What all tools need though,
are a way to capture the real world and receive data they can process each frame.
Calculating the viewer’s position and orientation is also done for handhelds and AR
glasses, and AR glasses might also allow for special operations, like understanding
when a hand gesture has been made by the user or a voice command has been heard.
An AR application commonly does most of these operations in real-time, and the
development process is considerably facilitated by simplifying or automating their
use.
11https://developer.apple.com/xcode/
12https://help.apple.com/xcode/mac/current/#/dev60b6fbbc7
==PAGE:78==
66
4 Project Implementation
When building a Unity project to your handheld, all Unity does is it creates an
application that can be run. When the user runs this, naturally what he would see
as the first thing is the environment that has been created in the scene, with the
position and orientation of Unity’s main camera, the same way it was placed in the
scene before being built. This is where the AR components mentioned before come
into play; they tweak the game’s camera in two special ways:
1. The game’s camera always renders the feed from the devices actual camera
as its background. This modification gives the AR feeling to the user. The
cameras feed is then put through detection algorithms which are responsible
for image or plane detection, light estimation etc. Each one of these will, in
turn, update the scene in different ways. For example, detecting a plane might
create an environment at the plane’s position, on which objects can be placed
and interacted with. Furthermore, detecting static environment that has been
identified before (in a previous game session) by the camera can trigger a reload
of all the previously detected surfaces, an operation called World Mapping13 by
ARKit developers. These are a few examples of what analyzing the cameras
feed can do for Unity’s current scene. Unity applications commonly run between
25-60 frames per second. For AR applications, this means that processing and
analyzing each camera frame has to be done on top of calculations that need to
be done for UI or any user interaction. These must be done quite fast so that
real-time operation is enabled. On average, all these calculations have to be
done in approximately 33-66 milliseconds, to ensure that the application runs
smoothly at least 30 frames per second. This is one of the reasons that AR
requires modern devices.
2. The inertial sensor input from the device is read each frame, and that is used
to change the camera’s position inside Unity’s scene. Changing the camera’s
position can be done in 3 or 6 DOF. With 3 DOF, the device’s gyroscope is used
to modify the cameras look-at direction, giving the feeling of looking at a 3D
world from a static position. 6 DOFs allow for actual movement of the device to
be transferred to the scene, with the camera acting more like a first-person game
view. AR applications with 3 or 6 DOFs need also a reference frame or position,
usually called the origin. In 6 DOFs, the first frame when the application starts
is by default used as a reference, but the possibility of resetting it is given.
With 3 DOF, the same can be done, although the position of the camera will
not change. However, depending on the application design, it is possible to set
the reference frame e.g. as the first detected image, the camera’s position when
an image is detected and/or a dynamic point that changes if some targets are
lost or found.
13https://developer.apple.com/documentation/arkit/arworldmap
==PAGE:79==
4.4 Developing Augmented Reality applications with Unity3D
67
4.4.1
AR development with ARInterface
ARInterface is an experimental package for AR developed by Unity Technologies
and showcased at one of Unity’s Unite14 events at Austin in 201715. This package
was created in order to ease the creation of applications for both iOS and Android.
The reason why I used this for the prototypes is development time: the 1st and 2nd
prototype took in total less than 6 hours to code and build into the device.
The scene setup for AR with ARInterface can be seen in figure 4.3. AR is imple-
Figure 4.3: NewtonARScene hierarchy view.
mented by ARInterface with the following 3 scripts attached to AR Root GO: AR
Point Cloud Visualizer, AR Plane Visualizer and AR Controller.
AR Point Cloud Visualizer is a script that, when enabled, shows in the scene where
feature points are detected. The developer can specify to use their own Particle
System to represent each point, limit the number of points or their size. AR Plane
Visualizer shows the surfaces detected in the scene, and the developer can also specify
to use a custom model for the surfaces. Finally, AR Controller implements every other
needed code for AR. In figure 4.3 it can be seen that the developer can enable Plane
Detection, Light Estimation, showing the Point Cloud of feature points or rendering
the camera’s feed as a background. Finally, the scale16 of the entire AR world can
be manipulated through this component.
ARInterface includes functionality into an ARInterface class which is used by the
ARController script. An excerpt of this class can be seen below.
1
...
2
public static ARInterface GetInterface()
3
{
4
if (m_Interface == null)
5
{
6 #if UNITY_EDITOR
7
m_Interface = new AREditorInterface();
14https://unite.unity.com/
15https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oNekBgognFE
16https://blogs.unity3d.com/2017/11/16/dealing-with-scale-in-ar/
==PAGE:80==
68
4 Project Implementation
8 #elif UNITY_IOS
9
m_Interface = new ARKitInterface();
10 #elif UNITY_ANDROID
11
m_Interface = new ARCoreInterface();
12 #endif
13
}
14
15
return m_Interface;
16
}
17
...
Listing 4.2: ARInterface class platform-specific function.
What’s interesting here is the use of Unity’s Platform Dependent Compilation17 for
retrieving a reference to a different interface class, according to what platform Unity
is targeting. ARKitInterface and ARCoreInterface are classes that use the respective
components for each target type, and because of that using ARInterface requires that
the developer imports the ARKit and ARCore unity packages into their project.
The benefit of using ARInterface for quick development can be seen in figure 4.4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: ARInterface’s capabilities in Unity Editor. (a) Debug planes when run-
ning the game in Unity Editor and (b) Camera navigation and gameplay in Unity
Editor.
As soon as the developer hits play in Unity, ARInterface spawns 2 debug planes
nearby. The camera can also simulate AR navigation with the WASD keys.
4.4.2
AR development with ARFoundation
ARFoundation18 is ARInterface’s descendant project and practically implements the
same capabilities of ARInterface, except for testing in the editor. It requires Unity
version 2018.1 and later to work. ARfoundation implements AR in a scene with the
use of 3 GOs: AR Session, AR Session Origin and AR Camera as a child to it.
17https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/PlatformDependentCompilation.html
18https://blogs.unity3d.com/2018/12/18/unitys-handheld-ar-ecosystem-ar-foundation-
arcore-and-arkit/
==PAGE:81==
4.4 Developing Augmented Reality applications with Unity3D
69
Figure 4.5: AR Session GO and component.
AR Session (figure 4.5) is responsible for the lifecycle and configuration options for
an AR session. Disabling the GO or the component will in turn disable the session19.
The developer can set the application’s frame rate through the attached SetTarget-
Framerate script, and can also, when the application is run on a device, prompt
the user to download the required AR package (ARCore or ARKit) by checking the
Attempt Update checkbox.
AR Session Origin is the GO responsible for linking Unity’s scene and the actual
world space. Wherever this GO is placed in the scene, is the start position of the
device when the session begins.
To understand this better, let’s say AR Session Origin is placed inside the Unity
scene at position (1,1,1). When the user starts the game, he moves 1 meter ahead in
the Z direction (forward) in the real world space. In the device’s space, the device
is now placed in position (0,0,1). In Unity’s space, the camera is now at position
(1,1,2). Also, any surfaces or trackables that have been found will be reported in
device space (relative to position (0,0,0) and AR Session Origin will convert them to
Unity’s space. In this simplified example every trackable object or surface will be
in position (x,y,z) plus AR Session Origin’s initial position (1,1,1).AR Session Origin
is also the parent transform to any trackable objects found by the camera.
The
developer can access those trackables directly by getting the child transforms of the
GO Trackables, which is created as a sibling object to AR Camera when the scene
starts. A thorough explanation of this GO’s purpose can be seen in 20.
In figure 4.6 this GOs component scripts can be seen. AR Point Cloud Manager is
19https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.unity.xr.arfoundation@1.0/api/UnityEngine.XR.
ARFoundation.ARSession.html
20https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.unity.xr.arfoundation@1.0/api/UnityEngine.XR.
ARFoundation.ARSessionOrigin.html
==PAGE:82==
70
4 Project Implementation
Figure 4.6: AR Session Origin GO and its components.
used to display the feature points detected as particles, AR Session Origin implements
the functionality mentioned above and AR Plane Manager is responsible for plane
detection in the scene. AR Plane Manager’s Detection Flags is what dictates what
kind of surfaces should be located; horizontal, vertical or everything.
The example script Place On Plane is also attached to AR Session Origin. This
script implements Hit Testing (or Raycasting) which is essentially is determining if
a ray that extends from the camera towards a specific direction intersects with any
trackable objects, e.g. a detected surface. The actual result of using this script during
gameplay is allowing the user to tap on the screen and place an example object on
any detected surface hit. An excerpt of Place On Plane’s code can be seen below:
1
...
2
var touch = Input.GetTouch(0);
3
4
if (m_SessionOrigin.Raycast(touch.position, s_Hits, TrackableType.
PlaneWithinPolygon))
5
{
6
// Raycast hits are sorted by distance, so the first one
7
// will be the closest hit.
8
var hitPose = s_Hits[0].pose;
9
10
if (spawnedObject == null)
11
{
12
spawnedObject = Instantiate(m_PlacedPrefab , hitPose.position,
hitPose.rotation);
13
}
14
else
==PAGE:83==
4.5 Additional tools
71
15
{
16
spawnedObject.transform.position = hitPose.position;
17
}
18
}
Listing 4.3: Hit testing.
What’s interesting in this screen is that Raycasting is done through AR Session Origin’s
script. This is because this GO is responsible for translating between device space
and Unity’s space.
Finally, AR Camera is a GO parented to AR Session Origin. This camera is the
game’s main camera and tracks the change in pose of the actual physical camera
using its inertial sensors.
Figure 4.7: AR Camera and its components.
AR Camera (figure 4.7) has the AR Camera Background script component, which
renders the camera’s feed in the game. It also has the Tracked Pose Driver compo-
nent which is a general script for detecting poses from any device’s inertial sensors.
4.5
Additional tools
Unity is the environment that allows for game and application creation. In order to
write code for an application a code editor is required. Unity, before version 2018.121
came packed with Monodevelop22 which is a good choice for C# development. For
21https://blogs.unity3d.com/2018/01/05/discontinuing-support-for-monodevelop-unity-
starting-in-unity-2018-1/
22https://www.monodevelop.com/
==PAGE:84==
72
4 Project Implementation
the first 2 phases of this project and for the initial prototypes I used Monodevelop to
code as no additional installations were required. However, since Monodevelop was
discontinued, using Monodevelop’s debugger to step into the code at runtime was not
possible, and this added some extra time to the development process.
In the project’s final phase I upgraded Unity’s version to 2018.323 for the additional
Package Manager available and due to compatibility with the newest AR package.
I also switched IDE to Jetbrain’s Rider24 which has excellent support for Unity and
a working debugger. Rider can be licensed for free to DTU students and provided me
with much faster development due to good intelligent code completion25 and a nice
working environment.
One of the best practices for programming is source or version control26. Version
control allows the developer to split the development process into different steps, and
if needed roll the code back to a previous version. There are many online platforms
for version control, but the most popular and commonly used is GitHub27. Many de-
velopers prefer using GitHub with the command line, but there are different software
options to ease the process, such as Sourcetree28, GitKraken29 (which is available for
free to students), SmartGit30 and others. For the first prototypes I used GitHub with
GitKraken and for the final project, I switched to Sourcetree. All the code written
for this thesis is online and available on GitHub31.
The importance of version control became apparent many times during develop-
ment. Reverting the source to a previous commit was particularly important when I
required to see the changes done for each iteration. It was also particularly helpful
to see which features were added at which date, which reminded me of the tester’s
feedback. At a certain point in the 3rd prototype’s development the current source
code was broken and I had to revert to a previous working commit before showcasing
it. In general, it is a practice that can make the developer’s work and life easier.
4.6
Final project development and code analysis
In this section, I will describe the code for the final showcased application during user
tests. Unity breaks an application’s flow into scenes. This application has a total of
3 scenes:
• The IntroScene, which has:
23https://unity3d.com/unity/whats-new/unity-2018.3.0
24https://www.jetbrains.com/rider/
25https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligent_code_completion
26https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control
27 https://github.com/
28https://www.sourcetreeapp.com/
29https://www.gitkraken.com/
30https://www.syntevo.com/smartgit/
31https://github.com/marioslokas
==PAGE:85==
4.6 Final project development and code analysis
73
– All the navigation functionality for moving around the menu and into other
scenes in the simulation.
– How to play explanation and example video
• The NewtonARScene, which implements AR and the entire game’s functional-
ity.
• The GravityARScene, which is a copy of the NewtonARScene with the same
overall functionality but only one challenge added.
4.6.1
Intro Scene
The intro scene’s hierarchy, scene view and game view can be seen in figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: IntroScene hierarchy and scene-game views.
There is no important code written or any complex functionality in this scene.
All the navigation is implemented in the Unity Inspector, which essentially entails
activating and deactivating different objects inside the IntroCanvas GO when buttons
are pressed. There are three points to note for this scene:
• All buttons seen in the Game View enable the same GOs that explain how to
play the game. This is done to make sure the player reads the instructions.
Since most players will go through the menu once or twice, there is little risk
to irritate the player.
• The buttons that move the player to the challenges (PlayWithMotionLaws
and PlayWithGravitationalAttraction) also inform the script GameSetup
about the name of the scene to be loaded. The button HowToPlay does not
do the same, and therefore the StartButton GO does not get enabled.
==PAGE:86==
74
4 Project Implementation
• The instructions video is loaded by Unity’s Video Player component, which
in turn renders the video on a Render Texture. All I needed to do to show
the video was to attach this texture on a UI Raw Image component.
The video was somewhat large though (95 MB) when taken and took some time to
load on the Android device. I had to reduce its size and quality to 5 MB and it still
took 2-4 seconds to load.
4.6.2
Newton AR scene
This scene is loaded when the player chooses to play with Newton’s laws of motion
in the IntroScene. The hierarchy in this scene can be seen in figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: NewtonARScene hierarchy view.
The game flow of this scene is the core of the application. In figure 4.9 the GOs
the game comprises of can be seen:
• The UpdateManager GO uses the UpdateManager script. This manager object
is responsible for pausing and resuming physics in the scene for objects that
require to do so. This GO is also a Singleton entity and exists in all scenes in
the game.
• The AR Session and AR Session Origin GOs implement the needed AR func-
tionality into the scene. AR Session Origin also has by default the AR Camera
as a child transform. Those two GOs are added to the scene to implement AR
according to the ARFoundation package. The reader should refer to 4.4.2 for
an explanation of how they work.
==PAGE:87==
4.6 Final project development and code analysis
75
• EventSystem is a default GO that appears in every scene interaction is required
and is needed for communicating events like screen touches to other objects in
the scene, like UI and buttons. It is created by default by Unity when a Canvas
GO is added.
• Challenge Manager is the backbone of the application. It implements the Chal-
lengeManager script, which is responsible for enabling a challenge, moving to
the next challenge when the required steps have been fulfilled, and enabling/dis-
abling the challenge-related objects.
• UIManager is a GO responsible for switching the UI around. Children trans-
forms to this GO are all UI needed for the game. It uses the UIController script
to govern which UI is shown at which time in the game.
• EnvironmentObjects is a GO that is used to group all the physical objects in
the scene in one, for better visibility.
The remainder of this section analyzes each entity in the game.
4.6.2.1
Update Manager
The sole purpose of this entity is to run an object’s Update function. This entity
has a double meaning for my application: first, it is an effective practice for Unity
developers32 that experience secret overhead when using a lot of Update function
calls in their game. Of course, a game such as this project’s core game will hardly
have any problems with lagging or low frame rate; regardless I wanted to try this
implementation as practice.
The second and more important function in this entity is the ability to pause
physics.
Since the Update Manager can get a reference to every RigidBody of
updatable entities in the game, and exists in every scene, it is easy to implement a
global function to pause the physics of every object in the game. Unity already exposes
a way to do this by using the Time class33 and setting the parameter Timescale to
zero. There are 2 reasons why I wrote my own Update Manager for this:
1. Using the Zero timescale method pauses the entire game. While I discovered
that this does not interfere with the AR functions of ARFoundation, it was still
possible that the game’s design would need only specific objects to be paused.
2. The UI in the game still runs Update functions detached from the Update Man-
ager. If the response to the messages required was not only pressing the Con-
tinue button, then using the Zero timescale method would block me from
adding additional functionality.
32https://blogs.unity3d.com/2015/12/23/1k-update-calls/
33https://docs.unity3d.com/ScriptReference/Time-timeScale.html
==PAGE:88==
76
4 Project Implementation
An online source34, which is remarkably similar to my implementation, shows an
example of an Update Manager implementation. This project’s UpdateManager script
implements the Updating part with the following code:
1
...
2 private List<IUpdatable > updatables = new List<IUpdatable >();
3
4
public void SubscribeUpdatable(IUpdatable updatableEntity)
5
{
6
if (!updatables.Contains(updatableEntity))
7
{
8
updatables.Add(updatableEntity);
9
if (updatableEntity.myRigidBody)
10
{
11
updatableRigidbodies.Add(updatableEntity.myRigidBody);
12
}
13
14
if (updatableEntity.myGravity)
15
{
16
updatableGravityComponents.Add(updatableEntity.myGravity);
17
}
18
}
19
}
20
21
public void UnsubscribeUpdatable(IUpdatable updatableEntity)
22
{
23
if (updatables.Contains(updatableEntity))
24
{
25
updatables.Remove(updatableEntity);
26
if (updatableEntity.myRigidBody && updatableRigidbodies.Contains
(updatableEntity.myRigidBody))
27
{
28
updatableRigidbodies.Remove(updatableEntity.myRigidBody);
29
}
30
31
if (updatableEntity.myGravity)
32
{
33
updatableGravityComponents.Remove(updatableEntity.myGravity)
;
34
}
35
}
36
}
37
...
Listing 4.4: UpdateManager’s updating functionality.
SubscribeUpdatable and UnsubscribeUpdatable are methods that are called by with
parameter an object of type IUpdatable. This is a simple interface that every object
that needs the pausing functionality needs to implement.
1 public interface IUpdatable
2 {
34https://forum.unity.com/threads/writing-update-manager-what-should-i-know.402571/
==PAGE:89==
4.6 Final project development and code analysis
77
3
void Register();
4
void Unregister();
5
void MyUpdate();
6
7
Rigidbody myRigidBody { get;}
8
ManualGravity myGravity { get; }
9 }
Listing 4.5: IUpdatable interface.
This interface needs to be implemented by every new class of type MyUpdatableBe-
haviour. This class is what a game entity class needs to implement instead of Unity’s
Monobehaviour to adhere to this game’s principles about in-game physics.
1 public abstract class MyUpdatableBehaviour : MonoBehaviour , IUpdatable
2 {
3
void Awake()
4
{
5
myRigidBody = this.GetComponent <Rigidbody >();
6
myGravity = this.GetComponent <ManualGravity >();
7
}
8
9
private void OnDisable()
10
{
11
Unregister();
12
}
13
14
private void OnEnable()
15
{
16
Register();
17
}
18
19
public void Register()
20
{
21
UpdateManager.instance.SubscribeUpdatable(this as IUpdatable);
22
Debug.Log("Object " + this.gameObject.GetInstanceID() + " registered
");
23
}
24
25
public void Unregister()
26
{
27
UpdateManager.instance.UnsubscribeUpdatable(this as IUpdatable);
28
Debug.Log("Object " + this.gameObject.GetInstanceID() + " removed");
29
}
30
31
public abstract void MyUpdate();
32
public Rigidbody myRigidBody { get; private set; }
33
public ManualGravity myGravity { get; private set; }
34 }
Listing 4.6: MyUpdatableBehaviour abstract class.
A class that implements MyUpdatableBehaviour will automatically register its GO to
the UpdateManager when it’s activated and the opposite when it is deactivated or
==PAGE:90==
78
4 Project Implementation
destroyed. It also is required to have a Rigidbody component and a ManualGravity
script attached to it.
1 public class ManualGravity : MyUpdatableBehaviour
2 {
3
public float earthG = 9.807f;
4
public bool gravitySwitch;
5
6
// used to actually control pausing gravity by freezing the body
7
public bool gravityPaused = false;
8
Rigidbody objectBody;
9
10
void Start()
11
{
12
objectBody = this.GetComponent <Rigidbody> ();
13
objectBody.isKinematic = false;
14
objectBody.useGravity = false;
15
gravitySwitch = false;
16
}
17
18
void FixedUpdate () {
19
if (gravitySwitch)
20
{
21
gravityPaused = !gravityPaused;
22
gravitySwitch = false;
23
objectBody.isKinematic = !objectBody.isKinematic;
24
}
25
if (gravityPaused)
26
{
27
return;
28
}
29
objectBody.AddForce (Vector3.down * earthG);
30
}
31
public override void MyUpdate(){}
32 }
Listing 4.7: ManualGravity class
Attaching the ManualGravity script on an object with a Rigidbody component on
it is what was needed for this application’s objects to be paused and un-paused. It
can also be seen in ManualGravity that MyUpdate does not really contain any code.
Through the game’s implementation, it was seen that objects do not do any complex
handling on their own. Therefore the idea of a global Update Manager was proven
not needed for this game, up to the point it reached within this thesis’ time slot. Still,
if later on more functionality is to be developed, this style will prove useful.
In the UpdateManager pausing an object is done by setting its Rigidbody to
Kinematic and stopping the manual gravity. In order to resume the movement, each
object’s velocity and angular velocity need to be stored during pausing and applied
back when resuming.
The rest of the UpdateManager’s functionality can be seen
below.
1
...
==PAGE:91==
4.6 Final project development and code analysis
79
2
private List<Rigidbody> updatableRigidbodies = new List<Rigidbody >();
3
private List<ManualGravity > updatableGravityComponents = new List<
ManualGravity >();
4
5
// can also be arrays
6
private List<Vector3> updatableVelocities = new List<Vector3 >();
7
private List<Vector3> updatableAngularVelocities = new List<Vector3 >();
8
9
// stop updating objects and save physics velocity
10
public void PauseUpdates()
11
{
12
pauseUpdating = true;
13
14
// pause rigid bodies
15
for (int i = 0; i < updatableRigidbodies.Count; i++)
16
{
17
updatableVelocities.Add(updatableRigidbodies[i].velocity);
18
updatableAngularVelocities.Add(updatableRigidbodies[i].
angularVelocity);
19
updatableRigidbodies[i].isKinematic = true;
20
}
21
22
// pause manual gravities
23
for (int i = 0; i < updatableGravityComponents.Count; i++)
24
{
25
updatableGravityComponents[i].gravityPaused = true;
26
}
27
}
28
29
public void ResumeUpdates()
30
{
31
pauseUpdating = false;
32
33
// re apply saved velocities to bodies
34
for (int i = 0; i < updatableRigidbodies.Count; i++)
35
{
36
updatableRigidbodies[i].isKinematic = false;
37
updatableRigidbodies[i].velocity = updatableVelocities[i];
38
updatableRigidbodies[i].angularVelocity =
updatableAngularVelocities[i];
39
}
40
41
// restart gravity
42
for (int i = 0; i < updatableGravityComponents.Count; i++)
43
{
44
updatableGravityComponents[i].gravityPaused = false;
45
}
46
47
updatableVelocities.Clear();
48
updatableAngularVelocities.Clear();
49
}
50
...
Listing 4.8: UpdateManager pausing physics functionality.
==PAGE:92==
80
4 Project Implementation
4.6.2.2
Challenge Manager
The ChallengerManager script is straightforward. Its main purpose is to serialize a
Challenge class, which later can be manipulated in the editor to set new GOs for a
challenge, new additional GOs needed and what are the messages to be displayed to
the user are.
1
...
2
/// <summary>
3
/// Challenge class has references to all the objects that need to be
enabled to start a challenge
4
/// </summary>
5
[Serializable]
6
class Challenge
7
{
8
public bool startWithMessage = true;
9
// show a message when firing the object. if false, let the
collisions or other scripts take care of the messages
10
public bool playMessageOnFire = true;
11
12
[Header("Main game object for the simulation")]
13
public GameObject[] mainGameObjects;
14
public GameObject mainObjectParent;
15
16
public GameObject[] _additionalChallengeObjects;
17
18
[Header("Messages to the player")]
19
public string[] mainMessages;
20
public string[] secondaryMessages;
21
...
22
...
23
24
public void EnableChallengeObjects(...){..}
25
public void DisableChallengeObjects() {...}
26
}
27
...
Listing 4.9: ChallengeManager’s Challenge class.
The method EnableChallengeObjects has a lot of initialization code. One part of it is
to ensure the UI scripts have all the proper references of the objects that are to be
handled. In 4.6.2.3 it can be seen that for the ChallengeManager to work properly,
each UI that changes an object in some way needs to initialize with new references,
through an Initialize function that is implemented from an ITransformHandler script.
This function is run in the EnableChallengeObjects method. Additionally, loading the
messages from the Challenge to the MessagesManager is also done in this method.
The rest of the ChallengeManager script only has a serializable array of Challenges
and a method to move to the next Challenge.
1 public class ChallengeManager : MonoBehaviour
2 {
3
4
[SerializeField] private UIController _uiController;
==PAGE:93==
4.6 Final project development and code analysis
81
5
[SerializeField] private GameObject _toNextChallengeCanvas;
6
[SerializeField] private GameObject _toNextChallengeButton;
7
8
/// <summary>
9
/// Challenge class has references to all the objects that need to be
enabled to start a challenge
10
/// </summary>
11
[Serializable]
12
class Challenge{..}
13
14
[SerializeField] private Challenge[] _challenges;
15
[HideInInspector] public Vector3 centralGamePosition;
16
17
private int _challengeCounter = 0;
18
19
/// <summary>
20
/// Start the next challenge. Disable the previous.
21
/// </summary>
22
public void NextChallenge()
23
{
24
if (_challengeCounter >= _challenges.Length)
25
{
26
Debug.LogError("No more challenges.");
27
_challenges[_challengeCounter - 1].DisableChallengeObjects();
28
29
_toNextChallengeButton.SetActive(false);
30
31
return;
32
}
33
34
if (_challengeCounter == 0)
35
{
36
Challenge thisChallenge = _challenges[_challengeCounter];
37
thisChallenge.EnableChallengeObjects(centralGamePosition ,
_uiController);
38
}
39
else
40
{
41
_challenges[_challengeCounter - 1].DisableChallengeObjects();
42
Challenge thisChallenge = _challenges[_challengeCounter];
43
thisChallenge.EnableChallengeObjects(centralGamePosition ,
_uiController);
44
45
}
46
47
// last challenge, disable the next button
48
if (_challengeCounter == _challenges.Length - 1)
49
{
50
_toNextChallengeButton.SetActive(false);
51
}
52
53
_toNextChallengeCanvas.SetActive(false);
54
_challengeCounter++;
55
}
56 }
==PAGE:94==
82
4 Project Implementation
Listing 4.10: ChallengeManager’s core functions and variables.
It can be seen here that the ChallengeManager scripts publicly exposes the method
NextChallenge, which in turn enables the next challenge in the Challenge array and
disables the previous. It is worth noting that the variable CentralGamePosition is the
position in space on a detected surface that the Gaze marker sees, when the player
presses the Start button. In figure 4.10 it can be seen how the 1st challenge looks in
the Unity inspector view.
Figure 4.10: ChallengeManager inspector view.
4.6.2.3
UIManager
The UIController script attached to the UIManager GO is responsible for switching
the UI according to each challenge. The child transforms of the UIManager GO have
different responsibilities and functionalities.
PrepareGameCanvas uses the PrepareGame script and also has the Gaze GO and
Gaze functionality on it. This script, as its name hints, is responsible for preparing
the game until the user locates a surface and presses start. It also stops further plane
detection after start, so as to stop the device from doing unnecessary calculations. It
finally passes messages to the screen about plane detection.
1 public class PrepareGame : MonoBehaviour
2 {
3
...
4
private bool surfaceFound;
5
public float waitingTime = 8f;
6
7
void Start()
8
{
9
_planeManager.planeAdded += OnPlaneAdded;
10
informationText.text = lookingForPlanesMsg;
==PAGE:95==
4.6 Final project development and code analysis
83
11
surfaceFound = false;
12
StartCoroutine(DelayedHelpMessage());
13
}
14
15
void Update()
16
{
17
#if UNITY_EDITOR
18
19
if (Input.touchCount > 3)
20
{
21
startButton.gameObject.SetActive(true);
22
_eyeRaycaster.gameObject.SetActive(false);
23
}
24
25
#endif
26
}
27
28
IEnumerator DelayedHelpMessage(){...}
29
30
void OnPlaneAdded(ARPlaneAddedEventArgs eventArgs)
31
{
32
informationText.text = planeFoundMsg;
33
startButton.gameObject.SetActive(true);
34
surfaceFound = true;
35
}
36
37
...
38
39
private void TogglePlaneDetection()
40
{
41
_planeManager.enabled = !_planeManager.enabled;
42
43
if (_planeManager.enabled)
44
{
45
SetAllPlanesActive(true);
46
}
47
else
48
{
49
SetAllPlanesActive(false);
50
}
51
52
}
53
54
void SetAllPlanesActive(bool value)
55
{
56
_planeManager.GetAllPlanes(s_Planes);
57
foreach (var plane in s_Planes)
58
plane.gameObject.SetActive(value);
59
}
60
61
public void StartGame()
62
{
63
_prepareGameCanvas.SetActive(false);
64
_challengeManager.centralGamePosition = _eyeRaycaster.
planeRaycastPoint;
==PAGE:96==
84
4 Project Implementation
65
_challengeManager.NextChallenge();
66
67
TogglePlaneDetection();
68
}
69
70
static List<ARPlane> s_Planes = new List<ARPlane >();
71 }
Listing 4.11: PrepareGame script.
In the code above, in the Start function it can be seen that as soon as the game starts,
this script runs the DelayedHelpMessage co-routine. This method waits a specified
amount of time and then prints the help message about standing up to the user.
It also listens to OnPlaneAdded event exposed from ARFoundation, and when the
event triggers, it alerts the player about the located surface. Finally, when the players
presses start, it stops further plane detection with the TogglePlaneDetection method,
passes the located world position to the ChallengeManager, starts the 1st challenge
and deactivates itself. Finally, the Update method has some debug code added that
starts the game when more than 4 fingers are placed on the screen. This was added
to be used with Unity Remote, and quickly see if the application progresses without
bugs without building it to the device.
PausePhysicsCanvas is a simple GO with a Canvas component.
It has, as a
child transform to it, a UI button with a question mark graphic that runs the
UpdateManager’s PauseUpdates method. This button disables itself and enables a
Resume button and two text areas that contain the most recent messages displayed
to the player. The Resume button in turn runs the UpdateManager’s ResumeUp-
dates method and disables all aforementioned objects.
ToNextChallengeCanvas is a GO with a Canvas component and a single button
as a child transform, to move to the next challenge. Its sole purpose is to be enabled
when the UIController script sees that there are no more messages to be shown the
player for this challenge.
MessagesCanvas is a GO with the MessagesManager script attached. The func-
tionality it exposes relates to loading messages and showing them on the screen.
1 public class MessagesManager : MonoBehaviour
2 {
3
private string[] mainMessages;
4
private string[] secondaryMessages;
5
...
6
private int _messageCounter;
7
8
private const int DelayFrames = 1;
9
10
public void LoadMessages(string[] mainMessages , string[]
secondaryMessages)
11
{
12
this.mainMessages = mainMessages;
13
this.secondaryMessages = secondaryMessages;
14
15
==PAGE:97==
4.6 Final project development and code analysis
85
16
_messageCounter = 0;
17
}
18
19
public bool HasNextMessage()
20
{
21
return _messageCounter < mainMessages.Length;
22
}
23
24
public void NextMessage(bool pauseUpdates = true)
25
{
26
if (!HasNextMessage())
27
{
28
Debug.Log("Messages end");
29
messageTextArea.text = "";
30
return;
31
}
32
33
messageTextArea.text = mainMessages[_messageCounter];
34
secondaryMessageArea.text = secondaryMessages[_messageCounter];
35
36
pauseCanvasMessageTextArea.text = mainMessages[_messageCounter];
37
pauseCanvasSecondaryMessageArea.text = secondaryMessages[
_messageCounter];
38
39
_messageCounter++;
40
41
if (pauseUpdates)
42
{
43
StartCoroutine(PauseUpdatesDelayed());
44
}
45
}
46
47
IEnumerator PauseUpdatesDelayed()
48
{
49
for (int i = 0; i < DelayFrames; i++)
50
{
51
yield return null;
52
}
53
54
UpdateManager.instance.PauseUpdates();
55
}
56 }
Listing 4.12: MessagesManager script.
The NextMessage function is called by the UIController script when a new message
has to be shown to the user, and it pauses physics. The reason why the optional
parameter pauseUpdates is set to true is that I considered at some point to show mes-
sages to the player without pausing the physics. Such functionality would be useful
for a different kind of challenge. Additionally, running PauseUpdates with a delay
of 1 second is a fail-safe workaround that I added, as pausing physics by running
the PausePhysics in a OnClick function in the Unity Editor had unspecified execu-
tion order and randomly caused problems. The AdjustForceOneDirectionCanvas and
==PAGE:98==
86
4 Project Implementation
AdjustForceTwoDirections are two similar GOs attached with the scripts OneHand-
TargetingManager and DoubleDirectionTargetingManager respectively. These scripts
allow the user to use the touch controls to change the sphere’s orientation and value
of force applied.
1 public class TargetingManager : MonoBehaviour , ITransformHandler
2 {
3
...
4
// Checks if the main game object is visible by the camera
5
// and makes the red arrow point to it
6
private void CalculateGuidingArrowPosition(){...}
7
8
void Update()
9
{
10
if (pauseUpdating) return;
11
12
CalculateGuidingArrowPosition();
13
14
// Detect touches for force and sphere rotation
15
...
16
}
17
18
public void Initialize(...) {...}
19
20
public void FireObject()
21
{
22
// apply the same force on both axis
23
if (secondaryForceRenderer)
24
{
25
_forceToObjects[0] = new Vector2(_forceToObjects[0].x,
_forceToObjects[0].x);
26
}
27
28
for (int i = 0; i < _movableObjectRigidbodies.Length; i++)
29
{
30
_movableObjectRigidbodies[i].AddForce( (movableObjects[0].
rotation *
_forceToObjects[i]) * pushForce, ForceMode.Force
);
31
}
32
33
if (messageOnFire)
34
{
35
_uiController.ShowNextMessage();
36
}
37
38
// disable force renderer while the object travels
39
for (int i = 0; i < directionRendererGameObjects.Length; i++)
40
{
41
directionRendererGameObjects[i].SetActive(false);
42
}
43
44
if (secondaryForceRenderer)
45
{
46
secondaryForceRenderer.gameObject.SetActive(false);
==PAGE:99==
4.6 Final project development and code analysis
87
47
}
48
}
49
50
// switch fire and restart buttons around
51
public void ToggleFireUI()
52
{
53
_fireButton.SetActive(!_fireButton.activeSelf);
54
_restartButton.SetActive(!_restartButton.activeSelf);
55
}
56
57
// for reseting the UI in between challenges
58
private void InitializeUI()
59
{
60
_fireButton.SetActive(true);
61
_restartButton.SetActive(false);
62
}
63
64
// Resets the sphere's position
65
public void Restart(){..}
66
...
67
// Changes the line renderer's length according to swipes
68
private void AdjustLineRendererPosition(...){...}
69 }
Listing 4.13: TargetingManager’s script.
Both OneHandTargetingManager and DoubleDirectionTargetingManager have the
code form that can be seen above. The only substantial difference is the way the
AdjustLineRendererPosition function is called, as the DoubleDirectionTargetingMan-
ager is used for the net-force challenge and has some small differences. Both scripts
also implement the ITransformHandler interface, which is an easy way to run their Ini-
tialize function from inside the ChallengeManager’s EnableChallengeObjects method.
1 public interface ITransformHandler
2 {
3
// initializes references for the Targeting Manager scripts
4
void Initialize(...);
5 }
Listing 4.14: ITransformHandler interface.
The scripts that are responsible for these functionalities could easily be refactored, and
a lot of functionality be moved to an abstract class to reduce code. Every Targeting
Manager script could then implement their own AdjustLineRendererPosition method.
Finally, every object under the EnvironmentObjects is enabled for a different
challenge. Almost all objects have the setup that can be seen in figure 4.11.
Every object in the challenges has a plane that rests beneath the sphere, a sphere
with the ManualGravity script on it and a Velocity GO that shows the object’s current
velocity. The ground plane is only enabled for the 2nd challenge on Earth as the sphere
needs to rest on the ground for that challenge.
==PAGE:100==
88
4 Project Implementation
Figure 4.11: EnvironmentObjects GO transform and children.
The AR Camera also plays an important role in the game’s flow, other than
displaying the game’s view. There are two separate GOs parented to the ARCamera,
each showing a different kind of space environment.
Figure 4.12: AR Camera and space background.
Each SpaceEnvironment GO that can be seen in 4.12 employs a different space
background for the app. This is achieved by an additional Camera GO that is set as
a child to the main camera, therefore it will follow it’s movement and rotation. This
extra Skybox Camera is set to show nothing but a skybox material, and furthermore,
it copies everything it sees to a Render Texture, similar to how the instructions
video was shown in the Intro scene. This camera is also set to have a lower depth
than the original camera, ensuring that everything it renders will be first in the depth
buffer35. Finally, the aforementioned Render Texture is attached on a material that
is used by a huge Quad mesh, which is placed on the AR Camera’s far clipping plane.
This quite complex technique is used to circumvent the fact that AR packages take
over the main camera to render the physical camera’s feed on it. There are two skybox
cameras used, as a way to give a little variety to the application.
4.6.3
Gravity AR Scene
The 3rd and final scene in the game is similar to the Newton AR scene, The only
difference is the new OneHandPositionChangeManager Targeting Manager script and
the Planets GO who are related to the final challenge of the game. At some point
it was debated whether these 2 scenes should be merged into one, and have the
gravitational attraction challenge after the 3rd law challenge.
Diana pointed out
that keeping it this way is okay as it lets the student differentiate between the laws.
The OneHandPositionChangeManager is a simplified version of the TargetingManager
script shown above. This script checks for user swipes in its Update function and
adjusts the distance between the 2 planets, between 2 limits set in the editor.
Each planet is a sphere transform, in the same way, the challenges in the Newton AR scene.
They are using different materials though, that have textures modelled after planets.
35https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-buffering
==PAGE:101==
4.6 Final project development and code analysis
89
One is using Earth’s texture and the other uses Neptune’s texture. Figure A.9 shows
how the planets look in the game.
Each planet uses a Line Renderer component, similar to how the force vector
and the velocity is being rendered. However, each line is set to change its length from
a script called GravityForceDisplay.
1 public class GravityForceDisplay : MonoBehaviour
2 {
3
...
4
public void UpdateForce()
5
{
6
DirectionToOtherObject = _otherObject.position - _thisTransform.
position;
7
distance = DirectionToOtherObject.magnitude;
8
_normalizedDirection = DirectionToOtherObject / distance;
9
10
gravitationalPull = (_otherObjectMass / Mathf.Pow(distance, 2));
11
12
// set the force renderer's length according to the
gravitationalPull value
13
...
14
}
15 }
Listing 4.15: GravityForceDisplay script.
The method UpdateForce is run every time there is a change in the objects’ distance
inside the OneHandPositionChangeManager script, for both planets. It can be seen
in the code above that the formula of gravitational attraction is used (in a simplified
form, without the gravitational constant) to calculate what is the force of attraction,
and therefore the Line Renderer’s length. In an attempt to have the application
use real values, the sphere with Neptune’s texture had a scale of 3.9 and a mass value
in the Rigidbody component of 17, while the sphere that represented Earth had 1
and 1 respectively.
4.6.4
Assets used
All assets used for this application were acquired either from Unity’s asset store or
from previous projects of mine. The list with the references can be seen in Appendix
D.
==PAGE:102==
90
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 5
User tests
During the 1st meeting with Diana Popescu, we discussed the possibility of arranging
user test sessions with some of her classes. As it has been analyzed in chapter 3,
specific parameters were taken into account for the students and for testing time:
• The students must be introduced to Newton’s laws of motion and gravitation in
their curriculum. Of course, the testing sessions needed to wait until the class
advances enough to reach that point.
• We required classes at the proper physics level (A level).
• The students or a part of them need to be willing to participate. This is a
requirement but it’s not guaranteed.
If, for reasons, the students refuse to
participate it’s their right to do so.
• It was requested to take time of normal lectures only when they are free to work
on their own, so as to not disturb their progress.
The 1st test was arranged to take place on January 25th, 2019, with one of Diana’s
classes. The students were taking A level physics and at that specific day had physics
lectures all day, from 8:00 a.m. until 14:00 p.m. It was possible to intervene their
normal lecture time either the 2nd hour at 9:00 a.m. or the last at 13:00 p.m. We
came to the conclusion that it’s better to hold the testing session at 13:00 p.m., as
they will probably be bored from a whole day of physics teaching and might want
to try something different. The 2nd test was planned a week after that, on January
31st, 2019, with 5 students from another class, at 8:00 a.m. This test was planned
at that time because these 5 students were free from taking an exam because their
scores were very good. The 3rd test was arranged the day before the 2nd test, to take
place immediately after at 9:00 a.m. This was so the rest of the class could also try
the app.
5.1
Preparation
Holding testing sessions is done with the purpose of collecting feedback about the
application. Designing a test session/experiment is a process with many different
parameters the experiment lead has to consider (see [20]). However, this project’s
==PAGE:104==
92
5 User tests
time constraints didn’t allow me to design such an experiment. A traditional way
of collecting feedback is through a questionnaire that the testers can answer. The
questionnaire used for user tests can be seen in figure B.1. This questionnaire is rather
simple; its purpose is to document ideas and initial feelings about the app. With those
3 questions that were included in, we hoped to elicit ideas for what is going good for
the app, if there are any important issues, as well as see what the users think the
app can do better. We also wanted to see how the general class environment would
transform: would the students collaborate and share ideas, would they independently
use the app by themselves, or would they not take any interest in it/get bored easily?
Taking these into account, the test had an exploratory characteristic, to record the
users’ first impression of our app.
Since the questions in the questionnaire were in English, a possible language bar-
rier had to be taken into account. Diana reassured me that their English mastery is
quite good and that talking or writing in English would not pose a problem. In any
case, we wanted the testers to feel comfortable, so we planned to let them know that
they can use any language they prefer.
Distributing the testing material during user tests also needs to be considered.
Since this was an application, the question of whether it was easy to have the students
receive the file by downloading it arose before user tests. The benefit of doing this is
so that all students could test at the same time. We rejected this option because of
the following reasons:
• There is no guarantee that all students have devices compatible with the ap-
plication. As stated before, ARFoundation internally uses either ARCore or
ARKit. ARCore requires Android version 7.0 ’Nougat’ which is available gen-
erally on models distributed after 20171. Likewise, ARKit is compatible with
iOS 11 which was also released in 2017.
• Building for iOS required a lengthy procedure, as it is described in section 4.3.4
Building for iOS.
• Uploading to the Play store requires a subscription fee.
At the same time,
uploading to the App store has a subscription fee as well as a lengthy internal
validation process done by Apple.
• Asking the students to do a procedure for a volunteering task can possibly deter
some testers from participating at all.
The simpler option of providing the devices seemed easier and faster at this point.
This option enabled us to simply hand in the devices to whoever wanted to play,
and at the same time, the only requirement was to set up the devices with a Google
account and build the application to them before the user tests.
1https://developers.google.com/ar/discover/supported-devices
==PAGE:105==
5.1 Preparation
93
We acquired thee test devices from DTU, their model being Samsung Galaxy A52.
This device type was compatible with ARCore and also its Android version was higher
than the minimum required (Android version 8.0 ’Oreo’).
One of the main agreed on points for the design of this application was that it
should not explain the theory behind Newton’s laws. Their teacher had introduced
Newton’s laws the same week the tests took place.
In order to get the most honest feedback from every user, it was imperative that
all students start from the same point or have the same experience regarding the
application, its controls and appearance. It was also important that the students
focus their attention, are informed of their rights regarding the testing session and
do not get guidelines about how to use it. We planned the sequence of events during
the user test sessions as such:
1. The teacher initiates the lecture time and gets all the student’s attention.
2. She gives a small, limited introduction to what they will be doing for the re-
maining time. The students were already informed of this, but this served to
remind them and also focus their attention.
3. As I was responsible for the experiment, I proceeded to give a short speech I
planned beforehand. Important speech points can be seen below.
4. It was decided that each student would play with the app as much as they
wished and then pass it on to the person sitting next to them. We left the
device exchanging up to the students.
5. Whoever of the testers wanted to, could, after testing the app, fill the ques-
tionnaire. The questionnaires were on the teacher’s desk and I handed them to
whoever needed it.
The points above were planned according to available time, the testing conditions
and theory on how to plan an experiment [20]. To ensure that the testers are unbiased
and in the proper mindset, we made sure the following points were mentioned during
the introductory speech:
• I introduced myself, informed them of me being a Master’s student and this
project being related to my thesis project.
• I informed them of the goal of the app, my hypothesis that is tested and how the
procedure will take place.
• I informed them of their rights as testers, which are:
– They are not forced to participate.
– They have the right to stop in the middle of the test, at any point.
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samsung_Galaxy_A5_(2017)
==PAGE:106==
94
5 User tests
– They don’t have to fill the questionnaire.
– They are also not forced to answer any verbal questions.
– All feedback they give is anonymous and confidential.
• I told them that this is an AR app and that they should be careful when moving
around and using it.
• They were asked to not write their name down on the questionnaire.
• They were also informed that they can answer in English or Danish, whichever
they preferred.
5.2
Ethical matters
The speech that was prepared above took into account the students rights to privacy
and individual behaviour. We are aware that certain schools might have regulations
regarding external parties having discussions with their students. This was mentioned
in a preparatory meeting with Diana, where she answered that there won’t be a
problem regarding this kind of prohibition.
She also said that both classes (test
groups) comprise of mature and bright students without any specific sensitivities or
needs.
For the purpose of showcasing the application, and recording any notable be-
haviour, we requested that photographs are taken and/or videos of the testing session
while it took place. It was agreed that it’s better this happens when the testing group
is small, and only if the students give their consent. We planned to do this during the
2nd testing session where the number of testers was low and of course, after they are
informed about it and say it’s okay. A small consent form was prepared and handed
out during the 2nd user test, that can be seen in figure B.2.
5.3
1st testing session
The 1st test session took place at 13:00 p.m., on January 25th, 2019, at Ordrup
Gymnasium where Diana teaches.
In the classroom, there were 20 students and
Diana present. The students were aged 15-16, and approximately 65% of the class
had Biotechnology as their major focus, with the rest being of the Math and Physics
study line. Before starting the session and while setting up, I had a chance for a short
introduction with 3-4 students from the class. The devices had version 0.3 of the final
application installed in them. For an explanation of the app’s state at that point, see
figure 3.8 and section 3.4.2. The test began at 13:10 p.m. and ended at 13:48 p.m.
The reason that the tests were held at 13:10 p.m. and on this particular day, is that
the students schedule included only Physics during that day; Diana argued that it
might be a good idea to have them try something new after a long day of lectures.
==PAGE:107==
5.3 1st testing session
95
The preparatory phase and testing session proceeded smoothly and as described
in the Preparation section above. Notable observations during the testing phase are
described below:
• Two students were playing with the application at the same time, looking at one
device together. They also had the device laying on a desk instead of holding
it upright.
• A number of students were reading the text in the app out loud.
• One student was repeatedly swiping up, likely to see what is the cap on the
force that can be applied to the sphere.
• While most students started by sitting down, they had to stand up eventually,
likely because of a timed prompt set to appear if no planes are found after some
seconds.
• Every student present in the classroom tried the app, even for a few minutes.
5.3.1
1st testing session: Discussions
A few students approached and asked questions, as well as stating observations, during
the session. Their inquiries are presented below:
• What technology are you using to develop this?: One student was aware of AR
frameworks like ARKit and ARCore and wanted to know which one was used.
He also asked about the development platform used (Unity3D).
• Why did you use the space environment? Other apps would possibly have the
planets displayed in actual AR space.: Due to prior AR experience, one student
wanted to know why the majority of the interaction was taking place in space.
This was a design choice for giving the feeling of being in space, therefore there
is no gravity or air friction.
• Who is the application made for?: One student wanted to know who is the
application made for.
• It would be good if we had a tutorial for the controls, as we were a bit disoriented
at first: Two students noted the need for better How to Play instructions.
• The acceleration vector is not visible enough after applying a force to the sphere.
An issue that was pointed out is that while the force vector was properly visible,
the length of the acceleration vector was much smaller in comparison and barely
visible. While this was presented as a flaw, this difference in vector length refers
back to the 2nd law of motion and makes the student take into account the
object’s mass and its relationship to the acceleration.
==PAGE:108==
96
5 User tests
• I missed the sphere in the environment and couldn’t find it. I had to restart
the app.: It’s possible that the app can lose tracking and therefore the entire
environment can be displaced. There was no fail-safe programmed for this issue.
• What will be the relationship of the acceleration vector and the force vector
if more than one force is applied to the sphere?: Two students asked Diana
about this. Due to this question additional challenge was included for the next
iteration.
Diana had one important addition to the process before the next testing session:
Alongside all the points mentioned in the speech, she suggested that we mention
that the application is not meant to teach, but rather give a visual understanding of
Newton’s laws. Without it being explicitly mentioned, it appears that the students
expected to also be shown the theory inside the app, in one way or another.
5.3.2
1st testing session: Written feedback
Out of the 20 students present, 10 filled the questionnaire. All questionnaires were
filled in English. We analyzed and aggregated similar feedback, and the results are
presented below. Note that students sometimes wrote down more than 1 thing they
liked, while some did not answer all questions. There were also answers that were
not clearly explained. The tables 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4 present the students’ feedback
from this session.
’One thing you liked’ user feedback
Times mentioned
’The graphics were good’
Twice
’Learning with different environments was nice’
Once
’The application was very hands-on’
Once
’The AR aspect and the ability to move freely are useful’
Four times
’The game had nice interactions’
Once
’The game was fun’
Once
’I like learning while playing’
Once
’I liked the questions before each challenge’
Once
’I got a good understanding of gravitational forces with this’
Once
’It’s fun to learn Newton’s laws with this app’
Once
Table 5.1: ’One thing you liked’ user feedback from 1st testing session.
==PAGE:109==
5.3 1st testing session
97
’Biggest encountered issue’ user feedback
Times mentioned
’I got stuck and had to restart’
Twice
’Required features were missing’
Four times
’The app was hard to use’
Three times
’I had an issue with the game’s questions’
Once
’The graphics were bad’
Once
No comment
Once
Table 5.2: ’Biggest encountered issue’ user feedback from 1st testing session.
’One thing to improve’ user feedback
Times mentioned
’Explain which law we are learning at each level’
Twice
’Add more features’
Once
’Give more variety to the game’
Once
’Give shorter and more precise challenge descriptions’
Once
’Give a better mechanics-How to play explanation’
Four times
’Use more colors or improve the graphics’
Once
’Add a fail-safe functionality when the app gets stuck’
Twice
Not comprehensive feedback
Once
Table 5.3: ’One thing to improve’ user feedback from 1st testing session.
General comments
”This app can be used to get a better, general understanding on Newton’s laws”
”I really liked the game♡!”
”The app has a good concept. Try to add more features”
”Nice work, the app needs some fixes but the AR part was useful”
”Great idea. Add more challenges to the app”
”Fix the sphere disappearing problem and improve the graphics”
”The game setup could be more attractive, and have a fun feeling”
Table 5.4: General comments from 1st testing session.
The nature of this way of collecting feedback has some disadvantages. In this
particular case, it was sometimes hard to understand the students’ points or what they
were referring to. At times they also repeated themselves or ignored the limitations
of one answer per question. As a future improvement, we consider automatic data
collecting while in-game and holding one-to-one discussions with students.
==PAGE:110==
98
5 User tests
5.4
2nd testing session
Due to these specific users already having experience using the application, the exper-
iment could not be repeated with the same classroom. However, the feedback from
the 1st test session deemed it was appropriate to produce a new app version while
solving the issues the students had.
The next test session took place at 8:00 a.m., on January 31st, 2019, at the same
place as the 1st testing session. This time, the conditions were different; a part of the
class was taking a test, but a small group of 5 students were not participating because
Diana deemed it was unnecessary for them. Diana previously talked about these 5
students and highlighted the fact that they are exceptional in physics. All 5 of them
had Biotechnology as their major and were around 16 years old. Out of the 5, there
were 3 boys and 2 girls. The devices provided had the final application version (0.4).
The app design and application’s look can be seen in figures A.11, A.12 and 3.9, and
the design in section 3.4.3. The test began at 8:10 a.m. and concluded at 8:35 a.m.
There were 2 differences in the conditions of this experiment, as opposed to the
previous one: Diana was not present for the majority of the test session; she gave a
short introduction to the experiment and afterwards moved back into the classroom.
Also, the test was held in the hallway outside of the classroom while the other students
were taking their test.
The introductory speech was also different on 2 points: first, when talking about
the experiment’s goal and the application’s purpose I added the correction that this
app is meant to give a visualization of Newton’s laws as Diana mentioned before.
Second, at the end of the speech, we informed them that they will be recorded during
the testing, and had them fill out consent forms, as was mentioned before in section
5.2.
The observations noted during this session follow:
• One student spent approximately 3-5 minutes mapping the space around him.
To our surprise, the device was able to locate vertical along with horizontal
planes, something we overlooked in the AR configuration. However, it intro-
duced no problems to the experience.
• One of the students explained the theory behind the law of universal attraction
to another while they were playing with the attraction challenge.
In figures 5.1, C.1 and C.2 the students that test the app, as well as their environment
can be seen.
5.4.1
2nd testing session: Discussions
In this testing session, the students addressed fewer questions to me while they were
testing. Their inquiries follow:
==PAGE:111==
5.4 2nd testing session
99
Figure 5.1: The 5 students taking part in the 2nd testing session.
• So the 1st challenge takes place in space and the 2nd takes place back on Earth?:
this inquiry felt more like an observation.
• Why are there no questions in the application?: this design choice was agreed
after reviewing an online learning software in Chapter 3, section 3.4.
• How do I exit back when I finish with the asteroid (challenge)?: Due to this,
I had to inform the student of the question mark button that reveals the To
Main Menu button.
When the students had enough testing, they proceeded to fill the questionnaire. When
asked if they had any closing remarks, one of the students mentioned that the app
was ”awesome”.
5.4.2
2nd testing session: Written feedback
All 5 students filled the questionnaire. Their feedback is presented in the tables below.
==PAGE:112==
100
5 User tests
’One thing you liked’ user feedback
Student no.
”It was easy to operate and use. Science application usually fail at that”
Student 1
”The app was well made”
Student 1
”I like that it is visual, it makes you understand it better”
Student 2
”This is a good way to show Newton’s laws”
Student 3
”The illustrations were very good”
Student 3
”The descriptions of the challenges made it easy to understand”
Student 4
”I liked that you have to think the solution yourself”
Student 5
”It’s not really a learning app”
Student 5
”The visual part helped me understand Newton’s laws better”
Student 5
Table 5.5: ’One thing you liked’ user feedback from 2nd testing session.
’Biggest encountered issue’ user feedback
Student no.
”The app was too short”
Student 1
”The user has to get the hang of the app first”
Student 2
”The app needs to have more exercises”
Student 3
”It takes a little time to understand how to use it”
Student 4
”The graphics were a little boring”
Student 5
”The app is short. It’s quickly over with”
Student 5
Table 5.6: ’Biggest encountered issue’ user feedback from 2nd testing session.
’One thing to improve’ user feedback
Student no.
”It would be nice to have some questions to answer in-game”
Student 1
”Get different kinds of games”
Student 3
”It would be nice to know which law is to be used each time”
Student 4
”The app is short. It would be great if there was more to it”
Student 5
Table 5.7: ’One thing to improve’ user feedback from 2nd testing session.
General comments
Student no.
”I had fun using the app”
Student 1
”This app is great for showcasing Newton’s laws for students”
Student 3
”Good, and great visually”
Student 4
”I liked it a lot ,”
Student 5
Table 5.8: General comments from 2nd testing session.
==PAGE:113==
5.5 3rd testing session
101
This feedback was more positive compared to the 1st session, and students had
fewer problems playing with the app. My initial thoughts after reading their feedback
were that they might have been a little too polite, or wanted to get the session over
with. This might be the case, as their teacher was not present during this session, as
well as the session being held relatively early in the morning.
5.5
3rd testing session
This session was not planned until the day before the 2nd session. The students that
were taking the exam requested from Diana to also test the application after they
finish their test, to which I agreed, even though it was last minute. This testing
session did not follow the planned sequence of events as before and therefore took a
different turn.
• The entire introduction was done in Danish and by Diana, including saying who
I am. I did not get a chance to speak or introduce myself.
• The students had to work on their own project for another class. Therefore,
this test was for whoever was interested.
• A few students started playing with the app, but I noticed that some quickly
gave up and returned the device back.
• I noticed that two of the students present in the previous test explained to
others how the student.
There were no discussions with students or written feedback for this session.
While this was an overall failed experiment, there is a lot to learn from it. The
most important reflections from this session are:
1. The experiment lead has to understand that the testers are people and have
times of the day when they can’t cooperate, or have more important things to
do.
2. Students in their school years have even more reason to attend to their own
matters because of deadlines and school work.
3. The person who holds the experiment has to be heard before the experiment in
order to establish his/her presence in the room, and also establish the reason
for taking part in this experiment. This will guarantee that he/she will have a
chance to connect in some way with the testers or spark their interest in some
other way. This becomes even more important if the 2nd point above is taken
into account; students might often listen to their teacher but possibly not if the
task is optional.
==PAGE:114==
102
5 User tests
5.6
Teacher’s overall feedback and notes
I held one last discussion with Diana on February 6th, 2019. During this discussion,
I was able to see her view on the application and the project’s goals. This discussion
was held in the form of an interview and what was discussed can be seen below.
Question 1:Can this project’s developed application be integrated as part of normal
physics teaching?: ”Absolutely, because it gives the feeling that they are seeing New-
ton’s laws in reality. In this case, besides Newton’s 2nd law of motion, there are not
so many experiments that can be done with applications, but with this one they can
get a visual idea of what Newton’s laws are about. They also looked like they were
enjoying playing around with the app!”
Question 2:What is this was a more general physics learning application? How
often should learning applications be used as part of teaching, and when is the right
time?: ”I try to use learning applets when the concept is too abstract for the students.
In physics teaching, teachers prefer hands-on experiments. I generally use a lot of
science applets but only for introducing the students to a subject and give them a
better understanding. Afterwards, when they have good knowledge about a subject
is possible to use an applet and play around with some values to see the result. But,
when problems are about space or atoms, it’s impossible to have actual experiments
so applets are preferred. Newton’s laws are also general and they don’t apply only
on Earth, so they have to understand that they are universal.”
Question 3:Is it a good idea for a student to use this application on their own, as a
way to review concepts?: ”Definitely. I often give them applets as homework, telling
them to just play with it and see what they can get out of it. Often with such applets
they can change some parameters and see the result. Afterwards, they talk to me in
detail about them.”
Question 4:Did you notice anything specific about the students while they were
using the app: Nothing really! But after the experiments, many said that it was
really fun to play around with the app.
Question 5:Did they say why they felt it was fun: ”They didn’t really say, but I
believe they enjoyed it because they are independent to move around and do whatever
they want with it, instead of just sitting down, looking at their laptop or worse,
reading. The ability to move around is the most enjoyable for them. Some of them
said that it was easier to understand Newton’s laws because of the visualization
capabilities of the app.”
Question 6:Do the students understand that they are learning an important skill
by playing this simulation?: ”I think it’s hard to say. The aim of a learning app
is to provide a deeper understanding, and the students generally achieve that when
they start working with a concept (Newton’s laws in this case) when they tackle
experiments and translate these physics problems into the underlying mathematical
formulas. They always need theory to understand first. A learning application is
usually supplementary and can give an initial understanding, but at the end of the
day, the student needs the formulas to understand the physics behind each problem
==PAGE:115==
5.6 Teacher’s overall feedback and notes
103
and understand what they are calculating and what they are using this formula for.
This is something that comes with practice.”
Question 7:How do you think this application can evolve further, to teach not only
Newton’s laws but other chapters from Physics?: ”The next step into this application
could very well be to show it to a class that had learned the theory about vectors,
and see how vectors in AR can be taught. Also, an AR app that gives the ability to
collect, analyze and present (e.g. with graphs) real data could be a great example.
An app like this could be appropriate for 2nd or 3rd high school year students.”
At the end of the interview, Diana asked also if it could be possible to share the
application with other students, or make it so that they can install it on their phones.
This is planned to happen after this project’s conclusion.
==PAGE:116==
104
==PAGE:117==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions and
Future work
In this thesis, we explored the use of AR in education, by developing an AR learn-
ing app and testing it with physics students. At first, the affordances of AR were
explored and researched, and we concluded that this technology has a lot of poten-
tials, demonstrated by the different fields that AR software exists for.
The main
advantages AR has are the visualization potential, the ability to immerse the user
and the possibility to entertain the user while she learns. However, through the tests
conducted we observed that there are issues when developing an AR app, issues that
are distributed throughout the design, programming and testing phases.
In this report, we also gave an explanation of the use of learning theories for
more effective learning. The use of this learning app in the classroom aligned with
constructivism and cognitivism principles. General questions like the ones our app
presented to the users leave users to create their own understanding of Newton’s
laws, while also making them practice by being active (moving or looking around) as
well as having the proper context (space environment). The visual representations of
Newton’s laws we developed and the sequence of challenges which adheres to the order
the laws are taught is also a choice that aids the student to form mental structures,
store them and retrieve them when needed.
One of our goals was to develop a simulation with game elements and see if this can
give the user a fun experience and/or make her active. During tests, a fun environment
was formed and students did seem to enjoy the experience. However, the application
could have had more game features; marking students’ scores or percentage of game
progression would have given us an indication of their motivation levels. This is one
of the main points we wish to explore further in this project.
During this project’s design phase we encountered a particularly difficult obstacle:
finding interested people to aid the development of a learning technology, or any
technology, is a hard task. It is not easy to convince a person to help, purely out of
good will. Also, even if a collaboration is formed it has to at least give some benefits
to keep the interest going. In this project’s case, we agreed to share the packaged
application with Diana, but there wasn’t really a benefit for the students taking part
in the tests. The low interest shown during the 3rd testing session could very well be
increased if there was a benefit for the students offered from our side. All in all, the
==PAGE:118==
106
6 Conclusions and Future work
design process started out in a good way, with interesting technology and multiple
good feedback from peers and external testers. The direction chosen, albeit not the
only one that could have been pursued, highlighted some of the advantages that AR
has as a learning potential technology.
The importance of a well planned, well-thought testing session was also highlighted
during this thesis. The necessity of user tests is by far the best way to reach conclu-
sions about a specific technology, especially with testers from the target user group.
However, it doesn’t stop to just conducting the experiment; users have to be treated
properly to give unbiased opinions about the app. They also have to feel like they
are taking part in something important, to commit to the purpose of the experiment
and understand the goals. It is also imperative, especially in the students’ case, that
they understand that they have rights to not participate; students could possibly feel
that they are graded for an activity taking place in school grounds if it’s not explicitly
mentioned.
During testing our AR app, we feel like we addressed most of these matters in
the right way, but the user tests could still be more engaging for them. In the case
of the 3rd testing sessions, the presence of the tester should have been established
in a more appropriate way; a small, off the record, chat with a few students before
the tests could improve their sense of commitment to the goals and give an informal
introduction. After seeing the difference in the students’ commitment between the
1st and 3rd testing sessions we conclude that a small pre-introductory chat alongside
a formal introduction, as it was done in the 1st test, can aid in engaging the testers
and capture their attention. To add to that, it would have been a good opportunity
during the 1st test to hold a more elaborate discussion on the experience with one
of the students who showed the most interest, e.g. the person who asked about the
underlying technologies used. Finally, we should mention that a well-planned testing
session requires more work on the data collected by the students. A better-designed
questionnaire using targeted questions and answers that use the Likert scale1 is a far
more reliable way to discover the users’ preferences.
The development process for this thesis was successful to an extent. Prototypes
were produced fairly fast, and very little time was wasted in developing unused fea-
tures. The choice of Unity for developing was ideal, as it is a very convenient, easy
to use tool with fast building processes. The choice of hardware was also optimal, as
mobile devices can be used anywhere and are available to most students in Denmark.
In direct comparison, the AR stage which was a technology taken into account at the
project’s start phase did not have such benefits. There are two points that could have
been done better though: first, the use of ARInterface for the prototypes provided
fast testing, but later on, it was proved that not a substantial amount of time was
gained, in comparison to using Unity Remote for testing in the editor. Switching
the core application tools introduces additional development time, which was the
case with this project. We, of course, don’t ignore the benefit of learning how to
use both packages and see the change to ARFoundation as the optimal choice for
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likert_scale
==PAGE:119==
6 Conclusions and Future work
107
developing the final application. A second improvement in the process is ensuring the
code has a certain level of quality. It is often the case that one lone developer tends
to code in ways that create a hard-to-review code base. Modern, advanced solutions
require multiple programmers and a way for them to review each others’ code, to
make sure all parts of the project have proper standards. It would have been really
beneficial should another developer had the chance to review some small parts of this
application’s code; frequently a fresh pair of eyes can see possible issues others can’t.
Back in section 1.5.2, we discussed possible questions that can be answered in
this thesis. Taking into account some students’ feedback and our observations we
conclude with the following answers:
• Can a physics problem or concept be understood better and deeper by
the students when it is visualized in AR?: The idea of visualizing New-
ton’s laws with this app has been noted multiple times during the tests, also by
Diana. This question cannot be answered without a different experiment setup;
in order to achieve an answer, we require 2 tester groups, a control group that
gets the information in a traditional way and an experimental group that uses
the app to learn, as it is done in [25]. The students’ learning also has to be
evaluated afterwards, to see if there are differences between the 2 groups. How-
ever, some students reported that they were helped in understanding Newton’s
laws through AR visualization. This is a good indication to, at the very least,
attempt a better experimental setup for this application.
• Is it possible that the students who use an AR learning app can benefit
in some way, e.g.
by becoming active in their learning process?:
Multiple students reported that they found the AR aspect useful for learning.
Diana also noted that such an application can have its uses during physics
teaching. It is not easy to deduce whether students became active by using this
AR app, but there is the indication that they like it.
• Does having game elements in an AR learning app benefit the students
in some way?: Playing a game is a great way of learning by doing [29]. An AR
simulation game, as it is in this case, coerces the student to complete challenge
after challenge, introducing a fun element. Some feedback mentioned that the
game was a fun experience, however, the number of times this was mentioned
was not enough. The application could also stand to include more game elements
into it. Such elements could inspire friendly competition between students.
• Can the AR aspect of a learning app inspire students to try it, in
hopes of seeking something new and interesting? AR is an interesting
technology for young users in this age. Our observations during the user tests,
especially during the 1st test, notes that a few were particularly interested in
the application; they even asked questions as to how it is developed. While not
every student filled the questionnaire, we noticed that everyone during the 1st
and 2nd tests tried the application. As for the 3rd test, since the students had
==PAGE:120==
108
6 Conclusions and Future work
different conditions and concerns at that point, we can’t safely say that it was
not engaging or interesting enough for them.
This thesis project has highlighted the advantages of using an engaging and easily
available technology for physics learning. The immersive AR element was noted to
produce a positive stance to testers, and the visualization aspect has the potential to
produce new and interesting learning situations.
6.1
Future work
Multiple ideas were considered throughout the entire project, with some even being
researched to an extent. There are many directions the project could have additionally
pursued, and they are summarized below.
• The use of different AR hardware: There is more advanced AR hardware
available, e.g. AR glasses like the Microsoft Hololens2. While these devices are
quite expensive in comparison, their capabilities for interaction and advanced vi-
sualization are many. If at some point in the future their availability increases, it
would be particularly interesting to design a learning application with advanced
features like gestures and voice recognition using AR glasses. The concerns of
AR glasses at the moment revolve around user’s comfort, therefore this technol-
ogy has a little way to mature first. Additionally, other AR-enabling devices,
like haptic feedback gloves, could possibly be introduced to the AR experience,
giving users feedback from different channels.
• Different experiment design: The use of questionnaires is a good initial
way to receive feedback.
As stated before, a more reliable way is to design
an experiment with an idea of what to test in mind. Defining dependent and
independent variables [20] for an HCI experiment would be the optimal way to
go, especially when testing AR controls or the player’s progress through a game.
Such a different experiment could also implement automatic data gathering,
which means to record the users’ actions or score during gameplay. This way
gives the researcher actual data that can be analyzed and produce further results.
The frequency of the test sessions, as well as the testers taking part, are also
important; one cannot test at irregular time intervals with whoever is available.
• Other learning difficulties: During the initial phases, we researched the pos-
sibility of using AR for force visualization with regards to fictitious forces. This
physics subject is taught at a university level and has even fewer options for
force visualization, in addition to being complex to deduce the direction the
fictitious force has during experiments. As a future opportunity, it’s interest-
ing to see how fictitious forces learning can be enhanced with AR. Also, since
2https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/hololens
==PAGE:121==
6.1 Future work
109
fictitious force direction depends on mathematical operations like the cross prod-
uct, a certain mathematical understanding of Linear Algebra is required. The
visualization of algebraic operations in AR space could potentially enhance the
students’ understanding.
• More game activities: The 2nd test session’s feedback underlined the stu-
dents’ wishes for more game activities in the app. At some point we saw a
certain resemblance of our simulation game to playing golf; as a next step,
this game could change to an AR golf game under different environments, like
different planets or different launched objects. Changing the conditions the en-
vironment has is easy in Unity, as it is demonstrated by the changes between
the 1st and 2nd challenge in our app.
• Competitive game features: Introducing score or game over conditions to
this game is a potential future update. This way, the game can create a fun
feeling between different players, or challenge the player for the best score. A
shared AR experience between students could also be explored.
• Questions and answers in the app: Few students reported the lack of
questions in the app. While we purposefully chose to not include evaluation
of concepts, student’s feedback hints that a few questions could possibly be
included. Diana’s feedback on this was that more than a few questions would
bore the student, so we leave it as a next step to include some evaluation of
concepts through the app.
• Fun feeling in the application’s setup: One feedback mentioned that the
game’s setup could have a more fun feeling. We received this feedback as an idea
for potential gamification of the surface detection process. Introducing a small
amount of gameplay, relevant or irrelevant to the context, during plane detection
can have benefits. For example, chasing an AR object with the camera makes
the user look around, while the camera records surfaces in the background.
• Teacher control of the application: With the appropriate time and design,
an AR app could have different roles for its users. By making the teacher a
game master, and giving her the ability to create challenges and send them
to students, we can create an engaging, motivational and possible competitive
learning environment.
• Porting to iOS: Since most students were using iOS devices, we could poten-
tially conduct different tests by building the app for their devices: we could
distribute it through the TestFlight3 app directly on their phones. This, along-
side automatic data gathering, can let us gather data and make observations
without holding sessions. Of course, this is only appropriate for specific situ-
ations; holding group testing sessions experiments has more potential, if done
right.
3https://developer.apple.com/testflight/
==PAGE:122==
110
6 Conclusions and Future work
• Continuous integration (CI): The building process can be lengthy, espe-
cially when done for iOS. It is common for developers to automate the building
process, using tools like Jenkins4 or JetBrains TeamCity5. This process can be
automated as far as having the CI system build the app into a device every time
a change is detected in the version control server, saving a ton of developing
time.
6.2
Closing Remarks
This thesis project dealt with the use of AR in education. We were able to study
different technologies and principles, as well as apply them in an actual learning
environment and observe their effect. The inclusion of interested people in the design
and development process gave us a good understanding of how a product is engineered,
and how important user experience is during development. We were also able to use
different AR tools and get experience with test sessions. Overall, this was a very
positive experience that provided the author with different sets of skills and a new
perspective into education and how to improve it.
4https://jenkins.io/
5https://www.jetbrains.com/teamcity/
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A: Final
project screenshots
A.1
Version 0.1 screenshots
Figure A.1: Final Project version 0.1: Intro screen and how to play explanation.
==PAGE:124==
112
A Appendix A: Final project screenshots
Figure A.2: Final Project version 0.1: Surface detection and game intro.
==PAGE:125==
A.1 Version 0.1 screenshots
113
Figure A.3: Final Project version 0.1: Force direction and space environment.
==PAGE:126==
114
A Appendix A: Final project screenshots
Figure A.4: Final Project version 0.1: Challenges and questions.
==PAGE:127==
A.1 Version 0.1 screenshots
115
==PAGE:128==
116
A Appendix A: Final project screenshots
A.2
Version 0.2 screenshots
Figure A.5: Final Project version 0.2: Updated starting screen and how-to-play in-
structions.
==PAGE:129==
A.2 Version 0.2 screenshots
117
Figure A.6: Final Project version 0.2: Descriptive UI, force value UI and To Main
Menu button updates.
==PAGE:130==
118
A Appendix A: Final project screenshots
Figure A.7: Final Project version 0.2: New challenge for Newton’s 2nd law.
==PAGE:131==
A.2 Version 0.2 screenshots
119
Figure A.8: Final Project version 0.2: New challenge for Newton’s 3rd law.
==PAGE:132==
120
A Appendix A: Final project screenshots
Figure A.9: Final Project version 0.2: New challenge for Newton’s law of Universal
Gravitation.
==PAGE:133==
A.2 Version 0.2 screenshots
121
==PAGE:134==
122
A Appendix A: Final project screenshots
A.3
Version 0.3 screenshots
Figure A.10: Final Project version 0.3: Quick fixes and helping messages.
==PAGE:135==
A.4 Version 0.4 screenshots
123
A.4
Version 0.4 screenshots
Figure A.11: Final Project version 0.4: Better instructions video and new How to
Play screen.
==PAGE:136==
124
A Appendix A: Final project screenshots
Figure A.12: Final Project version 0.4: New pause button and pause menu.
==PAGE:137==
A.4 Version 0.4 screenshots
125
Figure A.13: Final Project version 0.4: Net force challenge in space.
==PAGE:138==
126
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIX B
Appendix B:
Questionnaire and
consent form for user
tests
==PAGE:140==
128
B Appendix B: Questionnaire and consent form for user tests
Newton’s laws in Augmented Reality 
application 
 
 
1. Please describe one thing you liked about the app: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Which of the issues below was the biggest problem you experienced with the app? 
❏The app was hard to use. 
❏The app had problems, got stuck and had to restart etc. 
❏The graphics were bad. 
❏Required features were missing. 
❏Other:
 
 
 
3. Please describe one thing you believe the app can do better: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you for your feedback! 
 
 
Figure B.1: Questionnaire that was handed out to students who tested the applica-
tion.
==PAGE:141==
B Appendix B: Questionnaire and consent form for user tests
129
Name: 
 
 
 
“​I hereby consent that my photo or video can be taken during user tests for the thesis project 
‘Teaching physics with Augmented Reality’ and used only for academic purposes. I can at 
anytime request that the photo is deleted after it’s taken.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date:
Signature: 
 
____________
____________ 
 
 
 
Figure B.2: Consent form for the 5 students who participated in the 2nd user test.
==PAGE:142==
130
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX C
Appendix C: Photos
from the 2nd testing
session
Figure C.1: The testers using the app to navigate in AR.
==PAGE:144==
132
C Appendix C: Photos from the 2nd testing session
Figure C.2: One of the testers mapping the vertical surface of the environment.
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX D
Appendix D:
Resources and assets
used in development
• Singleton class: Wanzyee Studios Singleton class.
• Gaze UI (textures): Gaze UI for canvas by Youe++.
• Asteroid Pack: Asteroid Pack models by Pixel Make.
• Space background and planet textures: Introduction to Game Development
course.
• Milky Way Skybox: Milky Way Skybox by Adam Bielecki.
• UI elements: Simpe UI by Unruly Games
==PAGE:146==
134
==PAGE:147==
Bibliography
[1]
Ronald T Azuma. “A survey of augmented reality”. In: Presence: Teleoperators
& Virtual Environments 6.4 (1997), pages 355–385.
[2]
Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. “Surf: Speeded up robust fea-
tures”. In: European conference on computer vision. Springer. 2006, pages 404–
417.
[3]
John Bell, Sandra Sawaya, and William Cain. “Synchromodal classes: Designing
for shared learning experiences between face-to-face and online students”. In:
International Journal of Designs for learning 5.1 (2014).
[4]
Staffan Bjork and Jussi Holopainen. “Patterns in game design (game develop-
ment series)”. In: (2004).
[5]
Benjamin S Bloom et al. “Taxonomy of educational objectives. Vol. 1: Cognitive
domain”. In: New York: McKay (1956), pages 20–24.
[6]
Jean-Luc Dorier and Anna Sierpinska. “Research into the teaching and learning
of linear algebra”. In: The teaching and learning of mathematics at university
level. Springer, 2001, pages 255–273.
[7]
Thomas M Duffy and David H Jonassen. Constructivism and the technology of
instruction: A conversation. Routledge, 2013.
[8]
Matt Dunleavy. “Design principles for augmented reality learning”. In: TechTrends
58.1 (2014), pages 28–34.
[9]
Felix Emmerich, Roland Klemke, and Thomas Hummes. “Design Patterns for
Augmented Reality Learning Games”. In: International Conference on Games
and Learning Alliance. Springer. 2017, pages 161–172.
[10]
Peggy A Ertmer and Timothy J Newby. “Behaviorism, cognitivism, construc-
tivism: Comparing critical features from an instructional design perspective”.
In: Performance improvement quarterly 26.2 (2013), pages 43–71.
[11]
Steven Feiner et al. “A touring machine: Prototyping 3D mobile augmented
reality systems for exploring the urban environment”. In: Personal Technologies
1.4 (1997), pages 208–217.
[12]
Thomas A Furness III. “The super cockpit and its human factors challenges”.
In: Proceedings of the Human Factors Society Annual Meeting. Volume 30. 1.
SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. 1986, pages 48–52.
==PAGE:148==
136
Bibliography
[13]
Thomas A Furness III and Joel S Kollin. Virtual retinal display. US Patent
5,467,104. November 1995.
[14]
Jian Gu, Nai Li, and Henry Been-Lirn Duh. “A remote mobile collaborative
AR system for learning in physics”. In: Virtual Reality Conference (VR), 2011
IEEE. IEEE. 2011, pages 257–258.
[15]
Joel Hillel. “Modes of description and the problem of representation in linear
algebra”. In: On the teaching of linear algebra. Springer, 2000, pages 191–207.
[16]
Eric Klopfer and Kurt Squire. “Environmental Detectives—the development of
an augmented reality platform for environmental simulations”. In: Educational
Technology Research and Development 56.2 (2008), pages 203–228.
[17]
Gun A Lee et al. “CityViewAR: A mobile outdoor AR application for city
visualization”. In: Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR-AMH), 2012 IEEE
International Symposium on. IEEE. 2012, pages 57–64.
[18]
Marios Lokas. “A Comparison of Augmented and Virtual Reality technologies
for games and apps”. In: (2018).
[19]
David G Lowe. “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints”. In:
International journal of computer vision 60.2 (2004), pages 91–110.
[20]
I Scott MacKenzie. “Designing HCI experiments”. In: Human-computer inter-
action: An empirical research perspective. Newnes, 2012. Chapter 5.
[21]
Paul Milgram et al. “Augmented reality: A class of displays on the reality-
virtuality continuum”. In: Telemanipulator and telepresence technologies. Vol-
ume 2351. International Society for Optics and Photonics. 1995, pages 282–293.
[22]
Nassir Navab, A Bani-Kashemi, and Matthias Mitschke. “Merging visible and
invisible: Two camera-augmented mobile C-arm (CAMC) applications”. In: Aug-
mented Reality, 1999.(IWAR’99) Proceedings. 2nd IEEE and ACM Interna-
tional Workshop on. IEEE. 1999, pages 134–141.
[23]
Jean Piaget. “Play, dreams and imitation in childhood.” In: (1952).
[24]
Dale H Schunk. Learning theories an educational perspective sixth edition. Pear-
son, 2012.
[25]
Nyet Moi Siew, Jolly Geofrey, and Bih Ni Lee. “Students’ algebraic thinking and
attitudes towards algebra: the effects of game-based learning using Dragonbox
12+ App”. In: Electron. J. Math. Technol 10.1 (2016), pages 1–17.
[26]
S Stewart and MOJ Thomas. “Difficulties in the acquisition of linear algebra
concepts”. In: New Zealand Journal of Mathematics 32 (2003), pages 207–215.
[27]
Joung-Souk Sung. “Design of VR/AR Learning on Ubiquitous Environment”.
In: International Journal of Software Engineering and Its Applications 8.12
(2014), pages 189–198.
[28]
Ivan E Sutherland. “Sketchpad a man-machine graphical communication sys-
tem”. In: Transactions of the Society for Computer Simulation 2.5 (1964), R–
3.
==PAGE:149==
Bibliography
137
[29]
Charlotte Lærke Weitze. “Learning and motivational processes when students
design curriculum-based digital learning games”. In: Proceedings of The 9th
European Conference on Games Based Learning: ECGBL 2015. 2015.
[30]
Hsin-Kai Wu et al. “Current status, opportunities and challenges of augmented
reality in education”. In: Computers & education 62 (2013), pages 41–49.
[31]
Steve Chi-Yin Yuen, Gallayanee Yaoyuneyong, and Erik Johnson. “Augmented
reality: An overview and five directions for AR in education”. In: Journal of Ed-
ucational Technology Development and Exchange (JETDE) 4.1 (2011), page 11.
==PAGE:150==
