==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Control of Rotor-Bearing System Dynamics 
Interacting with Gas Seal Forces - 
Design, Implementation and Analysis
Simon Bo Jensen
March 2019
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Supervisors
Ilmar Ferreira Santos, Professor Dr.-Ing., Dr.Techn., Livre-Docente
&
Jonas Skjødt Lauridsen, Visiting Industial PostDoc
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Rotating machinery is the backbone in many industrial components such as pumps and compressors.
In these machines seals reduce leakage between compartments in the machine. Seals are necessary,
but introduce destabilizing forces into the rotor systems. Both gas seals, liquid seals and multiphase
seals have destabilizing properties. Rotating machinery often depends on high rotational speed for
high productivity, power density and efﬁciency. The rotational speed of the machine is limited by the
rotor dynamic stability margins which are reduced by the destabilizing seal forces. The characteristics
of seal forces are important to determine, in order to foresee stability margins and design rotating
machinery mitigating the destabilizing forces.
The seal force characteristics are difﬁcult to determine due to complex ﬂow in the seals, especially
for multiphase ﬂow. Thus, seal forces are determined experimentally utilizing a test facility. The test
facility is based on a rotor system where perturbations and sensing of the rotor behaviour is achieved
through active magnetic bearings (AMB). The AMB actuators depends on power ampliﬁers with fast
dynamics for the AMB actuator to deliver forces with fast dynamics, which is critical for stabilization
of the rotor. An eight channel current ampliﬁer was designed, manufactured and implemented in the
test facility. The current ampliﬁer was designed with a semi passive H bridge power stage, which
allows fast control of AMB coil current. The current ampliﬁer showed good results; the current
ampliﬁer showed a bandwidth of above 300 Hz and the nominal rotational speed of the test facility
was reached at 10.000 rpm.
With the new addition to the test facility a new mathematical model was created with insights
of the ampliﬁer dynamics. Important AMB parameters were optimized using experimental data as
reference for improving model behaviour. The model was used as basis in seal force characterization
for high preswirled gas ﬂow in a smooth annular seal on a rotor at zero rotational speed. The results
matched previous studies made on this subject; the major seal force component is the cross coupled
stiffness which increases with seal inlet pressure.
Destabilization of the rotor system was analysed and it was discovered that the cross coupled
stiffness delivered by the seal destabilized a rigid body mode in the rotor system. It was shown
experimentally that a simple cross coupled proportional gain in the AMB position controller could
counteract the destabilizing seal force. With this control approach seal inlet pressure before destabi-
lization was more than doubled.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This project is a master’s thesis conducted in the period between 27th of August 2018 to the 10th of
March 2019. The work was performed at DTU Lyngby Campus using the facilities of the Department
of Mechanical Engineering and DTU Electrical Engineering. The master’s thesis corresponds to the
workload of 30 ECTS points (825 hours) and is mandatory in order to obtain the master’s degree
(MSc) in mechanical engineering.
Besides the fact that this project was a mandatory part of my education it has been a project which
I have become very passionate about. Experimental work is a ﬁeld for itself, often the difﬁculty of
making good experiments is underestimated. In order to make good experimental work, skills within
a lot of other ﬁelds than the phenomena studied are often required. Understanding all the aspects
of a machine like the test facility used in this project requires skills within the ﬁelds of mechanics,
electronics, control and software. During the project I have acquired a lot of skills especially within
the last three ﬁelds. The broad spectre of competences acquired and used in this project is to a large
degree what has motivated me and made me passionate about the project, together with the support
of my supervisors.
This project would not have been possible without a handful of people who deserves a special
thanks. First of all my two supervisors Ilmar Ferreira Santos and Jonas Skjødt Lauridsen from DTU
Department of Mechanical Engineering. They gave me the chance to contribute to an important re-
search venture, supported, advised and helped me obtain the knowledge and skills needed to complete
the project successfully. Working with design and manufacturing of power electronics I beneﬁted
from advice and the facilities of the DTU Electrical Engineering department particularly through
Hans-Christian Andersen.
Simon Bo Jensen
Kgs Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Abbreviations
1
2
Introduction
2
2.1
General introduction to research venture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Introduction to the master’s thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Master’s thesis objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
AMB Current Ampliﬁer
6
3.1
AMBs as a load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.1
Magnetic bearings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.2
Induction of coils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Architecture of current ampliﬁer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.1
Controller/microprocessor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.2
Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.3
Analog to Digital Conversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.4
Power stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.5
Semi passive H bridge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.6
MOSFETs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.7
PWM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
PCB design consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.1
Signal noise considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Ground and power planes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.3
Thermal considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
10 Channel current ampliﬁer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.1
Overview of the ampliﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.2
PCB Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4.2.1
Power stage design block
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4.2.2
ADC design block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.2.3
Overall PCB layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Implementing the current ampliﬁer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.7
Current controller and response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.8
General ampliﬁer considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Rotor Dynamics and Seal Coefﬁcient Identiﬁcation
39
4.1
Creating baseline rotor dynamic model and optimizing model parameters
. . . . . .
39
4.1.1
The mechanical rotor dynamic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
The mathematical rotor dynamic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.3
Verifying mathematical rotor dynamic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.4
Optimizing mathematical rotor dynamic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.5
Verifying the optimized model in frequency domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.6
Optimizing model at speciﬁc frequencies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.7
Optimizing model at varying bias currents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.8
Model at 6A bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.1.9
6A bias model veriﬁcation in frequency domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.1.10 Flexible coupling characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2
Identiﬁcation of seal forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
==PAGE:7==
4.2.1
Identiﬁcation of seal forces procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2.2
Identiﬁed seal parameter results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5
Stabilizing System with Cross Coupled P Controller
69
5.1
Destabilizing the rotor system with seal ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
Dynamics of rotor during destabilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.3
Stabilizing the rotor system subjected to seal ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.4
Foreseeing rotor destabilization with mathematical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6
General Considerations Concerning the Test Rig
79
6.1
dSPACE ADC conﬁguration and loop timing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.2
Excitation of ﬁrst bending mode shape notch ﬁlter and master loop overrun
. . . . .
81
6.3
Electrical runout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7
Conclusion
84
8
Further Work
86
A Ampliﬁer schematics
89
B
Ampliﬁer component list
96
C Ampliﬁer parts blueprints
103
D Ampliﬁer model and parameter study
114
E
Response of model in time with optimized parameters
119
F
Zoom of responses of rotor position during destabilization experiment
121
==PAGE:8==
1
Abbreviations
CFD Computational Fluid Dynamics
AMB Active Magnetic Bearing
ADC Analog digital converter
LDO Low-dropout regulator (Linear voltage regulator)
PCB Printed circuit board
ESL Equivalent serial inductance
FRF Frequency response function
FE Finite element
IPC Inter processor communication
PRBS Pseudo random binary sequence
SP Set point
PV Present value
EDM Electrical discharge machined
SNR Signal to noise ratio
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Introduction
This chapter addresses the motivation of the master’s thesis project. The thesis is part of the re-
search venture: ’Seals in Multiphase Flow: Identiﬁcation of Rotordynamic Properties Using Active
Magnetic Bearings - Modelling and Validation’ which has been ongoing for several years including
several people contributing to the project. Seals are necessary and widely used in rotating machinery
such as pumps and compressors. Often the seals introduce destabilizing forces into rotor systems
making machine design and operation challenging. If seal force characteristics are determined, de-
sign and operation measures can be taken to mitigate the destabilizing effect of seals. Because of
the complex ﬂow characteristics in seals, force characteristics are difﬁcult to determine theoretically
and the mathematical model has to be veriﬁed experimentally. The research venture aims to create
and verify mathematical models of the seal ﬂow in order to predict seal force characteristics. This
master’s thesis contributes to the research venture in the area of experimental validation of seal force
characteristics.
2.1
General introduction to research venture
According to [1] the power consumed in compressors in the European Union is 80TWh a year and
constitutes around 10% of the electric power use in the industry. Globally, a similar percentage of
industrial electric power is spend in compressors. According to Grundfos [2] another 10% of the
worlds electrical energy is consumed in pumps. Not only will a higher efﬁciency of compressors
and pumps reduce the operating cost but also reduce the global power consumption. This will in
most cases result in reduced environmental impact when operating compressors and pumps. Modern
compressor and pump technology is pushing the limits of efﬁciency and the results of this research
venture will aid this process.
This research venture focuses on identifying the rotor dynamic properties of the seals of rotating
machinery. This ﬁeld of research is relevant for certain types of compressors and pumps mainly of
the types that uses a high speed centrifugal impeller i.e. centrifugal pumps and turbo compressors.
Centrifugal pumps are used in almost every industry to some degree and can be designed within a
large span of characteristics. Turbo compressors usually have the characteristic of delivering large air
ﬂows at low pressure. Acquisition cost is usually high, but over the compressors lifespan this is made
up for in efﬁciency, resulting in lower power consumption and low maintenance costs.
Complex ﬂow conditions occur in the seals of both turbo compressors and centrifugal pumps,
making the rotor dynamic properties difﬁcult to determine. In some industrial applications e.g. deep
sea drilling, the compressor pumps a multiphase media introducing multiphase ﬂow in the seal in-
creasing complexity of the seal ﬂow. The test rig build to determine seal force characteristics is
currently only introducing air ﬂow through the test seal. However, the test rig is prepared to handle
multiphase ﬂow in the test seal of water and air in the future, in order to verify mathematical models
of the multiphase ﬂow.
In order to reach a high efﬁciency and high power density of turbo compressors and centrifugal
pumps, high rotor speeds must be achieved. The operable range of rotational speed of rotating ma-
chinery is limited by its stability. It is known that seals has a large impact on rotor stability. Preswirled
ﬂow and high rotational speed both introduce large tangential ﬂuid velocity in the seal, which creates
the destabilizing forces. Seals are necessary for ensuring a low leakage of process ﬂuid from the
impeller housing into other compartments of the machine e.g. the electric motor. The characteristics
of the seal-rotor forces generated by the process ﬂuid ﬂow are difﬁcult to determine numerically, es-
pecially when dealing with multiphase process ﬂuid. Even with the advanced CFD software available
and utilizing the increasing computer power, it is difﬁcult to capture the force characteristics of seals.
Creating a CFD model representing the physical system closely is no trivial task due to the nature
2
==PAGE:10==
of the ﬂuid ﬂow in the seal i.e. large pressure and velocity gradients and the different length scales
involved to support the geometry of the seals. With increasing complexity of numerical models used
to determine seal force characteristics, veriﬁcation and calibrations of the CFD model becomes in-
creasingly important. To obtain benchmark data of these seal-rotor force characteristics, which can
be used in design or calibration of CFD models, the characteristics of the seal-rotor forces are deter-
mined experimentally. The contribution of this master’s thesis to the research venture deals with the
experimental determination of seal-rotor force characteristics.
The ﬁeld of single phase process ﬂuid interacting with seals and rotors is well documented ([3],
[4], [5], [6]). For curtain pumps multiphase ﬂow occurs in the seal e.g. when pumping immiscible
ﬂuids, mixtures of gas and liquid or when thermodynamic effect causes liquid to evaporate in the
seal. In deep sea oil-gas drilling, the pump media is multiphase ﬂuid. On the sea ﬂoor, separation
of the liquid and gas is not possible, so pumping of multiphase ﬂuid is necessary. It is the leakage
of this multiphase ﬂuid that the seal is reducing, thus multiphase ﬂow occurs in the seal. The low
maintenance of the turbo compressors is also a large factor in this application. It is necessary to
expand the knowledge of seal force characteristics into the ﬁeld of multiphase seal ﬂow. With this
knowledge the limits of these machines will be pushed.
The previous contributors have made a large effort designing, manufacturing, assembling, cal-
ibrating, testing and creating control software for the test facility produced in order to explore the
seal-rotor forces experimentally. The test facility consists of a main rotor levitated in AMBs, where
a 110mm diameter seal is mounted in a back to back conﬁguration where each seal land is 83mm
long. Pressurized ﬂuid, currently air, is introduced into the seal with a large preswirl. The AMBs are
used for levitating and perturbing the rotor and the response of the rotor is measured in the AMBs.
From experiments the characteristics of the rotor-seal forces are extracted. The current state of the
test facility is well described in papers produced by the previous contributors of the research venture.
The test rig was originally designed and manufactured by Andreas Voigt during his PhD thesis [7].
Christian Mandrup-Poulsen has created a procedure for calibrating the implemented hall effect sensor
system in the test rig during his master’s thesis [8]. In addition to the master’s thesis the control soft-
ware and computer interface is to a large extend created by Christian Mandrup-Poulsen. An article
on the design of the test facility and calibration of the hall effect sensors was released in [9]. At this
state, the test rig is installed with air as test ﬂuid. However, the test rig is designed bearing in mind
a conversion to multiphase ﬂow. The conversion to multiphase ﬂow has not been conducted, since
more experience with operation of the test rig was desired. To ensure the test rig is fully operational
and the seal force characteristics determination procedures are accurate, preliminary experiments and
analysis are conducted with only air used as media in the test seal. This was attempted in Frank
Skovsgaard and Ari Lamhauges master’s thesis [10] where the test rig was used to determine seal
forces for air ﬂow experimentally. An article by Jonas Lauridsen on the procedure of determining
seal force characteristics speciﬁcally on this test rig was published [6] in connection with his PhD
thesis.
Because of the extensive complexity of the test facility the full potential has not been reached yet.
During the work conducted by the previous contributors mentioned above, a major issue with the test
facility was discovered. The current ampliﬁers actuating AMB coils are not capable of controlling the
current correctly. This limits the dynamics of the forces produced by the AMBs during testing of seal
characteristics, which limits the operation of the test facility. In fact the ampliﬁers prevents the test
rig of reaching its nominal rotor speed of 10.000 rpm without destabilization, even with no seal ﬂow
introduced. All the seal force characterization have thus been conducted at rotor speed zero because
of this issue.
This master’s thesis deals with producing capable current ampliﬁers and implementing the ampli-
ﬁers in the test facility. When the test rig is operational with the new current ampliﬁers, seal force
characteristics are determined for air ﬂow. Since the seal forces are destabilizing, new control ap-
3
==PAGE:11==
proaches are required to stabilize the rotor system during experimental operation. These new control
approaches are developed and tested in this master’s thesis. The results produced during this thesis
are not pioneering, but comparable with results produced in previous papers allowing validation of
the experimental results. However, this is an essential task to be conducted before expanding the test
facility into supporting characterization of multiphase ﬂow in the seal.
2.2
Introduction to the master’s thesis
The objective of the test facility is to characterize the forces created between the seal and the rotor. To
allow implementation of the seal characteristics in a rotor dynamic analysis, the forces are deﬁned in
terms of stiffness where the forces depend on the lateral position of the rotor and damping where the
forces depend of the lateral velocity of the rotor. Experiments are conducted with the rotor vibrating
at different speciﬁc frequencies to record system behaviour at the relevant frequency. This is done
to determine frequency dependence of the seal characteristics. The physical states measured during
test rig operation indicating the system behaviour are, perturbation currents, control currents, present
value AMB coil currents, lateral rotor position and magnetic ﬂux between the AMB poles and rotor.
The rotor is vibrated at a speciﬁc frequency by adding a current disturbance to the control current
at the desired frequency. In order for the AMBs to accelerate the rotor, AMBs has to introduce a force
on the rotor, this is done by controlling the AMB coil currents. The AMB coil current is controlled
by a current ampliﬁer tracking a reference control current. For large accelerations of the rotor, large
forces are required which are a product of high AMB coil currents. For the AMBs to support fast
acceleration gradients, the forces delivered has to have fast dynamics requiring fast dynamics of
the coil currents. For high frequency excitation, this fast dynamics current ampliﬁer is needed. In
addition, the nature of the seal forces are destabilizing especially when operating at high pressures,
which also sets high requirements for the dynamics of the coil currents. The present ampliﬁers are
capable of delivering large currents enabling large forces in the AMBs, however they are not capable
of delivering large current gradients rejecting fast lateral rotor acceleration gradients. So far only
experiments with seal pressures of up to a few bars have been conducted because the ampliﬁers
cannot stabilize the system for higher seal pressure. In order to proceed with the research venture the
test facilitys current ampliﬁers has to be replaced.
A mathematical model of the test facility is used for several purposes. The forces created by the
seal ﬂow are not directly measurable. The approach used to determine seal force characteristics in this
master’s thesis is by optimizing for seal coefﬁcients in a mathematical model in order to ﬁt the models
behaviour onto experimental data. This approach requires a mathematical model that replicates the
system behaviour to some degree of precision. The mathematical model is also useful to gain insight
in the rotor dynamic system during destabilizing due to large seal ﬂows. Since the AMB actuation
system is a combination of AMBs and current ampliﬁers a new model has to be created when current
ampliﬁers are replaced.
Most of the parameters used in the mathematical model can be estimated analytically, but for
various reasons these parameters can vary in reality introducing errors into the mathematical model.
The important AMB parameters are optimized matching the model behaviour to the experimental
behaviour, thus calibrating the model. An accurate mathematical model will in the end create better
seal force characteristics results.
For high seal pressures, the main rotor will become unstable with the current decentralised AMB
position PID controllers. New control methods must be implemented to stabilize the rotor at high seal
ﬂow. An attempt is made to counteract the destabilizing cross coupled stiffness produced by the seal
by implementing a cross coupled proportional gain in the AMB position controller.
4
==PAGE:12==
2.2.1
Master’s thesis objectives
The overall goal of the master’s thesis is to increase the operational range of the test rig in terms of
maximum seal pressure and rotational speed. At the moment the test rig is not capable reaching the
speciﬁed operational conditions of 65 bars of seal inlet pressure and rotor rotational speed of 10.000
rpm. The seal force characteristics are explored in this new expanded operational range of the test rig.
In order to reach the overall goal of the master thesis the following tasks has to be completed.
Design and manufacture current ampliﬁers: New current ampliﬁers are designed and manufac-
tured which are capable of fast control of the currents in the AMB coils. The ampliﬁer is
purpose build as current ampliﬁer for magnetic bearings, however features are included so the
rotor position controller can be implemented in the ampliﬁer. It is designed with 10 channels
in order to support levitation of a typical rotor with 2 radial AMBs and one axial AMB. This
makes the ampliﬁer versatile and the design can be used for other AMB projects.
Implementation of current ampliﬁers: The new ampliﬁers has to be implemented in the test fa-
cility. For the sake of the ongoing research venture, this implementation should be done in a
fashion in which other operators are capable of conducting experiments easily and safely.
Modelling of test facility: The added dynamics from the new current ampliﬁers are assessed and
the corresponding mathematical models altered. Parameters in the model which are uncertain
are optimized. The model response is compared to the response of the physical system and the
model parameters are optimized to minimize the difference in response. This yields a calibrated
model which is used for destabilization analysis and seal force characteristics identiﬁcation.
The mathematical model is validated in the frequency domain.
Seal force characteristics identiﬁcation: The calibrated and validated mathematical model is used
as basis for seal force characteristics determination. The seal forces are added to the mathe-
matical model as unknowns. The seal force coefﬁcients are optimized for comparing the model
response to the response of the physical system. When seal ﬂow is introduced, the procedure
yields the seal force coefﬁcients present during operation of the test rig at the given seal inlet
pressure. Seal force coefﬁcients identiﬁed here are for higher seal inlet pressures than previ-
ously explored with this test facility. The seal forces are identiﬁed at zero rotor speed, because
of problems with electric run out at the position sensors.
Destabilizing of rotor with seal ﬂow: Experiments are conducted where the rotor is destabilized by
increasing seal ﬂuid ﬂow. The mathematical model is utilized to gain insight in what mecha-
nisms destabilize the rotor system. The mathematical model is also used to foresee destabiliza-
tion of the rotor, which can be used to ensure safe operation of test facility. This approach of
foreseeing instability could be applicable for other rotating machines.
Stabilizing rotor at high seal ﬂow with centralized PID controller with cross-coupling feedback:
With the gained insight of the destabilizing experiments conducted and the analysis of the math-
ematical model an approach is made to stabilize the rotor at higher seal ﬂows. A cross coupled
feedback is implemented in the AMB position controller to counteract the large cross coupled
stiffness created by the seal. This approach turns out to be very effective for stabilizing the rotor
at high seal ﬂows.
Documentation of general considerations concerning the test rig: The test rig is complicated to
operate and errors are easily made during operation. Since the test rig is a part of an ongoing
research venture, an effort is made to document observations and concerns regarding the test
rig in order to ease the work for future contributors.
5
==PAGE:13==
3
AMB Current Ampliﬁer
This chapter elaborates on considerations made when designing the current ampliﬁer and includes
documentation on the produced ampliﬁer. A current ampliﬁer consists of several components, that
have to work closely together for effective operation of the ampliﬁer. The critical components and
their interfaces are reviewed to gain insight in the workings of the AMB current ampliﬁer.
3.1
AMBs as a load
In order to design the current ampliﬁers for magnetic bearings, the load which the ampliﬁer drives
must be understood. The magnetic bearing consists of a number of electromagnets enabling the
bearing to pull the shaft in different directions. The magnetic bearing design only allows each of the
coils to pull the shaft in the one direction where the electromagnet is placed. The pulling force of an
electromagnet is controlled by inducing current in the coils which the magnetic ﬂux is related to. The
magnetic ﬂux is the physical phenomenon delivering the forces of the electromagnet.
Different approaches can be made when controlling AMBs. For the present test rig a controller
calculates reference currents required in the different coils. These reference currents are based on
the principal of differential driving mode of the opposing magnetic coils. This method allows for
the controller to couple the two opposing electro magnets and deliver forces in both directions. This
method is elaborated in [11, p.81].
The reference current is represented by an analog signal created in the dSPACE control computer
and fed into the current ampliﬁer by BNC cables. Optimally the current ampliﬁer induces the wanted
current in the load represented by reference signal.
A current ampliﬁer needs an internal current control circuit. The power stage control value does
not set the current output of the power stage, but the effective voltage. The controller needs to adjust
this effective output voltage of the power stages according the reference current signals and current
actually running in the coils. The relation between between effective voltage and current through a
coil is elaborated in section 3.1.2. The challenges of fast current tracking in a coil is reviewed in this
section.
3.1.1
Magnetic bearings
Figure 1: Schematic of typical magnetic bearing.
Figure 1 shows a schematic of a magnetic bearing cross section. Four electromagnets surround the
shaft. Each of the electro magnets can only attract the shaft, so at least 3 magnets are needed in order
to pull the shaft in any direction in the crossectional plane.
Magnetic ﬁelds are continuous and have to form a closed loop. This closed loop is formed through
the horseshoe shaped stator core, the shaft and the air gaps in between the shaft and cores. The
magnetic ﬁeld will mostly stay in the magnetic core and the shaft, because of the high magnetic
6
==PAGE:14==
permeability of the core material offers a low magnetic resistance loop. Air has a much smaller
magnetic permeability resisting the magnetic ﬁeld. The air gap between the shaft and the magnetic
cores is small i.e. 0.5 mm for the present AMBs. The magnetic ﬁeld can overcome this gap with a
certain added resistance of the magnetic loop. When a current runs in the coil, a magnetic ﬁeld will
form inside the coil proportional to the current, the number of coil windings and inversely proportional
to the magnetic resistance and disregarding the area of the coil. The pulling force of each magnet is
proportional to the squared magnetic ﬂux between the magnetic core and the shaft. The pulling force
is always attracting disregarding the direction of the magnetic ﬂux. The magnetic ﬂux is the plane
integral of the magnetic ﬁeld, this means that the cross sectional area of the coil and core will also
inﬂuence the forces from a certain current in the coil. So by increasing the cross-sectional area of
the coil or reducing the resistance of the magnetic loop a larger force is created from the same coil
current.
As shown in ﬁgure 1, the green magnetic ﬂux loop crosses the intersection between shaft and
stator core twice. This means that the magnetic ﬁeld that the coil induces will pull on the shaft in
nearly the same direction at each of the interfaces with the same force magnitude.
The dynamic parameters contributing to the forces acting from the electromagnet onto the rotor
is the coil current and the air gap. The constant parameters inﬂuencing the magnetic resistance are
related to material and magnetic core geometry which is ﬁxed for each individual bearing. Often the
change in air gap is considered constant since the radial movement of the rotor is small. This boils
down to the forces acting between the electromagnets and rotor, being proportional to the squared
current that runs in the coils. The core material limits this span because it saturates, meaning that
there is a limit of the magnetic ﬁeld it is able to carry. This means the forces induced by the magnetic
bearing on the rotor can be controlled by controlling the current of the coils.
3.1.2
Induction of coils
It is in the nature of a coil winding to be inductive. Inductiveness is a property of resisting current
change. This property is problematic since the forces working the magnetic bearings is proportional
to the squared current. For fast controlling of the forces working in the bearing the current in the coils
has to be forced to change fast, which the inductiveness resists.
The inductance of a coil L is calculated from the number of winding turns N and the reluctance
of the magnetic circuit R:
L = N 2
R
(3.1)
For the special case where the magnetic ﬂux is conﬁned to a path of constant cross-sectional area
the reluctance is:
R =
l
µA
(3.2)
Where l is the length of the core, µ is the permeability of the core material and A is the cross-
sectional area of the core. If the magnetic ﬂux is conducted in a series of materials such as in a
magnetic bearing i.e. the rotor, stator core and air gaps the reluctances of each part is added to ﬁnd
the total reluctance of the magnetic circuit. Because of the high permability of the core material, the
reluctance is almost exclusively determined by the area and size of the AMB air gaps.
The equation of the induced current in an inductor is:
U
L = dI
dt
→
∆I = ∆tU
L
(3.3)
Where I is the current in Amperes [A], U is the voltage across the coil in Volts [V] and L is the
inductance in Henry [H]. This means that for fast changes in current in the coils, a high voltage across
7
==PAGE:15==
the coil is needed. Not only is it needed to increase the current in the coils rapidly, but also decrease
the current rapidly. Thus, the ampliﬁer should be able to induce both a large positive and negative
voltage across the coil to allow high and low current gradients in the coils. This is the exact feature
the existing ampliﬁers are lacking, as they are only capable of applying a large positive voltage across
the coils.
3.2
Architecture of current ampliﬁer
The general architecture of the current ampliﬁer is presented in ﬁgure 2. The major components
of the ampliﬁer are the analog to digital converter (ADC), the current sensor, the controller and the
power stage. The controller is implemented on a microprocessor working in timesteps making the
controller discrete. The reference signal which indicates what current is wanted in the coil is an
analog signal coming in this case from the dSPACE control computer. Currently the sensitivity of
this signal is 5 A/V, and since the AMBs are rated for a maximum of 25 A the signal is potentially
5 V. The current sensing signal which represents the actual current in the coil is also analog. The
microprocessor which the controller is implemented on works digitally and cannot handle an analog
signal directly. An ADC is included in the system in order to convert the analog signals to digital
values that the microprocessor can convert to numbers which is used in the control algorithm, in this
case a PI controller.
Figure 2: General design of CAFMB
Based on the current reference signal and the current sensing signal the current controller calcu-
lates whether to increase or decrease the current in the coil and how fast. The coil current is changed
by the effective voltage across it, which is delivered by the powerstage. The powertage is controlled
by a pulse width modulated (PWM) signal coming from the microcontroller. The microcontroller
thereby controls the coil current with a PWM signal.
The PWM signal is a certain type of analog signal which is great for controlling high efﬁciency
switchmode power electronics. The PWM signal will be explained more thoroughly in section 3.2.7.
The PWM signal is low voltage (3.3 V) and low current (<100 mA) and is not powerful enough to
actuate the coils. The powerstage ampliﬁes the PWM signal to high voltage (around 120 V) and is
able to deliver high currents (around 20 A) which actuates the coil.
3.2.1
Controller/microprocessor
The microprocessor needs to attain the analog reference signal and analog current measurement sig-
nal, calculate an appropriate PWM duty cycle and output it on a pin into the power stage. The analog
signals are read through an external ADC described in section 3.2.3 through a serial peripheral inter-
face (SPI) described in 3.2.2. An ethernet connection is created in order to interface with the ampliﬁer
8
==PAGE:16==
through a computer for monitoring and control. The microcontroller will also have to spend resources
communicating with this ethernet connection which is also interfaced though SPI. In order to handle
wanted dynamics of the reference signal, the control loop should run at 10 times the frequency of the
signal. Aiming at supporting dynamics of 1000 Hz, the control loop should run at a frequency of 10
kHz, making each cycle take 0.1 ms. In each control cycle the microprocessor should be able to read
all the analog signals (20 signals), calculate 10 PWM duty cycle values and set the corresponding
output pins and still have time to interface with the ethernet connection.
The microprocessor used to implement the controller on is the Teensy 3.6 board. The Teensy 3.6 is
a development friendly microprocessor, which features all the speciﬁcations that are needed for such
a controller for a low price (around 200DKK). The Teensy 3.6 is ﬂashed trough a USB port, and the
code can be written in C++ or a patch for the Arduino IDE enables programming the microprocessor
through the Arduino environment. The Arduino language is easy to get started with and is well
documented online because of the vast community that deals with Ardunio. The datasheet for the
microprocessor used on the board [12], is very extensive and difﬁcult to navigate. The webpage [13]
offers everything needed to setup this microprocessor in a much simpler fashion. When referring to a
speciﬁc section of the domain the method [13, /td_libs_SPI.html - SPI Library] is used. The
url in the reference should be extended with the url in the citation to access the section.
The Teensy 3.6 has a 32 bit 180 MHz main processor that is ﬂoating point capable. The ﬂoating
point capability allows the processor to handle decimal numbers, which is favourable when imple-
menting a controller. The clock speed of the Teensy 3.6 is 180 MHz making a clock cycle 5.56 ns.
This allows 18.000 clock cycles per control loop. It was not possible to ﬁnd speciﬁcations on how
fast the Teensy 3.6 is able to perform ﬂoating point operations, so a test was run in order to determine
the number of cycles used to do ﬂoating point operations. The timers on the Teensy 3.6 works in mi-
croseconds, so a loop of 10.000 was made where ﬂoating point operations are made. The loop itself
takes time, so the loop was run with 1 and 2 operations and the difference in time taken determines
the time of 10.000 operations. The result is shown in table 1. This is merely to give an indication
of what the Teensy 3.6 is capable of. The number of operations possible to make during one control
loop cycle seems sufﬁcient even for making a rather advanced controller for a 10 channel ampliﬁer.
The other operations have to be made as well, such as ADC sampling and data transfer, which takes
time as well and has to be considered.
Table 1: Number of clock cycles and time of ﬂoating point operations on Teensy 3.6
Floating point operation
Addition
Subtraction
Multiplication
Division
Number of clock cycles
2
2
2
15
Time at 180MHz [ns]
11.1
11.1
11.1
83.3
Operations possible per control loop
9000
9000
9000
1200
3.2.2
Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI)
The Teensy 3.6 has 3 100 MHz SPI interfaces which are used for digital communication with other
components. SPI is a synchronous serial communication interface standard which is used for trans-
ferring data between devices. It is set up as shown in ﬁgure 3. The communication happens through 4
signals i.e. ’SCLK’, ’MOSI’, ’MISO’ and ’SS’. ’SCLK’, ’MOSI’ and ’SS’ are signals send out from
the master device and the ’MISO’ signal is send out from the slave device. All signals are shared
between the master device and all the slave devices, except the ’SS’ signal. Each of the slave devices
have their own ’SS’ signal as shown in ﬁgure 3. These are all digital signals and can all take one
of the two values 0 or 1 and in this case 1 corresponds to 3.3 V. The device sending out the signal
determines whether the signal line is ’High’ or ’Low’ (0 or 3.3 V), and the receiving device of the
signal will be able to read this information.
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3: SPI communication setup [14]
The master device, in this case the Teensy, selects a slave device to communicate with by setting
the corresponding ’SS’ pin high and the other devices ’SS’ pins low. Then the Teensy sends out a
clock pulse (alternating the voltage on the pin in a square waveform between 0 V and 3.3 V) through
the ’SCLK’ signal with speeds of up to 100 MHz as shown in ﬁgure 4. A bit can be send from master
to slave device through MOSI signal and a bit can be send from slave to master through the MISO
signal for every clock pulse. This happens by the sending device setting the signal of MOSI or MISO
high or low for a clock cycle and the receiving device reads this information as a bit.
Figure 4: SPI communication protocol [15]
At another time a different slave device can be selected and communicated with. This enables a
high speed communication with multiple devices through relatively few pins on the master device.
The Teensy 3.6 SPI speciﬁcations, libraries and code are explained further in [13, /td_libs_SPI.
html].
In the case of the current ampliﬁer the SPI is used to communicate with ADCs that are used to read
the analog signals. The current ampliﬁer is equipped with an ethernet port enabling high speed live
communication between the ampliﬁer and a computer. The ethernet port also communicates with the
Teensy 3.6 through SPI. The live communication between the ampliﬁer and a computer enables live
monitoring of any information that the microprocessor possesses. Control parameters can be changed
on the ﬂy, while the ampliﬁer is running.
SPI is a quite common interface for communication between devices. Therefore the Teensy has
a hardware setup that is able to run each of the SPI ports parallel with the main code. This means
that data can be transferred to or from the memory of the microprocessor through SPI while the main
code is running. The ADCs have to transfer a signiﬁcant amount of data. They read 8 channels, have
a resolution of 18 bits adding up to 144 bits per sample and are capable of running 20 MHz SPI.
10
==PAGE:18==
Transferring the 144 bits at 20 MHz takes 7.2 µs. Because the SPI operations run parallel, data from
up to 3 SPI ports can be read simultaneously. In this case data can be read from 2 ADCs taking a total
of 7.2 µs, while the microprocessor communicate with the ethernet connection and make calculations
on the main processor as well. This seems to be a sufﬁciently fast setup to support a control loop time
of 100 µs.
3.2.3
Analog to Digital Conversion
It is desirable to convert the analog signals to digital values with a curtain degree of precision and
resolution. The digital value is used by the microprocessor to calculate the output that is send to the
powerstage. Thus, the more precisely the digital value represents the actual physical state represented
by the analog signals, the easier it is to make a good controller.
An analog signal has inﬁnite resolution, i.e. it can take any value inbetween two voltages for
example 0 V and 5 V. When converting to a digital value information is lost because digital values are
discrete and have a ﬁnite resolution. The resolution possible is governed by the ADC speciﬁcations.
The Teensy 3.6 offers 13 bit resolution of signals up to 3.3 V. This means that the analog signals are
converted into digital integers inbetween 0 to 213 = 8192. The minimum voltage step possible in the
digital value is 3.3V/8192 = 0.4mV . This is a sufﬁcient resolution, since it will turn out that the noise
picked up in the analog signal lines and current sensors is signiﬁcantly larger then this voltage step.
The noise induced in the analog signal seems to have a periodic part and some seemingly random
noise.
The periodic part of the noise seems to come from the switching of the powerstage and is related
to the PWM signal and could be somewhat avoided sampling at speciﬁc times at the PWM cycle
where the noise is known to be low. The seemingly random noise has to be avoided in different
ways since its source is unpredictable. The source of the random noise is considered to come from
random magnetic radiation from the surroundings and the high frequency digital signals. Much of the
random noise is high frequency and is ﬁltered through a low pass ﬁlter close before the analog input
of the ADC. It is in general often favourable to have a lowpass ﬁlter the analog signals before the
ADC to avoid picking up aliased harmonic signals from out of band noise [16]. Any noise picked up
will be transferred to the digital values, misrepresenting the correct analog values, making the system
increasingly difﬁcult to control.
The Teensy 3.6 possesses 25 analog pins multiplexed into two 13 bit ADCs. This means that
the Teensy 3.6 has 25 pins where it can read analog signals and convert them into digital values, but
can only do it two signals at a time. Only 20 analog signals have to be converted for the 10 channel
ampliﬁer, 10 current signals and 10 reference signals. Sampling the signals asynchronously could
make the controller design more advanced. The shared power supply of the microprocessor and the
onboard ADC modules is problematic. The ADC is very sensitive to electrical noise in its supply
voltage, which is very pronounced in the digital environment which the microprocessor offers. When
the microprocessor makes calculations or sets pins high or low a current is drawn from the power
supply, which induces noise in the supply voltage. The onboard ADCs share this power supply and
the noise propagates to the digital values that the ADC supplies to the controller.
Because of the questionable functionality of the onboard ADCs, external ADC devices will be
used for the current ampliﬁer. The ADS8598HIMP [17] is utilized. It offers all the features necessary
for this ampliﬁer. It is capable of sampling 8 analog signals simultaneously with a resultion of 18
bit at 500 kSPS (Kilosamples per second). It has pseudo differential inputs, meaning that it reads the
difference between two analog signals. This can be used to mitigate noise in long analog signal lines
which is explained in section 3.3.1.
When the ADC is a separate device it can be located a distance away from digital signal lines
which could crosstalk into the analog signal lines and induce noise. A drawback of the internal ADC
of the Teensy is that it shares power supply with all the digital components of the microprocessor
11
==PAGE:19==
which will inevitably induce noise in the voltage supply and thereby the ADC. When the ADC is
chosen to be a separate device, a separate low noise voltage supply can be used to power the ADC
which will reduced the total noise picked up by the system.
Three of these devices are needed in order to sample the 20 analog channels needed. It transfers
the digital values to the Teensy 3.6 via SPI. Each of the ADCs needed are hooked up to two different
SPI ports on the Teensy 3.6. The third SPI port is used for Ethernet, so two of the ADCs will share one
SPI connection. Since the Teensy 3.6 is capable of running its 3 SPI ports independently parallel to the
main processor, it can transfer data to the memory of the Teensy 3.6 while doing other calculations,
increasing the speed of the control loop.
The ADS8598HIMP is able to oversample up to 64X, meaning that it reads the analog signal
64 times over a short period of time, takes the average and sends it to the Teensy 3.6. This works
as a digital low pass ﬁlter. This can be useful for noise reduction, since the digital value does not
rely on one sample instance which could lie on a noise spike. If problems with noise appear during
implementation of the controller, this feature could turn out useful.
The 8 channels of the ADC are read simultaneously, if no oversampling is used this takes 1.25 µs.
However, it takes relatively long time to transfer the data from the ADC to the Teensy 3.6, according
to the datasheet it takes at least 12.5 µs to take 8 analog samples and transferring them to the Teensy
3.6 by SPI.
3.2.4
Power stage
The signals transferred between the low power devices i.e. microprocessor, ADCs, sensors and MOS-
FET drivers are 5 V or less. Most of the input pins are high impedance (>1 MΩ), which draws almost
no current in the signal lines. In order for the magnetic bearings to actually deliver forces onto the
rotor larger currents are needed. In the case of the present test rig, currents of up to 25 A are needed
in order for the magnetic bearings to deliver its maximum force. As discussed in section 3.1.2 max-
imum voltage of the power stage should also be high in order to allow large current gradients. The
microprocessor is only able to deliver up to 20 mA at a voltage of 3.3 V, and is not able to drive the
magnetic magnetic bearings directly, therefore a power stage is needed.
What is needed from the power stage is a signal ampliﬁcation. This means that for an analog
signal from for example 0 V to 3.3 V, is scaled up and offset to for example -120 V to 120 V. There
are several different power stage architecture which can accomplish this. The two main architectures
are analog and switch mode ampliﬁers. In general the analog ampliﬁers use transistors as electrically
controlled variable resistors, which throttle high voltages over the driven load. The analog power
stage architectures are usually simple in design and are very low noise. However, since the transistors
work as throttling resistors, the architecture is very inefﬁcient. For example if the load is driven at 1 V
and 10 A, and the power supply is 120 V, the transistor would have to have a resistance which would
create a voltage drop of 119 V at 10 A. The transistor would then be dissipating (120V −1V )·10A =
1190W of heat. Sinking this magnitude of heat from a transistor would require extensive cooling.
An alternative to analog power stages are switch mode power stages. Here the transistors are used
as high speed switches only offering a very high resistance or a very low resistance most of the time.
The transistor only offers intermediate resistance when it changes state from open to closed or from
closed to open. This happens since the transistor is not able to change state instantaneously. The heat
losses in the transistor are greatly reduced because of this minimization of time where the transistor
offers intermediate resistance. The power dissipated in the transistor is I ·U. This means that if either
the voltage drop U over the transistor is small or the current through the transistor I is small, the
power dissipated will be small. When the transistor is in a fully closed state the resistance is very
low (<<1 Ω) only creating a small voltage drop over the transistor. When the transistor is fully open
the resistance is large (>1 MΩ), almost stopping the current running through the transistor. When
the resistance is intermediate it allows for both the current and voltage drop over the component to
12
==PAGE:20==
be fairly high dissipating energy in the component. When switching the transistors at speeds of 100
kHz, the energy dissipated during the switching time can become pronounced compared to the other
losses in the transistor. They should be considered in the thermal considerations taken when building
such a power stage.
The power stage architecture chosen to drive the coils in the magnetic bearings is the semi passive
H-bridge which is a switch mode architecture. This particular power stage is great for the application
for several reasons. Since this is a switchmode architecture only small losses are present, which
is essential when handling a lot of power to avoid thermal problems. From a single 120 V power
supply, this architecture is able to apply 120 V across the load but also reverse the voltage across the
load corresponding to -120 V. This feature is essential to decrease the current in the coils fast. This
architecture requires the load to be inductive for it to be able to apply this reversed voltage, however
this is not a problem because magnetic bearings are inductive by nature. The semi passive H-bridge
is only able to draw current in one direction in the inductive load. This is not a limitation for the
magnetic bearing which only requires current to be drawn in one direction. To drive the semi passive
H-bridge a PWM signal is needed. The Teensy 3.6 where the controller is implemented can supply
these PWM signals.
3.2.5
Semi passive H bridge
The semi passive H bridge consists of a two switches and two diodes and are conﬁgured as shown
in ﬁgure 5. The switches are MOSFETs which allow opening and closing of the switches at speeds
of hundreds of kHz, which is much faster than what mechanical switches are capable of. SN1 and
SN2 are abbreviations of switch nodes 1 and 2, this is where the load is connected to the electronics
drawing current through it. HSM and LSM are abbreviations for high- and low-side MOSFETs, and
HSD and LSD are abbreviations for high- and low-side diodes. The diodes have the property of
conducting current when the voltage at the cathode is lower than at the anode.
When the semi passive H bridge is closed as shown in ﬁgure 6 the two MOSFETs are closed. This
connects the high side voltage of the power rail (60 V), through the high side MOSFET to node 1
(SN1). The low side MOSFET connects switch node 2 to the low side power rail 0 V. This applies 60
V across the load.
Figure 7 shows the case where a current is already running in the load and both the MOSFETs are
open. When a current is drawn from a node and no current runs into the node the voltage will drop
rapidly. The load will drive the current due to its inductiveness and when the voltage in switch node
1 is driven to below 0 V, the low side diode will conduct current. The load pumps current into switch
node 2 and the voltage will rise until it reaches the high side power rail at 60 V and the high side
diode will conduct current. In this way 0 V is ensured at switch node 1 and 60 V is ensured in switch
node 2 during off time of the semi passive H bridge which effectively corresponds to -60 V across the
load.
Figure 5: Semi passive H bridge
Figure 6:
Semi passive H
bridge during on time
Figure 7:
Semi passive H
bridge during off time
Assuming the system is ideal and with no losses. If the the semi passive H bridge is turned on
13
==PAGE:21==
and off continuously the effective voltage across the load would alternate between 60 V and -60 V.
The load current would then ramp up during on time and ramp down at the same rate during off time
creating a triangular waveform due to the inductiveness of the load. The percentage of on time is
referred to as percentage duty cycle, and if the duty cycle is 50% the effective voltage across the coils
is 0 V. If the system was lossless this triangular waveform current would repeat and the average current
would stay at the initial current load current. Then by changing the ratio of time the semi passive H
bridge is on and off the effective voltage across the coil is changed, and the current is ramped up or
down. The effective voltage and ramping up and down of current is explained further in section 3.2.7.
Principally the same current has to run in and out of a node, so when the MOSFETs are opened
the transition from 60 V to -60 V in switch node 1 and -60 V to 60 V in switch node 2 happens in
the order of tens of nanoseconds, and can be adjusted by the gate resistor as explained in the next
section. The system is not ideal so a lot more factors than the ones drawn in these 3 ﬁgures have
to be considered. The MOSFETs cannot open and close inﬁnity fast, both the MOSFETs and diodes
have internal capacities and inductances and the tracing itself connecting the components creates stray
inductance and resistance. Also, losses will take place in the components which will create heat. All
these factors will be considered in the following sections.
3.2.6
MOSFETs
The switches used in the semi passive H bridge are N channel MOSFETs. They can be used for
several different purposes, but here they are used as switches. A MOSFETs has 4 connections, but
often the substrate is connected to the source pin internally in the package, which is also the case for
the MOSFETs used here. This internal connection is shown in the MOSFET symbol in ﬁgure 9 by the
arrow being connected to the ’S’ pin indicating the source pin. The MOSFETs used in this powerstage
are the BSC350N20NSFD [18] because of its fast switching capability, small on resistance and small
PCB footprint. The package is shown in ﬁgure 8, it is around 5.5 mm x 6.5 mm.
The switch effect works from drain ’D’ (pins 5-8) to source ’S’ (pins 1-3), where the current runs
from drain to source referring to ﬁgures 8 and 9. The drain voltage always has to be higher than the
source voltage. It is in the nature of a MOSFET that it has a diode effect from source to drain, which
prevents the source voltage exceeding the drain voltage.
The resistance from drain to source can be changed from the order of >1 MΩto the order of
<< 1 Ωdetermining weather the MOSFET is opened or closed. This is changed by applying a
certain voltage to the gate ’G’ pin (4). The voltage difference between the gate and source determines
the resistance between drain and source. The gate-source voltage where the drain source resistance
changes from high to low or opposite, is called the threshold voltage. For the MOSFETs used in this
semi passive H bridge, the typical threshold voltage is 3 V.
Because of the nature of MOSFETs, the gate has a signiﬁcant capacitance which has to be charged
or discharged in order for the gate-source voltage to rise or fall. Typically the higher drain-source volt-
age and current rating the MOSFETS has, the more capacitive the gate is. For this speciﬁc MOSFET
the gate input capacitance (Ciss) is maximum 2410 pF. A model of the MOSFET gate is shown in
ﬁgure 10. In order for the gate to be driven to a different gate-source voltage a current has to ﬂow into
the gate and charge the gate capacitor. The MOSFET has an internal gate resistor and typically an
extra external resistor is added in order to throttle the gate current in order to slow down the transition
from high drain-source resistance to low resistance and opposite.
The MOSFET gate is driven by a MOSFET driver. The MOSFET driver is needed for several
reasons. The gate drive voltage of 10 V is chosen to ensure that the MOSFET is properly turned on.
The microprocessor can only supply up to 3.3 V, so the MOSFET driver converts the 3.3 V signal to
a 10 V gate drive signal. When the MOSFET is turned off then initially 10 V voltage drop happens
across the internal gate resistor drawing 10V/5Ω= 2A. The gate driver is build to handle this current
as well.
14
==PAGE:22==
Figure 8: MOSFET in 8-PowerTDFN package. [18]
Figure 9: MOSFET diagram symbol
The high side MOSFET has its source pin at 60 V in the high time (as shown in ﬁgure 6) of the
semipassive H-brigde. To drive the gate voltage high, it has to have a voltage of 70 V, since the 10 V
is in relation to the source voltage. The MOSFET driver can take the 3.3 V PWM signals from the
Teensy 3.6 microprocessor and the source voltage of the high side MOSFET source and then drive
the high side MOSFETs gate at 0-10 V. In this case the International Rectiﬁer IR25607SPBF is used
[19].
Figure 10: Model of charging MOSFET GATE capacitor
Consider the case; the MOSFET has been in its open conﬁguration and the gate to source voltage
is zero. The MOSFET driver drives the gates at 10 V, so 10 V is applied to charge the gate capacitor
through the internal and external resistors. This is a case of charging a capacitor through a resistor,
and the equation for capacitor voltage during charging of a resistor is:
Vc = Vs
 1 −e−t/RC
(3.4)
Vc is the capacitor voltage, Vs = 10V is the supply voltage, t is the time, R = 87Ωis the resistance
which the capacitor is charged through and C = 2410pF is the capacitance of the capacitor which is
charged. The voltage over time of the gate capacitor when charged is shown in ﬁgure 11. It is seen
that charging the gate from 0 V past the threshold of the MOSFET at 3 V takes in the order of 10 ns.
In this time the MOSFET will go from open state to closed state, and in this time the MOSFET will
have intermediate resistance. This is referred to as the rise time. The same happens when going from
closed to open state and is called the fall time. It is in these transition times that a lot of energy is
dissipated in the MOSFET, this energy dissipation is referred to as switching losses. Thou, the fall
and rise time should be minimized for reducing losses and overheating of the MOSFETS. However,
having too fast fall and rise times could cause voltage spiking. This is due to parasitic inductances and
15
==PAGE:23==
capacitances of the components and printer circuit board (PCB). These characteristics are difﬁcult to
model, and often the rise and fall time of the MOSFET are adjusted after the PCB is produced in order
to obtain a good compromise.
Figure 11: Gate capacitor voltage turning on
Figure 12: Gate capacitor voltage turning off
The MOSFETs drain-source resistance is changed at a gate-source voltage of around 3 V. The
resistance change does not happen at exactly 3 V, but gradually over a small voltage interval. This
means that the drain-source resistance transition speed can be controlled by the gate-source voltage
gradient at 3 V. The voltage of the gate-source capacitor during turn on and off is shown in ﬁgures
11 and 12. These curves are the cases with the total gate resistance of 87 Ωwhich is used in this
design and a curve where the external resistor is 0 Ω. The charge and discharge happens signiﬁcantly
faster for the case without the external gate resistor. The gate-source voltage gradient at 3 V for both
charging and discharging the gate capacitor is signiﬁcantly steeper for the case with only the internal
resistance of 5 Ω. The threshold of 3 V is crossed faster and the drain-source resistance transition will
happen faster.
3.2.7
PWM
The pulse width modulated (PWM) signal is commonly used especially in connection with switch
mode electronics. A PWM signal is either high or low, like a digital signal. However, the information
contained in the signal is represented in what percentage of the time it is high. Essentially a PWM
signal has inﬁnite resolution like an analog signal, since the percentage of high time contained can
vary in inﬁnitesimal steps. However, the PWM is almost always created by a microprocessor, which
is a digital device only offering ﬁnite resolution. This ﬁnite resolution would also apply for an analog
signal created by a digital device.
The plot in ﬁgure 13 shows PWM signals with frequency of 100 kHz, making one cycle 10 µs.
For 100% duty cycle, the signal is always high. For a 75% duty cycle the signal starts out high for
75% of the time of the cycle and is low for the remaining 25% of the cycle. This on/off characteristic
matches well with the switch mode powerstage where the transistors are either on or off.
The Teensy 3.6 is able to generate PWM signals of 12 bit resolution at frequencies up to 140 kHz.
This means that the minimum increment in percent duty cycle would be 0.0244%. In a semi passive
H-bridge powered by a 60 V power supply, the load would see a voltage of 60 V during the high
time of the PWM signal and a voltage of -60 V during the low time of the PWM signal. For many
applications, this high frequency switching could prove a problem, and has to be ﬁltered. However,
the inductive nature of the magnetic bearings actually helps this problem by working as a low pass
ﬁlter from voltage across the the coil to current through the coil.
Because of the low pass ﬁlter properties of the AMB, the principal of average voltage of the power
stage during a duty cycle can be considered. The average voltage of a 100% duty cycle would be 60
V. At 50% duty cycle, the load would see an average of 0 V. And at 0% duty cycle the load would
see negative 60 V, if a current is running in the inductive load. As shown in ﬁgure 14, the current in
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 13: PWM signals
the inductive load will change during the duty cycle even though the average voltage over the load is
zero. In the high time, the current will increase with at a certain rate dependent on the supply voltage
and inductance of the coil. In the low time the current will decrease at the same rate. So at 50% duty
cycle, the current rises and falls for the same length of time and for each duty cycle the load current
will be back to where it started before the duty cycle. So understanding this principal the concept of
average voltage of a duty cycle makes sense. At 50% duty cycle, the average voltage is zero and the
average current in the inductive load stays the same. When increasing the duty cycle past 50% the
current rises and for duty cycle below 50% the current will fall.
Figure 14: PWM signals and current of an inductive load
Considering a whole duty cycle the change in current of an inductive load can be described by
equation (3.3), where U is the average voltage of the duty cycle. The load is not a pure inductor, but
also offers an ohmic resistance which also inﬂuence the current of the load. Also, the saturation of
the magnetic core can inﬂuence the inductance of the coil and affect the development of current in
the load. In the case of the magnetic bearing, the inductance is also inﬂuenced by the position of the
rotor as described in section 3.1.2.
17
==PAGE:25==
3.3
PCB design consideration
3.3.1
Signal noise considerations
Noise in the signal lines is a major concern since it introduces errors into the information delivered
to the microcontroller. These errors can destabilize the systems for high controller gains which are
desired for aggressive control. Errors can be picked up in several different ways in the chain of
information transfer from the physical state to the digital value used by the microcontroller. The
device creating the signal itself introduces noise and imprecision in the signal. If the power supply of a
sensor creating a signal is not steady this noise can be transferred to the signal. Ground plane currents
can introduce errors into the signal. Crosstalk from other circuits and electromagnetic interference
can cause errors in the signal lines. Lack of precision of the ADC introduces error as well. Obviously
several sources of error are present in the transfer of data from the physical state to the digital values
seen by the microprocessor. Precautions are made to mitigate these sources of error.
The ﬁrst source of error in the signal is introduced by the device creating the signal. For the case
of the current sensor this effect is limited by choosing a sensor with high precision speciﬁcations. For
the current ampliﬁer the current sensors used are the Allegro ACS724. This sensor has several good
properties among the fact that it has low noise ratings. The sensor has a signal offset at around 1/10
of the supply voltage. If the supply voltage is not steady this voltage ripple will show up in the output
signal as noise. As shown in ﬁgure 15 the current sensor is set up with its own linear voltage regulator
(LDO) to reject voltage ripples in the 12 V power supply and reduce the voltage to 5 V which is
needed for the sensor. The LDO works as a variable resistor, which throttles the current in such a
manner that 5 V is supplied to the sensor. This means that even if the supply voltage is changed, 5 V
is supplied to the sensor. According to the datasheet of the LDO used LDL1117, the noise rejection
from supply voltage to output voltage is 80 dB at 120 Hz and 40 dB at 100 kHz. The supply voltage
is fed to the LDO through a ferrite bead together with the LDO input capacitor, working as a LC ﬁlter
blocking high frequency noise. By taking these measures a low noise voltage supply is ensured for
the sensor. The same measures are taken for the ADC votlage supplies.
Figure 15: Signal path from physical state to digital value.
As seen in ﬁgure 15 the different components are powered through a common 12 V net and the
voltages are regulated with LDOs. When driving the current through the copper traces inevitably
a voltage drop will occur because of the ohmic resistance of the traces. This voltage drop is no
problem for the supply voltage since the LDOs reference 0 V voltage is connected near the respective
components so 5 V is ensured across them. The same voltage drop happens in the return path of the
supplied current to the components. The sensors reference 0 V voltage is then not exactly 0 V but
depending on the current and the ohmic resistance in the return path slightly higher than 0 V. For now
it is assumed to be 0.1 V as shown in ﬁgure 15. The sensor measures the current in the trace connected
18
==PAGE:26==
to the AMB coil and sends out a signal with a sensitivity of 200 mV/A. The signal the sensor sends
out is in reference to its ground supply pin, which is now at 0.1 V because of the returning current
from powering the sensor. The ADC that reads the sensor signal has a slight offset ground voltage due
to returning current. For now it is assumed to be 0.05 V. If the ADC is single ended it reads analog
signals in reference to its own ground voltage which is at 0.05 V, then an error is introduced. For this
case the error would be 0.05 V corresponding to 0.25 A. If this error is static it does not necessarily
have a great consequence for the AMB control, the bias current would then just be 0.25 A higher
than measured. However, the returning currents from the components are not necessarily static and
therefore the ground offset voltages of the ADC and sensor are not necessarily static, and the error
will become dynamic, which could prove to be a problem.
The ADCs used have individual ground pins for each of the analog signals read which it uses as
reference. The ADC ground reference is connected close to the ground reference of the respective
sensor. In this way the potential offset in ground voltages of the components is subtracted from the
signal when ADC reads the signal. The analog input of the ADC is high impedance, so no signiﬁcant
current is drawn in the signal trace and the reference ground trace and no voltage drop will occur.
Noise could possible be picked up by the signal trace from capacitive coupling with other traces
or electromagnetic interference. Both these noise sources could be quite pronounced in the ampliﬁer
environment due to digital signals and high voltages and currents in the powerstage. If the signal
trace and the ground reference trace are placed close to each other the same noise is picked up in both
traces. When the ADC samples the signal including the noise picked up, the same noise is picked up
in the ground reference trace and is subtracted and only the pure signal is read. In this way the ground
reference trace mitigates noise from the ground offsets of the components and the noise picked up in
the analog trace.
3.3.2
Ground and power planes
When placing a component it is usually favourable to have a solid groundplane under and between
other components it is interacting with. If current is drawn in the ground plane the resistance is so
small that the voltage drop over the ground plane is small (I · R = U). It is important to keep
components at the same reference voltage. Otherwise, mistakes can happen in digital communication
due to misread bits. Also noise can be induced in analog signal lines as described in the previous
section.
The solid ground plane will also reduce stray inductance of a signal path. As seen in ﬁgure 16 on
the left, two components are coupled by a ground trace represented by the black line and on the right
the two devices are coupled by grounding plane. A signal wire connects the two devices, represented
by the red line. In case of the grounding wire, the ground and the signal wire will form a loop acting
like one winding of a coil. This would lead to high stray inductance of such a connection. For any
current in a wire, a return current has to run back from the device receiving the current to the device
sending the current, usually through the ground plane. The return current running through the ground
plane will have the chance of running right under the signal path. This reduces the spanned area of
the current path and reduces the stray inductance of the signal path which is the main contributor of
impedance at high frequency signals. A current will always seek the path with least impedance, and
will then tend to run under the signal lead at higher frequencies.
According to [20] the inductance of the square loop to the left in ﬁgure 16 is around 0.253 µH. For
a signal of frequency f =30MHz (like the SPI clock for the ehthernet) this inductance will yield an
impedence of f2πL = 47Ω. If the traces are 10 mills wide the DC resistance would be in the order of
0.5 Ω. So the impedance of the path will change signiﬁcantly according to the frequency. The ground
plane will reduce this effect since there is no signiﬁcant area spanned by the leads.
Change in electromagnetic ﬁelds induce voltages in coils. Changing electromagnetic ﬁelds are
highly present in the ampliﬁer environment due to the large currents driven in the loads and the switch
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 16: Grounding by lead and grounding by groundplane
mode powerstage. The coil that the signal path forms can pick up this change in electromagnetic ﬁeld
and induce a voltage. These two effects are described by Maxwell’s third and fourth equations. These
effects are also reduced by the solid ground plane.
When having a ground plane it is often also favourable to have a supply voltage plane in a different
layer. This decreases the DC resistance from the voltage regulator to the device, but also the stray
inductance. This will reduce noise because of the low impedent path to bypass capacitors. The two
planes will also work as two capacitor plates yielding a tiny bit of capacitance. Even though this
capacitance is in the nF scale, it has a very low equivalent serial inductance (ESL) and is good at
rejecting high frequency differential mode noise.
3.3.3
Thermal considerations
The traces are much wider in power stages of the ampliﬁer, this is to lower the resistance for the high
current leads which reduces losses. These losses do not only lower the efﬁciency of the ampliﬁer but
the losses are dissipated as heat, which could lead to overheating of the PCB. The online trace width
calculator [21] claims that when drawing 10A in an external trace with the thickness of 1 Oz/ft2 with
a maximum temperature rise of 10◦, it should be at least 7mm wide. This minimum width of traces is
obeyed in the design.
The power diodes and the MOSFETS are the components that dissipate the most heat. Considering
the following case to give a rough estimate of heat dissipation in the components during maximum
load. The ampliﬁer is running a bias current of 10 A, and a square wave signal with amplitude
of 10 A. Half the time 0 current runs through the load and the other half of the time 20 A runs
through the system. For the time where no current is running in the semi passive H-bridge the heat
dissipated is assumed to be zero. For the time where the load is drawing 20 A the semi passive
H-bridge will be high half the time and low the other half of the time. This means that 20 A is
running through both the MOSFETS at around 1/4th of the time and 20 A runs through the power
diodes 1/4th of the time. The diode has a constant voltage drop and the average heat dissipated is
0.86V · 20A · 1/4 = 4.15W. The MOSFET has an on resistance of 35µΩand the average heat
dissipated would be 35µΩ·20A2·1/4 = 3.5W. The diode is chosen to be a Schottky diode, which has
a very low forward voltage drop and no reverse recovery time which both limits the heat dissipated in
this application. The MOSFET dissipates extra heat during rise and fall time because of it momentary
intermediate resistance, this can be quite cumbersome to calculate. An educated guess is 2 W, a bit
more than half the heat dissipated during the on time.
Each of the diodes have to sink 4.15 W of heat and each of the MOSFETs has to sink 5.5 W.
The heat is sunk through the PCB by the vias laying under and around the components and into a
heat sink. The vias and the plane around the components sinks the heat effectively since it is made
of copper which has high thermal conductivity. The component is soldered directly onto the copper
20
==PAGE:28==
which yields good thermal contact between the component and the PCB copper. Both the MOSFET
and diode has a thermal resistance from junction to case of 0.75 K/W. The same resistance is assumed
between junction and solder pads.
At least 60 0.24 mm vias are under each component with a minimum copper layer thickness of 18
µm, yielding a cross sectional area of 0.014 mm2. Copper has a thermal resistance of K=400W/(mK)
and the PCB is x=1.6mm thick. The equation for thermal resistance is R = x/(A · K). The thermal
resistance through the board for each component is then 4.9 K/W.
The thermal connectivity between the backside of the PCB and the heatsink is made with a 1 mm
H48-6 thermal conductive pad [22]. This pad is electrically resistant but offers a fairly high thermal
conductivity of 3.2 W/(mK) and a nice tackyness to ensure good contact to PCB and heatsink. The
powerstage base is 40 mm X 40 mm, so assuming one component utilizes one fourth of the heatpad
under the powerstage, each component has to sink its heat trough 100 mm2 of the thermal heatpad
yielding a thermal resistance of 3.13 K/W. The heatsink used for the ampliﬁer is so massive that it
can be considered to have zero thermal resistance.
The thermal resistances from junction to dissipation adds up to 8.78 K/W. So when the MOSFET
dissipates 5.5 W the temperature difference form the surrundings to junction is 5.5W·8.78K/W=48.3◦K.
Assuming an ambient temperature of 30 ◦C, the components work at around 80 ◦C at this maximum
load case. Obviously this is a rather rough calculation just giving a indication of what magnitude of
temperatures the components might reach. Both the components operate well under their maximum
operating temperature of 175 ◦C.
There are several factors working the favour of better thermal dissipation. No dissipation from the
top side of the PCB is included which is signiﬁcant. When soldering the components on top of the
vias solder is going to drip into the vias increasing thermal conductivity through the PCB.
3.4
10 Channel current ampliﬁer
The initial goal was to produce a 10 channel ampliﬁer capable of running at a bias of 10 A, and
switching 120 V into the coils. However, due to a lot of practical problems getting the ampliﬁer to
run as desired, the ampliﬁer only has 8 working channels capable of running at 6 A bias, switching
60 V into the coils.
The present test rig only requires 8 channels, because it only has two radial AMBs and no axial
bearing. Often an AMB machine has two radial bearings and an axial bearing requiring a 10 channel
current ampliﬁer. The goal of 10 channels was set in order to create a generic ampliﬁer capable
of running other AMB machines with axial bearings. The present test rig has a ﬂexible coupling
transferring torque to the main rotor and absorbs potential axial forces from the main rotor. At the
moment an axial bearing is not necessary for this test rig.
It turned out after the ampliﬁer was designed and produced that the power stages suffered from
signiﬁcant voltage spiking. The gate resistance of the MOSFETs had to be tuned to a very high value
to mitigate the voltage spiking in the power stage. This lead to large heat dissipation in the MOSFETs
which overheated them. By reducing the running conditions from 120 V to 60 V and 10 A bias to 6
A bias, as well as adding extra cooling of the MOSFETs, it was possible to run the ampliﬁer without
destroying the MOSFETs.
Obviously the ampliﬁer at these ratings does not utilize the full potential of the AMBs which has
signiﬁcantly higher current ratings. However, even with these low ratings it turns out that the dynam-
ics of this new ampliﬁer are signiﬁcantly better than the existing. This ampliﬁer can be considered as
a proof of concept.
21
==PAGE:29==
3.4.1
Overview of the ampliﬁer
Each of the current ampliﬁer channels works as described in ﬁgure 2. However, some of the compo-
nents are shared by the individual current ampliﬁers e.g. only one microprocessor is used to control
all 10 channels. These pin connection tables and overview are useful for troubleshooting and pro-
gramming of the ampliﬁer.
The overall architecture of the 10 channel ampliﬁer is shown in ﬁgure 17. The microprocessor
(Teensy 3.6) communicates with the ADCs through SPI ports 1 and 2 and the additional communi-
cation signals controlling the setup of the ADCs are indicated by the turquoise lines. Each of the
ADCs can read 8 analog signals. The red lines in the ﬁgure indicates the current sensor signals from
the power stages (SP0-SP9) being send to the channels of the ADCs. The remaining ADCs analog
channels are for external analog inputs, which are indicated by green lines. The additional analog
inputs are used for feeding in the current reference signal that each of the power stages has to track.
Figure 17: Principal drawing of 10 channel ampliﬁer
Each of the power stages (SP0-SP9) are fed with a common 60 V power supply indicated by the
pink lines and individual PWM signals from the Teensy 3.6 indicated by the blue lines. An overview
of what PWM pin from the Teensy 3.6 each of the power stages is controlled by is noted in table 2.
In this table information is also included on what analog channel the power stage current sensor is
sampled by and what analog channel sets the current reference of the power stages. Which power
stage tracks which reference signal is deﬁned in the software.
The ampliﬁer is installed with an ethernet connection allowing live communication with a com-
puter. The ethernet module used is a WIZ820IO. This module ensures all the correct protocols are
obeyed to communicate with the internet and is interfaced with the microprocessor through the SPI0
bus. The pin connections with the Teensy 3.6 are presented in table 3.
The ADC0 and power stages 0 and 5 are hatched with red. These are the devices not being used
in the 8 channel ampliﬁer. During the running in of the ampliﬁer these power stages were scavenged
for components, which were needed to replace burned out MOSFETs and drivers of the other power
stages. Since these two channels were never used, the software is not set up to run them neither.
ADCs 1 and 2 have a sufﬁcient number of analog channels in order to run the 8 channel ampliﬁer, so
only these two ADCs are set up in the software.
22
==PAGE:30==
Table 2: Power stage connections with ADCs and Teensy 3.6.
Teensy PWM pin
Current
sensor
Current
reference
SP0
35
ADC0 - Ch2
SP1
5
ADC1 - Ch7
ADC1 - Ch8
SP2
6
ADC1 - Ch5
ADC1 - Ch6
SP3
9
ADC1 - Ch4
ADC1 - Ch3
SP4
10
ADC1 - Ch2
ADC1 - Ch1
SP5
36
ADC0 - Ch4
SP6
20
ADC2 - Ch2
ADC2 - Ch1
SP7
21
ADC2 - Ch4
ADC2 - Ch3
SP8
22
ADC2 - Ch5
ADC2 - Ch6
SP9
23
ADC2 - Ch7
ADC2 - Ch8
Table 3: Pin connection of ethernet module (SPI0)
CS
Clock
MISO
MOSI
Reset
Teensy pin
16
13
12
11
14
The ADCs are interfaced by SPI with the Teensy 3.6 pins displayed in tables 4 and 5. In addition
to the normal SPI signals each of the the ADCs also have a ’First data’ and a ’Busy’ pin. When the
ADC is commanded to take a sample with the conversion pin it will take a curtain amount of time
to create the digital value varying according to the over sampling rate set by the OS pins. During
conversion, the ’busy’ pin is high and goes low when the conversion is done. This is useful, because
only after the conversion the ADC is ready to transfer the data to the microprocessor. The ’First data’
indicates the ﬁrst bit in the MISO line, this feature is currently not used.
The ADCs share some setup pins, which are presented in table 6. The ’conversion’ pin is pulled
high, the ADC converts the current analog voltages to digital values and saves the digital values, and
awaits the SPI transfer initiation. The analog voltage range can either be ±5 V or ±10 V, this is done
with the ’Range’ pin. Choosing the 5 V range will increase the resolution, but the ADC resolution
is so high (18 bit) that the increased resolution is not needed so the range is set to ±10 V. The OS0-
OS3 pins set the oversampling. If all the the pins are set to zero the ADCs only rely on one sample.
Currently, the OS0 is set high and the rest low in order to have 16X oversampling. The ADC takes
16 sample, ﬁnds the average of the values and sends the digital average value to the Teensy 3.6. This
is done for noise reduction, since this has a low pass ﬁlter effect. Other pins setting up the ADC are
to be connected. They concern the choise of internal or external reference voltage and data transfer
operation. These settings are already settled and nothing will be gained from controlling them with
the microprocessor, so they are connected directly to 0 V or 3.3 V through solder joints to ensure the
correct settings.
Table 4: Pin connection of ADC1 (SPI1)
CS
Clock
MISO
First data
Busy
Teensy pin
8
32
1
4
1
3.4.2
PCB Layout
The considerations addressed in the previous sections are applied when designing the PCB layout to
ensure a working ampliﬁer. In order to ease the PCB layout process design blocks are used. If a group
23
==PAGE:31==
Table 5: Pin connection of ADC2 (SPI2)
CS
Clock
MISO
First data
Busy
Teensy pin
2
46
45
0
2
Table 6: Common pin connections of ADCs
Conversion
Range
OS0
OS1
OS2
Teensy pin
25
26
29
28
27
of components and their layout are to be repeated in a PCB they can be made into a design block and
copied the desired number of times. Both the power stage and the ADCs are made as design blocks
since they both contain several components and have somewhat complicated layouts. The power
stage design block is shown in ﬁgure 18, the ADC design block is shown in ﬁgure 20 and the overall
design is shown in ﬁgure 22. The PCB design is made in Eagle and the design ﬁles are included in the
associated ’Hand in folder’ in the subfolder ’Ampliﬁer schematics and PCB’. It is difﬁcult to show
all details in a 4 layer PCB on paper, so the design is reviewed in this section and the Eagle design
ﬁles can be opened for further exploration of the design. The schematics of the design blocks and
ampliﬁer and partslist is included in Appendix A and B.
3.4.2.1
Power stage design block
In ﬁgures 18 and 19 the power stage is shown both as Eagle PCB layout and as a picture of ADC in
the produced ampliﬁer. The critical components are numbered in both ﬁgures and refer to table 7.
This is to gain an overview of the design for potential troubleshooting.
Initially the ampliﬁer was designed for handling 120 V in the DC bus and running a bias of 10 A
in the coils. However, because of insufﬁcient thermal design the MOSFETs burned out when running
under these conditions. To mitigate these thermal issues a workaround was made by soldering copper
plates directly on the MOSFETs to sink the heat created in the component. These copper plates are
shown in ﬁgure 19. This was a signiﬁcant improvement, however not enough to run the ampliﬁer at
the initially speciﬁed ratings. It is found that the ampliﬁer is capable of running at 6 A bias and 60 V
without overheating. These speciﬁcations are not exceeded in order to prevent overheating.
Initially the power stage was designed so that the high power part was galvanically decoupled
from the low power parts of the circuitry. This was done in order to avoid high currents being drawn
between the power stages through the low power ground plane. In order to make this work, all the
components connected to both the low power ground plane and the high power ground plane (i.e. DC-
DC converter, MOSFET driver and current sensor), have to be galvanically isolated internally. After
the ampliﬁer was produced, it was realized that the MOSFET driver was not galvanically isolated
as initially anticipated. This means that it could not handle a signiﬁcant potential difference in the
low power ground plane and the high power ground plane. This problem was suspected to cause a
lot of trouble, among others taking part in destroying a MOSFET driver which also destroyed the
microprocessor.
In order to protect the MOSFET driver, the high power and low power ground planes were con-
nected at the DC-DC converter. This mitigates the need for the galvanically isolated DC-DC converter.
The board is powered by a 12 V grid and the DC-DC converter converts from 12 V to 15 V for driving
the MOSFETs. The absolute maximum gate-source voltage that the MOSFETs can handle is 20 V.
An oscilloscope measurement showed that the high side MOSFET gate-source voltage exceeded this
absolute maximum rating. However, it later turned out that the oscilloscope was not calibrated, so
this measurement was incorrect. The high side MOSFET is driven by the bootstrap coupling, which
under curtain conditions can ’pump’ the voltage potential higher then what it is powered by i.e. 15
24
==PAGE:32==
V. So seeing 20 V in the bootstrap capacitor is not unrealistic, and since the high side MOSFET had
a tendency to burnout, it was suspected to be caused by this high drive voltage. In order to ensure
a lower drive voltage, the DC-DC converter was removed and the board supply voltage was reduced
to 10 V. This is possible since the high power and low power ground planes are connected. A 47Ω
resistor was placed in series with the bootstrap diode to limit the current into the bootstrap capacitor.
This is done on the back of the board and can not be seen in ﬁgure 19. A 13 V Zener diode is placed
across the bootstrap capacitor (the capacitor just above the number 4 circle in ﬁgure 19) in order to
clamp the high side drive voltage to a maximum of 13 V. With this new setup, the oscilloscope still
indicated that the high side MOSFET drive voltage exceeded 20 V, which is impossible with this new
conﬁguration. From this it can be concluded that the oscilloscope measurements are wrong. Since
this the power stage seemed to run ﬁne with this new conﬁguration, it was left as is.
The oscilloscope can only measure from ground to a signal. So when the high side gate-source
voltage is measured two probes are used, one measures from ground to source the other from ground
to gate and the two signals are subtracted in order to ﬁnd the gate-source voltage. This is suspected
to introduce the mistake in the gate-source measurement, because of imprecision in the oscilloscope
channels.
Figure 18: Power stage design block Eagle PCB layout.
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 19: Picture of power stage in ﬁnished product.
Table 7: Power stage numbering explanations
1
Input power 60V, the upper connection is positive
2
Bootstrap diode
3
MOSFET driver
4
Low side gate resistor
5
3.3V LDO for digital power supply of MOSFET driver
6
Ferrit for high frequency noise mitigation of current sensor power supply
7
LDOs stepping the voltage down to 8V, then 5V for current sensor supply
8
High side gate resistor
9
High side MOSFET
10
Low side power diode
11
High side power diode
12
Low side MOSFET
13
Current sensor
14
Power output, the load is connected here
3.4.2.2
ADC design block
In ﬁgures 20 and 21 the ADC is shown both as Eagle PCB layout and as a picture of the ADC in the
produced ampliﬁer. The ADC design block is inspired by the application note included in the data
sheet of the ADC ADS8598 [17]. It is set up with the LDOs supplying 5 V and 3.3 V for the analog
and digital part of the chip. It needs external stability capacitors for its reference voltage and bypass
capacitors which are placed nearby the ADC to mitigate parasitic inductance.
The ADCs analog inputs are connected to SMA connectors through a passive ﬁrst order RC low-
pass ﬁlter. The SMA connectors connect to coaxial cables, which are great for high frequency signals
and noise mitigation. For both ADCs 1 and 2 the row of SMA connectors furthest away from the
ADC are connected to the current sensor signals. So the sensor signal is connected to the SMA con-
nector, but also to ADC analog input through the low pass ﬁlter. The unﬁltered current sensor signal
26
==PAGE:34==
can be seen in the SMA connectors. These are connected to the input of dSPACE in order to obtain
the current signals in the dSPACE environment. The row of SMA connectors closest to the ADC are
the current reference signal inputs and are connected to the dSPACE current reference outputs.
The ADC does not tolerate voltages on the analog input outside the range of ±15 V. So 11 V TVS
diodes are added to the signal lines. This diode will clamp the signal to a maximum of 11 V. This
is useful feature if cables from another device are connected to the ADC and potential difference is
present it will not damage the analog input of the ADC.
Figure 20: ADC design block Eagle PCB layout.
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 21: Picture of ADC in ﬁnished product.
Table 8: ADC designblock number explanations
1
Low noise 5V voltage supply regulated by two LDOs
2
Capacitors stabilizing internal reference voltages
3
Analog input ﬁlter. The capacitor can be changed in order to change cut off frequency
4
SMA connector for in or output of analog signal
5
TVS protection diodes
6
Digital voltage supply of 3.3V
7
ADC IC
8
Analog inputs of ADC
3.4.2.3
Overall PCB layout
In ﬁgures 22 and 23 the full PCB design is shown both as Eagle PCB layout and as a picture of the
produced ampliﬁer hooked up with all the internal wiring of the box. The numbering of the ﬁgures
refer to table 9.
The ten power stages are placed in two rows along the edge of the PCB. The power stages are
designed without components on the backside in a 45 mm path in order to allow two large common
heat sinks on the back of the PCB.
As it is seen in ﬁgure 23, the microprocessor is placed on an additional board which is connected
to the ’microprocessor pinout connector’. Initially the Teensy 3.6 board was soldered directly on the
main PCB. However, after replacing the Teensy 3.6 twice the main board was so damaged that the
it was impossible to solder a new Teensy 3.6 on the board. The 64 pin connector (15 in ﬁgure 22)
was initially made for outputting the teensy pins for controlling another PCB in case additions to the
design was desired. However, now the Teensy 3.6 is placed on another board, which connects to the
64 pin connector in order to control the main PCB.
28
==PAGE:36==
Figure 22: Full PCB Eagle layout
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 23: Picture of full PCB installed in the box
Table 9: Full PCB number explanations
1
Ethernet connection for interfacing with the internet
2
Power stage 5
3
12V power output for fan
4
Power stage 6
5
Power stage 7
6
12V power supply for board
7
Power stage 8
8
12V power output for fan
9
Power stage 9
10
Power stage 0
11
Design block containing ADC0, which is not used in this design
12
12V power output for fan
13
Power stage 1
14
Teensy 3.6 microprocessor used for implementing the controller
15
Microprocessor pinout connector
16
Power stage 2
17
Design block containing ADC1
18
12V power output for fan
19
Power stage 3
20
Design block containing ADC2
21
12V power output for fan
22
Powerstage 4
30
==PAGE:38==
3.5
Implementing the current ampliﬁer
In order to implement the produced current ampliﬁer in a robust manner it has to be installed in a box
with heat sinks, fans, power supply and wiring. The structure supporting the PCB is shown in ﬁgure
24. A thermal pad is placed on the mounting rails and the PCB is mounted on the mounting rails.
The thermal pad ensures a good thermal contact between the PCB and the mounting rails but offers
electrical isolation. In order to ensure the PCB does not bend and loose contact with the thermal
padding it is mounted with 20 M4 screws through the PCB into the threaded holes of the mounting
rail. On the bottom side of the mounting rails two large heatsinks are ﬁtted with thermal paste in
between in order to maximize the thermal contact. The heat from the power components is sunk
through the PCB, through the thermal padding, into the aluminium mounting rails and heatsink and
convected into the air forced through the ﬁns of the heat sinks by two fans.
The support structure is made from aluminium for ease of machining and good thermal conduc-
tivity properties. The heat sinks are bought as extruded proﬁles and threaded holes were made for
fastening it to the underside of the mounting rails. The heat sinks and the PCB are supported by the
lateral beams attached to the sides of the enclosure. The parts are specially produced for this purpose
and the blueprints can be seen in Appendix C.
Figure 24: PCB support and heat sink.
The enclosure chosen for the PCB is a 19” rack box, which is compatible with the existing rack
cabinet for the test rig. The PCB is mounted in the rack enclosure as seen in ﬁgure 25. The rack
enclosure is purchased as a closed box, where holes and other geometries have to be milled in order
to make space for fans, air holes, switches and connectors. The blueprints for the parts are shown in
Appendix C. The ﬁnished ampliﬁer is shown in ﬁgure 26.
The 12 V supply for all the control of the ampliﬁer is turned on and of with the white toggle switch
mounted in the left of the front panel. Initially the white push button reset the Teensy 3.6, which is
sometime required when programming the Teensy 3.6. After the Teensy 3.6 was destroyed together
with the PCB area under it, the Teensy 3.6 was placed on a separate board connected through the
microprocessor pinout connector (number 15 in ﬁgures 22 and 23) and this reset button could not be
connected correctly. The Teensy 3.6 can reset by turning the ampliﬁer off and on.
The USB and ethernet connectors in the front panel are respectively for programming the Teensy
3.6 microprocessor and for interfacing with the ampliﬁer real time. As for now the average voltage of
the powerstages are controlled by a PID controller, referencing 8 individual signals fed to the ampliﬁer
by the dSPACE computer.
Figure 27 shows the back panel of the ampliﬁer. The power stages and the signals controlling
the power stages are connected here. The two blocks of power terminals to the left and right labeled
’Power stage 0-4’ and ’Power stage 5-9’ are for feeding the power stages DC bus and for the power
stage outputs. Initially the ampliﬁer was made as a 10 channel ampliﬁer but later was reduced to a 8
channel ampliﬁer, this is why two power terminals are missing (power stage 0 and 5). The lower two
connectors are for feeding the power stages DC bus with 60 V, so all these terminals are paralleled
and connected to a 60 V DC supply. The two upper terminals are the output of the power stages and
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 25: PCB installed in box.
Figure 26: Finished ampliﬁer ready for mounting in
19” rack.
are each connected to a coil of the AMBs of the testrig. It is the current between these two terminals
that is controlled. Since the power stage is a semipassive H bridge, it can only draw current in one
direction which is from the positive terminal to the negative terminal.
The current drawn in the power stages is controlled by the signals fed into the ampliﬁer through
middle block of connectors (Signals (BNC Connectors)). Two BNC connectors are tied to each power
stage. The upper ten connectors are tied to power stages 0-4 and the the lower ten are tied to power
stages 5-9. The two BNC connectors tied to each power stage is placed above each others. The upper
one is an input signal setting a reference for which current the ampliﬁer will try to track and the lower
one is a direct output from the current sensor sensing the actual current in the power stage.
As the old setup, the sensitivity of the current ampliﬁer is 0.2 A/V. Since the ampliﬁer is running
the testrig at 6 A bias, a maximum of 12 A is drawn in the power stages which mean the maximum
voltage applied to the input BNC connectors should be 2.4 V. Hardware wise the input BNC con-
nectors are ±10 V compatible. The software can be changed to utilize the full range of the ADCs,
however it does not seem to be necessary since the ADCs have a rather large resolution of 18 bit.
The software can also be changed for each of the power stages to current track a signal fed into the
ampliﬁer through a different connector.
The lower BNC connector outputting the current sensor signal has a sensitivity of 0.2 V/A. Both
the input and output signals have the same same sensitivity. However, due to the properties of the
current sensor the sensor output signal is offset with approximately 0.5 V. Internally in the ampliﬁer
this offset is cancelled out in the software uploaded to the Teensy 3.6. When the current sensor signals
are outputted from the current ampliﬁer to the dSPACE computer it is important to take this offset
into account.
Figure 27: Backside connections of current ampliﬁer.
32
==PAGE:40==
In ﬁgure 28 the general concept of the testrig is shown. The test rig setup is elaborated on exten-
sively in the master’s thesis of Christian Mandrup-Poulsen [8] and the PhD thesis of Andreas Jauernik
Voigt [7]. The produced current ampliﬁer replaces the ’Power ampliﬁer’ block in ﬁgure 28.
Figure 28: General concept of testrig [8]
3.6
Software
The software for the Teensy 3.6 microcontroller is written with the Arduino programming language
using Atom with PlatformIO as editor. The code is included in the ’Hand in folder’ in the subfolder
’Teensy 3.6 program’. In this program a PID controller is implemented for each of the power stages.
The ampliﬁer is installed with an ethernet module which allows live communication with a computer.
This happens trough a LabVIEW program, which is also included in the ’Hand in folder’ in the sub
folder ’LabVIEW interface’. The software is made in collaboration with Jonas Skjødt Lauridsen.
How the code works is commented on in the code. But a short walk through is explained here.
The code that runs on the Teensy 3.6 is interrupt based and different loops are run simultaneously,
this is done in order to not run all calculations at the frequency of the high speed control loop e.g.
10 kHz. Only the current tracking control is necessary to run at this speed, other functions can run
a lot slower. Control parameter inputs given from LabVIEW through the Ethernet interface is only
updated at 25 Hz. Since it is interfacing with a human through a computer one would not be able to
tell if the control parameter value is updated after 1/25 s or 1/10.000 s.
The 10 kHz control loop ’mainControlLoop’ contains the PID control for the current tracking
of the 8 power stages. The reference signals and current sensor signals are read with the external
ADCs. For noise mitigation oversampling of X16 is utilized. This takes 32 µs and after this, the ADC
values are transferred to the Teensy 3.6 through two SPI ports. The bit stream obtained by the SPI is
transformed into current values and the sensor offset is subtracted. The difference of the actual current
and reference current is fed into the respective PID controller objects, which output a control value
for each of the power stages. The poser stage control values are outputted to the respective power
stages a PWM pin. The duty cycle is limited to 99% ensure recharging of the bootstrap capacitor.
Initially the PWM frequency was run at 100 kHz, and only very little or no oversampling of the
ADCs was required to mitigate noise. This is because the clock controlling the ’mainControlLoop’
33
==PAGE:41==
and the timer controlling the PWM signal are rather precise, so they will for most of the time stay
synchronised. The ’mainControlLoop’ will sample the current every 10th duty cycle of the PWM
signal almost at the same time of the duty cycle. The current sensor signals are going to have a tri-
angular waveform as described in ﬁgure 14. Unless the current sensor signal is low pass ﬁltered very
hard it is critical at what time on the duty cycle the current sensor signal sample is taken. When the
’mainControlLoop’ is synchronized with the PWM duty cycle, everything runs smoothly. When sud-
denly the two loops get out of sync just from an occasional code hiccup, and the ’mainControlLoop’
starts sampling on random times of the PWM duty cycle too much noise is picked up and the system
becomes unstable. Examples have been seen where the rotor was levitated with this ampliﬁer for 20
min, and suddenly without warning the rotor is dropped. The problem with current sensor sampling
coming out of sync is suspected to cause this problem. So now the PWM frequency is changed to 98
kHz and the oversampling to 16X (working as a lowpass ﬁlter). The new PWM frequency ensures
that the ’mainControlLoop’ and the PWM are always out of sync and the noise introduced by this is
mitigated by the oversampling of the ADCs. This conﬁguration seems to solve the problem.
The LabVIEW program is used to receive and visualize the data send from the ampliﬁer to the
computer. The programme is originally made for a magnetic bearing controller, so it includes a lot of
features related to the operation of a complete magnetic bearing controller. It is modiﬁed to show the
reference currents, the actual currents and the PWM duty cycles. The control parameters and power
electronics can be controlled from the program. The program also features a window showing the
actual control loop time, which is useful for tuning the programme. A screen shot of the program is
taken during test rig operation which is shown in ﬁgure 29. Here the rotor is levitated at 6 A bias
and the current signal is disturbed with a harmonic signal at 100 Hz and 1.8 A amplitude. The 4
reference currents and actual currents are shown for each of the AMBs. Also the control signal send
the 8 power stages are shown to the left. If these signals are saturated i.e. goes above 100 or below 0
(%) the ampliﬁer will properly shown strong nonlinear behaviour.
Figure 29: Screen shot of ampliﬁer interface program
It is important for the ethernet interface to work correctly, so the local area connection that the
ampliﬁer is connected to has to have the IP address 10.10.10.11, Subnet mask 255.0.0.0 and Default
gateway of 10.10.10.10. This IP address is hard coded in the Teensy 3.6 program. When the ampliﬁer
34
==PAGE:42==
is connected directly to a computer through an ethernet cable, the network port of the computer has
to have this conﬁguration in order to allow the ampliﬁer communicating with LabVIEW.
3.7
Current controller and response
As described in the previous section the current is tracked using PID controllers. Depending on the
control parameters, the current tracking properties of the ampliﬁer are altered. The current ampliﬁer
is implemented with an integral term of 200 and different proportional gains between 400 A/A and
1400 A/A are tested. The fashion in which the integral term is implemented in the PID library used
is unknown. The integral term is considered as slow, since it takes several seconds for it mitigate a
constant offset. It is only included to integrate the PWM duty cycle from 0% to 50% and to mitigate
any constant error between the reference and the actual current. This DC error is mainly introduced
by the resistance of the coil and wiring, which changes as function of the operating temperature of
AMBs. Because of the slow integral term, it does not add signiﬁcantly to the dynamic behaviour of
the ampliﬁer. A series of experiments have been made in order to determine the proportional gains
effect of the current tracking properties of the ampliﬁer. The tests are conducted while the rotor is
levitated at a bias current of 6 A. The rotor is perturbed with a chirp signal with an amplitude of
0.75 A going from 0 Hz to 300 Hz over 180 seconds. The dSPACE computer has access to both the
reference current and the actual current running in the coils, which is fed back from the ampliﬁer. A
frequency response function (FRF) estimation is made between these two signals to characterize the
ampliﬁers current tracking capabilities. The current ampliﬁer uses 8 channels to levitate the rotor, so
8 FRF estimations are made from one test. The results are shown in ﬁgures 30 - 35. The coherences
are reasonably close to 1, so enough data is included in the dataset to ensure that the FRF estimations
are accurate. Generally some spread in both magnitude and phase of the different current ampliﬁer
channels is present, especially at higher frequencies.
The deviations of response from the different channels could have different causes. When the rotor
is levitated in what is believed to be the geometric center of the magnetic bearing the average current
of the upper AMB poles are higher than the lower poles in order to compensate for the gravitational
pull on the rotors mass. This changes the operating point of the AMB pole, and with this change in
operating point the magnetics of the AMB pole could change resulting in the change of inductance
of the AMB pole. If the air gaps in the AMB are not identical, the AMB poles yields different
inductances. This could be due to the rotor not being in the true center position of the AMBs. Also
the geometric tolerances of the AMBs inﬂuence the air gap size. This difference in inductance of
the AMB coils are suspected to cause the different magnitude and phase responses. This assertion is
proved in Appendix D, where a Simulink model of the ampliﬁer is made and the inductance of the
load is proved to have an inﬂuence on the reference current to actual current FRF estimation for a
given proportional gain of the ampliﬁer.
The fashion in which the dSPACE computer sample the analog signals is suspected to introduce
an error in the phase responses of the FRFs. The dSPACE ADC modules has 32 input ports, which
are multiplexed into two ADCs. This means that the analog channels are not sampled simultaneously,
but one after another. Two ADC modules are connected to the dSPACE computer. One is used for
sampling the 5 position sensors in a fast 16 kHz control loop. The other ADC is used to sample the
rest of the sensors including hall effect sensors, current sensors and pressure sensors. This is done
in a slower 3.2 kHz. Synchronizing this sampling is essential for obtaining an accurate phase in the
FRFs, but is impossible due to the multiplexing of the ADC modules. The error this factor causes is
especially pronounced at high frequencies and is elaborated on in section 6.1.
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 30: Gain 400
Figure 31: Gain 600
Figure 32: Gain 800
Figure 33: Gain 1000
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 34: Gain 1200
Figure 35: Gain 1400
This experiment gives insight connection between current tracking capability and the current con-
troller parameters. The most signiﬁcant control parameter is assessed to be the proportional gain,
which is varied from 400 to 1400. The average response of the 8 channels are taken and shown to-
gether in ﬁgure 36, in order to compare the FRFs. With increasing proportional gain of the current
PID controller, the magnitude is increased for higher frequencies and the phase lag is reduced. The
bandwidth is deﬁned by what frequency the response magnitude becomes lower than 0.7. The band-
width of the current ampliﬁer is increased with higher proportional gains. The closer the response
magnitude is to 1 and the close the phase lag is to 0, the better the current ampliﬁer is able to track
a reference current. It is concluded that the current tracking capabilities of the current ampliﬁer is
increased for higher proportional gains.
This analysis is only conducted up until 300 Hz, so the exact average bandwidth of gains above
800 cannot be determined. However, it is concluded from the average FRF plot that when gains above
800 are used the bandwidth is above 300 Hz. When using a proportional gain of 400, the bandwidth
is reduced to 125 Hz.
It is clear from the current tracking capability point of view that high proportional gains of the
current tracking PID controller is favourable. In practice noise is introduced in the system and there is
a stability limit of how high the proportional gain can be. Noise is especially introduced at the current
sensor, due to the switch mode power stage. For this current ampliﬁer in the present conﬁguration,
this limit is 1400. When attempting to increase the gain to 1600 the ampliﬁer becomes unstable and
the PWM duty cycle oscillates fast between 0% and 100%. Another disadvantage of high proportional
gains is that the PWM duty cycle excitation can be saturated under normal operating conditions. With
a more aggressive controller with a higher proportional gain, even small errors between reference
current and actual current will lead to large excitation of the powerstage. The PWM duty cycle is
limited to operate between 0% and 100%. If the controller commands a duty cycle outside these
limits, it is not possible i practice and power stage excitation is saturated. The effect of this is not
tested, but is expected to introduce strong non linearities.
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 36: Average FRF comparison
3.8
General ampliﬁer considerations
The general impression of the newly implemented ampliﬁers in the system is that they signiﬁcantly
improve the overall system behaviour. The response of the ampliﬁers are a lot faster. The ﬁst bending
mode shape at 550Hz of the rotor is exited with the new ampliﬁers, properly due to their larger
bandwidth. This is mitigated with a notch ﬁlter. Even with only a bias current of 6 A it is possible
to reach 10.000 rpm with the main rotor. This has not been possible earlier. With a price tag of less
than 10.000DKK for the 8 ampliﬁers it is signiﬁcantly cheaper than other industrial set ups available.
Actually the majority of the price originates from the box which it is packed in and the internal
cabling.
The new ampliﬁers limits the test facility in the sense that they cannot operate under large bias
currents e.g. 12.5A which the AMBs are rated for. However, they prove throughout the rest of the
project to have very good and predictable dynamics and increase the capabilities of the test facility
despite of the low amperage rating.
38
==PAGE:46==
4
Rotor Dynamics and Seal Coefﬁcient Identiﬁcation
This section reviews the mathematical modelling of the test rig, the procedures used to identify seal
characteristics and destabilization phenomena of the rotor exposed to seal forces. Because of the
extensively equipped test rig, different approaches can be taken to identify seal force behaviour. Here
it is attempted to produce a mathematical model of the test rig which replicates the behaviour of
it. In this process optimization procedures are utilized to determine true system parameters creating
the best possible ﬁt between experimental data and simulated results. When ﬂow is introduced in
the seal, it generates forces. These forces change the behaviour of the rotor dynamic system. This
behaviour is recorded by the data acquisition system of the test facility. The seal forces are added to
the mathematical model and optimization procedures are utilized to determine seal force coefﬁcients
making the best possible ﬁt between the mathematical model and experimental data, thus determining
the seal force coefﬁcients. The process of destabilizing the rotor with seal forces are analysed. The
mathematical model and determined seal forces helps gain insight in the mechanisms destabilizing
the rotor. With a new controller approach, the rotor is stabilized even at high seal pressures.
4.1
Creating baseline rotor dynamic model and optimizing model parameters
4.1.1
The mechanical rotor dynamic model
The process of generating a mathematical model of a physical system is helped by reducing the
physical system to a simpliﬁed mechanical model. The mechanical model is a model of the physical
system where factors expected to be negligible are not included and signiﬁcant factors are included.
The mechanical model also helps create an understand the mathematical model while working with
it.
Figure 37: Mechnical model of rotor, bearing and seal system.
The mechanical model used to describe the test rig is shown in ﬁgure 37. The mechanical model
is shown under a picture of the physical system in order to enhance understanding of directions in the
39
==PAGE:47==
Table 10: Description of dots indication point of interests in the mechanical model of the rotor.
Description
Coupling forces
Sensor A
AMB A forces
Seal forces
AMB B forces
Sensor B
Dot color
Black
Yellow
Red
Green
Blue
Magenta
physical system and the mechanical model. The main rotor is included in the model together with
the forces working on it and position sensor measuring points. The coloured dots in the mechanical
model indicate points of interest which are described in table 10.
The test seal is designed symmetrically in a back to back fashion in order to mitigate axial forces
[6]. Thus, forces along the axial direction of the main rotor (z-direction) are assumed negligible.
Two coordinate systems are present in order to describe directions. The xyz-coordinate system is
considered to be the global coordinate system. The z- and y-axis are in the horizontal plane, where
the z-axis is the main rotors axial direction and the y-axis is radial/horizontal direction. The y-axis is
in the vertical direction and radial to the main rotor. The ζηz coordinate system is rotated 45◦in the
positive direction around the z-axis. The z-axis is still axial to the main rotor. The ζ- and η-axis are
radial to the main rotor but unlike the x- and y-axis they are rotated 45◦from horizontal and vertical
directions.
The reasons for the two different coordinate systems are that the position sensors measure in the x
and y directions and the AMB actuation works in the ζ and η directions. The rotor is to be modelled in
the ζηz coordinate system. In this way the actuation directions of the model corresponds the physical
system. It is important to remember that the AMB actuator systems have several states and parameters
where experimental values are to be compared with theoretical values. Therefore these directions are
prioritized over the position sensor directions which are easily converted from ζη to xy directions
through a 45◦transformation matrix. The test rig is capable of acquiring several states in the AMB
actuator system (Position, current set point, present value current and magnetic ﬂux) which are used
to calibrate the mathematical model.
4.1.2
The mathematical rotor dynamic model
Jonas S. Lauridsen has created a general MATLAB program for identifying parameters in AMB-rotor
systems, which among others was used to create the results of his article [6] which deals with the test
rig which is also considered in this project. The modelling done here is largely based on this program
and existing model of the plant and controller. Because of the new current ampliﬁers, modiﬁcations
have been made in this part of the model. Since this is an ongoing research venture an effort has been
made to create a user friendly script. The generality of the program is reduced and tailored for the
present test rig, to reduce complexity of the program. An effort has been made to comment the scripts
used in order to ease usage of the programs for successors.
The mathematical model of the rotor, bearing and seal system is a combination of a reduced FE
model of the rotor and forces applied to the FE model by AMBs, seal and coupling implemented
partially directly in the stiffness matrix of the FE model and partially in a Simulink model. Feedback
from the position sensors to the AMB current set point is known from the controller implemented in
the test rig. Detailed knowledge of the dynamics of the current ampliﬁer is also present, since both
hardware and software are produced during this master’s thesis.
The FE model of the main rotor is made based on the script ”ﬂexible rotor modal DTU c.txt”
supplied in the DTU course Machinery Dynamics. A 40 element model is made with geometry
shown in ﬁgure 38. The ﬁrst bending mode shape of the rotor is determined experimentally to have
a natural frequency of 550 Hz by Christian Mandrup-Poulsen in his master’s thesis [8]. The FE
model geometry is taken from the program written by Jonas S. Lauridsen written in connection with
his paper on on-site identiﬁcation of seal forces [6]. In the article this particular test rig is used
and a FE model was created for the main rotor. The ﬁrst free-free bending mode shape of this FE
40
==PAGE:48==
model has a natural frequency of 683 Hz at ω = 0, which is signiﬁcantly higher than the natural
frequency of 550 Hz determined experimentally. If the machines operating point was above the
ﬁrst bending modeshape, the FE model would deﬁantly need to be altered to represent the rotor
behaviour better. However since the nominal speed of the machine is 167 Hz (10.000 rpm) and
a maximum excitation frequency signiﬁcantly lower than 550 Hz, the bending mode shapes of the
rotor will never be excited signiﬁcantly. Thus, the rotor can be modelled as rigid without neglecting
important dynamics. According to the FE model the gyroscopic effects of the rotor at 10.000 rpm,
only slightly impacts the two ﬁrst two bending mode shape natural frequencies of the rotor. At 10.000
rpm the model predicts the two ﬁrst bending mode shapes to be 644 Hz and 671 Hz. This is also
conﬁrmed in [8]. As stated, the FE model does not accurately represent the main rotor, but from the
results it is expected that gyroscopic effects only have little impact on the ﬁrst bending mode shape
natural frequency of the main rotor. This ensures that the main rotors ﬁrst bending mode shape natural
frequency only decreases slightly from 550 Hz, which is well above the operating frequencies.
The fact that the FE model does not ﬁt the bending mode shape natural frequencies of the main
rotor does not necessarily mean that the rigid mode shape natural frequencies are wrong. The main
rotor is not turned from a single piece of steel. The magnetic bearing rotor part is ﬁtted onto the shaft.
The undocumented mechanical properties of the magnetic steel laminations and the fashion in which
they are ﬁtted onto the main rotor adds uncertainty to how much stiffness the bearing itself adds to
the rotor. The stiffness of the rotor is important for the bending mode shapes. The rigid mode shapes
are mainly governed by the mass distribution of the rotor and external forces i.e. AMBs, seal forces
and coupling forces.
Figure 38: FE model of rotor
Since the ﬂexible modes of the rotor does not add any signiﬁcant dynamics to the system, the
FE model is reduced to only use the 4 rigid modes. The reduction method used is Pseudo Reduction
Method and complex separation is applied to convert the state space system from complex to real. In
this way the dynamics of the rotor is described by a state space model with 8 states with 6 inputs and
6 outputs. The 6 inputs are the AMB and seal forces in the ζηz coordinate system. The 6 outputs
are the position of the rotor at the position sensors and the position of the rotor in the seal in the
ζη coordinate system. In this way advanced feedback from the positions in AMBs and seal can be
implemented in Simulink. The simulation of the model is run discretely at 16.000 Hz, which is the
control loop speed of in the test rig. The state space model of the rotor is converted from continuous
time to a 16.000 Hz discrete time system. Because the dynamics of the system is signiﬁcantly slower
than the discrete time speed, almost no difference in results should be present.
Stiffness, damping, cross coupled stiffness and cross coupled damping of the seal is implemented
directly in the FE model. The coupling forces are implemented in this fashion as well as the negative
stiffness of the AMBs (Ks). The dynamic forces delivered into the rotor by the AMBs are modelled
in Simulink.
41
==PAGE:49==
The Simulink model representing the test rig is shown in ﬁgures 39 and 40. In an attempt to make
the model more transparent, signal line explanations are added. The coefﬁcients introduced into the
model varies depending on the conﬁguration of the test rig. For the absolute basic system, with
detached ﬂexible coupling and no seal forces, the model needs; PID coefﬁcients for the position and
current controller and magnetic bearing parameters (Ks, Ki, Ku and L). The controller coefﬁcients
are known from the implemented controllers. The magnetic bearing parameters can be estimated
analytically and varies according to bias current and geometric tolerances of the AMBs. The bias
current is known but the geometric tolerances of the AMBs adds uncertainty to the parameters, thus
the AMB parameters are adjusted with an optimization procedure.
42
==PAGE:50==
Present value current  [I]
[ A_zeta
 A_eta
 B_zeta
 B_eta]
Reference current 
signal [V]
[ A_zeta
 A_eta
 B_zeta
 B_eta]
EMF [V]
[ A_zeta
 A_eta
 B_zeta
 B_eta]
Bearing nodes
[ F_AMB_A_zeta
  F_AMB_A_eta
  F_AMB_B_zeta
  F_AMB_B_eta]
Rotor radial speed [m/s]
[ SENS_A_zeta
 SENS_A_eta
 SENS_B_zeta
 SENS_B_eta]
Rotor displacement [m]
[ SENS_A_x
 SENS_A_y
 SENS_B_x
 SENS_B_y]
Rotor displacement [m]
[ SENS_A_zeta
 SENS_A_eta
 SENS_B_zeta
 SENS_B_eta]
Controller and disturbance introduction. 
Same configuration as controller on 
dSPACE computer controlling plant 
Rotor displacement [m]
[SEAL_zeta
 SEAL_eta
 SENS_A_zeta
 SENS_A_eta
 SENS_B_zeta
 SENS_B_eta]
Seal forces
[F_SEAL_zeta;F_SEAL_eta]
To Workspace
To Workspace1
U
Y
Sensor Locations
Current Pertubation
K*uvec
Coor. Transformation
Rotor Dynamic System
u
y
PID Forward
K*uvec
Ki
Notch
Notch-Peak Filter
CurrentRefSig
BackEMF
PVCurrent
Current Amp
K*uvec
Back EMF factor
K (z-1)
Ts z
Discrete Derivative
To Workspace2
Z-2
ADC/DAC1
Figure 39: Simulink model of plant, controller and current ampliﬁer.
43
==PAGE:51==
Signal representing 
current in AMB coils [V]
[AMB_A_zeta
 AMB_A_eta
 AMB_B_zeta
 AMB_B_eta]
Present value current 
in AMB coil[I]
[AMB_A_zeta
 AMB_A_eta
 AMB_B_zeta
 AMB_B_eta]
Effective voltage 
across AMB coil [V]
[AMB_A_zeta
 AMB_A_eta
 AMB_B_zeta
 AMB_B_eta]
Excitation of 
powerstage [ ]
[AMB_A_zeta
 AMB_A_eta
 AMB_B_zeta
 AMB_B_eta]
12 bit PWM pin
gain: 1/2050
Current in the coil depends on the integral of the 
effective voltage across it and the inverse inductance 
Power stage voltage
gain: 60V
Analog lowpass filter
Firmware of current amplifier 
Reference Current signal - 
PV Current signal error [V]
[AMB_A_zeta
 AMB_A_eta
 AMB_B_zeta
 AMB_B_eta]
1
PVCurrent
1
CurrentRefSig
PID(z)
Discrete PID Controller
60
Power stage gain
1
Current sensor gain
LMatrix* uvec
Coil inductance
-K-
PWM
K Ts
z-1
Discrete-Time
Integrator
First-Order
Filter
2
BackEMF
Figure 40: Simulink subsystem representing the current ampliﬁer.
4.1.3
Verifying mathematical rotor dynamic model
To verify that the model is replicating the dynamics of the physical system, experimental data and
simulated results are compared. To avoid unknown forces the seal test ﬂuid is turned off, so no seal
44
==PAGE:52==
forces are present and the ﬂexible coupling is dismounted. This ensures that the only signiﬁcant forces
working on the rotor are the AMB actuation.
The experiment is conducted at 4 A bias current and the system is disturbed with a pseudo random
binary sequence (PRBS) fed into control current signal with an amplitude of ±0.6 A. The model is
implemented with the linearised analytically determined AMB parameters and the known controller
coefﬁcients shown in table 11. The method of determining AMB coefﬁcients analytically is shown
in [11, p. 69-81]. The current tracking controller in the current ampliﬁer is a PI controller. The
fashion in which the integral term is implemented is uncertain because it is an undocumented c++
library used and could not be implemented into the Simulink model. The integral term implemented
is 200 and seems to be very slow and is only included to mitigate the current offset due to the ohmic
resistance of the AMB coils which is neglected in this model. Initially this slow integral term was
considered insigniﬁcant. However, when running the simulation and comparing the obtained signals
with experimental results it was discovered that the integral term in the current controller had a sig-
niﬁcant inﬂuence despite its slow response. The integral term was added to the model and hand ﬁtted
to 10.000. This discrete integral corresponds to an integral time of 1.6 s when converting to from 16
kHz discrete time to continuous time, which is slow compared to the system dynamics.
Table 11: Analytically estimated system coefﬁcients at 4A bias and control parameters.
Position
Controller
P
17.000
A/m
tI
0.2
s
td
0.035
s
Position
Controller
P
1.000
A/A
tI
10.000
-
td
0
-
AMB
coefﬁceints
Ks
−1.54 · 106
N/m
Ki
193
N/A
Ku
-193
V/(m/s)
L
13
mH
In the physical system the gravity pulls on the main rotor offsetting control currents needed to
levitate the rotor, this effect is not included in the model. To mitigate the offsets from the experimental
data, the averages of each signal are subtracted from the signal. The PRBS generated by the test rig
dSPACE controller is recorded and fed into the simulation as well. Four present value (PV) AMB coil
currents exist for each AMB, while in the model only two present value current exist per AMB. The
current behaviour in opposite AMB coils are inverse due to the control current signal coupling. A coil
current and the inverse of the opposite coil current is compared with the single present value current
from the model in the actuation direction. Positions at sensors, present value current (PV current)
and current set point (Current SP) are compared for AMB A in ﬁgure 41. The script, functions and
models used to create the time response comparison plots is included in the ’hand in folder’ in the
path ’Mathematical model\3 identiﬁcation of AMB parameters\plotTimeResponse.m’.
Considering that all AMB parameters are analytically determined, the ﬁt between experimental
data and simulated results is quite good. The mathematical model seems to capture most of the
dynamics present in the test rig. The comparison is only shown for AMB A, AMB B shows similar
results since the system is symmetric. From these results it can be concluded that model to some
degree represents the physical system, and can be used as basis for the forthcoming work.
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 41: Time response of model AMB A before optimization
4.1.4
Optimizing mathematical rotor dynamic model
The mathematical model seems to capture the dynamics of the test rig to some degree despite the
uncertainty of the AMB parameters. The AMB parameters are sensitive to geometric tolerances in
the AMBs and the bias current. The analytic calculations determining the AMB parameters neglect
signiﬁcant factors such as magnetic ﬂux leakage, magnetic ﬂux saturation, magnetic ﬂux hysteresis,
geometric tolerances and other deviations. The model can be improved with optimization of the AMB
parameters. Also the fashion that the current controller integrator is implemented is uncertain, so this
parameter is optimized as well.
The optimization routine is based on changing parameters in the model to ﬁt model signals onto
experimental signals as precisely as possible. The signals optimized for are the same as shown in
ﬁgure 41 for both bearings i.e. rotor position at sensors, SP current and PV currents. The optimiza-
tion routine works by minimizing the accumulated error between the signals. The accumulated error
between the experimental and the simulated position signals are signiﬁcantly smaller than the errors
generated in the current signal errors because of the different scales. The position is in the order of
10−4 and the currents are in the order of 100. So the accumulated error of each signal pair is scaled
by the maximum value of the experimental signal. The MATLAB program used to optimize for these
parameters are included in the hand in folder with the path ’Mathematical model\3 identiﬁcation of
AMB parameters\main AMB Para Iden.m’, it is based on the build in optimizing function ’lsqnon-
lin’.
The steep ﬂanks of the PRBS contains all frequencies, so when optimizing with this signal the
model should be optimized for all frequencies. Data for 6 seconds of operation is acquired from the
test rig during PRBS perturbation, which is used for optimizing the model. The PRBS perturbation
runs continuously on the test rig, and the model is initialized at t=0. This means that transients in the
experimental data from t<0 are present which are not present in the model. It is estimated that the
transients have been damped out after 500 samples (0.16s), so the ﬁrst 500 samples are excluded from
the error function. The experiment is repeated 10 times and the average of the parameters found are
considered to be the result of the optimization procedure.
The parameters found in the procedure are introduced into the model and experimental and simu-
lated signals are compared in ﬁgure 42. The optimization seems to have improved the models ability
to replicate the physical systems behaviour. The accumulated error between simulated signals and
the experimental data divided by the timespan the signals cover is used as indicator of how well the
46
==PAGE:54==
model replicates the physical system. Using the analytically calculated parameters the error per time
is 2092 /s, using the parameters optimized with the PRBS signal the error per time is reduced to 1248
/s. The optimization procedure reduced the error per time by 40%.
Figure 42: Time response of model with parameters obtained with PRBS optimization procedure.
4.1.5
Verifying the optimized model in frequency domain
The model parameters are optimized in the time domain and should be veriﬁed. A different approach
to compare to systems is to compare frequency responses. When comparing in frequency domain a
lot of information is contained in a plot. The response of the system in an entire frequency range is
compared in one plot. The rotor is excited in the vertical direction in a parallel fashion by a 0-300
Hz chirp signal in the timespan of 180 s. The actuation direction of AMBs are 45◦off vertical, so
both actuation directions are excited simultaneously in both AMBs. The current disturbances are
converted from the ζηz coordinate system into the xyz coordinate system using a 45◦transformation
matrix. An FRF estimate is created from this transformed current perturbation to the position to the y
position of the rotor is AMB A. Two models are created, one using the analytic AMB parameters and
one using the optimized AMB parameters. Simulations of the models are run while perturbing them
with the current chirp signal recorded from the test rig. The same FRF estimates are made for the
two simulations. All three FRF estimates are plotted in ﬁgure 43 for comparison. The optimization
procedure seems to have improved the performance of the model not only in time domain but also in
frequency domain. The simulated magnitude lies signiﬁcantly closer the the experimental magnitude
at frequencies below 50 Hz, but still lacks some magnitude between 40 Hz and 65 Hz. The phase
response is improved to a good ﬁt in the entire frequency range.
The experimental FRF estimate has notches in both the magnitude and phase response at 27 Hz,
67 Hz, 167 Hz and 245 Hz. These notches are not captured by either the model implemented with
the analytic AMB parameters neither the model implemented with the optimized parameters. This
indicates that the model lacks components inﬂuencing the dynamics of the system.
The model considers a rigid foundation, however it is commonly known that the foundation can
have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on a rotor system. Michael Ganis master’s thesis [23], considers interaction
of a ﬂexible foundations interaction with a rotor system. The ﬂexible foundation considered in [23]
is a T-slot plate of the same type as the one used to support the test rig considered in this project. The
two T-slot plates are not identical but are in the same scale of dimensions. The components mounted
on the T-slot plate are not the same either, but also have similar order of scale of geometry and mass.
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 43: FRF estimate between current disturbance and position in bearing of experiment, analytic model
and optimized model.
The ﬁrst 11 bending mode shape natural frequencies of the T-slot plate considered in [23] with the
test rig mounted on it are determined experimentally in the range of 25 Hz to 223 Hz. The test rig
considered in this project is slightly different in dimensions, so the natural frequencies should also be
slightly different but in the same order of magnitude. When exciting the test rig at the frequencies
where response notches are seen, signiﬁcantly more audible noise is generated than when exciting
other frequencies. Because of the planes large area, it transfers a lot energy to the air as audible sound
waves when resonating at bending mode shapes where deﬂection amplitude is large. When exciting
the test rig at the suspected natural frequencies of the foundation vibration amplitude diversity across
the test rig plane felt by hand is signiﬁcant. This is a natural behaviour of a bending mode shape of
a plane. Some points will have large vibration amplitude and other points located at nodes has zero
amplitude. Considering Michael Ganis master thesis [23] and the observations made during operation
of the test rig, the response notches not produced by the model could possibly come from foundation
dynamics.
Modelling of foundation dynamics is out of the scope of this project. Despite the suspected plane
dynamics inﬂuencing the system, the ﬁt is acceptable both in time domain and in frequency. Since the
AMB parameters are optimized for all frequencies with the PRBS signal, they will try to compensate
the model for the suspected plane dynamics. This makes the model perform worse at frequencies
away from the response notches. In the next section an attempt is made to optimize the system only
for speciﬁc frequencies away from the response notches. In this way the optimization does compen-
sate for the suspected plane dynamics and the model should be more accurate for frequencies away
from the plane natural frequencies. This could be advantageous since the seal forces are identiﬁed as
function of the lateral rotor displacement frequency. It would be the lateral acceleration of the rotor
which excites the foundation natural frequencies. Thus, when identifying the seal forces at frequen-
cies away from the natural frequencies of the plane the suspected foundation dynamics will impact
the results less. The seal forces could then be identiﬁed with greater general accuracy but not at the
frequencies where the response notches are observed.
48
==PAGE:56==
4.1.6
Optimizing model at speciﬁc frequencies
For the reasons described in the previous section an attempt is made to optimize the model only for
frequencies away from the response notches seen in ﬁgure 43. The approach is to perform the same
optimization procedure as in the previous section. However, instead of exciting the system with a
PRBS signal, it is excited with a signal only containing frequencies that are desired to optimize the
model for. These frequencies are chosen away from the response notches. The signal used to do
this is a composition of sine waves at different frequencies. Such a signal is seen in ﬁgure 44. This
speciﬁc signal is concatenated of sine waves with frequencies described in table 12 as ’Signal 4’. ’N
Cycles’ is the number of cycles of the sine wave at the speciﬁct frequency. The optimization procedure
considers the system response in time, so the optimization is weighted towards ﬁtting the model at
frequencies where the system is excited for the longest duration. So in order to increase the weight of
the optimization error function at speciﬁc frequencies more sine cycles are run at desired frequencies.
Figure 43 shows that the model lacks accuracy in the frequency band 40 Hz to 60 Hz. Signal 3 has
a lot of cycles between 45 Hz and 58 Hz in order to try and optimize the models FRF magnitude in
this band. Four different excitation signals are described in table 12 which have different frequency
contents and weights. When conducting the experiment, the signals are used to perturb each of the
four control current signals one after another. The pertubation sequence is shown for signal four in
ﬁgure 45.
Experiments are conducted while perturbing the rotor with each of the four signals describes. The
perturbation and the response of the test rig is recorded. Four sets of AMB parameters are determined
using the optimization procedure fed with experimental data from each of the experiments using the
different excitation signals. The routine is conducted 10 times for each of the perturbation signals and
the average of the determined AMB parameters is used for implementing in the model representing
the optimization for the corresponding signal.
Figure 44: Pertubation sequence zoomed (signal 1)
Four models are created with the optimized AMB parameters. The models are simulated with the
exact same PRBS current perturbation as used for ﬁrst optimization shown in ﬁgure 42. The error per
time is recorded and displayed in table 13. The model optimized with the PRBS signal is the best
model in time domain. This is expected since the model is optimized for the signal which is used
create the error per time value for all the models. The model optimized with signal 4 has almost as
low error per time value as the PRBS optimized model.
Table 13: Error per time for the models created.
Model
NoOpt
PRBS
Signal1
Signal2
Signal3
Signal4
er/s
2092
1248
1673
1380
1752
1329
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 45: Pertubation sequence (signal 1)
Table 12: Perturbation signal speciﬁcations
Signal 1
Frequencies
5
15
45
50
53
55
58
60
85
100
150
200
250
300
N Cycles
1
1
4
4
10
20
10
10
4
4
4
4
4
4
Signal 2
Frequencies
5
15
45
50
53
55
58
60
85
100
150
200
250
300
N Cycles
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Signal 3
Frequencies
5
15
45
50
53
55
58
60
85
100
150
200
250
300
N Cycles
1
1
15
20
40
40
40
20
20
4
4
4
4
4
Signal 4
Frequencies
5
15
45
55
60
85
100
150
200
250
300
N Cycles
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Simulations of the models are conducted with the same vertical chirp excitation as in the previous
section. The same FRF estimates are made and shown in ﬁgure 46. Models optimized with signals
1 and 3 are heavily weighted in the frequency band 45 Hz to 60 Hz. In ﬁgure 46 it is seen that the
models optimized with signal 1 and 3 actually improved their performance slightly in the frequency
band in which they are optimized for. However, these two models have compromised the response
magnitude between 20 Hz and 40 Hz.
The model optimized with signal 4 has slightly better response in the frequency range 40 Hz to 65
Hz than the model optimized with the PRBS signal. Since it is only slightly worse in time, the model
optimized with signal 4 is chosen to use for the forthcoming work. The time response of the signal 4
optimized model is compared to experimental data in ﬁgure 47. The time response of the other three
models are shown in Appendix D.
4.1.7
Optimizing model at varying bias currents
As stated in section 4.1.2, the AMB parameters change according to the bias current. This is seen in
the analytic estimations. Inductance should not change as function of the bias current, if the core is
not saturated. Since the the AMBs are rated for a bias current of 12.5 A, it is not expected to saturate
50
==PAGE:58==
Figure 46: FRF estimate between current disturbance and position in bearing of experiment and tuned models
in the vertical direction.
when operating at 4 A - 6 A bias. Ki is expected to increase linearly as function of the bias current.
Ku is expected to be the same as Ki but with opposite sign, so it is expected to decrease linearly as
function of the bias. Ks has a negative quadratic dependence on the bias current, so it is expected this
value decreases quadratic.
30 experiments are conducted with bias current of 4 A, 5 A and 6 A, where the system is perturbed
by signal 4 deﬁned in section 4.1.6. No other factors inﬂuence the rotor i.e. seal ﬂow is turned off and
coupling is detached. The optimization procedure for estimating AMB parameters experimentally is
used to ﬁnd AMB parameters for bias currents 4 A, 5 A and 6 A. Because of thermal limitations of
the ampliﬁer it is not possible to operate at higher bias currents. The average of results of the 10
experiments conducted at each of the bias current are shown in ﬁgure 48. As expected, the inductance
stays somewhat constant as function of the bias current. Ki increases in a fashion which could be
linear as expected. Ks decreased as function of bias current in what could be a quadratic dependence.
With only 3 data points spaced closely it is difﬁcult to conclude which dependence a parameter has on
the bias current. However for Ki, L and Ks the dependence on bias current described by the analytic
estimates cannot be rejected considering these results.
Ku increases as function of bias current when it should be decreasing. This could be because of
the integrator of the current controller which is also optimized. The integral term is kept constant for
all experiments, however the optimized parameter change from 1.5·105 to 2.1·105 over the operating
range. This value should be constant since it is kept constant in the experiments. Both the integral term
of the current controller and the back EMF term Ku have direct inﬂuence on the SP current to current
PV transfer function and could possibly counteract each other, making the parameters nonunique. It
would be best to reimplement the integral term in the current ampliﬁer in a known fashion. Next,
implement it in the same fashion in the model, consider it known and not optimize for it. However,
what is important is to have a model which replicates the dynamics of the physical system and that is
the case with these models.
Time responses of the system at 5 A bias can be seen in Appendix E. The experiments identifying
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure 47: Time response of model with parameters obtained with optimization procedure 4
the seal forces will be conducted at 6 A bias, so the model for this operating point is reviewed in the
next section in some detail.
52
==PAGE:60==
Figure 48: AMB parameters changing as function of bias
4.1.8
Model at 6A bias
The AMB parameters found at 6 A bias using the optimization routine and signal 4 from section 4.1.6.
The experiment is conducted 10 times and 10 sets of AMB parameters are found. This is done in order
to ensure repeatability of the experiment. The 10 sets of AMB parameters are shown in ﬁgures 49
and 50. The ﬁgures are box plots which gives statistical insight in the results obtained. The red line
is the mean of the 10 results and is used as the parameter in the forthcoming work. The upper and
lower lines of the box represent the 25th and 75th percentiles. The whiskers extending outside the
box represent the maximum and minimum results. Red crosses represent outlying data.
Concluded from ﬁgures 49 and 50 the experiment and AMB parameter identiﬁcation is fairly
repeatable. The procedure seems to give about the same result every time. The perturbation signal
is exciting the test rig continuously and the data sample is taken at a random time. This means
when simulating the model it is initialized at random times in the excitation signal cycle. This could
inﬂuence the results.
Generally it is noticed that the parameters for one bearing in the two actuation directions are iden-
tiﬁed to be fairly close. However, the AMB parameters in one bearing differs signiﬁcantly from the
same parameters for the other bearings. This is explained by the difference in manufacturing tech-
53
==PAGE:61==
niques used to produce the AMB laminate stacks. One AMB is wire cut with the electrical discharge
machining (EDM) process and the other is laser cut. Generally the EDM process allows obeying
extremely tight tolerances, especially compared to laser cutting. As stated in section 4.1.4, the AMB
parameters are geometry dependent. When the AMBs are produced with different manufacturing
techniques, inevitably the two AMBs will differ slightly in geometry. These slight differences in
geometry shows up in these results.
Even the two different actuation directions of the same AMB differ slightly. These differences
could also be due to geometric tolerances, even though one process is used to make one bearing. This
just indicates how sensitive the AMB parameters are to geometric deviations.
Figure 49: Magnetic bearing parameters as 6A
Figure 50: Magnetic bearing parameters as 6A
The parameters found are implemented in the model and the model is perturbed with a PRBS
signal. The response of the model is compared with the experimental response in ﬁgure 51. The
model response seems to capture most of the dynamics of the physical system.
54
==PAGE:62==
Figure 51: Time response of model with parameters obtained with optimization procedure 4 at 6A bias
4.1.9
6A bias model veriﬁcation in frequency domain
The 6 A bias model described in the previous section is the model which is used to identify seal forces
so an analysis is conducted deﬁning in which frequency band the model is accurate. This is relevant
since the seal forces are identiﬁed as function of the lateral vibration frequency of the rotor. With this
analysis the correctness of the results can be evaluated. Two experiments are conducted where the
rotor is levitated and excited in a parallel fashion in respectively the vertical and horizontal direction.
The excitation signal is a 0.5 A 0-300 Hz chirp current excitation signal spanning 180 s. A FRF
estimate from the control current excitation signal to respectively the vertical and horizontal positions
of AMB A is created and shown in ﬁgures 52 and 53. In the FRF plots red boxes are shaded where the
model deviates signiﬁcantly from the experimental data. If the magnitude of the FRF deviates more
than 10% a red area is shaded. If the phase deviates more than 15◦, the plot is shaded red.
The frequency bands covered by red shaded areas is where the model deviates. Seal forces are
identiﬁed as function of radial position frequency of the rotor. The seal characteristics results obtained
in the red shaded frequency bands are expected to be corrupted. The model is expected to yield good
results in the frequency band 0 Hz - 60 Hz. In both the vertical and horizontal FRF estimate in the
frequency band 60 Hz - 110 Hz the model lacks magnitude. In the frequency band 110 Hz - 140 Hz
the results are expected to have some precision because of the good ﬁt of the model. From 140 Hz
and up the model deviates from the experimental response, magnitudes are very small and coherence
of the experimental FRF estimate starts to drop. The low coherence indicates that the signal to noise
ratio (SNR) is low. The noise level is likely constant, and is introduced by the AMBs and by the Eddie
current position sensors. When the signal becomes weak, the SNR drops and it becomes increasingly
difﬁcult to analyse the signal. The signal magnitude (i.e. position amplitude) becomes smaller with
frequency because of the inertia of the system. If a free mass is excited by a harmonic force the
position amplitude would be proportional to the inverses squared frequency (i.e. 1/f 2).
The FRF estimates for both the vertical and horizon perturbation are shown in logarithmic scales
in ﬁgures 54 and 55. The logarithmic plot of the response sometimes reveals behaviour which is
overlooked in the linear plots. However, in the frequency bands 0 Hz - 60 Hz and 110 Hz - 140 Hz
the model seems to replicate the response of the physical system.
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 52: FRF estimate between current disturbance and position in bearing A of experiment and optimized
model in vertical direction at 6A bias.
Figure 53: FRF estimate between current disturbance and position in bearing A of experiment and optimized
model in horizontal direction at 6A bias.
56
==PAGE:64==
Figure 54: FRF estimate between current disturbance and position in bearing A of experiment and optimized
model in vertical direction at 6A bias plotted in logarithmic scale
Figure 55: FRF estimate between current disturbance and position in bearing A of experiment and optimized
model in horizontal direction at 6A bias plotted in logarithmic scale
4.1.10
Flexible coupling characteristics
Up until now the system has been considered without the ﬂexible coupling attached. The ﬂexible
coupling is needed in order to conduct experiments with seal ﬂow. If the main rotor is not aligned
axially in the center of the seal, the seal ﬂow will create slight axial forces. These axial forces will be
counteracted by the ﬂexible coupling. The seal ﬂow also creates a signiﬁcant torque on the rotor. If
57
==PAGE:65==
the rotor is not kept at ω = 0 the rotor will accelerate, this is also done through the ﬂexible coupling.
For operation at 10.000 rpm the drive motor is coupled to the main rotor through the ﬂexible coupling.
The system model needs to be extended in order to include the characteristics of the ﬂexible
coupling. The coupling characteristics i.e. stiffness and damping is identiﬁed in the same fashion
as the AMB parameters. 10 experiments are conducted, where the main rotor is connected with
the ﬂexible coupling. The main rotor is levitated with the operating point 6 A bias. The system is
perturbed by signal 4 from section 4.1.6. The model is implemented with the already obtained AMB
parameters for 6 A bias and 4 extra parameters are implemented representing direct stiffness and
damping in the end node where the ﬂexible coupling is attached. These 4 parameters are optimized
with the same procedure as introduced in section 4.1.6. The parameters found are shown here:
Kη = 0.39 · 106N/m
∧
Kζ = 0.37 · 106N/m
∧
Dη = 122Ns2/m
∧
Dζ = 199Ns2/m
(4.1)
With these parameters obtained all the model parameters are identiﬁed and a baseline model is
created. When the seal ﬂow is turned on, the forces delivered by the seal ﬂow onto the rotor are the
only unknown characteristics of the system ignoring the suspected foundation dynamics.
4.2
Identiﬁcation of seal forces
4.2.1
Identiﬁcation of seal forces procedure
The purpose of the test rig is to identify seal forces. The previous work conducted developing an
AMB current ampliﬁer and a mathematical model of the system is in order to allow identiﬁcation of
seal force characteristics. The main rotor is considered to lie in the center of the annular seal which is
tested. This should lead to the seal force parameters being the same for the perpendicular directions,
and the seal force can be represented as in the following equation [3]:
fζ
fη

=
 K
k
−k
K
 ζ
η

+
 D
d
−d
D
  ˙ζ
˙η

(4.2)
f is the force working in the seal. K is the direct stiffness of the seal and k is the cross coupled
stiffness of the seal. ζ and η are lateral positions of the rotor in the seal. D is the direct damping and
the d is the cross coupled damping. ˙ζ and ˙η are lateral rotor velocities in the seal.
A model is implemented with all the AMB parameters and the ﬂexible coupling characteristics
which are already found for the 6 A bias operating point. The seal force characteristics i.e. K, k, D
and d are implemented in the FE model of the main rotor. The seal force coefﬁcients are optimized
for with the optimization procedure.
The seal forces are identiﬁed as functions of seal inlet pressure and lateral rotor frequency. Since
it is desirable to obtain the seal coefﬁcients as function of lateral position frequency of the rotor, the
excitation signal should only perturb harmonically at a speciﬁc frequency at a time. An excitation
signal is made, much like the one used for AMB parameter identiﬁcation in section 4.1.6. The signal
perturbs the main rotor harmonically in a parallel fashion. The frequency of the harmonic excitation
is changed throughout the signal. The frequencies contained in the signal are from 5 Hz to 255 Hz in
10 Hz increments. The number of cycles of each frequency is described in table 14 as ’nCycle’. The
time it takes to conduct the deﬁned number of cycles at the frequency is also shown in the table as
’FreqT’. The 5 Hz - 25 Hz portion of the signal is shown in ﬁgure 56.
Experiments are conducted, with a speciﬁc seal inlet pressure. The main rotor of the system is
perturbed with the described signal. The perturbation signal, sensor positions, SP current and current
PV are recorded. The model is simulated in a certain timespan of the perturbation signal. The simula-
tion is started slightly before the harmonic excitation signal desired to examine starts, and ends as the
harmonic signal switches to the next frequency. The simulation time used to identify the seal force
58
==PAGE:66==
for a speciﬁc frequency is shown in table 14 as ’SimT’. An error function is created based on the error
between experimental and simulated signals in time. The error function excludes the transients from
changing excitation frequency in the experiment and form simulation initialization. The timespan that
the error function is determined in is described in table 14 as ’ErT’. The optimization procedure uses
this error function to optimize for the seal force coefﬁcients at the speciﬁc excitation frequency. The
signal contains 26 harmonic excitations at increasing frequencies. This procedure is repeated for the
26 different timespans to identify the seal fore parameters at the different frequencies. The procedure
is elaborated on in the rest of this section.
Figure 56: Current disturbance for seal force identiﬁcation
Table 14: Description of excitation signal
Freq [Hz]
5
15
25
35
45
55
65
75
85
95
105
115
125
nCycle
11
16
21
26
31
36
41
46
51
56
61
66
71
FreqT [s]
2.20
1.07
0.84
0.74
0.69
0.65
0.63
0.61
0.60
0.59
0.58
0.57
0.57
SimT [s]
2.31
1.14
0.91
0.81
0.76
0.72
0.70
0.68
0.67
0.65
0.65
0.64
0.63
ErT [s]
1.10
0.53
0.42
0.37
0.34
0.33
0.32
0.31
0.30
0.29
0.29
0.29
0.28
Freq [Hz]
135
145
155
165
175
185
195
205
215
225
235
245
255
nCycle
76
81
86
91
96
101
106
111
116
121
126
131
136
FreqT [s]
0.56
0.56
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.53
0.53
SimT [s]
0.63
0.62
0.62
0.62
0.61
0.61
0.61
0.61
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
ErT [s]
0.28
0.28
0.28
0.28
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
The procedure optimizes for 12 signals i.e. positions, SP currents and current PV in both directions
in both AMBs. In ﬁgure 57 the seal force identiﬁcation procedure for AMB A positions for 0 pressure
and 5 Hz excitation is shown. Only the positions of AMB A is shown. The experiment is conducted
with no seal ﬂow and no forces should act from the seal on the rotor. This means that the model
created with the optimized AMB and ﬂexible coupling parameters should have the dynamics of the
present system, and the signals should match perfectly.
The ﬁrst and third plots in ﬁgure 57 are the timespan in which the model is simulated with the
corresponding perturbation signal. As it is seen, the model simulation timespan actually stretches
slightly into the 255 Hz domain which is the end of the previous excitation signal sequence which
repeats continuously. The second and fourth plots are the same signals as plots 1 and 3, but with
a shorter timespan. These plots show the timespan from which the error function for optimization
59
==PAGE:67==
Figure 57: Seal identiﬁcation procedure at 0 pressure and 5 Hz
is created. The ﬁrst part of the signal is not included in the error function to avoid inﬂuence from
transients. The transients come from transition of frequency in the excitation signal and initialization
of the simulation. The transients seems to have died out at the time where the error function timespan
starts.
In the x direction which is the direction the rotor is excited, the position simulated by the model
matches well for the model containing only the AMB and ﬂexible coupling parameters. In order to
move the rotor in the x direction, the rotor has to be excited synchronously in the ζ and η direction. If
the AMBs were ideal and parameters in ζ and η direction of each AMB was the same, the y position
should be 0 since the x and y directions are then decoupled. However, because of slight deviations in
AMB parameters in the ζ and η direction, small responses in the y direction are seen for the model
when exciting the main rotor in the x direction. However the coupling is weak, the magnitude of the
x position is in the order of 100 µm and the order of magnitude of the y position is in the order of a
hundred times less.
Since the system is considered to mostly be dominated by linear properties, the steady state re-
sponse of the system should be harmonic when the excitation is harmonic. Even though the experi-
mental y direction position signal is not harmonic, it seems to be periodic. The inﬂuence making the
signal nonharmonic must then be periodic. This noise could be introduced by electric run-out, which
could be initiated by the large x direction amplitude. The nonharmonic y direction position signal is
considered to be dominated by noise.
Even though the y direction signal is considered to have a low SNR in this case, the optimization
procedure is used to optimize for the seal parameters. Since no seal force ﬂow is introduced during
conduction of this experiment the seal force parameters should be zero if the mathematical model
captures all the dynamics of the physical system. Despite the fact that the y position is small, the
procedure optimizes the response of the model in the y direction equally with the x direction. The
model before optimization captures the movement in the x direction well, but fails to do so in the y
direction. Actually, the position in the y direction is 180◦out of phase. The optimization has tried
60
==PAGE:68==
to improve the y direction response, and has simply just reduced the amplitude of the position signal
since it it difﬁcult to change the phase 180◦.
Since the optimization procedure can only alter K, k, D and d, it must have altered one or more
of these parameters in order to change the characteristics of the model response. This is not optimal
but expected. Optimally the model should capture the exact dynamics of the physical system so when
optimizing for the seal parameters, while no ﬂuid ﬂows through the seal the coefﬁcients should give
zero.
Considering that the existing model is optimized for a frequency spectrum and now is used at a
speciﬁc frequency, allows the seal forces to compensate foundation dynamics at a curtain frequency.
The results will suffer from this effect. The seal parameter identiﬁcation process also suffers from
low SNR when when rotor movement is very low in at least one direction. However, this should
only be a problem for 0 pressure experiments. When seal ﬂow is introduced a large cross coupled
stiffness is introduced generating lateral displacement perpendicular to the excitation direction, so
both directions have a large amplitude.
The seal parameter identiﬁcation procedure for 0 ﬂow through the seal at 145 Hz excitation is
shown in ﬁgure 58. The 4 plots show the same as ﬁgure 57, except it is in the timespan where the
excitation frequency is 145 Hz. Again, the simulated timespan stretches slightly into the previous har-
monic excitation frequency which is 135 Hz in this case. A large transient is seen from the simulation
initiation. This transient seems to die out before the excitation frequency changes. And as in ﬁgure
57 plots 2 and 4 show the timespan from which the error function is calculated. The transients from
the simulation initiation and the perturbation frequency transition seems to have died out when this
timespan starts.
The model seems to capture the dynamics in the excitation direction quite well. Both before
optimizing for the seal parameters and when the seal parameters are optimized. This could indicate
that the seal coefﬁcients are close to zero, as they should be, for this case. Because of the inertia
term of the heavy main rotor, the amplitude of the positions has decreased. The amplitude of the
experimental y direction position is very low, less than 1 µm. The signal seems to contain some
random noise which is in the same order of magnitude making signal processing difﬁcult.
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure 58: Seal identiﬁcation procedure at 0 pressure and 145 Hz
Figures 57 and 58 show the optimization procedure for 0 pressure in the seal inlet at 5 Hz and
145 Hz. As stated previously in this section, the excitation signal contains harmonic excitation at
frequencies ranging from 5 Hz to 255 Hz. The procedure shown in the two ﬁgures is repeated for all 26
frequencies that the excitation signal contains. The seal parameters obtained through the optimization
procedure is shown in the next section (4.2.2).
Figure 59 shows the same signals as ﬁgures 57 and 58, but for the identiﬁcation of seal forces
at 3.4 bar with an excitation frequency of 5 Hz. The identiﬁcation procedure is used. The model is
simulated for a long timespan and the error function is created based on the last half of the signals in
order to avoid optimization of transient components of the signals.
It is observed that before optimizing for the seal coefﬁcients, the modelled rotor only moves in
the direction of excitation it is shown by the model. The movement in the y direction is close to zero
before optimizing for the seal parameters. After optimizing for the seal parameters, the amplitude
of x position signal is decreased and ﬁts so well on the experimental signal that it is hidden behind
the simulated signal. The y direction position signal amplitude is increased and ﬁts the experimental
signal very well. As seen in section 4.2.2 the most pronounced seal coefﬁcient is the cross coupled
stiffness. It is large in order to make the model response match the experimental response. The cross
coupled damping also has some magnitude and the other two parameters are close to zero in this case.
62
==PAGE:70==
Figure 59: Seal identiﬁcation procedure at 3.4 bar and 5 Hz
Figure 60 shows the seal identiﬁcation procedure for seal inlet pressure 3.4 bar and excitation fre-
quency 145 Hz. Here the simulation initialization transients are clear for the model with the optimized
seal parameters. The parameter of signiﬁcance is the cross coupled stiffness of the seal. This param-
eter is destabilizing the model resulting in these longer transients. It is difﬁcult to see the simulation
initialization transient in ﬁgure 59 due to the large time scale and large y axis scales to compliment the
large position amplitude of the 5 Hz exciation. However, the perturbation signal frequency transition
transient can actually be seen in the experimental data. It is difﬁcult to see due to the large scales,
however the transient time is in the same order of the simulation initialization transient of of ﬁgure
60. This is expected, because the large destabilizing cross coupled stiffness is also present in this
experiment.
For the seal parameter identiﬁcation procedure at 3.4 bar and 145 Hz excitation frequency shown
in ﬁgure 60, it is also seen that the inertia term of the heavy main rotor decreases the position ampli-
tudes in both in the direction of the excitation and the in the perpendicular direction. The problem
for identifying seal forces for zero seal ﬂow was that the SNR in the y direction was very low. Here
the y direction position signal has a signiﬁcant amplitude due to the cross coupled forces. This in-
creases the SNR, which is favourable for signal processing. A zoom of the position signals in the the
error function timespan is shown in ﬁgure 61. Here it becomes obvious that the y direction position
is somewhat harmonic and the optimization procedure has accomplished in improving the model re-
sponse in the y direction. However, it could also be suspected from ﬁgure 61 that if SNR becomes
much lower in the y direction, the actual signal will become difﬁcult to analyse.
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure 60: Seal identiﬁcation procedure at 3.4 bar and 145 Hz
Figure 61: Zoomed seal identiﬁcation procedure at 3.4 bar and 145 Hz
A zoom of the position signals in the the error function timespan for the 255 Hz seal parameter
identiﬁcation procedure for a seal pressure of 3.4 bar is shown in ﬁgure 62. In the excitation direction
the position signal is still strong enough compared to the noise in order to see what the signal is a
harmonic response. However, for the y direction position response the noise overcomes the signal
and the optimization procedure struggles to ﬁnd seal parameters improving the model response. This
is the reason why the seal parameter identiﬁcation procedure lacks precision at high frequencies.
64
==PAGE:72==
Figure 62: Zoomed seal identiﬁcation procedure at 3.4 bar and 255 Hz
4.2.2
Identiﬁed seal parameter results
The seal coefﬁcient identiﬁcation procedure described in the previous section is used to ﬁnd the
seal coefﬁcients described in (4.2). The procedure is used to ﬁnd seal coefﬁcients as function of
seal inlet pressure and rotor lateral vibration frequency. Two sets of experiments are conducted, one
which identiﬁes the seal coefﬁcients perturbing the rotor horizontally and one which identiﬁes the seal
coefﬁcients perturbing the rotor vertically. The experiment and identiﬁcation procedure is conducted
10 times for each of the approaches and the average of the results are shown in respectively ﬁgures
63 and 64. The coefﬁcients identiﬁed are K, k, D and d, which are plotted in separate plots. The
red shaded areas in the plots indicate the frequency spectra where the model response does not ﬁt the
response of the physical system. These frequency spectra are determined in section 4.1.8, where the
estimated FRF for experimental and simulated signals deviate too much. The threshold for when the
model is considered to not replicate the physical system behaviour is when the model FRF estimate
magnitude deviates more than 10% from the experimental value or model FRF estimate phase deviates
more than 15◦from the experimental value. This evaluation of the model in the frequency domain is
conducted for both parallel horizontal and vertical excitation of the rotor. The rotor is also excited in
a parallel fashion for identifying seal forces. Thus, the ﬁt of the model during this kind of excitation
is critical for good results when identifying seal coefﬁcients with this method. Consequently seal
coefﬁcients determined in the red shaded area should be considered inaccurate. The upper plot in
both ﬁgures 63 and 64 indicate what parameter rejects the model in the frequency domain. The red
line indicates that the model has a bad ﬁt in horizontal direction magnitude. The blue line indicates
that the model has a bad ﬁt in horizontal direction phase. The green line indicates that the model has a
bad ﬁt in vertical direction magnitude. The black line indicates that the model has a bad ﬁt in vertical
direction phase.
The identiﬁed seal coefﬁcient should be the same regardless of the direction they are identiﬁed in.
The seal forces are identiﬁed by perturbing the rotor in the horizontal and vertical direction in order
to verify this.
The most signiﬁcant force created in the test seal should be the cross coupled stiffness k. The
other coefﬁcients are often considered to be small in a seal of this size with this large clearance i.e.
500 µm.
The direct stiffness should be small in the entire frequency range. In the frequency range where
the results are expected to be accurate, the direct stiffness is in fact small. The direct stiffness in
65
==PAGE:73==
the frequency range 50 Hz to 100 Hz has signiﬁcant values, especially for higher seal inlet pressures.
However, the model responds incorrectly in this frequency range thus yielding inaccurate results when
used for seal coefﬁcient identiﬁcation.
The direct damping is expected to be small, because of the large seal clearance. The identiﬁed
direct damping coefﬁcients are close to zero below 150 Hz, for both the horizontal and vertical iden-
tiﬁcation procedure. Above 150 Hz the identiﬁed direct damping deviates signiﬁcantly from the ex-
pected, however this is in a frequency range where the model response is bad and results are expected
to be wrong.
The cross coupled stiffness is the most signiﬁcant seal force coefﬁcient. For both the horizontal
and vertical identiﬁcation procedure the cross coupled seal stiffness seems to increase with seal inlet
pressure. The cross coupled seal stiffness also seems to increase slightly with frequency. In the
horizontal identiﬁcation procedure the cross coupled stiffness for 3.4 bar inlet pressure drops below
the cross coupled stiffness of the 2.6 bar inlet pressure case. It happens in the frequency range 110 Hz
to 140 Hz, which is a frequency range where the procedure should yield accurate results. A higher
seal inlet pressure should result in a higher seal ﬂow and a higher cross coupled stiffness of the seal,
so the results are unexpected. The results seem correct for the vertical identiﬁcation procedure i.e. the
cross coupled seal forces increase with pressure.
The seal inlet pressure is challenging to control precisely, because it is fed to the seal inlet through
a large dome loaded pressure regulator. The dome loaded regulator regulates the pressure to the seal
from a 64 bar system and is capable of regulating in the range between 0.5 bar to 64 bar which makes
the resolution low. The precision and stability of this dome loaded regulator is unknown and could be
suspected to inﬂuence the experiment by changing the pressure.
The cross coupled damping should be small according to the literature. In fact they are identiﬁed
to be small in these identiﬁcation procedures. However, both the horizontal and vertical identiﬁcation
procedure the results are compliant. For low frequencies and increasing seal pressures, the cross
coupled damping takes a signiﬁcant value. This result cannot be ignored since both identiﬁcation
procedures concludes the same and it is in a frequency range where the model is considered to be
accurate and should yield accurate results. However, it must be considered that low frequencies in
the excitation signal causes large lateral position amplitudes of the rotor. The cross coupled damping
could be the result of large amplitudes and not the frequency.
Generally speaking the seal parameters identiﬁed above 200 Hz seem to contain some random-
ness. Not only is the model compliance bad here, but as discussed in section 4.2.1 the signals at high
frequency excitations are small in amplitude. Small amplitude signals reduce SNR and the identiﬁca-
tion procedure fails. If the model only had an inaccurate response at the frequency the expected seal
coefﬁcient results would be wrong, but at least to some degree consequent. The noise that the sig-
nals suffers from, also seems to be random and could explain the seemingly random seal coefﬁcient
results.
If the vertical identiﬁcation procedure results at 165 Hz are considered, interesting observations
are made. The results at this frequency differ signiﬁcantly according to the direction in which the
rotor is vibrated in order to identify the seal coefﬁcients. In the horizontal direction the results would
be considered unreliable since it is within a frequency spectrum where the model is considered to
comply poorly. However, the result could not be described as outliers since they follow the trends
of the surrounding results. The same coefﬁcients identiﬁed by vibrating the rotor vertically yields
different results. These results could deﬁnitly be considered as outliers, especially the K, D and d
coefﬁcients. It is observed in the upper plot that the model deviates in phase of the vertical movement
exactly at 165 Hz. This explains the bad results for the identiﬁcation procedure conducted in the
vertical direction at this frequency.
66
==PAGE:74==
Figure 63: Seal coefﬁcients, horizontal
67
==PAGE:75==
Figure 64: Seal coefﬁcients, vertical
68
==PAGE:76==
5
Stabilizing System with Cross Coupled P Controller
Large preswirled ﬂows in annular seals generate large destabilizing forces. The effect of the desta-
bilizing forces are examined for the test rig rotor system experimentally. The phenomena occurring
during destabilization is analysed using the mathematical models created and insight is gained. With
understanding of the destabilization a new control approach is implemented in the AMB position
controller in order to stabilize the rotor system during inﬂuence of the destabilizing seal forces.
5.1
Destabilizing the rotor system with seal ﬂow
A baseline experiment is conducted in order to determine at what seal inlet pressure the seal produces
large enough forces for destabilizing the rotor system. The forces required to destabilize the system
depend on the AMB position control parameters. Currently local PID controllers control the position
of the rotor in the AMBs. The P term works as a direct stiffness in the AMB and the D term works
as damping. The integral term I is slow, and should have no signiﬁcant effect on the dynamics of
the system but is included to mitigate DC position offsets. The P term has to overcome the negative
stiffness of magnetic bearing introduced by the bias current in order for the position of the rotor to be
stable. This means that the P term has a minimum value in order for the AMB to levitate the rotor.
In section 4.1.8 the AMB parameters are presented for the 6 A bias operating point which is
used for these experiments. The negative stiffness is 1.9 · 106N/m for AMB A and 2.37 · 106N/m
for AMB B. The current to force factor Ki of AMB A is 189 N/A and AMB B is 221 N/A. The
theoretical minimum P term would be 10.050 A/m for the AMB A and 10.723 A/m for AMB B.
This corresponds very well with observations made during operation of the test rig. Here the rotor
positions show slow oscillation at a P term of 10.500 A/m, and becomes unstable at 10.000 A/m at
6 A bias.
The effective stiffness of the AMBs will inﬂuence at what seal inlet pressure the rotor system
will become unstable. For increasing P term and increasing AMBs effective direct stiffness, the seal
forces required to destabilize the system will increase. For this baseline experiment it is not desirable
to reach high seal inlet pressures before destabilization. The modiﬁed controller will stabilize the
system for even higher seal inlet pressures. A potential destabilization of the rotor system at high
pressures could damage the test rig, so a small P term of 13.000 A/m is chosen for the baseline
experiment. The differential time of 0.035 s and integral time of 0.2 s are chosen for the experiment.
Figure 65: Destabilizing test rig with seal ﬂow
69
==PAGE:77==
The rotor is levitated at 6 A bias and zero rotational speed. The seal inlet pressure is gradually
increased in order to increase the destabilizing forces delivered by the seal ﬂow onto the rotor. The
position in AMB A in the y direction of the rotor and the seal pressure is shown in ﬁgure 65. It is
seen up until 2 bar of seal inlet pressure, the AMBs mange to keep the rotor centred and stable. From
2 bar to 2.8 bar the position amplitude of the rotor increases gradually with the seal inlet pressure. At
3 bar the system becomes unstable in the centred position of the AMBs. The AMBs are still trying
to levitate the rotor in the center, but have found a new off center equilibrium. The orbit made by the
rotor at this state is shown in ﬁgure 67. It seems that the orbit of the rotor interferes with the geometry
of the backup bearing, however during operation no signiﬁcant noise was observed at this operating
point. So if the rotor has interfered with backup bearing, it has only been slightly. Interesting zooms
of the plot presented in ﬁgure 65 are shown in Appendix F.
The orbits created by the rotor in the bearings just before destabilization (i.e. at seal inlet pressure
of 2.8 bar) is shown in ﬁgure 66. The orbit is circular and centred around the zero position in both
bearings. The movement of the rotor is almost synchronous in the the bearings, which is shown in
appendix F.
Figure 66: Trajectory of rotor in AMBs before destabilization
Figure 67: Trajectory of rotor in AMBs after destabilization
The behaviour shown by the rotor system during destabilization of the centred position in the
70
==PAGE:78==
AMBs could indicate the forces created by the seal are not symmetric. This could possibly be due
to misalignment of the rotor in the seal. Dara Childs suggests that the destabilizing forces of seals
are increased with eccentricity [4]. If the rotor is misaligned in the seal, the rotor is destabilized
prematurely compared to the case of perfect alignment. The forces created in the seal are due to the
tangential velocity of the seal ﬂow, in this case it is a result of the preswirl. It is suspected that the seal
could create a static force like an air bearing, due to the preswirled ﬂow and the possible eccentricity
of the rotor in the seal. This static force causes the AMB off center equilibrium.
The pressure step from 2.8 bar to 3 bar is considered from ﬁgure 65. Here the orbit around the
center destabilizes momentarily before returning to orbiting around the center position of the AMB. It
is suspected that the integral term of the AMB position controller mitigates the static force delivered
by the seal. This can be conﬁrmed investigating the control currents. The control current has large
amplitude because of the orbit that the rotor moves in, however the average of a short timespan of
the control current signals can be taken to determine weather a static force is present. The average
of the control currents in the timespan 30 s to 40 s where only low pressure is introduced in the seal
are (1.03 A, 2.02 A, 1.68 A, 1.48 A) in the respective AMB directions (AMB A ζ, AMB A η, AMB
B ζ, AMB B η). AMB A is the AMB close to the ﬂexible coupling, so a static force introduced by
the coupling is mitigated by the static offsets of control currents of AMB A. For the timespan 292 s
and 294 s, the control currents are (1.04 A, 2.41 A, 1.75 A, 1.85 A). All the average control currents
are increased slightly for the higher pressure, but especially the two control currents in the η direction
of the two AMBs have increased. In the η direction the static current change is respectively 0.39 A
and 0.37 A for AMBs A and B. The control current can be converted to a force by the current force
factor Ki found in section 4.1.8 by multiplying the two. The sum of the two forces are 155.5 N.
Considering this result the seal deﬁnitely has a static force component dependent on the seal inlet
pressure indicating that the rotor is off center.
The observation of the static force component of the seal was ﬁrst discovered after the experiment
was conducted. Thus, the system was immediately considered as unstable after increasing the pressure
to 3.2 bar at 295 s and the experiment was terminated. However, if enough time passed by for
the integrator to mitigate the static force of the seal, the system might have stabilized in an orbit
centred in the AMBs. The exact pressure at which the cross coupled force delivered by the seal ﬂow
becomes large enough to destabilize the rotor cannot be conﬁrmed from this experiment. However, the
amplitudes are becoming very large at this stage and the rotor backup bearing clearance is becoming
small. It is not desirable to hit the backup bearings. However there is a difference in hitting the
backup bearings because of large oscillation amplitudes and the system actually becoming unstable.
The system might have a stable orbit for larger pressures that exceed the geometry of the backup
bearings. Obviously this orbit would not be possible in practice unless the backup bearing clearance
is increased.
In order to gain insight in the destabilization of the rotor due to large seal forces a waterfall plot
is created. The waterfall plot displays the power spectrum of the y position in AMB A as function of
the seal inlet pressure. The waterfall plot is shown in ﬁgure 68. Remembering that the rotor is not
perturbed during this experiment, so the frequencies showing up in the waterfall plot are dynamics
provoked by the system itself. Both before and after destabilization of the rotor, a strong peak is
observed at 37.7 Hz.
Power spectra of the rotor movement before and after destabilization are respectively shown in
ﬁgures 69 and 70. The power spectra are shown in logarithmic plots to amplify peaks revealing them.
Immediately before destabilization i.e. at 2.8 bar of seal inlet pressure, the rotor has a strong 37.7 Hz
component in its movement and two smaller 2 and 3 multiple harmonics. After destabilization the
ﬁrst peak changes slightly to 39.7 Hz. Also the orbit of the rotor is not as circular, thus the power
spectrum contains many harmonics.
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure 68: Waterfall diagram of destabilization process
Figure 69: Power spectrum of rotor movement immediately prior to destabilization with logarithmic y scale
72
==PAGE:80==
Figure 70: After destabilization with logarithmic y scale
5.2
Dynamics of rotor during destabilization
It is suspected that the frequency peaks shown in ﬁgures 69 and 70 are a rigid mode shape natural
frequency of the rotor. In order to conﬁrm this, a FE model of the rotor is created. The AMB control
parameters can be translated to effective AMB stiffness and damping when neglecting the current
ampliﬁer dynamics. The ﬂexible coupling stiffness and damping are determined in section 4.1.10.
The seal forces are determined in section 4.2.2, which are also fed into the model.
In the previous section it was determined that the rotor destabilizes at a seal inlet pressure of 3 bar
or possible a higher pressure. A FE model of the rotor is created including the forces working on it at
the point of operation.
The effective stiffness of the AMBs are deduced from the negative stiffness Ks, the current to
force gain Ki and the P term of the AMB position controller in (5.1). The effective stiffness of AMB
A and B are respectively 0.56 MN/m and 0.5 MN/m.
KAMB = Ki · P −Ks
(5.1)
The effective damping of the AMB are deduced from the current to force gain Ki and the differ-
ential gain of the AMB position controller D and the proportional gain. The fashion in which the
differential term of the AMB position controller is implemented, the effective damping is determined
as shown in (5.2). The effective damping of AMB A and B are respectively 8.600 Ns/m and 10.056
Ns/m.
DAMB = Ki · P · D
(5.2)
Only the cross coupled stiffness from the seal is initially considered to be signiﬁcant. At the
operating point immediately prior to destabilization of the rotor the seal inlet pressure is 2.8 bar. The
seal cross coupled stiffness to pressure relation is determined from the experimental results. The cross
coupled stiffness is considered to be frequency independent and linearly dependent on the seal ﬂow,
which is considered to be linearly dependent on the seal inlet pressure [4]. The averages of the seal
coefﬁcients determined in section 4.2.2 for a curtain pressure represents the seal coefﬁcient at this
pressure. Only data points where the model is considered to be accurate are used for this average,
the rest are ignored. The averages are shown in ﬁgures 71 and 72. The pressure to stiffness factor is
73
==PAGE:81==
determined to be 1.46 N/(m · bar). This gives a cross coupled stiffness of 4.1 N/m at 2.8 bar of seal
inlet pressure, which is implemented into the FE model.
Figure 71: Cross coupled stiffness as function of
pressure
Figure 72: Cross coupled damping as function of
pressure
A ﬁnite element model is created like the one described in section 4.1.2. The AMB stiffness and
damping, ﬂexible coupling stiffness and damping, and the cross coupled stiffness from the seal are
implemented in the FE model at the corresponding nodes. Since the rotor has zero rotational velocity,
the gyroscopic forces are zero.
As a starting point only the cross coupled stiffness of 4.1 MN/m is used to describe the forces
of the seal. The highest natural frequency of the rigid mode shapes for this case is 28 Hz, this is far
from the 37.7 Hz observed in the experiment. In section 4.2.2 it is shown that for higher vibration
frequencies, the cross coupled seal forces increase to 6 MN/m for a seal inlet pressure of 2.6 bar.
Also, it is seen for low frequencies that a signiﬁcant cross coupled damping is present. A cross
coupled damping of 4 kNs/m is included as well. The larger cross coupled stiffness of 6 MN/m and
cross coupled damping of 4 kNs/m is used in order to match the natural frequency of the fourth mode
shape to the frequencies seen in the experiment. This case yields the four rigid mode shapes shown
in ﬁgures 73 to 76. Their respective natural frequencies are 12 Hz, 14 Hz, 26 Hz and 37 Hz.
With the described inputs the fourth mode shape’s natural frequency is very close to the power
spectrum peak of 37.7 Hz observed for the vibrations immediately prior to destabilization of the rotor.
The fourth mode shape will create orbits like the ones observed immediately prior to destabilization of
the rotor. The orbits are circular and in phase in both the bearings. The fourth natural frequency of the
rotor also has a positive real part, indicating that it is unstable. The three ﬁrst natural frequencies have
negative real parts, indicating that they are stable. Considering this, it is likely that the destabilization
of the rotor system happens through destabilizing this fourth rigid mode shape.
The seal coefﬁcients used to obtain these results are higher than the ones determined in section
4.2.2. However, there several reasons why it could be possible that the rotor system is destabilized
through destabilizing of fourth rigid mode shape. The seal inlet pressure sensor has some problems
with precision since it has a very wide range (0 - 100 bar). Thus, the pressure considered might not
be the true pressure. There might be some error in the seal coefﬁcient determination due to the model
lacking foundation dynamics. The rotor-seal eccentricity could also play a role. Ampliﬁer dynamics
are neglected in this analysis together with all possible non linearities. All these things taken into
account, the conclusion of a destabilized mode is reasonable.
74
==PAGE:82==
Figure 73: First mode shape
Figure 74: Second mode shape
Figure 75: Third mode shape
Figure 76: Fourth mode shape
The simpliﬁed model was not created to replicate the dynamics of the system accurately, but
to gain insight in the destabilization process. This simpliﬁed model explains the dynamics that the
rotor undergoes during destabilization. The fourth mode shape matches the behaviour of the rotor
immediately prior to destabilization. In addition to this, according to the linear FE model this mode
is unstable. There are factors which are not included in the model, such as some AMB dynamics
and possible non linearities of the seal forces. Whether the mode is actually unstable or just close to
unstable is still questionable from this linear analysis. However, results do indicate that rigid mode
shape four has low damping. Thus, it will have large amplitudes at resonance. These large amplitudes
could make the rotor hit the backup bearing in the physical system.
The seal ﬂuid ﬂow is suspected to perturb the fourth mode. The ﬂow is turbulent, thus generating
forces with components covering a wide frequency range. This frequency range just has to contain
the natural frequency of mode four in order for it to be excited. The 3 ﬁrst mode shapes have large
negative real components in their corresponding natural frequencies and the energy from these modes
are damped out. In addition to this the ﬁrst two modes cannot be excited by the broad frequency
75
==PAGE:83==
spectrum seal forces because their nodes are close to the seal center. Rigid mode shape four has a
large amplitude in the seal and is easily excited by a force created here. Because of the low damping
of rigid mode shape four and the source of excitation large amplitudes are seen in the experiment for
higher seal pressures.
5.3
Stabilizing the rotor system subjected to seal ﬂow
It is understood from section 5.1 that the rotor is destabilized primarily due to the cross coupled
force delivered onto the rotor by the seal, during large seal ﬂows. The large cross coupled stiffness
destabilizes or at least lowers the damping of a rigid rotor mode shape and the turbulent ﬂow in the
seal excites the destabilized rigid mode.
It is possible to stabilize the fourth rigid mode by counteracting the cross coupled stiffness in the
seal. The AMBs are agile in the sense that their stiffnesses, dampings and other dynamics are pro-
grammable. The stiffness and damping exerted by the AMBs on the rotor is the result of a controller,
which can be altered.
An addition to the existing AMB position PID controllers is implemented. It is a cross coupled
proportional term from the rotor position in the seal to the AMB control currents in the orthogonal
direction. The original PID controllers only have direct feedback working independently in the ζ
and η directions. This new addition is proportional gain from the ζ direction position of the rotor in
the seal to the η direction control current of both AMBs. The proportional gain is also implemented
from the η direction position of the rotor in the seal to the ζ direction control currents of both AMBs.
The seal is placed precisely centred in-between the AMBs levitating the main rotor. Effectively rotor
position in the seal is estimated by taking the average of the positions in the AMBs in respectively the
ζ and η direction.
The nodes of the two ﬁrst mode shapes immediately prior to destabilization are close to the seal
center. This means that these two modes are not effected by the new addition to the AMB position
controller since they are not observable in the seal center. The third and fourth mode shapes both have
large amplitude in the seal and should be effected by the new controller addition. The ﬁrst and second
mode shapes both have large deﬂection in the AMBs. If large cross coupled proportional gains were
added locally in the AMBs, they would inﬂuence the ﬁrst two mode shapes which are already stable,
possibly destabilizing them. Since the AMBs are controlled by a global controller it is possible to
implement the cross coupled seal position to AMB control current gain. This approach is chosen over
the local cross coupled gain in order to mitigate the risk of destabilizing modes one and two. Rigid
mode shape four which is the mode desired to stabilize is both observable and controllable with this
new controller addition. Both the observation point and actuation points have large amplitudes in
mode shape four.
It is the cross coupled stiffness of the seal that is considered to destabilize the rotor. So only a
proportional gain is included in the cross coupled controller. The proportional gain corresponds to a
stiffness.
The same experiment as in section 5.1 is conducted, with the same bias current and control pa-
rameters. The only difference is that the cross coupled proportional gain from rotor lateral position in
the seal to the AMBs is included. This cross coupled proportional gain is adjusted as the experiment
proceeds. The experimental data is shown in ﬁgure 77. The same plots are shown as in section 5.1, but
also the cross coupled proportional gain which is adjusted during the experiment in order to stabilize
the rotor position.
At 50 s the seal inlet pressure is already past 3 bar, which would destabilize the rotor for the
original AMB position PID controllers. Here the proportional gain is 2000 A/m for the cross coupled
P term, which is enough to stabilize the rotor at this seal inlet pressure. In the time between 100 s and
250 s, the cross coupled proportional gain is increased in line with the seal inlet pressure. For most
of the time, the rotor position is stable with almost no amplitude. The maximum seal inlet pressure
76
==PAGE:84==
Figure 77: Stabilizing test rig with cross coupled P term
reached is 5.7 bar, here the rotor has almost no amplitude. This is due to the large cross coupled
proportional gain of 13.000 A/m. The experiment was stopped at this point, since a rotor drop at this
seal inlet pressure is estimated to possibly be harmful for the test rig.
As the seal inlet pressure is decreased, the cross coupled proportional gain is kept at 13.000 A/m
to see if it would destabilize the rotor system when cross coupled seal force is terminated with the
seal ﬂow. The rotor system becomes unstable at around 2 bar of seal inlet pressure.
It is shown in this experiment, that such a cross coupled gain can actually stabilize a rotor system
with large cross coupled seal forces. The cross coupled proportional gain was increased to 13.000
A/m which is the same as the direct proportional gain of the AMBs in this experiment. This might
seem extreme, but the cross coupled seal forces are also large, according to the extrapolated experi-
mental results a seal inlet pressure of 5.7 bar would yield a cross coupled stiffness of 8.3 MN/m. The
combined current to force factors of the two AMBs is 410 N/A, yielding an effective cross coupled
stiffness of -5.3 MN/m for the cross coupled proportional gain of 13.000 MN/m.
Implementing the cross coupled gain more than doubled the operational range in terms of seal
inlet pressure. The experiment was stopped at this point, so the maximum seal inlet pressure possible,
stabilizing the rotor system with a cross coupled proportional term is still unknown.
5.4
Foreseeing rotor destabilization with mathematical model
An attempt is made to foresee destabilization of the rotor using the mathematical model created
and the seal force coefﬁcients obtained. In section 5.2 it was established that to make the natural
frequency of one of the rigid rotor modes match the pronounced frequency immediately prior to
destabilization of the physical system cross coupled stiffness and damping have to be included.
The Simulink model is implemented with the cross coupled stiffness and the cross coupled damp-
ing of the seal. The two coefﬁcients are implemented to be linearly dependent on the seal inlet
pressure (see yellow lines in ﬁgures 71 and 72). The pressure to cross coupled stiffness factor is 1.41
N/(m · bar) and the pressure to cross coupled damping factor is 868 Ns/(m · bar). The pressure in
77
==PAGE:85==
the simulation is increased with a rate of 0.05 bar/s and the results are shown in ﬁgure 78. The model
destabilizes and the displacement of the rotor goes towards inﬁnity at a seal pressure of 4.2 bar.
Figure 78: Destabilization of model
When simulating the rotor dynamic model, a small random perturbation has to be present in
order to destabilize the system. This is the same for the physical system, where this disturbance is
considered to be introduced by sensor noise and the high gains of the AMB position controller and
especially the turbolent seal ﬂow. In the model the Band-Limited White Noise block is used to feed a
small disturbance into the system in the seal node.
The large orbits prior to destabilization are not seen in this simulation. The large orbits prior to
destabilization seen in the experimental data could be a result of excitation of the fourth rigid mode
shape by the turbulent seal ﬂow. The magnitude and characteristics of this perturbation is unknown
and can therefore not be included in the simulation. However, it could be suspected that this broad
frequency spectre excitation increases in intensity as seal inlet pressure is increased. This would lead
to strong excitation of the almost undamped fourth rigid mode shape leading to large amplitudes.
According to section 5.2, the physical system starts to show sings of a mode shape with low
damping at 3 bar of seal inlet pressure. It is unknown at what exact pressure the physical system is
completely destabilized. It is not impossible that the physical system becomes unstable at seal inlet
pressure close to 4.2 bar, like the model predicts. However, large amplitudes of the rotor vibration will
properly make the rotor hit the backup bearing prior to a complete destabilization. This characteristic
cannot at the moment be captured by the model, since the seal ﬂow excitation characteristics are
currently known.
78
==PAGE:86==
6
General Considerations Concerning the Test Rig
This section contains considerations, observations, experience and modiﬁcations made on the test rig.
This masters thesis is only a part of a larger research venture, so it is important to transfer the knowl-
edge obtained during the thesis to the future individuals contributing to the research venture. The
modiﬁcations made to the test rig are also described in this section in order to justify and document
modiﬁcations.
6.1
dSPACE ADC conﬁguration and loop timing
The dSPACE computer is a dual core computer. The control loop is run on the master processor at
16.000 Hz. A different loop used for measuring sensors is run on the auxiliary processor at 3.200 Hz.
The data extraction code written in MATLAB extracts this sensor data and states from the controller
at 3.200 Hz. The data extracted from the two loops (master and auxiliary) are in reference to the
respective time scales of the auxiliary and master loop. These time scales are not absolute, but based
on the program loop number and timestep. This means that if the program overruns i.e. the program
takes longer time to run than the time available or drifts in time for some other reason, the timescale
will not capture this.
Initially, nothing is locking these two processes together ensuring that exactly 5 master loops are
run for every auxiliary loop. This mean that these processes can possibly drift time wise in relation to
each other, even when the programs do not overrun. This effect becomes clear when making a FRF
from a signal recorded on one processor to a signal recorded on the other loop. In section 3.7 FRF
estimates were made from reference current to actual current on all 8 channels. The reference currents
are recorded in the master loop and the actual currents are recorded in the auxiliary loop. The initial
results obtained are shown in ﬁgure 79. This FRF is made from a chirp signal going from 0 to 300
Hz over 180 s. In this case the auxiliary loop was running without overruns but the master loop had
occasional overruns. Observing the phase, occasional steps are seen, this is due to drift in data and
time scales between the two processes. Since the phase lag increases in these steps it must mean that
the current reference signal must advance when the master loop overruns. This is likely because the
overrun master loops are skipped and not registered in the time scale. If the absolute true time was
registered with the data extracted from the loops, the data could be interpolated to the correct time
scale in order to ensure the correct phase of the FRFs.
Considering the master loop has a timestep of 62.5 µs. A drift of one loop is going to correspond
to a phase shift of 6,75◦at 300 Hz. In the FRFs in ﬁgure 79, 9 steps in the phase corrosponding to 9
overruns of the master loop which would lead to a phase shift error of 60.75◦at 300 Hz. This is error
is considered to be signiﬁcant.
In addition to this time shift in the processes due to overruns, there is nothing locking the processes
speeds to each others at a ratio of 5:1. This means that over time the processes will most likely drift
compared to each others. This is difﬁcult to notice since the drift is graduate and will not show up as
steps in the phase of the FRFs. It does not show up of the time scales either since these are generated
by the times step and loop number and will always show up accurate. Since this drift is small, the
effect is only relevant for long samples, for example chirps.
79
==PAGE:87==
Figure 79: FRF when the processes drift
To ensure that the two processes run synchronized with a relative speed of 5:1 and the data is
sampled in an orderly fashion the inter processor communication (IPC) block is used. This block is
created for the dSPACE hardware allowing the transfer of signals from one application running on one
processor to another. In the IPC block settings, the synchronized data transfer is chosen. This ensures
that the receiving application waits for the sending application in case it is not ready to transfer the
signal. For this case the reference current signal from the master loop is transferred to the auxiliary
loop at a time step rate of 5:1. This locks the two application loops to each others not allowing them
to drift. In addition to this synchronization, the master loop signals are now available in the auxiliary
loop. This means that both signals used to make FRF estimations can be recorded in the same time
scale.
Figure 80 shows the timing of the program loops. The master loop has to run every 62.5 µs and
the program only takes 22 µs to run. The auxiliary loop has to run every 312.5 µs and the program
only takes 100 µs to run. The time steps are indicated by black line dividers and the program time is
indicated with a red bar. Overrunning should not be a problem for either of the loops.
The master loop, containing all the controllers for the test rig has signiﬁcantly heavier calculations
than the auxiliary loop, despite this fact the master loop takes shorter time to run than the auxiliary
loop. It it not the calculations that take a long time in the control loop, but sampling of the dSPACE
ADCs. The dSPACE ADC module used by the master control loop only samples 5 signals, and can
therefore do it within 22 µs including the controller calculations. The other dSPACE ADC module is
used by the auxiliary loop and utilizes all 32 channels, thus taking a lot longer i.e. within 100 µs and
makes no signiﬁcant calculations. The dSPACE ADC module has 32 inputs, which are multiplexed
into 2 ADCs. This means that each signal is sampled one after another and this can obviously not
happen inﬁnitely fast. This is what makes the auxiliary loop slow, when sampling 32 channels.
Because the ADC modules multiplex, it is impossible to make true simultaneous sampling of all
channels. As it is seen in ﬁgure 80, the auxiliary loop takes around 100 µs. All the signals converted
in this loop are sampled over these 100 µ that the program takes to run. Considering the second time
that the auxiliary loop is run, the master loop is run twice (time step 6 and 7). This means that it would
be equally correct to compare the the signals of the master loop 6 or 7 with the signals of auxiliary
loop 2.
Depending on what signal is sampled, it will be sampled at at different real time. This could prove
a problem especially when analysing phase shifts at higher frequencies. Assuming that the dSPACE
ADC module samples all the channels over 100 µs, then depending on what channel is used for a
80
==PAGE:88==
signal the phase could change 10.8◦for a 300 Hz signal.
Figure 80: Timing of program loops.
The method used here to obtain the best results is to transfer the relevant signals from the master
loop to the auxiliary loop for sampling with the IPC block, when making experiments where the
phase shift is essential. It would be the data from master loop 5 which corresponds the master loop
2. However, it is only possible to transfer data from the 5 master loops conducted during auxiliary
loop 1 to the auxiliary loop 2. The approach made is to transfer the data of the ﬁrst master loop of the
previous master loop conducted during the previous auxiliary loop to the current auxiliary loop. This
is shown by the black error in ﬁgure 80. When processing the data, the data recorded which has been
transferred from the master to he auxiliary loop is skewed one index forward in time.
6.2
Excitation of ﬁrst bending mode shape notch ﬁlter and master loop over-
run
The new current ampliﬁer was implemented in the testrig and the gains of the current tracking PID
was gradually increased to obtain higher bandwidths. Already at low proportional gains, around 600,
natural frequencies of the system are excited by the noise in the system. When the rotor is levitated it
would start to vibrate, increasing gradually in amplitude until the rotor hits the backup bearings. This
vibration was identiﬁed to have a frequency of 550 Hz, this is the natural frequency of the the ﬁrst
bending mode shape of the rotor. In order to mitigate the controller amplifying noise at this frequency,
thus exciting this mode shape, a notch ﬁlter is implemented in the position signal just before the PID
controller. The notch ﬁlter has its center at 550 Hz and a quality factor of 3. The test rig is designed
to run up to a rotational speed of 167 Hz with excitations of 250 Hz. Controlling frequencies at 550
Hz is not necessary, and the notch ﬁlter can be used. For example if the ﬁrst critical frequency of the
rotor bearing system was to be crossed, the notch ﬁlter would not be a solution.
In the Simulink model controlling the test rig a vector signal containing the position errors is fed
into the discrete PID controller. The notch ﬁlter was implemented on this vector signal. Initially one
notch ﬁtler block was implemented on the signal line, as shown in ﬁgure 81. The Simulink notch
ﬁlter block demultiplexes the signal out into 4 similar notch ﬁlters and multiplexes the 4 signals back
into one vector signal which is fed into the discrete PID controller. This implementation mitigated
the excitation of the ﬁrst bending mode shape.
The discrete notch ﬁlters is a simple ﬁlter, which requires only little computer power, so no change
in execution time of the master loop was recorded. However, the notch ﬁlter block caused the master
loop to overrun occasionally (approximately 5 times a minute) even though the typical execution
time was 22 µs, with 62.5 µs available. These occasional overruns did not seem to compromise the
stability of the system, but caused a lot of trouble sampling data because of the time drift between the
master loop and auxiliary loop. Troubleshooting this fault is difﬁcult to do systematically, because
of the complexity of Simulink. It is very difﬁcult to extract information on what exactly the different
blocks do and how long time it takes. However, by coincidence the problem was solved using the
81
==PAGE:89==
implementation shown in ﬁgure 82. Here the position error signal is demultiplexed by a demux block
ﬁltered through 4 similar notch ﬁlters and multiplexed back into one vector signal and fed into the PID
controller. Both implementations seem to work, i.e. mitigating ﬁrst bending mode shape vibration
for high ampliﬁer gains, but the implementation in ﬁgure 82 does not make the master loop overrun.
There is not clear reason why one implementation makes the control loop overrun and the other one
does not. However, it is suspected that there is a glitch in the notch ﬁlter software when it is used for
vector signals.
Figure 81: Single notch ﬁlter.
Figure 82: Manual demultiplexing before notch ﬁlters.
6.3
Electrical runout
Electrical runout of the position sensors of the main rotor is present. This means that the eddy current
proximity sensors not only measures the distance to the rotor but also an error due to electrical runout
of the steel that it measures on. The electrical runout is due to small deviations in magnetic properties
of the material which the eddy current sensor measures on referred to as the target [24]. Especially
for steel targets the electrical runout is pronounced and can be in the order of 75 µm. The present test
facility uses steel as target and it has signiﬁcant problems with electrical runout.
In [8] a compensation for sensor runout was created. It is suspected that the phenomenon of
electrical runout was not realized at this point, due to the fact that the documentation [8] mentions
nothing of ’electrical runout’ or ’magnetic runout’ but only ’runout’. The procedure of which the
runout was deﬁned also indicates that the electrical runout phenomenon was not realized. The main
rotor has an angular encoder with a resolution of 1440 positions per rotation. This means that if the
runout of the sensors are deﬁned, it can be subtracted from the sensor signal before it is fed into the
position controller. What was attempted in [8] was to reduce the runout of the position of the rotor in
the seal since this portion of the rotor is critical. An extra set of eddy current sensors was placed on
the seal portion of the rotor. The permanent eddy current sensor signals were adjusted so the runout
of the eddy current sensors measuring on the seal face was zero. However, the eddy current sensors
measuring on the seal portion of the rotor also suffers from electrical runout since the target here is
made from steel. This means that the this procedure compensates for two sets of electrical runouts
and does not actually eliminate the geometric runout of the seal portion of the rotor.
If the electrical runout was known, the compensation procedure in the controller could be used
to mitigate the electrical runout. The geometry of the rotor should be machined and properly ground
to a very ﬁne concentric tolerance of ±1 µm. In an attempt to ﬁnd the magnetic runout, the rotor
was support on the two sets of aluminium wheels implemented on the housings of the AMBs. The
aluminium wheels support the rotor on what seems to be a ground area, which should have a ﬁne
tolerance. The rotor is turned slowly and the signals from the stationary position sensors are measured.
This should be the magnetic runout. Results from two rotations of this procedure is shown in ﬁgure
82
==PAGE:90==
83. As it is seen the signals er noisy and changes from rotation to rotation. A lot of these samples
where made and the averages was taken of the signals and subtracted from the position sensor signals
in the controller. This slightly improved the system, but a large unbalance was still seen. When the
main rotor is operating at high speed, large dynamic control currents are needed indicating a large
unbalance. This signal is attempted smoothed in different fashions to improve performance, without
any luck. This does not necessarily mean that the rotor has a large geometric runout, but maybe the
error is caused by the wheels which the rotor is supported on. For now, the magnetic runout cannot be
determined with a precision good enough for the system to yield useful data at high rotational speed.
Figure 83: Runout measured for AMB A direction x for two rotations
83
==PAGE:91==
7
Conclusion
Seals working in rotating machinery are critical for many industrial applications such as compressors
and pumps. For certain applications seals are used with multiphase ﬂows, either because of multi-
phase pump media or because of evaporation of liquid in the seal due to thermodynamic effects. The
seal force characteristics of especially the multiphase ﬂow cases are difﬁcult to model theoretically
because of the complex ﬂow characteristics. The rotor dynamic seal forces are signiﬁcant because
they are often large and destabilizing. If the seal forces are known, measures can be taken to mitigate
destabilization of rotor systems subject to these large seal forces. This is favourable in the industry
for safe operation of rotating machinery.
This master’s thesis is a contribution to the ongoing research venture: ’Seals in Multiphase Flow:
Identiﬁcation of Rotordynamic Properties Using Active Magnetic Bearings - Modelling and Valida-
tion’. The contribution made is in the validation part of the research venture, where seal force charac-
teristics are determined experimentally. A test facility has been established by previous contributors,
where experiments have been conducted in order to determine seal force characteristics. Previously
and during this master’s thesis, seal forces have only been identiﬁed for a rotor speed of zero with a
highly pre swirled air ﬂow in the seal with the present test facility. The test facility is able to reach its
nominal speed of 10.000 rpm with new ampliﬁers. Unfortunately, the position sensors suffers from
signiﬁcant magnetic runout. This runout is introduced when the main rotor is rotating. Thus, it is not
possible to extract useful data, when the rotor is not at a standstill. The highly pre swirled ﬂow gives
some of the same effects as the high speed rotor in a seal since the rotor will then swirl the ﬂow, so
these effects are investigated. Only air is used for test ﬂuid at the moment since other challenges with
the test facility had to be overcome, before upgrading to a multiphase ﬂow.
It was suggested from the previous contributors that a problem was present with the ampliﬁers for
the magnetic bearings in the test facility. The AMBs are a central part in the test facility. Their correct
behaviour is critical for the stability of the system which is necessary for conduction of experiments. It
is necessary to understand that the AMB actuator is not only the AMB, but also includes the ampliﬁer
driving the AMB. The problem with the existing ampliﬁers was that they were not able to apply a
negative voltage across the AMB coils, drawing the current down fast. The new ampliﬁers have output
stages based on the semi passive H bridge architecture. This output stage is capable of applying both
positive and negative voltage across the AMB coils allowing fast control of coil current. Several
problems were faced during design, manufacturing and operation of the new ampliﬁers. Losses in
the power electronics dissipated as heat were underestimated, which lead to thermal overload. It was
mitigated by reducing the operation speciﬁcations to 6 A bias and 60 V. When sampling the actual
current of the coils, considerations had to be made. Because of the switching electronics of the power
stages, the currents in the coil has a triangular waveform with a large amplitude. The time of sampling
becomes critical with this waveform. The problem was mitigated by low pass ﬁltering the signal. This
of course compromised the phase of the signal limiting the controller gains for stable operation.
The produced current ampliﬁer was implemented in the test facility. As expected the ampliﬁers
signiﬁcantly improved the system dynamics. It became possible to operate the test rig at 10.000rpm
with a simple PID position controller, which was previously not possible. Because of the knowledge
of the internal workings of the ampliﬁer, it was possible to create a satisfying mathematical model
of the system. The AMB parameters necessary to create a rotor dynamic model are the negative
stiffness Ks, the current to force factor Ki, the back EMF factor Ku and the coil inductance L. The
AMB parameters are determined for each of the AMBs in each of their actuation directions. The
analytically obtained AMB parameters yielded a model with a response matching experimental data
well. The AMB parameters are very sensitive to tolerances of the magnetic cores. When optimizing
the parameters, the error between experimental signals and simulated signals were reduced 40%,
yielding an even better model. The rotor itself was represented by a FE model reduced to only rigid
84
==PAGE:92==
body mode shape. This was possible since the operational frequencies of the test facility are around
half of the ﬁrst bending mode shape of the rotor.
The mathematical model struggled to replicate the dynamics of the system exactly at all frequen-
cies. Based on other literature and observations made, it is suspected that foundation dynamics play a
role in this deviation. The model was used to determine seal force coefﬁcients. Generally the results
were as expected in the frequencies where the model is considered to ﬁt the physical system well.
In the frequency ranges where the model is considered to ﬁt the physical system bad, the seal coef-
ﬁcients determined were also deviating from the expected. The seal coefﬁcient determined to have
the absolute largest effect is the cross coupled stiffness. The clearance of the present test seal is large
thus the direct stiffness and damping are small. According to the results obtained in this master’s
thesis the cross coupled stiffness increases slightly with frequency but is mainly dependent of seal
inlet pressure.
Experiments and analysis was conducted for destabilizing the test facility main rotor with the
seal forces. It was found that the large cross coupled force that the seal introduced into the rotor
system destabilizes a ridged mode shape of the rotor. With this unstable mode shape present only a
small transient is required for destabilization. In the case of the physical system, the rotor position
is limited by the backup bearings. The rotor orbit might interfere with the backup bearings before
destabilization due to the excitation of a mode with low damping creating large vibration amplitudes.
The unstable mode could be stabilized using a cross coupled proportional gain between the rotor
position in the seal to the control current in both of the AMBs. This proportional cross coupled
proportional term counteracts the cross coupled stiffness of the seal. The rotor was stable for at least
twice the seal inlet pressure, when this cross coupled proportional gain was added to the controller.
Generally this master’s thesis has contributed to the present research venture. The test facility has
been improved. The mathematical model representing the test facility is improved with the gained
insight in the ampliﬁer dynamics. Seal coefﬁcients are determined for higher seal inlet pressures than
previously possible on the test rig. Finally a simple approach is presented on how a rotor can be
stabilized during large destabilizing seal forces using magnetic bearings. This could be interesting for
the industry but also for the operation of this test facility. The identiﬁcation of seal coefﬁcients could
be conducted for even higher pressures, where the limit is currently the destabilization of the rotor.
85
==PAGE:93==
8
Further Work
Here suggestions of further work are made based on the experience gained with the research
venture throughout this project.
Build or buy more powerful power ampliﬁers The new ampliﬁers have signiﬁcantly improved the
dynamics and capabilities of the test facility. However, they lack power compared to the rat-
ings of the AMBs (12.5 A bias). With more powerful ampliﬁers it will become possible to
characterize larger seal forces and perturb the rotor with large amplitudes at high frequencies.
Mitigate electric runout Either the magnetic runout has to be determined accurately and imple-
mented in the compensation procedure or the rotor should be altered with aluminium sensor
targets. Another approach of determining the magnetic runout could be to levitate the rotor and
measure the seal runout with a different method than using eddy current sensors e.g. with a dial
gauge or laser.
Determine true center of seal In order to ensure good seal force character results, the rotor should
be in the true center of the seal. This might be possible to do with determining the static
component of the seal force as function of the pressure. When this force is zero, the rotor is
centred.
Modelling of foundation dynamics If the same approach is used to ﬁnd the model parameters as in
this thesis, results could be improved by including foundation dynamics.
86
==PAGE:94==
References
[1] Dr. Peter Radgen. Compressed air system audits and benchmarking results from the german
compressed air campaign `ıdruckluft efﬁzientˆı. 2011.
[2] Grundfos.
Facts
about
pumps
and
sustainability.
https://www.grundfos.
com/water-energy/meet-the-water-and-energy-challenge-now/
facts-about-pumps-and-sustainability.html, 2015. Accessed: 15-10-2018.
[3] D. W. Childs. Turbomachinery Rotordynamics: Phenomena, Modeling, and Analysis. Wiley,
1993.
[4] D. W. Childs and J. M. Vance. Annular gas seals and rotordynamics of compressors and turbines.
1997.
[5] D. W. Childs and Zachary S. Zutavern. Identiﬁcation of rotordynamic forces in a ﬂexible rotor
system using magnetic bearings. 2008.
[6] Jonas S. Lauridsen. On-site identiﬁcation of dynamic annular seal forces in turbo machinery
using active magnetic bearings: An experimental investigation. 2018.
[7] Andreas Jauernik Voigt. Towards identiﬁcation of rotordynamic properties for seals in multi-
phase ﬂow using active magnetic bearings. design and commissioning of a novel test facility.
2016.
[8] Christian Mandrup-Poulsen. High precision contact free force measurements for rotating ma-
chinery: Calibration of an embedded hall sensor system in a set of active magnetic bearings
theory and application. 2015.
[9] Kenny Krogh Nielsen Andreas Jauernik Voigt, Christian Mandrup-Poulsen and Ilmar F. Santos.
Design and calibration of a full scale active magnetic bearing based test facility for investigating
rotordynamic properties of turbomachinery seals in multiphase ﬂow. 2017.
[10] Frank B. K. Skovsgaard and Ari Lamhauge. Characterization of dynamic forces in annular gas
seals - theory & experiment. 2017.
[11] Gerhard Schweitzer & Eric H. Maslen. Magnetic Bearings - Theory, Design, and Application
to Rotating Machinery. Springer, 2009.
[12] NXP. K66 sub-family reference manual, May, 2015.
[13] PJRC. Teensy usb development board. https://www.pjrc.com/teensy/.
[14] Wikipedia.
Serial peripheral interface-bus.
https://da.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Serial_Peripheral_Interface-bus, July, 2018.
[15] ELPROCUS.
Overview on electronic communication protocols.
https://www.
elprocus.com/communication-protocols/, 2018. Accessed: 29-11-2018.
[16] Bonnie C. Baker. An699 - anti-aliasing, analog ﬁlters for data acquisition systems, 2002.
[17] Texas Instruments.
Ads8598h 18-bit, 500-ksps, 8-channel, simultaneous-sampling adc with
bipolar inputs on a single supply, September, 2017.
[18] infeneon. Mosfet, ptimostm3power-transistor, 200v, 2016-12-05.
87
==PAGE:95==
[19] International Rectiﬁer. Ir25607spbf high and low side driver, 2013.
[20] EEWeb.
Rectangle
loop
inductance.
https://www.eeweb.com/tools/
rectangle-loop-inductance, August, 2018.
[21] Brad Suppanz. Trace width calculator. https://www.smps.us/pcbtracespacing.
html, 2018.
[22] H48-6
thermal
conductive
pad.
http://www.tglobaltechnology.com/
datasheets/H48-6.pdf, 2018.
[23] Michael Gani. Dynamics of Flexible Rotor on Flexible Foundation - Theory and Experiment.
DTU, 2018.
[24] Chen Xiaolong Lin Zaiyu Yang Jiangxin Wang Yifeng, Cao Yanlong. Development of electrical
runout online measurement system based on eddy current technique and laser triangulation.
2013.
88
==PAGE:96==
A
Ampliﬁer schematics
89
==PAGE:97==
14-12-2018 09:30  f=0.99  D:\SkyDrive\Dokumenter\DTU\11. Semester\Hand in folder\Amplifier schematics and PCB\10ch_amp.sch (Sheet: 1/15)
1u
4.7u
LOD4
0.1u
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
SSW-104-02-G-S
SSW-104-02-G-S
0.1u
4.7k
4.7k
SSW-104-02-G-S
MOUNT-PAD-ROUND4.1
SSW-104-02-G-S
MOUNT-HOLE5.5
MOUNT-HOLE5.5
MOUNT-HOLE5.5
MOUNT-HOLE5.5
MOUNT-HOLE5.5
MOUNT-HOLE5.5
MOUNT-PAD-ROUND4.1
C6
C12
5V1
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C3
12/MISO0
11/MOSI0
10/TX2/PWM
9/RX2/PWM
8/TX3/PWM
7/RX3/PWM
6/PWM
5/PWM
4/CAN0-RX/SDA2/PWM
3/CAN0-TX/SCL2/PWM
2/PWM
1/TX1/MISO1/T
0/RX1/MOSI1/T
GND
VIN
AGND
3.3V
23/A9/T/PWM
22/A8/T/PWM
21/A7/PWM
20/A6/PWM
19/A5/T/SCL0
18/A4/T/SDA0
17/A3/T/PWM
16/A2/T/PWM
15/A1/T
14/A0/PWM
13/SCK0/LED
PGM
VBAT
A10
A11
AREF
VUSB
24
25
26
27
28
29/T/PWM
30/T/PWM
31/A12/RX4
32/A13/TX4
33/A14/TX5/CAN1-TX
A22/DAC1
A21/DAC0
34/A15/RX5/CAN1-RX
35/A16/PWM
36/A17/PWM
37/A18/SCL1/PWM
38/A19/SDA1/PWM
39/A20
40
41
42
43
MOSI2/44
MISO2/45
SCK2/46
RX6/47
TX6/48
A23/49
A24/50
51
52
53
54
55
SDA3/56
SCL3/57
RESET
D+
D-
DO
DE
DC
VUSB1
P$1
P$1
P$2
P$2
P$1
P$1
P$2
P$2
P$1
P$1
P$2
P$2
P$1
P$1
P$2
P$2
P$1
P$1
P$2
P$2
P$1
P$1
P$2
P$2
P$1
P$1
P$2
P$2
R7
R8
R9
R10
R11
R12
R18
R19
R22
R23
R26
R14
R15
R71
R72
X25-1
X25-2
X25-3
X25-4
X26-1
X26-2
X26-3
X26-4
C79
R81
R82
X27-1
X27-2
X27-3
X27-4
H1
J1
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
X28-1
X28-2
X28-3
X28-4
H2
H3
H4
H5
H6
H7
H8
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
12V
12V
N$118
VCC
VCC
VCC
VCC
PWM7
PWM7
PWM8
PWM8
PWM9
PWM9
PWM10
PWM10
MOSI_ETHER
SCK_ETHER
MISO_ETHER
N$24
RESET_ETHER1
RESET_ETHER1
RESET_ETHER2
RESET_ETHER2
N$30
N$31
N$23
N$27
SS_ETHER2
SS_ETHER1
OS0
N$29
N$32
OS1
OS2
N$28
RANGE
N$33
CONVST
N$34
RESET
SCL
SCL
SCL
SDA
SDA
SDA
ADC_FRSTDATA0
ADC_BUSY0
ADC_BUSY0
ADC_CS0
ADC_CS0
ADC_MISO1
N$7
ADC_SCLK1
N$50
ADC_CS1
ADC_CS1
ADC_BUSY1
ADC_BUSY1
ADC_FRSTDATA1
ADC_FRSTDATA1
N$116
ADC_MISO2
ADC_SCLK2
ADC_FRSTDATA2
ADC_FRSTDATA2
N$37
ADC_BUSY2
ADC_BUSY2
ADC_CS2
ADC_CS2
ENABLE
ENABLE
PWM5
PWM5
PWM4
PWM4
PWM3
PWM3
PWM2
PWM2
PWM1
PWM1
PWM6
PWM6
GND
AREF
AREF
A11
A11
A10
A10
57
57
56
56
55
55
54
54
DO
DO
DE
DE
DC
DC
37
37
38
38
39
39
40
40
PGM
PGM
A22
A22
A21
A21
47
47
48
48
49
49
50
50
51
51
52
52
53
53
44
44
43
43
42
42
41
41
RESET_TEENSY
RESET_TEENSY
==PAGE:98==
15-12-2018 11:14  D:\SkyDrive\Dokumenter\DTU\11. Semester\Hand in folder\Amplifier schematics and PCB\10ch_amp.sch (Sheet: 2/15)
1u
4.7u
LOD4
1u
1u
4.7u
LOD4
1u
85
85
85
85
0
85
GND1
J1.1
GND2
J1.2
MOSI
J1.3
SCLK
J1.4
/SS
J1.5
/INT
J1.6
GND3
J2.1
VIN1
J2.2
VIN2
J2.3
PWDN
J2.4
/RESET
J2.5
MISO
J2.6
IC1
C46
C47
3.3V2
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C4
GND1
J1.1
GND2
J1.2
MOSI
J1.3
SCLK
J1.4
/SS
J1.5
/INT
J1.6
GND3
J2.1
VIN1
J2.2
VIN2
J2.3
PWDN
J2.4
/RESET
J2.5
MISO
J2.6
IC2
C1
C2
3.3V1
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C5
R102
R100
R101
R103
R79
R80
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
12V
12V
MOSI_ETHER
MOSI_ETHER
SCK_ETHER
SCK_ETHER
SS_ETHER2
RESET_ETHER2
SS_ETHER1
RESET_ETHER1
VCC_ETHER1
VCC_ETHER1
VCC_ETHER1
VCC_ETHER2
VCC_ETHER2
VCC_ETHER2
MISO_ETHER
N$121
==PAGE:99==
15-12-2018 11:17  f=0.67  D:\SkyDrive\Dokumenter\DTU\11. Semester\Hand in folder\Amplifier schematics and PCB\10ch_amp
10u x7r
10u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
100 
100 
100 
0.33u
0.1u
LOD4
1u
4.7u
LOD4
1u
4.7u
LOD4
1u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
85
85
85
AVDD1
AVDD1
AGND1
AGND1
OS0
OS0
OS1
OS1
OS2
OS2
PAR/SER/BYTE_SEL
PAR/SER/BYTE_SEL
STBY
STBY
RANGE
RANGE
CONVSTA
CONVSTA
CONVSTB
CONVSTB
RESET
RESET
RE/SCLK
RD/SCLK
CS
CS
BUSY
BUSY
FRSTDATA
FRSTDATA
DB0
DB0
DB1
DB1
DB2
DB2
DB3
DB3
DB4
DB4
DB5
DB5
DB6
DB6
DVDD
DVDD
DB7/DOUTA
DB7/DOUTA
DB8/DOUTB
DB8/DOUT8
AGND2
AGND2
DB9
DB9
DB10
DB10
DB11
DB11
DB12
DB12
DB13
DB13
DB14/HBEN
DB14/HBEN
DB15/BYTE_SEL
DB15/BYTE_SEL
REFSEL
REFSEL
AGND3
AGND3
REGCAP1
REGCAP1
AVDD2
AVDD2
AVDD3
AVDD3
REGCAP2
REGCAP2
AGND4
AGND4
AGND5
AGND5
REFIN/REFOUT
REFIN/REFOUT
REFGND1
REFGND1
REFCAPA
REFCAPA
REFCAPB
REFCAPB
REFGND2
REFGND2
AGND6
AGND6
AVDD4
AVDD4
AIN_1P
AIN_1P
AIN_1GND
AIN_1GND
AIN_2P
AIN_2P
AIN_2GND
AIN_2GND
AIN_3P
AIN_3P
AIN_3GND
AIN_3GND
AIN_4P
AIN_4P
AIN_4GND
AIN_4GND
AIN_5P
AIN_5P
AIN_5GND
AIN_5GND
AIN_6P
AIN_6P
AIN_6GND
AIN_6GND
AIN_7P
AIN_7P
AIN_7GND
AIN_7GND
AIN_8P
AIN_8P
AIN_8GND
AIN_8GND
C20
C19
C14
C13
SJ2
2
1
SJ1
2
1
SJ101
2
1
SJ100
2
1
R5
R4
R6
C7
C16
8V
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C15
C24
5V2
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C18
C17
3.3V
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C39
C42
C23
C22
C41
SJ3
2
1
X1
TVS1
TVS2
R1
C8
R2
SJ4
2
1
X2
TVS3
TVS6
R3
C9
R13
SJ5
2
1
X3
TVS7
TVS8
R16
C10
R17
SJ7
2
1
X6
TVS11
TVS12
R20
C11
R21
SJ9
2
1
X8
TVS15
TVS16
R24
C21
R25
SJ12
2
1
X10
TVS19
TVS20
R28
C25
R29
SJ14
2
1
X12
TVS23
TVS24
R32
C26
R33
SJ16
2
1
X14
TVS27
TVS28
R36
C27
R37
R129
R130
R131
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
12V
12V
OS0
CONVST
OS1
OS2
RANGE
3.3V_ADC0
3.3V_ADC0
3.3V_ADC0
VIOUT6
SIG_GRD6
VIOUT1
SIG_GRD1
5V_ADC0
RESET
ADC_CS0
ADC_BUSY0
ADC_FRSTDATA0
ADC_MISO1
ADC_SCLK1
3.3V_ADC0
5V_ADC0
ADC0
==PAGE:100==
15-12-2018 12:13  f=0.67  D:\SkyDrive\Dokumenter\DTU\11. Semester\Hand in folder\Amplifier schematics and PCB\10ch_am
10u x7r
10u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
100 
100 
100 
0.33u
0.1u
LOD4
1u
4.7u
LOD4
1u
4.7u
LOD4
1u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
85
100 
100 
AVDD1
AVDD1
AGND1
AGND1
OS0
OS0
OS1
OS1
OS2
OS2
PAR/SER/BYTE_SEL
PAR/SER/BYTE_SEL
STBY
STBY
RANGE
RANGE
CONVSTA
CONVSTA
CONVSTB
CONVSTB
RESET
RESET
RE/SCLK
RD/SCLK
CS
CS
BUSY
BUSY
FRSTDATA
FRSTDATA
DB0
DB0
DB1
DB1
DB2
DB2
DB3
DB3
DB4
DB4
DB5
DB5
DB6
DB6
DVDD
DVDD
DB7/DOUTA
DB7/DOUTA
DB8/DOUTB
DB8/DOUT8
AGND2
AGND2
DB9
DB9
DB10
DB10
DB11
DB11
DB12
DB12
DB13
DB13
DB14/HBEN
DB14/HBEN
DB15/BYTE_SEL
DB15/BYTE_SEL
REFSEL
REFSEL
AGND3
AGND3
REGCAP1
REGCAP1
AVDD2
AVDD2
AVDD3
AVDD3
REGCAP2
REGCAP2
AGND4
AGND4
AGND5
AGND5
REFIN/REFOUT
REFIN/REFOUT
REFGND1
REFGND1
REFCAPA
REFCAPA
REFCAPB
REFCAPB
REFGND2
REFGND2
AGND6
AGND6
AVDD4
AVDD4
AIN_1P
AIN_1P
AIN_1GND
AIN_1GND
AIN_2P
AIN_2P
AIN_2GND
AIN_2GND
AIN_3P
AIN_3P
AIN_3GND
AIN_3GND
AIN_4P
AIN_4P
AIN_4GND
AIN_4GND
AIN_5P
AIN_5P
AIN_5GND
AIN_5GND
AIN_6P
AIN_6P
AIN_6GND
AIN_6GND
AIN_7P
AIN_7P
AIN_7GND
AIN_7GND
AIN_8P
AIN_8P
AIN_8GND
AIN_8GND
C28
C29
C30
C31
SJ6
2
1
SJ8
2
1
SJ10
2
1
SJ11
2
1
R27
R30
R31
C32
C33
8V1
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C34
C35
5V3
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C36
C37
3.3V3
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C38
C40
C43
C44
C45
SJ13
2
1
X4
TVS4
TVS5
R34
C48
R35
SJ15
2
1
X5
TVS9
TVS10
R38
C49
R39
SJ17
2
1
X7
TVS13
TVS14
R40
C50
R41
SJ18
2
1
X9
TVS17
TVS18
R42
C51
R43
SJ19
2
1
X11
TVS21
TVS22
R44
C52
R45
SJ20
2
1
X13
TVS25
TVS26
R46
C53
R47
SJ21
2
1
X15
TVS29
TVS30
R48
C54
R49
SJ22
2
1
X16
TVS31
TVS32
R50
C55
R51
R83
R84
R132
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
12V
12V
OS0
CONVST
OS1
OS2
RANGE
3.3V_ADC1
3.3V_ADC1
VIOUT2
SIG_GRD2
VIOUT3
SIG_GRD3
VIOUT4
SIG_GRD4
VIOUT5
SIG_GRD5
5V_ADC1
RESET
ADC_SCLK1
ADC_CS1
ADC_BUSY1
ADC_FRSTDATA1
ADC_MISO1
5V_ADC1
ADC1
==PAGE:101==
15-12-2018 12:13  f=0.65  D:\SkyDrive\Dokumenter\DTU\11. Semester\Hand in folder\Amplifier schematics and PCB\10ch_am
10u x7r
10u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
100 
100 
100 
0.33u
0.1u
LOD4
1u
4.7u
LOD4
1u
4.7u
LOD4
1u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
1u x7r
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
BU-SMA-V
85
85
85
85
100 
85
AVDD1
AVDD1
AGND1
AGND1
OS0
OS0
OS1
OS1
OS2
OS2
PAR/SER/BYTE_SEL
PAR/SER/BYTE_SEL
STBY
STBY
RANGE
RANGE
CONVSTA
CONVSTA
CONVSTB
CONVSTB
RESET
RESET
RE/SCLK
RD/SCLK
CS
CS
BUSY
BUSY
FRSTDATA
FRSTDATA
DB0
DB0
DB1
DB1
DB2
DB2
DB3
DB3
DB4
DB4
DB5
DB5
DB6
DB6
DVDD
DVDD
DB7/DOUTA
DB7/DOUTA
DB8/DOUTB
DB8/DOUT8
AGND2
AGND2
DB9
DB9
DB10
DB10
DB11
DB11
DB12
DB12
DB13
DB13
DB14/HBEN
DB14/HBEN
DB15/BYTE_SEL
DB15/BYTE_SEL
REFSEL
REFSEL
AGND3
AGND3
REGCAP1
REGCAP1
AVDD2
AVDD2
AVDD3
AVDD3
REGCAP2
REGCAP2
AGND4
AGND4
AGND5
AGND5
REFIN/REFOUT
REFIN/REFOUT
REFGND1
REFGND1
REFCAPA
REFCAPA
REFCAPB
REFCAPB
REFGND2
REFGND2
AGND6
AGND6
AVDD4
AVDD4
AIN_1P
AIN_1P
AIN_1GND
AIN_1GND
AIN_2P
AIN_2P
AIN_2GND
AIN_2GND
AIN_3P
AIN_3P
AIN_3GND
AIN_3GND
AIN_4P
AIN_4P
AIN_4GND
AIN_4GND
AIN_5P
AIN_5P
AIN_5GND
AIN_5GND
AIN_6P
AIN_6P
AIN_6GND
AIN_6GND
AIN_7P
AIN_7P
AIN_7GND
AIN_7GND
AIN_8P
AIN_8P
AIN_8GND
AIN_8GND
C56
C57
C58
C59
SJ23
2
1
SJ24
2
1
SJ25
2
1
SJ26
2
1
R52
R53
R54
C60
C61
8V2
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C62
C63
5V4
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C64
C65
3.3V4
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C66
C67
C68
C69
C70
SJ27
2
1
X17
TVS33
TVS34
R55
C71
R56
SJ28
2
1
X18
TVS35
TVS36
R57
C72
R58
SJ29
2
1
X19
TVS37
TVS38
R59
C73
R60
SJ30
2
1
X20
TVS39
TVS40
R61
C74
R62
SJ31
2
1
X21
TVS41
TVS42
R63
C75
R64
SJ32
2
1
X22
TVS43
TVS44
R65
C76
R66
SJ33
2
1
X23
TVS45
TVS46
R67
C77
R68
SJ34
2
1
X24
TVS47
TVS48
R69
C78
R70
R73
R74
R75
R76
R77
R78
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
AGND
12V
12V
OS0
CONVST
OS1
OS2
RANGE
3.3V_ADC2
3.3V_ADC2
3.3V_ADC2
VIOUT10
SIG_GRD10
VIOUT9
SIG_GRD9
VIOUT8
SIG_GRD8
VIOUT7
SIG_GRD7
5V_ADC2
5V_ADC2
RESET
ADC_SCLK2
ADC_CS2
ADC_BUSY2
ADC_FRSTDATA2
ADC_MISO2
3.3V_ADC0
ADC2
==PAGE:102==
15-12-2018 12:11  f=0.86  D:\SkyDrive\Dokumenter\DTU\11. Semester\Hand in folder\Amplifier schematics and PCB\10ch_amp_cosmetic.sch (Sheet: 6/15)
IR2110SPBF
ACS712
1u
4.7u
LOD4
0.33u
0.1u
LOD4
1u
4.7u
LOD4
0.1u
SPU01
0.1u
0.1u
50
50
BY229B
BY229B
BSC093N04LSGATMA1
BSC093N04LSGATMA1
350428-1
350428-1
1u
50
100
5n
0.1u
10k
VDD
11
VCC
3
VS
6
VB
7
HIN
12
LIN
14
SD
13
NC_2
4
NC_3
5
NC_4
9
NC_5
16
NC
10
COM
2
VSS
15
LO
1
HO
8
U3
U4
VCC
8
IP+_2
1
IP-_2
4
IP+
2
IP-
3
FILTER
6
GND
5
VIOUT
7
C104
C105
5V5
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C106
C107
8V4
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C108
C109
3.3V6
GND
1
VO
2
VO1
4
VI
3
C110
U$14
+VIN
1
-VIN
2
+VOUT
4
-VOUT
3
C111 C112
C113
C114
R85
R86
D1
D4
D7
D8
D9
s
D
G4
1*3
5
Q1
s
D
G4
1*3
5
Q2
J2
1
J3
1
SJ36
2
1
C117
R87
R88
C118
C119
C120
R133
AGND
AGND
AGND
12V
ENABLE
15V1
GND
DC/DC CONVERTER
+
+
Heat sink
+
Power
15v
PWM
vdd
enable
3.3V Logic
3.3V
AGND
Current Sensor Signal
==PAGE:103==
B
Ampliﬁer component list
96
==PAGE:104==
Table 15: Component list for PCB
Part
Description
Value
QTY
Placement
Price
Total
PCB
300x315
1
47,118
USD
306,267
DKK
WIZ820IO
Ethernet module
1
IC1
178,36
DKK
178,36
DKK
Teensy 3.6
1
U$4
207,03
DKK
207,03
DKK
ADS8598HIPM
ADC
3
U9, U10, U$11
195,3
DKK
585,9
DKK
TE
Connectivity 1814832
SMA connector
24
X1-X24
0,65
USD
101,4
DKK
LDL1117S50R
5V LDO
14
5V1-5V14
2,87
DKK
40,18
DKK
LDL1117S33R
3.3V LDO
14
3.3V2-3.3V15
2,87
DKK
40,18
DKK
µA78M08
8V LDO
13
8V1-8V13
1,57
DKK
20,41
DKK
SPU01M-15
15V DC-DC supply
10
U14, U16 .... U$32
18,35
DKK
183,5
DKK
BSC350N20NSFD
BSC350N20NSFD
20
Q1, Q2, Q5-Q22
22,55
DKK
451
DKK
STPS20200C
POWER diodes
20
D8, D9, D13 ,D14, ... , D53, D54
24,59
DKK
491,8
DKK
MLX 42002
Power connector
20
J2, J3, J6-J23
2,74
DKK
54,8
DKK
MOLEX 35313
12V input connector
1
U$2
2,29
DKK
2,29
DKK
MOLEX 35312
12V output for fan
6
U1, U3, U5 −U8
0,7
DKK
4,2
DKK
IR25607SPBF
MOSFET driver
10
U3, U5, U7, ... U21
19,24
DKK
192,4
DKK
UCY2D181MHD3TN
Power Elect. Cap.
180uF
20
C111, C112, C133, C134, C154, C155, C175, C176, C196,
C197, C217, C218, C238, C239, C259, C260, C208, C281,
C301, C302
14,91
DKK
298,2
DKK
97
==PAGE:105==
GRM31CR72E104KW03L
Power ceramic Cap.
0.1UF
20
C113,C135, C156, C177, C198, C219, C240, C261, C282,
C303, C114, C136, C157, C178, C199, C220, C241, C262,
C283, C304
2,55
DKK
51
DKK
CMSH1-200HE TR13
Gate/bootstrap diode
2A
30
D1, D4, D7, D10, D11, D12, D15, D16, D17, D20, D21,
D22, D25, D26, D27, D30, D31, D32, D35, D36, D37,
D40, D41, D42, D45, D46, D47, D50, D51, D52
5,1
DKK
153
DKK
EMK325B7226KMHT
Gate drive cap 1210
22uF
30
C102, C103, C116, C123, C124, C125, C138, C145, C146,
C159, C166, C167, C180, C187,C188, C201, C208, C209,
C222, C229, C230, C243, C250, C251, C264, C271, C272,
C285, C292, C293, C306
5
DKK
150
DKK
C0805C106M8RACAUTO
ADC caps
10uF
6
C19, C20, C28, C29, C57, C58
3,82
DKK
22,92
DKK
ACS724LLCTR-20AU-T
Current sensor
10
U4, U6, ... , U22
36,75
DKK
367,5
DKK
SMBJ10CA-13-F
TVS diode - ADC
10V
48
TVS1 - TVS48
2,48
DKK
119,04
DKK
FBMH3225HM202NT
Ferrit bead
2000Ohm
13
FB1 - FB3, FB5 - FB14
2,04
DKK
26,52
DKK
TMP100AQDBVRQ1
Temperature sensor
2
X26, X27
13,25
DKK
26,5
DKK
0805 Ceramic cap.
C0805
0.1uF
35
C3, C16, C33, C61, C79, C107, C110, C119, C129, C132,
C141, C150, C153, C162, C171, C174, C183, C192, C195,
C204, C213, C216, C225, C234, C237, C246, C255, C258,
C267, C276, C279, C288, C297, C300, C309
0,1
DKK
3,5
DKK
0805 Ceramic cap.
C0805
0.33uF
13
C7,C32, C60, C106, C128, C149, C170, C191, C212,
C233, C254, C275, C296
0,1
DKK
1,3
DKK
98
==PAGE:106==
0805 Ceramic cap.
C0805
1uF
41
C1, C4, C5, C6, C15, C18, C34, C36, C46, C62, C64, C104,
C108, C117, C126, C130,C139, C147, C151, C160, C168,
C172, C181, C189, C193, C202, C210, C214, C223, C231,
C235, C244, C252, C256, C265, C273, C277, C286, C294,
C298, C307
0,1
DKK
4,1
DKK
0805 Ceramic cap.
C0805
4.7uF
29
C2,C12, C17, C24, C35, C37, C47, C63, C65, C105, C109,
C127, C131, C148, C152, C169, C173, C190, C194, C211,
C215, C232, C236, C253, C257, C274, C278, C295,
C299
0,1
DKK
2,9
DKK
0603 Ceramic cap.
C0603
1uF
21
C13, C14, C22, C23, C30, C31, C38, C39, C40, C41, C42,
C43, C44, C45, C58, C59, C66, C67, C68, C69, C70
0,1
DKK
2,1
DKK
0603 Ceramic cap.
C0603 COG
100pF
14
C8, C9, C10, C25, C27, C48, C50, C53, C55,C71, C73,
C76, C78
0,1
DKK
1,4
DKK
0603 Ceramic cap.
C0603 COG
3300pF
10
C21, C26, C49, C51, C51, C53, C72, C74, C75, C77
0,1
DKK
1
DKK
0603 resistor
R0603
0Ohm
3
R7, R8, R9, R79
0,1
DKK
0,3
DKK
0603 resistor
R0603
15Ohm
20
R85, R86, R89, R90, R93, R94, R97, R98, R105, R106,
R109, R110, R113, R114, R117, R118, R121, R122,
R125, R126
0,1
DKK
2
DKK
0603 resistor
R0603
85Ohm
0
0,1
DKK
0
DKK
0603 resistor
R0603
100Ohm
24
R4, R5, R6, R10, R11, R12, R14, R15, R18, R19, R22,
R23, R26, R27, R30, R31, R52,R53, R54, R71, R72, R77,
R78, R131
0,1
DKK
2,4
DKK
99
==PAGE:107==
0603 resistor
R0603
4.7kOhm
50
R1, R2, R3, R13, R16, R17, R20, R21, R24, R25, R28,
R29, R32, R33, R34, R35, R36, R37, R38, R39, R40, R41,
R42, R43, R44, R45, R46, R47, R48, R49, R50, R51, R55,
R56, R57, R58, R59, R60, R61, R62, R63, R64, R65, R66,
R67, R68, R69, R70, R81, R82
0,1
DKK
5
DKK
0805 resistor
R0805
50Ohm
10
R88,R92, R96, R104, R108, R112, R116, R120, R124,
R128
0,1
DKK
1
DKK
R0805
10kOhm
1
R133
0,1
DKK
0,1
DKK
Solder joint
0Ohm
12
SJ1, SJ2, SJ6, SJ8, SJ10, SJ11, SJ23, SJ24, SJ25, SJ26,
SJ100, SJ101
0,1
DKK
1,2
DKK
MOLEX 0901361204
4 pin onnector
3
X26, X27, X28
10,47
DKK
31,41
DKK
XG4C-6431
64pin connector
1
J1
27,58
DKK
27,58
DKK
100
==PAGE:108==
Table 16: Component list for enclosure
Part
Description
QTY
Price
Total
RM3U1918SBK
19” rack enclosure
1
1583,41
DKK
1583,41
DKK
1427P1BK
Enclusure handle
1
52,65
DKK
52,65
DKK
H48-6-320-320-1.0-0
Thermal pad
1
271,97
DKK
271,97
DKK
BaiTang 300*69*36MM
Heat sink
2
22,7
USD
295,1
DKK
Zeatop Hender Banana Plug
Binding post
40
1,43
USD
371,8
DKK
Zeatop Hender
SMA to BNC Connector 20cm
Analog signal cable
8
2,15
USD
111,8
DKK
Zeatop Hender
SMA to BNC Connector 30cm
Analog signal cable
8
2,42
USD
125,84
DKK
Zeatop Hender
SMA to BNC Connector 50cm
Analog signal cable
8
2,78
USD
144,56
DKK
33TS3101S-88N
Ethernet adapter
1
52,71
DKK
52,71
DKK
5353929-1
USB adapter
1
44,19
DKK
44,19
DKK
A-MCSP-80005
Ethernat cable
1
17,25
DKK
17,25
DKK
AK67421-2
USB cable
1
32,24
DKK
32,24
DKK
CFM-A225V-131-445
Heat sink fan
2
69,9
DKK
139,8
DKK
CFM-A238V-131-480
Enclusure fan
2
69,12
DKK
138,24
DKK
8170
Fan guard
4
4,65
DKK
18,6
DKK
LRS-100-12
12V powersupply
1
114,28
DKK
114,28
DKK
PM3GD
On LED indicator
1
4,26
DKK
4,26
DKK
TX29/19/7.6-3E27
Filter cores
30
6,26
DKK
187,8
DKK
FW0190A
Nylon washer
20
1,02
DKK
20,4
DKK
MOLEX 0008700056
FAN output terminal
8
0,65
DKK
5,2
DKK
MOLEX 0351550200
Fan output connector
4
1,49
DKK
5,96
DKK
MOLEX 0502179101
12V input terminal
2
2,59
DKK
5,18
DKK
MOLEX
0351560200
12V input connector
1
1,68
DKK
1,68
DKK
MOLEX
0002082004
Power terminal
40
0,27
DKK
10,8
DKK
MOLEX
0050841025
Power connector
20
2,57
DKK
51,4
DKK
703W-00/04
AC 230 socet
1
5,3
DKK
5,3
DKK
30-00392
4 lead cable
2
12,4
DKK
24,8
DKK
101
==PAGE:109==
P227EE2B20A
Reset pushbutton
1
15,63
DKK
15,63
DKK
SW3001A
Power rocker switch
1
24,74
DKK
24,74
DKK
TAGWHT
Puch button cap
1
1,55
DKK
1,55
DKK
MOLEX 0901560144
4 pin connector
3
2,71
DKK
8,13
DKK
MOLEX 0901190109
4 pin connector terminal
12
1,13
DKK
13,56
DKK
Wurth 5580506
ground ring terminal
2
8,14
DKK
16,28
DKK
TE 42100-2
Quick connect terminal
5
1,29
DKK
6,45
DKK
Internal 16AWG poer wires
50
50
DKK
Nuts and bolts
50
50
DKK
BOB-00717
Thermometer adapter
2
6,14
DKK
51
DKK
TMP100AQDBVRQ1
Thermometer
2
13,44
DKK
52
DKK
Custom made parts
Support beam
PCB support beam
2
200
DKK
400
DKK
Spacer
Thermal PCB spacer
2
200
DKK
400
DKK
Front
Milling of enclosure plate
1
200
DKK
200
DKK
Back
Milling of enclosure plate
1
200
DKK
200
DKK
Bottom
Milling of enclosure plate
1
200
DKK
200
DKK
Top
Milling of enclosure plate
1
200
DKK
200
DKK
102
==PAGE:110==
C
Ampliﬁer parts blueprints
103
==PAGE:111==
 40,0 
 9,3 
 9,3 
 20,0 
 0 
 10,0 
 77,2 
 139,4 
 201,6 
 263,9 
 326,1 
 361,2 
 371,2 
 0 
 55,8 
 97,6 
 118,1 
 159,9 
 180,3 
 222,1 
 242,5 
 284,3 
 304,8 
A
A
10X M4 Thread through hole 
 10,0 
 
4,5 
 
9,4 
 2,5 
SECTION A-A
8X Countersunk holes for M4 bolt
The part can be produced from untreated 
40X10mm extruded aluminium section
All tolerances are +-0.1mm
Number of parts: 4 
Name: Simon Bo Jensen
Student number: s134164
Master Thesis
Mobile:30234967
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
Spacer
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:112==
 10,0 
 20,0 
 5,0 
 10,0 
2X M4 25mm deep thread
(Threads in both ends)
 0 
 98,6 
 118,6 
 296,0 
 316,0 
 414,9 
4X M4 through hole thread
The part can be produced from untreated 
20X10mm extruded aluminium section
All tolerances are +-0.1mm
Number of parts: 4 
Name: Simon Bo Jensen
Student number: s134164
Master Thesis
Mobile:30234967
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
support_beam
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:113==
 69,5 
 36,5 
 34,8 
 0 
 62,1 
 124,3 
 186,5 
 248,7 
 300,0 
4X M4 thread 6mm deep
Extruded heatsinks are provided. 
No adjustment of heatsink dimentions needed,
only hole driling and threading. 
All tolerances are +-0.1mm
Number of parts: 2 
Name: Simon Bo Jensen
Student number: s134164
Master Thesis
Mobile:30234967
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
heat_sink
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:114==
 413,5 
 
4,3 8X 
 R63,5 X8 
 R2,0 X16 
 
4,3 X8 
 52,5 
 105,0 
 105,0 
 52,5 
 58,0 
 407,5 
 221,5 
 105,7 
 105,7 
 443,0 
The 2mm aluminium plate is supplied.
All tolerances are +-0,1mm
Number of parts: 1
Simon Bo Jensen
Masters Thesis
Mobile: 30234967
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
bottom
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:115==
 R3,0 
 40,0 
 20,0 
 40,0 
 15,0 
 413,5 
 407,5 
 183,8 
 443,0 
The 3,5mm aluminium plate is supplied.
All tolerances are +-0,1mm
Number of parts: 1
Simon Bo Jensen
Masters Thesis
Mobile: 30234967
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
top
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:116==
 416,0 
 133,0 
 R57,5 
 
4,3 X8 
 R4,0 X8 
118,0
 66,5 
 118,0 
52,5
 52,5 
 52,5 
 52,5 
 52,5 
B
C
The 3,5mm aluminium plate is supplied.
All tolerances are +-0,1mm
Number of parts: 1
Simon Bo Jensen
Masters Thesis
Mobile: 30234967
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 3
A4
WEIGHT: 
Front
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:117==
 14,9 
 30,0 
 16,6 
 16,6 
 30,0 
 8,3 
 
2,0 X2 
 16,0 
 20,0 
 9,0 
 40,0 
 R1,0 X4 
 
2,0 X2 
 4,5 
 37,5 
 37,5 
DETAIL B
SCALE 1 : 2
Midline of plate
Finish corners with square file to reduce radius 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 2 OF 3
A4
WEIGHT: 
Front
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:118==
 28,0 
 14,5 
 22,8 
 35,0 
 38,0 
 30,0 
 30,0 
 
3,5 
 
4,1 
 30,0 
 48,0 
 25,0 
 20,0 
 30,0 
 40,0 
 
3,5 X2 
 
9,2 
 5,0 
 7,3 
DETAIL C
SCALE 2 : 3
Finish hole with square file 
to reduce corner radius 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 3 OF 3
A4
WEIGHT: 
Front
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:119==
 
6,5 X40 
 20,0 
 17,0 
 24,0 
 24,0 
 24,0 
 24,0 
 20,0 
 17,0 
 24,0 
 24,0 
 21,5 
 25,0 
 25,0 
 145,5 
 R6,4 
 5,3 
 R3,0 
 40,0 
 20,0 
 20,0 
 128,0 
 15,0 
 R1,0 
A
The 3,5mm aluminium plate is supplied
All tolerances are +-0,1mm
Number of parts: 1
Simon Bo Jensen
Masters Thesis
Mobile: 30234967
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 2
A4
WEIGHT: 
Back
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:120==
 
5,0 
 30,0 
 23,0 
 48,0 
 40,0 
 28,0 
 54,0 
 20,0 
 13,0 
 
3,4 X2 
 R4,0 X6 
 135° 
 3,8 
 R6,4 
 5,3 
 R1,0 
DETAIL A
SCALE 2 : 3
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 2 OF 2
A4
WEIGHT: 
Back
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:121==
D
Ampliﬁer model and parameter study
114
==PAGE:122==
A model of the current ampliﬁer is made driving an inductive load representing an AMB pole. This
is done in order to simulate the ampliﬁer response at different proportional gains and load inductances.
The Simulink model is shown on the next page and is included in the ’Hand in folder’ under the
subfolder ’Current amp simulation’. Here the script running the Simulink model and creating the
FRF is included as well.
In section 3.7 a series of experiments was conducted in order to determine the effect of the pro-
portional gain in the current ampliﬁer on the ampliﬁers current tracking capabilities i.e. reference
current to actual current FRFs. It was found that for the different current ampliﬁer channels that the
response differed signiﬁcantly from one another despite the fact that the current ampliﬁer channels
are identical. It was suspected that among other factors, the operating point of the individual AMB
coils changed the inductance of the coils. This ampliﬁer model is simulated with different inductance
values of the load in order to see what the effect on the current ampliﬁer response is. The reference
current data was taken from the experimental data and fed into the model and actual current could
be extracted from the model. FRFs are made between the reference current and the actual simulated
current in order to compare them to the experimental FRFs.
It was found that the inductance of the load is around 10mH, so six cases was run with coil
inductances of ±15% (8.5mH and 11.5mH) at proportinal gains of 400, 1000 and 1400. The results
of the simulations are shown together with the corresponding experimental results from section 3.7 in
ﬁgures 84 - 86.
The simulation results does not accurately replicate the dynamics of the current ampliﬁer. The
only parameter that is ﬁtted in this model is the load inductance. Several known factors are mitigated
in this model e.g. the back electromagnetic force (EMF) of the movement of rotor. Taking this into
consideration, similarities are seen between the experimental and simulated FRFs.
The goal of making this model is to show in the inﬂuence of the AMB coil inductance on the
reference current to actual current FRF. Considering the simulated FRFs in ﬁgures 84 - 86. it is clear
that the load has a signiﬁcant effect on the current ampliﬁer models current tracking capabilities. The
model replicates the characteristics of the real current ampliﬁer moderately. Based on this, it is found
that a change of ±15% inductance in the AMB poles could change the reference current to actual
current FRF of the ampliﬁer signiﬁcantly.
115
==PAGE:123==
ADC third order analog internal anti aliasing filter
cut off 15.000Hz
Analog first order current sensor output fitler 
cut off at 88.000Hz
Coil current
ADC first order analog input filter
cut off 5.300Hz
The semi passive H bridge is not able to apply
negative voltage across the load when the current is 0 or below
Resistive loss of coil is subtarcted from the effective 
voltage delivered på the powerstage 
12 bit PWM pin
gain: 1/4096
Sofware implemented discrete PID controller (10.000Hz)
Integrator: 200
Proportinal gain: Varying
The semipassive H bridge has an average 
voltage of 0 af 50% dutycycle
Current in the coil depends on the integral of the 
effective voltage across it and inductance 
ADC first order analog input filter
cut off 176.838Hz
Power stage voltage
gain: 60V
PID(z)
Discrete PID Controller
60
Power stage gain
1
s
Integrator
1
Current sensor gain
-K-
Coil inductance
0.5
Coil resistance
In1
Out1
else { }
If Action
Subsystem
u1
if(u1 > 0)
else
If
In1
Out1
if { }
If Action
Subsystem1
Merge
0.5
Constant1
-K-
PWM
1
Out1
1
In1
butter
Analog
Filter Design
butter
Analog
Filter Design1
butter
Analog
Filter Design2
butter
Analog
Filter Design3
==PAGE:124==
Figure 84: Proportinal gain 400
Figure 85: Proportinal gain 1000
117
==PAGE:125==
Figure 86: Proportinal gain 1400
118
==PAGE:126==
E
Response of model in time with optimized parameters
Figure 87: Time response of model with parameters obtained with optimization procedure 1
Figure 88: Time response of model with parameters obtained with optimization procedure 2
119
==PAGE:127==
Figure 89: Time response of model with parameters obtained with optimization procedure 3
Figure 90: Time response of model with parameters obtained with optimization procedure 4 at 5A bias
120
==PAGE:128==
F
Zoom of responses of rotor position during destabilization ex-
periment
Figure 91: Zoomed response of position at low seal inlet pressure
Figure 92: Zoomed response of position at pressure going from 2 bar to 2.2 bar. Clear oscillations start to
appear.
Figure 93: Zoomed response of position at pressure going from 2.6 bar to 2.8 bar. Oscillations are periodic
and increasing in amplitude.
121
==PAGE:129==
Figure 94: Zoomed response of position at pressure going from 2.8 bar to 3 bar. The orbit around the AMB
center is destabilized.
Figure 95: The position in the two bearings oscillates almost in phase immidiatly priot to destabilization.
Figure 96: The rotor position has stabilized an orbit around the AMB centres at 3 bars of seal inlet pressure.
The orbit is destabilized by increasing the pressure to 3.2 bars.
122
