==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Technische Universität München
Photocatalytical properties of individual
Van der Waals heterostructures
Author:
Beatrice Sala
Supervisors:
Prof. Dr. Nicolas Stenger
Prof. Dr. Ursula Wurstbauer
Prof. Dr. Alexander Holleitner
March 10th 2019
==PAGE:2==
A Franca e Gianni, per essersi sempre prodigati tanto
amorevolmente per sostenermi in ogni mia scelta.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
I am extremely thankful to Prof. Dr. Nicolas Stenger, who took keen interest in my
project work, guided me all along and supported me despite being in diﬀerent countries.
I owe my deep gratitude to Prof. Dr. Ursula Wurstbauer, who was always willing to
help me whenever I had problems, or a question about my research or writing.
I respect and thank prof. Dr. Alexander Holleitner for providing me with the oppor-
tunity to do my thesis at the Walter Schottky Institute and giving me all the support
and guidance to duly complete my project.
I heartily thank Elmar, for his indispensable help, his constant encouragement and his
inﬁnite patience. It has been a pleasure working and sharing setbacks and victories with
a friendly and funny ”boss”.
I also would like to thank all the amazing members of the Holleitner group for the very
nice moments we shared together. They are more than just colleagues to me and I will
always remember them.
Inﬁne, vorrei ringraziare Arde, per aver sempre creduto in me, per essere stato al mio
ﬁanco e avermi sostenuto in questa e molte altre straordinarie avventure.
2
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have raised the interest of many researchers
for their peculiar properties as two -dimensional materials in the last decades. TMDCs
present exceptional opto-electronic properties. In addition, they are considered to be very
promising catalysts for the water splitting reaction. This process has signiﬁcant impor-
tance since it allows to produce hydrogen that can be used as environmental friendly fuel
or for energy storage.
According to the literature, molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2) is the best catalyst among the
two-dimensional material for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Consequently, many
researches have been done to enhance the catalytic activity of MoS2. In this respect, we
propose two possible approaches. The ﬁrst strategy consists in producing vertical het-
erostructures composed by two single monolayers of MoS2 and WSe2: the formation of
a type-II band alignment induces a charge separation, providing a larger number of the
electrons for the HER process.
The second approach involves a defect engineering method. From literature, it is known
that the catalytic active sites in pristine MoS2 are the edge sites, while the basal plane
is catalytically rather inert. Accordingly, we introduce defects with the aid of a helium
ion microscope (HIM) to improve the catalytic activity of the basal plane of monolayers
of MoS2. The HIM enables us to test diﬀerent ion doses in a controlled way.
For both the heterostructures and the ion treated MoS2 monolayers we perform a
pre-characterization with Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopy. Subsequently, we
employ the cyclic voltammetry technique to test the (photo)catalytic activity of the het-
erostructures and the defective MoS2 monolayers. In particular, we test the response of
the heterostructure to the light during the catalysis: we report a current enhancement
with respect to the current measured in a dark environment. This increase indicates that
the light promotes the charge separation and consequently fosters the catalytic activity
of the structure. Moreover, we characterize the catalytic activity of the treated MoS2
through a sequence of cyclic voltammograms after each ion dose exposure. The current
density is enhanced by increasing the ion dose, suggesting an improvement of the cat-
alytic activity of the monolayer.
From the cyclic voltammograms of both the heterostructures and the ion-treated MoS2
monolayers, we extract the so-called Tafel slopes that give us indications about the limit-
ing reaction step for the HER. Comparing our results with the literature, we conclude that
the adsorption of hydrogen atoms limits the overall HER for both analyzed structures.
3
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Two-dimensional materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Crystal structure of transition metal dichalcogenides
. . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Electronic and optical properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Introduction to electrochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Electrochemical cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Photocatalysis towards water splitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
MoS2 as photocatalyst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1.1
Heterostructures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1.2
Defects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Instrumentations and techniques
17
3.1
Sample fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Micromechanical exfoliation and viscoelastic stamp . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Electrochemical cell architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Cyclic voltammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Helium ion microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5.1
Defect engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5.1.1
Raman spectroscopy and phonon conﬁnement model . .
27
4
Experimental results
28
4.1
Photocatalytic properties of transition metal dichalcogenides . . . . . . .
28
4.1.1
MoSe2 monolayer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.2
Vertical MoS2-WSe2 heterostructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2.1
Light intensity dependence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Defect engineering of MoS2 monolayers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Summary and outlooks
50
A AFM measurements
53
B Light spectrum of Xe/Hg arc lamp
55
i
==PAGE:6==
C WSe2-MoS2 heterostructure
56
ii
==PAGE:7==
1
|
Introduction
Nowadays, global warming is a major issue for the planet.[1] The global warming is a
direct consequence of deforestation and human activities which involves burning fossil
fuels. The waste gases of industrial production contain large quantity of carbon dioxide,
methane and chloroﬂuorocarbons.[1] These gases, named as greenhouse gases, are re-
sponsible for the dramatic eﬀects of the global temperature increasing.[1] The impact of
a continuously increasing of the global temperature will aﬀect many aspects: the ecosys-
tems, the food supply, the human health, the economic growth and more. For this reason,
from the beginning of the 90’s of the last century, it has been tried to set rules to regulate
the global emission of the greenhouse gases. In particular, one of the most famous accord
regarding the climate change is the Kyoto protocol which was signed in 1997 from almost
two hundred countries all around the world.[1]
Renewable energies provide a solution for reducing the greenhouse gases and respect the
environment. Renewable energies constantly regenerate from nature, and there are many
renewable resources: solar energy, wind energy, marine energy, hydro energy, geothermal
energy and bioenergy.[2] All these resources represent excellent alternatives to the fossil
fuel based sources since they are non polluting, and most of them rely on potentially
inﬁnite provision of energy. However, they present some disadvantages.[2] Most of the
sources are not constantly available to fulﬁll the energy demand, such as sun or wind
energy. Accordingly, methods for storing energy must be found. From recent studies, hy-
drogen is becoming a very attractive solution for the energy storage.[3] Hydrogen occurs
in nature always combined with other elements (e.g. oxygen, carbon, nitrogen).[3] There
are diﬀerent techniques to isolate the hydrogen from the original molecule. Currently the
primarily source of hydrogen is methane. The hydrogen is extracted from the methane
molecule by the steam reforming process which produces carbon dioxide as a reaction
waste. Since this process has a bad impact on the environment, a clean alternative is
desiderable.[4] Among the diﬀerent resources, hydrogen can be found in water.[3, 4] Cur-
rently, electrolysis of water or water splitting is not extensively employed for the hydrogen
production, although it is an environmental friendly method.[4, 5] The water splitting is
a catalytic process which counts two steps: the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and
the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). HER is the step which involves the production of
hydrogen.[6] The ideal catalyst for HER is platinum, but it is an extremely expensive
and rare material.[6, 7]
Since the discovery of graphene in 2004 by Geim and Novoselov [8], an extensive study and
research of two -dimensional materials started.[9] In particular, transition metal dichalco-
genides (TMDCs) is a class of two -dimensional materials showing very interesting prop-
1
==PAGE:8==
erties which makes TMDCs suitable for opto-electronic and catalytic applications.[10]
Among the TMDCs group, molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2) has been widely studied for
(photo)catalysis applications.[10, 11, 12, 13, 14] MoS2 in the monolayer form present a
energy band gap in the visible regime of the light spectrum, making it a good catalyst
for HER. Furthermore, it is also a low-cost and abundant material.[10, 11, 12, 13, 14]
In order to improve the catalytic activity of MoS2 we suggest two diﬀerent routes. The
ﬁrst methodology consists in producing vertical heterostructures made of two single mono-
layers. A speciﬁc conﬁguration allows a charge separation due to the particular band
alignment, increasing the quantity of available electrons for the HER.[15, 16, 17] The
second suggested method is a helium ion treatment of MoS2, implemented with a helium
ion microscope. This technique allows to induce vacancies on the catalytically inert basal
plane of MoS2 monolayers.[10, 18] Accordingly, in this thesis we analyze the the catalytic
activity of MoS2-WSe2 vertical heterostructures and helium ion treated MoS2 monolayers.
MoS2-WSe2 heterostructures as well as the MoS2 monolayers are prepared with microme-
chanical exfoliation. For all the studied structures, we conduct a pre-characterization
with Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopy. Afterwards we perform cyclic voltam-
metry measurements to estimate the catalytic activity of the structures. We implement
the electrochemistry measurements in a dark environment for the ion treated MoS2 mono-
layers and in an illuminated environment for the heterostructures. To discuss our results,
we estimate theoretical parameters and suggest schematic models to explain the physics
behind the processes.
The contents of this thesis are organized in ﬁve chapters. The second chapter explains
the theoretical concepts regarding the employed materials and the experimental tech-
niques.
In particular, we present the crystal structure, the optoelectronic properties
of the TMDCs, the fundamentals of electrochemistry and photocatalysis, and ﬁnally,
we introduce the characteristic and role of heterostructures and defects for HER. The
third chapter presents the techniques we employ for the fabrication and the structures
characterization. Among the characterization techniques we present Raman and photo-
luminescence spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry. Lastly, we introduce the helium ion
microscopy for the ion treatment of the MoS2 monolayers. Chapter four presents the
results for the heterostructures and the treated MoS2 monolayer. For each structure,
we present the Raman and photoluminescence spectra, the cyclic voltammograms and
relative Tafel plots. Lastly, chapter ﬁve summarizes the results and presents the outlooks
for further improvements.
2
==PAGE:9==
2
|
Theory
This chapter introduces the theory behind the experiments that are discussed in this
project. The ﬁrst section presents the two-dimensional materials, and particularly, the
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs). The following section gives an overview of the
theoretical basis of electrochemistry and photocatalysis in order to clarify the mechanisms
that underlie the experimental approach. The last section gives an insight into vertically
aligned TMDCs and induced defects in TMDCs. In particular, we present the potential
ability of band and defect engineering to improve the (photo)catalytic activity.
2.1
Two-dimensional materials
Quantum conﬁned systems have been intensively studied for electronic applications:
one can conﬁne a system in one, two or three dimensions, generating 2D, 1D and
0D systems respectively.[19] For instance, two-dimensional systems can be obtained by
aligned materials with diﬀerent energy gap.[19] A practical example is given by the Al-
GaAs/GaAs/AlGaAs structure, in which the diﬀerence of the band gaps of the two ma-
terials generate a quantum well potential that forces the electrons and holes to move
only in two dimensions [19]. Two-dimensional materials are not only quantum conﬁned
systems. They are physically thin ﬁlms of one atom (or few) thickness.[20].
The most renowned two-dimensional material is certainly graphene for its outstanding
electronic properties that it was worth the Nobel prize to A.K. Geim and K.S. Novoselov
in 2010 [21]. Nevertheless, there are other interesting two-dimensional materials such
as the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) that show peculiar and very promis-
ing characteristics for optoelectronic and (photo)catalytic applications. [10] For instance,
TMDC monolayers are reported to be exceptional sunlight absorbers (with an absorbance
of 2.3% in the visible regime) and they can be employed for ultrathin photovoltaics.[22]
Another example is given by Roy et al. which suggests the fabrication of a tunnelling
FET combining MoS2 and WSe2 to overcome the physical limitations of the traditional
MOSFET.[23]
In this thesis, we concentrate on the (photo)catalytical properties of TMDC mono-
layers and heterostructure.
3
==PAGE:10==
X
M
c
a
c
a
a)   Trigonal prismatic (2H)
b)   Octahedral (1T)
Figure 2.1: From the top: bulk crystal structure and unite cell of TMDCs. In a) and
b) the 2H and 1T phase, respectively. In violet the transition metal (M) and in yellow the
chalcogens (X). ”a” indicate the lattice constant and ”c” the distance between two metal
atoms. Adapted from [25].
2.1.1
Crystal structure of transition metal dichalcogenides
The comprehensive chemical formula used to describe TMDCs is MX2, where M indicates
a transition metal atom (e.g. tungsten or molybdenum) and X indicates a chalcogen
element (sulfur, selenium or tellurium)[24, 25].
TMDCs as well as graphene present a hexagonal lattice structure.
Nevertheless, the
structure of the TMDCs evolves out of plane while the graphene structure lies on a
plane. The unit cell of a TMDC crystal structure is made of a central transition metal
atom that bounds six chalcogen atoms. Three chalcogen atoms position themselves in the
plane above and three in the plane below the transition metal atom, making an X-M-X
structure (ﬁgure 2.1) [10, 20, 21, 26] .
The quantitative parameters for the lattice structure of MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 are
reported in table 2.1. In general, TMDCs present strong covalent intralayer bonds and
weak Van der Waals interlayer bonds. This chemical conﬁguration allows to produce
single freestanding monolayer through diﬀerent kinds of techniques, among them me-
chanical and liquid exfoliation, chemical vapor deposition and Van der Waals epitaxial
growth [10, 20]. TMDCs show insulating, metallic or semiconducting behaviour.[24] The
reason of the diﬀerent behaviours is related to the distribution of the atoms. In particu-
lar, TMDCs present two diﬀerent phases depending on the orientation of the chalcogen
atoms: the trigonal prismatic (2H) and the octaedral (1T) conﬁguration.[10] In the 1T
phase (ﬁgure 2.1) the upper and lower corresponding chalcogen atoms in the unit cell
4
==PAGE:11==
are rotated of 180◦, while in the 2H phase the chalcogen atoms are one on top of each
other. The 1T phase can be obtained by chemical intercalation but it is thermodinami-
cally unstable at room temperature and TMDCs in the 1T phase relax to the 2H phase.
Furthermore, the 2H phase is semiconducting while the 1T phase is metallic.[10] The
crystal structure of the materials treated in this project, namely MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2,
is arranged in the 2H phase.
The conformation of a molecule deﬁnes the symmetry of the molecule itself. Molecules
with the same symmetry are grouped into speciﬁc classes called point groups. For each
point group only certain symmetry operations are allowed.[28] By reducing the number
of layers of the TMDCs, the symmetry, and consequently the point group of the lattice
structure, changes. In the 2H phase the unit cell of the bulk material belongs to the D6h
point group, characterized by the center of inversion. In the case of the monolayer in-
stead, the unit cell belongs to the D3h point group which lacks of the center of inversion.
In general, it has been observed that crystals having an even number of layers belong
to D6h group (D3d in case of a bilayer). On the other hand, crystals that have an odd
number of layers belong to D3h point group.[29, 30, 31]
Symmetry considerations are relevant to explain the electronic properties of TMDCs.
2.1.2
Electronic and optical properties
The band structure of TMDC crystals present a strong dependence on the number of the
layers they are made of. Most bulk TMDCs are indirect semiconductors. However, the
single TMDC monolayers are semiconductor with a direct band gap. In order to explain
the electronic band structure dependence on the number of layers, one has to take into
account the orbitals involved in the formation of the conduction and the valance bands.
We start considering the ﬁrst Brillouin zone of TMDCs in the k-space. The ﬁrst Brillouin
zone presents a hexagonal arrangement and the high symmetry points are Γ, M, Q and
K.
Bulk TMDCs exhibit an indirect band gap from the Γ point of the valence band and
half-way between Γ and K point of the conduction band. The energy gap has values in
the range of 1.0-1.2 eV for MoS2, around 1.1 eV for MoSe2 and 1.2 eV for WSe2 (ﬁgure
2.2).[32]
By decreasing the number of layers down to one, the transition becomes direct at the K
point in the k-space. The energy gap increases to 1.8-1.9 eV for MoS2, 1.5-1.6 for MoSe2
and 1.6-1.7 eV for WSe2. [12]
TMDC
a
c
MoS2
3.160
6.140
MoSe2
3.288
6.451
WSe2
3.260
6.422
Table 2.1: Lattice parameters for MX2 (Å).”a” and ”c” are the lattice constant and
the distance between the metal layers, respectively [27]. The two parameters are reported
for clarity in ﬁgure 2.1
.
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Electronic band structure of MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2: the top three panels
show the bulk crystals and three bottom panels the corresponding single layer. In the bulk
crystals the indirect transition is represented with a blue arrow, while for the monolayers
the direct transition is represented with red arrow. Adapted from[27].
The energy value of the direct band gap for monolayers between 1 to 2 eV, corresponds
to the visible range of the light spectrum. This makes the TMDCs monolayers suitable
for opto-electronic applications and photocatalytic processes [20, 31].
At the K point the larger contribution to the band structure is given by d orbitals of
the transition metal. At the Γ point hybridized d orbitals from the metal and pz orbitals
from the chalcogens dominate.[30, 33, 34, 35, 36]
The transition to the direct band gap is due to the change of the hybridization of d
and pz anti-bonding orbitals around the Γ point. Consequently, the valance band moves
to a more negative energy, making the direct transition at the K point energetically
favorable. At the K point the in-plane strong localized d orbitals of the metal remain
unaﬀected.[30, 33, 34, 35, 36] This results from the fact that the metal atom is in the
center of the unit cell and does not interact with the outer atoms.[12]
Furthermore, the d-orbitals of the transition metals are responsible for the spin orbit
coupling (SOC), resulting from the lack of the center of inversion in the monolayer crystal
structure. The spin orbit coupling leads to the split of the valance and conduction band
at the K point but not at Γ point (ﬁgure 2.2).[30, 37] The magnitude of the valance
band splitting in MoX2 and WX2 is diﬀerent: since Mo is lighter than W , the SOC in
MoX2 is around 150 meV and in WX2 compounds around 450 meV. [31, 33] The splitting
magnitude of the bands at the K point is related to the contribution of diﬀerent atomic
orbitals (d from the metal and p from the chalcogen).[37] Nevertheless, the spin splitting
6
==PAGE:13==
magnitude for the conduction band is negligible with respect to the valance band (7-10%,
down to 2 % for MoS2). The SOC in the conduction band in ﬁrst approximation is not
considered and only dz2 orbitals of the metal contribute to it.[37]
From optical experiments (e.g. absorption spectroscopy) the SOC can be detected by
the energy diﬀerence between A and B excitons.[37, 38] The presence of excitonic eﬀects
in TMDC monolayers is due to the charge conﬁnement and the reduction of dielectric
screening.[38]
2.2
Introduction to electrochemistry
Electrochemistry is the science that deals with the chemical and electrical processes occur-
ring at the interface between an electronic and an ionic conductor, namely the electrode
and the electrolyte. [39]
Metals and semiconductors are typically electronic conductors; liquid solutions are com-
monly used as electrolytes. The ions from the solution react with the electrode surface and
are held at speciﬁc spots. The charge transfer occurring across the electrode/electrolyte
interface generates a current.[39]
From thermodynamics, the chemical potential µi of a certain specie is deﬁned as the
variation of the Gibbs free energy G with respect to the number of that particular species
∂Ni at a ﬁxed pressure and temperature (p,T) (2.1).[39]
µi =
 ∂G
∂Ni

p,T
.
(2.1)
The electrochemical potential follows the same deﬁnition except for the fact that includes
also charged species. The electrochemical potential can be deﬁned both for the electrode
and the electrolyte. When the electrode and the electrolyte are in contact and no external
potential is applied, the two electrochemical potentials adjust because of the exchange
of charges. This leads to a built in potential at the interface once the equilibrium is
reached. The equilibrium potential, E0, is the electrostatic potential of the considered
electrode when all forward and backward reaction processes are in equilibrium and the
overall current across the interface is zero.[39, 40]
Electrons of a metal electrode react with the ions provided by the electrolyte (ion- trans-
fer reaction). An imbalance of charge concentration generate a two-layer distribution of
positive and negative charges at the interface of the electrode and the electrolyte. As a
result, a capacitance forms and it is deﬁned as Electric Double Layer (EDL). The EDL
is responsible for a voltage drop between the electrode and the electrolyte.[39] A diﬀer-
ent consideration must be done for semiconductor electrodes. As for the metal electrode,
when the semiconductor enters in contact with the electrolyte a potential builds in. How-
ever, the electrostatic potential rise from the bending of the valance and conduction band
of the electrode. As a consequence, a surface capacitance can be deﬁned.[39] For both the
metals and the semiconductor electrodes the interface voltage drop aﬀects the experimen-
tal measurements. The time resolution for electrochemical measurements of metallic or
semiconducting electrodes is in the order of milliseconds. Time resolution is so large be-
7
==PAGE:14==
cause during the measurements there is a change in the potential of the electrode thus the
capacitor (from the EDL or from the bands bending) undergoes a charging/discharging
process. The time constant of this capacitor dominates the time response of the whole
system.[39]
In order to determine if a reaction is spontaneous or not, one looks at the standard
Gibbs free energy change of the system deﬁned as [40]:
∆G0 = −nFE0,
(2.2)
where n is the number of electrons exchanged, F is the Faraday constant and E0 is the
equilibrium potential (or open circuit potential) [40]. If ∆G0 ≥0, the chemical reaction
is not spontaneous and additional energy has to be provided to the system.
By tuning the electrode potential one can monitor the reaction rate or change the reaction
direction. [39] In this respect, the overpotential, η, is the potential diﬀerence between the
cell potential, E, and the equilibrium potential E0 (eq. 2.3).
η = E −E0
(2.3)
E is the overall potential that includes all the electrochemical processes that might
occur.[40]
In general, if only one transport specie is involved in the electrochemical reaction it is
possible to correlate the current density to the reaction rate proportionally. Nevertheless,
impurities and defects on the surface of the electrode can aﬀect the reaction rate.
The total exchange current density j at the electrode/electrolyte interface can be seen as
the sum of the anodic and the cathodic currents for the oxidation and reduction processes
respectively [39]:
j = jcathodic + janodic.
(2.4)
The Butler-Volmer model can be used to express the exchange current density j and
assumes an exponential dependence of j on the overpotential η for both the anodic and
cathodic currents [39] (2.3 a)). In formula:
j = j0

exp
αzF
RT η

−exp

−(1 −α)zF
RT
η

,
(2.5)
where j0 is the current density in equilibrium (cathodic and anodic current density are
balanced), α is the transfer coeﬃcient, a unitless parameter that assumes values between
0 and 1, z is the number of electrons involved in the reaction, F is the Faraday constant, R
is the universal gas constant, T is the temperature. [40, 41] Depending on the magnitude
of the overpotential, one can focus on a particular case. If the absolute value of the
overpotential is greater than few hundred mV [41], the Butler-Volmer equation reduce to
the Tafel equation. In this case, the anodic (for η >0) or the cathodic current (for η <0)
8
==PAGE:15==
a)
b)
j 
η  
Anodic current
(oxidation)
Cathodic 
current
(reduction)
0
b
η  
log(|j|) 
0
log(j0) 
Figure 2.3: In a) an exemplary plot of the overpotential vs the current density. In
black the overall current. In blue and red the cathodic and anodic current contribution,
respectively. b) shows an exemplary Tafel plot: log|j| is plotted vs η. ”b” indicates the
Tafel slope estimated from the linear ﬁt (green dotted line) of the Tafel plot.
dominate over the other current contribution.[39] The explicit formula result in [18]:
log(|j|) = log(j0) −η
b .
(2.6)
In the Tafel equation (2.6) the coeﬃcient b is known as Tafel slope, η is the overpotential
and j0 is the current density in equilibrium.[18]
The corresponding Tafel plot is obtained by plotting log(|j|) vs η. An example of Tafel
plot is reported in 2.3 b).
One can extract the transfer coeﬃcient α from the slope of the curve and the exchanged
current density j0 from the intercept.[39]
2.2.1
Electrochemical cell
The electrochemical reactions take place in an electrochemical cell. The cells are classiﬁed
as galvanic, if the elctrochemical reaction are spontaneous, or electrolytic, if the reactions
are driven from an external source of energy.[40] The electrochemical cell used in this
project is electrolytic and it consists of three diﬀerent electrodes named in agreement of
their function: the counter electrode (CE), the reference electrode (RE) and the working
electrode (WE).
At the WE the studied reaction take place, while the RE keeps a stable potential during
the experimental process.
In this way, during the measurements, the WE is always
referred to the RE. It is extremely important to mention that no current ﬂows between the
WE and the RE.[39] In particular, the ideal reference electrode is the Normal Hydrogen
Electrode (NHE) which is deﬁned to be 0 V. Practically, the WE is always referred to the
NHE to determine its absolute potential.[40, 42] The pH of the media in which the HER
takes place is crucial for the deﬁnition of the RE potential: in fact, the RE potential
9
==PAGE:16==
linearly depends on the pH. In formula [43]:
EH+/H2 = ENHE + 2.303RT
F
pH,
(2.7)
where EH+/H2 is deﬁned as the reversible potential of the Reverse Hydrogen Electrode
(RHE), ENHE is the standard potential, R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, F is
the Faraday constant and lastly the pH of the media.[43] For this project we employ 1M of
sulfuric acid as electrolyte, thus the pH is zero and the potential for RHE coincide with the
potential of NHE. The third electrode, the CE, is needed to run the current through the
system and close the circuit.[39] In order to explain the exact function of this electrode,
we should mention that two kind of currents are present in an electrochemical reaction:
faradaic and non-faradaic current. Faradaic current originates from the redox processes
in the cell, while all the other currents are deﬁned as non-faradaic and they can be well
described by Ohm’s law. At the electrode/electrolyte interface a double layer originates
when an external potential is applied. The double layer acts as a capacitor and a non-
faradaic current is driven in the cell. By measuring the potential between the counter
and the working electrode, a voltage drop given by Ohm’s law is present:
V = inf · Rs
(2.8)
where Rs is the solution resistence and inf is the non-faradaic current in the system. If
this voltage drop V is higher than 2 mV, than a three electrodes conﬁguaration is needed
in order to keep the voltage drop as small as possible. CE is practically used to drive
away excess current from the the RE and allows the greater part of the current to ﬂow
between the working an the counter electrode.[40] For this purpose, CE is chosen so that
do not take part to the redox processes and ensure a current ﬂow with the minimum
resistance. For this reason a platinum wire is commonly used as CE.[39]
In our results we do not distinguish the two kind of currents and we consider the overall
current as a result of faradaic mechanism.
2.3
Photocatalysis towards water splitting
In general, a catalyst is a material that improves the reaction rate without altering
the standard Gibbs free energy change of the reaction.
Therefore, a catalyst aﬀects
only the kinetic of a reaction , not the thermodynamics.
A catalyst is employed to
lower the activation energy of certain reaction processes.[44, 45] Catalysis is an iterative
process: ﬁrst the reacting species adsorbe at the catalyst. The adsorbed species react
and generate a product. Lastly, the adsorbed product leaves the catalyst (desorb) and a
new cycle starts.[44] Catalysis is classiﬁed as homogeneous if only one phase is involved or
heterogeneous if the reaction occurs at the interface of two diﬀerent phases.[45] Catalysts
are extremely important in biology but also in industrial application.[44] In this regard,
using catalysts improves the eﬃciency of the chemical reaction from diﬀerent points of
view: ﬁrst, the quantity of unwanted products from the chemical reactions remain the
10
==PAGE:17==
same even if the overall reaction throughput is enhanced. Secondly, using catalyst allows
to work at moderate temperature and pressure conditions, lowering the cost of industrial
production.[44]
During the last few decades it has been started to look at the hydrogen production as a
very promising element to storage energy from renewable and solar energy: electrolysis of
water, also referred to as water splitting, is considered to be a valid solution since it allows
to produce hydrogen and oxygen from water without producing carbon dioxide.[4, 5].
Water splitting can be accomplished through photocalysis using a semiconductor material
as catalyst.
Ideally, the water splitting process is based on a heterogeneous catalysis in which charge
carries of a semiconductor material are excited by the absorption of sunlight without any
other external energy supply.[6] The eﬀectiveness of the process is related to the band gap
of the catalysts involved: the theoretical redox potential for the water splitting is ∼1.23
eV. In terms of wavelength, it is in the near infrared region (∼1 µm) and therefore the
visible spectrum of light can be used to promote this reaction. Accordingly, the band
gap of the catalyst must be consistent with redox potential. Indeed, the bandgap should
exceed 1.23 eV, since other processes take place during the redox reaction which requires
additional energy.[46] The photocalytic water splitting process can be divided into three
steps [4, 5]:
1. The electrons of the semiconducting catalyst are excited by photons with energy
greater than the band gap and excitons are generated.
2. The electron-hole pairs recombine or migrate to the surface where they participate
to the next step.
3. Two process can occur at the interface: H+ ions from the solution react with the
electrons on the surface of catalyst and diatomic hydrogen molecules form or the
water react with the holes and is oxidized. The former process is called Hydrogen
Evolution Reaction (HER), while the latter is termed Oxygen Evolution Reaction
(OER). In formula[6]:
(a) HER
2H+ + 2e−→H2
(b) OER
H2O →2H+ + 1
2O2 + 2e−
A sketch of the photocatalytic water splitting is depicted in ﬁgure 2.4.
In this project we focus on the hydrogen production as it is considered a valuable and
environmentally friendly method to store energy.[4, 5]
Three diﬀerent reaction steps contribute to the overall HER in acidic media [47]:
1. Volmer step: H+
(aq) + e−→Had
2. Tafel step: 2Had →H2,ad
3. Heyrowsky step: H+
(aq) + Had + e−→H2,ad
11
==PAGE:18==
hν>Eg
H2O
O2
e-
h+
H+
H2
Recombination
3
3
2
2
1
Catalyst particle
h+
e-
E vs NHE  (V)
hν
VB
CB
0.00 
Eox
H+/H2
O2/H2O
Ered
1.23
Eg=1.9 eV
Figure 2.4: On the left hand side, the electronic band of the semiconductor catalyst are
shown: the red arrow indicate an incoming photon with energy greater than the energy gap
of the catalyst that excites one electron from the valance band thus creating an electron-
hole pair. The electron and the hole will participate respectively to the HER and OER.
Reduction and oxidation potential are reported inside the band gap as required for the
reaction to occur. On the right hand side a more pictorial representation of the process.
Number 1 to 3 refers to the three steps mentioned. Adapted from [5]
The Volmer step (1), consists of the adsorption of a proton and its subsequent reduction
on the electrode surface. After that, two possible competitive mechanisms can occur: the
Tafel step (2), in which two hydrogen atoms react and then desorb from the electrode
surface as diatomic hydrogen molecule; the Heyrowsky step (3) in which, instead, one
proton from the electrolyte reacts with an adsorbed hydrogen and an electron from the
electrode surface, forming again a hydrogen molecule.[47] If the Hydrogen binds to the
surface too strongly the desorption (either Tafel or Heyrovsky step) will be the limiting
step. On the other hand, if the bond is too weak the adsorption (Volmer) step limits the
reaction.[48]
A simple yet immediate way to determine which materials are good catalysts or not is
to correlate the HER kinetics and the thermodynamic of the system through a basic graph
known as volcano plot. The volcano plot displays the Gibbs free-energy for the hydrogen
adsorption (∆Gad) vs the current density at equilibrium, deﬁned above as j0, for diﬀerent
materials (ﬁgure 2.5). The catalysis process is based on an adsorption mechanism (Volmer
step). In order to be an eﬀective active catalyst for HER, the catalyst should be able
to create a bond with hydrogen strong enough for the reduction process to take place
but also suﬃciently weak to release the hydrogen from the surface after the reaction. In
terms of ∆Gad, it should be as close as possible to zero.[6, 7, 49] Giving a closer look
at it, one sees that the best material in this sense is platinum, but it is an extremely
expensive material.[6, 7] On the other hand, MoS2 presents an exchange current density
at the equilibrium that is two order of magnitude lower than platinum, but the ∆Gad
is almost zero. In addition, MoS2 is a cheap and earth abundant material. For these
reasons, MoS2 is a good candidate as a catalyst for the HER.[6]
In this project TMDC materials with suitable band gap for the water splitting were
selected.
In ﬁgure 2.6 the energy band gaps for diﬀerent TMDCs are sketched with
respect to the energy level for HER (H+/H2) and OER (O2/H2O) at pH=0 and pH=7
12
==PAGE:19==
-0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
10-9
10-8
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
j0 (A cm-2)
GH (eV)
Pt
Re
Co
Rh
Ir
Pt(111)
Ni
Pd
W
Nb
Mo
MoS2
Cu
Au
Au(111)
Ag
Figure 2.5: The volcano plot. It reports the Gibbs free-energy for the hydrogen adsorp-
tion (∆Gad) vs the current density at equilibrium of diﬀerent materials. Platinum shows
the highest current density and it places very close to ∆Gad=0. MoS2 current density is
almost two orders of magnitude lower than Platinum but it has an adsorption free energy
very close to zero. Adapted from [13].
of the reaction environment.
As it can be seen from ﬁgure 2.6, MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 present suitable band gap
for water splitting at pH=0. According to this, the water splitting reaction with these
materials as catalysts should succeed without an external potential applied.[50]
2.3.1
MoS2 as photocatalyst
In order to boost the (photo)catalytic activity of MoS2, two main ideas were followed.
Firstly, we fabricate heterostructures with diﬀerent energy band gap materials. In ﬁgure
2.6 the band alignment for the adopted TMDCs are sketched: the band gaps suit the redox
potential for the water splitting process; furthermore, the heterostructures produced by
vertical stacking of single monolayers shows a type-II band alignment.
The other concept applied in this project consists in maximizing the density of the active
sites on the single TMDC monolayers by creating sulfur vacancies.
These two approaches are explained in more detail in the following sections.
2.3.1.1
Heterostructures
Consequently from the advent of two-dimensional materials, it arose the idea of com-
bining two or more monolayers in order to create new structures which characteristics
can be engineered by the appropriate choice of the constituent materials.[8] Single mono-
layers can be arranged on the same plane, one next to each other, or stacked one on
top of each other. The resulting arrays are named lateral and vertical heterostructure,
respectively.[51] Van der Waals heterostructures made of two-dimensional materials con-
nected by van der Waals bonds, present diﬀerent properties with respect to the traditional
13
==PAGE:20==
Energy level (eV)
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
pH=7
O2/H2O
pH=0
pH=0
pH=7
H+/H2
MoS2
MoSe2
WSe2
Figure 2.6: Band gaps and band alignment for TMDCs materials.The HER and OER
redox potentials for acid (pH=0) and neutral (pH=7) environments are reported in red
and blue dotted lines respectively. Adapted from [50].
bulk semiconductor heterostructures. Each monolayer acts at the same time as bulk and
interface and by that it reduces the charge displacement between the single layers.[38]
Vertical stacking of TMDC monolayers is facilitated by the fact that they present sharp
interfaces and no dangling bonds on the surface.
Furthermore, the mismatch among
TMDC lattice constants is very small (the lattice constants for MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2
are all around 3 Å), generating only small strain eﬀect in the resulting structures [31, 52].
As reported in section 2.1.2, bulk materials are usually indirect semiconductor. Bilayer-
heterostructeres made of diﬀerent two-dimensional materials, e.g.
MoX2 and WX2,
show instead a dominant direct band gap at the K point as in the monolayer case.[53]
The band gap of the heterostructure is found to be reduced with respect to the single
monolayers.[53, 54] By changing the orientation of the layers with respect to each other
or by changing the stacked materials one can create more favorable energetics.[53]
The alteration of the electronic structure is consequently ruled by the kind of materials
and their orientation in the stacking process. This allows one to optimize the kinetics in
the electrocatalytic processes. [8, 55] The band oﬀset at the interface of two monolayers
is an important feature in heterostructures since it inﬂuences the chemical activity.[17]
Monolayer MoS2 and WSe2 have diﬀerent work function: the conduction band minimum
and valance band maximum of WSe2 (made of 5 d-orbitals) are located at higher energies
than those of MoS2 (made of 4 d-orbitals) as shown in ﬁgure 2.6. This allows to create a
van der Waals heterostructure in which MoS2 and WSe2 are intrinsically n-type and p-type
materials respectively, leading to a type II semiconducting band alignment.[15, 16, 17]
The charge carries separate as a result of the type II band alignment.[15, 16] Fur-
thermore, an interlayer excitons might form by photon excitation of the electrons from
the valance to the conduction band. The binding energy of the indirect excitons can be
tuned by changing the distance between the layers.[38, 54]
14
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.7: Pictorial representation of hydrogen adsorption from sulfur vacancy in
MoS2 monolayer. In violet, yellow, turquoise and orange-dotted are respectively the molyb-
denum, the sulfur, the hydrogen and the sulfur vacancy. Hydrogen set in the sulfur va-
cancy, get reduced and then desorb for a new reaction to occur. This is is possible if
hydrogen does not create too strong bond with substrate, i.e. the adsorption free energy
is close to zero. The upper part shows the top view and the lower the side view of MoS2
monolayer. Adapted from [56]
2.3.1.2
Defects
MoS2 monolayers among the other TMDC are the most prominent catalysts for the Hy-
drogen Evolution Reaction (HER) that could be exploited for clean energy storage.[56]
During the natural formation of MoS2, the mineral has to release more sulfur than molyb-
denum atoms in the gas phase due to the thermodynamic conditions. This mechanism is
responsible for the intrinsic presence of sulfur vacancies in natural MoS2.[57] Furthermore,
the theoretical value of the formation energy of sulfur vacancies is the lowest among the
energies required for the generation of other kind of defects, such as anti-site defects or
molybdenum vacancies.[57]
Koh et al. and Hong et al. estimated the formation energies for sulfur and molybdenum
vacancies. The energy required to remove the chalcogen atom is around 2 eV against
the 5-7 eV needed to remove the transition metal. These results indicate that sulfur
vacancies are more prone to form then molybdenum vacancies in mechanical exfoliated
MoS2.[57, 58] However, MoS2 presents active edge sites and an inert basal plane, limiting
the reaction outcome.[10, 18]
One way to bypass this restriction and improve the activity of the MoS2 is to dope it by
creating sulfur vacancies.[18, 59] As explained in section 2.3, the ideal value of ∆Gad is
zero, reﬂecting the hydrogen is bonded to the surface neither too weak nor too strong and
the reaction can fully take place. For the basal plane of MoS2 the ∆Gad is around 2 eV,
indicating that it is inert.[56] But as reported by Li et al. work, the adsorption free en-
ergy decrease consistently by introducing sulfur vacancies.[56] Considering the electronic
structure of MoS2, new bands start to appear in the energy gap by introducing sulfur
15
==PAGE:22==
vacancies. The in-gap states close to the Fermi energy of the MoS2 allow the hydrogen
to be adsorbed at the sulfur vacancy sites. By increasing the density of the defects, the
number of the gap states increases as well and the states get closer to the Fermi level.[56]
Defects can be introduced by several techniques, e.g. thermal annealing, chemical func-
tionalization, plasma treatment and ion irradiation.[60] The latter was adopted during
this project. In previous works it has been reported both the employment of light ions,
such as Ar+ ion [60], and heavy ions, like Au+ [61], to treat MoS2 monolayers. In this
thesis He+ ions were used to induce sulfur vacancies by using a Helium Ion Microscope
(HIM). The details of the ion treatment will be discussed in section 3.5
16
==PAGE:23==
3
|
Instrumentations and techniques
This section will present the techniques used to fabricate and characterize the samples.
First we present the sample fabrication. Afterwards, we discuss the two methods we
used for a pre-characterization of the samples: Raman and Photoluminescence (PL)
spectroscopy.
Subsequently we present the functioning of Helium Ion Microscope (HIM) which we used
to introduce sulfur vacancies in a controlled way.
Lastly we present the Cyclic Voltammetry (CV), an electrochemistry technique which
was used to estimate the catalytic activity of the samples.
3.1
Sample fabrication
The production of 2D materials include several techniques that can be grouped into
two fabrication methods: top-down (e.g. micromechanical cleavage, liquid exfoliation)
and bottom-up approach (e.g. Van der Waals epitaxy and Chemical Vapor Deposition
(CVD)).[25] The latter techniques are scalable and provide controlled-size monolayer
structures but they are rather expensive. On the other hand, methods as micromechanical
exfoliation allows to get high-quality monolayer ﬂakes. This technique cannot provide
large-scale production: the size and thickness of the produced ﬂakes cannot be predicted
and typically the dimensions are in the range of µm. [12, 25] The details will be explain
in the next section.
3.1.1
Micromechanical exfoliation and viscoelastic stamp
The ﬁrst step in the sample fabrication is preparing the substrates which support the
analyzed monolayers and heterostructures. We employ a n-type silicon (100) wafer with
a thermal oxide layer of 285 nm thick to prepare the substrates. Each single substrate is
obtained by cleaving the wafer into square items of around 7 mm x 7 mm.
We perform UV lithography in order to pattern the desired feature for the electrical
contacts. Subsequently we evaporate 3 nm of Titanium and 12 nm of gold to develop
the electric contacts necessary for the electrochemistry measurements of the analyzed
structure (monolayer or heterostructure). Gold is well know to be an excellent electric
conductor [62], but it is also an active catalyst. In fact, looking at the ﬁgure 2.5 of the
volcano plot, gold places close to MoS2 (although it has a higher adsorption free energy).
Aware of these properties, we decide to design an ”H” shaped gold contact. A thin bridge
17
==PAGE:24==
SiO2
Scrintec
SiO2
TMDC
Au/Ti
TMDC
Ti/Au
a)
b)
c)
Figure 3.1: The ﬁgures a) and c) represent the ﬁnal vision of the sample. The ﬁgures
are not in scale. a) shows the top view of the sample. The SiO2 substrate is the blue
region, while the Au contacts are reported in pink (as it appears on the optical microscope
image); the thickness of Au is 12 nm and Ti is 3 nm. The Ti layer is not reported in the
picture but it is extremely important to improve the adhesion of the Au layer on the SiO2
substrate. In b) a zoom-in shows the TMDC monolayer (1L) or heterostructure (ML) in
turquoise on the Au stripe. c) represents the side view of the sample. The same colours
used in a) are here adopted to indicate the TMDC, the Au and the SiO2; the Scrintec layer
used to cover the contacts (not showed in the top-view) is indicated in red. Scrintec layer
allows to delimited the area of reaction to the 1L/ML and reducing the Au contribution
to the catalysis.
of 1000 × 10 µm connect the two large rectangular gold areas at the edges of the sub-
strate (ﬁgure 3.1). The bridge presents a small width in order to minimize the potential
contribution of gold to the catalysis process. We realize two edge contacts in case one of
the two is malfunctioning.
After the realization of the substrates we perform a micromecanical exfoliation to pro-
duce the single monolayers of TMDCs.
The bulk crystal of the required TMDC iss
exfoliated by using a common scotch tape. Subsequently, we proceed with a viscoelas-
tic stamping.[63] The stamp is made of a polymer material called Polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) placed on a glass support. The exfoliated material on the scotch tape is then
transferred on the PDMS just by pressing the two supports together. Afterwards, we
perform an accurate research through the optical microscope to ﬁnd the single monolayer
structures on the stamp. Single monolayers are distinguished by their optical contrast.
Once we have found the monolayer ﬂakes with suitable size, we transfer them on the gold
contact of the substrate. This step is performed with a double-stage microscope: the top
stage provides a holder for the glass-PDMS stamp, while the bottom stage supports the
substrate. The top stage can move in the x-y-z directions to center the ﬂake under the
objective. The bottom stage can move in the three directions as well, but it could also
rotate in order to align the substrate with the ﬂake. The bottom stage can be heated
in order to facilitate the transfer process. To complete the realization of the sample, we
perform an overnight cleaning in acetone in order to remove PDMS residuals that could
remain on the sample and hence interfere with the subsequent measurements.
The whole procedure is implemented twice to produce heterostructures: once the ﬁrst
layer is transferred on the substrate, the second ﬂake is transferred (as described above)
on top of the ﬁrst layer, oriented in the desired way. Finally, we let the structure once
18
==PAGE:25==
z
x
y
Rotating stage
Substrate
Objective
PDMS on glass
TMDC flake
Figure 3.2: The microscope set up for the transfer of the monolayers on the substrate.
From the top: the objective with 10x magniﬁcation allows to detect the TMDCs ﬂake
on the PDMS. The PDMS is placed on a glass support and ﬁxed on the top stage of the
microscope. The substrate is positioned on the bottom stage. The top and stages can move
along the x-y-z directions. The bottom stage can also rotate and be heated. By adjusting
the stage it is possible to align the monolayer and the substrate.
again in acetone overnight to remove the PDMS residuals.
We perform rapid thermal annealing at around 300 ◦C for two hours in order to improve
the adhesion between the layers. In all the heterostructure produced in this project the
MoS2 was positioned on top of the WSe2. Once we successfully transferred the structure,
we deposit a layer of Scrintec RT-V1 (a silicone paste) all around the monolayer ﬂake or
heterostructure. This last step is important in order to reduce the exposed gold surface
to the electrolyte to the minimum and improve the adhesion of the sample to the open
window in the electrochemical cell.
3.2
Characterization
3.2.1
Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy is a useful tool to characterize materials without destroying them.[31]
Raman scattering refers to an inelastic scattering of light by phonons in solids.[64] The in-
elastic scattering process involve two steps: the incident photon is annealed and a second
scattered photon is generated.[64] With Raman spectroscopy one detects the frequency
shift of the scattered photons with respect to the incident photon.[65] This deviation
is directly connected to the energy of a certain vibrational transition. The spectrum is
achieved by exposing the material to a monochromatic light (a laser) that provides pho-
tons at higher energies than the fundamental vibrations of the sample, and consequently
measuring the intensity of the scattered light at the diﬀerent frequencies.[65] If the fre-
quency of the scattered photon is greater than the incident photon we refer to as a Stokes
process. Vice versa, the process is referred to as anti-Stokes.[64] Raman spectroscopy
19
==PAGE:26==
 Mo,W
S, Se
E1g
A1g
E2g
1
2
E2g
Figure 3.3: Raman modes for MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2. Adapted from [66]
provides a unique ﬁngerprint for each material, since the spectra of diﬀerent materials
present peaks at diﬀerent wavelengths. These peaks correspond to the active Raman
modes of a particular group of symmetry.
As mentioned in section 2.1.1, the group of symmetry for trigonal prismatic TMDC mono-
layers is D3h and the only Raman active modes are A1 from dz2 orbitals (out of plane)
and E′ from the hybridization of dxy and dx2−y2 orbitals (in plane). For bulk TMDCs
the group is D6h and the corresponding modes are A1g and E1
2g.[12, 37] Furthermore, the
E1
2g mode and the A1g mode are sensitive to the strain and to the doping respectively.[60]
TMDCs present other two vibrational modes ( E2
2g and E1g) but they are not Raman
active. From literature it is known that Raman spectroscopy is an eﬃcient technique to
determine the exact number of layers of a crystal.[25] In fact, the E1
2g mode undergoes
to a red-shift and A1g mode to a blue-shift by increasing the number of the layers. The
energy diﬀerence between the two modes determines the number of layers.[25]
The symmetry of the diﬀerent modes is reported in ﬁgure 3.3.
The Raman spectra for MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 monolayers on SiO2 substrates at
room temperature are displayed in ﬁgure 3.4. The measurements are taken with a KrAr
laser of λ=488 nm, a power of 100 mW and the integration time set to 60 s.
The positions of the active modes for single monolayers are reported in terms of rel. cm−1
in table 3.1 for the sake of the reader.
As shown in ﬁgure 3.4, WSe2 presents a degenerated peak for the A1 and E’ modes
at 248.3 rel cm−1. The A1 and E’ modes of MoS2 present a energy diﬀerence of 18.2
cm−1; MoSe2 presents the A1 at 240.5 cm−1. These values are in good agreement with
the previous literature, proving that these structures are monolayers [16, 66].
Photoluminescence is another well known technique to characterize semiconductors
based on the absorption and emission of photons. Like Raman spectroscopy, each material
presents unique spectrum. The setup is similar to the one used for Raman spectroscopy
20
==PAGE:27==
Intensity (a.u.)
1.2
0.8
0.4
0230 240 250 260 270
390 400 410 230 235 240 245 250
380
Raman shift (rel. cm-1)
WSe2
MoS2
MoSe2
A1
A1
E', A1
E'
Figure 3.4: Raman spectra for WSe2, MoS2 and MoSe2 monolayers on SiO2. E’ and
A1 modes are clearly visible for MoS2. E’ and A1 modes are degenerated in the WSe2
spectrum. Only the A1 mode is visible for MoSe2. For the sake of the reader the position
of the peaks in rel. cm−1 are reported in 3.1. The spectra are taken at ambient conditions
with a KrAr laser of λ=488 nm, a power of 100 mW and an integration time of 60 s.
Material
E’
A1
(rel. cm−1)
(rel. cm−1)
WSe2
248.3
248.3
MoS2
384.0
402.2
MoSe2
240.5
-
Table 3.1: Position in terms of rel. cm−1 of Raman active modes for WSe2, MoS2
and MoSe2 monolayers on SiO2.
.
but the measured quantity is diﬀerent.
The sample is illuminated with a laser that
provides photons with enough energy to excite the electrons to the conduction band.
Electrons then relax to lower energy states and ﬁnally to the valance band, emitting
photons at lower energies. A fraction of the photons is collected by a spectrometer and
the spectrum is recorded by a CCD array.[19] For the photoluminescence spectra of this
thesis we employ a KrAr laser of λ=488 nm, a power of 100 mW and we set an integration
time of 30 s length. Figure 3.5 shows the spectra for the single monolayers of MoS2, MoSe2
and WSe2 on SiO2 at ambient conditions. The energy position of the peaks are in good
agreement with previous works ([66, 67]): MoS2 present the maximum emission peak at
1.84 eV, MoSe2 at 1.56 eV and WSe2 around 1.64 eV.
All results for Raman and photoluminescence spectra reported in chapter 4 are ob-
tained by applying the same parameters for Raman and photoluminescence spectra re-
ported above.
3.3
Electrochemical cell architecture
As discussed in section 2.2, one of the most common techniques used to characterize the
electrocatalytic activity of a material is cyclic voltammetry. An electrochemical cell is
needed in order to perform the measurements and a pictorial representation of it is given
21
==PAGE:28==
Intensity (a.u.)
MoS2
WSe2
MoSe2
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
2.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Energy (eV)
Figure 3.5: Photoluminescence spectra for MoSe2, WSe2 and MoS2 in green, red and
blue respectively. We recorded the spectra for 15 s with KrAr laser of λ=488 nm. The
applied intensity is approximately 100 mW.
in ﬁgure 3.6.
The cell is made of Polytetraﬂuoroethylene (commonly termed Teﬂon)
in order to resist to the acid used as electrolyte [68]. The electrolyte used in all the
experiments of this thesis is 1M of H2SO4.
The top of the cell is closed by a lid that presents holes to insert the RE, CE and the
inlet for the nitrogen gas. Moreover, the lid permits to ﬁll the cell with the electrolyte
and prevents unwanted contamination from the external environment.
The cell presents a window ﬁxed with Scrintec (a silicon rubber represented as a red circle
in ﬁgure 3.6). The window allows to illuminate the sample (WE) placed on the opposite
side of the cell. In order to get more information about the transmission behavior of
the glass window, we took a spectrum of a white light/Xe/Hg arc lamp with a hand
spectrometer with and without glass in the optical path. Notably the glass does not
change the light spectrum (compare ﬁgure B.1 in the appendix). Only the intensity is
reduced by a factor of two.
In order to simulate the sun radiation, which has a power density of around 1.3 kW
m−2 on the surface of the earth [69], we adopt two diﬀerent light sources: a broadband
whitelight/Xe/Hg arc lamp and a monochromatic KrAr laser (λ = 488 nm). Due to
the diﬀerent natures of the employed light sources, we use them for diﬀerent types of
experiments. All optics in the used setup are optimized for the use of monochromatic
laser light with a wavelength of 488 nm. Thus, the light can be focused to very small
spot with a diameter of approximately 0.7 µm under ambient conditions, and around
2 µm in the electrolyte. Consequently, in combination with CV, the laser allows us to
probe the local photocatalytic response of the sample with a high spatial resolution. In
contrast, the spot size of the broadband white light source is limited by the used optics.
Consequently, under white light illumination, the whole WE is illuminated and the overall
photocatalytic response of the sample is studied.
In this project we use a Ag/AgCl, 3,5 M KCl reference electrode with a potential of 0.204
V vs RHE. The RE electrode presents a salt bridge in order to prevent contamination in
22
==PAGE:29==
WE
N2 
CE
RE
Glass
Electrolyte
Figure 3.6: Sketch of the electrochemical cell. From the left: nitrogen gas bubbling; the
WE is the substrate on which the monolayer/heterostructure is placed and back-gated with
silver paint (in red the Scrintec used to cover the gold contacts); the CE is a platinum
wire used to close the circuit. We Ag/AgCl 3.5 M KCl RE with a potential of 0.204 V vs
RHE. All three elctrodes are connected to the potentionstat (not reported in this ﬁgure).
The glass window is ﬁxed on the cell with Scrintec (red circle); the electrolyte is 1 M of
H2SO4.
the event of leakage. The CE is a platinum (Pt) wire. From literature, a large amount
of HER measurements employs Pt as counter electrode material since it is a metal and
it is inert against oxidization. However, during the measurement of HER, Pt inevitably
dissolves and deposits on the catalyst (WE), in particular in acid media [70]. However,
from previous XPS studies after cyclic voltammetry with our conﬁguration show that the
Platinum amount on the WE is negligible.[71]
The three electrodes are connected to the potentiostat SP-200 from BioLogic Science
Instrument, which provides the potential necessary to run the CV measurement. During
the measurement, we perform a nitrogen gas bubbling (as also reported from Kissinger
et al.) in order to remove oxygen from the solution [72]. After each HER measurement,
we clean the cell with a Piranha solution (H2SO4 + H2O2) and we use a fresh electrolyte
in order to avoid the alteration of the HER results.
3.4
Cyclic voltammetry
In order to characterize the reaction processes running in the electrochemical cell, sev-
eral methods exist: in general they can be classiﬁed into potential, current and charge
controlled or impedance techniques.[40] In this project we use cyclic voltammetry (CV),
a controlled potential sweep method run in a stationary condition [40]. CV technique
23
==PAGE:30==
consists in the application of a linear sweep potential with a triangular waveform between
the WE and CE, provided by an external source: the potentiostat. The resulting current
between the WE and CE is measured and plot versus the applied potential η which is
referred to the RHE. The shape of the cyclic voltammogram depends on the interaction
of the diﬀusion and the charge transfer.[39] In this regard, an important parameter in the
CV technique is the scan rate, that is deﬁne as ν =
  ∂E
∂t

. It indicates the scan speed of
the applied potential during one cycle.[73] If the scan rate is too fast, the charging of the
double layer aﬀects substantially the current, thereby distorting the real outcome of the
measurement. Since there is not a unique way to estimate the activity of a catalyst, some
standard parameters are deﬁned in literature in order to make possible a comparison
between materials.
Cyclic voltammetry oﬀers a good starting point to analyze the activity of diﬀerent cat-
alyst, but the measured current depends on diﬀerent factors such as the size and the
composition of the catalyst. In order to interpret the results from the cyclic voltammo-
gram is useful to deﬁne some metrics.
The very ﬁrst evaluation technique one can use is normalizing the current to the area of
the catalyst. The current density versus potential plot alone though is not suﬃcient for
an exhaustive interpretation of the results.
One step further implies considering the onset potential and the Tafel slope.
The onset potential is generally deﬁned as the potential at which the reaction begins
and the current starts to increase. Itself it would not give a precise parameter for the
activity of the catalyst since it has not a speciﬁc deﬁnition. Thus the onset potential is
usually referred to a speciﬁc current density. In particular, for the HER a common ﬁgure
of merit in water splitting literature is 10 mA cm−2: this value gives 12.3% of eﬃciency
for solar/hydrogen conversion and this level ensures hydrogen production at competitive
costs with fossil fuels.[6, 74, 75, 76]
The Tafel slope instead indicates the additional potential necessary to enhance the
current of the catalyst by one order of magnitude. The Tafel slopes are reported in mV
dec−1.[6] Practically the measure of the slope suggests which step is rate limiting in HER:
for each step of HER (described in 2.3) the Tafel slopes have been estimated from Li et
al. work [47] and are hereafter reported:
1. bV olmer = 2.3RT
αF
≈120mV
2. bTafel =
2.3RT
(1+α)F ≈40mV
3. bHeyrovsky = 2.3RT
2F
≈30mV
where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, F is the Faraday constant and α ≈0.5
is the symmetry coeﬃcient.[47] Referring to this values, by ﬁtting the result from CV
with the Tafel equation reported in 2.6, one can estimate if either the Volmer-Tafel or
the Volmer-Heyrovsky mechanism is limiting the rate of the process.[47] In general the
overpotential needed to reach a set current density (deﬁned by Tafel slope along with the
onset potential) should be as small as possible in order to have an eﬃcient HER, thus
the Tafel slope is preferred to be small.[6]
24
==PAGE:31==
Trimer
Gun
He gas
Ion beam
Scanning 
deflectors
Final lens
Aperture
Focus
Sample
E-T detector
Figure 3.7: HIM structure: on top of the column the He gas ﬂows on the Trimer
formed by applying a high electric ﬁeld; the ion beam is aligned and driven through the
microscope columun by the aperture, quadrupole and octupole deﬂectors and electrostatic
lenses; at the bottom of the column the sample is placed as well as the secondary electron
detector (Everhart-Thornley detector). Adapted from [79].
3.5
Helium ion microscopy
The Helium Ion Microscope (HIM) is a particular microscope that exploits helium ions
to scan and detect sub-nanometric features. It also allows to pattern speciﬁc structures
on a sample when exposed to the ions.[77, 78] As an example, in the work of Bell et
al., they report the use of a HIM for helium ion lithography on graphene obtaining very
sharp edges with minor damages where the sample has been cut.[79] Furthermore, as well
as providing the surface topology of the sample, HIM could also give information about
chemical composition, conductivity and grain structure.[80] The working principle of the
microscope is very close to the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), although it oﬀers
diﬀerent advantages. First of all, the HIM can image non-conductive samples (with the
due precautions), giving its diﬀerent charged particle source. [78] Secondly, the helium
ions show a higher penetration depth and narrower excitation volume, interacting for
longer paths underneath the sample surface and generating more secondary electrons.
The higher the number of secondary electrons that are collected at the detector, the
higher the resolution of the acquired image.[77] The structure of HIM is schematically
depicted in ﬁgure 3.7.
The working principle of this microscope can be divided in three stages[78]: ﬁrst he-
lium must be ionized. In order to do so, a sharp metallic emitter (typically tungsten), is
placed on the top part of the microscope column.[77, 81] The emitter is shaped in-situ
by applying a high electric ﬁeld at its apex that removes weakly bound atoms on top of
it.[77, 78, 81] By controlling it, a pyramidal tip can be developed, made of only three
atoms: the trimer. Once this stable conﬁguration is achieved, the trimer is kept at cryo-
25
==PAGE:32==
genic temperature and high vacuum while helium gas ﬂows around it.[81] This kind of
ion source is known as Gas Field Ion Source (GFIS). The helium atoms are attracted to
the emitter tip and ionized by applying negative high voltage.[81] On the second stage,
the produced ion beam is accelerated and focused to the sample through the aperture
at the top of the microscope column to the sample by a sequence of electrostatic lenses,
quadrupole and octopole deﬂectors. Lastly, a 30 keV beam interacts with the sample:
the ion beam scatters with the nuclei of the substrate atoms by Rutherford scattering
process.[77] This scattering process is yet eﬀective only after few nanometers from the
sample surface. This ensures a sharp and deep interaction volume.[78] For the imaging,
a secondary electron detector is placed close to the sample and the number of collected
electrons deﬁne the grey scale of a certain pixel [81].
Beyond the imaging, the HIM can be also exploited for materials modiﬁcation, in partic-
ular for defect engineering.[78] This path is explained in more detail in the next section.
3.5.1
Defect engineering
There are many approaches to improve the activity of 2D photocatalysts towards HER.
Among them there are doping with substitutional heteroatoms and defects engineering.[48]
In particular this section gives an insight to the practical approach to the induced sulfur
vacancies in a MoS2 monolayer. Selective removing of sulfur atoms in MoS2 is possible
since sulfur presents a lower displacement threshold energy with respect to molybdenum.
From literature it is known that the the ion bombardment technique provides a direct
interaction between ions with a kinetic energy of few tens of keV and the sample atoms.
This leads to the formation of sulfur vacancies.[18] A collision cascade does not occur in
two dimensional materials [18], therefore, helium ion sputtering is a convenient method
for our purpose since it allows to introduce defects in a controlled manner. Quantita-
tively, it is possible to estimate the interdefect distance LD deﬁned by Mignuzzi et al.
as:
LD =
1
√σ
(3.1)
In equation 3.1, σ is the ion density used for the treatment and deﬁned as:
σ = it
Ae
(3.2)
where i is the beam current, t is the exposure time, A is the exposed area and e is
the electron charge.[82] Mignuzzi et al. conducted a study on defect engineering with
manganese ions. In order to account for the diﬀerent nature of the helium ions, Klein et
al. suggest a correction to the equation 3.3 that results in
LDHe+ =
1
q
YHe+
YMn+ σHe+
,
(3.3)
where YHe+ and YMn+ are respectively the sputtering yields for the helium and manganese
ions.[59] In order to estimate the sputtering yields for the manganese and the helium
ions, a simulation with the TRIM software was run.[59] The TRIM software is based on
26
==PAGE:33==
the Monte Carlo simulation and it evaluates the interaction between energetic ions and
a substrate.[83] In particular, in the considered sample, the MoS2 monolayer is placed
across two diﬀerent substrates: part of the ﬂake is placed on Si/SiO2/Ti/Au and part
only on Si/SiO2. To take this into account, diﬀerent sputtering yields were simulated and
applied to estimate the helium ion dose required to obtained the same interdefect distance.
Numerically, the estimated ratio of the sputtering yield between the Si/SiO2/Ti/Au and
Si/SiO2 substrates is 2
3.
3.5.1.1
Raman spectroscopy and phonon conﬁnement model
In several reports Raman spectroscopy has been used to characterize the eﬀect of induced
defects in a 2D material.[59, 61, 82] In order to explain the behaviour of the Raman
shift changing with the density of the introduced defects, it is suggested to apply the
phonon conﬁnement model.[84] This model describes the vibrational properties of solids.
Typically, each solid presents three acoustic phonon branches for low wavenumbers and
3N-3 optical phonon branches (N is the number of atoms in the primitive cell) for higher
wavenumbers.[84] In the case of MoS2 there are six optical branches. Phonons propagate
in the crystal lattice as waves with a dispersion that depends on their wavevector in the
Brillouin zone. The phonons propagation will stop when a defect is present. It is then
possible that the phonons remain conﬁned in the defect area. Raman spectroscopy is
generally used to study the vibrational modes of a system but typically the scattering
vector of the employed light is in the order of magnitude of ∼104 cm−1, while the
wavevector q of the phonon dispersion curve is around ∼108 cm−1. Raman spectroscopy
thus allows only to detect the optical phonon near the center of the Brillouin zone: q∼0.
This is the Raman selection rule and it is valid only if there are no defects.
When
the periodicity of the lattice is perturbed, this rule is not valid anymore and phonons
with larger q are responsible for the changing in the spectrum. Phonons are virtually
conﬁned into a circular region.[84] From the evalutions of Mignuzzi et al., the diameter
of this circular region is estimated to be approximately the interdefect distance.[82] For
the uncertainty principle it must be:
∆q ≈π
LD
.
(3.4)
The expression 3.4 states that the relation between the change in wavevector (Raman
shift) ∆q is inversely proportional to the interdefect distance LD. This is the reason for
the blue-shift of the treated MoS2 peaks observed in recently researches. [59, 82]
27
==PAGE:34==
4
|
Experimental results
The ﬁrst section of this chapter presents the results from photocatalysis measurements
of pristine monolayers of MoSe2 and MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures. The second section
deals with helium ion treated MoS2 monolayers. We use a helium ion microscope (HIM)
to introduce a varying number of defects into the monolayers. Thus, we could study the
inﬂuence of the defect density on the catalytic hydrogen evolution activity.
4.1
Photocatalytic properties of transition metal dichalcogenides
Heterostructures made of appropriate materials allow in principle to improve the photo-
catalytic activity due to the formation of a type-II band alignment and the consequent
charge carrier separation [16, 17, 15] (see section 2.3). We perform cyclic voltammetry
measurements in order to estimate the photocatalytic activity of our samples. In partic-
ular, we illuminate the TMDC heterostructures during the activity measurements. The
currents vary with increasing number of cycles due to structural changes of the WE [39].
In order to overcome these limitations, we repeatedly switch the illumination source on
and oﬀduring the cyclic voltammetry measurements. Hence, we can directly compare
the photocatalytic activity of our samples (illuminated) to the purely electro-catalytic
activity (without illumination).
4.1.1
MoSe2 monolayer
Firstly, we perform catalytically activity measurements on single monolayers of MoSe2.
We choose the Xe/Hg arc lamp as an illumination source and we used an illumination
power of 500 mW. All given illumination powers in this thesis describe the power on the
sample, if not speciﬁed diﬀerently. The measured polarization curves are shown in ﬁgure
4.1.
Figure 4.1 a) shows in black the measured current versus the potential during the
forward scan. During illumination, the current increases compared to the dark measure-
ment. Repeating switching on and oﬀof the light source causes the step-like current
response. A Butler-Volmer ﬁts of the dark and the illuminated currents are added in
blue and red, respectively. At a potential of -0.4 V, the maximum value of the current
reaches approximately 350 nA. In ﬁgure 4.1 a), the diﬀerence between the illuminated
and the dark current is very small for the potential between 0 V and -0.2 V, while it
increases for more negative potentials (between -0.2 V and -0.4 V). Figure 4.1 b) shows
the corresponding Tafel plots and Tafel slopes. We estimate the Tafel slopes by exploiting
28
==PAGE:35==
Illuminated
Dark
177 mV dec-1
186 mV dec-1
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0 0
10
100
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
η vs RHE (V)
-η vs RHE (V)
-i (nA)
i (nA)
0
-50
-100
-150
-200
-250
-300
-350
a)
b)
Figure 4.1: a) Photocatalytic activity of a MoSe2 monolayer. Repeating switching on
and oﬀof the light source causes the step-like current response. The measured currents are
more negative under illumination. The red and blue curves represent the Butler-Volmer
ﬁts for the illuminated and dark currents, respectively. b) Tafel plot obtained from (a) for
measurements with and without illumination. The corresponding Tafel slopes are added
to the plot.
the equation 2.6 and employing the current instead of the current density. Here, the x-
and y-axis are inverted and their absolute value is shown. The Tafel slopes for the dark
and illuminated measures are 177 mV dec−1 and 186 mV dec−1, respectively. The high
values for the slopes suggest the Volmer step (120 mV dec−1, see section 3.4) is the rate
limiting step. This means that the adsorption of hydrogen on the MoSe2 surface limits
the overall hydrogen evolution reaction.[47]
4.1.2
Vertical MoS2-WSe2 heterostructures
In a next step, we proceed measuring the photocatalytic activity of a more complex
MoS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructures using the same technique as for MoSe2 ﬂakes. Fig-
ure 4.2 shows an image taken with an optical microscope of the studied heterostructure.
The used SiO2 substrate appears in rose, and the conducting gold contact appears or-
ange. As a guide to the eye, the contours of the WSe2 and MoS2 monolayers (in blue) are
highlighted in white and black, respectively. The chosen geometry allows us to investigate
eight diﬀerent combination of material systems: 1) MoS2/WSe2 heterostructure on gold,
2) MoS2/WSe2 heterostructure on SiO2, 3) monolayer of MoS2 on gold, 4) monolayer of
MoS2 on SiO2, 5)monolayer of WSe2 on Au, 6) WSe2 on SiO2, 7) pure gold substrate and
8) few layer MoS2. All material systems are studied in more detail in the following.
For characterizing the heterostructure, we ﬁrstly perform Raman and photolumines-
cence spectroscopy under ambient conditions (ﬁgure 4.3). The colors used for both Raman
and photoluminescence are referring to the same tested region of the sample.
The obtained Raman and photoluminescence spectra are reported in ﬁgure 4.3. Figure
4.3 a) shows the Raman spectra of the bare SiO2 substrate and six diﬀerent material
29
==PAGE:36==
20 μm
7
5
1
3
8
4
2
6
Figure 4.2: Optical microscopy image of the MoS2-WSe2 heterostructure. The WSe2-
ﬂake is directly placed on top of the Au contact (orange line in the picture). The contours
of the WSe2 monolayer are marked by a white dotted line The MoS2 monolayer is placed
on top of the WSe2 ﬂake. The contours of the MoS2 ﬂake are highlighted by a black
dotted line. The numbers from 1 to 8 deﬁne the eight diﬀerent regions of the sample
studied during the optical and photocatalytic measurements.
compositions of the heterostructure (spot 1-6) from the bottom to the top. All measure-
ments were performed using a KrAr laser with λ = 488 nm and a illumination power of
100 µW with an integration time of 60 s. The peaks are not normalized in order to show
also the variation in intensity. The bottom grey line represents the SiO2 spectrum.
We take the Raman active mode from the SiO2 substrate (at 520 rel. cm−1 [85] ) as a
reference, to correct the recorded spectra. The characteristic E’ and A1 modes of MoS2
are positioned at 384 cm−1 and 402 cm−1 , respectively. The position of the peaks and
their intensities are not aﬀected by the presence of the WSe2 in the heterostructure re-
gion. The same is true for WSe2 that shows the same degenerated peak position at 248
rel. cm−1 for the diﬀerent substrates and material combinations.
As explained in the theoretical section, the type-II band alignment should cause a charge
carrier separation of the excited electron-hole pairs. However, the Raman spectra depicted
in ﬁgure 4.3 a) show an almost perfect matching of heterostructure and monolayer peak
positions, suggesting that the MoS2 and WSe2 monolayer are not properly coupled.[54]
Comparing the spectra of the heterostructure, it appears that all modes of the two mono-
layers show approximately the same intensity when the heterostructure is placed on gold.
In contrast, regarding the heterostructure on the SiO2 substrate, the intensity of the
WSe2 mode is higher than the intensity of the MoS2 modes. Furthermore, the intensity
of the WSe2 mode increases when positioned on SiO2, both for the monolayer and the
heterostructure conﬁguration.
Figure 4.3 b) shows the photoluminescence spectra of the same regions of the het-
erostructure. We applied the same laser power as for Raman spectroscopy. However, the
integration time is reduced to 30 s. We do not normalize the curves in order to show the
change in intensity of the PL spectra for the diﬀerent material combinations and areas.
MoS2 shows a peak at around 1.9 eV and WSe2 a peak around 1.65 eV. These values
can be assigned to the direct band gap at the K point of the Brillouin zone and are in
30
==PAGE:37==
1) WSe2 on SiO2
2) HS on SiO2
3) HS on Au
4) MoS2 on Au
5) MoS2 on SiO2
6) SiO2
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
WSe2
MoS2
E'
A1
E', A1
a)
b)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
230
250
380
400
420
2
4
6
8
0
Intensity (a.u)
Raman shift (rel. cm-1)
Energy (eV)
1.6
1.7 1.8
1.9 2.0 2.1
Intensity (a.u)
Figure 4.3: a) Raman spectra of the SiO2 substrate and the ﬁve regions (1) to 5))
of the MoS2-WSe2 heterostructure . The A1 and E’ peaks of MoS2 are positioned at 402
and 384 rel. cm−1 , respectively. The WSe2 degenerated peak is at 248 rel. cm−1. The
position of all the peaks remains the same, regardless the substrate or the heterostructure
conﬁguration. Notably, the intensity of WSe2 peak increases on SiO2. b) Photolumines-
cence spectra of the same the ﬁve regions (1) to 5)) of the sample analyzed in a). The
exciton peak for MoS2 is at 1.9 eV; the exciton peak for WSe2 at 1.65 eV. None of the
curves is normalized. Experimental conditions: λ = 488 nm; integration time: 60 s for
Raman spectroscopy and 30 s for photoluminescence spectroscopy.
good agreement with the values reported in literature.[66, 67] The energy of the peaks
remains constant for the diﬀerent substrates and conﬁgurations. Regarding MoS2, the
intensity remains the same for the monolayer on gold and SiO2, but reduces when the
MoS2 is stacked in the heterostructure. In addition, the peak is broadened on SiO2. The
photoluminescence intensity of WSe2 in the heterostructure is higher on SiO2 compared
to gold. WSe2 as single monolayer on SiO2 has the lowest intensity. For both substrates,
the intensity of the WSe2 peak is higher than the intensity of MoS2.
Chiu et al. reported that an interlayer exciton is formed and an extra peak is visible at
1.59 eV in the photoluminescence spectrum when the MoS2 and WSe2 layers are coupled
[54]. From the photoluminescence spectra in ﬁgure 4.3 it is conﬁrmed that the two mono-
layers are weakly coupled since the interlayer exciton is not visible. A second indication
that there is not a strong coupling between the layers is given by the fact that the peak
of each component of the heterostructure keeps approximately its emission energy as in
the monolayer case. The small variation of the position can be accounted by the diﬀerent
dielectric environment.[54, 86]
As reported by Kustamann et al., it is possible to generate interlayer excitons for 0◦
(aligned) and 60◦(anti-aligned) orientation angles between the two layers.[86] In our
case, the uncoupling of the layers might rise from the misaligned stacking of the mono-
layers when preparing the heterostructure.
31
==PAGE:38==
0
White Light
1)
HS on Au
2)
HS on SiO2
3)
MoS2 on Au
4)
MoS2 on SiO2
5)
WSe2 on Au
6)
WSe2 on SiO2
7)
Au
8)
Bulk MoS2
-0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0 -0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0 -0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0
0
-1.5
-3.0
-4.5
-6.0
0
-1.5
-3.0
-4.5
-6.0
0
-1.5
-3.0
-4.5
-6.0
η vs RHE (V)
i (nA)
Dark
Illuminated
Figure 4.4:
Cyclic voltammograms during illumination experiments with a Xe/Hg
arc lamp (top left) and a KrAr laser (488 nm) with diﬀerent illumination spots at the
heterostructure (from 1) to 8)). The measured currents are reported in black. The blue and
red curves show the Butler-Volmer ﬁts of the dark and illuminated currents, respectively.
For 7) and 8) the inﬂuence of the illumination to the current is too low to be separated.
Light intensities: 500 mW for the white light and a power density of 4×104 kW m−2 for
the laser
After the optical pre-characterization of our samples, we performed photocatalytic
activity measurements of the heterostructure samples using cyclic voltammetry. We set
the scan-rate to 10 mV/s to keep the electrodes in equilibrium also during the change
of illumination.
Similar to previous measurements, we use the light of a Xe/Hg arc
lamp and the light of a KrAr laser to illuminate the sample during the electrochemical
characterization. The white light is used to illuminate the whole sample, while the laser
is utilized for a site-selective illumination of the diﬀerent spots (see ﬁgure 4.2 with the
numbers from 1 to 8).
Figure 4.4 summarizes the photocatalytic activity measurements of the heterostructure.
The top left panel shows the activity measurement under illumination with a Xe/Hg arc
lamp with a power of 500 mW. As mentioned above, the white light cannot be focused
to a small spot in our setup. Hence, the complete sample is illuminated and we cannot
32
==PAGE:39==
distinguish between the diﬀerent regions of the heterostructure. The maximum current
under illumination of -4.2 nA is reached at a potential of -0.2 V. The current under
illumination is higher than without illumination
In a next step, we perform similar measurements with a KrAr laser (= 488 nm) with a
power density of 4 × 104 kW m−2. The controlled spot size allows us to measure the
local photocatalytic current response for the eight diﬀerent spots reported in ﬁgure 4.2
with very high spatial resolution.
The general trend of the curves from 1) to 8) shows a maximum current at around 6
nA. For spot 1) to 6) (monolayers and heterostructure on gold an SiO2) one can observe
a diﬀerence in the current signal between the illuminated and not illuminated case. To
exclude the inﬂuence of Au substrate and bulk MoS2 on the photocatalytic activity we
report the corresponding currents in spot 7) and 8) of ﬁgure 4.4. The current diﬀerence
for Au substrate and bulk MoS2 is too small, and the two diﬀerent cases cannot be
distinguished. From literature, bulk MoS2 is reported to be no active catalyst for HER
[6]; regarding gold, one can refers to the vulcano plot in ﬁgure 2.5.
As it can be seen, Au has a ∆Gad greater than platinum and MoS2 and a lower current
density. Therefore we attribute the weak response of spot 7) and 8) to the light due to
their poor photocatalytic activity. The general behavior of the current in panels 1) to 6)
of ﬁgure 4.4 is quite similar. One can observe an increased current under illumination
also at zero overpotential. With increasing the overpotential, the diﬀerence between the
illuminated and dark current decreases. Moreover, a saturation in the current change is
clearly visible. This behavior is diﬀerent from the single monolayer of MoSe2 (ﬁgure 4.1),
where no saturation is observed, and the current diﬀerence actually increases for more
negative potentials.
In order to explain the saturation of the current for more negative potentials, we
suggest two possible reasons. The ﬁrst one is related to the physical-chemical processes
occurring during the measurements: possibly, the hydrogen desorption process at the
catalytic sites for this potential range is extremely slow, and it prevents the subsequent
adsorption of protons. This process is known as surface poisoning.[87] The second reason
might be related to the measuring parameters. The measured polarization curves at the
used scan parameters did not have a perfectly exponential shape as the Butler-Volmer
equation implies. For a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 , the CV plot presents a reasonable expo-
nential shape. After decreasing the scan rate from 50 to 10 mV s−1, the shape changes
towards a ”double” exponential form. However, we set the scan rate to 10 mV s−1 in order
to allow the electrodes to be in chemical equilibrium during the whole scan.
The highest current diﬀerence is observed at spot 5) (WSe2 on Au), followed by spot
1) and 2) (heterostructure on Au and SiO2) and lastly spot 3), 4) (MoS2 on Au and on
SiO2) and 6) (WSe2 on SiO2) have the smallest diﬀerences.
These observations can be explained regarding the diﬀerent processes at the heterostruc-
ture/electrolyte interface. A scheme of the band structure of the heterostructure and the
main processes occurring during the electrochemistry measurements under illumination
are summarized in ﬁgure 4.5.
Figure 4.5 reports the following mechanisms:
33
==PAGE:40==
VBWSe2
CBWSe2
e-
h+
E 
MoS2
Au
2
2
1
3
3
hν
1
EF
4
hν
WSe2
H+
H
CBMoS2
VBMoS2
Figure 4.5: Schematic energy band diagram of the WSe2-MoS2 heterostructure on a
gold substrate. The Fermi level is aligned across the three materials. The four main
processes occurring during the photocatalytic HER are sketched: (1) incident light with
photon energy higher than the band gap (2) excites electrons from the valence bands (VB)
of WSe2 and MoS2 monolayer to the corresponding conduction bands (CB).[15] The type-
II band alignment (3) causes a charge carrier separation.[16] Electrons tunnel from the
CB of WSe2 to the CB of MoS2. The inverse process occurs for holes.[16] (4) Electrons
diﬀuse to the active sites at the surface of MoS2 where they can reduce protons and form
hydrogen.[5, 47]
1. Incident photons with energy above the band gap are absorbed by the TMDC
materials.
2. The electrons are excited from the valence band (VB) of the MoS2 and WSe2 to
the corresponding conduction bands (CB).
3. The type-II band alignment of the two semiconducting materials causes a separation
of the excited charge carriers. Electrons migrate from the CB of WSe2 to the CB
of MoS2, holes from the VB of MoS2 to the VB of WSe2.
4. The electrons diﬀuse to the active sites at the surface of MoS2 and reduce protons
in the electrolyte to form hydrogen molecules.
The above picture does not present possible defects states or traps at the semiconductor-
semiconductor interface [88] of MoS2 and WSe2 layers. Moreover, we are aware of the
presence of diﬀerent loss channels.[88] In particular, the loss channels can be radiative
if the relaxation of the electron to lower energies implies the emission of photons.[19]
The loss channels are non-radiative if the energy losses are related to internal or kinetic
34
==PAGE:41==
Material system
Dark slope
Illuminated slope
(mV dec−1)
(mV dec−1)
White light
301 ±4.0
401 ±4.8
(1) HS on Au
171 ± 1.7
206 ±2.0
(2) HS on SiO2
182 ±2.1
226 ±2.4
(3) MoS2 on Au
188 ±1.7
213 ±1.9
(4) MoS2 on SiO2
191 ±0.1
219 ±0.2
(5) WSe2 on Au
217 ±1.4
262 ±2.2
(6) WSe2 on SiO2
192 ±1.2
219 ±2.1
(7) Au substrate
194 ±0.9
194 ±0.9
(8) Bulk MoS2
197 ±0.9
197 ±0.9
Table 4.1: Tafel slopes extracted from ﬁgure 4.6 for dark and illuminated measure-
ments.
.
energy of the atom [19]. However we expect the recombination of the charge carries is
not the rate limiting step in our process because the life time of excitons in WX2-MoX2
heterostructures is in the order of tens of ns [89]. The reaction at the interface is detected
within a time range of ms [39].
The WSe2 monolayer presents a wider diﬀerence between the dark and the illuminated
current compared to the MoS2 ﬂake. This can be addressed to the diﬀerent absorption
coeﬃcients: the absorption coeﬃcient of WSe2 is ∼2.1 × 105 cm−1 [90], while the ab-
sorption coeﬃcient of MoS2 is ∼1.8 × 105 cm−1 [91]. One can extend this argument to
explain the diﬀerent behaviours of the currents obtained for the eight measured spots and
for the diﬀerent light sources. The diﬀerent material combinations aﬀect the dielectric
constant, hence the absorption coeﬃcient of the analyzed structures. The diverse ab-
sorption coeﬃcients lead to a diﬀerent response of the light stimulation.[19] For instance,
in the case of SiO2 as a substrate, the absorbance for both, the MoS2 and the WSe2
monolayer is decreased compared to the freestanding cases.[92]
Based on the cyclic voltammetry measurements, we estimate the relative Tafel slopes
for each region exposed to light. The Tafel plots are depicted in ﬁgure 4.6. The values
of each single slope are reported in table 4.1 for the clarity of the graphs.
Due to
the diﬀerent contributions of the diﬀerent material systems of the heterostructure to the
overall current, it is diﬃcult to calculate the corresponding current density. Consequently,
ﬁgure 4.6 reports the Tafel slopes obtained from the I-V diagram instead of a j-V diagram.
The convergence of the illuminated and dark ﬁts at -0.20 V for all analyzed regions might
reﬂect the saturation observed in the corresponding cyclic voltammogram. In general,
the estimated Tafel slopes are rather high. We observe the highest Tafel slopes under
white light illumination of 301 mV dec−1 and 401 mV dec−1 for the dark and illuminated
case, respectively. Under laser light illumination, the slopes are smaller but still above the
reference of the adsorption (Volmer) step slope (120 mV dec−1). This suggests that the
adsorption of the hydrogen at the catalytic active sites is the limiting step in the HER.
In addition, a big variety of the dark Tafel slopes is observed. Usually, one would expect
35
==PAGE:42==
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
6
0
White light
1) HS on Au
2) HS on SiO2
3) MoS2 on Au
4) MoS2 on SiO2
5) WSe2 on Au
6) WSe2 on SiO2
7) Au
8) Bulk MoS2
0
2
4
6 8
2
4
6 8
2
4
6 8
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
-i (nA)
-η vs RHE (V)
Dark
Illuminated
Figure 4.6: Tafel plots of the corresponding polarization curves shown in ﬁgure4.4 for
all diﬀerent material systems. The blue and red lines show the ﬁts to the data without
and with illumination, respectively. The numerical values of the slopes are reported in
table 4.1 for the clarity of the picture.
the same dark Tafel slope in all measurements, as the whole sample is then examined.
However, the observed dark Tafel slopes lie in the range of 171 mV dec−1 to 217 mV
dec−1. The diﬀerence of the Tafel slopes indicates photo-induced changes on a time scale
of several seconds, as the illumination is switched on/oﬀperiodically every two seconds.
One scenario is that two seconds are not enough time for the system to reach a stable
equilibrium state.
In order to explain the behavior shown in the of the Tafel plot, we would like to suggest
three possible mechanisms (ﬁgure 4.7). In ﬁgure 4.7 , µMoS2 represents the electrochemical
potential of the active sites, µH+/H2 the redox potential for HER and η the overpotential
barrier. The latter is the potential barrier electrons have to overcome during the transfer
from the active sites to the electrolyte during the reduction of protons in the solution
(step 4 in ﬁgure 4.5)
Figure 4.7 a) sketches a light induced heating. The incoming light provides thermal
energy to the sample, broadening the distribution of electrons towards higher energies as
predicted by the Fermi-Dirac statistics in the active sites [19]. Figure 4.7 b) sketches the
36
==PAGE:43==
a) Light induced heating
c) Light induced band renormalization
V
t
Interface
η
η
V
Interface
t
μMoS2
b) Light activated electrochemistry 
process
η
V
Interface
t
CB
μH+/H2
μMoS2
μMoS2
μH+/H2
μH+/H2
Figure 4.7: Light eﬀects on the electrochemical potential (µMoS2) and the overpotential
(η) at the interface Mos2 electrolyte.
µH+/H2 is the redox potential for the HER. a)
illustrates the mechanism of light induced heating: the light provides thermal energy to
the system broadening the charge distribution at the active sites (µ). b) depicts the light
activated electrochemical process: the light reduces η. c) shows the light induced band
renormalization mechanism: the energy bands are distorted and the band gap is reduced.
For a) and b) the eﬀective η is reduced, while for c), the eﬀective η is increased.
37
==PAGE:44==
light activated electrochemistry process. This mechanism can be explained as follows: the
incoming light excites the electrons to higher energy levels and it increases the probability
of the electrons to overcome the overpotential barrier.[93] We can interpret this eﬀect as a
ﬁctitious reduction of the overpotential barrier. In both cases a) and b), the light enhances
the reaction throughput. This should result in a reduced Tafel slope and the adsorption of
protons on the surface of the catalyst should not be the limiting step in the HER process.
A third possible mechanism is the light induced band renormalization depicted in ﬁgure 4.7
c). Light induces a lowering of the electrochemical potential µMoS2 for the active sites.[94]
Illumination of the materials excites electrons from the valance to the conduction band
creating excitons.
At high charge carrier densities, the coulomb interaction between
the electrons and holes is screened.
Therefore, the binding energy of the excitons is
weakened. This eﬀect is referred to as Mott transition.[94] As a consequence, the band gap
undergoes a renormalization process, meaning the band edges shift to lower energies.[94]
The chemical potential for the active sites is an in-gap state, and we can assume that it is
also aﬀected by the mentioned Mott transition of overall band structure. Hence, we would
expect a lowered energy level of the electrochemical potential.[94] This last mechanism is a
possible explanation for the adsorption being the limiting step in the HER reaction. From
this point of view, the energetics of the system are not favorable for the desorption of the
reduced hydrogen. Consequently, the active sites are not available for further adsorption
processes, leading to the accumulation of the electrons in the conduction band and to the
Mott transition.
4.1.2.1
Light intensity dependence
In a next step, we decide to investigate the inﬂuence of the illumination intensity on
the photocatalytic activity of the MoS2/WSe2 heterostructure. Due to the higher photo-
catalytic response observed on gold compared to the SiO2 substrate (ﬁgure 4.4), we
investigate the heterostructure, the MoS2 and the WSe2 monolayers on the gold substrate.
The scan speed rate is kept at 10 mV/s and we use the KrAr laser for the illumination.
We perform the ﬁrst measurements on the heterostructure on gold. Figure 4.8 a), b),
and c) show the measured current response for illumination intensities of 0.5 ×103, 6.25
×103 and 25 ×103 kW m−2. We observe no diﬀerence between the illuminated and dark
currents for low power densities (0.5 ×103 kW m−2). For power densities above 6.25 ×103
kW m−2 , the gap becomes more signiﬁcant. The currents present a saturation behavior
at higher potentials as observed in the measurements of ﬁgure 4.4. The corresponding
Tafel slopes are reported in ﬁgure 4.8 d), e) and f). The Tafel slopes are in the same
order of magnitude for all illumination intensities. However, the values are still higher
than the adsorption step slope (120 mv dec−1).
We perform similar measurements on single layer MoS2 on gold. We chose the same
intensities as for the previous case: 0.5 ×103, 6.25 ×103, and 25 ×103 kW m−2. The
cyclic voltammograms and relative Tafel slopes are reported in ﬁgure 4.9. As in the ﬁrst
power dependence test, the current change is not present for a power intensity of 0.5
×103 kW m−2. For higher illumination intensities a diﬀerence between illuminated and
38
==PAGE:45==
Illuminated
Dark
-0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0
-0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0
-0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
η vs RHE (V)
i (nA)
 a)
b)
c)
Illuminated
Dark
-i (nA)
2 
4
8
6
2 
4
8
6
-η vs RHE (V)
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
162 mV dec-1
166 mV dec-1
171 mV dec-1
159 mV dec-1
175 mV dec-1
d)
e)
f)
0.10
2 
4
8
6
MoS2-WSe2 heterostructure on gold substrate
0.5 x 103 kW m-2
6.25 x 103 kW m-2
25 x 103 kW m-2
Figure 4.8: a),b) and c): cyclic voltammograms for the heterostructure on gold with
diﬀerent illumination intensities: a) 0.5 ×103 kW m−2, b) 6.25×103 kW m−2 and c) 25
×103 kW m−2. With increasing power, the gap between the dark and illuminated curves
increases. There is no diﬀerence between dark/illuminated current for a power density of
0.5 ×103 kW m−2.
d), e) and f): Tafel plot and corresponding Tafel slopes estimated from a),b) and c)
respectively. In blue and in red the linear ﬁts for dark and illuminated current. The Tafel
slopes seem to be not consistently aﬀected by the variation of the power.
non-illuminated current can be observed. However, the diﬀerence is smaller compared
to the previous study of the heterostructure on gold. The current tends to saturate for
higher potentials also in this test. The Tafel slopes reﬂect the trend of the cyclic voltam-
mograms, leading to an almost overlap of the two linear ﬁts. The value of the slopes
oscillates around the same high values, regardless the change of the applied light power.
We investigate a WSe2 monolayer on gold during the last illumination dependent mea-
surement. Here, we apply three diﬀerent intensities: 0.5 ×103, 2.5 ×103 and 6.25 ×103
kW m−2. The cyclic voltammograms and the associated Tafel slopes are shown in ﬁgure
4.10. Once again, the current diﬀerence saturates for high potentials and by applying
0.5 ×103 kW m−2, and there is not a current gap. Remarkably, for the WSe2 ﬂake the
current gap is already present for 2.5 ×103 kW m−2 power intensity. The Tafel slopes
present high values for the diﬀerent intensities applied.
39
==PAGE:46==
Dark
Illuminated
163 mV dec-1
165 mV dec-1
166 mV dec-1
163 mV dec-1
173 mV dec-1
d)
e)
f)
a)
-0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0
-0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0
-0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
i (nA)
Illuminated
Dark
η vs RHE (V)
b)
c)
0.5 x 103 kW m-2
6.25 x 103 kW m-2
25 x 103 kW m-2
MoS2 monolayer on gold substrate
-i (nA)
2 
4
8
6
2 
4
8
6
2 
4
8
6
0.10
-η vs RHE (V)
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
Figure 4.9: a),b) and c): cyclic voltammograms for the MoS2 monolayer on gold with
diﬀerent illumination intensities: a) 0.5 ×103 kW m−2, b) 6.25×103 kW m−2 and c) 25
×103 kW m−2. With increasing power, the gap between the dark and illuminated curves
increases. There is no diﬀerence between dark/illuminated current for a power density
of 0.5 ×103 kW m−2. d), e) and f): Tafel plot and corresponding Tafel slopes estimated
from a),b) and c) respectively. In blue and in red the linear ﬁts for dark and illuminated
current. The Tafel slopes seem to be not consistently aﬀected by the variation of the
power.
The illumination intensity dependent measurements of heterostructures, MoS2 and
WSe2 monolayers on gold suggested that there is a threshold illumination power required
to see a diﬀerence between illuminated and dark currents. The threshold power of WSe2
monolayers is lower than the one of MoS2 and the heterostructure. In fact, the current
increase due to illumination is already visible for a power density of 2.5 ×103 kW m−2,
while for MoS2 and the heterostructure the current gap is visible only for illumination
intensities above 6.25 ×103 kW m−2. The diﬀerent power thresholds can be attributed
to the diﬀerent dielectric environments that inﬂuence the absorption of the analyzed
materials. The increased current change with increasing light intensity is tentatevely
accounted for the higher number of photons that interact with the target. This leads to
a higher number of excited electrons and therefore to a larger measured current.
40
==PAGE:47==
Dark
Illuminated
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
η vs RHE (V)
172 mV dec-1
194 mV dec-1
175 mV dec-1
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
164 mV dec-1
167 mV dec-1
-0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0 -0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0 -0.18 -0.12 -0.06
0
i (nA)
-i (nA)
-η vs RHE (V)
2 
4
8
6
2 
4
8
6
2 
4
8
6
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
0.5 x 103 kW m-2
2.5 x 103 kW m-2
6.25 x 103 kW m-2
WSe2 monolayer on gold substrate
Figure 4.10: a), b) and c): cyclic voltammograms for the heterostructure on gold with
diﬀerent illumination intensities: a) 0.5 ×103 kW m−2, b) 2.5 ×103 kW m−2 and c) 6.25
×103 kW m−2. By increasing the power, the gap between the dark and illuminated curves
increases. There is no diﬀerence between dark/illuminated for power density of 0.5 ×103
kW m−2.
d), e) and f): Tafel plot and corresponding Tafel slopes estimated from a),b) and c)
respectively. In blue and in red the linear ﬁts for dark and illuminated current.
41
==PAGE:48==
20 μm
Figure 4.11: Optical microscope image of a pristine MoS2. The pink stripe shows the
gold contact on the blue SiO2 substrate, as explained in section 3.1 a). The monolayer
MoS2 is highlighted in light blue and its dimensions are approximately 90 × 30 µm2.
4.2
Defect engineering of MoS2 monolayers
In the following chapter, we discuss the possibility of defect engineering with a helium ion
microscope (HIM). As explained in the theoretical section, most of the active sites of the
single monolayer are located at the edge sites, while the basal plane is catalytically rather
inactive. The introduction of additional active sites into the basal plane is one option to
improve the catalytic activity of the material [47]. The employment of a HIM allows a
selective removing of atoms, thus the helium ion treatment results in a controlled process
for introducing defects.[18] This approach enables us to slowly increase the inter-defect
density of sulfur and molybdenum vacancies on MoS2 and measure the corresponding
catalytic activity. We conduct diﬀerent helium ion treatments of MoS2 monolayer based
on previous work from Klein et al. and Mignuzzi et al. [59, 82]. Before and after every
helium ion treatment, we also characterized the ﬂakes using Raman and photolumines-
cence spectroscopy.
A microscope image of an exemplary MoS2 monolayer is shown in ﬁgure 4.11. The
pristine MoS2 monolayer (in light blue) is placed on a gold contact which is used as the
back electrode (pink stripe). The SiO2 substrate is depicted in blue. The dimensions of
the MoS2 ﬂake are around 90 × 30 µm2.
In a ﬁrst step, we calculate the sputtering yields of helium ions during the interaction
with MoS2 on diﬀerent substrates. For this, we use the Monte Carlo based open source
software SRIM.[83] We set an ion energy of 30 keV and an orthogonal angle of incidence
for our bombardment. In order to calculate the resulting inter defect distance, we refer
our sputtering yields to the results of Mignuzzi et al..[82] The results are reported in table
4.2.
In order to have a constant inter-defect density LD on the MoS2 ﬂake, we apply dif-
ferent helium ion doses according to the sputter yield of the underlying substrate. In a
second step, we characterize the pristine MoS2 ﬂakes. For this, photoluminescence and
Raman spectroscopy as well as cyclic voltammetry measurements are performed. In a
third step, we consecutively expose the sample to the helium ion beam, perform photo-
42
==PAGE:49==
Ion
Sputter yield (Υ)
Mn+
4.190
He+ (SiO2)
0.333
He+ (SiO2/Ti/Au)
0.596
Table 4.2: This table reports the sputter yields of the Mn and He ions. We used the
sputter yields to calculate the interdefect distance from the equation 3.3. We estimate
the sputter yield for the ions with the SRIM software. In the case of Mn+ we used as
reference the work of Klein et al. [59]. For the He+ we employed a energy beam of 30
keV and normal incidence to the surface.
.
luminescence, Raman, and CV measurements. This was repeated for four diﬀerent ion
doses.
The corresponding Raman and PL spectra are depicted in ﬁgure 4.12 and 4.13 respec-
tively. The energy diﬀerence of the A1 and E’ mode of the pristine sample conﬁrms the
presence of a MoS2 monolayer.[16] The spectral position of E’ and A1 mode of pristine
MoS2 are highlighted with a vertical black dotted line.
After the HIM treatment of
MoS2, the spectral position of the E’ and A1 mode is changed. The E’ mode shifts to-
ward lower wavenumber (redshift) with increasing helium ion dose, while the A1 mode is
slightly shifted toward higher wavenumber (blueshift) as has been reported before.[59, 61]
Furthermore, the peak intensity for both modes decreases and the peaks broaden with
increasing ion dose. The A1 mode of MoS2 on gold disappears after the ﬁrst helium ion
treatment and subsequent linear sweep measurements.
The redshift of the E’ mode can be explained by the fact that the Mo-S bonds dissoci-
ate by increasing the ion dose. The generation of additional sulfur vacancies induce a
compressive strain in the crystal structure. Consequently, a decreasing number of Mo-S
bonds contribute to the in-plane vibrations and the restoring force constant for the E’
mode reduces. Since the frequency is directly proportional to the restoring force constant,
the E’ mode shifts toward lower frequencies (redshift).[95]
The blue-shift, instead, can be explained with the phonon conﬁnement model discussed
in section 3.5.1.1. We assume the presence of phonons with a wavevector larger than zero
is due to the fact that we performed the measurements under ambient condition. The
blueshift of the A1 mode with decreasing inter-defect distance can be accounted to the
inverse proportional relation between the Raman shift and LD given by the equation 3.4
[82].
We address the strong change in the Raman spectrum, i.e. the absence of the A1, and
the disappearing of photoluminescence peak to a drastic change in the crystal structure
due to severe damages of the MoS2 monolayer with higher helium treatment. The van-
ishing of the MoS2 ﬂake on the gold substrate (depicted in ﬁgure 4.14) and at the edges
of the monolayer can be explained by two concepts. First, we can refer to Parzinger
et al.: in their work they describe the concept of corrosion of TDMC ﬂakes.[96] The
studies on the stability of MoS2 monolayers in aqueous solutions demonstrated that the
presence of oxygen in the electrolyte is responsible for the degradation of the structure
starting at defects and edge sites. This can be explained by the fact that both edges and
43
==PAGE:50==
370
380
390
400
410
420
380
390
400 410
420
0
1
2
3
4
5
Raman shift (rel. cm-1)
Intensity (a.u.)
a)
b)
370
0
1
2
3
4
5
Pristine
LD=2.05 nm
LD=1.73 nm
LD=1.53 nm
LD=1.38 nm
E'
A1
A1
E'
Figure 4.12: Raman spectra for a helium ion treated MoS2 monolayer on SiO2 (a)
and on Au (b). The black curves show the Raman signal of pristine single layer MoS2.
The other spectra are recorded after helium ion treatment and consequent electrochemical
performance measurements. The E and A1 modes are blue- and red-shifted, respectively.
The A1 mode of MoS2 on gold disappears after the ﬁrst linear sweep measurements. The
laser power is 100 µW at a wavelength of 488 nm.
defects present dangling bonds that facilitate the reaction with the charge carriers in the
electrolyte.[96] Second, in order to illustrate why the corrosion is faster on Au then on
SiO2, we need to clarify the band structure of the monolayers after the ion treatment.
This will be discussed later on.
Table 4.3 summarizes the calculated relative distance of the A1 and E’ mode, the corre-
sponding inter-defect density LD and the applied helium ion doses.
Photoluminescence spectra of MoS2 on SiO2 and gold substrates are reported in ﬁgure
4.13 a) and b), respectively.
The intensity of the peaks decreases with increasing helium dose compared to the
pristine MoS2 peak. The reduction of intensity can be accounted for an increasing num-
ber of in-gap states which provide additional non-radiative loss channels.[61] The spectra
are not normalized. The PL intensity of MoS2 on gold is almost half compared to the
value on SiO2 substrate.
It was not possible to detect the PL peak for inter-defect densities LD below 1.73 nm for
both substrates. For the SiO2 substrate (ﬁgure 4.13 a)), the peak is blue-shifted with
decreasing inter-defect distance. On gold (ﬁgure 4.13 b)), the peak does not substantially
44
==PAGE:51==
LD
Dose (SiO2)
A1-E’
Dose (SiO2/Ti/Au)
A1-E’
(nm)
(He+ nm−2)
(rel. cm−1)
(He+ nm−2)
(rel. cm−1)
-
0
21.2
0
20.9
2.05
30
24.9
20
22.9
1.73
42
25.8
28
-
1.53
54
26.8
36
-
1.38
66
26.8
44
-
Table 4.3: This table reports the inter-defect distance LD, the corresponding helium
ion dose in He+ nm−2 and the distance between the Raman E’ and A1 modes of the MoS2
monolayer (ﬁgure 4.12)
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
4
8
12
0
2
4
6
0
Energy (eV)
Intensity (a.u.)
a)
b)
1.7
Pristine
LD=2.05 nm
LD=1.73 nm
Figure 4.13: The photoluminescence spectra for HIM treated MoS2 monolayer on SiO2
in a) and HIM treated MoS2 monolayer on Au in b). It is possible to record the spectra
until the LD is greater than 1.73 nm. Below this value the photoluminescence peak of
MoS2 is not visible anymore both for the Au and the SiO2 substrates.
change.
We can observe structural changes of the helium ion treated MoS2 ﬂakes after CV mea-
surements.
Figure 4.14 shows the HIM images of a sample after the HIM treatment
before CV and subsequently after CV for several diﬀerent ion doses. Figure 4.14 a) shows
the HIM image of the ﬂake after the ﬁrst ion dose treatment (LD = 2.05 nm) before the
electrochemistry measurement. In this case, the MoS2 monolayer surface appears intact
and not aﬀected by the Helium ion bombardment. Figure 4.14 b) shows the HIM image
of the monolayer after the ﬁrst helium ion treatment and after the electrochemical mea-
surement. The ﬂake appears damaged at the edges and on the gold substrate. A zoom-in
in ﬁgure 4.14 d) shows the damaged monolayer close to the gold substrate.
The ﬂake after the second HIM treatment and after the second CV measurement is shown
in ﬁgure 4.14 c). The portion of the monolayer on SiO2 is severely damaged; the portion
of the ﬂake on the gold contact is practically dissolved. Figure 4.14 e) and f) show details
of ﬁgure 4.14 c). These images prove that the MoS2 structure is aﬀected by extensive
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.14: HIM images of a MoS2 monolayer. a) MoS2 after the ﬁrst HIM treatment
before performing the CV. b) MoS2 after the ﬁrst HIM treatment and after the ﬁrst CV. c)
MoS2 after the second HIM treatment and after the subsequent CV. d) Zoom-in of ﬁgure
b). e) and f) show a zoom-in of ﬁgure c). The MoS2 ﬂake on Au is clearly vanishing in this
region after the HIM treatment and the CV. In particular, the second treatment seriously
damages the ﬂake: most of the monolayer disappears and some residuals probably from
the electrochemistry measurements are deposited on the surface (white spots).
damages already after the second ion treatment. The white spots might be due to the
deposition of some residuals during the performance of CV.
The catalytic activity measurements are shown in ﬁgure 4.15. To take the structural
changes of the MoS2 ﬂakes into account, we normalize the background and correct the
currents to the surface of the ﬂakes obtained from the HIM images. The corrected po-
larization curves are shown in 4.15 a).
The current density increases with decreasing
inter-defect density LD. However, for LD=1.73 nm, the current density is lower than
for LD=2.05 nm. This behavior is also observable for LD=1.38 nm that shows a lower
current density than for LD=1.53 nm.
In order to understand the increased catalytic activity of MoS2 after helium treat-
ment, we would like to have a closer look at the band diagram of defective MoS2. Figure
4.16 represent a simpliﬁed schematic structure of the band alignment for MoS2 on a gold
substrate in equilibrium (band banding due to metal-semiconductor contact [88] are not
displayed). In ﬁgure 4.16 the energy of the valance band (VB) of MoS2 is deﬁned to
be zero. Consequently, the conduction band lies at 1.9 eV as reported in the theoret-
ical section 2.1.2. The induced defect state is placed in the band gap as suggest from
46
==PAGE:53==
0
10
100
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0
-5
-10
-15
j (mA cm-2)
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
-j (mA cm-2)
η vs RHE (V)
-η vs RHE (V)
α
β
a)
b)
Pristine
LD=2.05 nm
LD=1.73 nm
LD=1.53 nm
LD=1.38 nm
Figure 4.15: a) Cyclic voltammetry of pristine and helium ion treated MoS2. The
black polarization curves shows the pristine MoS2. The current density increases with
decreasing inter-defect density LD. b) Corresponding Tafel plots. The Greek letters α
and β indicate the lower and upper linear ﬁts of the same curve. The calculated Tafel
slopes are reported in table 4.4.
LD
Slope α
Slope β
(nm)
(mV dec−1)
(mV dec−1)
-
88
119
2.05
188
188
1.73
214
214
1.53
175
175
1.38
166
166
Table 4.4: Tafel slopes from ﬁgure4.15 b). α and β represent the lower and upper
linear ﬁts of the same curve, respectively.
Klein et al..[97] There are other induced defect levels in the band gap (e.g. double sul-
fur vacancies, single and double molybdenum vacancies and others)[97, 98]. However,
for simplicity, we only consider the energetic level of a generic vacancy (EV ∗). The po-
sitions of the Fermi level and the induced defect in-gap level are qualitatively chosen
accordingly to previous works.[97] We are aware of the fact that this is an oversimplify
picture, but it helps to get a ﬁrst insight to the possible energetic structure of the studied
process. Within this picture, the increasing of catalytic activity with the increasing of
the defects can be accounted for the formation of in-gap states providing new active sites.
Figure 4.15 b) shows the corresponding Tafel plots. The curve from the pristine sam-
ple is evaluated with two diﬀerent linear ﬁts. The Greek letters α and β in ﬁgure 4.15
b) indicate the lower and upper linear ﬁts of the same curve. For the readability of the
graph, the values of the slopes are reported in table 4.4. The pristine MoS2 presents the
lowest Tafel slopes, below the adsorption step value of 120 mV dec−1. It can be noticed
that for LD=2.05 nm and 1.73 nm, the slopes keep increasing. Once the LD gets down
47
==PAGE:54==
VB
CB
EF
EV*
E (eV)
0
1.9
MoS2
Au
H+
H
Figure 4.16: Band structure for helium ion treated MoS2 on gold. The Fermi level is
aligned across the two materials. By introducing defects, new in-gap states appear. The
induced defect energy level is labeled EV ∗. Other defects levels are possibly present in the
band gap. For simplicity, we neglected the surface and defect states that can rise at the
metal-semiconductor interface [39, 88].
to 1.53 nm the slope starts to decrease and reaches 166 mV dec−1 for LD=1.38 nm. In
order to propose a meaningful analysis of the photocalytic processes, we decided to study
the behaviour of the currents for potential values greater than the onset potential. As we
mention before, the onset potential is diﬃcult to estimate due to possible non-faradaic
behavior at low currents.[18] From literature, it is reported that the induced sulfur va-
cancies in MoS2 monolayer lowered the onset potential value with respect to the pristine
case.[56]. For this reason, for the evaluation of the Tafel slopes, we refer to the work of
Madauß et al. (in which the onset potential is set at -0.22 V [18]) and we consider the
potential range from -0.25 V to -0.4 V.
In ﬁgure 4.17, we suggest a band renormalization process in order to clarify the high
Tafel slope values for the treated ﬂake. Figure 4.17 shows the potential evolution across
the interface between the MoS2 and the electrolyte. In green is reported the electrochem-
ical potential of the defect active site (µdefect) and in black the potential of the pristine
active site (µpristine). The green and black dotted line represent the shift of the potentials
after the band renormalization. µH+/H2 is the redox potential for the HER and η is the
overpotential barrier.
Bruix et al. proved that the Au substrate is altering the band alignment of the MoS2
monolayer.[99] Since the Au contact is a metal and the MoS2 monolayer is a semiconduc-
tor, electrons tend to transfer from the MoS2 to the substrate to align the Fermi levels of
the two materials [60]. This eﬀect is less strong for MoS2 monolayer on SiO2 substrate
probably because the sulfur atoms create a weaker bond to the substrate. Moreover, this
also explain why the ﬂake dissolved faster on Au than on the SiO2 substrate.
The distortion of the band leads to an eﬀectively reduced band gap for the MoS2 mono-
layer on Au (around 1.3 eV from scanning tunnel spectroscopy measure at room temper-
ature) [99].
However, it is important to remind that it is only one of possible mechanisms that can
be accounted for the observed results. In fact, after each He+ treatment and CV mea-
48
==PAGE:55==
V
μdefect
μpristine 
t
Interface
η
μH+/H2
Figure 4.17:
The potential evolution at the interface of ion treated MoS2 and the
electrolyte. In green the electrochemical potential of the defect active site (µdefect ) and in
black the electrochemical potential (µpristine) of the pristine material. η is the overpotential
barrier. µH+/H2 is the redox potential for the HER. In green and black dotted line the
renormalized band of defects and pristine active sites due to interaction with the Au
substrate.
surement we altered the physical and chemical properties of the structure. Accounting
for all the possible processes that can occur leads to a very complex scenario, beyond the
scope of this thesis.
Having in mind ﬁgure 4.17 we can account for the high Tafel slopes reported in ﬁgure
4.15 b).
Tafel slopes are deﬁned by the concurrent presence of induced and "pristine" edge defects
but is not possible to distinguish clearly the two contributions.
However, for our results we suggest that for the doses corresponding to LD=2.05 nm and
1.73 nm, the induced defects should dominate. For these doses, we observe an increasing
of the Tafel slope, indicating a saturation of the active sites. For this reason we support
the idea that the edge sites do not consistently contribute to the catalysis.
We also observe that the slope start to decrease for LD smaller than 1.53 nm. For the
doses corresponding to LD=1.53 nm and 1.38 nm the monolayer present many missing
parts, hence, the edges extension is increased. Consequently, we assume that the major
contribution to the slope value for these cases should be given by the edge defects.
49
==PAGE:56==
5
|
Summary and outlooks
In this thesis, we study the catalytic properties of TMDCs towards the hydrogen evo-
lution reaction.
In particular, we introduce two diﬀerent approaches to improve the
(photo)catalytic activity of MoS2. In this respect, we produce vertical heterostructures
made of two single monolayers: MoS2 and WSe2. We also implement a helium ion treat-
ment (operated with a helium ion microscopy) to induce vacancies on the basal plane of
MoS2 monolayers.
The single monolayers are produced by micromechanical exfoliation from a bulk crystal
using a so-called scotch tape approach. We perform the transfer by viscoelastic stamp of
the single monolayers on a substrate or on top of the the ﬁrst layer in case of heterostruc-
ture. The transfer is practically accomplished with a two-stages microscope. The two
adjustable stages allow to align the ﬂake to the substrate. The substrates are prepared
by cleaving 7 × 7 mm2 items from a silicon wafer. Subsequently, we pattern gold contacts
through UV lithography and metal evaporation on the surface of the silicon substrates.
In order to characterize the sample, we implement diﬀerent techniques. We use Raman
and photolumiscence spectroscopy for a pre-characterization of the structures. Then, we
employ an electrochemistry technique for the analysis of the catalytic activity of the struc-
tures: the cyclic voltammetry. For the cyclic voltammetry measurements we adopt an
electrochemical cell with a three-electrodes conﬁguration (working, reference and counter
electrode). The cell presents a glass window that allow to illuminate the working elec-
trode (the structure) for photocatalysis experiments. In order to extract the information
from the results, we derive the Tafel slopes from the cyclic voltammograms and propose
other schematic models to analyze the catalytic activity.
We start our project with the analysis of the MoS2-WSe2 heterostructures. MoS2
ﬂake is placed on top of the WSe2 monolayer in order to be in direct contact with the
electrolyte. In fact, by aligning the two semiconductor materials, we obtain a type-II
band structure due to the diﬀerent energy band gaps.[15] This conﬁguration promotes
the charge separation: the electrons transfer to the conduction band of MoS2 and the
holes to the valance band of WSe2. In this way, we provide a source of electrons for the
HER.
From the Raman spectra of the single ﬂakes, we can conﬁrm that the analyzed structures
are monolayers: the position of their characteristic E’ and A1 mode peaks is in good
agreement with literature.[66, 67] Moreover, from the heterostructure photoluminescence
spectra (for SiO2 and gold substrates), we prove the weak coupling of the layers due
to the absence of an interlayer exciton.[54] Furthermore, we perform cyclic voltamme-
50
==PAGE:57==
try measurement for the heterostructure by applying a light source (a broadband white
light Xe/Hg arc lamp and KrAr laser of λ=488 nm). The light source is alternatively
switched on and oﬀto prove the eﬀective enhancement of the current density when the
light illuminates the sample. In general, we observe an increase of the current when the
heterostructure is illuminated, both for the application of the broadband white light and
the laser. The very narrow laser spot allows us to focus the light on diﬀerent regions
of our sample. The magnitude of the photo-induced current between the illuminated
and the non-illuminated measurements depends on the material and on the substrate
we considered, hence to the dielectric environment. However, the current saturate for
potential values of -0.2 V, meaning that the light enhancement is not eﬀective anymore.
We suggest that this behaviour could be due to a slow desorption of the hydrogen atoms
from the active sites, preventing the following adsorption step. Another possible rea-
son is the choice of a low scan rate of the measurement necessary to keep the chemical
equilibrium during the measurements. This induces a ”double exponential” shape of the
current, against the ideal exponential shape suggested by the Butler-Volmer equation.
Consequently, the anomalous current behaviour aﬀects the Tafel slopes. All the Tafel
slopes, regardless if the sample is illuminated or not, present very high values (above the
Volmer step value of 120 mv dec−1 [47]) indicating that the HER process is limited by
the adsorption of the hydrogen atoms at the active sites. We try to explain this eﬀect
through a band renormalization model [94]: we suggest that the light is responsible for
lowering the electrochemical potential for the active sites, making the desorption of the
hydrogen from the active sites less energetic favorable.
Moreover, we performed a light intensity test: we focus the KrAr laser on three diﬀerent
regions on a gold substrate. Each region is tested with increasing intensities of the laser
power. From the results, we can deﬁne a power density threshold for the considered
material combinations. We can estimate the lowest power density threshold for the WSe2
on gold substrate and we attribute this eﬀect to the diﬀerent dielectric environments that
aﬀects the absorption of light.
We interpret our results such that the catalytic activity is aﬀected by a mismatch of the
ﬂakes which constitute our heterostructure. We suggest to prepare heterostructures with
aligned crystalline axis in order to improve the activity and overcome the limitation of
the adsorption step in the HER process.[8, 55] Moreover, the combination of diﬀerent
TMDCs with diﬀerent energy band gaps may be considered to enhance the charge sepa-
ration process.
The second part of our project deals with helium treated MoS2 monolayers. MoS2 presents
an inert basal plane and most of the active sites are edge sites.[18] We exploit a HIM
to introduce defects to increase the catalytic activity of the basal plane in a controlled
way.[59, 82] We estimate the sputter yields for MoS2 on SiO2 and gold substrates before
performing the ion treatment through SRIM software. We decide to set a constant inter-
defect distance for both of the two substrates. In this way, due to the diﬀerent sputter
yields, we apply diﬀerent ion doses for MoS2 on SiO2 and gold substrates.
We perform Raman and photoluminescence spectra after each ion treatment/cyclic voltam-
metry measurement sequence in order to control the eﬀects of the introduced vacancies on
the monolayer. From Raman spectroscopy, we conﬁrm that the analyzed ﬂake is mono-
51
==PAGE:58==
layer by the good agreement with literature of the E’ and A1 mode peaks position.[67]
Furthermore, we observe a blue-shift of the E’ mode for increasing ion dose. This can be
explained with a phonon conﬁnement model.[84]
The Raman spectra on gold lack of the A1 mode for high ion doses. As well for the
photoluminesce spectra, we cannot detect any signal after the second ion treatment. The
severe damages of the ﬂake after the the HIM treatments and the electrochemistry mea-
surements can explain the anomalies in both the Raman and photoluminescence spectra.
We take HIM images after each dose test to keep track of the damages occurring to the
ﬂake. The degradation of the ﬂake can be accounted for the presence in the electrolyte
of oxygen which reacts with the dangling bonds of the edges and induced defect sites.[96]
From the electrochemistry measurements (implemented without illumination), we ob-
serve an increasing of the current density for the treated ﬂake with respect to the pristine
monolayer. The current strongly depends on the area of the ﬂake and on the defects. The
Tafel slopes help us to clarify which reaction processes are occurring during the measure-
ments. The Tafel slopes present higher values than the Volmer step value, indicating the
adsorption of the hydrogen as the limiting step in the HER process.[47] We propose a
band renormalization model to illustrate this behaviour.[99] In this case we consider the
eﬀect of the gold substrate on the MoS2 band structure. Gold is responsible for the band
distortion in MoS2 due to the diﬀerent nature of the two materials (metallic and semi-
conducting respectively).[99] We conclude that it is not possible to clearly distinguish the
contribution of the pristine defects from the induced defects to the catalytic activity of
the ﬂake. Nonetheless, we believe that for lower doses the major contribution is given by
the induced defects, while for higher doses the edge defects dominate due to the extensive
damage reported by the monolayer.
In order to improve our results, one could explore the ﬁeld of the defect engineering for
diﬀerent doses, in particular we suggest lower doses (the corresponding interdefect dis-
tance should be greater than 2 nm). From our results, the MoS2 monolayer is seriously
damaged for interdefect distance smaller than 1.53 nm. For this regime we cannot clearly
detect the induced defect contribution to the catalytic activity since the the extension of
the edge sites has become very large.
From literature, oxygen represents an issue for the TMDC monolayers performance.[96,
100] In fact, from recent studies, it is shown that the substitutional oxygen dominate over
vacancies in TMDC monolayer fabricated and characterized in ambient conditions[100].
Therefore substitutional oxygen defects are responsible for the absence of in gap states.
Furthermore, oxygen presents in the electrolyte reacts with the dangling bond of the de-
fects leading to the corrosion of the ﬂake during the electrochemistry measurements[96].
In order to reduce the amount of oxygen, we suggest to perform the production and
measurements of TMDC monolayers in a vacuum chamber.
In conclusion, we suggest diﬀerent approaches to improve the (photo)catalytic activity
of MoS2 toward a more eﬃcient hydrogen evolution reaction. Increasing the eﬃciency of
the hydrogen evolution reaction would help to extend the employment of water splitting
reaction as a clean alternative method for the hydrogen production.
52
==PAGE:59==
A
|
AFM measurements
In this appendix we report the results from Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) measure-
ment. AFM is a useful technique that allows to map the surface topography by measuring
the force between the scanning tip and the sample surface.[101] These measurements were
performed in tapping mode: the tip enters in contact intermittently with the sample by
exciting the cantilever where the tip is placed at a certain frequency, and the oscillation
amplitude is measured. The amplitude depends monotonously on the distance between
the tip and the sample and it is typically large in the tapping mode. This allows to
have an eﬀective signal with reduced instability.[101] A height proﬁle is estimated from
the grey scale pictures in order to prove that the heterostructures used for the HER are
formed by single monolayer. However the results are not compatible with the theory that
suggest a thickness of around 0.6 nm for both MoS2 and WSe2 (reported values in table
2.1). We perform rapid thermal annealing at 280◦for 4 hours in order to remove possible
water and PDMS residuals that could have cause the higher value for the thickness of the
heterostructure, but after the reiteration of the measurements it is still not possible to
distinguish any diﬀerence. It is not also possible to estimate the nature of this roughness
on the surface that causes the mismatch of theoretical and experimental data. Neverthe-
less, Raman spectroscopy conﬁrmed the fact that both MoS2 and WSe2 used to fabricate
the heterostructures are monolayer. Here are reported the pictures and the height proﬁle
for completeness:
53
==PAGE:60==
5 µm
474 nm
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
5 µm
450.8 nm
383.9
395.0
400.0
405.0
410.0
415.0
420.0
425.0
430.0
435.0
440.0
445.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
426
428
430
432
434
436
438
440
442
y (nm)
x (μm)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
412
414
416
418
420
422
424
426
428
y (nm)
x (μm)
a) Before annealing
b) After annealing
Figure A.1: Figure a) and b) show the AFM image of the MoS2 monolayer before and
after the annealing, respectively.
54
==PAGE:61==
B
|
Light spectrum of Xe/Hg arc lamp
200
400
600
800
1.2
0.9
0.6
0.3
Wavelength (nm)
Intensity (a.u.)
Without glass
Thin glass
Thick glass
Figure B.1: Light spectra of a Xe/Hg arc lamp source for diﬀerent medium: in green
a thick glass, in blue a thin glass (the one used for the window of the electrochemical cell)
and in red in air. The spectrum shape of the light remain the same for all the three cases.
55
==PAGE:62==
C
|
WSe2-MoS2 heterostructure
MoS2
WSe2
20 μm
1
2
3
4
5
6
WSe2 on Au
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
Au
HS on Au
WSe2 on SiO2
HS on SiO2
Bulk MoS2
-0.16
-0.08
0
-0.16
-0.08
0
-0.16
-0.08
0
0
0
-3
-6
-9
-12
0
-3
-6
-9
-12
η vs RHE (V)
i (nA)
Dark
Illuminated
a)
b)
Figure C.1: Figure a) shows a WSe2-MoS2 heterostructure. The white and yellow
dotted lines highlight the contours of the WSe2 and MoS2 monolayers, respectively. MoS2
is placed on top of the WSe2 monolayer. The gold contact appear rose due to the optical
contrast. The numbers from 1 to 6 indicate the analyzed regions. Figure b) reports the
cyclic voltammograms (in black) of the six regions indicated in a). In red and blue the
Butler-Volmer ﬁts for the illuminated and the dark currents, respectively. We perform
the measurements by alternatively exposing the sample to a KrAr laser (λ=488 nm) with
a power intensity of 100µW. The scan-rate is set at 5 mV/s.
56
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1] J. Houghton, Global warming, Reports on Progress in Physics, Volume 68, Issue 6,
pp. 1343-1403, (2005)
DOI: 10.1088/0034-4885/68/6/R02
[2] O. Ellabban, H. Abu-Rub, F. Blaabjerg, Renewable energy resources: Current status,
future prospects and their enabling technology : Current status, future prospects and
their enabling technology, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Volume 39,
pp. 748-764, (2014)
DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.113
[3] M. Becherif, H.S. Ramadan, K. Cabaret, F. Picard, N. Simoncini, O. Bethoux, Hy-
drogen Energy Storage: New Techno-Economic Emergence Solution Analysis, Energy
Procedia, Volume 74, pp. 371-380 (2015)
DOI:10.1016/j.egypro.2015.07.629
[4] N. A. Kelly,Hydrogen production by water electrolysis, Advances in Hydrogen Produc-
tion, Storage and Distribution, pp. 159-185 (2014)
DOI:10.1533/9780857097736.2.159
[5] M. R. Pai, A.M. Banerjee,A.K. Tripathi, et al.,
Fundamentals and Applications of
the Photocatalytic Water Splitting Reaction, Functional Materials, pp. 579-606 (2012)
DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-385142-0.00014-3
[6] J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont, T. F. Jaramillo, Catalyz-
ing the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction (HER) with Molybdenum Sulﬁde Nanomaterials,
Acs Catalysis, Volume 4, Issue 11, pp. 3957-3971 (2014)
DOI: 10.1021/cs500923c
[7] L.A. Kibler, Hydrogen Electrocatalysis, Cheminform, Volume 37, Issue 47 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/chin.200647228
[8] A. K. Geim, I.V. Grigorieva, Van der Waals heterostructures, Volume 499, Issue 7459,
pp. 419-425 (2013)
DOI: 10.1038/nature12385
[9] A. H. Castro Neto, K. Novoselov, Two-Dimensional Crystals: Beyond Graphene,
Mater. Express, Vol. 1 (2011)
DOI:10.1166/mex.2011.1002
57
==PAGE:64==
[10] L. Ruitao, J.A. Robinson, R.E. Schaak, et al, Transition Metal Dichalcogenides and
Beyond: Synthesis, Properties,and Applications of Single- and Few-Layer Nanosheets,
Volume 48, Issue 1, pp. 56-64 (2015)
DOI: 10.1021/ar5002846
[11] E. Parzinger, E. Mitterreiter, M. Stelzer, F. Kreupl, J.W. Ager, A.W. Holleitner,
U. Wurstbauer, Hydrogen evolution activity of individual mono-, bi-, and few-layer
MoS2 towards photocatalysis,Applied Materials Today, Volume 8, pp. 132-140 (2017)
DOI: 10.1016/j.apmt.2017.04.007
[12] S. Das,J. A. Robinson, M. Dubey, et al. Beyond Graphene: Progress in Novel Two-
Dimensional Materials and van der Waals Solids,Annual Review of Materials Re-
search, Volume 45, Issue 1, pp. 1-27 (2015)
DOI: 10.1146/annurev-matsci-070214-021034
[13] T. Jaramillo, K.P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J.H. Nielsen, et al., Identiﬁcation of Active
Edge Sites for Electrochemical H2 Evolution from MoS2 Nanocatalysts, Science, Vol-
ume 317, Issue 5834, pp. 100-102 (2007)
DOI: 10.1126/science.1141483
[14] M. Velicky, Mark. A. Bissett, C.R. Woods, P.S. Toth, T. Georgiou, et al., Photo-
electrochemistry of Pristine Mono- and Few-Layer MoS2, Nano Letters, Volume 16,
Issue 3, pp. 2023-2032 (2016) DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b05317
[15] S. Li, W. Zang, X. Liu, S. J. Pennycook, Z. Kou, C. Yang, C. Guan, J.
Wang, Heterojunction engineering of MoSe2/MoS2 with electronic modulation to-
wards synergetic hydrogen evolution reaction and supercapacitance performance DOI:
10.1016/j.cej.2018.11.036
[16] B. Peng, G. Yu, X. Liu, B. Liu, X. Liang, L. Bi, L. Deng, T.C. Sum, L.K. Loh,
Ultrafast charge transfer in MoS2/WSe2 p-n Heterojunction : Paper, 2d Materials,
Volume 3, Issue 2, pp. 025020 (2106)
DOI: 10.1088/2053-1583/3/2/025020
[17] M. Kang, B. Kim, S.H. Ryu, S.W. Jung, J Kim, L. Moreschini, et al., Univer-
sal Mechanism of Band-Gap Engineering in Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides, Nano
Letters, Volume 17, Issue 3, pp. 1610-1615 (2017)
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b04775
[18] L. Madauss, I. Zegkinoglou, H.V. Muinos, Y.W. Choi, S. Kunze, et al., Highly ac-
tive single-layer MoS2 catalysts synthesized by swift heavy ion irradiation, Nanoscale,
Volume 10, Issue 48, pp. 22908-22916 (2018)
DOI: 10.1039/c8nr04696d
[19] M. Fox,Optical properties of solids, Oxford university press, (2010)
ISBN 9780199573370
58
==PAGE:65==
[20] G. Ankur, S. Tamilselvan, S. Suclipta, Recent development in 2D materials beyond
graphene, Progress in Materials Science, Volume 73, pp. 44-126 (2015)
DOI:10.1016/j.pmatsci.2015.02.002
[21] Z. M. Wang,MoS2-Materials, Physics, and Devices, Lecture Notes in Nanoscale Sci-
ence and Technology Volume 21 (2014)
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-02850-7
[22] M. Bernardi, M. Palummo, J. Grossman, Extraordinary sunlight absorption and
one nanometer thick photovoltaics using two-dimensional monolayer materials, Nano
Letters, Volume 13, Issue 8, pp. 3664-3670 (2013)
DOI: 10.1021/nl401544y
[23] T. Roy, M. Tosun, X. Cao, H. Fang, D.H. Lien, et al., Dual-gated MoS2/WSe2van
der Waals tunnel diodes and transistors, Acs Nano, Volume 9, Issue 2, pp. 2071-2079
(2015)
DOI: 10.1021/nn507278b
[24] J.A. Wilson, A.D. Yoﬀe, The transition metal dichalcogenides discussion and inter-
pretation of the observed optical, electrical and structural properties,Adv. Phys. 18
193–335 (1969)
DOI: org/10.1080/00018736900101307
[25] Q.H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, et al., Electronics and optoelectronics of
two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Volume 7, Issue 11, pp. 699-712
(2012)
DOI:10.1038/NNANO.2012.193
[26] M. Velický, P. S. Toth, From two-dimensional materials to their heterostructures:
An electrochemist’sperspective, Applied Materials Today 8, 68–103 (2017)
DOI:10.1016/j.apmt.2017.05.003
[27] R. Roldan, J. Silva-Guillen,P. Lopez-Sancho, et al., Electronic properties of single-
layer and multilayer transition metal dichalcogenides MX2 (M = Mo, W and X = S,
Se), Annalen Der Physik, , Volume 526, Issue 9-10, pp. 347 (2014)
DOI: 10.1002/andp.201400128
[28] K. Molloy, Group Theory for Chemists, 2nd Edition, Woodhead Publishing (2010)
ISBN 9780857092403
[29] Y. Zhao, X. Luo, H. Li, et al., Inter layer Breathing and Shear Modes in Few-Trilayer
MoS2 and WSe2, Nano Letters, Volume 13, Issue 3, pp. 1007-1015 (2013)
DOI: 10.1021/nl304169w
[30] G.B.L. Di Xiao, F. Wanxiang, X. Xiaodong, Y. Wang, Coupled Spin and Valley
Physics in Monolayers of MoS2 and Other Group-VI Dichalcogenides, Physical Re-
view Letters, Volume 108, Issue 19, pp. 196802 (2012)
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.196802
59
==PAGE:66==
[31] G.G. Naumis, S. Barraza-Lopez, M. Oliva-Leyva, Maurice, et al.,Electronic and opti-
cal properties of strained graphene and other strained 2D materials: a review , Reports
on Progress in Physics, Volume 80, Issue 9, pp. 1-62 (2017)
DOI: 10.1088/1361-6633/aa74ef
[32] S.J. Sandoval, D. Yang, R. Frindt, J. Irwin, Raman study and lattice dynamics of
single molecular layers of MoS2, Phys. Rev. B 44:3955 (1991)
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.44.3955
[33] W. Zhao, Z. Ghorannevis, L. Chu, et al., Evolution of Electronic Structure in Atomi-
cally Thin Sheets of WS2 and WSe2, Acs Nano Volume 7, Issue 1, pp. 791-797, (2013)
DOI: 10.1021/nn305275h
[34] A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, et al., Emerging Photoluminescence in Monolayer
MoS2 Nano Letters, Volume 10, Issue 4, pp. 1271-1275 (2010)
DOI: 10.1021/nl903868w
[35] A. Kuc, N. Zibouche, T. Heine, Inﬂuence of quantum conﬁnement on the electronic
structure of the transition metal sulﬁde TS2,Physical Review B, Volume 83, Issue 24,
pp. 245213 (2011)
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.83.245213
[36] A.
V.
Kolobov,
J.
Tominaga,
Two-Dimensional
Transition-Metal
Dichalco-
genides,Springer Series in Materials Science, Volume 239 (2016)
DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-31450-1
[37] A. Kormanyos,G. Burkard, M. Gmitra, et al., k.p. theory for two-dimensional transi-
tion metal dichalcogenide semiconductors, 2d Materials, Volume 2, Issue 2, pp. 022001
(2015)
DOI: 10.1088/2053-1583/2/2/022001
[38] K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho, et al., 2D materials and van der Waals
heterostructures, Science, Volume 353, Issue 6298, pp. aac9439 (2016)
DOI: 10.1126/science.aac9439
[39] W. Schmickler, E.Santos. Interfacial Electrochemistry, Springer Berlin Heidelberg
(2010). ISBN 9783642049361
[40] C.G. Zoski, Handbook of electrochemistry, Elsevier (2007)
ISBN 9780444519580
[41] D.A. Noren, M.A. Hoﬀman, Clarifying the Butler-Volmer equation and related ap-
proximations for calculating activation losses in solid oxide fuel cell models, Journal
of Power Sources, Volume 152, Issue 1, pp. 175-181 (2005)
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2005.03.174
[42] A. J. Bard, L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applica-
tions, Wiley, (2000)
ISBN 9780471043720
60
==PAGE:67==
[43] W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, M. Gao, J. Zheng, J.G. Chen, Y. Yan, Correlating hydrogen
oxidation and evolution activity on platinum at diﬀerent pH with measured hydrogen
binding energy,Nature Communications, Volume 6, Issue 1, pp. 5848 (2015)
DOI: 10.1038/ncomms6848
[44] U. Hanefeld, L, Leﬀerts, Catalysis : An Integrated Textbook, John Wiley
Sons,
Incorporated (2017)
ISBN 9783-527341597
[45] http://goldbook.iupac.org/C00876.html
[46] J. Liao, B. Sa, J. Zhou, R. Ahuja, Z. Sun, Zhimei, Design of high-eﬃciency visible-
light photocatalysts for water splitting: MoS2/AlN(GaN) heterostructures, Journal of
Physical Chemistry C, Volume 118, Issue 31, pp. 17594-17599 (2014)
DOI: 10.1021/jp5038014
[47] Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong, H. Dai, MoS2 nanoparticles grown on
graphene: An advanced catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction, Journal of the
American Chemical Society, Volume 133, Issue 19, pp. 7296-7299 (2011)
DOI: 10.1021/ja201269b
[48] H. Zhang, R. Lv, Defect engineering of two-dimensional materials for eﬃcient elec-
trocatalysis, Journal of Materiomics, Volume 4, Issue 2, pp. 95-107 (2018)
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmat.2018.02.006
[49] Y. Wang, Y. Sun, H. Liao, S. Sun, S. Li, J.W. Ager, Z.J. Xu, Activation Eﬀect
of Electrochemical Cycling on Gold Nanoparticles towards the Hydrogen Evolution
Reaction in Sulfuric Acid, Electrochimica Acta, Volume 209, pp. 440-447 (2016)
DOI: 10.1016/j.electacta.2016.05.095
[50] H. Zhuang, R.G. Hennig, Computational search for single-layer transition-metal
dichalcogenide photocatalysts, Journal of Physical Chemistry C, Volume 117, Issue
40, pp. 20440-20445 (2013)
DOI: 10.1021/jp405808a
[51] M. Aras, Ç. Kılıç, S. Ciraci, Lateral and Vertical Heterostructures of Transition Metal
Dichalcogenides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 122 (3), pp 1547–1555 (2018)
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b08256
[52] H. Fang, C. Battaglia, C. Carraro, S. Nemsak, B. Ozdol, J.S. Kang, et al., Strong
interlayer coupling in van der Waals heterostructures built from single-layer chalco-
genides, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, Volume 111, Issue 17, pp. 6198-6202 (2014)
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1405435111
[53] H. Terrones, F. López-Urías, M. Terrones, Novel hetero-layered materials with tun-
able direct band gaps by sandwiching diﬀerent metal disulﬁdes and diselenides, Scien-
tiﬁc Reports volume 3, Article number: 1549 (2013)
DOI: 10.1038/srep01549
61
==PAGE:68==
[54] M.H. Chiu, M.Y. Li, W. Zhang, W.T. Hsu, W.H. Chang, M. Terrones, et al., Spec-
troscopic signatures for interlayer coupling in MoS2-WSe2 van der waals stacking,
Acs Nano, Volume 8, Issue 9, pp. 9649-9656 (2014)
DOI: 10.1021/nn504229z
[55] R.A.W. Dryfe,2D Transition Metal Chalcogenides and van der Waals Heterostruc-
tures: Fundamental Aspects of their Electrochemistry, Current Opinion in Electro-
chemistry (2018)
DOI: 10.1016/j.coelec.2018.11.021
[56] H. Li, C. Tsai, A.L. Koh, et al., Activating and optimizing MoS2 basal planes for
hydrogen evolution through the formation of strained sulphur vacancies, Nature Ma-
terials Open table of contents, Volume 15, Issue 1, pp. 48 (2016)
DOI:10.1038/NMAT4465
[57] J. Hong, Z. Hu, M. Probert, K. Li, D. Lv, et al., Exploring atomic defects in molyb-
denum disulphide monolayers, Nature Communications, Volume 6, Issue 1, pp. 6293
(2015)
DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7293
[58] E.W.K. Koh, C.H. Chiu, Y.W. Lim, Y.W. Zhang, H. Pan, Hydrogen adsorption on
and diﬀusion through MoS2 monolayer: First-principles study, International Journal
of Hydrogen Energy, Volume 37, Issue 19, pp. 14323-14328 (2012)
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.07.069
[59] J. Klein, A. Kuc, A. Nolinder, M. Altzschner, J. Wierzbowski, F. Sigger, et al.,
Helium Ion Modiﬁed Luminescence and Robust Valley Polarization of Atomically Thin
MoS2, Arxiv, (2017)
DOI: 10.1088/2053-1583/aa9642
[60] Y. Chen, S. Huang, X. Ji, K. Adepalli, K. Yin, X. Ling, et al., Tuning Electronic
Structure of Single Layer MoS2 through Defect and Interface Engineering, Acs Nano,
Volume 12, Issue 3, pp. 2569-2579 (2018)
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b08418
[61] Z. He, R. Zhao, X. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. Su, Defect Engineering in Single-Layer
MoS2 Using Heavy Ion Irradiation, ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, Volume
10, Issue 49, pp. 42524-42533 (2018)
DOI: 10.1021/acsami.8b17145
[62] N.W. Ashcroft, N.D. Mermin, Solid state physics, Saunders college, (1976)
ISBN: 0030839939 and 0030493463
[63] A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Buscema, R. Molenaar, V Singh, L. Janssen, et al., De-
terministic transfer of two-dimensional materials by all-dry viscoelastic stamping, 2d
Materials, Volume 1, Issue 1, pp. 011002 (2014)
DOI: 10.1088/2053-1583/1/1/011002
62
==PAGE:69==
[64] R. Merlin, A. Pinczuk, W.H. Weber, Overview of Phonon Raman Scattering in
Solids, Springer Series in Materials Science, vol 42. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2000)
ISBN 9783642086564
[65] Umesh P. Agarwal and Rajai H. Atalla, Raman Spectroscopy, Chapter from Methods
in Lignin Chemistry (1995) DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-74065-7_12
[66] P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Boettger, et al., Photoluminescence emission and Raman
response of monolayer MoS2, MoSe2, and WSe2, Optics Express, Volume 21, Issue
4, pp. 4908-4916 (2013)
DOI: 10.1364/OE.21.004908
[67] S. Tongay, J. Suh, C. Ataca, W. Fan, A. Luce, J.S. Kang, et al., Defects activated pho-
toluminescence in two-dimensional semiconductors: Interplay between bound, charged,
and free excitons, Scientiﬁc Reports, Volume 3, Issue 1, pp. 2657 (2013)
DOI: 10.1038/srep02657
[68] https://www.calpaclab.com/teﬂon-ptfe-compatibility/
[69] Paul A. Tipler, College physics, Worth Pub (1987)
ISBN: 9780879012687
[70] R. Chen, C. Yang, W. Cai, H.Y. Wang, J. Miao, L. Zhang, et al.,Use of Platinum
as the Counter Electrode to Study the Activity of Nonprecious Metal Catalysts for the
Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Acs Energy Letters, Volume 2, Issue 5, pp. 1070-1075
(2017)
DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00219
[71] E. Mitterreiter, Private Communication (2019)
[72] P.T. Kissinger, W.R. Heineman, Cyclic Voltammetry, Journal of Chemical Educa-
tion, Volume 60, Issue 9, pp. 702-706 (1983)
DOI: 10.1021/ed060p702
[73] R. G. Compton, E. Laborda, K. R. Ward, Understanding Voltammetry: Simulation
of Electrode Processes, ICP, (2013)
ISBN 9781783263233
[74] M.G. Walter, E.L. Warren, J.R. McKone, S.W. Boettcher, et al., Solar water splitting
cells, Chemical Reviews, Volume 110, Issue 11, pp. 6446-6473 (2010)
DOI: 10.1021/cr1002326
[75] J. Benson, M. Li, S. Wang, P. Wang, P. Papakonstantinou, Electrocatalytic Hydrogen
Evolution Reaction on Edges of a Few Layer Molybdenum Disulﬁde Nanodots Acs
Applied Materials and Interfaces, Volume 7, Issue 25, pp. 14113-14122 (2015)
DOI: 10.1021/acsami.5b03399
63
==PAGE:70==
[76] B.A. Pinaud, J. Benck, L. Seitz, A.J. Forman, Z. Chen, et al., Technical and economic
feasibility of centralized facilities for solar hydrogen production via photocatalysis and
photoelectrochemistry,Energy and Environmental Science, Volume 6, Issue 7, pp. 1983-
2002 (2013)
DOI: 10.1039/c3ee40831k
[77] J. Notte, R. Hill, S. McVey, L. Farkas, R. Percival, B. Ward, An introduction to
helium ion microscopy, Microscopy and Microanalysis, Volume 12, Issue 2, pp. 126-
127 (2006)
DOI: 10.1017/S1431927606069820
[78] G. Hlawacek, V. Veligura, R. Van Gastel, B. Poelsema, Bene Helium ion microscopy
IN Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology B:nanotechnology and Microelectron-
ics, Volume 32, Issue 2, pp. 020801 (2014)
DOI: 10.1116/1.4863676
[79] C.D. Bell, M.C. Lemme, L.A. Stern, R.J. Williams, M.C. Marcus, Precision Cutting
and Patterning of Graphene with Helium Ions, Nanotechnology, Volume 20, Issue 45,
pp. 455301 (2009)
DOI: 10.1.1.900.2139
[80] L. Scipioni, L.A. Stern, J. Notte, S. Sijbrandij, B. Griﬃn, Helium ion microscope,
Advanced Materials and Processes, Volume 166, Issue 6, pp. 27-30 (2008)
ISSN: 0882-7958
[81] https://web.archive.org/web/20081201174227/http://www.smt.zeiss.com/orion
[82] S. Mignuzzi, A.J. Pollard, N. Bonini, B. Brennan, I.S. Gilmore, M.A. Pimenta, et
al., Eﬀect of disorder on Raman scattering of single-layer MoS2, Physical Review B
- Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, Volume 91, Issue 19, pp. 195411 (2015)
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.91.195411
[83] http://www.srim.org/SRIM/SRIM%2008.pdf
[84] A.K. Arora, M. Rajalakshmi, T.R. Ravindran, et al., Raman spectroscopy of optical
phonon conﬁnement in nanostructured materials, Journal of Raman Spectroscopy,
Volume 38, Issue 6, pp. 604-617 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/jrs.1684
[85] P. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Xu, W. Mu, J. Xu, W. Li, K. Chen, Tunable nonlinear op-
tical properties in nanocrystalline Si/SiO2 multilayers under femtosecond excitation,
Nanoscale Research Letters, Volume 9, Issue 1, pp. 28 (2014)
DOI: 10.1186/1556-276X-9-28
[86] J. Kunstmann, F. Mooshammer, P. Nagler, A. Chaves, F. Stein, et al., Momentum-
space indirect interlayer excitons in transition metal dichalcogenide van der Waals
heterostructures,Nature Physics volume 14, pages 801–805 (2018)
DOI: 10.1038/s41567-018-0123-y
64
==PAGE:71==
[87] P. Forzatti, L. Lietti, Catalyst deactivation, Catalysis Today , Volume 52, Issue 2-3,
pp. 165-181 (1999)
DOI: 10.1016/S0920-5861(99)00074-7
[88] S. M. Sze , K.K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley-Interscience 3. edition
(2006)
ISBN: 978-0471143239
[89] M. Palummo, M. Bernardi, J. C. Grossman, Exciton Radiative Lifetimes in Two-
Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides, Nano Lett., 15 (5), pp 2794–2800
(2015)
DOI: 10.1021/nl503799t
[90] G.H. Jung, S. Yoo, Q.H. Park, Measuring the optical permittivity of two-dimensional
materials without a priori knowledge of electronic transitions, Nanophotonics, Volume
8, Issue 2, pp. 263-270 (2018)
DOI:10.1515/nanoph-2018-0120
[91] H. Zhang, Y. Ma, Y. Wan, X. Rong, Z. Xie, W. Wang, et al., Measuring the Refractive
Index of Highly Crystalline Monolayer MoS2 with High Conﬁdence, Scientiﬁc Reports,
Volume 5, Issue 1, pp. 8440 (2015)
DOI: 10.1038/srep08440
[92] Y. Li, A. Chernikov, X. Zhang, A. Rigosi, H. M. Hill, A. M. van der Zande,et al.,
Measurement of the optical dielectric function of monolayer transition-metal dichalco-
genides: MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, Physical Review B 90, 205422 (2014)
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.90.205422
[93] M.H. Choudhury, S. Ciampi, Y. Yang, R. Tavallaie, Y. Zhu, L. Zarei, et al., Con-
necting electrodes with light: One wire, many electrodes, Chemical Science, Volume 6,
Issue 12, pp. 6769-6776 (2015)
DOI: 10.1039/c5sc03011k
[94] A. Chernikov, C. Ruppert, H.M. Hill1, A.F. Rigosi,T.F. Heinz, Population inversion
and giant bandgap renormalization in atomically thin WS2 layers, Nature Photonics
volume 9, pages 466–470 (2015)
DOI: 10.1038/NPHOTON.2015.104
[95] W.M. Parkin, A. Balan, L. Liang, P.M. Das, M. Lamparski, C.H. Naylor, et al.,
Raman Shifts in Electron-Irradiated Monolayer MoS2, Acs Nano, Volume 10, Issue 4,
pp. 4134-4142 (2016)
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.5b07388
[96] E. Parzinger, B. Miller, B. Blaschke, J.A. Garrido, J.W. Ager, A. Holleitner, et
al.,Photocatalytic Stability of Single- and Few-Layer MoS2, Acs Nano — 2015, Volume
9, Issue 11, pp. 11302-11309 (2015)
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.5b04979
65
==PAGE:72==
[97] J. Klein, M. Lorke, M. Florian, F. Sigger, J. Wierzbowski, et al., Atomistic defect
states as quantum emitters in monolayer MoS2, arXiv:1901.01042v2 [cond-mat.mes-
hall] (2019)
[98] J.B. Park, C.B. France, B.A. Parkinson, Scanning tunneling microscopy investigation
of nanostructures produced by Ar+ and He+ bombardment of MoS2 surfaces Journal
of Vacuum Science and Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures,
Volume 23, Issue 4, pp. 1532-1542 (2005)
DOI: 10.1116/1.1993622
[99] A. Bruix, J.A. Miwa, N. Hauptmann, D. Wegner, S. Ulstrup, S. Grönborg, et
al., Single-layer MoS2 on Au(111): Band gap renormalization and substrate inter-
action,Physical Review B, Volume 93, Issue 16, pp. 165422 (2016)
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.93.165422
[100] S. Barja, S. Refaely-Abramson, B. Schuler, D.Y. Qiu, A. Pulkin, S. Wickenburg, et
al., Identifying substitutional oxygen as a proliﬁc point defect in monolayer transition
metal dichalcogenides with experiment and theory, arXiv:1810.03364 [cond-mat.mtrl-
sci] (2018)
[101] B. Voigtländer, Scanning Probe Microscopy : Atomic Force Microscopy and Scan-
ning Tunneling Microscopy, Springer, (2015)
DOI. 10.1007/978-3-662-45240-0
66
