==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Mathematical Models of the Glymphatic
System
Proposals for experiments and their interpretations
Peter Bork (s145779)
Panum 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The glymphatic system is a recently discovered macroscopic system of water flows in
the mammalian brain which serves roles in waste clearance during sleep and which is
intricately involved in stroke and cardiac arrest pathology. Currently, experiments
are able to illuminate only pieces of the larger system, causing difficulties in mak-
ing effective experiments. The scientific community is consequently divided on where
spaces for glymphatic flows exist, which direction the flows have, where the flows orig-
inate and what drives the flows. For this reason, three mathematical reductions of
the arterial glymphatic system are proposed and evaluated. They represent coherent
syntheses of key biophysical aspects of the arterial glymphatic system, fit the known
data qualitatively and make falsifiable predictions. The resulting models are consis-
tent with convective glymphatic flows along arteries into cortical tissue, regulated by
arterial dilation and contraction. Based on these results, it is proposed to prioritize
research in 1) anatomical structures of glymphatic spaces along small arterioles, 2)
regulation of arterial diameters and its consequences for healthy glymphatic flows,
and 3) osmotic water fluxes across the blood-brain barrier.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark and at the Center for Transla-
tional Neuromedicine at the Panum Institute and at the University of Rochester in
partial fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring the degree of Master of Science in
Engineering.
Panum, March 4, 2019
Peter Bork (s145779)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Professor Maiken Nedegaard brought me to Rochester where I learned more than
in any other month of my studies, helped me identify useful scientific problems I
could contribute to, and gave me resources to experiment my way into the field of
the glymphatic system. Professor Poul Hjorth taught me most of what I know about
dynamical systems, provided key mathematical and physical insights when needed
(such as the differential relationship between hill-shaped and bump-shaped curves)
and greatly improved the clarity of my reasoning by re-structuring my modelling
approach. Professor Erik Martens taught me how to analyse linear resistive networks
(which I used as a key step in developing the models in chapter 4 and 5 even though
it did not end up being part of the derivation presented) and showed me how to use
graph-notation to reason about spatial networks (which is foundational for chapter
5). My advisers have all spent attention well beyond duty for this project. Professor
Doug Kelley suggested the first project descriptions, one of which turned into chapter
3, and provided instructive discussions during my time in Rochester, but is owed most
thanks for the inspiring presentation that he gave at the glymphatics seminar in the
spring of 2018, where I was first hooked on trying my hand at biophysics. Professor
Jack Thomas also gave a very inspiring talk at that seminar, and later further eased
my introduction into the field of fluid dynamics through discussions and challenges
from a level of experience which is rare for beginners in the field to enjoy.
Humberto Mestre taught me what I know about vascular and glymphatic regu-
lation.
It is with his insights, patience and delight in discussing science, that we
in December 2018 arrived at a reduction of the glymphatic system that he could
sketch and I could translate into mathematics. That is mostly a feat on Humberto’s
part, who is the main author of the conceptual model that I have attempted to give a
mathematical representation. Lauren Hablitz taught me how to learn from mice both
practically and theoretically, and I would have liked to have given greater emphasis
to the very useful and important role of the circadian rhythms that she taught me
about. Jeff Tithoff gave useful feedback on several of my calculations. Emilie Herfelt
improved the mathematical reasoning with a smart re-interpretation of the time-scale
of the macroscopic data (predicting that volume flow rate rather than velocity could
be the bump-shaped value over which we can integrate to get hill-shaped tracer cov-
erage). Barbara Mathiessen assisted with sensitivity and volume calculations.
In spite of all this wonderful help, there is alas ample space for errors and omissions,
all of which are of course my own.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
The Glymphatic System
3
2.1
The healthy vascular and glymphatic systems: 3 levels of organization
4
2.2
The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of depolarization . . .
9
3
Class of models with simple scaling
25
3.1
A reduction: The space, the values and their relationships . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Discussion: Measure topology and water transport across the blood-
brain barrier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
A Compartment-like model
39
4.1
A reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Discussion: Measure diameter dynamics of penetrating arteries . . . .
48
5
A pseudo-spatial model
53
5.1
A reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3
Discussion: Measure functional glymphatic regulation
. . . . . . . . .
61
6
Conclusion
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the pursuit of ever increasing well-being for sentient life on planet Earth, science
is sometimes fortunate to find the means to tackle questions which are both clinically
relevant as well as fundamental to our understanding of the mammalian organism.
The recent advances in our understanding of water flows in the brain is an example
of just such a situation.
By providing a focal point for a diverse set of scientific
disciplines, the glymphatic system holds the potential to solve problems by build-
ing bridges between otherwise disparate branches of science. Such syntheses require
bringing experimental observations together in concise conceptualizations, and for
this purpose no other language rivals that of mathematics. In this thesis, the reader
will therefore find mathematics which attempts to concisely represent current knowl-
edge in an effort to clarify hypotheses, rather than to make new discoveries by the
deductive analytical method itself.
The main ambition of this thesis is to propose new experiments to further the
scientific understanding of how water flows in the mammalian brain. The secondary
aim is to propose and evaluate modelling approaches in order to use mathematics
as a bridge to invite physicists to contribute to research on the glymphatic system,
without requiring extensive specialist neurobiological knowledge.
1.1
Structure
The plan is to first introduce the glymphatic system and then to synthesize experi-
mental observations in mathematical models and produce falsifiable predictions.
Accordingly, chapter 2 details the anatomy and normal functioning of the glym-
phatic system and discusses how the phenomenon of waves of depolarization connects
the glymphatic system with stroke and cardiac arrest. The literature is split on crucial
aspects of the glymphatic system, such as whether it exists, what the direction and
sources are and what drives flows. Two features will prove useful for our mathemati-
cal reductions: The regulation of water flows in tissue seems to happen in lock-step
with regulation of blood flow (via expansions and contractions in blood vessels) and
the water seems to flow along the arterial branching tree as it enters tissue.
In chapter 3, an approach to specifying mathematical reductions of glymphatic
branching trees is developed and applied using Murray’s law as a particular case.
Based on this model, it is possible to calculate flow characteristics such as veloci-
ties, Péclet and Reynolds numbers along the branching arterial tree. By doing so,
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
calculations can compare competing hypotheses about spatial dimensions and flow
sources.
Chapter 4 examines a compartment-like reduction of the glymphatic system in
which tissue dynamically regulates water flows via their local arterial diameters. The
model allows an estimate of total water flow rates and is compared to recent experi-
mental data. Arterial diameters are highlighted as relevant experimental targets for
studies of glymphatic flows.
Chapter 5 positions the flows developed in chapter 4 in pseudo-spatial fashion on
the surface of the cortex and enable greater precision on temporal dynamics of flow
regulation. The model is consistent with competing hypotheses on baseline glymphat-
ics, but makes suggestions for how to experimentally distinguish these hypotheses.
Chapter 6 briefly summarizes the interpretation of data implied by these mathe-
matical syntheses and the proposals for experimental falsifications.
Target audience.
Amongst the intended readers of this text are both physicists
with no specialist knowledge of mammalian biology as well as specialists in neuro-
science with no specialist knowledge of mathematics. A main aim of this project is to
bridge these disciplines and the text reflects this by reducing jargon to a minimum and
placing deeper techniques in appendices in order to make this document available to
both groups of readers. The biologically trained reader will therefore find that words
such as ”edema” have been replaced by heavier and less precise descriptions such as
”water accumulation.” (Further examples include ”ischemia” being replaced by ”insuf-
ficient oxygen” or ”oxygen deprivation”, ”pia” being replaced by ”cortical surface”,
and even ”physiological” being replaced by phrases such as ”normal” or ”healthy”).
Furthermore, debates on appropriate nomenclature such as when to use para- versus
peri-vascular will be entirely ignored. In each case, precision has been sacrificed for
the benefit of availability for a wider audience. The mathematically trained reader
should be aware that any simplicity perceived in the biology presented here is the
result of such choices of reductions rather than any simplicity in the biology.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
The Glymphatic
System
The larger part of the work for this thesis has consisted in establishing a conceptual
foothold in the rich and vast complexity of research in the glymphatic system. At the
present stage, the scientific literature disagrees fundamentally about whether physical
spaces for water flows exist (or are ”artefacts”, Engelhardt2017), what direction the
water flows in (e.g. Bakker et al. 2016, Morris et al. 2016, Wang and Olbricht 2011,
Schley et al. 2006), where the water arrives in the brain (Hladky and Barrand 2016,
Orešković et al. 2017), what drives the flow (e.g. Asgari et al. 2016), and whether it
flows through tissue under normal conditions or just at death (Ma et al. 2018). It is
not the intention to provide a thorough review of these discussions here, but instead
to give a reader not trained in neuroscience the minimum pre-requisites for situating
the mathematical models of chapters 3-5 in their biological context. Impatient readers
may skip ahead to the figures and their texts, which are intended to be sufficient as
a bare minimum.
The main point of this chapter is to make the reader aware that any mathematical
reduction will unavoidably make several deeply contested assumptions.
A model
capable of replicating experimental observations therefore also implies an argument
about the validity of each of these opposing views.
2.0.1
Overview and motivation
In the following chapters, we shall be investigating what happens during very extreme
scenarios that do not occur in the healthy mammal. The reason for this is to get trac-
tion on modelling: The extreme cases show a remarkable shared feature of simplicity
absent in the diverse healthy states, namely waves of depolarization.
In the next two sections, we will first look at the healthy mammalian brain’s
vasculature and glymphatic system and then briefly review the mechanism of the
waves of depolarization.
For the reader completely new to neuroscience, figure 21 provides the picture of a
mouse brain fresh from the skull. The following discussions will be easier to interpret
when the reader can identify which end of the brain has the eyes and remembers
==PAGE:14==
4
2 The Glymphatic System
that blood vessels create a fine mesh throughout the brain tissue. See also figure
27 and notice that the arteries (which supply oxygen-rich blood whereas veins bring
oxygen-depleted blood back to the lungs) enter around the ”underside” of the brain
where the middle cerebral artery branches off from the circle of Willis to travel along
the surface ”out” and ”up”.
2.1
The healthy vascular and glymphatic systems: 3
levels of organization
The arterial tree of the mouse brain show different patterns of branching on at least
three levels of length scales - that of the capillaries and arterioles within tissue (radii
1−10µm), that of the tissue surface (radii 10−50µm) and that of the largest arteries
(radii > 50µm) (recent mappings include Xiong et al. 2017, Di Giovanna et al. 2018,
Helthuis et al. 2018, Qian et al. 2018, but see also Cassot et al. 2006, Francis et al.
(2009), Cassot et al. 2010, Blinder et al. 2013).
Since the regulation of the arterial and glymphatic systems likely takes places at
the cellular and molecular levels, we shall start there and work our way up to larger
spaces. This will allow us to follow the chain of causality that later chapters will
model.
2.1.1
The cortical level of tissue arterioles and capillaries
Structure of branches and glymphatic spaces.
The organization of capillaries
is reminiscent of little bushes, see figures 24 and 22. Through the depth of the cortical
layers, most branches maintain a radius of 2µm (ibidem).
At the level of capillaries, there seems to be no space where water can flow. The
walls of the blood vessels are tightly held by astrocytic endfeet (see figure 22). How-
ever, closer to the ”trunk” of the tree, (the ”penetrating arteriole”) which connects
with the cortical surface, the boundary structure opens up and becomes similar to
that of the structure on the main trunk, which has a perivascular space for water, see
figure 24. There has been some debate in the scientific literature about these spaces,
with a recent review claiming them to be artefacts of poor experimental technique
(Engelhardt et al. 2017). The depth to which the perivascular space extends is of
course crucially important in understanding the system, and chapter 5 will compare
the scenarios in which the perivascular space extends deeply versus shallowly into
cortex.
The volume of blood in cortex is a quite important magnitude since it is its
regulation is tightly coupled to the glymphatic system. A number of recent papers
have used modern techniques to map the volume of the entire cerebrovascular tree,
(Qian et al. 2018, Di Giovanna et al. 2018, and Xiong et al. 2017). In (ibidem) we find
the volume of artery in the cortex is about 3% of the total volume (distributed evenly
between small, medium and large vessels). The implied length of arterial vasculature
==PAGE:15==
2.1 The healthy vascular and glymphatic systems: 3 levels of organization
5
is about 124 meters (for a surface area of 52mm2 (Blinder et al. 2010) with depth
1.2mm (Blinder et al. 2013)) corresponding to about 140 mm arterial tree per cortical
column. This is a relevant physical magnitude to be aware of, as it will help us form
expectations about the volume of the perivascular space and indeed it’s capacity for
driving volume flow rates. Whether all of these 140 mm are likely to constrict, and
how much of them permit water flow along their perivascular spaces is not something
the experimental literature has yet definitively solved (though see Unekawa et al. 2016
for correlations between vessel size and magnitudes of contraction).
Dynamics of the glymphatics around arterioles and capillaries.
The cap-
illaries regulate blood flow by regulating their local arterial diameters as well as by
signalling to upstream arterioles (Jensen and N. H. Holstein-Rathlou 2013, Iadecola
2017). The regulation is both by ”feedforward” signals from neurons (including potas-
sium ions which are involved in depolarizations, see below), and by ”feedback” signals
such as concentrations of oxygen, carbon dioxide, lactate etc. (ibidem). Some authors
report a ”biphasic” pattern in which small arteries first dilate for a short period and
than constricts for a longer period of time due to an actively signalling process (Uh-
lirova et al. 2016).
An important discussion revolves around whether water enters cortical tissue in
a convective manner during healthy sleep, see figure 23.
Ma et al. 2018 believes
not, and instead interprets videos of tracer entering the tissue near the time of the
animal’s final breath to argue that tracer observed in tissue post-mortem arrived there
as a consequence of death-related dynamics rather than as part of normal healthy
functioning. On the other hand, the tracer seen entering the cortical surface with
various velocities in experiments of healthy sleep-like states, seem well correlated
with post-mortem tracer amounts (e.g. Plog et al. 2018). Furthermore, sleep seems
to enlarge the glymphatic spaces in order to increase waste clearance (Xie et al. 2013).
If water primarily enters the brain along the arteries (rather than through the
choroid plexii, see below), then the regulation would take place at this capillary level.
While capillaries take up as much volume in the cortex as the largest arteries (about
1% in measurements by Xiong et al. 2017), they are of course much thinner and thus
have a much larger surface area with which to exchange water. Any osmotic forces
driving water through the blood-brain barrier would therefore be applied mostly along
the thin-walled capillaries.
2.1.2
The level of the cortical surface
Structure of arteries and glymphatic spaces.
The organization of the arteries
on the cortical surface approaches the simple honeycomb lattice, but differs from it
slightly (Blinder et al. 2010), see figure 25. Here, radii vary in a larger range, from
about 20 microns to more than 50 microns in diameter (see e.g. Hirsch et al. 2012,
Blinder et al. 2013, Xiong et al. 2017 and Helthuis et al. 2018). The network contains
links between branches that therefore form circular loops. These are crucial to the
==PAGE:16==
6
2 The Glymphatic System
network’s stability against occlusions on the surface, but once the artery penetrates
into tissue, there are no more fault tolerances and tissue around occluded penetrations
will die (Shih et al. 2015).
Amongst the six maps of arterial surface networks shared with this project by
Blinder 2019, the number of cortical penetrations range from 628 to 1234 (sic!) (for
an average 1102).1This factor of uncertainty is significant enough to limit our hopes
for the precision of our calculations.
The structure of the glymphatic spaces on the surface of the cortex has recently
been measured (Mestre et al. 2018b, Bedussi et al. 2018): Along each of the arter-
ies, the perivascular spaces form a ”two-lobe” geometry, see figure 26. The ratio of
perivascular cross-sectional area to blood vessel cross-sectional area is measured to
be 1.4 (ibid). Analysis in preparation by Thomas 2018 argues that non-symmetrical
alignment of the artery in the perivascular space reduces the resistance to water flow,
and potentially provides an optimality argument on how the two lobes form.
On the cortical surface, Blinder et al. 2010 provides an estimate of the length of
the arterial tree belonging to the middle cerebral artery at 175 mm, with an average of
175 µm.2 Sources of diameters of arteries on the cortical surface include Blinder et al.
2013, Iliff et al. 2013, Uhlirova et al. 2016, Enger et al. 2015, Unekawa et al. 2016,
Mestre et al. 2018b, Ngai et al. 2011, Schmid et al. 2017b and Mestre 2019. Xiong
et al. 2017 is the most comprehensive of recent whole-brain mappings who provide
diameter measurements, and they give the ”diameter of the smallest terminal branches
of the [cortical] surface vessels ... as small as 25–30 µm” and give the largest as 90 µm.
Combining these with the ratio of perivascular space to artery cross-sectional areas
from Mestre et al. 2018b, we arrive at a cortical perivascular volume of around 0.1 mm3
for the mouse cortex supplied by the middle cerebral artery.
Dynamics of the glymphatics on the cortical surface.
The total volume flow
rate of water onto the cortical surface along the middle cerebral artery is of key interest
in this project. As water enters the perivascular space around the middle cerebral
artery at the base of the brain’s underside at the circle of Willis, it flows with a certain
volume per time. Estimates of this volume flow rate could naively be made by taking
the time it takes tracer to cover the surface in macroscopic imaging experiments (Plog
et al. 2018, Sigurdsson 2019), and dividing by the volume of perivascular spaces on the
cortical surface. In this way, we calculate an approximate volume flow rate onto the
cortical surface of 4.6 · 10−5mm3/s3 This estimate is a lower bound since significant
1In figure S4 of Blinder et al. 2010 they count 1945 penetrating arterioles on a mouse surface.
This is about twice the number of vertices in the maps that Blinder generously provided for this
project Blinder 2019.
2When the average is such a clean fraction, it could be because the distribution of lengths is
uniform, but it could also arise from a simple bifurcation tree such as Murray’s law discussed below.
10 generations of bifurcations give just over 1000 branches with decreasing lengths, but since there
are far more short than long branches, the average is much closer to the short than long branch
lengths.
3This results from estimating the perivascular space on the cortical surface belonging to the
middle cerebral artery to be about 0.1mm3 and filling in 30 minutes.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The healthy vascular and glymphatic systems: 3 levels of organization
7
parts of the tracer-filled water will depart the cortical surface on penetrations shortly
after entry, leaving only some of the water to cover the full surface area. In chapter
4 and 5, such considerations will be employed based on the modelling and simplified
geometric assumptions, with the resulting flow rate nearly 500 times larger. Clearly,
specific measurements of total flow rates would significantly aid the efforts to more
precisely quantify the glymphatic system.
Unpublished work by von Holstein-Rathlou illuminates the fine-tuned regulation
with which the tissue regulates water flow on a second-to-second basis under healthy
functioning (S. v. Holstein-Rathlou 2019). Von Holstein-Rathlou measures what is
essentially total water volume flow rate into the cortical surface from macroscopic
images of tracer in the water compartments taken through the skull under whisker
stimulation, by averaging light intensities over the territory supplied by the middle
cerebral artery. At the time of writing, this data suggests that during whisker stim-
ulation, the water flow is reduced as blood flow to the somatosensory barrel cortex
is increased - this is as expected due to dilation of the local arteries. Crucially, von
Holstein-Rathlou’s preliminary data finds that as whisker stimulation ends and blood
supply is expected to return to normal, there is a rapid catch-up phase in water
flow which may reflect a momentary over-compensation, where the local blood ves-
sels constrict below their baseline value.
This is potentially in order to facilitate
water throughput, which would align with a waste-clearing role for the glymphatic
system even on the functional time-scale of seconds. Calculations on the model in
chapters 4 and 5 could align with this hypothesis, depending on whether or not an
overcompensation in blood vessel diameters can be observed experimentally.
2.1.3
The macroscopic level
Structure of branches and glymphatic spaces.
The middle cerebral artery
supplies the largest surface area on each of the cortical hemispheres, but the anterior
and posterior cortical areas are supplied by the anterior cerebral artery and the pos-
terior cerebral artery, respectively. The glymphatic space at this scale level has been
mapped and visualized using uDISCO by Miyakoshi and Xavier 2019, see figure 28.
These maps reflect a networked mesh along arteries on the cortical surface. In the
wider skull compartment, water is found between the hemispheres, under the brain
and in the ventricles deep in the brain (see figures 27 and 29). The water compart-
ment extends down into the spine, where computational fluid dynamics methods have
quite precise replications of flow dynamics, reviewed by Linninger et al. 2016.
Dynamics of the macroscopic arteries and glymphatics.
Modelling of the
vascular network at this level has proved difficult, with different approaches reaching
opposing results on the distribution of resistance and other characteristics (Gould
et al. 2017, Schmid et al. 2017a, Iadecola 2017). Water from brain tissue collects in
perivascular spaces along veins and is brought ”up and out” to lymphatic vessels in
==PAGE:18==
8
2 The Glymphatic System
the neck and via pathways through the nasal area (see figure 29). The entry of water
into the brain will be discussed below.
2.1.4
Cerebrospinal fluid production
Cerebrospinal fluid is 99% water (Orešković et al. 2017) and we shall use the terms
water and cerebrospinal fluid interchangeably for most of this text. However, in un-
derstanding how the brain manages to produce cerebrospinal fluid it is important to
consider the effect of ions and other osmolytes. In the capillaries of leaves, which man-
age to bring many litres of water several meters up from the ground without applying
any mechanical work, gradients of sugar concentrations are used along with the forces
of capillary action relevant on the same dimensional scales as brain capillaries (Bohr
2019).
Three mechanical drivers of water in the brain dominate the scientific literature:
One is a hydrostatic pressure gradient created by a structure in the water-filled ven-
tricles deep in the brain called the choroid plexus. Another is the osmolar pressure
gradient between blood in the arterial tree and tissue. The third is the pulsation of
the heart.
The choroid plexus may be responsible for production and movement of
cerebrospinal fluid.
The traditionally accepted role of the choroid plexus as the
main producer of cerebrospinal fluid has been challenged in recent years (based in
part on studies dating back 5 to 10 decades), e.g. Orešković et al. 2017, M. Klarica
et al. 2013, Marijan Klarica and Orešković 2014, Bulat and Marijan Klarica 2014
(and for examples of mathematical models see e.g. Buishas et al. 2014, and Linninger
et al. 2017). Simultaneously, in a stream of contemporary reviews, authors Hladky
and Barrand have maintained the role of the choroid plexus as ”accounting for most
net fluid entry to the brain” Hladky and Barrand 2016 (see also Hladky and Barrand
2014 and Hladky and Barrand 2018).4 It is not the task of this text to adjudicate,
but simply to entertain these propositions without accepting them.5
Arterial pulsations drive water flow on the cortical surface.
Evidence for
arterial pulsation driving flow on the cortical surface was produced last year (Mestre
et al. 2018b) (see also Iliff et al. 2013). However, water movement in other parts
of the system may be different.
In the spine for example, the lungs could drive
4These authors are, however, as of 2018 not convinced about the data on the glymphatic system,
writing instead ”evidence demonstrating net fluid flow inwards along arteries and then outwards
along veins (the glymphatic hypothesis) is still lacking” (Hladky and Barrand 2018).
5This sentence paraphrases a popular quote often (mis)attributed to Aristotle: ”It is the mark
of the educated mind to be able to entertain a thought without accepting it.” Curiously, it seems the
closest Aristotle gets to this quote is: ”... it is the mark of an educated man to look for precision in
each class opf things just so far as the nature of the subject admits; it is evidently equally foolish to
accept probable reasoning froma matehtmaticisn and to demand from a rhetorician scientific proofs”
(sic, my italics), Aristotle 1952 (quote tracked by McGinniss 2019).
==PAGE:19==
2.2 The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of depolarization
9
flow (Linninger et al. 2016). In the cortical tissue, where the capillaries have very
little muscle to provide the right elasticity for propagating waves, pulsations may be
significantly smaller and no longer provide directionality.
Making predictions using modelling has been notoriously difficult. Rey and Sarnti-
noranont 2018 set up a mathematical model to investigate whether pulsation could
provide directional flows at all, and conclude that they cannot. However, their model
is symmetric on the boundaries of their pipe, so the finding seems more a conse-
quence of their assumptions than reflective of the physical system (as per the results
in Mestre et al. 2018b). Other modelling efforts also fail to predict the directional
flows observed in later experiments (Asgari et al. 2015, Schley et al. 2006). The failure
of these approaches in predicting later experimental observations highlight the diffi-
culty in making mathematical reductions without abstracting away key ingredients.
The capillary-level blood-brain barrier may provide significant water-flow.
The epithelial cells of the capillary walls create a barrier between the brain tissue and
blood circulation known as the blood-brain barrier. Recent experimental evidence
shows that osmolar pressure gradients across this barrier have significant influence
on the flows of water in the glymphatic spaces (Plog et al. 2018). Recent modelling
papers have used estimates of what they call ”interstitial fluid production” as the
key source of water flows, and presumably this means net water transport across the
blood-brain barrier (though their model calculates resistance to this flow based on
the flow proceeding from one end to other of a pipe network) (Faghih and Sharp
2018). Abbott 2004 and Szentistványi et al. 1984, make explicit parameter-estimates
of the net water flux through the blood-brain barrier at the capillary level.
The
studies cited above by Oreskovic, Klarica and Bulat all interpret the evidence to
mean that the water content of the brain is balanced by net water flux across the
blood-brain barrier. Recent biophysical modelling efforts argue that at the capillary
level, transport of water across the blood-brain barrier is the main producer of water
in tissue Linninger et al. 2017.
Net flow of water across the capillary barriers is discussed using the model in
chapter 3, and chapter 5 investigates whether the hydrostatic pressure gradient is
necessary for the model to comply with the macroscopic experimental data. How-
ever, the water supply is likely organized with redundant sources, so neither may be
necessary.
2.2
The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of
depolarization
Surprisingly, there is a shared feature between certain types of migraines, stroke and
cardiac arrest. This is when it comes to the brain cells’ ability to maintain their
polarization.
In each of these three cases, it has been observed that a subset of
cells in the cortex lose their polarization and cause a cascade of depolarization which
==PAGE:20==
10
2 The Glymphatic System
spreads across the cortex (Engelhardt et al. 2017, Mestre 2019), see figures 210 and
211. Chapters 4 and 5 will take advantage of the most extreme dynamics in the stroke
model.
In short form, the macroscopic mechanism of the depolarization is the following
(due to Hartings et al. 2017): insufficient oxygen (ischemia) leads to a destabilization
of the ion balance across the membranes of the cells (depolarization) and this is fol-
lowed by the unhealthy accumulation of water (edema). Macroscopic observations of
depolarization and tracer-filled water dynamics on the cortical surface during models
of cardiac arrest and stroke show water flowing along the surface arterial network
in what is most likely the perivascular spaces discussed above (see figures 210 and
211). The hypothesis that the edema is a result of glymphatic flows, the so-called
glymphedema, is due to Mestre 2019. Recent developments in velocimetry of these
flows allows useful quantifications of the depolarization and tracer wave-fronts, see
figure 212.
Microscopic measurements of artery diameter and local perivascular water veloci-
ties (similar to those in Mestre et al. 2018b but taken during cardiac arrest), indicate
a bump-shaped temporal profile of the volume flow rate into the surface perivascular
network, see figure 213. The amount of arterial constriction is quite severe, with the
artery shrinking to less than half its original diameter. In other, less severe cases
of waves of depolarization, smaller diameter constrictions have been found (Enger et
al. 2015, Unekawa et al. 2016) and much smaller constriction magnitudes are found
under more healthy treatments (Uhlirova et al. 2016, Schmid et al. 2017b).
Because the pairing of glymphatic flows and waves of depolarization have not
been studied in the literature before the experiments referenced here, no mathemat-
ical modelling has yet investigated the mechanics by which the very strong arterial
constrictions may drive water flows.
Kenny et al. 2018 models the spreading de-
polarization and its consequences for arterial diameters, but does not investigate
glymphatic flows.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of depolarization
11
Figure 21: Mouse brain overview. MCA: Middle Cerebral Artery. In the left-most
end of this picture, the reader finds a bulb-like structure - this is the end where
the eyes are. Blood arrives from below the brain and travels ”up” along the MCA
before branching out in a network on the surface in view (see figure 25 for the surface
network and figure 27 for the route of the MCA from below the brain). From the
surface, penetrating arteries enter the tissue and create a fine mesh of blood vessels
so that each brain cell is close to blood supply (see right panel of figures 22 and 24 for
penetrating arteries). Surrounding the MCA is the perivascular space, which brings
water in the same direction as the blood flow (see figure 26). The black circle shows
where one study measured the velocity of water and chapter 3 will discuss this point.
(Reprinted from Bedussi et al. 2018).
==PAGE:22==
12
2 The Glymphatic System
Figure 22: Blood supply by the smallest vessels. Right panel shows a penetrating
artery in green from the surface of the cortex (”pial surface”).
Left panels show
cross-sections of the smallest arterial branches (”intra-parenchymal arterioles” and
capillaries) with cells identified by name and color. Most of the length of the arterial
branching tree is capillary, with branches less than 8 microns in diameter making up
as much volume as branches with diameters around 20 microns (Xiong et al. 2017).
The surface area of the smallest blood vessels therefore is much larger than of large
blood vessels. Perhaps regulation of artery diameters further upstream arise from
these sites, in spite of them having only few smooth muscle cells (SMC) for their
own contraction and dilations. At the level of these smallest vessels, no perivascular
space for water along the branches is usually found and any water flowing along the
perivascular spaces by the middle cerebral artery should accordingly have entered
tissue upstream (figure 21). (Reprinted from Iadecola 2017).
==PAGE:23==
2.2 The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of depolarization
13
Figure 23: Water flows convectively through tissue in order to clear metabolic waste.
”Para-arterial CSF influx” will in this text be known as perivascular water inflow. It
arrives at the surface (the ”subarachnoid space”) along arteries and flows along them
in the ”para-arterial space”, known here as the perivascular space, which is formed
as an annulus around the artery on the inside and astrocyte vascular endfeet as the
outer boundary. All arteries become small capillaries, but at some point before doing
so, it seems the perivascular spaces shrink and water instead travels through the
astrocytic vascular endfeet (likely via AQP4 pores) and through tissue. Convective
water flows towards veins moves waste which is drained out of the brain with para-
venous efflux (see figure 29).
It has been proposed that sleep makes more room
for the water flows by shrinking cell volumes (Xie et al. 2013). Other authors do
not believe any water flows along the perivascular (”para-arterial”) spaces in the
healthy animal, and that observations of water-tracers in post-mortem brain slices
have rather arrived there as a consequence of unusual dynamics upon death (Ma
et al. 2018). However, convective water flows have been established in the surface
perivascular spaces Mestre et al. 2018b. Furthermore, macroscopic imaging of models
of normal functioning show tracer-filled water filling the surface network with tracer
later appearing in post-mortem brain slices in concentrations correlated with the
velocity of surface-filling. From Nedergaard 2013.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 The Glymphatic System
Figure 24: Blood supply by the surface and penetrating arteries. Right panel shows
an artery in green penetrating from the (”pial”) surface and branching out in the
depth. Left panel shows cross-sectional slices of surface arteries (”pial arterioles”)
and the ”trunk” of the penetrating ”tree” (”penetrating arteriole”). Water flows here
in what is labelled as the subarachnoid space (see figure 23) and in the perivascular
spaces. Nerves arriving from elsewhere can regulate the vascular muscle cells, and
signals from downstream can arrive to contribute to contractions and dilations, thus
regulating blood flows. Cells of the immune system (”PVM”) can travel in the same
spaces as the water, and seem to do so according to the needs of the tissue (Herisson
et al. 2018). The existence of the perivascular spaces is debated, with on recent review
claiming them to be artefacts (Engelhardt et al. 2017). Perhaps water arriving in the
perivascular spaces will enter tissue at these levels. (Reprinted without permission
from Iadecola 2017).
==PAGE:25==
2.2 The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of depolarization
15
Figure 25: One of the networks of middle cerebral artery networks on the cortical
surface of a mouse supplied by Blinder 2019 (published in Blinder et al. 2010) (this
particular network has 872 cortical penetrations and will be used for the model in
chapter 5). In this diagram, all nodes have 1, 2 or 3 connections, or degrees. Nodes of
degrees 1 or 3 represent cortical penetrations. Nodes with degrees 2 and 3 represent
bifurcations, and thus it is possible for a penetration to be located right under a
bifurcation. Amongst the six mice mapped by Blinder et al., the number of cortical
penetrations range from 628 to 1234 (sic) (average 1102). This factor of uncertainty
is significant enough to limit the precision of our calculations. The network contains
anastomoses, which are links between branches that therefore form loops. These are
crucial to the network’s stability against e.g. occlusions. A bottleneck occurs at the
cortical penetration, around which the tissue supply is not robust to occlusions (Shih
et al. 2015). Figure 26 shows the cross-sectional structure of these surface vessels.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 The Glymphatic System
Figure 26: On the cortical surface, Mestre et al. 2018b has observed a ”two-lobe”
geometry of perivascular spaces (in green) on the two ”horizontal” sides of each artery
(in red). On average, they find the cross-sectional area of the perivascular space to be
1.4 times larger than the arterial cross-sectional area (which compares well with other
studies, like Schain et al. 2017). The diagram here sketches a symmetric placement of
the artery, but this is an idealization and Thomas 2018 proposes that the asymmetries
observed in experiments may serve to reduce resistance to glymphatic flows. The flow
of water in these channels pulses in step with arterial pulsations, it is laminar, and
advection dominates diffusion (Mestre et al. 2018b). In some cases, backwards flow is
observed (Mestre 2019), but usually flow velocities are measured around 20 microns
per second (ibid.).
Several biophysical modelling papers have concluded that the
directional flows seen (ibid.) do not occur (Asgari et al. 2016, Rey and Sarntinoranont
2018, in particular the latter suffers from implausible assumptions on the wave-form).
(Reprinted from Mestre et al. 2018b).
==PAGE:27==
2.2 The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of depolarization
17
Figure 27: Macroscopic view of the cerebrovascular tree. The surface labeled with
”pial arterioles” corresponds to the surface visible in figure 21, though this diagram
shows a human brain. The supply of blood arrives at the ”underside” of the brain
via the internal carotid artery (ICA) and is distributed via the circle of Willis to the
middle cerebral artery (and others, such as the anterior and posterior arteries which
supply neighbouring volumes). Modelling of the vascular network at this level has
proved difficult, with different approaches reaching opposing results on the distribu-
tion of resistance and other characteristics (Gould et al. 2017, Schmid et al. 2017a,
Iadecola 2017). The distribution of water and glymphatic flows at this level are shown
in the next two figures. (Reprinted from Iadecola 2017).
==PAGE:28==
18
2 The Glymphatic System
Figure 28: Macroscopic view of the glymphatic system, using uDisco. This mouse
brain is seen ”from above” and slightly in front of the mouse (with the ”bulb” in
the bottom right being the end with the eyes). The whole animal has been cleared
and imaged such that only fluorescent tracer injected into the glymphatic system is
visible. The water is coloured purple on the surfaces of the brain and gold in the
deeper ventricles. The literature is split between whether most water in the brain
originates from these deeper ventricles (via the choroid plexii) (Hladky and Barrand
2016) or whether water arrives mostly via the blood-brain barriers along the arteries
(Orešković et al. 2017). Observe that tracer fills the gaps between hemispheres and
tends to provide a mesh over the cortical surface. A tracer intensity threshold has been
applied which clarifies the surface structures with high concentrations of tracer, but
hide the diffused tracer observable in tissue before thresholds have been applied. The
next figure sketches the proposed macroscopic flow patterns. (Figure by Miyakoshi
and Xavier 2019).
==PAGE:29==
2.2 The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of depolarization
19
Figure 29: Macroscopic view of the glymphatic flows following tracer injection at
the cisterna magna. The eyes of the mouse look left in this picture and the whole
mouse brain is seen from ”the side”. Much of the experimental literature relies on
tracer injections as the one depicted here, and tracer is consistently found to flow
towards the pool on the ”underside” of the brain where the circle of Willis distributes
arteries. The deeper ventricles containing the choroid plexii which may be where
most water in the brain originates are connected to the the surface structures visible
here via the cisterna magna. The cisterna magna injections thus inject tracer near
the putative entry point of water in the brain. In the previous figure (28), tracer
accumulation was seen by the bulb near the eyes, but this exit route is not shown
here. (Reprinted from Jessen et al. 2015).
==PAGE:30==
20
2 The Glymphatic System
Figure 210: About two minutes after cardiac arrest induced by supplying only ni-
trogen (depriving the animal of oxygen), the brain cells depolarize and tracer-filled
water covers the cortical surface. The two panels left show the same mouse brain
imaged from above through the skull, with the top image showing depolarized as-
trocytes in green and the bottom showing tracer in water in yellow and red. Right
panels show blood pressure in red, depolarization area coverage in green and tracer
area coverage in orange. The causal mechanism proposed is that arteries constrict as
a consequence of the depolarization, enlarges the perivascular volume in cortex and
on the surface, thus ”pulling in” water along the surface network. This mechanism
would suggest that a lot of tracer enters the cortical tissue upon death, thus raising
doubts about whether post-mortem brain slices with tracer in them show a healthy
glymphatic throughput or an artefact of death (Ma et al. 2018). Whether the data
here can adjudicate between the opponents and proponents of the glymphatic the-
ory will be discussed using the mathematical model developed in chapter 5. (Figure
produced for this thesis based on experiments at the Rochester Center for Transla-
tional Neuromedicine). CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid (water). GCaMP7: depolarization
marker.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of depolarization
21
Figure 211:
About 5 minutes after occlusion of the middle cerebral artery
(”MCAO”), a wave of depolarization starts on the same side of the brain as the
occlusion (the ”ipsi-lateral side”, here right). The brain cells repolarize, except for
a small area in which the tissue is eventually deceased. Water follows the depolar-
ization wave, just as in nitrogen-induced cardiac arrest (previous figure). The large
flow of water, dubbed ”glymphedema” (Mestre 2019), contributes to the pathology
of stroke and is potentially related to failures of the blood-brain barrier that could
be associated with the vast volume flow rate increase (Iadecola 2017). The two pan-
els left show the same mouse brain imaged from above through the skull, with the
top image showing depolarized astrocytes in green and the bottom showing tracer in
water in yellow and red. Right panels show blood pressure in white, depolarization
area coverage in green and tracer area coverage in orange. Whether the data here
can adjudicate between the opponents and proponents of the glymphatic theory will
be discussed using the mathematical model developed in chapter 5. (Figure produced
for this thesis based on data kindly shared by the Rochester Center for Translational
Neuromedicine).
==PAGE:32==
22
2 The Glymphatic System
Figure 212: Estimates of velocities for the wave of depolarization (”GCaMP7 speed”
in blue), and water (”CSF speed” in red) on the cortical surface (seen in the top) fol-
lowing occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (by Kelley 2019). The wave of depolar-
ization is faster than the flow of water on the surface and happens first. Other waves
of depolarization have been measured at higher velocities under other experimental
conditions (e.g. about 60 microns per second in Enger et al. 2015), and similarly we
may expect velocities of water to vary. Since we expect water to enter tissue at the
cortical penetrations, it is interesting that the tracer-wave velocity is increasing in the
first half of the time-period: not only does the wave-front expand over a larger and
larger territory in time, it also supposedly spills into more and more outlets. None
the less, the velocity of the wave front does not vary much.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 The extremes of the glymphatic system: Waves of depolarization
23
Figure 213: Measurements of water velocity and diameter of the middle cerebral
artery (MCA) taken during nitrogen-induced cardiac arrest. Each colored line repre-
sents a mouse, the black lines represent the mean over mice. Notice that The volume
flow rate implied by these measurements are largest before the drop in the vessel
diameter, suggesting that a large part of the water volume arrives before the local
constriction. Velocities and diameter estimates due to Tithof 2019 based on data
from the Rochester Center for Translational Neuromedicine, (Mestre 2019), (volume
flow rate estimates prepared for this project).
==PAGE:34==
24
2 The Glymphatic System
Figure 214: Dynamic of the cross-sectional area of penetrating artery and surround-
ing perivascular space (”PVS”) under a wave of depolarization, as measured using
blood and water tracers (Mestre 2019). Notice that the entire arterial area seems to
become replaced by perivascular flows, implying a constriction factor of nearly 100%.
In other animal models, the constriction following induced depolarizations are much
smaller, (e.g. in Schain et al. 2017, the constriction of artery is less than 50% and the
perivascular space collapses instead of expands, due to swelling of the glial endfeet
which make up the perivascular boundary). The 30 seconds delay between artery
constriction and perivascular expansion lacks explanation.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Class of models with
simple scaling
3.0.1
Motivation specific to this model.
In order to characterize water flows, the Péclet (Pe) and Reynolds (Re) numbers can
be taken as indicators of whether advection dominates diffusion and whether the flows
are laminar or turbulent respectively. Both are proportional to the product of the
characteristic length L and the average velocity U of the water, but the Péclet number
has the diffusion constant D in the denominator whereas the Reynolds number has
the kinematic viscosity ν.
Pe = U · L
D
(3.1)
Re = U · L
ν
(3.2)
The characteristic length relevant to the movement of water through the glym-
phatic system can intuitively be taken as the local vessel diameter.
However, we
should note that the choice of characteristic length limits the context of the indica-
tion. Take a mountain lake as an example: It may be fed by a single turbulent stream
and may conclude in a narrow water-fall, while appearing motionless in its middle.
If we were to submerge a sufficiently tiny straw parallel to streamlines in the middle
of the lake, we could find that diffusion dominates advection at that local level. We
would thus learn to expect a diffuse waste product to spread throughout the lake, po-
tentially even against the stream direction. This would not, however, tell us whether
diffuse waste would on the whole be cleared from the lake along particular outlets
or how fast waste would be cleared. In fact, the hypothesis that water flows into
the brain in a convective manner in order to clear waste is not contradictory to the
hypothesis that such convective water flows become spread out and slowed down over
vast numbers of very narrow and long channels in which diffusion becomes sufficient
to provide a clearance mechanisms for the tissue.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Class of models with simple scaling
3.1
A reduction: The space, the values and their
relationships
Overview:
Figure 31 represents the reduction of the physical space which the model
inhabits: namely the radii of arteries (r) as they branch off from the middle cerebral
artery and become smaller through the branching generations. Based on these, we
can calculate the cross-sectional area A through which water flows at any distance g
from the inlet and thereby determine a useful control volume. In order to reflect the
potential of continuous in- or outflow q of water through the perivascular boundaries
of this control volume, we can describe such flow magnitudes into and out of the
established control volume. Finally, from this reasoning, we will arrive at a formula
for predicting the velocities and Péclet numbers at all distances from the inlet. (Table
31 reviews the symbols).
3.1.1
A class of scaling geometries
The perivascular space expands exponentially in the number of branches (see figure
31). Here we wish to consider funnels which expand their cross-sectional area in order
to supply a three-dimensional space at the final generation. Imagine taking a tree
such as the ones in the right panels of figures 22 and 24 and ”unwinding” them in
order to let them ”hang” from their stem: In this case, the final total cross-sectional
area taken at increasing lengths from the base would resemble a funnel according
to this class of models. The limit of this metaphor is that the final cross-sectional
area of the arterial trees under consideration here grow faster than the length of the
tree squared (whereas the surface area of a sphere and likely also for the brain goes
as radius squared).
The explanation is of course, that the arterial trees here are
wound up in order to fill a volume rather than a surface area. The class of models
developed here contains as special cases Murray’s law, in which Murray’s exponent
makes explicit such dimensional considerations.
We take the branching point where the middle cerebral artery departs from the
circle of Willis to be the origin of our one-dimensional spatial coordinate g (see figure
27). Each molecule of water entering the perivascular space around the middle cere-
bral artery will traverse a streamline within the perivascular space until it exits this
space either at capillaries or through the perivascular boundary somewhere earlier. A
central assumption in the modelling approach taken here is that we can reasonably
describe the perivascular space dimensions as a function of the distance along these
streamlines. Centrally, take Ωr = Ωr(g) to be the set of arterial radii that can be
found a distance g from the root of the middle cerebral artery.
The number of parallel arteries (n) at the distance g from the base of the middle
cerebral artery is then the number of elements in this set, n = n(g) = |Ωr(g)|.
We can reasonably assume each artery to be a round tunnel, which therefore has
a cross-sectional area which is simply a function of the arterial radius r (πr2). If we
describe the cross-sectional area of the perivascular space around a single artery as
==PAGE:37==
3.1 A reduction: The space, the values and their relationships
27
Figure 31: Model schematic: Bifurcating branches originating with the base of the
middle cerebral artery with continuous decrease in segment length and radius create
a vascular tree in which there are no loops. A: The arterial tree, with l0 marked at
the first segment of the middle cerebral artery. When placed on a 2D-surface, the
branches overlap after only a few generations, as is visible especially amongst the
middle branches. B: Cross-sectional slice of the middle cerebral artery, where red is
blood, blue is perivascular space with water and r0 denotes the radius of the middle
cerebral artery. Figure A reprinted without permission from Zamir 2001.
being in proportion ρ to the arterial counterpart and call it a, then
a(g) = πr(g)2ρ
(3.3)
If we now sum this cross-sectional area over all the parallel perivascular space
at distance g from the inlet, we have the total cross-sectional area A through which
water flows when at a distance g from the base of the middle cerebral artery.
A(g) =
∑
Ωr(g)
a(g)
(3.4)
In the case of a very simple scaling where all the radii of all arteries equidistant
from the root of the middle cerebral artery are the same, this simplifies to A(g) =
n(g) · π · r2 · ρ. We maintain a more general representation here because, as we saw
in chapter 2, there are considerable variance in vessel radii equidistant from the root
of the middle cerebral artery (see figures 22 and 24 for examples).
The volume of perivascular space V that is spanned within a distance g from the
base of the middle cerebral artery is therefore
V =
∫g
0
A(x)dx
(3.5)
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Class of models with simple scaling
If we either ignore pulsation or take the average over an appropriate period of time
(such over several pulsations), this volume is static and and we can use it as a fixed
non-deforming control volume. As such, the rate of water volume flowing into it, Q,
will have to be exactly the same magnitude as the rate of water volume flowing out of
it, since we can assume constant water density.1The rate of outflow from the control
volume will be the sum of flow through the final cross-sectional area of the perivascular
space (A(g)) and the flow across the boundaries. Let’s use Q = Q(g) to refer to the
volume flow rate across the cross-sectional area of the perivascular space and q to
refer to flow exiting the perivascular space through its boundary. Conservation of
mass implies
Q(0) = −[Q(g) + q(g)]
(3.6)
Let us imagine that the net flow of water across the boundaries of the perivascular
space is proportional to the area of the arterial wall, by a factor f (e.g. Abbott 2004).
This transport would presumably kick in at the small levels of vessels, where the blood-
brain barrier is most exposed to the tissue, say from generation c. This simplification
of course lumps together net flow across the perivascular boundaries with blood vessel
and tissue. We would have2
q = f
∫g
c
2
√
πA(x)dx
(3.7)
At this stage, we have both the cross-sectional area through which water flows at
any distance from the base of the middle cerebral artery (A(g)) and the volume flow
rate through that area. The average flow velocity through the area A(g), which we
can call ¯v, is therefore a function of the initial flow rate at the base of middle cerebral
artery (Q(0)).
¯v(g) = Q(g)
A(g) = Q(0) −q(g)
A(g)
(3.8)
To estimate the Péclet number we can take the local average velocity to be our
characteristic velocity U = ¯v. The characteristic length is the width of the perivascu-
lar space branch, which is approximately L = r · √ρ (where we use the square root
since ρ originally reflects ratios of area rather than length). The diffusion constant
is a parameter to be estimated according to the particular scenarios, but notice that
being a constant it will not tell us much about how the Péclet number scales along
the arterial tree.
Pe = UL
D = ¯v(g) · r(g) · √ρ
D
= [Q(0) −q(g)] · r(g) · √ρ
D · A(g)
(3.9)
1Take for example the continuity equation as 5.5 from Young et al. 2012 with constant mass ρ
(which can then be divided out) and use A · V = Q to get Qin = Qout = Q(g).
2Expressed using A(g) for reducing the number of computational steps of the formula since we
would otherwise need to account for the many different radii here as well. The square root form
follows from the arteries’ round circumferences, c, fulfilling c2 = 22πA = 22r2π2.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 A reduction: The space, the values and their relationships
29
Similarly, the Reynolds number is naturally
Re = UL
ν
= [Q(0) −q(g)] · r(g) · √ρ
ν · A(g)
(3.10)
At this stage, we are ready to make a couple of early theoretical considerations.
With ¯v in the numerator of the Péclet number, the cross-sectional area through which
water flows (A(g)) is in the denominator. We see that the relative relevance of diffusive
versus convective forces is inversely related to the cross-sectional area through which
water flows. The cross-sectional area is itself determined by the number of arteries
and their radii. With the number of arteries at least doubling at every branch-point,
we see that the scaling of A(g) is determined by the assumptions on how radii change
across bifurcations: if the sum of daughter vessels areas are greater than their parent
vessel areas, then the Péclet number will decrease exponentially (see below).
3.1.2
Characteristics of Murray’s law
Let us look at a particular case of geometry which fits within the class of models
described above. Murray’s law takes as a starting point the idea that physiology is
”a problem in maxima and minima” (an idea which Murray credits to Pike) (Murray
1926). Specifically, Murray applies the principle of minimum work to derive formulas
for the radii and lengths of branches in a simply bifurcating vascular network. A
recent paper uses Murray’s law to argue that ”significant steady pressure-driven flow
in the periarterial space is found to be unlikely” (Faghih and Sharp 2018). Murray’s
law is both relatively simple and applied to make interesting and useful predictions
in recent literature, so relevant for our purposes.
In the recent usage of Murray’s law (ibidem), the radius of an artery after i
generations of bifurcations is3
ri =
(1
2
)
i
3.67
r0
i = 0, 1, 2, ...
(3.11)
The length of the bifurcation-free segments are the same at each branching gen-
eration i (ibid.), namely
li = 20 · ri
(3.12)
In the description of the class of models above, we have used a continuous variable
g to describe the distance from inlet at the base of the middle cerebral artery. This
3Here, I use 3.67 in the (denominator of the) exponent because that is the value used by Faghih
and Sharp 2018. They write ”while the exponent in the original Murray’s equation is 3, Cassot
et al.
[31] showed that the exponent should be modified to 3.67 for human cerebral arteries” (p.
4, my italics). I disagree with this statement: The paper they reference finds an extremely wide
distribution of measured values for this exponent, and concludes that ”our study demonstrates that
[Murray’s law] is not the case, neither at the bifurcation level, where we observed an extremely large
dispersal of the exponent, k, nor as a ’mean’ approximation” (p. 340) (Francis et al. 2009). However,
Francis et al. looked at bifurcations at the tissue level where capillaries dominate, so we can still
hope to use this approach for the level of cortical surface.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Class of models with simple scaling
description still holds, and we specifically have that i = i(g) is a discrete function on
continuous streamline distance g. The number of parallel arteries grows ”step-wise
exponentially”. Our calculations for the Péclet number relies on choosing a control
volume, and we can therefore summarily use one of the continuous distances which
correspond to the distance at a branching point. In the following, we could choose
to think of g as whole numbers between which the functions are constant, but this
author finds it easier to apply the continuous analogy. In the language of the class of
models discussed above, we have Ωr(g) = (ri)2g
i=0.
The number of parallel branches is naturally n(g) = 2g and our equation for the
cross-sectional area becomes
A(g) = 2g
[(1
2
)
g
3.67
r0
]2
πρ
(3.13)
When we simplify the exponentiation, it becomes clear that the cross-sectional
area in the case of Murray’s law is expected to grow exponentially:
A(g) = 1.36g · r2
0 · π · ρ
∝1.36g
(3.14)
We can plug this into the formula for the Péclet and Reynolds numbers in our
class of models and find that these number shrink exponentially (ignoring for the
moment flows through the boundaries, that is q = 0):
Pe(g) = 0.6g · Q(0) · √ρ
D · ρ · π
∝0.6g
(3.15)
Re(g) = 0.6g · Q(0) · √ρ
ν · ρ · π
∝0.6g
(3.16)
3.1.3
Hypotheses and their parameters
One key aspect of the glymphatic system we would like to consider is the dimension of
the perivascular space along the penetrations all the way into tissue, at the capillary
level and potential discontinuities in this space (see chapter 2). We further would
like to entertain the idea that there might be a net flux of water across perivascular
boundaries. For this purpose, we set up four sets of parameter assumptions which
represent hypotheses which can be separated from each other based on experiments
(see table 32 for parameter values).
==PAGE:41==
3.1 A reduction: The space, the values and their relationships
31
3.1.3.1
Hypothesis 1: Baseline scenario
In the baseline scenario, we shall simply assume that the ratio of perivascular cross-
sectional area to arterial cross-sectional area is everywhere the same ρ = 1.4 estab-
lished by Mestre et al. 2018b for the arterial network on the cortical surface. (Another
study found ρ = 1.26, an insubstantial difference Schain et al. 2017).
The widest radius and the number of branching generations.
In the baseline
scenario, the choice of the central parameter r0, which describes the widest arterial
radius, determines the distribution of arteries and their radii.
Faghih and Sharp
2018 use an initial radius of r0 = 1.5 mm for their human middle cerebral artery
and consequently find that 30 generations are appropriate to reach their preferred
pre-capillary radii of 6.25 µm. By adding another four generations to reach capillary
radii of 2.35 µm (and counting contributions from the other arteries deriving from the
circle of Willis), they count 98 billion capillaries deriving from the circle of Willis and
are as such satisfied with r0 = 1.5 mm since that is the number they expect based on
literature.
In humans, the middle cerebral artery is of course much larger than in the mouse.
Across a range of mouse strains, the average radius of the middle cerebral artery as
it branches from the circle of Willis is roughly r0 = 55 ± 10 µm (Qian et al. 2018). 12
generations of bifurcations are required to reach the same pre-capillary radius as in
the human.
3.1.3.2
Hypothesis 2: Replicating Faghih & Sharp 2018
In Faghih and Sharp 2018, the authors consider the gaps between smooth muscle
cells as the only space in which glymphatic water can flow. The gap width is taken
to be 0.1 µm. Starting from capillaries, each generation of bifurcations adds another
layer of smooth muscle cells and a gap to flow through, until a maximum of 20 layers
is reached in their human model. If we take generation i = 13 to be the final pre-
capillary generation, then we consequently have a difference between arterial radius
and outer radius of the perivascular space of
∆r(g) =
{
13 · 100nm −g · 100nm
g < 12
100nm
g ≥12
This gives us an area of the perivascular space which can be considered a narrow
”rectangular” strip around the much larger artery
a(g) = 2π · r(g) · ∆r(g)
Our ρ is then implied as ρ =
a(g)
πr(g)2 . The characteristic length in this case can be
taken as gap with ∆r(g).
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Class of models with simple scaling
3.1.3.3
Hypothesis 3: Constriction upon cortical penetration
The perivascular space may constrict as it dives into cortex from the cortical surface
or along the first branch-points in the tissue (see chapter 2). In the framework here,
we can use a stepwise drop in ρ(g) to represent this. E.g.
ρ(g) =
{
1.4
g ≤10
0.2
else
(3.17)
3.1.3.4
Hypothesis 4: Leakage of water from blood
Abbott 2004 estimates that net flow of water from the capillary bloodstream and
into tissue is about a percent of the net flow generated by the choroid plexus. Using
her estimate of each gram of tissue producing 0.1 −0.3
mm3
g1min1 therefore aligns with
the hypothesis that the choroid plexus is the main producer of cerebrospinal fluid
(water).
Hladky and Barrand 2018 argue that the entire blood-brain barrier can
secrete fluid with at most half of the rate of the choroid plexus, which they place at
350 −400 ml day−1. There is substantial agreement between these two sources.4
Using volume fraction estimates from Xiong et al. 2017, small vessels (which have
blood-brain barriers postulated to transport water) are about 1.25% of cortical tissue
volume, and with their mean radius being 2 µm, we find a total length of capillary
about 4
m
mm−3 . This results in a capillary surface area in each cubic millimetre of
brain tissue of 50 mm2. If we take the density of brain tissue to be similar to the
density of water, we find that the net flux of water from the blood and into tissue
to be 0.012 mm3s−1 mm−2 of capillary surface area. By the arguments made in the
papers making these estimates, most of this water will percolate through tissue, not
remain near the arteries (in the perivascular space). We will investigate the cautious
scenario in which one percent of this flux is kept within the perivascular space, such
that the scenario is represented by
f = 1.2 · 10−4 mm3s−1mm−2
(3.18)
3.2
Results
Figures 32 and 33 display the results of applying the four hypotheses to the model.
In two of the scenarios, the flow of water in perivascular spaces becomes slow enough
at capillary levels for diffusion to dominate advection.
Fit with data.
Murray’s law fit reasonably with lengths on the cortical surface.
The middle cerebral artery, which is the widest, is about 50 microns in radius (Qian
4If we take the human brain to weight 1.5 kg, then this reasoning gives us that the tissue produces
at most 0.092 ≈0.1 µlg−1min−1.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Results
33
Symbol
Description
units
Q(g)
PVS flow rate
mm3/s
A(g)
Total cross-area
mm2
a(g)
Local cross-area
mm2
¯v(g)
Mean flow velocity
µm/s
L
Characteristic length
µm/s
¯v(7)
Mean flow velocity
µm/s
Q(0)
Inflow rate
mm3/s
ρ
PVS to artery ratio
1
⌈g⌉
Length of PVS
# bifurc.
r0
Widest arterial radius
mm
f
Flow rate through BBB
mm3/s/mm2
c
Generation of boundary transport
# bifurc
D
Diffusion constant
10−7mm2/s
ν
Kinematic viscosity
6.97mm2/s
Table 31: Symbols overview for chapter 3. PVS: Perivascular space. BBB: Blood-
brain barrier. Bifurc.: bifurcation.
Symbol
units
hyp. 1
hyp. 2
hyp. 3
hyp. 4
L
µm/s
r(g) · ρ(g)
100 nm
r(g) · ρ(g)
-
¯v(7)
µm/s
20
20
20
20
Q(0)
10−4 mm3/s
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
ρ
1
1.4
-
ρ(g)
ρ(g)
⌈g⌉
# bifurc.
15
15
15
15
r0
mm
0.055
0.055
0.55
0.55
f
mm3/s/mm2
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.2 · 10−4
c
# bifurc.
-
-
-
8
D
10−7mm2/s
6.55
6.55
6.55
6.55
Table 32: Parameter overview. ρ for hypotheses 1 and 2 is taken from Mestre et al.
2018b. The inflow rate Q(0) will be justified in chapters 4 and 5. The radius at the
root of the middle cerebral artery, r0 is taken from Qian et al. 2018. The diffusion
constant is take for the spheres in Mestre et al. 2018b. ”hyp.” abbreviates hypothesis.
”-” denotes variables to be computed.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Class of models with simple scaling
et al. 2018), and Xiong et al. 2017 gives us 7-8 branch generations until a radius of
25-30 microns is reached. If we add a couple more generations to get down to the
about 25 microns that Xiong et al. observe as minimal on the surface, then Murray’s
law predicts there to be about 1000 arterial segments on the surface, which aligns
roughly with the dataset from Blinder, in which the total length of surface arteries is
175 mm with an average at 175 µm. However, upon penetration we expect a change
in the network’s topology and so should be careful with extending the validity of
Murray’s law beyond the surface based on this argument.
Velocities are in substantial agreement with known data. Between generations 0
and 1, the velocity of three of the scenarios (except hypothesis 2) drops from 13 to 9
microns per second. In hypothesis 2, the velocities are instead 79 and 52 microns per
second in the first two generations. The available data finds mean velocities (averaged
across a small section of the perivascular space) at 20 microns per second, ranging
between around 5 and 50 microns per second (Mestre et al. 2018b). A velocity of
17 microns per second was estimated by Bedussi et al. 2018 by the middle cerebral
artery where the black circle in figure 21 highlights. In other words, the calculations
here are within the measured range.
The Reynolds and Péclet numbers fit reasonably with known data. The Péclet
number calculated for the perivascular space near the base of the middle cerebral
artery is just over 1000 in all of the scenarios, which is very close to the average
found by Mestre et al. 2018b. In that study, the range of Péclet numbers is 110 to
1300. The calculations on this model is thus within the measured range. It may be
hypothesized that the 10-fold range in measured Péclet numbers arise in part from
variation in measurement location, since only few bifurcations would be necessary.
The Reynolds number naturally has the same fit, since they are exactly proportional
to each other.
What distinguishes the hypotheses?
Though the flow characteristics are differ-
ent between the baseline scenario and hypothesis 2 (from Faghih and Sharp 2018),
the velocities and flow characteristics at the capillary levels are where the results are
most different. Unfortunately, if measurements were made of convective water flow
at the capillary level, it would not be obvious whether these were due to constric-
tions of the perivascular space or due to net flux of water from the blood. However,
measurements of the perivascular space dimensions in tissue would certainly serve to
distinguish between the baseline scenario and that in which the perivascular space
constricts (hypothesis 3).
3.3
Discussion: Measure topology and water transport
across the blood-brain barrier
Making good estimates of the dimensions of the channels through which water flows is
beyond the level of the cortical surface crucial to using the approach of simple scaling
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Discussion: Measure topology and water transport across the blood-brain barrier
35
laws at those levels. Furthermore, the effect of net flow of water across the blood-
brain barrier is potentially vast. For these reasons, measurements of the perivascular
network dimensions in cortical tissue as well as of water flux through the blood-brain
barrier would be very useful.
3.3.1
Modelling approach evaluation.
Limitations and improvements.
The model is sensitive to Murray’s exponent,
which can vary quite substantially between tissues and does not provide a good de-
scription of capillary-level topology (Kassab 2005, Francis et al. 2009).
The class of models developed here has only been examined using those models
which have equal radii of arteries at equal distances from the middle cerebral artery,
though this is not the case - see e.g. figure 27. The velocities measured at the black
circle in that figure are both close to the main stem of the middle cerebral artery, but
also sufficiently far from the origin of the artery at the circle of Willis that assigning
it a low distance g is debatable. Unfortunately, the fit discussed above requires such
an assignment. The class of models could be used to look at velocities, Péclet and
Reynolds numbers when large and small vessels co-exist at the same distance from
inlet. Alternative scaling laws could be applied within this framework, e.g. the ones
found to be more precise at the capillary level than Murray’s law (ibidem).
The reasoning above is concerned with flow in perivascular spaces, not flow in the
extracellular space nor in channels within astrocytes (e.g. Abbott 2004, Asgari et al.
2016). Adding extracellular and intracellular pathways for the streamlines to pass
through could vastly increases the cross-sectional area traversed by the water flows
and therefore vastly decrease their average velocities. The estimates of total inflow
rate Q(0) would need to be under-estimated in order for the modelling approach
above to predict convective flows at such extra- or intra-cellular levels.
Given the proposition that sleep increases the volume available for water to flow
through (Xie et al. 2013), and that sleep increases glymphatic clearance, it is tempting
to speculate that the space opens up for the tissue to allow more water to flow through.
By the scaling model used here, adding more space for the water to flow through
would drastically reduce the flow speed and likely make it slow enough for diffusion
to dominate advection. In order for increases in the glymphatic spaces during sleep
to not reduce volume flow rates, the production rate of water in the tissue would
need to increase dramatically during rest phase. This is plausible, since this matches
patterns of activity in the choroid plxus and glymphatic flows (Hablitz 2019, Holth
et al. 2019, Zhang et al. 2018).
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Class of models with simple scaling
Figure 32: Results for perivascular space water flow velocities along the arterial
branching generations. Water flows are relatively fast on the cortical surface along
the middle cerebral artery, but quickly slow down along the branching generations.
If the perivascular space constricts (hypothesis 3) or there is a net flow of water
into it (hypothesis 4), then velocities are substantially higher at the capillary level
(at the final generations) than with simple scaling. The velocities are in substantial
agreement with Mestre et al. 2018b and Bedussi et al. 2018 who take measurements
near the middle cerebral artery. ”hyp 1-4”: hypothesis 1 through 4, see table 32.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Discussion: Measure topology and water transport across the blood-brain barrier
37
Figure 33: Results for perivascular Péclet numbers along the arterial branching
generations. Advection dominates diffusion from the perivascular space around the
middle cerebral artery and all the way to capillary level (hypotheses 1 and 2), where
the balance becomes more even. Constrictions in the perivascular space (hypothesis
3) or net addition of water from blood (hypothesis 4) maintain advection stronger
than diffusion through until the tissue level. ”hyp 1-4”: hypothesis 1 through 4, see
table 32.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Class of models with simple scaling
Figure 34: Results for perivascular Reynolds numbers along the arterial branching
generations. In all cases, the Reynolds number indicate laminar flow throughout the
perivascular space. ”hyp 1-4”: hypothesis 1 through 4, see table 32.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
A Compartment-like
model
4.0.1
Motivation specific to this modelling approach
The network from chapter 3 features a quite deep structure and thus carried the
risk of claiming precision beyond what the nature of the subject permits - especially
at levels below the cortical surface, evidence is not in favor of the simple scaling
law. This chapter zooms in on a subset of the perivascular branching network, that
which is on the cortical surface, and rather oversimplifies than overcomplicates. The
model considers tracer-filled water arriving to the surface perivascular spaces from a
much larger reservoir than the cortical surface itself (i.e. a cisterna magna injection),
and leaving at a rate determined by the flows through cortical penetrations. The
model is therefore a compartment-like model, in which the only compartment is the
surface perivascular space, see figure 41. Chapter 5 will later remedy some of the
oversimplifications made here.
The model will attempt to represent the flow of water in the surface perivascular
network following a wave of cardiac arrest-induced cortical spreading depolarization.
By starting with an extreme manipulation of the glymphatic system, it is easier to
abstract away from dynamics which are otherwise likely to be important such as water
transport across the blood brain-barrier.
4.1
A reduction
Brief overview.
This exposition will proceed in order of the proposed causality
and finally consider parameter values:
1. The area of a wave of depolarization (A) on the cortical surface expands to cover
a greater number (n) of cortical penetrations until it covers the entire surface.
2. Diameters of surface blood vessels and cortical blood vessels (d) constrict from
the moment they are under the wave of depolarization.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 A Compartment-like model
3. The total flow rate of water out of the surface and into the cortex is the sum
of flow rates across cortical penetrations (∑q) and is determined by changes in
cortical blood volume, the pressure gradient and resistance in the network.
4. The total flow rate of water into the cortical surface network (Q) is determined
by the outflow rates and the surface blood volume.
5. The accumulation of tracer-filled water in the cortical surface network (C) is
determined by Q and ∑q when taking the transport of tracer across the network
into consideration.
6. The parameter values allow us to represent a range of hypotheses, of which this
chapter investigates the impact of the magnitude of vascular constrictions.
4.1.1
Area of the wave of depolarization (A)
The wave of depolarization will here be considered exogenous to our problem and we
shall simply use a sigmoid curve to reflect the pattern that the wave is initially at
zero area and then increases to cover the full territory of cortical surface supplied by
the middle cerebral artery, apia. The wave reaches half it’s maximal size at time tCa
and grows at a rate of kCa:
ACa(t) = apia ·
(
1 −
1
1 + expkCa(t−tCa)
)
(4.1)
Figure 41: Model schematic: The compartment-like model where tracer-filled water
arrives from the cisterna magna via the ventral (”underside”) of the brain and travels
with rate Q along the middle cerebral artery into the surface network from which it
departs with rate ∑qt. The total outflow rate of water out of the surface perivascular
space (∑q) changes from it’s baseline levels (q0) by the volumetric changes in blood
within the cortex (V (c)) and the change in flow rates due to diameter changes in
the flow channels and pressure gradients (∆pR). The total inflow rate (Q) balances
total outflow rates and volumetric changes in the surface network (V (s)). Solid lines
indicate flow of mass, dotted lines indicate flow causal relationships.
V (s), V (c):
volume of surface (s) or cortical (c) perivascular spaces. CM: Cisterna magna.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 A reduction
41
The number of the evenly spread cortical penetrations covered by this wave is pro-
portional to the the wave area between 0 and the total number of cortical penetrations
on the apia territory, N:
n(t) =
{
N
apia ACa(t)
ACa(t) ≤apia
N
else
(4.2)
4.1.2
Diameters of surface and cortical blood vessels
Denote the average diameter of either the cortical surface arteries or the cortical
arteries as d. As a starting point, let us simply consider the scenario in which these
average vascular diameters adjust to the depolarization on a time-scale much faster
than the calcium wave. This allows us to consider a linear relationship between ACa
and d:
d(t) =
{
d0 −d0−⌊d⌋
apia ACa(t)
ACa(t) ≤Apia
⌊d⌋
else
(4.3)
The surface blood vessels will have distinct parameters from the intra-cortical
vessels - e.g. d and ⌊d⌋will be much smaller for the deeper vessels.1
In order to compare hypotheses, it will prove convenient to give the minimal (av-
erage) blood vessel diameter ⌊d⌋as a function of the magnitude of vessel constriction
compared to baseline vessel diameter d0:
⌊d⌋= kc · d0
(4.4)
Here, kc is a constant factor of constriction which is likely to differ according to the
intensity of the depolarization wave.
4.1.3
Local flow rates into cortex across cortical penetrations
At a very general level, laminar flow of Newtonian fluids through simple round tunnels
is well described by Hagen-Poiseuille flow, which can be derived from the Navier-
Stokes equations under assumptions applicable for the glymphatic flows. The flow
through annular tunnels is very similar, and we can expect the following relationship
to hold while disregarding changes and asymmetries in perivascular spaces3:
1There is a significant reduction here:
Though each cortical penetration can reasonably be
assumed equal to the next, the distribution of diameters along the intra-cortical arteries of course
vary. The median diameter of arteries in the tissue is 2 microns at all depths of cortex (Blinder et al.
2013), but the volume of cortex filled by large arteries (1%) is nearly identical to that filled by small
arteries according (Xiong et al. 2017). The length of capillaries is therefore >1000 times longer than
that of penetrating arterioles2. So any single diameter for penetrating arteries cannot fully reflect
the cortical arterial tree. As a starting point, the small diameter has been used on the argument
that this would under- rather than over-estimate the local glymphatic flow and thus be conservative
in predictions.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 A Compartment-like model
q = π
8µ
( dp
dx
)
·
[
(b4 −a4) −(b2 −a2)2
ln(b/a)
]
(4.5)
The equation here uses b for the outer radius of the perivascular channel and a (as
mentioned) for the radius of the arterial vessels under the penetration. The viscosity
is µ and dp
dx is the pressure gradient along the channel.
Since our conceptual hypothesis distinguishes between baseline flow, stable flow
through enlarged perivascular spaces and flow due to transiently increasing down-
stream volumes, we shall make this explicit in the mathematical representation. The
flow rate of water through a cortical penetration can be considered the sum of the
baseline flow, a stable change in flow rate due to any morphological change (∆qR, R
for resistance) and a transient downstream volume change ( ˙V ). The sum of flow rates
through cortical penetrations then has a simple formula
∑
q(t) = ˙V + n(t) · ∆q(d) + N · q0
(4.6)
Here, N is the total number of cortical penetrations and n is the number of those
penetrations which are contacted by the depolarization.
Resistance change ∆q(d).
∆q is a function of the diameter of the downstream
cortical blood vessels, as per our proposed causal mechanism, as well as being pro-
portional to the pressure gradient. When the blood vessel radius shrinks to a smaller
radius, q will increase to some new level as long as the pressure gradient remains
constant. Disregarding volume changes we have
∆q(d0) = 0
(4.7)
and
∆q(d) = q(d) −q0
(4.8)
Though the model uses the level change in q, (∆qR), it will prove convenient
to find the fold change in q between its baseline (q0) and equilibrium value after a
change in d (q∗), x. Simplify the Hagen-Poiseuille equation 4.5 using K =
π
8µ and a
Taylor-expansion (due to Thomas 2018) for narrow annulus,
q = K · ∆p · d · (b −d)3
(4.9)
We then have
∆q = q∗−q0 = x · q0 =⇒x = q∗−q0
q0
= q∗
q0 −1
(4.10)
3Two very interesting observations about the asymmetries of the perivascular spaces due to
Thomas 2018 deserve mention: The asymmetries are likely to reduce the resistance to perivascular
flow and perhaps it is in order to reduce resistance that the spaces take the shapes seen in e.g.
figure 26. Calculations by Tithof 2019 support this proposal. The approach taken here may thus
underestimate flow rates on account of assuming symmetric flow spaces.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 A reduction
43
The fold change becomes
x = q∗
q0 −1 = K · ∆p · a · (b −a)3
K · ∆p0 · a0 (b −a0)3 −1 =
∆p · a · (b −d)3
∆p0 · a0 · (b −a0)3 −1
(4.11)
In scenarios where the diameter is wide, it will be more appropriate to use the exact
formula rather than the Taylor-expansion, in which case the term in the square brack-
ets of equation 4.5 would go in the numerator and denominator (with appropriate
subscripts) of equation 4.11.
We therefore have a formula for ∆q which depends only on our previously stated
parameters.
∆q(d) =
( ∆p · 1
2d · (b −1
2d)3
∆p0 · 1
2d0 · (b −1
2d0)3 −1
)
q0
(4.12)
Rate of change in downstream volume.
What we need is the rate of change
of the volume of the perivascular space within the cortex, as we are assuming that
all of the volume added must be filled by water coming from the cortical surface.
By our assumptions, the change in cortical perivascular volume is exactly the same
magnitude as the change in cortical blood volume, since the walls of the perivascular
space remain fixed.
We imagine the perivascular space throughout the cortical penetration to be a
single (annular) tunnel. This makes the volume a simple function of the length of
perivascular space in the cortical penetration l, inner radii d and outer radii b.4
V (d) = l · π · (b2 −( 1
2d)2)
(4.13)
This makes the time derivative
˙V (d) = −1
2d · l · π · ˙d
(4.14)
Considering a drop in pressure gradient.
For flow in an annular pipe of
constant radius (and length and viscosity), any drop in pressure gradient must be
matched by the exact same fold-change in volume flow rate (see equation 4.5, where
the constant K above is proportional to the pressure gradient ∆P(t)).
If the pressure gradient drops from 100% to 0% in tp minutes, that means it
likely at least halves in tp
2 minutes and is reduced by at 25% in tp
4 minutes. A 25%
reduction in pressure gradient translates to a 25% reduction in volume flow rate.
The experiments discussed in chapter 2 saw flow coming to halt within tp ≈8 or so
minutes, making this a relevant parameter to include.
4We need to be careful with the numerical precision of this expression for narrow perivascular
spaces, but for the present purposes it works.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 A Compartment-like model
If the pressure gradient starts dropping around the same time that the wave of
depolarization starts and using a simple linear decline, we get
∆p(t) =





∆p0
t < tCa
∆p0 −∆p0
tp · (t −tCa)
tCa <= t < tCa + tp
0
tCa + tp <= t
(4.15)
Whichever unit we choose for the pressure appears equally on both sides of divi-
sions and we can therefore think of the pressure gradient as having the normalized
value 1.0 at baseline.
4.1.4
Total rate of inflow (Q)
If we allow the assumption that mass is conserved within the surface perivascular
space, then the rate of inflow must equal the sum of the rate of outflow and the rate
of change in volume.
Q = ˙V +
∑
q
(4.16)
The volume of perivascular spaces on the cortical surface can apply the same
formula as the cortical perivascular spaces, except we must use different parameters-
values.
4.1.5
The volume of tracer-filled water on the surface, C
The difficulty in providing a formula for tracer-filled water is that there is a time period
between tracer enters the surface network and begins departing it via the cortical
penetrations which depends on the spatial arrangement of the network channels and
cortical penetrations. At any given time, a certain number of cortical penetrations
will have been reached by tracer, n, which will consequently be leaving the surface
network at the rate of the local water flow rate. The total outflow rate is easier to
describe than the individual rates, since we are making heavy use of spatial averaging.
The sum of tracer outflow rates ∑qt is:
∑
qt ≈n
N
∑
q
(4.17)
The approximation is due to flow rates q not being uniformly distributed: if tracer first
reaches those cortical penetrations with expanded perivascular spaces, then equation
4.17 will under-estimate the outflow rate of tracer-filled water. (The model in chapter
5 solves this problem).
We can assume that the volume of the surface perivascular space will eventually
be filled by tracer at some time T:
∫T
tt
Q −n
N
∑
q = V (T)
(4.18)
==PAGE:55==
4.1 A reduction
45
Substituting in for Q, we find
V (T) =
∫T
tt
˙V + [1 −n
N ]
∑
q dt = V (T) −V (0) +
∫T
tt
[1 −n
N ]
∑
q dt
(4.19)
Subtracting the expanded volume V (T) −V (0) from both sides,
V (0) =
∫T
tt
[1 −nt
N ]
∑
q dt
(4.20)
At baseline conditions - under healthy sleep - we can take a time average over the
total inflow rate and think of it as constant in time over at least a couple of hours.
Moreover, it will equal the total outflow rate (as per our assumptions of conservation
of mass in the surface network).
Q(0) = Q0 =
∑
q(0)
(4.21)
If T is the time it takes for the surface network to fill, we therefore have
V (0) =
∫T
0
[1 −nt
N ] · Q0 dt
(4.22)
In order to get the unknown nt, we can reason along the lines of an idealized wave
of tracer-filled water as it covers the surface. If the cortical penetrations are evenly
distributed on the surface, and the area-coverage of the tracer-filled water is At, then
n
N = At
apia
(4.23)
As tracer enters the cortical network, it seems to spread in a circular fashion.
This corresponds to the network of surface vessels filling the area, a sort of idealized
space-filling curve. If we allow the velocity of the wave-front to be about constant,
the area covered by the tracer will correspond to that of a circle with radius v · t:
A = (v · t)2 · π
(4.24)
The time T it takes to fill a certain area, let’s say A, therefore implies an average
velocity:
v = T −1 ·
√
A
π
(4.25)
Based on these formula, we can integrate equation 4.22, to find Q0.
Q0 =
3V (0) · A
T · (3A −π · T 2 · v2)
(4.26)
We now have sufficient formulae to calculate the baseline total inflow rate in the
healthy state, Q0, by using equation 4.22. Pairs of T (time for tracer to cover the
==PAGE:56==
46
4 A Compartment-like model
relevant surface area) and A (area covered by tracer in time T) can be taken for a
number of conditions, but in order for the integration of equation 4.22 to be easily
solvable, we assumed a constant total inflow rate. This means we cannot use data
from e.g. the occlusion and cardiac arrest experiments discussed in chapter 2 (figures
211, 210). This is a limitation of the present modelling effort which is likely to cause
the estimates to be biased somewhat.
Continuing with that caveat, we can now prescribe a formula for the volume of
tracer-filled water in the surface perivascular space, because we have the total inflow
(Q) and the rate of total outflow ( At
apia
∑q):
C =
∫t
tt
Q −
∑
qt dt =
∫t
tt
Q −At
apia
∑
q dt
(4.27)
4.1.6
Parameter values
A key unknown parameter in this model is how much the diameters of the blood
vessels constrict. In the following text, we will investigate the consequences for tracer
flows and surface accumulation under two scenarios: that diameters constrict to 10%
or 70% of their baseline values (corresponding to kc = 0.1 or kc = 0.7 respectively).
Baseline local flow rate across cortical penetration.
From macroscropic imag-
ing under a sleep-like conditions,5the tracer seems to fill the territory of the middle
cerebral artery in around 20-30 minutes in some studies, (Sigurdsson 2019, S. v.
Holstein-Rathlou 2019), or about 15 minutes in others (Plog et al. 2018). In the
velocity maps accompanying Plog et al., the velocity of the tracer wave-front is cal-
culated to be about 50 microns per second (ibid., fig 2). It seems to take about 10
minutes to fill up the core branches of the middle cerebral artery and another 10 to
fill the whole territory of the middle cerebral artery. In the six mice in Blinder’s 2010
study, the average area supplied by the middle cerebral artery is 52mm2. If we use
the first 10 minutes of this data under the argument that the circular approximation
is more fitting in the beginning than the end of this interval, we can use A = 25mm2,
T = 10min and consequently find Q0 = 0.21 · 10−3mm3 · s−1.
When using data from sleep-like conditions, our estimates of the velocity v of
the tracer wave-front will be biased too low, since the effect of the large volumetric
changes due to the wave of depolarization not being present.
The rest of the parameters are chosen based on the literature discussed in chapter
2.
4.2
Results
Figures 42 and 43 display the results of the model and parameter scenarios.
5”Sleep-like” may be a bit too optimistic here: the data is from animals anaesthetized using
ketamine-xylazene, which is the best sleep-model available (Mestre et al. 2018a).
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Results
47
symbol
description
value
apia
Area of MCA-supplied cortical surface
52 mm2
kCa
Rate of Ca-wave spread
5
tCa
Time of Ca-wave midpoint
5 minutes
N
Number of MCA-supplied cortical penetrations
872
d0, pial
Initial average diameter of pial blood vessels
40 µm
d0, cortex
Initial average diameter of cortical blood vessels
2 µm
kc
Factor of blood vessel diameter constriction
{0.1, 0.7}
b, pial
Pial PVS outer radius
47 µm
b, cortex
Cortex PVS outer radius
2.5 µm
∆p0
Inital pressure gradient
1.0
q0
Baseline local flow rate of CSF into cortex
0.002 mm3/s
l, pial
Pial total length of arteries
175 mm
l, cortex
Cortex total length of arteries
31.15 m
tp
Time-period for pressure gradient to become 0
8 minutes
tt
Time at which tracer enters pial network
2 minutes
A
Area covered by tracer in T minutes
25 mm2
T
Time for tracer to cover territory A
600 s
v
Healthy velocity of tracer wave-front
5 µm/s
Table 41: Parameter overview for chapter 4.
(b for the surface network formed
simply as
√
1.4d0 based on Mestre et al. 2018b).
MCA: Middle Cerebral Artery.
PVS: Perivascular Space.
Pial: surface of the cortex (roughly, disregarding some
anatomy).
Fit with data.
The sigmoid shapes of the calcium-wave’s area and the radii of
arteries naturally take the right shape, as this was built into the model. The estimated
wave-front of tracer-filled water is 5µm/s, which is in substantial agreement with
the velocimetry in ibidem as well as in the unpublished data in figure 212. More
importantly, volume of tracer-filled water in the surface network (C) also takes the
same shape as in the macroscopic cardiac arrest data of figure 210 (and reaches a
level similar to that of the surface network’s volume). Tracer even fills most of the
surface network in similar time (about 2 minutes). The total inflow rate (Q) is bump-
shaped, which is roughly similar to the microscopic cardiac arrest data of figure 213
(though this data shows some variation across mice). The model calculations are thus
within the uncertainty factor of the count of cortical penetrations specifically and the
patterns of micro- and macroscopic data more generally.
Which physical variables distinguish between scenarios?
The total in- and
outflow rates double their magnitudes in scenario kc = 0.1 compared to scenario
kc = 0.7. A doubling is not a lot since the variability between the number of cortical
penetrations counted on the cortical surface by Blinder et al. 2010 also varied by
==PAGE:58==
48
4 A Compartment-like model
the same factor (see chapter 2), and because it is a response to a 7-fold decrease in
constriction. None the less, given the degree of fit with known data, the calculations
made here suggest that the difference between constrictions under various scenarios
will make a significant contribution to the wider glymphatic flows.
4.3
Discussion: Measure diameter dynamics of
penetrating arteries
Based on the calculations, the most distinguishing feature between the scenarios is
how narrow the arteries become. This is a natural target for future studies, since
2-photon microscopy allows such measurements (and indeed some have already been
made under conditions of less pathological models than cardiac arrest, see chapter 2
and e.g. Enger et al. 2015 and Schain et al. 2017).
The data for figure 214 (which display constriction of arteries under a wave of
depolarization), was collected after the formulation of this model and calculations.
That data seems to suggest a very strong constriction for the depolarizations after
cardiac arrest closer to kc = 0.1 than to kc = 0.7.
Overall, the qualitative fit with observed data is sufficient to claim that the calcu-
lations above are consistent with the hypothesis that blood vessel diameters are the
key regulatory mechanism for glymphatic flow on the surface surface. For this reason,
it is proposed to measure diameters of arteries as close to tissue as possible during
cardiac arrest and stroke models.
4.3.1
Modelling approach evaluation.
Limitations and improvements.
The walls of the perivascular space have been
assumed fixed, but recent studies have shown the glial endfeet which make up the
out wall to swell during cortical spreading depression and reduce glymphatic water
flows (Rosic et al. 2019, Schain et al. 2017). This swelling is likely relatively small
however, and the model assumptions above on fixed perivascular boundaries leading
to an increased perivascular volume are justified based on data on middle cerebral
artery occlusion where glymphatic flows increase through cortical penetrations (see
figure 214, Mestre 2019). However, the current model is not valid for cases where
there is a closure of the perivascular space rather than an expansion.
The spatial transport of tracer-filled water across the cortical surface and into
cortex should be modelled directly.
This would allow for better estimates of the
total inflow rate and of tracer accumulation on the cortical surface.
The current
artefact of the volume of tracer-filled water in the surface network (C) exceeding the
volume of the surface perivascular space would likely be remedied. Improvements
in the velocimetry of Plog et al. 2018 to the point of identifying velocities along
main arteries from macroscopic imaging could aid this undertaking. Taking more
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Discussion: Measure diameter dynamics of penetrating arteries
49
full advantage of the velocimetry in Mestre et al. 2018b is also a potentially fruitful
avenue.
The gradient of the exponential form of the sigmoid wave of depolarization may
be larger than what occurs in nature: If the depolarization spreads with a constant
velocity equally in all directions, then the area covered would go as time squared until
the boundaries were met. If instead the wave spreads in a more rectangular shape
along the middle cerebral artery, the wave area would go in simple proportion to time.
In both cases, the rates of change in blood volumes may be over-estimated by the
approach above, and a more precise representation of the geometry and velocity of
the depolarization wave is desirable.
The constriction of arteries does not happen on a time-scale much faster than the
spread of the wave of depolarization, as was assumed above. A slower constriction
would reduce the rate of change in blood volume and maximal flow rates would
therefore also be slower. This is one issue the next chapter will take a step towards
remedying.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 A Compartment-like model
Figure 42: Results for significant arterial constriction, kc = 0.1. Flow rates take
the same temporal pattern but are greater in maximal magnitudes compared to the
smaller constriction in the next figure. The constriction of surface and cortical arteries
in the top two rows cause surface and cortical perivascular spaces to increase (in
the next two rows) as well as a change in flow rate through cortical penetrations
related to diameter and pressure gradient (fifth row). The total flow rate into cortex
(pink) and into the surface network (grey) are bump-shaped, which is similar to
experimental data (figure 213) and the accumulation of tracer matches experimental
data qualitatively (figures 211 and 210).
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Discussion: Measure diameter dynamics of penetrating arteries
51
Figure 43: Results for small arterial constriction, kc = 0.7. Flow rates take the
same temporal pattern but are reduced in maximal magnitudes compared to the
significant constriction in the previous figure. The constriction of surface and cortical
arteries in the top two rows cause surface and cortical perivascular spaces to increase
(in the next two rows) as well as a change in flow rate through cortical penetrations
related to diameter and pressure gradient (fifth row). The total flow rate into cortex
(pink) and into the surface network (grey) are bump-shaped, which is similar to
experimental data (figure 213) and the accumulation of tracer matches experimental
data qualitatively (figures 211 and 210).
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5
A pseudo-spatial
model
5.0.1
Motivation specific to this modelling approach
Whereas chapter 3 risked extending the precision of the mathematical reasoning on
the physical dimensions beyond what is probable and chapter 4 conversely made
barely any claim to connecting with the spatial aspect of the glymphatic flows, this
chapter will take a couple of steps towards situating the flows in space.
Many of the clinically relevant phenomena and basic research questions which
remain to be answered about the glymphatic system are spatially located. In the
dementias, plaques form with particular spatial distributions which interact with the
glymphatic pathways (Mestre et al. 2017, see fig. 2). Furthermore, plaque formation
is potentially sensitive to flow characteristics (Trumbore 2018). After ischemic stroke,
damaged tissue is limited to the so-called ischemic tissue, the boundaries of which
separate crucial immunological operations (Hartings et al. 2017).
During normal
physiological functioning, the regulation of the glymphatic system is likely coupled to
normal neuronal functioning and therefore organized according to the same spatial
patterns.
Furthermore, non-spatial models may fail to account for compensatory mecha-
nisms taking place simultaneously in time but distributed in space.
For example,
when one part of cortex pulls water in, another could in principle compensate for this
flow by pausing it’s own.
Finally, by situating our model in space, we get access to more detailed experi-
mental techniques. Data on whisker-stimulation discussed in chapter 2 promises to
take advantage of spatially defined stimulation of cortex and it’s effect on glymphatic
flow. Future studies currently in the planning stage involve using optogenetics to
stimulate well-defined and arbitrary regions of cortex while measuring glymphatic
flow. Spatial models can potentially take more full advantage of such experiments.
It is therefore in general relevant to synthesize mathematical representations of the
glymphatic system which are explicitly situated in space.
More specifically, we are interested in
1. investigating the consequence for the temporal profile of tracer flow rates of the
spatial localization of penetrating arterioles under depolarization under differing
==PAGE:64==
54
5 A pseudo-spatial model
hypotheses about
• vessel diameter dynamics and
• baseline pressure-driven flow rates.
2. to enable experimental methods of falsification which can manipulate the precise
spatial location of vasculature regulation.
5.1
A reduction
The same causal mechanisms behind glymphatic flows in the model discussed in
chapter 4 are maintained here, but a couple of steps will be taken to begin situating
the calculations in space.
Where the last chapter distinguished between cortical penetrations contacted by
depolarization and those not yet contacted, the model in this chapter maintains a
separate dynamic value for the radii of each surface and penetrating artery and thus
a separate value for the flow rate across each cortical penetration. This allows for a
more accurate representation of temporal dynamics related to the spatial distribution
of the depolarization and for future extensions to consider manipulations of targeted
areas of cortex (e.g. using whisker stimulation or optogenetics, S. v. Holstein-Rathlou
2019, Mestre 2019).
Each of the arterial bifurcations are assumed to have a location on a 2-dimensional
surface on which the wave of depolarization and the wave-front of tracer-filled water
have near-constant velocity. Each bifurcation and cortical penetration can therefore
be arranged on a single line representing their distance from the epicentres of depo-
larization and tracer arrival (at the base of the middle cerebral artery), see figure 51.
Since the 3-dimensional flows are in this way reduced to flow on a line, the model
here is pseudo-spatial at this stage.
In order to progress from the compartment-like model of chapter 4, this chapter
develops a formula for the temporal diameter dynamics of spatially distributed arter-
ies contacted by a depolarization wave and takes a new approach to determine tracer
flow from surface into cortex.
5.1.1
The space
The network of arteries on the cortical surface can be considered a graph G consisting
of nodes which represent bifurcations, cortical penetrations and any other connection
points between arteries (N), edges which simply reflect which nodes are connected (E),
and the radii of arteries (R). Thus, G = (N, E, R). One example of such a network
is figure 25 (though radii are not represented there). Letting the outer boundaries of
the perivascular spaces be fixed and assuming the simple annular geometry used in
chapter 3, we now have a 2-dimensional representation of the surface network that
chapter 4 identified as the surface compartment. If the arterial walls had been fixed,
==PAGE:65==
5.1 A reduction
55
Figure 51:
Model schematic for chapter 5.
The two surface dimensions of the
cortical surface are reduced to one by using the Euclidian distance to each artery
and cortical penetration from the epicentres of depolarization (Ca-wave, green) and
tracer flow (yellow). Casual chain labelled 1-3: 1) Wave of depolarization spreads.
2) Depolarization causes arterial constrictions which enlarges the perivascular space
(blue and orange). 3) Water flows to balance the perivascular volume expansion and
is driven faster through larger channels in proportion to the pressure gradient.
this perivascular volume would be a non-deforming control volume (such as that of
chapter 3). This formulation allows for a varied distribution of surface arterial and
perivascular radii, but as a starting point a uniform distribution of these are assumed.
Each penetrating artery and each surface artery obey the same mechanisms of
constrictions upon local depolarization. However, they will be contacted by the depo-
larization at differing times. Compared to the approach in chapter 4, the graph-based
formulation allows us to become more specific about the temporal dynamics. This
will not be as important for the cardiac arrest model, but in all other cases of de-
polarizations, the re-polarization occurs according to a spatial and temporal profile
which is crucial for example in the localization of deceased tissue after strokes.
5.1.2
The wave of depolarization and glymphatic flows
The wave of depolarization has an epicentre at some specified time and location on
the 2-dimensional cortical surface, and we permit the assumption of roughly constant
wave-front velocity ¯vw (see figure 212). Given a network of arteries on the surface,
with bifurcations and cortical penetrations situated also in 2 dimensions, we can
estimate the time at which each artery is contacted by the depolarization. The sense
in which the model is spatial can thus be quickly reduced from the 2 dimensions of the
cortical surface to a single dimension of distance from the depolarization epicentre.
(A similar reduction is made for the tracer-flow across the surface further below).
Future improvements could extend this, and until then we shall identify this approach
as pseudo-spatial.
==PAGE:66==
56
5 A pseudo-spatial model
Constriction of the arteries.
The mechanism of arterial diameter regulation are
exogenous to the purpose of the modelling here, so the time evolution of the arterial
diameters can simply be given a sigmoid-shaped curve of constriction so as to match
the data in figure 214. We can construct a sigmoid reduction between two equilibria
of vessel diameters by using a difference equation for the magnitude of constriction
which solves to a logistic growth curve triggered when the depolarization wave makes
contact. With a being the arterial radius and c being the amount of constriction, we
can write
a(t) = ⌈a⌉−c(t)
c(t + 1) = c(t) + w(t) · δa ·
(
1 −c(t)
⌈c⌉
)
(5.1)
Here, δa determines how fast the constriction happens. The maximal constriction,
⌈c⌉is chosen to give the desired level of arterial constriction (and of course bound
less than ⌈a⌉). w(t) ∈{0, 1} triggers the beginning of the constriction.
If t(i)
w is the time where node i is reached by the depolarization-wave,1then the
trigger function can be found as
wi(t) =
{
1
t(i)
w ≤t
0
else
(5.2)
While all cortical penetrations are assumed to have the same baseline diame-
ters2and are each located in single points, the surface arteries are more varied and
are lines on the surface plane. As a starting point, we will let all the surface ar-
teries have the same baseline diameter and let each bifurcation-free segment begin
constriction when both bifurcations are contacted by the depolarization wave. This
of course means that rates of change in perivascular volumes will be calculated for
each bifurcation-free arterial segment.
The resulting formula for flow rates through cortical penetrations then becomes
(compare with equation 4.6)
q(a) = q0 + ∆qR(a) + ˙V (a)
(5.3)
These are naturally functions of the blood vessel radius a, and the first two terms
can be determined from equation 4.5. The volume referred to here is calculated on a
single cortical penetration. When calculating rate of change in volume of the surface
perivascular space, all surface vessel volumes must be summed.
1Determining tw is simple using the assumptions stated above.
Let d(p, cc) be the distance
between epicentre cc and the node at location ρ, and have t2
0 be the time point where the depolar-
ization commences. Then we have: tw = d(ρ,cc)
¯vw
+ tw
0 . The full procedure of calculation is available
as python-based jupyter notebooks, which are too large to include here.
2As discussed in chapter 4, the assumption that a single diameter can represent the perivascular
space in a cortical penetration is problematic.
==PAGE:67==
5.1 A reduction
57
The implication of this formula is that the glymphatic flow rate of water into
tissue from a single cortical penetration g is written as
g(a) = q(a) −˙V (a) = q0 + ∆qR(a)
(5.4)
This formula allows us to investigate how radius dynamics of penetrating arteries
influence the flow rate of water into tissue, but there is a significant limitation: The
formula for ∆qR (developed in chapter 4, see equation 4.11) divides out the length of
the perivascular space along the artery and it phrased as a proportion of baseline flow
rate q0. Without an independent parameter depth-parameter to calculate the surface
area between penetrating perivascular spaces and a formula for the flux across this
boundary independent of estimates of baseline flow rates, the formula unfortunately
does not allow us to compare glymphatic flows between deep and shallow perivascular
spaces nor to estimate the local glymphatic flow rates.
5.1.3
Tracer-filled water accumulation on the surface
The volume of the surface perivascular network is filled with water at all times. The
volume of tracer-filled water in the surface network, C, is a bit more complicated.
It starts at zero before tracer arrives (e.g. from a cisterna magna injection) and we
expect that it eventually fills the surface perivascular volume (here V (s) using s to
distinguish surface from intra-cortical).
C(0) = 0
C(T) = V (s)
for large T
(5.5)
Applying mass conservation under the stated assumptions makes the volume of
tracer equal to the cumulative sum of tracer arrival (starting at time ta) minus the
cumulative sum of tracer outflow. Outflows through cortical penetrations start at
time t(i)
o
in penetration i).
C =
∫t
ta
Q dt −
∑
i
∫t
t(i)
o
qi dt ≤
∑
V (s)
(5.6)
The t(i)
o
are in principle determined by the surface network and conditions given
so far. We could use Kirchoff’s approach to estimate the distribution of pressures at
each bifurcation and from that volume flow rates across each bifurcation, after which
we could identify tracer velocities between nodes and finally from inlet to each cortical
penetration. By dividing the length along vessels from inlet with these velocities we
would find all t(i)
o .
Leaving that for future improvements, here we imagine a single mean velocity for
the macroscopic wave-front of tracer-filled water, ¯vt. We can choose ¯vt in order to
satisfy the wave-front tracking in figure 212, or to satisfy equations 5.5 and 5.6 using
an experimentally given T (similarly to what chapter 4 did).
==PAGE:68==
58
5 A pseudo-spatial model
5.1.4
Parameter values
The surface network with its 2 dimensional localization of arteries and cortical pen-
etrations have been kindly supplied by Blinder 2019 who made such maps for their
2010 paper (Blinder et al. 2010). Distances calculated on this map necessarily suffer
from an unknown curvature, and are therefore of course approximate, and (as dis-
cussed in chapter 2) there is more than a factor 2 between low and high numbers of
cortical penetrations in these maps. Baseline total inflow rate as well as the implied
local flow rate into cortical penetrations will be re-estimated for this model based on
one of these particular maps, (and the estimates are in substantial agreement, see
table 52).
Of the many open questions discussed in this document, we shall here focus on
applying the modelling effort to make falsifiable predictions to illuminate the debate
about the significance of water flow into cortical tissue in the healthy animal. The
two questions we shall focus on is the depth of perivascular spaces in cortical tissue
and whether a hydrostatic pressure gradient sustains a baseline flow beyond the last
heartbeat. In each case, we can vary central parameters and ask if the resulting flows
are still consistent with observed evidence.
Would arterial constrictions be sufficient to produce the bump-like profile of vol-
ume flow rates and hill-like profile of tracer coverage observed under cardiac arrest
(figures 213, 210, and 211) if the perivascular spaces are very shallow in the cortex?
By varying the length of the penetrating arteries under each cortical penetration, we
can compare the consequences of shallow versus deep perivascular spaces. Blood vol-
ume lost from the brain will be compensated for by the perivascular spaces, but in
each case there is an upper limit to this compensation which is equal to the blood
volume in that part of the vascular system which has a perivascular sheath. This
assumption is somewhat heavier on the shallow scenario. To approach an answer, we
can compare the time it takes for tracer to fill the surface network with shallow versus
deep cortical perivascular spaces.
The question of whether a pressure gradient maintains a baseline flow (after the
last heartbeat stops pulsation) can similarly be investigated using a single parameter.
The pressure gradient is parametrized as ∆p and can be set to zero. The baseline
flow of water into cortex, q0 will also be set zero, and the hypothesis thus investigates
the water accumulation that would occur even if the perivascular spaces do not have
glymphatic convective flows.
To estimate the velocities of depolarization and tracer, this chapter applies the
procedure discussed in chapter 4, but takes the case of cardiac arrest (figure 210)
rather than the velocimetry estimates from occlusion of the middle cerebral artery
(figure 212). The resulting velocities are a couple of times larger than estimated for
middle cerebral artery occlusions and about 6 times larger than in sleep model. (see
tables 51 and 52).
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Results
59
Symbol
Description
units
R
Pial vascular radii
mm
a
Cortical vascular radii
mm
w(t)
trigger for wave arrival
{1, 0}
tw
wave arrival time
s
q
Flow rate in local cort. pen.
mm3/s
Q
Total inflow rate
mm3/s
C
Vol. of tracer in pial network
mm3
L
Lengths between pial nodes
mm
∆p
pressure gradient
norm.
∆qR
resistance-related cort. flow diff.
mm3/s
V
Volumes of cort. & pial PVS
mm3
a0
Baseline cort. vascular radii
µm
r0
Baseline pial vascular radii
µm
⌊a⌋
Minimal cort. vascular radii
µm
q0
q at baseline
mm3/s
l
length of vasc. under cort. pen.
mm
bc
PVS outer radius in cortex
µm
∆¯p0
Baseline pressure gradient
norm.
δt
Rate of artery collapse
1
tw
0
wave start time
s
¯vw
Ca-wave mean velocity
µm/s
¯vt
Ca-wave mean velocity
µm/s
Table 51:
Symbol overview for chapter 5.
PVS: Perivascular Space.
Pial: Of
the surface network. Cort.: Cortex. Vasc.: Vasculature. Pen.: Penetration. Vol.:
Volume. Diff.: Difference.
5.2
Results
Figures 52, 53, and 54 display representative values from the calculations of the three
hypotheses.
Fit with data.
The exogenous variables take the right shape of course: radii drop
to minimal values over about a minute (see figure 214) and the drop in pressure
gradient brings flow to a stop after about 8 minutes (Mestre 2019)). The volume of
tracer accumulation on the surface aligns sufficiently with the estimated perivascular
volume to interpret a near filling of the surface perivascular space following the wave
of depolarization.
Tracer accumulation follows the hill-like shape seen in macroscopic imaging in
models of cardiac arrest and occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. The volume of
tracer fills the surface network 4-5 minutes after arriving, but the majority of volume
==PAGE:70==
60
5 A pseudo-spatial model
Symbol
units
hyp. 1
hyp. 2
hyp. 3
a0
µm
2
2
2
r0
µm
40
40
40
⌊a⌋
µm
1
1
1
Q0
10−4 mm3/s
1.8
1.8
0.0
q0
10−7 mm3/s
2.1
2.1
0.0
l
mm
140
1.4
140
bc
µm
2.5
2.5
2.5
∆¯p0
norm.
1
1
0
δt
1
0.1
0.1
0.1
tw
0
s
120
120
120
¯vw
µm/s
66
66
66
¯vt
µm/s
33
33
33
Table 52: Parameter values for each of the three hypotheses. Hypothesis 1 uses
constrictions all the way down to the capillary level as glymphatic drivers (specifically
by setting l equal to the estimated length of vasculature belonging to each cortical
penetration).
Hypothesis 2 uses a shallow perivascular space which only extends
along the largest penetrating arterioles (see figure 24, specifically by setting l =
1.4mm). Hypothesis 3 assumes baselines flow rates to be zero due to an absence of
hydrostatic pressure gradient and arterial pulsations (specifically by using ∆¯p0 = q0 =
0). Parameter values are slightly different compared to chapter 4 due to the surface
network in this case being taken directly from measurements of a mouse (Blinder 2019)
rather than from an average of mice (which affects the length of surface vasculature,
thereby surface volume and thus tracer wave velocities). Hyp.: hypothesis.
is filled in about two minutes. These calculations align with the data presented in
figures 211 and 210.
In the microscopic measurements (figure 213), the bump in Q precedes the drop
in arterial diameter near the base of the middle cerebral artery. This is consistent
with the hypothesis that signals from constricting capillaries travel upstream to the
larger surface arteries. However, in the modelling above, the surface arteries respond
to the calcium wave independently and so the timing of arterial constriction on the
surface network is likely too early in the model. With that caveat, the model aligns
reasonably with the microscopic measurements.
Comparison of hypotheses.
Qualitatively, the three hypotheses are nearly indis-
tinguishable on volume flow rates and tracer accumulation. Though following the
same temporal pattern, total flow rates are about ten-fold larger in the scenario with
deep perivascular spaces. Tracer accumulation on the surface is unaffected by the
variation in perivascular depth since the difference between the total in- and out-
flows is maintained between the two scenarios. The results here are consistent with
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Discussion: Measure functional glymphatic regulation
61
the observed qualitative features of the macroscopic and microscopic data and essen-
tially reflect the hypothesis that the water flows to replace blood volume following
depolarization.
Even without a baseline pressure gradient to drive flow at healthy conditions, the
observed large inflow of tracer-filled water still occurs. It seems the macroscopic tracer
experiment cannot adjudicate between whether tracer enters the tissue at baseline
due to a pressure gradient. However, the macroscopic inflow of tracer-filled water is
consistent with the models, and since flows driven by arterial pulsations (rather than
hydrostatic pressure gradients) have been observed in the surface network (Mestre
et al. 2018b), it seems more likely that there are in fact a baseline water flow into
cortex (whether caused by pressure gradient or not).
5.3
Discussion: Measure functional glymphatic
regulation
5.3.1
Modelling approach evaluation
Compared to the compartment-like model in chapter 4, this chapter used a more real-
istic temporal dynamic for arterial constrictions and enabled a graph-based approach
to situating the flows in 2 dimensions which improved the formulation of total tracer
outflow from the surface network.
Limitations and improvements.
All arteries are assumed to be either of the
surface kind with a relatively large diameter or belonging to cortex with a much
smaller diameter. Since medium and large cortical arteries each take up as much
volume of the cortex as the small arteries (each around 1% in Xiong et al. 2017),
the perivascular volume expansion is likely underestimated until a more fine-grained
distribution of arterial diameters are used.
The formulas developed here for glymphatic flow rates all rely on external esti-
mates of q0, which in our case are made via macroscopic observations from which we
calculate the total flow rate Q and apply the assumption of mass conservation. If the
water leaves the surface network along surface veins rather than enter cortex, the pro-
posed glymphatic baseline flow rates of water into cortex q0 are of course zero. This
scenario was investigated above, and since it produces the same qualitative features,
the formulas here are not yet able to distinguish between whether or not there are
convective glymphatic flows in the absence of arterial constrictions. The quantitative
differences between the scenarios are large enough that given direct measurements of
baseline total flow rates it would be possible to distinguish experimentally between
the otherwise similar hypotheses.
Flow of tracer-filled water along the network could be calculated analytically
rather than assuming a constant velocity of a tracer-wave. In fact, this would al-
low for another validation of the reasoning permissible using fluid mechanic analysis.
==PAGE:72==
62
5 A pseudo-spatial model
Figure 52: Simulation results on hypothesis 1 where arteries deep in cortex respond
to the wave of depolarization by constricting and pulling in water. Here, deep cortical
perivascular spaces are responsible for drawing in a considerable volume of tracer-filled
water (something which does not happen in hypothesis 2 with shallow perivascular
spaces). The model replicates the known patterns of flow rates (which show a bump-
like pattern, 213) and macroscopic accumulation of tracer (which shows a hill-like
pattern, see figures 211 and 210). The rows are sorted by their role in the causal
chain with artery radii and pressure gradient in the top, followed by rates of change
in cortical and surface volumes and resistance-related flow rate increases below before
arriving at the sum of flow rates into cortex (∑q), the entry flow rate Q and finally
the accumulated volume of tracer-filled water in the bottom. ”Ca-wave”: wave of
depolarization. ”CSF”: Cerebrospinal fluid (water). ”Pial”: of the cortical surface.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Discussion: Measure functional glymphatic regulation
63
Figure 53: Simulation results on hypothesis 2 where cortical arteries only responds
on a shallow layer to the wave of depolarization. Here, shallow cortical perivascular
spaces mean volume flow rates of tracer-filled water is into and out the surface network
are smaller. The model replicates the known patterns of flow rates (which show a
bump-like pattern, (figure 213) and macroscopic accumulation of tracer which shows
a hill-like pattern (see figures 211 and 210). The rows are sorted by their role in
the causal chain with artery radii and pressure gradient in the top, followed by rates
of change in cortical and surface volumes and resistance-related flow rate increases
below before arriving at the sum of flow rates into cortex (∑q), the entry flow rate Q
and finally the accumulated volume of tracer-filled water in the bottom. ”Ca-wave”:
wave of depolarization. ”CSF”: Cerebrospinal fluid (water). ”Pial”: of the cortical
surface.
==PAGE:74==
64
5 A pseudo-spatial model
Figure 54: Simulation results on hypothesis 3.
Here, the absence of a pressure
gradient after the last heartbeat means that all water flow is caused by perivascular
volume expansion following blood volume reductions. The resulting flow is nearly as
large as that under hypothesis 1 since the rates of change in perivascular volumes
are large compared with pressure gradient-driven flow.
The model replicates the
known patterns of flow rates (which show a bump-like pattern, see figure 213) and
macroscopic accumulation of tracer (which shows a hill-like pattern, see figures 211
and 210). The rows are sorted by their role in the causal chain with artery radii
and pressure gradient in the top, followed by rates of change in cortical and surface
volumes and resistance-related flow rate increases below before arriving at the sum of
flow rates into cortex (∑q), the entry flow rate Q and finally the accumulated volume
of tracer-filled water in the bottom.
”Ca-wave”: wave of depolarization.
”CSF”:
Cerebrospinal fluid (water). ”Pial”: of the cortical surface.
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Discussion: Measure functional glymphatic regulation
65
It could furthermore allow the required precision for the model to begin investigating
the extent to which macroscopic imaging shows tracer leaving the perivascular space
on the surface. In figures 211 and 210, it is not clear whether the tracer stays within
perivascular spaces near arteries. A model with enough detail on channel flow and
diameters could compare this data against assumptions with boundary leakage.
Many fine-grained analyses of more intricate arterial diameter dynamics are pos-
sible to calculate on using this model. Most cases of depolarizations are followed by
re-polarization and a return to normal arterial diameters (see e.g. the discussions
on middle cerebral artery occlusion and migraine in chapter 2). Under healthy func-
tioning of the tissue, arteries show a biphasic pattern of an initial dilation followed
by a small but extended constriction (Uhlirova et al. 2016). This mechanism aligns
well with glymphatic flows being compensated after whisker stimulation in spite of
blood vessel dilations causing interruptions (S. v. Holstein-Rathlou 2019). Further-
more, surface artery diameters may be regulated by capillary signals (Iadecola 2017),
and perhaps this explains how the diameter collapse of the middle cerebral artery
seems to happen after volume flow rates bump, see figure 213. These scenarios are
straight forward to make calculations on using the model presented here, and they
would provide more falsifiable hypotheses to experimentally validate the model.
With the examples of intricate diameter dynamics being manifold, it will remain
important to maintain a concise theoretical concept of the causality. However, the
richness of observations can inspire some cautious considerations on how to proceed
with developing the theory.
In the experiments run for Mestre et al. 2018b, the
authors observe occasional changes in the direction of flow.
This is a potentially
meaningful observation. The glymphatic system is an example of adaptive transport
networks so it will not be surprising if traction on understanding its regulation can be
gotten from theoretical analysis of such networks. For example, Martens and Klemm
2018 find that tree-like flows are replaced by cyclical flows at critical amplitudes
of fluctuations. The flow reversals observed experimentally may thus be predictable
based on optimality considerations. Another effort based on network theory quantified
robustness and efficiency as organizing principles, (Papadopoulos et al. 2018). This
would continue the tradition from Murray who applied the principle of minimum work
to arrive at his highly influential model.
A theory derived from optimality considerations could also give a principled pre-
diction of whether and how local glymphatic flows should catch up after local arterial
dilations. Uhlirova et al. 2016 argues that local arterial constrictions are an active
process initiated with dedicated signalling molecules, which could indicate that the
system actively replenishes water flow after an arterial dilation. On the other hand,
total glymphatic water throughput does not increase for stimulated regions of cor-
tex, but simply maintains the baseline regardless of stimulation. With a principled
approach and well-defined criteria for optimality, it would be possible to argue more
forcefully about whether arterial constrictions in fact fit with a biologically optimal
glymphatic flow.
The model in its current does not represent flows across the perivascular bound-
aries. This extension is left open for future work.
==PAGE:76==
66
5 A pseudo-spatial model
5.3.2
Proposals for experimental priorities
The failure of the model here to distinguish qualitatively between the competing
hypotheses is due to the dominating effect of the large volumetric changes which follow
cardiac arrest and stroke models. It would therefore be interesting to manipulate
arterial diameters on a smaller scale: Either reduce the volume of cortex in which
arteries constrict, or reduce the amount of constriction. By comparing un-stimulated
with stimulated hemispheres, it would likely be possible to separate the qualitative
features experimentally. For example, a stable curve of tracer accumulation would
likely be seen on the unstimulated hemisphere, whereas kinks would appear on the
stimulated hemisphere. This would put extra strain on making correct assumptions
on the exogenous artery diameters as well as the currently indirect modelling of tracer
propagation on the cortical surface, so these aspects should be improved concurrently.
Two approaches to doing so are currently either already in progress or at the
planning stage. The work already in progress is by Stephanie von Holstein-Rathlou,
who takes macroscopic images of glymphatic tracer flow on the cortical surface under
whisker stimulation in a model of healthy sleep (S. v. Holstein-Rathlou 2019). Early
indications from this data suggest that arterial dilations reduce glymphatic flow, but
also that there is a catch-up of glymphatic flow so as to maintain the baseline in spite
of stimulation. If this mechanism happens via an active constriction of arteries (such
as suggested by Uhlirova et al. 2016), this suggests a role for glymphatics in healthy
local functioning of tissue on a time scale of seconds.
The other approach in the planning stage is to use optogenetics to control di-
ameters of vasculature in precisely defined volumes of mouse cortex while making
microscopic recordings of glymphatic flow velocities and channel diameters (Mestre
2019). By controlling the size and timing of cortical volumes in which vasculature
is made to constrict or dilate, variations in total flow rate can be made which may
distinguish between the hypotheses discussed above.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This thesis has condensed conflicting theories and interpretations of experiments of
the glymphatic system into mathematical representations which fit with known data
and which make predictions for future experiments to falsify. Centrally, a perivascu-
lar space around the middle cerebral arterial tree has been assumed to provide the
physical space for flows of water.
A class of models were developed in which a simple geometry of bifurcating arteries
aligns reasonably with measured velocities, Péclet and Reynolds numbers. In this
model, flows are convective on the cortical surface but may become diffusive around
the capillaries. However, the uncertainties about space dimensions in tissue and water
flux across the blood-brain barrier in tissue significantly limit the predictive quality of
this approach. It was therefore proposed to target these two aspects of the glymphatic
system in future experiments.
A compartment-like model of tracer accumulation on the cortical surface following
a wave of depolarization was developed in which the central regulating mechanism
of glymphatic flows is arterial diameters. The model fits the qualitative behaviour
of measured volume flow rates in perivascular spaces as well as macroscopic tracer
accumulation. The model is consistent with arterial constrictions driving glymphatic
flows after cardiac arrest. Because of this, it is suggested to take measurements of
arterial constrictions under models of cardiac arrest and stroke (such as were made
in parallel with this project).
The compartment-like model was extended by simplifying the 2-dimensional corti-
cal surface according to distance to the base of the middle cerebral artery and allowing
distributed temporal dynamics for flow through cortical penetrations. Qualitatively,
the macroscopic and microscopic evidence is consistent in this model with competing
hypotheses on the depth to which perivascular spaces extend in cortex and whether
baseline directional flow rates exist in the glymphatic system independent of large
blood volume variations.
The extreme volumetric dynamics of the cardiac arrest
and stroke models provide flows too strong for the normal functioning glymphatic
system to be identified in these calculations. It is therefore recommended that sim-
ilar macroscopic and microscopic measurements be made under normal functioning
conditions.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
Abbott, N. Joan (2004). “Evidence for bulk flow of brain interstitial fluid: Significance
for physiology and pathology”. In: Neurochemistry International 45.4, pages 545–
552. issn: 01970186. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2003.11.006.
Aristotle (1952). Great Books of the Western World N. 9 Aristotle II. Edited by Ross
Hutchins, page 340.
Asgari, Mahdi, Diane De Zélicourt, and Vartan Kurtcuoglu (2015). “How astrocyte
networks may contribute to cerebral metabolite clearance”. In: Scientific Reports
5, pages 1–14. issn: 20452322. doi: 10.1038/srep15024. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/srep15024.
— (2016). “Glymphatic solute transport does not require bulk flow”. In: Scientific
Reports 6, pages 1–11. issn: 20452322. doi: 10.1038/srep38635. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep38635.
Bakker, Erik N.T.P. et al. (2016). “Lymphatic Clearance of the Brain: Perivascu-
lar, Paravascular and Significance for Neurodegenerative Diseases”. In: Cellular
and Molecular Neurobiology 36.2, pages 181–194. issn: 15736830. doi: 10.1007/
s10571-015-0273-8.
Bedussi, Beatrice et al. (2018). “Paravascular spaces at the brain surface: Low resis-
tance pathways for cerebrospinal fluid flow”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow
and Metabolism 38.4, pages 719–726. issn: 15597016. doi: 10.1177/0271678X17737984.
Blinder, Pablo (2019). Unpublished communication.
Blinder, Pablo et al. (2010). “Topological basis for the robust distribution of blood
to rodent neocortex”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107.28,
pages 12670–12675. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1007239107. url: http:
//www.pnas.org/lookup/doi/10.1073/pnas.1007239107.
Blinder, Pablo et al. (2013). “The cortical angiome: An interconnected vascular net-
work with noncolumnar patterns of blood flow”. In: Nature Neuroscience 16.7,
pages 889–897. issn: 10976256. doi: 10.1038/nn.3426. arXiv: NIHMS150003.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn.3426.
Bohr, Tomas (2019). Unpublished communication.
Buishas, Joel, Ian G. Gould, and Andreas A. Linninger (2014). “A computational
model of cerebrospinal fluid production and reabsorption driven by Starling forces”.
In: Croatian Medical Journal 55.5, pages 481–497. issn: 0353-9504. doi: 10.3325/
cmj.2014.55.481. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4228294/.
==PAGE:80==
70
Bibliography
Bulat, Marin and Marijan Klarica (2014). “Fluid filtration and reabsorption across
microvascular walls: control by oncotic or osmotic pressure? (secondary publica-
tion)”. In: Croatian Medical Journal 55.
Cassot, Francis et al. (2006). “A novel three-dimensional computer-assisted method
for a quantitative study of microvascular networks of the human cerebral cortex”.
In: Microcirculation 13.1, pages 1–18. issn: 10739688. doi: 10.1080/10739680500383407.
Cassot, Francis et al. (2010). “Branching patterns for arterioles and venules of the
human cerebral cortex”. In: Brain Research 1313, pages 62–78. issn: 00068993.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.007.
Di Giovanna, Antonino Paolo et al. (2018). “Whole-Brain Vasculature Reconstruc-
tion at the Single Capillary Level”. In: Scientific Reports 8.1, pages 1–11. issn:
20452322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-30533-3.
Engelhardt, Britta, Peter Vajkoczy, and Roy O. Weller (2017). “The movers and
shapers in immune privilege of the CNS”. In: Nature Immunology 18.2, pages 123–
131. issn: 15292916. doi: 10.1038/ni.3666. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
ni.3666.
Enger, Rune et al. (2015). “Dynamics of ionic shifts in cortical spreading depres-
sion”. In: Cerebral Cortex 25.11, pages 4469–4476. issn: 14602199. doi: 10.1093/
cercor/bhv054.
Faghih, Mohammad M. and M. Keith Sharp (2018). “Is bulk flow plausible in perivas-
cular, paravascular and paravenous channels?” In: Fluids and Barriers of the CNS
15.1, pages 1–10. issn: 20458118. doi: 10.1186/s12987-018-0103-8. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s12987-018-0103-8.
Francis, Cassot et al. (2009). “Scaling laws for branching vessels of human cerebral
cortex”. In: Microcirculation 16.4, pages 331–344. issn: 10739688. doi: 10.1080/
10739680802662607.
Gould, Ian Gopal et al. (2017). “The capillary bed offers the largest hemodynamic
resistance to the cortical blood supply”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism 37.1, pages 52–68. issn: 15597016. doi: 10.1177/0271678X16671146.
Hablitz, Lauren (2019). Unpublished communication.
Hartings, Jed A. et al. (2017). “The continuum of spreading depolarizations in acute
cortical lesion development: Examining Leão’s legacy”. In: Journal of Cerebral
Blood Flow and Metabolism 37.5, pages 1571–1594. issn: 15597016. doi: 10.1177/
0271678X16654495.
Helthuis, Jasper H. G. et al. (2018). “Branching Pattern of the Cerebral Arterial
Tree”. In: The Anatomical Record 11. issn: 19328486. doi: 10.1002/ar.23994.
url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/ar.23994.
Herisson, Fanny et al. (2018). “Direct vascular channels connect skull bone marrow
and the brain surface enabling myeloid cell migration”. In: Nature Neuroscience
21.9, pages 1209–1217. issn: 15461726. doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-0213-2. arXiv:
arXiv:1011.1669v3. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0213-2.
Hirsch, Sven et al. (2012). “Topology and hemodynamics of the cortical cerebrovascu-
lar system”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 32.6, pages 952–
967. issn: 0271678X. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.39.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
71
Hladky, Stephen B. and Margery A. Barrand (2014). “Mechanisms of fluid movement
into, through and out of the brain: Evaluation of the evidence”. In: Fluids and
Barriers of the CNS 11.1, pages 1–32. issn: 20458118. doi: 10.1186/2045-8118-
11-26.
— (2016). Fluid and ion transfer across the blood-brain and blood-cerebrospinal fluid
barriers; a comparative account of mechanisms and roles. Volume 13. 1. BioMed
Central, pages 1–69. isbn: 1298701600. doi: 10.1186/s12987-016-0040-3.
— (2018). “Elimination of substances from the brain parenchyma: efflux via perivas-
cular pathways and via the blood–brain barrier”. In: Fluids and Barriers of the
CNS 15.1, page 30. issn: 2045-8118. doi: 10.1186/s12987-018-0113-6. url:
https://fluidsbarrierscns.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12987-
018-0113-6.
Holstein-Rathlou, Stephanie von (2019). Unpublished communication.
Holth, Jerrah et al. (2019). “The sleep-wake cycle regulates brain interstitial fluid tau
in mice and CSF tau in humans”. In: Science. doi: .1037//0033-2909.I26.1.78.
Iadecola, Costantino (2017). “The Neurovascular Unit Coming of Age: A Journey
through Neurovascular Coupling in Health and Disease”. In: Neuron 96.1, pages 17–
42. issn: 10974199. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.07.030. arXiv: 15334406. url:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.07.030.
Iliff, Jeffrey J. et al. (2013). “Cerebral Arterial Pulsation Drives Paravascular CSF-
Interstitial Fluid Exchange in the Murine Brain”. In: Journal of Neuroscience
33.46. issn: 0270-6474. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1592-13.2013.
Jensen, Lars Jørn and Niels Henrik Holstein-Rathlou (2013). “The vascular conducted
response in cerebral blood flow regulation”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism 33.5, pages 649–656. issn: 0271678X. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.25.
Jessen, Nadia Aalling et al. (2015). “The Glymphatic System: A Beginner’s Guide”. In:
Neurochemical Research 40.12, pages 2583–2599. issn: 15736903. doi: 10.1007/
s11064-015-1581-6. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3.
Kassab, Ghassan S. (2005). “Scaling laws of vascular trees: of form and function”. In:
American Journal of Physiology-Heart and Circulatory Physiology 290.2, H894–
H903. issn: 0363-6135. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00579.2005.
Kelley, Douglas (2019). Unpublished communication.
Kenny, Allanah, Michael J. Plank, and Tim David (2018). “Macro scale modelling of
cortical spreading depression and the role of astrocytic gap junctions”. In: Journal
of Theoretical Biology 458, pages 78–91. issn: 10958541. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.
2018.09.006. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.09.006.
Klarica, M. et al. (2013). “”Compensated hyperosmolarity” of cerebrospinal fluid and
the development of hydrocephalus”. In: Neuroscience 248, pages 278–289. issn:
03064522. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.06.022.
Klarica, Marijan and Darko Orešković (2014). “Enigma of cerebrospinal fluid dy-
namics”. In: Croatian Medical Journal 55.4, pages 287–298. issn: 0353-9504. doi:
10.3325/cmj.2014.55.287. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC4157379/.
==PAGE:82==
72
Bibliography
Linninger, Andreas A. et al. (2016). “Cerebrospinal Fluid Mechanics and Its Cou-
pling to Cerebrovascular Dynamics”. In: Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 48.1,
pages 219–257. issn: 0066-4189. doi: 10.1146/annurev-fluid-122414-034321.
url: http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-fluid-122414-
034321.
Linninger, Andreas A. et al. (2017). “Starling forces drive intracranial water ex-
change during normal and pathological states”. In: Croatian Medical Journal 58.6,
pages 384–394. issn: 0353-9504. doi: 10.3325/cmj.2017.58.384. url: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5778682/.
Ma, Qiaoli et al. (2018). “Rapid lymphatic efflux limits cerebrospinal fluid flow to
the brain”. In: Acta Neuropathologica 0123456789. issn: 14320533. doi: 10.1007/
s00401-018-1916-x.
Martens, Erik Andreas and Konstantin Klemm (2018). “Cyclic structure induced by
load fluctuations in adaptive transportation networks”. In: arXiv. arXiv: 1810.
10049. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.10049.
McGinniss, Jeremy (2019). Aristotle and Accuracy. url: http://publicnoises.
blogspot . com / 2009 / 02 / aristotle - and - accuracy . html ? m = 1 (visited on
February 19, 2019).
Mestre, Humberto (2019). Unpublished communication.
Mestre, Humberto et al. (2017). “Perivascular spaces, glymphatic dysfunction, and
small vessel disease”. In: Clinical Science 131.17, pages 2257–2274. issn: 0143-
5221. doi: 10.1042/CS20160381. arXiv: 15334406. url: http://clinsci.org/
lookup/doi/10.1042/CS20160381.
Mestre, Humberto et al. (2018a). “Aquaporin-4-dependent glymphatic solute trans-
port in the rodent brain”. In: eLife, pages 1–31. issn: 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/
eLife.40070. url: https://elifesciences.org/articles/40070.
Mestre, Humberto et al. (2018b). “Flow of cerebrospinal fluid is driven by arterial pul-
sations and is reduced in hypertension”. In: Nature communications 9.1, page 4878.
issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07318-3. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/s41467-018-07318-3.
Miyakoshi, Leo and Anna Xavier (2019). Unpublished data.
Morris, Alan W. J. et al. (2016). “Vascular basement membranes as pathways for
the passage of fluid into and out of the brain”. In: Acta Neuropathologica 131.5,
pages 725–736. issn: 0001-6322. doi: 10.1007/s00401-016-1555-z.
Murray, C. D. (1926). “The Physiological Principle of Minimum Work: I. The Vascular
System and the Cost of Blood Volume”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 12.3, pages 207–214. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.12.3.207.
Nedergaard, Maiken (2013). “Garbage Truck of the Brain”. In: Science 340.6140,
pages 1529–1530. doi: 10.1126/science.1240514.Garbage.
Ngai, Al C., Joseph R. Meno, and H. Richard Winn (2011). “Simultaneous Measure-
ments of Pial Arteriolar Diameter and Laser-Doppler Flow during Somatosensory
Stimulation”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 15.1, pages 124–
127. issn: 0271-678X. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.1995.14.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
73
Orešković, Darko, Milan Radoš, and Marijan Klarica (2017). “Role of choroid plexus
in cerebrospinal fluid hydrodynamics”. In: Neuroscience 354, pages 69–87. issn:
18737544. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.04.025.
Papadopoulos, Lia et al. (2018). Comparing two classes of biological distribution sys-
tems using network analysis. Volume 14. 9, pages 1–31. isbn: 1111111111. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006428.
Plog, Benjamin A et al. (2018). “Transcranial optical imaging reveals a pathway
for optimizing the delivery of immunotherapeutics to the brain”. In: JCI Insight
3.20, pages 1–15. issn: 2379-3708. doi: 10.1172/JCI.INSIGHT.120922. url:
https://www.google.pt/search?ei=_ZvPWoLXCMySkwXV-LaACg%7B%5C&%7Dq=
pirotecnia+wikipedia%7B%5C&%7Doq=pirotecnia+wiki%7B%5C&%7Dgs_l=psy-
ab.1.1.0j0i22i30k1l9.12138.13337.0.16057.5.5.0.0.0.0.84.367.5.5.0...
.0...1c.1.64.psy-ab..0.5.366....0.jQbcETotHbQ.
Qian, Baogang et al. (2018). “Cerebral Artery Diameter in Inbred Mice Varies as a
Function of Strain”. In: Frontiers in Neuroanatomy 12.February. issn: 1662-5129.
doi: 10.3389/fnana.2018.00010. url: http://journal.frontiersin.org/
article/10.3389/fnana.2018.00010/full.
Rey, Julian and Malisa Sarntinoranont (2018). “Pulsatile flow drivers in brain parenchyma
and perivascular spaces: A resistance network model study”. In: Fluids and Bar-
riers of the CNS 15.1, pages 1–11. issn: 20458118. doi: 10.1186/s12987-018-
0105-6. url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12987-018-0105-6.
Rosic, Brana et al. (2019). “Aquaporin-4-independent volume dynamics of astroglial
endfeet during cortical spreading depression”. In: Glia July 2018, pages 1–9. issn:
08941491. doi: 10.1002/glia.23604. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/
glia.23604.
Schain, Aaron J. et al. (2017). “Cortical Spreading Depression Closes Paravascular
Space and Impairs Glymphatic Flow: Implications for Migraine Headache”. In:
The Journal of Neuroscience 37.11, pages 2904–2915. issn: 0270-6474. doi: 10.
1523/JNEUROSCI.3390-16.2017. url: http://www.jneurosci.org/lookup/
doi/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3390-16.2017.
Schley, D. et al. (2006). “Mechanisms to explain the reverse perivascular transport of
solutes out of the brain”. In: Journal of Theoretical Biology 238.4, pages 962–974.
issn: 00225193. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2005.07.005.
Schmid, Franca et al. (2017a). “Depth-dependent flow and pressure characteristics in
cortical microvascular networks”. In: PLoS Computational Biology 13.2, pages 1–
22. issn: 15537358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005392.
Schmid, Franca et al. (2017b). “Vascular density and distribution in neocortex”. In:
NeuroImage, pages 1–14. issn: 10959572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.06.
046. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.06.046.
Shih, Andy Y. et al. (2015). “Robust and fragile aspects of cortical blood flow in
relation to the underlying angioarchitecture”. In: Microcirculation 22.3, pages 204–
218. issn: 15498719. doi: 10.1111/micc.12195.
Sigurdsson, Björn (2019). Unpublished communication.
==PAGE:84==
74
Bibliography
Szentistványi, István et al. (1984). “Drainage of interstitial fluid from different regions
of rat brain”. In: American Journal of Physiology-Renal Physiology.
Thomas, John (2018). Unpublished communication.
Tithof, Jeffrey (2019). Unpublished communication.
Trumbore, Conrad N. (2018). “Shear-Induced Amyloid Formation in the Brain: IV.
Effects on Synapses Surrounding Senile Plaque and in Plaque-Free Regions”. In:
Journal of Alzheimer’s disease : JAD 66.1, pages 57–73. issn: 18758908. doi:
10.3233/JAD-171080.
Uhlirova, Hana et al. (2016). “Cell type specificity of neurovascular coupling in cere-
bral cortex”. In: eLife 5.MAY2016, pages 1–23. issn: 2050084X. doi: 10.7554/
eLife.14315.
Unekawa, Miyuki et al. (2016). “Dynamic diameter response of intraparenchymal pen-
etrating arteries during cortical spreading depression and elimination of vasoreac-
tivity to hypercapnia in anesthetized mice”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism 37.2, pages 657–670. issn: 15597016. doi: 10.1177/0271678X16636396.
Wang, Peng and William L. Olbricht (2011). “Fluid mechanics in the perivascular
space”. In: Journal of Theoretical Biology 274.1, pages 52–57. issn: 00225193. doi:
10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.01.014. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.
2011.01.014.
Xie, Lulu et al. (2013). “Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain”. In:
Science 342.6156, pages 373–377. issn: 10959203. doi: 10.1126/science.1241224.
arXiv: NIHMS150003.
Xiong, Benyi et al. (2017). “Precise Cerebral Vascular Atlas in Stereotaxic Coor-
dinates of Whole Mouse Brain”. In: Frontiers in Neuroanatomy 11.December,
pages 1–17. issn: 1662-5129. doi: 10 . 3389 / fnana . 2017 . 00128. url: http :
//journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnana.2017.00128/full.
Young, Donald et al. (2012). Introduction to Fluid Mechanics. 5th. Wiley.
Zamir, M. (2001). “Arterial Branching within the Confines of Fractal L-System For-
malism”. In: The Journal of General Physiology 118.3. issn: 0022-1295. doi: 10.
1085/jgp.118.3.267.
Zhang, Yong et al. (2018). “The choroid plexus is an important circadian clock com-
ponent”. In: Nature Communications 9.1, pages 1–13. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-
03507-2.
