==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Modelling and Structural Optimization of Coatings 
for Table Tennis Rackets
Jon Kipp Lauesen
February 2019
==PAGE:2==
TITLE SHEET
Title:
Modelling and Structural Optimization
of Coatings for Table Tennis Bats
Project type:
MasterβÄôs Thesis
Credits:
32.5 ETCS
Project period:
07.09.2018 - 22.02.2019
Author:
Jon Kipp Lauesen
Location:
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels AllΟ©, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Supervisors:
Niels Aage
Associate professor
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Daniel Minzari
Specialist Engineer
IPU
Konstantinos Poulios
Senior researcher
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Andreas Top Adler
Performance Engineer
Team Danmark
Mads Rostgaard Sonne
Researcher
DTU Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Table tennis is a sport that is enjoyed by people around the world and by professional
players that are constantly striving to maximize their performance. Companies that
manufacture rubber and sponges used to coat the rackets, also work to continuously
improve their products. Despite of this, the amount of research publicized on the
topic is scarce. A ο§¹nite element capable of simulating the impact between table
tennis balls and rackets could contribute to the development of better products.
This thesis describes the development of a ο§¹nite element model that can simulate
the impact between a table tennis ball and a table tennis racket. The polymers that
are used to coat the rackets are viscoelastic materials and their behaviour can be
diο§Écult to capture in a dynamic simulation.
For the purposes of verifying the ο§¹nite element model, experiments have been con-
ducted and recorded with a high speed camera. The footage obtained from these
experiments were analyzed and used to estimate the material parameters of a table
tennis racket.
The element model which encompasses dynamic contact and a viscoelastic material
model was developed with the open source ο§¹nite element software getFEM. This
model was used to recreate an impact between a table tennis ball and a table tennis
racket.
This thesis contributes with a functioning dynamic contact model with viscoelastic
material behaviour. The ο§¹nite element model is intended to be a potential starting
point for future projects focusing on structural optimization of the surface coatings
of table tennis rackets, using topology optimization.
i
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Table Tennis Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Website
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Viscoelasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Contact analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Work aimed at Table Tennis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
GetFem++ Implementation
5
3.1
Geometry and Boundary Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Contact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Inertia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Viscoelasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4.1
Viscoelastic Material Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4.2
Viscoelasticity model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4.3
Velocity and Rotation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.4
Retrieving velocities from solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.5
Viscoelastic Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Experiments
16
4.1
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Results
20
5.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Captured Footage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Lessons Learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Revising the Model
26
6.1
ANSYS Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
Recreating the Impact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Results of revision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Conclusion
31
Appendices
34
A Software
34
ii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The Danish Sports organization Team Danmark approached IPU, a company that
specializes in product development, on behalf of the Danish Table Tennis Union,
DBTU. Team Danmark proposed an investigation of the possibility of making bet-
ter table tennis rackets.
IPU frequently partners with researchers at DTU and
recommended that the Department of Mechanical Engineering should be involved.
The focus of this thesis has been to develop a Finite Element Method (FEM) model
that simulates the impact between a table tennis ball and a table tennis racket. The
model encompasses a dynamic contact model and a viscoelastic material model.
The model can be considered preparation for a structural topology optimization,
although that is not part of this project.
The FEM model itself has been written in python, while drawing on packages from
the open-source software, GetFEM. This software provides tools for formulating and
solving FEM problems while allowing for easy implementation of new FEM formu-
lations for both linear and non-linear problems. To visualize the results obtained
in the GetFEM implementation, the open-source software Paraview is used. All
software used in this project is listed in appendix A.
For the experimental veriο§¹cation of the FE-model, a series of shots with a ball
against a racket were made and recorded with a highspeed camera. The footage and
the data obtained from the footage will be presented and discussed. Based on the
results of the experiment, the model was ο§¹tted to a speciο§¹c video and then veriο§¹ed
with a video with diο§Äerent initial conditions.
1.2
Table Tennis Terms
As this project revolves heavily around the subject of table tennis, there will be a lot
of terms that may seem strange without context. There are also several components
of the rackets that have more than one name. In fact even the word racket is not
universal, which underlines the need for deο§¹nitions. The terms used in this report
will therefore be listed here along with a short explanation.
ITTF
The International Table Tennis Federation is the organization that is responsible
for the table tennis world championships, and they also maintain the oο§Écial rules
by which all table tennis players abide. The handbook [1] includes speciο§¹cations for
balls and rackets.
1
==PAGE:6==
Racket
Racket is the oο§Écial name as deο§¹ned by the ITTF. Depending on the region, the
racket may also be referred to as a bat or paddle. To avoid confusion, the term
racket will be used throughout this report. Rackets generally consist of a rubber
layer, a sponge layer and a ο§²at piece of wood with a handle.
Rubber
The rubber is the outermost layer of the racket which comes into direct contact with
the ball. There are many diο§Äerent table tennis rubbers on the market with various
material compositions.
Nubs
Even though it is not a requirement, almost all rubbers have a pattern of tiny
pimples on either the back or the front. These pimples are also called nubs, and
help the rubber grip the ball, allowing the player to give the ball more spin. The
nubs are shaped like tiny cylinders that protrude from the rubber. In this report,
they will only be referred to as nubs.
Sponge
Sponge refers to the polymeric foam layer of the racket. The chemical composition
and manufacturing process can be done a number of ways and yield foams with
various qualities.
Blade
Blade is the term used for the wood that the other layers are glued to. The ITTF
has no particular requirements regarding the shape and weight of the blade, Though
the material must be at least 85% wood.
1.3
Website
Since a central part of this project is the captured footage of balls hitting rackets,
a website has been made to present videos. The report has been written with this
in mind, and will refer to the website when appropriate.
The website is http:
//www.student.dtu.dk/~s134149/ and several videos have been uploaded. The
website will be referred to as simply "the website" and will have a hyperlink that
can be clicked when reading a digital copy of the report, like this: website. The link
will always be directly to the url mentioned earlier. Even when reading a physical
copy, it is recommended to have access to the internet, as the videos will aid in
understanding the discussion.
2
==PAGE:7==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Viscoelasticity
Viscoelasticity is a term used to described a material that behaves as both an elastic
material and a vicous material when it subjected to some kind of load or strain. It is
a complex topic that is explored in many diο§Äerent ο§¹elds. In this report, a dynamic
impact with a viscoelastic solid is modeled in a FEM-setting. With this in mind,
the focus of the literature review will be on nonlinear viscoelastic solids.
Nonlinear viscoelasticity theory was formulated back in the 1960βÄôs and 1970βÄôs with
researchers such as Findley and Lockett formulating constitutive equations for non-
linear viscoelasticity. However at this point in time, these formulations were imprat-
ical to implement [2].
In 1981, a scientist by the name of Yuan-Cheng Fung who specializes in biomechanics
publishes a book on the subject [3]. In this book Fung formulates a constitutive
equation for the nonlinear viscoelastic behaviour of soft tissues that he calls "quasi-
linear viscoelasticity". The model is often abbreviated as QLV or simply referred
to as FungβÄôs model. For many practical applications, FungβÄôs model of nonlinear
viscoelasticity has proven to be the most successful [4].
The quasi-linear viscoelastic model has received some criticism for producing un-
physical results. However, Ricardo De Pascalis argues in his reappraisal of FungβÄôs
model that this in general is a consequence of how the model has been applied in
some works [5]. Pascalis goes on to show how FungβÄôs QLV model can be used, and
has been used by others, for many problems outside of the ο§¹eld of biomechanics and
soft tissues.
In the GetFem implementation presented in this report, the viscoelasticity model is
based oο§Äof FungβÄôs model and PascalisβÄô article.
2.2
Contact analysis
As contact mechanics is an expansive subject, the focus of this report will be nar-
rowed to contact problems relevant to studying the impact of the ball and racket.
These impacts will be considered as dynamic contact problems with large deforma-
tions and friction.
There are diο§Äerent ways to approach contact problems and this could for example be
the node-to-segment method, which Laursen employs with several sample problems
that consider large deformations with frictional contact [6].
Another angle of attack when it comes to modeling contact problems is to use
a contact domain method.
For problems with large deformations and frictional
3
==PAGE:8==
contact, J. Oliver has made a 2D implementation [7]. However, as Oliver also states,
the method may be more cumbersome to apply to 3D cases.
Finally, there are the mortar method and segment-to-segment method which are
very similar. An example of a mortar method approach to large deformations with
friction can be seen in PusoβÄôs and LaursenβÄôs work [8].
A segment-to-segment method is employed in this project, as GetFEM has imple-
mented the contact model developed and described by K. Poulios and Y. Renard
[9].
2.3
Work aimed at Table Tennis
The purpose of the project is to contribute to the development of better table ten-
nis rackets, and thus it becomes relevant to look into FEM research on this topic
speciο§¹cally. Two articles have been published from collaborations carried out by
the university of Lyon, France. The ο§¹rst article [10] investigates the vibrations in
composite wood blades. This article involves both experiments and FEM modeling
but treats quite a diο§Äerent subject than the impact between ball and racket.
The second article [11] falls much closer to the subject of this project, as it also treats
the dynamics of an impact between ball and racket with both experiments and FEM
modeling. However in this case the commercial software Abaqus is employed and
utilizes their built-in Maxwell model to model the viscoelastic material behaviour,
while the material model employed in this project is based on FungβÄôs quasi-linear
viscoelasticity model.
2.4
Contribution
For this project a code was developed. This code is a python-based implementation
of the open source FEM software getFEM. The code was ο§¹rst developed as part of a
preliminary course, which consisted of implementing a viscoelastic material model,
as well as the framework for impact analysis. The code was further developed during
this project to include 3D scenarios.
Experiments have been conducted in order to investigate the dynamics of a ball
and racket impact. These experiments consisted of launching balls at rackets while
recording the impacts with a high speed camera.
Data of the ballsβÄô speed and
rotation were subsequently extracted from the footage.
After transitioning from 2D meshes to 3D meshes, an academic version of the com-
mercial software ANSYS was used to generate 3D meshes. An APDL script was
written to allow for alterations and modiο§¹cations of the mesh.
4
==PAGE:9==
3
GetFem++ Implementation
The following section describes the development of the numerical model. This will
include both the basic geometric model, as well as the theory used for the material
behaviour. As the model was developed in steps with increasing complexity and
new features, there will be results and discussions for both the 2D and 3D models.
3.1
Geometry and Boundary Conditions
During the development of the model, it has undergone several changes. The model
was originally a simple 2D representation of the ball and racket. The ball was mod-
eled as a solid circle and the racket was a "wall" with only one material throughout,
and a line of ο§¹xed nodes on the backside of the wall. This representation was far
from an exact representation of the ball and racket but was suο§Écient for the initial
development of the GetFem code. Using this ο§¹rst model, contact, viscoelasticity
and the option of applying initial conditions were implemented in the code. The 2D
model can be seen in ο§¹gure 1.
Figure 1: Ball and wall geometry in 2D. Boundary condition shown in
green.
The next step for the model was to expand the code to accommodate 3D. This
meant that all vectors had to be expanded with an extra coordinate. At the same
time the ball was modeled to more closely resemble an actual table tennis ball by
making it hollow. This was done using a GetFem function that allows the user to
specify radius and thickness, which then returns a hollow sphere. The 3D model
can be seen in ο§¹gure 2.
5
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2: Ball and wall geometry in 3D
It should be noted here that the elements of the sphere are not shell-elements but
regular hexahedral 8-node elements. This is due to the fact that shell elements are
usually used when the element thickness is many times smaller than the dimensions
in the other directions. For this sphere, the elements are closer to 1mm x 1mm x
0.25mm.
3.2
Contact
The contact model used between the ball and racket is an augmented Lagrangian
contact model. It is a GetFem function that is based on work by K. Poulios and
Y. Renard [9], checking the distance between the contact surfaces of two or more
bodies using a method called raytracing. Contact surfaces of the 2D and 3D model
can be seen in ο§¹gures 3 and 4, respectively.
6
==PAGE:11==
Figure 3: Contact surfaces
of 2D model, highlighted
with red.
Figure 4: Contact surfaces
of 3D model, highlighted
with red.
Friction is implemented as Coulomb friction. Consequently there is just one constant
friction coeο§Écient with no discerning between static and dynamic friction. This is
considered to be an acceptable assumption, since the impact analysis is dynamic
and happens in such a short time interval that eο§Äects of a static friction can be
neglected.
3.3
Inertia
The model is dynamic and is discretized into time steps. When dealing with moving
bodies it becomes necessary to consider inertia. In the GetFem code, the inertia is
implemented with the following formulation:
I = œ¹
dt2 ¬Ζ (ut βà£2utβà£1 + utβà£2)
(3.1)
Where dt is the size of the timestep, and ut is the displacements of the current time
step in mm and utβà£1 and utβà£2 are the displacements at the previous time step and
the one before that, respectively.
3.1 is based on the Second central diο§Äerence method, which is explained by E. N.
StrΟΗmmen.
In his book [12], StrΟΗmmen describes a method of determining the
acceleration of an object by performing Taylor series expansions on the position
vector of the current and two previous timesteps. This is used with the density to
obtain the inertia of the body.
7
==PAGE:12==
3.4
Viscoelasticity
3.4.1
Viscoelastic Material Parameters
The material model used for the racketβÄôs rubber and sponge layers is a viscoelastic
model and it incorporates the parameters relaxtion time, œ³, and the ratio, r, between
the initial stiο§Äness, Kini, and the ο§¹nal stiο§Äness of the material, K.
Looking ο§¹rst at the parameter, r, which expresses how much a viscoelastic material
can "relax" when subjected to a constant strain or load. This means that when
the stiο§Äness of the material is deο§¹ned in the GetFEM implementation, it must be
considered if the prescribed stiο§Äness is the initial stiο§Äness or the ο§¹nal stiο§Äness. This
point has been illustrated in ο§¹gure 5.
Figure 5: Sketch depicting initial stiο§Äness Kini and ο§¹nal stiο§Äness K in
two approaches to handling the material stiο§Äness input Kprescribed. In
one approach, the prescribed stiο§Äness is the desired ο§¹nal stiο§Äness, and in
the other approach, the prescribed stiο§Äness is the initial stiο§Äness, which
then falls as the viscoelastic material relaxes.
From ο§¹gure 5 the diο§Äerence between deο§¹ning the initial and the ο§¹nal stiο§Äness can
be seen. For a given r-value, the stiο§Äness will decrease over time, and if the material
stiο§Äness prescribed is meant to be ο§¹nal stiο§Äness then the input must be scaled up
with the inverse value of r. Depending on which approach is used, the eο§Äect of the
relaxation time, œ³, will be "reversed".
The second viscoelasticity parameter, œ³, is relaxation time. This does not aο§Äect the
magnitude of the diο§Äerence between the material before and after it relaxes, but
8
==PAGE:13==
rather how rapidly, or slowly, it does so. So when considering impacts, which typi-
cally occur within small amounts of time, some materials have such long relaxation
times that the viscous eο§Äects are completely negligible.
3.4.2
Viscoelasticity model
The following is based on notes adapted by Konstantinos Poulios [13] from an article
on quasi-linear viscoelasticity used with FungβÄôs Method [5].
Strain energy function as formulated by J. C. Simo [14](equation 4.4):
W = ΈΚ
2(ln |F|)2 + ¬Β
2(|F|βà£2/3||F||2βà£3)
(3.2)
Where ΈΚ is the bulk modulus, ¬Β is the shear modulus and F is the deformation
gradient, F = I + u.
From 3.2 the corresponding 2nd Piola-Kirchoο§Ästress is composed of a hydrostatic
part
Se
H = ΈΚ ln|F|Fβà£1Fβà£T
(3.3)
and a deviatoric part
Se
D = ¬Β|F|βà£2/3Fβà£1dev(FFβà£T)Fβà£T
(3.4)
Where H and D denotes the hydrostatic and deviatoric strain components, respec-
tively. This only accounts for the elastic stresses in a material and is not time depen-
dent. When considering a material that is viscoelastic, the viscous stress components
must also be taken into consideration and this make the expression rate-dependent
[13]. In this case the total stress of a given material would be expressed as
S(t) = Se
H(t) + Sv
H(t) + Se
D(t) + Sv
D(t)
(3.5)
A viscoelastic material will relax over time during both dynamic and static strain
loads. How much the stress falls as the material relaxes and how fast this happens
depends on the viscoelastic properties of the material. The ratio between initial
stiο§Äness and the ο§¹nal stiο§Äness is denoted as r. The relaxation time is denoted as œ³.
Again there is a separation of hydrostatic and deviatoric strains, and the viscoelastic
parameters implemented in the GetFem code are therefore œ³H, œ³D, rH and rD. The
viscous stress can be written with these parameters in a time formulation as [13]
9
==PAGE:14==
S(t)v
H = eβà£βàÜt/œ³HSv
H(tβà½)
βà£(1 βà£rH)(1 βà£eβà£βàÜt/œ³H)Se
H(tβà½)
βà£(1 βà£rH)(1 βà£œ³H
βàÜt(1 βà£eβà£βàÜt/œ³H))(Se
H(tβà½) βà£Se
H(tβà½))
(3.6)
and
S(t)v
D = eβà£βàÜt/œ³DSv
D(tβà½)
βà£(1 βà£rD)(1 βà£eβà£βàÜt/œ³D)Se
D(tβà½)
βà£(1 βà£rD)(1 βà£œ³D
βàÜt(1 βà£eβà£βàÜt/œ³H))(Se
D(tβà½) βà£Se
D(tβà½))
(3.7)
Where tβà½is the previous time-step and Sv
H(tβà½) and Sv
D(tβà½) are the viscous stresses
from the previous step.
3.4.3
Velocity and Rotation
Since the objective of the model is to represent the impact of a ball against a racket,
there are no external loads on either body. Instead, the speed and spin of the ball
are controlled as initial conditions. Once "launched", the ball then simply ο§²ies into
the racket, resulting in an impact. Gravity is neglected as the impact occurs in such
a short span of time that there is no signiο§¹cant acceleration of the ball.
To initialize the starting translational and rotational speeds, it is utilized that the
code operates by calculating stresses and inertia from displacements from the previ-
ous timestep. For the initial conditions, the displacements of the ball can be deο§¹ned
as "having been" in another place before the start of the FEM solution at time t = 0.
This is achieved by calculating previous displacements utβà£1 and utβà£2. Equation 3.8
shows the calculation for going one step "backwards" in displacements by multiply-
ing the desired speed and rotation by βà£dt, where dt is the size of the timestep.
The displacement of the ball that is caused by rotation is controlled by using a
transformation matrix, A, which is also dependent on dt. Note that, for the sake
of simplicity, the transformation matrix only allows for rotations around the z-axis.
The expression for previous displacement at time t = βà£1 is then:
utβà£1 = βà£Vdt + A(X βà£Xcen)
(3.8)
Where V is a vector containing the initial values of velocity in directions x, y and
z. X is the positions of each node in the mesh and Xcen is the position of the ball
center. A is the transformation matrix:
10
==PAGE:15==
A =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
1 βà£cos(œâdt)
sin(œâdt)
0
βà£sin(œâdt)
1 βà£cos(œâdt)
0
0
0
0
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(3.9)
Where œâ is the desired initial angular velocity of the ball.
3.4.4
Retrieving velocities from solution
After the ball makes contact with the racket, the ball will bounce back and possibly
rotate, depending on the initial conditions. At this point it is interesting to obtain
the translational and rotational speed of the ball, so that the behavior of the ball
before, during and after the impact is known.
The get the position of the center of mass of the ball, a vector, Xcen, is deο§¹ned. It
is calculated by adding the displacements of the current timestep, ut, to the current
nodal coordinates, X.
This is then divided by the volume, V , to give the ο§¹nal
position of the ballβÄôs center of mass.
Xcen =
R X + utdV
V
(3.10)
To obtain the rotation of the ball, two other vectors, Xint and V, are needed. Xint
is the intermediary position of the ballβÄôs center. This is found in the same way
as Xcen, except the intermediary displacements, uint are used. The intermediary
displacement are calculated as the average of the current and previous timestep,
uint = ut+utβà£1
2
.
Xint =
R X + uintdV
V
(3.11)
V is the velocity at the ballβÄôs center of mass. This is calculated by taking the sum of
change in displacement between current timestep, βàÜu = ut βà£utβà£1, and dividing by
the volume of the ball, V , and the change in time, βàÜt, i.e. the size of one timestep.
V =
R βàÜudV
βàÜtV
(3.12)
With these vectors, the rotation of of the ball, œâ, can be determined as:
œâ =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
0
βà£1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
(X + uint βà£Xint) ¬Ζ
βàÜu
βàÜt βà£V
βàΞX + uint βà£XintβàΞ2
(3.13)
11
==PAGE:16==
To explain equation 3.13, a sketch of the problem can be found in ο§¹gure 6. The
problem is to determine the rotation about the z-axis of an arbitrary point, P,
relative to the center, C. The distance from the center of rotation to P is given as
the vector r, which in equation 3.13 is calculated as X + uint βà£Xint. The vector
r is then rotated 90¬Α so it is parallel with the tangent in point P. r can then be
converted into a unit vector by dividing with the length, βàΞrβàΞ.
The dot product of this unit vector and the velocity vector U, which is calculated as
U = βàÜu
βàÜt βà£V, will then yield the tangential velocity component of U. From the the
tangential velocity the angular velocity can be derived by dividing by the length, r,
a second time, thus giving βàΞrβàΞ2.
œâ =
οΘ°
οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘ·οΘΑ
0
βà£1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
οΘΙ
οΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΚοΘΜ
r ¬Ζ
U
βàΞrβàΞ2
(3.14)
Figure 6: Finding rotation in point P.
3.4.5
Viscoelastic Behaviour
To test the implementation of the viscoelastic material model, some basic tests were
performed. First a the ball was shot into the wall in a straight line with a speed of
10m/s i the x-direction. The ball was modeled as purely elastic, while the wall was
viscoelastic. Diο§Äerent values for the relaxation time œ³ were then investigated and
the result can be seen in ο§¹gure 7.
12
==PAGE:17==
Figure
7:
Ball
center
displacement
for
the
same
im-
pact
with
diο§Äerent
relaxation
times.
This
example
is
a
straight
impact
of
a
ball
without
spin
in
2D.
The
solid
black
line
is
the
displacement
without
viscoelasticity.
The three dashed lines are same plot with diο§Äerent relaxation times.
Violet: œ³ = 10βà£3s, blue: œ³ = 10βà£4s and red: œ³ = 10βà£5s
In ο§¹gure 7 the displacement of the center of a 2D ball shot into a viscoelastic wall
in a straight line with no rotation has been plotted. The plot shows ball center
displacement in the x-direction for diο§Äerent values of the relaxation time, œ³. As the
value used for œ³ becomes smaller, the more the wall "relaxes" during the impact from
the ball. Resulting in a diο§Äerent displacement curve. The ball goes deeper into the
wall and, as expected, bounces back with a lower speed.
The results shown in this plot also indicate that the material behaves in a way that
is similar to a real viscoelastic material. The graph can be compared to the ο§¹ndings
of CT. Tang [15], on pages 28 and 29. In TangβÄôs experiment, the mass of the object
that hits the viscoelastic material is altered, while in ο§¹gure 7, the relaxation time is
altered but the mass is kept constant. The tendency in the results however, appears
to be comparable.
To illustrate the point mentioned in section 3.4.1 about the diο§Äerence in approach
to the stiο§Äness of the viscoelastic material, another 2D impact was analyzed. This
impact was done with a horizontal speed of 10m/s, a vertical speed of 5m/s and a
rotational speed of 100Hz. In ο§¹gures 8 and 9 the total translational velocity and
angular velocity, respectively, have been plotted.
13
==PAGE:18==
Figure 8: Total translational velocity of the ball.
The blue lines are
prescribed initial stiο§Äness, Kini, and the red lines are prescribed ο§¹nal
stiο§Äness, K.
The relaxation time of the dashed red and blue lines is
œ³ = 10βà£4s, and the solid red and blue line is œ³ = 10βà£5s.
Figure 9: Rotational speed of the ball. Same conditions as described in
ο§¹gure 8.
In ο§¹gures 8 and 9 a black line shows the impact with no viscoelasticity; i.e. a purely
elastic impact. Then there is a set of two blue lines where the prescribed stiο§Äness is
14
==PAGE:19==
the initial stiο§Äness, meaning that the stiο§Äness falls to a lower value, as the material
relaxes. The two lines have diο§Äerent relaxation times. The red lines are set up in
the same way except the prescribed stiο§Äness is now the stiο§Äness that the material
approaches as it relaxes.
As the ball rotates, there is a slight loss of angular velocity for each timestep, due
to the numerical integration of the Euler time discretization method. Rotational
momentum is therefore not completely conserved. To test whether this was worsened
by implementing viscoelastic material parameters on the ball, it was set to rotate
without any translatory movement.
The result can be seen in 10 with diο§Äerent
values for the relaxation time, œ³.
Figure 10: Loss of rotation speed with diο§Äerent relaxation times.
From ο§¹gure 10 it can be seen that while there is slight diο§Äerences in the loss of
rotational speed, these are of such a small magnitude that they are negligible. This
also shows that the implementation of viscoelasticity in the ball, did not change the
rate at which the loss of angular momentum occurs.
15
==PAGE:20==
4
Experiments
4.1
Equipment
Camera
The camera used was a Phantom V2512 high speed camera that is capable of shoot-
ing 25.000 frames per second at a resolution of 1280p x 720p.
By reducing the
resolution the capture rate of the camera can be increased to as much as 200.000
frames per second. The camera was mounted on a tripod that could be adjusted in
height. The objective was a Zeiss-Macro Planar 2/50 lens.
Ball launcher
To launch the balls at the racket, a ball launcher usually meant for table tennis
practice was used. This launcher consisted of a feeder that would let balls through
one at a time down a track where it would then be accelerated and launched outward
by two rotating wheels placed at the top and bottom of the track. These two wheels
could be controlled individually and rotate at 9 diο§Äerent speeds, ranging from 0-
8, with 0 being stationary. By using diο§Äerent combinations of speeds for the two
wheels, it was possible to give the balls launched backspin or topspin.
Rackets
To obtain a better understanding of the impact between ball and racket, three rackets
with varying quality, and two sides of one of the rackets with diο§Äerent sponge and
rubber layers were used. The three rackets roughly cover the quality range of low
to high in three steps. For the sake of comparison they have also been measured in
thickness using a caliper and weighed on a scale.
Figure
11:
Racket A
Figure
12:
Racket B
Figure
13:
Racket C
16
==PAGE:21==
Rt
[mm]
St
[mm]
Wt
[mm]
ND
[mm]
NH
[mm]
NG
[mm]
mass
[g]
Racket A
-
1.4
5.2
-
-
-
75
Racket B
1.6
1.5
6.5
1.7
0.7
0.9
153
Racket C1
1.7
2.3
6.0
1.7
0.9
0.9
174
Racket C2
1.8
2.2
6.0
1.7
0.9
0.5
174
Table 1: Table of racket dimensions. Note that Racket A does not have
any rubber layer and that C1 and C2 refer to the same racket and hence
have the same mass. The measuremnt abbreviations are explained in
ο§¹gure 14.
Figure 14: Sketch of measured dimensions of the rackets
Racket A, seen in ο§¹gure 11, is a simple racket with one layer of sponge attached on a
wooden blade. The sponge layer is thin and does not appear to have much elasticity
as it is easily permanently dented. The racket is very light and the overall quality
seems poor.
Racket B, seen in ο§¹gure 12, has a rubber surface on top of a sponge layer attached to
a wooden blade. can be considered a mid-range level racket with a balance between
price and quality.
The ο§¹nal racket is Racket C, which can be seen in ο§¹gure 13. This racket is of high
quality, and has been used by professional table tennis players. The racket has two
diο§Äerent combinations of rubber and sponge, one on each side. Both sides have been
tested and will be treated individually. The ο§¹rst side of racket C will be referred to
as C1, and the other will be referred to as C2. In 13 C1 is the left side and C2 is
the right side.
17
==PAGE:22==
All rackets have been examined by hand and the rubber of C1 seems to have the
highest friction coeο§Écient. If a ball was placed on a table, it could actually be picked
up by simply pressing down with the C1 side and lifting. The ball would stick to
the rubber for approximately a second. This could not be done with the C2 side.
The two sponges are also quite diο§Äerent, although close to the same thickness as
seen in table 1. The C1 sponge is more dense and stiο§Ä, while the C2 sponge has tiny
visible air pockets throughout its structure. Overall the C1 sponge is harder and
less pliable than the C2 sponge. This is assumed to be because the player who made
assembled the racket wanted diο§Äerent material compositions for their forehand and
backhand strokes.
Balls
Three diο§Äerent balls were used in the experiments to investigate whether the ball
used would have an noticeable eο§Äect on the impact between ball and racket. The
balls all live up to ITTF regulations, which means that they weigh 2.7g and have
a diameter of 40mm. To make the rotation of the balls easier to observe, the balls
were covered in dots with a black marker.
Fixture
To ο§¹x the rackets used in the experiments, a vice that weighed approximately 15
kg was used. The rackets were clamped as hard as possible in the vice without
damaging them, in order to approach a ο§¹xed boundary condition.
Lighting
When capturing high speed footage, the camera shutter opens and closes very
rapidly. As light only hits the lens during the period where the shutter is open,
low shutter times result in dark pictures. To counteract this, one or more bright
light sources are required to make the ball and racket visible. To provide light, two
strong LED lamps were used.
4.2
Setup
The setup for the experiments can be seen in ο§¹gure 15. The racket was clamped
in the vice and placed on a table along with the ball launcher. Balls were then
launched with the ball launcher directly into the racket.
18
==PAGE:23==
Figure 15: Experimental setup. 1: Ball launcher, 2: Vice, 3: Camera, 4:
LED light, 5: Racket, 6: Flange
The ball launcher was placed approximately 40 cm from the racket. Two LED light
sources were arranged as seen on ο§¹gure 15 to light up the ball and racket from both
above and below. To make sure that reο§²ected light would not be an issue during
recording, divider walls with a matte black paint were used as background for the
experiment.
The old ο§²ange that has been placed in the ball launcher was used to add mass to
the launcher, so it would vibrate less and produce more consistent shots. The ο§²ange
was an ideal choice for this, as it had a hole in the top that allowed balls to be fed
into the launcher.
19
==PAGE:24==
5
Results
5.1
Method
In order to obtain data from the captured footage, two approaches were employed.
The ο§¹rst was using a software simply called Tracker, that is used to track the
position of a moving object in a video. The second method was by using a screen
measurement software called MB-Ruler. These two methods were used to determine
both translatory speed and rotational speed.
Translatory Speed
In order to extract data from the video footage, speciο§¹cally velocities and rotation
of the ball, two methods were used. The ο§¹rst method was to measure distances
travelled over an arbitrary number of frames. This was done by selecting two sets of
points where the ball travelled without hitting the racket. Knowing the number of
frames and the distances allowed for a speed to be calculated. The distances were
determined by using the known diameter of the ball as the scale. The software used
to measure the distances was MB-ruler, which is a simple software for measuring
distance with an overlay. A picture of the measuring can be seen in ο§¹gure 16.
Figure 16: Screenshot showing how the MB-Ruler softwareβÄôs overlay was
used to measure distances. The ballβÄôs diameter was used as reference and
set to 40mm, which is the blue line shown in the picture.
20
==PAGE:25==
The other method used to process the footage was by utilizing tracker software.
This software could be set to automatically track a speciο§¹ed point frame by frame.
The way this worked was by comparing pixels of a target cut-out of the image with
the next frame and ο§¹nding the best match. The results of of tracking an impact can
be seen in ο§¹gure 17 and ο§¹gure 18.
Figure 17: Plot of translatory speed in x-direction of ball during impact
with racket A. Dashed lines show velocities calculated before and after
impact.
Figure 18: Plot of translatory speed in y-direction of ball during impact
with racket A.Dashed lines show velocities calculated before and after
impact.
21
==PAGE:26==
From looking at ο§¹gures 17 and 18, it is immediately clear that there is a large amount
noise in the data. The tracking seems to have a consistent bias that suggests that the
software has a hard time separating two frames from each other. This is probably
due to the high frame rate of the footage. The ball moves so little between each
frame that the change is hard for the tracker software to accurately follow.
In order to reduce the noise of the results, the data has been smoothed with the
Matlab function "smooth", which uses a locally weighted linear regression method
to ο§¹t scattered data. The smoothed curve can then be compared to the calculated
translatory velocities, which can be seen as horizontal lines on the plots.
The two approaches to determining the velocities yield comparable results but both
suο§Äer from the same caveats. The ο§¹rst caveat being that any translation along the
z-axis is not accounted for. A second source for errors is the fact that all distances
and positions are measured with a scale deο§¹ned by hand.
Rotational Speed
When using the raw footage to determine the rotation of the ball, the same method
of comparing two points in time where the ball has travelled undisturbed in order
to document the change in angle of a speciο§¹ed point on the surface of the ball. The
change in angle was measured using the MB-ruler software. The center of the ball
was found in two points in time before the impact, and in two points after. Using
the angle measuring tool, two values could be extracted and used as a basis for the
calculation.
Figure 19: The MB-Ruler softwareβÄôs overlay used for determining angles
of a speciο§¹c black dot on the ball. The cross up to the right is a point
right after hitting the racket where the angle was also measured from the
center.
22
==PAGE:27==
An attempt to determine the rotational speed of the ball using the tracker software
was also made.
This was done by using the position of the ball center as the
coordinate system while tracking a speciο§¹ed point on the surface of the ball as it
rotates about the center of the ball. The result of this tracked rotation can be seen
in ο§¹gure 20.
Figure 20: Plot of rotational speed of ball during impact with racket A.
Dashed lines show velocities calculated before and after impact.
As can be seen from the plot in ο§¹gure 20, the data points are so erratic that the linear
regression cannot reveal any reliable value for rotational speed before or after the
impact. With data this scattered there cannot be made any reasonable conclusions
about the rotation of the ball. This suggests that other methods need to be explored
in order to conο§¹rm the calculated values for the rotational speed of the ball.
A general problem with determining the rotations for both methods is the fact that
the curvature of the ball is not taken into account. Neither is the translation along
the z-axis. Another assumption that has been made for these results is that the
rotation is happening purely about the z-axis, while in reality ball is rotation about
all three axes at once.
5.2
Captured Footage
From the captured footage, some immediate diο§Äerences between the rackets were
observed. The following comparisons between the three rackets are primarily based
on four videos which can be found on the website. The four videos are found under
the headline "Initial comparison", and they show an impact on rackets A, B, C1
and C2. In all four clips, the ball is coming in with backspin and then bounces
oο§Äthe racket. The velocities and rotation of the balls before and after impact can
23
==PAGE:28==
be seen in table 2. The rotation is about the z-axis and follow the right hand rule
convention, i.e. a counterclockwise rotation is positive and a clockwise rotation is
negative.
Before impact
Racket A
Racket B
Racket C1
Racket C2
Velocity in x-direction [m/s]
6.56
6.72
6.30
6.61
Velocity in y-direction [m/s]
0.51
0.69
0.63
0.77
Rotational speed [Hz]
60.2
62.3
59.4
59.2
After impact
Racket A
Racket B
Racket C1
Racket C2
Velocity in x-direction [m/s]
-3.70
-4.19
-4.84
-5.24
Velocity in y-direction [m/s]
-3.03
-3.94
-4.85
-5.05
Rotational speed [Hz]
18.5
6.28
-9.15
-11.5
Table 2: Velocities and rotational speeds of the balls hitting the three
rackets, before and after impact. [Hz] is short for revolutions per second.
The ο§¹rst thing to note is that speed of the ball is close to the same in all four shot
before the impact, but depending on the racket, the speed going out varies. Any
loss of speed is attributed to the contact between ball and racket, as the distance
travelled in the videos is just about one ball width, i.e. 40mm and the velocity is
below 7m/s. Therefore loss of speed due to drag is negligible.
Generally, all rackets were able to return the ball with more than half of the speed
in the x-direction, and convert rotation in the ball to downward movement. Racket
A seemed to have absorbed more of the kinetic energy in the impact than the other
rackets, slowing the ball the most, and also reduced the rotation of the ball the least.
This outcome is expected, as the build quality of the bat was very low.
Racket B was able to return the ball with greater speed and to better convert the
rotational kinetic energy to translatory kinetic energy, resulting in more downward
movement. As a result, the ball is rotating slower than in the impact with racket A.
Racket C1 returns the ball with more speed than racket A and B, and is actually
able to reverse the direction of the rotation of the ball. This was likely a result of
the higher quality materials and the overall thicker surface.
Racket C2 produces results very similar to C1, but returns the ball with even greater
speed and even more rotational speed. The diο§Äerences are diο§Écult to explain without
a more detailed knowledge of the materials, but the diο§Äerence could be intentional,
as a player may wish to have diο§Äerent material compositions for his forehand and
backhand strokes, as mentioned earlier.
24
==PAGE:29==
For further comparisons of the behaviour of each racket, a straight shot was per-
formed with each racket, ο§¹lming the impact in a close-up. In the close-up shots,
only the velocity in the x-direction has been calculated. These can be found on the
website under the headline "Close-ups of Impact"
In these videos it can be seen that racket A has almost no deformation in the
top layer.
Racket B has some more visible deformation and the rubber surface
presses into the sponge behind it, as the ball hits the racket. This behaviour is even
more pronounced in racket C1 and C2, where larger deformations occur during the
impact. There are visible ripples going though the rubber and sponge, and there is
a noticeable diο§Äerence in the stiο§Äness of the two layers.
To really understand the eο§Äects of the combination of the rubber and sponge sur-
faces, a close-up of racket C1 was made. This side of racket C was chosen due to the
unique "stickyness" of the rubber mentioned in section 4.1. In this close-up the ball
has backspin as it comes in, and while the exact values have not been determined,
the velocity is around 6m/s and the rotation 60Hz.
This video can be found on the website under the headline "Reversing Rotation
Close-up". This video aids the understanding of how the professional rackets are
capable of changing the direction of rotation. In the video, it can be seen how the
rubber sticks to the ball and turn around with it, until a maximum deformation is
reached. Then the ball is send back in the other direction, almost as if thrown by
the racket. The soft sponge seems to allow the rubber to move with the ball to an
extent.
This behaviour is believed to be the consequence of the viscoelastic qualities of
the materials used. As such it should be possible to recreate the impact with the
getFEM implementation. This has been explored in section 6.
5.3
Lessons Learned
When working with the footage, it became clear that many of the shots were cap-
tured with poor focus. While it was generally a challenge working with the ball
launcher and getting a consistent shot, this could have been made easier by moving
the launcher even closer to the racket. If the vice and launcher had been arranged
diο§Äerently, the distance from point of launch to the racket surface could have been
reduced signiο§¹cantly.
Another problem was the focus depth of the camera. It was simply not possible to
focus on both the dots on the ball and the edge of the ball at the same time. This
meant that translation or rotation would be slightly harder to identify. This might
be alleviated by using a diο§Äerent and more precise method of marking for the balls.
The method should allow for the rotation to be measured by markings directly on
the edge of the ball.
25
==PAGE:30==
6
Revising the Model
After obtaining the high speed footage, the focus of the project became ο§¹tting model
to the new data that had become available. The ο§¹rst step was creating a new 3D
mesh that more closely resembled the rubber and sponge on the racket.
6.1
ANSYS Mesh
When creating a more accurate 3D model of the racket geometry, using the meshing
functions available in getFEM became diο§Écult.
Instead a mesh was made with
the commercial FEM-software ANSYS. The objective was to make the rubber and
sponge layers of the racket using APDL code to allow adjustment of the size of the
racket geometry. Once the mesh was completed, it could be imported back into
getFEM and solved. A mesh created with the APDL can be seen in ο§¹gure 21.
Figure 21: 3D racket geometry generated in ANSYS.
The structure is a small section of the rubber and sponge layer with a pattern of
nubs with dimensions that are modeled after the measurement of racket C1. The
nub pattern was made by oο§Äsetting every second row by half of the diameter of a
26
==PAGE:31==
nub. This is not a completely accurate of representation of the actual pattern on C1,
but it is considered an acceptable approximation. The dimensions diο§Äer slightly, as
seen in table 3
Rt
St
ND
NH
NG
Racket C1
1.7
2.3
1.7
0.9
0.9
ANSYS input
1.8
2.2
1.7
0.9
0.8
Table 3: Geometric diο§Äerences between racket C1 and ANSYS mesh
input. All measurements are in [mm]. Abbreviations are explained in
ο§¹gure 14.
The elements used are 8-noded hexahedral elements which are equivalent to the
elements used in the earlier getFEM meshes. As can be seen in ο§¹gure 21, the mesh
is unstructured and has been determined by the ANSYS meshing tool based on
a prescribed average element size.
ANSYS will attempt to adjust and optimize
the mesh, but some areas of the mesh have elements that are poorly shaped and
elongated. A few of the elements have had two corners collapsed into one in 2D
which, after extrusion, created triangular prism-shaped elements.
Overall the mesh is satisfactory and can be used to solve the contact problem.
However, given more time there are some ways the mesh could be improved. It
would most likely beneο§¹t from a more structured mesh, as some elements tend to be
either too large or too small. One way to produce a better mesh could be to make
borders around each nub in order to secure evenly sized elements. Nubs could then
be arranged in a grid based on the desired dimensions.
6.2
Recreating the Impact
After setting up a more accurate geometry in 3D, the next step was to ο§¹t the mate-
rial parameters and initial conditions of the getFEM model to one of the recorded
impacts. Since the computational time needed to solve the model becomes many
times greater when transitioning from 2D to 3D, recreation has only been done for
one impact.
Based on the videos of the four rackets, it became apparent that viscoelastic material
behaviour was most pronounced in the professional racket, i.e. racket C1 and C2.
Of those two candidates, C1 was chosen as basis for the recreation.
On the website, under the headline "Recreating the Impact", two videos are shown.
The ο§¹rst video is labeled as the "target shot", and is a shot of the ball with backspin
hitting racket C1. The second video, labeled as "veriο§¹cation shot", is a shot of the
ball with topspin hitting the same racket. The target shot was meant to be used for
ο§¹tting the material input parameters of the model, while the veriο§¹cation shot was
27
==PAGE:32==
meant to be used as veriο§¹cation that the model was not just ο§¹tted to one speciο§¹c
impact.
To ο§¹t the model, the initial velocities and rotation of the target shot were used.
The material parameters of the rubber and sponge were then estimated by looking
up plausible ranges for the materials. For an initial approximation of the material
parameters, the materials handbook of Cambridge university [16] was used. Table
tennis balls used to be made from celluloid up until recently but have now been
replaced by polymer balls, often made from ABS. The rubber is harder to identify, as
there are many diο§Äerent brands with diο§Äerent mixtures, but all of them are assumed
to be elastomers of some kind. Finally there is the sponge which is assumed to be
some sort of ο§²exible polymeric foam.
From Camebridge UniversityβÄôs material handbook [16] a range of YoungβÄôs modulus
for ABS is listed as 1.1GPa to 2.9GPa while the elastomers range from 1MPa to
40MPa.
The ο§²exible polymeric foams have a range of 0.3MPa to 12MPa.
The
PoissonβÄôs ratio of was assumed to be 0.45 for the rubber. The ball, assumed to be
made of ABS, have a PoissonβÄôs ratio of 0.35. The ratio for the sponge was changed
for diο§Äerent attempts in a range of 0.3 to 0.49.
The coeο§Écient of friction was set to a value of 0.6 and kept constant to make model
adjustment simpler. Another step taken to make adjustments easier was to use the
same value for both the hydrostatic and deviatoric components of relaxation time
and the stiο§Äness ratio for both rubber and sponge.
The getFEM model was then run several times with the same initial conditions as
the target shot. In each run, the materials parameters were changed slightly, still
within the ranges mentioned above. From these runs the resulting translatory and
rotational speeds after impact were compared to the resulting speeds of the target
shot. The parameter values that resulted in the closest match to the target shot are
shown in table 4.
Material parameter
Unit
Ball
Rubber
Sponge
YoungβÄôs Modulus
[MPa]
1.5E3
8.0
4.0
Density
[Tonne/mm3]
1.1E-9
9.0E-10
3.5E-11
PoissonβÄôs Ratio
[-]
0.35
0.45
0.3
Relaxation time, œ³
[s]
-
5.0E-5
5.0E-5
Stiο§Äness ratio, r
[-]
-
0.9
0.9
Table 4: Table of parameter inputs used in best ο§¹tting of target shot.
The ball is modeled without viscoelasticity and thus have viscoelastic
material parameters.
28
==PAGE:33==
6.3
Results of revision
On the website, a video of the simulated impact can be found under the headline
"Recreated target impact result" under "getFEM results".
With the parameters
given in table 4, the results listed in table 5 were obtained.
Initial conditions
Target shot
getFEM
Velocity in x-direction [m/s]
6.3
6.3
Velocity in y-direction [m/s]
0.63
0.63
Rotational speed [Hz]
59.4
60
Resulting speeds
Target shot
getFEM
Velocity in x-direction [m/s]
-4.84
-5.37
Velocity in y-direction [m/s]
-4.85
-4.20
Rotational speed [Hz]
-9.15
0.10
Table 5: Initial conditions and resulting speeds obtained from getFEM
solution, for recreation of the target shot, using parameters listed in table
4.
As can be seen in table 5, there are some discrepancies in the resulting speeds of
the target shot and the getFEM solution. The ball seems to have bounced out in
a slightly more horizontal direction than the target shot. Additionally, the getFEM
solution was unable to recreate the reversal of rotation seen in the target shot.
One reason for these diο§Äerences can be the ο§¹xed boundary condition on the racket
geometry. In reality the handle of the racket is ο§¹xed in a vice, allowing the racket
itself to swing back and forth slightly, which can be observed for all rackets in the
video footage. This is not taken into account with a ο§¹xed boundary condition.
Another diο§Äerence between reality and the FEM simulation is the size of the racket
geometry. In the target shot ripples in the rubber, and presumably also the sponge,
can be observed close to the impact, but not not throughout the whole surface. This
is not the case for the racket mesh as it is signiο§¹cantly smaller in order to reduce
computation times. To be more accurate in this regard, the mesh would have to be
expanded to the point where no ripples were present at the edges.
A third reason for the discrepancies in table 5 is found in the method of ο§¹tting
the model to the target shot.
Since the parameters were adjusted simultaneous
and based on presumptions about what result in a better ο§¹t, there a numerous
combinations of parameters that have not been explored. A structured parameter
29
==PAGE:34==
sweep could potentially bring the model closer to reality, and identify parameters
that have the greatest eο§Äect on the outcome of the impact.
Using the material parameters that yielded the results closest to the target shot, a
simulation with initial conditions matching the veriο§¹cation shot was run. This was
to demonstrate that the model was not just ο§¹tted to one speciο§¹c example, but could
yield the same results as another video. This simulation failed to converge and, due
to the deadline for turn-in, could not be run again in time to yield any usable results
for this report. The results would have been presented in table 6.
Initial conditions
Veriο§¹cation shot
getFEM
Velocity in x-direction [m/s]
6.15
6.15
Velocity in y-direction [m/s]
0.13
0.13
Rotational speed [Hz]
-57.3
-57.3
Resulting speeds
Veriο§¹cation shot
getFEM
Velocity in x-direction [m/s]
-4.61
-
Velocity in y-direction [m/s]
4.83
-
Rotational speed [Hz]
7.4
-
Table 6: Initial conditions and resulting speeds obtained from getFEM
implementation, for the attempted veriο§¹cation shot, using parameters
listed in table 4.
There are no results to base a discussion on, but it is expected that the results would
have the same characteristics as the simulation discussed above. That is
The results in table 6 were expected to be similar to the results in 5, in the sense
that there would be some resemblance to the veriο§¹cation shot, but not without some
signiο§¹cant discrepancies. The causes of any such discrepancy would likewise be at-
tributed to the points mentioned for the results of the target shot and corresponding
simulation.
30
==PAGE:35==
7
Conclusion
A FEM model with dynamic contact and a viscoelastic material model was developed
and used to recreate footage of an impact between a table tennis ball and racket
ο§¹lmed with a high speed camera.
The FE code for simulating impacts between table tennis balls and table tennis
rackets was written as part of a preliminary course and has been further developed
during this project. The FE formulation for a viscoelastic material model has been
described and used to solve the dynamic contact problem.
As veriο§¹cation of the FE model, experiments were conducted on the sample rackets.
Three rackets of varying quality were evaluated in their ability to return balls with
various initial conditions. The experiments were recorded with a high speed camera
and the resulting data were used to improve upon the FE code. In the footage
from the experiments is was apparent that the surface coatings were crucial for the
performance of the racket. Work continued with the racket that performed the best
and most clearly displayed viscoelastic material behaviour.
Based on the experimental results, the material parameters of the ball and racket
were adjusted to recreate a target impact. To verify that these parameters were
a plausible approximation of the actual materials used in the racket coating, the
model was then compared to a diο§Äerent impact. It was observed that the model
largely followed the target impact footage, and was expected to do the same for the
second impact. However, the attempted solution failed to converge for this second
impact. Due to insuο§Écient time, no further simulations of the selected veriο§¹cation
impact could be attempted.
The discrepancies between the target impact and the successful simulation suggest
that the parameters used are not accurate. A more structured and comprehensive
parameter study could potentially improve the result. However, the successful recre-
ation of the target impact demonstrates that the FE model is capable of simulating
a dynamic contact problem with a viscoelastic material model.
31
==PAGE:36==
References
[1] ITTF. The International Table Tennis Federation Handbook. The Interna-
tional Table Tennis Federation, Chemin de la Roche 11, 1020 Renens/Lausanne,
Switzerland, 2018.
[2] A. Wineman.
Nonlinear viscoelastic solids βÄî a review.
Mathematics and
Mechanics of Solids(14: 300βÄ™366), 2009.
[3] Y. C. Fung. Biomechanics: mechanical properties of living tissues. New York,
NY: Springer, 1981.
[4] C. S. Drapaca, S. Sivaloganathan, and G. Tenti. Nonlinear constitutive laws in
viscoelasticity. 2007.
[5] Riccardo De Pascalis. On nonlinear viscoelastic deformations: a reappraisal
of FungβÄôs quasi-linear viscoelastic model. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London A(Vol. 470, issue 2166), 2014.
[6] T. A. Laursen and J. C. Simo.
A continuum-based ο§¹nite element formula-
tion for the implicit solution of multibody, large deformation frictional contact
problems. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering(vol. 36,
3451-3485), 1993.
[7] J. Oliver, S. Hartmann, J.C. Cante, R. Weyler, and J.A. HernΟΓndez. A contact
domain method for large deformation frictional contact problems. part 1: The-
oretical basis. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering(vol.
198, 2591βÄ™2606), 2009.
[8] M. A. Puso and T. A. Laursen. A mortar segment-to-segment frictional contact
method for large deformations. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering(vol. 193, 4891βÄ™4913), 2004.
[9] K. Poulios and Y. Renard. An unconstrained integral approximation of large
sliding frictional contact between deformable solids. Computers and Structures
(153:75-90), 2015.
[10] L. Manin, M. Poggi, and N. Havard. Vibrations of table tennis racket composite
wood blades: modeling and experiments. Procedia Engineering(vol. 34, 694 βÄ™
699), 2012.
[11] R. G. Rinaldi, L. Manin, C. Bonnard, A. Drillon, H. Lourenco, and N. Havard.
Non linearity of the ball/rubber impact in table tennis: experiments and mod-
eling. Procedia Engineering(vol. 147, 348 βÄ™ 353), 2016.
[12] E. N. StrΟΗmmen. Structural Dynamics. Springer Series in Solid and Structural
Mechanics Volume 2, 2012.
[13] K. Poulios. Quasi-linear viscoelasticity. 2018.
32
==PAGE:37==
[14] J.C. Simo, R.L. Taylor, and K.S. Pister. Variational and projection methods for
the volume constraint in ο§¹nite deformation elasto-plasticity. Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering(vol. 51, 177-208), 1985.
[15] Chin-Tza Tang. The nonlinear properties of a viscoelastic material under impact
loading. Retrospective Theses and Dissertations(5050), 1973.
[16] Cambridge University Engineering Department. Materials Data Book, 2003
Edition. 2003.
33
==PAGE:38==
Appendices
A
Software
Python
The code for the FEM model was written in Python, a versatile open source pro-
gramming language.
getFEM
getFEM is an open source FEM program which has extensive library of functions
that allow for easy formulatiion and solving of a wide range of problems.
ANSYS
An academic license of ANSYS was used to create 3D meshes for the project.
Paraview
Paraview is an open source software that can be used to visualize data in a variety
of ways. In this project it was used to plot the solutions obtained with the getFEM
model.
Matlab
An academic license of Matlab was used to generate plots for the report.
PCC
Phantom Camera Control (PCC) was the software used to capture high speed
footage on the Phantom V2512 camera.
Tracker
Tracker is an open source software that can be used to track moving objects in a
video.
MB-Ruler
MB-ruler is a software available for non-commercial use. It is used to measure angles
and distances with an on-screen overlay.
Maple
An academic license of Maple was used for various calculations in this project.
34
