==PAGE:1==
The functional capacity of
pulmonary dendritic cells in
neonates in response to
respiratory syncytial virus
Author:
Alexandra Pedersen (s143811)
Supervisor:
Katharina Lahl, Associate Professor at DTU Health
Technology
Anna Hammerich Thysen, PostDoc at DTU Health
Technology
Master’s Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
March 3rd, 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a major cause of lower respiratory tract
infections in children below ﬁve years of age. The susceptibility to experiencing
more severe RSV infections is related to both the immaturity and inexperience
of the neonatal immune response. The two migratory populations, CD103+ and
CD11b+, of dendritic cells (DCs) have been shown to carry antigens from the
lung to the mediastinal lymph node (MLN) for antigen presentation. Here we
compare the response of the two DC populations in day 7 neonates, day 14 and
adult C56BL/6 mice one day following infection with RSV. The neonatal response
was dominated by the functionally-limited CD103+ DCs. While the CD11b+ DCs
were limited in numbers, no diﬀerence was seen in the processing abilities when
comparing neonates to adults.
The expression of the co-stimulatory molecule
CD86 was reduced in both types of DCs in neonates compared to both day 14
mice and adults after infection with RSV. These reduced levels of CD86 indicate
less support to activate a T cell response. The results show that RSV induces a
more apparent change in the cytokine milieu in the lung of adults compared to
neonates. Furthermore, we successfully set up a model in adult mice to investigate
the DC ability to induce a CD4+ T cell driven response against RSV infection that
can be transferred to neonates in the future.
==PAGE:3==
Resumé
Respiratorisk syncytialvirus (RSV) er en væsentlig årsag til nedre luftvejsinfek-
tioner hos børn under fem år. Modtageligheden for mere alvorlige RSV infektioner
er relateret til både umodenheden og uerfarenheden af det neonatale immunre-
spons. De to migrerende populationer, CD103+ og CD11b+, af dendritiske celler
(DC’er) har vist sig at transportere antigener fra lungen til den mediastinale lym-
feknude (MLN) for antigen præsentation. Her sammenligner vi responsen af de to
DC populationer i 7 dage gamle, 14 dage gamle og voksne C56BL/6 mus en dag
efter infektion med RSV. Det neonatale respons var domineret af de funktionelt
begrænsede CD103+ DC’er. CD11b+ DC’erne var begrænsede i antal i neona-
tale, men der sås ikke nogen forskel i behandlingsevnen af antigen i forhold til
voksne. Udtrykket af det co-stimulerende molekyle CD86 blev reduceret i begge
typer af DC’er hos neonatale sammenlignet med både 14 dage gamle og voksne
mus efter infektion med RSV. Disse reducerede niveauer af CD86 indikerer en
svagere evne til at aktivere T-celle respons. Resultaterne viser, at RSV inducerer
en større ændring i cytokinmiljøet i lungerne hos voksne sammenlignet med neona-
tale. Derudover har vi med succes opstillet en model i voksne mus for at undersøge
DCernes evne til at inducere et CD4+ T-celledrevet respons mod RSV-infektion.
Modellen kan i fremtiden overføres til neonatale.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisors Associate Professor Katha-
rina Lahl, DTU Health Technology, for once again letting me join the group and
supervising me throughout this ﬁnal project, and Postdoc Anna Hammerich Thy-
sen, DTU Health Technology, for letting me be a part of her project, providing
guidance and teaching along the way. I would like to thank the other members of
Associate Professor Katharina Lahl’s group, Agnés, Xiao and Kathrine, for their
advice and help on my project. Finally, I would like to thank my family for stand-
ing by me when things got tough and a special thanks to Kristoﬀer for standing by
me throughout this project and for supporting me ﬁve years ago when I suddenly
decided to change my path in life and become an engineer - I could not have done
it without you.
Thank you!
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Lung immunology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Respiratory Syncytial Virus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
RSV associated cytokine production and innate immune cell
response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Dendritic cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.1
DC subsets migration, organization and T cell proliferation .
6
1.4
Development of the neonatal lung . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.1
Embryonic lung development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.2
Development of the lung immune environment . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Aims of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.1
Uptake, transport and processing of antigen by lung migra-
tory DCs in early life to adulthood
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.2
T-cell response of lung migratory DCs in response to infec-
tion with RSV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.5.3
Cytokine levels in the lung after infection with RSV in early
life to adulthood
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Methodology
11
2.1
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Antibody staining panel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Cytokine detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Materials and Methods
17
3.1
Virus culture and titration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
OVA A647, DQ OVA and RSV infection model for DC uptake and
processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:6==
3.2.1
Mice and ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Dissection and preparation of MLN and spleen . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
In vivo clonal expansion of antigen-speciﬁc CD4+ T cells in the
lung draining lymph nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.1
Mice and ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Preparation of the sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.3
Washing of Dynabeads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.4
Isolation of CD4+ T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.5
CellTrace Violet labeling of isolated CD4+ T cells . . . . . .
23
3.3.6
CD45.1 OT-II cell transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.7
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
DC and OT-II cell gating strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Cytokine analysis by ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5.1
IL-10 and IL-12(p70) ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5.2
Multiplex ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5.3
BCA Protein Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Results
31
4.1
The response and functional capacity of pulmonary DCs following
RSV infection in early life to adulthood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
The pulmonary DC response to infection with RSV . . . . .
31
4.1.2
Uptake, transport and processing capacity of antigen by pul-
monary migratory DCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.3
Expression of the co-stimulatory molecule CD86 and other
lineage deﬁning markers by pulmonary migratory DCs
. . .
39
4.2
The pulmonary DC capacity of T cell polarization in response to
infection with RSV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Cytokine levels in the lung post RSV infection in early life to adult-
hood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Discussion
53
6
Conclusion and Outlook
56
References
57
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
ANOVA
Analysis Of Variance
AMF
Alveolar Macrophage
APC
Antigen Presenting Cell
BAL
Bronchoalveolar Lavage
BALT
Bronchus Associated Lymphoid Tissues
Batf3
Basic Leucine Zipper Transcription Factor ATF-like 3
BSA
Bovine Serum Albumin
cDC
Conventional Dendritic Cell
CTL
Cytotoxic T cells
DC
Dendritic Cell
E
Embryonic
ELISA
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay
FLT3L
FMS-like Tyrosine Kinase 3 Ligand
FACS
Fluorescence-activated Cell Sorting
FCS
Fetal Calf Serum
FSC
Forward Scatter
FTY
Fingolimod
GM-CSF Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor
IL
Interleukin
IFN
Interferon
ILC
Innate Lymphoid Cell
IRF
Interferon Regulatory Factor
==PAGE:8==
LRTI
Lower Respiratory Tract Infections
LN
Lymph Node
LTi
Lymphoid Tissue inducer
MDP
Macrophage DC Progenitor
MHC
Major Histocompatibility Complex
MLN
Mediastinal Lymph Node
MFI
Mean Fluerecsence Intensity
Mϕ
Macrophage
NALT
Nasopharynx Associated Lymphoid Tissues
NK
Natural Killer
OVA
Ovalbumin
PBS
Phosphate Buﬀered Saline
PMT
Photomultiplier Tube
pDC
Plasmacytoid DC
PI
Propidium Iodide
PND
Post Natal Day
PRR
Pattern Recognition Receptor
RNA
Ribonucleic Acid
dsRNA
Double-Stranded RNA
ssRNA
Single-Stranded RNA
RPM
Revolutions per minute
RSV
Respiratorial Syncytial Virus
SAPE
Streptavidin Phycoerythrin
SLO
Secondary Lymphoid Organs
SSC
Side Scatter
TCR
T cell receptor
TCZ
T cell zone
Th
T Helper
TLR
Toll-like Receptor
==PAGE:9==
TNF
Tumor Necrosis Factor
VCT
Violet Cell Trace
XCR1
Chemokine XC Receptor 1
==PAGE:10==
1
|
Introduction
By the age of two, nearly all children worldwide have experienced at least one infec-
tion with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). While most children experience mild
symptoms, around one-third develop lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI),
which in most cases is bronchiolitis [1]. Many factors, including the shortcom-
ings of early life immunity, may inﬂuence the enhanced susceptibility of infants
developing more severe symptoms when infected with RSV compared to adults
[2]. Dendritic cells (DCs) are of crucial importance to respiratory viral infections
as these initiate the adaptive immune response once traﬃcked to the lymph nodes
from the infected lung [3]. A better understanding of the deﬁciencies in early
life immunity and the lung environment surrounding DCs at the time of infection
could in the future guide vaccine approaches. While there has been various pub-
lications on this subject, for example by Ruckwardt et al. and Desch et. al, some
elements are not yet fully understood and merits further investigation.
1.1
Lung immunology
The immune system consists of multiple organs, cells and molecules whose primary
task is to provide protection against foreign pathogens, such as microbes, viruses,
fungi and parasites. Protection against these pathogens relies on several levels of
innate immune defense including the anatomical barriers of the body, chemical
and enzymatic systems including body ﬂuid secretions and the general immune
response, including inﬂammation, the complement system and non speciﬁc cellular
response, if the epithel is breached. Important mediators of the innate immune
response include the three types of innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), macrophages
(Mϕ), mast cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils and natural killer (NK) cells
[4]. The DCs are the most important mediators between the innate and the adap-
tive immune response. They are able to present processed antigens from sites of
tissue infection or damage to naive T cells in secondary lymphoid organs (SLO).
Furthermore, they provide multiple signals that help guide the T cell diﬀerentia-
tion, hereby tailoring the T cells to provide a proper immune response that targets
the pathogen [3]. Finally, the antigen-speciﬁc adaptive immunity, dependent on
the functions of T cells and B cells, is able to mount a defense against pathogens,
1
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
that have passed previous defense mechanisms and is furthermore capable of gen-
erating immunological memory [4].
The respiratory tract can be divided into three compartments: the upper airways,
the central airways and the lower airways. In the upper airways, which includes
the nasal passages, the sinuses, and pharynx, the major inductive tissue for inhaled
antigens is the nasopharynx-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT). The inductive
sites within the central airways, which include the trachea, bronchi and bron-
chioles and the lower airways, which include the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar
ducts and sacs and alveoli, are the bronchus associated lymphoid tissues (BALT).
Furthermore, the lymph nodes (LN) that drain the airways are important induc-
tive sites for the respiratory tract. The cervical LN drain the upper airways while
the LN situated near the bronchi drain the central and lower part of the airways.
The LNs receive aﬀerent lymphatic vessels from NALT and BALT as well as from
the airway mucosa and the lung parenchyma. In contrary to the well-established
NALT, mice do not have clearly established BALT under homeostatic conditions,
though a related tissue can be induced upon inﬂammation or infection [5]. In this
project the focus is on the central and lower airways with the MLN as the draining
one.
1.2
Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Early life is associated with increased susceptibility to infections. This is due to
immaturity and inexperience of the infant immune response. LRTI have a large
impact on early life mortality, one of the most important pathogens causing LRTI
being the viral pathogen RSV. RSV is a single stranded, negative-sense RNA virus
of the family Pneumovirus and genus Orthopneumovirus. It is one of the most
common viruses to infect children worldwide and infects nearly all infants by two
years of age. The infection is most severe in children under six months of age,
but may cause the LRTI bronchiolitis in children under the age of ﬁve. While
most children experience mild upper respiratory tract infection, about one-third
develop LRTI and require hospitalization[1].
The RSV ribonucleic acid (RNA) genome is packed into a viral particle and con-
sist of ten genes encoding eleven proteins, as illustrated in ﬁgure 1.1. The matrix
protein (M) lies within the membrane, surrounding the proteins required for a
functional polymerase complex, nucleoprotein (N), phosphoprotein (P) and poly-
merase (L). The transmembrane glycoproteins, small hydrophobic protein (SH),
glycoprotein (G) and fusion protein (F) as well as the two regulatory protein M2-
1 and M2-2, are exposed to the outside [1, 6]. RSV enters host cells by the two
heavily glycosylated surface proteins RSV-G and RSV-F. These bind to multiple
receptors on the surface of the host cell, thereby promoting cellular entry [6].
2
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.1 – The structure of RSV. Figure from [1].
1.2.1
RSV associated cytokine production and innate im-
mune cell response
When RSV infects the respiratory mucosa, detection of the virus is mediated
through pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) expressed by respiratory epithelial
cells, ﬁbroblasts and antigen presenting cells (APCs). PRRs that have been linked
to the recognition of RSV include Toll-like receptors TLR3, TLR7/8, RIG-I and
TLR4 [7].
TLR3 recognizes double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) in the endosomal
membrane. Although RSV is a single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) virus, the virus
generates dsRNA intermediates during replication in the cytoplasm. TLR7 is also
located in the endosomal membrane, however, this receptor is able to recognize
ssRNA. RIG-I is activated by both ssRNA and dsRNA and TLR4 has been shown
to interact with RSV through the RSV-F protein on the viral surface [7]. Once
the PRRs have recognized the RSV-associated molecular patters they are able
to initiate immune responses against RSV infection, including the production of
cytokines.
Cytokines belong to a group of secreted proteins, that are important inﬂamma-
tory mediators. They are secreted by cells belonging to the immune system, and
inﬂuence cells bearing the suitable receptor. The cytokine-receptor interactions
can induce many diﬀerent eﬀects though many interactions are able to perform
the same function. Cytokines are able to both maintain homeostasis and provide
signals to induce host response at times of infection, therefore the composition of
the cytokine milieu changes as the disease progresses and during disease resolution
[4, 8]. RSV infection causes the production of several diﬀerent pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines by many diﬀerent types of cells. The activated epithelial cells of the
lung produce cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-1 that trigger the re-
3
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
cruitment and maturation of DCs [9]. DCs are furthermore able to secrete IL-12
and interferon (IFN)-γ to stimulate T helper (Th) type-1 responses, IL-4 and IL-
27 to stimulate T helper (Th) type-2 responses and IL-6 and IL-23 to stimulate T
helper (Th) type-17 response in the draining LN [7, 10].
Other cells recruited to the lung during RSV infection include alveolar macrophages
(AMFs), plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), neutrophils, NK cells and monocytes [11].
In pediatric patients with bronchiolitis a massive pulmonary inﬁltration of neu-
trophils is seen. These cells account for 76% and 93% of inﬁltrated cells in the
lower and upper respiratory tract, respectively [12]. Monocytes inﬁltrate the lung
shortly after neutrophils and both cell types are able to contribute to viral control.
However, they have also been shown to contribute to tissue damage during viral
infections [11, 12]. NK cells play an important role in viral infections as they kill
viral infected cells and promote Th1 responses by inducing IFN-γ [11]. γδT cells
have shown to be the main producers of the cytokine IL-17A during RSV infection.
The role of IL-17A in RSV-infected adults is two-fold, as the response has shown
to be both pathogenic and protective. Huang et. al. [13] observed an initial sig-
niﬁcant increase of IL-17A in adult whole lung homogenate compared to neonates
(5 days of age) as early as 0.5 days post RSV infection. The importance of T
cells in the clearing of RSV is well established, as both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
are important for the clearance of RSV from the respiratory tract. Bronchiolitis
in children caused by RSV has been associated with an induced type 2 innate re-
sponse in combination with poor type 1 response. The neonatal immune response
is greatly skewed towards promotion of the type 2 innate response whereas the
adult develops a type-1 response in response to RSV-infection with the cellular
response including NK cells, Th1 cells and CTLs [11].
1.3
Dendritic cells
The lung is continuously exposed to threats from the outside in the form of
pathogens, dusts and pollutants.
To recognize the invading threats, the lung
has an elaborate network of DCs, which provide a key link between the innate
and adaptive immune response.
Dendritic cells can be divided into functionally specialized conventional and non-
conventional subsets. Particular sets of transcription factors drive the diﬀeren-
tiation of progenitor cells into either DCs or monocytes as well as further dif-
ferentiation within these groups. The conventional DCs (cDCs) arise from the
common DC precursor, which requires the transcription factor FMS-like tyrosine
kinase 3 ligand (FLT3L) to develop from the macrophage DC progenitor (MDP),
as depicted in ﬁgure 1.2 [3]. The cDCs can be further divided by ontogeny into
two lineages termed type 1 (cDC1) and type 2 (cDC2) cDCs. The lineage known
as cDC1 is characterized by the surface expression of chemokine XC receptor 1
4
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.2 – Conventional and non-conventional dendritic cell subsets.
Figure adapted from [3].
(XCR1) and CD103+. The required transcription factors for the development of
XCR1+ DCs include basic leucine zipper transcription factor ATF-like 3 (Batf3)
and interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8). The cDC2 lineage requires the tran-
scription factor interferon regulatory transcription 4 (IRF4), which plays an im-
portant role in the development, migration and antigen presentation in CD11b+
DCs. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) is also important for the
development for both types of cDCs, though CD11b+ cells are less dependent
on GM-CSF than XCR1+ DCs [3, 14]. The XCR1+ DCs primarily cross-present
antigens on major histocompatibility complex class I (MHCI) to induce a CD8+
T cell response in mice and have a higher production of the cytokine IL-12. On
the other hand, the CD11b+ DCs have been associated with the presentation of
antigen on major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII) and thereby the
induction of CD4+ T cell responses [3, 15]. The cDC1s and cDC2s can be di-
vided further into LN-resident and migratory DCs. The LN-resident cDCs receive
antigen by either the lymphatic drainage or from other cells that have taken up
antigen, and are in this way able to prime T cells to proliferate. The main diﬀer-
ence between the LN-resident and migratory cDCs is their levels of MHCII and
CD11c expression, where, in the steady state, the migratory population express
intermediate levels of CD11c and high levels of MHCII (CD11cintMHCIIhigh) and
the resident population express high levels of CD11c and intermediate levels of
MHCII (CD11chighMHCIIint). However, during inﬂammation the discrimination
5
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
of the two populations becomes diﬃcult as the expression of the markers merge.
The expression of CD8αα on LN-resident cDC1s and the expression of CD103+ on
migratory cDC1s makes it possible to discriminate between the two populations,
but a similar marker to discriminate between LN-resident and migratory cDC2s
does not exist [3].
pDCs share the common DC precursor with cDCs, but they require diﬀerent tran-
scriptions factors for diﬀerentiation and express other surface markers. Although
pDCs are good producers of type I interferons, they have poor antigen-presenting
properties for naive T cells [3]. Besides DCs, there are several other types of anti-
gen presenting cells in the lung, which include AMFs, interstitial Mϕ, monocytes
and ILCs. The primary location of CD103+ DCs is in the basal lamina of the
bronchial epithelia and arteriols, underneath the endothelial cells, whereas the
CD11b+ DCs are localized to the lamina propria [16].
The DCs express PRRs such as the TLRs that are able to recognize foreign
pathogens [17]. In the presence of pathogens such as microbes or viruses, the
DCs are stimulated to produce co-stimulatory molecules and cytokines, interfer-
ons and chemokines. Furthermore, peptide antigens are formed by proteasomal
degradation of exogenous antigens and endogenous generated antigens, which the
DCs are able to present on MHCII and MHCI, respectively. Antigen presentation
together with co-stimulation and cytokine production, stimulate the diﬀerentiation
of antigen speciﬁc CD4+ and CD8+ T cells [4].
1.3.1
DC subsets migration, organization and T cell pro-
liferation
A number of cells require direct or indirect stimuli from DCs to become func-
tional. For example, B cells require help from CD4+ T cells for proliferation, class
switch and aﬃnity maturation, as the secondary lymphoid organs (SLOs) provide
the platform for naive T cell induction, they rely on migratory DCs for antigen
presentation. After the two types of migratory cDCs have encountered and taken
up antigen in the parenchymal tissue, they upregulate the expression of speciﬁc
surface receptors ultimately positioning migratory cDC1s in the deep T cell zone
(TCZ) and migratory cDC2s at the T cell-B cell border of the draining LN. Both
cDC1s and cDC2s are guided to the LN by the expression of the chemokine recep-
tor CCR7 and chemokine ligands CCL19 and CCL21, which are expressed in the
TCZ. However, cDC1s have a higher expression of CCR7 than cDC2s, which is
consistent with their localization in the TCZ. Furthermore, CD8+ T cells secrete
the ligand to XCR1+ expressed on cDC1s. cDC2s, on the other hand, express
more of the chemokine receptor CXCR5, positioning them at the T cell-B cell
border [3, 18].
Naive Th cells are activated by recognition of exogenous antigens and endoge-
nous antigens degraded by autophagy presented on MHCII molecules through
6
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
interactions with the T cell receptor (TCR) and co-stimulatory molecules. Once
activated the Th cells divide into one of three types of eﬀector T cells. These cells
are CD4+ and can be distinguished on the basis of their cytokine phenotype into
Th1, Th2 or Th17. The Th1 cells are particularly good at eliminating intracel-
lular pathogens including viruses due to their ability to secrete IFN-γ and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-β. These cytokines promote macrophage activation lead-
ing to phagocytosis and killing of intracellular viral and microbial particles. Th2
cells secrete cytokines which induce antibody production that targets parasitic
killing. These cytokines include IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 which induce inﬁltration of
eosinophils and mast cell proliferation and degranulation [19]. The third subset
of Th cells, the Th17 cells, activate neutrophils to eliminate extracellular bacte-
ria. They achieve this by secreting the cytokines IL-17A, IL-17F and IL-22 as
well a GM-CSF [20]. Endogenous antigens are presented on MHCI molecules to
naive CD8+ T cells. Furthermore, exogenous antigens can be presented by MHCI
molecules by a process known as cross-presentation. Following receptor-mediated
activation, the naive CD8+ diﬀerentiate and proliferate into their eﬀector cell, the
cytotoxic T cells (CTL). CTLs are capable of killing infected cells by secretion of
death-inducing molecules towards the infected cells and secretion of chemokines
and cytokines including IFN-γ and TNF [21].
1.4
Development of the neonatal lung
1.4.1
Embryonic lung development
The embryonic respiratory system speciﬁcation in mice begins at embryonic day
(E) 9.0, where the speciﬁcation of lung endoderm becomes evident with the expres-
sion of transcription factor Nkx2.1. By E9.5-E12.5 the epithelial cells result in the
formation of the trachea, which at the end of this stage becomes separated from
the esophagus, and two lung buds oﬀthe main bronchi airway, thereby marking
the beginning of embryonic lung development. During next stage of development
E12.5-E16.5, the two lung buds undergo a branching process, known as branching
morphogenesis, resulting in a tree-like network of airways. This process is highly
important for the formation of the structural airways and the terminal alveolar
compartments where gas exchange occurs.
The terminal branches narrow and
form clusters of sacs with epithelial cells forming pre-alveolar spaces during the
canalicular (E16.5-E17.5) and saccular (E17.5- postnatal day (PND) 5) stage. At
birth, the alveolar sacs are exposed to the external environment and subjected
to mechanical forces of ventilation as the newborn starts breathing. The ﬁnal
maturation of the alveoli occurs after the newborn starts breathing. During the
alveolarization stage PND0-PND14 the gas exchange surface is enlarged as a new
mature alveolar septa is formed, giving rise to a double layered capillary network.
The primary alveoli septa are formed from the mature pre-exciting septa dur-
ing stage PND14-PND36 [22–24]. The early mouse lung development stages are
7
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.3 – Early mouse lung development stages. Figure adapted from [23].
depicted in ﬁgure 1.3.
1.4.2
Development of the lung immune environment
Alveolar Mϕ are the most predominant cell type in the neonatal airway and they
are an important component of the ﬁrst line of defense in the lung. During steady
state, AMFs maintain homeostasis, while upon infection, AMFs ensures pathogen
clearance and produce proinﬂammatory cytokines. The fetal lung is populated for
the ﬁrst time around E12 by CD45+ yolk sac-derived macrophages [25, 26].
The prenatal inﬂux of fetal liver-derived monocytes is accompanied by an inﬂux
of granulocytes, which peaks around PND1. Around PND3, at the time of the
alveolarization stage of lung development, newborn mice upregulate the expres-
sion of the cytokine IL-33 which is accompanied by an inﬂux of type 2 innate cells
including ILC2s, mast cells, eosinophils and basophils. The number of these cells
increase rapidly at PND14 outnumbering the adult type 2 cells in the lung by a
factor 4 to 10 [27]. ILC2s are activated by IL-33 to secrete the type 2 cytokines
IL-13, IL-5, IL-6, IL-9 and GM-CSF, thereby highly contributing to the type 2 en-
vironment in newborns [28]. While the CD103+ DCs appear during the ﬁrst week
after birth, the CD11b+ DCs develop more slowly, leading to the predominance of
CD103+ DCs between PND1 and PND12. The numbers of cDCs continue being
impaired up until weaning around PND21 [2, 27]. T and B cells are also found
in low numbers after birth but gradually increase in time reaching adult numbers
around the time of weaning coinciding with the decrease of innate type 2 cell
numbers [27].
A previous study by Ruckwardt et al [2]. has demonstrated the evolution in the
8
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
composition and function of the lung migratory DCs in response to viral RSV
infection. CD103+ DCs were found to be less eﬀective in uptake and processing
of antigen. In addition of being less eﬀective in uptake and processing abilities
the CD11b+ DCs also appeared in much lower numbers during early life. In a
later study [14], they saw that CD103+ DCs in neonatal mice split up into two
phenotypically and functionally distinct populations, CD103low and CD103high,
following respiratory infection. In addition to being of greater size, the CD103high
population were found to be indistinguishable to adults in regards to the expres-
sion of the lineage-deﬁning markers including MHCII and CD11c [14]. Further-
more, CD103high DCs were shown to have signiﬁcantly higher expression of the
co-stimulatory molecules CD86 and CD80 and were more than ﬁve times more
likely to have processed antigen than CD103low, measured by co-administration of
DQ ovalbumin (DQ OVA). However, the expression levels of the co-stimulatory
molecules and the ability to process antigen in CD103high in neonates was shown
to be signiﬁcantly lower compared to adult mice, indicating that the CD103high
DCs in neonatal mice are not functionally similar to adult CD103+ DCs [14].
1.5
Aims of the project
The purpose of this project is to investigate the functional capacity of neonatal
pulmonary DCs as principal inducers of adaptive immunity, in response to RSV.
First, I investigated whether neonatal and juvenile (day 14 mice) DC-mediated
uptake and processing of RSV antigen in the lung diﬀers compared to adults, and
whether they activate suﬃciently. Next, I investigated whether neonatal DCs are
able to induce proliferation of CD4+ T cells. Lastly, I assessed how the cytokine
levels, important for DC maturation and eﬀector function in the lung, evolve from
neonatal and juvenile life into adult life.
1.5.1
Uptake, transport and processing of antigen by lung
migratory DCs in early life to adulthood
The ability to uptake, transport and process antigen, are important functions of
the lung migratory DCs. It is known that neonates are more prone to infections
and respond poorer to vaccines, presumably in part due to immature immune
activation. Therefore, we sought to investigate these abilities of DCs in neonatal
and juvenile mice following viral infection with RSV.
To determine the ability of DCs to uptake, transport and process antigen the mice
were intranasal (i.n.) co-administered Alexa-647 labeled ovalbumin (OVA A647)
or DQ labeled OVA (DQ OVA) at the time of RSV infection. The migratory DCs
that are able to uptake OVA A647 and DQ OVA in the lung and transport it to
the MLN can be detected by ﬂow cytometry. DQ-OVA is self-quenched, and is
9
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
therefore non-ﬂuorescent in itself, but emits green ﬂuorescence upon proteolytic
processing.
1.5.2
T-cell response of lung migratory DCs in response
to infection with RSV
We wanted to set up an experiment to investigate the DCs ability to induce a
CD4+ T cell driven response against RSV infection in neonatal and adult mice.
Due to time limitations, studies of neonatal DCs are missing. The experimental
setup include in vivo proliferation of OVA-speciﬁc OT-II cells.
Transgenic OT-II mice express a speciﬁc alpha-chain and a speciﬁc beta-chain T
cell receptor that pairs with the CD4 co-receptor. The allelic variant of CD45 in
these mice is CD45.1, making detection possible from the cells of the host mouse.
Furthermore, these cell are speciﬁc for OVA peptide. OT-II cells were adoptively
transferred into C57BL/6 mice and the recipients were immunized with OVA with
or without RSV. By labeling the OT-II cells with violet cell trace (VCT) we
were able to analyze the proliferation of T cells in response to RSV and OVA in
the MLN. The T cells were kept from exiting the MLN by adminitration of the
chemical compound FTY720 (Fingolimod).
1.5.3
Cytokine levels in the lung after infection with RSV
in early life to adulthood
The cytokine environment in the lung of a newborn is thought to be skewed
towards type 2 and regulatory/homeostatic immunity at the expense of type 1
and type 17 immunity. We therefore wanted to investigate how cytokine levels,
important for DC maturation and eﬀector function, evolve from neonatal and
juvenile life into adult life at diﬀerent days after infection with RSV, by using
diﬀerent ELISA assays.
10
==PAGE:20==
2
|
Methodology
2.1
Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry was used to characterize the results from the above described
experimental setups. This is a technology used to analyze the characteristics of
cells based on ﬂuorescent-labeling. There are two types of ﬂow cytometers, the
sorting and the non-sorting type. In this project the non-sorting BD LSRFortessa
cell analyzer was used to perform cell analysis. There are three main components
to the ﬂow cytometer: the ﬂuidic system, the optical system, which consists of
the excitation optics and collection optics, and the electronic system [29], as can
be seen in ﬁgure 2.1. The ﬂuidic system directs the cells from a solution through
the ﬂow cytometer and to the light source. The point where the laser intersects
with the cells, the interrogation point, is where the excitation optics focuses the
light source on the cells while the collection optics guides the scattered light and
ﬂuorescence light of the cells to the electronic system.
The electronic system
detects the signal and converts the signal into digital data [29].
The ﬂuidic system is designed to deliver cells in a single cell stream to the inter-
rogation point by the process of hydrodynamic focusing. This process is created
by the sheath ﬂuid which is injected into the ﬂow chamber by pressurized lines.
The pressurized lines also injects the cells from the sample into the ﬂow chamber.
Due to the diﬀerence in the pressure of the sheath ﬂuid and the sample stream,
the latter being higher, the cells align in a single cell stream through the laser
beam [29]. The user of the ﬂow cytometer is able to manipulate the injection rate
of the cells. In this project, a slow injection rate of the cells was chosen, as this
minimizes coincident events and provides the optimal precision of the signal [31].
The ﬂow cytometer has an optical bench, containing the lasers, lenses and collec-
tion optics in ﬁxed positions. The laser produces the excitation light while the
lenses focus the laser beam towards the cell stream. At the interrogation point
light deﬂects on the cells and the light scatters. There are two types of light scat-
ter, forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC). FSC is collected along the same
axis as the laser beam whereas SSC is collected at a 90 degree angle from the laser.
The amount of FSC correlates to the size of the cells, whilst SSC correlates to the
complexity and granulation within the cell, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.2. Fluores-
cent light derived from ﬂuorescent-labeled antibodies and dyes are reﬂected at the
11
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
Figure 2.1 – The three systems of a ﬂow cytometer.Figure adapted from [30]
same angle as SSC [29]. Light emitted from the particles from the particle-laser
interaction is collected by a lens and then passed through dichroic mirrors and
ﬁlters, in order to separate and direct light of speciﬁc wavelength to appropriate
optical detectors [29], see ﬁgure 2.1. The ﬁlters determine the speciﬁcity of a de-
tector to a ﬂuorescence and can be short pass, long pass and band pass ﬁlters.
The band pass ﬁlters allow a narrow range of wavelengths through that are close
to the ﬂuorescent emission peak. The short pass ﬁlters allow wavelengths of light
through equal to or shorter than a speciﬁc wavelength, whereas long pass ﬁlters
allow wavelengths of light through equal to or longer than a speciﬁc wavelength
[29].
The electronic system converts the light signals into electronic signals (voltages)
by photodetectors and performs data analysis. The photons from the sample are
ﬁrst converted into photoelectrons by the detectors, hereby an electrical current is
created that travels to the ampliﬁer and is transformed to voltage pulses. When
the cell enters the laser beam, the voltage pulse starts to increase. It peaks when
the cell is at the center of the beam and declines to baseline when the cell has
passed the beam. Prior to the data being transferred to a computer connected
to the ﬂow cytometer, the voltage pulses are converted into numerical values for
pulse height, width and area [32].
Fluorochromes that can be used for ﬂow cytometry analysis are classiﬁed into
several groups and the selection of appropriate ﬂuorochromes depends on the
12
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
Figure 2.2 – Light scattering. FSC correlates to the size of the cell whilst
SSC correlates to the complexity and granulation within the cell.
laser to be used [29]. The ﬂuorochromes used in this project include ﬂuorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC), phycoerythrin (PE), allophycocyanin (APC) and brilliant
ultraviolet (BUV). Furthermore, tandem dyes, containing two ﬂuorochromes, were
used including conjugates of PE and APC, PE-Cyanine7 (Cy7) and APC-Cy7.
The concept of using tandem dye is, that when the maximum absorbance of the
ﬁrst dye is reached, all the energy is transferred to the second dye, the second
ﬂuorochrome will be activated and produce the ﬂuorescence emission [29]. This
increases the ability to analyze multiple ﬂuorochrome dyes from one single laser.
Each ﬂuorochrome has a wide emission spectrum which may result in spectral over-
lap when multiple ﬂuorochromes are used. Some combinations of ﬂuorochromes
should be avoided, while other combinations with spectral overlaps can be used
together when compensated for. For example, the emission spectra for FITC and
PE overlap, resulting in some light from FITC passing through the ﬁlter used for
PE. This can be corrected by compensation, by subtracting the overlapping frac-
tion of the FITC signal from the PE signal, and the other way around. In order to
determine and apply compensation for the ﬂuorochromes used in the experiment,
control readings should be performed. The design of compensation controls should
include, for each ﬂuorochrome used in the experiment, a single-stained cell or bead
sample [29]. All compensation controls in this project were based on beads.
2.2
Antibody staining panel
An antibody staining panel was designed in order to detect diﬀerent cells based
on their cell surface expression characteristics. The antibodies are labeled with
diﬀerent ﬂuorochromes, as described in section 2.1, thereby allowing detection
when excited by a laser with corresponding excitation wavelength. The antibodies
13
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
were chosen based on the cell surface markers expressed on the cells of interest.
In this project, two diﬀerent antibody staining panels, the DC panel and the OT-
II panel, were used for the experiments described in section 3.2 and section 3.3,
respectively. The cell surface markers, what cell type they are speciﬁc for and the
ﬂuorochromes, which they are labeled to, can be seen in table 2.1.
The DCs express a variety of cell surface markers, where we chose to target CD45,
CD11c and MHCII as well as XCR1/CD103 and CD11b to target the diﬀerent
types of cDCs. To exclude cells not interesting for this analysis, a lineage gate was
created containing CD3, expressed on T cells, CD19 and B220, expressed on B
cells, NK1.1, expressed on natural killer cells, TER119, expressed on erythrocytes,
and CD64, expressed on Mϕ and monocytes.
To detect the CD4+ (OT-II) T cells, a panel containing CD3, CD4, CD45.1 and
TCR Vβ5 was created, as the cells of interest express all of these surface markers.
14
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
Table 2.1 – Antibody panel for detection of DCs.
Panel describing ﬂuo-
rochrome labeled antibody and the cell type that expresses the antigen.
Fluorochrome Antigen
Expression
Buv395
CD86
APCs
BV605
MHCII
APCs
V500
CD45
Hematopoitec lineage
BV421
CD103
(IntegrinαE)
cDC1s
Buv711
CD11c
(IntegrinαX)
DCs, AMFs
Buv737
CD11b
(IntegrinαM)
cDC2s, macrophages,
neutrophils,
eosinophils, etc.
PE
XCR1
cDC1s
PECY7
CD3
T cells
PECY7
CD19
B cells
PECY7
B220
B cells
PECY7
NK1. 1
NK cells
PECY7
TER119
Erythrocytes
PECY7
CD64
(FcγRI)
Macrophages
15
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.3
Cytokine detection
In order to determine the presence of cytokines 1, 2, 4 and 7 days post RSV
infection in the pup and adult lungs of C57BL/6 mice, the analytical method
of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used. Several variations of
the ELISA exist, all of which qualitatively or quantitatively analyze a speciﬁc
substance.
One of the most commonly used types, and the type used in this
project, is the sandwich ELISA. The principle behind the sandwich ELISA is
to measure the amount of antibody bound between a matched antibody pair.
First, the wells were coated with an immobilized (capture) antibody. Next, the
samples and standards were added to the wells, where they bound to the capture
antibody. The second antibody, the detection antibody, binds to the target on
a diﬀerent epitope on the samples and standards, hereby forming a sandwich.
Finally, an antibody conjugated with an enzyme binds to the sandwich producing
a measurable signal once the substrate for the enzyme is added. The Multiplex
ELISA is similar to a sandwich ELISA as it also uses an antibody pair to identify
the protein of interest. Unlike the sandwich ELISA, the Multiplex has the capture
antibody conjugated to the magnetic beads. Furthermore, each spectrally unique
bead is labeled with antibodies speciﬁc for one protein. For detection the Bio-
Plex MAGPIX multiplex reader (BIO-RAD) was used.
The MAGPIX system
immobilizes beads with magnetic force, excites them using light-emitting diodes
(LEDs), and detects beads and analytes using a charge-coupled device (CCD)
camera [33–35].
16
==PAGE:26==
3
|
Materials and Methods
3.1
Virus culture and titration
The RSV and Hep2 cell lines were kindly provided by Cecilia Johansson, Impe-
rial College, London. Plaque-puriﬁed human RSV (originally the A2 strain from
ATCC, US) was cultured and ampliﬁed in the Hep2 cell line by Postdoc Anna
Hammerich Thysen, see ﬁgure 3.1. The viral titer was determined to 1.3 x 107
infective virus per mililiter.
3.2
OVA A647, DQ OVA and RSV infection model
for DC uptake and processing
The protocol of the infection model is depicted in ﬁgure 3.2. Day 7 neonates, day
14 and adult C57BL/6 mice were i.n. administered RSV alone or co-administered
with OVA A647 or DQ OVA. The mice where euthanized one day (16-18 hours)
post administration for ﬂow cytometry and cytokine analysis and two, four and
seven days post infection for cytokine analysis, described in detail in section 3.5.
Figure 3.1 – Microscopy image showing RSV-infected Hep2 cells. Image
taken by Postdoc Anna Hammerich Thysen
17
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3.2 – Protocol of the RSV and/or co-administration of OVA
A647/DQ OVA model for ﬂow cytometry analysis and ELISA for cy-
tokine analysis.
3.2.1
Mice and ethics
The study was conducted in accordance with the EU directive on the protection
of animals used for scientiﬁc purposes and approved by the Animal Experiments
Inspectorate in Denmark (2016-15-0201-01041).
Female and male C57BL/6nrj mice were purchased from Janvier Labs (Saint
Berthevin Cedex, France) and maintained and bred in speciﬁc pathogen-free con-
ditions at the animal facility of Technical University of Denmark. 14-days-old and
adult mice were lightly anesthetized with isoﬂurane (3.5%) and O2 (2%). Then
infected intranasally with 1.3 x 107 PFU/mL live RSV alone or co-administered
with 0.5 mg/ml OVA A647 or 0.5 mg/ml DQ OVA, with a total volume of 100 µl
for adults and 20 µl for 14 day-old mice. Neonatal mice were infected at age 7
days-old without anesthesia and infected i.n. with with 1.3 x 105 PFU/mL live
RSV alone or co-administered with 1.78 mg/ml OVA or 1.78 mg/ml DQ OVA,
with a total volume of 10 µl. Adult mice were sacriﬁced with excess CO2 and
neonatal mice by decapitation. The lungs of these mice were used for detection of
cytokines. All tests were performed in duplicates or triplicates.
3.2.2
Dissection and preparation of MLN and spleen
After euthanization the mice were pinned down with the ventral side facing up.
After dousing the mice fur with 70% ethanol, a cut was made in the skin along
the ventral midline eventually removing the skin. The posterior MLN was located
beneath the thymus, just above the lungs and the spleen was located in the peri-
toneal cavity under the rib cage on the left side, as seen on ﬁgure 3.3. The posterior
MLN and spleen were dissected and stored on ice in 0.5 mL and 1 mL RPMI +
18
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3.3 – Location of various lymphoid tissue in the mouse. Figure from
[36]
5% fetal calf serum (FCS), respectively. Next, the organs were treated with 0.5
mg/ml collagenase and 1 mg/ml DNAse in a solution of RPMI + 5% FCS, for 45
minutes at room temperature (RT). The organs were mashed and ﬁltered through
a nylon ﬁlter. 25000 counting beads were added to each MLN sample in a solution
with phosphate buﬀered saline (PBS). The samples were centrifuged at 400 x g
for 7 minutes, whereafter the supernatant was removed, the pellet resuspended
in its own volume and moved to a v-bottom plate for antibody staining. The
spleen samples were centrifuged at 400 x g for 7 minutes at 22°C, the supernatant
removed and resuspended in its own volume. Hereafter, the spleen samples were
lysed in 2 mL lysing buﬀer, ammonium chloride-based lysing reagent diluted 1:10
with distilled water, for 3 minutes. The lysis was stopped by addition of PBS and
the washing was repeated at 4°C. 25000 counting beads were added to the spleen
samples as described above for the MLN sample. For adults, 1:10 spleen cells were
moved to a v-botttom plate for antibody staining, whereas 1:5 spleen cells were
used from the day 7 neonates and 1:7.5 spleen cells were used from the day 14
mice.
3.2.3
Flow cytometry
For compensation setup on the ﬂow cytometer, OneComp eBeads (Invitrogen)
were used. 3 drops of beads were used to 1 mL PBS, of which 100 µL was mixed
with 1 µL antibody, see table 3.1. The beads were stained for 15 minutes, at RT
19
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
in the dark and washed twice with PBS by centrifugation at 400 x g, for 3 minutes
at 4°C, resuspended in 300 µL PBS and moved to a FACS tube.
For compensation of the LIVE/DEAD Fixable Blue Dead Cell Stain Kit (Thermo
Fischer), the Amine Reactive Compensation Bead Kit (Thermo Fischer) was used.
1 µL of the LIVE/DEAD stain was mixed with one drop amine reactive beads and
100 µL PBS. The beads were stained for 15 minutes, on ice, in the dark. Hereafter,
one drop of negative beads were added to the LIVE/DEAD compensation control.
The cell samples prepared in section 3.2.1 were stained with ﬂuorochrome-labeled
antibodies according to table 3.1. First, the samples were washed twice in PBS
by centrifugation at 400 x g for 3 minutes at 4°C. The cells were labeled with
50 µL LIVE/DEAD stain, diluted 1:1000 in PBS, and incubated 30 minutes on
ice in the dark. The cells were washed twice in PBS as previously described and
blocked with 50 µL Fc block, anti-mouse CD16/32 Antibody (Invitrogen), diluted
1:100 in FACS buﬀer, 2% FCS in PBS, for 20 minutes on ice in the dark. The cells
were centrifuged once and labeled with 50 µL antibodies diluted in FACS buﬀer
according to table 3.1, for 30 minutes on ice in the dark. The cells were washed
twice with FACS buﬀer as previously described, resuspended in 100 µL FACS
buﬀer on plate and ﬁltered through a nylon strain into FACS-tubes. The cell
samples were collected on a ﬂow cytometer and the data analyzed using FlowJo.
3.3
In vivo clonal expansion of antigen-speciﬁc
CD4+ T cells in the lung draining lymph
nodes
The protocol of the experimental model is depicted in ﬁgure 3.4. OVA speciﬁc
CD4+ T cells were adoptively transferred into recipient C57BL/6 mice and one day
after the mice were i.n. co-administered RSV and OVA. On day two and four the
mice received FTY720 intraperitoneal (i.p) and were sacriﬁced on experimental
day 5.
3.3.1
Mice and ethics
The study was conducted in accordance with the EU directive on the protection
of animals used for scientiﬁc purposes and approved by the Animal Experiments
Inspectorate in Denmark (2016-15-0201-01041).
The female and male OT-II transgenic CD45.1 mice were kindly donated by as-
sociate professor Bengt Johansson Lindbom group. Female and male C57BL/6nrj
mice were purchased from Janvier Labs (Saint Berthevin Cedex, France) and
maintained and bred in speciﬁc pathogen-free conditions at the animal facility
of Technical University of Denmark.
20
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Table 3.1 – DC antibody panel.*Also used for compensation controls. **Only
used for compensation controls.
Fluorochrome Marker
Clone
Dilution #Lot
Buv395*
CD86
GL1
1:100
BD#564199
BV605*
MHCII
M5/114.15.2 1:200
BD#563413
V500*
CD45
RA3-6B2
1:100
BD#563413
BV421*
CD103
M290
1:100
BD#562771
Buv711
CD11c
HL3
1:100
BD#563048
Buv711**
IgG1
A19-3
1:100
BD#563128
Buv737*
CD11b
M1/70
1:200
BD#564443
FITC**
Ly6C
HK1.4
1:200
BL#128005
PE*
XCR1
ZET
1:100
BD#559652
PEDAZZLE**
CD172A
P84
1:100
BioLeg#148204
PECY7*
CD3
145-2C11
1:200
Bioleg#144016
PECY7
CD19
eBio1D3
1:200
PECY7
B220
RA3-6B2
1:200
eBio#25-0452-82
PECY7
NK1. 1
PK136
1:150
#eBio25-5921
PECY7
TER119
TER-119
1:200
#eBio25-5921
PECY7
CD64
X54-5/7.1
1:100
BD#563048
A647**
CD64/FcyRI X54-5/7.1
1:200
BD#558539
21
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3.4 – Protocol of the OVA speciﬁc CD4+ T cell proliferation ex-
perimental model.
3.3.2
Preparation of the sample
The spleen, mesenteric, mediastinal and ingunal lymph nodes were dissected from
an adult male or female transgenic OT-II mice, matching the sex of the recipient
mice. The TCR of CD4+ cells of OT-II mice are restricted to OVA, therefore
the OVA-speciﬁc CD4 T-cells (CD45.1+) were isolated by using a CD4+ T cell
Isolation Kit from Invitrogen. During the ﬁrst experiment, the dissected organs
were digested with 0.5 mg/mL collagenase and 1 mg/mL DNAse in RPMI + 5%
FCS at RT for 45 minutes. The organs were pooled, mashed and ﬁltered through
a nylon ﬁlter. The suspensions were spun, resuspended and lysed in lysis buﬀer
for 3 minutes and hereafter washed twice in media (RPMI + FCS 5 %). The
cell count was acquired using Sysmex and appropriate volumes were calculated
accordingly. It should be noted that in experiment 1, twice as many cells as the
CD4+ T cell Isolation Kit recommends were used.
3.3.3
Washing of Dynabeads
For the selection of CD4 cells the Invitrogen Dynabeads Untouched Mouse CD4
Cells kit was used. The beads were resuspended in the vial and the desired volume
was moved to a new tube. 1 mL isolation buﬀer was added to the tube and the
beads resuspended. The tube was placed in the magnet for 1 minute and the
supernatant discarded. The tube was removed from the magnet and the beads
resuspended in the same volume of isolation buﬀer, PBS (Ca2+ and Mg2+ free)
supplemented with 0.1% BSA and 2 mM EDTA, as the initial volume beads.
22
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.3.4
Isolation of CD4+ T cells
Isolation buﬀer was added to the cells, prepared in section 3.3.2. An appropriate
volume of cells was transferred to another tube whereto heat inactivated FCS and
antibodymix, from the Invitrogen it, were added. The cells incubated for 20 min-
utes at 8°C. Next, the cells were washed with isolation buﬀer, mixed by tilting
and centrifuged at 350 × g for 8 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and
the cells resuspended in isolation buﬀer. The pre-washed Dynabeads, see section
3.3.3, were added to the cells and the mixture incubated for 15 minutes at 8°C
with gentle tilting and rotation. Isolation buﬀer was added and the bead-bound
cells were gently resuspended. The tube with the bead-bound cells was placed
in the magnet for 3 minutes and the supernatant containing the CD4+ cells was
transferred to a new tube, this step was repeated one more time to remove any
residual beads. The total CD4+ cell count was acquired by Sysmex and a sample
was set aside for antibody staining and analysis.
3.3.5
CellTrace Violet labeling of isolated CD4+ T cells
The isolated CD4+ T cells were labeled with CellTrace Violet (VCT) from Invitro-
gen. A CellTrace stock solution was prepared by addition of 20 µL dimethylsulfoxid
(DMSO) to one vial of CellTrace reagent followed by mixing. The stock solution
was mixed 1:1 with 37°C PBS. The isolated CD4+ T cells were centrifuged and
the supernatant resuspended in 1 µL stock solution per milliliter cells. The cells
incubated in the dark for 20 minutes at 37°C, where after ﬁve times the original
staining volume of 37°C RPMI with 5% FCS was added to the cells and they
were set to incubate for 5 minutes. The cells were centrifuged and resuspended in
37°C RPMI with 5% FCS, where the cells incubated for at least 10 minutes. The
total CD4+ cell count was acquired by Sysmex and a sample was set aside for ﬂow
cytometry analysis to check for suﬃcient VCT staining.
3.3.6
CD45.1 OT-II cell transfer
A sample containing the isolated CD4+ cells from section 3.3.4 was stained with
antibodies and analyzed for the content of CD45.1+ OT-II cells according to table
3.2. The sample was put on a plate and washed twice in PBS by centrifugation
at 400 x g at 4°C for 7 minutes. Hereafter, the cells were blocked with 50 µL
1:100 Fc block in FACS buﬀer for 20 minutes. After centrifugation the cells were
resuspended and stained with 50 µL antibodymix according to table 3.2 for 30
minutes.
The cells were washed twice in FACS buﬀer, resuspended in 100 µL
FACS buﬀer on plate and ﬁltered through a nylon strain into FACS-tubes. Prior
to running the sample on the ﬂow cytometer, the cells were labeled with propidium
iodide (PI) for detection of dead cells. By ﬂow cytometry, the amount of CD45.1+
23
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Table 3.2 – OT-II antibody panel.*Also used for compensation controls.
Fluorochrome Marker
Clone
Dilution #Lot
BV711*
TCRVB5
1:200
FITC*
CD3
145-2C11 1:200
eBio#11-0031
PerCP Cy5.5*
CD4
GK1.5
1:200
eBio#46-0041-82
APC-CY7*
CD45.1
A20
1:100
BD#560579
Table 3.3 – Test groups
RSV 1 ug OVA 100 ug OVA FTY720
Group 1
+
-
-
+
Group 2
-
+
-
+
Group 3
-
-
+
+
Group 4
+
+
-
+
Group 5
+
-
+
+
OT-II cells were found in the sample, and a solution was made to contain a total
of 50000 CD45.1+ OT-II cells per injection. Note, that the TCRVβ5 staining, to
check for T cell purity, failed in experiment 1, therefore the CD3+ CD4+ cells were
used to calculate amount of CD45.1+ OT-II cells. The CD45.1+ OT-II cells were
transferred into CD45.2+ WT, adult C57BL/6 mice, by intravenous injection of
a total of 200 µL solution into the tail vein. The next day, experiment day 1, the
mice were immunized i.n. with 100 µg or 10 µg soluble OVA grade V (Invitrogen)
and 90 µL RSV (1,2 x 107 PFU/mL). The test groups can be seen in 3.3 and
each group contained 2-3 mice. To inhibit T cell migration from the MLN, the
mice were treated with i.p. injections of 20 µg FTY720 in a total of 100 µl salt
solution at experiment day 2 and day 4. FTY720 functions as an antagonist of
S1P receptors, thereby inhibiting the egression of T cells from secondary lymphoid
tissue to lymph circulation [37]. Note, that in experiment 1 at i.p. injection day
2 the FTY720 was diluted in PBS.
3.3.7
Flow cytometry
On experiment day 5 the anterior and posterior MLN and the mesenteric lymph
nodes were dissected and prepared as described in section 3.2.2. The cells were
stained according to table 3.2 by the protocol described in section 3.2.1. Just prior
to collection of the samples on the ﬂow cytometer, the cells were stained with PI.
24
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3.5 – DC gating strategy. Gating strategy for CD103+ and CD11b+ DC
populations in the MLN one day post infection with RSV, the example represents
the cells of an adult MLN. The populations were gated from the CD11c+, MHChigh
population, after gating on singlets, live cells and CD45 expressing cells. The lineage
gate contains CD3, CD19, B220, NK1.1, TER119 and CD64.
3.4
DC and OT-II cell gating strategy
All data collected from ﬂow cytometry was analyzed using FlowJo version 10.
Two diﬀerent staining panels, table 3.1 and 3.2, were used in the two experimental
setups described in section 3.2 and 3.3, respectively. For this reason, the gating
strategies are diﬀerent. In both cases, the gating of cells was a step-by-step process
starting by investigating the FSC and SSC, thereby eliminating cell debris and
dead cells followed by exclusion of doublets. Hereafter followed a more speciﬁc
phenotype based analysis based on the surface markers.
When analysing data from the experiment described in section 3.2, the intention
was to detect the two populations of DCs, XCR1+ and CD11b+, the gating is
depicted in ﬁgure 3.5. The dead cells were excluded by being positive for the live
dead stain. Next, the entire population positive for expressing CD45 was gated,
whereafter the lineage population was excluded. The lineage population was pos-
itive for expression of CD3, CD19, B220, NK1.1, TER119 and CD64, thereby
25
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3.6 – OT-II gating strategy. Gating strategy for the division history of
the OT-II population in the MLN of recipient adult mice, co-administered with OVA
at the time of RSV infection. The OT-II population was gated from the TCRVβ5,
CD45.1 expressing population, after gating on singlets, live cells, CD4 and CD3
positive cells.
identifying T cells, B cells, NK cells, erythrocytes and Mϕ/monocytes. From the
MHChigh/CD11c expressing population the DC populations were distinguished on
the basis of their expression of XCR1+/CD103+ and CD11b+, respectively. The
cells positive for DQ OVA were found from the MHChigh/CD11c expressing pop-
ulation, from where the XCR1+ and CD11b+ populations could be distinguished.
The DQ OVA gates were deﬁned using a DQ OVA negative sample. To investigate
the total number of cells in the organs we used counting beads for quantiﬁcation.
As the exact number of beads added to the sample was known, the quantiﬁcation
could account for the lost cells during sample preparation.
Of the data from the experiment described in section 3.3, the intention was to
detect and show the division history of the OT-II cells.
The dead cells were
excluded by being positive for PI. T cells expressing both CD4 and CD3 were gated
further, and the OT-II population was identiﬁed by the expression of CD45.1 and
the T cell receptor TCR Vβ5. To show the division history, the VCT labeling of
the cells expressing TCR Vβ was examined, the gating is depicted in ﬁgure 3.6.
26
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.5
Cytokine analysis by ELISA
C57B/6 adult, day 14 and day 7 mice were i.n. infected with RSV (PFU 1,2 x
107), as described in section 3.2.1. The mice were euthanized 16-18 hours (one
day), 42-43 hours (two days), four days and seven days post infection, respectively.
The euthanization and dissection preceded as described in section 3.2.2. Once the
chest of the mice was exposed, a small needle attached to a syringe ﬁlled with
PBS was inserted into the right ventricle and the PBS was gently pushed into
the pulmonary circulation. The lungs of adult mice were perfused with 20 mL
PBS and the neonatal day 7 and day 14 lungs were perfused with 5 mL PBS.
Immediately after dissection the lungs were put on dry ice, weighed and shortly
after moved for storage at -80°C. Prior to analysis the lungs of day 7 and day 14
pups were homogenized in 250 µL protease inhibitor cocktail by Roche, while the
adult lungs where homogenized in 300 µL. The tissues were homogenized by a
tissuelyser at max for 2 minutes using a bead and hereafter spun on maximum in
an eppendorf centrifuge, whereafter the supernatant was removed and stored at
-80°C until analysis. The subsequent cytokine ELISA and protein quantiﬁcation
assays were assessed in duplicate samples of the tissue homogenates.
3.5.1
IL-10 and IL-12(p70) ELISA
To determine the optimum sample concentration of IL-10 and IL-12(p70) a sand-
wich ELISA was performed using the BD Biosciences kit and the protocol based
on the BD data sheets. Furthermore, the cytokine concentration of IL-12(p70)
of all samples was determined by this analysis. Buﬀers and solutions used in the
experiment:
• Coating Buﬀer: PBS
• Assay Diluent: PBS with 10% FBS
• Wash Buﬀer: PBS + 0.05% Tween 20
• Substrate Solution: Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) and 30% hydrogen perox-
ide (1:1)
• Stop Solution
A 96-well ELISA plate was coated with 50 µL Capture Antibody diluted in PBS
(1:250) and incubated overnight at 4◦C. The plate was washed three times with
Wash Buﬀer and any residual buﬀer was removed by inversion of the plates onto
adsorbent paper. 200 µL Assay Diluent was added to each well and the plates
incubated for one hour at room temperature, followed by three washing steps, as
27
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
described above. A two-fold serial dilution of the standard was made with the
highest concentration being 20.000 pg/ml of IL-10 and 5000 pg/ml of IL-12(p70),
the standards were diluted in Assay Diluent. For the test run, the samples were
diluted 1:2, 1:5, 1:10 and 1:100 in Assay Diluent, and 100 µL of each sample was
transferred into their appropriate wells and the plate incubated for two hours at
room temperature. The plate was washed as described above, but with a total of
ﬁve washes, whereafter 50 µL of Working Detector was added to each well. The
plate incubated for one hour at room temperature and was washed with a total
of seven washes. 50 µL Substrate Solution was added to each well and the plate
incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark until color development.
Stop Solution was added and absorbance was measured with an ELISA reader at
450nm within 30 minutes of stopping the reaction. Standardcurves were created,
allowing quantiﬁcation of the IL-10 and IL-12(p70) cytokines, thereby determining
the optimal sample dilution to be used in Multiplex ELISA analysis and the IL-
12(p70) concentration in the samples. The dilution of the samples to be used in
the Multiplex and IL-12p(70) ELISA was determined to be 1:2 for day 7 and day
14 pups and 1:5 for adults.
3.5.2
Multiplex ELISA
The eBioscience mouse Th9/Th17/Th22/Treg cytokine 6-plex immunoassay kit
was used for this experiment and based on the Invitrogen ProcartaPlex Multiplex
Immunoassay User Guide [38]. The kit measures the following six protein targets
using Luminex xMAP technology: IL-10, IL-17A, IL-22, IL-23, IL-27 and IL-9.
The buﬀers and solutions were provided with the eBioscience kit if not stated
otherwise, the following buﬀers were prepared for the experiment:
• Wash buﬀer: 20 mL Wash Buﬀer Concentrate was brought to room temper-
ature and diluted in 180 mL ddH2O.
• Universal assay buﬀer: 10 mL Universal Assay Buﬀer was diluted in 90 mL
ddH2O.
• Detection antibody: 60 µL detection antibody was diluted in 2940 µL detec-
tion antibody diluent.
• Streptavidin-PE (SAPE)
• Reading Buﬀer
The magnetic beads were vortexed for 40 seconds and 50 µL of the beads solution
was added to each well in a 96-well ﬂat bottom plate. The magnetic beads were
washed by inserting the plate into a hand-held magnetic plate washer, waiting
two minutes to allow accumulation of the beads to the bottom of each well, and
removing the liquid in the wells by inverting the hand-held magnetic plate washer
28
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
with the plate. 150 µL wash buﬀer was added to each well, the beads were allowed
to accumulate at the bottom for 30 seconds where after the previous inversion step
was repeated. The plate was removed from the hand-held magnetic plate washer,
whereafter the standards and samples were added to appropriate wells. A four-fold
serial dilution of the standard was made by diluting the standards in Universal
Assay Buﬀer. The homogenized lung samples were diluted 1:2 (day 7 and day 14
pups) and 1:5 (adults) in Universal Assay Buﬀer prior to plating. After plating of
the standards and samples, the plate was closed with a black lid and incubated 30
minutes at room temperature on a shaker, then transferred to 4◦C for overnight
incubation. After overnight incubation the plate was shaken at room temperature
for an additional 30 minutes. The plate was washed as previously described with a
total of three washed, whereafter 25 µL Detection Antibody Mixture was added to
each well. After 30 minutes of incubation on a plate shaker at room temperature,
the plate was washed three times. 50 µL of SAPE was added to each well and the
plate incubated for 30 minutes, on the plate shaker at room temperature. The
previous washing step was repeated and 125 µL of Reading Buﬀer was added to
each well. After 5 minutes of incubation on the plate shaker, the plate was run on
the Bio-Plex MAGPIX multiplex reader (BIO-RAD) and the data was analyzed
using the Bio-Plex data software.
3.5.3
BCA Protein Assay
For quantiﬁcation of total protein of the left lungs, a BCA protein assay by Thermo
Fischer was performed on lung samples described in section 3.5. First, a test assay
was performed to determine the optimal dilution of the samples.
• BCA Reagent A: Sodium carbonate, sodium bicarbonate, bicinchoninic acid
and sodium tartrate in 0.1M sodium hydroxide
• BCA Reagent B: 4% cupric sulfate
• Albumine Standard Ampules 2ng/m: bovine serum albumin (BSA) at 2mg/m
in 0.9% saline and 0.05% sodium azide
The standards and samples were diluted in PBS, according to manufacturers pro-
tocol. The working reagent was prepared by mixing BCA Reagent A with BCA
Reagent B 50:1. 25 µL of each standard or sample were pipetted into a 96-well
ﬂat bottom plate, followed by 200 µL of working reagent.
The plate was cov-
ered, shaken on a plate shaker for 30 seconds, and incubated for 30 minutes at
37°C. Hereafter the plate was cooled to room temperature and the absorbance was
measured at 562 nm on a plate reader.
29
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.6
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0, using
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s or Dunnett’s multiple com-
parisons test or the nonparametric Mann-Whitney, also known as the Wilcoxon’s,
test.
ANOVA is a method for comparing the means of several populations.
ANOVA is used to test the hypothesis that the population means are equal,
thereby rejecting the hypothesis would imply that at least one of the means is
diﬀerent. Tukey’s test is used as post hoc analysis following the one-way ANOVA
to identify if a diﬀerence between two means is greater than the standard error,
while Dunnett’s test is used to identify diﬀerence between the test mean and a
control [39]. Only data proven to be normally distributed by the Shapiro-Wilk test
underwent further statistical analyses with ANOVA. The nonparametric Mann-
Whitney test does not require the assumption of normal distribution and is used
to determine whether two independent sample means are equal [39]. To reject the
null hypothesis a probability value (p-value) of P<0.05 applies for all cases.
30
==PAGE:40==
4
|
Results
4.1
The response and functional capacity of pul-
monary DCs following RSV infection in early
life to adulthood
The DCs in the MLN are of high importance for eliciting the adaptive immune
response following RSV infection. Previous studies have shown that the lung-
migratory DCs mature during early life, where the response towards RSV infec-
tion was dominated by a functionally-limited CD103+ DCs in CB6F1 neonates.
Furthermore, the CD11b+ cells were shown to be insuﬃcient in both numbers
and the functional ability to uptake and process antigen in neonates [2]. Later
studies, from the same group, revealed two subgroup populations of the CD103+
DCs, CD103low and CD103high, in CB6F1 neonates. Here they showed that the
CD103high DCs were similar to adult CD103+ DCs in their expression of CD103,
CD11c and MHCII [14]. We wanted to know whether we would see the same trend
in DC response after RSV infection in our mouse house by using C57BL/6 mice.
4.1.1
The pulmonary DC response to infection with RSV
We co-administered RSV and DQ ovalbumin (DQ OVA) to mice that were 7 and
14 days of age, respectively, and compared their DC response to those of adults
one day post infection. First, we assessed the disease condition of the mice by
measuring their weight prior to infection and again at the time of euthanization.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1, no signiﬁcant weight decrease is seen one day post
infection in day 7 and day 14 mice. However, a mean weight loss of 1 gram is
seen in the adult mice one day post co-administration of RSV with DQ OVA.
After uptake of antigen in the lung, the DCs are known to migrate to the MLN.
Therefore, we located posterior MLN, as depicted in ﬁgure 4.2, dissected and used
this organ for further analysis. We also analyzed the spleen to look for any systemic
eﬀects of the virus, since we use a relatively high volume of RSV, which we did not
see indications of and the anterior MLN, to investigate whether the DCs migrate
there or to the posterior MLN after infection. The size of the posterior MLNs
varied across the age groups, but was found to be consistently largest in the day
31
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.1 – Weight data of mice. Weight data of mice collected at the day of
infection and again at the day of euthanization, one day post infection. Mice age 7
days, 14 days and adults.
14 mice, depicted in ﬁgure 4.2a. Figure 4.3 depicts the CD103+ and CD11b+ cells,
gated for the CD11c+/MHCIIhigh population, across all three age points and is
representative for all samples. Backgating of DQ OVA was performed to include
these in the gate of the CD11c positive and negative population.
The composition of cell populations in the MLN one day post infection varied
greatly with the age of the mice, see ﬁgure 4.4. We found that the DCs in the
MLN of the young mice are predominantly composed of CD103+ DCs, see ﬁgure
4.4a. This is especially evident in the 7 days old pups, where only around 4% of
all CD11c+/MHCIIhigh DCs in the MLN were CD11b+ DCs. Furthermore, the
low percentage of CD11b+ DCs is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the day 14 and adult
mice. In ﬁgure 4.4a spread in the CD103+ DCs between the test groups within the
day 7 mice is seen. In two of the test groups nearly 80% of all CD11c+MHCIIhigh
DCs in the MLN were CD103+ DCs, whereas in a third test group nearly 35%
were CD103+ DC. This spread is most likely caused by the experiments being
performed on diﬀerent experimental days. As the spread diﬀerences aﬀect entire
test groups, it could be due to several things, including the virus being thawn for
too long, failure of the intranasal infection and variations of the sample preparation
protocol. Despite this, the diﬀerence in the CD103+ DC composition between 7
day neonates and adults is noticeable, see ﬁgure 4.4a. The ratio of CD103+ to
CD11b+ DCs, calculated as the frequency of CD103+ divided by the frequency
of CD11b+ DCs, in one experimental group was found to be around ﬁve in the
day 7 neonates, see ﬁgure 4.4b. The two other experimental groups within day 7
neonates showed to have more than 18-fold more CD103+ DCs than CD11b+ in
the MLN. Mice infected at 14 days showed a decrease in the ratio to 4-fold for
one experimental group and 1.5 fold ratio for the other experimental group. The
ratio in adults one day post RSV infection was found to be around 1.2. Despite
the above described spread within the day 7 neonates, the ratio was found to
32
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
Figure 4.2 – Position of posterior mediastinal lymph node (MLN). Pho-
tographs of the posterior MLN, one day post infection with RSV. The red arrows
indicate the posterior MLN, while the black arrows indicate the thymus. a) The
MLN and thymus of a day 14 neonate mouse. b) The MLN and thymus of an adult
mouse.
be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the day 14 and adult ratio, see ﬁgure 4.4b.
To
investigate the total number of DCs in the MLN we used counting beads for
quantiﬁcation. The numbers of CD103+ DCs were similar in day 7, day 14 and
adult mice one day post RSV infection. In contrary the numbers of CD11b+ DCs
were signiﬁcantly lower in the day 7 neonates compared to adult mice, see ﬁgure
4.4c. Taken together, these results suggest a CD103+ DC dominated response in
especially the day 7 neonatal mice compared to the adult.
33
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.3 – Changes in DC composition in the mediastinal lymph node
(MLN) during early life to adulthood. Gating of CD103+ and CD11b+ DCs
from CD11c/MHCIIhigh population in the MLN one day post infection with RSV.
34
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
c)
Figure 4.4 – Changes in DC composition in the mediastinal lymph node
(MLN) during early life to adulthood. CD103+ and CD11b+ DC populations
in the MLN one day post infection with RSV. a) DC populations as a percentage
of CD11c+/MHC class II gate of mice infected at the indicated age. b) Ratio of
CD103+ to CD11b+ cells in the CD11c+/MHC class II gate infected at the indicated
age. c) Quantiﬁed number of cells in the MLN in the CD11c+/MHC class II gate
infected at the indicated age. Results of day 7 and adult mice are representative
of three independent experiments, and results of day 14 mice represents data from
two independent experiments with 2-4 mice per group. Error bars represent the
standard deviation and P values indicate statistical signiﬁcance by one-way ANOVA
with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
35
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.1.2
Uptake, transport and processing capacity of antigen
by pulmonary migratory DCs
As shown previously by Ruckwartd et al [2], we also wanted to investigate the
ability of DCs from mice of diﬀerent ages to uptake, transport and process antigen
one day post RSV infection. We ﬁrst wanted to measure the transport of antigen
by DCs by co-administration of Alexa647 labeled OVA (OVA A647) at the time
of RSV infection. However, we chose to continue the experiments with DQ OVA,
because it provides the same and additional information to OVA A647.
The
gating strategy for identifying DCs that have taken up and processed DQ OVA is
depicted in ﬁgure 3.5 and explained in detail in section 3.4. Figure 4.5 depicts the
CD103+ and CD11b+ cells, respectively, gated from the cells that have taken up
and processed DQ OVA across all three age points. We investigated the percentage
of CD103+ and CD11b+ DCs expressing DQ OVA, respectively, see ﬁgure 4.6. In
day 7 neonates the percentage of both types of DCs that have processed DQ OVA is
around 5%, whereas in the adult mice, a mean of 14% CD103+ DCs have processed
DQ OVA and a mean of 4% CD11b+ DCs have processed DQ OVA. In the day
14 mice a spread is seen in the mice within the same test groups, which is likely
caused by infection issues or simply mice variations. Overall, equal percentages
of the CD103+ and CD11b+ DCs have processed DQ OVA in the day 14 mice.
The diﬀerence in processing by CD103+ DCs is signiﬁcant between the day 7
neonates and adults, while no diﬀerence is evident in the CD11b+ DCs between
the two groups, see ﬁgure 4.6a and 4.6b. The percentage of CD103+ DCs that have
processed DQ OVA in day 14 mice is close to the adult percentage and therefore
higher than day 7 neonates. The spread within the test group makes it diﬃcult
to give a deﬁnitive conclusion, but it looks as though the CD11b+s of the day
14 mice are better at processing DQ OVA across the age groups, see ﬁgure 4.6b.
The percentage of DCs that have processed DQ OVA is, across all age groups,
relatively low but in general it seems that the day 14 and adult CD103+ DCs
have processed more DQ OVA than the CD103+ DCs of day 7 neonates. When
comparing the ratio of the CD103+ to CD11b+ DCs of all the CD11c+/MHCIIhigh
DCs to the ratio of CD103+ to CD11b+ DCs of the CD11c+/MHCIhigh DCs that
have processed DQ OVA, a diﬀerence is evident, see ﬁgure 4.6c. Although the
ratio of CD103+ to CD11b+ DCs is signiﬁcantly higher in the day 7 neonates
than in adult mice, the ratios of CD103+ to CD11b+ DCs that have processed DQ
OVA do not diﬀer to the same extend. Furthermore, it is noticeable that while the
ratio of all CD103+ to CD11b+ DCs in adult is around one, the ratio of CD103+
to CD11b+ DCs that have processed DQ OVA is higher. This implicates that
despite equal amounts of the two types of cDCs in the MLN more CD103+ DCs
process DQ OVA than CD11b+ in adult mice. The ratios of CD103+ to CD11b+
DCs in the day 14 mice are nearly equal. Taken together, these results indicate
that despite the higher ratio of CD103+ to CD11b+ DCs in day 7 neonates, ﬁgure
4.6c, the CD103+ DCs show reduced ability to transport and process DQ OVA
compared to day 14 and adult mice, ﬁgure 4.6a.
36
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.5 – Gating on the DQ OVA expressing population.
Gating of
CD103+ and CD11b+ DCs from the DQ OVA, CD11c/MHCIIhigh population in
the MLN one day post infection with RSV.
37
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
c)
Figure 4.6 – Processing of DQ OVA in CD103+ and CD11b+ DC popu-
lations in the MLN one day post RSV infection. a) Percentage DQ OVA
CD103+ DCs of all CD103+ DCs.
b) Percentage DQ OVA CD11b+ DCs of all
CD11b+ DCs. c) Ratio of CD103+ to CD11b+ DCs and the ratio of CD103+ to
CD11b+ DCs that have processed DQ OVA. Results of adult mice are representative
of three independent experiments, and results of day 7 neonates and day 14 mice
represents data from two independent experiments with 1-4 mice per group. Error
bars represent the standard deviation and P values indicate statistical signiﬁcance
by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
38
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.1.3
Expression of the co-stimulatory molecule CD86 and
other lineage deﬁning markers by pulmonary migra-
tory DCs
The age-dependent (day 7, day 14 and adult) expression of the co-stimulatory
molecule CD86 on the surface of CD103+ and CD11b+ DCs in the MLN one day
post infection with RSV was investigated as the mean ﬂuerecsence intensity (MFI).
The results show that the expression of CD86 increase with age upon infection in
both CD103+ and CD11b+ DCs, which can be seen in ﬁgure 4.7. The diﬀerence
in the expression of CD86 is highly signiﬁcant between the adult mice and the two
pup groups (day 7 and day 14). However, the diﬀerence in CD86 expression is
not profound between day 7 neonates and day 14 mice. The expression of CD86
within the age-groups is similar across the two cell types. These reduced levels of
CD86 in neonates indicate less support to activate a T cell response.
We further examined the expression of the lineage deﬁning markers XCR1, CD103,
MHCII and CD11c within the CD103+/XCR1+ (cDC1s) DCs and CD11b, MHCII
and CD11c within the CD11b+ (cDC2s) DCs one day post infection with RSV.
The expression of lineage deﬁning markers on cDC1s can be seen in ﬁgure 4.8.
While CD103 is expressed in signiﬁcantly lower levels in day 7 neonates than day
14 and adult mice, there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the expression levels of XCR1
between the three age groups. The level of expression of MHCII in day 7 neonates
and day 14 mice is signiﬁcantly higher than expression of MHCII in adults. How-
ever, a large spread in the expression level of MHCII and CD11c within the day 7
age group can be seen, which is most likely caused by the experiments being per-
formed on diﬀerent experimental days. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the expression
level of CD11c can be detected between day 14 and adult mice. The expression of
lineage deﬁning markers on cDC2s can be seen in ﬁgure 4.9. The expression level
of CD11b is lower in both day 7 neonates and day 14 mice compared to adults,
though not signiﬁcantly. The expression levels of CD11c and MHCII on cDC2s
follow the same trend as the expression levels of the same markers on cDC1s.
The experiments being performed weeks apart holds a challenge when comparing
the MFIs across the experimental groups, due to diﬀerent compensation and ﬂow
cytometry settings, speciﬁcally the variation of photomultiplier tube (PMT) volt-
ages. These experiments should be repeated with emphasis on having the same
compensation and ﬂow cytometry settings for all experimental groups. Further-
more, a ﬂuorescence minus one control should be added to subtract background
MFI.
39
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
Figure 4.7 – Age-dependent expression of the co-stimulatory molecule
CD86 one day post infection with RSV. a) CD86 expression in CD103+ DCs
in day 7 neonates, day 14 and adult mice. b) CD86 expression in CD11b+ DCs in day
7 neonates, day 14 and adult mice. Error bars represent the standard deviation and
P values indicate statistical signiﬁcance by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple
comparisons test. * P=<0.0001
40
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 4.8 – Phenotypic diﬀerences between CD103+/XCR1+ (cDC1) DC
populations in the MLN of day 7, day 14 and adult mice one day post
infection with RSV. a-d) The expression of CD103, XCR1, MHCII and CD11c
lineage-deﬁning markers on cDC1s on day 7, day 14 and adult mice. Error bars
represent the standard deviation and P values indicate statistical signiﬁcance by
one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
41
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
c)
Figure 4.9 – Phenotypic diﬀerences between CD11b+ (cDC2) DC popula-
tions in the MLN of day 7, day 14 and adult mice one day post infection
with RSV. a-c) The expression of CD11b, MHCII and CD11c lineage-deﬁning
markers on cDC2s on day 7, day 14 and adult mice. Error bars represent the stan-
dard deviation and P values indicate statistical signiﬁcance by one-way ANOVA
with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
42
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.2
The pulmonary DC capacity of T cell polar-
ization in response to infection with RSV
Following the results described in previous sections, we were interested in investi-
gating the T cell polarization capacity by DCs in response to infection with RSV.
For this purpose, the idea was to setup an OVA speciﬁc CD4+ (OT-II) T cell
experiment in vivo in both adult and neonatal mice. Due to practical and time
limitations, the experiment was only performed in adult mice. The experiment was
set up twice, with the second experiment investigating two diﬀerent concentrations
of OVA, 1 µg and 100 µg, respectively. Thus, the experimental groups consisted of
two control groups of either mice receiving i.n. OVA and mice infected i.n. with
RSV, respectively, and a test group, in which the mice were infected i.n. with
a mixture of OVA and RSV. Each group comprised of two or three mice. The
OT-II cells were stained with VCT prior to adoptive transfer into WT C57BL/6
mice in order to track their cell divisions cycles. The gating strategy to deter-
mine the VCT stained CD45.1/TCR Vβ5 positive OT-II population is depicted in
ﬁgure 3.6. Figure 4.10 shows representative ﬂow cytometry and histogram plots
of the division history of the OT-II cells in the MLN of the indicated recipient
mice. This data show full division of OT-II cells of mice that have received RSV
and 100 µg OVA combined. Figure 4.11a depicts the percentage OT-II cells of
the CD4+/CD3+ cells, showing a higher percentage OT-II cells when stimulated
with 100 µg OVA and RSV, compared to the other groups. Figure 4.11b depicts
the cell number representative of each cycle of division of the VCT labeled OT-
II cells in the MLN of the indicated groups, indicating that a large amount of
OT-II cells have undergone full division cycles in mice that have received RSV
and 100 µg OVA combined. However, high loss of VCT is noticed in the control
groups, indicating the need for further optimization.
43
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.10 – Flow cytometry plots of division history of OT-II cells in
the MLN of recipient mice. Flow cytometry plots representative of the three
control groups and two test groups are shown.
a)
b)
Figure 4.11 – Percentage of OT-II cells and division history of OT-II cells
in the MLN. a) Percentage of OT-II cells of the CD4+/CD4+ population, data
from experiment 1 and 2. b) Quantiﬁed cell number of VCT labeled OT-II cells
representing the division history of each group data from experiment 2.
44
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.3
Cytokine levels in the lung post RSV infec-
tion in early life to adulthood
We then wanted to investigate the proinﬂammatory and immunoregulatory cy-
tokines that are produced in the course of RSV infection across three age points
from early life to adulthood, at diﬀerent days post infection with RSV. To that
purpose, the concentrations of cytokines in the left lung of 7 day old neonates,
14 day old mice and adult (8-weeks or older) C57BL/6 mice were measured 1,
2, 4 and 7 days post infection with RSV, respectively. In order to normalize the
cytokine concentrations to the left lung, two methods were used. The weight of
the left lung was known in all one day post infection and two day post infection
samples, therefore this was used to ﬁnd the amount of cytokine per gram left lung.
Figure 4.12a shows the weight of the left lungs at the day of euthenization of the
diﬀerent age groups. The adult lung weighs around twice as much as the day 8
neonatal lung. The spread of the weight within the adults may be due to the scale
not being sensitive enough. As the weight data was missing for the remaining
samples, the BCA protein concentration of each left lung was quantiﬁed, see ﬁg-
ure 4.12b. The diﬀerence in the protein concentration in the left lung, was not as
great as the diﬀerence in weight. Furthermore, a higher protein concentration was
detected in the left lung of RSV infected neonates versus the mock treated ones.
The cytokine concentrations in the homogenate were normalized to the protein
concentrations by calculating the amount cytokine per gram protein of the left
lung, these calculation were performed on all sample groups, see ﬁgures 4.13, 4.14
and 4.15.
45
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
Figure 4.12 – Weight in mg and protein concentration in ug/mL of the
left lung in mice of diﬀerent ages. a) Weight in mg of the left lung in mice
of diﬀerent ages. Mock treated and RSV infected mice are combined. b) Protein
concentration in ug/mL of the left lung in mice of diﬀerent ages.
The cytokine concentrations in the left lung homogenate were measured by two
diﬀerent ELISA methods. The IL-12(p70) concentrations were measured by sand-
wich ELISA, whereas the concentrations of IL-10, IL-17A, IL-22, IL-23 and IL-9
were measured by bead based Multiplex ELISA, as described in section 2.3. How-
ever, the standardcurve for IL-9 was unsuccessful wherefore there are no results for
this cytokine. As can be seen in ﬁgure 4.13, a trend towards the induction of the
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines IL-12(p70) and IL-17A was seen in day 7 neonates by
RSV infection. However, the statistical analysis shows no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
cytokine levels between the mock treated and RSV infected neonates. The levels
of IL-22 and IL-23 was under detection level across all sample groups. In the 14
days old age group, cytokines were only measured one day post RSV infection. No
statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in cytokine levels between the mock treated and
RSV infected day 14 mice was evident, see ﬁgure 4.14. Furthermore, the levels
of IL-22 and IL-23 were under detection level across the sample groups. More
profound changes are detected in the cytokine environment in the lung of adult
mice after infection with RSV, see ﬁgure 4.15. The levels of the immunoregulatory
cytokine IL-10 decrease signiﬁcantly 4 days post infection, whereas the levels of
the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines IL-12(p70) and IL-17A increase 7 days post infec-
tion. A two fold increase is detected in IL-27 one day post infection compared to
the mock group, however due to non normalized mock data, statistical analysis
was not applied. The cytokine IL-22 was, as the only sample group, detectable
in the adults. IL-22 was detected in especially high levels one day post infection.
The levels of IL-23 was under detection level across all samples.
46
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 4.13 – Production of cytokines in RSV-infected mice 7 days of age,
normalized to the protein amount of the left lung. a-d) IL-10, IL-12(p70),
IL-17A and IL-27 of mock treated and RSV-infected mice at 1, 2, 4 and 7 days post
infection, respectively. There are no sample group of mock treated d.p.i. 2 mice.
Error bars represent the standard deviation. No statistical signiﬁcance was found
by the nonparametric Mann-Whitney test.
47
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 4.14 – Production of cytokines in RSV-infected mice 14 days of
age, normalized to the protein amount of the left lung. a-d) IL-10, IL-
12(p70), IL-17A and IL-27 of mock treated and RSV-infected mice at 1 day post
infection. Error bars represent the standard deviation. No statistical signiﬁcance
was found by the nonparametric Mann-Whitney test.
48
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
Figure 4.15 – Production of cytokines in RSV-infected adult mice, nor-
malized to the protein amount of the left lung. a-e) IL-10, IL-12(p70), IL-
17A, IL-27 and IL-22 of mock treated and RSV-infected mice at 1 day post infection.
The levels of IL-22 were under detection limit for mock and dpi. 4 mice. Error bars
represent the standard deviation and P values indicate statistical signiﬁcance by
one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test.
49
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
When the cytokine detected in the homogenate was normalized to the weight of
the left lung, the most profound variations in the cytokine levels, one day post
infection, were the increased levels of IL-27 and IL-22 and a trend indicating
increased levels of IL-12(p70) in the adults, see ﬁgure 4.16. The cytokine levels
of day 7 neonates and day 14 mice one day post infection with RSV do not diﬀer
compared to the mock treated mice. In ﬁgure 4.17 the cytokine levels of day 7
neonates one and two days post infection is depicted. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
the cytokine levels was detected between the two days post infection with RSV.
To summarize, these results show that at day one post infection the levels of
the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines IL-27 and IL-22 increase in adults, whereas no
diﬀerence in these cytokines is detected in the day 7 neonates and day 14 mice.
Furthermore, the levels of the pro-inﬂammatory cytokine IL-17A and the levels
of the Th1 stimulating cytokine, IL-12(p70), increase at day 7 post infection in
adult mice. Whereas a trend towards higher levels of IL-12(p70) in day 7 neonates
is evident. Finally, the immunoregulatory cytokine IL-10 decreases from one day
post infection in adult mice. It is generally seen that the value of cytokines at day
4 post infection is lower across all samples measured, suggesting that there was a
technical problem at this harvest day.
50
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
Figure 4.16 – Production of cytokines in RSV-infected mice, normalized
to weight of the left lung. a-e) IL-10, IL-12(p70), IL-17A, IL-27 and IL-22 of
mock treated and RSV-infected mice at day one post infection. The levels of IL-23
were under detection limit for all groups except adults one day post RSV infection.
Error bars represent the standard deviation. No statistical signiﬁcance was found
by the nonparametric Mann-Whitney test.
51
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.17 – Production of cytokines in the left lung of RSV-infected and
mock day 7 neonates, normalized to weight of the left lung, one and two
days post infection. IL-10, IL-12(p70), IL-17A and IL-27 levels of RSV-infected
neonates at day one and two post infection. The levels of IL-22 and IL-23 were
under detection limit for all groups. Error bars represent the standard deviation. No
statistical signiﬁcance was found by the one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple
comparisons test.
52
==PAGE:62==
5
|
Discussion
RSV is a major cause of respiratory illness in young children. Nearly all children
worldwide have experienced at least one infection with RSV [1]. Furthermore,
RSV-related acute LRTI is to this day an important cause of childhood mortality
in developing countries [40]. Little is known about the neonatal immune system,
however, a variety of factors, including the shortcomings of early life immunity,
may inﬂuence the enhanced susceptibility of young children developing more severe
disease towards RSV [2]. The DCs are of crucial importance to respiratory viral
infections as they are able to initiate an adaptive immune response in the MLN.
A previous study by Ruckwardt et al [2]. suggest that the response to RSV in
neonates is dominated by functionally-limited CD103+ DCs, while the CD11b+
DCs were both limited in numbers and function compared to adults. While these
results represent CB6F1 neonates, which is the oﬀspring of a cross between BAL-
B/c females and C57BL/6 males, we have shown the quantitative and qualitative
diﬀerences between neonatal and adult lung-migratory DC populations and the
cytokine environment surrounding them in the lung of C57BL/6 mice. Further-
more, we have set up a model to investigate the ability of pulmonary DCs to
polarize CD4+ T cell of adults which could eventually be used to investigate and
compare the ability of pulmonary DCs to polarize CD4+ T cell of neonates.
One day after infection with RSV the CD103+ DCs were found to be numeri-
cally similar in neonatal mice compared to adults. Contrary, the CD11b+ DCs
appeared in lower numbers in the MLN one day post RSV infection in neonates
compared to adults. While both types of DCs appeared in nearly equal numbers
in adults, a 4- and 18-fold higher amount of CD103+ DCs to CD11b+ DCs in
the MLN was found for day 14 and neonatal mice, respectively. The uptake and
processing abilities of both CD103+ were low in neonates, as less than 10% showed
to have taken-up and processed DQ OVA. Whilst the CD103+ DCs of day 14 and
adult mice were more eﬀective in uptake and processing, no diﬀerence was seen
in the CD11b+ DCs between the age groups. In accordance with Ruckwardt et
al. [2] we saw, that despite the CD103+ population being numerically similar, the
neonatal CD103+ DCs were not able to uptake and process antigen suﬃciently
compared to adults. A shift towards the adult CD103+ DC numbers and uptake
and process abilities is seen in the day 14 mice. Despite being numerically low
in the MLN of neonates compared to adults, we, unlike the previous study, did
53
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
not see any diﬀerence in the process ability of CD11b+ DCs in neonates compared
to adults. Both the neonates and the day 14 mice show reduced expression of
CD86 compared to the adults, thereby oﬀering less co-stimulatory support for the
initiation of the adaptive response. However, a trend towards a higher expression
of CD86 is seen for both DC types in the day 14 mice compared to the neonates,
indicating maturity in the DCs.
Furthermore, we examined the expression of
other lineage-deﬁning and activation markers of cDCs in the MLN one day post
infection. The neonatal cDC1s expressed less of their identifying marker CD103
while the expression of XCR1 was not diﬀerent compared to day 14 and adult
mice. Experimental variation occurred within the day 7 neonatal group, where
one group expressed greater levels of CD11c and MHCII. The two other groups
within the day 7 neonates showed a similar expression of CD11c as the day 14
and adult mice but the expression of MHCII was still higher, in both cDC1s and
cDC2s, in the neonates compared to adults. While the neonates showed a some-
what mature phenotype, except for the expression of CD103+, they maintained a
signiﬁcantly lower expression of CD86 than adult DCs, indicating functional lim-
itations compared to the adults. We did not discriminate between the CD103high
and CD103low populations as described by Ruckwardt et al. [14] in day 7 neonates
two days post infection. An indication of two populations was noticeable within
the XCR1/CD103 gates of neonatal mice, however, no clear separation of the two
populations was evident in day 7 neonates one day post infection. The study by
Ruckwardt et al. [14] furthermore demonstrated that the expression of CD103,
MHCII and CD11c in CD103high DCs in day 7 CB6F1 neonates was similar to
the expression of these markers in CD103+ DCs in adults two days post infection,
while the CD103low DCs in day 7 CB6F1 neonates expressed lower levels of all
markers compared to adult CD103+ DCs. Overall, our results using C57BL/6
mice show a similar trend in age-dependent diﬀerences in the neonatal response
towards RSV as the response of CB6F1 neonates.
We are aware of the technical spread throughout the data that might have skewed
the results. As such the experiments should be repeated. Furthermore, when the
experiments are to be repeated, an adult control should be added for normalization
purposes.
The cytokine milieu plays an important role in the maintenance of pulmonary
homeostasis and in host defense against diﬀerent types of pathogens. During the
ﬁrst two days following RSV infection, the inﬂammatory cytokine milieu within
the lung is maintained by the cells of the innate immune system, whereas the T
helper cells of the adaptive immune system contribute to the response starting
from day 4-5 after infection. While IL-10 is known as an immunoregulatory cy-
tokine, it has also been shown to play a role in the induction of a Th2-dominant
response during RSV infection [41]. Previous studies have reported IL-10 to be
induced after infection with RSV, peaking 24 hours after infection and decreasing
by day 2 in adults in BALB/c mice [42]. Contrary, we detected decreasing levels
of IL-10 immediately after infection in adult mice. A possible explanation for this
can be that the cytokine levels were measured in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
54
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
ﬂuid in the previous study, whereas here the neonates were euthanized by decapi-
tation, making it impossible to collect BAL and therefore the cytokine levels were
measured in the left lung homogenate. IL-12(p70) and IL-27 are cytokines capa-
ble of producing IFN-γ and promoting a Th1 type response [10]. Higher levels of
these cytokines were seen in the adults yet only a trend towards elevated levels
of IL-12(p70) was seen post infection of neonates. Furthermore, the increase of
the pro-inﬂammatory cytokine IL-22 at mucosal surfaces, was only detected in the
adults. Especially, the lack of IL-12(p70) production is interesting, as it plays an
important role in the response towards RSV [43]. It should also be noted that the
protein concentration of the lungs showed variation with or without RSV infec-
tion, and therefore all the experiments should be repeated with normalization to
the lung weight.
Following our results showing that the CD11b+ DCs in C57BL/6 neonates appear
in dramatically lower numbers compared to adults after infection with RSV and
that the CD11b+ DCs have been associated with the induction of the CD4+ T cell
response [3], we wanted to investigate the ability of the DCs to induce a CD4+
T cell driven response during RSV infection. We successfully established a model
that could show the polarization capacity of the CD4+ T cell population in the
MLN of adults. However, it is evident that there was a high loss of VCT in the
control groups and therefore a need for further optimization prior to performing
the experiment in neonates. Furthermore, it is necessary to consider whether an
in vivo study of pulmonary DCs in neonates is possible as the DCs appear in much
lower numbers than in adults, therefore an in vitro study might be a better option.
55
==PAGE:65==
6
|
Conclusion and Outlook
We compared the responses of the two migratory DC populations CD103+ and
CD11b+ from early life to adulthood in mice following infection with RSV. We
have shown, in accordance with previous ﬁndings by Ruckwardt et al., that the
composition of migratory DCs in the MLN of C57BL/6 mice one day post infec-
tion with RSV changes from early life to adulthood. Compared to the adults,
the response of the neonates was dominated by the phenotypically equivalent, in
regards to the expression of CD11c+ and MHCII, but functionally limited CD103+
DCs. While the CD11b+ DCs were limited in numbers and their expression of the
co-stimulatory molecule CD86, no diﬀerence was seen in the processing abilities
compared to adults, as both levels were low. Furthermore, we have demonstrated
that overall RSV induces a more apparent change in the cytokine proﬁle of the
lung of adults, where changes in the cytokine milieu were not well deﬁned in the
neonates and day 14 mice. Most noticeably, the levels of the pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines IL-22 and IL-17A were induced after infection in adults and the level
of the Th1 promoting cytokine IL-27 increased one day post infection in adults.
Furthermore, only a trend towards increasing levels of the Th1 promoting cytokine
IL-12(p70) was detected in neonates and adults.
It is of high interest to investigate whether the neonatal migratory DCs are capable
of inducing a CD4+ T cell driven response against RSV infection. Therefore, we
have set up an in vivo transgenic OT-II experiment in adult mice that can be
transferred to neonates in the future. Another possible approach to investigate
the polarization capacity of DCs in neonates is to setup the experiment in vitro.
Furthermore, the cytokines produced by the proliferating CD4+ T cells should
be measured to investigate the skewing capacity of the neonatal DCs. As the
neonatal CD103+ DCs have previously been found to stimulate proliferation of
CD8+ T cells in a diﬀerent pattern than adult CD103+ DCs, it could be of interest
to study whether the neonatal CD103+ DCs are capable of inducing CD8+ T cell
mediated cell death at levels comparable to adult CD103+ DCs.
More knowledge about the diﬀerences in the immune response during early life
can help predict antigenicity and improve vaccine design to induce immunity in
newborns towards pathogens that could otherwise cause potentially lethal infec-
tions.
56
==PAGE:66==
References
1.
Lambert, L., Sagfors, A. M., Openshaw, P. J. & Culley, F. J. Immunity to
RSV in early-life. Frontiers in Immunology 5, 1–14 (2014).
2.
Ruckwardt, T. J., Malloy, A. M. W., Morabito, K. M. & Graham, B. S.
Quantitative and Qualitative Deﬁcits in Neonatal Lung- Migratory Dendritic
Cells Impact the Generation of the CD8 + T Cell Response. PLOS Pathogens
10 (2014).
3.
Eisenbarth, S. C. Dendritic cell subsets in T cell programming: location dic-
tates function. Nature Reviews Immunology 19 (2019).
4.
Murphy, K. & Weaver, C. Janeway’s Immunobiology 9’th (2017).
5.
Smith, P. D., MacDonald, T. D. & Blumberg, R. S. Principles of Mucosal
Immunology (2013).
6.
Griﬃths, C., Drews, S. J. & Marchant, D. J. Respiratory Syncytial Virus
: Infection , Detection , and New Options for Prevention and Treatment.
American society of microbiology 30, 277–319 (2017).
7.
Zeng, R., Cui, Y., Hai, Y. & Liu, Y. Pattern recognition receptors for respi-
ratory syncytial virus infection and design of vaccines. Virus Research 167,
138–145 (2012).
8.
Toews, G. B. Cytokines and the lung. European Respiratory Journal 18, 3–
17 (2003).
9.
Lambrecht, B. N. & Hammad, H. Lung Dendritic Cells in Respiratory Viral
Infection and Asthma: From Protection to Immunopathology. Annual Review
of Immunology 30, 243–270 (2012).
10.
Ringkowski, S., Thomas, P. S. & Herbert, C. Interleukin-12 family cytokines
and sarcoidosis. Frontiers in Pharmacology 5, 1–11 (2014).
11.
Openshaw, P. J., Chiu, C., Culley, F. J. & Johansson, C. Protective and
Harmful Immunity to RSV Infection. Annual Review of Immunology 35,
501–532 (2017).
12.
Geerdink, R. J., Pillay, J., Meyaard, L. & Bont, L. Neutrophils in respiratory
syncytial virus infection: A target for asthma prevention. Journal of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology 136, 838–847 (2015).
57
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
13.
Huang, H., Saravia, J., You, D., Shaw, A. J. & Cormier, S. A. Impaired
gamma delta T cell-derived IL-17A and inﬂammasome activation during early
respiratory syncytial virus infection in infants. Immunological Cell Biology
93, 126–135 (2015).
14.
Ruckwardt, T. J., Morabito, K. M., Nair, D & Graham, B. S. Neonatal mice
possess two phenotypically and functionally distinct lung-migratory CD103
þ dendritic cell populations following respiratory infection. Nature 11, 186–
198 (2018).
15.
Del Rio, M.-L., Rodriguez-Barbosa, J.-I., Kremmer, E. & Forster, R. CD103-
and CD103+ Bronchial Lymph Node Dendritic Cells Are Specialized in Pre-
senting and Cross-Presenting Innocuous Antigen to CD4+ and CD8+ T
Cells. The Journal of Immunology 178, 6861–6866 (2007).
16.
Sung, S.-S. J. et al. A Major Lung CD103 ( E)- 7 Integrin-Positive Epithelial
Dendritic Cell Population Expressing Langerin and Tight Junction Proteins.
The Journal of Immunology 176, 2161–2172 (2006).
17.
Desch, A. N., Henson, P. M. & Jakubzick, C. V. Pulmonary dendritic cell
development and antigen acquisition. Immunol Res 55, 178–186 (2013).
18.
Hintzen, G. et al. Induction of Tolerance to Innocuous Inhaled Antigen Relies
on a CCR7-Dependent Dendritic Cell-Mediated Antigen Transport to the
Bronchial Lymph Node. The Journal of Immunology 177, 7346–7354 (2006).
19.
Kaiko, G. E., Horvat, J. C., Beagley, K. W. & Hansbro, P. M. Immunological
decision-making: How does the immune system decide to mount a helper T-
cell response? Immunology 123, 326–338 (2008).
20.
Sandquist, I. & Kolls, J. Update on regulation and eﬀector functions of Th17
cells. F1000Research 7, 205 (2018).
21.
Halle, S., Halle, O. & Förster, R. Mechanisms and Dynamics of T Cell-
Mediated Cytotoxicity In Vivo. Trends in Immunology 38, 432–443 (2017).
22.
Schittny, J. C. Development of the lung. Cell and Tissue Research 367, 427–
444 (2017).
23.
Herriges, M. & Morrisey, E. E. Lung development: orchestrating the genera-
tion and regeneration of a complex organ. Development 141, 502–513 (2014).
24.
Mund, S. I., Stampanoni, M. & Schittny, J. C. Developmental alveolarization
of the mouse lung. Developmental Dynamics 237, 2108–2116 (2008).
25.
Guilliams, M. et al. Alveolar macrophages develop from fetal monocytes that
diﬀerentiate into long-lived cells in the ﬁrst week of life via GM-CSF. The
Journal of Experimental Medicine 210, 1977–1992 (2013).
26.
Van de Laar, L. et al. Yolk Sac Macrophages, Fetal Liver, and Adult Mono-
cytes Can Colonize an Empty Niche and Develop into Functional Tissue-
Resident Macrophages. Immunity 44, 755–768 (2016).
58
==PAGE:68==
REFERENCES
27.
De Kleer, I. M. et al. Perinatal Activation of the Interleukin-33 Pathway
Promotes Type 2 Immunity in the Developing Lung. Immunity 45, 1285–
1298 (2016).
28.
Saluzzo, S. et al. First-Breath-Induced Type 2 Pathways Shape the Lung
Immune Environment. Cell Reports 18, 1893–1905 (2017).
29.
Adan, A., Alizada, G., Kiraz, Y., Baran, Y. & Nalbant, A. Flow cytometry:
basic principles and applications. Critical reviews in biotechnology 37, 163–
176 (2017).
30.
Semrock. https://www.semrock.com/flow-cytometry.aspx.
31.
BD Biosciences. BD LSRFortessa (2015).
32.
Snow, C. Flow cytometer electronics. Cytometry Part A 57A, 63–69 (2004).
33.
Premjeet, S. et al. Enzyme-Linked Immuno-Sorbent Assay (ELISA), basics
and it’s application: A comprehensive review. Journal of Pharmacy Research
4, 4581–4583 (2011).
34.
Leng, S. X. et al. Elisa and Multiplex Technologies for Cytokine Measure-
ment in Inﬂammation and Aging Research. Journals of Gerontology Series
A, Biological Science and Medical Sciences 63, 879–884 (2008).
35.
Invitrogen. https://www.thermofisher.com/content/dam/LifeTech/
migration/files/technical-reference-library/newsletters-journals/
bioprobes/bioprobes-66.par.93694.file.dat/bioprobes-66-magpix.
pdf Accessed on 03-03-2019.
36.
Pathbase. http://www.pathbase.net/Necropsy_of_the_Mouse/index.
php?file=Chapter_3.html Accessed on 04-12-2018.
37.
Aoki, M., Aoki, H., Ramanathan, R., Hait, N. C. & Takabe, K. Sphingosine-
1-Phosphate Signaling in Immune Cells and Inﬂammation: Roles and Ther-
apeutic Potential. Mediators of Inﬂammation 2016 (2016).
38.
Invitrogen. ProcartaPlex Multiplex Immunoassay For Simplex Kits and Com-
binable Panels (For Serum, Plasma, and Cell Culture Supernatant Samples).
2017 (2017).
39.
Berry, D. A. & Lindgren, B. W. Statistics Theory and Methods 2’nd (1996).
40.
Halasa, N. et al. Global respiratory syncytial virus-associated mortality in
young children (RSV GOLD): a retrospective case series. The Lancet Global
Health 5, e984–e991 (2017).
41.
Villadangos, J. A., Schnorrer, P. & Wilson, N. S. Control of MHC class
II antigen presentation in dendritic cells: A balance between creative and
destructive forces. Immunological Reviews 207, 191–205 (2005).
42.
Guerrero-Plata, A., Casola, A. & Garofalo, R. P. Human Metapneumovirus
Induces a Proﬁle of Lung Cytokines Distinct from That of Respiratory Syn-
cytial Virus. Journal of Virology 79, 14992–14997 (2005).
59
==PAGE:69==
REFERENCES
43.
Tripp, R. A. Cytokines and Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection. Proceed-
ings of the American Thoracic Society 2, 147–149 (2005).
60
