==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
The impact of intra axonal nano sized neu-
rofilaments on the diffusion MRI signal
Shahab Brandt Ajloo (s161621)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Supervisors: Tim Dyrby & Henrik Lundell
Richard Petersens Plads, building 321
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
The human brain is functioning as a big cloud network, which consists of different
regions that functionally are linked together and communicate by dispatching elec-
tric impulses. The connection among different portions of the brain, are composed
of bundles of micrometer-sized cables which is called axons. Axons vary in length
and diameter, and the size of the axon diameter determines the acceleration of signal
transmission. Nevertheless, the transporting system inside the axon is composed of
another transmission system called Intra Axonal Transportation (ITA) that consists
of tubular subsets inside the axons, known as neurofilaments. Neurofilaments play
an essential role in the transmission of information, and demolition or destruction of
the neurofilaments structures causes degenerative diseases like Alzheimer to appear.
However, the impact of the neurofilaments on the diffusion of water molecules inside
the axon is not including in the estimated diffusion MRI. A method to handle this
evaluation comes in the form of Camino Monte-Carlo simulation, that provides a
simulation of an environment including neurofilaments configuration to analysis how
neurofilaments alter water diffusion measured with diffusion MRI.
This thesis commences by providing a review of the human brain structure, in which
the concept of axons, neurofilaments and microtubules are described more explicitly.
Then the definition of diffusion process accommodates to understand the explanation
of the diffusion MRI functionality. Finally, several simulations have been investigated
where in each simulation the diffusion of water molecules are examined in a condition
of different neurofilaments arrangement inside various diameters of axons.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract (Danish)
Den menneskelige hjerne fungerer som et stort ”cloud”-netværk, som består af forskel-
lige regioner, der funktionelt er forbundet sammen og kommunikerer ved at sende
elektriske impulser til hinanden. Forbindelsen mellem de forskellige dele af hjernen,
der består af bundter af mikrometer-størrelse kabler, kaldes axoner. Axoner varierer
i længde og diameter, og størrelsen på aksondiameteren bestemmer accelerationen af
signaloverførslen. Transportsystemet inde i axonet består desuden af et andet trans-
missionssystem, kaldet ”Intra Axonal Transportation” (ITA), der er opbygget som
rørformede undergrupper inde i axonerne. Disse kaldes neurofilamenter. Neurofil-
amenter spiller en afgørende rolle i transmissionen af information, og ved skade på
eller nedbrydning af disse strukturer, kan der forekomme degenerative sygdomme som
Alzheimers. Det er imidlertidigt ikke muligt at estimere effekten af neurofilamenterne
på diffusion af vandmolekyler inde i axonen ved brug af almindelige MR-scanninger.
En metode til at håndtere dette, kommer derfor i form af Camino Monte-Carlo-
simulering, der tilvejebringer en simulering af et miljø, hvor det er muligt at undersøge
både neurofilaminkonfiguration til analyse, og hvor man kan se nærmere på hvordan
neurofilamenter ændrer vanddiffusionen, målt med diffusions-MR.
Denne afhandling begynder ved at give en gennemgang af den menneskelige hjernes
struktur, hvor begreberne axoner, neurofilamenter og mikrotubuli beskrives i de-
taljer.
Herefter defineres diffusionsprocessen ved at klaregøre funktionaliteten af
diffusions-MR. Til sidst, bliver adskillige simuleringer studeret, hvor diffusionen af
vandmolekyler i hver simulation undersøges i en tilstand af forskellige neurofilamen-
tarrangementer, inden for forskellige diametre af axoner.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in collaboration with Danish
Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, March 3, 2019
Shahab Brandt Ajloo (s161621)
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Tim Dyrby and Henrik Lundell for all conver-
sations we have had about the project, their valuable feedback, support, and all the
helpful guidance that led me to complete this thesis.
Additionally, I would like to thank Hvidovre Hospital, who welcomed me during
the project period, and provided facilities which made the project more manageable.
Finally, I want to thank all dear DRCMR-staff at Hvidovre Hospital, for all the
memorable moments.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstract (Danish)
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Brain structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Axon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Neurofilament . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Microtubule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
MRI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Method
12
2.1
Measuring diffusion using MRI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Diffusion Tensor Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Monte-carlo simulation method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Results
23
3.1
Monte-carlo simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Tensor Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Discussion
44
5
Future work
47
6
Conclusion
48
A Appendix
50
Bibliography
54
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Brain structure
The human brain is responsible for controlling all emotions, behaviors, data analyzes,
actions, and reactions. In essence, we are nothing but the connections of our brain.
The structure of the brain is composed of several segments that each has a particular
obligation while they work contemporaneously in parallel [39]. Since the main focus
of this project concerns the microstructure of the brain, it is avoided to explain the
brain segments and their functions; instead, it focuses on the microstructure of the
brain.
We can liken the human brain as a vast coherent network which connects to en-
tire body components and governs all their functions by communication with them
through sending and receiving the electrical impulses [31]. Hence, the brain is a giant
graph including multitudinous nodes called cell bodies, where the communication be-
tween cells is the main task. This aspect is obtained by a closer look at the structure
of the brain and the nervous system which illustrates the microstructure that con-
sists of two general categories of cells: Neurons and glial cells. In studies [22] [4], the
proportion of these two groups of cells in the human brain with an average of 1.5 kg
weight is almost equal 1:1 whereas an approximate abundance of 86 billion neurons
and 85 billion non-neuronal cells are declared.
There are several types of glial cells with various functions such as the initial immune
defense of the central nervous system (CNS), nutrient support to neurons, regulat-
ing communication between neurons and covering neurons with an insulator material
composed of lipids called myelin [26].
Neurons have the most critical task which is namely electrical impulse transmission
within the nervous system. If this process is disrupted either by degeneration or de-
struction of neurons it will cause diseases such as Alzheimer and Lewy body dementia
[29]. Mainly, neurons are composed of the cell body(soma), the axon, dendrites, the
hillock area, and terminals. In section 1.2, the axon, its components, and the task of
the neuron will be explained in greater detail [36].
Neurons differ based on their structure, size, and function. Build on the structural
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Brain structure
2
classification there are five types of neurons; Bipolar, Unipolar, Pseudounipolar, Anax-
onic and multipolar [25]. The anatomy of one kind of neuron is depicted in figure
1.1. One structural feature that all of these neurons have in common is that they
all have a cell body, but what distinguishes them from each other is the number of
Poles linked to the cell body. Poles manage the input and output of signals, and
in a certain way, they are a navigator of the signal movement direction. Since the
multipolar neurons are predominant in our body, consequently this type of neuron is
more commonly known than others. In Figure 1.1, is illustrated a multipolar neuron
where signals emitted by other axons are taken by dendrites and then addressed to
the terminals through the axon. From here, the terminals forward the signals to the
other neurons [36].
Figure 1.1: A prototype of a multipolar neuron. Arrows show the orientation of the
signal movement. Input signals are received by dendrites from neighbor neurons and
lead through the axon to the axon terminals. Axon terminals forward the signal to
other neurons [Getty Images].
Furthermore, the neurons can be classified founded on their functions which are
categorized into Sensory neurons, Motor neurons, and Interneurons [48]. The sen-
sory neurons receive information stimulus coming from our body organs to CNS, and
functions as the input channel. The motor neurons are responsible for transmitting
information response or commands to the organs, and they are the output channel of
the CNS. Eventually, Interneurons that communicate between neurons in the CNS
comes into play and make reciprocity among them [52].
Consider the reaction of muscles when the skin touches a hot subject, like a burning
stove. The Sensory neurons receive information from the skin and transmit them to
the CNS. Thereupon, the reaction function signals are sent to the relevant muscles
through the motor neurons to avoid the hot subject. This is an example of a mono-
synaptic reflex [39].
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Axon
3
The other concept that is relatively important in the general understanding of the
brain is the difference between grey matter and white matter. Figure 1.2 shows a
brain that has been sectioned in the coronal plane(frontal plane) view. The grey
matter assigns to the part which has a dark pink(greyish pink) color, and the white
matter refers to the area with a bright pink color. The cell bodies, dendrites, the
axon, terminals, and unmyelinated axons are located in the grey matter, whereas
myelinated axons are located in the white matter. The white matter is full of path-
ways that connect the brain regions and the reason for the white color in this area is
the fatty structure of myelin [13].
Figure 1.2: An example of a sliced brain in the median plane is shown. The outer
part is distinguished from the inner part based on their color where the two segments
are called grey and white matter, respectively [24].
1.2
Axon
An axon is one part of the neuron with a long cylindrical shape like a cable where its
task is to transmit information or electrical impulses between the Soma and the cell
targets. In Figure 1.3, a simple anatomy of an axon, along with neurofilaments (NFs)
and microtubules (MTs) within it, is presented. The area that the axon attaches
to the Soma is called Hillock which regulates the initiation of the Soma’s chemical
impulse after processing the incoming signals from the other neurons. The length of
the axons is varying from 1 mm to more than 1 meter in the human body, whereas,
the size of the longest axon relies on the person’s height. Further, the size of the
axon diameter situated in the white matter (WM), varies between 0.1-10 µm [2]. The
diameter of the axon has a linear correlation with the speed of the electrical impulse
transfer in the axon. That is to say, the greater size of the axon diameter, the higher
speed of the signal transmission. It can be likened to an Internet network, the more
bandwidth it has, the higher the internet speed [33].
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Axon
4
As mentioned earlier, the myelin is formed by glial cells with a function like wire
insulation and aids to preserve the action potential in the axon. In the case of un-
myelinated axons the electrical impulses that travel along the axon, decay due to
ions leaking out through the axon membrane. The myelin’s function is to insulate
the axon membrane which causes a reduction of the probability that ions can cross
the axon membrane and escape. This protection permits the myelinated axons to be
faster than the unmyelinated axons in terms of signal transduction [37].
Figure 1.3: A prototype of a myelinated axon with neurofilaments and microtubules
inside the axon.
The bright cylinder in the middle demonstrates the axon.
The
microtubules are wider than neurofilaments with regards to diameter, and they are
distinguished from neurofilaments by thicker lines. The grey layers wrapped around
the cylinder is a myelin sheath. This figure is reproduced from Reference [6].
Almost all axons in the CNS with a diameter greater than 0.2 µm are wrapped in
a myelin sheath [44]. The myelin is a substance derived from the combination of pro-
tein and fat. The thickness of only one layer of the myelin sheath is approximately 10
nm. However, the myelin shield does not cover the axon entirely. These membranes
are separated at a points called “Nodes of Ranvier,” which are repeated regularly and
make the shape of the axon similar to a cocktail sausage chain. Consequently, the
axon is unmyelinated in the region of nodes of Ranvier where the range of each gap
is around 1-2 µm and the length of the myelinated segment varies between 0.2- 2 mm
[2][44].
The axon myelination tends to enhance signal acceleration about 5.5 times faster
[2]. The voltage in the unmyelinated axon drops down after a short displacement in
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Neurofilament
5
the axon, and if the voltage decreases, then the velocity of transmission reduces as
well.
As illustrated in figure 1.3, there are inner cylinders inside the axon, called Neurofila-
ments (NFs) and Microtubules (MTs), which are located along the axon while water
molecules surround them. The particles impetus in this space plays a decisive role in
the transmission of signals within the axon [2]. Lower temperature and more barriers
yield slower particle movement, but how much will the NFs and MTs affect the flow of
the particles? To answer this question, it is first needed to know about the structure
of NFs and MTs that is defined in the section 1.3 and section 1.4.
1.3
Neurofilament
The majority of the area inside the myelinated axon is occupied by NFs [14] [53]. NFs
have a cylindrical appearance which are placed in parallel along the signal transmis-
sion path inside the axon. Figure 1.4 exposes the structure of an NF. As illustrated,
the NF-structure is composed of a cylinder as the core of the intermediate filaments,
and moreover three different types of protein that is known as NF sidearms such
as NF-L, NF-M and NF-H 1 [41]. However, new studies [49] [51] prove that the α-
Internexin in the central nerve system (CNS) and Peripherin in the Peripheral nerve
system (PNS) are the fourth subunits in their regions. NFs sidearms are connected
to the other NFs and determine a gap between NFs and perform an essential role
to ascertain the size of the axon diameter. Nfs construct a significant part of the
neuronal cytoskeleton in the CNS. The size of the filament core diameter or NFs di-
ameter is approximately 10-15 nm on average [42]. The main task of neurofilaments
is to determine the size of the axon in diameter and provide a stable axon structure
to avoid fluctuating in the process and to withstand the physical forces [47] [50] [41].
The number of NFs has a linear relation with the cross-sectional area of the axon,
while the density of NFs will be reduced due to the expansion in the interval of NFs
separation [17] [7].
1light NF (NF-L), medium NF (NF-M), and heavy NF (NF-H)
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Microtubule
6
Figure 1.4: The side view of a neurofilament on the left and a top view on the
right. Sidearms illustrated with red circle chains are in the area between the NFs and
play a crucial role in determining the distance between NFs. ”d” corresponds to the
diameter of the NF core.
1.4
Microtubule
MTs perform a significant role in the internal transport inside of neurons. The func-
tion of MTs incorporate intracellular transmission, as well as tightening the structure
of the axon. MTs are hollow cylinders formed by the integration of two protein called
α-tubulin and β-tubulin where the conjugation of these two proteins together creates
a dimer. A large number of dimers are put together and form polymer tubes. Figure
1.5 illustrates a schematic of MT [21].
==PAGE:14==
1.5 MRI
7
Figure 1.5: The MT units are α-tubulin and β-tubulin that are placed next to each
other like building bricks. The motor proteins activity are associated with MT to
arrange the traffic of the MT along the axon. This illustration is reconstructed from
Ref [1].
MTs construct a transport network like a railroad from the cell body to the synap-
tic terminals. The task of transporting the different substances, such as proteins and
organelles, along the MTs railroad is the responsibility of two kinds of proteins called
kinesin and dynein that is shown in figure 1.5 [8].
MTs vary in their lengths so that some of them are short and dynamic, i.e., they
move along axons, while longer MTs are stationary. The size of the MTs are greater
than NFs in outer diameter, and they are approximately 24 nm on average. The num-
ber of MTs like NFs has a positively linear correlated with the cross-sectional area of
an axon, in contrast, the density of the MTs has a negative linear proportion with the
cross-sectional area. This content reveals that in axons with a larger cross-sectional
area, the area between MTs is increased. Another factor that directly affects the
density of MTs is the location of the axons. In a sense, the density proportion of the
MTs in an axon located in the PNS is twice that of an axon with the same diameter
size in the CNS [15].
1.5
MRI
Imaging of an object can be done by two different methods: Passive imaging and
active imaging. Consider the camera as a light or signal receiver. If the sun is going
to supply the light source and the camera receive the reflection of the sun’s light,
accordingly the result is passive imagine. This means, through the process of light
spreading, the camera was playing a passive role.
However, in the active imaging, the receiver and the source of energy works unit-
==PAGE:15==
1.6 Diffusion
8
edly. Imagine that in the previous example we positioned the camera in a dark room
and utilized the camera flash as a light source instead of the sun. In this instance,
the camera captures the reflected light that is scattered from the camera flash and is
now an example of active imaging.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is one of the advanced methods of medical imag-
ing.
A high percentage of our body consists of water molecules, and these water
molecules each derive from the incorporation of two hydrogen atoms and an oxygen
atom. Hydrogen is the simplest element in the periodic table. The hydrogen atom
is neutral and comprises of a single proton in its nuclei which is orbited by a single
electron. A hydrogen nuclei have a magnetic moment which implies its direction and
strength like a bipolar magnetic. We should additionally keep in mind that the nuclei
are spinning around its center like earth. This feature proffers the opportunity to
change the direction of the nuclei through the magnetic field [20]. The magnet power
and radio frequency are utilized to measure a signal to reveal an image of the inside
of the body. The unit of magnetic field strength in the MRI scanners is measured in
Tesla. In the MRI the human body is located in the center of a mighty magnet. After-
ward, the radio frequency passes through the body in the magnetic field environment,
and due to that, an echo is acquired. The image is then constructed by collecting
the echoes and reproducing the composition of different parts of the body. Further
details regarding the signal generation and measurement process will be explained in
section 2.1.
1.6
Diffusion
In this section, the concept of diffusion and Brownian motion are expounded. Fur-
thermore, there will be focused on the method to measure the diffusion of particles
inside the axon.
The diffusion flux according to the Fick’s first law, is the particle movement from
one region with high concentration to an area with low concentration [5]. This is a
process which leads to making an equal concentration in a medium while the whole
process is passive. The concept of passive transport refers to the fact that there are
no requirement for energy entry for mixing the particles in the process. For instance,
when placing a drop of ink into a glass of water, initially the ink is spread in a small
area, and the liquid concentration is not the same everywhere. It is important to
realize that the ink movement is not known as diffusion at the commencement be-
cause of the initial energy which flows due to the ink dropping. If the drop of ink
is being inserted calmly into the glass of water, after a short while the initial energy
is taken out of the equation and subsequently the diffusion happens. It can be seen
that without any bulk motion, all the water inside the glass becomes uniform.
==PAGE:16==
1.6 Diffusion
9
Figure 1.6: Ink particles make a high concentration at the left side of the jar of
water, and over time they move to the low-density area to make an equilibrium in
the medium.
In figure 1.6 the diffusion process of a drop of ink which is located in a jar of
pure water is divided in to four steps. The vector J represents an average movement
direction of all particles from the high concentration region to the low concentration
which results in net particle flux. According to Fick’s first law in the equation 1.1,
the flux vector J is achieved by considering the diffusion coefficient D, the particle
concentration difference ∆C, and the distance and direction of the displacement of
the particles ∆X. The ∆C = C2 −C1 has a negative result due to the C2 which
refers to the low concentration area, and C1 indicates the high concentration area. To
neutralize the negative impact of the ∆C the right part of the equation is multiplied
by a negative. The ∆X is always positive where it indicates the displacement of the
particles. The diffusion coefficient is an inherent attribute of the environment where
its quantity is reliant on the size of the particle, temperature, pressure and other
features in the diffusing substance. The fraction of ∆C
∆X is only used in the definition
of a one-dimensional space, whereas for calculating the J in a space of more than two
dimensions, the gradient of this fraction is computed ∇C [5] [30].
J = −D∇C
(1.1)
Nonetheless, the particles still have diffusion, after the drop of ink is entirely
distributed, i.e., there is no net particles flux from now on, and there is an equal
concentration throughout the liquid. In particular, if the environmental conditions
and temperature are constant, the displacement of the particles will continue after
completion of the net flux process while their migrate are independent of each other.
This phenomenon is called Brownian motion [5]. In this phenomenon, all particles in
the medium have randomly jagged movement due to how they strike each other, and
their direction will change after each collision.
The displacement of particles in a medium is irregular and random, and this move-
ment can be described by explaining the concept of Random walk [5].
==PAGE:17==
1.6 Diffusion
10
Random walk determines the likelihood of a particle displacement toward its ori-
gin location over a specified time or step. In figure 1.7, Random walk is exhibited in
a one-dimensional space, and at each movement, the probability of movement to the
left or right is equal to 50 percent. Consider a particle with a probability of 100% at
the origin in step zero. The left figure shows the likelihood of particle displacement
after one step. The probability is 50% for both left and right side since there is an
equal chance for both in the one-dimensional coordinate. The right figure shows the
probability after two steps. At this stage, a similar manner is applied to calculate
the probability of displacement in positions 2, -2, and 0, considering 1 and -1 as the
origin from the last step. Therefore the probability of displacement at this stage in
the center increases to 50% and position 2 and -2 have an equal likelihood of 25%.
The likelihood of a final displacement is achieved by the sum of all probabilities at
each step.
Figure 1.7:
Random walk probability in a one-dimensional area at two
steps. Left figure (step one), and right figure (step two).
Using the Random walk’s definition, the Brownian motion, and Fick’s first law,
Einstein could formulate the probability of the particle displacement over time based
on its free diffusion coefficient [5].
r2 = 2Dt
(1.2)
Wherein this equation D[µm2/s] is defined the diffusion coefficient similar to equation
1.1, ts indicates the diffusion time and r2[µm2] is the mean-squared displacement
of particles.
In figure 1.8 the Gaussian displacement distribution is indicated for
particles with various D and the same t. By increasing the amount of D and t, the
mean-squared displacement of particles increases, and this causes the likelihood of
the particle displacement to decrease in the zero displacement area while increasing
in other areas.
==PAGE:18==
1.6 Diffusion
11
Figure 1.8: The probability of distribution of particles with various D coefficients
in the same time observation t. The probability will be closer to zero, by increasing
the value of D and t, until the distribution becomes uniform [5].
It should be considered that equation 1.2 estimates the displacement of particles
in a one-dimensional coordinate, while particles flow in three dimensions. Equation
1.3 obtains the calculation of displacement in a three-dimensional space [5].
r2 = 6Dt
r =
√
6Dt
(1.3)
Where r is a radius of a sphere where its center is placed on the origin and
determines the probability of particle displacement in a given diffusion coefficient
and time interval [28].
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Method
2.1
Measuring diffusion using MRI
As mentioned before, hydrogen molecules in the human body have magnetic proper-
ties. The hydrogen has a nucleus of only one proton. The hydrogen nuclei rotate
around its axis, also known as a spin, which generates the magnetic field around the
nuclei. However, the direction of all nuclei magnetic fields are not the same, as they
have random directions and neutralizing each other is a common condition. The re-
sult of the sum of all nuclei vectors defines the net magnetization which is close to zero
in normal circumstances [20]. By placing the human body in a powerful magnetic
field, all of the spins tend to go in the same direction as the magnetic field. Despite
the facts that the spins still have a random direction due to the interaction between
the spins, the net magnetization direction of the spins aligns with the magnetic field.
Subsequently, the particles, in addition to the rotation around their axes, have coni-
cal motion around the net magnetization which is called Larmor precession [35]. By
increasing the magnetic field’s strength, the precession frequency will increase, i.e.,
the spins will move faster around the net magnetization. The Larmor equation 2.1
illustrates the relationship between Larmor frequency ω, the magnetic field strength
B and the gyromagnetic ratio γ. Consider hydrogen protons which has the gyromag-
netic ratio constant approximately equal to 2.68 × 108 rad/s/Tesla, in a scanner with
1 Tm−1 magnetic field strength. This results in the Larmor frequency being equal
to 42 MHz which means the spins precess around the net magnetization is 42 million
times per second [20].
ω = γB
2π
(2.1)
2.1.1
Spin-echo
After the net magnetization is determined as longitudinal magnetization, the other
magnetic field which oscillates at a 90-degree radio frequency (RF) pulse, is applied
concisely to the spins. The net magnetization direction of the spins will rotate 90
degrees after this excitation, and the new magnetization vector is called transverse
magnetization [20]. As soon as the RF pulse is switched off the dephasing of spins
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Measuring diffusion using MRI
13
begin, due to the interaction between the spins and slight variation in the B-field,
which leads to frequencies through the rotation of the spins toward the B-field. On
the one hand the transverse magnetization starts to disappear which is a process
called transversal relaxation, and on the other hand, the longitudinal magnetization
begins to take its place back again and aligns with the B magnetic field which is the
process called longitudinal relaxation [20]. The duration of time that the longitudi-
nal magnetization starts to grow until the spins realign with the B magnetic field, is
specified by T1. The other time duration is concerning the transverse magnetization
disappearing which is defined by T2. T1 and T2 are varying for different types of
tissue.
After a brief delay, the second pulse sequence that is a 180 degree RF pulse ap-
plies to the spins, and this makes them approach each other and a refocusing process
occurs. The echo will appear after the same delay as it was between two RF and the
duration from the excitation pulse until spin-echo is appearing. This phenomenon
is called Time to Echo (TE). The spin-echo will be received by a signal receiver to
perform the MR image [20].
2.1.2
Pulsed Gradient Spin Echo
As discussed, particles have various diffusion in different tissue. However, the criti-
cal point is that diffusion influences the magnitude of the echo [18]. In the Pulsed
Gradient Spin Echo (PGSE) sequence, the magnetic field gradient is applied to spins.
Using this method, the magnetic field will change in three directions linearly, and
particles in different locations will be affected by different magnetic field strengths.
Therefore their precision will be variant and eventually the receiver antenna in the
MRI will obtain different signals [28].
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Measuring diffusion using MRI
14
Figure 2.1: An illustration of pulsed gradient spin-echo (PGSE) sequence. The
gradient pulses are displayed in two equal red squares, which means they have the
same gradient strength G and gradient duration time δ. The radio frequencies apply
in a short time and they are not active when gradients are applied. In the bottom
box, the views of the applied gradients are individually specified in three directions to
measure the diffusion in the corresponding direction. TE indicates the time of echo.
Figure reference [45].
The PGSE sequence is illustrated in figure 2.1, and as it is evident in this method,
two pulse gradient magnetic fields are applied to the spin-echo experiment where the
first one takes place after 90 degrees RF pulse and changes the magnetic field and the
new magnetic field will be determined by equation 2.2. In this equation 2.2, B will
define the new magnetic field applied on a spin at a position defined by x, y, z, and
the time (t). The gradient magnitude is specified through Gx,Gy and Gz based on
the position of the spin and will add to B0 which is the homogenous main magnetic
field. The second pulse gradient transpires after 180 degrees RF pulse with exactly
the same magnitude as the first gradient, merely at the reverse direction due to neu-
tralizing by the effect of the first pulse gradient.
B = B0 + Gx(t)x + Gy(t)y + Gz(t)z
(2.2)
In this circumstance, if we consider the spins on an environment without any dif-
fusion, consequently after the second pulse gradient there will be no signal loss as
indicated in figure 2.2.
However, in an environment with diffusion, particles will
change their place at each moment, and therefore at the second pulse gradient, the
spins will receive different pulse magnitude in comparison to the first one due to the
displacement [34]. Eventually, diffusion is the cause of a signal loss, and there is more
signal attenuation in a condition of high diffusion rate and less signal attenuation in
a condition of low diffusion rate. In other words, stationary particles have no phase
change, and eventually, there is no signal reduction. Particles with random motion
will shift their phase which ultimately causes the attenuation in the signal.
==PAGE:22==
2.1 Measuring diffusion using MRI
15
Figure 2.2: The PGSE sequence steps in the presence and absence of diffusion. At
the top of each row, the PGSE steps is indicated and at the bottom of each row, the
influence of PGSE steps on the spins are shown with the arrows. In the case of no
diffusion, since the particles are constant in their places, thus there is no reduction
in total signals, while in the case of diffusion, particles receive a different gradient
strength due to the displacement, which leads to decrease the sum of signals.
The b-value parameter plays a pivotal role in the PGSE experiment whereas it is
needed to evaluate the b-value and define the gradient strength G, the duration that
the gradient applied on the spins δ and the delay time between the starting point of
the first and second gradient ∆. In the perspective of the PGSE sequence in figure
2.1, the gradient pulses are exhibited by two identical rectangles where the vertical
side defines the gradient magnitude, and the horizontal side represents the gradient
applied duration. The quantity of the magnetic field gradient area is specified by the
q-value that is provided in the equation 2.3.
q = γGδ
(2.3)
Where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio.
The result of a high q-value, is yielding the
higher frequency range due to the magnetic field gradient and thereupon more sen-
sitivity on diffusion in a condition of fixed δ. In equation 2.3, the interval between
two gradient ∆is not taken into account to evaluate the quantity of q-value. Never-
theless, to evaluate the b-value, it is needed to calculate the effective diffusion time td.
td = ∆−δ
3
(2.4)
b = q2 × td
(2.5)
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Diffusion Tensor Model
16
The diffusion time establishes the duration of how long the environment is being in-
vestigated, and by increasing the td, indeed, the greater microstructural area will be
explored. As to say, the diffusion-signal attenuation is a function of q and td. Using
the interpretation of these quantities, the amount of the diffusion-attenuated signal
S can be specified by equation 2.6.
S(q, td) = S0 e−b.ADC
(2.6)
Where S0 is the signal intensity in a situation while there is no gradient magnetic
field, and ADC is the apparent diffusion coefficient. Hence, the MR signal attenua-
tion E(q) is achieved by dividing the S by S0 in a free diffusion condition [43].
E(q) = e−b.ADC
(2.7)
Using this equation, and taking into account the received MR signal in a situation
with and without the gradient magnetic field, the value of ADC can be calculated in
equation 2.8.
ADC = −Log(E(q))
b
(2.8)
2.2
Diffusion Tensor Model
The phenomenon of anisotropic diffusion of water molecules in the white matter is
declared in the earlier studies [11] [46]. These studies illustrated that the diffusion is
reliant on the direction of the applied gradients in diffusion-weighted images. Con-
sider three different diffusion-weighted MRI’s from a specific area in the brain. By
altering the orientation of the applied gradients, which means on each occasion the
gradient magnetic field applied on only one of the three orthogonal axes (Gx, Gy or Gz
illustrated in Figure 2.1), subsequently the results of the signal attenuation will be
different in the anisotropic area of the brain, due to the fact that in the anisotropic
environment, the diffusivity is not the same in all directions [6].
The reason for the anisotropy diffusion in the white matter associates with the shape
of the long axons [6]. In the microstructure of an axon, the diffusivity of molecules
is anisotropic, since the displacement of the spins are not equal in all directions due
to the restriction of water molecules by the axonal membrane, myelin, NFs, and MTs
inside the axon. Hence, as illustrated in Figure 1.3 the spins displacement are re-
stricted in the x and y-axes whereas the diffusion is free in the z-axes. The purpose
==PAGE:24==
2.2 Diffusion Tensor Model
17
is to examine the validity of this claim.
The critical point is that by specifying just one ADC it is not possible to ascer-
tain the diffusion in all directions. Accordingly, to establish an elliptic model, which
specifies the anisotropic diffusion in each circumstance, the amount of diffusion is
measured and presented in the form of a complex model called the diffusion tensor,
which represents specifically the Gaussian diffusion model in all directions by a ma-
trix illustrated in Equation 2.9 [28].
D =


Dxx
Dxy
Dxz
Dxy
Dyy
Dyz
Dxz
Dyz
Dzz


(2.9)
The Dxx, Dyy, and Dzz have a relevance to the diffusion along the three orthogonal
axes, whereas Dxy, Dxz, and Dyz refer to the diffusion correlation between the axes.
Due to the repetition of the off-diagonal elements, the diffusion tensor model can
be defined as a vector, where each element determines the diffusion in a particular
direction as shown in Equation 2.10.
D =
[ Dxx
Dxy
Dxz
Dyy
Dyz
Dzz
]T
(2.10)
Following this, to achieve the values of vector D using the obtained amounts from
diffusion-weighted signals, initially, the matrix B should be reproduced, where it is
composed of 6 columns and N rows in which the columns represent different directions
in each signal measurement, and the rows correspond to the number of experiments.
B =


b1
xx
2b1
xy
2b1
xz
b1
yy
2b1
yz
b1
zz
b2
xx
2b2
xy
2b2
xz
b2
yy
2b2
yz
b2
zz
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
bN
xx
2bN
xy
2bN
xz
bN
yy
2bN
yz
bN
zz


(2.11)
The diffusion vector D contains six unknown values, thus to obtain these values, at
least six equations is required, i.e., six diffusion-weighted images that differ on their
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Monte-carlo simulation method
18
b-value. Thereby, the log-transformation of achieved signals has formed the vector X.
Finally, we can obtain the vector D with the equation 2.12.
X = BD
D = B−1X
(2.12)
It is worth noting that if the number of experiments is more than six, i.e., there are
more rows than columns in the B matrix, the ordinary least square(OLS) model is
used to obtain the diffusion tensor.
Since the diffusion tensor model is a 3 × 3 symmetric matrix, thus it has 3 inde-
pendent eigenvectors with the real and orthogonal coordinates. Furthermore, this
model illustrates the orientation of the greatest diffusivity. Considering diffusion ten-
sor D from Equation 2.9, it is now possible to calculate the 3 orthogonal eigenvectors
(ε1, ε2, ε3) and their corresponding eigenvalues (λ1, λ2, λ3). The λ1 corresponds to
the largest eigenvalue which means the orientation of the diffusion tensor ellipsoid
is parallel to the eigenvector ε1. Using the results of the eigenvalues, the fractional
anisotropic (FA) can be obtained by the Equation 2.13. The range of FA value is
between 0-1, where 0 intimates that the diffusion is isotropic, and 1 indicates that
the diffusion transpires only in one direction [28].
⟨λ⟩= Dxx + Dyy + Dzz
3
FA =
√
3
2
√
(λ1 −⟨λ⟩2) + (λ2 −⟨λ⟩2) + (λ3 −⟨λ⟩2)
√
λ1
2 + λ2
2 + λ3
2
(2.13)
Where ⟨λ⟩is the mean diffusion based on all orientations. The tensor model will be
used to illustrate the diffusion tensor ellipsoid of axons in chapter 3.
2.3
Monte-carlo simulation method
The MR image is a 3D image where the unit is voxel. The voxel size in MR images
is approximately 2 × 2 × 2 mm3 [9]. Given this, considering the axon diameter is
being 1 µm, thus one voxel contains at least more than one million axons. Due to
this, measuring the diffusion with consideration to just one axon trough MR images
is impossible. Fortunately, using simulators that simulate the process of MRI, it is
now possible to approximate the diffusion of a particle in a nanoscale.
==PAGE:26==
2.3 Monte-carlo simulation method
19
In this thesis, the Monte Carlo diffusion simulator of Camino framework is used
to generate synthetical MR data and validate diffusion models in brain tissue. This
simulator emulates an environment in which simulations of simple to very complex
models are possible.
In this section, the simulation of particle motion in a 3D geometric environment
is examined. Initially, diffusion modeling is performed in an environment with the
consideration of cylinders as neurofilaments and microtubules, which means each par-
ticle or spin has a random walk in the surrounding area that is restricted by cylinders.
At the starting point of the simulation, spins are randomly dispersed over the sub-
strate. Spins movement is based on the random walk which is explained in Brownian
motion. According to the random walk motion, each spin in the substrate may move
in a random direction. The length of each step can be defined in equation 2.14 [19].
l =
√
6D ts
T
(2.14)
Where l is the length of each step, D is the diffusion coefficient, ts is the duration of
the diffusion simulation which is equal to the time of echo (TE), and T is the number
of timesteps. This equation is the same as equation 1.3, where ts/T is substituted for
t, to observe the displacement of spins in a smaller intervals. In order to determine
the value of l, it should be noted that the size of the step length is considered to be
smaller than the diameter of the smallest cylinder in each simulation to increase the
computation accuracy. The spin at each stride will be investigated in terms of having
crossed a barrier or not. If the spin did not cross a barrier, then the movement direc-
tion will not change, but if it crosses a barrier, the direction and length will change.
This is illustrated in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: The process of particle displacement in a case of collision with a barrier
is shown. ∆x′ indicates the displacement in the event of a collision, while ∆x is the
displacement regardless of the obstacle [19].
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Monte-carlo simulation method
20
Given the sample code that is used to generate the synthetic diffusion MRI data
in this project Figure 2.4, the description of all these commands are listed here:
Figure 2.4: An example of commands that are applied to simulate the substrate
including NFs and MTs.
• datasynth: By this command, the Camino Diffusion MRI toolkit will start to
produce the simulation and generate the synthetic data.
• walkers: It should be defined how many particles or spins ought to be eval-
uated in each experiment. The number of walkers has a direct impact on the
simulation time. In other words, the simulation time will be increased by en-
larging the number of spins, since the displacement of more particles should be
estimated. However, the measured signals will be more accurate by more spins.
The number of walkers in the NFs and MTs substrates is defined as 40000 spins
and for the axons substrates they are set to be 160000 spins [3].
• tmax: The number of timesteps defined by -tmax which should be calculated
for each simulation base on the equation 2.14, where tmax is denoted as T.
However, in all simulations, the number of updates is defined as 1000000.
• p: The probability that spins can pass through barriers or elastically be re-
flected is determined by -p, which is to say, when the probability is equal to
zero, particles cannot cross the barriers. The value of -p is defined as 0 in all
simulations in this study, to evaluate the diffusion of spins in an environment
of cylinders without any permeability.
• geometry & substrate: These two commands have a similar function which
is to define the geometry of the substrate aspect. For instance, it can determine
if the substrate contains a packed parallel or crossing cylinder. The simulation
of NFs and MTs are defined by -geometry ”inflammation” which generates a
substrate with random placement of cylinders. In the simulation of axons the
-substrate ”cylinder” is utilized to produce a substrate with regularly placed
cylinders.
• latticesize: To estimate simulation results, it is necessary to consider a frame-
work for the environment that is being monitored. This command defines the
size of the framework. Note that the frame does not restrict the diffusion of
spins, and its function is merely to illustrate the density of cylinders and make
a calculation of simulation in a specific frame size. Consequently, the larger the
==PAGE:28==
2.3 Monte-carlo simulation method
21
frame size, the higher the calculation accuracy, and the longer the simulation
time will be. To simulate the environment of NFs and MTs the lattice size is
2.5 × 10−13m2.
• numcylinders: This command determins the number of cylinders, i.e., the
density of NFs in the substrate is defined here. The first column of Figure 3.1
indicates the number of cylinders that is distributed as NFs and MTs.
• initial: To measure the diffusion, it is necessary to conclude what region of
the substrate is taken into account. The evaluation of spins diffusivity can be
measured inside or outside the cylinders or in a uniform condition by command
-initial which defines the initial distribution of particles. In the simulation of
NFs and MTs it is considered to measure the diffusion outside of cylinders, while
in axons substrate the Intra diffusion is evaluated.
• cylinderrad & cylindersep: There are two methods to define the size of cylin-
ders. The first method is being used while -substrate specifies as “cylinder”. In
this case, the substrate contains cylinders with the same size, that the radius
of cylinders specifies by command -cylinderrad. The cylinders are located at
regular and equal intervals where the distance between the centers of the cylin-
ders is defined by -cylindersep. It should be noted that the cylinder separation
value ought to be at least double the cylinder radius. Otherwise, the cylinders
will overlap with each other. This command is utilized to generate the axons
substrates.
• gamma & GAMA & GAMB: The second method is used while the -geometry
is defined as “inflammation” to generate the NFs substrates where its results
is randomly located cylinders. In this case, the size of cylinders are not equal
and is defined by gamma distribution command -gamma with the parameters
of distribution defined by GAMA = α as a shape parameter and GAMB = β
as a rate parameter.
• diffusivity: The free diffusion D0 that we want to implement into the simu-
lation should be indicated by command -diffusivity. The free diffusion for NFs
and MTs environment is 6 × 10−10 [m2/s] [3]. The result of D at this step will
define the D0 values in the simulation of axon substrates.
• schemefile: The information about b-value parameters is determined in the
scheme file and utilized by command -schemefile. The format of the scheme file
that is used in this study is Stejskaltanner which is depicted below.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Monte-carlo simulation method
22
schemefile.scheme1
VERSION: STEJSKALTANNER
x1
y1
z1
|G1|
∆1
δ1
TE1
x2
y2
z2
|G2|
∆2
δ2
TE2
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
xN
yN
zN
|GN|
∆N
δN
TEN
The first line in this file display the format of the scheme file, which is important
due to the ordering of the parameters which are based on the file format. There are
seven columns in this file to indicate the b-value parameters, and the number of rows
illustrates the number of experiments, i.e., each row stands for one diffusion-weighted
image.
• xi, yi, zi :
xi, yi, zi :
xi, yi, zi : The first three columns represents the gradient orientation base on
the MRI coordinate system (The z-axes is parallel to the tunnel in the MRI
scanner while the x,y-axes are in the same plane and they are orthogonal to the
z-axes). .
• |Gi| :
|Gi| :
|Gi| : The fourth column denotes gradient strength in a range from 0 to 1 Tm−1.
• ∆i :
∆i :
∆i : In this column, the time between the onset of the first and second pulse is
defined, known as pulse separation time.
• δi :
δi :
δi : This parameter displays the duration of each gradient pulse.
• TEi :
TEi :
TEi : The echo time is the duration from the start point until the echo appears.
The echo time can be calculated having ∆i : and δi :. TEi = ∆i + δi (s)
The schemefile sample that is used in this project is illustrated in Figure 3.5.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3
Results
In this section the results of the simulated model is shown, to illustrate the diffusivity
of the water molecules in different conditions inside an axon.
In general, the simulation is done in two stages.
In the first stage of the simula-
tion, the interior ambient of the axons is considered, which means that we first define
an environment comprising of NFs and MTs, an example of this is shown in figure 3.4.
This figure demonstrates the cross-sectional area of the NFs and MTs and how they
are located next to each other. It should be noted that the size of NFs and MTs are
closely related to all simulations, and they are both defined in one template, in order
to have a better interpretation of the simulation results. In the second simulation,
the space consisting of axons is located next to each other, and this time the intention
is to measure the diffusion within these axons. At this stage of simulation, the results
of the diffusion of spins in the previous step is used to define the free diffusion D0,
while this value will be described and measured separately and exclusively for y and
z-directions.
3.1
Monte-carlo simulation
3.1.1
Diffusion measurement between Nfs and MTs
The first step to measuring the signal in simulations is to determine the Intra-axonal
diffusion coefficient of water molecules. The diffusion coefficient varies based on the
environment and temperature. However, the diffusion coefficient of water molecules
with a temperature of 37° C will be 3 × 10−9 [m2/s] [28].
This amount is as long as the water molecules are in normal condition. When the
water molecules are located inside the body, the situation changes and alters the diffu-
sion coefficient. Accordingly, the diffusion coefficient in the intra-axonal environment
is considered to be 6 × 10−10 [m2/s] which determines the value of free diffusion D0
in all simulations [32] [3].
Simulations have been run on the DRCMR 1 server running Ubuntu 16.04, with dual
6-core Intel Xeon 5600 processor, and 64 Gb RAM. The simulation time was depend-
ing on its scenario and varied between 12 hours to 6 days.
1DanishResearch Centre for Magnetic Resonance
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
24
A total of 49 virtual environments(substrates) have been formed by impermeable
cylinders at this stage to simulate and measure the diffusivity for different distribu-
tions of NFs and MTs with varying quantities. In all 49 simulations, the value of the
lattice size is determined as 0.5 µm2. Given the allocated area for lattice size, the
number of walkers in all NFs simulations is defined as 40,000 with 1000000 updates.
The time steps is measured by equation 2.14 giving the step length of 7.3 × 10−9 m.
The percentage of permeability in all simulations is set to 0, which refers to the cylin-
ders being impenetrable. All cylinders are aligned parallel along the z-axes. In figure
3.1 the chart of the simulation variables is represented. The first column defines the
number of cylinders in each experiment, which goes from a low density of cylinders
to a high. The second column shows the size of the cylinders in diameter, and the
final column depict the b-value and gradient direction.
Since the purpose of this section is to estimate the diffusion of water molecules be-
tween NFs and MTs, after defining the cylinders as neurofilaments, it is needed to
identify the outer space of cylinders as an environment that walkers should walk.
==PAGE:32==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
25
Figure 3.1: The chart of the simulations of NFs and MTs substrates. The number
of cylinders is illustrated in the first column. The size of the cylinders are shown in
the second column, and finally, the number of b-values that was applied are displayed
in the last column. Note that the largest diameter of cylinders are eliminated from
the evaluation in steps which is shown by larger arrows in the first column, due to
the lack of space to include all cylinders with that specific cylinder diameter.
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
26
The density of NFs and MTs are varying and is correlated to the place of an axon
and the size of the cross-sectional area. To further build on this, it is needed to define
the various densities of MTs and NFs to evaluate the diffusivity in different conditions
comparable to the real situation. The first column in figure 3.1 notes that at the first
experiment the density started by 25 cylinders in a latticesize area which is defined
as 0.5 µm2. Using the equation 3.1 to measure the density of the number of the
cylinders per µm2 (ρNcyl), the first experiment will start by 100 [cylinders/µm2].
ρNcyl = Ncyl
Alat
(3.1)
Where Ncyl is the number of cylinders and Alat is the area of the latticesize. For each
of these cylinder size categories, the amount of them increases in each experiment by
taking into account the constant latticesize, up to where there is no space available
to add a new cylinder. The density of occupied space by cylinders at each stage is
measured using the equation 3.3 and the result is shown in figure 3.2.
ρAcyl =
∑Acyl
Alat
(3.2)
∑Acyl is the sum of areal of all cylinders and Alat is the area of latticesize. The
number of cylinders, which is described in four size categories, increases in each class
to saturate the area defined by the lattice. In figure 3.2, it is explicit that increasing
the number of cylinders will also increase their density, and the larger the size of the
diameter, the more occupied space will be. It turns out that 30nm cylinders reach
their ultimate boundary by 184, while 25nm cylinders reach it by 269, and 15nm
cylinders at 729. Finally, cylinders with 10nm in diameter require 1671 cylinders at
their last stage. The interesting point is that the final possible density for all of these
categories is 52 percent, which suggests that 48 percent of the lattice area is still
empty when the diffusion occurs in these areas. In other words, the cylinders have
not been fully closed together.
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
27
Figure 3.2:
Each line refers to the density of the area of a specific number of
cylinders on four different sizes. The last stage for cylinders with 30 nm diameter is
when their number reaches 200; then there is no more space to add any cylinders.
However, figure 3.3 illustrates an environment in which circles are as close to each
other as possible, and by measuring the density of cylinders in this condition, it is
evident that they can occupy up to 90% of the lattice space. Accordingly, it can be
concluded that in the environment defined by Monte-Carlo, the particles in the area
saturated with cylinders have still the necessary space for diffusion, and they are not
blocked completely in transverse motion.
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
28
Figure 3.3: Measuring the density of the circles when they are located side by side.
All circles are considered to have the same size, and their radius is equal to r.
ρcyl =
∑Acyl
Ahexagon
=
3πr2
6 × 2r2 sin 60 =
π
2
√
3 = 0.9
(3.3)
Where ∑Acyl referred to cylinders inside the hexagon, and Ahexagon is the area of the
hexagon.The final limit for the abundance of cylinders using Monte-Carlo is shown
in the last column of the figure 3.4, in which the space between the cylinders is quite
apparent.
To determine the environment of the substrate, we have to specify the distribution of
the cylinders. NFs and MTs are located in the various distances within the axon, and
hence we use the command inflammation to select a chaotic distribution of cylinders.
The result of this command defines an accidental blend of cylinders. Figure 3.4 il-
lustrates the environment of some simulated sample substrates. Each row represents
the distribution of cylinders of the same size with 10, 15, 25 and 30 nm in diameter,
respectively. The first and last columns represent the lowest and highest congestion
in each category, while the second and third column represent two examples of ex-
periments with middle densities. It should be noted that apart from the first column,
the columns are varied in terms of the number of cylinders.
==PAGE:36==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
29
Figure 3.4: Cross-section of NFs and MTs with different sizes and distributions. In
each row, the size of the cylinders is the same, and on the left, the size of the radius
of the cylinders in that row is defined by r.The density of cylinders are based on their
number as well as their area. This is exhibited under each image. ρNcyl determines
the density of number of cylinders while ρAcyl clarify the density of their area.
As presented in figure 3.1, diffusion measurement is performed among NFs in four
different sizes to manifest the influence of the size of the NFs with varying widths. In
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
30
each experiment, the size of the diameters of the cylinders is close together, though
they are not the same, and the statistical pattern called gamma distribution is used
to determine cylinders diameters.
According to the studies [42] [15] [16], the anatomical measurements of the neuro-
filaments diameter vary between 10-15 nm and the diameter of the microtubules lie
in the range of 15 -30 nm. Therefore, the distribution of cylinders is categorized based
on their diameter by defining four sizes; 10, 15, 25 and 30 nm to observe the spins
diffusion in these conditions.
As previously explained, in the scheme file, the list of b-value parameters are arranged,
where we determine the gradient magnitude and its direction, and further the term
of applied gradient and duration between starting points of two gradient pulses. In
order to run the simulation, the scheme file that is illustrated in figure 3.5, is pro-
vided. Each line relies explicitly on just one of three directions by choosing the value
of one for one of them and give the other two the amount equal to zero. The gradient
magnitude applied merely on x and z-directions, since both x and y-directions are
implying on the cross-sectional directions, they will yield similar results. Therefore,
we just evaluate one of them to reduce simulation time-span. The z-direction is the
longitudinal orientation inside an axon.
Gradient magnitude from low to high strength has been applied to gain an accu-
rate model of the obtained signal. The values considered for ∆, δ and TE are the
same between the shells, that is to say, the b-value only varies in gradient strength.
By ignoring varying the diffusion time, it may affect the accuracy of the results, but
due to a large number of simulations, we ignored this content to reduce the calcula-
tion time in general.
==PAGE:38==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
31
Figure 3.5: The configuration of the scheme file that applied to measure the diffu-
sivity of spins in the environment between neurofilaments.
In this file is displayed a total of 18 rows (other than the first one, which is used to
measure the signal in non-applied gradient conditions) which is determined to mea-
sure 18 diffusion-weighted signals. In other words, nine various b-values have been
applied in two directions.
The number of walkers in this section is different from the next simulation stage,
hence, after simulating and obtaining the final signal, the signals are first normalized
according to the number of walkers using equation 3.4 to make the results comparable.
S = Signal
Nwalkers
(3.4)
Nwalkers defines the number of walkers which in this part of the simulation, and cor-
responding to the size of the lattice, is found to be 40,000 [3].
The results of the signals collected from the simulation of the models presented in
figure 3.4 are shown in figure 3.6 where signal curves are arranged in four rows based
on cylinder size in diameter. Each curve presents the signal (S) as a function of b-
values. The first column compares the received signals obtained from varying gradient
magnitudes in the y-direction, and the second column examines the same notion in
the z-direction. In all four categories, what is quite apparent is the reduction of the
acquired signal in the y-direction by increasing the number of cylinders. These results
suggest that the diffusivity of spins decrease by increasing the number of cylinders
since by increasing the number of cylinders, spins are more restricted, and in fact,
they need more time than the free diffusion conditions to travel an identical and spe-
cific distance.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
32
Nevertheless, the circumstances are different in the z-direction. The results of the
signals obtained in the z-direction, which is illustrated in the second column in figure
3.6, are very close together, and by increasing the number of NFs, there is not much
change in the collected signals. In other words, all curves are uniform and almost the
same. The reason is that the diffusion of spins is not going to be restricted in the longi-
tudinal direction by cylinders, and in particular, the diffusion is free in the z-direction.
We know from equation 2.7 that log(S) = −b.ADC (S is the same as E), which
means the log(S) can be defined as a function of the b-value and ADC. Accordingly,
the log(S) is estimated for all signals and illustrated in figure 3.7 for the models pre-
sented in figure 3.4. In most situations, the graph of the log(S) resembles a straight
line, where the log(S) is a linear function of the b-value where the ADC represents
the slope of the line. However, the estimated signal for high b-values causes the ab-
normality at the end of some log(S) graphs. The computation error can occur when
simulation estimates the signal attenuation for high gradient magnitude. From figure
3.6, it can be seen that the signal attenuation for gradient magnitude is more than
0.4 Tm−1 and in some cases is extremely close to zero. This matter can impair the
accuracy of the signal estimation in Monte-Carlo simulation, due to the reduction of
signal to noise ratio (SNR).
As indicated, the gradient of the graphs represents the diffusivity of spins in each
model. Consequently, the higher the slope, the greater the diffusion of spins in the
model, also, there will be more signal attenuation. Once again, it is seen that in
each category of the first column of figure 3.7, the slope decreases with the increas-
ing number of cylinders, which means that the diffusion decreases. Although, in the
z-direction, all graphs with different abundances have the same slope, i.e., cylinders
do not alter the diffusion of particles in the z-direction.
Finally, using equation 2.8, the diffusion in each model is calculated and displayed
in figure 3.8. This figure has the same configuration to display the models as figure
3.6. The impact of the computational error on the calculation of diffusion is quite
tangible. The diffusion results are strongly variable for b-values with gradient power
greater than 0.4 Tesla in z-direction.
Another point to note here is the influence of the size of the cylinders to reduce
the amount of diffusion of spins in the y-direction by increasing the size of the NFs
diameter. For instance, the diffusion of particles in a substrate with 100 cylinders
with 10 nm diameter is equal to 6×10−10 [m2/s], where the diffusion of spins reduces
to 5.5 × 10−10 [m2/s] through the identical number of cylinders with a diameter of
30 nm.
The comparison of the results and the influence of the diameter and number of NFs
on the diffusion of particles is shown in figure 3.9.
==PAGE:40==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
33
Figure 3.6: The signal attenuation against the b-value. The first column indicate the
result of b-value considering the Gy = 1; Gx, GZ = 0. The second column illustrate
the result of b-value in regards to Gz = 1; Gx, Gy = 0. Each row illustrates the
result of the distribution of the specific size of cylinders. The diameter of cylinders
is specified by Dcyl on the top of each plot.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
34
Figure 3.7: The log(S) against b-value. The first column shows the result of b-
value considering the Gy = 1; Gx, GZ = 0. The second column illustrate the result
of b-value in regards to Gz = 1; Gx, Gy = 0. Each row illustrates the result of the
distribution of the specific size of cylinders. The diameter of cylinders is exhibited by
Dcyl on the top of each plot.
==PAGE:42==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
35
Figure 3.8: The diffusion results against b-value. The first column indicate the
result of b-value considering the Gy = 1; Gx, GZ = 0. The second column shows the
result of b-value regarding Gz = 1; Gx, Gy = 0. Each row illustrates the result of the
distribution of the specific size of cylinders. The diameter of cylinders is depicted by
Dcyl on the top of each plot.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
36
Figure 3.9: The perpendicular diffusion against the number of cylinders, while each
category includes the results of diffusion for various cylinders diameter. The last step
for cylinders with a diameter of 30 nm occurs in 200 numbers of cylinders, whereas
for 25, 15, and 10 nm, the last step occurs in 300, 750, and 1700, respectively.
3.1.2
Diffusion measurement inside axons
In the previous step, the diffusion of particles among NFs was measured for both lon-
gitudinal and transverse directions, while the impact of the axon membrane was not
considered. At this stage, in each substrate, packed cylinders are defined as axons,
and the diffusion of particles inside these axons are measured.
A total of 91 simulations were conducted in this section.
Different axon diame-
ters are considered, wherein each substrate axons with the same size are arranged
at regular intervals. The definition given in the axon anatomy determines the axon
diameters. Besides, two diameters of 12 and 24 µm are also measured to study the
variations in diffusion at larger scales. An illustration of substrate is shown in figure
3.10. D0 is defined according to the diffusion that is obtained from the previous step.
This means that the diffusion achieved from the longitudinal direction of the NFs are
used as D0 to measure the diffusion along the longitudinal axes, and the diffusion
obtained in the transverse direction of the NFs are used as D0 to simulate the diffu-
sivity in the transverse direction of the axon. Accordingly, D0 range determined by
2.5 −5.5 × 10−10 [m2/s] concerning transverse diffusion and 6 −10 × 10−10 [m2/s]
during longitudinal diffusion to estimate the diffusion inside the axon. It should be
mentioned that in the final Tensor model, only the result of the diffusion regarding
D0 = 6×10−10 [m2/s] in z-axes is considered, and the higher values, which is defined
here, are yields of high gradient strength that due to weak signal strength in that
range, they are not sufficiently accurate. However, these values have been calculated
==PAGE:44==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
37
at this level to scrutinize the consequence of diffusion with greater D0 amounts. To
calculate the signal, the same b-values used in the previous step were used, with the
only difference being that for each direction of Y and Z scheme file, they were con-
structed separately.
Axons
Figure 3.10: A schematic illustrations of substrate including axons. The diameter
of the cylinders in this sample is 3µm and the cylinder separation is considered to be
3.15µm, which means there is 0.15µm space between two cylinders. The lattice size
is equal to 10µm2.
The diffusion results of simulations as a function of b-value are shown in figures
3.11 and 3.12. The first figure shows the diffusion in the transverse direction and
the second one is the diffusion in the longitudinal direction. The results of the S
and log(S) functions is included in figures A.1, A.2, A.3 and A.4 in the appendix.
The simulation has been evaluated for seven different diameters of axons, where the
size of axons are noted in the top of each plot. In each of them, seven simulations
were performed to measure diffusion with different D0 in the transverse direction(Y)
and six simulations with different D0 in the longitudinal direction(Z). The values of
the D0 for the Y and Z-directions are different, which is indicated at the bottom
right of each image. Diffusion in the Z-direction shows the corresponding results as
the previous step, where the diffusion is substantially equal to D0 due to the free
diffusion. Nevertheless, the situation is different for the Y-direction since the axon
membranes restrict the particles. Figure 3.12 shows that the diffusion of particles in
the transverse direction decreases sharply by decreasing the axon diameter.
Diffusion diversity concerning axon diameter with a range of 3 µm and less for dif-
ferent D0 are quite close together. According to figure A.1, the signal attenuation
for the first four diameters is insignificant compared to the last three diameters for
the same b-value range, due to the small diffusion area. Simulation can be done by
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
38
increasing the gradient values and reducing the diffusion time to enhance the sensi-
tivity of estimation to lower axon diameter.
Subsequently, the comparison of the results and the influence of the axon’s diameter
on the diffusion of particles is shown in figure 3.13.
Looking at Figure 3.11, it can be seen that the result of the diffusion for the smaller
D0 is greater in the first four plots. The reason for this is the displacement of particles
which are investigated based on the concept of the center of mass. This evaluation
will determine the first center of mass (C1) of particle displacement in the duration of
the first gradient pulse, as well as the second center of mass (C2) in the period of the
second gradient pulse. By relying on this concept, it can be realized that increasing
the particle movement in a small restricted area due to the higher D0, the two values
of C1 (as the first place of the particle) and C2 (as the second place of the particle)
becomes closer to each other, which consequently leads to a decrease in the amount
of D (C2-C1) for the larger D0s [27].
==PAGE:46==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
39
Intera-axonal perpendicular diffusion
Figure 3.11: The plots of Intra-axonal perpendicular diffusion against the b-value.
The size of axon diameter is indicated on the top of each plot. Note that the scale
on the Y axeses vary.
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Monte-carlo simulation
40
Intra-axonal parallel diffusion
Figure 3.12: The plots of Intra-axonal parallel diffusion against the b-value. The
size of the axon diameter is shown on the top of each plot.
==PAGE:48==
3.2 Tensor Model
41
Figure 3.13: The perpendicular diffusion against the axon diameter, while each
category of axon diameters includes the results of Intra perpendicular diffusion for
various defined D0s. The diffusion result of the first three categories are very close to
zero, and therefore their results are not apparent on this scale.
3.2
Tensor Model
Using the diffusion tensor model, the orientation of the particle’s diffusion based
on the extracted eigenvalues from the diffusion matrix can be seen, as well as the
orientation that has the greatest diffusion.
The samples of diffusion tensor ellipsoid, based on the final diffusion results achieved
from Intra-axonal ADC evaluations are shown in figure 3.14. In these figures, the
results of the estimated ADC correspond to three different D0 for axons with 6, 12,
and 24 µm in diameter which are displayed respectively. The eigenvalue (λ1) indicates
the ADC of spins along the length of the axons and the two smaller eigenvalues (λ2),
(λ3) indicate the perpendicular ADC of the axons. The fractional anisotropy (FA) in
each step demonstrates the degree of diffusion anisotropy inside the axon. Looking
at the figures and comparing their results, it is clear that increasing the size of the
axon and D0 have an inverse relationship with FA. It should be noted that D0s refer
to the ADC of spins between NFs and MTs, where the low quantity of D0 achieved
from the high density environment of NFs and MTs, in contrast, the greater value of
D0 refers to the lower density of environment.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Tensor Model
42
The diffusion tensor ellipsoids for the axon diameter = 6 µm
FA=0.75
λ1 = 5.89 × 10−10
λ2,3 = 1.24 × 10−10
D0Y = 2.5 × 10−10 [m2/s]
D0Z = 6 × 10−10 [m2/s]
FA=0.69
λ1 = 5.89 × 10−10
λ2,3 = 1.54 × 10−10
D0Y = 4 × 10−10 [m2/s]
D0Z = 6 × 10−10 [m2/s]
FA=0.66
λ1 = 5.89 × 10−10
λ2,3 = 1.67 × 10−10
D0Y = 5.5 × 10−10 [m2/s]
D0Z = 6 × 10−10 [m2/s]
The diffusion tensor ellipsoids for the axon diameter = 12 µm
FA=0.63
λ1 = 5.89 × 10−10
λ2,3 = 1.82 × 10−10
D0Y = 2.5 × 10−10 [m2/s]
D0Z = 6 × 10−10 [m2/s]
FA=0.48
λ1 = 5.89 × 10−10
λ2,3 = 2.56 × 10−10
D0Y = 4 × 10−10 [m2/s]
D0Z = 6 × 10−10 [m2/s]
FA=0.37
λ1 = 5.89 × 10−10
λ2,3 = 3.12 × 10−10
D0Y = 5.5 × 10−10 [m2/s]
D0Z = 6 × 10−10 [m2/s]
==PAGE:50==
3.2 Tensor Model
43
The diffusion tensor ellipsoids for the axon diameter = 24 µm
FA=0.56
λ1 = 5.89 × 10−10
λ2,3 = 2.14 × 10−10
D0Y = 2.5 × 10−10 [m2/s]
D0Z = 6 × 10−10 [m2/s]
FA=0.36
λ1 = 5.89 × 10−10
λ2,3 = 3.21 × 10−10
D0Y = 4 × 10−10 [m2/s]
D0Z = 6 × 10−10 [m2/s]
FA=0.21
λ1 = 5.89 × 10−10
λ2,3 = 4.08 × 10−10
D0Y = 5.5 × 10−10 [m2/s]
D0Z = 6 × 10−10 [m2/s]
Figure 3.14:
The diffusion tensor ellipsoid for three different axon diameter in three rows and three
different D0Y in three columns. The fractional anisotropy decreases by increasing the D0Y and diameter
of the axon.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
The impact of NFs and MTs on the diffusion of water molecules inside the axon was in-
vestigated in this thesis. The synthetic data was stimulated by Monte-Carlo Camino
in a way that it could mimic the diffusion of water molecules within the structure of
axons in the CNS and PNS. For this purpose, to observe the behavior of particles in
various conditions, 124 simulations were successfully implemented with regard to the
diverse size of diameter and density of axons, NFs and MTs. Simulating the axons
with NFs and MTs were impossible in one frame, so simulations were performed in
two categories. Initially the cylinders was defined as NFs and MTs, and secondly,
they were specified as axons in substrates. 33 simulations allocated to measure the
diffusion of particles in the environment between NFs and MTs. The diameter and
number of NFs and MTs were represented and simulated in a wide range by consider-
ing their anatomical measurements, so that various scenarios regarding the different
configurations of NFs and MTs densities were implemented. Although, in some cases
the density of NFs area was not realistic for the defined substrate, their outcomes are
vital in terms of observing how much the NFs could ultimately affect the diffusion of
particles. The diffusion of particles in all simulations were measured for both trans-
verse and longitudinal directions along the cylinders. Since both X and Y-directions
indicate the cross-sectional area coordinates of cylinders, it is expected that both of
them provide the same results, and so the diffusion measurement of merely one of
them is sufficient.
From the results obtained from the simulation, the outliers (the signal obtained from
the high b-values where it was close to zero) were eliminated, and then the Ordinary
least squares (OLS) model was calculated for the signals by different b-values in each
simulation. This was done to achieve the best linear model with the lowest error
that determined the diffusion. The results of this calculation for the Y-direction are
shown in figure 3.9. For high b-values that lead the signal attenuation to be close
to zero, the signal to noise ratio (SNR) decreased, which reduced the measurement
accuracy of the obtained signal and consequently the calculated diffusion contained
a high error rate.
The results of the diffusion in the first stage were divided into two distinct categories
for the longitudinal (Y) and perpendicular (Z) directions, where each category deter-
mined the values of D0s to estimate the diffusion in two directions for the remaining
==PAGE:52==
4 Discussion
45
Intra-axonal simulations. At the second stage, seven different sizes of axon diameter
had been determined to measure the diffusion inside them, where five of them were
chosen based on the anatomical measurements and two of them were oversized and
they were out of the anatomical size range.
Looking at figure 3.9 and 3.13, the results revealed that the diffusion was more sensi-
tive to the density of NFs and MTs in the larger axon diameters, whereas the result
of the diffusion for various densities was almost the same in the axons with the minor
sizes of diameters.
Comparing the results of signal attenuation for the given b-value in figure A.1, it was
seen that signal attenuation was insufficient to the axons with a low cross-sectional
area. In figure A.3, the log(S) subtraction were less than 0.04% in the axon with
0.5 µm diameter, whilst the log(S) reduction was 90% for the axon with 24 µm
diameter. This was because the gradient strength was not adequate to produce a
suitable high frequency, and td was considered excessive to observe the particle dis-
placement in a small area. The alternative to resolve this issue could be to utilize
the oscillating gradient spin‐echo (OGSE) sequence [12], which is similar to PGSE
sequence with a difference in that the dephasing and refocusing in OGSE repeats
several times. Although, the PGSE had a high sensitivity to estimate the signal in
which the gradient was applied perfectly in the parallel and perpendicular orientation
[12], decreasing the time of diffusion and increasing the gradient magnitude strength
led to the b-value increasing and eventually the received signals were not attenuated
sufficiently. The OGSE sequence enables us to examine the displacement of the par-
ticles in a shorter time, without increasing the b-value exceedingly. Due to this, the
received signals will be sufficient for axons with a diameter smaller than 3 µm [12] [38].
As noted in the anatomy of MTs, the structure of them was not the same, and their
length varied. Indeed, they were not in the form of integrated cylinders, i.e., their
length varied, and they moved back and forward within the axons. This phenomenon
might influence the diffusion of particles in areas where the cylinders are fragmented.
The permeability of the microtubules membrane was studied in article [40], which
clarified the permeability of the microtubules which varied correspondingly to several
conditions, for instance, the diameter of the neuron. However, in all simulated mod-
els in this thesis, all cylinders were integrated, and its permeability was fixed to be
zero. Based on this assumption, the results of diffusion due to the permeability and
separation of cylinders, in some places could be affected, and it may have altered the
final results of diffusion.
The sidearms for neurofilaments [10] and motor proteins for microtubules [23] are
located everywhere inside the axon structure.
These barriers, depending on their
number and density, may affect the diffusion of particles. Furthermore, some dis-
eases or injuries deform the structure of NFs and MTs. In study [41], by monitoring
==PAGE:53==
4 Discussion
46
the damaged axons, it is discerned that the distribution of NFs and MTs alters in
axons, as well as their placement will change from parallel to crossing form. Besides
this, they also deform from straight cylinders to undulant cylinders.
One solution to optimize the simulation model and obtain a more realistic result
could be to make a polygon mesh cylinder (ply file) of an axon and include all condi-
tions in the axon model. Hereby, it would be possible to implement the simulation
on the ply file in Monte-Carlo Camino simulator.
The results of simulated substrates with complex distribution combinations of cylin-
ders demonstrated the impact of NFs and MTs on the diffusion of water particles.
Using the Tensor model, the diffusion ellipse for the various samples in figure 3.14
shows that with increasing cylinder diameter, the perpendicular diffusion increased
and the FA decreased, which yielded the tensor model to be a spherical shape. Based
on all achieved results it can be concluded that NFs and MTs have an impact on the
diffusivity of water molecules’ movement in perpendicular orientation of axons which
its influence is correlated to the density of the NFs and MTs.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5
Future work
In this thesis, NFs and MTs were defined as cylinders that were parallel and impen-
etrable in all simulations. However, considering the anatomical measurements it can
be seen that their structure is more complex. Making a ply model of axons and in-
cluding all detail inside it, could be an alternative to creating a better simulation.
To simulate the diffusion of spins in the case of diseases and injuries that has ef-
fected the axons, the crossing cylinders simulation method can be used to peruse the
diffusion between NFs and MTs [41].
The OGSE sequence is more sensitive to measure the diffusion inside the axons with
diameter of less than 3 µm [12]. Using this method to evaluate the signals inside the
axons will provide more accurate result than PGSE method.
Considering a different combination of δ and ∆to define the b-value in the scheme
file would lead to a more accurate result of diffusion. It ought to be noted that the
scheme file in this project just measured the Y and Z-directions, while using ply file
including undulant cylinders, it should define multiple blends of gradient directions
to evaluate the displacement of the particles in various situations between undulated
cylinders.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to measure the impact of the neurofilaments and
microtubules on the diffusion of water mulecules inside the axon. Overall using Monte-
Carlo Camino, 124 simulations were implemented to estimate the diffusion of particles
considering the various combination of NFs and MTs within the axon.
According to the results of the experiments, the factors affecting the diffusion in the
transverse direction of the axon can be divided into three categories:
1. Axon diameter
2. NFs and MTs diameter
3. NFs and MTs density
Diffusion-weighted MRI with PGSE sequence was used to evaluate the signal and
subsequently the diffusion.
The variation of signal attenuation observed in all defined scenarios suggest that
there is a measurable effect on the diffusion of particles in the transverse direction of
the axons, while on the longitudinal direction the diffusion of the particles remains
constant and in essence, the perpendicular diffusion is free (D = D0).
==PAGE:56==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
==PAGE:57==
A Appendix
50
Signal attenuation in Y-direction
Figure A.1
==PAGE:58==
A Appendix
51
Signal attenuation in Z-direction
Figure A.2
==PAGE:59==
A Appendix
52
log(S) in Y-direction
Figure A.3
==PAGE:60==
A Appendix
53
log(S) in Z-direction
Figure A.4
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
https://www.mechanobio.info/cytoskeleton-dynamics/what-is-the-
cytoskeleton/what-are-microtubules/#what-are-microtubules.
[2]
Daniel C Alexander et al. “Imaging brain microstructure with diffusion MRI:
practicality and applications”. In: NMR in Biomedicine (2017), e3841.
[3]
Daniel C Alexander et al. “Orientationally invariant indices of axon diameter
and density from diffusion MRI”. In: Neuroimage 52.4 (2010), pages 1374–1389.
[4]
Frederico AC Azevedo et al. “Equal numbers of neuronal and nonneuronal cells
make the human brain an isometrically scaled-up primate brain”. In: Journal
of Comparative Neurology 513.5 (2009), pages 532–541.
[5]
Peter J Basser and Evren Özarslan. “Introduction to diffusion MR”. In: Diffu-
sion MRI. Elsevier, 2009, pages 2–10.
[6]
Christian Beaulieu. “The biological basis of diffusion anisotropy”. In: Diffusion
MRI. Elsevier, 2014, pages 155–183.
[7]
Christian Beaulieu and Peter S Allen. “Determinants of anisotropic water dif-
fusion in nerves”. In: Magnetic resonance in medicine 31.4 (1994), pages 394–
400.
[8]
A Berk, Sl Zipursky, and H Lodish. Molecular Cell Biology 4th edition. 2000.
[9]
Manuel F Casanova, Ayman S El-Baz, Jasjit S Suri, et al. Imaging the brain in
autism. Springer, 2013.
[10]
Rakwoo Chang, Yongkyu Kwak, and Yeshitila Gebremichael. “Structural prop-
erties of neurofilament sidearms: sequence-based modeling of neurofilament ar-
chitecture”. In: Journal of molecular biology 391.3 (2009), pages 648–660.
[11]
Thomas L Chenevert, James A Brunberg, and James G Pipe. “Anisotropic
diffusion in human white matter: demonstration with MR techniques in vivo.”
In: Radiology 177.2 (1990), pages 401–405.
[12]
Ivana Drobnjak et al. “PGSE, OGSE, and sensitivity to axon diameter in diffu-
sion MRI: Insight from a simulation study”. In: Magnetic resonance in medicine
75.2 (2016), pages 688–700.
[13]
Julia M Edgar and Ian R Griffiths. “White matter structure: a microscopist’s
view”. In: Diffusion Mri. Elsevier, 2009, pages 74–103.
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
55
[14]
Gregory A Elder et al. “Age-related atrophy of motor axons in mice deficient
in the mid-sized neurofilament subunit”. In: The Journal of cell biology 146.1
(1999), pages 181–192.
[15]
R Fadić, J Vergara, and J Alvarez. “Microtubules and caliber of central and
peripheral processes of sensory axons”. In: Journal of Comparative Neurology
236.2 (1985), pages 258–264.
[16]
Feroze N Ghadially. Ultrastructural pathology of the cell and matrix: a text and
atlas of physiological and pathological alterations in the fine structure of cellular
and extracellular components. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2013.
[17]
John W Griffin and Danny F Watson. “Axonal transport in neurological dis-
ease”. In: Annals of Neurology: Official Journal of the American Neurological
Association and the Child Neurology Society 23.1 (1988), pages 3–13.
[18]
Erwin L Hahn. “Spin echoes”. In: Physical review 80.4 (1950), page 580.
[19]
Matt G Hall and Daniel C Alexander. “Convergence and parameter choice for
Monte-Carlo simulations of diffusion MRI”. In: IEEE transactions on medical
imaging 28.9 (2009), pages 1354–1364.
[20]
Lars G Hanson and Theis Groth. “Introduction to magnetic resonance imag-
ing techniques”. In: Clinical and research applications of diagnostic imaging
techniques: MR, PET, SPECT, CT and ultrasound: PhD Course. 2009.
[21]
Rebecca Heald and Eva Nogales. “Microtubule dynamics”. In: Journal of Cell
Science 115.1 (2002), pages 3–4. issn: 0021-9533. eprint: http://jcs.biologists.
org/content/115/1/3.full.pdf. url: http://jcs.biologists.org/
content/115/1/3.
[22]
Suzana Herculano-Houzel. “The human brain in numbers: a linearly scaled-up
primate brain”. In: Frontiers in human neuroscience 3 (2009), page 31.
[23]
Nobutaka Hirokawa, Shinsuke Niwa, and Yosuke Tanaka. “Molecular motors in
neurons: transport mechanisms and roles in brain function, development, and
disease”. In: Neuron 68.4 (2010), pages 610–638.
[24]
Sebastian Hitziger. “Modeling the variability of electrical activity in the brain”.
PhD thesis. Université Nice Sophia Antipolis, 2015.
[25]
Ferris Jabr. “Know your neurons: How to classify different types of neurons in
the brain’s forest”. In: Scientific American (2012).
[26]
Sarah Jäkel and Leda Dimou. “Glial cells and their function in the adult brain:
a journey through the history of their ablation”. In: Frontiers in cellular neuro-
science 11 (2017), page 24.
[27]
Derek K Jones. Diffusion mri. Oxford University Press, 2010.
[28]
Derek K Jones. “Gaussian modeling of the diffusion signal”. In: Diffusion MRI.
Elsevier, 2014, pages 87–104.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
56
[29]
K Kantarci et al. “Dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer disease: neurode-
generative patterns characterized by DTI”. In: Neurology 74.22 (2010), pages 1814–
1821.
[30]
John G Kirkwood et al. “Flow equations and frames of reference for isother-
mal diffusion in liquids”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 33.5 (1960),
pages 1505–1513.
[31]
Edward Koenig. Cell biology of the axon. Volume 48. Springer, 2009.
[32]
Nicolas Kunz, Analina R da Silva, and Ileana O Jelescu. “Intra-and extra-axonal
axial diffusivities in the white matter: Which one is faster?” In: NeuroImage 181
(2018), pages 314–322.
[33]
AV Kuznetsov and K Hooman. “Modeling traffic jams in intracellular transport
in axons”. In: International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 51.23-24 (2008),
pages 5695–5699.
[34]
Denis Le Bihan and Mami Iima. “Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging: what
water tells us about biological tissues”. In: PLoS biology 13.7 (2015), e1002203.
[35]
Malcolm H Levitt. Spin dynamics: basics of nuclear magnetic resonance. John
Wiley & Sons, 2001.
[36]
Molecular Cell Biology. 4th edition. eng. W. H. Freeman, 2000. isbn: 0716731363.
[37]
Ralph A Nixon and Aidong Yuan. Cytoskeleton of the nervous system. Springer,
2011.
[38]
Olivier Reynaud. “Time-dependent diffusion MRI in cancer: tissue modeling
and applications”. In: Frontiers in Physics 5 (2017), page 58.
[39]
Bente Schibye and Klaus Jørgen Klausen. Menneskets fysiologi. Hvile og arbejde.
eng. FADL’s Forlag, 1992.
[40]
Chun Shen and Wanlin Guo. “Ion Permeability of a Microtubule in Neuron En-
vironment”. In: The journal of physical chemistry letters 9.8 (2018), pages 2009–
2014.
[41]
S Shrestha et al. “Changes in Neurofilament and Microtubule Distribution fol-
lowing Focal Axon Compression”. In: (2015).
[42]
Peter M Steinert and Dennis R Roop. “Molecular and cellular biology of inter-
mediate filaments”. In: Annual review of biochemistry 57.1 (1988), pages 593–
625.
[43]
Edward O Stejskal and John E Tanner. “Spin diffusion measurements: spin
echoes in the presence of a time-dependent field gradient”. In: The journal of
chemical physics 42.1 (1965), pages 288–292.
[44]
K Susuki. “Myelin: a specialized membrane for cell communication”. In: Nat.
Educ. 3 (January 2010).
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
57
[45]
Mohammad Kazem Tarzamni, Ali Kiani Nazarlou, and Jamil Abdolmoham-
madi. “Acta HealthMedica (ISSN: 2414-6528) http://www. ActaHealthMedica.
com”. In: (2016).
[46]
Carsten Thomsen, O Henriksen, and P Ring. “In vivo measurement of water
self diffusion in the human brain by magnetic resonance imaging”. In: Acta
radiologica 28.3 (1987), pages 353–361.
[47]
Haitao Wang et al. “Neurofilament proteins in axonal regeneration and neu-
rodegenerative diseases”. In: Neural regeneration research 7.8 (2012), page 620.
[48]
Jane A Westfall and John C Kinnamon. “A second sensory—motor—interneuron
with neurosecretory granules inHydra”. In: Journal of neurocytology 7.3 (1978),
pages 365–379.
[49]
Aidong Yuan et al. “α-Internexin is structurally and functionally associated
with the neurofilament triplet proteins in the mature CNS”. In: Journal of
Neuroscience 26.39 (2006), pages 10006–10019.
[50]
Aidong Yuan, Mala V Rao, Ralph A Nixon, et al. Neurofilaments at a glance.
2012.
[51]
Aidong Yuan et al. “Peripherin is a subunit of peripheral nerve neurofilaments:
implications for differential vulnerability of CNS and peripheral nervous system
axons”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 32.25 (2012), pages 8501–8508.
[52]
By Daisy Yuhas and Ferris Jabr. “Know your neurons: Meet the glia”. In: Sci-
entific American 18 (2012).
[53]
Qinzhang Zhu, Sébastien Couillard-Després, and Jean-Pierre Julien. “Delayed
maturation of regenerating myelinated axons in mice lacking neurofilaments”.
In: Experimental neurology 148.1 (1997), pages 299–316.
