==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark - DTU
Solvent design for chromatographic
separation and puriﬁcation
Master Thesis
End of Degree: M.Sc. Chemical and Biochemical engineering
By:
Supervised by:
Anders Jul Stricker Olsen
Associate Professor, Jens Abildskov
PhD Student, Kristian Meyer
Process and Systems Engineering Center (PROSYS Research Centre)
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
February 27, 2019
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis is concerned with the idea of constructing a screening method for solvent
selection for chromatographic separations. by applying a variety of diﬀerent group contri-
bution based models it is the aim to create a generic and easy to use framework structure
able to generate a list of suitable solvent systems for a given liquid chromatographic
separation task. The main case study of interest is the chromatographic puriﬁcation of
Hesperidin.
The built screening method used O. Odele and S. Macchietto’s feasibility rules to generate
a long list of solvents that passed the simple chemical feasibility conditions. The models
of Gani and Constantinou for estimating melting point and boiling point for chemicals
was used to accommodate diﬀerent operating temperatures. A consideration of toxicity
was implemented based on Martin and Youngs work on the topic. The UNIFAC model
of Fredenslund was used to estimate activity coeﬃcients and partition coeﬃcients which
served to describe solute(s), the mobile phase(s) and the stationary phase.
A validation of each estimation method were conducted to test if the implementation was
performed correctly and if the methods gave reliable results. All the methods used in
this thesis was compared to experimental data or known systems from the literature with
satisfying results.
A clear objective, from the start, was to ﬁnd a suitable solvent system with the abil-
ity to dissolve and carry the solute Hesperidin through a reversed phase chromatographic
column. The Hesperidin case served as a great case since preliminary experimental work
had been performed by other students at DTU. Most recently DMSO + MeOH was tested
as solvent system for Hesperidin with promising results. These results served as bench-
mark case for the further analysis. Diﬀerent screenings were performed, ﬁrst with the
objective of ﬁnding a two-component system and later a three-component system. With
the screening methods assessment it was noticed that the preliminary work that was used
in the benchmark case, wasn’t as promising as initial belief. A deeper analysis was con-
ducted and a hypothesis was constructed about the desorption-adsorption constant being
too low, meaning that the solvent was unequipped to a chromatographic system. The
three-component system was investigated as solution to the desorption-adsorption issue.
The issues encountered in the investigations led to a set of improvements and new features
for the screening method framework. Adjustment was made to the boundary conditions
as improvement of the framework. A new feature that not only took the solute but also
the impurities into account was implemented making it possible to select a solvent system
with the added objective of making the separation of solute and impurities as easy as
possible.
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Resum´e
Denne afhandling omhandler ideen at opbygge en selekteringsmetode for solvent udvæl-
gelse til kromatograﬁske separationsprocesser. Ved at anvende en række gruppe bidrags-
baserede modeller er m˚alet, at opbygge en generisk og nemt anvendelig metode, der er
i stand til at generere en liste over egnede solvent systemer for en given kromatograﬁsk
adskillelsesopgave. Som casestudy bliver den kromatograﬁske oprensning af Hesperidin
benyttet.
Den endelige selekteringsmetode anvendte O. Odele og S. Macchietto’s struktursregler
for at generere en lang liste af solventer, der opfyldte de kemiske strukturbetingelser.
Modellerne Gani og Constantinou blev brugt til estimering af smeltepunkt temperaturer
og kogepunkt temperaturer for at være i overensstemmelse med eventuelle operations
betingelser. En vurdering af giftigheden af de individuelle solventer, blev implementeret
ud fra Martin og Youngs metode. Fredenslunds UNIFAC-model blev brugt til at estimere
aktivitetskoeﬃcienter og partitionskoeﬃcienter, der blev benyttet til beskrivelse af kom-
ponenterne, den mobile fase og den stationære fase.
En validering af hver estimeringsmetode blev udført for at teste om implementeringen
var udført korrekt, og om metoderne gav p˚alidelige resultater. Alle metoder anvendt i
denne afhandling blev sammenlignet med eksperimentelle data eller kendte systemer fra
litteraturen som ved sammenligning gav tilfredsstillende resultater.
Et klart m˚al var fra starten var at ﬁnde et egnet solventsystem med evnen til at opløse
og bære det opløste Hesperidin gennem en RP kromatograﬁsk søjle. Hesperidin-casen
fungerede godt, da der forg˚aende for denne afhandling allerede var udført en god portion
arbejde omhandlende dette emne. Senest blev DMSO + metanol testet som solventsys-
tem til oprensning af Hesperidin med lovende resultater. Disse resultater fungerede som
udgangspunkt for den videre analyse. Forskellige selekteringer blev udført, først med det
form˚al at ﬁnde et to-komponentsystem og senere et tre-komponentsystem. Med hjælp fra
selekteringsmetoden blev det bemærket, at det tidligere arbejde, ikke var s˚a lovende som
først troet. En dybere analyse blev udført, og en hypotese blev konstrueret om at ligevægt-
skonstanten mellem den stationære og mobile fase var for lav. Dette betød, at komponen-
ten (Hesperidin) ikke interagerede med det den stationære fase. Tre-komponentsystemet
blev undersøgt som løsning p˚a dette problem.
De problemer, der opstod i undersøgelserne, førte til et sæt forbedringer og nye funk-
tioner til screeningmetoden. Der blev foretaget tilpasning til grænsevilk˚arene. En ny
funktion, som ikke alene tog komponentet, men ogs˚a de urenheder, der blev taget i be-
tragtning, hvilket gør det muligt at vælge solventsystem med det tilsigtede m˚al at gøre
adskillelsen af komponentet og urenheder s˚a let som muligt.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This project was written, reported, performed and conducted as part of the ﬁnal as-
sessment of the M.Sc. degree in Chemical and Biochemical Engineering. The project
was performed at the Process and Systems Engineering (PROSYS) research center at the
department of chemical engineering (KT) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
I want to thank my supervisors from DTU, Associate professor, Jens Abildskov and Ph.D.
student, Kristian Meyer for the countless meetings throughout the project, which ensured
that the project was heading in the right direction and had relevant academic content.
I appreciate the people around me during the project time and especially Kevin Creutzberg
Feldmann and Joakim Peter Madsen who never failed to light up the atmosphere. The
biggest thanks of all go to my girlfriend, Sandie Akkermans, who have been incredibly
understanding through tough periods, especially up to the deadline.
I hereby declare that the work represented in this report is carried
out by me/the author.
Signature
Date
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Greek letter notations
Symbol
Units
Description
γC
i
−
Combinatorial part of the activity coeﬃcient
γR
i
−
Resudual part of the activity coeﬃcient
γ∞
i
−
Activity coeﬃcient of solute i at inﬁnite dilution
Φk
−
Phase ratio
φ
−
Volume fraction
∆
−
Delta (diﬀerence)
Roman letter notations
Symbol
Units
Description
anm
K
Group interaction parameters between group n
and m
Rk
cm3/mol
Relative volume
ri
cm3/mol
Volume parameter
Qk
cm2
Relative surface area
qi
cm2
Area parameter
vk(i)
−
Occurrance of group k in compound i
Ni
−
Contribution parameter
Ci
−
Quantity parameter
Mj
−
Contribution parameter
Dj
−
Quantity parameter
vj
−
Valencies for a given subgroup j
Tm
K
Normal melting point
tm
K
Normal melting point contribution
Tb
K
Normal boiling point
tb
K
Normal boiling point contribution
LC50
mol / L
Toxicity parameter
Kow
−
Partition coeﬃcient
x0
−
Composition of octanol
xw
−
Composition of water
nbas
−
Number of groups in basisset
nmax
−
Number of maximum legal groups to form a com-
pound
nmin
−
Number of minimum legal groups to form a com-
pound
e%
−
error in percentages.
R2
−
Coeﬃcient of determination.
Ki,j
−
Closeness ration between solute i and j.
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Abbreviations
Symbol
Description
GMO
Gen Manipulated Organism
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
LC
Liquid Chromatography
HPLC
High Pressure Liquid Chromatography
RPLC
Reversed-Phase Liquid Chromatography
HILC
Hydrophobic-Interaction Liquid Chromatography
HILILC
Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography
SEC
Size Exclusion Chromatography
IEX
Ion-Exchange Chromatography
CAMD
Computer-Aided Molecular Design
ASOG
Analytical solution of groups
GCM
Group Contribution Method
GC
Group contribution
RP
Reverse phase
CPU
Central processing unit
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resum´e
iii
Preface
v
Nomenclature
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background on chromatography and CAMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
The concept of liquid chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.2
Stationary phase in liquid chromatography
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.3
The mobile phase in liquid chromatography
. . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.4
Solvent selection procedures for separation processes . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.5
The UNIFAC method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.1
Tasks description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3.2
Gantt chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Applicability of CAMD on liquid chromatography
11
2.1
Types of liquid Chromatography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Reverse-phase chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.2
Other types of liquid chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Computer-Aided molecular design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
CAMD methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
relating GC-CAMD to retention time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Material and Methods
19
3.1
Experimental materials and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Shake-ﬂask method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2
Calibration curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.3
Used equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.4
HPLC program and sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Computer-aided methods and tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
MATLAB for for CAMD implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
ChromX for analysis of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Design of screening method for solvent selection
23
4.1
Initial framework procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Initial framework structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Case: Solvents for separation of Hesperidin in a RPLC system
. . . . . .
24
4.3.1
Introduction to Hesperidin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.2
Case objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
ix
==PAGE:12==
4.4
Model selections and model constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4.1
Structural feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.2
Melting point and boiling point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.3
Toxicity of candidate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.4
Activity coeﬃcients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.5
Hydrophobicity of solvent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Implementation of screening method for solvent selection
31
5.1
Flowchart of screening method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Data library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Input speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Description of MATLAB functions in screening method
. . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Test and validation of implementation procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5.1
Molecular feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5.2
Estimation of melting and boiling point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5.3
Toxicity index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5.4
UNIFAC estimation of activity coeﬃcients . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5.5
Partition coeﬃcient estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Results and Analysis for Chromatographic separation of Hesperidin
45
6.1
General input speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Hesperidin benchmark case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2.1
Mobile phase investigation - Benchmark case . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2.2
Stationary phase investigation - Benchmark case . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2.3
Summary of benchmark case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Alternatives to benchmark case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3.1
Two component system: (1) Methanol - (2) Solvent
. . . . . . . .
49
6.3.2
Summary of the two component solvent system investigation
. . .
59
6.4
Three-component system: (1) Methanol - (2) water - (3) solvent
. . . . .
60
6.4.1
Changes in solvent concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.4.2
Changes in methanol concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.4.3
Experimental validation of the three component results
. . . . . .
61
6.5
Investigation on the eﬀect of changing in stationary phase . . . . . . . . .
65
6.6
improvements to the screening method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.6.1
Change in search goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.6.2
Screening method with respect to impurities
. . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.7
Changes in stationary phase with respect to impurities . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.8
Separation of Hesperidin and Narigin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
Conclusion
77
6.9
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
Appendices
81
Appendix A - UNIFAC properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Appendix B - RPLC column information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
References
85
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The science and knowledge of the human body are continuously expanding day by day
and the diseases that were previously obscure, are now characterized in such details that
almost every sickness can be treated with the right medicine [1]. People live longer each
generation, which has caused new complex diseases and illnesses to emerge.
Lifestyle
illnesses like diabetes which in many cases are caused by bad food choices have become
a huge strain on society [2]. The growth of U.S population with diagnosed diabetes is
shown in 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Number and percentages of U.S. Population of diagnosed diabetes
patients from 1958 - 2015 [3].
The increase in the number of sickness and the increasing knowledge concerning these,
many diverse and complex medicines have emerged to the market over the last couple of
decades. Many of these medicines belong to the same family or category called biophar-
maceuticals. Biopharmaceuticals are deﬁned as a drug product which is extracted or semi
synthesized from biological sources.
With a greater understanding of bio-science, a greater understanding of the biotechno-
logical ﬁeld have followed [4]. Overpopulation has put a huge strain on farmers and food
manufacturers all over the world, thus a crucial need for more eﬀective and sustainable
food sources is of great importance and have a high value to the world. A huge increase
in Gen-Manipulated-Organisms (GMO’s) and pesticides have been a crucial part of opti-
mizing the eﬀect of corn-, fruit- and vegetable production.
Organizations like US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for the con-
trol and supervision of the food and drug industry in the US, which is one of the biggest
and most lucrative markets.
They are founded on basis of protecting and promoting
1
==PAGE:14==
2
human health and ensuring high product quality and purity [5]. constantly increasing
quality and purity demand from organizations such FDA have resulted in a need for more
speciﬁc pharmaceuticals with higher purity and complexity than previously. With more
complicated and challenging impurities, that can be time consuming and thus expensive
to remove. These new products that require more specialized production and puriﬁcation
methods are very expensive to develop and produce in industrial scale. The pharmaceuti-
cal industry is, in fact, one of the most capital intensive industries in the world and does
not seem to change direction any time soon [6].
Up to 80% of the total manufacturing cost of a product is caused by downstream process-
ing, puriﬁcation and polishing [7,8]. Among all the unit operations used in the production
of these products; chromatography is by far the most expensive, as they usually are placed
as ﬁnal step in the puriﬁcation and thereby removing the last amount of waste. The ap-
plication of chromatography has been widely used as analytical research tool but more
importantly as a preparative separation tool in the large scale production of pharma-
ceuticals. A great deal of work has been dedicated to optimizing the chromatographic
separation and many companies have established specialized departments into optimiz-
ing of chromatographic separations. The greatest issues connected to preparative chro-
matography is feasibility [9]. Even a small optimization operation in a chromatographic
separation step will likely have a great impact on the total cost of production.
==PAGE:15==
1.1. BACKGROUND ON CHROMATOGRAPHY AND CAMD
3
1.1
Background on chromatography and CAMD
1.1.1
The concept of liquid chromatography
Chromatography consists of a mobile phase and a stationary phase. Liquid chromatogra-
phy is a type of chromatography and has its name from the fact that the mobile phase is
liquid [9, 10]. Liquid chromatography is supported by a column and an illustration of a
typical liquid column chromatographic separation can be seen in Figure 1.2.
Mobile  
phase
Time
Time
Collecting 
device
Column
Stationary 
phase
Component A
Component B
Component C
Figure 1.2: Illustration of a liquid chromatographic column separation of
component A, B and C over time, displayed with stationary phase exposed [10].
Both the mobile and the stationary phase are illustrated on ﬁgure 1.2. The mobile phase
consists of a mixture of components dissolved in a ﬂuid traveling through a ﬁxed struc-
ture called the stationary phase. The stationary phase is speciﬁcally chosen to interact
with the mobile phase, causing the individual components in the mobile phase to travel
through the stationary phase at a diﬀerent velocity and thus separating the mobile phase
into their individual components. The mixture of components, to be separated, is called
the application and is usually loaded into the column and forms a layer in the top/start
of the column. The volume of the application can vary based on the puriﬁcation step
and production size. Chromatographic separations are typically performed as batch unit
operations, where the application is a ﬁxed volume. A typical illustration of a liquid
chromatography setup can be found in ﬁgure 1.3. The mobile phase is forced by gravity
or pressure through the stationary phase. The mobile phase will likely contain more than
one solvent [11]. The components in the application will have a diﬀerent aﬃnity towards
the stationary phase which will cause the solutes to separate at diﬀerent rates. This phe-
nomena serves as the primary driving force for the separation in a given chromatography
column, also seen in ﬁgure 1.2. A high aﬃnity towards the stationary phase leads to
a long retention time in the column and the elution time will thus also be long. If the
component has a high aﬃnity towards the mobile phase (or poor aﬃnity towards the
stationary phase), the retention time and the elution time will be short [12].
It is important to understand the diﬀerence between preparative chromatography and
analytical chromatography. Analytical chromatography is only used to characterize com-
==PAGE:16==
1.1. BACKGROUND ON CHROMATOGRAPHY AND CAMD
4
Mobile phase
Pump
Injector
Column
Detector
Product
Waste
Figure 1.3: Typical model design of a preparative liquid chromatographic
separation, with the intake of a mobile phase through a pump into a column
where a detector separates product form purity [13].
pounds and sample testing. After a successful column run the mobile phase is dumped
into a waste container together with everything else, except for the stationary phase,
which just needs to be regenerated. Analytical chromatography is performed with very
small amounts (less than 1 ml) and it would not make much sense to collect such small
amounts. The purpose of preparative chromatography is to separate the solute of interest
from other solutes (impurities) and thus purifying the desired component and collect it.
This type of operation is better suited for production scale where the volumes tend to be
much larger [13]. Figure 1.2 illustrates how a typical design could look like. The products
are collected separately so it can be puriﬁed further or collected as is [13]. Two aspects
are very important to grasp for the later understanding of the project - The stationary
and mobile phase. To get a better understanding of these concepts, the stationary phase
is described in details in section 1.1.2, while the mobile phase is described in section 1.1.3.
1.1.2
Stationary phase in liquid chromatography
The stationary phase is a stationary medium, which is either 1) a stagnant bulk liquid, 2)
a liquid layer on a solid surface or 3) an interfacial layer between a liquid and a solid [14].
The stationary phase has so far been characterized as being one of two elements present
in the column. While that is true, it is necessary to go a bit more into details with the
stationary phase, which can be divided into two key elements: The stationary structure
and ligands. This report won’t go much into details with the stationary structure, but a
small understanding is of importance. The stationary structure also called the packing
material is an object in a column, which serves to enlarge and utilize the speciﬁc surface
area per unit volume and to improve the mass transfer kinetics and the column eﬃciency
[14]. An illustration of the relationship between the stationary structure and the ligands
are shown in ﬁgure 2.1. The ligand is attached, not only on the outer particle surface
but also inside the pores. The particles usually have a spherical shape as this provides a
much higher resistance towards pressure and does not bend out of shape, which helps to
promote a clear ﬂow path through the column.
The stationary structures are usually made from a porous material since this is the best
way to maximize the speciﬁc surface area per unit volume.
The stationary structure
can be produced in many materials, though the most commonly used is either silica or
polymers. Certain things are important to know about the structure before designing a
chromatographic separation procedure. First is the pH stability: The LC columns are
==PAGE:17==
1.1. BACKGROUND ON CHROMATOGRAPHY AND CAMD
5
Particle
(Stationary structure)
Ligand
(Stationary phase)
Porous surface 
Figure 1.4: Illustration of the stationary ligands on a spherical structure with
a close-up of the particle structure.
typically stable in a pH range of 2-8. This is also where the silica particle is stable. If it
is desired to operate beyond this range, then maybe a more pH resistant structure like
a polymer-based type is to prefer. Second is the mechanical stability: If high pressure
occurs (as they usually do in LC), then silica is likely the best choice. Silica stationary
structures are stable, if well packed, at more than 100 MPa with no problem. Polymer
choices are less stable under pressure and should be avoided if high pressure is crucial [15].
1.1.3
The mobile phase in liquid chromatography
The stationary phases are always produced to be compatible with most organic solvents,
otherwise, they are of little relevance to the companies that purchase them. The real
challenge comes when the mobile phase is chosen. The mobile phase is diﬃcult to char-
acterize as it diﬀers from case to case. However, as a rule of thumb, a few things can be
done when a mobile phase is prepared to minimize problems for the separation. Firstly,
always use HPLC-grade solvents, as those solvents have been puriﬁed to an extent that is
intended HPLC separations. HPLC grade is usually above 99.99 %. Secondly, all solvents
and anything else that ﬂows through the column should ﬁrst go through a 0.45 µm ﬁlter
so the column does not clod [15].
The simplest description of the mobile phase is a moving liquid, which is characterized
by its composition, solubility with solvents, ultraviolet (UV) transparency, viscosity and
miscibility with other solvents There are many diﬀerent types of chromatography and they
diﬀer immensely in the way the stationary and mobile phase works and interact [14,16].
However, the underlying principles remain the same. The mobile phase is usually a good
place to investigate optimization possibilities since they can lead to great capital savings.
1.1.4
Solvent selection procedures for separation processes
Although the stationary phase has great importance it is of little value without a well-
deﬁned solvent system. The importance of a proper solvent has been stated already, but
the solvent selection itself has not. It can be very time consuming and expensive to ﬁnd
==PAGE:18==
1.1. BACKGROUND ON CHROMATOGRAPHY AND CAMD
6
a proper solvent or buﬀer to carry the solutes to the stationary phase and later elute the
solutes [17].
Traditional approach
A practice that has been widely used when it comes to solvent selection and creation
of solvent systems for HPLC is the use of solvent classiﬁcation schemes. By creating a
schematic classiﬁcation of a known list of solvents, a tool for quick solvent selection can
be established or constructed. Snyder et al. [17] have made such a classiﬁcation scheme
speciﬁcally to classify solvents with diﬀerent functional groups.
Figure 1.5:
Classiﬁcation scheme of multi-component solvent systems.
Reprinted from Ref. [17]
The diﬀerent types of classiﬁcation groups were then related to diﬀerent parameters,
creating a tool that quickly and easily could estimate many diﬀerent properties. This ap-
proach is eﬀective when the separation task is well known and when the user is absolutely
certain that a suitable solvent is among the original list of solvents. What happens when
the knowledge of a certain separation is sparse or if the limited list of solvents does not
include any suitable solvent?
Computer-aided approach
Computer-aided molecular design (CAMD) is an eﬀective, time-eﬃcient and cost-eﬃcient
way to generate a suitable solvent for a given separation task. By creating a simulation
routine, it is possible to generate a long list of compounds, calculate appropriate parame-
ters and hold them up against a certain goal. A great way to implement a CAMD routine
is by the use of a group contribution method (GCM). A group contribution method cre-
ates a library of subgroups that each serves as building blocks to form larger complete
molecules. In a group contribution method, each subgroup is correlated to one or more
thermodynamic properties and the subgroup has an individual contribution to the total
value of that property. Such procedures can be very helpful in research and optimization
==PAGE:19==
1.2. PROBLEM STATEMENT
7
related work when no clear solution is known or if it is too expensive to perform a long
list of experiments [18].
Diﬀerent types of GCM exists. Some consider atoms as subgroups, meaning that C (car-
bon) is one subgroup and H (hydrogen) is another. Other types of GCM sees subgroups
as fractional parts of a molecule, meaning that CH3 is one subgroup and CH2 is another.
The second type is by far the most widely used and is correlated to more thermodynamic
parameters [18].
The GCM originated from the idea that most organic components were built of carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, halogens, and sulfur or phosphorus. That was collected with
the fact that organic compounds only are constructed with three types of bonds: single,
double and triple bonds. The last building block are the diﬀerent types of functional
groups, which in some ways resemble the normal subgroups. However, functional groups
are more complex as they posses certain distinctive characteristics that normal subgroups
does not include.
So, they are described as individual groups and not as atoms and
bonds [18].
By utilizing such a method it is possible to reduce the needed data to no more to no
more than 50-100 subgroups with known contributions instead of knowing the properties
of many million compounds.
1.1.5
The UNIFAC method
The UNIFAC method is used to estimate activity coeﬃcients.
The original UNIFAC
method was developed in 1975 and today several extensions have been made to focus the
UNIFAC group contribution method to better prediction of Polymers, electrolytes and
so on. The UNIFAC method is a semi-empirical group contribution-based model that
classiﬁes subgroups based on the number of free attachments (how many bonds can be
made). Groups with only 1 attachment are categorized as terminal groups. This means
that they no matter what will be at the end of a molecule. All other groups with 2 or
more free attachments are called intermediate groups. The UNIFAC model is developed
to liquid/gas phase predictions but is also applicable for predicting the liquid/liquid phase
activity of the solute that is present in the mobile phase [18].
1.2
Problem statement
The scope of this project to investigate solvent selection for liquid chromatographic column
separation. The objective is to establish a systematic and structured screening method
to select a suitable solvent for the mobile phase buﬀer system. The aim is to use informa-
tion like the group contribution method and relevant thermodynamic data to construct a
systematic and automated computer-aided screening method to ﬁnd suitable solvent can-
didates able to perform the desired separation in a chromatographic column. A further
desire is to test and compare the screening results with actual laboratory experiments on
a realistic case to further investigate the usefulness of the program.
1.3
Project plan
During the ﬁrst few weeks of the thesis, a Gantt chart was drafted to get an overview
of the project timeline. - A crucial part of the takeoﬀis to ensure an exhaustive project
with time to perform the individual project parts and meet deadlines with supervisors.
The master thesis has a time span from August 28th, 2018, until February 27th, 2019,
==PAGE:20==
1.3. PROJECT PLAN
8
which gives a total of six months or 26 weeks.
Disclamer: The following two sections have been updated so it corresponded to the
actual workﬂow.
1.3.1
Tasks description
Task 1: Initialization
At the start of this thesis, only the title was decided. The ﬁrst few weeks were ﬁlled with
collecting reading material and learning more about the topic. It was also in this phase
that the scope of the project was decided and a reasonable timeline for each part of the
scope objectives was constructed.
Task 2: Investigation
Secondly, a deeper and more thorough investigation of the topic and each project part
were conducted.
The knowledge gathered in this task was more detailed than in the
initialization and the focus in this was focused In search of literature with actual model
descriptions that could be useful for the framework implementation.
Task 3: Design and Implementation
The main part of this project is the development of the screening method so the vast
majority of the time spent is dedicated to the implementation of the method. A large
part of the implementation is to validate each sub-part. Task 3 is divided into three parts,
which all are very time-consuming.
• Develop the framework structure and the parts included.
• Implement the screening method in MATLAB.
• Validate each part of the screening method.
Task 4: Case analysis
A suitable and realistic case study was chosen. Properties for this case were collected and
the case solute was deﬁned so it was applicable to the screening method. The case was
implemented into the screening method and thorough analysis was performed. A further
perspective was to test the case results in an experimental setup.
Task 5: Finalizing
The project was ﬁnalized while still not being completely done with the fourth task. Only
the last week was completely dedicated to ﬁnalizing the project. This was not the original
plan and not the ideal case, but necessary since it was decided critical for the project to
be rounded up with an experimental setup.
==PAGE:21==
1.3. PROJECT PLAN
9
1.3.2
Gantt chart
Figure 1.6: Gantt Chart showing the project plan.
Year
2018
2019
Week
35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Initialization
literature gathering
Project scoping
Project planing
Investigation
Literature study
Design and implementation
Design framework structure
Implement screening method
Validation of method
Case analysis
Deﬁne case
Implementation and simulations
Experimental analysis
Finalizing
Final reporting
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Applicability of CAMD on liquid
chromatography
The purpose of this chapter is to investigate studies and topics from the open literature
with high relevance to this project. The chapter will include a short description of such
literature and advocate thier relevance to this thesis.
2.1
Types of liquid Chromatography
Many types of liquid chromatography exists. Some of the most common types of liquid
chromatography are described in the subsections beneath.
2.1.1
Reverse-phase chromatography
Reverse-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) is estimated to be applied for between 75%
and up to 90% of all liquid chromatography separations worldwide [19]. This makes RPLC
the most used type of column. Its high popularity can be explained by its broad range of
applications, spanning a wide range of molecular size, and ionicity [12,16]. The stationary
phase consists of multiple hydrophobic compounds of which the most predominant has
18 carbon chains. The hydrophobic solutes(components in the mobile phase) interacts
with the ligands and form a reversible non-polar complexes and minimizing the speciﬁc
surface area. The water molecules will be in a state of disorganization which will decrease
the systems free energy. The most hydrophobic solutes interact more strongly with the
stationary phase and will elute later than the less hydrophobic solutes. The mobile phase
is usually composed of a mixture of weak strength solvents like water and stronger solvents
like methanol, tetrahydrofuran or acetonitrile [15]. A solvent is either weak and strong
relative to the material being dissolved.
2.1.2
Other types of liquid chromatography
Hydrophobic-interaction chromatography
Hydrophobic-interaction liquid chromatography (HILC) is very similar to RPLC because
both use hydrophobic interactions to separate solutes. The diﬀerence can be seen in the
interaction strength, which is much weaker in HILC than RPLC due to weaker solvents.
The solvent in HILC has a high-to-moderate salt concentration, where the elution is
achieved by a downward going gradient in salt concentration. This makes the HILC much
milder compared to the RPLC because the separation is performed in a non-denaturing
area, which prevents disruption in the proteins tertiary structure and biological activity
[15].
11
==PAGE:24==
2.1. TYPES OF LIQUID CHROMATOGRAPHY
12
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the interactions that takes place during the elution
inside an RPLC. [45]
Hydrophilic interaction chromatography
The Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILILC) is typically used when
RPLC is a bad choice, which would be the case if the solutes are polar. The station-
ary phase in HILILC is polar, often made with an amide-bonded phase. HILILC has
been applied to a broad range of applications but one major setback is that the retention
mechanisms still to this day is debated. However, the most accepted explanation is based
on the partitioning mechanism between the layer of water and the stationary phase [20].
Size exclusion chromatography
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) is a type of chromatography where the stationary
phase has no ligands. The column is packed with ﬁne porous beads, often composed of
polymers or agarose much similar to the stationary structure of any other type of liquid
chromatography. The solutes in the mobile phase are separated only on the diﬀerences
in size, making the pore size the primary driving force. It is a method relevant to the
separation of big molecules such as proteins and polymers [13].
Ion-exchange chromatography
The mechanism in Ion-exchange chromatography is mainly driven by the electrostatic
interactions between hydrated ions from the solutes and oppositely charged functional
groups on the surface of the stationary phase. Ion-exchange thereby separates solutes
based on their diﬀerence in net surface charge [21,22]. Ion-exchange have high selectivity
==PAGE:25==
2.2. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN
13
making it possible to separate solutes with very small diﬀerences in net charge. This
type of operation is greatly applicable to the separation of bases and acids and any other
solutes with exposed net charges. The elution of such an operation is usually performed
by increasing the salt concentration, thereby increasing the ionic strength in the mobile
phase. Sometimes it is easier to increase pH instead, as this also will result in an ionic
strength increase. In both cases, the salt ions will compete with the bound solutes for
the charge on the stationary phase. If the salt concentration gets high enough the ions
will win that competition, which will start the separation of the solutes. The solutes with
the highest net charge at the selected pH will be the last to elute as they are retained
strongly to the stationary phase. Likewise, the lowest net charge will elute ﬁrst because
of weak retention to the stationary phase [21,22].
Aﬃnity
Aﬃnity chromatography is the most selective type of chromatography. The stationary
phase is composed of biologically related agents that are selected speciﬁcally to individual
separation. The mechanism behind aﬃnity chromatography is a speciﬁc reversible inter-
action between the solutes and the stationary phase [8]. Aﬃnity chromatography is used
to separate and purify products that are present in the biological systems such as binding
of a hormone to a receptor or an antibody to its antigen [8].
2.2
Computer-Aided molecular design
The concepts of CAMD has already been touched upon in the background section. This
section creates a deeper understanding of the concept and where and how it makes sense
to use.
2.2.1
CAMD methodology
The formulation of a CAMD problem is essential to success. Even though it is a method,
which is great if only sparse data is collected, at the same time it is a method that only
really can be utilized if the user/creator of the method knows how to deﬁne the needs and
goal for a given case. Figure 2.2 shows an illustration of the work ﬂow when a CAMD
problem is solved. A CAMD method is usually used as a routine to design a product [18].
However, the product in this thesis is a solvent.
Process Design 
”Manufacture & test 
product”
CAMD
”Generate & select 
alternatives”
Pre – Design 
”Define needs & goals” 
Product design
Process-Product Design 
Figure 2.2: Steps of the CAMD design that relates to product design. [18]
==PAGE:26==
2.2. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN
14
The UNIFAC method, brieﬂy described in the background chapter, is a semi-empirical
estimation method that utilizes the GCM principles to estimate activity coeﬃcients. In
fact, most of the models relatable to such problems are semi-empirical GC methods [18].
For the understanding of the later chapters in the thesis, two topics regarding GC methods
are crucial.
• Group contribution methods for property predictions.
• Group contribution method for estimation of activity coeﬃcients.
Group contribution methods for property predictions.
As brieﬂy described, in the background section, group contribution methods are based on
the principles that any compound can be divided into fragments, usually atoms, bonds or
groups of atoms [46]. - In the literature this is also described as the additive principle. All
the individual fragments have a speciﬁc contribution (a partial value). The contributions
are calculated when the GCM is developed. A GCM is built on the basis of experimental
data. The property of a compound is found by summation of all the individual fragment
contributions [46]. An example of this can be found in Figure 2.3, for the compound
ethanol.
Figure 2.3: Example of division of ethanol molecule into atomic, bond and
group structural fragments [46]
Many types of GCM have been presented in the literature but they can all be expressed
as a generic form, that describes the summation of each contribution, Ci, and the number
of times the individual contribution occurs in a compound,Ni.
Property =
X
i
NiCi
(2.1)
This types of GCM can be divided into 1st level models and multiple level models. Con-
stantinou and Gani (1994) [18] presented a two-level GCM. The ﬁrst level is similar to
other GCMs as shown in equation 2.1. By just using the ﬁrst level of the model, an esti-
mation with the same accuracy as the method from equation 2.1 would be achieved. The
==PAGE:27==
2.2. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN
15
second level of the model uses the second order groups that have the ﬁrst order groups as
building blocks. By taking level one and level two into account in the group contribution,
the method is able to increase the accuracy in terms of more accurate activity coeﬃcients.
The model they emphasize in the work by Gani (1994) have following form:
f(X) =
X
i
NiCi + W
X
j
MjDj
(2.2)
Where, Ci is the contribution of the ﬁrst-order groups of group type i and Ni is the number
of times that same group occurs. Mj is the contribution of the second-order group that
occurs Dj number of times. W is a constant that is assigned to unity in the second-order
estimation. In the case where W is 0, the equation is reduced to the same expression as
eq. 2.1.
Diﬀerent opinions are debated about this expansion of the original model. Not which
model is more precise, as the method at hand is more detailed but also much harder to
implement and to use with complex structured molecules.
The model regression was used to develop thermodynamic expressions, for the estimation
of critical temperature, critical pressure, critical volume, melting point, normal boiling
point, standard Gibbs energy, standard enthalpy of vaporization at 298K and standard
enthalpy of formation at 298K. These thermodynamic expressions were developed with
a generic mindset meaning that the expression also could be used by only 1st level GC
methods. Among these property estimation method the estimation method for normal
melting point and normal boiling point is highlighted, as they have an important role in
the solvent selection procedure in this project.
GCM for estimation of activity coeﬃcients (UNIFAC)
Design processes in chemical engineering typically involve separation of liquid mixtures,
thereby creating a need for characterizing those mixtures. Information of such requires
quantitative estimation of the ﬂuid phase equilibria(s). Performing experimental proce-
dures to collect suﬃcient information is often time-consuming and ﬁlled with uncertain-
ties. The study at hand suggests a rational method for predicting activity coeﬃcients
in non-electrolyte liquid mixtures, which is both fast and standardized. The method is
called the UNIFAC method, which is already explained shortly in the background. Over
the years many UNIFAC methods have been developed, but it is the one by Fredenslund
(1975) is known as the original UNIFAC [24].
The UNIFAC method builds upon an idea called solution-of-groups.
It is a concept
developed by Derr and Deal (1969) analytical solution of groups (ASOG) model where
activity coeﬃcients are related to interactions between structural groups. This enables
an estimation of activity coeﬃcients without any use of experimental procedures. These
structural groups are called subgroups, as mentioned before, and a list of them can be
found in Appendix A. The activity coeﬃcients depend not only on the relative volume, R
and the relative surface area, Q but also the interaction between subgroups, A (all three
parameters listed in Appendix A). The equations that utilize this group contribution
system are written in equation 2.3 - 2.13 [24].
lnγC
i = 1 −Ji + lnJi −5qi(1 −Ji
Li
+ ln Ji
Li
)
(2.3)
==PAGE:28==
2.2. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN
16
and
lnγR
i = qi(1 −lnLi) −
X
(Φk
ski
ηk
−Gki lnski
ηk
)
(2.4)
With respect to the two equations following deﬁnitions apply:
Ji =
ri
P
j rjxj
(2.5)
Li =
qi
P
j qjxj
(2.6)
ri =
X
k
v(i)
k Rk
(2.7)
qi =
X
k
v(i)
k Qk
(2.8)
Gki = v(i)
k Qk
(2.9)
Φk =
X
i
Gkixi
(2.10)
ski =
X
m
Gmiτmk
(2.11)
ηk =
X
i
skixi
(2.12)
and
τmk = exp(−amk
T
)
(2.13)
i identify species where j is a index running over all species. Likewise, k identiﬁes sub-
groups and m is an index running over all subgroups. v(i)
k
is the repetition of the same
type k in compound i.
2.2.2
relating GC-CAMD to retention time
One of the main objectives in liquid chromatography (LC) is the prediction of solute re-
tention and phase selectivity. The method presented in Pretrovic (1985) is a combination
of the functional group concept and a model for activity coeﬃcients based on the UNIFAC
model. At inﬁnite dilution, the relationship between the capacity ratio of a solute i and
the activity coeﬃcients in the mobile (m) and stationary (s) phases is:
ln(ki) = ln(Ki) + ln(Φ) = ln(γim) −ln(γis) + ln(Φ)
(2.14)
Ki is the distribution constant of the solute, γi is the activity coeﬃcient of the solute and
Φ is the phase ratio of the chromatographic system. The phase ratio is a common param-
eter in chromatographic theory being a simple ratio between the volume of the columns
stationary phase and the void volume of the column, the space that can be occupied by
==PAGE:29==
2.2. COMPUTER-AIDED MOLECULAR DESIGN
17
the mobile phase.
According to theory, if γi and Φ are constant, the equation will represent a linear rela-
tionship between ln(ki) and ln(γim), with a slope of unity. This relationship will make
it possible to predict retention data by utilizing the activity coeﬃcients of the solute in
a given chromatographic system. The overall aim of this study is to investigate a cor-
relation between the calculated activity coeﬃcients and the measured retention data by
high-performance LC on a chemically bonded reversed phase (RP), in order to examine
the ability of UNIFAC method to determine quantitatively solute chromatographic be-
havior.
Pretrovic performed the experiments on a C18, 10µm reverse phase column, of 300x3.9
mm I.D, commercially fabricated column. The eluent was methanol (E.Merck) mixed
with distilled water in various proportions. The ﬂow rate was 1 ml/min and the column
temperature was held constant at 22 degrees Celsius throughout the elution. The calcu-
lations of the activity coeﬃcients of solutes at inﬁnite dilution was performed based on
the equations and groups parameters given by some of the previous studies conducted
by Fredenslund and co-workers [24, 25]. - The UNIFAC model already presented in the
report. The method was designed to handle ternary systems consisting of a solute, two
solvents, water, and methanol, using a concentration of solute equal to zero. The lin-
ear relationship between the calculated ln(γim) of the solute and the volume fraction of
methanol, φ, can in most instances be expressed as:
ln(γim) = mφ + ln(γiw)
(2.15)
In eq. 2.15 γiw is the activity coeﬃcient of the solute in pure water and m is a constant.
The study also suggests that the capacity factors, mainly those higher than 1, are also
linearly correlated with the volume fraction of methanol, φ, and can be expressed by the
following equation.
ln(ki) = miφ + ln(kiw)
(2.16)
In eq. 2.16 kiw refers to the ki value for pure water as mobile phase.
If the desire is the prediction of a solute retention by the use of equation 2.3, it is necessary
to know both γis and φ. To predict the retention of a solute by the means of the calculated
activity coeﬃcients in the mobile phase, it is ﬁrst necessary to know the extent to which
the stationary phase aﬀects the retention. The results suggest that the activity coeﬃcients
in the stationary phase depend on the character of the functional group of a stationary
phase. Based on results showing that monocarboxylic acids show better solubility in both
mobile and stationary phases than e.g., n-alkanes, it suggests that free silanol groups on
the surface of bonded silica play an important role in the retention process.
The work done by Petrovic (1985) showed that adsorption (or absorption) of a solute in
the stationary phase cannot be a priory neglected. This means that the UNIFAC method
can be used, only as a rough estimation of absolute retention indices of certain compounds
in RPLC. The UNIFAC method was able to calculate reliable activity coeﬃcients, with
the exception of compounds containing either hydroxy or amino groups. The activity
coeﬃcients could be used to calculate changes in retention of a solute in the mobile
phase. However, only as rough estimates.
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Material and Methods
3.1
Experimental materials and methods
3.1.1
Shake-ﬂask method
The solubility of Hesperidin in diﬀerent solvent systems was tested experimentally by
utilizing the shake-ﬂask method. It was desired to test and validate the results found
by the program screenings in an experimental setup. The experiments was carried out
as follows: 20 mL of a solution containing Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and Methanol
(50:50; v/v) was added to a ﬂask, which was placed on a shaker, with continued shaking
throughout the entire experiment.
Next Hesperidin was added to the solvent system
in slow and steady rate until the solution became saturated and Hesperidin started to
precipitate. The ﬂask was left overnight to ensure that the precipitation was as complete
as it could be with only gravitational force. 1 mL of the supernatant was transferred to
an Eppendorf tube to centrifuge the sample, to ensure that there was no solid present
in the sample. This describes the shake-ﬂask method and was used to carry out several
solvent systems.
3.1.2
Calibration curve
The shake-ﬂask experiments had to be related to a speciﬁc Hesperidin concentration
and this was where the calibration curve method came into play. The concentration of
Hesperidin was determined by HPLC. - An absorbance was found by the HPLC system
through a UV detector. The experiment was carried out as a calibration curve, where
a known amount of the saturated mixture from the shake-ﬂask experiment runs through
the column with the same solvent composition as used to perform the shake-ﬂask experi-
ment. The calibration curve would take the shape of a linear graph, where the connection
between the absorbance and the calibration curve could be determined. Additional infor-
mation about the calibration curve is given in the report where necessary.
3.1.3
Used equipment
The experiments that required HPLC used was performed on a Dinoex Ulitmate 3000
HPLC with a UV-detector from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. A reverse phase column was
used for the shake-ﬂask experiments. - This particular column is a DISCOVERY HS C18,
Cat#:568523-U, with the dimensions (25 cm x 4.6 mm, silica particles 5 µ m). The system
that is used to display the results from the HPLC is displayed in Chomeleon software and
later processed in MATLAB.
The chemicals, solvents and stationary phases that were used to perform the experiments
is listed with details in table 3.1
19
==PAGE:32==
3.2. COMPUTER-AIDED METHODS AND TOOLS
20
Table 3.1: Chemicals, solvents and stationary phases used in the experiments
throughout in the report.
Chemical
CAS no.
Manufacturer
Product no.
Purity
Acetic acid
64-19-7
Merck
5.43808.0250
≥99.99%
Acetonitrile
75-05-8
Merck
1. 00030. 2500
≥99.9%
DMSO
67-68-5
Fluka
41650 - 2.5 L
≥99.0%
DMF
68-12-2
Sigma-Aldrich
270547-1 L
≥99.9%
Dimethoxymethane
109-87-5
Sigma-Aldrich
D134651 - 1 L
≥99.0%
Hesperidin
520-26-3
Sigma-Aldrich
H5254 - 25 g
≥80.0%
Methanol
67-56-1
Sigma-Aldrich
34860-2.5L-M
≥99.9%
Narginin
10236-47-2
Sigma-Aldrich
N1373-25 g
≥90.0%
3.1.4
HPLC program and sequence
The HPLC experiments were primarily controlled by an automatic procedure, where
small adjustments could be made to optimize the operating conditions. The experiments
in this thesis where performed isocratic which means that the solvent concentrations was
the same throughout the entire separation procedure. Likewise, the ﬂow rate of the mobile
phase was also kept constant throughout the entire separation. The adjustable parameters
and the chosen properties for the HPLC column runs were set so they were identical to
the properties set in the screening method. They were as follows:
• Temperature control: The temperature in the column was set to 25 ◦C. This
was possible with the use of a column oven.
• Sample temperature control: The temperature in the sample tray was set to
room temperature, 25 ◦C.
• Pressure limits and ﬂow rate: The pressure limit was 400 bar and was the
maximum allowance for the system. The internal pressure was determined by the
ﬂow rate and could only be adjusted by adjusting the ﬂow rate. The ﬂow rate was
set to 1 ml/min.
• Time setting: The elution time was set to 20 min. The Hesperidin eluted after
roughly 5 min. - It was desired that the peak of the solute did not occur after only
one column volume (4.15 mL) because it meant that the Hesperidin only remained
in the mobile phase without interacting with the stationary retention.
• UV setting: An absorbance of 285 nm was found to be most ﬁtting in detecting
Hesperidin, in an experiment where a range of 240 to 300 nm wavelength spectrum
was tested, shown in ﬁgure 3.1.
3.2
Computer-aided methods and tools
3.2.1
MATLAB for for CAMD implementation
The screening method was built in MATLAB. MATLAB is a numerical computer pro-
gramming language developed by MathWorks. MATLAB is an abreviation for Matrix
Laboratory and was developed to easily implement matrix manipulations and algorithms
==PAGE:33==
3.2. COMPUTER-AIDED METHODS AND TOOLS
21
Figure 3.1: Absorption spectrum of hesperidin. The maximum absorbance
of hesperidin is measured at a wavelength at 285 nm.
compared to other programming languages like C or FORTRAN. MATLAB is a high-
performance language for technical simulations and computing. It has an in-built visu-
alization and a modern programming environment, that means that the user only needs
to have MATLAB open when implementing and not multiple environments. MATLABs
debugging feature makes it an excellent tool for the task at hand. MATLAB connects
easily with other programs like Excel, Python or simulation tools like Aspen or GAMS.
It is an interactive software which by default assign data elements as arrays and rarely
require dimensioning. It is a powerful tool with immediate visualization of results and
built-in routines enabling graphical output of data [26].
3.2.2
ChromX for analysis of results
ChromX is a simulation software to separation processes carried out in liquid chromatog-
raphy. It can be used to investigate the chromatographic separations of proteins and
other organic compounds. It uses a very user-friendly interface and is usable without
any training. It is developed as a commercial toolbox but a free version I available for
students. The software is in this project used to strengthen certain topics in the analysis
of results.
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Design of screening method for
solvent selection
This chapter will cover the details of the product design part of this thesis. This chapter
will include a detailed description of the construction of the screening from the initial
step and to the ﬁnal framework. The choices that are made early on in the development
of the screening method will also be included in this chapter.
4.1
Initial framework procedure
The basic idea for setting up and solving the solvent screening screening module is based
on a generate and test method. Figure 4.1 illustrates a general and overall simpliﬁed
ﬂowchart of how the framework will look once it is built. The procedure is composed of
3 main steps: 1) The problem is speciﬁed by selecting a set of limitations. 2) All feasible
structures within the set limitations are generated. 3) All the generated compounds are
tested to ﬁnd suitable solvent candidates and removing all the generated compounds
which are not suitable.
Step 1:
Characterize problem 
Step 3:
Test candidates 
Step 2:
Generate candidates 
Figure 4.1:
Simple illustration of the three main parts of the screening
method solution procedure.
The initial purpose of the framework is to build a generic screening method, which can be
used to investigate multiple cases. A solution must satisfy all the criteria of the screening
and is removed if any of the constraints are not met. This type of method ensures an
exhaustive search but no solution is guaranteed (maybe the solution is that there is no
solution to such a search).
4.2
Initial framework structure
It is always a complicated task to build a CAMD method and thus it would therefore be
beneﬁcial to outline the initial framework of ideas and then work in a systematic order to
reach the goal. A list of essential precautions is explained in this section.
23
==PAGE:36==
4.3. CASE: SOLVENTS FOR SEPARATION OF HESPERIDIN IN A RPLC SYSTEM
24
A test case: When building a generic method it can be very diﬃcult to know which
step to take or what parts to include. It is therefore very beneﬁcial to have a test case
as a guideline in the development of a generic screening method. When adapting a test
case it is essential to include knowledge about the molecule(s) and the desired thermo-
dynamic properties that concern the molecule(s). The thermodynamic properties would
be a critical part of describing the equilibrium relationship between the mobile phase and
the stationary phase of such a case.
Operating conditions: It is important to decide the desired operating conditions when
the test case is chosen. It might be that the operating conditions are already known from
a detailed test case, but if not this is something that needs to be taken into account.
The temperature at which the separation occurs is a relevant and important operating
condition, as the optimal pH of the mobile phase and the pressure through the chromato-
graphic column. The number of diﬀerent component to construct a solvent system and
the wanted composition of the diﬀerent component is also a crucial information to have.
With a better understanding of operating conditions it becomes easier to implement a
successful screening method.
Design criteria: The decision of appropriate design criteria is one of the most impor-
tant parts of the initial thought process. The design criteria can appropriately be called
case conditions. The case conditions are a very speciﬁc part of the screening method and
they are decided for each case selectively. The conditions are the main ﬁlter in removing
unsuited solvent candidates. It is, therefore, a delicate procedure to decide the conditions
as too few equals to many solvents and to many equals no solvents.
Estimation of thermodynamic properties: Some thermodynamic data might be
diﬃcult to ﬁnd in the literature, therefore an estimation of interesting thermodynamic
data is unavoidable. Diﬀerent methods to estimate thermodynamic properties are listed
in the literature, with large diﬀerences in user-friendliness. It has already been stated, in
the background chapter, that the method used to solve this problem is a group contribu-
tion based UNIFAC model.
Structural group selection: Selection of structural groups to form a so-called basis set
(eg. CH3, CH2, CH2O) that can be included in the screening method is an important
thing to have in mind when the system is developed. It can be time-saving to exclude
some undesirable structural groups when you generate feasible molecules.
4.3
Case: Solvents for separation of Hesperidin in a RPLC
system
This section contains a thorough description of the case chosen to test and validate the
product design part of this thesis, the screening method. The case is also used in the
development of the screening method as a guideline in terms of which parts need to be
added to the procedure. Hesperidin is well described in the literature and serves as an
ideal practice case in the initial and ﬁnal part of the product design.
==PAGE:37==
4.4. MODEL SELECTIONS AND MODEL CONSTRAINTS
25
4.3.1
Introduction to Hesperidin
Hesperidin is a C28H34O15 compound with the molecular mass of 610.56 g/mol. The
molecular structure is shown in ﬁgure 4.2 [24]. Hesperidin is a well-known compound
found in lime and lemon peels among others in relatively high concentrations [24]. When
extracted and in high concentrations, Hesperidin is a white to yellow crystalline powder.
It has proven to have a series of health beneﬁts in terms of being an anticancer, anti-
inﬂammatory, antimicrobial, antioxidant among others [27–31].
Figure 4.2: Molecular structure of Hesperidin [24].
Hesperidin has poor solubility in aqueous solutions [28] and studies have reported Hes-
peridin to be insoluble in many physiologically safe organic solvents useful to a chromato-
graphic separation [32,33]. Instead, unsafe and toxic solvents like methanol, chloroform,
and ethers are frequently used to dissolve Hesperidin [34, 35].
These solvents are not
suitable for large scale separation and puriﬁcation.
This, among other things, makes
Hesperidin an interesting case as obvious problems are connected to this separation.
4.3.2
Case objective
Hesperidin will serve as a case solute in a mobile phase as part of a chromatographic
system. The system will consist of the stationary phase, being an RPLC column and the
mobile phase being Hesperidin in a suitable solvent system. The solvent system should be
able to dissolve Hesperidin and carry Hesperidin to the stationary phase and let it interact
with the ligands and not carry it all the way through the column without interactions.
The CAMD program, when built, consists of a systematic approach to generate and test a
long list of solvent candidates. The output of this program will be a short list of candidate
solvent systems satisfying a set of conditions that favor the separation of Hesperidin.
4.4
Model selections and model constraints
As mentioned in the initial framework structure, a very important part of the product
design is the selection of boundary conditions, which ensures a optimal selection of solvent
candidates. This section contains the diﬀerent models which the boundary conditions
refers to.
==PAGE:38==
4.4. MODEL SELECTIONS AND MODEL CONSTRAINTS
26
4.4.1
Structural feasibility
The ﬁrst boundary condition that described is the feasibility constraint. A molecule that
is physically impossible to form is of no desire to this program. A qualitatively simple way
to calculate feasibility is through the octet rule. The octet rule provides a simple and yet
accurate way to tell if a molecule is feasible or not. It consists of a simple mathematical
expression developed by O. Odele and S. Macchietto [36] and is presented in eq. 4.1.
X
j
(2 −vj) · nj = 2m
(4.1)
Where nj and vj are the number and valency, respectively of a group of type j in a
molecule. m is a constant that determines if the compound is an acyclic molecule (m=1),
monocyclic molecule (m=0) or bicyclic molecule (m=0). It is timesaving if m instead of
being one of three numbers is a range from [1, -1] instead. This allows for simultaneous
consideration of all the possible feasible molecular structures.
The mathematical expression in eq. 4.1 is the simplest form of the octet rule. However,
it is also necessary to implement a condition that speciﬁes that two adjacent groups may
only be connected by a single bond. This ensures that there are just as many groups
available as there are available attachments, see eq. 4.2 [36].
X
i
ni ≥
X
j
nj(vj −1) + 2
(4.2)
One can also constrain any group of j to a lower and upper bound nL
j and nV
j , if an
additional constraint is placed, see eq. 4.3:
nL
j ≤nj ≤nV
j
(4.3)
With the increasing number of groups the group contribution method becomes less accu-
rate, so a last constraint is placed on the feasibility expression, see eq. 4.4:
1 ≤
X
j
nj ≤nmax
(4.4)
In eq. 4.4 nmax is the maximum number of groups allowed to form a feasible molecule.
Implementation of these mathematical expressions, serves as a great and simple way of
testing a long list of candidates in regards to feasibility.
The method created by O.
Odele and S. Macchietto ?? is by no means perfect and will still view certain infeasible
candidates as feasible.
4.4.2
Melting point and boiling point
The melting point and the boiling point of a molecule is listed because of the need for a
liquid solvent. The estimation of melting point and boiling point for a molecule serves
as a good way to gain knowledge about a molecules ﬂuid phase. Gani (1994) ?? have,
as mentioned, developed estimation expressions for a set of thermodynamic properties,
including the estimation of normal melting point and normal boiling point. The expres-
sions for the melting point and the boiling point, respectively, are shown in eq. 4.5 and
eq. 4.6.
e
Tm
tm0 =
X
i
Nitmi
(4.5)
==PAGE:39==
4.4. MODEL SELECTIONS AND MODEL CONSTRAINTS
27
e
Tb
tb0 =
X
i
Nitbi
(4.6)
In eq. 4.5 and eq. 4.6, tmi and tbi is the contribution of melting point and boiling point,
respectively, for each group type i and Ni is the number of times that the same type i is
used in a single compound.
By formulating eq. 4.7:
Tm < ϵ1 < Tb
(4.7)
Where, ϵ1 is the operating temperature. The boundary condition at hand can be adjusted
based on operating temperature. Obviously, a solvent that is liquid at the temperature
where the separation occurs is desirable. Such a boundary condition is not restricted to
this case, and should instead be seen as a general boundary condition applicable to all
chromatographic systems.
4.4.3
Toxicity of candidate
It has been described by previous studies that hesperidin had very low solubility in water
and that the current method to dissolve hesperidin is performed in toxic solvents. To
accommodate this problem, a constraint is placed to lower the acceptance rate of toxicity
for the solvent candidates. A quantitative measure of toxicity can be given by the LC50
index. The LC50 index stands for the aqueous concentration that causes 50 % mortality
among a population of fathead minnows (mol
L ) [37]. The higher the index the safer and
less toxic the solvent is, shown in eq. 4.8.
LC50 > ϵ4
(4.8)
Like the other constraints eq. 4.8 is adjustable so the individual user of the method can
decide the maximum LC50.
The LC50 model was ﬁrst developed by by eq. 4.9.
−log(LC50) =
X
i
ni∆Ti + T0
(4.9)
In eq. 4.9, ni is the number of groups type i that have replaced hydrogen on benzene.
∆Ti is the toxicity change that happens when hydrogen is substituted with a group type
i. T0 is the toxicity of the compound benzene [37].
This type of expression is not applicable to the problem in this project.
Thankfully,
Martin and Young (2001) [37] used eq. 4.9 to develop a group contribution based method
to estimate LC50 on the basis of a LC50 index [37]. The expression that goes with the
index is shown in eq. 4.10:
−log(LC50) =
ng
X
i=1
niai
(4.10)
In eq. 4.10 ng is the number of groups in the model. Ni is the number of groups of type
i in the compound. ai is the toxicity contribution of the group i. This type of model is
==PAGE:40==
4.4. MODEL SELECTIONS AND MODEL CONSTRAINTS
28
much easier to implement in the screening method, due to the similarities between the
construction of model expression and the construction of the screening method.
4.4.4
Activity coeﬃcients
Implementation of the UNIFAC method by Fredenslund presented in chapter two serves
as a great and reliable way to estimate the activity coeﬃcients [24]. A constraint for
the estimated activity coeﬃcients can at this point in time not be set. This is because
further analysis is necessary to gain a better understanding of the need and the separation
itself. However, it is already known that the interest lies in the understanding of the
activity coeﬃcient of hesperidin in the solvent system in an inﬁnite dilution,γ∞
HS. The
activity coeﬃcients create a measure of how much a solute prefers to be in a solution.
Very low activity coeﬃcients in inﬁnite dilutions mean that the conditions are very close
to ideal, meaning that the solubility should be high. Very large activity coeﬃcients is
a sign of the solute not preferring the solvent or even repelling it and creating multiple
phases. It is, therefore, the original intent that γ∞
HS needs to be low to select solvents with
favorable solubility properties. a basic boundary condition that meets the descriptions
just mentioned could be formulated as eq. 4.11.
γ∞
HS < ϵ4
(4.11)
where the only thing taking into account is that the activity of hesperidin in inﬁnite
dilutions in a solvent system is lower than a speciﬁed value.
4.4.5
Hydrophobicity of solvent
The hydrophobicity of a solute in a liquid phase is a complicated matter. The actual
mechanism behind a hydrophobic interaction is to this day still debated. However, par-
titioning can provide an estimate of the hydrophobicity in a liquid phase. Most used in
the open literature is the octanol/water partition coeﬃcient, KOW [38]. In the literature
it is frequently used to characterize pollutants partitioning into a liquid phase of aquatic
organisms, but it is just as applicable to measure the hydrophobicity of a solute in a sol-
vent. The octanol/water partition coeﬃcient is in the literature also described as log P.
In 1991 Suzuki T. [38] developed automatic estimation system for both the aqueous sol-
ubility from the structural formula and the partition coeﬃcient between 1-octanol and
water phases. The two key equations used in the article is presented in eq. 4.12 [38].
log 1
s =
X
nifsi + 0.0095(Tm −25)
(4.12)
log 1
s = 1.050 log P + 0.009565(Tm −25) −0.515
(4.13)
Eq. 4.12 describes the aqueous solubility of a molecular structure from the basis of the
melting point and a group contribution method to the negative logarithm of the aqueous
solubility. Since the expression is contribution based, the implementation and calculation
of aqueous solubility are easily performed as part of the screening method.
Eq. 4.13 describes the relationship between the aqueous solubility and the octanol/water
partition. When the aqueous solubility is estimated from equation 4.12 the partition co-
eﬃcient is easily found from equation 4.13.
==PAGE:41==
4.4. MODEL SELECTIONS AND MODEL CONSTRAINTS
29
The described method is valid and is a good way to calculate the logP value.
How-
ever, In this situation where multiple methods are combined, it is desired to lower the
accumulated error of the estimation methods as much as possible. A way to do this is by
relating logP to the already estimated activity coeﬃcients. By doing this, only the error
related to the estimation of activity coeﬃcients will be present since only one method to
estimate two properties is used. The simplest way of describing KOW is preseneted in eq.
4.14.
KOW = co
cw
(4.14)
in eq. 4.14 a relationship between a solute in an octanol-rich phase and the solute in a
water-rich phase is shown. The octanol-rich phase is characterized by a mixture where the
solute of interest is in a solution of water and octanol with 79.3 mol% octanol at 25 ◦C.
The water-rich phase is still a mixture of octanol and water but with 99.99 mol% water
at 25 ◦C. By calculating activity coeﬃcients for Hesperidin in the octanol-rich phase and
the water-rich phase we are able to obtain a value for KOW .
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Implementation of screening
method for solvent selection
This chapter contains a fully detailed description of the screening method implementation
and a brief analysis and validation of the diﬀerent parts of the screening method.
5.1
Flowchart of screening method
A work ﬂow diagram showing the decomposed parts of the screening method and the
execution path through the program is shown in Figure 5.1.
Describe solute
(eg. Hesperidin)
Choose limitations for 
screening
Generate combinations
Structural conditions
Thermodynamic 
conditions 
Case specific conditions
Data library
OUTPUT 
List of suitable solvent candidates 
If no solution is found:
Try again with new limitations
Figure 5.1: ﬂowchart of the screening method procedure, showing a detailed
ﬂow of work from the initial description of solute and search goals until the
output of suitable solvent candidates.
31
==PAGE:44==
5.1. FLOWCHART OF SCREENING METHOD
32
Describe solute
The ﬁrst part of the screening method, shown in Figure 5.1, is deﬁning the problem/
case that is of interest. This part is not generic and needs to be performed manually,
ensuring that the screening method can be used to investigate more than just one speciﬁc
solute. The input has been simpliﬁed to increase usability of describing a new solute
for investigation. This is done by constructing the program in a way so it is capable of
extracting the right information from only one vector that needs to be deﬁned by the
user. An example of this could be 1-butanol that in the screening method is deﬁned by
1 −Butanolsubgroups = [1 2 2 2 15]. The program is then able to analyze that the test
solute has three unique subgroups and that subgroup 2 is repeated 3 times and that the
number 1 is translated into CH3, that 2 is translated into CH2 and that 15 is translated
into OH.
Choose limitations
The second and last part of the user-deﬁned input section is selecting a set of limitations
for the screening method. This subsection in the screening method serves two purposes;
1) A set of limitations are deﬁned so the list of feasible solvent candidates can be gener-
ated, without taking up too much computer force(CPU) or memory. The limitations are
constructed as inputs and the speciﬁc inputs can be found in Table 5.1. 2) Another set of
limitations are deﬁned related to the thermodynamic and case-speciﬁc boundary condi-
tions. This set of limitations is to make the screening method more applicable to diﬀerent
cases since the operating conditions might change for the separation of Hesperidin and
for the separation of another solute.
Generate combinations
The third part of the screening method is the generator, the main engine in the screening
method. This part is able to generate all the possible combinations of subgroups while
keeping the limitations chosen in the second part into account. This part of the screening
method does not take the feasibility of the compound or any of the boundary conditions
into account, the only purpose of this part is to construct a matrix where each horizontal
line contains a set of subgroups that form a compound when combined.
Structural feasibility and conditions
The next three parts of the screening method all contain diﬀerent types of constraints that
essentially removes non-qualiﬁed solvent candidates. They all uses the information listed
in the data library and this part of the method would not work without the data library.
The ﬁrst among the three is the structural condition part. This part goes through all of the
generated structures from the previous part and removes all the in-feasible compounds.
This part does not take any user-speciﬁc inputs and are either feasible which means that
the compound remains in the list or it is in-feasible which means that the compound is
removed from the list. This part removes many compounds and thus is placed as the ﬁrst
code sequence that removes non-qualiﬁed solvent candidates. Another reason why the
code sequence is placed where it is because it is unnecessary to estimate e.g. UNIFAC
parameters for in-feasible compounds and would take up too much computer force and
memory, essentially slowing the screening method down.
==PAGE:45==
5.2. DATA LIBRARY
33
Thermodynamic property estimation and conditions
This part is where the thermodynamic conditions come into play and diﬀerent thermody-
namic parameters are estimated with the group contribution method. Parameters like the
boiling point and the UNIFAC activity coeﬃcients are estimated in this section. Some
of the limitations that were chosen in the ”choose limitations for screening” part are
utilized in this section to increase the usability. This part removes non-qualiﬁed solvent
candidates if they are outside of the criteria set by the limitations.
Case speciﬁc property estimations and conditions
The ﬁnal test for the candidates is the case-speciﬁc conditions. This is the lesser generic
part of the screening method and needs to be chosen speciﬁcally for each case, the screen-
ing method is used for. For the Hesperidin case, it makes sense to implement a case-speciﬁc
condition that relate to the solubility issues. This step is implemented as a way to mold
the screening method so it is applicable to more cases and thereby keeping it generic in
a sense. this section works the same as the previous part so it also removes non-qualiﬁed
solvent candidates if they are outside of the criteria set by the limitations.
Result and output of screening method
After a successful screening, the user will be left with a list of suitable solvent candidates
that all have in common that they satisfy every single condition chosen for the screening.
If the user is in a situation where no suitable solvents are left. The user should try to go
back to step one and consider if any of the boundary conditions could be loosened.
5.2
Data library
A data library is built with relevant information for the screening method. Since the
screening method is group contribution based, a great deal of data is needed to make the
models work. The screening method is constructed to be semi-generic so the structure of
the data library needs to be systematic and follow only one type of group contribution
method.
The data library is fully developed for 50 main group components which are split up in
108 subgroups. The data library enable UNIFAC parameter estimation, toxicity and all
the other properties utilized in the screening method. The data library is collected into
one Microsoft Excel ﬁle.
5.3
Input speciﬁcations
In Figure 5.1, the ﬂowchart was illustrated and it was brieﬂy described that a set of lim-
itations needs to be placed to operate the screening method. This section will go into
details with respect to the exact limitations which need to be speciﬁed. In table 5.1 a list
of inputs/limitations is given. With them follows a short description of the type of input
and the placement for where it is used.
There are three types of inputs; structural constraints, case description, and boundary
conditions. The ﬁrst among them are structural constraints, where the user decides the
number of groups in a basis set, meaning what type of subgroups the screening should
have at disposal. The user also needs to decide how large or how small a compound
==PAGE:46==
5.4. DESCRIPTION OF MATLAB FUNCTIONS IN SCREENING METHOD
34
can be, meaning how many or how few subgroups is allowed to form one compound. As
mentioned before, the user has to describe the subgroups that combined forms the case
solute. It is a simple vector that follows the same group contribution principles as the
rest of the screening method.
Finally, the user can choose to specify a set of boundary conditions. As described before,
this is done to ensure a wider range of applicability. the choices are as follows:
• The user can choose to specify a boundary condition for the normal melting point
and normal boiling point.
• The user can specify a boundary condition that describes the limitation in toxicity.
• A boundary condition that describes the limitations in activity coeﬃcients between
the solute and solvent can be speciﬁed.
• A boundary condition partition between case solute and solvent can be placed.
Table 5.1: Initial Input speciﬁcations to operate the screening method. To
work the screening method the user needs to specify nbas, nmax, nmin and
the case description. The boundary conditions are optional but emphasized to
specify.
Type
Input
Decription
structural constraint
nbas
Number of groups in a basis set
nmax
Number of maximum legal groups to form a compound
nmin
Number of minimum legal groups to form a compound
Case description
subgroups
Listing the subgroups of the case solute
Boundary conditions
ϵ1
Boundary condition for Melting point and boiling point
ϵ2
Boundary condition for Toxicity
ϵ3
Boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients
ϵ4
Boundary condition for Partition
5.4
Description of MATLAB functions in screening method
This section goes into details with the individual code functions that combined make up
the screening method. All the functions used in the screening method are listed in table
5.2 together with a thorough description of what they do.
What is not listed in the table is main.m. This ﬁle serves as the main MATLAB ﬁle and
calls all the functions at the proper times. It is also in this ﬁle that the user deﬁnes the
inputs and the case information, so the function ﬁles can extract the information. The
data library is loaded in the main ﬁle as well.
==PAGE:47==
5.4. DESCRIPTION OF MATLAB FUNCTIONS IN SCREENING METHOD
35
Table 5.2: List and descriptions of all function ﬁles used to work the screening
method in MATLAB. All the screening method function ﬁles are called from
the main MATLAB ﬁle.
Function name
Description
f UNIFAC.m
This function estimates the activity coeﬃcients using the
UNIFAC model. This function needs to be given the in-
formation about R, Q and AIJ from the data library, the
composition between the solute and the solvent and the
operating temperature through the column.
f combical.m
This function serves as a simple calculation of how many
possible combinations the screening will result in. This is
of cause without respect to the boundary constraints and
feasibility of a molecule. To compile this function, infor-
mation about nbas, nmin and nmax is fed to the function.
f npermutek.m
This function the the main engine of the generator.
It
calculates all the possible combinations and lists them in
a matrix structure, while only taking into account the
nbas, nmin and nmax. This function also operates with-
out respect to the boundary constraints and feasibility of
a molecule, meaning that a large portion of the solutions
found in this structure is unfeasible or undesirable.
f feasiblecombi.m
This function uses the matrix structure which is the out-
put of f npermutek.m together with information about
the subgroups from the data library to generate a new ma-
trix which only lists the structurally feasible compounds
and removes the rest.
f meltboilBC.m
This
function
uses
the
compound
matrix
found
in
f feasiblecombi.m together with information about the
group contribution based melting and boiling point from
the data library to estimate melting and boiling point for
each solvent candidate and then remove the candidates
that do not satisfy the constraint (also an input for the
function).
f LC50BC.m
This
function
uses
the
compound
matrix
found
in
f meltboilBC.m together with information about the
group contribution based toxicity 50 indexes from the data
library to estimate LC50 for each solvent candidate and
then remove the candidates that do not satisfy the con-
straint (also an input for the function).
f partitionBC.m
This function uses the UNIFAC function (f UNIFAC.m)
with all the same inputs to estimate partition coeﬃcients
from the estimated activity coeﬃcients.
==PAGE:48==
5.5. TEST AND VALIDATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
36
5.5
Test and validation of implementation procedures
This section is a detailed description of main parts of the implementation procedures
with tests to validate the quality of each part of the screening method. The tests that
are presented in this section are restricted to small problems to keep the overview. The
examples used in this section will not have anything to do with the case example and will
primarily serve as a tool to check the quality of the screening method.
5.5.1
Molecular feasibility
The ﬁrst important brick in the screening method is the feasibility investigation of the
molecular structures formed in the ﬁrst part of the program. A small example is imple-
mented to illustrate and validate the function of the ”molecular design generator”. The
limitations that were chosen for this example can be seen in Table 5.3
Table 5.3: Limitations for the structural feasibility test
Property
Value
Description
nbas
[CH3 CH2 CH C OH]
Number of possible groups
nmax
5
Maximum length of any compound
nmin
2
Minimum length of any compound
As Table 5.3 shows, it was the groups: CH3, CH2, CH, C and OH that was allowed
for this screening, a total of 5 basis groups. The formation of compounds is restricted
to a minimum of two a maximum of ﬁve groups. No limitations are placed in regards
repetitions of same basis groups to form a single molecule. The main reason for such an
example and the reason why such a test is made is to investigate if the solution shows a
comprehensive list of feasible molecular structures.
The search is executed and a total of 25 solutions are found. The immediate solution can
be seen in Table 5.4. The table illustrates that the screening method ﬁnds 25 compounds
that are feasible within limitations of the test. Each subgroup that goes into the formation
of a compound is represented with numbers. 0 illustrates an empty spot. This feature
was implemented to avoid issues with matrix dimensions. The number 1 equals the ﬁrst
subgroup, CH3, the number 2 equals the second subgroup, CH2, and so on. The matrix
structure is formulated in such a way that the most simple compounds are listed in the
top of the matrix structure and increases in complexity in a downward direction. Though
it might be easy for the experienced eye to see how the numbers represent subgroups
and thereby what compounds are formed with this search, this may not be the case for
everyone. Figure 5.2 shows a 2D structural representations of the 25 molecular structures
that are listed as feasible compounds in table 5.4.
Now that a structural representation is given it is also easier to see if the solutions, the
screening method ﬁnds feasible; actually is feasible. All the compounds listed in table 5.2
are feasible in regards to the structural constraints described by O. odele and S. Macchietto
[36] thereby indicating that the implementation of such constraints is performed correctly.
The second part of the objective of such a test is to validate if the list is comprehensive
or if the solution is missing a few feasible compounds that have been overseen by the
algorithm. The compounds containing no more than 4 subgroups are easy to investigate
and by simply looking at ﬁgure 5.2 it is clear that all possible acyclic compounds are
listed. No cyclic compounds are listed due to a restriction that only compounds above 6
==PAGE:49==
5.5. TEST AND VALIDATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
37
Table 5.4: Feasible candidates with manually assigned names for identiﬁca-
tion
Compound
Subgroups
Name
1
0
0
0
1
1
Ethane
2
0
0
0
1
15
Methanol (*)
3
0
0
0
15
15
Hydrogen peroxide(*)
4
0
0
1
1
2
Propane
5
0
0
1
2
15
Ethanol
6
0
0
2
15
15
Methanediol
7
0
1
1
1
3
2-methane-propane
8
0
1
1
2
2
Butane
9
0
1
1
3
15
2-Propanol
10
0
1
2
2
15
1-Propanol
11
0
1
3
15
15
Ethanediol
12
0
2
2
15
15
1,2- Ethanediol
13
0
3
15
15
15
Methanetriol
14
1
1
1
1
4
2,2 dimethane propane
15
1
1
1
2
3
methane butane
16
1
1
1
4
15
2,2 dimethyl propanol
17
1
1
2
2
2
Pentane
18
1
1
2
3
15
2-methane propanol
19
1
1
4
15
15
2,2-propanediol
20
1
2
2
2
15
1-butanol
21
1
2
3
15
15
1,1-propanediol
22
1
4
15
15
15
Ethanetriol
23
2
2
2
15
15
1,3 - Propanediol
24
2
3
15
15
15
1,2,2 - Ethanetriol
25
4
15
15
15
15
Methanetetrol
subgroups can form cyclic structures. Compounds consisting of 5 subgroups are another
matter since they can form diﬀerent types of isomers and are not visible to the structure
generation method. The screening method is like mentioned before only able to diﬀeren-
tiate between present or not present in a compound. Since this is still a relatively simple
test, it is easy to see that all possible compounds are listed in ﬁgure 5.2.
When that is said, the user should be careful when generating very small compounds
containing only a 2 subgroups, since there is a slight chance that a compound is generated
that is otherwise viewed as a pure compound. Take the methanol that is found to be a
feasible compound. Based on the feasibility algorithm a CH3 group and an OH group can
be combined to form methanol. This also makes sense in the real world. However, the
GC properties are not as precise as the data for a pure compound. Due to this reason,
methanol is added to the data library as a pure compound and should be used as such.
The same is the situation for water, acetonitrile, DMSO, DMF, pyrimidine and others.
5.5.2
Estimation of melting and boiling point
The group contribution method is used to estimate the boiling point and melting point
of the feasible candidate solvents. The screening method utilizes that knowledge to per-
==PAGE:50==
5.5. TEST AND VALIDATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
38
C
H3
CH3
C
H3
OH
O
H
OH
C
H3
CH3
C
H3
OH
O
H
OH
CH3
CH3
C
H3
C
H3
CH3
CH3
OH
C
H3
C
H3
OH
OH
OH
C
H3
O
H
OH
OH
OH
O
H
CH3
C
H3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
H3
CH3
C
H3
OH
CH3
C
H3
C
H3
CH3
OH
C
H3
OH
C
H3
OH
CH3
C
H3
O
H
OH
OH
C
H3
OH
C
H3
OH
OH
OH
O
H
OH
OH
O
H
O
H
OH
OH
O
H
Figure 5.2:
Molecular representation of restricted screening with basisset
including CH3, CH2, CH, C and OH (nmin=2 , nmax=5).
form a selection among the candidate solvents by removing solvents that do not meet the
temperature criteria set by the user. This raises an essential question. - How well does
the group contribution method describe the melting point and boiling point compared to
actual experimental data?
A small test example serves as a suitable way to test and validate the estimation of boiling
and melting point in the screening method. A simple list of primary alcohols is chosen
as a suitable test example. The list starts with ethanol and increases in carbon chain all
the way up to 1-Nonadecanol (C19H39OH). The estimated boiling and melting points
are compared with tabulated values found in the ”Handbook of Chemistry and Physics”.
Figure 5.3 contains the complete comparison and validation of the test example compared
with table values.
In the top left corner of the ﬁgure the boiling point estimation is compared to the ta-
ble values for the normal boiling point. Simply by looking at the plot comparison, it is
clear that the curves show a great resemblance. A parity plot is constructed to further
strengthen the validation and can be seen in the top right corner of ﬁgure 5.3. The parity
plot is equipped with a diagonal line that illustrates the perfect ﬁt and an upper and
lower bound both diverging 10% from the perfect ﬁt. The boiling point estimation seems
to be describing the primary alcohols quite well with exception of the smallest alcohol,
methanol.
The comparison and validation plots regarding the melting points, follows the exact same
structure as the just described boiling point. The bottom left corner of ﬁgure 5.3 shows
==PAGE:51==
5.5. TEST AND VALIDATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
39
0
5
10
15
20
Carbon chain (1-19)
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Temperature [K]
Boiling point comparison for primary alcohols
Table value
GCM
0
5
10
15
20
Carbon chain (1-19)
150
200
250
300
350
Temperature [K]
Melting point comparison for primary alcohols
Table value
GCM
150
200
250
300
350
Temperature [K]
150
200
250
300
350
Temperature [K]
Melting point parity plot for primary alcohols
Parity curve
diagonal
+10% bound
-10% bound
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Temperature [K])
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Temperature [K]
Boiling point parity plot for primary alcohols
Parity curve
diagonal
+10% bound
-10% bound
Figure 5.3: Melting point and boiling point comparison between model im-
plementation and table data (Handbook of chemistry and physics).
the comparison made between the group contribution method and the table values for the
alcohols melting point. Visually it is clear that the ﬁt is poorer for the smaller alcohol
chains compared to the longer chains. A more similar structure is formed for the medium
long and long alcohols but still with a large divergence in comparison to the estimated
values. The bottom right corner shows the parity plot, illustrating the exact same ten-
dency, that the method is not able to describe the melting points for the small alcohols
and that the method starts to have an accuracy within the 10 % conﬁdence bound for
the longer alcohol chains. It is worth mentioning that the experimental measurement
of melting point is a complicated matter in general and often connected with a higher
inaccuracy due to many diﬀerent physical and chemical aspects.
The validation performed in this section is not purely performed to show how well the
group contribution method estimates boiling and melting point of solvents. This was
an interesting and fortunate outcome, but the original objective was to perform quality
control, to test if the implementation was performed successfully and thereby applicable
to a real case. Though nothing can be stated with certainty, everything seems to work
according to expectations and nothing seems to be a hindrance regarding the future case
implementation.
5.5.3
Toxicity index
An attribute of the screening method is the capability of estimating a toxicity value on the
basis of a group contribution based method. The screening method is with this knowledge
==PAGE:52==
5.5. TEST AND VALIDATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
40
able to remove environmentally unfriendly solvent candidates. By the same methodology
as illustrated before, in the validation of melting and boiling point, the toxicity estimation
is validated. The example with the primary alcohols also serves as a suitable comparison
for the estimated LC50 values with the experimental values. The article that originally
developed the group contribution based LC50 method performed a multi-linear model ﬁt
to a long list of experimental data [37]. These experimental data, the multi-linear model
and the screening method implementation of the group contribution based LC50 method
is compared and validated in ﬁgure 5.4.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Carbon chain (1-12)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
LC50 index
Toxicity comparison for primary alcohols
GCM
Experimental value
Multilinear model
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
GCM LC50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Experimental LC50
Toxicity parity plot for primary alcohols
Parity curve
diagonal
+10% bound
-10% bound
Figure 5.4: Toxicity comparison between model implementation and experi-
mental data.
The left part of the ﬁgure shows a simple comparison between the experimental data
(red *), the multi-linear model (blue line) that was the underlying expression behind the
development of the group contribution method and the group contribution based toxicity
estimation implemented in the screening method. By simply looking at the multi-linear
model and the GCM implementation (green o) It is clear that the implementation is per-
formed correctly, the two models are completely identical, which is a positive indication.
Looking at the right part of ﬁgure 5.4, a parity plot is made with 10% divergence from
the perfect ﬁt. The red dots are the comparison between the experimental LC50 values
and the GCM LC50 values. Though the parity curve does exceed the 10 % bound, the
error is still relatively small and still serves as a great tool in the screening method.
5.5.4
UNIFAC estimation of activity coeﬃcients
The UNIFAC method is a crucial part of the screening method since it is used to esti-
mate the activity coeﬃcients and the partition coeﬃcients, thus creating a need for more
thorough investigation and validation. A simple example from the literature is tested to
initiate the quality check of the implementation of UNIFAC. The example is found in
Appendix D of ”introduction to engineering thermodynamics” [39]. The example consists
of the binary mixture diethylamine(1) / n-heptane(2) at 308.15K with a composition of
x1=0.4 and x2=0.6. When compiled in the UNIFAC implementation a set of activity
coeﬃcients are estimated to be γ1 = 1.1330 and γ2 = 1.0470 which is exactly the same
result as found in the example, all the way down to last decimal. This is not enough to
validate the method but is suitable as an initial check.
==PAGE:53==
5.5. TEST AND VALIDATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
41
It is also desirable to investigate a more complex system. To accommodate this need,
a ternary system is found in the literature consisting of Acetonitrile (1) - Benzene (2) -
n-heptane (3) at 318 K [24]. The system is in the literature used to compare the UNI-
FAC method by Fredenslund and co-workers (1975) with observed experimental data
conducted by Palmer and Smith (1972) [40]. The comparison can be seen in Table 5.5.
The observed activity coeﬃcients have the notation, γobs
i
. The implemented UNIFAC
activity coeﬃcients have the notation, γimp
i
.
Table 5.5:
Acetonitrile (1) - Benzene (2) - n-heptane (3) at 318 K [24].
Observed and calculated activity coeﬃcients for the three component system.
x1
x2
x3
γobs
1
γimp
1
γobs
2
γimp
2
γobs
3
γimp
3
0.062
0.5379
0.4001
5.09
4.9760
1.11
1.0755
1.27
1.2174
0.3527
0.3942
0.2531
2.000
2.100
1.080
1.058
2.160
2.145
0.8869
0.0991
0.014
1.030
1.018
2.150
2.275
16.930
17.532
0.0297
0.8648
0.1055
3.340
3.238
1.020
1.007
1.490
1.614
0.5719
0.412
0.0161
1.230
1.233
1.370
1.392
6.170
6.242
From table 5.5 it is relatively clear that the estimated activity coeﬃcients are close to
the observed values.
To gain a better perspective of the comparison table 5.6 shows
the absolute error in percentages between the estimated activity coeﬃcients and the ob-
served activity coeﬃcients. The overall performance of the implemented UNIFAC is very
satisfying with the highest error being 8.32%.
Table 5.6: Percentages absolute error between the implemented UNIFAC and
the observed data.
|e%
γ1|
|e%
γ2|
|e%
γ3|
2.23
3.10
4.14
5.02
2.02
0.67
1.17
5.79
3.55
3.06
1.31
8.32
0.27
1.57
1.16
By now it should be clear that UNIFAC performs well in the estimation of activity coeﬃ-
cients with high enough accuracy that it can be used for screening. To further strengthen
the validation of the UNIFAC implementation, a binary system was tested with the en-
tire range of compositions. The system that was tested is a 1-Propanol (1) - Heptane (2)
system. The system is displayed in ﬁgure 5.5.
The ﬁgure illustrates that when the composition of one of the component goes to 1 (pure
component) then the natural logarithm of that component goes to zero, meaning that the
activity coeﬃcients of the component becomes 1.
d ln γ1
dxi
→0
for
x1 →1
(5.1)
This phenomenon is called the Gibbs-Duhem equation that describes the relationship
between changes in chemical potential for components in thermodynamic systems. This
is a simple test, but it illustrates that the physical phenomena described by the UNIFAC
model are in fact the same as real life. This does not prove that the UNIFAC method is
==PAGE:54==
5.5. TEST AND VALIDATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
42
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
composition of x2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
activity coefficients of ln( 1) and ln( 2)
Propanol(1) - Heptane(2) binary system
Propanol(1)
Heptane(2)
Figure 5.5: Binary system of 1-Propanol and Heptane. Estimated activity
coeﬃcients development as composition of the binary system changes.
able to estimate precise activity coeﬃcients for all type of mixture systems but it is as far
as this thesis will take the validation.
5.5.5
Partition coeﬃcient estimation
The partition coeﬃcient is estimated by the use of activity coeﬃcients which is estimated
by the UNIFAC implementation that was just tested and validated in the previous section.
The partition coeﬃcient is found by estimating the activity coeﬃcients for a ternary sys-
tem consisting of the component of interest, water and octanol. Two sets of calculations
are needed to estimate a partition coeﬃcient for a component.
First, the activity in
the water-rich phase is estimated. This is done by assuming that the phase consists of
xw = 0.99 and xo = 0.01 with almost nothing of the component of interest (eg. 10−9).
Secondly, the activity in the octanol rich phase is estimated. This is done by assuming
that the phase consists of xw = 0.21 and xo = 0.79 still with the same amount of the
component. Remember that the activity coeﬃcients are estimated at inﬁnite dilute. The
partition coeﬃcient is found by the relationship between the component in the octanol
rich phase and the water-rich phase.
This means that we now only need to test how well the estimated activity coeﬃcients
correlate to the estimation of partition coeﬃcients. To accommodate this need, a com-
ponent list with known experimental partition coeﬃcients is collected so it is possible to
compare with the UNIFAC estimated Kow values. The experimental data series is found
in the work performed by W.J.Doucette and A.W.Andren (1988) [41]. The components
are listed in table 5.7.
A parity plot of the data showed in table 5.7 is constructed and can be found in ﬁgure
5.6. The parity plot is made in the same fashion as the other parity plots presented in
this chapter, with a 10% divergence from the perfect ﬁt. The red dots illustrates the
==PAGE:55==
5.5. TEST AND VALIDATION OF IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
43
Table 5.7: Component list with experimental and estimated Octanol/water
partition coeﬃcients
Component name
log(Kow) (exp)
log(Kow) (UNIFAC)
Benzene
2.13
2.2115
Toluene
2.65
2.6340
Biphenyl
3.89
4.1416
1,2-dimethylbenzene
3.13
3.0565
1,3-dimethylbenzene
3.18
3.0565
1,4-dimethylbenzene
3.2
3.0565
1,2,3-trimethylbenzene
3.55
3.4790
1,2,4-trimethylbenzene
3.65
3.4790
1,2,3,4-tetramethylbenzene
3.98
3.9015
1,2,3,5-tetramethylbenzene
4.04
3.9015
Hexamethylbenzene
4.61
4.7465
parity and the lines illustrates the perfect ﬁt and the bounds. All the components tested
in this small example is to be found within the 10 % divergence which is an indicator
for the quality of not only the implementation but also the model. This small test also
strengthens the validation of UNIFAC since the Kow estimation is performed exclusively
on the basis of the estimated activity coeﬃcients.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
UNIFAC logKow
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Experimental logKow
Kow parity plot for data series
Parity curve
diagonal
+10% bound
-10% bound
Figure 5.6: octanol/water partition coeﬃcients comparison between model
implementation and experimental data.
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Results and Analysis for
Chromatographic separation of
Hesperidin
This chapter contains case-speciﬁc results for the Hesperidin separation and a thorough
analysis of the results. The case-speciﬁc results are found with the basis in the screening
method described in the previous chapters. The analysis is performed with a combination
of experimental procedures and the use of ChromX simulation tools to further investigate
the chromatographic separation.
6.1
General input speciﬁcations
The screening simulations are performed based on the input speciﬁcations presented in
this section. Since it is favored to separate Hesperidin it is necessary to implement the
structure of Hesperidin in a way that the screening method can understand. This is done
by dividing the solute into subgroups. This ensures that the information can be utilized
by the method to estimate the correct properties. The input speciﬁcation presented in
this section is generic and used in all simulations throughout the project. A graphical
structure of Hesperidin was presented in Figure 4.2 and the subgroups that together build
Hesperidin is listed in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Hesperidin translated into subgroups.
Subgroups
Maingroups
Repetition
Structure
1
1
1
CH3
3
1
7
CH
10
3
5
ACH
11
3
5
AC
15
5
6
OH
18
6
2
ACOH
20
9
1
CH3CO
25
13
1
CH3-O-
26
13
1
CH2-O-
27
13
4
CH-O-
To ease the input process for the user the method is structured to translate a simple vector
into a compound. Hesperidin is characterized in accordance to Table 6.1 so the vector is
subgroupsHesperidin = [1 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 ... 20 25 26 27 27 27 27]. The vector is incomplete but
it should be clear how the complete vector would look.
It is necessary to know both the temperature at which the separation is performed and
45
==PAGE:58==
6.2. HESPERIDIN BENCHMARK CASE
46
the relationship between Hesperidin and the solvent(s). For convenience, the temperature
is set to be equal to room temperature, 25 degrees Celsius (298K). This will later make it
easier to practice in an experimental setup since there will be no need for a column-oven.
The composition of Hesperidin and the solvent(s) is in the initial simulations set to be
x = [0.0, 0.5, 0.5]. which illustrates the ﬁrst molecule of Hesperidin that is added to the
solvent system consisting of two solvents in equimolar concentrations where one of the
solvents is ﬁxed and the other is found through the screening method. The buﬀer solution
that is to consist of two solvents needs to have the ability to be both a carrier and have
great dissolving ability towards Hesperidin. It is diﬃcult to have both abilities in one
solvent, so one of the solvents is designed with the ability to carry the Hesperidin through
the column and the other solvent is designed with the ability to dissolve the Hesperidin
into the liquid phase. The carrier solvent is initially Methanol, due to previous work with
successful column runs using Methanol.
6.2
Hesperidin benchmark case
Like mentioned, previous work suggests that a 50 % mixture with Methanol and some
other solvents gives a suitable solvent system for the separation of Hesperidin. Three
solvents, in particular, were studied as part of a 50/50 solvent system with Methanol,
Water, DMSO and Acetone.
It was quickly realized that water was a very poor candidate for the solvent system. This
is in agreement with the case description of Hesperidin in the early part of the project
since Hesperidin has poor solubility in aqueous mixtures. DMSO was found to be a prime
candidate, able to dissolve large amounts of Hesperidin and still be carried through the
column. Acetone was due to unknown reasons unable to perform the job due to errors
in the system [42]. Since a few experiments already are performed for this case these
data now serve as benchmark systems. From this standpoint, an additional boundary
condition on the activity coeﬃcients will be developed.
6.2.1
Mobile phase investigation - Benchmark case
The screening method is used to estimate the activity coeﬃcients for the benchmark case.
This means that no further solvent candidates will be generated in this simple test. The
activity coeﬃcients are estimated to represent the mobile phase with Hesperidin at inﬁnite
dilution. Table 6.2 shows the result of the simulation for the mobile phase.
Table 6.2: Mobile phase results for the benchmark system. Two ways of
expressing the mobile phase is showed. 1) Solvent system with methanol +
solvent and Hesperidin. 2) Hesperidin pure solvent.
Hesperidin in (50:50 ; Methanol + solvent)
Hesperidin in solvent
Solvent
γ∞
Hes
γMethanol
γsolvent
γ∞
Hes
γsolvent
Water
0.000788
1.15
1.27
40.324
1.0
DMSO
0.0000373
0.68
0.76
0.000000080
1.0
Acetone
0.00729
1.29
1.26
0.799
1.0
Table 6.2 illustrates both the mobile phase in the case where Methanol is in a 50% mixture
with one of the three solvents and also the case where one of the three solvents is the only
contributor to the solvent system. The best representation of what happens in the column
is the complete solvent system where both Methanol and solvent is part of the equation.
==PAGE:59==
6.2. HESPERIDIN BENCHMARK CASE
47
However, it was also interesting to test how the results could diﬀer if no Methanol was
added. When looking at the activity coeﬃcients at inﬁnite dilutions, it is known that if the
sum of contributors is close to 1 then an ideal behavior is achieved. By that deﬁnition, we
now have a way to analyze these results directly as they are being presented. If the activity
coeﬃcient for Hesperidin is close to zero, then the Hesperidin is satisﬁed to be in solution
with the solvent mixture. - The solubility is high. However, if a large activity coeﬃcient
of Hesperidin is estimated, then the solubility is very poor and the solvent candidate
is therefore not suitable for this particular task.
If we ﬁrst analyze the pure solvent
activity coeﬃcients, it is shown that water results in a very large activity coeﬃcient.
This means that water is a poor candidate when it comes to the solubility of Hesperidin.
This is in agreement with the result performed in the experimental setup, that preceded
this work [42]. DMSO as a pure solvent for the mobile phase estimates a small activity
coeﬃcient for Hesperidin. This is in agreement with the results obtained experimentally,
which showed DMSO to be a prime candidate. Acetone gives an activity coeﬃcient that
is close to 1. This shows that though it was not workable in the experimental setup it is
not very qualiﬁed either. When it comes to the pure solvent systems, a best to the worst
ranking would be DMSO - Acetone - Water. Now, for Hesperidin at inﬁnite dilutions
in a solvent system containing 50% Methanol and 50 % solvent-candidate: Hesperidin in
water/Methanol results in a much better solubility than what is achieved with pure water.
The same can be said for Acetone/Methanol. However, the solubility of Hesperidin in
DMSO + Methanol is worse than that in pure DMSO. DMSO + Methanol is still far
better than the other two. It is interesting to see that with the addition of Methanol,
water becomes a better solvent system than that of acetone and water.
6.2.2
Stationary phase investigation - Benchmark case
Until now it has only been of interest to look at the mobile phase interactions with
Hesperidin. With the experimental results for the benchmark case, it is now possible to
investigate a relationship between the stationary phase and the screened solvents. The
stationary phase available is an RPLC column with C18 carbon ligands on a silica surface.
It is assumed that an estimation of activity coeﬃcients for a screened solvent at inﬁnite
dilution in a medium of 18 carbon-chains is in agreement with the environment within
such a column.
Table 6.3 illustrates the results of such an investigation of the three
solvents of interest.
Table 6.3:
Stationary phase results for the benchmark system.
Solvent
present in pure stationary phase ligand, C18
Solvent in C18
Solvent
γ∞
solvent
γC18
Water
663.224
1.0
DMSO
58.345
1.0
Acetone
3.398
1.0
Where it was desired for the mobile phase to have very low activity coeﬃcients, it seems
that the opposite is the case for the stationary phase. Methanol is already chosen to be
the carrier contributor of the solvent, meaning that the retention through the column
is controlled by the Methanol/C18 interactions. It is desired to ﬁnd a solvent with high
activity coeﬃcients, unwilling to interact with the C18 ligands.
Water is found to be
unwilling to interact with the C18 ligands.
Not surprisingly because the C18 ligands
==PAGE:60==
6.2. HESPERIDIN BENCHMARK CASE
48
are very hydrophobic and water is the exact opposite. DMSO also has a high activity
coeﬃcient in C18 and since it was a prime candidate, it should be possible to ﬁnd a
great alternative if similar conditions are used for screening. Acetone has the smallest
activity coeﬃcient among the three, still with a relatively large value. The data suggest
that acetone is unwilling to interact with C18 but not nearly as unwilling as DMSO and
nowhere near water. If we only looked at the stationary phase, then water would be the
best solvent to add to the solvent system. However, when we also takes the mobile phase
into account, it is clear that DMSO is the best candidate.
6.2.3
Summary of benchmark case
From the investigation of the three solvent candidates, DMSO, acetone, and water, it
was decided to take advantage of the results and perform a set of simulations to estimate
the activity coeﬃcients illustrating the behavior between the solvent system, the solute
Hesperidin and the stationary phase in an attempt to imitate the environment of the mo-
bile phase and stationary phase. The attempt led to the development of a new boundary
condition on the estimated activity coeﬃcients.
• The estimated activity coeﬃcients of the solute in the mobile phase should be as
low as possible.
γ∞
Hes,mp < ϵ4
(6.1)
Where ϵ4 is user deﬁned value for the maximum allowed.
• The estimated activity coeﬃcients of the solvent in the stationary phase should be
as large as possible.
γ∞
Sol,sp > ϵ5
(6.2)
Where ϵ5 is user deﬁned value for the lowest allowed activity coeﬃcient.
So now the input speciﬁcations for the complete screening method utilization look as
shown in Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Input speciﬁcations to operate the screening method with the new
boundary conditions included.
Type
Input
Decription
structural constraint
nbas
Number of groups in a basis set
nmax
Number of maximum legal groups to form a compound
nmin
Number of minimum legal groups to form a compound
Case description
subgroups
Listing the subgroups of the case solute
Stationary ligands
ligands
Listing the subgroups of the stationary ligands
Boundary conditions
ϵ1
Boundary condition for Melting point and boiling point
ϵ2
Boundary condition for Toxicity
ϵ3
Boundary condition for Partition
ϵ4
Upper boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients in the mobile phase
ϵ5
Lower boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients in the stationary phase
==PAGE:61==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
49
6.3
Alternatives to benchmark case
6.3.1
Two component system: (1) Methanol - (2) Solvent
If for various reasons someone was not interested in the use of DMSO for the dissolution
of Hesperidin, it would be necessary to ﬁnd a suitable solvent candidate with similar
properties. That means that a simulation could be performed, where Hesperidin is the
solute and the solvent system is consisting of Methanol and another solvent in a 50/50
mixture.
A 50/50 mixture was used when water was part of the solvent system and
since it is no longer, the conditions will might not be valid anymore. However, since
the knowledge still is sparse, it is the best standpoint to follow. The conditions now are
almost the same as what was done in the benchmark case, with the exception that no
solvents were generated through a systematic procedure but chosen based on intuition
and ”what has worked before”. The simulation is restricted to a number of groups (basis
set) equal to 42. This is done because of a lack in computer power. It is not important,
at this point in time, to constrain the minimum number of subgroups allowed to form
a single solvent (nmin), so that is just speciﬁed as 1. However also due to computation
speed no compound greater than 4 subgroups to form a single solvent (nmax) is allowed.
This means that no single solvent must have more than 4 subgroups. Since the nmax is 4
it is assumed that no suitable aromatic solvent is found and thus all aromatic subgroups
are removed for the list of solvent candidates. The boundary conditions for the melting
point and boiling point is set to 298K, the same as the operating conditions. This means
that the melting point needs to be below this temperature and that the boiling point
needs to be above. The maximum toxicity is set to be 1.5, meaning that no solution with
higher toxicity is allowed. Table 6.5 gives a quick overview of the boundary conditions
chosen for this speciﬁc simulation.
Table 6.5: Boundary conditions for simulation: Alternatives to Benchmark
case.
Type
Value
Decription
structural constraint
nbas
42
Number of groups in a basis set
nmax
5
Number of maximum legal groups to form a compound
nmin
1
Number of minimum legal groups to form a compound
Case description
subgroups
Hesperidin
Listing the subgroups of the case solute
Stationary ligands
ligands
C18 carbon chain
Listing the subgroups of the stationary ligands
Boundary conditions
ϵ1
298
Boundary condition for Melting point and boiling point
ϵ2
1.5
Boundary condition for Toxicity
ϵ3
No bound
Boundary condition for Partition
ϵ4
1 · 10−2
Upper boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients in the mobile phase
ϵ5
3.5
Lower boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients in the stationary phase
The two new boundary conditions are placed on the activity coeﬃcient of Hesperidin
in the mobile phase and the activity coeﬃcient in the stationary phase. This is done
in agreement with the simulation performed for the benchmark case.
A low activity
coeﬃcient for Hesperidin in the mobile phase is set to 1∗10−2 meaning that for all solvent
systems where the activity coeﬃcient for Hesperidin is higher than the chosen value are
removed from consideration. An activity coeﬃcient for the solvent in the stationary phase
==PAGE:62==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
50
is constrained to a value of no less than 3.5 meaning that for all solvent + C18 combination
results, only activity coeﬃcients with a higher value is accepted.
The output of the screening method is structured as in Table 6.6. A total of 8 suitable
solvent mixtures are found and listed with their respected estimated properties. As men-
tioned before, the Odele and Macchietto rules are not perfect. So subsequent manual
evaluation/ screening of the results, is necessary. However, it is a manageable and not
very time-consuming task. By quick analysis, it is clear that no. 6 and 7 are infeasible
and will not be tested further. Table 6.7 is displayed based on Table 6.6 but only with the
6 remaining feasible solutions present. This table shows the activity coeﬃcients for the
mobile and stationary phases, which will help in the later assessment of the simulation.
The method calculates a total number of solvent possibilities of a little over 31 thousand
compounds, which would be impossible to go through manually or experimentally. How-
ever, after a successful screening, the total number of suitable solvent candidates have
been reduced to a manageable task.
Table 6.6:
Screening method result for Hesperidin in solvent system
(Methanol + Solvent), as part of the alternatives to benchmark case.
No.
Subgroups
Tm
Tm
LC50
Structure
Name
1
0
0
0
68
−1
−
−
C2H6OS
DMSO
2
0
0
0
16
−
−
−
CH3OH
Methanol
3
0
0
0
41
−
−
1.262
CH3CN
Acetonitrile
4
0
0
0
72
−
−
−
C3H7NO
DMF
5
0
0
5
15
169.748
328.817
1.193
CH2 = CH −OH
Ethenol
6
0
0
15
25
192.076
347.218
0.166
Infeasible
−2
7
0
0
19
25
210.425
359.952
0.996
Infeasible
−
8
0
2
25
25
195.951
345.752
1.202
CH3O −CH2 −OCH3
Dimethoxymethane
Table 6.7: Screening method results for Hesperidin in solvent system (50:50
; Methanol + Solvent) - Activity coeﬃcients for the stationary and mobile
phase. Connected to Table 6.6.
Name
γ∞
Hes,mp
γMethanol,mp
γSolv,mb
γ∞
Solv,sp
γC18,sp
DMSO
4.86E-05
0.694
0.773
49.94
1.00
Methanol
3.72E-04
1.028
1.059
8.73
1.00
Acetonitrile
8.94E-04
1.234
1.228
11.97
1.00
DMF
4.05E-04
0.793
0.861
30.14
1.00
Ethenol
6.22E-03
1.062
1.043
14.69
1.00
Dimethoxymethane
7.76E-03
1.307
1.244
3.77
1.00
As mentioned, some of the solvents that successfully passes all the boundary conditions
will be infeasible. This will be the case for many screenings where ether and other oxygen-
containing subgroups are allowed since all can be arranged so two ether are connected
through an oxygen-oxygen binding, which is impossible but accepted in regards to the
feasibility rules. It can also be that the compound is arranged so a ketone and alcohol
are forced to form an acid group. This is also not the correct procedure since the acid
group is a subgroup on its own with diﬀerent values than what is achieved when a ketone
and alcohol is combined. Compounds structured in such a way will be invalid and have
false properties. Such structures are what needs to be sorted when manual handling is
1The screening method is not able to estimate GC based properties for pure components.
2No name exists because it is an infeasible component.
==PAGE:63==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
51
performed. The interest of this case has at all times been to ﬁnd a solvent able to dissolves
the Hesperidin but under no circumstances react with it. Therefore it is necessary to
remove all unstable and reactive compounds from the list. Ethenol also known as vinyl
alcohol is a compound that is unstable under normal conditions and prefers to convert into
acetaldehyde. So Ethenol is removed and will not be considered in further analysis. For
further analysis, it is necessary to go into details with the individual solvent candidates.
DMSO
DMSO has the chemical formula (CH3)2SO. It is a colorless liquid with lower toxicity
than other solvents like DMF which is also found as a solution. It has many times proven
to be a very useful solvent when it comes to the great dissolving abilities that DMSO
possess. - it is able to dissolve a wide range of both nonpolar and polar compounds and
is also miscible in the most organic solvents and also in water. It just strengthens the
trust in the other simulation results, since DMSO was found to be a suitable solvent and
proved to be in the lab. This thesis will not rely totally on other experimental results, so
DMSO will be tested in the experimental set up next to the other candidates.
Methanol
Methanol, the simplest alcohol is already present in the solvent system for all the solvent
candidates. So, when this was found a solution it simply means that the solvent system
contains 50/50 Methanol/Methanol or just pure Methanol. Methanol is more toxic than
ethanol, so it would be interesting to test if another less toxic suitable solvent candidate
could be found through the screening method for the carrier part of the solvent system
while keeping the dissolving part ﬁxed.
Acetonitrile
Acetonitrile, the simplest nitrile with the formula CH3CN. It is a colorless liquid with
medium polarity and is used as a solvent many times connected to chromatographic HPLC
and LC-MS analytic systems. As it from the screening method was designed, Acetonitrile
is to be mixed with Methanol in a 50/50 solution. This is a particular solution since solvent
systems often contain either Methanol or Acetonitrile but not both. However, they are
miscible and so it should be possible to test the solvent system in the experimental setup.
It would not be surprising if the two solvent systems pure methanol and Methanol +
Acetonitrile showed very similar results.
DMF
Dimethylformamide, DMF with the formula (CH3)2NCHO is a colorless liquid that is
miscible in most organic liquids and water. It is known for it is often used as a solvent,
and is known as a universal solvent, meaning that it is used as a ”go too” when either a
quick ﬁx is of interest or if sparse knowledge about separation is the case. - It is therefore
not surprising that DMF is a suitable solvent.
Dimethoxymethane
Dimethoxymethane, with the alternative name DMM, is a colorless ﬂammable liquid
which is known to have excellent dissolving powers. It is soluble in three parts water
and miscible in most common organic solvents. It has a wide range of applications in
==PAGE:64==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
52
the industry. In addition to the solvent properties, Dimethoxymethane can be used as
gasoline-additive to increase the octane number, in the production of perfumes and in
painting among others. Based on the information about excellent dissolving powers makes
this compound a prime candidate, and must be tested in the laboratory.
Summary of the screening method results
This subsection concludes the ﬁrst full case simulation where it was desired to ﬁnd a
solvent system containing 50 pct Methanol and 50 pct of a suitable solvent with the
abilities to dissolve and carry Hesperidin through a C18 Reverse phase column. 5 worthy
candidates were left after manual handling. None of the 5 suitable solvents that are left,
can be directly discarded. Some are more promising than others but, it will be necessary
to test them all in an experimental setup.
Experimental validation of results
An easy and reliable way to test the solubility of a solute in a solvent system is by using
the shake-ﬂask method, described in the Materials and Method section. From the sim-
ulation results, it was desired to ﬁnd a solvent system containing Methanol and another
solvent (50:50; v/v) able to not only dissolve Hesperidin but also carry it through a C18
RPLC column. First, it is tested if it is possible to dissolve Hesperidin in the diﬀerent
suitable solvent systems in a concentration that is in agreement with what the results
from the screening method suggest.
The shake ﬂask method is analyzed on the HPLC in a system of water + Methanol
+ acetic acid. A calibration curve is created so it is possible to relate the area under
the peak to concentration. The calibration curve is made by a set of samples with a
known concentration from 0 - 100 mg/L. More than that and the Hesperidin starts to
precipitate. The calibration curve together with a linear regression can be seen in Figure
6.1.
From the linear regression a relation is found to be:
y = 20.76 · x −5.940
(6.3)
Where y is the concentration in mg/L and x is the area (mAU · min) of the peak given
as output from an HPLC column run with the same column and solvent system. The
calibration curve is only equipped to relate area and concentration up until 100 mg/L so
the shake ﬂask experiments are diluted 50 times before analysis.
Table 6.8: Shake-ﬂask results for alternatives to benchmark case.
Solvent solution
Diluted concentration of
Hesperidin [mg/L]
Real concentration of
Hesperidin [mg/L]
DMSO + Methanol
> 1000
> 50 · 103
DMF + Methanol
> 1000
> 50 · 103
Pure Methanol
103.9
5195
Acetonitrile + Methanol
96.14
4807
DMM + Methanol
70.72
3536
One of the two objectives for this case was to ﬁnd a set of solvents that was able to dis-
solve Hesperidin in the desired amount. The experimental results show that this part was
==PAGE:65==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
53
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Area [mAU*min]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Concentration [mg/L]
Calibration curve of (MeOH:DMSO ; 50:50)
Fit is: y = 20.7561x - 5.9396 (R2=0.9943)
Experimental data
Linear regression
Figure 6.1: Calibration curve of Hesperidin in Methanol + water + Acetic
acid (50:50:1 ; v:v:v) with a linear regression to correlate concentration to
mAU*min.
succesful. If we ignore the fact that the UNIFAC model is estimation based and that the
results found from the screening method are only to guide, then a comparison of estimated
activity coeﬃcients and the experimental concentrations can be made. From best to worst:
Screening results:
DMSO > pureMethanol > DMF > Acetonitrile > DMM
Experimental results:
DMSO ≃DMF > pureMethanol > Acetonitrile > DMM
The next objective is to carry the dissolved Hesperidin through a column. As previously
mentioned, 50 % Methanol was used in the solvent system to keep the retention factor
constant. Even though pure Methanol is an interesting answer it is not desired to have
such a solvent system. The same goes for the Acetonitrile + Methanol solvent system.
Acetonitrile is a solvent that is very similar to Methanol so to have a solvent system of
50:50 Acetonitrile + Methanol would be almost the same as pure Methanol.
DMSO + Methanol was already tested in the previous work, with great results. So, the
ﬁrst solvent system that was tested was the DMF + Methanol.
A 5 g/L solution of
Hesperidin in DMF + Methanol was used as a sample with an injecting volume of 10.00
µl with a ﬂow of 1.00 ml/min. The result is shown in Figure 6.2.
On ﬁrst glance, the chromatographic column run does not seem to be ﬂawed. However,
with a closer look, it is clear that the elution time is the exact same as the time it takes
the sample to travel through the column. This is a clear indication that the solutes do
not interact with the stationary phase and no retention of solute is achieved. This would
also mean that if the sample contained multiple similar impurities, then it would not
be possible to separate the solute from the impurities. This hypothesis can be tested
by overloading the column. If the peak starts tailing then, the solute interacts with the
stationary phase as it is desired. However, if the peak remains as a Gaussian peak then
the hypothesis could be correct. A 25 g/L solution of Hesperidin was prepared for such
an experiment. All the other operating conditions are set to be the same. The attempt
to overloading the column is shown in Figure 6.3.
==PAGE:66==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
54
Figure 6.2: HPLC result of 5 g/L Hesperidin in solvent system (DMF +
Methanol) through a C18 column with dimensions (250mm x 4.6mm) with a
ﬂow of 1 ml/min, injection volume of 10.00 µl.
Figure 6.3: HPLC result of 25 g/L Hesperidin in solvent system (DMF +
Methanol) through a C18 column with dimensions (250mm x 4.6mm) with a
ﬂow of 1 ml/min, injection volume of 10.00 µl. An attempt to overload the
column
From Figure 6.3 it is evident that, no tailing is achieved. This strengthens the hypothesis
that the solute does not interact as desired with the stationary phase. This phenomenon
==PAGE:67==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
55
can be due to the use of DMF. DMF could be too strong of a solvent, forcing Hesperidin
to not interact with the stationary phase when dissolved in DMF.
Dimethoxymethane was also a possible candidate.
A sample with concentration 0.05
g/L Hesperidin is used as a sample to test out the solvent system. the output of the
experimental column run is shown in Figure 6.4. Unfortunately, the peak is still eluted
just as quickly. In an attempt to overload the column a concentration of 0.1 g/L Hes-
peridin is used as a sample, this time with an injection volume of 90 µl. The experimental
column run is shown in Figure 6.5. The results clearly show that it was not possible to
overload the column. Furthermore it seems as if there are some impurities to the right of
the peak. These impurities can be caused by more than one thing. The ﬁrst possibility
is that it is impurities from the solvent. As it can be seen in the material and methods
section a purity of 90% was the highest obtainable purity of Dimethoxymethane so the
impurities could originate from there, also Hesperidin is only 80 % pure. However, by
looking at Figure 6.4 it would seem that the impurities have grown, which would not be
the case if the impurities originated from the solvent. The other possibility could be that
the Dimethoxy methane partly denaturates the Hesperidin and creates impurities from
the Hesperidin compound. The exact time and place when the samples were created was
not noted so the analysis cannot be taken any further.
Figure
6.4:
HPLC result of 0.05 g/L Hesperidin in solvent system
(Dimethoxymethane + Methanol) through a C18 column with dimensions
(250mm x 4.6mm) with a ﬂow of 1 ml/min, injection volume of 10.00 µl.
The boundary condition regarding the activity coeﬃcients in the screening method is
developed on the basis of the benchmark case, to ﬁnd alternative solvents with similar
properties as DMSO. It would be a good idea to test if DMSO is actually a great candidate.
To test if the DMSO + Methanol solvent system shows more promising results, an overload
experiment, like performed for DMF + Methanol, is now tested for DMSO + Methanol.
The procedure is set to be the same for most of the operating conditions. This experiment,
==PAGE:68==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
56
Figure
6.5:
HPLC result of 0.1 g/L Hesperidin in solvent system
(Dimethoxymethane + Methanol) through a C18 column with dimensions
(250mm x 4.6mm) with a ﬂow of 1 ml/min, injection volume of 90.00 µl.
An attempt to overload the column
however, is a bit more aggressive in the sense that a 50 g/L Hesperidin sample is used
and the fact that the injection volume for this column run was pushed up to 99 µL. - The
highest tolerable injection size on the HPLC system. If these conditions didn’t create a
tailing nothing would. The result of the extreme overload experiment is shown in Figure
6.6.
From the ﬁgure, it is clear that no tailing is achieved.
Meaning that DMSO +
Methanol (50:50 ; v:v) unfortunately does not let Hesperidin interact with the stationary
phase. This suggests that the solvent system is not suitable as a chromatographic system
for this particular RPLC column at least with these concentrations.
As a follow-up
experiment, it was tested if a tailing peak is obtainable if the Methanol concentration
is lowered and the DMSO concentration is increased. The test system contained 20:80
Methanol + DMSO results are shown in Figure 6.7. - The other operating conditions for
this experiment is the exact same as the extreme overload experiment. The peak shows
the exact same peak as what was presented in Figure 6.6 is observed, indicating that it
is not the concentration of Methanol that disrupt the stationary phase interactions. The
two attempts to extreme overload of the column both have a very distinct shape, which
clearly shows that the adsorption and desorption constant is very low.
Adsorption - disorption constant in a chromatographic column.
According to the Langmuir adsorption isotherm, the internal system of a chromatographic
separation process that follows this phenomenon can be described as:
S + A ↔SA
(6.4)
Assuming that there are a ﬁxed number of surface sites present on the surface, this can
be formulated as an equilibrium constant:
==PAGE:69==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
57
Figure 6.6: HPLC result of 50 g/L Hesperidin in solvent system (DMSO
+ Methanol) through a C18 column with dimensions (250mm x 4.6mm) with
a ﬂow of 1 ml/min, injection volume of 10.00 µl.
An attempt to extreme
overload the column
Figure 6.7: HPLC result of 50 g/L Hesperidin in solvent system (DMSO +
Methanol ; 80:20) through a C18 column with dimensions (250mm x 4.6mm)
with a ﬂow of 1 ml/min, injection volume of 10.00 µl. An attempt to extreme
overload the column
==PAGE:70==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
58
K =
[SA]
[A] · [S]
(6.5)
The equilibrium constant can be used to express many phenomena but the one of interest
here is the desorption/ adsorption ratio. By examining equation 6.5 it does not take much
to understand the [SA] complex as solute bounded to the stationary phase, and [A] · [S]
as solutes and stationary phase divided. This can be related to adsorption and desorption
in the following way:
K = Adsorption
desorption
(6.6)
By this deﬁnition, it is clear that if the equilibrium constant becomes very small then the
desorption is much more favored than the adsorption. This means that nothing binds to
the column but instead runs straight through with no interactions to the stationary phase.
By using the ChromX simulation tool, this phenomenon can be illustrated by graphi-
cal visualization. A simulation is performed with a column that has similar dimensions
as the one used to the experimental setup. Hesperidin is stated to follow the Langmuir
isotherm, so that is selected in ChromX also. Only one solute is described in ChromX
which is injected into the system with a concentration of 0.1 g/L and an injection size
of 10 µL. If the Adsorption-desorption constant, is set to a good value like 0.16 [M−1],
which replicates a healthy system with good stationary phase interactions, then the plot
presented to the left in Figure 6.8 would the output of such a column run.
0
50
100
150
200
time [Min]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Absorbance
[0.1 g/L]
0
50
100
150
200
time [Min]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Absorbance
[0.1 g/L]
[0.5 g/L]
[1 g/L]
[10 g/L]
Figure 6.8: ChromX simulation of solute behavior inside a HPLC column
with speciﬁcations: sample concentration: 0.1g/L, injection size of 10 µL and
adsorption-disorption constant 0.16 [M −1].
If one tried to overload the system by increasing the concentration of the solute in the
sample then the right part of Figure 6.8 would be the case. Notice how the peak changes
from a symmetric gaussian peak to a very steep tailing peak as the concentration in-
creases. This is the exact same analysis that was tried in the experimental analysis but
with a diﬀerent outcome.
If the operating conditions are kept the same for a new simulation where the only thing
==PAGE:71==
6.3. ALTERNATIVES TO BENCHMARK CASE
59
that is changed is the equilibrium constant that is decreased to a very small value of 0.01
[M−1] then Figure 6.9 would be the output of such a column run.
0
50
100
150
200
time [Min]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Absorbance
[0.1 g/L]
0
50
100
150
200
time [Min]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Absorbance
[0.1 g/L]
[0.5 g/L]
[1 g/L]
[10 g/L]
Figure 6.9: ChromX simulation of solute behavior inside a HPLC column
with speciﬁcations: sample concentration: 0.1g/L, injection size of 10 µL and
adsorption-disorption constant 0.01 [M −1].
Now notice how no matter the concentration of the sample the shape of the peak remains
the same. This is the exact same as what was seen in the experimental analysis. Thereby
further strengthening the hypothesis of the solvent system being too favorable to be in
for Hesperidin to interact with the stationary phase.
6.3.2
Summary of the two component solvent system investigation
This section became a bit more comprehensive than ﬁrst expected. The objective of this
section was to generate a list of alternatives to the benchmark case example and then
validate the results in an experimental setup. This was done but with a diﬀerent outcome
than expected. Instead, the validation showed that the benchmark case might not be as
great as initially believed. Instead, a hypothesis was developed that built upon the idea
that the solvent system presented as ideal in the benchmark case might be too favorable
for the solute, Hesperidin, to be in. Resulting in a very low stationary phase interaction.
This hypothesis was backed-up by the ChromX simulations that were performed as an
analysis of the issue.
The Screening method was able to ﬁnd a list of ﬁve solvent systems that all were able
to dissolve large amounts of Hesperidin.- This was one of the objectives for the case. As
for the second objective, it makes perfect sense that the screening method was not able
to solve this issue. You cant expect to solve an issue if the benchmark case in which the
boundary conditions for the activity coeﬃcients was developed did not solve it either. All
the screening method did was to generate a set of alternative with equally undesirable
stationary phase interactions, as the benchmark case.
To solve this problem and to further validate the screening method, one could try to
shape the screening method to generate a set of solvent systems with intentionally lower
favorable interactions for Hesperidin, while still keeping it better than what has been
observed for water + methanol systems. A way to do this is to add another compound
==PAGE:72==
6.4. THREE-COMPONENT SYSTEM: (1) METHANOL - (2) WATER - (3)
SOLVENT
60
to the screening method. So the solvent system no longer contains only two solvent but
three instead. The compound that should be added must be one that is known to make
it more unfavorable for Hesperidin. Water is the obvious choice. This exact problem is
investigated further in the next section.
6.4
Three-component system: (1) Methanol - (2) water -
(3) solvent
A three-component system is developed with the hope that the addition of a third com-
ponent will create a better-suited solvent system to carry Hesperdin through the HPLC
column and solve the issue that seems impossible to solve with only two components.
6.4.1
Changes in solvent concentration
The concentration of Methanol is kept still at the original 50 %. The conditions that have
been used are the same as illustrated in Table 6.5. The only thing that is changing from
simulation to simulation is the water and solvent ratio. Table 6.9 shows the solvents that
pass the boundary condition when water is added to the mixture.
Table 6.9: Solvent system solutions with changing water and solvent con-
centrations. Notation 1 means that this type of solvent passes the boundary
conditions. (1:2:3) (Methanol + water + solvent)
Structure
(50:0:50)
(50:10:40)
(50:20:30)
(50:30:20)
(50:40:10)
DMSO
1
1
1 (*)
Methanol
1
1
1
1
1
Acetonitrile
1
1
1
1
1
DMF
1
1
1
1 (*)
Dimethoxymethane
1
1
1 (*)
Methanol and Acetonitrile seem to be great candidates for a solvent with various concen-
trations of water. However, it has already been stated before that these type of solvent
systems are of no interest in this case. DMSO and DMF seem to favor it less when the
water concentration increases. Dimethoxymethane seems to favor it only when it is a
two-component system of solvent and Methanol or when it is a three component system
with high water concentrations.
For further studies, it would be an idea to test the three systems with sign (*), as they
all three have the highest found water content while still being qualiﬁed as solutions.
Besides the obvious reasons, that this screening is performed to try and ﬁx the issue
of Hesperidin not interacting with the stationary phase. Such a screening with water
included also makes sense from a business perspective. Capital expenses associated with
solvent usage can be highly dependent on the solvent system. Adding water, if water can
be added, can be a great way to lower the capital cost of the production. The simulations
were also performed to illustrate that the screening method can adopt more complex
solvent systems.
6.4.2
Changes in methanol concentration
By lowering the Methanol concentration a slower elution will most likely be the result.
This could solve the problem with little or no stationary phase interactions. The same
==PAGE:73==
6.4. THREE-COMPONENT SYSTEM: (1) METHANOL - (2) WATER - (3)
SOLVENT
61
practice as in the previous section has been used. This time, however, it is the Methanol
and water concentration that is changed. The diﬀerent screenings is collected in Table
6.10.
Table 6.10:
Solvent system solutions with changing water and Methanol
concentrations. Notation 1 means that this type of solvent passes the boundary
conditions. (1:2:3) (Methanol + water + solvent)
Structure
(50:0:50)
(40:10:50)
(30:20:50)
(20:30:50)
(10:40:50)
DMSO
1
1
1
1
1 (*)
Methanol
1
1
1
1
1
Acetonitrile
1
1
1
1
1
DMF
1
1
1
1
1 (*)
Dimethoxymethane
1
The results seem consistent.
Only Dimethoxymethane is rejected as water content is
increased and Methanol content decreased. The results are not surprising as the screening
method is developed to rate the dissolution of the solute very highly and when the solvent
is kept constant that objective should not change much. It would be interesting to test
the two solvent systems that is marked with the (*) sign as they both contain a great
deal of water instead of methanol, while still being characterized as solutions.
6.4.3
Experimental validation of the three component results
As with the other screenings, it is also of interest to investigate the three-component sys-
tems with an experimental setup. This has ﬁrst been done with a shake ﬂask experiment
to test the highest achievable concentration of Hesperidin in the 5 (*) marked solvent
systems, shown in Table 6.11.
Table 6.11: Shake ﬂask method for testing solubility of Hesperidin in the ﬁve
interesting solvent systems. (MeOH:Water:solvent).
Solvent system
Composition
Area*min
Conc. [mg/L]
MeOH+WATER+DMSO
(50:20:30)
7.07
7042.5
MeOH+Water+DMF
(50:30:20)
2.13
1910.9
MeOH+WATER+DMM
(50:40:10)
1.21
956.2
MeOH+Water+DMSO
(10:40:50)
4.45
4322.7
MeOH+Water+DMF
(10:40:50)
5.02
4911.8
If the focus to begin with is on the top three solvent systems with 50 % methanol, it can
be drawn that they all are remarkably better than the system of methanol + water in a
(50:50 ; v:v) composition where a maximum of 80 mg/L concentration was observed. The
worst among the three is the solvent system containing 10 % DMM still able to dissolve
almost 1 g/L Hesperidin making it relevant for preparative separation. The two last sol-
vent systems presented in Figure 6.11 a both able to dissolve large amount of Hesperidin.
This is not too surprising as they both contain large portions of solvent.
The solvent systems presented in Figure 6.11 are used to perform a chromatographic run
on the well-known RPLC column, like done many times before in this project. The sys-
tems was tested on a 0.01 g/L Hesperidin solution. The primary focus by performing
this column run is to test if the addition of water can promote a later elution time and
==PAGE:74==
6.4. THREE-COMPONENT SYSTEM: (1) METHANOL - (2) WATER - (3)
SOLVENT
62
thereby indicating that the adsorption-desorption relationship presented in eq. 6.5 and
eq. 6.6 is more healthy than what was seen before. Figure 6.10 and 6.11 shows that even
though water is added and less solvent is used, the peak still shows after very short time.
This could possibly be due to the fact that MeOH is the main problem in relation to
the adsorption-desorption issue. Figure 6.12 shows a baseline that is out of the ordinary.
The column run was performed multiple time to try and ﬁx this issue, but with same
result. If the baseline is ignored, then it can be drawn that the peak is eluted a little later
than what was observed in Figure 6.10 and 6.11. This can either be due to the baseline
issue but there is a slight chance that the solvent DMM is more gentle and thus creating a
more suitable system. However, this can not be tested before the baseline issue is ﬁxed. It
should also be mentioned that the solvent system was associated with a very high system
pressure.
Figure 6.13 and 6.14 both have in common that they uses solvent systems with smaller
concentrations of methanol in them. Since the retention from the beginning was set to
be determined by the methanol concentration it should be so that the elution of solute
would occur later when the composition of methanol is decreased. Figure 6.13 unfortu-
nately shows that this is not the case. A weird peak is found eluting just the same time
as observed in Figure 6.10 and 6.11. Further it can also be seen that the baseline is trou-
blesome. The column run was performed multiple time, all with same outcome. Figure
6.14 illustrates a more promising result. The main peak elutes later than whats observed
in Figure 6.11. These two solvent systems contain the same components. The diﬀerence
is that Figure 6.14 contains less methanol, more water and more DMF. The later elution
can be an expression for better desorption-adsorption relationships. The small peak that
elutes after 2.5 min is most likely the solvent peak. For future investigation this solvent
system are the most promising as it is the only one that show a retained elution peak.
Figure 6.10: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMSO in a composition of (50:20:30; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin concentration of 0.01 g/L and ﬂow
of 1ml/min.
==PAGE:75==
6.4. THREE-COMPONENT SYSTEM: (1) METHANOL - (2) WATER - (3)
SOLVENT
63
Figure 6.11: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMF in a composition of (50:30:20; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin concentration of 0.01 g/L and ﬂow
of 1ml/min.
Figure 6.12: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMM in a composition of (50:40:10; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin concentration of 0.01 g/L and ﬂow
of 1ml/min.
==PAGE:76==
6.4. THREE-COMPONENT SYSTEM: (1) METHANOL - (2) WATER - (3)
SOLVENT
64
Figure 6.13: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMSO in a composition of (10:40:50; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin concentration of 0.01 g/L and ﬂow
of 1ml/min.
Figure 6.14: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMF in a composition of (10:40:50; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin concentration of 0.01 g/L and ﬂow
of 1ml/min.
==PAGE:77==
6.5. INVESTIGATION ON THE EFFECT OF CHANGING IN STATIONARY
PHASE
65
6.5
Investigation on the eﬀect of changing in stationary
phase
So far the investigation of the issue have been focused on the mobile phase. The stationary
phase has been included in the thought process but not as the root cause of the issue. It
can not be said with certainty that the problem won’t be solved if the stationary phase is
changed. - Maybe another stationary phase will eﬀect the desorption-adsorption constant
in a positive way?
The same screening as presented in Table 6.6 have been performed multiple times with
diﬀerent reverse phase ligands. The screenings have been performed with a stationary
phase that ranged from a carbon-chain of length 4 and up to a carbon-chain of length 18.
The inﬁnite diluted activity coeﬃcient of the solvents in the diﬀerent stationary phases
are presented in ﬁgure 6.15.
As a general tendency all the solvent solutions are decreasing in activity coeﬃcient as the
carbon-chains are incresed. This means that if it was desided that the activity coeﬃcients
for C18 was too small, then it would be a qualiﬁed idea to use a stationary phase with
shorter carbon chains.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Carbon-chain length
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Hes,Solvent
DMSO + MeOH
pure MeOH
ACN + MeOH
DMF + MeOH
DMM + MeOH
Figure 6.15: Presentation of γ∞
Hes,solvent values as a result of changes in the
stationary phase in the ﬁve result solutions.
The screenings was performed with C18 as starting point and then gradually decreased
the stationary ligands length, in hopes that more solutions would be found. However, as
the mobile phase boundary condition is the limiting factor, no new solutions were found.
Further analysis with loosen boundary condition on the mobile phase could create new
solvent systems, which have not before been investigated.
As disclaimer it should be mentioned that it is intentionally chosen so the stationary phase
changes are as easy implemented as possible. The boundary conditions and the way the
system is viewed does not need to change when the stationary phase goes from one carbon-
chain RPLC to anoter carbon-chain RPLC. It would be a much more complicated change
==PAGE:78==
6.6. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE SCREENING METHOD
66
if the stationary phase was changed from a RPLC phase to a Ion-exchange. Even though
that would be interesting to look into it is decided to be out of scope for this project.
6.6
improvements to the screening method
6.6.1
Change in search goals
The results suggested that the activity coeﬃcients for the mobile phase could indeed be
too small. Thus created a need for adjustment in the boundary condition for the activity
coeﬃcients in the mobile phase. The old conditions built upon the knowledge gained from
the benchmark thus it was originally suggested that the activity coeﬃcient of Hesperidin
in the mobile phase should be as small as possible. However, it seems like that infor-
mation was either ﬂawed or that it did not take into account the adsorption-desorption
equilibrium for the column separation.
A new suggestion for the estimated activity coeﬃcients in the mobile phase builds upon
the idea that a range of acceptance is a better way to construct a boundary condition.
It is now suggested that the activity coeﬃcient of Hesperidin in the mobile phase follows
the following guideline:
γ∞
Hes,(Methanol:DMSO) < γ∞
Hes,mp < γ∞
Hes,(H2O:Methanol)
(6.7)
Where γ∞
Hes,(Methanol:DMSO) is the inﬁnite dilution activity coeﬃcient of Hesperidin in
a solvent system of Methanol and DMSO. It is thereby not desired to ﬁnd an activity
coeﬃcient lower than this since such a solvent system may have too unfavorable binding
conditions. γ∞
Hes,(H2O:Methanol) is the inﬁnite dilution activity coeﬃcient of Hesperidin in
a solvent system of Methanol and water. It was experimentally decided that this solvent
system was not able to dissolve enough Hesperidin and so, any activity coeﬃcient larger
than this is assumed to be just as unfavorable or more. if the knowledge of the separation
was greater, a smaller acceptance window could be constructed. However, as for now,
this is the best formulation.
The boundary condition placed on the activity coeﬃcient related to the stationary phase,
still holds, as nothing suggests that this BC should be invalid. The new suggestion, for
an input speciﬁcation scheme, is as shown in Table 6.12.
6.6.2
Screening method with respect to impurities
So far every decision has been made with the thought that Hesperidin is a pure solute with
no impurities. If this was not the case and if the user knew some or all of the impurities
that would be present in a solute mixture from the start, then, in theory, it would be
possible to specify these impurities the same way Hesperidin is speciﬁed and screened for
a solvent mixture with diﬀerent aﬃnity towards the solute and impurities. This diﬀerence
in aﬃnity would, in theory, leaded to diﬀerence in separation and diﬀerent elution times.
A realistic impurity proﬁle is designed to imitate a CPKelco mixture.
CPKelco has
for some time been researching the possibilities of purifying Hesperidin as a business case.
A study [47] has examined a sample from Aaisland Chemical Products (Aurangabad) of a
mixture right after an extraction process with Hesperidin as interest. A total of 7 compo-
nents were quantiﬁed and proﬁled. Of the seven compounds one was Hesperidin another
==PAGE:79==
6.6. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE SCREENING METHOD
67
Table 6.12: Improved input speciﬁcations to operate the screening method.
Type
Input
Decription
structural constraint
nbas
Number of groups in a basis set
nmax
Number of maximum legal groups to form a compound
nmin
Number of minimum legal groups to form a compound
Case description
subgroups
Listing the subgroups of the case solute
Stationary ligands
ligands
Listing the subgroups of the stationary ligands
Boundary conditions
ϵ1
Boundary condition for Melting point and boiling point
ϵ2
Boundary condition for Toxicity
ϵ3
Boundary condition for Partition
ϵ4
Boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients in the stationary phase
ϵ5
Lower boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients in the mobile phase
ϵ6
Upper boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients in the mobile phase
was Ferulic acid and the ﬁve others was diﬀerent ﬂavonoids. The ﬁve ﬂavonoids have
great interest since they reassemble Hesperidin a lot and might be diﬃcult to separate.
All ﬁve ﬂavonoids are used as the impurity proﬁle and are shown in Figure 6.16 - 6.20.
To be able to investigate the ﬁve impurities they are divided into subgroups in the exact
same way as it was done for Hesperidin. The ﬁve divided impurities can be seen in Table
6.13.
Table 6.13: The ﬁve ﬂavonoids: Narigin, Poncirin, Apigenin, Quercetin and
Diosmin divided into subgroups.
subgroups
Structure
Naringin
Poncirin
Apigenin
Quercetin
Diosmin
1
CH3
1
1
1
2
CH2
1
1
1
1
3
CH
6
6
7
8
C=CH
1
9
C=C
1
10
ACH
6
6
6
5
5
11
AC
4
4
3
3
4
15
OH
6
5
1
6
18
ACOH
2
2
3
4
2
20
CH3CO
1
1
1
1
1
25
CH3-O-
1
1
26
CH2-O-
1
27
CH-O
5
5
1
4
Changes in partition coeﬃcients
As a small inbuilt part of the investigation is the calculation of the partition coeﬃcient
for all the solutes and impurities in a sample, wished to be examined by the screening
method. This was implemented as a fast way of getting an idea of how the impurities
and solutes elute compared to each other in an RPLC column. As mentioned previously,
==PAGE:80==
6.6. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE SCREENING METHOD
68
Figure 6.16: Naringin
Figure 6.17: Poncirin
Figure 6.18: Apigenin
Figure 6.19: Quercetin
Figure 6.20: Diosmin
the partition coeﬃcient does per se not calculate a parameter for hydrophobicity but it
is used in the screening method as a quick way to compare solutes to each other. The
calculation of partition coeﬃcients of Hesperidin and the 5 ﬂavonoids are presented in
Table 6.14.
Table 6.14:
Estimated partition coeﬃcients of Hesperidin and the ﬁve
ﬂavonoids listed from highest to lowest partition coeﬃcient.
Solute
Estimated Kow
Apigenin
5516.4
Quercetin
621.37
Poncirin
122.09
Naringin
35.972
Hesperidin
6.7378
Diosmin
0.2005
==PAGE:81==
6.6. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE SCREENING METHOD
69
Development of new screening criteria
As a generic part of the screening method, a new feature is implemented. A screening of
solvent systems that can select a solvent system based on the partition knowledge of two
solutes with the objective of constructing a solvent system that is able to separate the
two solutes from each other.
An expression is developed that within reason symbolizes the equilibrium constant of
a solute in the mobile and stationary phase, as shown in eq. 6.8.
Ksolute =
γ∞
solute,mp
γ∞
solute,sp
(6.8)
Where mp is the mobile phase consisting of the solvent system whatever that consists of.
sp is the stationary phase in this project consisting of C18. Now that same formula can
be used to quantify the equilibrium constant of an impurity, as shown in eq. 6.9, where
the notations are the same.
Kimpurity =
γ∞
impurity,mp
γ∞
impurity,sp
(6.9)
Now by simply comparing the two equilibrium constants, it should be possible to see if an
impurity would be troublesome or not to separate with a given solvent system. However,
to make this task easier, the two equilibrium constants are compared to get a quantiﬁable
value of closeness, as shown in eq. 6.10.
Ksolute,impurity =
Ksolute
Kimpurity
(6.10)
in eq. 6.10 Ksolute,impurity is the closeness ratio. If this expression was in perfect agreement
with the real situation then a value of 1 would mean that the two solutes would be
impossible to separate with a given solvent system.
It is desired to use this ratio to
predict how diﬃcult it will be to separate a solute from an impurity.
Screening results with closeness factor
The implemented feature is tested on the Hesperidin case with the same conditions as
described in Table 6.5. However now, the subgroups of the impurities are implemented.
Now the input speciﬁcation scheme is as described in Table 6.15.
Every restrictions for this screening are the same as the one performed to reach Table
6.6 and Table 6.7 so the results are the same with the exception of the impurity feature.
When using the impurity feature Table 6.16 is also produced from the screening method.
Where the notation H is Hesperidin, N is Narigin, P is Poncirin, A is Apigenin, Q is
Quercetin and D is Diosmin. The closer the closeness ratio for a speciﬁc impurity is for a
given solvent system the more diﬃcult the impurity is to separate from Hesperidin. The
results suggest that Diosmin and Narigin, in general, would be more diﬃcult to separate
from Hesperidin. This is also what is suggested by the small implemented feature that
estimates the partition coeﬃcient for all the solutes in the system, presented in Table 6.14.
The impurities Apigenin and Quercetin seem to be easier to separate from Hesperidin
compared to the other impurities. All the results presented in Table 6.16 are in perfect
agreement with the results presented in Table 6.14.
==PAGE:82==
6.7. CHANGES IN STATIONARY PHASE WITH RESPECT TO IMPURITIES
70
Table 6.15: Improved input speciﬁcations and boundary conditions for sim-
ulation with impurity proﬁle implementation.
Type
Value
Decription
structural constraint
nbas
42
Number of groups in a basis set
nmax
5
Number of maximum legal groups to form a compound
nmin
1
Number of minimum legal groups to form a compound
Case description
subgroups
Hesperidin
Listing the subgroups of the case solute
Stationary ligands
ligands
C18 carbon chain
Listing the subgroups of the stationary ligands
Impurity descriptions
subgroups
Narigin
Listing the subgroups of the impurity
subgroups
Poncirin
Listing the subgroups of the impurity
subgroups
Apigenin
Listing the subgroups of the impurity
subgroups
Quercerin
Listing the subgroups of the impurity
subgroups
Diosmin
Listing the subgroups of the impurity
Boundary conditions
ϵ1
298
Boundary condition for Melting point and boiling point
ϵ2
1.5
Boundary condition for Toxicity
ϵ3
No bound
Boundary condition for Partition
ϵ4
1 · 10−2
Upper boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients in the mobile phase
ϵ5
3.5
Lower boundary condition for activity coeﬃcients in the stationary phase
Table 6.16: Solvent systems where the impurity feature is used to represent
which impurities might be diﬃcult to separate from Hesperidin.
Solvent system
KH,N
KH,P
KH,A
KH,Q
KH,D
DMSO
0.176
0.003
2.1 · 10−13
1.5 · 10−9
0.940
Methanol
0.148
0.004
2.4 · 10−12
5.9 · 10−8
1.021
Acetonitrile
0.144
0.005
4.4 · 10−12
4.3 · 10−8
0.815
DMF
0.182
0.005
1.1 · 10−12
5.7 · 10−9
0.630
Dimethoxymethane
0.168
0.009
6.5 · 10−11
5.5 · 10−7
0.686
6.7
Changes in stationary phase with respect to impurities
The small investigation of solvent interactions with changes in stationary phase presented
in section 6.5 can be combined with the impurity related work conducted in section 6.6.
By conducting a screening that takes into account the impurities and repeats that screen-
ing for all the stationary phases of interest Figure 6.21 can be produced.
Each plot symbolizes a solvent solution. Top left corner shows the DMSO investigation.
The straigt black line shows situation where the similarity ration K is 1 meaning that
the Hesperidin and the impurity has the exact same activity coeﬃcient. According to
the theory that is emphasized in this project, this spot means the two solutes cant be
separated. If a separation is favored then another type of stationary phase or another sol-
vent should be used. The green line shows the similarity line for Diosmin and Hesperidin.
According to the plot, the two solutes will be very diﬃcult to separate if a solvent system
with DMSO and a column with C18 are used. It is also displayed that if the user is set on
using DMSO, then a shorter ligand length could create certain advantages. If the user is
set on using a column with C18 stationary phase, then it could have certain advantages to
use a solvent system containing DMF or DMM instead. From the diﬀerent plots created
==PAGE:83==
6.7. CHANGES IN STATIONARY PHASE WITH RESPECT TO IMPURITIES
71
it seems that only Diosmin would cause problems for the separation. Narigin seems easier
separated from Hesperidin for all the listed solvents. Poncirin, Apigenin and Quercetin
are place in the bottum of the plots as they all have similarity ratios that are far from
Hesperidin.
5
10
15
Carbon-chain length
0
0.5
1
1.5
Similarity ratio [K]
DMSO + MeOH
Similarity
KHes,Naigin
KHes,Poncirin
KHes,Apigenin
KHes,Quercetin
KHes,Diosmin
5
10
15
Carbon-chain length
0
0.5
1
1.5
Similarity ratio [K]
Pure MeOH
5
10
15
Carbon-chain length
0
0.5
1
1.5
Similarity ratio [K]
ACN + MeOH
5
10
15
Carbon-chain length
0
0.5
1
1.5
Similarity ratio [K]
DMF + MeOH
5
10
15
Carbon-chain length
0
0.5
1
1.5
Similarity ratio [K]
DMM + MeOH
Figure 6.21: Presentation of the similarity ratio vs carbon-chain length of
the stationary phase for the individual solvent systems. The ﬁve impurities of
interest, are included in each solvent system.
==PAGE:84==
6.8. SEPARATION OF HESPERIDIN AND NARIGIN
72
6.8
Separation of Hesperidin and Narigin
Now that Hesperidin and a realistic impurity proﬁle have been investigated with the
screening method, it seems natural to perform a simple chromatographic column run
where Hesperidin is tried separated from one of the ﬂavonoids. The previous analysis of
the full impurity proﬁle presented in Figure 6.21 was more concerned about the Diosmin
impurity as it seemed to be more diﬃcult to separate. However, due to exceptionally
high prizes for a very small batch, it is decided instead to perform the analysis with the
second most similar impurity, Narigin. This is of no concern since the most interesting
thing about Diosmin was the eﬀect of the stationary phase and since the stationary phase
cant be changed Narigin will be just as suitable. It is the ﬁrst time in this project that
two solutes are investigated. The ﬁrst column run is performed with with the well-known
solvent system of methanol and water (50:50; v:v), shown in Figure 6.22. It can be drawn
that Hesperidin elutes after only 2.5 min and that Narigin elutes a little later. The sepa-
ration of the two solutes are very clean.
Figure 6.22: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water in a composition of (50:50; v/v). Injection
size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin and Narigin concentration of 0.01 g/L and
0.01 g/L respectively and ﬂow of 1ml/min.
Figure 6.23 and 6.24 both shows very similar tendencies. Narigin elutes before Hesperidin
in both cases with a separation that is possible to see. The separation however is not
nearly as good as what was illustrated in Figure 6.22. Nevertheless it is interesting to see
that the compounds can be separated with this solvent system. As a future perspective
it could be a good idea to test small variations of the solvent systems used to produce the
separation of Hesperidin and Narigin in Figure 6.23 and 6.24.
Figure 6.25 seems to show a very close elution of Hesperidin and Narigin. If the peak
shapes are consisting, it can be drawn that Hesperidin elutes ﬁrst, followed by Narigin.
==PAGE:85==
6.8. SEPARATION OF HESPERIDIN AND NARIGIN
73
Figure 6.23: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMSO in a composition of (50:20:30; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin and Narigin concentration of 0.01
g/L and 0.01 g/L respectively and ﬂow of 1ml/min.
Figure 6.24: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMF in a composition of (50:30:20; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin and Narigin concentration of 0.01
g/L and 0.01 g/L respectively and ﬂow of 1ml/min.
==PAGE:86==
6.8. SEPARATION OF HESPERIDIN AND NARIGIN
74
Figure 6.25: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMM in a composition of (50:40:10; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin and Narigin concentration of 0.01
g/L and 0.01 g/L respectively and ﬂow of 1ml/min.
Figure 6.26 and 6.27 both shows baselines that are not centered to zero. Same solvent
system also gave troubles in the results presented in Figure 6.13 and 6.14. When that
is said, Figure 6.26 seems to show a poor separation between the two solutes with no
clear split. Figure 6.27 shows a couple of peaks which could either mean that something
went wrong or that a small distribution of impurities can be seen. Remember that the
Hesperidin and Narigin are only 80 % and 90 % pure respectively.
==PAGE:87==
6.8. SEPARATION OF HESPERIDIN AND NARIGIN
75
Figure 6.26: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMSO in a composition of (10:40:50; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin and Narigin concentration of 0.01
g/L and 0.01 g/L respectively and ﬂow of 1ml/min.
Figure 6.27: Chromatographic column run over C18 reverse-phase with a
solvent system of MeOH+Water+DMF in a composition of (10:40:50; v/v/v).
Injection size of 10 µL with a Hesperidin and Narigin concentration of 0.01
g/L and 0.01 g/L respectively and ﬂow of 1ml/min.
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
Conclusion
This thesis was concerned with the goal of constructing a screening method framework
able to ease the research and development work in the industry where chromatographic
separations processes are used to purify or separat one or multiple components with the
use of liquid solvents. The main motivation for creating such a framework came from
personal experience with the very time consuming classic screening approach normally
used to create a suitable solvent system for a chromatographic system. The screening
method was designed so it was capable of generating a long list of solvents using the prin-
ciples behind molecular feasibility and then calculating certain properties with the use
of UNIFAC. This made it possible to ﬁnd the best compounds among the list of feasible
molecules to give a suitable solvent system with one or more components. The screening
method is created to work as a generic method applicable to solvent selection for any
given solute with any given stationary phase.
The complete screening method is the construction of many diﬀerent estimation methods,
creating a need for validation of each individual part that plays a role in the screening
method. The molecular feasibility that is developed was based on O. Odele and S. Macchi-
etto’s rules was tested by running a small case where, with the model boundaries, it was
possible to form diﬀerent types of alcohols. A manual validation was then used to show
that all the solutions, in fact, was feasible. The toxicity, melting point and boiling point
estimations where all tested and validated as well. Validation of those was conducted by
creating parity plots with known experimental values and creating not only a justiﬁcation
of correct implementation of code but also a validation of the estimation accuracy. The
activity coeﬃcients that plays an important role in the screening method. They are used
directly to ﬁlter solvent candidates based on the solutes interactions with a given solvent
system and by the interactions between a given stationary phase and a solvent.
The
activity coeﬃcients are also used to calculate the partition coeﬃcient, which is used to
give a quantiﬁable value of hydrophobicity. The activity coeﬃcients were compared and
validated with examples from the literature.
Even though, that the screening method was developed as a generic tool, the development
of this method has from the start been with a clear objective to ﬁnd a suitable solvent
system able to dissolve and carry the solute Hesperidin through a reversed phase chro-
matographic column. Diﬀerent simulations were made, ﬁrst with the objective of ﬁnding
a two-component system where the carrier where methanol and the solvent with dissolv-
ing abilities are screened. For this particular case, DMSO and DMF showed promising
results in the screening method. These results was tested experimentally. The solubil-
ity of Hesperidin in DMSO, DMF and DMM as part of a 50:50 solvent solution with
methanol was found to be > 50g/L, > 50g/L and 3.5g/L. The three solvent systems
were tested as part of a chromatographic separation which showed that the interactions
between Hesperidin and the stationary phase was very limited. This led to a hypothesis
that the adsorption-desorption constant was too low. A set of simulations was performed
in ChromX which illustated very high possibility for this hypothesis.
77
==PAGE:90==
6.8. SEPARATION OF HESPERIDIN AND NARIGIN
78
As a way to solve this problem, a three component solvent system was screened for.
Whereas, methanol was kept and water was added. Not surprisingly was DMSO, DMF
and DMM qualiﬁed as solvents again. A solubility test was performed again. The worst
of the suitable solvent systems was methanol + water + DMM which were able to dissolve
0.96g/L Hesperidin. The best of the suitable solvent system was methanol + water +
DMF able to dissolve 7.0g/L Hesperidin. A new chromatographic separation was per-
formed with the three component solvent systems. The results was not much better than
what was found with the two component sytems, with the exception of the solvent system
where DMM was included. This solvent system showed a little better resolution than the
other results.
Since the results found from the investigation of the mobile phase was less ideal than
hoped, and since no clear favorite solvent system is found, the investigation moved on to
the hypothesis that the real issue was caused by the stationary phase. This investigation
was performed purely on the basis of the screening method, as there was no column to
use besides for the C18. The simulations was set to vary in ligand length, where the
shortest was C4 and the longest was C18. A clear diﬀerence in estimated activity coeﬃ-
cients of solvent in stationary phase could be seen as the stationary phase changes. As
the stationary phase increases in ligand length the activity coeﬃcients between solvent
and stationary phase seemed to decrease. This means that by decreasing ligand length a
general tendency of stronger repulsion between ligand and solvent seems to be the case.
It also means that by using a shorter ligand stationary phase more solvents should pass
the lower boundary, which might cause new interesting solvents to be found.
The great knowledge that was collected during the result and analysis part, created a
insight into the phenomena investigated in this project. A knowledge that could be utilized
to implement a set of improvements for the screening method. The ﬁrst improvement was
to constrain the activity coeﬃcient regarding the mobile phase to a range instead of an
upper value. This improvement was implemented as the results suggests that the activity
coeﬃcient can be too small, creating a solvent system which is too favorable to be in for
the solute. This did not create any diﬀerence to this case, but it might will for future
implementations.
The second improvement was created to not only look at one solute but also take the
impurities into account. The improvement was developed with the aim to select a solvent
system based on the easiest possible separation between solute and impurities. An impu-
rity proﬁle consisting of the ﬁve ﬂavonoids: Narigin, Poncirin, Apigenin, Quercetin and
Diosmin were implemented to act as realistic impurity proﬁle. An implementation was
made to create a similarity ratio between Hesperidin and each of the impurities. Diosmin
was found to be very similar to Hesperidin. As a further investigation the similarity ratios
was combined with the investigation of changing the stationary phase. The investigation
was purely screening based, but it created an interesting perspective. The results further
strengthened the idea of how important the interconnection between the choice of solvent
system and the choice of stationary phase is. It was found that if a solvent system con-
tained DMSO then it could be favorable to have a shorter ligand on the stationary phase,
as the separation of Diosmin seemed to be easier. Whereas, it could be drawn that if the
solvent system contained either DMM or DMF then it would be a better idea to use a
stationary phase with longer ligands, as it then would be easier to separate Diosmin.
==PAGE:91==
6.9. FUTURE WORK
79
6.9
Future work
The screening method it self was right from the beginning built so it was applicable on
multiple cases. It would therefor only be natural to try out the method on a completely
diﬀerent case, which had nothing to do with Hesperidin.
As far as the investigation in this project went, following 4 points would interesting to
look further into in the future.
1. Dimethoxy methane as part of a mobile phase solvent system.
This project have with the assessment of the screening method performed a thorough
analysis of the Hesperidin case. Dimethoxy methane have by the help of the screening
method been found and analyzed with decent results. At least enough to further investi-
gate the possibility of creating a mobile phase to separate Hesperidin through a C18 RPLC.
2. Change in stationary phase ligand length.
The work related to the stationary phase change in this project was limited as only screen-
ings could be performed. The investigation of changing the length of the reverse phase
ligands, gave very promising results which would be interesting to test experimentally,
and further analyze the separation of Hesperidin in a reverse phase column with shorter
ligands.
3. Investigate the possibilities of performing screening methods with impurity
proﬁles included
The relationship between the ligand length, the solvent choice and the separation of im-
purity from solute would be interesting to test out in an experimental setup. Only a
new stationary phase and few impurities should be purchased and the detailed screening
results are already presented in the report.
4. Expand the screening method to include multiple liquid chromatography
types
As a comprehensive task, it would be the natural next step to expand the screening
method to also include other types of liquid chromatography. This would require a lot
of work as some of the boundary conditions in this project have been developed directly
with the intent of describing a reverse phase system. However, if such an expansion would
be made, the applicability of the method would increase exponentially.
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
Appendices
Appendix A - UNIFAC properties
Table 6.17: the ﬁrst 35 subgroups with connecting R and Q properties. The
Valencies are also included. These data are utilized by the UNIFAC method.
Subgroup, k.
Name
Rk
Qk
Main group
uk
Main group
1
CH3
0.90110
0.848
1
1
CH2
2
CH2
0.67440
0.54
1
2
CH2
3
CH
0.44690
0.228
1
3
CH2
4
C
0.21950
0
1
4
CH2
5
CH2=CH
1.34540
1.176
2
1
C=C
6
CH=CH
1.11670
0.867
2
2
C=C
7
CH2=C
1.11730
0.988
2
2
C=C
8
CH=C
0.88860
0.676
2
3
C=C
9
C=C
0.66050
0.485
2
4
C=C
10
ACH
0.53130
0.4
3
2
ACH
11
AC
0.36520
0.12
3
3
ACH
12
ACCH3
1.26630
0.968
4
2
ACCH2
13
ACCH2
1.03960
0.66
4
3
ACCH2
14
ACCH
0.81210
0.348
4
4
ACCH2
15
OH
1.00000
1.2
5
1
OH
16
CH3OH
1.43110
1.432
6
0
CH3OH
17
H2O
0.92000
1.4
7
0
H2O
18
ACOH
0.89520
0.68
8
2
ACOH
19
CH3CO
1.67240
1.488
9
1
CH2CO
20
CH2CO
1.44570
1.18
9
2
CH2CO
21
CHO
0.99800
0.948
10
1
CHO
22
CH3COO
1.90310
1.728
11
1
CCOO
23
CH2COO
1.67640
1.42
11
2
CCOO
24
HCOO
1.24200
1.188
12
1
HCOO
25
CH3O
1.14500
1.088
13
1
CH2O
26
CH2O
0.91830
0.78
13
2
CH2O
27
CH-O
0.69080
0.468
13
3
CH2O
28
FCH2O
0.91830
1.1
13
2
CH2O
29
CH3NH2
1.59590
1.544
14
0
CNH2
30
CH2NH2
1.36920
1.236
14
1
CNH2
31
CHNH2
1.14170
0.924
14
2
CNH2
32
CH3NH
1.43370
1.244
15
1
(C)2NH
33
CH2NH
1.20700
0.936
15
2
(C)2NH
34
CHNH
0.97950
0.624
15
2
(C)2NH
35
CH3N
1.18650
0.94
16
2
(C)3N
81
==PAGE:94==
6.9. FUTURE WORK
82
Table 6.18: Interaction matrix for the diﬀerent maingroups, A. Only the ﬁrst
10 are presented. These data are utilized by the UNIFAC method.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
CH2
C=C
ACH
ACCH2
OH
CH3OH
H2O
ACOH
CH2CO
CHO
1
CH2
0.00E+00
8.60E+01
6.11E+01
7.65E+01
9.87E+02
6.97E+02
1.32E+03
1.33E+03
4.76E+02
6.77E+02
2
C=C
-3.54E+01
0.00E+00
3.88E+01
7.42E+01
5.24E+02
7.88E+02
2.71E+02
5.26E+02
1.83E+02
4.49E+02
3
ACH
-1.11E+01
3.45E+00
0.00E+00
1.67E+02
6.36E+02
6.37E+02
9.04E+02
1.33E+03
2.58E+01
3.47E+02
4
ACCH2
-6.97E+01
-1.14E+02
-1.47E+02
0.00E+00
8.03E+02
6.03E+02
5.70E+03
8.85E+02
-5.21E+01
5.87E+02
5
OH
1.56E+02
4.57E+02
8.96E+01
2.58E+01
0.00E+00
-1.37E+02
3.54E+02
-2.60E+02
8.40E+01
-2.04E+02
6
CH3OH
1.65E+01
-1.25E+01
-5.00E+01
-4.45E+01
2.49E+02
0.00E+00
-1.81E+02
-1.02E+02
2.34E+01
3.06E+02
7
H2O
3.00E+02
4.96E+02
3.62E+02
3.78E+02
-2.29E+02
2.90E+02
0.00E+00
3.25E+02
-1.95E+02
-1.16E+02
8
ACOH
2.76E+02
2.18E+02
2.53E+01
2.44E+02
-4.52E+02
-2.65E+02
-6.02E+02
0.00E+00
-3.56E+02
-2.71E+02
9
CH2CO
2.68E+01
4.29E+01
1.40E+02
3.66E+02
1.65E+02
1.09E+02
4.73E+02
-1.33E+02
0.00E+00
-3.74E+01
10
CHO
5.06E+02
5.63E+01
2.34E+01
1.06E+02
5.29E+02
-3.40E+02
4.81E+02
-1.56E+02
1.28E+02
0.00E+00
==PAGE:95==
6.9. FUTURE WORK
83
Appendix B - Discovery R
⃝HS C18 HPLC Column
This appendix contains the complete description ﬁle of the RPLC column used to perform
the laboratory experiments on the Hesperidin case.
Information can be found on next page.
==PAGE:96==
Denmark Home
568523-U - Discovery® HS C18 HPLC Column 
SDS 
Similar Products
SKU-Pack SizeAvailability
Price (DKK) Quantity
568523-U
Available to ship on 04.01.19 - FROM
5,480.00
0
568523-U 
Supelco 
Discovery
® HS C18 HPLC Column 
5 μm particle size, L × I.D. 25 cm × 4.6 mm 
 eCl@ss 32110501 
Bulk orders?
ADD TO CART
Properties
Related Categories
Analytical/Chromatography, C18 Columns, 5 micron, 
Discovery HPLC Columns, Discovery HS C18, HPLC, 
More...
feature   
endcapped 
extent of labeling   
20% Carbon loading 
parameter   
≤70 °C temp. range 
application(s)   
HPLC: suitable 
L × I.D.   
25 cm × 4.6 mm 
surface coverage   
3.2 μmol/m2
impurities   
<10 ppm metals 
Show More (16) 
Description
Features and Benefits 
• Stable, low bleed for LC-MS applications
• Scalable from analytical to preparatory
• Highly stable to ensure excellent run-to-run and lot-to-lot reproducibility
• Higher hydrophobicity for better resolution of difficult analytes
Recommended products 
Discover LiChropur reagents ideal for HPLC or LC-MS analysis 
Legal Information 
Discovery is a registered trademark of Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC 
Symbol  
GHS07
Signal word  
Warning 
Hazard statements  
H319
Precautionary statements  
P305 + P351 + P338
WGK Germany  
3 
Safety Information
Certificate of Analysis 
Bulk Quote-Order Product
SDS
Documents
Enter Lot No.
Sub
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1] World Health Organization, ”Global Health and Aging.” October 2011, pp. 1 - 25.
Url: https://www.who.int/ageing/publications/globalhealth.pdf .
[2] World
Health
Organization,
”Global
report
on
diabetes.”
2016,
pp.
4-
5 Url:
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/204871/9789241565257-
eng.pdf;sequence=1.
[3] CDCs Division of Dibetes Translation, ”Long-term Trends in Diabetes”, United States
Diabetes Surveillance System, 2017, pp. 1-6.
[4] Rader, R.A. ”Biopharmaceutical Products in the US and European Markets, 6th ed.,
vol. 2, BioPlan Associates, Rockville, MD, 2007.
[5] U S Food and Drug Administration, “FDA ’ s International Posts :
Improving
the safety of Imported Food and Midical products.”, (2010), page. 1 – 3. url:
https://test.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm185769.htm.
[6] M. D. Rawlins, ”Cutting the cost of drug development?”, 2004, pp. 360 - 364, Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery, URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nrd1347.
[7] Sunanda R Narayanan, “Review Preparative aﬃnity chromatography of proteins”.
Pharmacia (1994).
[8] Michael Zachariou, “Aﬃnity chromatography:
methods and protocols”, Humana
Press (2008).
[9] R.E. Majors and P.W. Carr, “Glossary of liquid-phase separation terms”, LC-GC, 19
(2001) 124–162.
[10] B.L. Karger, L.R. Snyder, and C. Horvath, An Introduction to Separation Science,
John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1973.
[11] Michael R. Ladisch. Bioseparations engineering: principles, practice, and economics.
Wiley, 2001.
[12] Poole CF, ”The essence of chromatography”, Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2003.
[13] Lloyd R. Snyder, Joseph J. Kirkland, and John W. Dolan. ”Introduction to Modern
Liquid Chromatography”. Wiley, 2009.
[14] S. Fanali, P. Haddad and co., ”Liquid Chromatography - Fundamentals and Instru-
mentation.”, Elsevier, 2013, vol. 1, ch. 3, pp. 39 - 85.
[15] GE Healthcare Biosciences, “Hydrophobic Interaction and Reversed Phase Chro-
matography - Principles and Methods”, 2006.
[16] Melander WR, Horvath C. High-performance liquid chromatography. Advances and
Perspectives. vol. 2. New York: Academic Press; 1980. p. 113–310.
85
==PAGE:98==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
86
[17] Vicki J. Barwick, ”Strategies for solvent selection - a literature review”, trends in
analytic chemistry, vol. 16, no. 6, 1997, pp 293 - 305.
[18] L.E:K Achenie, R. Gani, V.Vemkatasubramanian, ”Computer Aided Molecular De-
sign: Theory and Practice”, Elsevier, 1st edition, 2003, 3-21.
[19] Waters
-
The
science
of
what
is
possible,
URL:
http://www.waters.com/waters/enDK/HPLC−Separation−Modes/nav.htm?cid =
10049076locale = enDK.visited : 26.02.2019.
[20] Myer Kultz, ”Handbook of Measurement in science and engineering”, Book ,2013 page
2417
[21] GE Healthcare. ”Ion Exchange Chromatography & Chromatofocusing: Principles and
Methods.” GE HealthCare Handbooks, 2016.
[22] Jørgen M. Mollerup. The thermodynamic principles of ligand binding in chromatography
and biology. Journal of Biotechnology, 2007.
[23] Pilar Franco. ”The Evolution of Chiral Chromatography.” Lc Gc Europe, 2011.
[24] Fredenslund A and co., ”Group Contribution Estimation of Activity Coeﬃcients in Non-
ideal Liquid Mixtures”. AIChE Journal, vol. 21, no.6, pp. 1086 - 1099, 1975.
[25] Fredenslund A and co., ”Computerized Design of Multicomponent Distillation Columns
Using the UNIFAC Group Contribution Method for Calculation of Activity Coeﬃ-
cients.”,Ind. Eng. Chem., Process Des. Dev., Vol. 16, No. 4, 1977.
[26] Mathworks, URL:https://se.mathworks.com/academia/student-version/details.html.
[27] Garg, A and co., ”Chemistry and pharmacology of the citrus bioﬂavonoid hesperidin.”,
Phytother, 2001, 15, pp 655 to 669.
[28] Mauludin, R and Muller, R. H. ,” Physicochemical properties of hesperidin nanocrystal.”,
Pharm. Sci, 2013, 5, pp 954 to 960.
[29] Chiba, H. and co, ”Hesperidin, a citrus ﬂavonoid, inhibits bone loss and decreases serum
and hepatic lipids in mice”. J. Nutr. 2003, 133, 1892 −1897.
[30] Kanno, S and co., ”Eﬀects of naringin on hydrogen peroxide-induced cytotoxicity and
apoptosis in P388 cells.”, J. Pharmacol. Sci. 2003, 92, 166 −170.
[31] Benavente −Garcia, O. and Castillo, J., ”Update on uses and properties of citrus
ﬂavonoids: new Findings in anticancer, cardiovascular, and anti-inﬂammatory activity.”
J. Agric. Food Chem. 2008, 56, 6185 −6205.
[32] Freag, M. S. and co., ”Development of novel polymer-stabilized diosmin nanosuspensions:
in vitro appraisal and ex vivo permeation.” Int. J. Pharm. 2013, 454, 462 −471.
[33] Freag, M. S. and co., ”Lyophilized selfphytosomal nanocarriers (LSPNs) as platforms
for enhanced diosmin delivery: optimization and ex-vivo permeation.” Int. J. Nanomed.
2013, 8, 2385 −2397.
[34] Jassbi, A. R. and co., ”Cytotoxic, antioxidant and antimicrobial eﬀects of nine species
of woundwort (Stachys) plants.”, Pharm. Biol. 2014, 52, 62 −67c
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
[35] Yadav, U. C. S. and Baquer, N. Z, ”Pharmacological eﬀects of Trigonella foenumgraecum
L. in health and disease.” Pharm. Biol. 2014, 52, 24 −54.
[36] Odele. O and Macchietto. S., ”Computer Aided Molecular Design: A novel Method for
Optimal Solvent Selection.”, Elsevier, Fluid Phase Equilibria, vol. 82, 1993, pp. 47 −54.
[37] Martin T. M. and Young D. M, ”Prediction of the Acute Toxicity (96-h LC50) of Organic
Compounds to the Fathead Minnow (Pimephales promelas) Using a Groups Contribution
Method”, Chem. Res. Toxicol, 2001, 14, 1378 −1385.
[38] Suzuki T., ”Development of an automatic estimation system for both the partition coef-
ﬁcient and aqueous solubility”, Journal of Computer-aided Molecular Design,5, 1991, 149
−166.
[39] J. M. Smith, H. C. Van Ness, ”Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics”,
McGraw-hill International Editions,4th, 1987, Appendix D, 677 - 683.
[40] D. A. Palmer, B. D. Smith, ”Thermodynamic Excess Property Measurements for
Acetonitrile-Benzene-n-Heptane system at 45 degrees”, Journal of Che. and eng.,vol.
17,No. 1, 1972, 71 - 76.
[41] W. J. Doucette and A. W. Andren, ”Estimation of octanol/water partition coeﬃcients:
Evaluation of Six methods for highly hydrophobic aromatic hydrocarbons”, Pergmon
Journals Ltd.,vol. 17,No. 2, 1988, pp 345 - 359.
[42] A. V. Høst, ”Chromatographic Separation of Hesperidin”, DTU,Diploma Thesis, 2019.
[43]
[44] M. Scordino and co., ”Adsorption of ﬂavonoids on Resins: Hesperidin”, J. Agric. Food
Chem. ,2003, 51, pp 6998 - 7004.
[45] Pediaa.Com,
2017,
URL:
http://pediaa.com/diﬀerence-between-reverse-phase-and-
hydrophobic-interaction-chromatography/ (visited on 08/02/2019).
[46] Z. Kolska, M. Zabransky, A. Randova ”Group contribution methods for estimation of
selected physico-chemical properties of organic compounds”, Intech Ch. 6, 2012, 135-160.
[47] V. S. Mugale, N. P. Sapkal ”Proﬁling and Quantiﬁcation of impurities in hesperidin by
using HPLC-PDA and LC-MS techniques”, Int. PharmacyTechnology, 2012, 4514 - 4527.
