==PAGE:1==
Semi-Supervised Generative
Question Answering
Péter Semság
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
This thesis studies the problem of Question Answering (QA) in the ﬁeld of
natural language processing. Speciﬁcally, I examine the use of semi-supervised
learning as proposed by a previous research paper (Yang et al. [2017]) to repro-
duce results and get an understanding of the models involved.
The thesis consists of:
• A review of the literature pertaining to the paper by Yang et al. and the
diﬀerent datasets used in the ﬁeld.
• Overview of the methodology of the ﬁeld, starting with the basics of Neural
Networks. Then progressing into how they succeed in reading comprehen-
sion with the help of various improvements such as sequential modelling,
representing words as vectors, and attention mechanisms.
• A description of the models used in this thesis, their architecture and
experimental setup
• Presentation and discussion of the results.
For the learning objectives, see A.1.
Lyngby, 22-February-2019
Péter Semság
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would ﬁrst like to thank my supervisors, Lars Maaløe (Chief Technology Oﬃ-
cer - Corti) and Søren Hauberg (Associate Professor - DTU Compute) for their
support and patience for the duration of this thesis.
I would also like to thank the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark for letting me use their
computational hardware for my project.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methodology
7
2.1
The discriminative branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Recurrent Neural Networks and Gated Units
. . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
Attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.4
Word Vector Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
The generative branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.1
Sequence to Sequence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.2
Copy Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Implementation
27
3.1
Gated-Attention Reader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.1
Original Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.2
Modiﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.3
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Generative Domain-Adaptive Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.1
Simple seq2seq model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.2
Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.3
Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
3.2.4
Approximating the GDAN architecture
. . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Results and Discussion
41
4.1
Supervised Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.1
Exact Match vs. F1-score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.2
Interpreting attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Generative model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Semi-supervised method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Conclusion
57
5.1
Potential improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.1.1
Discriminative model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.1.2
Generative model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A Appendix
59
A.1 Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Machine learning is reaching every ﬁeld and industry at a rapid pace, providing
state-of-the-art results in a lot of tasks. Natural language processing (NLP) is no
exception to this. Thanks to machine learning, there have been great successes
in machine translation (e.g. Google Translate), speech recognition (Apple’s Siri,
Amazon’s Alexa etc.) and sentiment analysis. Question Answering (QA) has
beneﬁted as well from the recent improvements, but what is question answering?
Simply put, question answering is a discipline of building artiﬁcial intelligence
systems that can answer questions asked in a natural language, based on a
source of information. Some examples of such systems would be:
• Chat bots, which answer customer and user questions regarding a product
or service (Replacing and improving the F.A.Q. section of a website).
• Automated help systems, in business environments or in emergency ser-
vices.
• Search engines, such as Google’s answer snippets that show up before a
user even clicks on a link in their search results.
• Watson, a question answering computer that has defeated former cham-
pions of the quiz-show "Jeopardy!".
These applications are trained on special datasets meant for question answering.
In such a dataset, every example consists of a document or paragraph that serves
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
as the source of information, a question posed with regards to that information,
and the correct answer. When the answer is literally a part of the document,
the problem is called Extractive Question Answering. That is, the answer is
extracted from the document word for word, see the short example below:
Document: Bob is a 29-year-old history teacher.
Question: How old is Bob?
Answer: 29-year-old
The answer has to be a literal part of the document. In case of purely generative
question answering, the answer might have been "29", "twenty-nine" or even
"He is 29 years old.". The thesis will not deal with this type of QA.
In a supervised setting, where the answers are known for each example, it is
desirable to have large datasets. (See ﬁgure 1.1 for an example of dataset sizes
from Dhingra et al. [2016]) In the past two years, supervised methods have im-
proved signiﬁcantly and quite recently (October 2018) have also reached human
level performance on datasets such as the Stanford Question Answering Dataset
(SQuAD).
Figure 1.1: Example of dataset sizes, vocabulary size and paragraph length
(doc) used in the paper by Dhingra et al. [2016].
Figure from
Dhingra et al. [2016]
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Motivation
3
Figure 1.2: Figure showing the leaderboard for the Stanford Question An-
swering Dataset version 1.1. As of October 2018, human perfor-
mance (top-row) has been surpassed in both exact match accuracy
and in F1 score.
Source: "https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-
explorer/"
Creating such immense datasets is an expensive and time-consuming process
(Yang et al. [2017]). On the other hand, obtaining unlabeled data is trivial,
since one might simply collect masses of text from the internet using web scrap-
ing tools. The problem from there on, is to generate question-answer pairs in
this unlabeled data in order to arrive at a labelled dataset that can be used
to train supervised models. One can imagine how much easier it would be to
train these models to high performance if we weren’t conﬁned by the size of
labeled datasets (which generally "only" have hundreds of thousands of exam-
ples). That is where the main motivation lies behind methods such as the one
covered by this thesis.
These methods are called semi-supervised and stand
between unsupervised (where only unlabeled data is available) and supervised
methods (where only labeled data is available). The point is to leverage the ease
and low cost of obtaining large amounts of unlabeled data and pair it with a
limited amount of labeled data to achieve results that are on par or even better
than those of supervised methods.
Another issue with fully supervised methods is that they are tied to the dataset
they were trained on.
They will always have some amount of bias towards
the data presented to them during training. This leads to situations, where a
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
model will perform good on examples that are similar to the dataset used in
training and validation, but will perform worse on data from another domain.
As an example, the SQuAD dataset consists of about 107,785 question-answer
pairs posed by crowd-sourced contributors on a set of 536 Wikipedia articles.
These articles were sampled randomly from the top 10000 articles of English
Wikipedia (Rajpurkar et al. [2016]). Arguably, this leads to a wide range of
topics. But if somebody wanted to apply a model to a more speciﬁc topic (e.g.
healthcare, engineering), the performance will likely suﬀer. So the option to
train on domain speciﬁc data freely, without having to create labeled datasets
in advance, is another motivation behind the use of generative semi-supervised
methods (Dhingra et al. [2018]).
1.2
Project goals
The goal of the thesis is to
• Study the topic of QA and get an understanding of the modelling tech-
niques and architectures involved.
• Reproduce the results of the Generative Domain-Adaptive Network by
Yang et al. [2017].
I plan to achieve these goals by ﬁrst familiarizing myself with the ﬁeld. Then
I will break up the Generative Domain-Adaptive Network model into its base
parts, and implement those one by one. Finally, I combine the separate parts
to obtain the ﬁnal results. These steps make up the contents of the thesis and
are broken up in the following chapters:
Chapter 2 - Methodology
The background material that is necessary for implementing the Genera-
tive Domain-Adaptive Network.
Chapter 3 - Implementation
My work on implementing the separate parts of the model and their com-
bination.
Chapter 4 - Results & Discussion
The results of the implementation and the discussion of them.
Chapter 5 - Conclusion
Potential improvements and ﬁnal thoughts.
For the learning objectives, see A.1.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 List of Abbreviations
5
1.3
List of Abbreviations
-Bi-GRU
Bidirectional gated recurrent unit
-CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
-EM
Exact match (accuracy)
-GA
Gated attention
-GDAN
Generative Domain-Adaptive Network
-GloVe
Global Vector
-GPU
Graphical processing unit
-GRU
Gated Recurrent Unit
-LSTM
Long Short-Term Memory
-NER
Named entity recognizer
-NN
Neural Network
-NLP
Natural Language Processing
-NLTK
Natural language toolkit
-OOV
Out of vocabulary
-POS
Part of speech
-RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
-Seq2Seq
Sequence to sequence (model)
-SQuAD
Stanford Question Answering Dataset
-QA
Question Answering
==PAGE:14==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Methodology
My aim in this chapter is to introduce the reader to the background mate-
rial needed for reproducing the results of the paper "Semi-Supervised QA with
Generative Domain-Adaptive Nets" by Yang et al. [2017]. The literature and
technical details are shown side by side for brevity.
The Generative Domain-Adaptive Net (GDAN) relies on two major parts, a
discriminative (or supervised) model used for question answering as described in
the introduction, and a generative model which generates question-answer pairs
based on unlabeled text. The supervised model is the Gated-Attention Reader
by Dhingra et al. [2016], while the the generative model is a Sequence2Sequence
model by Sutskever et al. [2014] with various improvements. The theory and
implementation of these models are detailed in the next chapter, in section 3.1
and 3.2.
These two models originate from diﬀerent branches of machine learning research,
therefore this chapter is structured in a similar way, starting with a section for
the discriminative side, followed by the generative one.
A later part also lays out the diﬀerent datasets used for QA and how they
evolved over time.
2.1
The discriminative branch
Contemporary supervised QA models rely on many diﬀerent innovations start-
ing from the use of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and gated units, to
attention mechanisms and word vector embeddings. While Convolutional Neu-
==PAGE:16==
8
Methodology
ral Networks (CNN) have also been used with success in QA problems, they are
not discussed in this thesis.
2.1.1
Neural Networks
Neural Networks (more speciﬁcally, Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, also known as
Feed-forward Neural Networks or Multilayer Perceptrons) are the foundation of
modern deep learning.
These are models which approximate a function f ∗to map an input x to an
output y.
y = f(x)
If a model has depth, the input ﬂows through a series of functions where each
functions output will be the input to the next one. These are called layers,
where the ﬁnal layer is called an output layer and each previous layer a hidden
layer:
y = f (2)(f (1)(x))
The structure of the layers are deﬁned by the units inside them. The number of
these gives the neural network its width. Each unit calculates a weighted sum
of its inputs:
X
i
ωi · xi
Where xi is a scalar element of the original x vector input (note: vectors are
bolded). Each scalar input has its own respective weight in the unit.
In general, the output from a neural network is rarely taken as it is. Rather,
an activation function is applied over the output to introduce a non-linearity to
the network. This allows the network to learn much more complex mappings
between input and output. For example, a common activation function is the
logistic sigmoid, which takes an input and compresses it’s values into ]0, 1[.
f(xi) =
1
1 + e−xi
These activation functions can be independently applied to each layer of the
network, and often depend on the intended application of the neural network.
Fig. 2.1 shows the structure of a general neural network with an activation
function as a summary to the above. These traditional neural networks can
perform quite well and thanks to the activation function can approximate non-
linear functions too. Combined with regularization and other techniques such
as using convolutional layers they are highly eﬀective at e.g. classifying images.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The discriminative branch
9
Unit
-1
-2
-inf
+inf
1
2
0.5
1
Activation Function
Input
Output
Figure 2.1: Neural Network (with one unit) - the input x is weighted and
summed up by the neural unit and the result is passed through an
activation function (in this case, a sigmoid) to produce the output.
2.1.2
Recurrent Neural Networks and Gated Units
While traditional neural networks are quite powerful, they fall short in certain
situations due to some limitations. Their number of parameters are ﬁxed to the
size of the input, which means they are not able to handle inputs of a diﬀerent
shape or size. This is an issue when it comes to sequential data (text, audio etc.),
since the length of sequences can vary (e.g. sentences with diﬀerent number of
words or speech of varying length), but the way they should be interpreted
does not. We need a model that can share the same parameters across steps in
sequences (Goodfellow et al. [2016]).
RNNs are neural networks that can selectively pass information across sequence
steps.
They can simultaneously model sequential dependencies on multiple
scales (Lipton [2015]).
An RNN is a neural unit that is self-connected. With each time-step (one input
from a sequence), it receives the input and its previous hidden activation (Graves
[2012]). If we mark the input elements and respective units with i, the activation
from the previous time-step as h, and the number of units for the hidden layer
as N, then the current hidden output a at a given time-step is:
a =
I
X
i=1
ωi · xi +
N
X
n=1
ωn · hn
And the activation for the next time-step (with f being the activation function)
is simply:
b = f(a)
Fig. 2.2 summarizes the above the same way as for traditional neural networks,
but also in the so-called time unfolded structure. This way, the neural unit is
shown at each time-step, which makes the ﬂow of the hidden states from unit
to unit more visible.
==PAGE:18==
10
Methodology
Figure 2.2: Recurrent Neural Network illustrated as a cycle and in a time
unfolded structure, Graves [2012], Goodfellow et al. [2016]
Long short-term memory
When RNNs are given enough hidden units, they can approximate sequence-
to-sequence mappings to arbitrary accuracy (Graves [2012], Hammer [2001]).
However, in practice they fail at keeping relevant information over long-term,
which makes them ineﬀective in learning the required dependencies to solve
these sort of problems. They also suﬀer from the vanishing gradient problem,
which means that the partial derivative of the error function with respect to the
model’s parameters gets very small. During the parameter update, the values
of the parameters stay almost constant and the network is unable to train. One
of the most successful architectures to solve these issues is the Long Short-Term
Memory model (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber [1997]), which introduced the idea
of memory cells and gates that regulate how the hidden state of said cell is up-
dated over sequential steps.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The discriminative branch
11
Figure 2.3: Illustration of Long Short-Term Memory. Figure by Olah [2015]
Essentially, the original recurrent unit is replaced by a cell state that persists
from timestep to timestep and additional gates which can modify its values as
well as generate the output of the unit. The cell state is also sometimes called
the memory cell (C), which makes its usage a bit more intuitive.
Similarly to the standard RNN, the current input and the previous hidden state
is passed through activation functions. But instead of directly generating the
output, the results are used separately to modify the cell state from the previous
timestep and also to generate the output and hidden state. Following ﬁg. 2.3
from left to right, the ﬁrst thing that happens is a modiﬁcation of the previous
cell state Ct−1. Since some of the information might no longer be relevant, we
want the unit to "forget". This process is controlled by the forget-gate (ﬁrst
yellow box with σ). The current input xt and the previous hidden state ht−1 are
concatenated and passed through the gate with a sigmoid activation, σ (ωfandbf
are the weight and bias of the layer):
ft = σ(ωf · [ht−1, xt] + bf)
Next, a new candidate cell state eCt is formed based on ht−1 and xt (yellow box
with tanh activation). But we want to control how much this should overwrite
the existing cell state. Therefore another gate, the input-gate is used to weight
the candidate cell state before it is added to the existing one (second yellow box
with σ):
it = σ(ωi · [ht−1, xt] + bi)
eCt = tanh(ωC · [ht−1, xt] + bc)
Now the new cell state can be calculated by ﬁrst multiplying the forget-gate’s
output element wise (where the ⊙symbol denotes element wise multiplication)
with the old cell state and adding the candidate cell state after being weighted
by the input-gate:
==PAGE:20==
12
Methodology
Ct = ft ⊙Ct−1 + it ⊙eCt
From here, the cell state exits the unit undisturbed, but its current values are
used to generate the output and the hidden state of the unit. Interestingly, in
case of the LSTM these two are the same, since the cell state took the role of
the hidden state in the standard RNN (never being exposed outside the unit),
and the old hidden state is now used as the output as well.
But only after
an interaction with the ﬁnal gate, the output-gate. This gate is responsible for
scaling the values of the ﬁnal cell state after it is passed through an element
wise tanh operation:
ot = σ(ωo[ht−1, xt] + bo)
ht = ot ⊙tanh(Ct)
All the above changes lead to a much more complex unit than the standard
RNN. But it is the extra ﬁltering of the various gates that allows the LSTM
to interact with information on diﬀerent timescales. Compared to the standard
RNN, which only has one set of weights interacting with its hidden state, the
LSTM’s gates can modify the cell state in more complex ways depending on the
input and previous timesteps’ output.
Gated Recurrent Unit
Is it really necessary to separately tell the cell state of the LSTM what to forget,
what to keep and what to update? Some newer architectures manage to simplify
these interactions without sacriﬁcing predictive performance. One of these is the
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), which lets go of the LSTMs forget and input gate.
These units were introduced in 2014 (Cho et al. [2014]). They are capable of
performance on par with LSTMs, while carrying less parameters, which makes
their training faster and easier. The main diﬀerence compared to LSTMs lies in
the absence of a memory cell, leading to the fact that its hidden state is exposed
without control at every sequential step. Update- and reset-gates then decide
how much to keep of the previous state and how much to update it based on
the current input (Cho et al. [2014], Chung et al. [2014]).
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The discriminative branch
13
Figure 2.4: Illustration of Gated Recurrent Unit. Figure by Olah [2015]
First the reset gate (r) interacts with the previous hidden state ht−1, similarly
to the LSTM’s forget gate, and then is used to create the candidate hidden state
eht:
rt = σ(ωr · [ht−1, xt])
eht = tanh(ω · [rt ⊙ht−1,xt])
The update-gate (z) takes the role of both the input- and output-gates from the
LSTM. It is used for ﬁnalizing the candidate hidden state, but before then it’s
complement is used to update the previous hidden state too:
zt = σ(ωz · [ht−1, xt])
ht = (1 −zt) ⊙ht−1 + zt ⊙eht
Another improvement that is used in the GDAN architecture by Yang et al.
[2017] are bi-directional RNNs as ﬁrst described by Schuster et al. [1997]. These
architectures have two sets of hidden nodes. The ﬁrst one processes the input
sequence forward (in regular order), while the second one processes it in reverse
order. In the bidirectional GRU (as used in GDANs), the ﬁnal hidden states are
concatenated together, resulting in a representation that can see both forward
and backward in "time". This might sound like cheating, but when we think
about it, is not so diﬀerent from how humans interpret text or speech.
We
continuously update our understanding of what we hear and read as we get
more information letter by letter (or phoneme by phoneme in case of speech). A
simple example is a paraprosdokian, which is a sentence that changes meaning
unexpectedly towards the end. For example:
==PAGE:22==
14
Methodology
"I haven’t slept for ten days, because that would be too long." - Mitch Hedberg.
Reading only the words before the comma gives the opposite meaning compared
to when we read the whole sentence. Unidirectional recurrent models can make
the same mistake by not taking into account later inputs in a sequence while
generating their output. This is the equivalent of someone trying to answer a
question one word at a time while only being able to read the question one word
at a time too. Context is extremely important in natural language processing, no
matter if it’s about recognizing hand writing, translating languages or question
answering.
2.1.3
Attention
Attention in the context of natural language processing was ﬁrst introduced by
Bahdanau et al. [2014] for solving machine translation. Most applications relied
on encoder-decoder architectures (which are discussed in section 2.2) which ﬁrst
encode a source text into a hidden representation, then decode it into a diﬀerent
language. The issue with this approach is that the encoder has to compress the
input sequence into a ﬁxed length representation, and when it encountered a
longer sequence outside the training, the performance would suﬀer (Bahdanau
et al. [2014]). This prompted the development of attention based solutions which
allow the model to search for parts of a source sequence that help to predict the
target sequence.
Figure 2.5: Figure illustrating the attention based machine translation model
proposed by Bahdanau et al. [2014]. Note: the image (by Bah-
danau et al. [2014]) was modiﬁed to use the same index notation
as the equations in the paper.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 The discriminative branch
15
Keeping in line with the notation by Bahdanau et al. [2014], the next element yi
in a sequence needs to be predicted based on the previously predicted elements
and the inputs (x). This can be written as the conditional probability:
p(yi|y1, . . . , yi−1, x)
Which is then modeled with the decoder:
g(yi−1, si, ci)
Where si and ci are the current decoder hidden state and context. The hidden
state depends on the context as well:
si = f(si−1, yi−1, ci)
Here, the context ci takes the role of catching the relevant information needed
to generate the current output based on the encoded sequence. The encoder is
a bidirectional RNN as described in 2.1.2, which simply concatenates the RNN
hidden states for both the forward and backward sequence.
Given an input
sequence x1, . . . , xTx, the forward looking RNN calculates a set of hidden states
−→h 1, . . . , −→h Tx

, and the backward looking one does the same,
←−h 1, . . . , ←−h Tx

,
where −→h marks the hidden state of the sequence being read in regular order
and ←−h marks the same when the sequence is read in reverse. The ﬁnal hidden
states (rectangles with dashed lines on ﬁg. 2.5) for an input word xj is:
hj =
h−→
hj
T ; ←−
hj
T iT
These hidden states of the encoder are also called annotations, as they contain
information about the given word in the input based on the surrounding input
words both to the left and right. Going back, the context ci will be calculated
based on these annotations using a soft-search or soft-alignment (which comes
from the way words need to be aligned between sentences of diﬀerent languages
during machine translation),
ci =
Tx
X
j=1
αij · hj
This soft-search operation is marked with the L symbol on ﬁg. 2.5. The above
equation states, that the context for the ith output will depend on the weighted
sum of the annotations for the whole input sequence. The probabilities, αij are
also unique for the output at each timestep i. These probabilities are calculated
by using an alignment model (a feedforward neural network) to calculate the
energies, e between each annotation and the previous decoder state and then
==PAGE:24==
16
Methodology
using softmax to calculate the probabilities:
The energy calculated with the alignment model:
eij = a(si−1, hj)
And the probabilities:
αij =
exp(eij)
PTx
k=1 exp(eik)
Since the decoder is now able to focus or attend on particular parts of the
encoded sequence at each timestep, there is no more limitation regarding the
sequence length. There is no ﬁxed size encoding that the decoder reads from, or
to be more precise, the encoding is still ﬁxed in size, but the decoder can take
a variably sized portion of it to generate its output.
Later, Hermann et al. [2015] has successfully employed the advances in machine
translation above (along with Sukhbaatar et al. [2015]) in the ﬁeld of Question
Answering. At the same time, introducing some of the ﬁrst large datasets in QA
meant for supervised learning (see CNN and Daily Mail on ﬁg. 1.1). They intro-
duced the Attentive Reader model (which they also look at as a generalization
of the Memory Network by Weston et al. [2014], but with a higher resolution.)
The model tries to learn the conditional probability p(a|d, q), where a is the
answer given a source document d and a query q.
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the Attentive Reader model by Hermann et al.
[2015]. Notice the similar structure and working to ﬁg. 2.5. Figure
from Hermann et al. [2015]
In the case of the Attentive Reader the datasets are so-called cloze style question
answering datasets, which means that the query is not an actual question, but
a sentence with a word replaced by a placeholder. The task is to ﬁnd the most
suitable word from a list of candidates that ﬁts to the placeholder. This is similar
to language tests, where a student needs to ﬁll in missing words of a text. The
==PAGE:25==
2.1 The discriminative branch
17
Attentive Reader works very similarly to the machine translation model above
by Bahdanau et al. [2014], the document is encoded bidirectionally the same
way. However, the query also gets its own encoding (u), and this encoding is
used to calculate the ﬁnal attended representation (r) of the document.
With slightly diﬀerent notation, but similar to Bahdanau’s, weights are cal-
culated for each document word yd(t) separately based on the query encoding
u. Then softmax is used to get the probabilities that will weight the complete
document encoding yd to get the representation r:
m(t) = tanh(ωymyd(t) + ωumu)
s(t) ∝exp(ωT
msm(t))
r = yds
Once both the document and query representation is ready, they are combined
non-linearly:
gAR(d, q) = tanh(ωrgr + ωugu)
The ﬁnal combined representation of the document and the query is compared
against all candidate answers using a dot product. Finally, using softmax over
the vector of dot products results in a probability distribution showing the most
likely answer.
The model’s limitation lies in the fact that the document representation r is a
weighted sum of the individual word embeddings. On the other hand Kadlec
et al. [2016] introduced the Attention Sum Reader which (contradicting its
name) does not use a weighted sum, but selects the answer directly from the
computed attentions over the document words.
==PAGE:26==
18
Methodology
Figure 2.7: Figure showing the Attention Sum Reader (Kadlec et al. [2016]),
which computes the dot product between document word embed-
dings and the query representation individually. Softmax is used
to select the likeliest answer word. Figure from Kadlec et al. [2016]
Here, instead of creating a joint document f(d) and query representation g(q),
the two representations are combined with a dot product for each document
word representation fi(d), and are normalized by softmax to get a probability
distribution over the document:
si ∝exp(fi(d) · g(q))
The sum in the model’s name comes from pointer-sum attention, which they
use to aggregate the probabilities of words that show up multiple times in the
document to get the most likely answer:
P(w|q, d) ∝
X
i∈I(w,d)
si
Where I(w, d) is a set of positions where the word w appears in the document d.
As seen on ﬁg. 2.7, the model sums up the values related to the word ’Obama’.
Finally, Dhingra et al. [2016] introduced the Gated-Attention Reader, which is
the supervised model used in this thesis. It is detailed in section 3.1, but in
short, their architecture combines the multi-hop architectures used by Weston
et al. [2014] and Sukhbaatar et al. [2015] with the ﬁne-grained attention models
presented above, as well as adding their own improvements.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 The discriminative branch
19
2.1.4
Word Vector Representations
Humans accumulate knowledge about language over their lifetime. When we
read a sentence with the word ’crane’ in it, we have seen it in diﬀerent contexts
multiple times before. So when the sentence also contains the words ’construc-
tion’ or ’eggs’, we can immediately decide if ’crane’ in this case stands for a ma-
chine or for a bird. Neural Networks however are usually trained from scratch
on a dataset with limited size, which means that they bring zero previous knowl-
edge to the table. Even in case of larger datasets, a model might not see enough
examples of words to build knowledge that matches that of a human. This is
where pretrained vector representations of words come into play.
Recently, one of the major models introduced was Word2Vec by Mikolov et al.
[2013a] and Mikolov et al. [2013b]. The model is capable of producing multi-
dimensional vector representations of words, that retain information about the
similarity of words and also about how they relate to each other. These repre-
sentations work to such a degree, that even algebraic operations are possible to
arrive with the mathematical equivalent of analogies. For example:
V ("King") −V ("Man") + V ("Woman") ≈V ("Queen")
That is, the diﬀerence between the vector representations of "King" and "Man"
plus "Woman" roughly equals "Queen" in the trained vector space, or to put
it in everyday language: A King is to a man, as queen is to a woman. This
shows gender relationship between words, but the model is capable of equally
accurate analogies relating to countries/capitals, countries/currencies, degrees
of adjectives and so on. Word2Vec tries to maximize the accuracy of such vector
operations.
Later, GloVe (Global Vectors) by Pennington et al. [2014] improved on previous
models using global matrix factorization and local context window methods.
Their model gains eﬃciency by only using the non-zero elements of a word-word
co-occurrence matrix (which is a matrix showing which words occur within some
window of another word for all words in a dataset).
Even more recent models such as ELMo (Embeddings from Language Models,
Peters et al. [2018]) improve the state-of-the-art performance by having con-
text dependent representations for words, so that its vector will depend on the
context in which the word is used e.g. the word ’bank’ will have two diﬀerent
representations for the geographical (river-bank) and ﬁnancial meaning (invest-
ment bank). It also uses character based deep networks for training.
Finally, BERT by Devlin et al. [2018] again raised the bar by exceeding the
human performance level on tasks such as SQuAD 1.1 (see ﬁg.
1.2).
They
managed this by using a bidirectionally trained attention model (called Trans-
former, Vaswani et al. [2017]) and conditioning on both left and right context
in all layers.
==PAGE:28==
20
Methodology
Figure 2.8: Comparison of BERT (Devlin et al. [2018]) and ELMo (Peters
et al. [2018]). Figures from Devlin et al. [2018]
Having a dataset of word vectors with such capabilities as the ones produced
by the above methods can bring the "missing" knowledge into QA models.
By simply using a dictionary, every word in the document and the query can
be replaced with the respective word vector, which can then be used by the
modelling layers. This improvement is what allowed recent QA models to reach
and even surpass human level performance on QA tasks.
2.2
The generative branch
The GDAN architecture uses only a simple sequence to sequence model to gen-
erate questions for an unlabeled dataset consisting of paragraph-answer pairs.
They do however employ some improvements over this model. One of them is
the attention mechanism by Bahdanau et al. [2014] that is covered in sec. 2.1.3.
The other is the copy mechanism by Gu et al. [2016], which is detailed in this
section.
2.2.1
Sequence to Sequence
The Sequence to Sequence (Seq2Seq) model was introduced by Sutskever et al.
[2014] to provide a solution for sequential problems like machine translation
where sequences do not have ﬁxed lengths (and are not suitable for traditional
deep neural networks with ﬁxed vector encodings). But these models can also
be applied to text summarization (e.g. customer reviews) or chatbots.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 The generative branch
21
Figure 2.9: The sequence to sequence model by Sutskever et al. [2014], which
encodes an input sequence (A, B, C) and produces the output
(W, X, Y, Z). The output is stopped when the decoder reaches the
end of sequence symbol (<EOS>). Figure from Sutskever et al.
[2014]
The model shown on ﬁg. 2.9 uses LSTM units (as described in section 2.1.2)
both to encode the input sequence and to decode it into a translation. The goal
of the model is to estimate the conditional probability of the output sequence
given the input sequence:
p(y1, . . . , yT ′|x1, . . . , xT )
With x1, . . . , xT being the input sequence with length T and y1, . . . , yT ′ being
the output sequence with length T ′ (which can diﬀer from the output length).
This conditional probability is computed by ﬁrst getting an input encoding
v with a ﬁxed length, which is the last hidden state of the encoder LSTM
units. Then the decoder uses this ﬁnal encoder hidden state as its own initial
hidden state. Then each output symbol’s conditional probability distribution
is estimated separately by using a softmax over the whole vocabulary (unique
words in the data):
p(y1, . . . , yT ′|x1, . . . , xT ) =
T ′
Y
t=1
p(yt|v, y1, . . . , yt−1)
The three main changes compared to the vanilla LSTM architecture that adopted
from Graves [2013] are the usage of separate LSTMs for input and output, using
deep LSTMs (with 4 layers), and reversing the order of the inputs.
2.2.2
Copy Mechanism
A common human communication phenomenon is copying, which means a speaker
will repeat an entity name during a sentence to refer to what was said before,
or repeat an entire sub-sequence of a sentence in a question to get clariﬁca-
tion. Copynet, introduced by Gu et al. [2016], aimed to implement the same
mechanism as an improvement for sequence to sequence modelling at the time.
==PAGE:30==
22
Methodology
Figure 2.10: Examples of copying in human communication.
(I: Input, R:
Response). Figure from Gu et al. [2016]
The Copynet model very closely resembles the Attentive Reader by Hermann
et al. [2015] (see sec. 2.1.3), using a bidirectional encoder and the same attention
mechanism as well. The main diﬀerence is in the decoder, where the probability
distributions of the generated words are estimated.
Figure 2.11: The Copynet architecture. The left side (marked a) shows an
attention based encoder-decoder, while the right side (b and c)
shows the details of how a new word is generated based on the
vocabulary and the document sequence. Figure from Gu et al.
[2016]
Starting from the beginning, the input is encoded by the bidirectional RNN
units into a sequence of hidden representations (h1, ..., hTS) which the authors
mark as M for short-term memory (purple rectangles with blue dashed border
around them on ﬁg.
2.11).
The decoder RNN then updates its state using
attention as:
==PAGE:31==
2.2 The generative branch
23
st = f(yt−1, st−1, c)
With yt−1 being the previous output, st−1 the previous state and c the context
vector. Originally the output was generated as below in the Attentive Reader:
p(yt|y<t, X) = g(yt−1, st, c)
Where y<t denotes the previous output history (y1, . . . , yt−1) and g(·) the func-
tion outputting the softmax probabilities over the vocabulary. Instead of this,
in the Copynet, the conditional probability is made up of two parts:
p(yt|st, yt−1, ct, M) = p(yt, g|st, yt−1, ct, M) + p(yt, c|st, yt−1, ct, M)
Where g denotes the generate-mode and c the copy-mode. The probabilities in
the model are estimated as:
p(yt, g|·) =





1
Z eψg(yt),
yt ∈V
0,
yt ∈X ∩¯V
1
Z eψg(UNK)
yt /∈V ∪X
p(yt, c|·) =
(
1
Z
P
j:xj=yt eψc(xj),
yt ∈X
0
otherwise
Here the diﬀerent cases depend on where the token yt falls in the vocabulary.
Assuming a vocabulary V = v1, . . . , vN, and using the symbol UNK for unknown
or out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words. The other set being tracked is all the unique
words in the source sequence X = x1, . . . , xTS which is marked X. Since some
of the source sequence words might not be in V, copying from X can lead to
copying OOV words. ψg(·) and ψc(·) denote the score or classifying function for
the generate- and copy-mode respectively, and work the same way as the score
function g(·) did in the Attentive Reader. Finally, Z is a normalization term
used by both modes deﬁned as:
Z =
X
v∈V∪UNK
eψg(v) +
X
x∈X
eψc(x)
And the score functions:
φg(yt = vi) = vT
i ωost,
vi ∈V ∪UNK
φc(yt = xj) = σ

hT
j ωc

st,
xj ∈X
Where vi is the one-hot vector for vocabulary element vi, ω are the weights and
σ(·) is a non-linear activation function (tanh was used in the paper).
==PAGE:32==
24
Methodology
2.3
Datasets
To have a better understanding of the Gated-Attention Reader supervised model,
and its modiﬁcations, it is worth going through the diﬀerent datasets used in
question answering, the major diﬀerences and their implications.
As written by Hermann et al. [2015], reading comprehensions tasks can naturally
be formulated as supervised learning, where the aim is to estimate the condi-
tional probability p(a|q, c), where c is a context document, q a query/question
relating to the document and a is the answer to the question. These approaches
require a large training corpus (which is a structured set of texts, i.e. dataset),
which were limited in size (see also sec. 1.1). Hermann et al. [2015] proposed a
methodology for creating such large scale datasets, by collecting online articles
from the CNN and Daily Mail websites. These sites supplement news articles
with summaries of the information contained therein in the form of bullet points.
They mention the importance of these summaries not being simple quotes from
the article but rather being abstract and using diﬀerent wording. Next, they
turn these summaries into cloze style questions, by replacing an entity with a
placeholder, therefore turning the summary into a query. Since the aim of the
researchers was to train a model to have better reading comprehension, they
wanted to avoid generating data samples, where the answer can be found based
on simple word co-occurrence. E.g having examples such as: a) The hi-tech bra
that helps you beat breast X, b) Could Saccharin help beat X?, c) Can ﬁsh oils
help ﬁght prostate X? Certain models can answer these questions (X=cancer)
without having to rely on the context document. Since these cases do not require
much real comprehension the authors also anonymised data points by replacing
entities with anonymous markers which are randomly permuted whenever the
data point is loaded. See ﬁg. 2.12 for an example. This way, models must rely
on the context document to ﬁgure out an answer to the questions.
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Datasets
25
Figure 2.12: Example of anonymisation from the Daily Mail dataset by Her-
mann et al. [2015]. Figure from Hermann et al. [2015]
A similar dataset is the Children’s Book Test by Hill et al. [2015], which also
uses cloze style queries. But instead of choosing the answer from the whole
context, it must be chosen from a list of 8 candidate words that are randomly
selected from both the context and the query. The also evaluated their model
based on what type of word was removed from the sentence that results in the
query: Named entities, Nouns, Verbs and Prepositions.
The above datasets all fall into the cloze style category, however in natural
language, questions are not posed with missing words in them and there might
be no overlap at all between the words of the query and context document.
For this reason and due to the lack of large datasets Rajpurkar et al. [2016]
introduced the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD), which contains
both numerous examples and also does not rely on cloze style queries or random
anonymisation of the context. It also holds a great diversity of question and
answer types. The dataset was created by crowdworkers who had to spend a
minimum amount of time reading a paragraph of text (sampled from Wikipedia),
then write a question with their own words while trying to avoid copying words
from the paragraph, then ﬁnally mark the answer as a continuous span of words
in the paragraph.
==PAGE:34==
26
Methodology
Figure 2.13: Example from the SQuAD 1.1 dataset by Rajpurkar et al. [2016]
and their categories based on what kind of reasoning might be
required to answer them. Figure from Rajpurkar et al. [2016]
Figure 2.13 shows some examples from the dataset, and various categories of
reasoning that is needed to answer the questions. As can bee seen, some types
of reasoning (such as lexical or syntactic variation) are not possible to replicate
in cloze style datasets, but with SQuAD, these can be used to better train and
test the text comprehension skills of models.
Practical implications of going from cloze style to span based datasets also means
that the models trained on these datasets need to ﬁnd the answers among more
choices (over the whole context as opposed to candidates). This for most deep
neural network models means that a change is required in the ﬁnal output layer,
where the conditional probability p(a|q, c) is estimated. For the details of those
modiﬁcations, see sec. 3.1.2.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Implementation
This chapter focuses on the models I implemented for reproducing the results by
Yang et al. [2017]. First, I detail the discriminative QA model, its theory, and
how it needed to be modiﬁed to work with span based datasets (e.g. SQuAD).
This is followed by a section covering the implementation of the generative
model.
Finally, the two models are used jointly to approximate the GDAN
architecture by Yang et al. [2017].
3.1
Gated-Attention Reader
This question answering model was ﬁrst developed by Dhingra et al. [2016],
intended for supervised settings and cloze style datasets (see sec. 2.3). During
the thesis the original Theano implementation was ran and studied to get a
better understanding of the architecture’s inner workings. For the reproduction
of results, I used the TensorFlow implementation made by Chen [2017]. Since
this was an exact reproduction of the original, it was also meant to be used
with cloze style data. In this thesis, the goal was to work on models using the
SQuAD dataset, therefore the model needed modiﬁcations. All changes made to
the pre-processing, data parsing and model architecture are detailed in section
3.1.2.
==PAGE:36==
28
Implementation
3.1.1
Original Model
3.1.1.1
Theory
According to the authors (Dhingra et al. [2016]), the main drivers of success
for previous question answering models (or more generally, text comprehension
models) has been due to improvements in two areas: a) Multi-hop architectures,
meaning encoders with multiple layers, where the document and query represen-
tations get combined iteratively over multiple passes. b) Attention mechanisms,
which allow the model to pick relevant sub-sequences from the document. In
their paper, they combined the above approaches (which was not done before)
by using a new attention mechanism which acts on the common representation
of query and document at each hop in the multi-hop architecture. This so-called
Gated-Attention module provided improvements for large datasets compared to
previous state-of-the-art solutions.
3.1.1.2
Implementation
The question answering problem for cloze style data can be formulated as ﬁnding
the answer a in a set of candidate words c ∈C given the document d and query
q. This is represented by the conditional probability P(c|d, q) which is a simpler
task compared to the more general P(a|d, q). Below, the process of estimating
this probability is described in detail.
Figure 3.1: Gated-Attention Reader architecture. The path of the query is
shown in green, while document and its combined representation
with the query is in blue. Figure from Dhingra et al. [2016]
The architecture uses many of the mechanisms and units that might already be
familiar from sections 2.1.2, 2.1.3 and 2.1.4. In these cases some of the details are
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Gated-Attention Reader
29
already assumed to be known. As a ﬁrst step in the model, the raw text inputs
are replaced by their word vector representations (speciﬁcally pretrained 100
dimensional GloVe vectors, see sec. 2.1.4), marked as Embed and Embed for
the query and document respectively on ﬁg.
3.1.
The input sequence X =
[x1, x1, . . . , xT ] is then mapped to an output sequence H = [h1, h2, . . . , hT ]
by a GRU unit (see 2.1.2). This mapping is performed by bidirectional units
( Bi-GRU and Bi-GRU ) for each layer k over K total layers:
The document representation at layer k based on the output X(k−1) from the
previous layer:
D(k) = ←−→
GRU(k)
D (Xk−1)
Where ←−→
GRU marks the bidirectional GRU unit. The query representation is
similarly calculated for each layer based on query embedding Y :
Q(k) = ←−→
GRU(k)
Q (Y )
Using the query and document representations, the input for the next layer is
calculated with the Gated-Attention module ( GA on ﬁg. 3.1):
X(k) = GA(D(k), Q(k))
The module acts similarly to the attention mechanism by Hermann et al. [2015]
(sec. 2.1.3):
αi = softmax(QT di)
˜qi = Qαi
xi = di ⊙˜qi
Where αi is the vector of probabilities/relevance between each query token and
a speciﬁc document token di. This relevance is then used to weight the original
query representation Q, to create a document token speciﬁc representation of the
query ˜qi. Finally, the new layer input (xi) is calculated by using a multiplicative
interaction between the the document token representation (di) and the speciﬁc
query token representation (˜qi) for i = 1, . . . , |D|.
This process is repeated for each layer in K except the last. After the ﬁnal
document Bi-GRU and query Bi-GRU , instead of using the gated-attention
module, the probability of a document token being the right answer (that ﬁts
into the empty placeholder position of the query) is estimated.
This is done by taking only the query token representation at the location l of
the cloze token at the ﬁnal layer K:
==PAGE:38==
30
Implementation
q(K)
l
= qf
l ||qb
T −l+1
This is the concatenation of the forward and backward GRU outputs for the cloze
token only. Where the location in the backward case is T −l+1. The probability
is estimated by taking the inner-product between this query token representation
and the full document representation after layer K. This operation is shown as
<,> and Softmax on ﬁgure 3.1.:
s = softmax

(q(K)
l
)T D(K)
Technically, the above probability distribution s could already be used to ﬁnd
the likeliest answer token, but in the cloze style case we also have the set of can-
didates C (usually 8 words), which can make the selection simpler. So the ﬁnal
probability is estimated as an aggregation of all the candidate word probabilities
which also show up in the document ( Aggregation on ﬁg. 3.1):
P(c|d, q) ∝
X
i∈I(c,d)
si
Where I(c, d) is the set of positions over the document d where a candidate
word c shows up. This process is the same as the pointer-sum operation done in
Kadlec et al. [2016] (see the aggregation of probabilities for the word ’Obama’
on ﬁg. 2.7). The probability distribution is normalized over the candidates.
The predicted answer is chosen as the token with the maximum probability from
the aggregated vector:
a = argmaxc∈CP(c|d, q)
A further improvement used in the model was the use of character embeddings.
These are analogous to the word embeddings, except that they are not pre-
trained, rather they are randomly initialized. For a token w in the document or
the query, the embedding is calculated as:
z = zf
nc||zb
nc
C(w) = Wz + b
Here, zf
nc and zb
nc are the outputs of a bidirectional GRU layer (forward and
backward) with nc number of hidden units. To get the embeddings C(w) a
linear transformation is used with weights W and bias b.
The input x of the model is then calculated as a concatenation of the word- and
character embeddings:
x = L(w)||C(w)
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Gated-Attention Reader
31
These enhanced embeddings perform better with out-of-vocabulary tokens, since
they are not relying on unique word vector representations, but rather have
unique vectors for each character in the OOV token.
This way, the overlap
between an OOV token and a regular token (e.g. the word ’democrat’ might
be in our vocabulary, but ’democratically’ isn’t) will show up in the character
embeddings.
3.1.1.3
Loss and Accuracy
During training, the model is optimized by updating the parameters according
to the cross-entropy loss between the predicted probabilities and the true answer.
Since in case of the cloze style data, the answer consists of one word, the loss
simpliﬁes to the negative logarithm of the predicted answer’s probability:
loss = −log(P(ccorrect|d, q))
Where ccorrect is the candidate word representing the correct answer.
The accuracy of the model is measured simply as the ratio of correct answers
and all answers.
accuracy = 100 · correct predictions
all predictions
[%]
In the GDAN architecture, we’ll see that accuracies are measured diﬀerently,
since the predictions and answers are spans of words in that case. Exact Match
(EM) accuracy and the F1 score are used there. The above accuracy for cloze
style data is the equivalent of the EM accuracy for single word predictions. They
will be further discussed in section 3.2 and in section 4.1.1.
3.1.2
Modiﬁcations
The next step in working with the Gated-Attention Reader model was to modify
to work with span style datasets (such as SQuAD). This was done based on Yang
et al. [2017], where they give a brief comment about the prediction of the answer
tokens.
Recall that in section 3.1.1.2 the Gated-Attention module was used on every
layer of the model except the last, where only the vector representation of the
cloze token was taken from the query Bi-GRU. Then the prediction was es-
timated with an interaction between this query token representation and the
document representation, which was passed through a softmax layer.
Similarly in the span based version, we calculate an interaction between docu-
ment and query representations
 Q(K)T · D(K), but since we now care about
the entire query sequence and not only the token for the cloze, the entire query
representation is used. For the SQuAD dataset, since answers are continuous
==PAGE:40==
32
Implementation
spans, they can be described entirely by the indices of the ﬁrst and the last
token. Using two fully connected layers as classiﬁers with softmax activation we
can estimate the probability distributions over the document marking the start
and end indices. During training, the two layers learn to focus on either the
start or the end index:
ystart = fstart

Q(K)T
D(K)

sstart = softmax(ystart)
yend = fend

Q(K)T
D(K)

send = softmax(yend)
Where f(·) is a fully-connected neural network layer, with number of hidden
units equalling the length of the document sequences. The y outputs from the
dense layers are passed through a softmax activation to estimate the probability
distributions:
p(astart|d, q)
p(aend|d, q)
The ﬁnal predictions are chosen the same way as for cloze style except for having
the values represent the answer:
a = argmax
i
sstart(i)|| argmax
j
send(j)
The loss is measure with categorical cross-entropy, treating the answer start and
end as two separate classes. The ﬁnal loss is the mean of those two.
lossstart = −log(P(astart, correct|d, q))
lossend = −log(P(aend, correct|d, q))
Where astart, correct and astart, correct mark the location of the correct answer
start and end in the probability distributions.
An argument can be made here that this loss measure could be improved by
incorporating the probabilities of the entire answer span, this will be further
discussed in sec. 4.1.1.
Two measures are used for the accuracy, both deﬁned by Rajpurkar et al. [2016].
The ﬁrst is the exact match accuracy (EM), which as its name implies measures
the ratio of predictions that match the ground truth answer exactly. However,
there is some help implemented by the authors, in order not to make this measure
too punishing. When comparing the prediction to the ground truth, both are
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Gated-Attention Reader
33
modiﬁed by removing articles and punctuation (e.g.
’,’, ’.’, ’a’, ’an’, ’the’),
removing white space (so that both are continuous strings of text) and changing
all letters to lowercase. This is called normalizing the text. After this process
the strings are compared and exact matches output an accuracy of 100%, while
anything else will result in 0%.
The second accuracy measure is the F1 score. According to the broad deﬁnition,
it is the harmonic mean of the precision and recall over all the predictions. These
values can be calculated by deﬁning a classiﬁer, which can output positive and
negative predictions.
If a positive prediction is correct, it is a true positive
(TP), otherwise it is a false positive (FP). Similarly negative predictions can be
either true negative (TN) or false negative (FN). These four values cover all the
possibilities for a 2-class problem. Now the precision and recall are deﬁned as:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
That is, we measure how precise the model is by taking the amount of times it
predicted a positive class and divide it by all the times it predicted positive.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
Recall measures the ratio of correct predictions to actual positive classes in the
dataset. Using these two measures, the F1 score is calculated as:
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
The F1 measure gives a combination of precision and recall, but it is not an
arithmetic mean.
It’s value will be the same as the arithmetic mean when
Precision = Recall, but otherwise it will be weighed down by the smaller of the
two values. This way it puts equal importance on both, and high F1 scores are
only produced by being both precise and having a high recall value.
Rajpurkar et al. [2016] implemented the F1 score for the SQuAD dataset by
taking the ground truth and predicted answers as two bags of words where
overlapping words are counted as true positives. This value is then divided by
either the length of the prediction (= TP + FP) or the length of the ground
truth (= TP +FN) to arrive with the precision and recall values. Since they are
treated as bags of words, the order of the words does not count, which one might
think is too forgiving. However, because answers are always continuous spans of
words, this change does not make any diﬀerence, since the words involved will be
the same regardless of their ordering. The only time this can lead to inaccuracies,
is if the model chooses a predicted span which happens to contain the same
words as the ground truth, but at a diﬀerent part of the context document.
But in this case, we might as well reward the model with a high accuracy,
since the model is correctly "looking" at a part of the context document which
==PAGE:42==
34
Implementation
contains the information relevant to the question. Therefore its decision should
be semantically correct.
There can be a large gap between exact match accuracy and the F1 score. The
implications of this are discussed in sec. 4.1.1.
3.1.3
Data
3.1.3.1
Pre-processing
To be able to reproduce the original results, the data processing also needed
to be adapted to work with the SQuAD dataset. The original dataset can be
downloaded as one ﬁle in JSON format which contain about 20 thousand unique
paragraphs, with each having a set of 5 questions and answers. In the Gated-
Attention Reader implementation, the cloze-style data was parsed into separate
ﬁles, then read into the batch loader script of the architecture. To keep the data
reading code mostly intact, I used the same parsing technique for the SQuAD
dataset. This meant, that I wrote a separate processing script which reads the
JSON format data, goes through each paragraph, then uses the NLTK tokenizer
(Natural Language Toolkit by Bird et al. [2009]) to convert the continuous text
into tokens as opposed to the original method of simply converting the string
text into lists of tokens separated by spaces. During this process, many checks
needed to be built in, to account for mistakes in the dataset, such as multiple
newline characters per paragraph and similar. At the same time, since a lot of
the original indices marking the position of the answer in the paragraph were
wrong, these also needed rewriting.
This meant using the answer text and
comparing it with the paragraph string to ﬁnd the actual start and end indices.
During the work done on the GDAN architecture (see next section), the data
processing was changed once again, because there were pre-selected subsets of
the full data by Yang et al. [2017].
3.2
Generative Domain-Adaptive Networks
This section details the implementation of the complete GDAN architecture.
The work was carried out on a step-by-step basis, going from less complex to-
wards more complex sub-models. A big part of this is the discriminative model
which was described in section 3.1, and the other part is the generative model.
During the thesis, due to time and hardware constraints, the complete coop-
erative architecture was not implemented.
Instead of the full model (which
iteratively trains the generative and discriminative parts with both maximum
likelihood method and reinforcement learning), the generative and discrimina-
tive parts were implemented separately. Once there was a working generative
model trained on the SQuAD dataset, it was used to create a labeled dataset
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Generative Domain-Adaptive Networks
35
from an unlabeled dataset released by the authors Yang et al. [2017]. This gen-
erative labeled dataset was then used in the training of the discriminative model
to study the semi-supervised method. The generative model was implemented
starting with a simple Seq2Seq model, which was incrementally modiﬁed into
the one used in Yang et al. [2017]. The subsections below will follow the same
path from less to more complex implementations.
3.2.1
Simple seq2seq model
Since there were no model details shared in the original paper, other than men-
tioning that the generative model is Seq2Seq and uses the Copy mechanism by
Gu et al. [2016], I implemented it based on various other papers and through
trial and error.
As a ﬁrst step, the simple Seq2Seq model from sec.
2.2.1 was implemented
with one major change: switching the LSTM units to GRU as described by
Yang et al. [2017]. In this case the input of the encoder was simply the context
documents from the dataset. The output of the decoder was trained to generate
questions based on the input by using the teacher forcing method, and inputting
the ground truth questions from the dataset at every time step into the decoder.
This way the decoder was estimating the following probability distribution:
p(qt|q0, . . . , qt−1, d)
and the generated token is selected as:
qt = argmax
qt∈V
p(qt|q0, . . . , qt−1, d)
Where qt is the next question token to be generated at timestep t, q0, . . . , qt−1
are the previously generated tokens, d the context document input into the
encoder and V the vocabulary (set of unique words in the dataset).
When
teacher forcing is used, the "previous" tokens q0, . . . , qt−1 are replaced by the
true question tokens. During inference however, the decoder does not receive
any outside information from the training data and it must generate the full
question sequence based only on the encoded document and its own generated
tokens.
During training, cross-entropy loss is used to update the model parameters.
The loss is calculated as the negative logarithm of the probability of the correct
question token at timestep t, which is taken from the probability distribution
over the vocabulary.
losst = −log (p(qt,actual|q0,...,t−1, d))
With the total loss for a predicted sequence being:
==PAGE:44==
36
Implementation
loss = 1
T
T
X
i=1
lossi
Where the length of the sequence is T.
3.2.2
Improvements
The implementation does not perform very well when put to the test. Since
the answer information is not included at all, the decoder can only generate
questions by learning what questions look like on average across the dataset. It
does not have any context regarding what the subject of the question is. This
can be seen by looking at a generated example of such a simple Seq2Seq model.
Document: "Super Bowl 50 was an American football game to determine the
champion of the National Football League (NFL) for the 2015 season.
The
American Football Conference (AFC) champion Denver Broncos defeated the
National Football Conference (NFC) champion Carolina Panthers 24–10 to earn
their third Super Bowl title. The game was played..."
Query: "Which NFL team represented the AFC at Super Bowl 50?"
Generated query: "Who type type American??"
From the above, we can see that without much guidance, the sequential model
can only generate questions based on what it thinks questions look like in gen-
eral as well as the overall content of the paragraph. To improve, an essential
element needs to be injected, and that is the answer itself. To ask a question
about a given text, the model needs to know what the answer should be.
This was carried out by creating a new binary feature, which has the same length
as the document sequence, and marks whether or not a word in the document
was part of the answer. Then the feature is concatenated with the document
representation.
Other improvements included using bidirectional encoders (sec. 2.1.2), imple-
menting the attention mechanism in the decoder (sec. 2.1.3) and adding the
copy mechanism (sec. 2.2.2).
During the implementation of the above mechanisms and upgrades, the com-
plexity also increased rapidly. While the ﬁrst simple version would ﬁt completely
into GPU memory (mainly using Nvidia GeForce GTX1080 Ti graphics cards
with 11GBs of memory), the ﬁnal version needed substantial changes to make
training possible.
The main driver behind memory usage was the size of the chosen vocabulary.
Without limitations, using a unique identiﬁer for each unique token in the
dataset would result in a vocabulary size of around 130 thousand.
Since in
some parts of the model, calculations are done with matrices of shape:
[batch size, document length, vocabulary size], unlimited vocabularies quickly be-
come unfeasible. For this reason the vocabulary for all models was limited ﬁrst
to 10000 and later increased to 20000 (which then required the use of 2 GPUs).
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Generative Domain-Adaptive Networks
37
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Tokens from most to least frequent
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Percentage of dataset covered cumulatively [%]
Cumulative percentage of dataset covered by the unique tokens.
Figure 3.2: The ﬁgure shows what percentage of the whole SQuAD dataset is
covered by the most frequently appearing tokens. It is clearly vis-
ible that almost 50% of the dataset is already covered by roughly
the ﬁrst 100 words, which include tokens such as "a", "the", "of",
"and" etc.
Fig. 3.2 shows that more than 90% of the SQuAD dataset can be covered with
unique token identiﬁers by choosing a vocabulary of size 10000. The rest is then
marked with "@UNK", meaning unknown words.
Other "tricks" used to ﬁt the model in memory included capping the maximum
sequence lengths for queries and documents and using a batch splitting method,
which would split batches of input in two in case the batch would cause the
GPU to run out of memory.
3.2.3
Accuracy
The model’s accuracy was measured with the average per-word perplexity. The
perplexity of a probability model f(w) given the tokens we would like to predict
w1, . . . , wN:
Perplexity = exp
 
−1
N
N
X
i=1
logf(xi)
!
==PAGE:46==
38
Implementation
Since the loss is already calculated as a per-word average cross-entropy, it can
be used to calculate the model’s per-word average perplexity:
Perplexity = eloss
Where lower values of perplexity are better. This value can also be interpreted
as the "confusion" (hence the name, perplexity) of the model, when it is trying
to predict a token. Its value can also be interpreted by comparing to an n-sided
die. A model with perplexity of n will on average be correct as many times as
a n-sided die.
3.2.4
Approximating the GDAN architecture
In the paper by Yang et al. [2017], the authors created an unlabeled dataset
consisting of around 5 million document/answer pairs. They did this by ﬁrst
sampling 205,511 articles from Wikipedia (making sure they do not overlap
with those in the SQuAD dataset), extracted the paragraphs in those articles
and limited their length to a maximum of 850. Then they used Stanford’s Part-
Of-Speech (POS) tagger and Named-Entity-Recognizer (NER) to identify and
extract possible answer spans in the data. Finally, 5 answers are sampled for
each document paragraph with the same ratio of named entity types as it was
in the original SQuAD dataset. Once the best model has been achieved, it can
be used in inference mode to generate questions for the document/answer pairs
which come from the unlabeled dataset described above. This way an artiﬁcially
labelled dataset (G) is created.
This generative labelled data (more speciﬁcally 50,000 examples sub-sampled
from the original) was then used to train the Gated-Attention Reader model.
During training certain ratios of the original labelled data L was used as part
of the training process, complemented by samples from G. Diﬀerent ratios of
labelled to generated data were used to explore the performance of the discrim-
inative model depending on the diﬀerent "levels" of semi-supervision.
During this process various problems were encountered with training the dis-
criminative model, which will be discussed in section 4.3.
3.3
Experimental Setup
Software used during the project:
• Python V3.6.5
• Numpy V1.14.5
• TensorFlow V1.10.1
• CUDA V9.0.176
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Experimental Setup
39
• CuDNN V7
• NLTK V3.2.4
Hardware used during the project:
Nvidia GeForce GTX1080 Ti 11GB (up to two per model)
==PAGE:48==
40
Implementation
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
This chapter will lay out the results of the diﬀerent models described in the
Methodology chapter. Discussion and interpretation of the results are presented
at the same time. The structure roughly follows that of the previous chapter,
with sections detailing the supervised, generative and semi-supervised method
results.
4.1
Supervised Method
There are various tune-able settings of the Gated-Attention Reader model. Dur-
ing the implementation process multiple combinations were tried, some of these
are reported below. In the end, the model was trained to a comparable level
with the authors’ version. See table 4.1.
==PAGE:50==
42
Results and Discussion
Model
Exact Match Accuracy [%]
F1 Score [-]
GA Reader (original)
0.45
0.61
GA Reader (mine)
0.39
0.57
Table 4.1: Table of test accuracies for the Gated-Attention Reader (original
results and my own). Note: All results reported here were acquired
on the SQuAD dataset, so comparison can only be made to the
results by Yang et al. [2017] and not to the ﬁrst implementation by
Dhingra et al. [2016]. In the semi-supervised paper only one set of
validation and test accuracy was reported for the pure supervised
method.
The model implemented by me has lagged behind the original results, and there
are multiple reasons. The most likely reason comes from a diﬀerence in the hy-
perparameters of the model, which have not been disclosed by the authors Yang
et al. [2017]. The hyperparameters are known for the ﬁrst cloze style implemen-
tation by Dhingra et al. [2016], but those were not suﬃcient to reach the same
performance as seen on table 4.1. E.g. in the cloze style version, the character
GRU hidden unit number was 50, in my implementations I experimented with
much higher values and have consistently increased the performance (see ﬁg.
4.2). However, increasing the character or the word GRU hidden unit (ﬁg. 4.1)
number greatly increases the memory usage as well. During the experiments,
the optimal value of the dropout ratio was found to be around 0.5-0.6 and af-
fected the exact match accuracy and F1 score similarly (ﬁg. 4.1).
Another unknown in the SQuAD implementation, was how the ﬁnal answer in-
dices are predicted, and how the loss related to this prediction is calculated.
Some papers show alternate, heuristic methods in optimizing the search for the
correct answer such as the DrQA model by Chen et al. [2017], but these methods
were not used in my implementation.
The quality of the pre-trained GloVe word embeddings was also tested (ﬁg. 4.2
b), and the results were consistent with those of Dhingra et al. [2016]. Keeping
the embeddings ﬁxed and not training them leads to better results.
This is
likely because the SQuAD dataset is not large enough to provide more precise
embedding vectors than those by Pennington et al. [2014] which were trained
on the "Wikipedia 2014" and "Gigaword 5" datasets and contain ∼6 billion
tokens with a vocabulary of size 400,000.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Supervised Method
43
64
128
256
Number of hidden units
0.30
0.33
0.36
0.39
0.42
0.45
0.48
0.51
0.54
0.57
0.60
Exact match accuracy and F1 score [-]
Best exact match accuracy and F1 score
 for different word GRU sizes (hidden units)
Exact Match
F1
(a)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Dropout ratio [-]
0.30
0.33
0.36
0.39
0.42
0.45
0.48
0.51
0.54
0.57
0.60
Exact match accuracy and F1 score [-]
Best exact match accuracy and F1 score
 for different dropout levels
Exact Match
F1
(b)
Figure 4.1: Figures showing the best validation exact match accuracy and F1
score achieved based on diﬀerent settings of the Gated-Attention
Reader model. Figure (a) shows increasing number of hidden units
in the word encoding GRU units increase performance and have a
higher eﬀect on the F1 score. Figure (b) shows the optimal value
of dropout for the recurrent layers around 0.5-0.6
==PAGE:52==
44
Results and Discussion
0 50 128
256
512
1024
Character GRU size
0.2750
0.3075
0.3400
0.3725
0.4050
0.4375
0.4700
0.5025
0.5350
0.5675
0.6000
Exact match accuracy and F1 score [-]
Best exact match accuracy and F1 score
 depending on character GRU size
Exact Match
F1
(a)
Fixed Embeddings
Trainable Embeddings
Word embedding train mode
0.300
0.325
0.350
0.375
0.400
0.425
0.450
0.475
0.500
0.525
0.550
Exact match accuracy and F1 score [-]
Best exact match accuracy and F1 score
 for trainable and fixed word embeddings
Exact Match
F1
(b)
Figure 4.2: Figures showing the best validation exact match accuracy and F1
score achieved based on diﬀerent settings of the Gated-Attention
Reader model. Figure (a) shows that higher character GRU unit
numbers are beneﬁcial, while ﬁgure (b) shows that letting the
model train and change the pre-trained GloVe word embeddings
actually decreases performance.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Supervised Method
45
The training of the supervised model was a long process and also a learning
experience, which involved many mistakes.
Some of those are quite easy to
notice (causing errors in the code or inﬁnite loss during training), while some
can be quite subtle. For example, to make the training process faster, sequences
are padded to the length of the maximum sequence length in any given batch.
In the default implementation, the padding symbol was not explicitly deﬁned
and this led to an actual word being repeated many times at the end of each
sequence. However, deﬁning a unique padding symbol, and making sure it’s
value is zero (so that matrices are always initialized as sequences of the padding
symbol) makes the model easier to train and even improved the performance by
1-2%.
4.1.1
Exact Match vs. F1-score
As it can be seen from the ﬁgures and tables above, the gap between exact
match accuracy and F1 score can be quite high (close to 0.2). Since the F1
score rewards overlap between ground truth and prediction, the gap makes sense:
It will always be easier to approximate the correct answer rather than ﬁnd it
exactly. However, it is still worth thinking about in terms of the model and
dataset in question.
Take for example the sample predictions below, generated by a Gated-Attention
Reader on the SQuAD dataset.
Example 1
Query: "What was the date that the Armistice of Mudros came to be signed?"
Ground Truth Answer: "30 October 1918"
Predicted Answer: "on 30 October 1918"
Example 2
Query: "When was Robert Hicken’s book wrote?"
Ground Truth Answer: "1913)"
Predicted Answer: "1913"
Example 3
Query: "How many plant species does Brazil’s Atlantic Forest contain?"
Ground Truth Answer: "20,000 plant species"
Predicted Answer: "roughly 20,000"
In some cases the model ﬁnds the correct solution semantically, but gives a
slightly more verbose answer (see example 1). Example 2 shows the case where
the dataset creators made an error during the labelling process (marking an
extra unnecessary character as part of the answer span). The model found the
correct answer however. The third example shows probably the most interesting
case, where the model actually gives a semantically more precise answer than
the ground truth (which is also over-complete, since it includes the words "plant
species").
In all of these examples, the model’s exact match accuracy would equal 0, while
==PAGE:54==
46
Results and Discussion
the F1 score would give a slightly less harsh value (e.g. 0.5 for the last example).
This raises the question, are we using the right accuracy measures when trying
to quantify these kind of models? And why should we even care about the exact
match accuracy?
The answer to those questions likely depends on the goal of research in this
area. If the goal is to obtain models with better and better text (or generally
natural language) comprehension, then the F1 score is probably a better mea-
sure. While the exact match accuracy is more punishing and is probably great
for leaderboards and the competition surrounding the ﬁeld, it doesn’t seem to
overlap with the overall goal. The same thoughts should be kept in mind while
deﬁning the loss function of the model. Teaching a model to predict beginning
and end tokens of answer spans might achieve the results we seek short-term, but
long-term could be a dead-end because it does not correlate well with compre-
hending language, and intuitively does not match the process that takes place in
the human brain while performing the same task. A better loss function could
be deﬁned as calculating the cross-entropy loss for a span of words selected by
the model (where the selection could still be made by two classiﬁer for start and
end indices). It can be said, that exact match still has its place, if models are
used for speciﬁc datasets and domains. In these cases the practitioners might
gladly accept over ﬁtting over their target dataset at the expense of performing
worse on datasets from other domains which are not relevant to them.
4.1.2
Interpreting attention
Likely the most interesting aspect of the Gated-Attention Reader is the at-
tention mechanism and how it reﬁnes the document embedding over multiple
layers to reﬂect some information in the query, which it deems relevant to ﬁnd
the answer. This process, or at least certain steps of can be visualized by tak-
ing the interaction between the document and query representation (QT · D).
The resulting matrix has the shape [document length, query length] and can be
interpreted as the attention paid to document tokens (rows of the matrix) by
query tokens (columns of the matrix). If we mark this matrix as A, the attention
paid to a document token di depending on query token qj is aij:
A =


a11
a12
. . .
a1T ′
a21
a22
. . .
a2T ′
...
...
...
...
aT 1
aT 2
. . .
aT T ′


Where T and T ′ are the lengths of the document and query sequences respec-
tively. From here, we can take an average over the query tokens to get an overall
attention over the document tokens, or take each column of the matrix individ-
ually to see how each query tokens aﬀects the attention values. Fig. 4.3 shows
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Supervised Method
47
an example where the range of attention values were normalized and used as a
heatmap over the words of the document tokens.
Figure 4.3: Visualization of attention over a document sequence. The atten-
tion was normalized and averaged across the query tokens to ob-
tain a general distribution over the document. Note: the heatmap
uses a logarithmic scale (base 10) to make diﬀerences more visible
to the naked eye.
Looking at the overall attention distribution over the document we can already
see the likely answer ("10 meters"). At the same time, other parts of the se-
quence seem to "trigger" the model as well, such as the sub-sequence "an open
service", which is likely due to the long query that was posed.
The second
part which says "China promised to oﬀer..." seemingly misleads the model, and
makes it pay attention to what was "promised to be oﬀered by China" in the
context document.
Taking only the columns of the attention matrix for the same example gives a
bit more insight into how individual words of the query interact or modify the
common representation of document and query.
==PAGE:56==
48
Results and Discussion
Figure 4.4: Visualization of attention over the document tokens related to a
speciﬁc query token (’was’) which is marked by a darker color.
Note: logarithmic color scale
Figure 4.5: Visualization of attention over the document tokens related to a
speciﬁc query token (’accuracy’) which is marked by a darker color.
Note: logarithmic color scale
The examples on ﬁgure 4.4 and 4.5 show how diﬀerent query words can "push"
attention towards diﬀerent parts of the document sequence, although there is
still an overall attention in play that is common for both words.
The word
"was" causes higher attention values for word related to time or dates such as
"2 November 2006", while the query word "accuracy" will elicit higher values
for words related to itself: units, measures that can have accuracy, or simply the
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Generative model
49
word itself. This behaviour is likely strongly aﬀected by the pre-trained GloVe
word embeddings. Since it is trained based on the co-occurrence of words, in
some dimensions, words such as "accuracy" and "speed" will likely be much
closer to each other in the vector space.
4.2
Generative model
Obtaining good results from a generative model is both an easier and harder task
than the case of the discriminative model. While the architecture was simpler,
it was not possible to compare results with the paper (Yang et al. [2017]) since
there were no results published there for a generator trained in a supervised
fashion. Once again, the implementation depended a lot on other sources and
trial and error.
The most relevant settings for the model were the number of hidden units both
for the encoder and the decoder, where after going above a minimum value,
performance quickly saturated. The best results were achieved with 100 hidden
units (=200 units for the bidirectional encoder and decoder).
Since the full
training set was used, the model was able to perform with a low dropout level
of 0.1.
Figure 4.6 shows the best model’s loss and perplexity curves for training and
validation. This model used a vocabulary with size 10,000.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Epochs
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
Cross-entropy loss
Seq2Seq - training and validation loss.
Training
Validation
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Epochs
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Per-word perplexity
Seq2Seq - training and validation perplexity.
Training
Validation
(b)
Figure 4.6: Best single layer generative model training and validation curves
for both cross-entropy loss (a) and per-word perplexity (b). Note:
the values for training have been smoothed by a moving average for
easier interpretation. Validation was performed twice per epoch
and models were run for 10 epochs in total (only ﬁrst 6 are shown).
While the perplexity values might seem low enough, they are not so easy to put
into context. Looking at some generated predictions makes the task easier.
==PAGE:58==
50
Results and Discussion
There are some cases of the model generating a semantically ﬁne query, although
the syntax might be oﬀ. Note, that the original query is only there as a reference,
during validation the model does not ever see it. Start and end of sequence and
padding symbols are removed for brevity. "@unk" marks the unknown words,
which were out of vocabulary (OOV).
Example 1
Document: "...there was a signiﬁcant Jewish minority in Warsaw. According
to Russian census of 1897, out of the total population of @unk, Jews constituted
@unk ( around 34% percent)..."
Answer: "around 34%"
Query: "What percentage of the population of Warsaw was Jewish in 1897?"
Generated query: "How much of the total of Jews population were there?"
There also cases (examples 2 and 3 below), where the model produces ﬁne
questions, despite seeing unknown words in the document and using unknown
words in its own prediction.
Example 2
Document: "...It was 33 feet ( @unk m) in diameter and stood @unk feet (
@unk m) tall with its @unk ( @unk kg) lunar @unk. Its capability..."
Answer: "33 feet"
Query: "What was the diameter of the Saturn V in feet?"
Generated query: "How many feet does the @unk have?"
Example 3
Document: "The plague repeatedly returned to @unk Europe and the Mediter-
ranean throughout the 14th to 17th centuries. According to @unk..."
Answer: throughout the 14th to 17th centuries
Query: "When did the plague return to Europe?"
Generated query: "When did the plague begin to @unk Europe?"
Both examples show incomplete questions. However they give enough context
that they could plausibly be answered if the context document does provide
alternate answers.
Unfortunately the model often provides misleading questions (example 4), which
while being syntactically almost perfect, will point a discriminative model in
the wrong direction over the context document.
Similarly, example 5 shows
another common occurrence, where the model becomes completely ambiguous.
While the generative model is aware exactly which @unk symbol it is referring
to with its questions (thanks to the answer being injected into the document
representation and the use of the copy mechanism), using such a generated
question for the training of a discriminative model leads to terrible results.
Example 4
Document: "Oxygen is the most abundant chemical element by mass in the
Earths @unk, air, sea and land. Oxygen is the third most abundant chemical
element in the universe, after hydrogen and @unk. About @unk% of the Suns
mass is oxygen..."
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Generative model
51
Answer: "@unk%"
Query: "How much of the sun is made up of oxygen?"
Generated query: "What is the most abundant chemical in the Earths?"
Example 5
Document: "...It is @unk that there are @unk many @unk primes, pairs of
primes with diﬀerence 2 ( @unk prime @unk)..."
Answer: "pairs of primes with diﬀerence 2"
Query: "What is a @unk prime?"
Generated query: "What is the @unk of the @unk?"
The above results and the ones discussed in the next section (4.3) prompted me
to improve the quality of generated questions. Since they not only have to look
like actual questions, they must also behave as such, by being able to point to
speciﬁc tokens or sequences of the document.
One of the main issues with model seemed to be how the performance is nega-
tively aﬀected by unknown words (@unk). For this reason, I attempted to train
models using a greatly increased vocabulary with size of 20,000. This needed
some restructuring and tweaking of the underlying code, since such a model has
a much higher memory usage on the GPUs. But splitting parts of the model to
diﬀerent devices (such as the estimation of the probability distributions over the
vocabulary) and reducing the maximum parallel computations in the decoder
made it possible.
Figure 4.7 shows this model’s training and validation loss and per-word perplex-
ity values during the training process.
==PAGE:60==
52
Results and Discussion
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Epochs
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
Cross-entropy loss
Seq2Seq - training and validation loss.
Training
Validation
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Epochs
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Per-word perplexity
Seq2Seq - training and validation perplexity.
Training
Validation
(b)
Figure 4.7: Figure showing the evolution of training/validation losses and per-
plexity of the big generative model, using a vocabulary size of
20,000 and with increased hidden units number of 150 (300 for
the bidirectional encoder and the decoder).
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Generative model
53
It is important to note that while the both the loss and perplexity values seem
to converge to a higher value than in the case of the smaller model, those values
are not exactly comparable. Since now, the model’s decoder has to estimate
probabilities over words of a vocabulary that has twice the size as before. This
means the probabilities will be diluted between many more potential candidate
words which could be generated at any given time step.
This has made it
diﬃcult to judge the goodness of a model during training. The only way to tell
the diﬀerence is once again by looking at the generated output of the model on
the validation or test set.
Example 1
Document: "Despite @unk longtime running back @unk Williams and losing
top wide receiver Kelvin Benjamin to a torn @unk in the preseason, the Carolina
Panthers had their best regular season in franchise history, becoming..."
Answer: "Carolina Panthers"
Query: "Which team had the best regular season in their history?"
Generated query: "What team did Barcelona play to win regular regular
regular in history history?"
Example 2
Document: "Normans came into Scotland, building castles and founding noble
families who would provide some future kings, such as Robert the Bruce, as
well as founding a considerable number of the Scottish clans. King David I of
Scotland, whose elder brother Alexander I had married @unk of Normandy, was
..."
Answer: "@unk of Normandy"
Query: "Who did Alexander I marry?"
Generated query: Who was Alexander I?"
Sadly, it turns out that the increased vocabulary does not solve the issue, even
though it helps with making generated questions be less ambiguous, thanks
to the presence of less unknown words.
Example 1 shows a case where the
increased vocabulary helps the model draw a tangent with a sport unrelated to
the one in the topic (European (Barcelona) vs. American football (Carolina)),
but does not help in generating a meaningful question that could be used by
the discriminative model later.
Example 2 also shows how even a greatly increased vocabulary might not help.
Often, the words which are most relevant to answering a question (or posing
a question to an answer) are the least frequent words in the dataset. When
vocabularies are limited based on word frequency, such as in my case, this
means that covering 95% of all tokens might still not be enough to make the
text sequences explicit.
The larger underlying problem seems to be the limit of the text comprehension
skills of the model, which are simply not on par with e.g. the Gated-Attention
Reader. This makes sense, since the architecture is also much more simple and
does not use any complex interaction between document and answer, as the
==PAGE:62==
54
Results and Discussion
discriminative model does with document/query.
4.3
Semi-supervised method
The ﬁnal combination of the discriminative and generative model results in a
mixed dataset of original labelled data L and generated data G.
Using this
combined dataset, I attempted to train the Gated-Attention Reader model, in
order to improve the results based solely on L.
A lot of issues arose during this process, which were mostly related to how the
unlabeled dataset was inferred with the generated model, how the generated
queries were stored, wrong character embeddings and similar. This method also
requires a lot of attention over the entire data processing pipeline and the way
vocabularies are generated and saved. Since diﬀerent levels of labelling can be
used (e.g. 50% of L with 100% of G), the vocabularies have to reﬂect the word
usage of the datasets in use. With the number of diﬀerent combinations and
various vocabulary sizes, this increases the data processing complexity greatly.
Using the wrong vocabulary for inference with an already trained model simply
leads to nonsensical text being produced.
After solving the above issues, a simple experiment was run on the complete data
L + G. The number of samples in this case are roughly 80,000 for the labelled
and 50,000 for the unlabelled data. This mixture proved to be very unsteady
for the training of the discriminative model. The losses quickly diverged and
the model stopped training.
One of the reasons for the unstable training process was the lack of control
over the batching data and feeding it to the model. Fig. 4.8 shows each batch
in a combined dataset sorted according to the ratio of labelled and generated
samples.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Semi-supervised method
55
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Batches (sorted)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ratio of generated to labelled samples in batch [­]
Ratio of generated data to labeled data per batch (sorted)
Figure 4.8: Figure showing the ratio of generated samples to labelled samples
for each batch in the dataset (batch size = 32). There is a high
variance in the ratio across the batches. (Batches are sorted for
ease viewing)
As it can be seen, without controlling the ratio of samples within batches, the
the data fed to the model can vary greatly during training. While some batches
will be almost purely labelled data (beginning of the curve), some batches will
be 60-80% generated samples. Some of these samples (as shown in section 4.2)
will unsettle the training of the discriminative model. To alleviate this issue,
I changed the batch loading method to keep the ratio roughly constant, while
allowing some batches to have only labelled data (since there is no issue with
that). See ﬁg. 4.9 for the ﬁxed ratios.
==PAGE:64==
56
Results and Discussion
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Batches (sorted)
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
Ratio of generated to labelled samples in batch [­]
Ratio of generated data to labeled data per batch (sorted)
Figure 4.9: Figure showing the ratio of generated samples to labelled samples
for each batch in the dataset after forcing the batch loader to keep
the ratio limited.
After the above ﬁx, further experimentation led to a working model which used
a mixture with the whole labelled dataset and 10% of the generated data (L +
0.1G, where random sampling was used on G). Only by keeping the generated
data under a certain limit, were I able to train the model. Finally, the model
achieved results equalling the original and even slightly surpassing it (by about
0.05 in exact match accuracy and no improvement in F1 score), although that
could be due to the random initialization of weights in the model. Due to time
running out at the end of the project, the improvements and detective work had
to stop to focus on rounding up the project goals. This is unsatisfying but still
provides some valuable insights about semi-supervised learning and its validity.
While it can work, it requires more eﬀort and despite being semi-supervised, in
a way it requires more "supervision" from practitioners to make sure what is
happening under the hood is intended behaviour.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
The project included a large number of topics within natural language process-
ing, many diﬀerent models and mechanisms and a challenging goal of improving
on supervised methods by leveraging generative models. While the outcome is
unsatisfying, neither being able to conﬁrm or deny the validity of the use of
semi-supervision in question answering, it does provide a lot of insight into the
practicalities of the ﬁeld. It is also quite clear what areas are the most exciting,
sensitive or need the most attention and improvement in the future. I discuss
these in the following section.
5.1
Potential improvements
5.1.1
Discriminative model
The discriminative model could be called outdated at this point as many other
architectures have overtaken it in leaderboards of popular datasets/problems,
but the underlying mechanisms are very much relevant today. Some of the areas
that could use the most improvement are the loss measure, the choice of the best
answer candidate (span based) and the use of diﬀerent word embeddings.
The default loss measure in span based scenarios can be rough. While it does
help in training the model to select the best answer start and end indices, it
does not overlap very much with the intention of the model. Meaning, that the
goal of better language comprehension should use loss measures which guide
the model toward semantically better answers. This is especially relevant for
==PAGE:66==
58
Conclusion
the time when we will have to move away from span based datasets (just as we
did for cloze style) and use more and more general, "real-life" datasets. Since
these datasets will likely need higher and higher levels of abstraction, focusing
on maximizing performance on edge-cases such as the answer index choice in
SQuAD could negatively aﬀect the pace of improvement.
Choosing the predicted answers could also be improved with some heuristic
methods, such as limiting the length of possible answer spans to some manu-
ally picked value that is less than the length of the complete document, since
intuitively, most answers are a short sub-sequence of the context document (in
some papers such as Chen et al. [2017]) they choose the limit to be 15, based
on some quick analysis of the answer lengths over the whole dataset, and this
can give substantial improvements over the baseline method. It must be kept
in mind however, how applicable these heuristics are in general scenarios.
5.1.2
Generative model
The generative model’s biggest weakness seems to be the lack of text compre-
hension skills that the Gated-Attention Reader has which are made possible
by the multi-hop reﬁning and interactions between document and query. The
equivalent in the generative model would be to pass the document and the
answer through a similar multi-hop structure with interactions between the
two representations. This is largely what was done by Song et al. [2018], who
make the answer and the document interact through an attention based mech-
anism. Based on how much labelled data was used (10-20-50% of the original)
they achieve 2-12% better exact match accuracies than the baseline supervised
method with the same amount of training data (using the SQuAD dataset).
Due to the diﬃculties and hardware limitations (memory usage of large vocab-
ulary models) of training a word-based model, trying a character based imple-
mentation might also be a valid path to try and improve the results.
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Learning Objectives
Develop deeper knowledge and understanding of QA problems in natural lan-
guage processing. During the reproduction of results from the paper by Yang
et al. [2017], acquire expertise and practical skills in relation to the following:
• Supervised QA models, such as the Gated-Attention Reader by Dhingra
et al. [2016]
• Use of generative models in cooperation with supervised methods to boost
QA performance, and the training of such architectures
• Pre-processing of text based natural language
• Modelling techniques and the deep learning frameworks (Theano, Tensor-
Flow) relevant to the above
==PAGE:68==
60
Appendix
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. (2014). Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate. CoRR, abs/1409.0473.
Bird, S., Klein, E., and Loper, E. (2009). Natural Language Processing with
Python.
Chen, D., Fisch, A., Weston, J., and Bordes, A. (2017). Reading wikipedia to
answer open-domain questions. CoRR, abs/1704.00051.
Chen, M. (2017). Gated-attention reader, tensorﬂow implementation. http:
//ttic.uchicago.edu/~mchen/.
Cho, K., van Merrienboer, B., Gülçehre, Ç., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., and
Bengio, Y. (2014).
Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
decoder for statistical machine translation. CoRR, abs/1406.1078.
Chung, J., Gülçehre, Ç., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. (2014). Empirical evaluation of
gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. CoRR, abs/1412.3555.
Devlin, J., Chang, M., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. (2018).
BERT: pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. CoRR,
abs/1810.04805.
Dhingra, B., Liu, H., Cohen, W. W., and Salakhutdinov, R. (2016). Gated-
attention readers for text comprehension. CoRR, abs/1606.01549.
Dhingra, B., Pruthi, D., and Rajagopal, D. (2018). Simple and eﬀective semi-
supervised question answering. CoRR, abs/1804.00720.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016). Deep Learning. MIT Press.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
==PAGE:70==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Graves, A. (2012). Supervised Sequence Labelling with Recurrent Neural Net-
works, volume 385 of Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer.
Graves, A. (2013). Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. CoRR,
abs/1308.0850.
Gu, J., Lu, Z., Li, H., and Li, V. O. K. (2016). Incorporating copying mechanism
in sequence-to-sequence learning. CoRR, abs/1603.06393.
Hammer, B. (2001). On the approximation capability of recurrent neural net-
works. Neurocomputing, 31.
Hermann, K. M., Kociský, T., Grefenstette, E., Espeholt, L., Kay, W., Suley-
man, M., and Blunsom, P. (2015). Teaching machines to read and compre-
hend. CoRR, abs/1506.03340.
Hill, F., Bordes, A., Chopra, S., and Weston, J. (2015). The goldilocks princi-
ple: Reading children’s books with explicit memory representations. CoRR,
abs/1511.02301.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural
Comput., 9(8):1735–1780.
Kadlec, R., Schmid, M., Bajgar, O., and Kleindienst, J. (2016). Text under-
standing with the attention sum reader network. CoRR, abs/1603.01547.
Lipton, Z. C. (2015). A critical review of recurrent neural networks for sequence
learning. CoRR, abs/1506.00019.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013a). Eﬃcient estimation
of word representations in vector space. CoRR, abs/1301.3781.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013b). Dis-
tributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality.
CoRR, abs/1310.4546.
Olah, C. (August 27, 2015).
Understanding lstm networks. http://colah.
github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. D. (2014). Glove: Global vectors
for word representation. In In EMNLP.
Peters, M. E., Neumann, M., Iyyer, M., Gardner, M., Clark, C., Lee, K., and
Zettlemoyer, L. (2018). Deep contextualized word representations. CoRR,
abs/1802.05365.
Rajpurkar, P., Zhang, J., Lopyrev, K., and Liang, P. (2016). Squad: 100, 000+
questions for machine comprehension of text. CoRR, abs/1606.05250.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
Schuster, M., Paliwal, K. K., and General, A. (1997). Bidirectional recurrent
neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing.
Song, L., Wang, Z., Hamza, W., Zhang, Y., and Gildea, D. (2018). Leverag-
ing context information for natural question generation. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short
Papers), pages 569–574. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sukhbaatar, S., Szlam, A., Weston, J., and Fergus, R. (2015). Weakly supervised
memory networks. CoRR, abs/1503.08895.
Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. V. (2014). Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks. CoRR, abs/1409.3215.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N.,
Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. (2017).
Attention is all you need.
CoRR,
abs/1706.03762.
Weston, J., Chopra, S., and Bordes, A. (2014).
Memory networks.
CoRR,
abs/1410.3916.
Yang, Z., Hu, J., Salakhutdinov, R., and Cohen, W. W. (2017). Semi-supervised
QA with generative domain-adaptive nets. CoRR, abs/1702.02206.
