==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Ship-Iceberg discrimination in Sentinel-1 SAR
imagery using Convolutional Neural Net-
works and Transfer Learning
Nicolai Mogensen
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Maritime surveillance is essential for collision avoidance, piracy control, illegal fishing,
trafficking, and smuggling. This study uses Sentinel-1 SAR imagery to detect and
discriminate ships and icebergs. Unlike optical imagery, SAR can penetrate cloud
cover and operates independent of time of day, making it perfect for surveillance no
matter the location, weather or time of day. Icebergs can be dangerous to shipping
and seabed structures and therefore correctly identifying and classifying them can
prevent accidents and damage. The test statistic in the complex Wishart distribu-
tion have been used for CFAR target detection in Sentinel-1 Dual-polarized SAR
imagery. Two regions of interest has been selected for target detection. Ships are
being detected in SAR images of Skagen, which is the northern tip of Denmark, and
Icebergs are being detected in SAR images of Disko Bay which is the midwest coast of
Greenland. A Convolutional Neural Network is trained to discriminate against ships
and icebergs based on a series of SAR-AIS annotated training data. The network is
trained on small Regions Of Interest (ROI) centered around a detected target, either
ship or iceberg. The classification yields good results, but further studies are needed
to assess model performance
Keywords: - Complex Wishart Distribution, Convolutional Neural Net-
work, Synthetic Aperture Radar, AIS, CFAR,Sentinel-1
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring the degree Master of Science in Engineer-
ing, M.Sc.Eng.
Kongens Lyngby, February 10, 2019
Nicolai Mogensen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge and thank my three thesis advisors, Allan Aasbjerg
Nielsen, Henning Skriver, and Henning Heiselberg for their availability and eagerness
to help.
This study has not been without its problems so a special thanks go out to my ad-
visors who have helped me through these problems. I would especially like to thank
Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen for stepping in as the role of main advisor on short notice
due to unforeseen circumstances and Henning Heiselberg for providing me with an
exciting thesis subject.
A special thanks to Chris Colaw, Henning Heiselberg and Lockheed Martin Aero-
nautics, Fort Worth TX for facilitating my thesis defense and enabling me to finish
my M.Sc abroad.
Virum, Danmark
10. februar 2019
Nicolai Mogensen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
Polarimetric SAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Speckle Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
The Gaussian Speckle Model - Single Look
. . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Speckle statistics for multilook-processed SAR
. . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Change Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Dual-polarized Diagonal Only . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Application in target detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Target Detection with Constant False Alarm Rate
. . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Constant False Alarm Rate - CFAR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Classification using Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.1
History
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.2
Convolutional Neural Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.3
The Convolution Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.4
Pooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5.5
Training a Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5.6
Regularization in Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . .
21
3
Experimental Setup and Data Acquisition
23
3.1
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.1
Sentinel-1 GRD Imagery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Geocoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Areas of Interest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Automatic Identification System - AIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Landmasking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4
Marine Target Detection using the test statistic in the complex
Wishart distribution
31
4.1
Dual Polarized Cell-Averaging CFAR Target Detection . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
SAR - AIS validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
45
5.1
Network Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
GradCAM - Investigation of gradients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
Data Augmentation and Regularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3.1
Data Augmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3.2
Dropout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4.1
Grad-CAM - Interpretations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.5
Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Conclusion and Future Work
63
6.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A SentinelSat - Python API
65
B Sentinel-1 GRD Metadata
67
C Example of an AIS record
69
D Python Package Versions
71
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Maritime surveillance for safety applications and situation awareness is used by gov-
ernments and law-enforcing agencies to control and monitor human activities at sea.
Maritime surveillance is essential for collision avoidance, piracy control, illegal fish-
ing, trafficking and smuggling among other things. One of the most versatile and
effective means to aid in maritime surveillance is space-borne radars. Synthetic Aper-
ture Radar (SAR) sensors are active imaging systems based on microwaves. Unlike
optical imagery, SAR can penetrate cloud cover and operates independent of time of
day, making it perfect for surveillance no matter the location, weather or time of day.
SAR imagery is especially useful in arctic surveillance as clouds make surveillance
with optic imagery troublesome. In SAR imagery ships and icebergs can be detected
in the ocean as their backscatter is stronger than the surrounding background. Ships
and icebergs can therefore be detected using an adaptive threshold based on the
surrounding background. The Sentinel-1 mission is the first satellite mission under
the Copernicus Programme carried out by the European Space Agency (ESA). The
mission consists of two satellites Sentinel-1A and Sentinel-1B each with alternating
12-day repeat cycles in ascending and descending direction. The Sentinel-1 satellites
carry C-band SAR sensors in various acquisition modes, a 5x20 meter spatial reso-
lution, and data products in either single- or dual polarization. Their short revisit
time, open use, and cloud penetrating capability makes the Sentinel-1 satellites excel-
lent choices for free and quick arctic surveillance, sea-ice coverage, and ship detection.
Ships of a certain size are required to fit an onboard Automatic Identification system
(AIS) which sends tracking information to nearby harbours, however ships with non-
functioning transponders, deliberate or not, can not get tracked. We call these Black
ships as they are not transmitting AIS information as required by maritime law. It
is of great importance to be able to detect and classify these ships, and space- and or
airborne imaging systems can help facilitate this.
In this study, we focus on the detection and discrimination of ships and icebergs us-
ing dual-polarized Sentinel-1 Ground Range Detected (GRD) Interferometric Wide
(IW) Swath data. Two regions of interest have been selected, Skagen at the northern
tip of Denmark as it contains many ships and Disko Bay on the west coast of Green-
land as the passage has plenty of icebergs and few ships. Icebergs can be dangerous
to shipping and seabed structures and therefore correctly identifying and classifying
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
them can prevent accidents and damage. The detection method proposed is a Cell
Averaging Constant False Alarm Rate (CFAR) detection scheme based on the test of
equality between two complex covariance matrices. The test statistic in the complex
Wishart distribution is used to determine a threshold to distinguish target cells from
the sea-clutter background used in an adaptive threshold. Detected resolution cells
are merged together using a series of morphological operations. Ships are verified
using a novel SAR-AIS algorithm that registers detected targets to the best corre-
sponding AIS record. The AIS records are verified on timestamp, residual distance to
the detected centroid, and estimated values of width and height for the detected tar-
get. Width and height estimates are calculated using a Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) and the best target based on a weighted average of all estimates are registered.
This ensures verifiable annotated training data and prevents noise in the data set.
A Convolutional Neural Network will be trained to discriminate against ships and
icebergs. CFAR detection works for detecting targets from the surrounding back-
ground, but does little to discriminate them from each other. The discrimination
between ships and icebergs has historically been carried out by manually creating
features that distinguish them. By training a Convolutional Neural Network feature
extraction is done automatically based on a series of SAR-AIS annotated training
data. The network is trained on small Regions Of Interest (ROI) centered around
a detected target, either ship or iceberg.
The network utilizes the dual-polarized
Sentinel-1 data to strengthen classification. Convolutional Neural Networks are able
to learn features directly from the input without any prior knowledge.
Transfer Learning is the process of using prior knowledge from other networks who
has been trained on other classification problems, usually image classification prob-
lems with 1000’s of categories such as ImageNet [10]. The idea is that early layers
contain information that is shared by multiple classification problems, an increase in
either accuracy or a decrease in training time can be achieved by just re-training the
last few layers to suit the classification problem at hand.
CFAR target detection is a broad term and has many variations.
[4] uses a sim-
ple cell averaging CFAR with a gaussian distribution assumption for a single TS-X
multilooked ground-range detected stripmap product in HH polarization, and finds
good results. [27] uses a pixel-by-pixel CFAR and uses the Generalized Gamma dis-
tribution as proposed clutter model for single polarizaion Sentinel-1 and TerraSAR-X
imagery. [34] Uses a CFAR detector to find edges in polarimetric SAR data based on
the test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution developed by Conradsen et. al
[8]. The test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution is used in this and shows to
also be useful in a pixel-by-pixel Cell Averaging CFAR approach for Sentinel-1 dual
polarized SAR imagery.
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
Overview and structure of thesis
The structure of this thesis is split into the following chapters
Chapter 1 Concerns a brief introduction to the problem and a small motivation.
Chapter 2 Concerns relevant theory concerning Polarimetric SAR, target detection
and classification using Convolutional Neural Networks
Chapter 3 describes the experimental setup and data acquisition. It also touches
upon data preprocessing such as landmasking.
Chapter 4 Describes marine target detection using the test statistic in the com-
plex Wishart distribution and its properties in a CFAR detection algorithm
Chapter 5 Describes ship-iceberg discrimination and the Convolutional Neural Net-
work structure used. It also concerns investigation and visualization of gradients
Chapter 6 Contains the final conclusion and a section regarding future perspectives
and challenges.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This chapter contains preliminaries and background knowledge concerning polarimet-
ric SAR, CFAR Target Detection and Convolutional Neural Networks. A complete
description in each of these areas is beyond the scope of this chapter, but will serve
as a summary of basic concepts.
2.1
Polarimetric SAR
A Synthetic Aparture Radar is an active radar used to create 2D or 3D imagery
and is typically mounted on a moving platform such as a plane or a satellite. While
moving, electromagnetic waves are transmitted and the backscattered responses are
collected by the receiving antenna. The polarization of a plane wave is defined by the
direction of its electrical field. The direction can either be linearly horizontal H or
linearly vertical V. Receive and transmit polarizations can either be co-polarized if
the polarization for transmitting and receiving are the same or cross-polarized if they
are different. Dual-polarization refers to a radar system that transmit only one type
of polarized signal, but receives the signal in both polarization. A fully polarimetric
Synthetic Aperture Radar also called quad-polarization transmits sequentially and
alternately a linear vertically polarized (V) and a linear horizontally polarized (H)
signal and records the reflected waves in both polarizations.
This results in four
measurable combinations HH, HV, VH and VV. The relationship can be described
as:
• HH - Transmit horizontal, receive horizontal
• HV - Transmit horizontal, receive vertical
• VH - Transmit vertical, receive horizontal, and
• VV - Transmit vertical, receive vertical
These four complex components can be represented by a 2 by 2 complex scattering
matrix for each recorded resolution cell on the ground. This matrix is also called the
Jones matrix.
[
Esh
Esv
]
=
[
Shh
Shv
Svh
Svv
] [
Ei
h
Ei
v
]
(2.1)
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theory
The elements of the scattering matrix are complex and measures phase and am-
plitude. For natural targets in monostatic radars reciprocity can be assumed and
the scattering matrix can be represented by three independent elements [5]. if we
let Srt denote the complex amplitude where r means receive and t means transmit
(r, t) ∈h, v and we assume reciprocity the scattering matrix can be represented by
the three-component complex target vector s
s =


Shh
√
2Shv
Svv


(2.2)
Raw SAR imagery is often multi-look processed as it reduces speckle, which is an
unwanted granular noise that complicates detection. Simply put speckle is caused
by interference from multiple scattering returns inside a single resolution cell [24].
Multi-looking is one way to reduce speckle at the cost of reduced spatial resolution.
Multi-look processing can be achieved by dividing the radar beam into n sections.
Each part of the beam constitutes a ”look” and is processed independently to form
an intensity image. Multi-looking is the process of incoherently averaging these looks
to form a final multi-looked image of n looks[24]. Figure 2.1 displays a SAR mounted
on a plane dividing its beam into n = 5 sub-looks.
Figure 2.1: A radar beam A is divided into n = 5 independent looks. Image courtesy
of Natural Resources Canada 2015-11-25
In the multi-look case it makes sense to represent the backscattered signal as a
covariance matrix as the average properties of a group of sub-look resolution cells
are expressed in a single matrix created by the outer products of the averaged target
vectors [8]. If we again assume reciprocity the resulting covariance matrix with rank
3 is defined as:
⟨C⟩full =


⟨ShhS∗
hh⟩
⟨ShhS∗
hv⟩
⟨ShhS∗
vv⟩
⟨ShvS∗
hh⟩
⟨ShvS∗
hv⟩
⟨ShvS∗
vv⟩
⟨SvvS∗
hh⟩
⟨SvvS∗
hv⟩
⟨SvvS∗
vv⟩


(2.3)
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Speckle Noise
7
⟨˙⟩means ensemble averaging and ∗complex conjugation. The multi-look operation
for N covariance matrices is defined below
⟨C⟩= 1
N
N
∑
i=1
Ci
(2.4)
If ⟨C⟩is defined as a hermitian positive definite matrix it follows a complex Wishart
distribution Wc(p, n, Σ) where the pdf is defined as
ω(x) =
1
Γp(n)
1
|Σ|n |x|n−p exp(−tr[Σ−1ω])
(2.5)
Where Γp(n) is the multivariate complex gammafunction. [8] Spaceborn SAR systems
such as the Sentinel-1, which will be used in this study [30], only transmit one signal,
for GRD products, in either vertical V or horizontal H polarization and receive both
V and H polarizations.
This gives rise to the dual-polarized case.
In the dual-
polarized case the complex covariance matrix has rank 2.
Below is the resulting
covariance matrix for the case where a horizontal polarized signal is transmitted and
both vertical and horizontal polarized signals are received.
⟨C⟩dual =
[⟨ShhS∗
hh⟩
⟨ShhS∗
hv⟩
⟨ShvS∗
hh⟩
⟨ShvS∗
hv⟩
]
(2.6)
2.2
Speckle Noise
Speckle noise can be referred to as the granular noise effect of a SAR image [25].
Speckle is generally considered as unwanted noise that lessens the quality of the SAR
image. Speckle noise occurs when there are coherent interference scattered from mul-
tiple scatterers inside a single resolution cell.
Moving forward we will be working with intensity notation and omit writing the
distributions for amplitude, but note that it is possible to go from intensity to am-
plitude by the simple relation I = x2 + y2 = A2. The resulting probability density
functions can be transformed by applying the transformation of random variables [24].
We now consider a simple speckle model in a single-look scenario, we will then go
on to the multi-look case.
2.2.1
The Gaussian Speckle Model - Single Look
For speckle to be considered ”fully developed” and for the central limit theorem to
apply three conditions must be met. A selected region of interest should meet the
following conditions [24].
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
1. The number of scatterers in a resolution cell should be large, and the region
homogeneous
2. No scatterer in the region should exceed the observed scattering coefficient
3. The amplitude and phase of scatterers are assumed to be uniformly distributed
in the interval (−π, π)
For the central limit theorem to be applicable the scatterers real- and imaginary part
x and y should be independent and identically Gaussian distributed with zero mean
and a variance denoted σ2
s/2. The intensity I = x2 + y2 = A2 which is defined as the
squared amplitude follows a negative exponential distribution with scale parameter
σ2
s/2
pI(I; σ2
s/2) =
1
σ2s/2 exp(−
I
σ2s/2), i ≥0
(2.7)
This speckle distribution fits homogeneous regions such as water relatively well in
practice. The negative exponential distribution is a special case of the gamma dis-
tribution for one degree of freedom. Figure 2.2 shows the fitting of both a negative
exponential distribution and a Gaussian distribution.
2.2.2
Speckle statistics for multilook-processed SAR
A way to reduce speckle is to average multiple realizations of the same scatterer
together to create an L-look image, averaged over L independent looks. One way this
can be done is by dividing up the signal spectrum into L pieces, and then process
these individually to create L different intensity images, and then average these to
form the equivalent multi-looked intensity image.
The equivalent multilooked intensity image can be created from L single-look intensity
images like so:
IL = 1
L
∑
i=1
Ii
where L is the number of looks. This results in a Gamma distribution with shape
parameter L and scale parameter
σ2
√
(L). the pdf is given by [26]:
pIL
(
IL; L;
σ2
√
(L)
)
=
( L
σ2
)L I2L−1
L
Γ(L) exp
(
−LI2
L
σ2
)
, IL ≥0
(2.8)
It becomes apparent that setting L = 1 in equation 2.8 yields the negative expo-
nential pdf from the single-look case in equation 2.7. Thus the negative exponential
distribution can be said to be a special case of the gamma distribution.
Figure
2.3 shows a homogeneous region of sea north of Denmark in VV polarization in a
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Speckle Noise
9
Figure 2.2: Sentinel-1 Single Look VV intensity SAR image of Skagen (top).
A
negative exponential distribution and a Gaussian distribution has been fitted to the
histogram.
multi-look configuration. A histogram has been fitted with a gamma distribution, by
estimating the scale parameter
σ2
√
(L).
Setting L = 1 results in the single-look case and as we saw that has a negative
exponential distribution. In reality L is not exactly equal to the number of looks av-
eraged, as some of the resolution cells will co-correlate. Instead you replace L with an
estimated number of looks, called ENL. The estimated number of looks will always
be smaller than the actual number of looks used to create the multi-looked image.
This speckle model works well where the speckle is fully-developed and the region
is homogenous, but fails if the region has texture. In this case the speckle will follow
a product distribution, and something like a K distribution will work better, see [24].
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
Figure 2.3: Sentinel-1 Multi-look VV intensity SAR image of Skagen (top) Equivalent
Number of looks is 4.4. A gamma distribution and a Gaussian distribution has been
fitted to the histogram.
2.3
Change Detection
Pixels in a PolSar image can be considered as covariance matrices. To detect changes
in a multi-looked dual-polarized SAR image, we look to the test for equality of two
complex Wishart covariance matrices as described by Conradsen et al. [8]. The test
statistic for two independent complex Wishart distributed p by p hermitian, positive
definite matrices X ∈WC(p, n, Σx) and Y ∈WC(p, n, Σy) tests the null hypothesis
H0 : Σx = Σy against the alternative hypothesis H1 : Σx ̸= Σy. The test statistic is
defined as [8]:
Q = (n + m)p(n+m)
npnmpm
|X|n|Y|m
|X + Y|n+m , Q ∈[0, 1]
(2.9)
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Change Detection
11
n and m are the number of looks and |· | denotes taking the determinant. Taking the
natural logarithm of Q yields the following [8].
ln Q = p
(
(n + m) ln(n + m) −n ln(n) −m ln(m)
)
(2.10)
+n ln |X| + m ln |Y| −(n + m) ln |X + Y|
n and m, which are the equivalent number of looks, must be set to gain an accurate
measure for the test-statistic. It can either be estimated, or for Sentinel-1 products
be looked up in the technical guide [30].
2.3.1
Dual-polarized Diagonal Only
We continue with the notion of working with the special case of dual polarized diagonal
only covariance matrices. Sentinel-1 GRD products are published in dual-polarization
diagonal only in either VV+VH or HH+HV. For a V polarized signal this yields
the dual-polarized covariance matrix:
Cdual =
[SV V S∗
V V
0
0
SV HS∗
V H
]
=
[X1
0
0
X2
]
(2.11)
Where the rank p1 of X1 is 1 and the rank p2 X1 is 1. This matrix is not Wishart
distributed [8], but we can use the same test statistic as in the fully polarimatric case.
2.3.1.1
Calculation of probabilities
The test statistic can be rewritten as a probability if we write up the following pa-
rameters for the dual-polarized case where p1 = 1 and p2 = 1:
f1 = p2
1
f2 = p2
2
f = f1 + f2
ρ1 = 1 −2f1 −1
6p1
( 1
n + 1
m −
1
n + m
)
ρ2 = 1 −2f2 −1
6p2
( 1
n + 1
m −
1
n + m
)
ρ = 1
f (f1ρ1 + f2ρ2)
and
ω2 = −f
4
(
1 −1
ρ
)2
+ f1(f1 −1) + f2(f2 −1
24ρ2
) ·
( 1
n2 + 1
m2 −
1
(n + m)2
)
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
and if the observed value of −2ρlnQ is z = −2ρlnqobs then the probability of observing
a smaller value than −2ρlnQ is
P−2ρlnQobs ≤z ≃[1 −ω2]γ(f
2 , −ρlnQobs) + ω2(f
2 + 2, −ρlnQobs).
(2.12)
Then the probability of no change is given as
1 −P−2ρlnQ ≤z = PQ < qobs
(2.13)
2.3.2
Application in target detection
The probability of finding a smaller value of −2ρ ln Q in the dual-polarized case is
given by equation 2.12. When comparing two multilooked dual polarization covari-
ance matrices this probability of no change can be used to obtain a false alarm rate
in a CFAR detection algorithm. Figure 2.4 shows the probability of finding a smaller
value than −2ρ ln Q as a function of z for p1 = 1, p2 = 1 and n = m = 4.4. The
ENL for n and m has been set by looking up the ENL value for Sentinel-1 GRD IW
products in the technical guide [30]. Since the test statistic depends on the number
of looks chosen, the distribution changes when the number of looks changes. It is
therefore a good idea to pick a suitable value for both n and m. When the difference
in n and m becomes large; ω2 and ρ and therefore the probability of finding a smaller
value than −2ρ ln Q becomes nearly constant, and the probability can be used for all
values of either n or m as long as they are large enough. Figure 2.5 shows ρ and ω2
as a function of ENL, here m. According to figure 2.5 the number of looks m > 40
when n = 4.4 is large enough for ρ and ω2 to stay nearly constant. This fact will
become useful in a CFAR detection, as we will see. In figure 2.5 the number of looks
for X is set to n = 4.4 as this is the reported ENL for multi-look dual polarized SAR
imagery from the Sentinel-1 satellite in beam mode IW, which is the SAR imagery
used in this thesis.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Target Detection with Constant False Alarm Rate
13
Figure 2.4: −2ρ ln Q as a function of z. n = m = 4.4
Figure 2.5: ρ and ω2 as a function of number of looks m
2.4
Target Detection with Constant False Alarm Rate
In this section the theory and basic concepts of target detection with Constant False
Alarm Rate (CFAR) detectors are outlined. CFAR detection refers to a form of
adaptive algorithm or filtering used especially in radar systems to detect targets from
the surrounding background. This section will quickly go over the basic principles of
what CFAR detection is. The section will then discuss using the test for equality of
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theory
two complex covariance matrices to do polarimetric CFAR detection and explain a
few of its properties.
2.4.1
Constant False Alarm Rate - CFAR
Traditionally Constant False Alarm Rate (CFAR) detection is composed of two ele-
ments, a background clutter model and a detector [40].
Figure 2.6: CFAR sliding window setup with Pixel under test, guard area and back-
ground area
CFAR detection analyzes a pixel under test (PUT) against a threshold Tr gener-
ated by a surrounding region of background. If the backscatter of the PUT exceeds
this threshold it is considered to be a target. This threshold can be computed ana-
lytically if the assumptions of the selected clutter model fits the background region
reasonably well, or it can be estimated numerically if an analytical solution is not
available.
Figure 2.6 shows a typical sliding window configuration where the PUT is surrounded
by a guard area, and a background area. The guard area is in place to avoid target
pixels spilling into the background. The size of the guard area should be big enough
to cover the largest target of interest. The pixel under test is a single pixel, and is
tested against the surrounding background. Finally the size of the background area
should be of a size that allows good estimates of the clutter model parameters, but
not so large that other targets will spill into the area.
The CFAR threshold is generated by estimating the statistical parameters for the
chosen clutter model from the background region, like the scale and shape parameter
for the Gamma function. Once the distribution of the background has been evaluated
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Classification using Convolutional Neural Networks
15
a threshold value Tr is computed to obtain a constant false alarm Pfa:
Pfa = 1 −
∫Tr
−inf
pAdA =
∫inf
Tr
pAdA
(2.14)
In a previous section suitable clutter models were investigated for single polarization
intensity SAR imagery namely the negative exponential distribution for single-look
2.7 and the Gamma distribution for multi-look 2.8. In the dual polarization case we
can use the test statistic for test of equality between two complex wishart distributed
covariance matrices to utilize information from both polarizations. We can assume
that the PUT is a covariance matrix tested against the mean covariance matrix of
the background.
2.5
Classification using Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks, often shortened CNN’s or Convnets, is a neural net-
work comprised of convolutional layers and often also pooling and fully connected
layers. Convnets can be used for data that has a known grid-like topology such as
image data where the grid-like topology can be thought of as 2-D grid of pixels [14].
This explanation of grid-like topology can be extended into higher dimensions such
as computerized RGB imagery which has three channels red green and blue. Other
examples could be Fully-Polarimetric SAR Imagery and Multispectral Imagery. Con-
volutional Neural Networks are faster to train than traditional fully connected Neural
Networks due to parameter sharing.
2.5.1
History
The theory behind convolutional neural networks draw on work by D. Hubel and
T.Wiesel, 1959 [17] where experiments on the neurons of the visual cortex of a cat
was carried out.
They found that the primary visual cortex has a structured to-
pographical map that is represent-able of the visual field where neurons share and
process information from each other to form visual images. The term convolutional
neural network was first introduced by Y. LeCun et al. in 1989 [22] who used convo-
lutional neural networks to recognize hand-written zip codes. The work introduced
back-propagation by gradient descent, weight-sharing and subsampling for convolu-
tional neural networks. Their work also evaluated the performance with the MNIST
data set which has become a famous benchmark for visual machine learning algo-
rithms since [33].
Neural Networks in general started gained traction in 2004 when K. S. Oh and
K. Jung [28] found that GPU accelerated training speed greatly outperformed CPU
training by a factor of 20 on an equivalent network. The first GPU trainable con-
volutional network was described by K. Chellapillia et al. 2006 [6] and from here
arguably the biggest discovery was made in 2010 when Dan Ciresan et al. [7] found
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theory
that the short-comings of back-propagation in deeper neural networks could be solved
by using graphics cards. Back-propagation was considered the old method at the time
as gradients vanish exponentially in deeper layers. The practice before Ciresan et al.
was to train each layer one by one in an unsupervised fashion and then stack them
on top of each other. Ciresan et al. found a speed up on inference and backward-
propagation by a factor of 40 on a network with 9 hidden layers. Their accuracy
on the MNIST data set was also the up until that point highest recorded with an
accuracy of 99.65%.
In 2012 Alex Krizhevsky et al. won the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge [10][21] with their network SuperVision. ImageNet is an image database
consisting of 1.3 million images spanning 1000 different classes. AlexNet has since
become a famous benchmark network included in many Deep Learning toolboxes such
as Tensorflow, Keras, Theano, Caffe and PyTorch.
2.5.2
Convolutional Neural Network Architecture
A Convolutional Neural Network or ConvNet is typically composed of three different
layer types.
The layer types are convolutional, pooling and fully-connected.
A typical ConvNet will be divided into two parts, a feature extraction part and
a classification part.
The combination of convolutions and pooling layers make
up the feature extraction and a series of fully-connected layers in the second part
make up the classification. ConvNets learn local spatial feature detectors directly
from data inputted by the convolution operation. The resulting feature maps are
then subsampled or pooled by a pooling method like max-pooling, where the largest
value is selected or mean-pooling where the mean of the pooling window is selected.
Pooling reduces the size of the feature-maps.
This continues for several layers of
convolutional and pooling layers until the features are of a desirable spatial resolution
fit for classification. It is usually desirable to decrease the number of neurons towards
classification to avoid overfitting. These feature maps are then fed into one or two
classical fully-connected layers where classification will happen.
Figure 2.8 shows
an example of a convolutional neural network applied to an image of a traffic sign.
Early feature maps learn simple features such as edges or colors and deeper layers
learn more complex features specific to the task at hand, such as combinations of size,
color and text that is unique to that particular traffic sign
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Classification using Convolutional Neural Networks
17
Figure 2.7: An input I of size 32x32 is first filtered with four 5x5 kernels K which
produces four 28x28 feature maps which are max-pooled with a 2x2 kernel. This
continues until the feature maps are of a desirable size.
The final layer is fully-
connected. Image by Maurice Peemen
The example in figure 2.8 can be described in more detail:
• INPUT [32x32x1]. Here a 1-layer gray scale image of a traffic sign is defined as
a 32x32x1 volume.
• CONV2D [5x5]. This layer slides a 5x5 convolutional kernel over the image.
The convolution computes the dot product between their weights and a small
region of the input volume.
• RELU layer will apply a non-linear activation for each element. The rectifier
function is usually max(0, x) and constrains the activation to be non-negative.
This does not change size of volume.
• MAXPOOL [2x2]. The input is now 28x28 as we did not account for padding.
Max-pooling in this case selects the maximal activation in a 2x2 window, effec-
tively reducing the input resolution by half.
• ... This can continue for arbitrarily many layers as long as the resolution al-
lows it. De-convolution layers can even increase the volume size by an inverse
convolution [42].
• FULLY-CONNECTED. This layer forms a fully-connected connection between
the last layer of feature-maps to tie the regions together. A Softmax function
is used to calculate the class probabilities.
Batch Normalization can be used after the activation layer, to scale activations from
0 to 1 to minimize covariance shifts. Batch normalization ensures that no activation
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theory
drifts away and becomes either really high or really low. During training a batch
normalization calculate the mean and variance of the layers input:
µB = 1
m
m
∑
i=1
xi
σ2
B = 1
m
m
∑
i=1
(xi −µB)2
and normalize the activations using the previous batch mean and variance from the
previous step.
¯xi = xi −µB
√
σ2
B + ϵ
finally scale and shift are computed which is the output of the batch normalization
layer. The scale and shift parameters are trainable parameters of the layer and are
updated by the networks optimizer during backpropagation
yi = γ¯xi + β
Batch Normalization improves gradient flow through the network, by reducing the
dependence of gradients on the scale of the parameters or of their initial values [18].
This also makes the initialization of weights less important.
2.5.3
The Convolution Operation
A convolution is its most general form is an operation on two functions of real-valued
arguments [14]. In the context of a Convolutional Neural Network this loosely for-
mulated definition refers to a weighted sum that operates on images often multi-
dimensional. These multi-dimensional arrays are in Neural Network terminology also
referred to as tensors. Convolutions on images essentially refers to sliding a small
local function over the image, we call this the kernel. The kernel slides over the entire
image and computes a new pixel as a weighted sum of the pixels. The weights are
what we refer to as neurons, and they are updated through backpropagation. Many
Neural Network libraries do not do classic Convolutions but rather cross-correlation,
which is convolution but without flipping the kernel. Flipping the kernel achieves
the commutative property, but it is not really important in the context of neural
networks, but rather for proof-writing. We will from here on define cross-correlation
as convolution. The convolution operation between an input I and a kernel K is
defined as: [14]
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
∑
m
∑
n
I(i + m, j + n)K(m, n)
(2.15)
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Classification using Convolutional Neural Networks
19
Figure 2.8: An example of a 2-D convolution. A kernel K of size 2x2 with stride 1 is
applied to input I. Image from the Deep Learning Book, Goodfellow [14]
In a convolutional layer the kernel is effectively slid over every sub-image of I.
The dot product of the kernel K and the corresponding sub-image of I yields the
output value of S centered at i, j. A stride can be defined to determine how many
cells are skipped at each iteration. The output matrix S is also called the feature-
map. The kernel values or weights are trainable neurons and are updated in the
backwards propagation pass. Special rules are to be considered in the edges of the
input image. If the image is not padded, the feature map will decrease in size. Typi-
cally neural network layers use matrix multiplication with a matrix of parameters to
describe the interaction between each input and each output unit [14]. Convolutional
networks utilize sparse connectivity as the kernel is smaller than the input. In
a fully-connected layer each input is connected to each output resulting in m × n
neurons. In a convolutional neural network, m is replaced by k which is the number
of trainable parameters in the kernel K. The number of connections then become
k × n which can be significantly smaller than in the fully-connected case if the input
is large. Convolutional layers are locally connected which means that they neurons
are spatially connected between each layer. The neurons of the upper left corner of
one layer will be connected to the upper left corner of the next layer. This reduces
the number of trainable parameters significantly and speeds up learning.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Theory
2.5.4
Pooling
A convolutional layer typically consists of three stages: convolution, detection and
pooling.
After convolution the output is fed through a non-linear activator this
step is typically called the detector stage. Typically this activation function is the
rectified linear unit ReLu. Pooling is used to down-sample the input. It is useful
to decrease the size of the feature maps towards the end of the network to make
classification more manageable with fewer trainable parameters. Pooling works by
dividing the activated units into non-overlapping regions, and picking a value for
that region. Usually this is done by max-pooling, which is simply to pick the neuron
with the highest activation value. The pooling step can have a kernel size and stride
different from the convolution step. This operation decreases the size of the output
layer, while maintaining the neuron responsible for the highest activation in that
region. This down-sampling is a way of reducing the size of the feature-maps while
retaining as much information as possible.
Figure 2.9: An example of max-pooling with a 2 × 2 kernel and a stride of 2.
2.5.5
Training a Convolutional Neural Network
A Neural Network is trained by changing the values of weights such that the network
can minimize a target loss gained from classifying known inputs into target outputs.
Solving this problem with potentially millions of weights becomes difficult so solve
analytically, and there might not be a complete solution. Instead we use the backprop-
agation algorithm to update the weights in steps. The backpropagation algorithm, as
described by Y LeCun, is a gradient-based learning method [23] that solves the weight
problem numerically in steps. Assume the network has been initialized by some ran-
dom weights to begin with, in the first step an input vector is propagated forwards
in the network. The output of the network is compared to the desired output and
an initial loss is computed, this is typically a log-loss or cross entropy. The gradient
of the loss function is then back propagated through the network to calculate the
individual neurons contribution to that error. The loss for each hidden neuron can
be solved by using the chain rule of derivatives. The weight of each neuron is then
updated based on the gradient of the weights and a small ratio is subtracted from the
gradient, defined by the learning rate α. For an extensive explanation and derivation
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Classification using Convolutional Neural Networks
21
of back-propagating see [32].
For a multi-class classification problem the Softmax activation function can be used
as the final activation in the output of the network [14]. The Softmax activation
function is defined as:
ϕ(s) =
exp sk
∑K
k=1 exp sk
The Softmax function squishes the input vector K into a vector of K elements between
0...1 that sums to 1. For a binary classification problem K only has length 1, and
could be replaced by a simple Sigmoid function.
2.5.6
Regularization in Convolutional Neural Networks
Regularization in Convolutional refer to methods that seeks to reduce overfitting.
Overfitting happens when the network is too closely fit for the data provided, such
that it does not generalize on new data. One way to reduce overfitting is dropout [38].
Dropout can be applied to a layer and it reduces co-adaptation of neurons. Dropout
applied to a layer correspond to applying a probability p to all neurons in a given
layer. The probability for that layer corresponds to the probability that any neuron
will be ”forgotten” or left out in that particular training step. The network will then
have a slightly different configuration at each training step, forcing the network to
learn neurons independently of each other.
Another way to decrease overfitting is simply to increase the quantity of training
data. Data might be sparse, so instead of gathering new training data, already exist-
ing data can be augmented to inflate the training set. Data augmentation generates
additional data by using geometric transformation such as translation, rotation and
scale. Data augmentation usually only applies to the training set to make the ”train-
ing” challenge harder than the data tested against, thereby reducing overfitting.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Experimental Setup
and Data Acquisition
Introduction
This chapter goes through the data acquisition and experimental setup. The main
goal of this thesis is to detect and discriminate between ships and icebergs in Sentinel-
1 GRD IW imagery. The study can be divided into two parts: A maritime target
detection part and a classification part. Target detection is accomplished by a CFAR
detection algorithm implemented using a sliding window utilizing the test-statistic
in the complex wishart distribution as a threshold. An extensive and representative
training set is required in order to create a good supervised ship-iceberg classifier.
Annotated data for ships are obtained by comparing a detected SAR target with
Automatic identification system (AIS) data for ships in the waters of Kattegat and
Skagerak in Denmark, using a novel SAR-AIS algorithm. Annotated data for icebergs
are obtained by selecting regions of icy waters which can be assumed to be free of
ships. Data augmentation is carried out to increase the size of the data set and to
create more generalized features. A Convolutional Neural Network is trained with
the collected annotated data to solve the two-class ship-iceberg classification problem.
We will examine the image filters of the convolutional filter as well as the activation
maps to interpret the classification results.
Methodology
In this study every step from data collection to ship-iceberg discrimination has been
carried out. The majority of the steps have been implemented in Python 3.5 [13],
while sigma nought calibration for comparison between Sentinel-1 GRD imagery and
the imagery from the Kaggle competition has been carried out in SNAP [12].
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Experimental Setup and Data Acquisition
3.1
Data acquisition
Data has been acquired from the imaging radar mission Sentinel-1 which provides
radar imagery at the C-band. Data has been acquired using the Python package Sen-
tinelSat [39]. A small Python example can be found in Appendix A used to download
and search for Sentinel-1 products through the Copernicus Scihub API access.
The imagery used in this study is multi-looked dual-polarized diagonal only Ground
Range Detected imagery. The data can be represented by the two-by-two covariance
matrix of VV+VH or HH+HV in the diagonal and 0 in the off-diagonal. Conradsen
et. al. [8] shows that the test-statistic in the complex Wishart distribution is still
applicable even though the data does not follow a complex Wishart distribution. The
Sentinel-1 product is more specifically Sentinel-1 Ground Range Detected (GRD)
dual-polarization Interferomatric Wide swath (IW). Sentinel-1 primarily operates in
IW over land and Extra Wide swath (EW) over open ocean, however IW imagery
near coasts are available. One complication which was found late in the study is
that VV+VH and HH+HV dual polarization imagery are not both included for a
given region. HH+HV coverage is mostly limited to the north and south poles where
VV+VH is recorded mostly everywhere else. This complication will be discussed in
detail later, but it complicates classification as it was difficult to find both icebergs
and ships with AIS data in the same polarization, creating an incoherent dataset.
Training a classifier to detect the features of the detected targets and not features
concerning the polarization is important. We want a ship-iceberg classifier and not
a vertial-horizontal polariation classifier. Methods to investigate and mitigate this
is discussed in the classification with Convolutional Neural Network section. The
European Space Agency (ESA) has decided not to include both polarizations in the
GRD products. Figure 3.1 shows coverage maps for VV+VH and HH+HV in IW
swath. Figure 3.1 shows the very limited regions of horizontal polarization imagery.
Obtaining icebergs in horizontal images is easy, but obtaining annotated data for
ships becomes challenging. On the other hand obtaining ships in vertical polariza-
tion is easy, but only parts of Iceland and North America are candidates for finding
icebergs. It has not been possible in this study to find data for both classes, ships
and icebergs in the same polarization. This is not desirable, and we will discuss the
implications of this when looking at the classification results.
3.1.1
Sentinel-1 GRD Imagery
According to the Sentinel-1 product definition document S1-RS-MDA-52-7440 [30] the
following specifications apply for the SAR imagery used. In IW acquisition mode the
high-resolution imagery has a spatial resolution of 22×20 meters with a pixel spacing
of 10 × 10. This means that each pixel correspond to approximately 10 meters, but
the actual resolution is half that. This means that a scatterer that is 10×10 meters in
length can sometimes be represented by a pixel, and sometimes not depending on the
sampling. GRD products are multi-looked over 5 looks with an Equivalent Number
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Geocoding
25
Figure 3.1: Coverage maps for IW swath Sentinel-1 data. VV+VH coverage top and
HH+HV coverage bottom. Coverage maps provided by: EODC
of Looks (ENL) of 4.4. ENL corresponds to an average over all swaths, and can
therefore vary from swath to swath. We will later give an overview of the estimated
ENL for the regions of interest. GRD products are ground range detected with image
coordinates along the flight direction.
GRD products are produced by projecting
slant range coordinates onto ground coordinates using an ellipsoidal model such as
the WGS84 model, which is then corrected with a terrain height model. The WGS84
model has been used in this study to geocode the images such that AIS data can be
related to the imagery. Each Sentinel-1 GRD product contains a series of reference
points called Ground Control Points (GCP) that is scattered across the image which
can be used for geocoding.
3.2
Geocoding
Geocoding is the process of converting pixel information in row, column notation
into real world coordinates. The model used is the WGS84 ellipsoidal model, which
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Experimental Setup and Data Acquisition
represents coordinates by their latitude and longitude. WGS84 is also the datum
used in GPS systems. AIS data for ships are provided with a location in latitude
and longitudal coordinates. It is therefore necessary to transform these coordinates
into image pixel coordinates to relate detected targets in the SAR image with their
AIS position.
GDAL is a translator library for raster and vector geospatial data
formats that is released under an X/MIT style Open Source license by the Open
Source Geospatial Foundation [31]. Geocoding is done by defining a gdaltransform
utilizing the GCP of the Sentinel-1 product as specified by the metadata.xml file, a
full trace of the metadata for a Sentinel-1 GRD product can be seen in appendix B.
The gdaltransform command takes an input of latitude-longitude pairs and output
corresponding pixel coordinates. Pixel coordinates outside the bounds of the SAR
image are discarded. Now every record in the AIS database has a corresponding image
coordinate and it is possible to work on the raw SAR image without resampling it. A
slight error is introduced when performing this transformation as the GCP points are
not evenly distributed, but the error is in the magnitude of 2 to 10 pixels corresponding
to at most a 100 meter error, which is acceptable for the purpose of this study.
3.3
Areas of Interest
In this study two areas of interest has been chosen. For ship detection an area of
the waters surrounding Skagen in Denmark has been chosen. This area was chosen
as it has many ships of various sizes and a good ocean to land ratio. Denmark was
chosen primarily because Automatic Identification System (AIS) data is historically
available free of charge through the Danish Maritime Authority [9]. This enables the
creation of annotated training data with additional information such as type, size, and
orientation. This information can be used to analyse for which ships the classification
is erroneous, and ensures that targets found are actual ships and not windmills or
rocks. Correctly annotated data is very important in supervised learning to ensure
the features learned are representative of the task you are trying to solve. Introducing
noise into the data set with falsely annotated data can compromise accuracy. Figure
3.2 shows the area of interest for ship detection. The region is just north of Skagen in
Denmark and the imagery is provided in GRD IW VV + VH polarization. Figure 3.3
shows the area of interest for iceberg detection. The region is the Disko Bay near the
mid-west coast of Greenland. The region at time of image acquisition can be assumed
to be free of ships. The imagery is provided in GRD IW HH + HV polarization, so
not the same as the imagery used for ship detection.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Areas of Interest
27
Figure 3.2: Area of interest. Sentinel-1 GRD IW imagery north of Skagen, Denmark.
Shown in VV polarization scaled to 0-255 pixel values
Figure 3.3: Area of interest. Sentinel-1 GRD IW imagery at Disko Bay, Greenland.
Shown in HH polarization scaled to 0-255 pixel values
Multiple images of the same two regions over multiple acquisition dates have been
used. three acquisitions have been carried out for Skagen and just a single acquisition
have been carried out for the Disko Bay due to the abundance of icebergs in this
region.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Experimental Setup and Data Acquisition
3.4
Automatic Identification System - AIS
The Automatic Identifacation System (AIS) is a tracking system technology that
enables maritime surveillance, collision avoidance and search and rescue. AIS is a
VHF-based navigation and anti-collision system [2]. Ships are to be fitted with a
VHF radio transponder. VHF has a range of about 10-20 nautical miles, limiting the
range of visible targets that can be detected from the installation point on the shore.
AIS data in Denmark is collected by a shore-based AIS system, while other countries
might use a satellite based AIS system. Two types of ship AIS transponders exists,
class A and class B. Class A is required for ships over 300 tons, passenger ships and
fishing vessels above 15 metres. The resolution of the data used is 10 meters pixel
spacing and 20 meters spatial resolution. This means that ships under 15 meters will
be very hard to find, as they are at most represented by two pixels in either direction.
Smaller vessels are not required by law to fit an AIS transponder, but can choose
to fit a smaller class B transponder if they wish. This limits validation data for the
supervised classification to ships over 15 metres in length. For an extensive study
on detection capability on smaller ships other validation methods must be employed.
See Appendix C for an example of a complete AIS record.
3.5
Landmasking
To avoid registering targets on land as ships, a landmask has to be applied. A land-
mask is a binary image of the same size as the SAR image, with a 1 for ocean, and
a 0 for land. The landmask can then easily be multiplied with the SAR image to
remove land from the image. Landmasking can be achieved by obtaining a coastal
ground truth and using that as the boundary between land and ocean. However it is
not always possible to obtain coastal data precise enough to mask out small islands,
rocks or larger icebergs which will then be registered as false positives. We introduce
a method based on Gaussian blur, morphological erosion and large connected compo-
nents to segment land from the background (ocean, ships and icebergs). The method
is simple and works by convolving the image with a gaussian kernel over the entire
region, applying a threshold and then applying a morphological erosion of size 50x50.
This works because the backscatter from the land is larger than from the ocean. The
erosion operations ensures that the mask covers the entirety of the coast, at the cost
of over extending the mask and removing parts of the ocean. Finally the mask is in-
verted such that the land components get the value 0, which will remove the land in
the original SAR image when multiplied. Figure 3.4 shows the landmasking process
applied to a region of a SAR imagery of Disko Bay, Greenland.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Landmasking
29
Figure 3.4: Coastal region near Disko Bay (Top Left), Gaussian blur (Top Right),
Thresholded mask (Bottom Left), and the applied mask onto the original image (Bot-
tom Right)
Blurring the image with a Gaussian kernel washes out smaller targets and makes
it easier to find bigger components with a threshold. This method is versatile and
works for almost any coastal situation, and it is easy and fast to implement. Applying
the mask takes just a single matrix multiplication like so
Imasked = I ∗M
where I is the SAR image and M is the mask. It is important that I and M are
the same size. One con is that the generated landmask can remove quite a lot of
information near the coast. If targets are primarily close to a harbour this method
needs to be refined. This was not a requirement for this study, and so we are satisfied
with the simplistic solution. Figure 3.5 shows the landmask applied to a coastal area
of Disko Bay, Greenland. It can be seen that the landmask also masks out parts of
the ocean, so caution must be taken if target detection is to be applied for ships near
land.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Experimental Setup and Data Acquisition
Figure 3.5: A section of a coastal area near Disko Bay (left) with its generated
landmask (right).
The landmask is applied after calculating the test-statistic −2ρlnQ for the entire
image, and before doing CFAR detection and SAR-AIS registration. The reason for
applying the landmask after calculating the test-statistic is to avoid detecting the
edge of the landmask as an abrupt change.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Marine Target
Detection using the
test statistic in the
complex Wishart
distribution
Target detection concerns distinguishing objects from the surrounding background.
A good target detector should be able to accurately detect changes with a low prob-
ability of false alarms denoted Pfa. The probability of false alarms can be fixed by
a threshold Tr in the tail of the chosen probability density function. In maritime
target detection it is desirable to have a constant rate of false alarms. Such a de-
tection algorithm is also referred to as a Constant False alarm rate (CFAR) target
detection algorithm. As explained previously CFAR is a detection scheme that works
by utilizing the statistical characteristics of the surrounding sea clutter. The role of
the CFAR detector is to determine an adaptive threshold for which the pixel under
test (PUT) can be determined to be either a target or part of the background. This
threshold is local to the PUT to keep the probability of false alarm constant over the
entire region. In this implementation the PUT is not a single intensity value, but
represented by the two-by-two real valued covariance matrix.
The adaptive-threshold can be found by setting the appropriate parameters for the
test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution based on the local background statis-
tics. This also has the added benefit that for all homogeneous regions in the scene a
constant false-alarm rate is obtained by using the same threshold [35]
It was previously discussed that the test statistic for equality in the complex Wishart
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Marine Target Detection using the test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution
distribution can be used for the multi-looked dual-polarized Sentinel-1 data, even
though it does not follow a complex Wishart distribution.
The ground range de-
tected data products from Sentinel-1 is dual polarized diagonal only. Unfortunately
Sentinel-1 ground range detected products only provide one transmit polarization for
a given region, V or H and receive both resulting in two possible covariance matrices.
The resulting covariance matrix for transmitting vertical polarization and receiving
both:
⟨C⟩dual =
[⟨SvvS∗
vv⟩
0
⟨0
⟨SvhS∗
vh⟩
]
(4.1)
And for horizontal polarization:
⟨C⟩dual =
[
⟨ShhS∗
hh⟩
0
⟨0
⟨ShvS∗
hv⟩
]
(4.2)
4.1
Dual Polarized Cell-Averaging CFAR Target
Detection
The CFAR target detection is carried out by visiting each pixel, represented by a real-
valued 2x2 covariance matrix and calculating the test statistic for equality between
two covariance matrices in the complex Wishart distribution. The first covariance
matrix, which we call the Pixel Under Test IP UT is tested against the background rep-
resented by the mean covariance matrix of the training cells. The complex Wishart
distributed covariance matrices X and Y are defined as X = n⟨C⟩x and Y = n⟨C⟩y
where n and m are the equivalent number of looks. The Sentinel-1 Product Specifi-
cation lists the equivalent number of looks for GRD IW products to be 4.4 [11].
The CFAR detection is carried out by creating a guard barrier around the IP UT
and then taking the average of a window of training pixels. The window as defined
by this study is created such that the guard area is large enough that no target pixels
leak into the training area, and the training area is defined to be as large as possible
while avoiding other targets to interfere. The guard area is set to be a 25 pixels on
either side of the IP UT , corresponding to roughly 250 meters on each side, and the
training area is set to be an additional 100 pixels on either side of the guard area
which correspond to 1000 meters.
The CFAR filter was supposed to be a two-dimensional sliding window, but due
to complications that was not resolved in time it was not possible. Instead the CFAR
filter looks to the left and right of the PUT. Figure 4.1 shows a small illustration of
this principle.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Dual Polarized Cell-Averaging CFAR Target Detection
33
Figure 4.1: One dimensional CFAR window.
Ideally the window would be two-dimensional, but the implementation seems to
produce good results even for a one-dimensional filter. Using the one-dimensional
window this results in a 251 pixel window where the inner guard window is 50 × 50
pixels and the single PUT sits in the middle. For computational efficiency the average
of the guard window is subtracted from the entire window to give the mean value of
the background area. The number of pixels averaged in the background area is then
nbackground = 251 −50 −1 = 200
. For each pixel value in the background that gets averaged the equivalent number
of looks increase proportionally.
If the number of looks for the PUT is n = 4.4
then the Equivalent Number of Looks for the background is m = 200 ∗4.4 = 880.
Investigating the parameters ρ and ω2 for the test-statistic we see that it plateaus,
which is fortunate as it means that the parameters are a certain number of looks stops
varying. Writing up the parameters for the test of equality of two complex covariance
matrices we get the following:
p1 = 1
p2 = 1
f1 = p1
f2 = p2
f = f1 + f2
ρ1 = 1 −2f1 −1
6p1
( 1
n + 1
m −
1
n + m
)
ρ2 = 1 −2f2 −1
6p2
( 1
n + 1
m −
1
n + m
)
ρ = 1
f (f1ρ1 + f2ρ2)
And lnQ:
ln Q = p
(
(n + m) ln(n + m) −n ln(n) −m ln(m)
)
(4.3)
+n ln |X| + m ln |Y| −(n + m) ln |X + Y|
If we recall from the theory the independent p by p Hermitian positive definite ma-
trices X and Y who we assume to be complex Wishart distributed (X = n⟨C⟩x and
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Marine Target Detection using the test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution
Y = m⟨C⟩y Here the number of looks for the PUT is n = 4.4 and for the background
m = 880 for the window chosen. If the observed value of −2ρlnQ is z = −2ρlnqobs
then the probability of finding a smaller value of −2ρlnQ can be found by two calls
to the incomplete gamma function γ( v
2, X2
2 ) [] where v is the number of degrees of
freedom and X2 is the test-statistic. Writing this up we get
P−2ρlnQobs ≤z ≃[1 −ω2]γ(f
2 , −ρlnQobs) + ω2(f
2 + 2, −ρlnQobs).
(4.4)
Then the probability of no change is given as
1 −P−2ρlnQ ≤z = PQ < qobs
(4.5)
The probability of finding a smaller value of −2ρ ln Q can be also be found by two
calls to the incomplete gamma function γ( v
2, X2
2 ) where v is the degrees of freedom
and X2 is the test statistic −ρ ln Q. The probability of finding a smaller value than
−2ρ ln Q then becomes:
P{−2ρ ln Q ≤z} ≃(1 −ω2)γ
(f
2 , −ρ ln Q
)
+ ω2γ
(f
2 + 2, −ρ ln Q
)
This probability is easier to calculate in a programming language like Python. This is
the probability that the observed value of the test statistic is equal to the test statistic
as defined by the background. This means that if the PUT has a low probability of
no change meaning a low value for 1 −P−2ρlnQ ≤z it can be considered a target.
A suitable number for a threshold to apply for 1 −P−2ρlnQ ≤z can be found by
looking at the relation between false positives, false negatives and true positives. We
will carry out this analysis when we test detected targets against AIS. This number
directly relates to the Pfa used in traditional CFAR detectors and should remain
constant as the statistics for the background are calculated adaptively.
If we let n denote the number of looks for the PUT and let m denote the num-
ber of looks for the background we can investigate what happens with ρ and ω2, the
parameters of the test statistic, as the number of looks in the background changes.
For every covariance matrix averaged over in the background the number of looks
m increases. Figure 4.2 shows ρ and ω2 as a function of ENL with n = 4.4 and m
varying from 1 to 800. ρ and ω2 stops varying after a certain number of looks have
been met in the background.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Dual Polarized Cell-Averaging CFAR Target Detection
35
Figure 4.2: ω2 (left) and ρ (right) as a function of ENL for the situation n = 4.4 and
m ∈[1 . . . 800]
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Marine Target Detection using the test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution
Figure 4.3: 700 × 700 region in a no-target situation (top left). Threshold at 1e-6
(top right). 1 −P histogram (bottom)
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Dual Polarized Cell-Averaging CFAR Target Detection
37
Figure 4.4: 700 × 700 region in a target situation (top left). Threshold at 1e-6 (top
right). 1 −P histogram (bottom)
For a 700×700 pixel region with and without targets the P-value has been plotted,
and as we see on figure 4.3 and 4.4 the P-values are uniformly distributed. This is
expected and shows that a Constant False Alarm Rate can be achieved. In the target
situation in figure 4.4 the histogram is slightly left tailed, because there are many
targets in the region. Both regions have been thresholded by their 1−P with a value
of 1e −6. It would seem that in figure 4.3 a single pixel is detected as a false positive.
This is expected as the chosen Pfa is 1e-6 which on average should flag one pixel once
every one million pixels.
Now that we know that the measure for false alarm rate Pfa stays constant we can
start detecting some targets using the dual polarized Cell Averaging CFAR filter. For
a given dual-polarized diagonal only SAR image every pixel is visited once. For each
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Marine Target Detection using the test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution
PUT the test for equality of two covariance matrices are carried out
H0 = Σx = Σy
against all alternatives using the test-statistic outlined above. This generates a P-
value, or a probability for change in every pixel of the image. The probability for
no change is then 1 −P. This new image where each pixel is a P-value can then
be thresholded by setting a threshold Pfa. To determine a good value for Pfa we
need to determine what constitutes a false positive or a true positive target. For this
we use AIS validation. Figure 4.5 shows a target filtered with above parameters and
test-statistic using three different Pfa from 1e-4 to 1e-8. Most false positives are gone
at around 1e-6 but it is possible to cut down the false positive rate quite a bit and
still find the target. If we lower Pfa too much, smaller targets will not be detected.
Figure 4.5: A target thresholded with various values of false alarm rate Pfa
4.2
SAR - AIS validation
To validate that the detected targets found with the CFAR detection scheme explained
in the previous section, we have chosen to use a data set of AIS ground truths. Achiri
et. al [1] presents a novel approach to fuse SAR images with AIS data. The work
outlined here has inspired the approach in this study. The approach is simple and in
our case consists of three steps. First step is to perform ship detection in the SAR
image using the CFAR algorithm outlined in the previous section. Second, features
are extracted from the detected ships (position, size and distance to the ground truth)
using morphological connectivity and Singular Value Decomposition, and thirdly the
features are used in a weighted average to find the correct related AIS record. Achiri
et. al uses a fusion block with both features extracted separately both from SAR and
AIS to perform classification.
In this study we will not use the properties of the AIS record for classification but
rather use it as a ground truth to validate that the detected ships are in fact ships,
and not noise. The AIS properties are used to create the best matching from detected
targets into real AIS targets. Bentes et. al uses a similar approach to annotate regis-
tered ships with AIS to classify the detected ship into one of five classes [3], however
==PAGE:49==
4.2 SAR - AIS validation
39
as we are trying to distinguish ships from icebergs, the correct AIS-SAR registration
is sufficient. Each SAR-AIS registered ship will have its centroid calculated and cut
out from the SAR image in a size that fits the input of the Convolutional Neural
Network (100x100x2 in this study). A Convolutional Neural Network will then be
trained on slices of SAR images known to have real ships in them, as they have
been found in the AIS database with a reasonable probability. A threshold on vari-
ous parameters will be used to avoid attaching a wrong AIS record to a detected ship.
For all detected targets a region of interest IROI is cut out. The size of every IROI
is 100x100x2 which correspond to a 1000x1000 meters window with a pixel spacing
of 10.0 meters. This size is chosen such that the largest ships will fit entirely in the
region, but also to minimize the amount of sea-clutter present. Each IROI is pro-
cessed by a series of morphological operations, erosion and dilation. Dilation expands
the boundary of detected pixels while erosion removes pixels at the boundary. By
sliding a morphological erosion filter over the IROI we connect close pixels over 3
iterations. This connects close regions which are likely to be from the same target.
The connected region are then blurred and eroded such that the binary mask closer
resembles the size of the original target. Figure 4.6 shows two examples of this series
of operations After preprocessing we estimate the length and width of each IROI us-
ing a Principal Component Analysis (PCA). The first two principle components will
be the two largest directions in the image with the largest variance. This correspond
to the width and length of the connected component. The two principal component
vectors are clipped by the boundary of the connected component and the pixel spac-
ing is multiplied to gain an estimate in meters for width and height. To gain a good
registration we will also use the euclidian distance from the centroid of the detected
target to the tested position of the AIS record. This is possible as every AIS record
has had their position transformed from geocoordinates into pixel coordinates.
Figure 4.6: Example of two IROI processed with the morphological operations. The
IROI are initially detected as multiple objects, but merged into one after dilation,
blurring and erosion.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Marine Target Detection using the test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution
For each record in the filtered AIS data for the given SAR region at the appropriate
timestamp we now search for detected targets inside a window of 500 meters. If there
is no detected CFAR target within 500 meters of the AIS records position the target
is not considered to be found, and we record it as a false negative. If a single target is
found within the 500 radius window we apply a weighted average of euclidean distance
and estimated width and length to check if the detected target correspond to the AIS
record. The error measure used is novel, but helps to eliminate false registrations.
The error threshold is defined as follows where ROI is the estimated value and AIS
is the ground truth:
EROI = 0.2(wAIS −wROI) + 0.5(lAIS −lROI) +
√
(xAIS −xROI)2 −(yAIS −yROI)2
The criteria to keep an AIS registration is set to E < 100. This value has been esti-
mated experimentally. The weights and values have been set experimentally, such to
eliminate false registrations. The most common cause of a wrong registration is either
a ship that is too far away from its detected target, or two ships in close proximity
but with different sizes. If two ships are similar in size and distance false negatives
can occur. The width estimation is not always accurate, due to the morhpological
operations and so we give it a smaller weight. However the length of the ship and
distance to the recorded position are both important, and usually close to the truth,
where the distance to the target is given the highest weight.
IROI =
{
accepted
E ≤0
rejected
E > 100
If a IROI is rejected for one AIS record, it can still be accepted by another row in the
AIS data. This ensures that the mapping between detected targets and AIS records
are as accurate as possible. Figure 4.7 shows two examples of registered AIS targets
which were accepted under E. Both ships have been registered within a distance of
10 meters. Figure 4.8 shows the PCA process of estimating the features of a detected
target. In this picture the detected ship is a Tanker measuring 32 meters in width
and 179 meters in length. The size estimation using Principal Components yields 64
meters width, which is almost double of the ground truth, and a length of 183 meters
which is close to the AIS ground truth.
Correctly registering ships to their AIS
record ensures that foreign objects such as windmills or large rocks do not enter the
dataset. The binary mask can also be used to mask out sea clutter and only keep
the backscatter from the actual target, this is also the approach taken by Bentes [3].
This can help make the classification invariant of the background, and as we will see
this will become important.
An AIS record that successfully map its position to a detected target counts as a
true positive (TP), an AIS record that does not map its position to a detected tar-
get counts as a false negative (FN) and finally targets that are lefter over from the
==PAGE:51==
4.2 SAR - AIS validation
41
Figure 4.7: Two IROI with estimated width, length and distance to the ground truth
AIS record
Figure 4.8: A ship of type Tanker (left), detected pixels thresholded with Pfa (middle)
and estimated width and length by PCA
registration, which did not get matched to an AIS record counts as false positives
(FP). Figure 4.9 shows a region of Skagen with detected ships. Green boxes are TP,
red boxes are FP and yellow boxes are FN. It makes no sense to talk about true
negatives, as this would be ships that are not there which we do not find. From
figure 4.9 it can be seen that a good part of the false positives are at the bottom
of the image, which has north down. One guess could be that the ships are too far
away from Skagen, which is where the danish shore-based AIS beacon is located. The
range of such a system is only about 40 kilometers, and so it could explain why the
targets have no AIS record. Even though these false positives might be ships, they
are not included in the training data. The rate of false alarm Pfa has been picked by
optimizing the ratio between false positives, true positives and false negatives. Figure
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Marine Target Detection using the test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution
Figure 4.9: SAR of Skagen with detected ships. Green=TP, Red=FP and Yellow=FN
4.10 shows the number of objects detected in each of the three groups for a single
acquisition at Skagen. The optimal Pfa is found between the two red vertical dashed
lines. After this point the number of false positives increases exponentially without
any gain in true positives. The optimal Pfa has been set to Pfa = 1e−8 based on this
statistic. The results for the three acquisitions near Skagen, Denmark and the single
acquisition near Disko Bay, Greenland can be seen in table 4.1. The number of true
positives, false positive and false negatives are reported. For Greenland there are no
AIS validation available, so only the number for detected icebergs are reported. It
can be assumed that the region at the acquisition time is free of ships. Heiselberg et.
al uses the same region and acquisition time in multi spectral Sentinel-2 imagery and
uses the same assumption [16].
Product ID Acquisition Time Pfa
TP FP TN Total Ships Total Icebergs
A085
2018-09-05T170159
1e-8 161 75
17
178
0
5D32
2018-10-23T170225
1e-8 81
28
23
104
0
7839
2018-09-29T170159
1e-8 85
18
20
105
0
E236
2018-07-30T10014
1e-8 0
0
0
0
310
Table 4.1: SAR-AIS results for four image acquisitions
Examples of false positives can be seen in figure 4.13, examples of false negatives
in figure 4.12 and examples of true positives in 4.11. The collection of false positives
are made up of noise and very small specs which could be fishing boats, and also
==PAGE:53==
4.2 SAR - AIS validation
43
Figure 4.10: An investigation of true positives, false positives and false negatives for
a single acquisition near Skagen. The optimal Ffa is found between the two vertical
dashed lines
ships too far north of Skagen which are not part of the AIS database. The collection
of false negatives consists of small fishing vessels and situations where multiple ships
are gathered in a small location and the AIS registration have been faulty. It can
happen that similar ships in close proximity can be mistaken for one another, such
that only one of the ships gets the correct AIS registration. Figure 4.14 shows AIS
mismatch due to ships being in close proximity.
Yellow boxes are false negatives, and you can see that the ships are detected,
but given the wrong label.
This causes other ships to fall outside the 500 meter
search range and become false negatives. The mapping of AIS to SAR here has been
switched up, and therefore multiple false negatives are reported. A better SAR-AIS
algorithm could help mitigate this in the future.
It is difficult to make a perfect
SAR-AIS registration as multiple sources of errors are at work. The geocoding of the
AIS records from world coordinates to pixel coordinates is based on ground control
points and therefore introduce a small error. AIS records are emitted once every 5 to
15 seconds for moving ships and more rarely for anchored ships. If the timestamp is
just off by a little and the boat is moving at a steady pace, the registration will drift.
An algorithm to determine heading, speed and projected position for interpolated
timestamps should be implemented to mitigate the errors based on timestamps.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Marine Target Detection using the test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution
Figure 4.11:
Examples of
True
Positives
found
by
CFAR and validated by AIS
Pfa = 1e−8
Figure 4.12: Examples of
False Negatives not found
by CFAR at Pfa = 1e−8
Figure 4.13: Examples of
False Positives not found
by CFAR at Pfa = 1e−8
Figure 4.14: Examples of similar ships having their AIS record switched up, resulting
in the creation of two False Negatives.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Ship-Iceberg
Discrimination with
Convolutional Neural
Networks
This section concerns the two-class classification problem of ship-iceberg.
Several
image regions IROI has been extracted by a Cell Averaging Dual Polarized CFAR
filtering scheme and validated by an AIS database. The classification will be sought
solved by a Convolutional Neural Network. In the section we will discuss various
design choices and hyper-parameters, the performance of the classifier and try to
interpret the results. Firstly we go over the network structure, then evaluate the
model and try to interpret the results by dissecting the hidden layers of the neural
network. We then investigate different ways to generalize model performance to avoid
overfitting, by trying out the method as suggested by Bentes [3] by using the detected
pixels as a binary mask to cut out the sea-clutter but keeping the detected pixels.
5.1
Network Structure
The CNN model used is quite shallow compared to deeper models such as AlexNet,
VGG16 and ResNet[21][37][15]. One of the reasons for picking a shallow network is
that the data is sparse, the number of classes are few, and the data is not that com-
plex. A deeper network such as network trained for ImageNet which has 1000 classes
and million of images need to learn complex interactions between classes. This is not
the case for the ship-iceberg classification problem. We only have two classes and
two layers, which are made up of the two diagonal elements of the covariance matrix,
either VV and VH or HH and HV. The input to the network will be IROI chips of
100×100 pixels and two channels. This results in an input volume of size 100×100×2.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
Three different experiments with the same layer structure, but different input will
be trained and evaluated:
1. CNN model where the input is the entire IROI background included for both
polarizations, with no augmentation or regularization
2. CNN model where the input is the entire IROI background included for both
polarizations, with augmentation and regularizations
3. CNN model where the IROI has been segmented from the background for both
polarizations, with augmentation and regularizations.
The Convolutional Neural Network has been implemented in Keras and TensorFlow
using Python 3.5. For a complete list of relevant python packages see Appendix D.
The network structure is the same for all three experiments. A Network Summary
output has been taken from Keras below:
_________________________________________________________________
Layer (type)
Output Shape
Param #
=================================================================
conv2d_1 (Conv2D)
(None, 96, 96, 256)
19456
_________________________________________________________________
leaky_re_lu_1 (LeakyReLU)
(None, 96, 96, 256)
0
_________________________________________________________________
batch_normalization_1 (Batch (None, 96, 96, 256)
1024
_________________________________________________________________
max_pooling2d_1 (MaxPooling2 (None, 47, 47, 256)
0
_________________________________________________________________
dropout_1 (Dropout)
(None, 47, 47, 256)
0
_________________________________________________________________
conv2d_2 (Conv2D)
(None, 43, 43, 128)
819328
_________________________________________________________________
leaky_re_lu_2 (LeakyReLU)
(None, 43, 43, 128)
0
_________________________________________________________________
batch_normalization_2 (Batch (None, 43, 43, 128)
512
_________________________________________________________________
max_pooling2d_2 (MaxPooling2 (None, 21, 21, 128)
0
_________________________________________________________________
dropout_2 (Dropout)
(None, 21, 21, 128)
0
_________________________________________________________________
conv2d_3 (Conv2D)
(None, 17, 17, 64)
204864
_________________________________________________________________
leaky_re_lu_3 (LeakyReLU)
(None, 17, 17, 64)
0
_________________________________________________________________
batch_normalization_3 (Batch (None, 17, 17, 64)
256
_________________________________________________________________
max_pooling2d_3 (MaxPooling2 (None, 15, 15, 64)
0
_________________________________________________________________
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Network Structure
47
dropout_3 (Dropout)
(None, 15, 15, 64)
0
_________________________________________________________________
flatten_1 (Flatten)
(None, 14400)
0
_________________________________________________________________
dense_1 (Dense)
(None, 64)
921664
_________________________________________________________________
batch_normalization_4 (Batch (None, 64)
256
_________________________________________________________________
activation_1 (Activation)
(None, 64)
0
_________________________________________________________________
dropout_4 (Dropout)
(None, 64)
0
_________________________________________________________________
dense_2 (Dense)
(None, 1)
65
_________________________________________________________________
activation_2 (Activation)
(None, 1)
0
=================================================================
Total params: 1,967,425
Trainable params: 1,966,401
Non-trainable params: 1,024
_________________________________________________________________
To summarize, the network consists of just three convolution blocks which generates
features. Each Convolutional Block consists of the following elements:
• Conv2D
• LeakyReLU which is a gradient preserving version of ReLU, which is an ac-
tivation function. It is found to improve performance for small scale dataset
[41].
• BatchNormalization which allows us to use much higher learning rates and be
less careful about initialization by normalizing activations between batches [18].
• MaxPooling to reduce the input size for the next layer by picking maximum
activations over a sliding window.
• Droput which prevents overfitting by dropping connections between batches to
force the network to relearn these, minimizing co-adapting features [38]
The kernel sizes and strides for the convolutional layers are listed below:
1. Conv2D 256 filters, kernel size 5 × 5, MaxPool kernel size 4 × 4 stride 2 × 2
2. Conv2D 128 filters, kernel size 5 × 5, MaxPool kernel size 3 × 3 stride 2 × 2
3. Conv2D 64 filters, kernel size 5 × 5, MaxPool kernel size 3 × 3 stride 1 × 1
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
After the feature extracting convolutional layers we stack a fully connected layer with
64 neurons, batch normalization and a ReLU activation function. Finally a sigmoid
layer is added with the sigmoid activation function which gives us the final class prob-
abilities represented by a single float.
The model is trained using a binary cross-entropy or binary log loss. The cross-entropy
measures the performance of the classification output whose output lies between 0
and 1, thanks to the final Sigmoid activation function. Because the cross-entropy is
binary we get a single probability out. It has been determined that the targeted class
is ”is iceberg”, and that means a probability of 1.0 is a 100% class probability in
favor of ”is iceberg” and 0% class probability for ”is not iceberg” which in this case
is ship. Reversely a probability of 0.0 will correspond to a 100% class probability for
not iceberg or ship in this case. In binary classification, such as this case, the cross
entropy can be defined as
Hp(q) = −1
N
N
∑
i=1
yi ∗log(p(yi)) + (1 −y)log(1 −p(yi))
(5.1)
Where y is a binary indicator (0 or 1) and p(y) is the predicted probability of the
observed class being is iceberg for all N observations. This loss is what we want the
network to minimize.
ADAM is chosen as the optimizer, which is an extension to stochastic gradient de-
scent. Adam is more computationally efficient, is invariant to diagonal rescale of the
gradients and appropriate for problems with noisy or sparse gradients [20]. Adam
is a little different from classic stochastic gradient descent in that it maintains the
same learning rate parameter αt for all weight updates and it does not decrease or
change during training. However a learning rate is kept for each weight in the network
which is manipulated separately from the global learning rate. Adam takes 4 hyper
parameters which are set to the following:
• alpha, αt or the learning rate is set to 1e −5
• β1 the decay for first-moment estimates, set to 0.9
• β2 the decay for second-moment estimates, set to 0.999
• epsilon, small number added to avoid division by zero. et to 1e −9
All values are set to the suggested values of the original Adam paper, except the
learning rate which is set as a lower value which was found experimentally to be a
better value [20].
The dataset consists of 310 icebergs and 327 ships. As touched upon briefly in previ-
ous sections the polarization for icebergs is given as HH + HV and the polarization
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Network Structure
49
for ships is given as VV + VH. It is never a good idea to have data drawn from
different distribution as the network will use this information to classify the input.
This fact was figured out too late in the study to have time to gather data from the
same send-receive polarization, but it enables us to investigate the networks ability
to become invariant of this fact, if at all possible, through regularization and data
augmentation. Before we go into ways to mitigate this, let us train a network naively
with no regularization and no reservation to the knowledge about polarization.
Prior to training data is split into three sets, Training, Validation and Test. The
network will be trained using mini-batch learning as the memory on the GPU used
on my particular hardware is limited. Each batch will contain 16 images batched
together drawn randomly from the training set in each epoch. One epoch covers the
duration it takes for the network to look at every image in the training data once.
After every epoch the network is evaluated on a randomly sampled validation batch
and the weights of the network is then updated according to the log-loss. After the
network has trained for a set number of epochs, the network is evaluated on the
entirety of the test set, which has not been seen by the network. The network will
be scored on its single metrics precision, the ratio of true positives and predicted pos-
itive observations, and recall, the ratio of true positives and all positive observations.
Finally you can combine precision and recall into an f1-score which is given as
f1score = 2 ∗Precision ∗Recall
Precision + Recall
(5.2)
For a perfect classification precision, recall and f1-score will be all be equal to 1.0.
Before giving any special treatment to the data we train a baseline CNN on a train,
validation and test split of 70%, 20% and 10% respectively.
We also remove any
regularization and dropout to see what happens with the log-loss and accuracy. We
train this model on the full image without segmenting it IROI. Figure 5.1 shows
the distribution of correctly classified images. The classification is perfect with no
mis-classifications. Figure 5.2 shows the accuracy and log-loss over 30 epochs and
Figure 5.3 shows three examples of classification with corresponding predicted class
probabilities.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
Figure 5.1: Classification performance for baseline CNN
Figure 5.2: Accuracy and log-loss for baseline CNN after 30 epochs of training
==PAGE:61==
5.2 GradCAM - Investigation of gradients
51
Figure 5.3: CNN classification results, IROI on the left, and classification probability
on the right. All three images are correctly classified with high probability.
This first experiment is very interesting as the validation accuracy starts at 100%
after the very first epoch, after the network has only seen the data once. It is highly
unlikely that the network has learned a general set of features for distinguishing ships
from iceberg, but rather a systematic difference between the images, such as the
polarization. If the network were to be tested in a situation where ships and icebergs
were recorded in the same polarization it is unlikely that the classification would be
correct.
5.2
GradCAM - Investigation of gradients
The first experiment shows almost too perfect a classification, and it looks like the
model is overfitting to the data. What is interesting is that even the test loss and
accuracy are near perfect. To investigate whether the model learns features which we
would assume to be connected to distinguishing icebergs from ships of if the model is
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
in fact a VV+VH or HH+HV classifier we can use an approach called Gradient-
weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM) by Ramprasaath et. al [36]. Grad-
CAM uses the gradient of a target class and creates a localization heatmap showing
where the neurons in the network are firing the most. Interpreting the model in this
way creates a more transparent classification. The details concerning Grad-CAM are
out of the scope of this study but we’ll outline the general idea. To create a Grad-
CAM the gradient of the score for a given class c with respect to feature maps Ak of
a convolutional layer are computed. The gradients are recorded flowing back through
the network to obtain weights which captures the important of a feature map k for
a target class c. A weighted combination of forward activation maps are performed
and activated through an activation function like ReLU:
Lc
Grad−CAM = ReLU(
∑
k
ac
kAk)
(5.3)
This creates a heat-map the same size as the convolutional feature map it is computed
for. The ReLU activation function is used to create a linear combination of features
that has a positive influence on classification for the class chosen [36]. We can create
a Grad-CAM for different convolutional layers to see where the neurons fire for the
particular layer.
Figure 5.4 shows two examples of activation maps generated by
Grad-CAM for the class Is Iceberg using the baseline network trained previously. Top
row is an iceberg, and here the activations fire in the middle of the image, where the
iceberg is. The bottom row is a ship, here the activations fire almost exclusively in
the background. This makes sense as the heat-maps are generated for the target class
iceberg. When there is an iceberg present, the activations fire around or near it, but
when there is no iceberg, the activations start firing in the background. An interesting
thing to see is that the first Conv Layer is very structured, and then becomes more
diffuse in the later layers as the neurons learns more general features.
5.3
Data Augmentation and Regularization
In an effort to make the classification invariant of the background multiple approaches
has been taken. The first approach is Data Augmentation, as it has been successful in
other classification tasks, for a comparison of methods and their effectiveness tested
on ImageNet, see [29]. We also force upon the network something called dropout.
5.3.1
Data Augmentation
A small structured dataset can become large by augmenting it in various ways. A
single image can be augmented in thousands of ways generating almost endless data
for the training set. We will in this study constrain our self to a set of very generic
augmentations that are likely to appear in the real-world also. Since we are working
with SAR imagery it would be wrong to zoom or scale the image in any way, as
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Data Augmentation and Regularization
53
Figure 5.4: Grad-Cam output for network trained without augmentation and dropout
with full IROI. Top row is an iceberg, bottom row is a ship
the resolution of the cells matter. Rotating the images in anything other than π/2
increments will leave gaps that needs to be filled, so we only rotate images in π/2
increments. In addition to rotating the images, we also flip horizontally and vertically.
Creating augmentations that will not occur in the real world introduces unnecessary
noise. Since the CFAR detection scheme for detecting targets is very rigid it will
produce data that has the same pixel-spacing every time. Feeding the network data
that has a different pixel-spacing will not be beneficial. Figure 5.6 shows a single
image which has been sampled a multitude of times. Being able to draw random
augmented samples from each mini-batch will help the network generalize and avoid
overfitting.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
Figure 5.5: A single SAR image which has been rotated, and flipped in a various
of ways. The images generated are sampled from a Data Augmentation generator
implemented in Keras.
5.3.2
Dropout
Droput is a regularization scheme that works by attaching a dropout probability to
a particular layer. At each training step nodes have a chance to get dropped with
a probability of 1 −p or kept with the inverse probability p. The network will then
in that particular training step lose a percentage of its nodes which can then not
contribute to either the forward or backwards pass. The nodes are restored in the
next training step. The fully connected layer in the classification end of the network
occupies a lot of parameters. Neurons can develop so-called co-dependency which
makes individual neurons weaker in comparison to co-dependant ones. Dropout can
solve this by randomly dropping neurons which can help combat overfitting. As we
saw in the first experiment the training accuracy is high, and the log-loss is low. We
can therefore afford to put a quite aggressive dropout on both the convolutional layers
and the fully-connected ones.
Dropout only temporarily removes neurons during
training. Dropout is determined at each training step before any inference is done,
now forward and backpropagation is carried out as normal, but with a randomly
selected subset of neurons.
At test time, dropout has no effect, and all neurons
will be available in the network. We apply a small dropout of 0.1 in each of the
convolutional layers and a significant dropout of 0.4 in the fully-connected layer.
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Results
55
Figure 5.6: A visual explanation of dropout. Image from ”Dropout: A Simple Way
to Prevent Neural Networks from Overfitting” Nitish Srivastava et. al 2014 [38]
5.4
Results
To see the effect that data augmentation and regularization has on the network we
train two new models. Both models will use data augmentation and dropout, the
main difference is that the fist model uses the entire IROI and the second model
will use a segmented version of IROI, which is also the approach Bentes uses [3].
Using the P values in the region of interest we can create a binary mask that can
be used to segment the targets from the background. This is done in an attempt to
remove information about the sea-clutter, to make the classification more invariant
of polarization. Only the centroid in the middle of the IROI will be used as a mask
to remove multi-target situations. Figure 5.7 shows and example of the segmentation
process.
Figure 5.7: Example showing the IROI being segmented by its P-value mask. Multi
target situations are eliminated (Top and bottom).
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
To summarize, two networks are trained on 327 ships and 310 icebergs with data
augmentation and dropout, one model is trained with the full region of interest and
one with segmented regions. A confusion-matrix, accuracy and log-loss graph and
examples of classification are given below for both models.
Figure 5.8: Classification performance for full regions of interest
Figure 5.9: Accuracy and log-loss for full regions of interest after 30 epochs of training
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Results
57
Figure 5.10: CNN classification results, full IROI on the left, and classification prob-
ability on the right. All three images are correctly classified with high probability.
Figure 5.11: Classification performance for segmented regions of interest
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
Figure 5.12: Accuracy and log-loss for segmented regions of interest after 30 epocs of
training
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Results
59
Figure 5.13: CNN classification results, segmented IROI on the left, and classification
probability on the right. All three images are correctly classified with high probability.
Model
Precision
Recall
f1
CNN - No augmentation
1.0
1.0
1.0
CNN - Full ROI
1.0
0.9615
0.9804
CNN - Segmented ROI
1.0
0.9629
0.9811
Table 5.1: Classification performance of trained CNN’s
From the results in table 5.1 we can see that all three models perform very well on
the data. To investigate the difference between the three approaches we look at the
activation maps using Grad-CAM. The performance-metrics are based on a hold-out
test-set that has not been seen by the network. The test set is approximately 10% of
the training set.
5.4.1
Grad-CAM - Interpretations
Getting such good classification results so early in the training process is suspicious.
The learning curves for the training looks normal, but as we validate without dropout
the accuracy reaches 100% in the very first epoch. This might be due to a hidden
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
property of the data that makes it very easy for the network to distinguish between
ships and icebergs. No validation data is entering the training data, and no cross
contamination has happened. Two models have been trained, one with full regions
of interest and one where the sea-clutter has been removed. Figure 5.14 shows the
Grad-CAM for all three convolutional layers from first to last and also the output
from 25 image filters from the convolutional layer. One easy way to gain insight about
what a convnet is learning is by looking at the output of the convolutional layer and
the activation layer. Unfortunately it is hard to distinguish any flaws with the image
filters or the produced Grad-CAM.
Figure 5.14: Visualizaton of a 5x5 grid of Convolutional Kernels (Top) and Grad-
CAM visualization for the three convolutional layers (Bottom). Convolutional layer
depth increases towards the left. Model is trained with full IROI
The second model, where only the segmented regions of interest are trained on
has more smoothed image filters, which is good as the target of interests is in the
middle of the image. Figure 5.15 shows the Grad-CAM for the model with segmented
regions of interest as well as 25 image filters of the three convolutional filters.
==PAGE:71==
5.5 Transfer Learning
61
Figure 5.15: Visualizaton of a 5x5 grid of Convolutional Kernels (Top) and Grad-
CAM visualization for the three convolutional layers (Bottom). Convolutional layer
depth increases towards the left. Model is trained with segmented IROI
The image filters starts to blur out as the resolution drops in the last convolutional
layer, this is intentional. A sub-conclusion here is that it seems to help the activations
localize the important features if the IROI is segmented, since it does not seem to
decrease test accuracy.
5.5
Transfer Learning
As the data has been collected in different polarizations V V + V H for ships and
HH + HV for icebergs, and no training has been acquired for targets in the same
polarization transfer learning does not benefit classification. All three models trained
perform very well, and further improvement seems to just overfit to the data.
It
would have been exciting to see if features learned in one polarization could carry
over and improve the accuracy in the other, but since accuracy is already quite high,
such improvement would be small. Early transfer learning experiments were carried
out for data provided by Statoil/C-Core through Kaggle [19]. The dataset has been
converted to dB through a sigma-nought σ0 transform. Data collected from Sentinel-
1 has been processed by me in SNAP in accordance to a forum-post on the challenge
page, but the trained model on SNAP processed Sentinel-1 was not able to obtain
more than a 50% accuracy on the Statoil/C-core dataset. This indicates a problem
with the SNAP processing. I was unable to get any further with these experiments.
I would have liked to have trained a network first on the SNAP processed Sentinel-1
data and then used that network as a base for Transfer Learning to improve the
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Ship-Iceberg Discrimination with Convolutional Neural Networks
Statoil/C-core accuracy. Unfortunately technical difficulties prevented me from fin-
ishing the experiment.
Conclusion
We have trained three Convolutional Neural networks on 327 ships and 310 icebergs.
One network was trained without augmentation, regularization or dropout and two
networks were trained with data augmentation and dropout, where one model was
trained with the full region of interest and one with segmented regions.
We saw
surprisingly good results for both precision, recall and f1-scores for all three models.
The gradients of the two later models has been inspected, but we were unable to find
a distinct reason for the good accuracy. I am still not convinced that the network has
truly learnt the difference between ships and icebergs. A dataset with icebergs and
ship in the same polarization is needed to be sure.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and Future
Work
Four sets of Sentinel-1 GRD IW SAR images have been acquired and preprocessed,
three over Skagen, the northernmost tip of Denmark and one over Disko Bay, the
midwest coast of Greenland. A large number of ships and icebergs have been detected
using the CFAR detector based on the test statistic in the complex Wishart distribu-
tion by Conradsen et. al. [8]. The test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution
has been used for CFAR target detection in Sentinel-1 Dual-polarized SAR imagery
successfully. The CFAR detector works well and maintains a constant false alarm
over the entire region, with few false negatives. Using a novel SAR-AIS registration
algorithm based on PCA it was possible to create accurate annotated training data
with correct AIS records attached. It was found that ships that do not get picked
up by the CFAR algorithm, false negatives, are small in size to the point of only
measuring one or two pixels. False positives were either small fishing vessels, ships
too far away from shore or simply missing AIS records.
The classification was carried out with a Convolutional Neural Network, the best
performing model was prone to overfitting as it achieved a perfect classification score
after a few epochs. By inspecting the activation maps and convolutional image filters
it was found that the best model for ship-iceberg discrimination was the model where
the regions of interest had their detected pixels segmented from the background. The
resulting accuracy measures display a recall of 0.96 a precision of 1.0 and an f1 of
0.98. Even if we were not able to determine why the model is very much prone to
overfitting due to the incoherence of the polarizations between classes.
6.1
Future Work
Unfortunately, data has been recorded by ESA in two different polarization which
could be the reason for the optimistic results. Ships are recorded in V V + V H polar-
ization while icebergs up north are recorded in HH +HV . The distributions for these
two polarizations were shown to be significantly different. An obvious extension of
this study is to gather coherent data.
==PAGE:74==
64
6 Conclusion and Future Work
One natural extension is to produce fully polarimetric SAR products from Sentinel-1
and extend the CFAR detection to utilize this. This would take a substantial amount
of work and pre-processing work as multilooking has to be done in a tool such as
SNAP. This can be achieved by combining SLC products in SNAP. The memory
footprint for a single GRD Sentinel-1 product is around 1.8GB, so that is also to be
considered. It was also briefly discussed that the introduction of a garbage or other
class could help the network in situations where the uncertainty between the two
classes is too big. In the current model, it is not possible for the network to predict
don’t know. Introducing a tertiary other class could stop the network from wrongly
classifying a target with an unsure probability.
Another extension is to combine Sentinel-1 SAR data with Sentinel-2 multispectral
data to create a compound classifier. Geocoding can be achieved for both products,
so it would only be a matter of overlapping them and creating a classifier capable of
taking multi-dimensional input. It would be a natural extension for a Convolutional
Neural Network, where the input is represented by a tensor.
We did not get to do transfer learning in this study, if the data had been coher-
ent it would have been exciting to see if features learned from other classification
problems share features. In the future, such experiments could help create a robust
ship-iceberg classifier across polarizations.
The AIS data used in this study has been provided by Søfartsstyrelsen free of charge
[2]. It would be a good idea to test the possibility of gaining AIS data for other re-
gions of the world, to create more varied data with different types of ships, azimuthal
incident angles and weather conditions.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
SentinelSat - Python
API
below is a snippet of Python code used to download data from the Copernicus SciHub.
registration is required for API access [11]. Figure A.1 shows a world map where
footprints can be plotted to.
1 # connect to the API
2 %matplotlib inline
3 from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
4 from sentinelsat import SentinelAPI , read_geojson , geojson_to_wkt
5 from datetime import date
6 from collections import OrderedDict
7
8 from shapely.geometry import Point
9 import geopandas as gpd
10 from geopandas import GeoSeries, GeoDataFrame
11
12 api = SentinelAPI(USER,PASSWORD)
13
14 footprint = geojson_to_wkt(read_geojson('map.geojson'))
15 products = OrderedDict()
16
17 pp = api.query(date = ('20180904', '20180906'),
18
producttype='SLC',
19
sensoroperationalmode="IW",
20
polarisationmode="VV VH",
21
relativeorbitnumber=44,
22
slicenumber=19)
23
24 products.update(pp)
25 footprints = api.to_geodataframe(products)
26
27 # Plot the image footprint
28 fig, ax = plt.subplots()
29 ax.set_aspect('equal')
30 fig.set_size_inches(16, 25)
31
32 world = gpd.read_file(gpd.datasets.get_path('naturalearth_lowres'))
33 world.plot(ax=ax, color='white', edgecolor='black')
34 footprints.plot(ax=ax,edgecolor='blue')
35
==PAGE:76==
66
A SentinelSat - Python API
36 plt.show();
Figure A.1: Map where Sentinel-1 footprint can be visualized
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Sentinel-1 GRD
Metadata
Below is a tracelog for the command gdalinfo S1A_IW_GRDH_1SDV_20180905T170159_20180905T1
which lists the metadata for the Sentinel-1 GRD product S1A_IW_GRDH_1SDV_20180905T170159_20
which is one of the products used in this study
Metadata:
ACQUISITION_START_TIME=2018-09-05T17:01:59.164718
ACQUISITION_STOP_TIME=2018-09-05T17:02:24.163744
BEAM_MODE=IW
BEAM_SWATH=IW
FACILITY_IDENTIFIER=Copernicus S1 Core Ground Segment - DPA
LINE_SPACING=1.000000e+01
MISSION_ID=S1A
MODE=IW
ORBIT_DIRECTION=ASCENDING
ORBIT_NUMBER=23566
PIXEL_SPACING=1.000000e+01
PRODUCT_TYPE=GRD
SATELLITE_IDENTIFIER=SENTINEL-1
SENSOR_IDENTIFIER=SAR
SWATH=IW
Subdatasets:
SUBDATASET_1_NAME=SENTINEL1_DS:S1A_IW_GRDH_1SDV_20180905T170159_20180905T170224_
SUBDATASET_1_DESC=Single band with IW swath and VH polarisation
SUBDATASET_2_NAME=SENTINEL1_DS:S1A_IW_GRDH_1SDV_20180905T170159_20180905T170224_
SUBDATASET_2_DESC=Single band with IW swath and VV polarisation
SUBDATASET_3_NAME=SENTINEL1_DS:S1A_IW_GRDH_1SDV_20180905T170159_20180905T170224_
SUBDATASET_3_DESC=IW swath with all polarisations as bands
Corner Coordinates:
Upper Left
(
0.0,
0.0)
Lower Left
(
0.0,16683.0)
Upper Right (26543.0,
0.0)
==PAGE:78==
68
B Sentinel-1 GRD Metadata
Lower Right (26543.0,16683.0)
Center
(13271.5, 8341.5)
Band 1 Block=26543x1 Type=UInt16, ColorInterp=Undefined
Metadata:
POLARISATION=VH
SWATH=IW
Band 2 Block=26543x1 Type=UInt16, ColorInterp=Undefined
Metadata:
POLARISATION=VV
SWATH=IW
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX C
Example of an AIS
record
Below is an example of an AIS record for a Class A Tanker. This appendix includes the
AIS record as received by the Danish Maritume Authority as well as the corresponding
SAR-AIS registered image and the detected pixels. An estimate of the width and
length of the ship is also given.
Figure C.1 shows the Tanker MMSI 636017876
centered by the detected centroid
Figure C.1: MMSI 636017876 Tanker in VV polarization (left), detected pixels (mid-
dle) and estimated width and length (right)
==PAGE:80==
70
C Example of an AIS record
# Timestamp
2018-09-29 17:00:14
Type of mobile
Class A
MMSI
636017876
Latitude
57.661215
Longitude
10.647780
Navigational status
At anchor
ROT
0.0
SOG
0.5
COG
323.3
Heading
269.0
IMO
9233973
Callsign
D5NC9
Name
MERMAID
Ship type
Tanker
Cargo type
NaN
Width
32.0
Length
179.0
Type of position fixing device
GPS
Draught
7.5
Destination
ES LPA >DK SKA
ETA
29/09/2018 12:00:00
Data source type
AIS
A
143.0
B
36.0
C
20.0
D
12.0
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX D
Python Package
Versions
Below is an edited output of the Python environment used in this study. Only rele-
vant packages are included. Anaconda has been used with conda-forge to make sure
packages are compatible with each other. The python version used is Python 3.5.5.
Fiona==1.7.13
GDAL==2.2.4
geojson==2.4.0
geopandas==0.4.0
h5py==2.7.1
Keras==2.2.2
Keras-Applications==1.0.6
Keras-Preprocessing==1.0.5
numba==0.40.1
numpy==1.15.1
opencv-python==3.4.1.15
pandas==0.23.4
Pillow==5.2.0
plotly==3.2.0
pyproj==1.9.5.1
rasterio==1.0.3
requests==2.19.1
scikit-image==0.13.1
scikit-learn==0.18.1
scipy==1.1.0
seaborn==0.7.1
sentinelsat==0.12.2
tensorboard==1.11.0
tensorflow-gpu==1.11.0
tensorflow-tensorboard==0.1.6
urllib3==1.23
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Lotfi Achiri, Raffaella Guida, and Pasquale Iervolino. “SAR and AIS Fusion for
Maritime Surveillance”. eng. In: 2018 Ieee 4th International Forum on Research
and Technology for Society and Industry (rtsi) (2018), 4 pp., 4 pp. doi: 10.
1109/RTSI.2018.8548352.
[2]
Danish Maritime Authority. FAQ about AIS. url: https://www.dma.dk/
SikkerhedTilSoes/Sejladsinformation/AIS/FAQAIS/Sider/default.aspx.
[3]
Carlos Bentes et al. “Ship-Iceberg discrimination with convolutional neural net-
works in high resolution SAR images”. eng. In: Proceedings of the European
Conference on Synthetic Aperture Radar, Eusar (2016), page 7559347. issn:
21974403.
[4]
S. Brusch et al. “Ship Surveillance With TerraSAR-X”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 49 (March 2011), pages 1092–1103. doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2010.2071879.
[5]
Natural Resources Canada. The scattering matrix. https://www.nrcan.gc.
ca/node/9537. 2016. url: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/node/9537.
[6]
Kumar Chellapilla, Sidd Puri, and Patrice Simard. “High Performance Convo-
lutional Neural Networks for Document Processing”. In: Tenth International
Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition. Edited by Guy Lorette.
http://www.suvisoft.com. Université de Rennes 1. La Baule (France): Suvisoft,
October 2006. url: https://hal.inria.fr/inria-00112631.
[7]
Dan Claudiu Ciresan et al. “Deep, Big, Simple Neural Nets for Handwritten
Digit Recognition”. In: Neural Comput. 22.12 (December 2010), pages 3207–
3220. issn: 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00052. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1162/NECO_a_00052.
[8]
K. Conradsen et al. “A test statistic in the complex Wishart distribution and
its application to change detection in polarimetric SAR data”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 41.1 (January 2003), pages 4–19.
[9]
Danish Maritime Authority - AIS FTP Server. 2019. url: ftp://ftp.ais.dk/
ais_data/.
[10]
J. Deng et al. “ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database”. In:
CVPR09. 2009.
==PAGE:84==
74
Bibliography
[11]
Sentinel Scientific Data Hub ESA Copernicus Program. https : / / scihub .
copernicus.eu/. Accessed: 27-08-18.
[12]
European Space Agency ESA. SNAP. 2018. url: http://step.esa.int/main/
download/.
[13]
Python Software Foundation. 2018. url: https://www.python.org/downloads/
release/python-356/.
[14]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http:
//www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[15]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: CoRR
abs/1512.03385 (2015). arXiv: 1512.03385. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1512.03385.
[16]
Peder Heiselberg and Henning Heiselberg. “Ship-Iceberg Discrimination in Sentinel-
2 Multispectral Imagery by Supervised Classification”. eng. In: Remote Sensing
9.11 (2017), page 1156. issn: 20724292. doi: 10.3390/rs9111156.
[17]
David H. Hubel and Torsten N. Wiesel. “Receptive Fields of Single Neurons in
the Cat’s Striate Cortex”. In: Journal of Physiology 148 (1959).
[18]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep
Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift”. In: Proceedings of
the 32Nd International Conference on International Conference on Machine
Learning - Volume 37. ICML’15. Lille, France: JMLR.org, 2015, pages 448–456.
url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3045118.3045167.
[19]
Statoil/C-CORE - Kaggle. https://www.kaggle.com/c/statoil-iceberg-
classifier-challenge. Accessed: 27-08-18.
[20]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Op-
timization”. In: CoRR abs/1412.6980 (2014). arXiv: 1412.6980. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[21]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “ImageNet Classifica-
tion with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 25. Edited by F. Pereira et al. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2012, pages 1097–1105. url: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-
imagenet-classification-with-deep-convolutional-neural-networks.
pdf.
[22]
Y. et.al LeCun. “Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recogni-
tion”. In: Neural Comput. 1.4 (December 1989), pages 541–551. issn: 0899-7667.
doi: 10.1162/neco.1989.1.4.541. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/neco.
1989.1.4.541.
[23]
Yann LeCun et al. “Efficient BackProp”. In: Neural Networks: Tricks of the
Trade, This Book is an Outgrowth of a 1996 NIPS Workshop. London, UK, UK:
Springer-Verlag, 1998, pages 9–50. isbn: 3-540-65311-2. url: http://dl.acm.
org/citation.cfm?id=645754.668382.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
75
[24]
Jong-Sen Lee and Eric Pottier. Polarimetric Radar Imaging : From basics to ap-
plications. February 2009. isbn: 9781420054989. doi: 10.1201/9781420054989.
[25]
Carlos López-Martínez. Speckle Noise Characterization and Filtering in Polari-
metric SAR Data. ESA ESRIN Talk - Frascati Italy. 2013. url: https://earth.
esa.int/documents/10174/669756/Speckle_Noise_Characterisation.
pdf.
[26]
Henri MaÃ®tre. “Processing of Synthetic Aperture Radar Images”. eng. In: Pro-
cessing of Synthetic Aperture Radar Images (2010). doi: 10.1002/9780470611111.
[27]
J. Martin-de-Nicolas et al. “Robustness of a Generalized Gamma CFAR Ship
Detector Applied to TerraSAR-X and Sentinel-1 Images”. eng. In: Ieee Euro-
con 2015 - International Conference on Computer As a Tool (eurocon) (2015),
pages 370–375.
[28]
Kyoung-Su Oh and Keechul Jung. “GPU implementation of neural networks”.
In: Pattern Recognition 37 (June 2004), pages 1311–1314. doi: 10.1016/j.
patcog.2004.01.013.
[29]
Luis Perez and Jason Wang. “The Effectiveness of Data Augmentation in Image
Classification using Deep Learning”. In: CoRR abs/1712.04621 (2017). arXiv:
1712.04621. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.04621.
[30]
ESA Copernicus Program. https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/user-
guides/sentinel-1-sar/product-overview/polarimetry. Accessed: 27-08-
18.
[31]
OsGeo Project. GDAL - Geospatial Data Abstraction Library. 2019. url: https:
//www.gdal.org/.
[32]
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. “Neurocom-
puting: Foundations of Research”. In: edited by James A. Anderson and Edward
Rosenfeld. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1988. Chapter Learning Represen-
tations by Back-propagating Errors, pages 696–699. isbn: 0-262-01097-6. url:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=65669.104451.
[33]
Juergen Schmidhuber. “Deep Learning in Neural Networks: An Overview”. In:
CoRR abs/1404.7828 (2014). arXiv: 1404.7828. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1404.7828.
[34]
Jesper Schou et al. “CFAR Edge Detector for Polarimetric SAR Images”. eng.
In: (2009). doi: 10.1.1.89.4403.
[35]
J. Schou et al. “CFAR edge detector for polarimetric SAR images”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 41.1 (January 2003), pages 20–
32. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
[36]
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju et al. “Grad-CAM: Why did you say that? Visual
Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradient-based Localization”. In: CoRR
abs/1610.02391 (2016). arXiv: 1610.02391. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1610.02391.
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[37]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks
for Large-Scale Image Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1409.1556 (2014). arXiv:
1409.1556. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
[38]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks
from Overfitting”. In: J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15.1 (January 2014), pages 1929–
1958. issn: 1532-4435. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2627435.
2670313.
[39]
Marcel Wille @willemarcel. SentinelSat Python API. 2018. url: https : / /
github.com/sentinelsat/sentinelsat/.
[40]
X. W. Xing et al. “A fast algorithm based on two-stage CFAR for detecting ships
in SAR images”. eng. In: Apsar 2009 - 2009 Asia-pacific Conference on Synthetic
Aperture Radar, Proceedings (2009). Edited by Wu Shunjun, pages 5374119,
506–509. doi: 10.1109/APSAR.2009.5374119.
[41]
Bing Xu et al. “Empirical Evaluation of Rectified Activations in Convolutional
Network”. In: CoRR abs/1505.00853 (2015). arXiv: 1505.00853. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1505.00853.
[42]
Li Xu et al. “Deep Convolutional Neural Network for Image Deconvolution”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27. Edited by Z. Ghahra-
mani et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014, pages 1790–1798. url: http : / /
papers.nips.cc/paper/5485-deep-convolutional-neural-network-for-
image-deconvolution.pdf.
