==PAGE:1==
Discovery of bioactive natural products from fungi
Master Thesis
Frederik Helmer Nielsen
Supervisors:
Professor Thomas Ostenfeld Larsen
Professor Charlotte Held Gotfredsen
PhD Karolina Subko
February 2019
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Bioengineering - Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Alexander Fleming discovered more than 80 years, that the ﬁlamentous fungi Penicillium notatum
produced an antimicrobial compound which was later characterized as Penicillin. This ﬁnding initi-
ated the revolution of treatment of microbial infections with bio-active natural products. Since then,
ﬁlamentous fungi have proven to be a resource of numerous drug leads with a vast variety of therapeu-
tic applications. Despite of this, the approach of discovering antimicrobial compounds in the phar-
maceutical industry has been focused on synthetic chemistry. However, discovery and development
of antimicrobial compounds has for the past decades not been able to keep up with the threatening
increase in antimicrobial resistance. With numerous species being fully genome sequenced within the
last few years researchers are now realizing the massive biosynthetic potential of fungi and with mil-
lions of unexplored fungal species. This indicates that fungi could still be a promising source of novel
antimicrobials. A key feature of fungal biosynthesis is that the biosynthetic pathways can produce
compounds of structural complexity and diversity unrivalled by traditional synthetic chemistry.
The aim of this project has been to use two different drug discovery approaches in parallel to discover
potentially novel bioactive compounds from ﬁlamentous fungi. The ﬁrst approach was to perform
a bioassay-guided puriﬁcation of a compound with antibacterial properties using explorative solid
phase extraction and fractionation. Bioassays were performed using the Gram-positive bacterium
Bacillus subtillis for screening of a total of 72 extracts and fractions prepared from the eight fun-
gal species. These fungal species were Aspergillus homomorphus, A. turcosus, A. eucalypticola, A.
sulphureoviridis, A. californicus, P. frequentans and P. astrolabium. The second approach was to
use a standard LC-DAD-MS dereplication procedure to identify unknown metabolites from one of
these species, which would then be puriﬁed for NMR characterization. The result of bioassay guided
screening revealed that the all the species were bioactive to some degree, however P. astrolabium and
A. homomorphus showed the highest bioactivity. The fungus P. astrolabium was selected for large
scale production followed by bioguided isolation of the most active compound, which proved to be
the very potent antibacterial compound Xanthoepocin. Furthermore, re-evaluation of the data showed
that another related initially minor metabolite also had strong bioactivity. This compound could how-
ever be demonstrated to be an artefact of Xanthopoecin, in which one of the epoxide rings has been
opened up by methalysis. Dereplication of the fungal extract showed the presence of the known
metabolites Asperphenamate and Meleagrin and several unknown metabolites. Interestingly, P. astro-
labium was shown to produce a number of analogues of the anti-cancer compound Asperphenamate.
Thus, a novel tyrosine asperphenamate analogue was isolated and structurally characterized for the
ﬁrst time from a microorganism. Careful analysis of MS/MS data also indicate further two potentially
novel analogues, one likely with incorporation of tryptophan, which has not previously been seen for
this class of compounds.
I
==PAGE:3==
Resum´e
Alexander Fleming opdagede for mere end 80 ˚ar siden at skimmelsvampen Penicillium notatum
producerede et antimicrobielt stof som senere blev karakteriseret som Penicillin. Denne opdagelse
p˚abegyndte revolutionen i behandlingen af mikrobielle infektioner med bioaktive naturstoffer. Siden
hen har skimmelsvampe vist sig at være en resource for en stor mængde medicin og inspiration til
medicinske stoffer med en bred vifte af terapeutiske anvensdelsesomr˚ader. Dog har lægemiddelin-
dustriens forskning med henblik p˚a opdagelsen af nye antibiotika været fokusered i højere grad p˚a
syntetisk kemi. Det har vist sig at opdagelsen og udviklingen af antibiotika ikke har kunne følge
med den stige antibiotikaresistens trussel. De seneste ˚ar er adskillige arters genomer blevet sekven-
terede og forskere er begyndt at indse det svampes enorme biosyntetiske potentiale, og idet der stadig
ﬁndes millioner uuforskede skimmelsvape tyder p˚a det disse kan være en kilde til nye antimikrobielle
stoffer. Svampe har den egenskab at deres biosyntese kan producere stoffer der har en høj strukturel
kompleksitet og diversitet som ikke kan matches med traditional kemisk syntese.
M˚alet med dette projekt var at bruge to forskellige lægemiddel opdagelsesmetoder i parallel til at
opdage potentielle nye bioaktive stoffer fra skimmelsvampe. Den første metode indebar brugen af
bioguided oprensning til at oprense et stof med antibakterialle egenskaber ved brug af solid phase
extraction og fraktionering. Bioassays blev udført ved brug af den Gram-positive bakterie Bacillus
subtillis til at screene 72 ekstrakter og fraktioner samlet. Disse svampe var Aspergillus homomorphus,
A. turcosus, A. eucalypticola, A. sulphureoviridis, A. californicus, P. frequentans and P. astrolabium.
Den anden metode indebar brugen af LC-DAD-MS data til at dereplikere ukendte metabolitter som
s˚a ville blive oprenset og strukturopklarede med NMR. Svampen P. astrolabium blev valgt til at blive
groet p˚a stor skala efterfulgt af bioguided oprensing, som resulterede i det kendte antibakterielle stof
Xanthoepocin. Derudover, blev der igennem yderligere databehandling vist at en relateret metabolit
ogs˚a viste bioactivite. Dette viste sig at være en artefakt af Xanthoepocin hvor en epoxid ring var
blevet ˚abnet af methanolyse.
Dereplikering af svampe ekstrakterne viste at de kendte stoffer Asperphenamte og Meleagrin og ﬂere
ukendte stoffer. Bemærkelsesværdigt viste P. astrolabium at producere mange analoger af anticancer
stoffet Asperphenamate. En ny tyrosine Asperphenamate analog blev isoleret og strukturopklaret for
første gang fra en mikroorganisme. Yderligere undersøgelse af MS/MS data viste to potentielt nye
analoger, hvor den ene havde en inkorpereret tryptofan hvilket ikke før er blevet set i denne stofklasse.
II
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is credited 30 ECTS points and was carried out from September 2018 to February 2019
at the Technical University of Denmark as the ﬁnal project in obtaining a degree in Pharmaceutical
Design and Engineering. The work presented in this thesis was carried out at the Department of
Biotechnology and Biomedicine of DTU Bioengineering under the supervision of Professor Thomas
Ostenfeld Larsen, PhD student Karolina Subko and Professor Charlotte Held Gotfredsen.
Firstly, I would like to thank my Professor Thomas Ostenfeld Larsen for introducing me to the ﬁeld
of natural product discovery and guidance throughout the project. A special thanks to my daily
supervisor Karolina Subko for her efforts in teaching me how to conduct fungal research and the
analytical methods. I would also like to thank Professor Charlotte Held Gotfredsen for running the
NMR sample and providing assistance in elucidating the structure. Furthermore, I would like to thank
PhD Heiko T. Kiesewalter for preparing the bacterial culture and helping out with the bioassays. I
would also like to thank Tim Vinther for his valuable support during the ﬁnal weeks of the project.
Finally I would like to thank all the members of the group for being helpful by answering questions
and help solve technical issues.
III
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
ACP
acetyl carrier protein
AMP
adenosine monophosphate
AT
acetyl transferase
ATP
denosine triphosphate
BPC
base peak chromatogram
CID
collision induced dissociation
COSY
correlation spectroscopy
CV
column volume
d
doublet
DAD
diode array detector
DCM
dichloromethane
dd
doublet of doublets
δ
chemical shift
DH
dehydratase
EIC
extracted ion chromatogram
Ek
kinetic energy
ESI
electrospray ionisation
EtOAc
ethylacetate
FDA
U.S Food and Drug Administration
GC
gas chromatography
H2BC
heteronuclear 2 bond correlation
HBA
hydrogen bond acceptor
HBD
hydrogen bond donor
HPLC
high performance liquid chromatography
HR
highly reducing
HR-MS
high resolution mass spectrometry
HSQC
heteronuclear single quantum coherence spectroscopy
J
couplings constant
KR
ketoreductase
KS
ketosynthase
LC
liquid chromatography
m/z
mass-to-charge
IV
==PAGE:6==
MAX
mixed-mode anion exchange
MeOH
methanol
MS/MS
Tandem mass spectrometry
NMR
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
NOESY
nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy
NR
nonreducing
NRP
non-ribosomal peptides
NRPS
non-ribosomal peptide synthase
PKS
polyketide synthases
PM
primary metabolite
ppm
parts per million
PR
partially reducing
Q-TOF
quadropole - time of ﬂight
RP
reversed-phase
RT
retention time
s
singlet
SAX
strong anion exchange
SCX
strong cation exchange
SFC
supercritical ﬂuid chromatography
SM
secondary metabolite
SPE
solid phase extraction
t
triplet
T
temperature
TFA
triﬂouroacetic acid
TLC
thin-layer chromatography
TOF
time of ﬂight
tt
triplet of triplets
TWC
total wavelength chromatogram
UHPLC
ultra high performance liquid chromatography
WAX
weak anion exchange
V
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
I
Resum´e
II
Preface
II
Abbreviations
IV
1
Natural product drug discovery
1
1.1
Bioactive compounds derived from fungi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Biosynthesis in fungi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Analytical chemistry in natural product drug discovery
7
2.1
Chromatography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Liquid chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Analytical and semi-preparative liquid chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.3
Solid phase extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Mass spectrometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
Electrospray ionisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
Time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Data processing and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Dereplication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Aim and objectives
21
4
Materials and experimental
22
4.1
Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
UPLC-DAD-MS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.2
Semi-preparative fractionation and puriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.3
Solvents and chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.4
NMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.5
Software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Experimental
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.1
Initial cultivation of fungi and extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
VI
==PAGE:8==
4.2.2
Preparative fractionation of crude extracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.3
Initial bioactivity screening against Bacillus subtillis . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Large scale cultivation of Penicillium Astrolabium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.1
Growth, extraction and work-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.2
Bioactivity screening against Bacillus subtillis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.3
Solid phase extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.4
Preparative fractionation of Penicillium astrolabium crude extract . . . . . .
28
4.3.5
Semi-preparative fractionation of S3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.6
Puriﬁcation of Xanthoepocin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.7
Puriﬁcation of Xanthoepocin artefact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.8
Puriﬁcation of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue from dereplication guided
discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.9
Methanolysis of Xanthoepocin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.10 Plug extraction of Penicillium astrolabium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Results and discussion
31
5.1
Initial screening of fungi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Bioassay directed puriﬁcation of Penicillium astrolabium extract . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.1
Solid phase extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.2
Isolation of bioactive compound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.3
Dereplication of bioactive compounds in DCM fraction . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Dereplication of metabolites in large scale Penicillium astrolabium crude extract . . .
38
5.3.1
Dereplication of metabolites in crude extract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3.2
Dereplication of peak 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3.3
Dereplication of peak 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3.4
Dereplication of Asperphenamate analogues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3.5
NMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Conclusion
51
7
Future perspectives
52
8
References
53
9
Appendix
61
9.1
NMR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
VII
==PAGE:9==
9.1.1
1H NMR of Asperphenamate tyrosin analogue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
9.1.2
DQF-COSY of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9.1.3
DQF-COSY of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.1.4
HSQC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
9.1.5
HSQC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9.1.6
H2BC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
9.1.7
HMBC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
9.1.8
HMBC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
9.1.9
13C NMR of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
9.2
Results of initial bioassays of the 8 fungi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
9.2.1
Tabulated overview of initial screening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:10==
1
Natural product drug discovery
Historically drugs derived from natural products (NPs) have had a massive impact on modern medicin,
with over half of all small molecule approved drugs from 1981 to 2014 being either unaltered NPs
or derived from NPs as shown in ﬁgure 1[1]. This includes semisynthetic derivatives and drugs
containing the pharmacophore of a NP[1].
Figure 1: Approved small molecule drugs from 1981-2014. Botanical drugs are deﬁned by the FDA
as complex mixtures of plant, algae or fungal origin with no distinct active ingredients i.e. dietary
supplements[2]. Figure adapted from Newman et al 2016[1]
Despite the success of NPs in drug discovery, the approach of drug discovery has been shiftet from
NPs to synthetic compounds derived from combinatorial chemistry. These compounds can be synthe-
sized in massive libraries which are suitable for high-throughput screening for bioactivity. However,
since the 1980’s there has been a signiﬁcant decrease in the number of drug leads and approved drugs
as shown in ﬁgure 2[3]. The shift towards a more synthetic approach to drug discovery has been
speculated to be one of the potential causes of this decrease[4].
A pressing issue which could be affected by this decline in the efﬁciency of drug discovery, is the
emergence of the increasing antimicrobial resistance according to a recent report by the World Health
Organization[5]. On this basis, there is still an argument to be made to continue investigating NPs,
since these have been purposely developed by the organisms to posses bioactivity[6; 4]. In addition,
one key feature of NPs is that they posses a vast chemical and structural diversity which cannot be
matched by synthetic libraries[7; 4].
1
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2: Number of drugs approved in the US from 1981 to 2007. From Li et al 2009[3].
A major part of the NPs are the secondary metabolites (SMs). SMs are synthesized by various or-
ganisms and are differentiated from primary metabolites by not being essential for the survival of
the organism under optimal conditions. SMs are generally used by the organism for communication,
reproduction, competition with other species, and defense against other pathogenic species[8]. A his-
torically important source of SMs are fungi. SMs from fungi have repeatedly been shown to posses
high bioactivity and fungi has for decades been a source of revolutionizing medicines[9].
1.1
Bioactive compounds derived from fungi
Fungi is a highly diverse kingdom of eukaryotic organisms, with the largest subcategory being the
ﬁlamentous fungi. Today, over 100,000 fungal species have been described, and it has been esti-
mated that several million exit[10; 11]. Fungi are found in almost every environment and posses
high metabolic diversity, as they are able to utilize a large variety of carbon and nitrogen sources[12].
Furthermore, can to survive in a large span of pH-ranges, temperatures and salt concentrations. This
extraordinary ability is the product of millions of years of adaptations. An interesting adaptation, is
the ability of the fungi to produce a vast range of SMs which are used for a variety of purposes. These
include enabling the fungi to overcome environmental challenges such as changes in the nutrient sup-
ply, pH and temperature but also competition from other microorganisms[13]. It is therefore possible
to manipulate with the growth conditions of the fungi to trigger these biosynthetic pathways[14].
Fungal SMs contain an enormous structural diversity as they are synthesized through many different
bio-synthetic pathways[15; 14]. Due to this vast structural diversity within fungal SMs, they provide
a large resource of bioactive compounds exempliﬁed by the revolutionizing discovery of the antibac-
terial properties of a compound from Penicillium notatum in 1928 by Alexander Fleming which was
later characterized as Penicillin[16; 9]. Since then, several compounds with antimicrobial properties
2
==PAGE:12==
have been discovered from fungi making them the second greatest contributor of antibiotics after acti-
nomycetes (38% from fungi versus 45% from actinomycetes)[17]. Numerous other revolutionizing
drugs and drug leads have also been found in fungi, with the immunosuppressive gliotoxin and an-
tilipidemic statins such as Mevastatin being prominent examples[9]. Furthermore, with the immense
development of genome sequencing, the presence of several cryptic gene clusters encoding SMs are
being discovered. These cryptic gene clusters can be triggered by enviromental cues and have the po-
tential to produce a vast variety of compounds[18]. Researches are therefore realizing the enormous
biosynthetic potential of fungi[19; 20]. Due to the vast diversity of fungi and the fact that only a tiny
fraction of species have been described, there is still a huge untapped potential to discover bioactive
compounds of interrest from fungi[21; 20].
1.2
Biosynthesis in fungi
The metabolism of fungi consists of two main systems, namely the primary and the secondary
metabolism. The primary metabolism is responsible for essential processes within the fungi i.e.
growth, development and reproduction and is similar between species. The primary metabolites can
then together with compounds in the environment be further metabolized enzymatically into SMs.
The secondary metabolism differs between species which has given rise to the use of secondary
metabolites in chemotaxonomy which has been shown to be a powerful tool in the classiﬁcation of
fungi[22]. The biosynthesis of secondary metabolites can be divided into four main classes namely
the polyketides, non-ribosomal peptides (NRPs), terpenes and alkaloids. Polyketides and NRPs are
the most common in fungi and will be described in detail in the following sections.
Polyketides
Polyketides is the most abundant class of SMs in fungi and contain high structural diversity along
with high bioactivity toward various targets[23]. Famous examples of antibiotic polyketide drugs
include streptomycin and erythromycin[24]. Interestingly, fungal polyketide compounds had a hit-
rate of 0.03% compared to <0.001% of synthetic high-throughput libraries, and accounted for 20%
of the revenue of the pharmaceutical industry in 2005[25; 26].
Polyketides have the same biosynthetic origin and are generally synthesized from derivatives of mal-
onic acid and acetic acid. The enzymes responsible for the biosynthesis are the polyketide synthases
(PKSs) which are closely related to the enzymes used in fatty acid synthesis[27]. PKSs are divided
into three broad categories namely type I, II and III. PKS type I are massive multienzymes with the
highest versatility of the three categories. The PKS type I is built up of different domains responsible
for the biosynthesis, which can be either modular or iterative. The modular PKS type I, are found
3
==PAGE:13==
in bacteria and consists of different modules that each are responsible for a single addition to the
polyketide chain. In contrast, the modules of iterative PKS type I are used for several additions to
the polyketide chain. Iterative Type I is the predominant PKS found in fungi. In fungi, three types
of iterative PKSs are present which are classiﬁed depending on their catalytic activity, namely the
nonreducing (NR), partially reducing (PR) and highly reducing (HR)[27; 23].
Figure 3: Simpliﬁed illustration of the polyketide synthesis[27]
The main domains making up the iterative PKS type I are the acetyl transferase (AT), acetyl carrier
protein (ACP) and ketosynthase (KS) domains. In its essence, the iterative polyketide synthesis is a
series (iterations) of Claisen condensations forming the polyketide chain and various modiﬁcations.
As shown in ﬁgure 3, KS is responsible for building up the backbone of the polyketide by catalysing
the carbon bond formation through Claisen condensations of a starter unit with either a polyketide
chain or extender units (typically linked to ACP or coenzyme A). AT is responsible for the loading
of the extender units (malonate-CoA) onto the ACP[23]. The modiﬁcations of the polyketide chain
is performed during each iteration by the ketoreductase (KR), dehydratase (DH) and enoyl reductase
(ER) domains. As illustrated in the ﬁgure, there are multible ways of which the polyketide can be
formed depending on the number of iterations and modiﬁcations performed. This is a simple form
of polyketide formation, however polyketides can during iterative process cyclise, have amino acids
incorperated or be decorated through i.e. glycolisation or methylation[23; 27].
4
==PAGE:14==
Non-ribosomal peptides
Some of the most well known examples of NRPs are Penicillin G and cephalosporins[28]. These are
made from amino acids by the enzymes non-ribosomal peptide synthases (NRPSs). NRPs also contain
great chemical diversity, but instead of obtaining this diversity through post-translational modiﬁca-
tions like ribosomal peptides, it is through transformations by the domains of the NRPSs. Further-
more, NRPs can by synthesized using both both L- and D-stereoisomers of the 22 standard amino
acids or non-proteinogenic amino acids which leads to great variety in the chemical structure[29].
NRPSs are huge enzymes with multible functionalities containing various domains including adeny-
lation domains (A), thiolation by peptidyl carrier protein domains (PCP) and condensation domains
(C)[30]. A simpliﬁed mechanism of the synthesis of NRPs is shown in ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4: Simpliﬁed mechansim of non-ribosomal peptide synthesis. Figure adapted from Evans, S.
B. 2010[31]
The A domain of the NRPS selects the amino acids from which the peptide is made up of. This is
done by catalyzing the reaction between the amino acid and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to form
an aminoacyl adelytate by a nucleophillic substitution reaction. Next, the aminoacyl adelytate is
coupled to the PCP through thiolation by a serine residue hereby liberating adenosine monophosphate
(AMP) to form an aminoacyl thioester. The PCP functions similarly to the ACP domain in polyketide
5
==PAGE:15==
synthesis, since this is the attachment point on which the backbone of the chain is formed. The
formation of the peptide chain is formed by adjacent aminoacyl thioesters on the PCP. The C domain
can then catalyze the condensation of these forming the peptide bond. This cycle of adenylation,
thiolation and condensation can then be repeated to increase the number of amino acid residues in
the peptide chain, or the process can be terminated by liberating the peptide from the PCP through
intramolecular cyclization of the peptide or hydrolysis by a thioesterase domain[32].
6
==PAGE:16==
2
Analytical chemistry in natural product drug discovery
Analytical chemistry is a key element in natural product drug discovery. Fungal extracts are highly
complex and not immediately suited for high-throughput screening without extensive sample prepa-
ration. However, advances in fractionation, puriﬁcation, and characterization techniques has allowed
researchers to efﬁciently separate, isolate and characterize compounds within the extracts, making it
possible to create large libraries of fungal compounds for screening[3]. Today, several different strate-
gies of natural product drug discovery exists, with two common approaches being through bioassay-
guided puriﬁcation and dereplication guided or a combination of both[33; 34].
Bioassay-guided is an approach where an extract is fractionated and tested in a bioassay. The fractions
showing biological activity in the bioassay are then further fractionated. This process is repeated until
the compounds responsible for the bioactivity are isolated and characterized. Dereplication guided is
the process of identifying known and novel compounds within the extract which can then be isolated,
characterized, and tested in bioassays. This is accomplished by using advanced chromatography and
high-resolution mass spectrometric techniques[33]. This method is useful since it can quickly give
the researcher an indication of the metabolic potential of the fungus and can be used to complement
other strategies. This could i.e. be to select fungal strains for bioassay-guided puriﬁcation to avoid
rediscovering known compounds. A downside to dereplication guided drug discovery is that there is
a possibility of not detecting a novel compound due to low abundance or poor ability to ionize[33].
Extraction of secondary metabolites
Extracting the SMs from the media used for fungal growth is a key step for natural product drug
discovery. The extraction protocol must be selected carefully to make sure that a reasonable amount
and diversity of molecules can be extracted[35]. Considerations such as temperature, miscibility,
selectivity and reactivity of the solvent mixture used for extraction, must therefore be made. The PMs
fatty acids and carbohydrates are generally apolar and polar respectively, with SMs falling in between.
However, there is a large overlap due to the structural diversity of both PMs and SMs. As the majority
of natural products contain ionizable functional groups, it is important to choose a solvent system with
a suitable pH to ensure extraction[36; 37]. Therefore, when using a water immiscible organic solvent
for extraction, a weak acid like formic acid is often added to ensure protonation of acids to increase
the partioning into the organic phase. As fungi are often grown on solid agar media, extraction can
also be complemented with maceration and ultrasound techniques to increase the surface area, and
thus extraction rate[35].
7
==PAGE:17==
2.1
Chromatography
Chromatography is a key technique widely utilized in natural product drug discovery and is used to
separate, purify and identify components in complex mixtures[38; 35]. Chromatography is a highly
versatile tool that is utilized within all stages of drug discovery and can be used for a variety of
compounds classes. Most notably with natural product drug discovery are proteins, peptides and
small molecules[1]. Several different types of chromatography exists as shown in ﬁgure 5.
Figure 5: Overview of chromatographic methods. Figure adapted from C.F., Poole 2013[39]
The basis of chromatography consist of a stationary and a mobile phase. Separation of the molecules
in the mixtures is achieved by taking advantage of their physical and physicochemical properties
which affects their ability to be retained by the stationary phase. These properties can be for an exam-
ple be size, polarity, charge or speciﬁc groups within the molecule able to interact with the stationary
phase[38]. The stationary phase is attached to what is referred to as the chromatographic bed. A ﬁg-
ure showing the different types of chromatograﬁc beds is shown in ﬁgure 6. These vary depending on
the type of chromatography, and can be split into two main types namely plane and column. Columns
can then either be open tubular capillaries or packed tubes. These are used for gas, liquid and super-
critical ﬂuid chromatography (SFC). Plane chromatographic beds are used in paper chromatography
or thin-layer chromatography (TLC), which can only be used for liquid chromatography (LC).
8
==PAGE:18==
Figure 6: Overview of chromatographic beds
The three types of chromatophaﬁc beds. Packed column (A), open tubular capillary (B) and plane
(C). The grey within these show where the stationary phase resides. Figure adapted from Meyer, V.
2013 [40]
The mobile phase can either be gasous, a supercritical ﬂuid or a liquid. In liquid or supercritical
ﬂuid chromatography the mobile phase is used to decrease or disrupt the interactions between the
molecules and the stationary phase allowing the molecules to move through the stationary phase,
whereas in gas chromatography the mobile phase is simply carrier gas with no direct effect on sep-
aration [38]. This is because retention in gas chromatography (GC), is generally determined by the
boiling point of the molecules and their afﬁnity for the stationary phase[39].
The chromatographic technique used in this project is liquid chromatography which will be elaborated
on the the following section 2.1.1.
2.1.1
Liquid chromatography
LC is a highly versatile tool and gives rise to a number of separation techniques including adsorption,
ion-exchange and reversed-phase as shown in ﬁgure 5. Choosing chromatographic techniques for
separating the complex fungal extracts can be assisted by performing solid phase extraction (SPE)
which is a small scale method to test a large variety of column materials[41].
An extensively utilized method in natural product drug discovery is column chromatography which
is used for fractionation, puriﬁcation and analytical purposes[42]. The stationary phase is most com-
monly solid and contained within the column. Inside the column, the stationary phase is covalently
linked to microporous silica particles. The pores in the silica particles are large enough to allow sol-
vent and compounds to pass through. However, the ﬂow of the mobile phase through the pores is
largely stagnent which causes compound diffusion through the pores to be slow. This can ultimately
lead to peak broadening in the chromatogram[39]. Therefore, mesoporous silica particles are com-
monly used for analytical and puriﬁcation purposes. These are often referred to as solid core, and
can in some cases increase separation [43; 19]. The size of the particles can also vary which impacts
the separation efﬁciency. For analytical and puriﬁcation purposes a small particle size is therefore
used[39]. Furthermore, columns used for analytical and puriﬁcation purposes are often smaller in
9
==PAGE:19==
diameter. Therefore, the combination of smaller particle size and column diameter requires these to
be performed under a high pressure.
The most commonly utilized chromatopgraphic technique is reversed-phase, as this is an efﬁcient
method of separating complex mixtures such as fungal extracts. The principle of reversed-phase is
based on adsorbtion and partitioning. The stationary phase is nonpolar, generally octadecyl (C18)
aliphatic chains, which can interact with compounds through Van der Wall forces. The mobile phase
is an aqueous-organic gradient where the concentration of the organic component is increased over
the gradient[42]. The mobile phase displaces the molecules from the stationary phase, which allows
the molecules to move through the column[39]. Polar molecules will partition into the mobile phase
at earlier points in the gradient than apolar molecules due to weaker interactions with the stationary
phase[40]. Another commonly used stationary phase in reversed-phase chromatography is phenyl
hexyl. The principles of elution are similar to C18 however, this type of stationary phase has the
added beneﬁt that it can retain compounds with aromatic moeties more efﬁciently due to π −π
interactions. This increases the retention of aromatic compounds compared to non-aromatic[42]. In
order to detect the compounds eluting from the liquid chromatography column, this is coupled with a
ultraviolet–visible (UV-vis) light absorption detector.
UV-vis detection
Some compounds absorb both light from the UV and vis spectrum. The wavelength of the light ab-
sorbed by the compound depends on the unsaturation and conjugation of the compound. The parts of
a molecule reponsible for absorbtion of UV-vis light are referred to as the chromophores[44]. Fur-
thermore, some heteroatoms also play a role in the how a compound absorbs light. In the case of
natural products, SMs like polyketides or NRPs often have conjugated chromophore systems and will
show distinct UV-vis absorbtion patterns. Therefore, combining a UV-vis detector with the chro-
matographic column can provide valuable information about the molecules being eluted and help
with structure elucidation[45; 19].
In this project a diode array detector (DAD) was used. In principle the DAD is composed of a se-
ries of detectors each responsible for detecting light of a small wavelength interval. The eluent of
the chromatographic column is subjected to light which passes through the eluent and into a beam
splitter. Here the light beam is split into several small wavelength intervals which passes on to the
corresponding detectors. The wavelengths absorbed by molecules in the eluent will not be detected
which will show in a chromatogram[37]. Plotting the total absorption of the eluent over time gives
rise to the total wavelength chromatogram (TWC). Additionally, due to the DAD’s ability to detect ab-
sorbtion of speciﬁc wavelengths it is possible to extract certain wavelengths of interest in an extracted
10
==PAGE:20==
wavelength chromatogram (EWC).
2.1.2
Analytical and semi-preparative liquid chromatography
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and ultra high performance liquid chromatography
(UHPLC) are advanced types of chromatographic methods which are widely used in natural product
drug discovery for semi-preperative and analytical purposes respectively. Both of these methods are
most commonly used in reversed-phase chromatography, and are performed under higher pressure
which allows for better separation. This higher pressure is partly due to the use of smaller particles
and a narrow column diameter[41]. A schematic overview of a HPLC system is shown in ﬁgure 7.
Figure 7: Overview of a HPLC system from Waters[46]
In this system the sample is loaded onto the column through the injector. Solvent reservoirs A and B
each have a solvent pump and a degassing system. Solvents will generally contain dissolved gasses
which can cause bubbling in the mobile phase which interferes with the system. Therefore, a non-
soluble gas like helium is pumped through the solvents before the run is initiated. The solvent is then
pumped to a mixer prior to entering the column, which allows for tuning of the gradient. The column
can be kept at ambient temperature or in a column heater. Heating the column decreases the viscosity
of the mobile phase and allows for faster run times at the same pressure. Futhermore, it ensures that
retention times (RT) are reproducible independent on ambient temperature[47]. For semi-preperative
HPLC, as elution is occuring the DAD detector can be used to monitor in real-time the UV absorbtion
of the eluent, this allows for collection of compounds with destinct UV-absorbtions. For analytical
UPLC, after the eluent has passed the DAD detector it is either discarded or passed on to a mass
spectrometer[47].
11
==PAGE:21==
2.1.3
Solid phase extraction
In order to develop a chromatographic method for separating complex mixtures of i.e. fungal extracts,
SPE is a useful tool as it is a fast inexpensive small scale method. The types of SPE column materials
commonly used include adsorption, reversed phase, size-exclusion and various ion exchange mate-
rials. The basis of SPE is running the complex mixtures in parallel through a variety of small scale
columns. SPE also has the beneﬁt for natural product discovery that it can provide valuable infor-
mation about the physicochemical properties of compounds within the mixture i.e. ionizeable groups
and polarity[36]. This information is extremely useful prior to developing a puriﬁcation protocol.
Combining this method with bioassays can help increase the concentration of some compounds in
the extracts which may only be active at higher concentration. Furthermore SPE can help simplifying
dereplication by separating co-eluting compounds[36]. In this project reversed-phase, adsorption and
ion exchange materials were used and the two latter will be described.
Ion exchange
Figure 8: Ion exchange column materials for SPE. Strong anion exchange (SAX) and strong cation
exchange (SCX).
In 2010 the pKa values of the 34390 compounds present in a database for natural products (AntiBase
2008) were calculated[36]. This showed that 52% of the compounds contained ionizable funtionalities
in the pH range 2-11 with 44% containing acidic funtionalities, 17% basic funtionalities and 9%
containing both. Ion exchange chromatography can therefore be a beneﬁcial chromatographic tool
since it provides information about ionizeable groups and provide an efﬁcienct separation of neutral
and charged compounds. Simple strong anion exchange stationary phases like SAX, typically contain
a quartenary amine moeity attached to the silica bead via a short aliphatic linker as shown in ﬁgure
8. The amine will interact strongly though ionic bonds with an anion. The sample is therefore
often treated with base prior to addition to the column to deprotonate acidic funtionalities. After
sample loading, the column is ﬂushed with a pH neutral mobile phase thereby eluting compounds
with unionizeable and basic funtionalities. Increasing the pH of the mobile phase will allow the
compounds with acidic funtionalities to protonate and be eluted.
12
==PAGE:22==
In strong cation exchange stationary phases like SCX the same princibles regarding retention apply
except with cations instead of anions. SCX contains a benzylic sulfonic acid moeity as shown in
ﬁgure 8 with a pKa below 0 and therefore maintains a negative charge[48].
Figure 9: Mixed mode ion exchange column materials for SPE. Mixed mode anion exchange (MAX)
and weak anion exchange (WAX). A protonated specie of WAX is shown. Both of these materials
have reversed-phase properties.
The ion exchange properties can also be complemented by incorporating reversed-phase properties
into the stationary phase. Examples of this are MAX and WAX shown in ﬁgure 9. These are both
mixed mode anion exchange columns. Here the linker between the ionic group and the silica bead
contains aliphatic chains with aromic moeities which can interact with the molecules through hy-
drophobic interactions such as Van der Wall or π −π interactions. This means the retained acids on
the column can be eluted into several fractions. A key difference between the two is MAX contains
a permanently charged quartenary amine while WAX contains tertiary and secondary amines. WAX
can be used to retain strong acids, as these can protonate the secondary or tertiary amines. Addition
of base to the sample prior to loading is therefore not necessary for WAX compared to MAX[36].
Adsorption
Figure 10: Adsorption materials column used for SPE
Another commonly used type of E-SPE column material uses alcohols or amines exempliﬁed by the
NH2 and diol stationary phases shown in ﬁgure 10. These can bind polar compounds in the mixture
through hydrogen bonding. Hydrogen bonds are weaker than ionic bonds but stronger than Van der
Wall interactions. The principle here is that a proton attached to a signiﬁcantly more electronegative
13
==PAGE:23==
atom such as nitrogen or oxygen, will be electron deﬁcient and therefore carry a transient positive
charge, referred to as the hydrogen bond donor (HBD). This allows the hydrogen to interact inter-
molecularly with atoms in a molecule that are electron rich and therefore carry a transient negative
charge which is referred to as the hydrogen bond acceptor (HBA). This could be an atom with for
example a lone pair. Therefore, the alcohols or amine groups in the stationary phase can act both
as HBAs and HBDs. Compounds retained on this column are able to hydrogen bond efﬁciently to
the column material. The compounds are eluted from the column by changing the mobile phase to a
solvent which can displace the compounds.
2.2
Mass spectrometry
Identifying the molecular masses of the compounds present in complex fungal extracts is an ex-
tremely powerful tool in natural product drug discovery. These extracts contain hundreds of different
compounds, therefore isolating each compound for nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR)
characterization is extremely time consuming and compounds might be difﬁcult to isolate in high
enough quantities[19]. Today, high resolution mass spectrometers can measure the mass of a com-
pound with an accuracy of <5 ppm, making it possible to deduce the chemical formula[19; 49].
Furthermore, tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) allows for the analysis of the fragmentation pat-
terns of molecules which can reveal structural information. MS and MS/MS can be used to help
elucidate the structure of a novel molecule or conﬁrm the identity of a known molecule to a certain
degree[49]. This is part of the dereplication process which is described in section 2.3.1.
In order for molecules to move through the mass spectrometer and ﬁnally be detected, it has to be
charged. A mass spectrometer therefore contains a ionization source at the inlet. From here the
ionized molecules can travel through the instrument to the detector where the number of ionized
molecules is counted[50].
In this project a mass spectrometer using soft electrospay ionisation (ESI), with a quadropole mass
ﬁlter and a time-of-ﬂight (TOF) ion separator was used and will be elaborated on. A schematic
overview of the system is shown in ﬁgure 11.
14
==PAGE:24==
Figure 11: Overview of a quadrupole time-of-ﬂight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer. Figure from Is-
brandt, T., 2018[51].
2.2.1
Electrospray ionisation
Many methods of ionizing the molecules exists. For natural product discovery, a popular method is
ESI, as this can be used on the eluent of the chromatographic column since most of the compounds
are ionized in the eluent. Additionally, its ability to perform ”soft” ionisation decreases the in-source
fragmentation making it easier to identify the protonated [M+H]+ ion[49]. The purpose of the ESI is
to transform the ions in the eluent solution into the gas phase, as the mass spectrometer functions in a
vacuum. Figure 12 shows a schematic of the electrospray ionisation process. ESI consists of aerosol
formation through nebulization followed by desolvation and evaporation of the ions[52].
Figure 12: Electrospray ionisation process exempliﬁed with cations. Figure from Banerjee et al
2012[52]
Nebulization is done by leading the sample through a capillary into an evaporation chamber. At the
end of the capillary a large electric voltage is applied causing the liquid to be vaporized into tiny
charged droplets of solvated ions. Within the evaporation chamber is a ﬂow of N2 gas which causes
the solvent to evaporate. As the solvent evaporates, the droplets decrease in size while the charge
density increases. This can cause the molecules that did not ionize in the eluent to ionize. The high
15
==PAGE:25==
charge density increases the repulsive forces within the droplets until these ﬁnally surpass the surface
tension of the droplet creating a ”Coulomb explosion”[52]. This cycle happens repeatably until all
solvent has evaporated and bare ions are obtained. The electric potential then leads the ions into the
mass spectrometer. The direction of the electric potential determines whether anions or cations are
passed on to the mass spectrometer[52; 49].
2.2.2
Time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry
Upon entering the mass spectrometer, the beam of ions is focused through ion funnels. The focused
ion beam is then passed through the quadropol and collision cell to the TOF separator. As shown in
ﬁgure 11, the TOF consists of a pulser, a reﬂectron and a detector. The pulser applies a perpendicular
pulse which accelerates the ions through the ﬂight tube giving the ions the same amount of kinetic
energy (Ek). At the end of the ﬂight tube the reﬂectron, also refered to as an electrostatic mirror,
consists of several hoops which have an increasingly higher electric potential as the distance toward
the pulser increases. The ions are therefore reﬂected toward the detector. The formula for kinetic
energy is 1
2mv2 where m is the mass and v is the velocity. Since all ions are applied the same kinetic
energy, their velocity and therefore time to reach the detector is solely dependent on the mass which
can then be calculated. The reﬂectron also has another purpose. In practice, ions closer to the pulser
will experience a higher acceleration than those further away. This causes some ions of the same
mass to have higher energies, and travel faster through the ﬂight tube. However, these will also
penetrate further into the reﬂectron. This allows the ions of same mass but slightly different energies
to ”catch up”, and ultimately ions of the same mass will reach the detector simultanously[53]. This
process happens at such a rapid rate that it can occur many times during the elution of each individual
molecule from the chromatographic column. This gives rise to tandem mass spectrometry[54].
Tandem mass spectrometry
The quadrupole has the ability to ﬁlter ions based on their mass-to-charge ratio[54]. It consists of four
parallel rods to which a voltage is applied generating a magnetic ﬁeld with a speciﬁc radiofrequency.
Ions of different m/z values will resonate within this magnetic ﬁeld at different radiofrequencies.
It is therefore possible to tune the instrument to only allow a speciﬁc m/z through as nonresonant
ions will collide with the rods and not pass through[53]. Following the selected ion moves into the
collision cell where it is collided with inert gas molecules to induce fragmentation. This process is
called collision induced dissociation (CID). The fragments then move onto to the TOF separator and
detector generating the MS/MS spectra[53].
16
==PAGE:26==
2.3
Data processing and analysis
2.3.1
Dereplication
Dereplication is a key step in natural product drug discovery, as it allows the researcher to identify
known and potential unknown compounds in e.g. fungal extracts[55]. This is especially useful in
bioactivity guided drug discovery as this analysis can reveal if the observed bioactivity can be assigned
to a known bioactive compound within the extract. Thereby minimizing the risk of rediscovering
known compounds[55; 34]. Dereplication guided natural product drug discovery is an alternative or
complementary method to the bioactivity guided method, as unknown compounds can be identiﬁed,
isolated and tested in an array of bioactivity assays[56]. The process of dereplication is based on
LC-DAD-MS analysis of crude- or fractionated extracts combined with database searches[57].
The output of the mass spectrometer is visualized as a total ion chromatogram (TIC) which is a plot
of the summation of ions from each scan plotted versus time. From this a base peak chromatogram
(BPC) can be extracted. This contains the sum of the most intense (highest abundance) ions from
each scan plotted versus time. This gives a smoother baseline making it easier to identify signiﬁcant
peaks[58]. Investigating the peak itself gives rise to the mass spectrum which shows an average of
the ions at a speciﬁc RT. As mentioned previously, fungal extracts contain a multitude of molecules
and the mass spectrum will often show the ion of interest along with a variety of co-eluting ions.
Compounds eluting at very similar RTs will show as a single peak in the BPC. To differentiate between
the two compounds, a deconvolution procedure can be performed. Here, extracted ion chromatograms
(EICs) of the ions in question are extracted. It is then possible to determine the exact RT of the
speciﬁc ions. The task is then to identify the molecular ion ([M+H]+) of the ion of interest, this can
be a daunting task as this is not always the most intense ion present. This can be attributed to both
in-source fragmentation, the loss of H2O or CO2 or formation of di- or trimeric ions. During the
ionisation process, the molecules can form adducts, with the most common in positive mode being
[M+Na]+, [M+K]+ and [M+NH4]+ and in negative mode [M-HCOO]- and [M-Cl]-. Furthermore, ions
have multiple charges with an example being a double protonated ion ([M+2H]2+). However, this
can easily be recognized since there is a peak between protonated adduct and the ﬁrst isotope peak
separated by 0.5 Da[49]. This peak corresponds to the A+1 double protonated ion.
These adducts can help in identifying the molecular ion, as their occurrence in natural products has
been described in the literature[57]. Common losses and adduct formations of natural products is
shown in table 1.
The molecular formula can then be calculated based on this information. To accompany this infor-
17
==PAGE:27==
ESI+
ESI-
Neutral losses
Adduct
Relative to
Observed (%)
Adduct
Relative to
Observed (%)
Relative to
Observed(%)
[M+H]+ (Da)
[M-H]+ (Da)
[M+H]+ (Da)
[M+H]+
88.7
[M-H]-
69.4
H2O
18.0106
33.0
[M+Na]+
21.9820
21.0
[M-HCOO]-
46.0055
36.4
CO2
43.9898
4.9
[M+NH4]+
17.0265
20.0
[M-Cl]-
35.9767
13.6
[M+H+MeCN]+
41.0265
26.7
[M-HCOONa]-
67.9874
9.9
[M+Na+MeCN]+
63.0085
20.2
Table 1: Overview of common adducts and neutral losses in positive and negative electrospray ioni-
sation and their observed occurrence. Adapted from Nielsen et al 2011[57].
mation, some elements have characteristic isotope ratios which can narrow down the list of possible
molecular formulas. Especially chlorine and bromine have signiﬁcant A+2 isotopes generating char-
acteristic M+2 peaks in the mass spectrum[49].
One of the last steps in dereplication is establishing if the ion of interrest has previously been de-
scribed in the litterature. This can be done through searching various databases, which in the case of
this project were AntiBase 2017, Reaxys and an internal MS/MS database of DTU Bioengineering.
Antibase is a popular database used for natural products, as the 2017 version includes 43.743 natural
products from all sources[59]. Reaxys is an online database which contains 229,031 compounds us-
ing the search queries Isolation from Natural Product and molecular mass >200, <1000 at the time
of writing. These give a good reference, but they are insufﬁcient for determining the exact compound
without NMR characterization. The internal MS/MS database contains 1592 compounds at the time
of writing. These compounds have been analysed on the LC-DAD-HRMS within the department and
therefore contain accurate RTs, adduct patterns and fragmentation patterns[57]. Here, MS/MS spectra
acquired can be used directly used as a search query.
18
==PAGE:28==
2.4
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
To elucidate the chemical struture of a NP, NMR is a powerful tool[60; 61].
The nuclei of some atoms have what is referred to as spin. This property can be found amongst nuclei
with an odd mass, odd atomic number or both[62]. Common examples of these are 1H and 13C,
which have a nuclear spin quantum number of 1
2 with two spin states (+ and -). This feature allows
them to align their spin when placed in a strong magnetic ﬁeld. When these nuclei are aligned in the
magnetic ﬁeld, a pulse of energy is applied at 90° which causes the nuclei to change from one spin
state to another. When the pulse is discontinued, the spin will realign with the magnetic ﬁeld. This
realignment is detected and gives the signal in NMR.
However, since 1H and 13C in molecules are usually in different chemical environments they will
align differently in the magnetic ﬁeld. One example of this is neighboring atoms i.e. protons, that
can shield the nuclei from the magnetic ﬁeld. This causes the nuclei to have different signals or
shifts in the NMR spectrum[62]. This data can then be plotted in a one-dimensional (1D) 1H or 13C
spectrum. Examples of the information which can be obtained from the 1D experiments are, number
of atoms and their chemical environment. A particularly useful feature which arises from the chemical
environment is ”splitting”. An example of this is the ”n+1 rule”. Here the multiplicity of i.e. a proton
signal will depend on the number of neighbouring protons (n). Shown in ﬁgure 13 is an example of
a 1D 1H spectrum of 2-butanone. Protons c have no neighbouring protons and will therefore show
a singlet in the spectrum. Protons b and a have 3 and 2 neighbouring protons respectively and their
signal will therefore have multiplicity. Prontons b will shows as a quartet and protons a as a triplet.
Figure 13: Example of an estimated 1D 1H spectrum of 2-butanone
NPs can be of high structural complexity and therefore often require more advanced NMR techniques
to elucidate their structure. Several NMR experiments have been developed including multidimen-
19
==PAGE:29==
sional correlation experiments with the most commonly used being two-dimensional (2D). These
correlation methods allow the researcher to determine the atoms’ relative position in the molecule.
2D experiments are divided into two categories, namely the homonuclear and the heteronuclear ex-
periments. Examples of homonuclear experiments are correlation spectroscopy (COSY) and nuclear
Overhauser effect spectroscopy (NOESY). COSY experiments can i.e. determine protons on adjacent
carbons, while NOESY can determine which i.e. protons are in close proximity in space[63]. Het-
eronuclear experiments determines correlations between different atoms i.e. 1H and 13C. Some popu-
lar heteronuclear experiments are heteronuclear single quantum coherence spectroscopy (HSCQ) and
heteronuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC). HSQC can determine the protonated carbons and
determine which protons are directly bonded to that carbon. This is especially useful for detecting
diastereotopic protons, as these are in different chemical environments and will show separate signals
in the 1D spectrum. HMBC is a powerful tool to determine correlations over several bonds (two to
ﬁve), which makes it possible to connect fragments of molecules when elucidating the structure[63].
20
==PAGE:30==
3
Aim and objectives
Figure 14: Flowchart illustrating the experimental work to be carried out
The overall goals of the project is shown in ﬁgure 14. The ﬁrst goal of the project was to ﬁnd a can-
didate fungus for large scale cultivation. This selection process was based on two criteria. High anti
Bacillus subtillis activity and no reported litterature on antibacterial compounds from that speciﬁc
fungus. The subsequent work then had two primary goals. First was to identify and purify the com-
pound(s) responsible for the bioactivity observed through bioassay guided puriﬁcation. The second
was to dereplicate a potentially novel compound which would then be isolated and characterized by
NMR. The process of achieving these goals where done in parallel.
21
==PAGE:31==
4
Materials and experimental
4.1
Instrumentation
4.1.1
UPLC-DAD-MS
LC-DAD-MS analysis was performed using using ultra-high performance liquid chromatography -
high resolution mass spectrometry (UHPLC-HRMS) was done using an Agilent Inﬁnity 1290 UHPLC
system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with a DAD. The column used was
an Agilent Poroshell 120 phenyl-hexyl column with the dimensions 2.1 mm x 250 mm and a particle
diameter of 2.7 µm. Column was heated in a column oven at 60°C. A linear gradient of water (A) and
acetonitrile (B) containing 20 mM of formic acid was used starting at 10% B and increased to 100%
over 15 min where it was held for 2 min. B was returned to 10% over 0.1 min and held for 3 min. The
ﬂowrate was 0.35 mL/min. MS detection was performed in both positive and negative detection on
an Agilent 6546 QTOF MS equipped with an Agilent Dual Jet Stream electrospray ion source with
drying gas temperature of 250 °C with a gas ﬂow of 8 L/min. Sheat gas had a ﬂow rate of 12 L/min
and a gas temperature of 300 °C. Capillary voltage was set to 4000 V and nozzle voltage to 500 V.
Mass spectra were recorded at 10, 20 and 40 eV as centroid data for m/z 85-1700 in MS mode and
m/z 30-1700 in MS/MS mode with an aquisition rate of 10 spectra per second. Lock mass solution
in 70:30 methanol:water was infused in the second sprayer using an extra LC pump at a ﬂow of 15
µL/min using a 1:100 splitter. The solution contained 1 µM tributylamine (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10
µM Hexakis(2,2,3,3-tetraﬂouropropoxy)phosphazene (Apollo Scientiﬁc Ltd., Cheshire, UK) as lock
masses. The [M+H]+ ions of 186.2216 and 922.098 respectively of both compounds were used.
4.1.2
Semi-preparative fractionation and puriﬁcation
Throughout the project, semi-preparative fractionation and ﬁnal puriﬁcation of compounds was per-
formed using a semi-preparative HPLC Waters 600 Controller with a 996 photodiode array detector
(Waters, Milford, USA). The eluents used were acetonitrile and water, both containing 5 ppm of
triﬂouroacetic acid (TFA). Methods used will be speciﬁed in later sections.
4.1.3
Solvents and chemicals
Solvents and chemicals used were commercially available. The water used throughout this project
was puriﬁed using a Milli-Q system (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA).
22
==PAGE:32==
4.1.4
NMR
The solvent used for the NMR was deuturated chloroform (CDCl3) which was treated with sodium
bicarbonate prior to solvating the compound. This was to remove potential acidic impurities in the
chloroform which can form in the presence of air[64].
The NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker AVANCE II 800 MHz spectrometer equipped with a
TCl Cryoprobe and a 18.7 T magnet (Oxford Magnet Technology).
4.1.5
Software
UPLC-DAD-MS data For analysis of UPLC-DAD-MS data MassHunter Workstation Software. Qual-
itative Analysis. Version B.07.00. Build 7.0.7024.0. Agilent Technologies, Inc. 2014. was used.
NMR For analysis and dataprocessing of NMR data Topspin. Version 3.7pl7 was used.
Databases The databases used to search for metabolites were: Antibase 2017[59]. Reaxys, and an
internal database containing MS/MS data as described by Kildgaard et al 2014[34]
Strains and media Strains were obtained from an in-house library. All solid agar media for fungal
cultivation were prepared following Samson et al 2002[65].
23
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Experimental
4.2.1
Initial cultivation of fungi and extraction
Eight fungi were selected from an in-house library and cultivated as three point inoculations on Cza-
pek yeast agar and Yeast extract sucrose agar (YES) media (ﬁve plates of each) at 28 for 7 days. Cul-
tivation time was extended to 11 days for Aspergillus californicus to increase colony size to roughly
match the colony size of the remaining strains after 7 days. An overview of the strains and growth
conditions used is shown in table 2. Extraction was performed twice, once after 1 hour and once
overnight using EtOAc containing 1% formic acid. The extracts were ﬁltered and solvent was re-
moved in vacuo. The extracts would were then tested for bioactivity. Due to the complexity of the
extracts and high variety of metabolites present, the extracts were divided into 8 fractions each using
a Isolera One automated ﬂash puriﬁcation system as described in section 4.2.2. These fractions were
also tested for bioactivity.
No.
In-house ID
Strain
Growth conditions
1
21983
Aspergillus homomorphus
YES/CYA, 28°C, 7d
2
27921
Aspergillus turcosus
YES/CYA, 28°C, 7d
3
29274
Aspergillus eucalypticola
YES/CYA, 28°C, 7d
4
30014
Penicillium galathea
YES/CYA, 28°C, 7d
5
34879
Penicillium frequentans
YES/CYA, 28°C, 7d
6
28865
Penicillium astrolabium
YES/CYA, 28°C, 7d
7
21868
Aspergillus sulphureoviridis
YES/CYA, 28°C, 7d
8
16748
Aspergillus californicus
YES/CYA, 28°C, 11d
Table 2: Initial selection of fungi from in-house library.
4.2.2
Preparative fractionation of crude extracts
The fungal extracts were dissolved in dichloromethane (DCM), and adsorbed onto C18 RP column
material. DCM was evaporated in vacuo and the solids were transferred to samplets that were attached
to C18 RP Biotage SNAPTM cartridges (10 g). Fractionation was done using a Isolera One automated
ﬂash system (Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden). Fractions were collected by increasing the concentration of
MeOH in water in 8 increments of 10% over 20 min (30:70, 40:60, 50:50, 60:40, 70:30, 80:20, 90:10,
100:0). This yielded in 8 fractions for each crude extract. Solvents were removed in vacuo and the
fractions were taken for bioactivity screening.
24
==PAGE:34==
4.2.3
Initial bioactivity screening against Bacillus subtillis
Bacillus subtillis seed culture and growth media preparation for bioactivity screening
The B. subtillis seed culture was prepared by PhD student Heiko T. Kiesewalter of DTU Bioengineer-
ing. Media was prepared inspired by Tedesco et al 2016[66]. The strain was grown on Luria-Bertani
broth (LB) consisting of Tryptone 10 g/L, Yeast extract 5 g/L and NaCl 10 g/L whereto 20 g/L of
bacteriological agar had been added to obtain a solid media.
Bioactivity screening: Bored-well assay
Prior to streaking the B. subtillis seed culture, wells of 5 mm were bored into the solid media to
which a 50 µL solution of either 10 or 20 mg/mL of crude extracts or fractionated extracts dissolved
in MeOH were added. The MeOH was evaporated at room temperature and the plates were inoculated
overnight at 37 °C. The agar plates from bored-well bioactivity screening are all shown in Appendix
9.2.
Bioactivity screening: Disk-diffusion assay
Crude extract or fractionated extracts dissolved in methanol (MeOH) were evaporated onto blank
Whatman™Antibiotic Assay Discs achieve a loading of 0.5 or 1 mg per disc. Immediately after
streaking the seed culture, discs were added to the plates with adequate spacing. The plates were
inoculated overnight 37 °C. The agar plates from disc-diffusion bioactivity screening are all shown in
Appendix 9.2.
4.3
Large scale cultivation of Penicillium Astrolabium
4.3.1
Growth, extraction and work-up
P. astrolabium was grown as three point inoculations on 118 CYA and 150 YES plates at 28 for 7
days. Extraction was performed twice, once after 1 hour and once overnight using EtOAc containing
1% formic acid. The extracts were combined, ﬁltered and solvent was removed in vacuo yielding
5.5 g of crude. Work-up, defatting and desugaring was performed by liquid liquid fractionation.
Crude was dissolved in 200 mL 9:1 MeOH/water and transferred to a separation funnel. Low polarity
compounds were extracted twice by adding 200 mL heptane and separating the phases. An additional
160 mL water was added to obtain a ratio of 1:1 MeOH/water. Medium polarity compounds were
extracted twice using 360 mL of DCM. Solvents was removed in vacuo. All fractions were sampled
for LC-DAD-MS analysis. The DCM phase yielded in 1.02 g of crude (1) and was taken to SPE and
bioassays.
25
==PAGE:35==
4.3.2
Bioactivity screening against Bacillus subtillis
The bored-well assay, as described in section 4.2.3, was used to screen for bioactivity throughout the
bioactivity guided puriﬁcation process.
Bioactivity screening: Bored-well assay
Prior to streaking the B. subtillis seed culture, wells of 5 mm were bored into the solid media to
which a 50 µL solution of 10 mg/mL of crude extracts or fractionated extracts dissolved in MeOH
were added. The MeOH was evaporated at room temperature prior to inoculation.
4.3.3
Solid phase extraction
SAX (Strata SAX)
Strong anion exchange was performed using a Strata-SAX column (Phenomenex, column volume
(CV): 1 mL).
Sample preparation: 1 mg of (1) was dissolved in 200 µL 70% MeOH/water. 8 µL of an ammonia
solution (25%) was added. The SAX column was equilibrated using two CVs of 100% MeOH and
70% MeOH/water. The sample was loaded onto the column followed by washing with 1 CV of 70%
MeOH/water and 100% MeOH (A1). Column was eluted with 2 CVs of 1% formic acid in MeOH
(A2).
SCX (Isolute SCX)
Strong cation exchange was performed using a Strata-SCX column (Phenomenex, CV: 1 mL).
Sample preparation: 1.3 mg of (1) was dissolved in 200 µL 70% MeOH/water. 8 µL of formic acid
was added. The SCX column was equilibrated using two CVs of 100% MeOH and 70% MeOH/water.
The sample was loaded onto the column followed by washing with 1 CV of 70% MeOH/water and 1
CV of 100% MeOH which were combined (B1). Column was eluted with 2 of 1% ammonia solution
in MeOH (B2).
MAX (Oasis MAX)
Mixed-mode reversed-phase anion-exchange was performed using a Oasis MAX column (Waters,
Milford, MA, CV: 1 mL)
Sample preparation: 1.4 mg of (1) was dissolved in 200 µL 70% MeOH/water. 8 µL of ammonia
solution was added. The MAX column was equilibrated using two CVs of 100% MeOH and 2 CVs
of 2% ammonia solution in water. The sample was loaded onto the column followed by washing with
2 CVs of 25% MeOH/water (C1). Column was eluted yielding in the following fractions; 2 CVs 60%
26
==PAGE:36==
MeOH/water (C2), 2 CVs 100% MeOH/water (C3), 1 CV water and 1 CV of 2% formic acid in 25%
MeOH/water which were combined (C4), 2 CVs of 1% formic acid in 60% MeOH/water (C5), 3 CVs
1% formic acid in MeOH (C6).
WAX (Oasis WAX)
Mixed-mode reversed-phase weak anion-exchange was performed using a Oasis WAX column (Wa-
ters, Milford, MA, CV: 1 mL)
Sample preparation: 4 mg of (1) was dissolved in 800 µL 70% MeOH/water. 8 µL of formic acid was
added. The WAX column was equilibrated using two CVs of 100% MeOH and 70% MeOH/water.
The sample was loaded onto the column followed by washing with 2 CVs 100% MeOH (D1). Column
was eluted with 2 CVs of 100% MeOH 1% formic acid (D2).
E-WAX (Express WAX)
Express Mixed-mode reversed-phase weak anion-exchange was performed using a EVOLUTE® EX-
PRESS WAX column (Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden, CV: 1 mL).
Sample preparation: 3 mg of (1) was dissolved in 800 µL 70% MeOH/water. 8 µL of formic acid was
added. The E-WAX column was equilibrated using two CVs of 100% MeOH and 70% MeOH/water.
The sample was loaded onto the column followed by washing with 2 CVs 100% MeOH (E1). Column
was eluted with 2 CVs of 1% formic acid in MeOH (E2).
NH2 (Strata-NH2)
Adsorption extraction of polar analytes was performed using an ISOLUTE® NH2 column (Biotage,
Uppsala, Sweden, CV: 1 mL).
Sample preparation: 1.7 mg of (1) was dissolved in 200 µL 50/50% MeOH/ethyl acetate(EtOAc).
The NH2 column was equilibrated using two CVs of 100% MeOH and 100% DCM. The sample was
loaded onto the column followed by washing with 2 CVs DCM (F1). Column was eluted yielding
in the following fractions; 2 CVs 50/50% DCM/EtOAc (F2), 2 CVs EtOAc (F3), 2 CVs 50/50%
MeOH/EtOAc (F4), 3 CVs MeOH (F5).
Diol (Isolute Diol)
Adsorption extraction of polar analytes was performed using a ISOLUTE® DIOL column (Biotage,
Uppsala, Sweden, CV: 1 mL).
Sample preparation: 1.6 mg of (1) was dissolved in 200 µL 50/50% MeOH/EtOAc. The Diol column
was equilibrated using two CVs of 100% MeOH and 100% DCM. The sample was loaded onto the
27
==PAGE:37==
column followed by washing with 2 CVs DCM (G1). Column was eluted yielding in the following
fractions; 2 CVs 50/50% DCM/EtOAc (G2), 2 CVs EtOAc (G3), 2 CVs 50/50% MeOH/EtOAc (G4),
3 CVs MeOH (G5).
RP (Isolute C18)
Reversed-phase extraction of non-polar analytes was performed using a ISOLUTE® C18 column
(Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden, CV: 1 mL).
Sample preparation: 1.3 mg of (1) was dissolved in 100 µL 100% MeOH. The C18 column was
equilibrated using two CVs of 100% MeOH and 30% MeOH/water. The sample was loaded onto
the column followed by washing with 2 CVs 30% MeOH/water (H1). Column was eluted yielding
in the following fractions; 2 CVs 40% MeOH/water (H2), 2 CVs 50% MeOH/water (H3), 2 CVs
60% MeOH/water (H4), 2 CVs 70% MeOH/water (H5), 2 CVs 80% MeOH/water (H6), 2 CVs 90%
MeOH/water (H7), 3 CVs 100% MeOH (H8).
All fractions collected from E-SPE were sampled for LC-DAD-MS analysis.
4.3.4
Preparative fractionation of Penicillium astrolabium crude extract
290 mg of the DCM phase extract was dissolved in DCM, and adsorbed onto SAX column material.
DCM was evaporated in vacuo and the powder was transferred to a samplet that attached to a SAX
Biotage SNAP® cartridge (10 g). Fractionation was done using an Isolera One automated ﬂash system
(Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden). The cartridge was equilibrated using 50 mL 100% MeOH followed by
50 mL 70% MeOH/water. The samplet was then attached to the cartridge and washed with 50 mL
70% MeOH/water (S1) and 50 mL 100% MeOH (S2). Fractions were collected with 100 mL 1%
formic acid in MeOH (S3) and 100 mL of 5% formic acid and 0.5% TFA in MeOH (S4). Solvents
were removed in vacuo and the fractions were taken for bioactivity screening. Fractions were sampled
for LC-DAD-MS analysis.
4.3.5
Semi-preparative fractionation of S3
Further fractionation of S3 was performed on a semi-preparative HPLC Waters 600 Controller with
a 996 photodiode array detector (Waters, Milford, USA) using a Phenomenex Luna Gemini C6-Ph
column. Elution was done using a 10-90% acetonitrile/water gradient over 20 min with a ﬂowrate of
4 mL/min. 50 ppm TFA was added to the eluents. Fractions were collected every minute yielding in
a total of 20 fractions which were taken for bioactivity screening.
28
==PAGE:38==
4.3.6
Puriﬁcation of Xanthoepocin
Final puriﬁcation of Xanthoepocin artefact from E2 pooled with D2 was performed using a Phenomex
Kinetix® 5 µm C18 100 ˚A 250 x 10 mm column. Elution was done using a 55-85% acetonitrile/water
gradient over 20 min with a ﬂowrate of 4 mL/min. 50 ppm TFA was added to the eluents.
4.3.7
Puriﬁcation of Xanthoepocin artefact
Final puriﬁcation of Xanthoepocin artefact from E2 was performed using a Phenomex Kinetix® (5
µm C18 100 ˚A 250 x 10 mm) column. Elution was done using a 55-85% acetonitrile/water gradient
over 20 min with a ﬂowrate of 4 mL/min. 50 ppm TFA was added to the eluents.
4.3.8
Puriﬁcation of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue from dereplication guided discovery
S1 was fractionated using an Isolera One automated ﬂash system (Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden). S1 was
dissolved in DCM, evaporated and adsorbed onto C18 RP column material. Fractions were collected
by increasing the gradient of MeOH in water in 8 increments of 10% over 20 min (30:70, 40:60, 50:50,
60:40, 70:30, 80:20, 90:10, 100:0). A ﬁnal fraction was collected using 100% MeOH 50 ppm TFA
yielding in 9 total fractions. All fractions were sampled for LC-DAD-MS analysis. Fraction 70:30
was then used for ﬁnal puriﬁcation. Final puriﬁcation of Asphernamate analogue (m/z 523.2211) was
performed on a semi-preparative HPLC Waters using a Phenomenex Luna Gemini® C6-Ph column.
Elution was done using a 55-75% acetonitrile/water gradient over 10 min with a ﬂowrate of 4 mL/min.
50 ppm TFA was added to the eluents.
4.3.9
Methanolysis of Xanthoepocin
Xanthoepocin was dissolved in 950 µL MeOH and in a 16 mL glass vial. 50 µL TFA was added.
Solution was left stirring at 40-50°C for 3 h. Solvent was removed in vacuo, and sampled for LC-
DAD-MS analysis.
4.3.10
Plug extraction of Penicillium astrolabium
For metabolite proﬁle analysis of P. astrolabium the fungus was grown on YES, CYA, malt ex-
tract agar (MEA), creatine agar (CREA), oatmeal agar (OAT), potato-dextrose agar (PDA), minimal
medium (MM) solid media as three point inoculations for 10 days. The fungus was also grown on
both rice and beans by adding spore solution to falcon tubes containing these followed by inoculation
for 10 days. Plug extractions were done by taking 3 plugs of 5 mm in diameter from the colony. The
plugs were transferred to Eppendorf tubes and extracted with either a 3:1 of EtOAc, isopropanol con-
taining 1% formic acid or with acetonitrile. The rice and beans media were extracted by adding the
same extraction solvents. This was followed by 30 min of sonication and 3 min of centrifugation. The
29
==PAGE:39==
supernatant was then transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. The solvents were removed under nitrogen
ﬂow at 37°C, and the dried extracts were redissolved in acetonitrile with sonication. Next the samples
were centrifuged before aliquots were transferred to LC-MS vials.
30
==PAGE:40==
5
Results and discussion
5.1
Initial screening of fungi
The overall goal of the initial screening was to select a strain to grow on a large scale which showed
high bioactivity towards B. subtilis. Bioactivity screening was done by a bored-well assay in two
concentrations for all 8 strains. Furthermore, 4 strains were selected for disc diffusion assay using
the same two concentrations. The results of the disc diffusion assays were in concordance with the
bored well assay, however sensitivity of the bored well assay proved to be higher, as larger inhibition
zones were observed. This was expected, as disc diffusion assays generally show a decreased sensi-
tivity in antimicrobial testing [67]. Therefore, the bored-well assay was chosen for further testing of
bioactivity.
The B. subtilis bioactivity assays were performed using the fractionated extracts of the eight strains
along with the crude extracts. Bioactivity was observed in all crude extracts except P. galathea. One
or more of the 8 fractions of each of the 8 crude extracts showed bioactivity, however the number of
active fractions and magnitude of bioactivity varied vastly between strains, with extracts and fractions
of P. astrolabium and A. homomorphus being the most active as shown in table 3.
No.
Strain
Bioactivity
Reported antibacterial compounds
1
Aspergillus homomorphus
High
Secalonic acid[68]
2
Aspergillus turcosus
Medium
Gliotoxin[69]
3
Aspergillus eucalypticola
Low
N/A
4
Penicillium galathea
Very low
N/A
5
Penicillium frequentans
Medium
Sclerotiorin [70]
6
Penicillium astrolabium
High
N/A
7
Aspergillus sulphureoviridis
Medium
N/A
8
Aspergillus californicus
Low
An arugosin[71]
Table 3: An overview of the results obtained from the initial bioactivity screening against B. subtilis,
including bioactive compounds reported to be produced by these strains in the litterature. Bioactivity
is scored according by how many fractions showed bioactivity and the magnitude of inhibition. The
score ”high” means several fractions showed large clearing zones on the agar. A score of low or very
low indicates that there were few fractions showing bioactivity and the clearing zones observed were
smaller than average. See appendix 9.2 for images of plates and analysis.
31
==PAGE:41==
Selection process
The strain which would be chosen for further work had to fulﬁll two major criteria; high bioactivity,
and no literature regarding production of antibacterial compounds. In order to minimize the risk of
selecting a strain producing already known antibiotic compounds, a literature search was conducted
for each of the strains. The search revealed 4 of the strains had been shown to produce antibacterial
compounds which are shown in table 3. The presence of these compounds in the extracts were con-
ﬁrmed performing a targeted analysis of the LC-DAD-MS data. EICs were extracted of the reported
m/z values for each of the respective compounds. If the compound was described in the internal
database, RT and fragmentation patterns were compared.
As shown in table 3, A homomorphus had been shown in the litterature to produce the bioactive
compound Secalonic acid D with the formula C32H30O14[68].
The EIC showed several peaks with different RT containing ions corresponding to the formula of
Secalonic acid. The fragmentation patterns of these ions were compared to a MS/MS reference in
the internal data base and were nearly identical. This could suggest there could be several isomers
or related compounds of Secalonic acid present in the extract, making it unlikely to purify unknown
bioactive compounds. Since Secalonic acids have shown antibiotic activity, the decission was made
not to continue to large scale with A.homomorphus[72; 73]. Due to its high bioactivity and absence of
previously reported antibacterial compounds, P. astrolabium was selected for further bioassay guided
puriﬁcation and in-depth non-targeted dereplication.
32
==PAGE:42==
5.2
Bioassay directed puriﬁcation of Penicillium astrolabium extract
The goal of the bioassay directed puriﬁcation was to isolate the compound(s) responsible for the
bioactivity observed. P. astrolabium was therefore grown on 268 agar plates, as described in 4.3 which
following extraction and liquid liquid fractionation, yielded in 3 fractions; an aqueous MeOH/water,
a DCM (1) and a heptane fraction. Bioassay of these fractions revealed the bioactive component(s)
were in the DCM fraction indicating the bioactive compound(s) were of medium polarity. The DCM
fraction was used in SPE with the goal of developing a puriﬁcation protocol along and ﬁnally aiding
in the dereplication of the active compound(s). The fractions obtained in SPE were screened for
bioactivity against B. subtillis.
In the following sections, the DCM fraction (1) obtained by liquid liquid fractionation is referred to
as the crude extract.
5.2.1
Solid phase extraction
An overview of the SPE fractions and the results of the following bioassay is shown in table 4.
Bioactive fractions are marked in grey.
SAX
SCX
MAX
WAX*
E-WAX*
NH2
Diol
RP
A1
B1
C1
D1
E1
F1
G1
H1
A2
B2
C2
D2
E2
F2
G2
H2
C3
F3
G3
H3
C4
F4
G4
H4
C5
F5
G5
H5
C6
H6
H7
H8
Table 4: Overview of solid phase extraction fractions and bioactivity results. Fractions marked in
grey show anti Bacilus subtilis activity. Elution of the columns and fraction labelling of fractions is
explained in section 4.3.3. *Bioactivity was not evaluated for WAX and E-WAX as these were used
in the development of a puriﬁcation protocol and not the initial bioactivity screen. Reversed-phase
(RP)
It was not possible to draw any conclusions from the bioassay of SAX and SCX fractions since the
inhibition zones overlapped. However, in the MAX fractions bioactivity was primarily observed for
fractions containing formic acid and MeOH concentrations of 60% and 100% with 60% showing the
largest inhibition. This indicated that the bioactive compound(s) contained acidic moeities and were
of medium to low polarity. The NH2 fractions showed no bioactivity in any fractions indicating the
bioactive compounds interacted strongly with the column material. Interestingly, the diol column
did not seem to retain the bioactive compound, as this eluted in the ﬁrst two fractions. This could
33
==PAGE:43==
indicate the retention of the compound in the NH2 fraction were not due to hydrogen bonding, as
diol sidechains have great potential for this. However, this further substantiated the hypothesis of the
compound containing acidic moeities, as the NH2 could potentially deprotonate this moeity allow-
ing for strong ionic interactions. The fractions of the reversed-phase column showed the bioactivity
increased in correlation with MeOH concentration in the mobile phase. This indicated either multi-
ble bioactive compounds or poor retention by the C18 column material. Another possibility is that
reversed phase chromatography is highly dependent on column dimensions, linear ﬂow-rate, sample
loading, pressure etc. which could inﬂuence separation. All SPE fractions were sampled for later
LC-DAD-MS analysis.
5.2.2
Isolation of bioactive compound
From the SPE information and the hypothesis of acidic moeities within the bioactive compound, the
crude was fractionated using SAX column material as described in section 4.3.4. Fractions S1 and S2
show very little bioactivity, while S3 and S4 showed immense bioactivity, with S3 being the highest.
S3 was therefore further fractionated into 20 fractions as described in section 4.3.6. These fractions
were screened for bioactivity and interestingly only one fraction (at 19 min) showed bioactivity. The
fractions were sampled for LC-DAD-MS analysis.
5.2.3
Dereplication of bioactive compounds in DCM fraction
Figure 15: Total wavelength chromatogram of fraction at 19 min
The LC-DAD-MS data revealed one single peak at RT = 10.4 min in the TWC as shown in ﬁgure
15. The positive mode BPC showed 3 major peaks at RT = 9.1, RT = 10.3 and RT = 10.4 min as
shown in ﬁgure 16. RT = 9.1 min showed a m/z of 387.1813. By extracting a MS/MS spectrum
and performing a spectral search in the internal database, this peak was determined to an unknown
contaminant from a pipette tip. RT = 10.3 min showed a of 411.2072 with a sodiated adduct at
m/z 433.1896. By referencing the LC-DAD-MS data from SPE m/z 411.2072 was observed in the
inactive NH2 fractions, and therefore likely not the cause of bioactivity. The last peak at RT = 10.4
min showed a major peak of m/z 589.0986 which was a result of waterloss. The protonated adduct
34
==PAGE:44==
was determined to be m/z 607.10910. This compound was present in all the active fractions from SPE
but absent in the inactive fractions, meaning this was likely the bioactive compound. Next, a formula
was calculated for m/z 607.10910 with an accuracy of -3.65 ppm to C30O14H22 which gave the hit
Xanthoepocin in AntiBase. The recorded UV-data in AntiBase matched. The hit was conﬁrmed
using the internal database where fragmentation patterns, RT and were in concordance as shown in
ﬁgure X. This explained the observed bioactivity since Xanthoepocin has previously been isolated
from Penicillium strains and has been shown to be highly cytotoxic toward Bacillus subtilis[74].
Xanthoepocin was then puriﬁed as described in section 4.3.6.
Figure 16: BPC of the bioactive fraction from semi-preperative HPLC (19 min). Below to the left
MS/MS spectrum of m/z 607.10190 and to the right MS/MS spectrum of Xanthoepocin from internal
database. Both MS/MS spectra were at CID 20 eV.
5.2.3.1
Xanthoepocin artefact formation
Interestingly, upon examination of the LC-DAD-MS data of all the bioactive SPE fractions for the
presence of Xanthoepocin, a second peak was reoccuring in the bioactive fractions exempliﬁed with
fraction C5 shown in ﬁgure 17. The UV-spectrum of Xanthoepocin and this second peak were com-
pared and showed nearly identical shapes as shown in ﬁgure 17. It was decided to isolate the com-
pound for bioactivity evaluation, where it was found to be equipotent to Xanthoepocin. This com-
35
==PAGE:45==
pound was not discovered during the bioactivity guided puriﬁcation, as it was only present in trace
amounts in S3 and the crude extract. The protonated adduct was determined to be m/z 639.1348.
Figure 17: TWC of bioactive SPE MAX fraction C5. a: UV spectrum of potential Xanthoepocin
analogue (m/z 639.1348). b: UV spectrum of Xanthoepocin.
A formula was calculated to C31H26O15 with an accuracy of -0.55 ppm, and a search in AntiBase gave
no hits. Due to the similar UV spectra it was speculated that this compound was a possible unknown
analogue of Xanthoepocin. The EIC of m/z 639.1348 showed a similar fragmentation pattern to
Xanthoepocin further substantiating the analogue hypothesis. The amount isolated of m/z 639.1348
was insufﬁcient for NMR, and isolating it from the crude would be a tedious task due to its low
abundance. It was therefore decided to investigate if the production of this could be media dependent.
P. Astrolabium was therefore grown on a variety of media as described in section 4.3.10, and plug
extracts were analyzed by LC-DAD-MS. Interestingly, Xanthoepocin was present in all extracts but
the potential analogue could not be identiﬁed in positive mode ESI and only trace amounts were
identiﬁed in the negative mode ESI. This ﬁnding suggested that the analogue could be a result of
the fractionation process and sample preparation. It was hypothesized that the analogue could have
been a result of MeOH addition as this was the solvent used for dissolving the crude in spe and LC-
DAD-MS samples. This hypothesis ﬁt with the mass difference of 32 Da corresponding to MeOH
addition. Addition of MeOH is often seen as a byproduct of sample handling in the analysis of
secondary metabolites where the presence of MeOH in acidic conditions can generate artefacts of the
metabolites[75].
To investigate possible MeOH artefact formation plugs of P. astrolabium were sampled and extracted
with acetonitrile. The following sample preparation for LC-DAD-MS was done without any contact
36
==PAGE:46==
with MeOH. The LC-DAD-MS data did not show any presence of m/z 639.1348 conﬁrming this was
a by-product of MeOH in sample preparation. The structure of the artefact was hypothesized to be
caused by the MeOH opening up the one of the epoxide moeities of Xanthoepocin, as Igarashi et
al 2000 had previosly described the methanolysis of these. As shown by Igarashi et al, MeOH in
acidic conditions could open the epoxide moeities of Xathoepocin, however in the case of Igarashi
et al, methanolysis of both epoxides was achieved as the sole product with m/z 669.1448 [M-H]- in
negative mode ESI[74].
Extracting a EIC in negative mode ESI of the P. Astrolabium crude, this m/z was identiﬁed at RT = 9.0
min. The UV-spectrum was in concordance with the reported UV data, and the fragmentation pattern
was similar to Xanthoepocin. It was therefore likely m/z 639.1348 was caused by MeOH opening up
one of the epoxide groups. Structures of Xanthoepocin, a proposed structure of the MeOH artefact as
well as the MeOH derivative by Igarashi et al is shown in ﬁgure 18.
Since there was no reported bioactivity of Xanthoepocin with both epoxide groups opened by MeOH,
a test reaction reaction was attempted to synthesize the compound with the goal of establishing the
importance of the epoxide moeties for bioactivity. It was not possible to accurately recreate the reac-
tion conditions of Igarashi et al who used methanolic acid[74]. Instead, Xanthoepocin was dissolved
in MeOH and 5 % TFA was added to catalyze the reaction. Using this method, it was not possible
to obtain a high enough conversion to the desired compound and bioactivity could therefore not be
examined.
Figure 18: Structure of Xanthoepocin and artefacts
1: Structure of Xanthoepocin, 2: Proposed structure of MeOH artefact 3: Structure of methanolysis
of Xanthoepocin [74]
37
==PAGE:47==
5.3
Dereplication of metabolites in large scale Penicillium astrolabium crude
extract
5.3.1
Dereplication of metabolites in crude extract
Dereplication of the crude extract was performed by analyzing the peaks within the TWC and positive
mode BPC as shown in ﬁgure 5. Numbered peaks in the ﬁgure correspond to dereplicated compounds
in table 5.
Figure 19: Base peak chromatogram (top) and total wavelength chromatograms (bottom) of Peni-
cillium astrolabium crude extract. Numbered peaks correspond to dereplicated known compounds
shown in table 5
Dereplication of the major peaks in the positive BPC was performed using a similar approach as de-
scribed by Nielsen et al[57]. Mass spectra were extracted of these peaks, and by analyzing the adduct
and isotope patterns the [M+H]+ ions were identiﬁed. From this the formulas were calculated with
the accuracy shown in table 5. The next step was searching for these formulas within the databases.
Dereplication yielded in 4 known compounds as shown in the table and 7 unknown compounds as
shown in table 5. Compounds with no database hits are referred to as unknown. Detailed examples
of the dereplication procedure of the peaks with known and unknown compounds will be described
in the following sections.
38
==PAGE:48==
Peak no.
m/z [M+H]+
RT (min)
UVmax (nm)
Analyte
Accuracy (ppm)
Ion/Adduct
Hit in databases
1
507.2288
11.1
240
C32H30N2O4
-1.91
[M+H]+
Asperphenamate
[M+Na]+
[M+H-H2O]+
[2M+H]+
[2M+Na]+
2
434.1834
6.1
228
C23H23N5O4
-2.58
[M+H]+
Meleagrin
280
[M+Na]+
333
3
607.1103
10.4
247
C30H22O12
1.06
[M+H]+
Xanthoepocin
270
[M+Na]+
305
[M+H-H2O]+
400
[2M+Na]+
4
245.1287
5.0
N/A
C14H16N2O2
-0.84
[M+H]+
Cyclo(-Phe-Pro)
5
355.2341
7.3
N/A
C17H30N4O4
-0.33
[M+H]+
No database hits
[M+Na]+
[M+K]+
6
546.2372
10.9
N/A
C34H31N3O4
2.77
[M+H]+
No database hits
[M+Na]+
Asperphenamate analogue*
[M+K]+
[M+H-H2O]+
7
473.2421
11.0
N/A
C29H32N2O4
2.97
[M+H]+
No database hits
[M+Na]+
Asperphenamate analogue*
[2M+Na]+
[M+K]+
8
523.2211
9.8
230
C32H30N2O5
3.16
[M+H]+
No database hits
270
[M+Na]+
Asperphenamate analogue*
[M+K]+
[2M+H]+
[2M+Na]+
9
411.2078
10.5
230
C27H17N2O2
-2.77
[M+H]+
No database hits
260
[M+Na]+
[M+K]+
[2M+Na]+
[M+H-H2O]+
10
409.1913
9.1
235
C27H24N2O2
-0.7
[M+H]+
No database hits
255
[M+Na]+
310
[M+K]+
11
613.2288
6.6
236
C32H36O12
-1.38
[M+H]+
Gave the hit
255
[M+Na]+
Cardinalin 16*
309
[M+K]+
Table 5: Results of the dereplication of Penicillium astrolabiuim crude extract. *The asperphenamate
analogues are discussed in section 5.3.4.
39
==PAGE:49==
5.3.1.1
Dereplication of peak 2
Peak 2 in the positive mode BPC revealed a major [M+H]+ ion at m/z 434.1834 with a sodiated adduct
at m/z 456.16344 [M+Na]+ as shown in ﬁgure 20. A molecular formula was calculated based on the
[M+H]+ adduct to C25N2O5H25 with an accuracy of -1.17 ppm. Using the formula a search in Reaxys
and Antibase was conducted, which resulted in 7 and 1 hit(s) respectively with Meleagrin showing up
in both databases. The UVmaxs as shown in table 5, were in concordance with what had been reported
in the litterature for Meleagrin[76]. Finally a spectral search in the internal database using a MS/MS
spectra at 10 eV of the ion conﬁrmed the identity of Meleagrin as shown in ﬁgure 20.
Figure 20: A: Mass spectrum of peak 2. B: MS/MS of m/z 434.1858 at 10 mV. C: MS/MS of
Meleagrin from internal database at 10 eV
40
==PAGE:50==
5.3.2
Dereplication of peak 11
Peak 11 in the BPC showed two [M+H]+ adducts at m/z 307.1202 and m/z 613.2788. [M+Na]+ and
[M+K]+ adducts were observed for both ions, however m/z 613.2788 also had a [M-H2O+H]+ adduct.
The ion of m/z 307.1202 was determined by MS/MS to be the product of in-source fragmentation of
m/z 613.2788 as shown in ﬁgure 21. The high abundance of the monomer was likely due to in-source
fragmentation. MS/MS fragmentation of m/z 613.2788 at 10 mV showed only the monomer peak
further indicating this was a dimer prone to fragmentation.
Figure 21: Mass spectrum and fragmentation pattern of m/z 613.2288 [M+H]+
A molecular formula was calculated to C32H36O12 with an accuracy of 0.05 ppm. Using the formula,
a search in Reaxys and Antibase was conducted, which resulted in 4 and 1 hit(s) respectively. None
of the hits from Reaxys were from fungi and were therefore discarded. The hit in Antibase was Car-
dinalin 16 which has been previously isolated from the fungus Dermocybe cardinalis[77]. There was
no record of Cardinalin 16 in the internal database and the identity could therefore not be conﬁrmed
by comparing MS/MS fragmentation. There was also no reported UV data of Cardinalin 16 in the
litterature and even though the core chemical structure of Cardinalins are similar, UVmax ranges vastly
between molecules[78]. This is exempliﬁed as Cardinalin 1 is reported to be a colourless compound
while Cardinalin 2 is reported as yellow and Cardinalin 4 as red[78].
In order to determine if Cardinalin 16 could be the compound. The theoretical fragments of the
41
==PAGE:51==
compound were calculated to m/z 306.11 [M+H]+ and m/z 308.13 [M+H]+ as shown in ﬁgure 22.
Because these were not observed in the mass spectrum, m/z 613.2288 was determined likely not
to be Cardinalin 16. Therefore, m/z 613.2288 could potentially be an unknown metabolite of P.
astrolabium. The structure of m/z 613.2288 would have to be elucidated by NMR.
Figure 22: Structure and theoretical positive mode ESI fragmentation of Cardinalin 16.
5.3.3
Dereplication of peak 1
Peak 1 in the BPC showed a major ion at m/z 507.2291. Adducts of [M+Na]+, [M+K]+, [2M+H]+
and [2M+Na]+ proved that m/z 507.2291 was the protonated adduct. A formula was calculated to
C32H30N2O4 and the internal database gave the hit Asperphenamate. Fragmentation patterns and RT
were in concordence with the internal database which conﬁrmed the identity of Asperphenamate. This
ﬁnding was to be expected, as the production of Asperphenamate by P. astralabium has previously
been described in the litterature[79].
5.3.4
Dereplication of Asperphenamate analogues
Peak 8 in the positive mode BPC showed a major [M+H]+ ion at m/z 523.2211 along with a [M+K]+
adduct at m/z 545.2056 and a [M+K]+ at m/z 561.1774. A formula was calculated to C32H30N3O5
with an accuracy of 2.77 ppm. A search in AntiBase and Reaxys yielded in 0 and 1 hit respectively.
The hit in Reaxys was Chaetochin A which has previously been isolated from the fungus Chaetomium
globosum[80]. The reported UVmax of Chaetochin A (239, 411 nm) did not ﬁt the the observed UV
(230, 270 nm). Furthermore, Chaetochin A had shown a bioactivity towards Bacillus subtillis in the
litterature, but could not be identiﬁed in any of the bioactive SPE fractions. It was therefore unlikely
that Chaetochin A was the compound.
Next, a search in the internal database using a MS/MS spectra gave Asperphenamate as a potential
hit, as the major fragments observed were identical as shown in ﬁgure 23. They both shared the ions
of m/z 238, 256 and 105, with the difference being the presence of a m/z 252 ion in Asperphenamate
which was not present in the case of m/z 523.2211. Instead an ion of m/z 268.0972 was observed.
42
==PAGE:52==
Figure 23: Comparision of fragmentation pattern of Asperphenamate from internal database (left)
with acquired spectrum of m/z 523.2211 (right).
This ﬁt with the mass difference of 16 Da and was likely due to the addition of a oxygen in this part
of the molecule. The potential analogue was therefore puriﬁed, as described in section 4.3.8, and
characterized by NMR as described in 5.3.5.
NMR structure elucidation revealed that one of the phenyl alanine moeties of Asperphenamate had
exchanged for a tyrosine as shown in ﬁgure 24. The structure of the potential novel compound was
searched for in SciFinder revealed that the compound had previously been synthesized[81; 82]. How-
ever, it had not been isolated from a fungal source.
Figure 24: Structure of Asperphenamate and tyrosine analogue (m/z 523.2211).
Further investigation into the literature revealed that m/z 523.2211 had previously been described
within the department by Kildgaard et al 2014[34]. This was part of a dereplication of secondary
metabolites, including Asperphenamate and four analogues from marine-derived fungi. Here, a struc-
ture was proposed solely from fragmentation patterns without NMR structure elucidation, however
they managed to predict the position of the additional oxygen based on the observed fragments[34].
The fragmentation of Asperphenamate and the four additional analogues including were described
in detail by Kildgaard et al 2014[34]. They showed Asperphenamate fragmenting at 20 mV into
the major ions m/z 256.1334, m/z 238.1231 and m/z 252.1062 corresponding to [C16H18NO2]+],
43
==PAGE:53==
[C16H16NO]+] and [C16H14NO2]+. The fragment of m/z 256.13341 comes from cleavage of the ester
bond and 238.1231 is formed from this ion by water loss as shown in ﬁgure 28. The remaining part
of the molecule then formed the m/z 252.1062 ion.
The analogues were proposed to arise from C-H to N substitution in the asperphenamate skeleton or
oxygen addition at either the phenylalanine or the benzamide moeties as shown in ﬁgure 25. The
position of the C-H to N substitution was predicted from the fragmentation pattern, since the main
fragments containing the N would have a mass 1 Da higher. Differentiating between oxygen addition
at the phenylalanine and benzamide moeities was possible, as an additional ion at m/z 121.0287 was
present for the benzamide with a alcohol. Determining which side of the ester the tyrosine had been
substituted was possible, as the m/z 252 ion corresponding to the carbonyl side of Asperphenmate
was not present, and instead a m/z 268.0975 was observed as shown in 25.
Figure 25: Structure and fragmentation patterns of Asperphenamate analogues reported by Kildgaard
et al[34].
The Asperphenamate analogues I, II and IV described by Kildgaard et al, were also found to be
present in the P. astrolabium crude extract in small amounts by extracting MS/MS chromatograms as
shown in ﬁgure 26.
The fragmentation of Asperphenamate has been described in detail by Kildgaard et al 2014[34]. They
showed Asperphenamate fragmenting at 20 mV into the major ions m/z 256.1334, m/z 238.1231 and
m/z 252.1062 corresponding to [C16H18NO2]+], [C16H16NO]+] and [C16H14NO2]+. The fragment of
m/z 256.13341 comes from cleavage of the ester bond and 238.1231 is formed from this ion by water
loss as shown in ﬁgure 28. The remaining part of the molecule then forms the m/z 252.1062 ion.
This previous research conducted by Kildgaard et al on an Asperphenamate producing Penicillium
strain, showed 4 novel Asperphenamate analogues [34]. These analogues were proposed to arise from
C-H to N substitutions in the asperphenamate skeleton or oxygen additions at either the phenylalanine
44
==PAGE:54==
Figure 26: MS/MS spectra of Asperphenamte analogues (I, II and IV) described by Kildgaard et al
from the Penicillium astrolabium extract[34].
or the benzamide moeties with reported m/z values as shown in ﬁgure 25. The reported m/z value
of 508.2232 corresponded to C-H to N substitutions at either side of the ester and m/z value of
523.2211 corresponded to an addition of oxygen at either the phenylalanine or benzamide moeity
of Asperphenamate. These analogues with identical masses could be distinguised from eachother
through their MS/MS fragmentation pattern as shown in ﬁgure 25. By extracting EIC of the reported
m/z values and comparing the fragmentation patterns, all the analogues I to IV shown in ﬁgure 25,
were found to be present in the P. astrolabium crude extract. It was chosen to purify m/z 523.2211 for
NMR characterization to investigate the position of the additional oxygen. Characterization of m/z
523.2211 is elaborated on in section 5.3.5.
5.3.4.1
Dereplication of potentially novel asperphenamate analogues
Encouraged by these ﬁndings, it was decided to investigate if P. astrolabium was able to produce addi-
tional analogues with amino acid substitutions. The peaks 6 and 7 close to Asperphenmate therefore
investigated.
Firstly, peak 6 was examined and m/z 546.2372 was determined to be the protonated adduct. A
formula was calculated to C34H31N3O4 with an accuracy of 2.77 ppm. Searching Antibase, Reaxys
45
==PAGE:55==
Figure 27: Positive mode BPC of Penicillium astrolabium crude extract with EIC of 20 mV for ions
m/z 546.2372 and m/z 473.2421 from peaks 6 and 7 respectively.
and the internal database gave no hits. Interestingly, the fragmentation pattern shown in ﬁgure 27
revealed an almost identical fragmentation to Asperphenamate at the same voltage of 20 mV re-
ported by Kildgaard et al[34]. However, a major difference was the presence of a m/z 291.1131 ion
instead of the 252.1052 ion as shown in ﬁgure 28. A formula was calculated for 291.1131 giving
[C18H15N2O2]+] which showed a difference of [C2H1N] compared with m/z 252.1062. The difference
could be explained by the exchange of one of the phenylalanine residues with a tryptophan since this
matched the change in formula and mass difference of 39 Da. This meant m/z 546.2372 could be
a novel analogue of Asperphenamate. A proposed structure as well as fragmentation of the novel
analogue and Asperphenamate is shown in ﬁgure 28.
Peak 7 showed a protonated adduct m/z 473.2421 which gave a formula of C29H31N2O4 with an
accuracy of 2.97 ppm. A MS/MS spectra at 20 mV of m/z 473.2421 is shown in ﬁgure 27. This
was used to conduct a spectral search on similarity in the internal database gave which the hit As-
perphenamate with a reverse score of 95% due to the m/z fragments 238.1231 and 256.13341 being
identical. However, the ion 252.1052 was not present instead another ion with m/z 218.1170 was
46
==PAGE:56==
present. The mass difference from m/z 473.2421 and Asperphenamate of 33.9870 Da could be ex-
plained by the exchange of a phenylalanine residue with a leucine or isoleucine. A proposed structure
and fragmentation is shown in ﬁgure 28.
Figure 28: Structures of Asperphenamate (1) and proposed structures of potential analogues m/z
546.2372 (2) m/z 473.2421 (3). Stereochemistry of the compounds is not shown. For 3 the leucine
analogue is shown, however fragmentation would be identical for the isoleucine analogue.
A structural search in SciFinder revealed that the leucine analogue has previously been isolated from
the Schismatomma hypothallinum and given the name Hypothallin[83]. The fragmentation pattern
had been described in detail and also showed the presence of the m/z 218.1171 ion supporting this
hypothesis. However, since the isoleucine analogue would show the same fragments, structural elu-
cidation by NMR would have to be conducted to conﬁrm the identity of the compound.
Finally, a search for the common ions m/z 238.1231 and 256.1334 was performed by extracting EICs.
However, it was not possible to identify additional amino acid substitution analogues.
47
==PAGE:57==
5.3.5
NMR
The numbering of the atoms was performed inspired by Zheng et al 2013 and is shown in ﬁgure
29[84]. A list of chemical shifts and correlations is shown in table 6. All recorded spectra can be
found in appendix 9.1.
Figure 29: Structure of asperphenamate tyrosine analogue (m/z 523.2211). Atom labels correspond
to numbers in table 6. Bold bonds correspond to COSY and/or H2BC correlations. Arrows indicate
HMBC correlations.
The 1H NMR spectrum of the compound showed 19 aromatic protons in the highﬁeld. Three mono-
substituted phenyls were identiﬁed. The protons in the para position of two of the phenyls were
identiﬁed as two distinct triplet of triplets (tt’s). Through COSY and H2BC correlations, the three
spin systems were identiﬁed at δH [7.65 (2H, dd, J = 8.0, 1.0 Hz, 7.39 (2H), 7.50 (1H, tt, J = 8.0, 1.0
Hz) and 7.21 (2H), 7.30 (2H), 7.23 (2H) and 7.68 (2H, dd, J = 7.2, 1.1 Hz), 7.33 (2H), 7.43 (1H, tt, J
= 7.2, 1.1 Hz)]. The parasubstituted phenyl was identiﬁed at δH [7.06 (2H, d, J = 8.3 Hz), 6.75 (2H,
d, J = 8.3 Hz)].
The remaining part of the spectrum resembled to a that of Asperphenamate as reported by Yuan et
al 2010, however the chemical shifts were shifted slightly downﬁeld[85]. The two secondary amino
protons were observed at δH 6.59 (1H, d, J = 6.8 Hz), and 6.71 (1H, d, J = 8.5 Hz). The two methine
groups were observed at δH 4.87 (1H, m) and 4.59 (1H, m). The three methylene groups all showed
diastereotopic protons. The oxygenated methylene was observed upﬁeld at δH [4.04 (1H, dd, J = 11.4,
6.8 Hz) and 4.50 (1H, dd, J = 11.4, 4.7)]. The two remaining methylene groups were observed at δH
[3.16, (1H, dd, J = 14.1, 6.8 Hz), 3.22, (1H, dd, J = 14.1, 6.8 Hz) and 2.90, (1H, dd, J = 13.8, 8.4
Hz), 3.00, (1H, dd, J = 13.8, 6.6 Hz).
48
==PAGE:58==
The 13C NMR spectrum showed four downﬁeld carbons with the ester carbon at δC 172.2, the two
amide carbons at δC 167.71 and 167.75 and the oxygenated carbon of the tyrosine moeity at δC 155.3.
Using the COSY correlations marked in blue the individual parts making up the backbone could be
assigned. The HMBC correlations, shown as blue arrows in ﬁgure 29, were used to determine how
the parts where connected and the orientation of the ester and amides.
Finally, the phenyl moeties were assigned to the backbone by HMBC correlations shown as black
arrows in the ﬁgure. Assigning the position of the benzamide moeities proved to be difﬁcult as the 3J
coupling of 2” and 2”’ to 7” and 7”’ respectively showed overlap and were difﬁcult to distinguish as
shown in ﬁgure 30. However, the presence of long range coupling 4J from 3” and 3”’ made it possible
to distinguish as shown in the ﬁgure.
Figure 30: HMBC expansion
The observation from MS/MS described in section 5.3.4.1 of the phenol moeity’s position being on
the carbonyl side of the ester was conﬁrmed as a 3J from 2-7 was observed.
49
==PAGE:59==
Position
δH (ppm,mult., J(Hz))
δC(ppm)
COSY
H2BC
HMBC (1H to 13C)
1
-
127.3
-
-
-
2
7.06 (d, 8.6)
130.5
3
3
3, 4
3
6.75 (d, 8.6)
116.0
2
2
1, 4
4
-
155.3
-
-
-
7a
3.16 (dd, 14.1, 6.7)
36.9
7b, 8
8
1, 2, 8, 9
7b
3.22 (dd, 14.1, 6.7)
36.9
7a, 8
8
1, 2, 8, 9
8
4.87 (ddd, ?, 6.7, 6.7)
54.8
7a, 7b, 10
7, 10
1, 7, 7”’, 9
9
-
172.2
-
-
-
10
6.59 (d, 6.7)
-
8
8
7, 7”’, 8, 9
1’
-
137.14
-
-
-
2’
7.21*
129.4
3’
3’
7’, 4’
3’
7.30*
128.9
2’, 4’
2’, 4’
1’
4’
7.23*
126.4
3’, 2’
3’
2’
7’a
2.90 (dd, 13.8, 8.4)
37.4
8’
8’
1’, 2’, 8’, 9’
7’b
3.00 (13.8, 6.6)
37.4
8’
8’
1’, 2’, 8’, 9’
8’
4.59 (m)
50.6
7’a/7’b, 9’a/9’b, 10’
7’, 9’
1’, 7’, 7”
9’a
4.04 (dd, 11.4, 6.8)
65.5
8’
8’
7’, 8’, 9
9’b
4.50 (dd, 11.4, 4.7)
65.5
8’
8’
7’, 8’, 9
10’
6.71 (d, 8.5)
-
-
-
7’, 8’, 9’, 7”
1”
-
134.1
-
-
-
2”
7.68 (dd, 7.2, 1.1)
127.2
3”, 4”
3”
3”, 4”, 7”
3”
7.33*
128.8
2”, 4”
2”, 4”
2”, 4”, 7”
4”
7.43 (tt, 7.2,1.1)
131.7
2”, 3”
3”
2”, 3”
7”
-
167.71
-
-
-
1”’
-
133.4
-
-
-
2”’
7.65 (dd, 8.0, 1.0)
127.2
3”’, 4”’
3”’
3”’, 4”’, 7”’
3”’
7.39
128.6
2”’, 4”’
2”’, 4”’
1”’ ,7”’
4”’
7.50 (tt, ??)
132.2
2”’, 3”’
3”’
2”’, 3”’
7”’
-
167.75
-
-
-
Table 6: Table of NMR chemical shifts of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue. *It was not possible
to identify the J-coupling constants.
50
==PAGE:60==
6
Conclusion
Of the eight initial fungi P. astrolabium was chosen due to its high bioactivity toward B. subtillis and
no litterature regarding its production of antimicrobial compounds existed. The bioguided puriﬁcation
yielded in Xanthopoecin which is a known antimicrobial compound. Furthermore by examining
LC-DAD-MS data of the active fractions it was found that a MeOH artefact of Xanthoepocin was
formed during sample preparation and proposed to be a product of methanolysis of one of the epoxide
moeities. This artefact was puriﬁed and showed equal bioactivity compared with Xanthoepocin.
Methanolysis of both epoxides was attempted however conversion was insufﬁecient for puriﬁcation
and bioassay.
Dereplication showed that P. astrolabium produced the compounds Meleagrin and Asperphenamate
along with multible unknown compounds. Dereplication guided puriﬁcation yielded in the puriﬁca-
tion and structure elucidation of an Asperphenamate analogue with m/z 523.2211 [M+H]+, where the
phenylalanine of Asperphenamate had been exchanged for a tyrosine. This analogue had not previ-
ously been puriﬁed from a fungal source. Furthermore through analysing MS/MS data it was shown
that P. astrolabium was able to produce a large variety of Asperphenamate analogues including two
potentially novel analogues with m/z 473.2421 [M+H]+ and m/z 546.2372 [M+H]+. Both of these
were proposed to arise from an amino acid substitution in the structure, with the ﬁrst potentially be-
ing a leucine or isoleucine analogue and the second a tryptophan analogue. The tryptrophan analogue
has not previosly been described for this class of compounds.
51
==PAGE:61==
7
Future perspectives
Asperphenamate analogues
Asperphenamate has been reported to have anticancer activities against several cell lines in vitro[85].
It would therefore be interesting to purify and characterize the potential analogues and test them in
anticancer assays to establish the effect of the amino acid substitution. Furthermore the stereochem-
istry of the compounds would have to be investigated as the (R,S) stereoisomer of Asperphenamate
was found to be more potent than the (S,R) conﬁguration[86]. The stereochemistry of the Asper-
phenamate analogues were not evaluated in this project. This could be done by measuring the optical
rotation of the compounds as chiral molecules have the ability to rotate plane polarized light[87].
However this method would not give the full conﬁguration of the molecule. A method often used
in natural product discovery is the Marfey’s method[88; 84]. A method for Asperphenamate has
been described by Zheng et al 2013[84]. Here Asperphenamate is hydrolyzed and the products of
the hydrolysis are characterized. From here standards of the hydrolysates can be synthesized in the
different possible conﬁgurations. Next the hydrolysates and the standards are derivatized with the
chiral Marfey’s reagent (1-ﬂouro-2,4-dinitrophenyl-5-L-alanine), the structure of which is shown in
ﬁgure 31. These derivatives are then analyzed by HPLC as the derivatives will have different retention
times[84]. From this information the stereochemistry of the compounds can be determined.
Figure 31: Marfey’s reagent (1-ﬂouro-2,4-dinitrophenyl-5-L-alanine)
Unknown secondary metabolites
Furhermore it would be interesting to purify and characterize the unknown compounds listed in table
5. The structures or regions of the structures could be compared to the pharmacophores of known
drugs and bioassays could be conducted to evaluate bioactivity.
52
==PAGE:62==
8
References
[1] Newman, D. J. & Cragg, G. M. Natural products as sources of new drugs from 1981 to 2014.
Journal of Natural Products 79, 629–661 (2016).
[2] U.S. Food
Drug Administration.
What is a botanical drug?
(Date accessed:
02.02.2019).
URL
https://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/
OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CDER/ucm090983.htm.
[3] Li, J. W. H. & Vederas, J. C. Drug discovery and natural products: End of an era or an endless
frontier? Science 325, 161–165 (2009).
[4] Shen, B. A new golden age of natural products drug discovery. Cell 163, 1297–1300 (2015).
[5] Geneva: World Health Organization; (WHO/EMP/IAU). Antibacterial agents in clinical devel-
opment: an analysis of the antibacterial clinical development pipeline, including tuberculosis.
4–44 (2017).
[6] Harvey, A., Edrada-Ebel, R. & J. Quinn, R. The re-emergence of natural products for drug
discovery in the genomics era. Nature reviews Drug discovery 14, 111–129 (2015).
[7] Butler, M. S. The Role of Natural Product Chemistry in Drug Discovery. Journal of Natural
Products 67, 2141–2153 (2004).
[8] Demain, A. L. & Fang, A. The natural functions of secondary metabolites. In History of Modern
Biotechnology I, 1 – 39 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2000).
[9] Aly, A. H., Debbab, A. & Proksch, P. Fifty years of drug discovery from fungi. Fungal Diversity
50, 3–19 (2011).
[10] Hawksworth, D. L. & L¨ucking, R. Fungal diversity revisited: 2.2 to 3.8 million species. Micro-
biology Spectrum 5 (2017).
[11] Schuefﬂer, A. & Anke, T. Fungal natural products in research and development. Natural Product
Reports 31, 1425–1448 (2014).
[12] Sharma, M. & Sharma, R.
Drugs and drug intermediates from fungi: Striving for greener
processes. Critical Reviews in Microbiology 42, 322–338 (2016).
[13] Macheleidt, J. et al. Regulation and Role of Fungal Secondary Metabolites. Annual Review of
Genetics 50, 371–392 (2016).
53
==PAGE:63==
[14] Boruta, T. Uncovering the repertoire of fungal secondary metabolites: From Fleming’s labora-
tory to the International Space Station. Bioengineered 9, 12–16 (2017).
[15] Calvo, A. M., Wilson, R. A., Bok, J. W. & Keller, N. P.
Relationship between Secondary
Metabolism and Fungal Development. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 66, 447–
459 (2002).
[16] Tan, S. Y. & Tatsumura, Y. Alexander ﬂeming (1881-1955): Discoverer of penicillin. Singapore
Medical Journal 56, 366–367 (2015).
[17] Mahajan, G. B. & Balachandran, L. Antibacterial agents from actinomycetes - a review. Fron-
tiers in Bioscience - Elite 4, 240–253 (2012).
[18] Lim, F. Y., Sanchez, J. F., Wang, C. C. & Keller, N. P. Toward awakening cryptic secondary
metabolite gene clusters in ﬁlamentous fungi. Methods in Enzymology 517, 303–324 (2012).
[19] Nielsen, K. F. & Larsen, T. O. The importance of mass spectrometric dereplication in fungal
secondary metabolite analysis. Frontiers in Microbiology 6, 71 (2015).
[20] Nielsen, J. C. et al. Global analysis of biosynthetic gene clusters reveals vast potential of sec-
ondary metabolite production in Penicillium species. Nature Microbiology 2, 17044 (2017).
[21] Pearce, C. Biologically Active Fungal Metabolites. Advances in applied microbiology 44, 1–80
(1997).
[22] Frisvad, J. C., Andersen, B. & Thrane, U. The use of secondary metabolite proﬁling in chemo-
taxonomy of ﬁlamentous fungi. Mycological Research 112, 231 – 240 (2008). Fungal Secondary
Metabolite Research.
[23] Cox, R. J., Skellam, E. & Williams, K. Biosynthesis of fungal polyketides. In Physiology
and Genetics: Selected Basic and Applied Aspects, 385–412 (Springer International Publishing,
2018).
[24] Gomes, E. S., Schuch, V. & de Macedo Lemos, E. G. Biotechnology of polyketides: New breath
of life for the novel antibiotic genetic pathways discovery through metagenomics. Brazilian
journal of microbiology : [publication of the Brazilian Society for Microbiology] 44, 1007–
1034 (2014).
[25] Ventola, C. L. The antibiotic resistance crisis: part 1: causes and threats. P & T : a peer-reviewed
journal for formulary management 40, 277–283 (2015).
54
==PAGE:64==
[26] Agarwal, V. & Moore, B. S. Fungal polyketide engineering comes of age. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 111, 12278–12279 (2014).
[27] Weissman, K. J. Chapter 1 Introduction to Polyketide Biosynthesis. In Complex Enzymes in
Microbial Natural Product Biosynthesis, Part B: Polyketides, Aminocoumarins and Carbohy-
drates, vol. 459 of Methods in Enzymology, 3 – 16 (Academic Press, 2009).
[28] Caboche, S. et al. NORINE: A database of nonribosomal peptides. Nucleic Acids Research 36,
326–331 (2008).
[29] Keller, N. P., Turner, G. & Bennett, J. W. Fungal secondary metabolism — from biochemistry
to genomics. Nature Reviews Microbiology 3, 937–947 (2005).
[30] Stack, D., Neville, C. & Doyle, S. Nonribosomal peptide synthesis in Aspergillus fumigatus and
other fungi. Microbiology 153, 1297–1306 (2007).
[31] Evans, S. B. Reengineering and Discovery of Nonribosomal Peptide Synthetases. Ph.D. thesis,
Graduate College of the University of Illinois (2010).
[32] Stevens, B., Joska, T. & Anderson, A. Progress toward re-engineering non-ribosomal peptide
synthetase proteins: a potential new source of pharmacological agents.
Drug Development
Research 66, 9–18 (2005).
[33] Cie´sla, L. & Moaddel, R. Comparison of analytical techniques for the identiﬁcation of bioactive
compounds from natural products. Natural Product Reports 33, 1131–1145 (2016).
[34] Kildgaard, S. et al. Accurate dereplication of bioactive secondary metabolites from marine-
derived fungi by UHPLC-DAD-QTOFMS and a MS/HRMS library. Marine drugs 12, 3681–
3705 (2014).
[35] Zhang, Q.-W., Lin, L.-G. & Ye, W.-C. Techniques for extraction and isolation of natural prod-
ucts: a comprehensive review. Chinese Medicine 13, 20 (2018).
[36] M˚ansson, M. et al. Explorative Solid-Phase Extraction (E-SPE) for Accelerated Microbial Nat-
ural Product Discovery, Dereplication, and Puriﬁcation. Journal of Natural Products 73, 1126–
1132 (2010).
[37] Harris, D. C.
Introduction to Analytical Separations.
In Quantitative Chemical Analysis,
chap. 23, 604–628 (W. H. Freeman and Co.,, 2015).
55
==PAGE:65==
[38] Coskun, O. Separation techniques: Chromatography. Northern Clinics of Istanbul 3, 156–160
(2016).
[39] Poole, C. F. Chromatography. In Reference Module in Chemistry, Molecular Sciences and
Chemical Engineering (Elsevier, 2018).
[40] Meyer, V. CHROMATOGRAPHY | Overview. In Reference Module in Chemistry, Molecular
Sciences and Chemical Engineering (Elsevier, 2013).
[41] Hostettmann, K. & Wolfender, J. NATURAL PRODUCTS | Liquid Chromatography. In Ency-
clopedia of Separation Science, 3424 – 3434 (Academic Press, Oxford, 2000).
[42] Bucar, F., Wube, A. & Schmid, M. Natural product isolation - how to get from biological
material to pure compounds. Natural Product Reports 30, 525–545 (2013).
[43] Gallis, K. W., Araujo, J. T., Duff, K. J., Moore, J. G. & Landry, C. C. The Use of Mesoporous
Silica in Liquid Chromatography. Advanced Materials 11, 1452–1455 (1999).
[44] Kuball, H.-G., H¨ofer, T. & Kiesewalter, S. Chiroptical Spectroscopy, General Theory. In Ency-
clopedia of Spectroscopy and Spectrometry, 250 – 266 (Elsevier, Oxford, 1999).
[45] El-Elimat, T. et al. High-resolution MS, MS/MS, and UV database of fungal secondary metabo-
lites as a dereplication protocol for bioactive natural products. Journal of Natural Products 76,
1709–1716 (2013).
[46] Waters.
Identifying
and
quantitating
compounds
(Date
accessed:
2019-02-1).
URL
http://www.waters.com/waters/en_DK/
Identifying-and-Quantitating-Compounds/nav.htm?cid=10049064&
locale=en_DK.
[47] Harris, D. C. High-Performance Liquid Chromatography. In Quantitative Chemical Analysis,
chap. 25, 667–706 (W. H. Freeman and Co., 2015).
[48] Guthrie, J. P. Hydrolysis of esters of oxy acids: pKa values for strong acids; Brønsted relation-
ship for attack of water at methyl; free energies of hydrolysis of esters of oxy acids; and a linear
relationship between free energy of hydrolysis and pKa holding over a range of 20 pK units.
Canadian Journal of Chemistry 56, 2342–2354 (1978).
[49] De Vijlder, T. et al. A tutorial in small molecule identiﬁcation via electrospray ionization-mass
spectrometry: The practical art of structural elucidation. Mass Spectrometry Reviews 37, 607–
629 (2018).
56
==PAGE:66==
[50] Gross, J. H. Instrumentation. In Mass Spectrometry: A Textbook, chap. 4, 117–221 (Springer,
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011).
[51] Isbrandt, T. Discovery and Characterization of Fungal Natural Product Biosynthetic Pathways.
Ph.D. thesis, Technical University of Denmark (DTU) (2018).
[52] Banerjee, S. & Mazumdar, S. Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry: A Technique to
Access the Information beyond the Molecular Weight of the Analyte. International Journal of
Analytical Chemistry 2012, 40 (2012).
[53] Harris, D. C. Mass Spectrometry. In Quantitative Chemical Analysis, chap. 22, 559–596 (W.
H. Freeman and Co., 2015).
[54] Perreault, H. & Lattov´a, E. 1.50 - Mass Spectrometry. In Comprehensive Biotechnology, 669 –
677 (Academic Press, Burlington, 2011), Second Edition edn.
[55] Ito, T. & Masubuchi, M. Dereplication of microbial extracts and related analytical technologies.
Journal of Antibiotics 67, 353–360 (2014).
[56] Kildgaard, S. et al. A Dereplication and Bioguided Discovery Approach to Reveal New Com-
pounds from a Marine-Derived Fungus Stilbella ﬁmetaria. Marine Drugs 15 (2017).
[57] Nielsen, K., M˚ansson, M., Rank, C., Frisvad, J. & Larsen, T. O. Dereplication of microbial
natural products by LC-DAD-TOFMS. Journal of natural products 74, 2338–2348 (2011).
[58] Niessen, W. M. A. Mass Spectrometry: Chromatography–MS, Methods. In Encyclopedia of
Spectroscopy and Spectrometry, 758 – 763 (Academic Press, Oxford, 2017), Third edn.
[59] Laatsch, H.
Antibase:
The natural compound identiﬁer (Date accessed:
2019-02-7).
URL https://www.wiley.com/en-dk/AntiBase:+The+Natural+Compound+
Identifier-p-9783527343591.
[60] Reynolds, W. F. & Mazzola, E. P. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance in the Structural Elucidation
of Natural Products. In Progress in the Chemistry of Organic Natural Products 100, 223–309
(Springer International Publishing, 2015).
[61] Breton, R. C. & Reynolds, W. F.
Using nmr to identify and characterize natural products.
Natural Product Reports 30, 501–524 (2013).
[62] Pavia, D. L., Lampman, G. M., Kriz, G. S. & Vyvyan, J. R. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spec-
troscopy. In Introduction to Spectroscopy Fifth Edition, 215–276 (Cengage Learning, 2015).
57
==PAGE:67==
[63] Darbeau, R. W. Nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) spectroscopy: A review and a look at its
use as a probative tool in deamination chemistry. Applied Spectroscopy Reviews 41, 401–425
(2006).
[64] Kawai, S. Discussion on Decomposition of Chloroform. YAKUGAKU ZASSHI 86, 1125–1132
(1966).
[65] Samson, R., Hoekstra, E., Frisvad, J. & Filtenborg, O. Mycological media (appendix). In
Introduction to food- and airborne fungi, 378–383 (Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures,,
2002).
[66] Tedesco, P. et al. Antimicrobial Activity of Monoramnholipids Produced by Bacterial Strains
Isolated from the Ross Sea (Antarctica). Marine Drugs 14, 83 (2016).
[67] Dickert, H., Machka, K. & Braveny, I. The uses and limitations of disc diffusion in the antibiotic
sensitivity testing of bacteria. Infection 9, 18–24 (1981).
[68] Vesth, T. C. et al. Investigation of inter- and intraspecies variation through genome sequencing
of Aspergillus section Nigri. Nature Genetics 50, 1688–1695 (2018).
[69] Frisvad, J. C. & Larsen, T. O. Extrolites of Aspergillus fumigatus and Other Pathogenic Species
in Aspergillus Section Fumigati. Frontiers in Microbiology 6, 1485 (2016).
[70] Chidananda, C., Rao, L. J. M. & Sattur, A. P. Sclerotiorin, from Penicillium frequentans, a
potent inhibitor of aldose reductase. Biotechnology Letters 28, 1633–1636 (2006).
[71] Samson, R. A., Varga, J., Meijer, M. & Frisvad, J. C. New taxa in Aspergillus section Usti.
Studies in Mycology 69, 81–97 (2011).
[72] Ciegler, A., Hayes, A. W. & Vesonder, R. F. Production and Biological Activity of Secalonic
Acid D. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 39, 285–287 (1980).
[73] Andersen, R., Buechi, G., Kobbe, B. & Demain, A. Secalonic acids D and F are toxic metabo-
lites of Aspergillus aculeatus. The Journal of organic chemistry 42, 352–353 (1977).
[74] Igarashi, Y. et al. Xanthoepocin, a New Antibiotic from Penicillium simplicissimum IFO5762.
The Journal of Antibiotics 53, 928–933 (2000).
[75] Sauerschnig, C., Doppler, M., Bueschl, C. & Schuhmacher, R. Methanol Generates Numerous
Artifacts during Sample Extraction and Storage of Extracts in Metabolomics Research. Metabo-
lites 8 (2018).
58
==PAGE:68==
[76] Nielsen, K. F. & Smedsgaard, J. Fungal metabolite screening: database of 474 mycotoxins and
fungal metabolites for dereplication by standardised liquid chromatography–UV–mass spec-
trometry methodology. Journal of Chromatography A 1002, 111 – 136 (2003).
[77] Hussain, H., Al-Harrasi, A., Green, I., Abbas, G. & Ahmed, I. Recent Advances in the Chem-
istry and Biology of Natural Dimeric Quinones. vol. 46, chap. 10, 447–517 (2015).
[78] Buchanan, M., Gill, M. & yu, J. Pigments of fungi. Part 43. Cardinalins 1–6, novel pyranonaph-
thoquinones from the fungus Dermocybe cardinalis Horak. Journal of The Chemical Society,
Perkin Transactions 1 1, 919–926 (1997).
[79] Frisvad, J., Houbraken, J., Popma, S. & Samson, R. Two new Penicillium species Penicillium
buchwaldii and Penicillium spathulatum, producing the anticancer compound asperphenamate.
F E M S Microbiology Letters 339, 77–92 (2013).
[80] Xu, G. B. et al. Indole Alkaloids from Chaetomium globosum. Journal of Natural Products 78,
1479–1485 (2015).
[81] Yuan, L. et al. Synthesis and in vitro antitumor activity of Asperphenamate derivatives as au-
tophagy inducer. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Letters 22, 2216–2220 (2012).
[82] Patent CN101215276B - N,N’-substituted phenylpropylamino acid phenylpropylaminoalcohols
esters derivatives and preparation method thereof.
URL https://patents.google.
com/patent/CN101215276B/en.
[83] Huneck, S., Porzel, A., Schmidt, J. & Follmann, G. Hypothallin, Ein Weiterer Vertreter Eines
Aminos¨aure-Aminoalkohol-Esters Aus Der Krustenﬂechte Schismatomma Hypothallinum.
Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung C 47, 785–790 (1992).
[84] Zheng, C. J. et al. Bioactive Phenylalanine Derivatives and Cytochalasins from the Soft Coral-
Derived Fungus, Aspergillus elegans. Marine Drugs 11, 2054–2068 (2013).
[85] Yuan, L., Wang, J. H. & Sun, T. M.
Total synthesis and anticancer activity studies of the
stereoisomers of asperphenamate and patriscabratine. Chinese Chemical Letters 21, 155 – 158
(2010).
[86] Bladt, T. T., Frisvad, J. C., Knudsen, P. B. & Larsen, T. O. Anticancer and antifungal compounds
from Aspergillus, Penicillium and other ﬁlamentous fungi. Molecules 18, 11338–11376 (2013).
59
==PAGE:69==
[87] Clayden, J., Greeves, N. & Warren, S. Chapter 14 stereochemistry. In Organic chemistry, 302 –
327 (Oxford University Press, 2012).
[88] Andersen, M. R. et al. Accurate prediction of secondary metabolite gene clusters in ﬁlamentous
fungi. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110,
E99–E107 (2013).
60
==PAGE:70==
9
Appendix
9.1
NMR
9.1.1
1H NMR of Asperphenamate tyrosin analogue
[ppm]
 7 
 6 
 5 
 4 
 3 
 2 
BIO_TOL_CHG_FHN109 in CDCl3
1D 1H 16 scans
160119
FHN  10  1  C:\Bruker\TopSpin3.5pl7\data
61
==PAGE:71==
9.1.2
DQF-COSY of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
F2 [ppm]
 10 
 8 
 6 
 4 
 2 
F1 [ppm]
 10 
 8 
 6 
 4 
BIO_TOL_CHG_FHN109 in CDCl3
DQF-COSY
160119
NMR-mz523  11  1  C:\Bruker\TopSpin3.5pl7\data
62
==PAGE:72==
9.1.3
DQF-COSY of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
F2 [ppm]
 7.5 
 7.0 
 6.5 
F1 [ppm]
 8 
 7 
 6 
 5 
BIO_TOL_CHG_FHN109 in CDCl3
DQF-COSY
160119
NMR-mz523  11  1  C:\Bruker\TopSpin3.5pl7\data
63
==PAGE:73==
9.1.4
HSQC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
F2 [ppm]
 7 
 6 
 5 
 4 
 3 
F1 [ppm]
 140 
 120 
 100 
 80 
 60 
 40 
BIO_TOL_CHG_FHN109 in CDCl3
edHSQC
160119
NMR-mz523  12  1  C:\Bruker\TopSpin3.5pl7\data
64
==PAGE:74==
9.1.5
HSQC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
F2 [ppm]
 7.8 
 7.6 
 7.4 
 7.2 
 7.0 
 6.8 
 6.6 
F1 [ppm]
 140 
 135 
 130 
 125 
 120 
 115 
BIO_TOL_CHG_FHN109 in CDCl3
edHSQC
160119
NMR-mz523  12  1  C:\Bruker\TopSpin3.5pl7\data
65
==PAGE:75==
9.1.6
H2BC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
F2 [ppm]
 7 
 6 
 5 
 4 
 3 
F1 [ppm]
 140 
 120 
 100 
 80 
 60 
 40 
BIO_TOL_CHG_FHN109 in CDCl3
H2BC
160119
NMR-mz523  14  1  C:\Bruker\TopSpin3.5pl7\data
66
==PAGE:76==
9.1.7
HMBC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
F2 [ppm]
 7 
 6 
 5 
 4 
 3 
F1 [ppm]
 140 
 120 
 100 
 80 
 60 
 40 
BIO_TOL_CHG_FHN109 in CDCl3
HMBC
160119
NMR-mz523  13  1  C:\Bruker\TopSpin3.5pl7\data
67
==PAGE:77==
9.1.8
HMBC of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
F2 [ppm]
 7.8 
 7.6 
 7.4 
 7.2 
 7.0 
 6.8 
 6.6 
F1 [ppm]
 160 
 140 
 120 
 100 
 80 
 60 
BIO_TOL_CHG_FHN109 in CDCl3
HMBC
160119
NMR-mz523  13  1  C:\Bruker\TopSpin3.5pl7\data
68
==PAGE:78==
9.1.9
13C NMR of Asperphenamate tyrosine analogue
[ppm]
 160 
 140 
 120 
 100 
 80 
 60 
 40 
[rel]
 0 
 2 
 4 
 6 
BIO_TOL_CHG_FHN109 in CDCl3
1D 13C 1024 scans
160119
NMR-mz523  16  1  C:\Bruker\TopSpin3.5pl7\data
69
==PAGE:79==
9.2
Results of initial bioassays of the 8 fungi
The results of the initial bioassays of the 8 fungi are shown below. The images are in order of fungal
strain and numbers on the plates correspond to those found in the tables in section 9.2.1.
 
70
==PAGE:80==
 
71
==PAGE:81==
9.2.1
Tabulated overview of initial screening
The results of the initial bioassays of the 8 fungi are tabulated below. Left column shows the sample
number which corresponds to the labelling on the plates. The preﬁx ”A” or ”B” on the plates corre-
spond to the concentration in last four columns. The numbers given in last four columns are derived
from the size of the clearing zone with 0 being none and 3 being large, and 3 highlighted in yellow
indicates a very large clearing zone.
No.
Strain
Growth
Fractions
Date
Bored well
Bioactivity 
0.25 mg (A)
Bored well
Bioactivty
 0.1 mg (B)
Disc dif. 
Bioactivity 0.25 
mg (A)
Disc dif. 
Bioactivity 
0.1 mg (B)
2010 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
Crude (24 h)
24.09.2018
2
1
0
0
2010 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
Crude (1 h)
24.09.2018
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
2067 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
F1 RP 30% MeOH
25.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2068 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
F2 RP 40% MeOH
25.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2069 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
F3 RP 50% MeOH
25.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2070 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
F4 RP 60% MeOH
25.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2071 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
F5 RP 70% MeOH
25.09.2018
2
2
0
0
2072 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
F6 RP 80% MeOH
25.09.2018
2
2
1
1
2073 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
F7 RP 90% MeOH
25.09.2018
2
2
0
0
2074 A.californicus/16748
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 11d  
F8 RP 100% MeOH
25.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2004 A.eucalypticola/29274
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
Crude
13.09.2018
2
1 N/A
N/A
2027 A.eucalypticola/29274
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F1 RP 30% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2028 A.eucalypticola/29274
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F2 RP 40% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2029 A.eucalypticola/29274
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F3 RP 50% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2030 A.eucalypticola/29274
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F4 RP 60% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2031 A.eucalypticola/29274
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F5 RP 70% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2032 A.eucalypticola/29274
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F6 RP 80% MeOH
17.09.2018
1
1 N/A
N/A
2033 A.eucalypticola/29274
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F7 RP 90% MeOH
17.09.2018
1
2 N/A
N/A
2034 A.eucalypticola/29274
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F8 RP 100% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2002 A.homomorphus/21983
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
Crude
13.09.2018
3
3 N/A
N/A
2011 A.homomorphus/21983
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F1 RP 30% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2012 A.homomorphus/21983
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F2 RP 40% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2013 A.homomorphus/21983
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F3 RP 50% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2014 A.homomorphus/21983
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F4 RP 60% MeOH
17.09.2018
3
2 N/A
N/A
2015 A.homomorphus/21983
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F5 RP 70% MeOH
17.09.2018
3
3 N/A
N/A
2016 A.homomorphus/21983
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F6 RP 80% MeOH
17.09.2018
3
3 N/A
N/A
2017 A.homomorphus/21983
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F7 RP 90% MeOH
17.09.2018
3
3 N/A
N/A
2018 A.homomorphus/21983
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F8 RP 100% MeOH
17.09.2018
3
3 N/A
N/A
2009 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
Crude (24 h)
24.09.2018
2
2 N/A
N/A
2009 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
Crude (1 h)
24.09.2018
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
2059 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F1 RP 30% MeOH
25.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2060 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F2 RP 40% MeOH
25.09.2018
3
2 N/A
N/A
2061 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F3 RP 50% MeOH
25.09.2018
2
1 N/A
N/A
2062 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F4 RP 60% MeOH
25.09.2018
2
2 N/A
N/A
2063 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F5 RP 70% MeOH
25.09.2018
1
3 N/A
N/A
2064 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F6 RP 80% MeOH
25.09.2018
N/A
0 N/A
N/A
2065 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F7 RP 90% MeOH
25.09.2018
2
0 N/A
N/A
2066 A.sulphureoviridis/21868
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F8 RP 100% MeOH
25.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
72
==PAGE:82==
No.
Strain
Growth
Fractions
Date
Bored well
Bioactivity 
0.25 mg (A)
Bored well
Bioactivty
 0.1 mg (B)
Disc dif. 
Bioactivity 0.25 
mg (A)
Disc dif. 
Bioactivity 
0.1 mg (B)
2003 A.turcosus/27921
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
Crude
13.09.2018
1
1
0
0
2019 A.turcosus/27921
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F1 RP 30% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2020 A.turcosus/27921
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F2 RP 40% MeOH
17.09.2018
3
2
3
2
2021 A.turcosus/27921
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F3 RP 50% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2022 A.turcosus/27921
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F4 RP 60% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2023 A.turcosus/27921
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F5 RP 70% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2024 A.turcosus/27921
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F6 RP 80% MeOH
17.09.2018
2
1
1
0
2025 A.turcosus/27921
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F7 RP 90% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0 N/A
0
2026 A.turcosus/27921
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F8 RP 100% MeOH
17.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2008 P.astrolabium/28865
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
Crude
20.09.2018
3
3
2
2
2051 P.astrolabium/28865
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F1 RP 30% MeOH
24.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2052 P.astrolabium/28865
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F2 RP 40% MeOH
24.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2053 P.astrolabium/28865
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F3 RP 50% MeOH
24.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2054 P.astrolabium/28865
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F4 RP 60% MeOH
24.09.2018
3
2
1
0
2055 P.astrolabium/28865
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F5 RP 70% MeOH
24.09.2018
3
3
1
1
2056 P.astrolabium/28865
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F6 RP 80% MeOH
24.09.2018
3
3
2
2
2057 P.astrolabium/28865
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F7 RP 90% MeOH
24.09.2018
3
3
1
1
2058 P.astrolabium/28865
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F8 RP 100% MeOH
24.09.2018
3
3
0
0
2006 P.frequentans/34879
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
Crude
13.09.2018
3
1 N/A
N/A
2043 P.frequentans/34879
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F1 RP 30% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2044 P.frequentans/34879
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F2 RP 40% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2045 P.frequentans/34879
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F3 RP 50% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2046 P.frequentans/34879
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F4 RP 60% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2047 P.frequentans/34879
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F5 RP 70% MeOH
20.09.2018
2
1 N/A
N/A
2048 P.frequentans/34879
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F6 RP 80% MeOH
20.09.2018 N/A
1 N/A
N/A
2049 P.frequentans/34879
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F7 RP 90% MeOH
20.09.2018
3
2 N/A
N/A
2050 P.frequentans/34879
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F8 RP 100% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
0 N/A
N/A
2005 P.galathea/30014
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
Crude
13.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2035 P.galathea/30014
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F1 RP 30% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2036 P.galathea/30014
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F2 RP 40% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2037 P.galathea/30014
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F3 RP 50% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
0
0
0
2038 P.galathea/30014
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F4 RP 60% MeOH
20.09.2018 N/A
0
0
0
2039 P.galathea/30014
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F5 RP 70% MeOH
20.09.2018 N/A
0
0
0
2040 P.galathea/30014
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F6 RP 80% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
2
0
1
2041 P.galathea/30014
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F7 RP 90% MeOH
20.09.2018 ?
0
0
0
2042 P.galathea/30014
YES/CYA sm, 28°C, 7d  
F8 RP 100% MeOH
20.09.2018
0
0
0
0
73
