==PAGE:1==
Structural Biomimicry
Master Thesis Research
Bogdan Vlad Voineag, S170384
Technical University of Denmark
February 28, 2019
==PAGE:2==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 2
Contents
1
Abstract
4
2
Objective and Scope
5
3
Introduction
5
4
What has and can be done
6
4.1
General examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Buildings Inspired by Nature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2.1
Sagrada Familia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Structures inspired by nature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3.1
Beijing National Stadium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3.2
The Gherkin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3.3
Royal Albert Bridge - Brontosaurus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Structural Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4.1
Spider Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4.2
Honeycomb . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Initial Design
14
5.1
Geometry of the roof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Loads on the roof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2.1
Self Weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.2
Snow Load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.3
Wind Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.4
Design Situations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.3
Secondary beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.4
Internal Eﬀorts of the truss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5
Member check under axial load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Final Design
20
6.1
Geometry of the roof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2
Internal Eﬀorts of the truss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.3
Member and connection veriﬁcations of truss structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.3.1
Node K - K Type Joint
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.3.2
Node H - KT Type Joint
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.3.3
Node G - KT Type Joint
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.3.4
Truss - Beam Connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.4
Deformation of truss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7
Carbon Fiber Alternative
29
7.1
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.2
General Characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.3
Manufacturing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.3.1
Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.3.2
Resin Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.3.3
Consolidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.3.4
Voids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:3==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 3
7.3.5
Compression Molding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.3.6
Filament Winding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.3.7
Pultrusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.4
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.4.1
Tension Member Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.4.2
Compression Member Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.4.3
Connection Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Comparison
48
8.1
Resistance Capacities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.2
Weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9
Discussion
51
9.1
Suitability of CFRP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9.2
Truss Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10 Conclusions
53
11 Further Work
54
==PAGE:4==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 4
1
Abstract
Ever since the beginning of creation, human beings were inspired and helped
in an indirect way by nature. When one observes and follows closely, nature
can teach us eﬃcient and sustainable solutions about structures, aesthetics,
material systems and processes. One of the main reasons of its eﬃciency in
dealing with problems is the fact that nature has the oldest ’Research and
Development’ system ever since. By going through around 4.5 billion years
of biological trial and errors, it has reached some of the most harmonious
ways of solving problems about stability, safety and sustainability. Harmony
which makes us humans want to reproduce that way of solving issues.
It is safe to say that with passing of time, the twentieth century was
a century of discoveries in physics and the twenty-ﬁrst century is going to
be the century of biology with numerous discoveries from it. Also, from an
economical, ethical and human welfare point of view, biology is considered
more important nowadays than physics.
==PAGE:5==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 5
2
Objective and Scope
In this paper, the theoretical and practical aspects that rise from certain principles of biomimicry
are explored in a case study from a structural engineering point of view with focus on safety,
functionality and sustainability.
The ﬁrst research motive was to ﬁnd inspiration in a shape produced by nature and
make a civil application of it. A structural analysis of this shape was made with main questions:
How does this structure behave?; What generic solutions exist for creating such a structure?;
The second research motive was given by a modern alternative to building materials,
that of carbon ﬁber reinforced polymers.
Studies show that this material has exceptional
resistance and strength behaviour while also oﬀering a very low self-weight when compared
to generic materials such as steel or concrete. This material was found while in search of
an answer for the question: How can this structure be improved based on the biomimicry
principle of material eﬃciency?
3
Introduction
Biomimicry, Biomimetics or Bionics is one of the oldest procedures of thinking when in search
of an eﬃcient, innovative and most important, sustainable solution to certain human-related
issues and requirements. With roots from Greek, ”bios” means ”life” and ”mimesis” - ”imita-
tion”, Biomimicry is considered a relatively new scientiﬁc ﬁeld. As a deﬁnition, biomimicry is
the procedure of exploring and mimicking mother nature with certain principles that it applies.
Ever since manhood started to develop, nature provided shelter and solutions to basic
survival conditions. Nature was used to its full extent from a materialistic point of view in
which everything from above or underground was used to live and create thus it can be seen
how nowadays still, humankind depends on nature to survive.
From centuries ago, numerous well known engineers and architects have applied this
way of thinking in order to solve human problems. Looking back, before the industrial revo-
lution and advances in computer aided computations, one of the most well known names to
adopt this way of thinking was Antoni Gaudi which had nature as inspiration in his biggest
creation, Sagrada Familia. Back in Gaudi’s period, the lack of fuel powered machinery meant
that the entire building industry was forced to use resources from the given circumstances in
the best way possible in order to keep material consumption to a minimum but also to keep
energy input by the manual workforce to a human limit. This is exactly what a biomimetic
principle is in fact, to use the available materials in the most eﬃcient way in order to create
a function that performs with minimum amount of energy input and minimum impact on its
ecosystem. Soon after the industrial revolution and advances in heavy machinery, technology
systems and availability of fossil fuels, the building industry quickly surpassed sustainable ways
of building and functioning and reached a point with signiﬁcant increase of gases released in
the environment which are having a high negative impact on it.
Biomimicry design could be an answer to the problem of carbon-footprint and source
depletion due to the fact that a basic principle of it is to provide solutions that require a re-
duced energy input in the construction phase and also in the lifetime of the system concerned.
As the deﬁnition states, biomimicry is an imitation. This imitation procedure can be made in
==PAGE:6==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 6
diﬀerent ways by imitating a shape, a material or a process.
This imitation process always has to come within reasonable and doable limitations
of engineering knowledge since it is not possible to mimic any kind of shape from nature.
The key factor to mimicking nature is to ”look inside and ﬁnd the interior motif that builds
outward again” [15].
Considering the fact that no structure in nature exists or happened
accidentally, as Santiago Calatrava stated ”God does not roll dice”, it is safe to state that all
natural structures have a logic arrangement. A short example for this statement would be the
most natural vertical structure there is, a tree. A generic tree is made out of a middle trunk
from which principal and secondary branches come out with leaves afterwards. The section
of the trunk, as well as the number and length of branches, are always reduced in the top
part of it for reasons such as transportation of water and nutrients but also from a loading
point of view since the top part supports a smaller load than the bottom part. The same
section-reduction principle is applied in numerous high rise civil buildings in case of columns,
where the ground ﬂoor columns have to transfer loads from the entire superstructure, while
the columns from an upper end ﬂoor have to transfer loads only from the ﬂoors above that
certain ﬂoor.
4
What has and can be done
As follows, other signiﬁcant examples are shown in this chapter in which examples of the
biomimicry procedure are shown. Biomimicry inspiration can be used in almost all human
situations in which a certain solution is required for a given problem, thus the fact the examples
that follow are divided in certain categories.
4.1
General examples
The bullet train, otherwise known as ”Shinkansen” [5], is a train on which the economy and
infrastructure of Japan depends on due to its function of transporting hundreds of thousand of
passengers per day in numerous locations across the country. With a length of over 400 meters
the train is capable of speeds of up to 320 km/h, speed at which a certain problem came up
during the design phase. It was observed that when the train was about to exit a tunnel at
high speed it would make a loud booming sound similar to a thunder. It was considered that
the nose of the train ”hit” a wall of air at the exit which not only created the uncomfortable
noise but also slowed the trains down. The solution of Eiji Nakatsu, train engineer, was to
adopt a nose shape for the train similar to the head of the kingﬁsher bird, a bird capable of
diving in water. The main inspiration idea from the bird came up after it was observed that
when the bird entered the water at close to 40 km/h, it is capable to create almost no splash
of water. The main principle of shaping was applied for the trains front nose and it proved to
be highly eﬃcient when tests showed that not only the thunder noise was canceled but also
fuel eﬃciency increased.
==PAGE:7==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 7
A picture with the birds and trains front ends can be observed in Figure 1:
Figure 1: Head of Kingﬁsher Bird on the left, and the Shinkansen train on the right
Moving forward, the ratio of strength/weight of the bird skull that has inspired archi-
tects and engineers when the task of a roof shell or certain structures are required. “Skulls in
general are extraordinary impact-resistant structures and extremely light at the same time as
they protect the most important organs of an animal body and this performance and physical
property can be applied in structure or architecture design” says architect Andres Harris. It
was observed at a microscopic level that the bone tissue of a bird skull (Figure 2b ) is divided
in a very organic way with irregulated air voids between its ﬁbers that are made out of non-
directional spingiosa cells. From a structural point of view, these highly complex cells allow
for a multidimensional distribution of shear eﬀorts within the overall skull while in the same
time reducing weight.
The cell layout inspired a shell structure (Figure 2a) made out of an upper and lower
layer that are connected through vertical structural components with air gaps between them.
It is considered that a vertical load on the shell is transmitted from the upper layer through the
vertical components and towards the lower layer. The verticality of the structural components
between the two layers is modeled as such because of the curvature of the shell that transfers
shear eﬀorts to the end supports of it.
(a) Figure 2a: Bio-inspired shell structure for pavilion
(b)
Figure
2b:
Microscopic
im-
age of bird skull
tissue
==PAGE:8==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 8
4.2
Buildings Inspired by Nature
4.2.1
Sagrada Familia
Arguably one of the most intriguing and fascinating buildings in the world, the Sagrada Familia
with its famous creator Antoni Gaudi, is a true work of art from both architectural and
engineering point of view. The last 43 years of his life were dedicated to the cathedral which
had the main interior inspiration idea of a forest that would create a perfect ambient for pray.
By Gaudi’s words, ”look no further than nature to see construction at its ﬁnest”, he
managed to prove his point with numerous incredibly detailed structural components of the
cathedral, and the main hall of the cathedral created with 24 meter high columns that are
shaped around the concept of a tree trunk with branches at the top that support the roof.
As the columns give the feeling of a forest, the one aspect that tops the interior design of
the cathedral is the interior illumination by daytime that is made with gold, green and other
vibrant colored windows situated at the end and between the columns ”branches”. Illustrations
of the main hall (Figure 3) of the cathedral and the main facade (Figure 4) are illustrated as
follows.
Figure 3: Main Hall of Sagrada Familia Cathedral, Credit: All Canada Photos/Alamy Stock Photo
Figure 4: Main Facade of Sagrada Familia Cathedral, Credit: barcelonahacks.com
==PAGE:9==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 9
4.3
Structures inspired by nature
4.3.1
Beijing National Stadium
Also called ”The Bird’s Nest”, Beijing National Stadium represents an iconic building that
marked the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing. As the nickname of the stadium suggests, the
exterior structure of the stadium is inspired from a birds nest but also from the tradition of
Chinese ﬁne cracks on surfaces while the curvature is inspired from the balance and harmony
philosophy of yin yang. Due to the fact that Beijing is a highly seismic area with frequent
earthquakes, the exterior steel shell of the Stadium is divided in 8 sectors and each of them
work individually in order to meet earthquake design requirements. Moreover, Beijing National
Stadium is considered a very ”smart” and sustainable building by use of natural ventilation
and lightinng, photovoltaic systems, renewable geothermal technology and rainwater collection
systems [9].
The Beijing National Stadium is shown as follows in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Beijing National Stadium ”The Bird’s Nest” by Ove Arup with Herzog and de Meuron
4.3.2
The Gherkin
Considered one of the most representative constructions of London, The Gherkin is host of the
Swiss Re Headquarters designed by Norman Foster together with Ove Arup and Partners. The
iconic circular shape that diminishes gradually on vertical distance, is a distinctive byomim-
icked product as the main inspiration a sea sponge. From a structural point of view, the towers
circular shape ameliorates to a high degree the wind loads acting on it and results show that
compared to a rectangular shape building it reduces ground level wind speed [14]. In the case
of the sea sponge, due to its shape, it ameliorates as well water ﬂow in its surrounding which
helps for a more convenient, turbulent free environment for marine life. The most interesting
part of the tower represents its facade made out of a diagonally placed steel grid of beams
connected with regular horizontal nerves. The Gherkin of London can be seen as follows in
Figure 6.
==PAGE:10==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 10
Figure 6: The Gherkin Tower, designed by Norman Foster together with Ove Arup and Partners
Moreover its shape, The Gherkin has another feature related to a sea sponge. The
building is capable to cool or heat its interior environment on its own by use of its double
curtain wall system. One that is the exterior curved facade with double layered windows,
second an interior rectangular curtain wall system with single layered windows. The interior
curtain wall and exterior facade have numerous openings that are controlled automatically
depending on the air pressure diﬀerences inside the building and the layer of air in between
the two curtain walls. Sensors monitor the temperature and pressure diﬀerences between these
two mediums and automatically open gaps for air to ﬂow in or out depending on the inside
environment. By the help of this system, energy consumption of the tower was reduced by 50%
and Norman Foster claimed that “Nature takes care of the temperature of the building” and
“It is only in extreme heat and cold that the windows close and the temperature is regulated
by the automated air conditioning system”. The sea sponge is capable as well to maintain an
interior balance by use of tiny pores called ostia that ﬁlter water and from which it procures
its oxygen and other nutrients. A graphic of air ﬂow described previously on the towers facade
and interior is shown as follows in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Automatic Ventilation air ﬂow of The Gherkin
==PAGE:11==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 11
4.3.3
Royal Albert Bridge - Brontosaurus
In bridge structures it is known that an arch bridge creates outwards horizontal forces on the
end supports while on the other hand in a suspension bridge the horizontal forces are inwards.
A combination of these two systems can be observed in some of the oldest creatures that
existed on planet Earth millions of years ago from which a bridge structure was inspired, the
brontosaurus. If one looks from a side view, the dinosaur had a massive heavy body with a
top arch formed by its spine, a lower curvature given by its belly and the only parts that had
to carry all that weight were four relatively thin legs, when compared to the actual size of the
creature. A visual representation of the above description is shown as follows in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Similarities between an arch bridge and the brontosaurus skeleton
The same balance of eﬀorts was applied in case of the Royal Albert railway Bridge
engineered by Brunel in 1859 located in Plymouth, England. The bridge is composed of two
main spans of 138.7 meter each that are supported by three piers placed in the water. Brunel
created a combination of arch and suspension bridge system made out of oval sectioned steel
tubes for the arch in compression while for the suspension system in tension he adopted a
curved structural element that is connected with the arch by a system of steel trusses. Due to
the balance given by the upper compression and lower tension chords, it was possible to use
supports of lower cross-section which had an economical advantage [16]. The railway track
was based on a conventional plate girder span and an illustration with the actual bridge can
be seen as follows in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Royal Albert Bridge, Brunel 1859
==PAGE:12==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 12
4.4
Structural Principles
4.4.1
Spider Web
A spider web is one of the most lightweight and eﬃcient structures in nature. Most of its eﬃ-
ciency is given by its simplicity in requirements and functionality. A spider web has two tasks,
ﬁrst of all to be able to withstand weather conditions as wind or rain, second and probably
the most important to keep its prey safe and secure while also to remain sustainable and easy
to repair from the impact of its prey. The functionality and redundancy of a spider web is
accomplished by use of its material, spider silk from its spinneret glands, which is capable to
change its stiﬀness (see Figure 10c) and the layout the spider web.
From a structural point of view, it is observed that a spider web can be divided as a
layout of main and secondary frames composed out of numerous long radials connected with
each other by spiral strands, as seen in Figure 10a. Studies show that the spider prestresses its
web in order to remain stable and a key redundancy factor, among the numerous components,
is that it inserts less presstressing force in the spirals that transfer the eﬀort to the radials
which have a higher degree of presstress in order to transfer the load to the overall frame and
afterwards to its support [14]. Depending on the load point, see Figure 10b, the web vibrates
to diﬀerent degrees in order to dissipate energy through its supports.
Figure 10: Spider Web Layout and Division
The main structural feature of the webs layout is the fact that the only eﬀorts through
its structure are tensile stresses. In structural engineering, only tensile forces through struc-
tural elements represent a big advantage because the structure can be kept lightweight while
on the other hand if one adds eﬀects of bending or shear eﬀort, a considerable higher amount
of material is required to dissipate loads. Cable structures are based on the same principle
and can be seen in long-span bridges. Moreover, a spider web design was adopted by Frei
Otto when given the opportunity to create the roof over Munich’s Olimpic Stadium and sec-
ondary facilities.
The roof is made out of tensile loaded steel cables connected by acrylic
panels through a steel grid, all supported by circular hinged columns anchored with cables to
the ground.
==PAGE:13==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 13
The roof structure design can be seen in the following Figure 11.
Figure 11: Top View of Roof Structure from Munich Olimpic facility
4.4.2
Honeycomb
It is safe to state that numerous animal created structures are as eﬃcient as possible for
their purpose of survival. The same can be said for the honeycomb structure within a bees
nest. A shape used for thousands of years was and still is inspiration for numerous designs
nowadays whether they are for functionality, aesthetics, or structural engineering purposes.
It was observed that a honeycomb structure in which a rectangular shape is continuously
repeated gives the advantage to use a thin plate concrete slab that is reinforced on its sides
with small, slender nerves. Based on this shape, the cassetted concrete slab was born which is
capable to carry higher loads on longer spans that conventional concrete slabs. Also, numerous
roof arched shells were created for cathedrals as is the famous Pantheon in Rome which can
be seen as follows in Figure 12.
Figure 12: View of the roof shell structure of the Pantheon, Rome
==PAGE:14==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 14
5
Initial Design
First, it was decided to create a spider web shaped roof due to its structural eﬃciency given
by its layout.
Second, with an actual shape in hand, it was decided to use a spider web structural
principle, that of only tensile eﬀorts through its main components. Based on this fact, steel
bowstring trusses were chosen for the main (radial) components and standard rectangular hol-
low section beams for the secondary (spiral) components. The trusses are considered of main
interest in this project since these are the longest elements.
Third, taking inspiration of the arch structure as the Pantheon (Rome), it was decided
that a more eﬃcient way to transfer forces through the roof is to create a pitch angle for the
trusses and close the circular top of the roof with a rigid compression ring. Since no external
boundaries were set for the roof, it was decided to consider that the roof is situated above an
open space of a large size building with a rigid concrete ﬂoor surrounding it.
5.1
Geometry of the roof
A circular roof in shape of a truncated cone with lower diameter (opening) of 42 m and upper
diameter of the compression ring of 6 m was decided to be initially designed. The entire 360
◦is divided by principal trusses atcer an equal angle of 15◦which gives a total of 24 truss
elements that support the roof. The pitch angle of the roof was also set for 15◦. Initial dimen-
sions were set for the actual roof of which layout can be seen as follows in Figure 13:
Figure 13: Roof Top View. Phase: Initial Design; Units: [cm]
==PAGE:15==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 15
From top to bottom, the roof cover is considered to be made out of glazing sheets
which are placed and connected to the 200×200×8mm secondary beams (SB). The main
components of the roof structure are the steel trusses (TR - Figure 13) which are designed out
of circular hollow section proﬁles. An initial layout of the truss is illustrated as follows with
the tubes axes in Figure 14.
Figure 14: Truss Layout. Phase: Initial Design; Units: [mm]
With the basic geometry set, all dimensions of the roof structure were implemented in
MathCad in order to automatize diﬀerent variations of roof diameters. The truss dimensions
were implemented as well together with angles within it that would change together with roof
dimensions. This process can be seen in ”Appendix A” - Section 1.2. And a more deﬁnite
visualisation of the roof layout in the initial phase is to be found in ”Appendix B - Roof Top
View and Section” and ”Appendix B.1 - Truss Layout”
5.2
Loads on the roof
The unloading path of the loads that act on the roof starts from the glazing cover which
transmits its weight and imposed loads to the secondary rectangular hollow beams. Moving
forward, the rectangular hollow beams transfer the loads through a beam-truss connection
designed in such way that the load is transferred in the vertical and horizontal direction to
each upper node of the truss. More details regarding connections will follow in this paper.
(Chapter 6, Section 6.3)
While self weight and snow act in the vertical direction, wind load was implemented
as perpendicular pressure on the glass cover from which vertical and horizontal forces were to
be calculated to load the truss.
Before the start of load computation, the following safety coeﬃcients were set:
• Permanent actions: γG = 1.1 - DS/EN 1990 DK NA:2013 Version 2
• Variable actions: γQ = 1.5 - DS/EN 1990 DK NA:2013 Version 2
==PAGE:16==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 16
5.2.1
Self Weight
The self weight of the glazing cover was selected from a glass cover producer [21] and multiplied
with the permanent actions coeﬃcient. In order to ﬁnd a liner load that acts on the secondary
beam, the self weight was multiplied with the transversal length on which the glazing unloads.
Next, the area that each secondary beam has to carry was calculated in order to ﬁnd the
actual force that acts on the truss from self weight of the glass cover. Calculation procedure
for these can be found in (”Appendix A” - Section 2.1).
5.2.2
Snow Load
The snow load was computed by use of ”DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA:2015 2011”, in which in
part ”4.1 (1) NOTE 1” the characteristic value for snow load is given as sk = 1kN/m2. The
above Danish National Annex gives coeﬃcients for ground topography of the building which
was considered to be normal with Ctop = 1. Moreover, considering this case of a pitched roof,
the norm gives recommendations for coeﬃcients related to the angle of the pitched roof. By
use of the following ﬁgure:
Figure 15: Coeﬃcients that take in to account the pitch angle of the roof
The coeﬃcient for an initial 15°pitched roof was selected as µw = 1.2 and the snow
load Sd was calculated as Sd = µw ∗sk = 1.2kN/m2. This snow value was then multiplied
with the area from which it unloads to the secondary rectangular hollow beam in order to
ﬁnd the point force for each node of the truss. Calculations for this procedure can be seen in
(”Appendix A” - Section 2.2).
5.2.3
Wind Load
Moving forward, wind load was computed by use of ”EN1991-1-4.2005” and ”DS/EN1991-1-4
DK NA:2010-03” which give guidance to compute wind pressures on certain roof types. While
the norm gives solutions for numerous types of roofs, it does not present the actual roof shape
designed through this project. Due to the fact that an accurate wind pressure is not the key
aspect of this paper, it was decided to compute a wind pressure for a roof that has the most
similar shape to the roof that was to be designed and that is to compute wind pressure for a
dome shaped roof.
==PAGE:17==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 17
The wind load calculation procedure is based for all types of roof on the following
formula: We = cpe ∗qpz. In this, qpz represents the peak velocity pressure that was found
in section 4.5 of EN1991-1-4.2005 and cpe is the pressure coeﬃcient related to the external
pressure applied on the roof. This formula was applied to Section 7.2.8 of EN1991-1-4.2005 in
which Figure 16 shows the wind distribution on the roof.
Figure 16: Wind pressure distribution on a dome shaped roof. EN1991-1-4.2005, Section 7.2.8
It can be seen in Figure 16 that the norm gives a pressure distribution of pressure on
the lower part of the wind direction, after which suction is created from approximately middle
opening between points A and B. To be noted that the norm does not give numerical values
for the pressure-suction transition on this surface so in order to ﬁnd an approximate location
of this, the actual ﬁgure was inserted in AutoCad and scaled to the truncated roof that is in
purpose in order to ﬁnd it.
The pressure-suction distribution found in Figure 17 was decided:
Figure 17: Wind pressure distribution on the truncated shape roof. Phase: Initial Design; Units: [cm]
And the calculation process of the wind load can be found in ”Appendix A - Section
2.3”.
5.2.4
Design Situations
With the load values and load distribution set for the truss, three design situations were
compared for the later analysis of the truss.
==PAGE:18==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 18
• Self weight of glass cover + Snow
• Self weight of glass cover + Wind
• Self weight of glass cover + Snow + Wind
From these three cases, with results that can be found in ”Appendix A” - Section 3,
the most unfavourable situation is that of Snow and Wind acting on the truss together with
the self weight of the glass cover. To be noted that self weight was considered a permanent
action, while snow and wind were implemented as variable actions which means that safety
coeﬃcients were applied as such.
5.3
Secondary beams
A conservative decision was made for the secondary beams (spirals) of the truss. The longest
spiral, that is SB.5, was designed in such way that it would transmit its load in the vertical
direction to the truss. This was done in order to exclude the torsional eﬀect that would ap-
pear if the beam would be rotated at the angle of the roof cover. A rectangular hollow section
beam of dimensions 200×200×8mm was intended to be used for the spiral solution of this roof.
The secondary beam was checked for moment resistance by:
MEd ≤Mc.Rd
(1)
in which:
• MEd - applied bending moment
• Mc.Rd - resistance bending moment given by: Wy∗fy
γM0
This veriﬁes with a resistance bending moment of 88.9kN and an applied bending
moment of 79.74kN
Moreover, the secondary beam was checked for shear resistance by:
VEd ≤Vc.Rd
(2)
in which:
• VEd - applied shear force
• Vc.Rd - resistance shear given by:
Av∗fy
√
3
γM0
This veriﬁes with a resistance shear eﬀort of 833.6kN and an applied shear force of
50.3kN Calculations of secondary beam check are found in ”Appendix A” - Section 4.
5.4
Internal Eﬀorts of the truss
With the loads and geometry of the truss automatized in MathCad, the support reactions
were calculated and the internal eﬀorts of each member of the truss were computed by use
of section and joint methods [20]. Basically the truss was loaded with the external loads and
support reactions, and sectioned before critical members to compute equilibrium equations
from which the ﬁrst internal eﬀorts were to be calculated. Moving forward, each individual
==PAGE:19==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 19
node was isolated in order to write the equilibrium equations in order to ﬁnd the respective
internal eﬀorts. The detailed calculation is to be found in ”Appendix C” - Section 1.
While these methods give solutions to compute the internal eﬀorts, they also give the
possibility to check if the internal eﬀorts in the truss members are computed correct due to
the fact that the computation of internal eﬀorts start from middle of truss and go to both ends
of the truss. The actual check was made by computing the end compression/tension members
of the truss and relating them to the support reactions with which they must be in equilibrium.
In order to check the precision of these calculation methods, the results from manual
calculation of the internal eﬀorts were checked with a computer model in AxisVM Structural
Analysis Software that was set with the initial truss geometry and loaded with the initial loads.
5.5
Member check under axial load
A system to check members subjected to axial loading was set in order to see resistance ca-
pabilities. With a characteristic yielding strength of fyk = 235MPa and a safety factor for
steel of γs = 1.2 the maximum eﬀorts were checked for axial capacity of tubes by use of
NR.Ed = fydA, in which fyd represents the design yielding strength and A the area of the
hollow section circular members.
Members were also checked for buckling eﬀects by use of the critical Euler buckling
load deﬁned by:
Pcr.Euler = π2EI
L2
(3)
In which EI is the members stiﬀness deﬁned by its material E-Modulus and section
Inertia, and L is a members length. The maximum loaded member and the longest member
were checked for Euler buckling load and computations can be seen in ”Appendix C” - Section
2, in which it was found that the governing resistance of tube was given by the buckling load.
==PAGE:20==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 20
6
Final Design
6.1
Geometry of the roof
With the automation process ﬁnished for an initial design, the ﬁnal model was set to be done.
After geometrical and member check iterations, a truncated conical roof with 56 meter lower
diameter, 8 meter upper diameter, a pitch angle to the roof of 11° that gave a roof height of
4.85 meter was decided to be analyzed for the ﬁnal design. These diameters give a truss length
of 24.51 meters, a distance from which the length between supports (secondary beams) of the
glass cover is kept at a reasonable distance of 4.086 meters.
Figure 18: Roof Top View. Phase: Final Design; Units: [cm]
After checks to connection between members, will follow later in this chapter, the
height of the truss was modiﬁed as well in order to stay between the limits of the veriﬁcation
procedure. This was set to 3.85 meters for member FG and the longest member in the truss
as 5.614 meters (member GH) with other dimensions shown in Figure 19.
A more deﬁnite visualisation of the roof layout in the ﬁnal phase is to be found in
”Appendix D - Roof Top View and Section” and ”Appendix D.1 - Truss Layout”.
==PAGE:21==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 21
Figure 19: Truss Layout. Phase: Final Design; Units: [mm]
6.2
Internal Eﬀorts of the truss
Internal eﬀorts of the ﬁnal truss layout were computed and checked again in Axis Structural
Analysis Software to check again the validity of manual calculations. With compression and
tension eﬀorts that are to be found in Figure 20.
Figure 20: Internal eﬀorts in the ﬁnal truss layout, made in AxisVm Structural Analysis Software.
It was observed that there is a diﬀerence in the maximum axially loaded member of
less than 4% between the manual results (”Appendix C” - Section 1) and computer software
results.
From manual calculations, maximum tension eﬀort was found as 141.8kN in the
bottom-end member KL, maximum compression eﬀorts was found as 132.8kN in the top-end
member JL and 63.2kN for the longest diagonal compression member GH. From structural
software calculations (Figure 20), maximum tension eﬀort was found as 147.4kN in the bottom-
end member KL, maximum compression eﬀorts was found as 138.4kN in the top-end member
JL and 59.2kN for the longest diagonal compression member GH.
6.3
Member and connection veriﬁcations of truss structure
As in the initial design of the truss, the resistance of JL and GH members were checked for
governing buckling load. With a diameter of 80 mm and thickness of 6mm, the inner compres-
sion member GH has a buckling resistance of 63.2kN and applied compression of 63.18kN. As
for member JL, the diameter was increased to 100mm for geometrical validity of the connec-
tion and with a thickness of 5mm the buckling resistance is 209.5kN and applied compression
==PAGE:22==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 22
force of 132.785kN. Results and member check calculations are to be found at ”Appendix C”
- Section 2.
In order to resemble as much as possible to the carbon ﬁber alternative that will follow
in this project, it was decided to use welded connections between members of the truss. A key
aspect of a safe and eﬃcient welded joint connection between compression and tension members
in a truss structure is to place multiple components that belong to a joint in such a way that
their geometrical axes intersect in one point. Otherwise, the diﬀerences in intersection points
give rise to connection eccentricities from which internal bending moments appear within
the connection. In order to do so, an overlap had to be made between components. A design
manual from TATA Steel was used which takes direct recommendations from EN 1993-1-8:2005
[26]. Before actual calculations of the connection, these were designed with a recommendation
as seen in Figure 21:
Figure 21: Correct and Incorrect method of overlap between members of a truss
As seen in the above illustrations, it is not recommended to cut both toes of speciﬁc
members and weld them together. It is stated that, from a practical point of view, it is more
diﬃcult and time consuming to approach the connection as such while from a resistance point
of view, the joint resistance was found to be up to 20% lower after calculations were compared
with the correct layout of members.
The veriﬁcation procedure also recommends the following geometrical boundaries in
order to keep the veriﬁcation within validity limits.
10 ≤d0 ≤50
(4)
d0
t0
≤70ϵ; ϵ = 235
fyk
(5)
di
ti
≤50
(6)
0.2 ≤di
d0
≤1.0
(7)
−0.55d0 ≤e ≤+0.25d0
(8)
0.25 ≤λov ≤1.0
(9)
==PAGE:23==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 23
30° ≤θi ≤90°
(10)
In which each component of the check represents as follows:
• d0 - Diameter of the chord member (eg: KL)
• t0 - Thickness of the chord member
• di - Diameter of brace member (eg: JK)
• ti - Thickness of brace member
• e - Eccentricity given by intersection points of axes
• g - Overlap between braces
• λov - Percentage of overlap given by brace over chord member
• θi - Angle between brace and chord
By taking in to account the recommended layout and validity limits of a connection
as such, the following connections were designed:
6.3.1
Node K - K Type Joint
A detail of connection point K is represented as follows:
Figure 22: Layout of K-type joint of intersection point K
Veriﬁcation for chord face failure deformation was computed by use of:
N1.Rd = kgkpfyd ∗t2
0
sin(θi)
∗
1.8 + 10.2 ∗d1
d0
γM5
(11)
in which:
==PAGE:24==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 24
• kg - factor that takes in to account the overlap g
kg = γ0.2[1 +
0.024γ1.2
1 + exp(0.5 g
t0 −1.33)]
(12)
γ = d0
2t0
(13)
• kp - factor that takes in to account the chord end stress factor
kp = 1 + 0.3 ∗np ∗(1 + np)
(14)
np =
Np.Ed
A0
fyk
(15)
Veriﬁcation for chord punching shear was computed as well by use of:
N1,Rd = fyd
√
3 ∗t0 ∗π ∗di ∗
1+sinθi
2sinθ2
i
γM5
(16)
It was observed that strength of joint K was dictated by chord face failure with a
resistance of 103.2kN with a maximum applied compression force from member JK of 49.6kN.
Calculations are to be found in ”Appendix C” - Section 3.1.
==PAGE:25==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 25
6.3.2
Node H - KT Type Joint
Figure 23: Layout of KT-type joint of intersection point H
While norm EN1993-1-8 suits a considerable variety of connections between steel
elements, it does not give recommendations for an overlapped welded KT-Joint. The veriﬁca-
tion procedure of this is given and made from TATA Steel Design of Welded Joints manual [26].
It can be observed in ”Appendix C” - Section 3.2 that a 5 mm eccentricity in the
connection is acceptable for the geometrical validity limits that are the same as for node K.
The chord face failure deformation was computed on the same basis as for node K, moreover,
a localised brace-to-Chord shear check was presented for overlapped members.
As stated
by the design manual, this veriﬁcation procedure is based on research by CIDECT (Comit´e
International pour le D´eveloppement et l´Etude de la Construction Tubulaire) at it is applied
only when the two K members overlap the T member of the connection.
The Brace-to-Chord shear check was computed on the following expression:
|N1.Edcos(θ1) + N2.Edcos(θ2) + N3.Edcos(θ3)| ≤π
4 ∗[fu1
√
3 ∗(1−λov.1
1
∗2d1 + deff.1) ∗t1
sin(θ1)
+
+ fu2
√
3 ∗(1−λov.2
1
∗2d2 + deff.2) ∗t2
sin(θ2)
+ fu3
√
3 ∗(cs1 ∗deff.2 + cs2 ∗deff.3) ∗t3
sin(θ3)
] ∗
1
γM5
in which:
==PAGE:26==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 26
• deff.i - Brace Eﬀective Width deﬁned by: deff.1 ≤di or:
deff.i = 12t0
d0
∗fyk ∗t0
fyd ∗ti
∗di;
(17)
• cs1 = cs2 = 1, if hidden toes are not welded. Otherwise chosen as 2.
It was observed that strength of joint H was dictated by chord face failure veriﬁcation
with a resistance of 170.5kN and a maximum applied compression force from member GH of
63.2kN. Calculation can be found at ”Appendix C” - Section 3.2.
6.3.3
Node G - KT Type Joint
Figure 24: Layout of KT-type joint of intersection point G
With a 24mm overlap for both braces, node G can be created with all the axes
intersecting in one point. Chord face failure and brace-to-chords shear check were done by
the same procedure as in previous node H. It was observed that strength of joint G was
dictated by chord face failure veriﬁcation with a resistance of 219.8kN with a maximum applied
compression force from member GH of 63.2kN. Calculation can be found at ”Appendix C” -
Section 3.3.
==PAGE:27==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 27
6.3.4
Truss - Beam Connection
To be noted that only the previous mentioned connections were veriﬁed for resistance capa-
bilities. This is due to the fact that the main element of interest for this project is the truss
structure and its behaviour under applied loads. A beam to truss connection is proposed and
illustrated as follows:
Figure 25: Proposal of connection between truss and seconday beam
Further details are shown in ”Appendix E” - Detail: Node H, in which a 200×200×8mm
section connecting proﬁle is connected to the truss by one bottom plate situated under the con-
necting proﬁle and two vertical side plates at both sides of the upper truss member. Two end
plates are welded to the ends of the connecting proﬁle in order for the secondary rectangular
beams to be bolted to it and create the connection with the truss.
6.4
Deformation of truss
Force method was used to compute vertical displacement of the truss. It was observed that the
point of maximum displacement is point I and in order to compute a ﬁnal vertical displacement,
all individual displacements of members had to be computed. The calculations were on the
basis of the follow1ing formula:
δ = Σ(Fi.1 ∗Fi ∗Li
E ∗Ai
)
(18)
in which:
==PAGE:28==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 28
• Fi - internal eﬀort from applied load
• Li - length of member i
• E - material modulus
• Ai - area of member i
• Fi.1 - internal eﬀort from a force of 1kN in the point of interest, in the direction of
interest
By use of AxisVM Structural Software, a vertical force of 1kN was inserted in point
I (Figure 26), and the following internal eﬀorts were noted:
Figure 26: Internal compression/tension eﬀorts from a vertical force of 1kN in point I, AxisVM Software
With the above results, and internal eﬀorts from applied loads, a displacement of
19.7mm was computed which is satisfactory considering a deﬂection limit of
trussspan
200
=
122mm. The deﬂection calculation was checked with displacement value of the designed truss
in AxisVM Structural Software where a similar deﬂection of 20.5mm was found. Calculation
of the displacement can be seen in ”Appendix C” - Section 4 and deﬂection of the truss in
AxisVM Structural Software can be seen as follows in Figure 27:
Figure 27: Vertical displacements of truss points, with highlight on point I, AxisVM Software
==PAGE:29==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 29
7
Carbon Fiber Alternative
7.1
Deﬁnition
CFRP (Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer) is a composite material with a layout principle
similar to reinforced concrete. High strength carbon ﬁbers are embedded in a polymer matrix of
additives and resin which bond together to form a combination of excelent material properties.
While in reinforced concrete the reinforcement is the main component for resistance properties
and concrete acts as a protective and load transfer medium, the same division is found in a
CFRP with carbon ﬁbers as load-bearing components and the polymer matrix which transfers
internal eﬀorts within the material and also protects it from environmental aspects. A visual
representation of the layout of a CFRP can be seen in Figure 28
Figure 28: Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer unidirectional layout
7.2
General Characteristics
A carbon ﬁber reinforced polymer is a material which gives high strength and modulus while
also at a very low-weight when compared to almost any construction materials. This fact gives
the main advantage of this material that of a very high tensile strength to weight ratio. From a
material properties point of view, steel is considered an isotropic material with constant density
and material properties along an elements length. For a CFRP element, material properties
are dependent on the direction of ﬁber layout which are referred as the main component.
As seen in the previous layout-Figure 28, the longitudinal direction has diﬀerent material
properties than the transversal one. On the other hand, a multidirectional ﬁber layout can be
used in order to create a material with constant strength properties along its principal axes.
While a multidirectional ﬁber layout gives lower strength to weight ratio than an unidirectional
layout, it still represents a big diﬀerence over steel ratios. Generic types of ﬁber layouts can
be visualized in Figure 29:
==PAGE:30==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 30
Figure 29: Unidirectional, Bidirectional and Multidirectional ﬁber layouts. [28]
The mechanical properties of the actual carbon ﬁbers are related to other ﬁbers as
Kevlar, S-glass and E-glass in Table 1:
Table 1: Material properties of diﬀerent types of ﬁbers used in civil engineering; [28]
Fiber
Material
Young
Modulus
E [GPa]
Tensile
Strength
σ [MPa]
Ultimate
tensile
strain
ϵ [%]
Density
ρ
(g/cm3)
Carbon
240
2600
1.7
1.7
Kevlar
130
2800
2.4
1.45
S-glass
86
4500
5.7
2.5
E-glass
70
3450
4.8
2.54
The resin mixture is referred as the second component in a CFRP element which
unites and binds the ﬁbers together to form the actual composite. Depending on the properties
and manufacturing procedure, usually there are two categoryes of resins: thermosetting or
thermosoftening polymers. With polyester, vinylester, epoxy and phenolic resins being the
most common for ﬁber reinforced polymer composites [28]. Mechanical properties of these
resin mixtures can be seen in Table 2:
Table 2: Material properties of diﬀerent types of resins used for composite materials; [29]
Resin
Mixture
Young
Modulus
E [GPa]
Tensile
Strength
σ [MPa]
Ultimate
tensile
strain
ϵ [%]
Density
ρ
(g/cm3)
Polyester
4
65
2.5
1.2
Vinylester
3.5
82
6
1.12
Epoxy
3
90
8
1.2
Phenolic
2.5
40
1.8
1.24
==PAGE:31==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 31
By combining epoxy resin mixtures with diﬀerent grades of carbon ﬁbers, diﬀerent
modulus CFRP can be obtained. Table 3 shows resistance capacity diﬀerences between steel
and diﬀerent types of CFRP.
Table 3: Mechanical properties diﬀerences between steel and CFRP [27]
Material
Density
g/cm3
Modulus
E[GPa]
Tensile
Strength
σt[MPa]
Yield
Strength
σy[MPa]
Ratio of Ten-
sile Strength
to Weight
Steel (cold-worked)
7.87
207
365
303
4.72
High Strength carbon ﬁber
epoxy resin (unidirectional)
1.55
137.8
1550
-
101.9
High modulus carbon ﬁber
epoxy resin (unidirectional)
1.63
215
1240
-
77.5
Carbon ﬁber epoxy resin
(quasi-isotropic)
1.55
45.5
579
-
38
As seen in Table 3, a quasi-isotropic CFRP is found to be almost 8 times more eﬃ-
cient than regular steel in the tensile strength to weight ratio. This fact is mainly given by its
low density but also increased tensile strength. A low density gives the advantage to keep self
weight of big structures at a considerable lower value when compared to steel structures. This
fact is important in structural engineering because a lower self-weight of a structure means
lower support reaction forces thus a smaller load for the foundation system to transmit to the
ground. The main advantage of this if from an economical point of view since smaller loads
mean less material in the structural system.
Considering the fact that Table 3 referred from [27] is from 2007, with passing of time
numerous manufacturers appeared which are capable of producing carbon ﬁber elements with
higher mechanical capabilities. One of which is ”Rock West Composites” which started in 2009
[35] and is capable of producing carbon ﬁber tubes with the following mechanical properties:
• Carbon ﬁber tubes of Standard Modulus - E Modulus of 236GPa; Tensile Strength of
ftk = 4826MPa and Ultimate Tensile Strain of 1.2%;
• Carbon ﬁber tubes of Intermediate Modulus - E Modulus of 291GPa; Tensile Strength
of ftk = 5688MPa and Ultimate Tensile Strain of 1.4%;
• Carbon ﬁber tubes of High Modulus - E Modulus of 395GPa; Tensile Strength of ftk =
4620MPa and Ultimate Tensile Strain of 0.5%;
• Carbon ﬁber tubes of Ultra High Modulus - E Modulus of 652GPa; Tensile Strength of
ftk = 2854MPa and Ultimate Tensile Strain of 0.2%.
It can be observed that diﬀerent degrees of elastic modulus of carbon ﬁber elements
can be produced, all of which have signiﬁcantly better tensile capacity than steel. Moreover,
with the increase of the elastic modulus, the tensile strength is reduced with approximately
==PAGE:32==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 32
40% and the ultimate tensile strain by 6×.
Another important characteristic of a CFRP is its high damping capability by which
it absorbs vibrational energy from external factors thus transmitting a reduced amount of
vibrations and noise from external factors. This feature is especially important in mediums of
cyclic loading hence the fact such a material is used in automotive components (roof panels,
suspension systems etc.) and sporting goods (bicycle frames, tennis rackets etc.). Moreover,
by use of special epoxy resins, CFRP elements are not susceptible to corrosion factors which
represent another advantage over metallic structures [27].
Other speciﬁc characteristics of carbon ﬁber reinforced polymer components are enu-
merated in Table 4
7.3
Manufacturing
The manufacturing process of carbon ﬁber reinforced polymers can represent the biggest dis-
advantage of this material. In general, for any time of construction material, a good quality,
reliable and cost eﬀective manufacturing process is essential for mass production rates.
In the past, the manufacturing process of CFRP elements was made by hand layup
of each individual carbon ﬁber layer which by its nature, makes of a time consuming manufac-
turing method due to the fact that one single CFRP element can have up to several hundreds
layers of carbon ﬁber. Ever since the mid-1970s, more convenient, cost-eﬀective and reliable
manufacturing methods are under research and development due to the high demand from
automotive, military and aerospace industry [27].
7.3.1
Fundamentals
In order to transform uncured ﬁber layers of thermoset polymers into composite elements,
high pressures and temperatures are used in a speciﬁc baking oven over a set period of time.
Increased temperature in an uncured CFRP is necessary for the initiation and continuity of
the chemical reaction that transforms the mixture in to a fully cured component. Increased
pressure is necessary in order to force the ﬂow of resin mixture through the layers of ﬁbers
thus creating and consolidating the required bond between the individual layers of ﬁber that
create the ﬁnal laminated carbon ﬁber element.
The quality of a CFRP element is highly dependent on the duration and amount of
pressure applied during the baking phase. The time interval over which these two parameters
take place is called the cure cycle and this determines the rate of production for carbon ﬁber
components [27]. In order to have a consistent production technology, the cure cycle should
be kept to the minimum requirement of the desired element. Other factors that aﬀect the cure
cycle are: presence of accelerators, composition of resin mixture, reaction reactivity and cure
temperature.
==PAGE:33==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 33
Table 4: Speciﬁc characteristics of Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymers
Laminated structure
Properties of component depend on the mechanical properties of each individual laminate
Properties of component depend on the stacking sequence of each laminate
Stresses between laminates which may create weakness points
Mechanical properties and behaviour of component can be adjusted for speciﬁc requirements
Poisson’s ratio can be higher than 0.5
Nonisotropic
Properties dependent on the layout and direction of ﬁbers
Orthotropic with more than two elastic constants
Nonhomogeneous
One component can have several resistance constituents
Laminated structure
Defects as: voids, resin rich/poor areas, delamination create variations in mechanical properties
Brittle behaviour
No plastic yield at failure
Elastic stress-strain behaviour
Failure Modes
Shear failure between layers of laminates when bending
Delamination
Sensible to accidental point loads and notches
Fiber pullout, matrix cracking or debonding, ﬁber breakage
Thermal expansion
Low coeﬃcient of thermal expansion
Possibllity to create a component of zero coeﬃcient of thermal expansion
Noncorrosive behaviour
High internal damping
==PAGE:34==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 34
7.3.2
Resin Flow
During the baking process of a CFRP laminate, adequate resin ﬂow is essential for an eﬃcient
production process. During curing, if resin viscosity rises too fast due to temperature increase,
its ﬂow may be inadequate in such way that it could cause voids within the layers of carbon
and poor adhesion between them. Darcy’s equation derived for liquid ﬂows through a porous
medium is used to measure resin ﬂow through carbon ﬁber layers:
q = −P0
η
dp
dx
(19)
in which:
• q - ﬂow area per unit area in longitudinal direction m
s ;
• P0 - permeability m2;
• η - viscosity Ns
m2 ;
•
dp
dx - pressure gradient
N
m3 ;
Kozeny-Carman equation is used to determine permeability P0:
P0 =
d2
f
16K
(1 −vf)3
v2
f
(20)
in which:
• df - diameter of ﬁbers;
• vf - volume fraction of ﬁbers;
• K - Kozeny constant, dependent on the measured direction of ﬁber ﬂow which has higher
values for transversal over longitudinal direction.
7.3.3
Consolidation
Consolidation of a carbon ﬁber element is highly dependent on resin ﬂow and compaction
process, both of which have to be speciﬁcally applied under pressure in the normal direction
to the ﬁber during the processing phase. A calculated amount of pressure has to be applied
so that voids through ﬁbers and air bubbles are squeezed out by resin ﬂow through it creating
uniform fraction of ﬁber volume.
Gutowski [33] assumes that the pressure applied is divided to the ﬁber layout and
resin by his consolidation model:
p = σ + pr
(21)
in which:
• p - applied pressure;
• σ - eﬀective stress on ﬁber network;
• pr - resin pressure;
==PAGE:35==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 35
Eﬀective stress on ﬁber network is directly proportional with ﬁber volume fraction
and it is given by:
σ = A
1 −
qvf
v0 )
(
q va
vf −1)4
(22)
in which:
• A - constant that takes in to account ﬁber waviness and stiﬀness;
• v0 - ﬁber volume fraction before compaction;
• vf - instant ﬁber volume fraction;
• va - maximum ﬁber volume fraction;
The previous equation states that the eﬀective pressure σ is directly proportional to
ﬁber volume fraction vf during the compaction process. By this fact, with increasing com-
paction, applied pressure is increased on the ﬁber network, while pressure on resin is decreased.
An unbalanced transfer of pressures can lead to void formation, poor/rich resin areas or cracks
in the end carbon ﬁber element.
7.3.4
Voids
Internal voids in a carbon ﬁber reinforced polymer element are the most dangerous defects
that can appear during manufacturing process. The reason for this is the fact that voids cre-
ate a discontinuity in the material layers which create diﬀerences in the mechanical properties
within it thus making an unequal and additional distribution of internal stresses. If a CFRP
composite element was not designed in such way to resist the diﬀerences in internal eﬀorts,
then it will produce micro cracks in the layers which can expand in time leading to complete
failure of the element. Another danger appears in carbon ﬁber components (bicycle frames,
car roofs etc.) that are exposed to humidity cycles from which the rate of moisture engagement
increases through voids thus changing the physical dimension and mechanical properties of the
component.
Frequent causes of void occurrence in a CFRP element are: air bubbles trapped in
the resin mixture or numerous layers of a laminate element; ﬁber manipulation and rate of
ﬁber pull through resin mixture; resin mixture viscosity and ﬂow by which air is not displaced
during the coating or curing process. It was found that mechanical properties as ﬂexural,
compressive and tensile strengths are signiﬁcantly reduced in the presence of only 2-3% of
void content. Figure 30 shows the test author and results on which this statement is based.
Solutions for air entrapment in CFRP components are to allow free ﬂow of resin
mixture through the mold which carry air bubbles out. Vacuum application in the molding
process which is existent in the Bag-Molding manufacturing process, a technology existent in
the aerospace industry where the quality of components is of highest demand. Or a partial
solution is to degass the liquid resin mixture in which there can be found air bubbles.
While there are numerous manufacturing methods of producing CFRP, as follows
there will be presented technological processes that are relevant to the truss structure in this
project.
==PAGE:36==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 36
Figure 30: Void volume fraction eﬀect on the shear strength of a CFRP laminate. (Yokota, M.J., SAMPEJ.
11, 1978)
7.3.5
Compression Molding
The main feature of the compression molding manufacturing process is its ability to transform
sheet-molding compounds (SMC) into ﬁnal products of complex geometrical shapes. Other
feature is the repetitiveness of the procedure, by use of molds that are created to a desired
shape, compression molding is suitable for high-volume production of composite parts (road
wheels, bumper, car roof components etc.) in a short period of time. The schematic of this
production technology is shown in Figure 31:
Figure 31: Compression Molding Technological Scheme, [27]
A charge which is basically a weighed and pre-cut stack of sheet-molding compounds,
==PAGE:37==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 37
is placed in the preheated ﬁxed mold half. The charge should usually occupy 6-70% of the ﬁxed
mold and after this is placed, the top movable mold is constantly applied until the pressure
on the charge surface reaches a required value. At a calculated speciﬁc pressure, the sheet-
molding compounds (SMC) starts to ﬂow through the ﬁxed mold thus covering the entire
surface. The applied pressure might vary from 1.4 to 34.5MPa depending on the geometry
of the shape, for example if a component presents bosses and deep ribs, a high pressure is
necessary to be applied. The temperature in the mold is in the range of 130-160°C and it
was found that, in the molding manufacturing process of BMW-Automotive Group, they are
capable of producing long and complex CFRP roof components in only 180 seconds [40]. As a
comparison, according to [41], production temperature of steel can reach 800°C and can take
up to 40-50 minutes for a modern furnace or up to 10-12 hours in an open heart furnace.
Certain defects can be found in compression molding technology and these together
with causes are enumerated as follows:
• a) Surface Roughness and Voids - Shrinkage of resin;
• b) Pop-up blisters - Voids under the surface of the laminate due to air bubbles;
• c) Uneven distribution of ﬁbers - Usually due to unequal pressure distribution or basic
layout;
• d) Surface Waviness - Fiber buckling, expansion or shrinkage of resin;
• e) Pinhole - Agglomeration of ﬁller particles;
• f) Sink Marks - Shrinkage of resin, uneven layout of mold;
These eﬀects are also illustrated in Figure 32:
Figure 32: Compression Molding defects, [27]
==PAGE:38==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 38
Figure 33: Filament Winding Manufacturing Scheme
7.3.6
Filament Winding
As seen in Figure 33, the ﬁlament winding process starts from stacks of ﬁbers that are pulled
through a resin bath tank via ﬁber tensioning guides located before it. Multiple rotating sup-
ports are situated in the bath tank in order to ensure proper resin application and tension.
Shortly after the resin is applied, the ﬁbers pass through a resin wiping device which create
uniform resin thickness and also keep the ﬁber rovings tensioned. The next step is the actual
application of the ﬁbers. Fiber rovings pass through a carriage which has a ﬂat band at the
end after which the ﬁbers are laid on a heated, rotating mandrel. A ﬁber path is created on the
mandrel by its rotation and back and forward movement of the carriage along the mandrels
longitudinal direction. The rotation of the mandrel and speed of the carriage usually give a
winding speed of around 90-110 linear meters/min which is automatically controlled in order
to give a desired ﬁber path of the CFRP component. The ﬁnal step of the ﬁlament winding
procedure is to insert the mandrel in an oven in order to cure the carbon ﬁber reinforced
polymer.
This technological process is ideal to create: helicopter blades, drive shafts, cylindrical
tanks or the most important component for this project, circular hollow section tubes. An
illustration with what type of element cross-sections can/can not be made by this procedure
is shown in Figure 34:
Figure 34: Examples of cross-sections that can (a;b) and can not be produced (c)
The previously described ﬁber path is one of the main aspects on which the behaviour
of an element depends on. The ﬁber path, also called helical winding process, can be produced
at a near θ = 0° longitudinal on the x direction of the mandrel, or at θ = 90° transversal on
the y direction of the mandrel. A crisscross of ﬁber bands is produced at plus and minus of the
ﬁber path angle due to the back and forward movement of the carriage. The helical winding
==PAGE:39==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 39
process is illustrated in Figure 34 with a production example:
Figure 35: a) Helical winding loop together with a helicall wound CFRP tank (b), (En-Tec Technology, Inc.)
The strength behaviour of a cylindrical element with diﬀerent winding angle is shown
in Figure 36:
Figure 36: Strength and material properties with variations of the winding angle on a CFRP element [27]
It can be observed that the longitudinal x direction E Modulus together with the
tensile strength decrease with increment of the winding angle. The shear strength and shear
modulus are the highest at the minimum winding angle, while the transversal y direction E
modulus is of highest value at the minimum angle, and it decreases with increase of winding
angle up to around 45°where it increases again.
==PAGE:40==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 40
Important process parameters in the ﬁlament winding manufacturing are enumerated
as follows:
• Fiber tension - with tension values from 1.1 - 4.4N, ﬁber tension is essential to keep the
desired alignment on the mandrel and control the resin quantity on it;
• Fiber wet-out - this is essential for void reduction and is highly dependent on the resin
viscosity in the bath tank, number of strand ﬁbers in a roving and also on winding speed
and length of the resin bath. As a rule, the resin has a viscosity level of 1-2 Pa ∗s which
is low enough to impregnate the ﬁber roving, but not too low so that the resin get wiped
out by itself;
• Resin content - this is necessary in order to create good physical and mechanical prop-
erties of the CFRP tube. This is usually done by the resin wiping device that follows
after the resin bath tank.
Defects that can appear in a ﬁlament winding manufacturing process are:
• Voids - reasons for this defect are air bubbles in the resin tank, not enough ﬁber wet-out
or gaps/overlaps of ﬁbers through the bandwidth of ﬁbers;
• Fiber Wrinkles - wrinkles usually appear due to slippage of the ﬁber roving which is not
properly tensioned or aligned;
• Delamination - depending on how much the resin lasts until it hardens, delamination
happens if the time gap for a ﬁber layer to be covered by the next one is to much.
7.3.7
Pultrusion
The pultrusion manufacturing process is deﬁned as an automated pulling and extrusion com-
binations in order to produce continuous composite proﬁle. The pultrusion machine is capable
of producing tubes and rectangular hollow section proﬁle with constant cross-section and con-
stant thickness. The pultrusion process starts with ﬁbers (1) being pulled through a resin bath
in order to impregnate ﬁbers with the liquid resin. The ﬁber are pulled afterwards through a
forming and curing die (2) where heat is applied and the cross-section shape is created. At
this phase, the material is reinforced and cured and it is pulled through a pulling unit (3) to
a sawing unit (4) in order to create the required length. The above process can be visualized
in Figure 37.
The main features of this manufacturing process are the automation process and the
fact that the lengths of the CFRP elements are only limited to transportation aspects which
makes it an ideal process for creating tubes relevant to the truss structure in this project
7.4
Design
Due to the orthotropic state of carbon ﬁber reinforced polymer components, there are con-
siderable diﬀerences between design of isotropic material elements as steel when compared
to design of carbon ﬁber elements. One of which, stands at the very nature of carbon ﬁber.
Due to the fact that a CFRP element is very brittle - it will create almost zero elongation
before fracture - the only strength that can be used in the design of carbon ﬁber elements is
the ultimate tensile strength. As follows, the design procedures relevant to this project are
presented.
==PAGE:41==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 41
Figure 37: Pultrusion manufacturing process: (1) Fibers; (2) Pultrusion die; (3) Pulling Unit; (4) Sawing Unit
7.4.1
Tension Member Design
The ratio of carbon ﬁber volume related to volume of resin mixture is implemented in the
design of a hollow section element subjected to tension as follows:
P = σfuvfA0
(23)
in which:
• P - maximum load capacity for an CFRP element subjected to tension;
• σfu - ultimate tensile strength of the CFRP material;
• vf - fraction of ﬁber volume;
• A0 - area of CFRP material that is tensioned;
To be noted that the fraction of ﬁber volume vf has a practical limit of 0.6, frac-
tion at which its material properties were used in the current design. Calculations found in
”Appendix C” - Section 5.2 show that tubes of 5mm thickness and 100mm diameter Carbon
Fiber Reinforced Polymer have a resistant tensioning load capacity of 1110kN and tubes of
6mm and 80mm diameters have a resistant tensioning load capacity of 1038kN. The ulti-
mate tensile strength used in this calculation was for a unidirectional layout of ﬁbers which is:
ftd = 1240MPa.
And with axial stiﬀness dependent on the ﬁber volume fraction as:
EA0 = EfvfA0
(24)
The axial deformation can be written as follows:
∆= PL0
EA0
= σfuL0
Ef
(25)
==PAGE:42==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 42
7.4.2
Compression Member Design
Similar to design of steel compression members, the compression stress on a tube of thickness
t and radius r is represented as follows:
σ = P
A0
=
P
2πrt
(26)
Note the local buckling stress on a tube of thickness t and radius r is represented as
follows:
σlocal = β0
t
r
(27)
in which it can be observed how the diﬀerence of modulus dependent on the direction
of ﬁbers is taken in to account:
β0 =
Φ
p
ExxEyy
p
3(1 −νxyνyx
(28)
in which:
• Φ = [
2Gxy
√
ExxEyy (1 + νxyνyx)]
1
2 ≤1;
• Exx - elastic modulus in the longitudinal direction of ﬁbers;
• Eyy - elastic modulus in the transversal direction of ﬁbers;
• νxx - Poison Ratio in the longitudinal direction;
• νyy - Poison Ratio in the transversal direction;
• Gxy - shear modulus.
By use of the compression stress and local buckling stress relationships, the optimum
stress equation for a tube under compressive load was determined [31].
σ3
opt[
4
πExxβ0( P
L2 )] + σopt
2
Gxy
= 1
(29)
in which:
•
P
L2 - loading index
Considering the tubes in the designed truss are not subjected to shear eﬀorts, this is
neglected as follows:
σopt = [πExxβ0( P
L2 )
4
]
1
3
(30)
And with σopt known, the optimum thickness and radius of the tube dimensions can
be calculated with the following equations:
ropt =
Pβ0
2πσ2
opt
1
2
(31)
==PAGE:43==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 43
topt = σopt
β0
ropt
(32)
With the basis of tension and compression calculation for CFRP tubes, the following
values were set for input:
• Exx - 215GPa for a unidirectional layout of ﬁbers;
• Eyy - 11GPa
• Gxy - 5GPa taken as an approximation from [34]
• νxy - 0.3 according to [34]
• νyx - 0.015 which was calculated according to [27] as
Eyy
Exx∗νxy
Calculations found in ”Appendix C” Section 5.3 show that a carbon ﬁber reinforced
polymer tube can have tensile capacity of 4136kN for a tube of 100mm diameter and 5mm
thickness, and 3866kN for a tube of 80mm diameter and 6mm thickness. With a maximum
tension force in the truss of 132.8kN the capacity of such tubes is more than satisfactory.
For experimental reasons, an optimum thickness and radius were calculated for the
maximum compression member - member JL - in the truss which has a compression eﬀort
of 132.8kN. Calculations found in ”Appendix C” Section 5.3 show that for this compression
force, an optimum diameter would be 108.6mm with a thickness of only 1.13mm. As a com-
parison, dimensions of tubes in the steel truss are 100mm diameter, 5mm thickness for the
upper compressive and lower tension tubes, and 80mm diameter, 6mm thickness for the inner
tubes of the truss.
Buckling of the compression members was treated for the longest member (GH) with
a length of 5.61m and the maximum compression loaded member (JL) with a length of 4.1m
by use of the overall buckling stress presented in [27] as:
σcol = (
2L2
Exxπ2r2 +
2
Gxy
)−1
(33)
From which the buckling capacities were extracted as 96.95kN for member GH which
is loaded with a compression eﬀort of 63.2kN, and a capacity of 322.33kN for member JL which
is loaded with a compression eﬀort of 132.78kN. Calculations are to be found in ”Appendix
C” Section 5.3.
7.4.3
Connection Design
Two types of connections can be found in a carbon reinforced composite, mechanical or bonded
connections. A mechanical connection between carbon ﬁber structural elements can be made
by use of carbon/steel plates with bolts or rivets, but also by only bolts or rivets. For the
later, a speciﬁc design and layout of the carbon material has to be designed around the bolt
hole. A bonded connection between carbon ﬁber structural elements can be made by use of
and adhesive material. A bonded joint was decided to be used in the carbon alternative of
this project due to the fact that it resembles the closest the ﬁnal steel truss solution.
==PAGE:44==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 44
Several aspects of mechanical and bonded connections are enumerated as follows:
Mechanical Joints
• Disassembly - bolts, but rivets as well, can be disassembled from a speciﬁc connection
for replacement or repair works;
• Preparation - although no actual preparation has to be done on the surface of the car-
bon ﬁber material, a practical design in the layout of carbon ﬁber has to be done for
dissipation of internal eﬀorts around the bolt/rivet hole;
• Stress Concentration - due to the fact that the actual connection with the bolt is done
on its small surface, a mechanical connection creates a highly stressed area around the
bolt which may create microcracks in the ﬁber composite;
• Corrosion - while carbon ﬁber composites are known to be unsusceptible to corrosion,
the bolt is usually steel which in certain environments can corrode.
The main parameters for strength of a mechanical joint are:
•
e
d - ratio between distance from edge of the connection e and diameter of the bolt hole d.
In the test presented in Figure 38, it was found that at a low e
d ratio, the failure mode
is by shear-out;
•
w
d - ratio between width w and diameter of bolt hole d. In the test presented in Figure
38, it was found that at a low w
d ratio, the failure mode is by cracks at the hole boundary
due to net tension;
•
d
h - ratio between diameter of bolt hole d and thickness of composite laminate h. In the
test presented in Figure 38, it was found that a low d
h ratio, the failure mode is by shear
failure and a ratio between 1 - 1.2 gives the highest bearing capacities;
• Fiber layout and sequence of stacking the laminates - a laminate with unidirectional
longitudinal ﬁber layout has a relatively low bearing capacity, with failure mode by a
longitudinal split due to transverse stresses at the hole. But by including layers at 30°,
±45°, 60°or 90°near the surface of the laminate, the bearing capacity is signiﬁcantly in-
creased. And relating to stacking sequence, [35] have demonstrated in a test as presented
in Figure 38 that a [90°/±45°/0°] stacking layup is 30% stronger than a [0°/±45°/90°]
and [36] concluded that a laminate with a [0°/45°] stack of laminates has the maximum
bearing capacity when the amount of layers is at 60:40.
Bonded Joints
• Disassembly - in case of damage of a certain component, temporary supports would have
to be made for the entire structure while the damaged carbon composite elements is
repaired.
• Preparation - a bonded joint requires surface preparation as cleaning, treatment for
adhesion, etc.
• Stress Concentration - eﬀort distribution is made by the entire bond, through the entire
adhesive that is applied;
==PAGE:45==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 45
Figure 38: Pin-bearing test and failure modes of (a) shear-out; (b) net tension; (c) cleavage; (d) bearing failure
Probably the main advantage of the bonded joint is its simplicity. The stress distri-
bution between two single-bonded carbon ﬁber elements is made through shear and normal
stresses in the adhesive with peak values at the ends of the adhesive layer. Diﬀerent types of
bonded joints can be made with a single-lap joint being the simplest and stepped or scarf joints
the most complicated due to manufacturing reasons. Diﬀerent types of bonded connections
are presented in Figure 39:
Figure 39: Bonded connections. (a) single-lap; (b) double-lap; (c) single/double strap joint; (d) stepped lap
joint; (e) scarf joint, [27]
Internal eﬀorts are signiﬁcantly reduced in the adhesive by nearly one-half (see Figure
40) when comparing a double to single-lap connection. Due to this fact, it was decided that
for the carbon ﬁber alternative of the truss in this project, to use double-lap connections in
==PAGE:46==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 46
order to keep eﬀort distribution as simple and safe as possible. Moreover, the reason for using
a bonded connection between CFRP tubes in the truss was the fact that it resembles the best
the welded connections of the steel truss.
Figure 40: Joint strength comparisons between Single, Scarf, Stepped, Double lap bonded connections, Compos.
Technol. Rev., 4, 136, 1982
A layout of the proposed connecting component if shown in Figure 41, which can also
be visualised in ”Appendix F”:
Figure 41: Connecting component detail.
Individual connecting components are proposed for the carbon ﬁber alternative.
These components would have diﬀerent ﬁber layout and diﬀerent mechanical properties than
the individual tension/compression tubes in the truss as follows:
• A ﬁber layout with ﬁbers at 30°, ±45°, 60°and 90°;
• Stacking sequence of [90°/±45°/0°];
==PAGE:47==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 47
• Higher tensile stress capacities and higher E-modulus than the individual tension-compression
tubes due to the fact that the connections are the week points in a carbon ﬁber structure;
• Higher thickness for a safe distribution of eﬀorts.
By using the compression molding manufacturing procedure for the connecting com-
ponent, a double-lap connection as in Figure 42 is proposed:
Figure 42: Proposal of double-lap connection between the connecting component and individual tubes of the truss
The individual tension-compression tubes would be inserted in a circumferential slot
created at the end of the connecting component in which a double-lap bonded connection
would be created. The slots of the double-lap bond are proposed to be made of the same
thickness as the tubes, with an increase in thickness at the edge of the connecting component
for a safe distribution of internal stresses.
With the type of bonding connection set, the adhesive selection process was done by
searching the market for real adhesives used in structural bonding of carbon ﬁber elements. In
[38], an adhesive with 30MPa adhesive resistance was found, a capacity which is considered
safe to be used in calculus when referring to values found in a study of carbon ﬁber bonding
capacities [39].
By use of the basic resistance equation:
NRad = fadAad ∗2
(34)
in which:
• NRad - Resistance capacity of connection;
• fad - Adhesive Resistance;
• Aad - Surface of adhesion.
This is doubled due to the fact the adhesion surface is
considered on both sided of the tension-compression tubes.
And with values of fad = 30MPa, and only 5 cm long circumferential adhesion
surface of Aad = 315cm2, a bond resistance of NRad = 942.5kN was found which is almost
10× the maximum applied force of 141.8kN found in member KL. Calculations of the bonded
connection are to be found in ”Appendix C” - Section 6.
==PAGE:48==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 48
8
Comparison
8.1
Resistance Capacities
The purpose of this chapter is to present and compare the steel and carbon alternative of the
truss system designed in this project.
Results of axial and buckling load capacities are compared between the generic steel
alternative and three diﬀerent variants of carbon ﬁber alternatives. A normal-modulus, quasi-
isotropic, carbon ﬁber reinforced polymer material is used on the basis that it oﬀers a similar
isotropic layout as steel. A high-modulus, unidirectional CFRP material is used since this is
the most eﬃcient material layout for axially loaded tubes. And a high-modulus CFRP material
provided by RockWest composites, which has excellent material properties, is used in order to
show a higher limit of the capability of carbon ﬁber materials. The mechanical properties and
results are tabulated as follows:
The maximum tension loaded member KL, compression loaded member JL and
==PAGE:49==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 49
longest member GH were set to be checked with the safe results of steel design as a refer-
ence.
It can be observed that in the case of the normal-modulus, quasi-isotropic CFRP
material layout, the tube is capable of resisting high tensile capacities of up to 518,4kN for
member KL and 484.57kN for member GH which are approximately 40% more than the steel
alternative with 350.7kN for member KL and 327.8kN for member GH. On the other hand,
buckling results show poor capacities due to the low elasticity modulus with 40.2kN for max-
imum compressed member JL and 37.57kN for maximum length member GH which are not
suﬃcient for the applied compression load of 132.7kN for member JL and 63.2kN for mem-
ber GH. These results are obtained with an optimal tube diameter of 215.7mm and optimal
thickness of only 1.25mm for maximum compression loaded member JL.
By use of a higher modulus CFRP with 215GPa, which has a higher tensile strength
as well of 1240MPa, the compression load capacity is greatly increased to 182,6kN for mem-
ber JL and 53.45kN for member GH which are approximately 15% higher respectively 4%
lower than steel capacities of 209.5kN for member JL and 63.2kN for member GH. Tension
capacities are also increased up to 1110kN for member KL and 1038kN for member GH which
are 320% higher when compared to steel design results. These results are obtained with an
optimal diameter of 127.44mm and optimal thickness of only 1.28mm for maximum compres-
sion loaded member JL.
Lastly, the high-performance carbon ﬁber tubes provided by RockWest composites
are capable of resisting tensile loads of up to 4136kN in member KL and 3866kN in member
GH which are approximately 12x the steel alternative, and compressive loads of up to 322.3kN
for member JL and 96.95kN for member GH which are approximately 2x respectively 1.7×
higher than steel capacityes of 160.85kN for member JL and 56.1kN for member GH. These
results are obtained with an optimal diameter of 108.66mm and optimal thickness of only
1.12mm for maximum compression loaded member JL.
8.2
Weight
The weight between the steel and carbon ﬁber alternative, both with the same diameters and
thicknesses, are compared in this section. The weight of one individual steel-carbon truss was
calculated initially by use of steel density of 7870 kg/m3 and density of carbon of 1630 kg/m3
and by computing the weight of each member of the truss, the following weights were found
from Table 5:
A signiﬁcant weight reduction can be observed for an individual truss of 778.97kg
with the steel truss weighing 982.45kg and the carbon ﬁber truss 4.8x lighter with 203.48kg.
By this diﬀerence, a total roof weight saving of 18.7 tonnes was found.
Such a weight diﬀerence represents one of the biggest advantage of carbon ﬁber alternative since
a lower self-weight of the roof structure means lower loads in the supporting and foundation
system of the entire structure.
==PAGE:50==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 50
Table 5: Truss weight diﬀerence between steel and carbon alternative
Members
Length
(m)
r1
(m)
r2
(m)
Volume
(m3)
Steel
(kg)
Carbon
(kg)
AB
4.086
0.05
0.045
0.0061
47.99
9.94
BD
4.086
0.05
0.045
0.0061
47.99
9.94
DF
4.086
0.05
0.045
0.0061
47.99
9.94
FH
4.086
0.05
0.045
0.0061
47.99
9.94
HJ
4.086
0.05
0.045
0.0061
47.99
9.94
JL
4.086
0.05
0.045
0.0061
47.99
9.94
KL
4.714
0.05
0.045
0.0070
55.36
11.47
IK
4.154
0.05
0.045
0.0062
48.78
10.10
GI
4.154
0.05
0.045
0.0062
48.78
10.10
EG
4.154
0.05
0.045
0.0062
48.78
10.10
CE
4.154
0.05
0.045
0.0062
48.78
10.10
AC
4.714
0.05
0.045
0.0070
55.36
11.47
BC
2.35
0.04
0.034
0.0033
25.80
5.34
CD
4.714
0.04
0.034
0.0066
51.75
10.72
DE
3.1
0.04
0.034
0.0043
34.03
7.05
DG
5.614
0.04
0.034
0.0078
61.63
12.76
FG
3.85
0.04
0.034
0.0054
42.26
8.75
GH
5.614
0.04
0.034
0.0078
61.63
12.76
HI
3.1
0.04
0.034
0.0043
34.03
7.05
HK
4.714
0.04
0.034
0.0066
51.75
10.72
JK
2.35
0.04
0.034
0.0033
25.80
5.34
Total (kg)
982.45
203.48
Diﬀerence for one truss (kg)
778.97
Diﬀerence for entire roof (kg)
18695.31
==PAGE:51==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 51
9
Discussion
9.1
Suitability of CFRP
One of the most important aspect when considering a carbon ﬁber reinforced polymer structure
over a generic steel structure, is the economical result.
Although CFRP components and
structures have signiﬁcant advantages over generic materials as steel or concrete, it is the
manufacturing process that keeps this alternative on hold. A cost/kg comparison between
numerous materials was found presented in Figure 43, made by [42].
Figure 43: Cost Comparison of numerous materials, [42]
The study of carbon ﬁber costs [42] shows that commercial grade production of car-
bon ﬁber is nearly 28× more expensive than steel per kg of material produced. This diﬀerence
goes even bigger when relating to the highest quality production carbon ﬁber composites can
become in aerospace grade, that of approximately 85× more expensive per kg than steel. Even
though, taken from the CFRP truss comparison shown in this project, one would require ap-
proximately 5× less quantity of material than steel, this fact still does not come in favour of
the CFRP alternative.
An economical case of study would have to be made for a CFRP alternative. One in
which the entire structure should be taken in to account as a whole since the eﬀect of a CFRP
roof has resemblance to the superstructure both the infrastructure especially. Considering
a case of diﬃcult foundation terrain, a lightweight roof structure would be beneﬁcial to the
overall material consumption in the foundation system since this can easily occupy up to 25%
or more of the entire structures price. Moreover, a high quality CFRP truss alternative would
have an increased service life over the steel alternative with inspection interval at a lower rate
due to the statement that a CFRP element is less susceptible to environmental factors. While
certain production tests demonstrate the environmental safety aspects, it has to be stated
the fact that conﬁdence in CFRP structures have to catch up to a high degree over generic
structures since some of the ﬁrst CFRP structures are not older than 25-30 years. Transport
and operation costs would also be reduced due to the weight diﬀerence since a smaller crane
would have to used.
Considering the fact that CFRP elements have a high damping degree, a CFRP truss
structure would probably be more suitable in a high seismic are. And although, from a static
structural point of view, a high-modulus and high-tensile strength CFRP truss can deﬁnitely
==PAGE:52==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 52
take higher loads than a steel truss, a great eﬀort has to be implemented in the design phase
to create elements as light and eﬃcient as possible through their layout and material selection
process.
It also has to be stated that carbon ﬁber reinforced polymers are relatively new ma-
terials when compared to generic construction materials, and with advances in manufacturing
technologies, assembly techniques and raw materials that started from the early 1970’s, there
will still be a considerable amount of research and development for this composite material
in order to reduce production costs, production times, design phases but also to improve the
capacities of it.
Another case of study regarding sustainability should be made for production of
CFRP elements. One study [43] shows that ﬁber reinforced polymers that are produced by
a protruded manufacturing process emit 3.09 kgCO2 per kg unit of FRP, while comparing to
production of steel piles of less than half with 1.25 kgCO2 per kg unit. While the respective
study [43] takes in to account the construction phase as well, a broader perspective has to be
applied when calculating such carbon footprints. One important aspect is again the weight
diﬀerences speciﬁc for each structure. A lighter roof structure results in less material for the
supporting system and infrastructure hence less carbon emission will follow for the overall
structure. Transportation and maneuvering aspects have to be taken in to account as well
since less fuel will be consumed for a lighter structure which would again reduce the overall
carbon footprint of the structure.
9.2
Truss Design
The design and comparisons between the two truss alternatives are of most interest in this
project.
It has to be stated that the proposed designs are not claimed to be ﬁnal design
concepts. A larger span for the truss system could be done, but it was intended to keep the
maximum diameter of the steel alternative at 100 mm for the upper and lower compression
and tension members respectively 80 mm for the inner tubes in order to ﬁnd out what capaci-
ties such a structure would have and to compare it with a carbon ﬁber alternative. As seen in
Section 8.1, utilization percentage of member GH is at 100% with a practical thickness of 6 mm.
While this is not possible for the steel alternative, for the CFRP truss alternative a
more eﬃcient design could be made by creating variable thicknesses through the tube which
would reduce the amount of carbon ﬁber used for the truss.
It was decided to use welded connections for the steel truss since this is the most
basic connection to be found for a truss. A bonded connection was chosen for the CFRP truss
alternative since this resembles the most a welded connection between steel tubes. Compar-
isons with mechanical bolted connections would be interesting to ﬁnd out for both steel and
CFRP alternative in order to compare resistance capacities between them.
Section 8.1 of resistance capacities show that an almost 5× decrease of the thickness
of tubes could be done by use of high-performance tubes as provided by [37]. This factor would
increase to a higher degree the weight diﬀerence between the two truss alternatives since the
weight diﬀerence was calculated with 5 mm respectively 6 mm for both alternatives.
==PAGE:53==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 53
10
Conclusions
The ﬁrst research motive was developed by taking inspiration of the spiders web layout. A
circular truncated roof was designed with a top view similar to the layout of a spiders web.
While a spider web is made out of radials and spirals, the roof in this project was made out
of trusses subjected to axial eﬀorts for the radials and rectangular hollow section beams sub-
jected to bending for the spirals.
It was found that by imitating such a layout, the roof structure can withstand the
required loads from glazing self-weight, snow and wind while still maintaining a relatively
slender shape with tubes of only 100 respectively 80 mm diameter. A large opening of 56m
can be covered by such a shape which would be suitable for big open spaced buildings.
The second research motive has lead to a certain controversy about a relatively new
but very capable material, carbon ﬁber reinforced polymers. While carbon ﬁber reinforced
polymers are highly capable to resist a higher degree of loading when compared to generic steel,
and also with a weight diﬀerence of at least 5×, the biomimicry principle of material eﬃciency is
not covered to the full extent. The only aspect of this principle that is not yet eﬃciently solved
it the sustainability aspect. A CFRP structure would indeed require less energy input during
the lifetime of its service, but on the other hand with current manufacturing technologies, it is
still under debate in what locations and situations such a material is actually more sustainable
over steel.
==PAGE:54==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 54
11
Further Work
Clearly not all aspects of such a roof shape have been completely covered. As described in
section 9 of this paper, numerous considerents would still have to be taken in to account only
for the validity of choosing a carbon ﬁber reinforced alternative. As follows, an enumeration
is done with further work suggestions for such a roof structure and its alternative:
• Wind Analysis - due to the fact that ”EN1991-1-4.2005” does not give recommendations
on such a roof shape, a CFD analysis would give a more realistic approach over the
pressure distribution and actual pressure values;
• Connection Design - all individual connections should be checked together with eﬀort
distribution and resistance capabilities of the welds should be checked as well for the steel
alternative. While for the CFRP alternative, an analysis of eﬀort distribution should
be done in the connecting component. Also, a comparison between mechanical bolted
connections for both alternatives would be required;
• Compression Ring - the upper compression ring should be taken in to account and
designed accordingly since in this project it is only considered to be fully rigid and safe;
• Support Analysis - the lower support of the truss should be analyzed and decided upon
a practical solution;
• Overall Stability - this project only takes in to account uniform loading over the entire
roof. However, this is not the case for the entire lifespan of such a roof structure and
other load paths should be checked for overall stability of the structure;
• CFRP Material Selection Process - more research could be done in this direction in order
to ﬁnd the most capable material but also the most eﬃcient ﬁber layout for diﬀerent
types of internal eﬀorts;
• Economical analysis - an economical case of study should be made with diﬀerent foun-
dation ground scenarios in which the entire infrastructure and superstructure should be
taken in to account;
• Sustainability - an analysis of carbon footprint should be made for both alternatives to
see if the CFRP alternative produces less emissions overall;
• Dynamic Response - vibrations of both alternatives should be compared to see which
behaves better in seismic areas;
• Life Cycle Cost - analysis of how much maintenance and interventions both structures
would require and also ﬁnd out to what extend the service life of the CFRP alternative
could actually be extended over the steel alternative;
• Fire Safety - Structural Fire Safety analysis for both alternatives.
==PAGE:55==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 55
References
[1] Animals inspire innovations in science and engineering
https://www.kth.se;
[2] Biomimicry in Architecture and Engineering
https://www.autodesk.com/redshift/biomimicry-in-architecture/;
[3] Classiﬁcation Systems: Animals and Engineering
https://www.teachengineering.org;
[4] Nine incredible buildings inspired by nature.
http://www.bbc.com;
[5] 14 Animal-Inspired Inventions.
https://www.momtastic.com;
[6] bioMASON:building with nature.
http://biomason.com/;
[7] Bionic design: The future of lightweight structures.
https://www.compositesworld.com;
[8] 10 Nature Inspired Architectural Designs.
http://www.ucreative.com;
[9] Biomimicry – Nature Inspired Building Structures.
Ar. Anjali Prashant Kshirsagar, Ar. Seema Santosh Malani, Er. Vikramsinh
S. Tiware - International Journal of Engineering Research and Technology.
ISSN 0974-3154 Volume 10, Number 1 (2017);
[10] The Load Bearing Duct: Biomimicry in Structural Design.
Stylianos Yiatros, Ar. M. Ahmer Wadee, Gary R. Hunt - Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine, London, SW7 2AZ, UK October 12, 2007;
[11] Lessons from a Coral Reef: Biomimicry for Structural Engineers.
Diana A. Chen, S.M.ASCE, Brandon E. Ross, Ph.D., P.E., M.ASCE, Leidy E.
Klotz, Ph.D., M.ASCE - Dept. of Civil Engineering, Clemson Univ;
[12] Biomimicry as an approach for bio-inspired structure with the aid of computation.
Moheb Sabry Aziz, Amr Y. El sherif - Alexandria University, Faculty of
Engineering, Architectural Engineering Department, Egypt, 27 November 2015;
[13] Biomimicry as an approach for bio-inspired structure with the aid of computation.
Moheb Sabry Aziz, Amr Y. El sherif - Alexandria University, Faculty of
Engineering, Architectural Engineering Department, Egypt, 27 November 2015;
[14] Nature as inspiration: Tools for Structural art.
L. Leif Johnson. - Skidmore, Owings and Merrill foundation 2004 Structural
Engineering traveling fellowship;
==PAGE:56==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 56
[15] Structural Design in the Work of Gaudi
Santiago Huerta - Department of Structural Design, Escuela Ticnica
Superior de Arquitecrura, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Avida Juan
de Herrera 4, 28040 Madrid, Spainp;
[16] The Role of Nature in Structural Art
https://somfoundation.som.com;
[17] Nature-inspired structural optimization of freeform shells
https://www.researchgate.net;
[18] BIOMIMICRY ENGINEERING: NEW AREA OF TRANFORMATION INSPIRED BY
THE NATURE
Mohd Syahrul Hisyam Mohd Sani, Fadhluhartini Muftah, Tan Cher Siang.
Faculty of Civil Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Mara, Pahang, Malaysia;
[19] STRUCTURAL AND STRESS ANALYSIS
Dr. T. H. G. MEGSON Senior Lecturer in Civil Engineering, University of
Leeds;
[20] Analysis of Statically Determinate Trusses. Theory of Structures
Asst. Prof. Dr. Cenk ¨Ust¨unda˘g;
[21] Double R, Glass and Rooﬁng Systems Ltd
https://www.glassandroofs.com/glass-weights/
[22] EN1991-1-4 (2005) (English)
Eurocode 1:
Actions on structures - Part 1-4:
General actions - Wind
actions [Authority:
The European Union Per Regulation 305/2011, Directive
98/34/EC, Directive 2004/18/EC];
[23] DS/EN 1991-1-4 DK NA:2010-03.
National Annex to Eurocode 1:
Actions on structures - Part 1-4:
General
actions { Wind actions;
[24] Design Guide: For fabrication, assembly and erection of hollow section structures.
D. Dutta, J. Wardenier, N. Yeomans, K. Sakae, O. Bucak, J.A. Packer;
[25] Energy Methods in Structural Analysis.
Version 2 CE IIT, Kharagpur;
[26] Design of welded joints: Manual.
TATA STEEL, Tata Steel Europe Ltd;
[27] Fiber Reinforced Materials, Manufacturing, and Design.
P.K. Mallick Department of Mechanical Engineering University of
Michigan-Dearborn Dearborn, Michigan. 2007 by Taylor and Francis Group,
LLC.;
[28] Structural Design of Polymer Composites: Eurocomp Design Code and Background Doc-
ument.
Clarke, J. L. (1996), New York, USA: CRC Press; www.books.google.se;
==PAGE:57==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 57
[29] Composites for Construction: Structural Design With FRP Materials. Hoboken, NJ, USA:
John Wiley and Sons.
Bank, L.C. (2006) https://books.google.se;
[30] Global Carbon Fibre Market Remains on Upward Trend. Reinforced Plastics.
Holmes, M. (2014) 10.1016/S0034-3617(14)70251-6;
[31] Tubular composite compression members—design considerations and practices.
D.P. Maass, Proceedings 41st Annual Conference, Society of the Plastics
Industry, January (1986);
[32] Composites for Construction: Structural Design with FRP Materials.
Proceedings 41st Annual Conference, Society of the Plastics Industry,
January (1986);
[33] Processing of advanced thermoplastic composites.
The Manufacturing Science of Composites (T.G. Gutowski, ed.), ASME, New
York (1988).;
[34] Mechanical Properties of Carbon Fibre Composite Materials, Fibre / Epoxy resin.
http://www.performance-composites.com/carbonfibre/;
[35] The eﬀect of stacking sequence on the pin-bearing strength in glass ﬁbre reinforced plastic.
W.J. Quinn and F.L. Matthews, J. Compos. Mater., (1977);
[36] The strength of bolted joints in multi-directional cfrp laminates.
T.A. Collings, Composites (1977).;
[37] HIGH MODULUS CARBON TUBING.
https://www.rockwestcomposites.com;
[38] Bonding and Joint Design For Carbon Fiber Tubing Construction.
https://www.chemical-supermarket.com;
[39] The robustness of carbon ﬁbre members bonded to aluminium connectors in aerial
delivery systems.
Nada Aldoumani, Hamed Haddad Khodaparast, Ian Cameron, Michael Friswell,
David Jones, Arun Chandrashaker and Johann Sienz, Wei Meng, Wuhan
University of Technology, China;
[40] Wet compression molding.
https://www.compositesworld.com/blog/post/wet-compression-molding;
[41] Steelmaking.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steelmaking;
[42] Carbon composites are becoming competitive and cost eﬀective.
Shama Rao N., Simha T.G.A., Rao K.P. and Ravi Kumar G.V.V., Infosys,
Bengaluru, India;
[43] Carbon Footprint Analysis of Fibre Reinforced Polymer (FRP) Incorporated Pedestrian
Bridges: A Case Study.
Jianguo Dai and Tamon Ueda, Department of Civil and Structural
==PAGE:58==
s170384 - Bogdan-Vlad Voineag | Structural Biomimicry
Page 58
Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University; Division of Built
Environment, Faculty of Engineering, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan;
