==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Likelihood Estimation of Drug Occupancy
using PET – Generalization to Multiple Doses
Ali Ilhan
Supervisors:
Chair, Professor, MD, DMSc, Gitte Moos Knudsen *
Chief Engineer, PhD, Claus Svarer *
Post Doc, Engineer, Martin Schain *
* Department of Neurology and Neurobiology Research
Unit, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet
Copenhagen 2019
==PAGE:2==
Neurobiology Research Unit
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen
28 Juliane Maries Vej, 3rd floor
2100 Copenhagen
Phone (+45) 3545 6712
Mail info@nru.dk
www.nru.dk
Biomedical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 349
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 5832
www.bme.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Submitted in fullfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science
in
Biomedical Engineering
at
Technical University of Denmark
and
University of Copenhagen
Supervisors:
Chair, Professor, MD, DMSc, Gitte Moos Knudsen *
Chief Engineer, PhD, Claus Svarer *
Post Doc, Engineer, Martin Schain *
* Department of Neurology and Neurobiology Research Unit,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet
Examiner:
Post Doc, Engineer, Kasper Winther Andersen
Danish Research Center for Magnetic Resonance,
Hvidovre Hospital
Date of exam: March 20, 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Introduction: Neuroimaging with Positron Emission Tomography (PET) is a valuable
asset for drug development. Using PET, it is possible to determine whether a new drug
can diffuse across the blood-brain-barrier and bind to the target of interest. The target
occupancy (∆) is given as the fraction by which a drug occupies the target of interest.
Studies can be conducted to estimate the target occupancy. These studies are conducted
with several PET scans where one scan is taken at baseline when no drug has been ad-
ministered and the other scans taken after a drug dosage has been administered (block
scans). The common approach, called the Lassen plot (Cunningham et al., 2010), to an-
alyze these data from the several PET scans has been shown to produce biased outcomes
and be sensitive to noise. A recently developed method, called the Likelihood Estima-
tion of Occupancy (LEO) (Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018), has shown major
improvements compared to the Lassen plot in all relevant aspects. LEO estimates the
values of the radioligand non-displaceable distribution volume (VND) and ∆that max-
imize the likelihood of the radioligand total distribution volume (VT) values observed
in multiple brain regions (ROIs), using the same assumptions as those implicit in the
Lassen plot. However, LEO can only handle the situation where a single dose has been
administered to each research subject. When developing a new drug, in order to deter-
mine the relationship between an administered drug dose and the resulting occupancy,
it is common that each research subject is scanned several times with multiple doses of
the drug. The aim of this project was to generalize LEO into Likelihood Estimation of
Multiple Occupancies (LEMO) so that it can accommodate multiple measurements at
varying doses for each research subject scanned. The project will consist of an analytical
derivation of a high-dimensional log-likelihood function and data simulation.
Methods: If considering the case where a research subject has underwent one baseline
scan and N block scans then the research subjects baseline VT values can be modelled
as Vbaseline
T
= VS + VND1 + ϵbaseline and the ith block scans’ VT values can be modelled
as Vblock,i
T
= (1 −∆1)VS + VND1 + ϵblock,i, where i=1,2,...,N. Bold font indicates a kx1
vector, with k being the number of ROIs. All ϵ’s are error terms, VS is the radioligand
specifically bound distribution volume. It is assumed that each ∆i is constant across
ROIs but changes between scans, VS is changing between ROIs but constant across
==PAGE:6==
ii
Abstract
scans and VND is constant across ROIs and scans. By assuming normality of the error
terms, the high-dimensional log-likelihood function can then analytically be derived.
By maximizing the high-dimensional log-likelihood function with standard optimization
techniques, it will then be possible to identify the coordinates at which the optimal value
for all ∆i and VND is reaching a maximum. With the error terms a covariance matrix of
the errors (Σ) can be estimated with a separate test-retest data. Test-retest data comes
from PET scans where a research subject has underwent at least two PET scans under
identical conditions. LEO and LEMO take the Σ into account.
LEMO was examined under different conditions and compared to LEO and the Lassen
plot. One dataset using the radioligand [11C]DASB and another dataset using the radioli-
gand [11C]Cimbi-36 were simulated. The simulation were set up based on one simulated
baseline scan and three simulated block scans. 1000 instances were simulated with vary-
ing simulated test-retest sample size used to estimate Σ, varying simulated occupancy
and varying simulated noise. The Lassen plot and LEO estimated occupancies and VND
independently compared to the baseline scan. While LEMO estimated occupancies and
VND simultaneously in a one-step-procedure.
Results: The assessment of the results obtained from the simulations has been quan-
tified and shown as graphs. Simulations were also shown as violin plots. The graphs
show the summed squared distances while the violin plots show the distributions of the
estimates.
From the graphs is seen that higher test-retest sample size to estimate Σ will lead to
estimates of occupancies and VND with lower values of summed squared distances. Lower
values indicate better performance and was observed for LEO and LEMO. The Lassen
plot makes no use of Σ and was observed to have a constant summed squared distance
value and the highest value compared to LEO and LEMO.
From the violin plots is seen that LEO and LEMO has a lower spread and bias compared
to the Lassen plot. LEMO is seen to be unaffected by varying occupancy and noise
for VND estimates. LEMO is further seen to have the lowest spread and bias in low
occupancies.
Conclusion: LEMO yields an important contribution to determine the relationship
between an administered drug dose and the resulting occupancy when several block
scans are used. LEMO has been shown to have superior VND estimates compared to
LEO and the Lassen plot regardless of noise and occupancy.
In particular, for low
occupancy cases it is seen that LEMO has superior VND and occupancy estimates.
==PAGE:7==
Resume
Introduktion: Neurobilleddannelse med Positron Emission Tomography (PET) er et
værdifuldt aktiv for lægemiddel udvikling. Ved hjælp af PET er det muligt at bestemme,
om et nyt lægemiddel kan diffundere over blod-hjerne-barrieren og binde til målet af in-
teresse.
Okkupans (∆) er angivet som den fraktion, som lægemidlet okkuperer ved
målet af interesse. Undersøgelser kan udføres for at estimere ∆. Disse undersøgelser
gennemføres med flere PET-scanninger, hvor en scanning er taget ved baseline, når der
ikke er blevet administreret noget lægemiddel, og de andre scanninger, er taget efter
en lægemiddel dosering, er blevet administreret (block scanning). Den normale tilgang,
kaldet Lassen plottet (Cunningham et al., 2010), for at analysere data fra flere PET-
scanninger, har vist sig at producere biased resultater og være følsomme for støj. En
nylig udviklet metode, der kaldes Likelihood Estimation of Occupancy (LEO) (Schain,
Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018), har vist store forbedringer i forhold til Lassen plot-
tet i alle relevante aspekter. LEO estimerer værdierne for radioligand i ikke-forskydelig
fordelingsvolumen (VND) og ∆, der maksimerer likelihood for radioligand i total fordel-
ingsvolumens (VT) værdier observeret i flere hjerneområder (ROI’er) under anvendelse
af de samme implicitte antagelser som dem i Lassen plottet. LEO kan dog kun håndtere
situationen, hvor en enkelt dosis er administreret til hvert forsøgsperson. Ved udvikling
af et nyt lægemiddel er det almindeligt, at hvert forsøgsperson bliver scannet flere gange
med flere doser af lægemidlet for at bestemme forholdet mellem den administrerede
lægemiddeldosis og den resulterende okkupans. Formålet med dette projekt var at gen-
eralisere LEO til Likelihood Estimation of Multiple Occupancies (LEMO), således at det
kan rumme flere målinger i varierende doser for hvert forsøgsperson der blev scannet.
Projektet vil bestå af en analytisk afledning af en højdimensional log-likelihood funktion
og datasimulering.
Metode: I situationen hvor en forsøgsperson har gennemgået et baseline scan og N
block scanninger kan forsøgspersonens baseline VT værdier modelleres som Vbaseline
T
=
VS +VND1+ϵbaseline og for det ite block scans VT værdier kan modelleres somVblock,i
T
=
(1−∆1)VS+VND1+ϵblock,i, hvor i=1,2,...,N. Fed skrift markerer vektorer af længde kx1,
hvor k er antallet af ROI’er. Alle ϵ’er er fejl termer, VS er radioligand i speficikt bun-
den fordelingsvolumen. Det er antaget at hver ∆i er konstant over ROI’er men ændres
==PAGE:8==
iv
Resume
over scanninger, VS ændres over ROI’er men er konstant over scans og VND er konstant
over ROI’er og scans. Ved at antage normalfordeling af fejltermerne, så kan en højdi-
mensional log-likelihood funktion analytisk blive afledt. Ved at maksimere den højdi-
mensionalle log-likelihood funktion ved standard optimeringsrutiner, så er det muligt at
identificere de koordinater, hvorved den optimale værdi for alle ∆i og VND opnås ved en
maksimering. Med fejltermerne kan en covariance matrix af fejlene (Σ) estimeres med et
separat test-retest datasæt. Test-retest datasættet kommer fra PET-scanninger hvor en
forsøgsperson har gennemgået mindst to PET-scaninnger under identiske forhold. LEO
og LEMO tager hensyn til Σ.
LEMO blev undersøgt under forskellige forhold og sammenlignet med LEO og Lassen
plottet. Et datasæt med radioliganden [11C]DASB og et andet datasæt med radioligan-
den [11C]Cimbi-36 blev simuleret. Simuleringen var baseret på et simuleret baseline scan
og tre simulerede block scanninger.
1000 forekomster blev simuleret med varierende
simulerede test-retest prøvestørrelser brugt til estimering af Σ, varierende simulerede
okkupanser og varierende simulerede støj. Lassen plottet og LEO estimerer okkupanser
og VND uafhængigt i forhold til baseline scanningen. Medens LEMO estimerer okku-
panser og VND samtidig i en et-trins-procedure.
Resultater: Vurderingen af de opnåede resultater fra simuleringerne er blevet kvantifi-
ceret og vist som grafer. Simuleringerne blev også vist som violin plot. Graferne viser
de summerede kvadrarede afstande, mens violin plottene viser estimaternes fordelinger.
Fra graferne ses, at højere test-retest prøvestørrelser til estimering af Σ vil føre til es-
timater af okkupanser og VND med lavere værdier af summerede kvadrerede afstande.
Lavere værdier indikerer bedre effektivitet og blev observeret for LEO og LEMO. Lassen
plottet gør ikke brug af Σ og blev observeret til at have en konstant værdi af summerede
kvadrerede afstande og den højeste værdi sammenlignet med LEO og LEMO.
Fra violingplottene ses, at LEO og LEMO har en lavere spredning og bias i forhold
til Lassen plottet. LEMO ses at være upåvirket af varierende okkupanser og støj for
VND estimater. LEMO ses derudover at have den laveste spredning og bias ved lave
okkupanser.
Konklusion: LEMO giver et vigtigt bidrag til at bestemme forholdet mellem den ad-
ministrerede lægemiddeldosis og den resulterende okkupans, når flere block scanninger
anvendes. LEMO har vist sig at have overlegen VND estimater sammenlignet med LEO
og Lassen plottet uanset støj og okkupans. I særdeleshed ses der i tilfælde af lav okku-
pans, at LEMO har overlegen VND og okkupans estimater.
==PAGE:9==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Neurobiology Research Unit, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen
University Hospital in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science
degree in Biomedical Engineering.
The work has been carried out from September 2018 to March 2019 with holidays in-
cluded and the assigned workload was 32.5 ECTS credits, corresponding to 890 hours
of work.
This thesis was handed in on March 1st 2019
Supervisors:
Chair, Professor, MD, DMSc, Gitte Moos Knudsen *
Chief Engineer, PhD, Claus Svarer *
Post Doc, Engineer, Martin Schain *
* Department of Neurology and Neurobiology Research Unit,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet
Examiner:
Post Doc, Engineer, Kasper Winther Andersen
Danish Research Center for Magnetic Resonance, Hvidovre Hospital
Copenhagen, March 1st, 2019
Ali Ilhan
==PAGE:10==
vi
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
Many persons have been involved and helped me along the way on this project, and they all
deserve to be thanked. First of all I would like to thank my supervisors Professor Gitte Moos
Knudsen, Senior Researcher Claus Svarer and Post Doc Martin Schain from the Neurobiology
Research Unit at Rigshospitalet. I am very grateful to have benefited from your knowledge
and experience, and I am very grateful for the level of dedication that you have given this
project.
The staff at the Neurobiology Research Unit, Copenhagen University Hospital, deserves a big
thanks for providing a great research environment. It has been a great educational experience
to be here and if I had questions then it was always possible to ask and learn more. Especially
I would like to thank Post Doc, Biostatistician, Brice Ozenne for his helpful guidance and PhD
Student, MD, Martin Korsbak Madsen for giving me the opportunity to see how a scanning
procedure was conducted.
On a more personal level, I would like to thank my wife and family for their support, under-
standing and encouragement throughout my entire project period. Finally, I would like to
thank my friend and fellow student, Yosef, who have proofread this report and through our
time of study always been a cheerful soul.
==PAGE:12==
viii
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
1TCM 1-Tissue Compartmental Model
2TCM 2-Tissue Compartmental Model
B3B
Baseline and three block, as in one baseline scan and three block scans
BB
Baseline and block, as in one baseline and one block scan
BBB
Blood-Brain-Barrier
CM
Compartmental Model
LEMO Likelihood Estimation of Multiple Occupancies
LEO
Likelihood Estimation of Occupancy
LL
Log-Likelihood
LLH
Low-Low-High
LLM
Low-Low-Medium
LMM Low-Medium-Medium
MD
Multiple dosage
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
PET
Positron Emission Tomography
ROI
Region Of Interest
TAC
Time-Activity Curve
TRT
Test and retest
List of symbols
==PAGE:14==
x
Acknowledgements
ϵ
Error terms
ˆΣ
Estimated covariance matrix
Σ
Covariance matrix
∆
Fractional occupancy
λ
Noise level, where 1 corresponds to 100% of realistic noise
cT
Radioactivity concentration in tissue
cblood
Radioactivity concentration in blood
cND
Radioactivity concentration in radioligand which is nondisplaceable
cPET
Radioactivity concentration measured by PET
cp
Radioactivity concentration for radioligand measured in plasma and corrected for metabo-
lites
VS
Volume of distribution for radioligand which is specifically bound
VT
Regional volume of distribution for tissue compartment
VND
Volume of distribution for radioligand which is nondisplaceable
Other
1
k x 1 vector of ones
I
Number of simulated instances in the simulated baseline-block experiment
i
ith block scan
j
ROI j, as in one specific ROI j
k
Number of ROIs
M
Number of subjects
N
Number of block scans
T
Test retest sample size
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resume
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Nomenclature
ix
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical background
5
2.1
Positron Emission Tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
PET Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Radioactive compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Time Activity Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Kinetic modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Arterial input function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Three tissue compartmental model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Two tissue compartmental model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
One tissue compartmental model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.5
Parameters from the compartmental models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Target Occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
Competitive binding in target occupancy studies
. . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
The revised Lassen plot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.3
Likelihood estimation of occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Extension of the likelihood estimation of occupancy
23
3.1
Covariance matrix of LEO and LEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Methods
29
==PAGE:16==
xii
Contents
4.1
Acquired datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Radioligands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.2
Data quantification of [11C]Cimbi-36 datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Data simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.1
Noise matrix and definition of a true covariance matrix . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Simulating data based on a test-retest experiment . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.3
Simulating data based on a baseline-block experiment . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.2
Effect of increasing number of test-retest subjects . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.3
Effect of noise level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.4
Effect of varied occupancies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Results
39
5.1
Effect of increasing number of test-retest subjects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
[11C]DASB dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.2
[11C]Cimbi-36 dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Effect of noise level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.1
[11C]DASB dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.2
[11C]Cimbi-36 dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Effect of varied occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3.1
[11C]DASB dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3.2
[11C]Cimbi-36 dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Discussion
55
6.1
Likelihood Estimation of Multiple Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Effect of increasing number of test-retest subjects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Effect of noise level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.4
Effect of varied occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.5
General observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Conclusion
63
7.1
Future perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A Visual representation of procedure
65
B Tables
67
C Conference paper
71
C.1
Abstract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
C.2
Abstract full figure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
D Matlab functions
75
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Studies of the brain as a research field is under the broad and multidisciplinary field of neuro-
biology. The neurobiology field includes all research fields of the nervous system. One of these
research fields is the neurology field which deals with diseases such as Alzheimer’s Disease
(AD). The cause of AD is poorly understood and unknown, but it is believed genetic factors
could be of influence. Treatment of AD focuses on improving symptoms and life quality of the
patient as there is no cure for AD. (Lane et al., 2018) Like AD there are many other neurologic
diseases. Many aspects of these neurologic diseases can be studied. These aspects are ranging
from diagnosing the diseases to drugs for the treatment of the diseases. One tool which can
both be used to diagnosing of diseases and supporting drug development is Positron Emission
Tomography (PET).
PET is a technique used to observe the metabolic processes in the body. The use of PET
is broad and ranging from diagnosing of diseases to research areas such as supporting drug
development. In either case, the overall use of PET is based on the same concept. PET consists
of compounds which are labelled with radioactive material, a camera typically containing
scintillation crystals and a computer. PET via the camera counts the number of positron
emissions from the beta decay of the radiolabelled compound. However, PET provides very
limited structural information of the body which is one of the reasons for coregistering PET
images with other imaging modalities such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). (Zhang
and Fox, 2012)
The compounds used in PET are biochemical substances which are radiolabelled. These bio-
chemical substances that are radiolabelled are called radioligands as they consist of radioactive
materials. There are many ways to combine biochemical substances with radioactive materials
and this is a research area itself. (R. N. Gunn and Rabiner, 2017; Matthews et al., 2012) A
property of the radioactive materials is that they can lead to ionization. Another property
of the radioactive materials is their half-life. Depending on the objective of the human brain
study the half-life of the radioactive material can span from a few seconds to hours as most of
the radioactive decay is desired to happen inside the body when the patient is being scanned.
The radioligand is administered to the patient via injection into the bloodstream where the ra-
dioligand then flows with the bloodstream and diffuses across the Blood-Brain-Barrier (BBB)
into the brain.
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
Depending on what is wanted to be studied in the brain specific radioligands can then bind to
specific targets such as a serotonin neuroreceptor which is implicated in a variety of diseases
such as AD. With only PET data one would be able to use the spatial information from the PET
image to see where in the brain the uptake of the radioligand is. The spatial information from
the PET image could also be used to see the location of the specific targets in the brain. With
the application of mathematical models called kinetic modelling and the acquired PET data
one can be able to quantify the kinetics of the radioligand such as quantifying the rate of influx
of a radioligand into brain tissue or other relevant parameter estimates. The kinetic models
are typically non-linear and hence parameter estimations are done by non-linear regression.
This type of parameter estimation is specific for the model chosen. (Mark Slifstein and Marc
Laruelle, 2001)
PET can also be used as a tool for drug development. With PET one can estimate how much
a certain drug is occupying the target for which the drug is intended to work on. The kind of
studies where occupancy is estimated is called target occupancy studies. The target for which
a drug is intended could be a neuroreceptor hence a receptor occupancy would be estimated.
The occupancy estimated is a fractional occupancy (∆) and can be estimated by having at
least two PET scans. One scan before any drug is administered (baseline scan) and one scan
after the drug has been administered (block scan). The administered drug and radioligand
binds to the same neuroreceptors and will therefore compete for the same binding sites. Hence
the difference between a baseline scan and a block scan can then be used to estimate the target
occupancy of the drug.
Another method to estimate ∆is by the Lassen plot (N A Lassen et al., 1995) which was later
revised and simply called the revised Lassen plot (Cunningham et al., 2010). Both the original
Lassen plot and revised Lassen plot are graphical approaches which by linear regression seeks
to estimate the occupancy. Both plots though cannot be used if parameters estimated from
kinetic modelling is not at hand.
Even though the Lassen plot, or the revised Lassen plot, is simple to use and implement it
violates the assumptions of linear regression. First, the baseline scan is both a variable in the
dependent and independent variables and secondly the baseline scan is noisy which makes the
noise correlated with the dependent variable (Cunningham et al., 2010; Naganawa, Gallezot,
et al., 2017; Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018; Slifstein and Laruelle, 2000). Hence
alternative methods are sought.
Recently one such new alternative was proposed. The new method is maximum Likelihood
Estimation of Occupancy (LEO). (Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018) LEO is based
upon the same assumptions as the Lassen plot which are that ∆and volumes of distribution
in each region estimated are the same and that only ∆differs between baseline and block
scan. Thereby a joint probability density function can be constructed and the likelihood which
maximises the estimates of ∆and volume of distribution can be found. The LEO method
has shown major improvements in all relevant aspects compared to the graphical approaches
(Lassen plot/revised Lassen plot). The LEO method is though limited to only handle the
situation where a single dose is administered to each research subject, i.e the case where each
subject has underwent one baseline and one block scan. To determine the relationship between
administered dose and the resulting occupancy, it is common in drug development applications,
==PAGE:19==
1 Introduction
3
that each subject is administered multiple doses. Consequently, each subject is scanned several
times. (Ametamey et al., 2008; R. N. Gunn and Rabiner, 2017; Naganawa, Gallezot, et al.,
2017)
This project aims to extend the LEO method so that it can accommodate multiple block
scans for each subject where varying doses was administered.
The extension of LEO con-
sists of analytically deriving a high-dimensional log-likelihood function and implementing this
high-dimensional log-likelihood function on simulated data. The simulated data is based on
previously published datasets.
==PAGE:20==
4
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical background
2.1
Positron Emission Tomography
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) is a functional imaging technique used in nuclear
medicine that enables the study of metabolic processes in the body.
The technique relies
on radiotracers to emit radiation resulting from β+ decay to trace the biochemical processes
happening inside the body.
The β+ decay occurs when the nucleus has a low neutron-to-
proton ratio and can attain stability by emitting a positron. (Cember and Johnson, 2008) If
the positron interacts with an electron they are annihilated. The annihilation of a positron
with an electron will lead to two photons separated by 180°. The annihilation process is an
essential part of the PET imaging technique.
2.1.1
PET Physics
Generally the β+ decay follows
p →n + e+ + ve,
where p is a proton, n is a neutron, e+ is the positron and ve is the electron neutrino. E.g
Carbon-11 decay to Boron-11 by β+ decay follows
11
6 C →11
5 B + e+ + ve
The electron neutrino is an uncharged subatomic particle and the positron is an antimatter
electron, i.e. the positron has a +1 charge and a mass equal to the electron. Furthermore
the decay follows an exponential function. The annihilation of the positron with an electron
happens after the positron has travelled a few mms in the tissue leading to a deposition of
kinetic energy. The annihilation leads to two 511keV photons from the conservation of energy.
Furthermore, from the conservation of momentum the emitted two photons are emitted back-
to-back by 180°. (see Figure 2.1) Although in practice as the positron and the electron has
==PAGE:22==
6
2 Theoretical background
momentum before annihilation the two photons emitted are not exactly separated by 180°.
These two photons can then travel outside the body and be detected by opposing pairs of PET
cameras in a detector ring. An unit inside the PET camera will determine if the detected
photons should be counted as an event or not.
If counted as an event then these events
are called Annihilation Coincidence Detections (ACDs). As the photons are emitted at the
same time the unit inside the PET camera will determine if the two photons detected arrived
simultaneously. In practice what is defined as ”simultaneously” is an user set interval called
the time window. The time window can range from 2ns-20ns in modern scanners. (Prince and
Links, 2015) If one photon is detected at one PET camera then the second photon detected
has to be detected inside this time window at the opposing PET camera to be considered a
”simultaneous” detection and thereby recorded as an event. All recorded events are counted.
The straight line joining any pair of opposing PET cameras for which an ACD could be
identified are called Lines of Response (LOR). These LOR are not limited to 2 dimensions as
any pair, including 3 dimensional pairs, of opposing PET cameras can be regarded a LOR.
The only requirement for a LOR is that an ACD should be identified on a line connecting two
opposing PET cameras. (see Figure 2.1)
Figure 2.1: The 2D principle of positron emission tomography and β+ decay (electron
neutrino not shown) leading to a positron annihilation.
Positron path is shown as
straight line, though this is in nearly all cases not true. An annihilation coincidence
detection is shown as a coincidence event. Line of response is shown. Image from Zhang
and Fox, 2012 page 70
The path which the positrons leaves the nucleus is difficult to determine. The positron path is
difficult to determine due to the interactions with other nuclei. The main purpose of PET is to
estimate the location in which the decaying nucleus is located and not the annihilation of the
positron with an electron. The travelled distance of the positron gives rise to uncertainties of
determining the location of the decaying nucleus but as the annihilation process happens after
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Positron Emission Tomography
7
the positron has travelled a few mms in tissue then this uncertainty of where the decaying
nucleus is located will be in mms in proximity to the annihilation process.
Regions with high activity will over time generate more LORs and vice versa for low activity
regions. Hence the total number of ACDs counted along a LOR will represent the integration
of the total activity along the LOR, i.e. on a particular line the measured counts represents
an integration of the activity on that line. Thereby PET measures line integrals of activity.
These line integrals of activity can then be used to reconstruct the PET image by different
techniques (see Prince and Links, 2015 for the different techniques used) but this is not the
scope of this thesis.
The reconstructed PET image will give limited structural information which is why the patient
will either before or after the PET scan be scanned with other anatomical image modalities such
as structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) which can provide anatomical images with
high resolution. The image from other anatomical image modalities will then be coregistered
to the PET image via different affine transformation methods. These affine transformation
methods could be translation (i.e. moving the image in any direction) or rotation (i.e. rotating
the image in any direction). (Svarer et al., 2004) The coregistration of PET images with e.g.
MR images makes it possible to delineate specific tissue or regions in detail.1
2.1.2
Radioactive compounds
There are over hundreds of radionuclides but only a few out of these are suitable for PET ap-
plications. The prerequisites that has to be fullfilled to use radionuclides for PET applications
can be many depending on what is wanted to be studied. (Ametamey et al., 2008; Matthews
et al., 2012; Takano et al., 2016; Varnäs et al., 2013) Furthermore, the biochemical processes
behind these prerequisites can be complex.
Therefore the prerequisites presented here are
simplifications.
Radionuclides are by some complex biochemical process combined with ligand (i.e.
ion or
molecule) to make what is called a radioligand. Some of the prerequisites for these radioligands
used for brain PET imaging are the following:
• Selectivity/affinity for the target: Affinity is the inverse of KD (radioligand equilib-
rium dissociation constant). KD is a term describing the dissociation/separation from
bound complex to unbound complex. The radioligand has to have some selectivity/affin-
ity for the target site. The binding to the target site should ideally have the highest
affinity for the target site which is wanted to be studied.
• Metabolism: When the radioligand in any way is administered into the blood stream
it will to a degree metabolize i.e degraded into some other smaller compound which is
referred to as metabolites. Depending on how the radioligand is metabolized and what
the radioligand is metabolized into then the metabolites can either be bound with the
1For the rest of the thesis it is assumed that a PET and MR image has been coregistered unless
otherwise stated.
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Theoretical background
radionuclude or not. The PET signal can only measure compounds which emit radiation
hence the metabolites which do not have any radionuclide would disappear from the
signal measured by PET and are therefore not considered. If the radioligand metabolizes
to some metabolite which has a radinuclide bound then this would be measured by the
PET signal. The metabolite bound with a radionuclide is referred to as the radiolabelled
metabolite. When referring to metabolites in PET applications it is the radiolabelled
metabolite which one are referring to, as previously stated, the metabolites with no
bound radionuclide disappears from the PET signal. The radioligand administered into
the blood stream in any way is referred to as the parent radioligand.
The ratio of
unchanged radioligand to total radioligand in plasma can be determined by analysing
blood samples and is referred to as the parent fraction.
• Blood-brain barrier permeability: The radioligand should be able to cross the blood-
brain barrier (BBB) into the brain. The ability to cross the BBB is determined by the
radioligands molecular weight and lipophilicity (i.e. ability to dissolve in lipids).
A physical property of radionuclides is their half-life (T1/2). The half-life is a quantity that
describes the time it takes for half the radionuclides to decay. Depending on the radionuclide
the T1/2 can span from few ns to billions of years.
Though for the radionuclides used in
human subjects T1/2 usually spans from a few seconds to a few hours (Cember and Johnson,
2008; Prince and Links, 2015). The cause for using radionuclides with relative short T1/2 is
to minimize the radiation dose. The radiation dose is not directly related to the radionuclides
T1/2, but the lower the half-life, the faster the radionuclide will decay and thereby less risk of
depositing energy to the surrounding tissue. How much energy which is deposited into tissue
depends on the particles energy, radiation type and tissue (Matthews et al., 2012; Takano
et al., 2016). Moreover, the relative short half-life makes the PET images towards the end of
the studies more noisy as there will be less emissions to detect.
2.1.3
Time Activity Curves
The images that PET produce are quantitative images of radioactivity, i.e.
Bq/voxel, or
concentration of radioactivity cPET with the units Bq/ml. The concentration of radioactivity
is measured over time (i.e. cPET (t)) and hence PET not only as an output produces images
but can also output a Time-Activity Curve (TAC). The TAC can either be from a pixel, voxel
or a Region Of Interest (ROI). The ROIs can be delineated by manual methods or different
automatic delineation methods (Svarer et al., 2004) hence regional cPET (t) can be obtained. If,
in addition to the PET image, blood samples are drawn during the PET scan it is possible to
quantify the radioactivity concentration in blood over time cblood(t). The activity time course
of cblood(t) and a regional cPET (t) can be seen from Figure 2.2.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Kinetic modelling
9
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
T [min]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Activity [kBq/mL]
CPET
Cblood
Figure 2.2: Time activity curve. Red ’*’ showing the activity time course of the parietal
cortex region measured by PET while black ’x’ showing the activity time course of blood.
Radioligand used is [11C]Cimbi-36. Curves are for subject 003 and has been normalized
to the area under the curve. Details on data is in Section 4.1
2.2
Kinetic modelling
The PET images obtained are high-quality 3 dimensional images. These PET images provide
spatial information and with TACs also quantitative information. Further quantitative analysis
of the TACs can be done. One method often used to describe the TACs are kinetic modelling
which is a mathematical toolbox. Knowledge of the radioligand are used together with the
measured data to develop a mathematical model. The separate pools of radioligand substance
are defined as compartments. (K.L. Leenders, 2007) Thereby these mathematical models are
also known as Compartmental Models (CM). A CM describes the uptake and clearance of a
radioligand in tissue.
Before diving further into the CMs some general assumptions about the PET radioligand must
be made. These are general assumptions, 1) the radioligand does not affect the physiological
and molecular interactions. An extension to 1) assumption is 2) that the interactions are in
steady-state and lastly 3) concentrations in the compartments are homogeneous. Assumption
3) is an essential assumption to be able to use the mathematical models concerning the com-
partments. If this does not hold then distributive models could be used (K.L. Leenders, 2007)
but this is not the scope of this thesis.
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Theoretical background
2.2.1
Arterial input function
The administration of radioligand into the body can be in various ways but for neuroimaging
purposes then the administration of radioligand is usually via injection into an artery. If only
considering the situation where one blood sample was drawn a few minutes after the injection
of radioligand into the body and this blood sample was analyzed. One would would possible
see the following contributing to the total radioactivity measured
• The radioligand has bound to some molecule which contribute to the total measured
radioactivity
• The radioligand has metabolized therefore metabolites contribute to the total measured
radioactivity
• Parent radioligand floating freely in the blood
With the drawn blood sample it is possible to account for the above mentioned contributions
to the total measured radioactivity in blood. Furthermore, it is possible to analyze and esti-
mate radioactivity concentrations for all above mentioned contributions (see A.A.Lammertsma,
2007). The analysis of the blood sample is usually done with different tecniques such as the
technique High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). The concentration estimated
from one blood sample would be cblood and if blood samples are drawn over time then cblood(t).
When looking at Figure 2.2 it is seen that the blood curve cblood has a steep rise in the first few
minutes. This steep rise is seen if the radioligand was administered into the body as a bolus
injection. The steep rise is then followed by a tail. The tail is due to the redistribution of the
radioligand, when radioligand is released from tissue back to blood circulation.
For the CM used in the following subsections it is the parent radioligand which is assumed to
cross the BBB and be absorbed into tissue. The parent radioligand is measurend in plasma and
further corrected for metabolites. The radioactivity concentration for radioligand measured in
plasma and corrected for metabolites is called the metabolite corrected plasma cp. If blood
samples are drawn over time then cp(t). cp(t) is the input function for the CMs in following
subsections.
2.2.2
Three tissue compartmental model
An arbitrary number of compartments can be used for the mathematical model assumed to
describe the regional TACs. Here, though the 4 Compartmental Model (4CM) or 3-Tissue
Compartmental Model (3TCM) will be described and can be seen from Figure 2.3. The 3TCM
and the figure described is intended as a form of introduction to CM and is not used in this
thesis.
Compartments and concentrations
Each rectancgle in Figure 2.3 is considered a compartment. Furthermore from Figure 2.3 it
can be seen that, in overall, one can split the model up in two, 1) radioligand in plasma and
2) radioligand in tissue.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Kinetic modelling
11
BBB
cp
Plasma
Tissue
cS
cF
K1
k2
k3
k4 
k5
k6
cNS
Figure 2.3: Three tissue compartmental model. Each rectangle is a pool/compartment
hence this model is also known as a three tissue-compartmental model (3TCM) or a
four compartmental model (4CM). Each K1,...,k6 is a rate constant while all c’s are
concentrations for their respective compartments. Input function is cP
Radioligand in plasma is considered the model input function (cp, see Section 2.2.1) and is
absorbed into the tissue. The compartment of cp is not a part of the model itself which is why
the model is called 3TCM but figuratively it is drawn as a compartment and thereby the name
4CM.
Radioligand in tissue can be split up in three compartments. These are the following
1. Radioligand free (F) in tissue water, i.e not bound to any target
2. Radioligand which is non-specifically (NS) bound, i.e the radioligand is bound to some
other target than intended
3. Radioligand which is specifically (S) bound, i.e the radioligand is bound to the target of
interest
As described in Section 2.1 the PET signal can not distinguish between signals from each
compartment. Thereby the signal measured from the tissue is the total activity concentration
in tissue, i.e the radioactivity in tissue is given as cT = cS +cNS +cF and over time this would
be cT (t) = cS(t) + cNS(t) + cF (t). Further for one subject there is only one input function, i.e.
cp, but there can be an arbitrary number of cT depending on the number of ROIs. Hence cT
refers to the regional radioactivity concentration in tissue, i.e each ROI has a cT .
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Theoretical background
Rate constants
All K1, ..., k6 in Figure 2.3 are rate constants. Where K1 describes the transport of radioligand
into tissue from plasma while k2 describes the transport of radioligand out a tissue into plasma.
Thereby K1 and k2 describes the uptake and clearance of radioligand from plasma to tissue.
k3 and k4 describes the radioligand transport between the compartments F and S. k5 and k6
describes the radioligand transport between the compartments F and NS. The units of the rate
constant k2, ..., k6 are min−1 while the units of the rate constant K1 is mL · cm−3 · min−1.
2.2.3
Two tissue compartmental model
The 4CM can become too complicated with all the many parameters and therefore it is com-
mon to simplify the model. This simplification is based on the assumption that equilibrium
is reached fast between the F and NS compartments. (A.A.Lammertsma, 2007) With this
assumption the F and NS can thus be seen as one compartment leading to the two tissue
compartmental model (2TCM) or three compartmental model (3CM). In Figure 2.4 a 2TCM
can be seen.
BBB
cP
Plasma
Tissue
cS
cND
K1
k2
k3
k4 
Figure 2.4: Two tissue-compartmental model (2TCM) or a three compartmental model
(3CM). Each K1,...,k4 is a rate constant while all c’s are concentrations for their respec-
tive compartments. Input function is cP
From Figure 2.4 it is seen that the F and NS compartments have become the nondisplaceable
(ND) compartment hence cND = cF +cNS leading to cT (t) = cND(t)+cS(t) (see Section 2.2.2).
The following differential equations can be setup from Figure 2.4
dcND(t)
dt
= K1cP (t) −k2cND(t) −k3cND(t) + k4cS(t)
dcS(t)
dt
= k3cND(t) −k4cS(t)
(2.1)
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Kinetic modelling
13
Furthermore it can be assumed that the measured PET scan cPET for a region can be described
by the following equation:
cPET,model(t) = (1 −vB)cT (t) + vBcblood(t)
(2.2)
where vB is the vascular volume fraction. It is seen from eq. (2.2) that the cPET,model(t) is a
weighted sum of cT (t) and cblood(t). Furthermore cPET,model(t) is a model description of the real
measured cPET . The parameter vB is included to account for the intravascular radioactivity.
The reasoning to account for the intravascular radioactivity is due to that in a region there will
still be a fraction of blood vessels. These blood vessels will also contribute to the measured PET
signal. The contribution from these blood vessels are not due to radioactivity concentration in
metabolite corrected plasma cp(t) but due to the radioactivity concentration in blood cblood(t).
With the input function cp(t), the eqs. (2.1) and (2.2) and, e.g.
by non-linear regression,
the best fit can then be estimated for the parameters K1,...,k4 and vB. With the estimated
parameters it is then possible to see if assumed CM description of the regional PET TAC
(i.e, cPET,model) fits the measured regional PET TAC (i.e, cPET ). A perfect fit would mean
cPET (t) = cPET,model(t) though this is never the case in reality. In practice the best fit (and
CM) that describes the observed regional cPET is sought. Furthermore to fit less parameters
and thereby be less prone to errors sometimes vB is constrained to some published value (KL
Leenders et al., 1990).
2.2.3.1
Operational equation
In above section Section 2.2.3 the 2TCM was described in terms of differential equations.
Usually though to fit the regional TACs measured by PET with a 2TCM, then the operational
equation can be written as (Schain, Zanderigo, Mann, et al., 2017).
cPET,TAC(t) = (1 −vB)cP (t) ⊗
2
∑
C=1
ϕCe−θCt + vBcblood(t)
(2.3)
where ϕC and θC are functions of the rate constants (R. N. Gunn, S. R. Gunn, et al., 2001)
given as
ϕ1 =
K1(θ1 −k3 −k4)
√
(k2 + k3 + k4)2 −4k2k4
θ1 =
k2 + k3 + k4 +
√
(k2 + k3 + k4)2 −4k2k4
2
ϕ2 =
K1(θ2 −k3 −k4)
−
√
(k2 + k3 + k4)2 −4k2k4
θ2 =
k2 + k3 + k4 −
√
(k2 + k3 + k4)2 −4k2k4
2
The derivation of the solutions for eq. (2.3) can be found in Müller-Schauenburg, 2007.
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Theoretical background
To understand eq. (2.3) let us first consider the case in which a true bolus (spike) could
directly be injected into the tissue then the observed regional TAC (cPET ) would be an impulse
response function. In practice, a true bolus directly into the tissue is though not possible
(see Section 2.2.1), hence the regional cPET becomes the convolution (⊗in eq. (2.3)) of the
input function (see Section 2.2.1) with the impulse response function.
2.2.4
One tissue compartmental model
Another CM is the one tissue compartmental model (1TCM) or two compartmental model
(2CM). The 1TCM is a more simple model than the 2TCM and can be seen in Figure 2.5.
BBB
cP
Plasma
Tissue
ct
K1
k2
Figure 2.5: One tissue-compartmental model (1TCM) or a two compartmental model
(2CM). K1 and k2 are rate constants while all c’s are concentrations for their respective
compartments. Input function is cP
It is clear from Section 2.2.4 that all tissue compartments, when compared to 2TCM or 3TCM,
is collapsed into a single tissue compartment. Hence the differential equation which can be
setup from Figure 2.5 follows
dcT (t)
dt
= K1cP (t) −k2cT (t)
(2.4)
The best fit that describes the regional cPET can then then be estimated for the parameters
K1, k2 and vB. This can be done with the input function cp(t), the eqs. (2.2) and (2.4) and,
e.g. by non-linear regression. The operational equation for the 1TCM is not given here but
can be found in the litterature. (R. N. Gunn, S. R. Gunn, et al., 2001)
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Kinetic modelling
15
2.2.5
Parameters from the compartmental models
The rate constants are describing the kinetics of a CM and are generally described in Sec-
tion 2.2.3. Other parameters describing the CM are also viable such as the volumes of distri-
bution and binding potential.
Regional volume of distribution for tissue (VT ) is defined as the ratio of radioactivity concen-
tration of radioligand in tissue to the radioactivity concentration of radioligand in plasma at
equilibrium, i.e. the following (Innis et al., 2007)
VT = cT
cP
= cF
cP
+ cNS
cP
+ cS
cP
= cND
cP
+ cS
cP
= VND + VS
(2.5)
and VT when related to the TAC can be described as
VT =
∫∞
0 cT (t)dt
∫∞
0 cP (t)dt
(2.6)
Meaning that VT mathematically is defined as the ratio of the Area Under the Curve (AUC)
between cT (t) and cP (t) (N. A. Lassen, 1992). In practice, this definition is not usable to
estimate VT since it is not possible to measure until t = ∞.
The rate constants of a CM can also be used to estimates regional VT as the following for the
different CMs (Innis et al., 2007; Mark Slifstein and Marc Laruelle, 2001)
3TCM : VT = K1
k2
(1 + k3
k4
+ k5
k6
)
(2.7)
2TCM : VT = K1
k2
(1 + k3
k4
)
(2.8)
1TCM : VT = K1
k2
(2.9)
Binding Potential (BP) is a term describing the linear role between receptor density and affinity
( 1
KD ). For an in vitro study the BP is given as BP = Bmax
KD (Mintun et al., 1984) where Bmax is
the total receptor density. Usually for in vivo imaging not all receptors are available for binding
(see Section 2.3.1 for a brief explanation). The available receptors for binding is denoted as
Bavail. The in vivo equivalent of the binding potential will be described in the following as
the in vivo measurements of the binding potential is thought to reflect the in vitro binding
potential but are not equal.(Innis et al., 2007) Furthermore in vitro studies is not the scope of
this thesis.
Another description of the binding potential is that the binding potential is also a quantification
of the ratio between the equilibrium concentration of cS to a concentration of a reference
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Theoretical background
concentration. (Innis, 2007; Innis et al., 2007) When looking at the CMs described earlier
at least three distinct concentrations can be used. Hence for an in vivo imaging study e.g.
the binding potential for the ND compartment (BPND) is given as the ratio between the
equilibrium concentration of cS to cND for a region.
The in vivo binding potential can also be calculated in terms of volume of distributions (for a
2TCM) as the following
BPND =
VS
VND
= VT −VND
VND
(2.10)
2.3
Target Occupancy
It is challenging to directly analyze the human brain in regards of drug development. PET can
aid in analyzing different aspects of drug development such as confirming that a drug penetrates
the BBB, furthermore, PET makes it possible to quantify the level of target engagement (Target
Occupancy). The target occupancy is a fractional occupancy (∆) describing the relation of a
drug occupying the target which it is intended to bind to. A brief overview of target occupancy
study setups will be given in Figure 2.6 below. Furthermore the methods described in following
sections to estimate ∆is depending on that cT or VT has been calculated (e.g. with methods
described in Section 2.2).
Test
scan
Retest
scan
PET study
Test and retest scan
(a) A test and retest scan
Baseline
scan
Drug
administration
Block
scan
PET study
Baseline and block scan
(b) One baseline and one block scan
Baseline scan
1st Drug
administration
1st Block scan
PET study
Baseline scan and N block scans
2nd Drug
administration
2nd Block scan
Nth Drug
administration
Nth Block scan
(c) One baseline scan and N block scans
Figure 2.6: Target occupancy PET study setup
In Figure 2.6a a Test and Retest (TRT) study/experiment is seen. In a TRT study the PET
scans are repeated two times in similar conditions for a group of subjects. It is not necessary
for the TRT study to be conducted on the same day as long as there is similar conditions
for both test and retest scan.
The TRT study will provide a measure of repeatability of
the measurements. An important information gained from TRT studies are an estimate of the
within-subject variability (WSV). WSV can be measured with different methods (Baumgartner
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Target Occupancy
17
et al., 2018). TRT studies is relevant for target occupancy studies as repeated measurements
on the same subject is done (see below). (Baumgartner et al., 2018; Schain, Zanderigo, and
Todd Ogden, 2018)
In Figure 2.6b a Baseline and Block (BB) study/experiment is seen. In a BB study the PET
scans are repeated two times in similar conditions for a group of subjects.
The difference
between a BB study and a TRT study is that some time between the baseline scan and
block scan the subject is administered a drug dosage. (Ettrup et al., 2014; N A Lassen et
al., 1995) The administration of the drug can be in anyway. The BB study can be used to
measure ∆as the difference between the baseline and block scan would be attributed to the
drug administered. (See Section 2.3.1) Furthermore, in Figure 2.6c the BB experiment can
be expanded so there is now only one baseline but N number of block scans and thereby N
number of drug administration. The administered drug before each N number of block scans
can be any dosage relevant to study. Knowing the relevant dosage will make it possible to find
a range of doses which maximizes the theraupetic effect (desired) and minimizes side effects
(undesired). Hence knowing the relevant dosage to administer can help a medical doctor to
perscribe the correct dosage that causes a therapeutic effect with limited side effects.
2.3.1
Competitive binding in target occupancy studies
If looking back at Figure 2.6b then some time after the drug has been administered a block
scan will be conducted. If one where to look at the regional VT values one would see that
the regional VT values measured for the block scan would have changed from the regional VT
values measured from the baseline scan. This change between the regional VT value for the
baseline and block scan would be due to competitive binding between the administered drug
and radioligand. The competitive binding between administered drug and radioligand is based
on the assumption that both drug and radioligand bind to the same specific target thereby
competing for the same binding site of the target. Hence competitive binding is an underlying
principle for target occupancy studies as the competitive binding for the same target translates
to changes which can be measured and thereby calculation of ∆. (Marc Laruelle, 2000; Takano
et al., 2016)
If one where to further look at the change seen in regional VT values between baseline and block
scan for one subject and for one region. The change in one regional VT could be described by
expanding on Figure 2.6b with a 2TCM (a 3TCM would also be viable) as seen in Figure 2.7.
As stated earlier it is assumed that the drug and radioligand compete for the same target
binding site and furthermore that the administered drug does not in any way affect the ra-
dioligand uptake into tissue, i.e changes in cF , nor does the drug compete for non-specific
binding sites with the radioligand, i.e. there are no changes in cNS. Hence it is assumed that
cND = cF + cNS is constant across both baseline and block scans. Furthermore if no drug was
administered and two PET scans under same identical conditions were conducted for the same
subject then, ideally, cT would be exactly the same between the two PET scans. If cT is the
exact same between the two PET scans then one would assume that cS also is the exact same.
Thereby the change we see in cT from a BB study is due to that the drug is now occupying the
target binding sites (see cS compartment red ’box’ in Figure 2.7) which the radioligand would
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Theoretical background
BBB
cP
Plasma
Tissue
cS
cND
K1
k2
k3
k4 
Baseline scan 
BBB
cP
Plasma
Tissue
cS
cND
K1
k2
k3
k4 
Block scan 
Occupied
Figure 2.7: Target occupancy with a baseline and block scan.
otherwise have occupied (Zhang and Fox, 2012), i.e the drug is leading to a discrepancy in VS.
Estimation of target occupancy
With the above description the difference in baseline and block scan should reflect the target
occupancy.
The target occupancy can be calculated in a simple way if a reference region
exist for the radioligand. (R. N. Gunn and Rabiner, 2017; Zhang and Fox, 2012) A reference
region is ideally a region where there is no target to bind to for the radioligand, i.e.
the
reference region is devoid of specific binding to a target and hence cS = 0 which leads to
cT,reference = cS+cND = cND. In practice though cT,reference ≈cND. Thereby from description
in Section 2.2.5 and eq. (2.10) the fractional occupancy ∆can be estimated as (Innis et al.,
2007)
∆= BP baseline
ND
−BP block
ND
BP baseline
ND
(2.11)
In eq. (2.11) BP baseline
ND
and BP block
ND
is calculated from the baseline and block scan respectively.
If no suitable reference region exists on the other hand then estimation of ∆is not simple to
calculate.
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Target Occupancy
19
2.3.2
The revised Lassen plot
The description in Section 2.3.1 can, according to kinetic models with an arbitrary number of
compartments, be given by the following for one subject (in terms of volume of distribution)
{
Vbaseline
T
=
VS + VND1
Vblock
T
=
(1 −∆)VS + VND1
(2.12)
In eq. (2.12) vectors are marked in bold as all regions are now considered, hence Vbaseline
T
,
Vblock
T
andVS are of length kx1, where k is the number of regions/ROIs for 1 subject. Further
1 is a kx1 vector of ones. The assumptions in eq. (2.12) can be summarized as
• VND is constant across all regions and constant across all scans for one subject
• VS is constant across scans but not across regions as each region will have different
densities of specific targets to bind to for the radioligand
• ∆is constant across all regions but not between scans and 0 ≤∆≤1
The revised Lassen plot is a graphical approach and can be used to estimate ∆if no suitable
reference region exists. This is without further ado done by a simple rearrangement of eq. (2.12)
and leads to the following equation
Vbaseline
T
−Vblock
T
= ∆(Vbaseline
T
−VND1)
(2.13)
Eq. (2.13) is describing the axes-transformed Lassen plot also known as the revised Lassen
plot (Cunningham et al., 2010) and is the one used in this thesis.2
The Lassen plot can
graphically be represented as (x-axis = Vbaseline
T
, y-axis = Vbaseline
T
−Vblock
T
). An example
of a Lassen plot is seen in Figure 2.8. The original Lassen plot (N A Lassen et al., 1995) is simply
the axes-transformed of eq. (2.13), i.e. (x-axis = Vbaseline
T
−Vblock
T
, y-axis = Vbaseline
T
)
It is clear from Figure 2.8 that eq. (2.13) produces a linear relationship. Furthermore it is seen
from eq. (2.13) that the slope describes ∆while the x-intercept describes VND. The method is
limited to only one baseline-block pair at a time (The situation of Figure 2.6b) and hence for
more than one baseline-block pair (The situation of Figure 2.6c) the method has to be used
sequentially, i.e for three baseline-block pair scans there will be three pairs of ∆and VND (6
estimated values) estimates as the following:
Vbaseline
T
−Vblock,1
T
= ∆1(Vbaseline
T
−VND,11)
Vbaseline
T
−Vblock,2
T
= ∆2(Vbaseline
T
−VND,21)
Vbaseline
T
−Vblock,3
T
= ∆3(Vbaseline
T
−VND,31)
(2.14)
2The revised Lassen plot will simply be referred to as the Lassen plot in this thesis unless otherwise
stated.
==PAGE:36==
20
2 Theoretical background
0
10
20
30
40
50
Vt
baseline
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Vt
baseline-Vt
block
2TCM
Slope: 0.79, 
y-intercept: -8.49, 
R2: 0.985
data
fit
Figure 2.8: Lassen plot. Blue ’o’ are VT-values for different regions. Red solid line is the
linear regression fit. Slope, y-intercept and R2 are seen on plot. VT values are estimated
by the two compartmental model. The plot is for subject 003 which was injected with
[11C]Cimbi-36. Details on data is in Section 4.1
Even though the Lassen plot seems simple to use there are some problems that has to be
addressed; First of all, the dependent and independent variables are correlated as Vbaseline
T
is a
component of both the dependent and independent variables. Hence noise in the independent
variable will be correlated with noise in the dependent variable and lead to noise-induced
bias (Cunningham et al., 2010); Secondly, standard regression analysis assumes that there are
no measurement errors in the independent variable, which, though is not the case (Slifstein
and Laruelle, 2000) and hence will lead to attenuation bias. An alternative method such as
likelihood estimation can be used instead of the Lassen plot to estimate ∆.
2.3.3
Likelihood estimation of occupancy
An alternative to the Lassen plot is the Likelihood Estimation of Occupancy (LEO) (Schain,
Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018). The idea behind LEO is to find estimates of VND and ∆
that maximizes the likelihood of observed regional VT values. The assumptions are the same
as given earlier in Section 2.3.2 for eq. (2.12). (see also Figure 2.6b) There is k ROIs hence k
number of estimated regional VT values. All measurements contain some form of error which
also is valid for eq. (2.12), hence
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Target Occupancy
21
{
Vbaseline
T
=
VS + VND1 + ϵbaseline
Vblock
T
=
(1 −∆)VS + VND1 + ϵblock
(2.15)
where ϵ’s are error terms and 1 is a k x 1 vector of ones (k being the number of ROIs). These
errors terms are assumed to be normal furthermore the errors are assumed to be independent
between scans but not between ROIs within a scan. With the errors assumed normal, then
eq. (2.15) can be expressed as the following
{
Vbaseline
T
∼
N(VND1 + VS, Σ)
Vblock
T
∼
N((1 −∆)VS + VND1, Σ)
(2.16)
where Σ is the covariance matrix of the PET data (for the following it is assumed known.
See Section 3.1 on how it can be estimated and what it describes). It can from eq. (2.16) be
seen that the marginal probability density function for V baseline
T,j
, where j is for each ROI j, are
univariate Gaussian distributions having a mean of VS,j + VND and a standard deviation of
√Σj,j. V block
T,j
also has a marginal probability density function which is univariate Gaussian
distributed with mean (1 −∆)VS,j + VND and a standard deviation of
√Σj,j.
The joint
probability density function for Vbaseline
T
and Vblock
T
is given as
L(∆, VND, VS|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock
T
) =
1
√
(2π)j|Σ|
· e−1
2
[
(Vbaseline
T
−VND1−VS)T Σ−1(Vbaseline
T
−VND1−VS)
+(Vblock
T
−VND1−(1−∆)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock
T
−VND1−(1−∆)VS)
]
(2.17)
The Log-Likelihood (LL) is then given as
ℓ(∆, VND, VS|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock
T
) = −(Vbaseline
T
−VND1 −VS)T Σ−1(Vbaseline
T
−VND1 −VS)
−(Vblock
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆)VS)
(2.18)
Going from eq. (2.17) to eq. (2.18) can be seen in Chapter 3 for the N=1 case. In eq. (2.18)
the constant term has been neglected (see proof-of-concept in Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd
Ogden, 2018) as this corresponds to adding/subtracting from the LL value, which is not the
primary interest. The primary interest is in which coordinates that maximizes the LL value.
In eq. (2.18) the LL is in a k+2 dimensional space which can be challenging to maximize hence
a profile likelihood technique can be used to reduce the dimensionality. The dimensionality
can be reduced by solving
∂
∂VS ℓ= 0 and rearranging (see N=1 case in Chapter 3) we find that
VS = Vbaseline
T
−VND1 + (1 −∆)(Vblock
T
−VND1)
1 + (1 + ∆)2
(2.19)
==PAGE:38==
22
2 Theoretical background
hence the k+2 dimension in eq. (2.18) is reduced to a two-dimensional problem by replacing
the VS in eq. (2.18) by the found VS in eq.(2.19). Furthermore it is seen from eq. (2.19)
that VS is a weighted average. The weighted average of VS are from the baseline and block
scan and is determined by the occupancy. LEO is limited to only one baseline-block pair at
a time (The situation of Figure 2.6b) and hence for more than one baseline-block pair (The
situation of Figure 2.6c) LEO has to be used sequentially like the Lassen plot method (see
Section 2.3.2), i.e for three baseline-block pair scans there will be three coordinate sets of ∆
and VND (6 estimated values) estimates as the following:
ℓ(∆1, VND,1, VS,1|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,1
T
)
ℓ(∆2, VND,2, VS,2|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,2
T
)
ℓ(∆3, VND,3, VS,3|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,3
T
)
(2.20)
and where VS,1−3 are estimated from eq. (2.19) as the following
VS,1 = Vbaseline
T
−VND,11 + (1 −∆1)(Vblock,1
T
−VND,11)
1 + (1 + ∆1)2
VS,2 = Vbaseline
T
−VND,21 + (1 −∆2)(Vblock,2
T
−VND,21)
1 + (1 + ∆2)2
VS,3 = Vbaseline
T
−VND,31 + (1 −∆3)(Vblock,3
T
−VND,31)
1 + (1 + ∆3)2
(2.21)
Lastly the LEO method can be implemented by a standard optimization routine to maximize
the LL.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Extension of the likelihood
estimation of occupancy
LEO is limited to be used sequentially (see Section 2.3.3) if there is more than one block scan,
i.e. if the situation is as seen in Figure 2.6c. The situation in Figure 2.6c is though used in
multiple studies (Cunningham et al., 2010; Kågedal et al., 2013; Paul et al., 2014) where one
baseline scan and two or three block scans were conducted where different drug dosages were
given prior to the block scan. To incorporate the situation where there is only one baseline
scan but an arbitrary number of block scans the LEO method can be extended.
In the extension of LEO not only one block scan is considered but an arbitrary number of
block scans (i.e. the situation seen in Figure 2.6c) hence Likelihood Estimation of Multiple
Occupancies (LEMO). The general idea for LEMO is the same as given in Section 2.3.3. The
assumptions in LEMO are the same as in LEO (summarized below) with the difference being
in an expansion to eqs. (2.12) and (2.15), hence according to kinetic models with an arbitrary
number of compartments and an arbitrary number of block scans is given by the following

















Vbaseline
T
=
VS + VND1 + ϵbaseline
Vblock,1
T
=
(1 −∆1)VS + VND1 + ϵblock,1
Vblock,2
T
=
(1 −∆2)VS + VND1 + ϵblock,2
...
Vblock,N
T
=
(1 −∆N)VS + VND1 + ϵblock,N
(3.1)
where Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,1
T
, Vblock,2
T
, · · · , Vblock,N
T
are vectors of length k x 1 containing the
estimated regional VT values for baseline and N block scans from k ROIs. The summarized
assumptions (from Section 2.3.3) are
• VND are constant across all scans and regions for one subject
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Extension of the likelihood estimation of occupancy
• ∆1, · · · , ∆N for one subject is constant across all regions but not between scans. Values
for each ∆1, · · · , ∆N are 0 ≤∆1, · · · , ∆N ≤1
• VS for one subject varies across regions due to each region having different densities of
specific targets to bind to for the radioligand. VS is constant across all scans.
All ϵ’s in eq. (3.1) are measurement errors for each scan and are assumed normal. The ϵ’s
are also pairwise independent across scans, but not independent within each scan. Now the
distributions for eq. (3.1) are given as

















Vbaseline
T
∼
N(VND1 + VS, Σ)
Vblock,1
T
∼
N((1 −∆1)VS + VND1, Σ)
Vblock,2
T
∼
N((1 −∆2)VS + VND1, Σ)
...
Vblock,N
T
∼
N((1 −∆N)VS + VND1, Σ)
(3.2)
1 is a k x 1 vector of ones and the covariance matrix Σ is treated as known (see Section 3.1 on
how it can be estimated and what it describes). It is from Section 2.3.3 clear that the marginal
probability density function for one ROI j for V baseline
T,j
and V block
T,j
are univariate Gaussian
distributions. This is also true in eq. (3.2) for V baseline
T,j
, V block,1
T,j
, · · · , and V block,N
T,j
. Keep in
mind that the multivariate Gaussian distribution is given as
fx(x1, · · · , xk) =
1
√
(2π)k|Σ|
· e−1
2 (x−µ)T Σ−1(x−µ)
(3.3)
where |Σ| is the determinant of Σ and that x is a k x 1 vector of observed data. It is clear from
eq. (3.3) that it reduces to an univariate Gaussian if the covariance matrix is a 1x1 matrix.
The multivariate Gaussian distribution for baseline and each block scan becomes
==PAGE:41==
3 Extension of the likelihood estimation of occupancy
25
f(V baseline
T,1
, · · · , V baseline
T,j
) =
1
√
(2π)j|Σ|
· e−1
2 (Vbaseline
T
−VND1−VS)T Σ−1(Vbaseline
T
−VND1−VS)
f(V block,1
T,1
, · · · , V block,1
T,j
) =
1
√
(2π)j|Σ|
· e−1
2 (Vblock,1
T
−VND1−(1−∆1)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,1
T
−VND1−(1−∆1)VS)
f(V block,2
T,1
, · · · , V block,2
T,j
) =
1
√
(2π)j|Σ|
· e−1
2 (Vblock,2
T
−VND1−(1−∆2)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,2
T
−VND1−(1−∆2)VS)
...
f(V block,N
T,1
, · · · , V block,N
T,j
) =
1
√
(2π)j|Σ|
· e−1
2 (Vblock,N
T
−VND1−(1−∆N)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,N
T
−VND1−(1−∆N)VS)
(3.4)
The joint probability density function is then given as
L(∆1, ∆2, · · · ,∆N, VND, VS|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,1
T
, Vblock,2
T
, · · · , Vblock,N
T
) =
1
√
(2π)j|Σ|
· e−1
2
[
(Vbaseline
T
−VND1−VS)T Σ−1(Vbaseline
T
−VND1−VS)
+(Vblock,1
T
−VND1−(1−∆1)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,1
T
−VND1−(1−∆1)VS)
+(Vblock,2
T
−VND1−(1−∆2)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,2
T
−VND1−(1−∆2)VS)
+···+(Vblock,N
T
−VND1−(1−∆N)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,N
T
−VND1−(1−∆N)VS)
]
(3.5)
The LL is then given as
ℓ(∆1, ∆2, · · · ,∆N, VND, VS|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,1
T
, Vblock,2
T
, · · · , Vblock,N
T
) =
−
[(Vbaseline
T
−VND1 −VS)T Σ−1(Vbaseline
T
−VND1 −VS)
+ (Vblock,1
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆1)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,1
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆1)VS)
+ (Vblock,2
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆2)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,2
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆2)VS)
+ · · ·
+ (Vblock,N
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆N)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,N
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆N)VS)
]
(3.6)
In eq. (3.6) the constant terms are ignored as these does not depend on observed data or
unknown parameters (see Section 2.3.3). The LL is in a N+k+2 dimensional space, where
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Extension of the likelihood estimation of occupancy
N is from the N number of occupancies to estimate due to N number of block scans. This
can be quite challenging to maximize hence a profile likelihood technique is used to reduce
the dimensionality. This can be done as solving
∂
∂VS ℓ= 0. It is though clear from eqs. (3.5)
and (3.6) that each term is independent hence the following definitions can be introduced:
x
= −
[(Vbaseline
T
−VND1 −VS)T Σ−1(Vbaseline
T
−VND1 −VS)
]
y1
= −
[(Vblock,1
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆1)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,1
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆1)VS)
]
y2
= −
[(Vblock,2
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆2)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,2
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆2)VS)
]
...
yN
= −
[(Vblock,N
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆N)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,N
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆N)VS)
]
(3.7)
Thereby
∂
∂VS
ℓ(∆1, ∆2, · · · ,∆N, VND, VS|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,1
T
, Vblock,2
T
, · · · , Vblock,N
T
) =
∂(x + y1 + y2 + · · · + yN)
∂VS
= 0
(3.8)
and by applying the sum rule
∂x
∂VS
=
−
[(Vbaseline
T
−VND1 −VS)T (Σ−1 + (Σ−1)T )
]
∂y1
∂VS
=
−
[(Vblock,1
T
−∆1Vblock,1
T
−VND1 + ∆1VND1
−VS + 2∆1VS −∆2
1VS)T (Σ−1 + (Σ−1)T )
]
∂y2
∂VS
=
−
[(Vblock,2
T
−∆1Vblock,2
T
−VND1 + ∆2VND1
−VS + 2∆2VS −∆2
2VS)T (Σ−1 + (Σ−1)T )
]
...
∂yN
∂VS
=
−
[(Vblock,N
T
−∆NVblock,N
T
−VND1 + ∆NVND1
−VS + 2∆NVS −∆2
NVS)T (Σ−1 + (Σ−1)T )
]
(3.9)
hence with eq. (3.9) a rearranging of eq. (3.8) will lead to
==PAGE:43==
3 Extension of the likelihood estimation of occupancy
27
VS = Vbaseline
T
−VND1 + (1 −∆1)(Vblock,1
T
−VND1) + · · · + (1 −∆N)(Vblock,N
T
−VND1)
1 + (1 + ∆1)2 + (1 + ∆2)2 + · · · + (1 + ∆N)2
(3.10)
Hence the LL can be reduced to a (N+2)-dimensional problem by replacing the VS in eq. (3.6)
by the found VS in eq.(3.10).
It can clearly then be seen from eqs. (3.5), (3.6) and (3.10) that a generalization of these would
be as the following:
L(∆, VND, VS|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,1
T
, Vblock,2
T
, · · · , Vblock,N
T
) =
1
√
(2π)j|Σ|
· e−1
2 ((Vbaseline
T
−VND1−VS)T Σ−1(Vbaseline
T
−VND1−VS)
+∑N
i=1(Vblock,i
T
−VND1−(1−∆i)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,i
T
−VND1−(1−∆i)VS)
]
(3.11)
ℓ(∆, VND, VS|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,1
T
, Vblock,2
T
, · · · , Vblock,N
T
) =
−
[(Vbaseline
T
−VND1 −VS)T Σ−1(Vbaseline
T
−VND1 −VS)
+
N
∑
i=1
(Vblock,i
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆i)VS)T Σ−1(Vblock,i
T
−VND1 −(1 −∆i)VS)
]
(3.12)
VS = Vbaseline
T
−VND1 + ∑N
i=1(1 −∆i)(Vblock,i
T
−VND1)
1 + ∑N
i=1(1 + ∆i)2
(3.13)
Note though in eqs. (3.11) to (3.13) that ∆is a vector of length Nx1 containing the occupancy
for each scan. The high dimension of eq. (3.12) can be reduced by replacing VS in eq. (3.12)
with the found VS from eq. (3.13). Furthermore LEMO will be reduced to LEO if only one
baseline-block pair is used, i.e. the situation of Figure 2.6b (N=1). In the situation where
N>1 (Figure 2.6c) then LEMO as opposed to LEO works as a one-step-procedure, e.g for
three baseline-block pair scans (N=3) there will be 3 ∆’s and one VND estimated for each
subject (i.e, a total of 4 estimated values for each subject) as the following
ℓ(∆1, ∆2, ∆3, VND, VS|Vbaseline
T
, Vblock,1
T
, Vblock,2
T
, Vblock,3
T
)
(3.14)
where VS are estimated from eq. (3.13) as the following
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Extension of the likelihood estimation of occupancy
VS=
Vbaseline
T
−VND1+(1−∆1)(Vblock,1
T
−VND1)+(1−∆2)(Vblock,2
T
−VND1)+(1−∆3)(Vblock,3
T
−VND1)
1+(1+∆1)2+(1+∆2)2+(1+∆3)2
(3.15)
Lastly, just like the LEO method, the LEMO method can be implemented by a standard
optimization routine to maximize the LL.
3.1
Covariance matrix of LEO and LEMO
If we go back to the covariance matrices Σ in Section 2.3.3 and Chapter 3 they can be described
as the within-subject covariance matrix of the regional VT values across ROIs for one subject,
i.e the covariance between VT values for each ROI hence a k x k matrix.
If one subject
has undergone at least two PET scans under same conditions then the differences seen in
the regional VT values across ROIs can be attributable to measurement errors since biological
variability should have no influence as it is the same subject being scanned repeatedly. Thereby
Σ can be interpreted as the covariance across regional VT values for one subject that has been
scanned repeatedly. The diagonal elements of Σ then describes the variances for each ROI
while off-diagonal elements of Σ describes the covariance between ROIs.
The real true covariance matrix Σ is usually unknown (for both Section 2.3.3 and Chapter 3 it
was treated as known) but can be estimated from a TRT experiment (see Figure 2.6a) where
a subject has been scanned twice under same conditions with the same radioligand which also
has or is going to be used for a BB experiment (either Figure 2.6b or Figure 2.6c).
It has been shown in Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018 that Σ can be estimated as
Σ ≈cov(Vtest
T
−Vretest
T
)
2
where Vtest
T
and Vretest
T
are k x M matrices with k ROIs, i.e regional VT
values and M TRT subjects. Though if M is not sufficiently large then the covariance estimates
between the ROIs may not be accurate furthermore if M<k then the estimated matrix Σ will
not be invertible. Another method to estimate Σ is by a non-linear shrinkage method (Ledoit
and Wolf, 2015). The non-linear shrinkage will be referred to as the Shrink method. Lastly,
the estimated Σ will be denoted ˆΣ.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
4.1
Acquired datasets
The simulations were based on four acquired datasets that have been previously published.
The first dataset containing VT estimates is from Ogden et al., 2007 where a TRT study with
subjects scanned on the same day (see Figure 2.6a) were conducted.
The subjects in this
dataset were all scanned with the radioligand [11C]DASB and therefore this dataset will be
referred to as the TRT [11C]DASB dataset. The regional VT estimates in the TRT [11C]DASB
dataset was calculated with a 1TCM (see Section 2.2.4). The second dataset containing VT
estimates is from Parsey et al., 2006 where a BB study (see Figure 2.6b with sertraline as the
drug administered) were conducted. The subjects in this dataset were all scanned with the
radioligand [11C]DASB and therefore this dataset will be referred to as the BB [11C]DASB
dataset. Both acquired TRT and BB [11C]DASB datasets are identical with the datasets used
in the paper where the LEO method was proposed as an alternative to the Lassen plot. (Schain,
Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018) Collectively the TRT and BB [11C]DASB datasets1 will be
referred to as the [11C]DASB dataset. The third and fourth acquired dataset is from Ettrup
et al., 2014 and will be described below.
The previously published study (Ettrup et al., 2014) was the first study where the radioligand
[11C]Cimbi-36 was used in humans. In this study 29 subjects (mean age: 23.0±5.1 years) were
included. All subjects went through the following:
• A Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan in a 3T Siemens Magnetom Verioe Scanner
(Siemens AG, Erlangen, Germany). The MRI images were used for coregistering to the
PET images so as to delineate ROIs.
• At least one PET scan in a high-resolution research tomography PET scanner (CTI/Siemens,
Knoxville, TN, USA). For each PET scan the subjects were injected with the radioligand
[11C]Cimbi-36 as a bolus injection. Scanning began as [11C]Cimbi-36 was administered.
1For further information on these two datasets the reader is kindly referred to the respective papers
on data acquisition and VT values estimation
==PAGE:46==
30
4 Methods
During the PET scan, blood samples were taken. For the first 10 minutes of scan time blood
samples were taken continuously every 2 seconds with an Allog ABSS autosampler (Allogg
Technology, Mariefred, Sweden). Blood samples were also drawn manually at the scan times
2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 70, 90, 105, 120 minutes. The blood samples were used to find
radioactivity concentration in metabolite corrected plasma cP (t)
5 of the subjects included in the study were given a per oral blocking dose of Ketanserin of
10mg or 20mg 48.7 ± 7 minutes before a second PET scan (block scan). The same PET scan
procedure (described above) was used for the block scans. 9 of the subjects were included as
TRT subjects. The activity in the ROIs were found after coregistering the MRI images with the
PET scans. See Section 4.1.2 for VT value estimation of TRT and BB [11C]Cimbi-36 datasets.
Collectively the TRT and BB [11C]Cimbi-36 datasets will be referred to as the [11C]Cimbi-36
dataset.
Table 4.1: Overview of the datasets included for simulation. ROIs were chosen according
to the previously published papers reporting high densities of the target in the respective
ROIs.
TRT [11C]DASB
BB [11C]DASB
TRT [11C]Cimbi-36
BB [11C]Cimbi-36
# of subjects
10
13
9
5
# of ROIs
k = 8
k = 8
k = 7
k = 7
ROI names
Anterior cingulate cortex
Amygdala
Dorsal putamen
Insula
Occipital cortex
Orbitofrontal cortex
Thalamus
Ventral striatum
Same as TRT [11C]DASB
Anterior cingulate
Caudate
Insula
Medial inferior frontal gyrus
Orbitofrontal cortex
Putamen
Superior temporal gyrus
Same as TRT [11C]Cimbi-36
VT estimated?
Acquired
Acquired
Estimated, see Section 4.1.2
Estimated, see Section 4.1.2
4.1.1
Radioligands
The two different radioligands used in their respective datasets are different in their biochemical
structure but also in the target they bind to. For the radioligand [11C]DASB the target is the
serotonin transporter (5-HTT) and for the radioligand [11C]Cimbi-36 the target is the serotonin
2A receptor (5-HT2A). Further description of the biochemical structure of the radioligands or
the biology behind is not the scope of this thesis and will not be described. Below is a short
description of why these targets are studied.
The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) implies a role in the pathophysiology of major depressive
disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder and other mood and anxiety disorders. (Parsey et
al., 2006) While the serotonin 2A receptor (5-HT2A) implies a role in the pathophysiology of
depression and schizophrenia. Furthermore the serotonin 2A (5-HT2A) is responsible for the
hallucinogenic effects of recreational drugs such as psilocybin. (Ettrup et al., 2014)
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Data simulation
31
4.1.2
Data quantification of [11C]Cimbi-36 datasets
Kinetic modelling was performed with PMOD version 3.0 (PMOD Technologies Ltd., Zürich,
Switzerland) on both TRT and BB [11C]Cimbi-36 datasets. The kinetic modelling was based
on a 2TCM as described in Section 2.2 to fit the regional TACs where a constant of VB = 5%
was used thereby only four parameters were fitted by non-linear regression, i.e. K1, k2, k3, k4.
PMOD takes as input the data from the PET scan and the blood samples. Only regional VT
estimates from the PMOD output were used for the simulations.
4.2
Data simulation
The simulations are based on the setups seen in Figure 2.6a and Figure 2.6c, ie. simulating a
TRT experiment and a BB experiment with a baseline and three block scans. The data simu-
lations are based on some ’true’ VT values defined from the datasets described in Section 4.1.
Initially, how the ’true’ values are defined will be described, followed by a description of the
equations used to simulate the aforementioned experiments.
4.2.1
Noise matrix and definition of a true covariance
matrix
If considering the situation where the true Σ is known for a given dataset then by Cholesky
factorization of Σ will produce an upper triangular matrix Γ, hence Σ = ΓT Γ. Furthermore let
B denote kxL, where each L, holds k independent random numbers which are sampled from
N(0, 1). Then Σ can be described as
Σ = ΓT IΓ = ΓT cov(B)Γ = cov(ΓT B)
(4.1)
The columns of ΓT B can be added to some kx1 vector V to create L realisations of V. Each
column of V will then have unique noise and with a covariance matrix that is equal to Σ. ΓT B
will be referred to as the noise matrix.
In practice Σ is not known but for the purposes of the simulations the ’true’ Σ will be defined
as described in Section 3.1, i.e the ’true’ Σ is given as
Σ = cov(Vtest
T
−Vretest
T
)
2
(4.2)
where Vtest
T
and Vretest
T
are kxM matrices from the TRT [11C]DASB or TRT [11C]Cimbi-36
datasets depending on the simulation performed. k is the number of ROIs included and M is
the number of subjects.
==PAGE:48==
32
4 Methods
4.2.2
Simulating data based on a test-retest
experiment
The true values for simulating TRT data from a TRT dataset is defined as the following
• VTrue
T
as the average regional VT across subjects and TRT scans for k ROIs. VTrue
T
is
a kx1 vector.
With Σ defined then separate noise matrices can be generated, i.e. (ΓT B)test and (ΓT B)retest.
With all terms defined then the t’th realisation of Vtest,sim
T,t
and Vretest,sim
T,t
can be calculated
as
{
Vtest,sim
T,t
=
VTrue
T
+ (ΓT B)test
t
Vretest,sim
T,t
=
VTrue
T
+ (ΓT B)retest
t
(4.3)
where (ΓT B)test
t
and (ΓT B)retest
t
are the t’th coloumn in the noise matrices.
If e.g.
T=5
instances is wanted, then t = 1, ..., T and thereby Vtest,sim
T
will be a kx5 matrix and each
column will represent one simulated test subject.
The same applies for Vretest,sim
T
.
The
simulated TRT data can then be used to calculate ˆΣ (see Section 3.1). Notice that unique
noise is added to the defined true values in (4.3) to simulate test and retest subjects with
realistic noise.
4.2.3
Simulating data based on a baseline-block
experiment
The true values for simulating one baseline and three block scans data from a BB dataset is
defined as the following
• VTrue,baseline
T
as the average regional VT across subjects for the baseline scan. Same
ROIs as in VTrue
T
was used. VTrue,baseline
T
is a kx1 vector.
• VTrue,block
T
as the average regional VT across subjects for the block scan. Same ROIs as
in VTrue
T
was used. VTrue,block
T
is a kx1 vector.
The true VT values are then used to define the following true values:
• VTrue,baseline
T
and VTrue,block
T
are used with a Lassen plot to define V True
ND
where V True
ND
is a value.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Simulations
33
• VTrue
S
is then defined as VTrue
S
= VTrue,baseline
T
−V True
ND 1. VTrue
S
is a kx1 vector.
With Σ (see Section 4.2.2) defined then separate noise matrices can be generated, i.e. (ΓT B)baseline,
(ΓT B)block,1, (ΓT B)block,2 and (ΓT B)block,3. With all terms defined then the b’th realisation of
Vbaseline,sim
T,b
, Vblock,sim,1
T,b
, Vblock,sim,2
T,b
, and Vblock,sim,3
T,b
can be calculated as











Vbaseline,sim
T,b
=
VTrue
S
+ V True
ND 1 + (ΓT B)baseline
b
· λ
Vblock,sim,1
T,b
=
(1 −∆True
1
)VTrue
S
+ V True
ND 1 + (ΓT B)block,1
b
· λ
Vblock,sim,2
T,b
=
(1 −∆True
2
)VTrue
S
+ V True
ND 1 + (ΓT B)block,2
b
· λ
Vblock,sim,3
T,b
=
(1 −∆True
3
)VTrue
S
+ V True
ND 1 + (ΓT B)block,3
b
· λ
(4.4)
where 1 is a k x 1 vector of ones, λ (noise level) is a scaling factor for the noise (e.g if λ = 1,
then corresponding to 100% of realistic noise) (ΓT B)baseline
b
, (ΓT B)block,1
b
, (ΓT B)block,2
b
and
(ΓT B)block,3
b
are the b’th coloumn in the noise matrices. If e.g. I=5 instances is wanted, then
b = 1, ..., I and thereby Vbaseline,sim
T
will be a kx5 matrix and each column will represent one
simulated baseline subject. The same applies for Vblock,sim,1
T
, Vblock,sim,2
T
, and Vblock,sim,3
T
.
These simulated data of one baseline and three block scans will be referred to as B3B. Notice
that unique noise is added to the defined true values in (4.4) to simulate B3B subjects with
realistic noise.
4.3
Simulations
With the data simulated as described in Section 4.2 based on the datasets described in Sec-
tion 4.1. We can now examine LEMO under different conditions compared to LEO and the
Lassen plot. A brief description of how LEMO was implemented will be given, followed by
subsections describing the different conditions examined with LEMO. All estimated values of
∆and VND will be denoted ˆ∆and
ˆ
VND. How LEMO, LEO and Lassen operates is described
in their respective sections described in Chapter 3 and Sections 2.3.2 and 2.3.3 and can be seen
visually in Figure A.1.
4.3.1
Implementation
All simulations were performed in MATLAB version 9.3.0.713579 (R2017b). The Lassen plot
was used sequentially as described in Section 2.3.2 (used as a linear regression) to estimate the
occupancies and VND, i.e. three pairs of estimated ˆ
∆i and
ˆ
VND,i where i=1,2,3 (6 estimated
values). LEO 2 was used by sequentially maximizing eq. (2.18) as described in Section 2.3.3
to estimate the occupancies and VND’s, i.e. three coordinate sets of estimated ˆ
∆i and
ˆ
VND,i
where i=1,2,3 (6 estimated values). LEMO was used as a one-step-procedure as described
2LEO Toolbox available from https://github.com/martinschain/LEO (Schain, Zanderigo, and
Todd Ogden, 2018)
==PAGE:50==
34
4 Methods
in Chapter 3 to estimate occupancies and VND, i.e one set of estimated ˆ
∆i and
ˆ
VND where
i=1,2,3 (4 estimated values). LEMO was implemented by using the inbuilt MATLAB optimizer
’fminsearch’. The implemented LEMO function can be found in Appendix D.
The free parameters in LEMO was constrained according to the definitions of 0 ≤∆≤1 and
VND > 0 where each ∆i was constrained to be in the interval between 0 and 1 by maximizing
over log(
∆i
1−∆i ) for each ∆i rather than ∆i, and VND was constrained to be non-negative
by maximizing over log(VND) rather than VND. These constraints were also applied to the
LEO method. On the other hand the Lassen plot is executed without any constraints on the
parameters therefore if any of the estimates were ˆ∆< 0 then these estimates were set to 0.
The same applies if any estimates for the Lassen plot were
ˆ
VND < 0 then these estimates were
also set to 0.
The start guess in the optimisation for the LEMO method was implemented in the following
for the estimates of VND
1. Use the Lassen plot to estimate V guess
ND
from baseline and 1st block scan.
2. Check if estimated V guess
ND
from the Lassen plot is between 0 and the minimal VT value
of the baseline scan for that particular subject
a) If yes then use estimated V guess
ND
from the Lassen plot as start guess
b) Else use minimal VT value of the baseline scan for that particular subject as start
guess
The start guess in the optimisation for the LEMO method was implemented in the following
for the estimates of ∆1,··· ,N.
1. Use the Lassen plot to sequentially estimate each ∆guess
1,··· ,N
2. Check one-by-one if each estimated ∆guess
1,··· ,N from the Lassen plot is between 0 and 1 for
that particular subject
a) For all estimates of ∆guess
1,··· ,N that is between 0 and 1 then use those estimates from
the Lassen plot as start guess
b) For all estimates of ∆guess
1,··· ,N that is NOT between 0 and 1 then use a value of
0.5 ± N(0,1) as a start guess. N(0,1) can be thought of as a random Gaussian
pertubation.
For LEMO and LEO they were employed with two covariance matrices for the simulations
described in the following subsections. One being the ’true’ Σ as defined in Section 4.2.1. The
’true’ Σ is unattainable in practice but is here used as the ’gold standard’ and will be referred
to as the Multiple Dosage Oracle matrix (MD-Oracle) for the LEMO method and as the Oracle
matrix (Oracle) for the LEO method. The second employed covariance matrix will be the ˆΣ.
This ˆΣ is as described in Section 3.1 and is estimated based on simulated TRT data described
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Simulations
35
in Section 4.2.2. The ˆΣ will be referred to as Multiple Dosage Shrink matrix (MD-Shrink) for
the LEMO method and as the Shrink matrix (Shrink) for the LEO method. It has to be stated
that even though the ’true’ defined covariance matrix is denoted MD-Oracle for LEMO and
Oracle for LEO, they are the same covariance matrices if they come from the same dataset.
Likewise for MD-Shrink and Shrink.
The naming difference is to distinguish between how
LEMO uses e.g MD-Shrink compared to how LEO uses Shrink to estimate values.
4.3.2
Effect of increasing number of test-retest subjects
In this simulation the effect of increasing the number of TRT subjects will have on esti-
mated values ˆ
∆1, ˆ
∆2, ˆ
∆3 and
ˆ
VND for the LEMO method compared to the estimated values
ˆ
∆1, ˆ
∆2, ˆ
∆3,
ˆ
VND,1,
ˆ
VND,2 and
ˆ
VND,3 for LEO and the Lassen plot will be studied. The effect
of increasing the number of TRT subjects will be conducted separately for the [11C]DASB and
[11C]Cimbi-36 datasets.
For both the [11C]DASB dataset and [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset (see an overview in Table 4.1) a
simulation for one B3B subject is given as:
1. Define true Σ as in Section 4.2.1
2. Define true values as in Section 4.2.2 and Section 4.2.3
3. Define ∆True
1
= 0.25, ∆True
2
= 0.50, ∆True
3
= 0.75, i.e corresponding to 25%, 50% and
75% of the target occupied.
4. Use defined true values (step 1-3) to simulate Vbaseline,sim
T
, Vblock,sim,1
T
, Vblock,sim,2
T
and Vblock,sim,3
T
based on eq. (4.4) with a defined noise level λ
5. Use defined true values (step 1-3) to simulate Vtest,sim
T
and Vretest,sim
T
based on eq. (4.3)
for T number of subjects
• Obtain ˆΣ from simulated Vtest,sim
T
and Vretest,sim
T
6. Estimate occupancies and VND with LEMO in a one-step-proceudre by using Σ and ˆΣ
(i.e MD-Oracle and MD-Shrink)
7. Estimate occupancies and VND’s with LEO in a sequential manner by using Σ and ˆΣ
(i.e Oracle and Shrink)
8. Estimate occupancies and VND’s with Lassen in a sequential manner
Repeat step 4-8 for 1000 instances (i.e b=1,...,1000 in eq. (4.4)) with varying noise levels
(λ = [1, 1.1, 1.25] in eq. (4.4)) and varying number of TRT subjects (i.e step 5, T=[5, 10,
15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100] in eq. (4.3)). Thereby for one dataset there is 39
simulation sets and in total for both the [11C]DASB and [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset there is 78
simulation sets. For each simulation set the values were quantified as the normalized summed
squared distance, i.e
==PAGE:52==
36
4 Methods
dVND = 1
σ
σ
∑
b=1
(V True
ND
−
ˆ
VND)2, valid for LEMO method
dVND,i = 1
σ
σ
∑
b=1
(V True
ND
−
ˆ
VND,i)2, valid for Lassen and LEO method
d∆i = 1
σ
σ
∑
b=1
(∆True
i
−ˆ
∆i)2, valid for Lassen, LEO and LEMO method
(4.5)
where i=1,2,3 and σ is the number of ’successes’ (i.e successes=1000-fails). A ”fail” (i.e ”failure”
rate) was defined as for any method where
ˆ
VND was being larger than the maximal VT for that
particular simulated subject. Failed simulations were thereby excluded from quantification of
the estimated values.
The results of the simulation are shown as a graph of the normalized summed squared distance
and can be seen in Section 5.1. Further tables of failure rates can be found in Appendix B.
Lastly violin plots were made for the scenario with a TRT sample size of 10 TRT subjects and
a noise level of 1 (i.e, λ=100%). These violin plots were used for a conference paper and can
be found in Appendix C.
4.3.3
Effect of noise level
In this simulation the effect of varying noise levels will have on estimated values ˆ
∆1, ˆ
∆2, ˆ
∆3
and
ˆ
VND for the LEMO method compared to the estimated values ˆ
∆1, ˆ
∆2, ˆ
∆3,
ˆ
VND,1,
ˆ
VND,2
and
ˆ
VND,3 for LEO and the Lassen plot will be investigated visually. This simulation, like the
simulation in Section 4.3.2, will be conducted separately for the [11C]DASB and [11C]Cimbi-36
datasets.
For both the [11C]DASB dataset and [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset (see an overview in Table 4.1) a
simulation for one B3B subject is given as:
1. Define true Σ as in Section 4.2.1
2. Define true values as in Section 4.2.2 and Section 4.2.3
3. Define ∆True
1
= 0.15, ∆True
2
= 0.75, ∆True
3
= 0.85, i.e corresponding to 15%, 75% and
85% of the target occupied.
4. Use defined true values (step 1-3) to simulate Vbaseline,sim
T
, Vblock,sim,1
T
, Vblock,sim,2
T
and Vblock,sim,3
T
based on eq. (4.4) with a defined noise level λ
5. Use defined true values (step 1-3) to simulate Vtest,sim
T
and Vretest,sim
T
based on eq. (4.3)
for T number of subjects
• Obtain ˆΣ from simulated Vtest,sim
T
and Vretest,sim
T
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Simulations
37
6. Estimate occupancies and VND with LEMO in a one-step-proceudre by using Σ and ˆΣ
(i.e MD-Oracle and MD-Shrink)
7. Estimate occupancies and VND’s with LEO in a sequential manner by using Σ and ˆΣ
(i.e Oracle and Shrink)
8. Estimate occupancies and VND’s with Lassen in a sequential manner
Repeat step 4-8 for 1000 instances with varying noise levels (λ = [1, 1.1, 1.25] in eq. (4.4))
and with T=10 TRT subjects (i.e step 5, T=10 in eq. (4.3), 10 TRT subjects is chosen as in
practice the usual size for a TRT study is between 5-10 subjects). Thereby for one dataset
there is 3 simulation sets and in total for both the [11C]DASB and [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset there
is 6 simulation sets.
The results of the simulation are shown as violin plots and can be seen in Section 5.2.
4.3.4
Effect of varied occupancies
In this simulation the effect of different sets of defined true occupancies will have on esti-
mated values ˆ
∆1, ˆ
∆2, ˆ
∆3 and
ˆ
VND for the LEMO method compared to the estimated values
ˆ
∆1, ˆ
∆2, ˆ
∆3,
ˆ
VND,1,
ˆ
VND,2 and
ˆ
VND,3 for LEO and the Lassen plot will be investigated visu-
ally. This simulation, like the simulation in Section 4.3.2 and Section 4.3.3, will be conducted
separately for the [11C]DASB and [11C]Cimbi-36 datasets.
Defining 3 sets of occupancies as
Low-Low-High (LLH): ∆True
1
= 0.1, ∆True
2
= 0.2, ∆True
3
= 0.7
Low-Low-Medium (LLM): ∆True
1
= 0.1, ∆True
2
= 0.2, ∆True
3
= 0.5
Low-Medium-Medium (LMM): ∆True
1
= 0.05, ∆True
2
= 0.4, ∆True
3
= 0.6
where low occupancy corresponds to occupancies in the range from 0-30%, medium occupancy
in the range from 31-60% and high occupancy in the range from 61-100%.
For both the [11C]DASB dataset and [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset (see an overview in Table 4.1) a
simulation for one B3B subject follows the following scheme:
1. Define true Σ as in Section 4.2.1
2. Define true values as in Section 4.2.2 and Section 4.2.3
3. Define true values for ∆True
1
, ∆True
2
, ∆True
3
4. Use defined true values (step 1-3) to simulate Vbaseline,sim
T
, Vblock,sim,1
T
, Vblock,sim,2
T
and Vblock,sim,3
T
based on eq. (4.4) with a defined noise level λ
==PAGE:54==
38
4 Methods
5. Use defined true values (step 1-3) to simulate Vtest,sim
T
and Vretest,sim
T
based on eq. (4.3)
for T number of subjects
• Obtain ˆΣ from simulated Vtest,sim
T
and Vretest,sim
T
6. Estimate occupancies and VND with LEMO in a one-step-proceudre by using Σ and ˆΣ
(i.e MD-Oracle and MD-Shrink)
7. Estimate occupancies and VND’s with LEO in a sequential manner by using Σ and ˆΣ
(i.e Oracle and Shrink)
8. Estimate occupancies and VND’s with Lassen in a sequential manner
Define in step 3 varying occupancy sets (LLH, LLM and LMM) then repeat step 4-8 for 1000
instances with noise level (λ = 1 in eq. (4.4)) and with T=10 TRT subjects (i.e step 5, T=10
in eq. (4.3), 10 TRT subjects is chosen as in practice the usual size for a TRT study is between
5-10 subjects). Thereby for one dataset there is 3 simulation sets and in total for both the
[11C]DASB and [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset there is 6 simulation sets.
The results of the simulation are shown as violin plots and can be seen in Section 5.3. Lastly
as explained in Section 4.3.1, values where the Lassen plot estimated a negative VND estimate
were set to 0. A table showing the # of estimates for VND which were set to 0 is also shown.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Results
In the following sections the results obtained from the described simulations in Chapter 4 are
shown. It has to be kept in mind that LEMO is executed in a one-step-procedure (see Chap-
ter 3) to estimate occupancies and VND simultaneously, i.e all scans are used. While LEO
(see Section 2.3.3) and Lassen (see Section 2.3.2) are used in a sequential way.
From the results in Sections 5.2 and 5.3 is seen that none of the violin plots seems to be
normally distributed. Hence comparing the violin plots with usual statistical methods is not
viable and therefore usual statistical tests are not used for comparison.
5.1
Effect of increasing number of test-retest
subjects
Results from the simulation of Section 4.3.2 are shown in Figures 5.1 to 5.4.
The figures
show the normalized summed squared differences between the true and estimated values of
∆and VND. The values of the normalized summed squared differences indicate a deviation
from the true values and hence a lower value reflects a better performance. LEMO executed
with MD-Oracle and LEO executed with Oracle showed the lowest values in all cases. The
exception is in Figure 5.3 where LEMO executed with MD-Shrink in a few cases had a lower
value compared to LEMO executed with MD-Oracle.
Furthermore in Figures 5.1 to 5.4 it is seen that increasing the TRT sample size to estimate ˆΣ,
i.e MD-Shrink and Shrink, results in lower values. LEMO executed with MD-Shrink and LEO
executed with Shrink is seen to asymptotically reach MD-Oracle and Oracle, respectively. The
exception is in Figure 5.3 where LEMO executed with MD-Shrink seems to fluctuate around
MD-Oracle and in a few cases surpasses MD-Oracle. Furthermore it is seen that a ”plateau”
is reached when approximately 30-40 test-retest subjects is included in the test-retest sample
size. Again an excemption is seen for LEMO executed with MD-Shrink in Figure 5.3.
Considering the cases where test-retest sample size is below 20, the results indicate that LEMO
executed with MD-Shrink is preferable over the LEO executed with Shrink and Lassen plot in
cases where occupancy is either 25% or 50%.
==PAGE:56==
40
5 Results
Lastly the calculated ’failure’ rates can be seen from Appendix B. From the tables is seen that
for LEMO, regardless of the dataset, that the ’failure’ rate is always under 1%.
5.1.1
[11C]DASB dataset
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
  
1 = 25%
  Sum of sq. error in occ.
 = 100%
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
  
2 = 50%
  Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
  
3 = 75%
  Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Sum of sq. error in occ.
 = 110%
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Sum of sq. error in occ.
 = 125%
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Sum of sq. error in occ.
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
Figure 5.1: Sum of normalized squared error in estimates of occupancy (1st row’s y-axes
describes d∆1, 2nd row’s y-axes describes d∆2, 3rd row’s y-axes describes d∆3) for various
test-retest sample size (x-axis in each subplot), noise levels (columns) and occupancy
levels (rows). Simulated data is based on the [11C]DASB dataset. Various test-retest
sample size was used to estimate Σ, i.e. ˆΣ. MD-Oracle, MD-Shrink, Oracle and Shrink
is seen to provide lower errors than the Lassen plot. Both MD-Shrink and Shrink is seen
to asymptotically reach MD-Oracle and Oracle, respectively.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Effect of increasing number of test-retest subjects
41
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
   = 100%
  Sum of sq. error in VND
1 = 25%
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sum of sq. error in VND
2 = 50%
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sum of sq. error in VND
3 = 75%
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sum of sq. error in VND
MD
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
   = 110%
  Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
   = 125%
  Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sum of sq. error in VND
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
Figure 5.2: Sum of normalized squared error in estimates of VND’s (1st column’s y-axes
from left describes dVND,1, 2nd column’s y-axes from left describes dVND,2, 3rd column’s
y-axes from left describes dVND,3, rightmost column’s y-axes describes dVND) for various
test-retest sample size (x-axis in each subplot), noise levels (rows) and occupancy levels
(columns).
Simulated data is based on the [11C]DASB dataset.
Various test-retest
sample size was used to estimate Σ, i.e. ˆΣ. MD-Oracle, MD-Shrink, Oracle and Shrink
is seen to provide lower errors than the Lassen plot. Both MD-Shrink and Shrink is seen
to asymptotically reach MD-Oracle and Oracle, respectively.
==PAGE:58==
42
5 Results
5.1.2
[11C]Cimbi-36 dataset
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
  
1 = 25%
  Sum of sq. error in occ.
 = 100%
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
  
2 = 50%
  Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
  
3 = 75%
  Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Sum of sq. error in occ.
 = 110%
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Sum of sq. error in occ.
 = 125%
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Sum of sq. error in occ.
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Sum of sq. error in occ.
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
Figure 5.3: Sum of normalized squared error in estimates of occupancy (1st row’s y-axes
describes d∆1, 2nd row’s y-axes describes d∆2, 3rd row’s y-axes describes d∆3) for various
test-retest sample size (x-axis in each subplot), noise levels (columns) and occupancy
levels (rows). Simulated data is based on the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset. Various test-retest
sample size was used to estimate Σ, i.e. ˆΣ. MD-Oracle, MD-Shrink, Oracle and Shrink
is seen to provide lower errors than the Lassen plot. Shrink is seen to asymptotically
reach Oracle. MD-Shrink is seen to approach MD-Oracle.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Effect of increasing number of test-retest subjects
43
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
   = 100%
  Sum of sq. error in VND
1 = 25%
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sum of sq. error in VND
2 = 50%
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sum of sq. error in VND
3 = 75%
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sum of sq. error in VND
MD
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
   = 110%
  Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
   = 125%
  Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sum of sq. error in VND
10 20 30 40
60
80
100
# of TRT subjects
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sum of sq. error in VND
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
Figure 5.4: Sum of normalized squared error in estimates of VND’s (1st column’s y-axes
from left describes dVND,1, 2nd column’s y-axes from left describes dVND,2, 3rd column’s
y-axes from left describes dVND,3, rightmost column’s y-axes describes dVND) for various
test-retest sample size (x-axis in each subplot), noise levels (rows) and occupancy levels
(columns). Simulated data is based on the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset. Various test-retest
sample size was used to estimate Σ, i.e. ˆΣ. MD-Oracle, MD-Shrink, Oracle and Shrink
is seen to provide lower errors than the Lassen plot. Both MD-Shrink and Shrink is seen
to asymptotically reach MD-Oracle and Oracle, respectively.
==PAGE:60==
44
5 Results
5.2
Effect of noise level
Results from the simulation of Section 4.3.3 are shown in Figures 5.5 to 5.8. The figures shows
the distributions of estimated values of ∆and VND when increasing the noise level. Assumed
test-retest sample size was 10 test-retest subjects. In each violin plot the relative width and
colour represents the density of the distribution. Yellow colour indicates a higher density, while
blue colour indicates a lower density. The black dashed line is corresponding to the true value.
None of the violin plots showing the estimates of occupancy and VND appears to be normally
distributed.
In Figures 5.5 and 5.7 it is seen for the 15% occupancies that increasing the noise levels leads
to a higher spread around the true value (indicated by a more spread yellow colour) in all
methods. The higher spread is also seen for the 75% occupancy when noise level is increased.
For the 85% occupancy case it is seen that the Lassen method at increased noise levels gets a
more narrow distribution around 1 for the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset. For both datasets a cap at 0
or 1 is observed for the 15% and 85% occupancy. In the [11C]DASB dataset, LEMO executed
with either MD-Oracle or MD-Shrink is seen to have a cap at 1 for the 75% occupancy case. In
the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset, some dots at 0 is seen for LEMO executed with either MD-Oracle
or MD-Shrink.
In Figure 5.6, an overestimation in estimated VND is observed for the Lassen and LEO executed
with Shrink for the 15% occupancy case. Furthermore for the 15% occupancy case it is seen that
increasing the noise levels displaces the LEO executed with Shrink towards 0. The spread is
observed to be reduced when looking at LEO executed with either Oracle or Shrink compared
to Lassen for the 15% occupancy case.
The reduced spread of LEO executed with either
Oracle or Shrink is more noticeable for the higher occupancy cases even for increased noise
levels. The overestimation is seen to be reduced at higher occupancy levels. LEMO executed
with either MD-Oracle or MD-Shrink is seen to have a low bias and spread around the true
values. In Figure 5.8, an underestimation in estimated VND is observed for the Lassen and
LEO executed with Shrink for the 15% occupancy case. The spread is observed to be reduced
when looking at LEO executed with either Oracle or Shrink compared to Lassen for the 15%
occupancy case. The reduced spread of LEO executed with either Oracle or Shrink is more
noticeable for the higher occupancy cases even for increased noise levels. The underestimation
is seen to be reduced at higher occupancy levels. LEMO executed with either MD-Oracle or
MD-Shrink is seen to have a low bias and spread around the true values.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Effect of noise level
45
5.2.1 [11C]DASB dataset
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
1 = 15%
  Occupancy
 = 100%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
2 = 75%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
3 = 85%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
 = 110%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
 = 125%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
Figure 5.5: Violin plots showing the distribution of Lassen plot, LEO and LEMO esti-
mates for occupancy. Simulated data is based on the [11C]DASB dataset. Test-retest
sample size is assumed to consists of 10 test-retest subjects. Each column of subplots rep-
resents a noise level. Each row of subplots represents an occupancy level. Black dashed
line corresponds to the true values. Each violins’ relative width and colour represents
the density. A cap around 0 or 1 is seen for some of the violin plots.
==PAGE:62==
46
5 Results
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
   = 100%
  VND
1 = 15%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
2 = 75%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
3 = 85%
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
20
VND
MD
 = 100%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
   = 110%
  VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
20
VND
 = 110%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
   = 125%
  VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
20
VND
 = 125%
Figure 5.6: Violin plots showing the distribution of Lassen plot, LEO and LEMO esti-
mates for VND. Simulated data is based on the [11C]DASB dataset. Test-retest sample
size is assumed to consists of 10 test-retest subjects. Each row of subplots represents a
noise level. Each column (1st column from left until 3rd column from left) of subplots
represents an occupancy level. Rightmost column (MD column) represents violin plots
of estimated VND for the LEMO method. Black dashed line corresponds to the true val-
ues. Each violins’ relative width and colour represents the density. At 15% occupancy,
an overestimation in estimated VND is observed for the Lassen and LEO executed with
Shrink. The overestimation is seen to be reduced at higher occupancy levels. LEMO
is observed to be more narrow around the true values regardless of noise level, thereby
indicating a low spread and bias.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Effect of noise level
47
5.2.2
[11C]Cimbi-36 dataset
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
1 = 15%
  Occupancy
 = 100%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
2 = 75%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
3 = 85%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
 = 110%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
 = 125%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Occupancy
Figure 5.7: Violin plots showing the distribution of Lassen plot, LEO and LEMO esti-
mates for occupancy. Simulated data is based on the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset. Test-retest
sample size is assumed to consists of 10 test-retest subjects. Each column of subplots rep-
resents a noise level. Each row of subplots represents an occupancy level. Black dashed
line corresponds to the true values. Each violins’ relative width and colour represents
the density. A cap/dot around 0 or 1 is seen for some of the violin plots.
==PAGE:64==
48
5 Results
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
   = 100%
  VND
1 = 15%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
2 = 75%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
3 = 85%
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
20
VND
MD
 = 100%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
   = 110%
  VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
20
VND
 = 110%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
   = 125%
  VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
20
VND
 = 125%
Figure 5.8: Violin plots showing the distribution of Lassen plot, LEO and LEMO es-
timates for VND. Simulated data is based on the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset. Test-retest
sample size is assumed to consists of 10 test-retest subjects. Each row of subplots rep-
resents a noise level. Each column (1st column from left until 3rd column from left)
of subplots represents an occupancy level. Rightmost column (MD column) represents
violin plots of estimated VND for the LEMO method. Black dashed line corresponds to
the true values. Each violins’ relative width and colour represents the density. At 15%
occupancy, an underestimation in estimated VND is observed for the LEO executed with
Oracle or Shrink. The underestimation is seen to be reduced at higher occupancy levels.
At 15% occupancy Lassen is observed to be distributed around 0. LEMO is observed
to be more narrow around the true values regardless of noise level, thereby indicating a
low spread and bias.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Effect of varied occupancies
49
5.3
Effect of varied occupancies
Results from the simulation of Section 4.3.4 are shown in Figures 5.9 to 5.12. The figures
shows the distributions of estimated values of ∆and VND when using different sets of true
occupancies (LLH: ∆true
1
= 10%, ∆true
2
= 20%, ∆true
3
= 70%, LLM: ∆true
1
= 10%, ∆true
2
=
20%, ∆true
3
= 50% and LMM: ∆true
1
= 5%, ∆true
2
= 40%, ∆true
3
= 60%). Assumed test-
retest sample size was 10 test-retest subjects. In each violin plot the relative width and colour
represents the density of the distribution. Yellow colour indicates a higher density, while blue
colour indicates a lower density. The black dashed line is corresponding to the true value.
None of the violin plots showing the estimates of occupancy and VND appears to be normally
distributed. Lastly from the simulation of Section 4.3.4 the tables showing # of zeros for VND
estimates for each occupancy set are shown in Tables 5.1 and 5.2.
In Figure 5.9 it appears that for all simulation sets of occupancies where occupancies are < 20%
that the Lassen plot is distributed around 0, hence suggesting difficulties for the Lassen plot to
estimate the occupancies. Further it is observed that LEMO executed with either MD-Oracle
or MD-Shrink has less spread and bias for all simulation sets of occupancies where occupancies
< 20%. For all simulation sets of occupancies where occupancy is ≥40%, it is observed that
both LEO and LEMO seems to have a less spread and bias than the Lassen plot. For LEMO,
a cap or dot is observed around 0 or 1 for all simulation sets of occupancies when occupancies
are ≥40%.
In Figure 5.11 it appears that for all simulation sets of occupancies where occupancies are
≤10% that the Lassen plot is distributed around 0, hence suggesting difficulties for the Lassen
plot to estimate the occupancies.
Further it is observed that LEMO executed with either
MD-Oracle or MD-Shrink has less spread and bias for all simulation sets of occupancies where
occupancies ≤10%. In the LLM simulation set for 10% occupancy it is observed that LEMO
executed with MD-Shrink has a more narrow distribution (yellow colour) around the true value.
For all simulation sets of occupancies where occupancy is ≥20%, it is observed that both LEO
and LEMO seems to have a less spread and bias than the Lassen plot. For LEMO, a cap or dot
is observed around 0 or 1 for all simulation sets of occupancies when occupancies are ≥20%.
In Figure 5.10 an overestimation is seen for Lassen and LEO executed with Shrink for all
sets of occupancies where occupancy is ≤40%, though more observable for Lassen.
The
overestimation for LEO and Lassen seems to disappear with higher occupancies. It is observed
that LEO executed with Shrink has a lower spread than the Lassen plot for all simulation sets
of occupancies. LEO executed with Shrink in the LMM simulation set for 5% occupancy is
seen to be distributed around 0. LEMO executed with either MD-Oracle or MD-Shrink has a
narrow distribution around the true value.
In Figure 5.12 an underestimation is seen for LEO executed with Shrink for all sets of occupan-
cies where occupancy is ≤40%. The underestimation for LEO seems to disappear with higher
occupancies. It is observed that LEO executed with Shrink has a lower spread than the Lassen
plot for all simulation sets of occupancies. LEO executed with Shrink in the LMM simulation
set for 5% occupancy is seen to be distributed around 0. Lassen is observed to be distributed
around 0 for all simulation sets of occupancies where occupancy is ≤20%. The Lassen plot is
observed to have a high spread and bias for all simulation sets of occupancies where occupancy
==PAGE:66==
50
5 Results
is ≥40%. LEMO executed with either MD-Oracle or MD-Shrink has a narrow distribution
around the true value.
5.3.1
[11C]DASB dataset
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
1 = 10%
  Occupancy
LLH
 = 100%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
2 = 20%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
3 = 70%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
1 = 10%
  Occupancy
LLM
 = 100%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
2 = 20%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
3 = 50%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
1 = 5%
  Occupancy
LMM
 = 100%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
2 = 40%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
3 = 60%
  Occupancy
Figure 5.9: Violin plots showing the distribution of Lassen plot, LEO and LEMO esti-
mates for occupancy. Simulated data is based on the [11C]DASB dataset. Test-retest
sample size is assumed to consists of 10 test-retest subjects. Noise level is assumed to be
100%. Leftmost column represents the simulation set of LLH used to estimate occupan-
cies, middle column represents the simulation set of LLM used to estimate occupancies
and rightmost column represents the simulation set of LMM used to estimate occupan-
cies. Black dashed line corresponds to the true values. Each violins’ relative width and
colour represents the density. The Lassen plot is observed to have a more narrow tail
than the other methods and be distributed around 0 for all cases where the occupancy
is <20%. A cap/dot around 0 or 1 is seen for some of the violin plots.
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Effect of varied occupancies
51
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
LLH
   = 100%
  VND
1 = 10%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
VND
2 = 20%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
VND
3 = 70%
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
VND
MD
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
LLM
   = 100%
  VND
1 = 10%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
VND
2 = 20%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
VND
3 = 50%
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
LMM
   = 100%
  VND
1 = 5%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
VND
2 = 40%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
VND
3 = 60%
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
VND
Figure 5.10: Violin plots showing the distribution of Lassen plot, LEO and LEMO
estimates for VND.
Simulated data is based on the [11C]DASB dataset.
Test-retest
sample size is assumed to consists of 10 test-retest subjects.
Noise level is assumed
to be 100%. Upper row represents the simulation set of LLH used to estimate VND,
middle row represents the simulation set of LLM used to estimate VND and bottom
row represents the simulation set of LMM used to estimate VND. Black dashed line
corresponds to the true values. Each violins’ relative width and colour represents the
density. At < 40% occupancy, an overestimation in estimated VND is observed for the
Lassen plot. The overestimation is seen to be reduced at higher occupancy levels. At
< 20% occupancy LEO executed with Shrink is observed to be distributed around 0.
A slight overestimation is observed at 20% occupancy for LEO executed with Shrink.
LEMO is observed to be more narrow around the true values regardless of used occupancy
set, thereby indicating a low spread and bias.
==PAGE:68==
52
5 Results
Table 5.1: Table showing # of zeros in VND estimate for the different occupancy sets.
Simulated data is based on the [11C]DASB dataset.
# of zeros
in
occupancy set
∆true
1
∆true
2
∆true
3
LLH
79
99
17
LLM
69
80
61
LMM
60
82
30
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Effect of varied occupancies
53
5.3.2
[11C]Cimbi-36 dataset
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
1 = 10%
  Occupancy
LLH
 = 100%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
2 = 20%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
3 = 70%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
1 = 10%
  Occupancy
LLM
 = 100%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
2 = 20%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
3 = 50%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
1 = 5%
  Occupancy
LMM
 = 100%
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
2 = 40%
  Occupancy
MD-Oracle
Oracle
MD-Shrink
Shrink
Lassen
-0.5
0
0.5
1
  
3 = 60%
  Occupancy
Figure 5.11: Violin plots showing the distribution of Lassen plot, LEO and LEMO esti-
mates for occupancy. Simulated data is based on the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset. Test-retest
sample size is assumed to consists of 10 test-retest subjects. Noise level is assumed to be
100%. Leftmost column represents the simulation set of LLH used to estimate occupan-
cies, middle column represents the simulation set of LLM used to estimate occupancies
and rightmost column represents the simulation set of LMM used to estimate occupan-
cies. Black dashed line corresponds to the true values. Each violins’ relative width and
colour represents the density. The Lassen is observed to have a more narrow tail than
the other methods and be distributed around 0 for all cases where the occupancy is
≤10%. A cap/dot around 0 or 1 is seen for some of the violin plots.
==PAGE:70==
54
5 Results
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
LLH
   = 100%
  VND
1 = 10%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
2 = 20%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
3 = 70%
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
20
VND
MD
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
LLM
   = 100%
  VND
1 = 10%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
2 = 20%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
3 = 50%
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
20
VND
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
LMM
   = 100%
  VND
1 = 5%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
2 = 40%
Oracle
Shrink
Lassen
0
5
10
15
20
VND
3 = 60%
MD-Oracle
MD-Shrink
0
5
10
15
20
VND
Figure 5.12: Violin plots showing the distribution of Lassen plot, LEO and LEMO
estimates for VND. Simulated data is based on the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset. Test-retest
sample size is assumed to consists of 10 test-retest subjects. Noise level is assumed to be
100%. Upper row represents the simulation set of LLH used to estimate VND, middle row
represents the simulation set of LLM used to estimate VND and bottom row represents
the simulation set of LMM used to estimate VND. Black dashed line corresponds to the
true values. Each violins’ relative width and colour represents the density. LEMO is
observed to be more narrow around the true values regardless of used occupancy set,
thereby indicating a lower spread and bias.
Table 5.2: Table showing # of zeros in VND estimate for the different occupancy sets.
Simulated data is based on the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset.
# of zeros
in
occupancy set
∆true
1
∆true
2
∆true
3
LLH
361
159
0
LLM
325
150
0
LMM
443
10
0
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
6.1
Likelihood Estimation of Multiple
Occupancies
Even though the Lassen plot is not strictly valid (see Section 2.3.2). The Lassen plot is a
common approach to estimate occupancy for radioligands where no suitable reference region
exist, due to its simplicity in implementation and interpretation. (Cunningham et al., 2010;
Kågedal et al., 2013; Paul et al., 2014; Salinas et al., 2013)
LEO was developed as a method to avoid some of the problems (e.g correlated errors) with
the Lassen plot while LEMO was developed to expand the LEO method to multiple occupancy
estimation as a one-step-procedure. In order not to introduce new assumptions in the derivation
of LEMO. LEMO was based on the standard assumptions in compartmental modelling, that
when the radioligand has diffused across the BBB then each molecule of the radioligand is either
specifically (VS) bound to a target or non-displaceable (VND), at any given time point (Innis
et al., 2007). Further LEMO was based on the assumption in likelihood theory that the error
terms are normally distributed.
Another assumption in LEMO comes from the assumptions of PET target occupancy studies.
The assumption is that in eq. (3.2) (shown with error terms) that neither VND or the occupancy
is changing between the included ROIs for one scan and that VND is constant between scans.
If these assumptions are violated then it could lead to bias. To test if the assumption of VND
uniformity between ROIs is valid it could be done in the way of conducting a baseline-block
scan where a drug dosage is given that leads to ∆= 100%. Though a drug dosage leading
to ∆= 100% is often not possible in human studies, due to pharmacological effects of the
drug dosage. (Naganawa, Gallezot, et al., 2017) On the other hand testing for the assumption
of uniform ∆between ROIs is not obvious (Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018) and
furthermore the assumption of uniform ∆can easily be violated if there is some endogenous
ligand in tissue which also competes for the same specific binding sites as drug and radioligand.
As described in Section 2.3.3 and Chapter 3 all measurements contain some form of error. The
errors in estimation of regional VT values (Slifstein and Laruelle, 2000) could come from either
the PET data or noise in the input function (cP ). Depending on the noise source these errors
==PAGE:72==
56
6 Discussion
can either be independent or dependent across ROIs for one particular subject with one PET
scan. Local image noise, e.g due to a low count in a region, would only influence that region and
hence this type of noise would be independent between ROIs. If on the other hand the noise is
due to e.g calibration errors (either in PET scanner or measurement equipment for the blood
samples) or ROI delineation errors in the coregistered image between PET and MRI. These
two examples of error sources could influence different ROIs similarly and hence errors from
these two examples would be dependent across ROIs. (Naganawa, Gallezot, et al., 2017; Mark
Slifstein and Marc Laruelle, 2001) Hence the assumption of noise being independent across
scans but not between ROIs in the derivation of LEMO. Furthermore to assess dependency
across ROIs the covariance was considered in LEMO.
In the derivation of LEMO it was assumed that the true covariance matrix Σ describes the
measurement errors (some of the above described). Furthermore in the derivation of LEMO it
was assumed that the measurements errors in a target occupancy study can be estimated from
a test-retest dataset with eq. (4.2). In the derivation of eq. (4.2) (Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd
Ogden, 2018) biological variation between test and retest was assumed to be negligible but
under certain circumstances it can not be assumed neglible, e.g. a disease (Naganawa, Zheng,
et al., 2015) or diurnal variation (Matheson et al., 2015).
The covariance estimated with eq. (4.2) was considered the ’true’ covariance matrix in this the-
sis and furthermore this ’true’ covariance matrix was used to generate noise matrices (see Sec-
tion 4.2). If the regional VT estimates (e.g, in the TRT [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset) for any reason
was erroneously estimated then this could lead to erroneously generated noise matrices and
thereby possibly lead to erroneously generated instances (eq. (4.4)).
Furthermore the use of eq. (4.2) in real applications of LEMO would limit the number of ROIs
which could be included (i.e invertebility problems, see Section 3.1). The use of the non-linear
shrinkage method is not limited by the number of ROIs which can be included as the test-retest
sample size is not constrained in any way (see Section 3.1 and Ledoit and Wolf, 2015)). Lastly
obtaining a TRT dataset providing a perfect description of the measurement errors is unlikely
in practice.
6.2
Effect of increasing number of test-retest
subjects
The newly proposed LEO method has shown in Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018 that
the LEO method executed with the Shrink covariance matrix resulted in higher accuracy and
precision in estimating occupancy and VND, compared to the Lassen method. In the paper
by ibid. a simulation study was conducted and furthermore the LEO method was applied to
real data. The simulations were based on a dataset with regional VT estimates (Ogden et al.,
2007; Parsey et al., 2006) and data was collected by using the serotonin transporter radioligand
[11C]DASB. In this thesis the same dataset used in Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018
was acquired to both replicate the findings with LEO and to apply the newly extended version
of LEO.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Effect of increasing number of test-retest subjects
57
The results obtained in this thesis for LEO executed with Shrink is in accordance with what
was found in ibid. with the [11C]DASB dataset; First of all, that a higher number of test-retest
sample size leads to better estimates (in the sense that the value of summed squared differences
becomes smaller) of occupancy. (see Figures 5.1 and 5.3) Secondly, that a higher number of
test-retest sample size also leads to LEO executed with Shrink asymptotically approaching
LEO executed with Oracle. The same is also seen applicable for LEMO executed with MD-
Shrink aprroaching LEMO executed with MD-Oracle. Except for the 75% occupancy in the
[11C]Cimbi-36 dataset (Figure 5.3) where, in a few cases, it is seen that LEMO executed
with MD-Shrink surpasses LEMO executed with MD-Oracle. It should not be possible for
LEMO executed with MD-Shrink to surpass LEMO executed with MD-Oracle, as LEMO
executed with MD-Oracle is the ’gold’ standard and hence should be the upper bound of
LEMOs performance. In real applications it is very unlikely to reach the upper bound. There
can be a number of reasons for the estimation with MD-Shrink surpassing the estimation with
MD-Oracle. First of all, it could be differences due the regional VT estimates in test-retest
scans used from the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset. Secondly, it could be due to bias (see Section 6.3
for further discussion) and lastly it could be due to that the number of instances used (I=1000
instances) is not enough to describe the simulated [11C]Cimbi-36 data.
In Figures 5.1 and 5.3 is observed for 25% occupancies that LEMO executed with MD-Shrink
has lower values of summed squared distances compared to LEO but becomes less evident
for higher occupancies. This observed difference between LEMO and LEO could be due to
procedure differences in how they estimate occupancies between the two methods, while LEMO
uses information/data available from four scans, LEO only uses information/data from two
scans at a time. The procedure difference between LEMO and LEO also explains the low
values seen for LEMO estimates of VND in Figures 5.2 and 5.4 compared to LEO and the
Lassen plot. The difference seen between the different methods becomes less evident when
comparing the VND estimates from the 75% occupancy scan (3rd block scan).
From Slifstein and Laruelle, 2000 one would expect a lower summed squared difference value
with higher occupancy levels. In Figures 5.2 and 5.4 it is seen that for all methods the values are
getting lower with higher occupancy levels and as such is as expected. Though in Figures 5.1
and 5.3 the values for the summed squared differences are seen to be fluctuating and not
necessarily becoming smaller with higher occupancy levels.
This is especially seen for the
Lassen plot. The reasoning for this observation is due to a combination of the failure rates
(see Appendix B) being higher, the spread in the estimated occupancies and the constraints
set in Section 4.3.1.
In eq. (4.5), the normalization is based on how many successes there are out of the total
number of simulated instances. A ’fail’, in this thesis, is defined as a VND estimate that is
higher than the regional maximal VT value for that particular subject, which, from a theoretical
standpoint, is not correct. In theory, a ’fail’ should be defined as a VND estimate higher than
the regional minimal VT value for that particular subject, but this would lead to a too strict
definition. Because in the case of defining a ’fail’ based on the theoretical way, then imprecise
VND estimates around the correct value could also be counted as a fail. However, an imprecise
VND estimate around the correct value is not an outlier or ”fail” but a consequence of the
estimation procedure. On the other hand, an estimate higher than the maximal regional VT
value is considered a ”bad” estimate but also an outlier. For the LEMO method there is only
==PAGE:74==
58
6 Discussion
one failure rate as there is only one VND estimate while Lassen and LEO has three different
failure rates. One way to avoid the use of ’failure’ rates is by constraining the estimated VND
values from LEMO and LEO to be between 0 and the minimal regional VT estimate for a
particular subject. For Lassen an upper boundary on the VND estimate could be set and if an
estimate is higher than that upper boundary then the estimate could be set to the value of the
upper boundary. Though setting further constraints on the VND estimates could lead to bias
in the estimates obtained. Most likely this bias would be an underestimation.
6.3
Effect of noise level
From the simulations in Section 5.1 is seen that a higher noise level leads to higher values of
summed squared differences. In this simulation from Section 4.3.3 the effect of increasing the
noise level was investigated visually with violin plots as seen in Section 5.2. From the figures
in Section 5.2 it is seen for both datasets that the estimates of ∆and VND with increased
noise level (λ) leads to the distributions becoming more spread for all methods which is in
accordance with Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018.
It is also seen that LEMO executed with either MD-Oracle or MD-Shrink looks to have the
lowest spread for high occupancy cases in Figures 5.5 and 5.7. In the low occupancy cases
(∆= 15%) it is seen that a higher noise level can lead to that the estimates are distributed
around 0 and not the true occupancy (see Figure 5.5). LEMO still though seems to have a
more narrow distribution around the true occupancy compared to LEO and Lassen.
When looking at Figures 5.5 and 5.7 for the occupancy at 15% a cap at 0 is seen. This is due
to the constraints set in Section 4.3.1. For LEMO in Figures 5.5 and 5.7 for high occupancies
(i.e., 75% and 85% occupancy) a cap is seen at 1 (i.e, 100% occupancy) and a few dots at 0
(i.e, 0% occupancy). The cap seen at 1 is also most likely due to the constraints set and the
dot could be due to local minima. As the LEMO uses information from all scans it could be
that noise from one scan effects the estimates leading to estimates that are capped at 1 or dots
at 0 due to constraints.
In ibid. an overestimation was reported for VND estimated at 25% occupancy with both the
LEO method and the Lassen plot. In Figure 5.6 an overestimation is seen for the VND estimate
for the simulated 15% occupancy scan for both LEO and Lassen. The overestimation could
be due to the noise matrices generated with the TRT [11C]DASB dataset. If the radioligand
[11C]DASB leads to overestimated measurement errors in the regional VT estimates for the test
and retest scans then these overestimated measurement errors could maybe be reflected in the
simulated instances. Further the bias observed for the Lassen plot and LEO has disappeared
for LEMO executed with either MD-Oracle or MD-Shrink, most likely due to LEMO having
information/data available from all simulated scans.
In Figure 5.8 an underestimation is seen for VND estimate for the simulated 15% occupancy
scan for LEO. This underestimation is most likely due to the radioligand [11C]Cimbi-36 leading
to underestimated measurement errors in the regional VT estimates for the test and retest scans
and hence reflected in the simulated instances. The Lassen plot is distributed around 0 which
==PAGE:75==
6.4 Effect of varied occupancies
59
is most likely due to the correlated errors in the dependent variable. (Cunningham et al., 2010)
6.4
Effect of varied occupancies
From the results in Section 5.2 it was seen that at low occupancies when increasing the noise
level could lead to higher spread and in a few cases could lead to estimates being distributed
around 0.
Further it was seen for high occupancy cases that a higher noise level leads to
relatively higher spread but the distribution is still around the true value. For LEMO these
observations were only seen for the occupancy estimates and not for the VND estimates which
seems to be unaffected by the increased noise level. As LEMO is a one-step procedure, and
thereby uses information available from all simulated scans, a visual investigation of how
different sets of defined true occupancies was investigated in Section 5.3.
It is seen in Figure 5.11 for the LLH case at 70% occupancy that there is a cap at 1 for
LEMO executed with MD-Shrink and for the LLM case when the true defined occupancy is
changed from 70% to 50% no cap is seen. With the cap gone then for 10% occupancy there
is seen a more dense (more yellow colour) distribution around the true value in the LLM case
compared to the LLH case. Hence when estimates from a high or medium occupancy scan is
estimated with low spread and bias it will lead to better estimates for low occupancy scans
when using LEMO. Further it is seen in the LMM case that LEMO executed with MD-Oracle
seems to be the only method which seems to have a distribution around the true value for the
5% occupancy scan.
The aforementioned observations are not observed in Figure 5.9 for the 10% occupancy in LLM
compared to LLH. Neither is it observed that the LEMO executed with MD-Oracle seems to
have a distribution around the true value for the 5% occupancy scan in the LMM case. This
observed difference between the [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset and [11C]DASB dataset can be due to
that the TRT [11C]DASB dataset does not describe the measurement errors well in low occu-
pancy scans. For LEMO to work satisfactory a good description of the measurements errors
are needed and likewise for LEO (Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018). Furthermore
from Tables 5.1 and 5.2 is seen a relatively high difference in the # of zeros in VND estimates
for the Lassen plot between the two datasets which is most likely due to the bias observed.
6.5
General observations
In Section 6.1 there is a discussion about the assumptions behind LEMO. In addition, the
results in Chapter 5 and the discussions from Sections 6.2 to 6.4 show that there are some
general observations. It can be seen that LEMO, regardless of occupancy and noise level, has
a superior VND estimate, and that LEMO has a smaller spread and bias at low occupancies.
Below are some of the reasons for LEMO’s superiority in VND estimation, as well as a discussion
on why there is the difference seen in the two datasets at low occupancies.
Due to procedure differences in LEMO compared to LEO and Lassen one VND estimate is
obtained from LEMO and N number of VND estimates are obtained from LEO and Lassen, even
==PAGE:76==
60
6 Discussion
though it is assumed in the Lassen and LEO method that VND estimates are constant across
scans (eqs. (2.13) and (2.15)). Strictly speaking then obtaining N number of VND estimates for
LEO and Lassen violates the assumption of VND being constant across scans as also described
in Radua et al., 2011 (described for the Lassen method). Furthermore this violation of VND
being constant across scans could lead to a loss of efficiency in the occupancy estimates or
unpredictable bias. In Cunningham et al., 2010 it was suggested for the Lassen method to
constrain the VND estimates to one common x-axis. This could be done by constraining the
x-axis to the best estimate of VND (i.e, the one with lowest spread and bias). The best VND
estimate for the Lassen method was obtained in the high occupancy cases Sections 6.2 to 6.4
The same could be applied to LEO by using the best VND estimate. Though in real applications
of Lassen and LEO it is not apparent how to assess if a VND estimate is the best one obtained.
In addition due to Lassen and LEO violating the assumption of constant VND across scans
and hence obtaining N number of VND estimates. It is not viable to compare the superior
VND estimates (due to the low spread and bias) obtained from the LEMO method with those
obtained from Lassen and LEO.
LEMO was seen to provide the best estimates for low occupancies compared to LEO and Lassen.
Low occupancy scans tend to have more noise compared to high occupancy scans as described
in Slifstein and Laruelle, 2000 and can be indirectly seen from Sections 5.2 and 5.3 due to the
distributions not being distributed around the true value. Hence it is thought that LEMO uses
information from the high occupancy scans to estimate the low occupancies in low occupancy
scans but simultaneously makes estimates of high occupancy more noisy (the dots and caps
seen). The noisy high occupancies would then be caused by the low occupancy scans also being
used to estimate the high occupancies from high occupancy scans. Though it could also be
that the best estimates for low occupancies obtained with LEMO is due to the superior LEMO
VND estimates. Furthermore the dots could also occur due to local minima. The problem of
local minima could possible be solved by taking the gradients into account and thereby use of
another optimization procedure (i.e., instead of using the ’fminsearch’ in MATLAB). Another
way of possible solving the problems with local minima and simultaneously solving the problem
of noise from different scans effecting each other in LEMO is to use LEO combined with LEMO.
E.g by using LEMO to obtain a VND estimate and then constrain LEO to use this VND.
There are some general differences observed between the estimated values from the [11C]DASB
dataset and [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset. It seems that the occupancies estimated from the [11C]DASB
dataset has a relatively higher spread than the occupancies estimated from the [11C]Cimbi-36
dataset. Furthermore there is an overestimation in the VND estimates for low occupancy scans
with the [11C]DASB dataset compared to the underestimation seen with the [11C]Cimbi-36
dataset. As previously stated this difference could be due to how the regional VT estimates
were obtained for the respective TRT datasets. One difference is that for the TRT [11C]DASB
dataset the regional VT values were estimated with a 1TCM while for the TRT [11C]Cimbi-36
dataset the regional VT values were estimated with a 2TCM. Using the 1TCM to estimate
regional VT values for the TRT [11C]Cimbi-36 dataset did not describe the regional TACs well
and hence was not used. Furthermore as we did not have access to the TACs from the TRT
[11C]DASB dataset it was not possible to estimate the regional VT estimates with a 2TCM.
Therefore it was not possible to assess if choosing of the CM to estimate regional VT estimates
would make a difference in what was observed. Another difference for the two datasets was in
their targets of interest (see Section 4.1.1). It could be that the different targets of interest
==PAGE:77==
6.5 General observations
61
leads to unpredictable measurement errors in the regional VT estimates for the respective TRT
datasets. It could also be that there is a violation of negligible biological variability due to the
targets of interest being different. To assess this would require further studies.
Lastly as a final remark all the simulations from Section 4.3 and results obtained from these
simulations in Chapter 5 were based on having obtained a TRT dataset so as to estimate ˆΣ.
In practice, it is not always possible to obtain a TRT dataset. If no TRT dataset is available
then it would beg the question of how LEMO (or LEO) could estimate occupancies and VND.
It has been shown in Schain, Zanderigo, and Todd Ogden, 2018 that an identity matrix as the
covariance matrix could be used (i.e, the diagonal elements consists of ones). Though it was
seen that using an identity matrix as the covariance matrix for the LEO method is similar to
using the Lassen plot. The same would be expected for LEMO using an identity matrix as
the covariance matrix and it could possibly lead to worse estimates than the Lassen plot due
to noise from all scans being present in the one-step-procedure. Another method could be to
estimate the noise characteristics of the PET data as suggested in Naganawa, Gallezot, et al.,
2017. To assess the scenario where no TRT dataset is present would require further studies.
==PAGE:78==
62
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The extension of the LEO method to accommodate multiple block scans for a subject when
varying doses are administered was carried out by analytically deriving a high-dimensional log-
likelihood function. The extension resulted in the LEMO method. The LEMO method can
accommodate an arbitrary number of block scans for a subject and was tested on simulated
data.
The simulation of the effect of increasing the number of TRT subjects included in a TRT
study showed that LEMO is resulting in lower normalized summed squared differences when
increasing the number of TRT subjects included in a TRT study. When increasing the noise
level the normalized summed squared differences obtained with LEMO also increased.
The simulation of increasing the noise level was visually investigated with violin plots. It was
shown for the estimated occupancies with LEMO that an increased noise level leads to higher
spread and bias, but this higher spread and bias was the lowest compared with the LEO and
Lassen method. The higher spread and bias was most evident for the estimated low occupancies
for the low occupancy scans. The VND estimates obtained by increasing the noise level showed
superior VND estimates with the LEMO method regardless of increased noise level.
The simulation of defining varying sets of true occupancies was visually investigated with violin
plots. It was shown that depending on which set of true defined occupancies was used that
LEMO could obtain low occupancy estimates even in the noisy low occupancy scans. Further
it was shown that regardless of the defined true set of occupancies that the LEMO method
could obtain superior VND estimates.
7.1
Future perspective
This project leads to interesting observations and to LEMO as an important tool that could
be used in target occupancy studies and as such a conference paper has been written up
(see Appendix C). Furthermore these interesting observations needs to be explored before a
journal article can be written.
It was seen that LEMO could obtain accurate estimates of low occupancies and these low
==PAGE:80==
64
7 Conclusion
occupancies could be explored more thoroughly. The different true defined set of occupancies
could be explored by defining different sets of true occupancies to investigate in which set of
occupancies that LEMO can estimate stable low occupancies for low occupancy scans. The
scenario of having no TRT dataset to estimate occupancies and VND is also of interest to study.
Furthermore it could be of interest to extend LEMO by including gradients to test if this
would have an influence on the estimates. Another interesting extension of LEMO could be a
combination with LEO so as to reduce noise from different scans effecting the estimates. These
two suggested extensions of LEMO could then be compared to each other and the original
LEMO method. Both the original LEMO method and the two suggested extensions could also
be compared with the Lassen plot constrained to a common x-axis and LEO constrained to a
’good’ estimate of VND.
Lastly, but also as the most natural stage in the development of LEMO; applying LEMO to a
real dataset containing one baseline and a few block scans.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Visual representation of
procedure
Scenario
Baseline scan
1st dose  
of 
 drug  
administered
1st block scan
2nd dose  
of 
 drug  
administered
2nd block scan
3rd dose  
of 
 drug  
administered
3rd block scan
LEMO
(one-step-
procedure)
LEO and
Lassen
(sequential
procedure)
Baseline scan
1st block scan
Use data 
from
1st set of
Estimates 
VND,1
Δ1
Baseline scan
2nd block scan
Use data 
from
2nd set of
Estimates 
VND,2
Δ2
Baseline scan
3rd block scan
Use data 
from
3rd set of
Estimates 
VND,3
Δ3
Baseline scan
1st block scan
Use data 
from
One set
of
Estimates 
VND
Δ1
2nd block scan
3rd block scan
Δ2
Δ3
Figure A.1: Overview of procedure. One baseline and three block scan scenario depicted
at top. Arrow from one box to another indicates ’to estimate’
==PAGE:82==
66
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
Tables
Table B.1: Failures rates calculated according to defined fail in eq. (4.3). Simulated data
is from [11C]DASB dataset used in eq. (4.3). The shown failures in this table is for the
Lassen and LEO method.
#
of
TRT subjects
100% noise level
110% noise level
125% noise level
25%
50%
75%
25%
50%
75%
25%
50%
75%
Lassen plot
3.7
1.2
0.1
4.6
1.2
0.1
4.4
2.8
0.6
Oracle
0.8
0
0
1.1
0
0
1.5
0
0
5
Shrink
1.7
0.01
0
3.5
0
0
5.6
0.3
0
10
Shrink
1.5
0
0
2.4
0
0
4.0
0
0
15
Shrink
1.4
0
0
2.1
0
0
3.1
0
0
20
Shrink
1.7
0
0
2.1
0
0
2.7
0.1
0
25
Shrink
1.5
0
0
1.7
0
0
2.1
0.1
0
30
Shrink
0.7
0
0
1.4
0
0
2.4
0.1
0.1
40
Shrink
1.2
0
0
1.6
0
0
2.5
0.1
0
50
Shrink
1.0
0
0
1.4
0
0
2.5
0.1
0
60
Shrink
1,0
0
0
1.2
0
0
2.3
0
0
70
Shrink
0.9
0
0
1.3
0
0
2.1
0.1
0
80
Shrink
1.4
0
0
1.3
0
0
1.9
0.1
0
90
Shrink
0.8
0
0
1.2
0
0
2.3
0.1
0
100
Shrink
0.7
0
0
1.4
0
0
1.9
0
0
==PAGE:84==
68
B Tables
Table B.2: Failures rates calculated according to defined fail in eq. (4.3). Simulated data
is from [11C]DASB dataset used in eq. (4.3). The shown failures in this table is for the
LEMO method.
#
of
TRT subjects
100% noise level
110% noise level
125% noise level
MD-Oracle
0.1
0
0
5
MD-Shrink
0.1
0.2
0.1
10
MD-Shrink
0
0
0.2
15
MD-Shrink
0
0
0.2
20
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
25
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
30
MD-Shrink
0.1
0.1
0.1
40
MD-Shrink
0
0.1
0
50
MD-Shrink
0
0.1
0
60
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
70
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
80
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
90
MD-Shrink
0
0.1
0
100
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
==PAGE:85==
B Tables
69
Table B.3: Failures rates calculated according to defined fail in eq. (4.3). Simulated data
is from [11C]Cimbi −36 dataset used in eq. (4.3). The shown failures in this table is for
the Lassen and LEO method.
#
of
TRT subjects
100% noise level
110% noise level
125% noise level
25%
50%
75%
25%
50%
75%
25%
50%
75%
Lassen plot
9.9
1.1
0.1
10.0
2.3
0
13.1
2.9
0.4
Oracle
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.2
0
0
5
Shrink
8.6
1.0
0.2
11.9
1.6
0
14.6
3.3
03
10
Shrink
4.0
0.1
0
5.0
3
0
8.3
0.6
0
15
Shrink
1.5
0
0
2.0
0
0
3.0
0.4
0
20
Shrink
07
0
0
1.2
0
0
2.6
0.1
0
25
Shrink
0.2
0
0
0.5
0
0
0.9
0
0
30
Shrink
0.3
0
0
0.4
0
0
0.6
0
0
40
Shrink
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
0
0
50
Shrink
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.2
0
0
60
Shrink
0
0
0
0.1
0
0
0.3
0
0
70
Shrink
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.2
0
0
80
Shrink
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.1
0
0
90
Shrink
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.2
0
0
100
Shrink
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.3
0
0
==PAGE:86==
70
B Tables
Table B.4: Failures rates calculated according to defined fail in eq. (4.3). Simulated data
is from [11C]Cimbi −36 dataset used in eq. (4.3). The shown failures in this table is for
the LEMO method.
#
of
TRT subjects
100% noise level
110% noise level
125% noise level
MD-Oracle
0
0.1
0
5
MD-Shrink
0.1
0.1
0.3
10
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
15
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
20
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
25
MD-Shrink
0
0.1
0
30
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
40
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
50
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
60
MD-Shrink
0.1
0.1
0
70
MD-Shrink
0
0.1
0
80
MD-Shrink
0
0.1
0
90
MD-Shrink
0
0.1
0
100
MD-Shrink
0
0
0
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX C
Conference paper
In Appendix C.1 is seen the abstract submitted for BRAIN & BRAIN PET 2019 conference in
Yokohama, Japan 2019. The conference is arranged by the International Society for Cerebral
Blood Flow and Metabolism (ISCBFM). The conference is arranged biannually and covers
numerous aspects within neuroscience research.
In Appendix C.2 the full figure from the abstract is seen where 50% occupancy and VND is
also included.
==PAGE:88==
LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION OF DRUG OCCUPANCY – GENERALIZATION TO MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY 
MEASUREMENTS  
Ali Ilhan1, Francesca Zanderigo2,3, R. Todd Ogden2,3,4, Gitte Moos Knudsen1, Claus Svarer1, Martin 
Schain1 
 
1Neurobiology Research Unit, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark 
2Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 
3Molecular Imaging and Neuropathology Division, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, 
NY, USA. 
4Department of Biostatistics, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, NY, USA. 
 
Objective 
Neuroimaging with PET can be used to measure in vivo the occupancy (Δ) by a drug. For radioligands 
for which no brain reference region exists, the only established method for estimation of Δ is the 
Lassen plot1, which is based on linear regression. Simple linear regression is, however, not ideal for 
analyzing this type of data for several reasons, including regression attenuation and correlated 
errors2.  
We have recently proposed to use Likelihood Estimation of Occupancy (LEO)2 instead. LEO estimates 
the values of VND and Δ that maximize the likelihood of VT values observed in multiple ROIs. In the 
scenario in which each occupancy experiment consists of one baseline and one block measurement 
(i.e., taken after administration of a competitor), it was shown that LEO provides improved 
estimation relative to the Lassen plot.  
The objective of the current study was to generalize LEO into Likelihood Estimation of Multiple 
Occupancies (LEMO), to accommodate an arbitrary number of blocking scans, where a different 
value of Δ is to be estimated based on each block measurement, while VND is assumed to be the 
same across all scans.  
Methods 
Consider the case where a subject has undergone 𝑀+ 1 PET measurements.  Baseline VT values are 
modeled as 𝑽𝑻
𝒃𝒂𝒔𝒆𝒍𝒊𝒏𝒆= 𝑽𝑺+ 𝑉𝑁𝐷𝟏+ 𝜺𝒃𝒂𝒔𝒆𝒍𝒊𝒏𝒆, and the ith blocking scan is modeled as 𝑽𝑻
𝒃𝒍𝒐𝒄𝒌,𝒊=
(1 −∆𝑖)𝑽𝑺+ 𝑉𝑁𝐷𝟏+ 𝜺𝒃𝒍𝒐𝒄𝒌,𝒊, 𝑖= 1,2, … , 𝑀. Here bold font indicates a kx1 vector, where k is the 
number of ROIs, 𝜀‘s are error terms, and 1 is a vector of ones. ∆i is assumed constant across ROIs,  𝑽𝑺 
is assumed constant across scans, and 𝑉𝑁𝐷 is assumed constant across ROIs and scans. Assuming 
normality of the errors, the likelihood function can be analytically derived, and estimates of 𝑉𝑁𝐷 and 
∆𝑖 can be obtained using maximum likelihood techniques.  
LEO and LEMO take into account the covariance matrix of the errors (Σ), which can be estimated 
from a separate cohort of test-retest data2.  
To evaluate the performance of LEMO, 2 datasets ([11C]DASB and [11C]Cimbi-36) were simulated 
(N=1000). In addition to the baseline scan, each simulated subject had 3 blocking scans, with 
simulated 25%, 50%, and 75% occupancy, respectively. For each blocking scan, Δ and 𝑉𝑁𝐷 were 
72
C Conference paper
C.1
Abstract
==PAGE:89==
calculated using Lassen plot and LEO via comparison to the baseline scan. In addition, LEMO was 
used to calculate all 3 ∆𝑖 and 𝑉𝑁𝐷 in a one-step procedure. For LEO and LEMO, 10 test-retest 
subjects were simulated in parallel to the baseline-block data, and used to estimate Σ. All 
simulations were based on real test-retest data to create realistic covariance patterns across ROIs. 
Results 
The results are compiled in Figure 1. Only results for the lowest (25%) and highest (75%) simulated 
occupancy studies are shown. 
Conclusion 
Using all available PET measurements to estimate VND and all occupancies, LEMO appears to provide 
increased accuracy and precision for both [11C]Cimbi-36 and [11C]DASB datasets. In particular, the 
estimates of VND and occupancy are superior using LEMO for the lowest simulated occupancy case.  
References 
1. Cunningham VJ et al., J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2010. 
2. Schain M et al., Neuroimage. 2018. 
 
C.1 Abstract
73
==PAGE:90==
74
C Conference paper
C.2
Abstract full figure
Lassen 25%
LEO 25%
Lassen 50%
LEO 50%
Lassen 75%
LEO 75%
LEMO
0
5
10
15
20
[11C]DASB, VND
Lassen 25%
LEO 25%
Lassen 50%
LEO 50%
Lassen 75%
LEO 75%
LEMO
0
10
20
30
[11C]CIMBI-36, VND
Lassen 25%
LEO 25%
LEMO 25%
Lassen 50%
LEO 50%
LEMO 50%
Lassen 75%
LEO 75%
LEMO 75%
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
[11C]DASB, occupancy
Lassen 25%
LEO 25%
LEMO 25%
Lassen 50%
LEO 50%
LEMO 50%
Lassen 75%
LEO 75%
LEMO 75%
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
[11C]CIMBI-36, occupancy
Figure C.1: Violin plots showing the distribution of Lassen, LEO and LEMO estimates
for (a) [11C]DASB VND, (b) [11C]Cimbi-36 VND, (c) [11C]DASB 25%, 50% and 75%
occupancy and (d) [11C]Cimbi-36 25%, 50% and 75% occupancy.
Black dashed line
corresponds to the true values. Lassen 25% and LEO 25% shows results from where the
25% occupancy scan was compared to baseline scan, while in LEMO, all occupancies
and VND are estimated in a one-step procedure. As such, LEMO 25%, 50% and LEMO
75% occupancies are estimated simultaneously, while for Lassen and LEO, the 25%, 50%
and 75% occupancies were estimated independently.
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX D
Matlab functions
1 function[vnd, occ, feval]=LEMO(scans , covar)
2 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
3 %
4 %
Likelihood Estimation of Multiple Occupancies function.
5 % INPUT
6 %
scans:
a struct containing vectors of regional VT estimates
from a
7 %
baseline and N number of block scans.
8 %
First structure element should always be the regional
VT
9 %
estimates from a baseline scan
10 %
The following structure elements keeps the regional VT
11 %
estimates from N block scans.
12 %
The last structure element can contain ROI names [
optional]
13 %
covar:
covariance matrix
14 % OUTPUT
15 %
vnd:
VND estimated with LEMO. One scalar value
16 %
occ:
occupancy estimates with LEMO. N estimated occupancies
17 %
feval:
Log-likelihood value
18 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
19 sc=numel(fieldnames(scans));
% Number of scans are found.
20 su=length(scans);
% Number of subjects are found
21 fn=fieldnames(scans);
% Fieldnames are extracted. Baseline
has to
22 % be first column.
23 % Checking if ROIs are included and saving the index of that. Also
used to
==PAGE:92==
76
D Matlab functions
24 % remove length of sc if ROIs are included. It is assumed that the
ROIs are
25 % included as the last column in the structure.
26 index=find(contains(fn,'ROI')); % Finding index of ROI structure
element
27 sc=sc-sum(~isempty(index));
% Removing from number of scans if ROI
is
28 % included as last structure element
29
30 %Preallocating
31 vnd=zeros(su,1);
% One value for VND per subject
32 feval=vnd;
% 'fminsearch ' evaluated values.
33 occ=zeros(su,sc-1);
% N values for occupancies per subject
,
34 % where N is number of scans.
35 for i=1:su
36
% Extracting baseline and block VT estimates from structure
element
37
b0=extractfield(scans(i),fn{1}) ';
% Baseline is always first
structure
38
% element
39
b1=zeros(length(b0),sc-1);
% Preallocating
40
for j=2:sc
41
a=extractfield(scans(i),fn{j})'; % VT estimates from N number
of
42
% block scans are extracted
43
b1(:,j-1)=a;
44
end
45
% Startparameters as described in the implementation of LEMO.
46
for j=1:(sc-1)
47
p(j,:) = polyfit(b0,b0-b1(:,j),1); %Do Lassen plot
48
end
49
Vnd_Lassen = -p(1,2)/p(1,1);
% Always using baseline -block1
for
50
% start parameter guess of VND
51
% Estimating occupancies from Lassen plot
52
occ_Lassen=zeros(sc-1,1);
53
for j=1:(sc-1)
54
occ_Lassen(j) = p(j,1);
55
end
56
% Checking the values from obtained from Lassen plot
57
if Vnd_Lassen > 0 && Vnd_Lassen < min(b0) % Checking VND guess
58
stpar(1,1) = log(Vnd_Lassen);
59
else
==PAGE:93==
D Matlab functions
77
60
stpar(1,1) = log(min(b0));
61
end
62
for j=1:(sc-1)
% Checkinng occ guess
63
if occ_Lassen(j) > 0 && occ_Lassen(j) < 1
64
stpar(1,j+1) = log(occ_Lassen(j)/(1-occ_Lassen(j)));
65
else
66
a=0;
67
while a==0
68
b=0.5+rand();
69
if b > 0 && b < 1
70
a=1;
71
else
72
a=0;
73
end
74
end
75
stpar(1,j+1) = log(b/(1-b));
76
end
77
end
78
% Options for fminsearch
79
options = optimset('MaxFunEvals',1e5,'MaxIter',1e5,'Display','off'
);
80
[par, feval(i)] = fminsearch(@LEMOll ,stpar ,options ,b0,b1,covar); %
LEMO
81
% Output parameters
82
vnd(i)=exp(par(1));
83
for j=2:sc
84
a=par(j);
85
occ(i,j-1)=exp(a)/(1+exp(a));
86
end
87 end
88 end
89
90 function ll=LEMOll(spar ,Vt0,Vt1,rc)
91 % Function is log-likelihood of k block scans with k ROI
92 % spar is start parameters
93 % Vt0 is baseline scan ,
94 % Vt1 is N number of block scans
95 % rc is covariance matrix
96 vnd=exp(spar(1)); % First startpar is always VND, rest is occupancies
97 for i=2:size(Vt1 ,2)+1 % As base scan is not included in the size
98
occ(i-1)=exp(spar(i))/(1+exp(spar(i)));
99 end
100
101 % Calculating some constants
==PAGE:94==
78
D Matlab functions
102 o=(1-occ);
103 p=o.*(Vt1-vnd);
104 Vs=(Vt0-vnd+sum(p,2))./(1+sum(o.^2,2));
105
106 % Calculating log-likelihood function in parts
107 a=-(Vt0- vnd - Vs)'*inv(rc)*(Vt0-vnd-Vs);
108 for i=1:size(Vt1 ,2)
109
b(i)=-(Vt1(:,i) - vnd - Vs*o(i))'*inv(rc)*(Vt1(:,i) - vnd - Vs*o(i
));
110 end
111 ll = -(a+sum(b)); % This is done as fminsearch minimizes , we want to
112 % maximize
113 end
LEMO.m
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
A.A.Lammertsma (2007). In: PET Pharmacokinetic course manual. Ed. by R.P. Maguire
and K.L. Leenders. Kobe, Japan. Chap. 8.
Ametamey, Simon M., Michael Honer, and Pius August Schubiger (2008). “Molecular
Imaging with PET”. In: Chemical Reviews 108.5, pp. 1501–1516. issn: 00092665. doi:
10.1021/cr0782426. url: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/cr0782426.
Baumgartner, Richard, Aniket Joshi, Dai Feng, Francesca Zanderigo, and R. Todd
Ogden (2018). “Statistical evaluation of test-retest studies in PET brain imaging”.
In: EJNMMI Research 8. issn: 2191219X. doi: 10.1186/s13550- 018- 0366- 8.
url: http://virtual.funlam.edu.co/repositorio/sites/default/files/
CajadeHerramientas.pdf.
Cember, H. and T.E. Johnson (2008). Introduction to Health Physics: Fourth Edi-
tion. McGraw-Hill Education. url: https : / / books . google . dk / books ? id =
bjRt8125dJUC.
Cunningham, Vincent J., Eugenii A. Rabiner, Mark Slifstein, Marc Laruelle, and Roger
N. Gunn (2010). “Measuring drug occupancy in the absence of a reference region:
The Lassen plot re-visited”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 30.1,
pp. 46–50. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2009.190. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
jcbfm.2009.190.
Ettrup, Anders et al. (2014). “Serotonin 2A Receptor Agonist Binding in the Human
Brain with [11C]Cimbi-36”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 34.7,
pp. 1188–1196. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2014.68. url: http://journals.sagepub.
com/doi/10.1038/jcbfm.2014.68.
Gunn, Roger N., Steve R. Gunn, and Vincent J. Cunningham (2001). “Positron emis-
sion tomography compartmental models”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism 21.6, pp. 635–652. issn: 0271678X. doi: 10.1097/00004647-200106000-
00002.
Gunn, Roger N. and Eugenii A. Rabiner (2017). “Imaging in Central Nervous System
Drug Discovery”. In: Seminars in Nuclear Medicine 47.1, pp. 89–98. doi: 10.1053/
j.semnuclmed.2016.09.001. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.semnuclmed.
2016.09.001.
==PAGE:96==
80
Bibliography
Innis, Robert B. (2007). In: PET Pharmacokinetic course manual. Ed. by R.P. Maguire
and K.L. Leenders. Kobe, Japan. Chap. 7.
Innis, Robert B. et al. (2007). “Consensus nomenclature for in vivo imaging of re-
versibly binding radioligands”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism
27.9, pp. 1533–1539. doi: 10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600493.
Kågedal, Matts et al. (2013). “A positron emission tomography study in healthy volun-
teers to estimate mGluR5 receptor occupancy of AZD2066 - Estimating occupancy
in the absence of a reference region”. In: NeuroImage 82, pp. 160–169. issn: 10538119.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.006. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2013.05.006.
Lane, C A, J Hardy, and J M Schott (2018). “Alzheimer’s disease”. In: European Journal
of Neurology 25.1, pp. 59–70. issn: 1351-5101. doi: 10 . 1111 / ene . 13439. url:
https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.13439.
Laruelle, Marc (2000). “Imaging Synaptic Neurotransmission With in Vivo Binding Com-
petition Techniques : A Critical Review”. In:
Lassen, N. A. (1992). “Neuroreceptor quantitation in vivo by the steady-state principle
using constant infusion or bolus injection of radioactive tracers”. In: Journal of Cere-
bral Blood Flow and Metabolism 12.5, pp. 709–716. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.1992.101.
Lassen, N A et al. (1995). “Benzodiazepine Receptor Quantification in-Vivo in Humans
Using [C-11] Flumazenil and Pet - Application of the Steady-State Principle”. In:
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 15.1, pp. 152–165.
Ledoit, Olivier and Michael Wolf (2015). “Spectrum estimation: A unified framework
for covariance matrix estimation and PCA in large dimensions”. In: Journal of Mul-
tivariate Analysis 139, pp. 360–384. doi: 10.1016/j.jmva.2015.04.006. arXiv:
1406.6085. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmva.2015.04.006.
Leenders, K.L. (2007). In: PET Pharmacokinetic course manual. Ed. by R.P. Maguire
and K.L. Leenders. Kobe, Japan. Chap. 1.
Leenders, KL et al. (1990). “Cerebral blood flow, blood volume and oxygen utilization:
normal values and effect of age”. In: Brain 113.1, pp. 27–47.
Matheson, Granville J., Martin Schain, Rita Almeida, Johan Lundberg, Zsolt Cselényi,
Jacqueline Borg, Andrea Varrone, Lars Farde, and Simon Cervenka (2015). “Diurnal
and seasonal variation of the brain serotonin system in healthy male subjects”. In:
NeuroImage 112, pp. 225–231. issn: 10959572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.
03.007. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.03.007.
Matthews, Paul M., Eugenii A. Rabiner, Jan Passchier, and Roger N. Gunn (2012).
“Positron emission tomography molecular imaging for drug development”. In: British
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 73.2, pp. 175–186. issn: 03065251. doi: 10.1111/
j.1365-2125.2011.04085.x.
Mintun, Mark A., Marcus E. Raichle, Michael R. Kilbourn, G. Frederick Wooten, and
Michael J. Welch (1984). “A quantitative model for the in vivo assessment of drug
binding sites with positron emission tomography”. In: Annals of Neurology 15.3,
pp. 217–227. doi: 10.1002/ana.410150302.
Müller-Schauenburg, W. (2007). In: PET Pharmacokinetic course manual. Ed. by R.P.
Maguire and K.L. Leenders. Kobe, Japan. Chap. 5.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
81
Naganawa, Mika, Jean Dominique Gallezot, Samantha Rossano, and Richard E. Car-
son (2017). “Quantitative PET Imaging in Drug Development: Estimation of Target
Occupancy”. In: Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, pp. 1–34. doi: 10.1007/s11538-
017-0374-2. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-017-0374-2.
Naganawa, Mika, Ming-Qiang Zheng, et al. (2015). “Test–Retest Reproducibility of Bind-
ing Parameters in Humans with 11C-LY2795050, an Antagonist PET Radiotracer
for the κ Opioid Receptor”. In: Journal of Nuclear Medicine 56.2, pp. 243–248. doi:
10.2967/jnumed.114.147975. url: http://jnm.snmjournals.org/content/56/
2/243.abstract.
Ogden, R. Todd, Ashish Ojha, Kjell Erlandsson, Maria A. Oquendo, J. John Mann,
and Ramin V. Parsey (2007). “In vivo quantification of serotonin transporters using
[11C]DASB and positron emission tomography in humans: Modeling considerations”.
In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 27.1, pp. 205–217. doi: 10.1038/
sj.jcbfm.9600329.
Parsey, Ramin V., Justine M. Kent, Maria A. Oquendo, Misty C. Richards, Mali Pratap,
Thomas B. Cooper, Victoria Arango, and J. John Mann (2006). “Acute Occupancy of
Brain Serotonin Transporter by Sertraline as Measured by [11C]DASB and Positron
Emission Tomography”. In: Biological Psychiatry 59.9, pp. 821–828. issn: 00063223.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.08.010.
Paul, S., S. Khanapur, J. W. Sijbesma, K. Ishiwata, P. H. Elsinga, P. Meerlo, R. A. Dier-
ckx, and A. van Waarde (2014). “Use of 11C-MPDX and PET to Study Adenosine
A1 Receptor Occupancy by Nonradioactive Agonists and Antagonists”. In: Journal
of Nuclear Medicine 55.2, pp. 315–320. issn: 0161-5505. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.113.
130294. url: http://jnm.snmjournals.org/cgi/doi/10.2967/jnumed.113.
130294.
Prince, J.L. and J.M. Links (2015). Medical Imaging Signals and Systems. Pearson. isbn:
9780132145183.
Radua, Joaquim, Santiago Bullich, Natalia Lopez, and Ana M. Catafau (2011). “Re-
stricted maximum likelihood estimation of PET neuroreceptor occupancy in the ab-
sence of a reference region”. In: Medical Physics 38.5, pp. 2558–2562. doi: 10.1118/
1.3578606.
Salinas, Cristian, David Weinzimmer, Graham Searle, David Labaree, Jim Ropchan,
Yiyun Huang, Eugenii A. Rabiner, Richard E. Carson, and Roger N. Gunn (2013).
“Kinetic analysis of drug-target interactions with PET for characterization of phar-
macological hysteresis”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 33.5,
pp. 700–707. issn: 0271678X. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.208.
Schain, Martin, Francesca Zanderigo, J. John Mann, and R. Todd Ogden (2017). “Es-
timation of the binding potential BPND without a reference region or blood sam-
ples for brain PET studies”. In: NeuroImage 146.November 2016, pp. 121–131. issn:
10959572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.11.035. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.11.035.
Schain, Martin, Francesca Zanderigo, and R. Todd Ogden (2018). “Likelihood estimation
of drug occupancy for brain PET studies”. In: NeuroImage 178.March, pp. 255–265.
==PAGE:98==
82
Bibliography
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.05.017. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2018.05.017.
Slifstein, M and M Laruelle (2000). “Effects of statistical noise on graphic analysis of
PET neuroreceptor studies.” In: Journal of nuclear medicine : official publication,
Society of Nuclear Medicine 41.12, pp. 2083–2088.
Slifstein, Mark and Marc Laruelle (2001). “Models and methods for derivation of in vivo
neuroreceptor parameters with PET and SPECT reversible radiotracers”. In: Nuclear
Medicine and Biology 28.5, pp. 595–608. doi: 10.1016/S0969-8051(01)00214-1.
Svarer, Claus et al. (2004). “MR-based automatic delineation of volumes of interest in
human brain PET images using probability maps”. In: NeuroImage 24.4, pp. 969–979.
issn: 1053-8119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.10.017. url: www.elsevier.
com/locate/ynimg%20https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S105381190400624X?via%7B%5C%%7D3Dihub.
Takano, Akihiro et al. (2016). “Guidelines to PET measurements of the target occupancy
in the brain for drug development”. In: European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and
Molecular Imaging 43.12, pp. 2255–2262. issn: 16197089. doi: 10.1007/s00259-
016-3476-4. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00259-016-3476-4.
Varnäs, Katarina, Andrea Varrone, and Lars Farde (2013). “Modeling of PET data in
CNS drug discovery and development”. In: Journal of Pharmacokinetics and Pharma-
codynamics 40.3, pp. 267–279. issn: 1567567X. doi: 10.1007/s10928-013-9320-6.
Zhang, Yumin and Gerard B. Fox (2012). “PET imaging for receptor occupancy: Med-
itations on calculation and simplification”. In: Journal of Biomedical Research 26.2,
pp. 69–76. issn: 16748301. doi: 10.1016/S1674-8301(12)60014-1.
