==PAGE:1==
Effects of Particle Size, Uniformity,
and Particle Shape on the Strength
and Bearing Capacity of Sands
Master’s Thesis, March 2019
Mathias Rolf Jensen
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
MATHIAS ROLF JENSEN
Effects of Particle Size, Uniformity,
and Particle Shape on the Strength
and Bearing Capacity of Sands
Master’s Thesis, March 2019
Supervisor:
Varvara Zania, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Effects of Particle Size, Uniformity, and Particle Shape on the Strength and Bearing
Capacity of Sands
This report was prepared by:
Mathias Rolf Jensen
Supervisor:
Varvara Zania, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Section for Geotechnics and Geology
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nordvej, Building 119
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Phone: +45 45251882
Project period:
September 2018- March 2019
ECTS:
32.5
Education:
MSc
Field:
Geotechnical Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the degree of Master
of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The project
is credited to 32.5 ECTS points. The theme of the project was agreed on between the
supervisor and the author, and small adjustments have been made during the process.
I am very grateful to my supervisor Varvara Zania who has generously provided her
guidance and time for my project. I would also like to thank Professor Barry Lehane (The
University of Western Australia) for guidance leading up to this project and for many
fruitful discussions during the process. I would like to extend my gratitude to my family
- in particular my wife, Chantelle, for her endless support.
Kgs. Lyngby March 13, 2019
Mathias Rolf Jensen (s124269)
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
This thesis describes the results from a systematic study examining the shear strength
parameters of ﬁve different silica sands, as well as CPTs and footing tests performed in
the geotechnical beam centrifuge at Technical University of Denmark. A comprehensive
series of direct shear tests and four triaxial tests were carried out to assess the strength
and dilatancy of the sands. A total of 11 centrifuge tests, each including a CPT accom-
panied by a footing test, were conducted. The element testings were used to form basis
for the interpretation of the centrifuge tests, and the bearing capacity of the footings were
evaluated with a design approach based on the phenomenon of progressive failure. For
the interpretation of the CPTs, a new stress normalisation method for shallow depth inter-
pretation was proposed. Furtermore, the basis of relationships used to assess the bearing
capacity of footings in sand with the CPT qc was examined. The overall theme of the
project was to evaluate the effects of particle size, uniformity, and particle shape on the
shearing characteristics and bearing capacity of sands.
iii
==PAGE:10==
Table of Content
1
Introduction
1
2
Principles governing shear strength and bearing capacity of sand
5
2.1
Peak friction angle and dilatancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Effects of relative density and conﬁning stress on strength and dilatancy .
6
2.3
Effects of particle size, uniformity, and particle shape on strength and
dilatancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Assessing Dr from CPTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Principles governing the bearing capacity of shallow foundations on sand
12
3
Classiﬁcation properties of sands investigated
17
3.1
Particle size distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Void ratio limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Particle shape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Experimental investigations
23
4.1
Direct shear tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Triaxial tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Centrifuge tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Results
35
5.1
Shear strength and dilation of the sands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
CPT results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Footing test results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Data interpretation and discussion
47
6.1
Evaluation of shear strength and sand behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
iv
==PAGE:11==
TABLE OF CONTENT
v
6.2
Bearing capacity of footings on sand: a progressive failure approach . . .
50
6.3
Evaluation of CPT results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Relating bearing capacity of footings on sand to CPT qc . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
Conclusions
65
Appendices
69
A Raw data of the particle size distributions
71
B
Calculations for void ratio limits
77
C Binary pictures for quantiﬁcation of shape parameters
81
C.1
Binary images of Leighton Buzzard B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
C.2
Binary images of Leighton Buzzard C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
C.3
Binary images of Leighton Buzzard D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
D Calibration of vertical load cell
97
E
All direct shear tests
99
F
Estimations of ψmax from direct shear tests
101
F.1
Leighton Buzzard B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
F.2
Leighton Buzzard C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
F.3
Leighton Buzzard D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
F.4
Mix 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
F.5
Mix 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
G Footing Tests
105
H Estimations for new stress normalisation method
109
H.1 Estimations of C1 from Test 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
H.2 Estimations of C1 from Test 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Notation
115
References
119
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
For different geotechnical applications, knowledge of shearing characteristics of granular
soils at different stress level and densities is required to correctly predict the soil strength.
For example, for assessing conditions along pipelines or telecommunication cable routes
and near-surface slip failures, knowledge of the difference between the peak friction angle
φ′
p and the critical state friction angle φ′
cs (φ′
p-φ′
cs) at low stress levels is of great impor-
tance. At these low stress levels, φ′
p is usually signiﬁcantly in excess of φ′
cs, leading to
high values of (φ′
p-φ′
cs).
Among practitioners, one of the most popular descriptions of the strength of sand is
the approach by Bolton (1986). Bolton established the following expression, which links
(φ′
p-φ′
cs) to the stress level and relative density Dr:
φ
′
p −φ
′
cs = AIR = A[Dr(Q −ln p′) −1]
(1.1)
where IR is a relative dilatancy index, p′ is the mean effective stress, the A coefﬁcient
was suggested equal to 3 for triaxial strain, and the Q coefﬁcient is related to the effective
stress required to ensure zero dilation (since zero dilation leads to no peak friction angle,
and hence IR=0). With this expression, Bolton was able to ﬁt the data of 17 different
sands with a good precision. It was, however, pointed out that there is no one-to-one
correspondence between φ′
p and Dr, even at a given stress level. The A and Q coefﬁcient,
which φ′
p is highly dependent on, must therefore be entirely empirical.
Very little guidance has been published to assist practitioners in choosing appropriate
values of A and Q. This is due to the difﬁculties involved in accurately quantifying
how these coefﬁcients are inﬂuenced by different soil characteristics (such as the mean
particle size d50, uniformity coefﬁcient Cu, particle regularity ρ, and mineralogy). With a
study including six different sands with different soil characteristics, Jensen et al. (2019)
found a direct correlation between the A and the Q coefﬁcient, i.e. A was increasing with
reducing Q. This observation led to a common soil classiﬁcation factor, Isc deﬁned as:
1
==PAGE:14==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Cu/ρ0.5+1.9d50, which was based on regression of the data, to predict the values of A and
Q. However, Jensen et al. noted that more suitable forms of Isc and the correlations with
A and Q could be investigated thoroughly with data from other sands. In this report, a
systematic study (similar to the study of Jensen et al., 2019) on ﬁve different sands tested
in direct shear, with similar values of ρ and varying values of d50 and Cu, was conducted
in order to present a new database of sands with which the correlations between Isc and A
and Q could be reﬁned. Furthermore, four triaxial tests were carried out to draw parallels
with axisymmetric conditions.
In the ﬁeld, a geotechnical engineer needs a good estimate of the relative density in
order to use expressions such as Equation 1.1 for design. A cone penetration test (CPT)
is an accepted means of assessing Dr and hence φ′
p of sands. The estimations of Dr are
made with correlations proposed by several researchers from the cone end resistance qc
of mini CPTs performed in a laboratory (e.g. Schmertmann, 1978; Baldi et al., 1986;
Jamiolkowski et al., 2001). Each of the proposed correlations were developed based on
only one or a few different sands, and signiﬁcant errors may therefore arise when assess-
ing Dr and φ′
p of different sands with soil characteristics dissimilar to those. Another
limitation of these correlations arises due to the fact that the tests were made in cali-
bration chambers at high stress levels, which means that the correlations do not account
for the strong inﬂuence of the low conﬁning pressures due to the overburden on qc for
shallow depth interpretation. This report proposes a new method for shallow depth in-
terpretation developed from a range of CPTs carried out in the geotechnical centrifuge at
Technical University of Denmark (DTU). This approach involves a new stress normalisa-
tion method appropriate for small stress levels. Furthermore, observations made from the
reﬁned correlations between Isc and A and Q were used to discuss the effects of different
soil characteristics on the CPT qc, since the ﬁve sands that were tested in direct shear were
also the ones tested in the centrifuge.
It is, however, commonly known that a good estimate of the peak friction angle is
not in itself enough to obtain a reliable value in a standard geotechnical stability design
problem, such as for the bearing capacity of a footing. Many researchers have discussed
the importance of a good understanding of progressive failure for the estimate of footing
capacity (e.g. Muhs, 1963; Yamaguchi et al., 1976; Perkins & Madson, 2000), i.e. as
footing load is gradually increased, shearing strength is not simultaneously mobilised at
all points on the slip surface. As a consequence of progressive failure, the bearing ca-
pacity is overestimated when using φ′
p in a standard bearing capacity calculation. In this
study, every CPT was accompanied by a footing test (circular footings with a prototype
diameter of 2.4 m). With the comprehensive series of element tests, these footing tests
were used to evaluate the progressive failure, and this evaluation was then used in an ap-
proach accounting for progressive failure to predict footing capacity (an approach similar
==PAGE:15==
3
to one described by Perkins & Madson, 2000).
However, it has been argued by some researchers that a direct correlation between the
CPT qc and the foundation capacity is preferable to the two stage process of determining
a geotechnical parameter from CPT correlations and then use this parameter in a bearing
capacity calculation. Lehane (2013) proposed that the bearing pressure required to make
a shallow foundation settle by 10% of its width can be simply obtained by 0.16qc,avg,
where qc,avg is the average value of qc within the depth of inﬂuence. However, this direct
correlation is assuming a proportional relationship between capacity and qc, and is there-
fore not structured in a way that allow different soil characteristics to be accounted for
explicitly in the calculations. In this report, the variation of the proportional relationship
between capacity and qc with the Isc factor was evaluated.
The overall purpose of this study was to emphasize the differences in sand behaviour
between various sands with different soil characteristics. This way, important limitations
of the available theory used by designers today was highlighted. Furthermore, the newly
established Isc factor was used to show how improved repeatability and reliability can be
achieved in geotechnical design when accounting for these different soil characteristics.
Finally, a new stress normalisation method for shallow depth interpretation of CPTs was
developed.
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Principles governing shear strength
and bearing capacity of sand
Ever since D. W. Taylor’s early work in soil mechanics, strength and dilatancy of soils
has received a great deal of attention. It is widely accepted amongst researchers that
understanding the dilatancy behaviour towards critical states is a key to understand soil
behaviour. The stress-dilatancy theory of Rowe (Rowe, 1962, 1969) has proven very
useful in explaining the relation between the friction angle φ
′ and the angle of dilation ψ,
and in particular between the peak friction angle φ
′
p and the maximum angle of dilation
ψmax.
Bolton (1986) developed an expression for frictional materials (such as sand), which
deviates only slightly from Rowe’s in its estimate of φ
′. Bolton, furthermore, developed
a relative dilatancy index which has proven to be a powerful tool to predict the strength
of sand. In this chapter, Bolton’s approach will be built up in stages, and research on the
effects of various soil characteristics on the strength of sandy soils will be reviewed.
After the review of the state-of-knowledge on the strength-dilatancy behaviour of
sands, the chapter brieﬂy goes through some common empirical correlations used for
the assessment of Dr in sand from cone penetration tests (CPTs). Finally, the chapter
ends with an explanation of the principles governing bearing capacity of shallow founda-
tions. It is pointed out, that when using conventional bearing capacity theory one has to
make due allowance for phenomenons such as nonlinear strength envelopes, progressive
failure, and footing geometries.
2.1
Peak friction angle and dilatancy
In accordance with Wood (1990), a simple way of understanding dilation of soil is pro-
vided by the interlocking saw blades shown in Figure 2.1a (mechanical analogue ﬁrst
5
==PAGE:18==
6
CHAPTER 2. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING SHEAR STRENGTH AND BEARING
CAPACITY OF SAND
suggested by Taylor (1948)). This type of sliding surface could be imagined to form dur-
ing shearing of a soil sample in a direct shear box test. Because dense soil is expanding
as it is sheared, it is supposed that sliding between adjacent soil particles occurs, not on
horizontal planes, but on planes inclined at ψ (referred to as angle of dilation) to the hor-
izontal; see Figure 2.1a. Forces involved in this sliding process are shown in Figure 2.1b.
If it is supposed that the critical state friction angle φ
′
cs is a soil constant, and that φ
′
cs is
the angle of friction on the inclined planes, then an expression for the apparent externally
mobilised angle of friction on horizontal planes, φ
′
m, is:
φ
′
m = φ
′
cs + ψ
(2.1)
This simple analogy immediately suggests that a relationship between φ
′
m and ψ is to be
expected.
Bolton (1986) showed that this simple relationship (Equation 2.1) overestimates (φ
′
m−
φ
′
cs) by about 20%. Hence, noting that the maximum angle of dilation ψmax occurs close
to or at φ
′
p, a relationship between φ
′
p and ψmax was established:
φ
′
p = φ
′
cs + 0.8ψmax
(2.2)
with the coefﬁcient in front of ψmax often referred to as the B coefﬁcient (here B = 0.8).
Equation 2.2 was given by Bolton for the plane strain situation, whereas the majority
of the element testings in the present investigation are performed in direct shear. Simoni
& Houlsby (2006) reported that the approach used by Bolton can be used also for the case
of direct shear, however, with slightly lower B coefﬁcients in the range 0.71-0.75.
It is furthermore commonly recognised that the friction angle mobilised on the central
plane in a direct shear test is an underestimate of the plane strain friction angle. It is
therefore more appropriate to refer to the peak friction angle on this plane as the direct
shear peak friction angle φ
′
p,ds, giving a relationship:
φ
′
p,ds = φ
′
cs + Bψmax
(2.3)
where only a minor variation from the usual value of B = 0.8 is expected according to
Simoni & Houlsby (2006).
2.2
Effects of relative density and conﬁning stress on
strength and dilatancy
Peak strength of sand can be properly understood only if both conﬁning stress and packing
of the sand are taken into account. The packing of the sand is indicated with the relative
density:
Dr =
emax −e
emax −emin
(2.4)
==PAGE:19==
2.2. EFFECTS OF RELATIVE DENSITY AND CONFINING STRESS ON
STRENGTH AND DILATANCY
7
Figure 2.1: (a) Sliding of interlocking saw blades on inclined rough surfaces in shear box;
(b) Forces on inclined surface.
where e is the void ratio, and emax and emin are the maximum and minimum void ratio
limits, respectively. It is commonly recognised in soil mechanics that φ
′
p of dense sand
(high values of Dr) decreases as the conﬁning stress increases as shown in Figure 2.2
(from Vesic & Clough, 1968; De Beer, 1965). This decrease continues until at high
conﬁning stresses (this is mean effective stress p′ in Figure 2.2), when the sand proceeds
to φ
′
cs. This is more or less the case for loose sand (very low values of Dr), which show
only little or no peak friction angle, at all stress levels. With this combined relation
between conﬁning stress and Dr, Bolton (1986) developed a relative dilatancy index:
IR = Dr(Q −ln p
′) −Cr
(2.5)
This equation has the advantage that at some conﬁning stress p
′
crit a zero value is returned,
and hence:
ln p
′
crit = Q −Cr
Dr
(2.6)
It was also noted that Equation 2.5 reduces strongly with Dr, which reﬂects the data in
Figure 2.2 very well. With extensive data, Bolton found a unique set of correlations for
this dilatancy-related behaviour by taking Q = 10 and Cr = 1:
IR = Dr(10 −ln p
′) −1
(2.7)
With Equation 2.7 it was found that for triaxial conditions:
φ
′
p,tr −φ
′
cs = 3IR
(2.8)
with φ
′
p,tr being the peak friction angle in triaxial conditions and the number in front of
IR being a constant, which is referred to as the A coefﬁcient in this report (A = 3 in
Equation 2.8). Equation 2.8 is superimposed onto the data in Figure 2.2 and is seen to
give a maximum error of only 2◦.
==PAGE:20==
8
CHAPTER 2. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING SHEAR STRENGTH AND BEARING
CAPACITY OF SAND
Figure 2.2: Variation of (φ
′
p −φ
′
cs) with mean effective stress p
′ for Chattahoochee River
sand with initial Dr = 0.8 (after Vesic & Clough, 1968) and Berlin sand with initial
Dr = 0.5 (after De Beer, 1965) with Equation 2.8 superimposed.
Table 2.1: Q values suggested by Bolton (1986).
Grain mineral
Q
Quartz and feldspar
10
Limestone
8
Anthracite
7
Chalk
5.5
Billiam’s (1972) study indicated that reducing the crushing strength of the grains re-
duces the mean effective stress at which dilatancy is suppressed (and hence when no peak
friction angle exists). When considering Equation 2.5 and Equation 2.6, this tendency
suggests that the coefﬁcient Q depends on the crushing strength of the grains, i.e. de-
creasing values of Q are to be expected as the grain crushing strength decreases. Table
2.1 reports the values of Q as suggested by Bolton (1986), which are dependent on the
mineralogy of the sand.
==PAGE:21==
2.3. EFFECTS OF PARTICLE SIZE, UNIFORMITY, AND PARTICLE SHAPE ON
STRENGTH AND DILATANCY
9
2.3
Effects of particle size, uniformity, and particle
shape on strength and dilatancy
In agreement with Simoni & Houlsby (2006), studies by Liu & Lehane (2012) and Jensen
et al. (2019) suggested that using Equation 2.7 for a relative dilatancy index provides a
reasonable description for direct shear data. However, given the nature of a direct shear
the mean effective stress p
′ has to be replaced by the vertical effective stress σ
′
v; and in
accordance with Equation 2.5 and Equation 2.8 following relationship is assumed:
φ
′
p,ds −φ
′
cs = A[Dr(Q −ln σ
′
v) −1]
(2.9)
When estimating the value of Q from the conﬁning stress at which dilatant behaviour is
suppressed in direct shear, Equation 2.6 immediately changes to:
ln σ
′
v,crit = Q −1
Dr
(2.10)
where σ
′
v,crit is the critical vertical effective stress at which dilatant behaviour is sup-
pressed.
Liu & Lehane (2012) examined the inﬂuence of particle shape with a comprehensive
series of direct shear tests. They found that the coefﬁcient A for silica sands can be
approximately represented as 2.2/ρ0.5 (ρ being the regularity of the grains), when Q is
assumed equal to 10. This trend supports the trends observed by Santamarina & Cho
(2004) and Cho et al. (2006), and leads to following expression:
φ
′
p,ds −φ
′
cs = 2.2
√ρ[Dr(10 −ln σ
′
v) −1]
(2.11)
Their study, however, only included manufactured uniformly graded silica materials.
In Figure 2.3 data of all four silica materials prepared at Dr = 0.5 from Liu &
Lehane’s study are collected (named A, B, C and D). Despite a good deal of scatter,
the trends for each sand clearly indicate that the stress level at which no peak friction
angle exists varies between the sands. When using Equation 2.10, values of Q are de-
rived as 10.6, 10.1, 10.5, 11.2, respectively. This not only indicates that Liu & Lehane’s
assumption of Q being equal to 10 leads to inaccuracies in the prediction of φ
′
p, it also
indicates that Q is affected by other factors than just the mineralogy.
Due to the uncertainties surrounding the use of IR, Jensen et al. (2019) did a sys-
tematic study examining the effects of particle shape, particle size and uniformity on
the A and the Q coefﬁcients in direct shear. Their study included two natural dune
siliceous sands and two natural calcareous sands, as well as two commercially sourced
uniform silica sands. A systematic decrease of A was found with an increasing Q coefﬁ-
cient; see Figure 2.4. It was therefore suggested that these two coefﬁcients can be more
==PAGE:22==
10
CHAPTER 2. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING SHEAR STRENGTH AND BEARING
CAPACITY OF SAND
Figure 2.3: Variation of (φ
′
p,ds −φ
′
cs) with vertical effective stress σ
′
v of four different
silica materials prepared at Dr = 0.5 (from Liu & Lehane, 2012).
or less described by the same parameters and hence a new coefﬁcient, Isc deﬁned as:
Cu/ρ0.5 + 1.9d50 (Cu being the coefﬁcient of uniformity and d50 being the mean particle
size) was found to give following best-ﬁt expressions:
Q = 19 −2Isc
(2.12a)
A = 1.5(Isc −2)
(2.12b)
Isc = Cu/ρ0.5 + 1.9d50
(2.12c)
with d50 expressed in mm. Jensen et al. (2019) pointed out that more suitable forms of
Isc can be investigated thoroughly and reﬁned once data from more sands are available.
2.4
Assessing Dr from CPTs
The cone penetration test (CPT) was developed some-eighty years ago to assess the qual-
ity and thickness of sand layer deposits (GeoDelft, 1936). Essentially, the CPT is a load
test in which the end resistance qc is the bearing capacity of a small diameter foundation
at depth in the soil.
==PAGE:23==
2.4. ASSESSING Dr FROM CPTS
11
Figure 2.4: Variaton of A with Q of six different sands from (Jensen et al., 2019).
Table 2.2: Fitting parameters for Equation 2.13 suggested by several researchers.
Sand
C0
C1
C2
Reference
Different NC sounds
0.050
0.700
2.91
Schmertmann (1978)
Ticino
0.157
0.550
2.41
Baldi et al. (1986)
Hokksund
0.086
0.530
3.29
Ticino
0.140
0.550
2.90
Jamiolkowski et al. (2001)
Ticino, Toyoura, Hokksund
0.175
0.500
3.10
Soil parameters for geotechnical investigation are often determined from CPT-based
empirical correlations. One such parameter is Dr, and extensive research has been carried
out to develop empirical correlations of CPT measurements using laboratory calibration
chamber experiments (Schmertmann, 1978; Baldi et al., 1986; Jamiolkowski et al., 2001).
These experiments are very reliable and provide precise experimental data, since the en-
tire procedure is performed in the laboratory and can be easily monitored and controlled.
Pioneering work of Schmertmann (1976) suggested the following correlation between
qc and Dr for normally consolidated and unaged ﬁne to medium clean sands:
Dr(%) = 100
C2
ln
qc(MPa)
C0(σ′
v)C1

(2.13)
where C0, C1, and C2 are empirical ﬁtting parameters. Several researches have made
attempts to ﬁt these parameters and some of the outcomes are found in Table 2.2.
25 years later, Jamiolkowski et al. (2001) proposed a new modiﬁed form of Equation
==PAGE:24==
12
CHAPTER 2. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING SHEAR STRENGTH AND BEARING
CAPACITY OF SAND
2.13 with additional consideration regarding the effect of soil compressibility:
Dr(%) = 26.8 ln

qc/pa
(σ′
v/pa)C1

−bx
(2.14)
where C1, as in Equation 2.13, is a stress normalisation exponent (suggested equal to 0.50
by Jamiolkowski et al., 2001), pa is the atmospheric pressure (≈100 kPa), and bx=52.5,
67.5, 82.5 for high, medium, and low compressibility sands, respectively.
2.5
Principles governing the bearing capacity of shallow
foundations on sand
Soil-structure interaction is a process of which a foundation transmits loads directly to
the underlying soil. In order to perform in a satisfactory way, a foundation must have
both sufﬁcient capacity to support the loads applied (to not collapse) and also to avoid
excessive deformation under these loads, since this might damage the supported structure.
Design to avoid collapse or instability of the structure is known as the ultimate limit states
(ULS) and design involving excessive deformations is known as serviceability limit states
(SLS). This report is focusing on the basic behaviour of shallow foundations on sand
under vertical loading at ULS.
Terzaghi & Peck (1948) developed the classical bearing capacity equation including
bearing capacity factors Nc, Nq and Nγ, which are deﬁned in terms of a linear strength
envelope τf = c′ + σ′ tan φ′, and the classical bearing capacity equation is given by:
qult = c′Nc + q′Nq + 1
2γ′BNγ
(2.15)
where c′ is the effective soil cohesion, q′ is the surcharge existing at the footing base
expressed in terms of an effective stress, γ′ is the buoyant soil unit weight and B is the
footing width. Values of Nq and Nc can be determined by limit analysis, and are given in
closed-form by (Knappet & Craig, 2012):
Nq = (1 + sin φ′)
(1 −sin φ′) exp π tan φ′
(2.16a)
Nc = Nq −1
tan φ′
(2.16b)
and Vesic (1973) recommended that for a soil with a rough footing-soil interface:
Nγ = 2(Nq + 1) tan φ′
(2.17)
Terzaghi & Peck advised to only use peak strength parameters for c′ and φ′ when the
soil underneath the structure is going to fail in general shear; see Figure 2.5. They postu-
lated that for the two other modes of failure (local shear and punching shear) shear would
==PAGE:25==
2.5. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE BEARING CAPACITY OF SHALLOW
FOUNDATIONS ON SAND
13
Figure 2.5: Modes of failure: (a) general shear, (b) local shear, and (c) punching shear
(from Knappett & Craig, 2012).
occur beneath, but not around, the foundation, and for the particular case of local shear,
peak strength should be reduced by a factor 1.5 to achieve satisfactory design. However,
researchers have since found difﬁculty in separating various effects that Terzaghi & Peck
were unable to discriminate between, including: nonlinear strength envelope; progres-
sive failure due to strain localisation and softening to critical states; anisotropy; and an
allowance for footing shape between a long strip (plane strain) and a circular pad (ax-
isymmetric), meaning that appropriate determination of strength parameters (plane strain
or triaxial) are important, and so on (Lau & Bolton, 2011).
In contradiction to Equation 2.15, it has long been recognised that bearing capacity
does not, in general, increase linearly with footing width. This observation, termed scale
effect, was reviewed and discussed by de Beer (1965) and has also been discussed in more
recent studies (Ovesen, 1975; Yamaguchi et al., 1976, 1977; Kimura et al. 1985; Kutter
et al., 1988).
Equation 2.15 was based on Terzaghi’s assumption that peak strength of soil is caused
by strong cohesive bonds giving a constant c′ and φ′; see Figure 2.6. Schoﬁeld (1998)
elaborately explains how this assumption is wrong, since there is no "true" cohesion on
the dry side of the critical states (cs). As ﬁrst realised by Taylor (1948), peak strength
is in reality caused by friction and interlocking between particles leading to dilation; see
Figure 2.6. In fact, experimental results have shown that the failure envelope is curved
for nearly all kinds of soils, especially in the range of small conﬁning stresses (Penman,
1953; Bishop et al., 1965; Ponce & Bell, 1971; Maksimovic, 1989). Clearly, one of the
reasons for the scale effect is the nonlinear shape of the soil failure envelope, which results
in a secant measure of friction angle that decreases with increasing conﬁning stress until
a critical state is reached (note that this statement is in agreement with Bolton’s (1986)
theory explained in the previous sections of this chapter). Hence, it is postulated in this
==PAGE:26==
14
CHAPTER 2. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING SHEAR STRENGTH AND BEARING
CAPACITY OF SAND
Figure 2.6: Peak strength is caused by particle interlocking, not cohesive bonds (from
Schoﬁeld, 1998)
report that Bolton’s expression, with an inclusion of the Isc factor, can be used to describe
the effects of nonlinear strength behaviour. Furthermore, due allowance has to be made
for the footing shape when using Bolton’s equations to predict strength of soils, i.e. it is
commonly accepted that soils in plane strain take friction angles up to 10% higher than
soils in triaxial conditions.
However, small-scale and large-scale tests have shown that accounting for the non-
linear strength behaviour and the strain restraint condition is not sufﬁcient to predict the
bearing capacity (e.g. Muhs, 1963). Muhs explained that the reason for the discrepancies
between experiment and prediction is progressive failure; meaning that shearing strength
is not simultaneously mobilised at all points on the slip surface. Consequently, when the
bearing capacity of the foundation is reached, only some of the material along the slip
plane may be contributing with a shear strength dependent on the soil’s peak friction an-
gle, whereas the remaining material is contributing with a shear strength dependent on
the critical state friction angle.
Perkins & Madsen (2000) pointed out that two counteracting mechanisms seem to oc-
cur for the progressive failure: (1) The physical observation by Yamaguchi et al. (1976),
that progressive failure becomes more signiﬁcant with increasing conﬁning stress for a
soil at a given relative density, i.e. with increasing footing width; and (2) that the po-
tential for progressive failure, when deﬁned by the difference between the peak friction
angle and the critical state friction angle, is more signiﬁcant as the conﬁning stress de-
creases, i.e. the footing width decreases. It is difﬁcult to predict the point of which one
effect predominates the other. In agreement with Perkins & Madsen, it is postulated in
the present report that strength-dilatancy characteristics, since being dictated by the soil
type, relative density, and footing geometry, can be used to describe the combination of
the two effects. Thus, IR, with an inclusion of Isc, was used for this purpose.
Perkins & Madsen showed that the peak friction angle in most cases greatly over-
==PAGE:27==
2.5. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE BEARING CAPACITY OF SHALLOW
FOUNDATIONS ON SAND
15
predicts the experimentally observed bearing capacity. They argued that the effect of
progressive failure for each individual experimental observation can be described by the
relative position of the experimental value qult−experiment between the peak value qult−peak
and the critical state value qult−cs. This led to a progressive failure index given by:
IPF = qult−peak −qult−experiment
qult−peak −qult−cs
(2.18)
Once a large amount of experimental data is available, a relationship between IR and
IPF can be estimated and the predicted bearing capacity can be determined from:
qult−predicted = qult−peak −IPF(qult−peak −qult−cs)
(2.19)
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Classiﬁcation properties of sands
investigated
This chapter goes through the determination of the basic classiﬁcation indices of the ﬁve
sands investigated. Three different fractions of Leighton Buzzard sand were investigated
(fractions B, C, and D), which are all silica sands. All three fractions are practically
identical when it comes to uniformity (very uniform sands), and they only vary slightly
in particle shape. In order to compliment the study performed by Jensen et al. (2019), it
was decided to include two sands in the present study, which compared to fraction C are
only varying in uniformity. This was achieved by mixing two different sands (Mix 1 and
Mix 2) from the three Leighton Buzzard fractions. A concrete mixer was used for this
purpose; see Figure 3.1. Mix 1 comprises 1/3 of each fraction, and Mix 2 comprises 1/5
of both fractions B and D and 3/5 of fraction C. All index properties are seen in Table 3.1.
3.1
Particle size distribution
The particle size distributions were determined following Danish Geotechnical Society
Guidelines (DGF, 2001), and are shown in Figure 3.2.
Samples from three different locations in Mix 1 and Mix 2 were tested to make sure
Table 3.1: Index properties of sands investigated
Sand
Gradation
Void ratio limits
Particle shape
Gs
φ
′
cs: degrees
d50: mm
Cu
emax
emin
R
S
ρ
Leighton Buzzard B
0.76
1.49
0.79
0.53
0.51
0.75
0.63
2.66
33.8
Leighton Buzzard C
0.40
1.54
0.78
0.53
0.51
0.75
0.63
2.66
31.4
Leighton Buzzard D
0.19
1.49
0.87
0.59
0.46
0.70
0.58
2.66
30.7
Mix 1
0.37
2.80
0.71
0.43
0.49
0.73
0.61
2.66
32.6
Mix 2
0.38
2.31
0.74
0.47
0.50
0.74
0.62
2.66
32.7
17
==PAGE:30==
18
CHAPTER 3. CLASSIFICATION PROPERTIES OF SANDS INVESTIGATED
Figure 3.1: Concrete mixer used to mix sand.
that the sand was mixed homogeneously. All three tests are plotting more or less on top
of one another in Figure 3.2 for both Mix 1 and Mix 2, indicating that they were indeed
mixed homogeneously.
The distributions are summarized in Table 3.1 by the value of the particle diameter at
50% in the cumulative distribution d50 and the coefﬁcient of uniformity Cu (= d60/d10).
Raw test data is found in Appendix A.
3.2
Void ratio limits
The speciﬁc gravity Gs was assumed equal to 2.66 for all the sands in this study, since
a look through the literature reveals that nearly all silica sands take values ±0.02 of this
value (e.g. Youd, 1973; Lau & Bolton, 2011; Liu & Lehane, 2012; Jensen et al., 2019).
This value of Gs was then used to calculate the maximum void ratio emax and minimum
void ratio emin from the minimum dry density ρdmin and the maximum dry density ρdmax,
respectively. The values of ρdmin and ρdmax were estimated following Danish Geotech-
nical Society Guidelines (DGF, 2001). These void ratio limits are provided in Table 3.1
and calculations are shown in Appendix B.
It is well known that challenges arise when measuring ρdmin and ρdmax, since these
seem to be dependent on the method or Standard used. Blaker et al. (2015) carried
out a laboratory testing programme to systematically determine ρdmin and ρdmax of ﬁve
different sands, using different Standards and in-house methods. Large variations of ρdmin
==PAGE:31==
3.3. PARTICLE SHAPE
19
Figure 3.2: Particle size distributions.
and ρdmax were introduced due to the large variations in procedures, different amount of
material required, and the varying degree of soil degradation.
The particle strength of silica sand is high and the forces used to compact the sand
for the estimate of ρdmax were relatively low; degradation is therefore unlikely. Hence,
uncertainties when determining ρdmin and ρdmax arise due to the method and amount of
material used only.
3.3
Particle shape
Typically, the particle shape is quantiﬁed by the roundness R (reﬂecting the average radius
of curvature of the surface features), the sphericity S (reﬂecting similarity between a
particle’s length, width and height) and regularity ρ (being the average of roundness and
sphericity, ρ = (R + S)/2).
Powers (1953) quantiﬁed S as the diameter ratio between the largest inscribed sphere
and the smallest circumscribing sphere, and Wadell (1932) deﬁned R as the average radius
of curvature of surface features relative to the radius of the maximum sphere that can be
inscribed in the particle.
Liu and Lehane (2012) quantiﬁed R and S using a commercial program called ImageJ
(Rasband, 2004), with a plugin called Particle8_Plus (Landini, 2006). However, when
comparing their results with the light microscope images of the grains, it seems that even
==PAGE:32==
20
CHAPTER 3. CLASSIFICATION PROPERTIES OF SANDS INVESTIGATED
the very angular particles have R values which are values of rounded particles according
to Youd (1973). Hence, it is questionable if the program is actually capable of capturing
the very sharp edges.
For the purpose of this report, R and S (and hence also ρ) were determined as the
average values of a visual assessment from microscope images of no less than 75 grains of
each sand. In order to enhance the quality of the assessment of the grains, the microscope
images were converted to binary images with MATLAB. Typical grains of each sand are
shown in Fig. 3.3 and the same grains converted into binary images are shown in Fig.
3.4. All binary images are shown in Appendix C.
The R values were determined with the chart shown in Fig. 3.5 (from Krumbein,
1941), and the S values with the chart shown in Fig. 3.6 (from Krumbein, 1963). All
values are provided in Table 3.1.
Figure 3.3: Microscope images of typical grains of (a) Leighton Buzzard B (b) Leighton
Buzzard C (c) Leighton Buzzard D.
Figure 3.4: Binary images of typical grains (a) Leighton Buzzard B (b) Leighton Buzzard
C (c) Leighton Buzzard D.
==PAGE:33==
3.3. PARTICLE SHAPE
21
Figure 3.5: Visual particle roundness R chart (from Krumbein, 1941).
Figure 3.6: Visual particle sphericity S and roundness R (from Krumbein, 1963).
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental investigations
In this chapter the experimental procedures are provided and the test setups are discussed
in order to establish the sources of errors and to quantify these.
4.1
Direct shear tests
Direct shear tests were performed on all of the ﬁve different sands, prepared at Dr = 0.80
and with 7-9 different vertical effective stress levels employed (from 15 kPa to 1200 kPa).
The accuracy of the loading system of the machine was found to be inadequate for tests
performed at vertical effective stress levels smaller than 100 kPa. At smaller stress levels
the tests were instead performed by placing dead weight on top of the sample; see Figure
4.1 (this was only one test for each sand). Furthermore, one test was performed for each
sand with the aim of estimating the interface friction angle δ between the sand and the
footings used for the centrifuge tests. This section describes the device used to perform
the tests, outlines potential errors and corrections, and goes through the experimental
procedure and interpretation of results.
Shear box testing device
The shear box apparatus used is a ShearTrac-II Direct Shear Apparatus; see Figure 4.2
(www.geocomp.com). It is a relatively basic device with a 63.35 mm diameter shear ring
and the sample depth is approximately 25 mm. The unit has two force transducers as
well as two displacement transducers (horizontal and vertical). The required values spec-
iﬁed in the computer control the loading and unloading of the load frame. The loading
mechanisms applying vertical loads and shear loads are micro-stepper motors connected
to worm gears. The computer and monitor are used for displaying test results in real time
and for editing test results.
23
==PAGE:36==
24
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 4.1: Vertical effective stress applied with dead weight.
The side wall of the shear box is smooth (stainless steel), and porous stones are placed
on either side of the sample to provide drainage and to distribute the pressure during the
test. The upper box is restrained against horizontal movement, while the shear load is
applied to the lower box.
Sources of errors and corrections
The shear box used in this study has a relatively small size. The same kind of box was
used by Jensen et al. (2019), who examined the applicability of the box for the testing of
sand. This examination was performed by comparing test results to one test conducted in
a larger shear box apparatus (sample measuring 71 mm in diameter and approximately 46
mm in height). Jensen et al. showed that this test was in good agreement with the tests
performed in the smaller shear box, and the apparatus used in this study was therefore
assumed to be reliable for estimating the peak friction angle.
In the early stages of shearing, the upper box may be lifted by the sample dilation
concentrated on the shearing plane (Lehane & Liu, 2013). With sufﬁcient internal friction,
a gap between the boxes can be maintained, and the vertical stress on the shearing plane
is increased by the weight of the upper box; see Fig. 4.3 (from Lehane & Liu, 2013). The
likelihood of a gap existing throughout shearing is higher for lighter shear boxes. Since
the upper box has a weight of only 284 g, it is very likely that this gap will exist. To
account for this, a reduction factor for the stress ratio τ/σ
′
v (τ being the shear stress) is
==PAGE:37==
4.1. DIRECT SHEAR TESTS
25
Figure 4.2: The direct shear apparatus (from www.geocomp.com).
given as:
RF = Ft + W
Ft
(4.1)
where Ft is the applied vertical force and W is the weight of the upper box.
Experimental procedure and interpretation
The samples were prepared and sheared in dry conditions. The samples were vibrated
to obtain the required density (Dr = 0.80), which was monitored by measurement of
sample height. With the reduction factor (Equation 4.1) in mind, the peak and critical
state friction angles are given as:
φ
′
p,ds = tan−1 τp
σ
′
v
= tan−1
Tp
Ft + W
(4.2a)
φ
′
cs = tan−1 τcs
σ
′
v
= tan−1
Tcs
Ft + W
(4.2b)
where τp and τcs are the peak and critical state shear stresses applied, and Tp and Tcs are
the peak and critical state shear loads. A critical state is an ultimate condition in which
==PAGE:38==
26
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 4.3: Schematic view of shear box (from Lehane & Liu, 2013)
shearing could continue indeﬁnitely without changes in volume or effective stresses. The
maximum angle of dilation ψmax in direct shear is determined as:
ψmax = tan−1
dδv
dδh

max
(4.3)
where δv is the vertical displacement and δh is the horisontal displacement.
For the interface friction angle tests, the lower box was ﬁlled with sand up to about 1
mm from the top and the footing was placed on top of the sand surface; see Figure 4.4.
The footing was 60 mm in diameter, which left 3.35 mm for the sand-footing shearing
test. For this type of test, the upper box will not be lifted, and the reduction factor was
therefore not needed when estimating δ. The value of δ was estimated from the critical
state, giving:
δ = tan−1 τcs
σ
′
v
(4.4)
4.2
Triaxial tests
A total of four triaxial tests were performed at Dr values ranging from 0.65 to 0.80.
The tested sands were Leighton Buzzard B and Mix 1, as well as two Australian dune
siliceous sands, which were also included in the study performed by Jensen et al. (2019)
(Bassendean and Shenton Park). Bassendean was tested at a consolidation pressure p′
0 =
70 kPa, Mix 1 was tested at p′
0 = 60 kPa, and the two remaining sands were tested at
p′
0 = 40 kPa. All tests were tested as consolidated drained tests (CD).
==PAGE:39==
4.2. TRIAXIAL TESTS
27
Figure 4.4: Interface friction angle test.
This section describes the triaxial test setup, outlines potential errors and corrections,
and goes through the interpretation of results.
Triaxial test setup
The setup of a sample can be seen in Figure 4.5. The dry sand was poured into a cylin-
drical latex membrane, which was making a sample measuring approximately 70 mm in
height and 70 mm in diameter. A pressure head, with a built-in porous stone to allow
drainage, was closing off the top and bottom of the sample. When prepared, the sample
was placed in a chamber of de-aired water to provide a conﬁning pressure σr (which in a
CD test is equal to the effective conﬁning pressure σ′
r and the consolidation pressure p′
0).
The sample was mechanically driven up or down with the top plate applying pressure on
the sample. Two LVDT’s sitting on each side of the sample were used to measure the axial
displacement ∆H. The change in volume was estimated by the weight of water ﬂowing
in or out the sample ∆Wwater. Finally, the axial load applied on the upper pressure head
was measured as σa −σr (with σa being the total axial stress).
Corrections and interpretation
For the calculation of axial strain εa, volumetric strain εp, radial strain εr, and shear
strain εq, accurate estimation of initial height and area of the sample is required. For this
reason, corrections provided by British Standard (1990) were applied for the volume, area
and height of the sample after consolidation:
Vc = V0 −∆Vc
(4.5a)
Ac = A0

1 −2
3
∆Vc
V0

(4.5b)
Hc = H0

1 −1
3
∆Vc
V0

(4.5c)
==PAGE:40==
28
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 4.5: Triaxial test set up.
where ∆Vc = ∆Wwater/ρwater (ρwater being the density of water at a given temperature),
and V0, A0, and H0 are the volume, area, and height before consolidation, respectively.
The axial, volumetric, radial, and shear strains were then calculated as:
εa = ∆H
Hc
(4.6a)
εp = ∆V
Vc
(4.6b)
εr = εp −εa
2
(4.6c)
εq = 2(εa −εr)
3
(4.6d)
As the area is changing all throughout the shearing, this has to be corrected in order to
calculate the axial stress:
A = 1 −εp
1 −εa
Ac
(4.7)
==PAGE:41==
4.3. CENTRIFUGE TESTS
29
Following the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, the limiting relationship between the
major and minor principal effective stresses, which in triaxial tests are σ′
a and σ′
r, is:
σ′
a + c′cotφ′
σ′
r + c′cotφ′ = 1 + sin φ′
1 + sin φ′
(4.8)
and since sand generally can be considered cohesionless, Equation 4.8 simpliﬁes to:
σ′
a
σ′
r
= 1 + sin φ′
1 + sin φ′
(4.9)
Equation 4.9 can be rewritten in terms of the mean effective stress p′ and the deviatoric
stress q, where:
p′ = σ′
a + 2σ′
r
3
(4.10a)
q = σ′
a −σ′
r
(4.10b)
and becomes:
q
p′ =
6 sin φ′
3 −sin φ′
(4.11)
The triaxial peak friction angle φ′
p,tr was evaluated at the maximum stress ratio qf/p′
f (qf
being the deviatoric stress at failure, and p′
f being the mean effective stress at failure),
which from Equation 4.11 gives:
φ′
p,tr = sin−1
3qf
6p′
f + qf
(4.12)
4.3
Centrifuge tests
By placing a scaled model in a geotechnical centrifuge, the "gravity" acting on the model
is increased. The centrifugal acceleration creates the ”Ng” environment in which the
scaled model will behave in a similar way to the prototype in the ﬁeld (N being the scaling
factor and g being earth’s gravity). Following Madabushi (2017), when the centrifuge is
rotating with an angular velocity of ˙θ, the centrifugal acceleration at any radius r is given
by:
¯a = r ˙θ2
(4.13)
The centrifugal acceleration then needs to be matched to give the same geometric scale
factor as the one used to scale down the prototype by N:
Ng = r ˙θ2
(4.14)
Equation 4.14 indicates that the centrifugal acceleration changes linearly with the radial
distance from the center of rotation and as a square of the angular velocity. While the
earth’s gravity ﬁeld may be assumed to be constant with the height of a real structure,
==PAGE:42==
30
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 4.6: DTU beam centrifuge.
the error due to change in radius in a centrifuge model may not be insigniﬁcant. The
speed of the centrifuge is therefore arranged such that the model at the desired radius will
experience the desired centrifugal acceleration Ng. In this study, the radius was chosen
to be at a depth of 1/3 of the height of the soil layer.
DTU’s beam centrifuge (Figure 4.6) was employed for cone penetration tests (CPTs)
and footing tests in the ﬁve dry sands investigated.
Three tests were performed for
Leighton Buzzard B and two for the remaining four sands; see the testing programme
in Table 4.1. All samples, apart from Test 3, were prepared at Dr = 0.80 ± 0.04. Test 3
was prepared at a slightly higher density of Dr = 0.91. The tests were carried out at an
acceleration of either 40g or 60g, requiring an angular velocity of 122.2 RPM and 149.7
RPM, respectively (with r = 2.396 m in Equation 4.14). The sample preparation, test
set-up, CPTs, and footing tests are explained and discussed in this chapter.
Sample preparation and test set-up
The sand was pluviated into the strongbox (having an internal diameter of 527 mm and
an internal height of 498 mm) to give a ﬁnal height of 317 mm when levelled off. The
sand pluviation was performed at 1g and manoeuvred manually in a circular motion at a
==PAGE:43==
4.3. CENTRIFUGE TESTS
31
Table 4.1: Centrifuge testing programme.
Test no.
Sand
Drop height (F/C)*: mm
Dr
g level
Footing diameter: mm
CPT before/after footing test
1
Leighton Buzzard B
120 (C)
0.81
40
60
Before
2
Leighton Buzzard B
120 (C)
0.79
60
40
Before
3
Leighton Buzzard B
300 (C)
0.91
60
40
None
4
Leighton Buzzard C
750 (C)
0.81
40
60
Before
5
Leighton Buzzard C
750 (C)
0.82
60
40
Before
6
Leighton Buzzard D
220 (F)
0.82
40
60
Before
7
Leighton Buzzard D
220 (F)
0.82
60
40
Before
8
Mix 1
700 (C)
0.84
40
60
Before
9
Mix 1
700 (C)
0.82
60
40
After
10
Mix 2
380 (C)
0.80
40
60
Before
11
Mix 2
350 (C)
0.78
60
40
Before
* F: ﬁne sieve, C: coarse sieve
Figure 4.7: Different nozzles employed for the sand pluviation.
constant drop height above the sand surface. Two different nozzles, with different aperture
sizes, were employed for the sample preparation (Figure 4.7); one with a ﬁne sieve and
the other with a coarse sieve. Using the ﬁne sieve resulted in a lower ﬂow rate and hence a
denser sample in comparison to using the coarse sieve. A denser sample can also achieved
by increasing the drop height. The drop heights used for the preparation of each sample
are seen in Table 4.1, and the sieve employed is indicated with (F) for the ﬁne sieve and
(C) for the coarse sieve.
The test set-up is seen in Figure 4.8. The loading frame was secured on top of the
strongbox with four bolts. For the footing tests, a piston was installed with a hinge above
it to allow free rotation. This piston was then used in-ﬂight to apply load to the footings
placed on the sand surface. A stiff plastic beam was screwed ﬁrmly onto the piston, and
was functioning as a reference point for the LVDT mounted on the side of the loading
frame. This made it possible to monitor the vertical displacement of the footing during
penetration. The LVDT was regretfully not mounted for Test 1-4, meaning that the ver-
tical displacement was recorded from the less accurate motor measurements. The load-
displacement curves for these tests, presented in Chapter 5, therefore seem less smooth
than the ones of Test 5-11.
With the piston replaced by a cone, CPTs were performed in all of the samples apart
==PAGE:44==
32
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 4.8: DTU beam centrifuge test set-up.
from Test 3. All CPTs were undertaken before the footing tests. However, there was an
error in the CPT performed before the footing test in Test 9, and a new CPT was therefore
performed after the footing test; this is speciﬁed in Table 4.1.
In order to ensure accurate measurements of the loads applied to the footings, a cali-
bration of the vertical load cell was undertaken prior to the centrifuge testing programme.
The calibration is found in Appendix D.
CPTs
The cone used for the centrifuge CPTs had a diameter of 11.3 mm and is seen in Figure
4.9. This cone records end resistance qc, sleeve friction fs, pore pressure u, and the
vertical displacement is recorded from the motor. However, only the qc and the vertical
displacement were of interest, since this study only includes dry sands with negligible
sleeve friction.
As seen in Figure 4.8, the CPTs were performed approximately 150 mm from the
nearest boundary. For Test 9 a new CPT had to be performed after the footing test. This
==PAGE:45==
4.3. CENTRIFUGE TESTS
33
Figure 4.9: Cone used for the centrifuge testings.
test was performed at the same distance from the boundary as the ﬁrst CPT, however, at
the opposite position relative to the footing along the center line. Garnier et al. (2007)
created a catalogue of scaling laws in geotechnical centrifuge modelling. According to the
catalogue, no signiﬁcant difference in qc is to be expected for S/B > 10 and D/B > 30
(S being the distance of the centre of the CPT test from the nearest container wall, B
the diameter of the cone, and D the diameter of the container). No signiﬁcant effect is
therefore expected in the present study with S/B ≈13 and D/B ≈47.
Dimensional analysis requires the cone end resistance to be normalised with respect to
the vertical effective stress σ′
v, and the penetration depth z to be normalised with respect to
the cone diameter B, giving the normalised cone resistance Q and normalised penetration
depth Z:
Q = qc
σ′
v
(4.15a)
Z = z
B
(4.15b)
In a geotechnical centrifuge test, the increase of σ′
v with z is dependent on the distance
from any point in the sample to the center of rotation. According to Madabushi (2017),
the vertical effective stress for a dry sand is at any depth z in the centrifuge model given
by:
σ′
v =
Z H
0
ρ ˙θ2(rt + z)dz
(4.16)
where H is the height of the soil sample, ρ is the mass density of the soil, ˙θ is the angular
velocity of the centrifuge in rad/s, and rt is the radius from the center of rotation to the
top surface of the centrifuge model.
Footing tests
The footing tests were placed in the center of the sand surface as seen in Figure 4.8. The
footings, which are shown in Figure 4.10, were 60 and 40 mm diameter circular footings.
==PAGE:46==
34
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 4.10: Footings used for the centrifuge testings.
The footings were tested at two different g levels. The 60 mm diameter footing was tested
at 40 g, and the 40 mm diameter footing was tested at 60 g. Both these models represent a
circular footing of 2.4 m diameter at the prototype scale. This way, a modelling of models
was undertaken, which can serve to conﬁrm the scaling laws.
The vertical load applied onto the circular footing was converted into a bearing pres-
sure q by dividing the load with the area of the footing. Similarly, the vertical settlement
was normalised with the diameter of the footing; this way, a representative strain was
obtained, which ideally should show a similar stress-strain behaviour for the two similar
tests performed at different g levels.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Results
In this chapter, the results obtained in the study are presented and brieﬂy discussed. In
order to keep a steady ﬂow in the reading, one result is presented and the graphs or tables
used are explained and discussed immediately after. However, no ﬁnal conclusions are
drawn in this chapter as Chapter 6 is dealing with the ﬁnal interpretation and discussions
of the results.
5.1
Shear strength and dilation of the sands
Critical state friction angles
Direct shear test results of Mix 1 are shown in Figure 5.1, which plots the variations
of measured vertical displacements and ratios of applied shear stress to vertical effective
stress (τ/σ′
v) with shear displacement. All direct shear tests are found in Appendix E. The
critical state friction angle φ
′
cs seems to decrease with increasing vertical effective stress,
and the same trend was observed for the four other sands tested. This gave difﬁculties
when determining φ
′
cs, since this is commonly accepted to be a soil constant (e.g. Rowe,
1962, 1971; Bolton, 1986). Therefore, as dilation and second order frictional effects are
reduced with increasing vertical effective stress, φ
′
cs was estimated as the average from
the tests performed at a vertical effective stress in excess of 300 kPa. The critical state
friction angles were determined from Equation 4.2b, and are plotted in Figure 5.2 and
listed in Table 3.1.
35
==PAGE:48==
36
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.1: Direct shear test results of Mix 1. Variation with shear displacement of: (a)
τ/σ′
v; (b) vertical displacement.
Peak friction angles
From direct shear test results
Figure 5.2 plots φ′
p for all the sands tested in direct shear, derived from Equation 4.2a.
It is evident that φ′
p varies approximately linearly with ln σ
′
v at a given value of Dr, as
suggested by Bolton (1986).
Jensen et al. (2019) reported large values of (φ′
p −φ′
cs) for loose sands at even high
stress levels, which is inconsistent with Equation 2.9. This is most likely reﬂecting the
problem with the use of Dr as an index of sand behaviour. The value of Dr is conven-
tionally computed using the void ratio of the sample as it has been prepared, with no
conﬁning pressure. Consequently, it does not reﬂect the changes in void ratio that may
occur when an initial stress state has been applied. This issue has previously been dis-
cussed by several researchers (e.g. Hamidi et al., 2013). One can imagine this effect to
be less signiﬁcant for samples prepared at a dense state, and the author is therefore not
expecting this to have a signiﬁcant effect in this study.
From triaxial test results
Triaxial test results of Bassendean, Shenton Park, Leighton Buzzard B, and Mix 1 are
shown in Figure 5.3, which plots the variations of measured volumetric strain εp and
stress ratios (q/p′) with shear strain εq.
The triaxial peak friction angles φ′
p,tr are calculated from Equation 4.12, and are listed
together with the relative density and the consolidation pressure p′
0 in Table 5.1.
==PAGE:49==
5.1. SHEAR STRENGTH AND DILATION OF THE SANDS
37
Figure 5.2: Critical state friction angles φ′
cs and peak friction angles φ′
p of the ﬁve sands
tested in direct shear.
==PAGE:50==
38
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.3: Triaxial test results of Bassendean, Shenton Park, Leighton Buzzard B, and
Mix 1. Variation with shear strain of: (a) q/p′; (b) volumetric strain.
Table 5.1: Dr, σ′
r and φ′
p,tr of triaxial tests on Bassendean, Shenton Park, Leighton Buz-
zard B, and Mix 1.
Sand
Dr
p′
0: kPa
φ′
p,tr
Bassendean
0.80
70
42.5
Shenton Park
0.65
40
41.9
Leighton Buzzard B
0.80
40
42.8
Mix 1
0.70
60
40.8
Table 5.2: Estimations of σ′
v,crit, Q, and A from Bolton’s (1986) expression.
Sand
σ′
v,crit
Q
A
Leighton Buzzard B
55286
12.2
2.5
Leighton Buzzard C
35818
11.7
2.3
Leighton Buzzard D
28964
11.5
1.6
Mix 1
5897
9.9
3.5
Mix 2
5679
9.9
3.1
Q and A coefﬁcients
Variations of (φ′
p −φ′
cs) with ln(σ′
v) for all the sands tested in direct shear are shown in
Figure 5.4, and the variations are indicated with a best-ﬁt linear expression. The critical
vertical effective stress at which dilatant behaviour is suppressed σ′
v,crit was estimated
for each sand from the linear expressions; this is the vertical effective stress σ′
v at which
(φ′
p −φ′
cs) = 0. With σ′
v,crit determined for all the sands, the Q coefﬁcients from Bolton’s
(1986) expression was estimated with Equation 2.10; see Table 5.2.
With reference to Equation 2.9, the A coefﬁcients were determined as the average of
all direct shear tests performed for each sand; see Figure 5.5. There was clearly a very
good agreement on the A coefﬁcients between the tests for each individual sand, since
==PAGE:51==
5.1. SHEAR STRENGTH AND DILATION OF THE SANDS
39
Figure 5.4: (φ′
p −φ′
cs) variation with ln(σ′
v) from all direct shear tests, and estimation of
Q.
==PAGE:52==
40
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.5: A coefﬁcients estimated as an average of all direct shear tests for each sand.
very little scatter is seen on the graphs.
Dilation of the sands
According to Equation 4.3, the maximum angle of dilation ψmax in direct shear can be
estimated from the maximum slope of the variation of vertical displacement δv with hori-
zontal displacement δh. One such estimation is shown in Figure 5.6a, showing one of the
tests performed on Leighton Buzzard B (prepared at Dr = 0.80 and tested at σ′
v = 1000
kPa); giving ψmax = 14.0◦. No measurements of vertical displacement for the tests
performed at σ′
v = 15 kPa were obtained, since the set-up of these tests were slightly
different, as described in Section 4.1. All estimations of ψmax are shown in Appendix F.
It is described in Section 2.1 that Bolton (1986) found a relationship in the plane strain
situation of B = (φ′
p −φ′
cs)/ψmax = 0.8. The value of B was calculated for all the direct
shear tests performed in this study (apart from those performed at σ′
v = 15 kPa) and these
are plotted in Figure 5.6b. It is apparent that all values of B at vertical effective stress
levels in excess of 200 kPa are lower than the plane strain value of Bolton; and for most
of the tests even lower than than the ratio of 0.71-0.75, which was proposed by Simoni
and Houlsby (2006) for direct shear. However, it is evident that there is a systematic
increase in the value of B with reducing stress level, and a similar trend was observed by
Lehane & Liu (2013).
It is unexpected that B does not take a constant value with changing stress level. This
==PAGE:53==
5.2. CPT RESULTS
41
Figure 5.6: (a) Estimation of ψmax from a graph showing variation of δv with δh; (b)
Variation of B = (φ′
p −φ′
cs)/ψmax with σ′
v.
is likely to be partly due to inaccuracies in the measurement of vertical displacement
caused by tilting of the upper box and upper plate as shearing progresses; since one can
imagine the tilting to be changing with stress level. It is the author’s opinion that no
conclusions can be drawn from these measurements.
5.2
CPT results
One CPT was carried out with every centrifuge test apart from Test 3. Hence, ﬁve tests
were performed at 40g and ﬁve tests at 60g; see Figure 5.7. The maximum penetration
depth was approximately the same (200 mm) for all the CPTs, and a vertical effective
stress of about 130 kPa was reached for the CPTs carried out at 40g and about 180 kPa
was reached for the ones at 60g.
For dimensional analysis of the CPTs, the Q and Z axes were normalised (Equation
4.15a and 4.15b), and this transformation is shown in Figure 5.8. It should be noted that
employing the same cone for CPTs at different g levels leads to different prototype size
cones. With the 11.3 mm cone used in this study, the prototype size cone is one with a
diameter of 452 mm at 40g and 678 mm at 60g. These prototype size cones are extremely
large when compared to the cones used in the ﬁeld; these have a diameter of only 35.7
mm.
The different g levels are the reason why a nearly constant value of Q was reached at a
smaller value of Z at 60g when compared to the CPTs at 40g (Figure 5.8); this is due to the
vertical effective stress increasing at a higher rate with Z at 60g. Furthermore, the smaller
prototype diameter of the CPTs at 40g led to higher values of Q in comparison with the
ones performed at 60g; this is consistent with the scale effect of a footings (Section 2.5).
==PAGE:54==
42
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.7: (a) CPTs performed at 40g; (b) CPTs performed at 60g.
Normalisation of the cone end resistance and the effects of different g levels are dis-
cussed in more details in Section 6.3.
5.3
Footing test results
Footing-sand interface
The bearing capacity factor Nγ in Equation 2.15 is challenging to determine analytically,
in particular, because it is highly inﬂuenced by the roughness of the footing-soil interface
(Kumar & Kouzer, 2007). In order to obtain a rough estimate of the footing-soil interface
in this study, the interface friction angle δ was estimated from one direct shear test for
each sand with the footing placed on the sand surface; see Section 4.1. The variations of
τ/σ′
v with shear displacement for these tests are shown in Figure 5.9; and the interface
friction angles, which are estimated from Equation 4.4, are listed in Table 5.3.
It should be noted that some researchers postulate that δ should be estimated from a
peak value and not a critical state value (Potyondy, 1961; Acar et al., 1982; Uesugi et al.,
1990), which is suggested by Equation 4.4. Consequently, δ would increase with relative
density and decrease with the vertical effective stress (consistent with the dilatancy theory
presented in Section 2.2). However, since the relative density was not monitored for the
==PAGE:55==
5.3. FOOTING TEST RESULTS
43
Figure 5.8: Normalised cone resistance for (a) CPTs performed at 40g; (b) CPTs per-
formed at 60g.
Table 5.3: Footing-soil interface friction angles
Sand
Interface friction angle δ: degrees
Leighton Buzzard B
10.1
Leighton Buzzard C
12.9
Leighton Buzzard D
16.7
Mix 1
8.9
Mix 2
10.2
interface friction angle tests in this study and only one test for each sand was conducted,
this peak value behaviour of δ was not quantiﬁable. For this reason, the value of δ was
estimated from the critical state, and it should therefore be appreciated that the values
in Table 5.3 only serve as a rough and conservative estimate of the footing-soil interface
friction angles. Based on the results, δ seems to be highly inﬂuenced by the particle size
(or d50).
==PAGE:56==
44
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.9: Variation of τ/σ′
v with shear displacement of the footing-soil interface direct
shear tests.
Figure 5.10: Example of a general shear failure observed after one of the footing tests.
Ultimate bearing capacity of footings
A footing placed on a dense sand and loaded to failure is expected to fail in a general
shear failure. One characteristic of a general shear failure is heaving of the soil surface
adjacent to the footing. As expected, this characteristic was visually observed after every
footing test; an example is shown in Figure 5.10.
A sudden collapse (or failure) is rarely seen for a footing placed on sand, as it is for an
undrained clay. In general, loading of a footing on a dense sand rapidly reaches a peak and
a subsequent plateau, after which the surcharge around the footing (Nq term in Equation
2.15) makes the bearing capacity increase to very large depths. The ultimate bearing
==PAGE:57==
5.3. FOOTING TEST RESULTS
45
Figure 5.11: Footing results of Test 1, 2, and 3; with Equation 2.15 superimposed for
different friction angles.
Table 5.4: The values of qult−experiment of the footing tests
Test no.
qult−experiment: kPa
1
1479
2
1419
3
1783
4
1401
5
1485
6
1775
7
1820
8
1700
9
1732
10
1702
11
1655
capacity can therefore be challenging to estimate; and often irrelevant, since serviceability
limit state would be governing in this case.
However, when plotting the footing test results in a graph with Equation 2.15 super-
imposed for different friction angles, it is seen that the maximum mobilised friction angle
of the footing tests are at or close to a settlement equal to 10% of the footing width. This
is illustrated in Figure 5.11, where Test 1, 2 and 3 are plotted (note that w is the settle-
ment, d is the footing diameter, and q is the applied pressure). For this reason, it was
decided to evaluate the ultimate bearing capacity from the experiments qult−experiment at a
limiting relative settlement of 10%. This value is similar to the value suggested by Briaud
& Jeanjean (1994), and referred to as the 0.1B Method.
All the footing tests are plotted to a relative settlement of 10% in Figure 5.12 and
are found plotted to the full settlement of each test in Appendix G.
The values of
qult−experiment are listed in Table 5.4.
==PAGE:58==
46
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.12: Footing test results to a relative relative settlement of 10%.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Data interpretation and discussion
A comprehensive interpretation and discussion of the results found in Chapter 5 is pre-
sented in this chapter. Since this study consists of different elements, the chapter is di-
vided based on different investigations and partial conclusions and discussions are pre-
sented. However, the chapter is intentionally structured in a way that should make it easy
for the reader to appreciate the connection between the different elements of the study.
6.1
Evaluation of shear strength and sand behaviour
Sand behaviour deﬁned by A and Q
The relative dilatancy index IR (Equation 2.5), deﬁned by Bolton (1986), has served as
an extremely useful tool to predict peak friction angle as a function of relative density
and stress level. However, in order to use this index to accurately predict sand behaviour,
a sound understanding of the inﬂuence of various factors on the A and Q coefﬁcients is
needed.
What basically differentiates sand is particle shape, particle size, uniformity, and min-
eralogy (crushability). Hence, an expression to predict A and Q should be based upon
those soil characteristics. Mineralogy is in itself difﬁcult to put into an expression, but is
partly incorporated with the particle shape and particle size, since weak grains tend to be
more angular and larger than strong grains; see Nakata et al. (2007). Furthermore, a cor-
relation between grain crushing and the uniformity of the sand is expected, since breaking
of particles means that the sizes of the particles are continuously changing. Based on these
characteristics, Jensen et al. (2019) suggested an index Isc, deﬁned by Equation 2.12c,
to reﬂect effects of ρ, d50, and Cu on the Q coefﬁcient based on regression; see Equation
2.12a.
Jensen et al. also found a systematic increase in the A coefﬁcient with Isc, and deﬁned
47
==PAGE:60==
48
CHAPTER 6. DATA INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION
a best-ﬁt expression (Equation 2.12b). The increasing value of A with reducing ρ is in
good agreement with the study performed by Liu and Lehane (2012); this study was
discussed in Section 2.3. That A is increasing with increasing Cu indicates that a uniform
sand is expected to have a smaller peak friction angle at low stress levels compared to a
more well graded sand. Numerous studies have conﬁrmed this characteristic, such as the
one of Igwe et al. (2007). Igwe et al. explained this behaviour to be a result of greater
particle-to-particle contacts occasioned by the combination of a wide range of particle
sizes.
Based on these observations, it should be appreciated that A and Q basically deﬁne a
sand’s potential for dilation at low stress levels and also the compressibility; since com-
pressibility of sand is highly related to the crushability of the particles. These factors have
signiﬁcant effects on CPT end resistance qc and the bearing capacity of footings, which
are extensively investigated in this study.
New database of sand for the evaluation of A and Q
Jensen et al. (2019) made it clear that more suitable forms of the correlation between
Isc and A and Q can be investigated thoroughly and reﬁned using data from other sands.
The A and Q values determined in Section 5.1 (listed in Table 5.2) are therefore plotted
together with values of Jensen et al. (2019) in Figure 6.1. Exceptionally good agreements
between the two studies show for both A and Q with the following best-ﬁt expressions:
Q = 16.4 −1.4Isc
(6.1a)
A = 1.5(Isc −1.9)
(6.1b)
Only Shenton Park sand stands out with a surprisingly high A value in Figure 6.1b.
This is most likely caused by the geological origin of the sand. Schneider (2007) ex-
plained that in this sand is a presence of small quantities of remnant carbonates, which
provide a potential for cementation between siliceous sand grains. This cementation could
possibly lead to higher peak friction angles and hence a higher value of A.
The coefﬁcients A and Q are clearly dependant on the same parameters, and it is
therefore not surprising that A and Q are strongly correlated; see Figure 6.2. A decreasing
Q coefﬁcient leads to a considerable increase in the A coefﬁcient, and a best-ﬁt correlation
for direct shear is indicated in the graph.
The A coefﬁcients range from 1.6 to 6.4 and the Q coefﬁcients range from 8.7 to 12.3.
The coefﬁcient of variation of the product of the best estimate A and Q values for each
sand (on which (φ′
p,ds-φ′
cs) depends) was calculated as 0.29. This is a relatively low value,
which indicates that compensating errors are the reason why good estimates of the peak
==PAGE:61==
6.1. EVALUATION OF SHEAR STRENGTH AND SAND BEHAVIOUR
49
Figure 6.1: (a) Variation of A with Isc; (b) Variation of Q with Isc; values obtained from
both Jensen et al. (2019) and from this study.
Figure 6.2: Variation of A with Q in direct shear with an inclusion of the values obtained
from the four triaxal test in this study.
friction angle are often achieved using Bolton’s expression with his suggested constant A
and Q values (Equation 1.1).
A and Q in triaxial conditions
Only four triaxial tests of four different sands were conducted (Section 5.1), and an esti-
mation of Q was therefore not possible. However, if assuming similar Q values in triaxial
conditions and direct shear, then the A values in triaxial conditions seem to agree very
well with the ones of direct shear (using Equation 1.1); see Figure 6.2. Even though a
large database of triaxial tests would be needed to verify this observation, it serves as an
indication that Equation 6.1a & 6.1b can be used to give a reasonable estimation of A and
==PAGE:62==
50
CHAPTER 6. DATA INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION
Table 6.1: Parameters for the Progressive failure approach to bearing capacity of footings.
Sand
Dr
γ′
p′
Isc
A
Q
IR
φ′
p
qult−peak
p′/qult−peak
qult−cs
qult−experiment
IPF
qult−prediction
kN/m3
kPa
degrees
kPa
kPa
kPa
kPa
Leighton Buzzard B
0.80
16.5
325.4
3.51
2.41
11.79
3.80
43.0
4064
0.08
903
1449
0.63
2063
Leighton Buzzard B
0.91
16.8
405.8
3.51
2.41
11.79
4.26
44.1
5069
0.08
920
1783
0.58
2658
Leighton Buzzard C
0.80
16.6
208.8
3.23
2.00
12.23
4.51
40.4
2605
0.08
634
1451
0.55
1514
Leighton Buzzard D
0.80
15.9
167.9
3.09
1.78
12.46
4.87
39.4
2093
0.08
549
1798
0.51
1302
Mix 1
0.80
17.6
298.2
4.85
4.41
9.64
2.15
42.1
3724
0.08
804
1716
0.82
1329
Mix 2
0.80
17.1
324.9
4.21
3.47
10.66
2.90
42.8
4057
0.08
793
1679
0.73
1659
Q also in triaxial conditions.
6.2
Bearing capacity of footings on sand: a progressive
failure approach
For the evaluation of the bearing capacity of the footings tested in this study, an approach
similar to the one of Perkins & Madson (2000) was adopted; it is referred to in this report
as a progressive failure approach. With only ﬁve different sands, prepared at approxi-
mately the same relative density and having the same prototype footing diameter, it is
difﬁcult to develop and verify a method. Therefore, this section serves more as a way of
quantifying and discussing the progressive failure.
Every two footing tests, carried out on the same sand and prepared at approximately
the same relative density, were paired and assigned a value of Dr=0.80. Test 3 was,
however, prepared at a slightly higher relative density of Dr=0.91, and was therefore
evaluated on its own. All values for the progressive failure approach are shown in Table
6.1 and this iterative method is built up in steps in this section.
Progressive failure approach in steps
Step 1:
For each sample, γ′ and Dr were estimated from the void ratio limits and speciﬁc gravity,
and the critical state friction angle φ′
cswas taken as the one given in Table 3.1. An average
value of mean effective stress p′ within the soil appropriate for the footing was assumed.
Step 2:
The peak friction angle was calculated using Equation 1.1. The coefﬁcients Q and A were
estimated with Equation 2.12a and 2.12b, and the mean effective stress was taken as the
average value assumed in the previous step.
==PAGE:63==
6.2. BEARING CAPACITY OF FOOTINGS ON SAND: A PROGRESSIVE FAILURE
APPROACH
51
Step 3:
The ultimate bearing capacity corresponding to peak strength qult−peak was calculated
using Equation 2.15 (using φ′
p calculated in the previous step). The Nc-term was assumed
equal to zero, since sand is assumed non-cohesive. The Nq-term was estimated at a 10%
relative settlement of the footing, as this is the point at which the experimental ultimate
bearing capacity qult−experiment was evaluated.
Step 4:
In step 1, a value of p′ was assumed as appropriate for the footing being analysed. How-
ever, it is expected that p′ in an average sense for the sand beneath the footing at failure
would depend mostly on the ultimate bearing capacity achieved. Over the last 60 years,
several expressions to predict the relationship p′/qult−peak have been proposed. Perkins
& Madson (2000) proposed a simpliﬁed relationship p′/qult−peak=0.08 for conditions of
axisymmetry (this is the condition for a circular footing), which was adopted in this study.
Therefore, the ratio of p′/qult−peak was calculated based on the value of p′ assumed in Step
1. A new value of p′ was then assumed, and an iterative process for Steps 1-4 was carried
out until p′/qult−peak=0.08 was achieved; with the resulting value of qult−peak representing
the peak bearing capacity in the absence of progressive failure. These values are plotted
in Figure 6.3 (labeled as "peak’ values).
Step 5:
The ultimate bearing capacity corresponding to the critical state qult−cs was calculated
using Equation 2.15 with the critical state friction angle. The values are plotted in Figure
6.3 (labeled as "critical state’ values).
It is seen in Figure 6.3 that the peak friction angles greatly overpredict the values
observed in the experiments, and the critical state angles underpredict these values. It was
argued in Section 2.5 that the effect of progressive failure can be described by Equation
2.18, and that a correlation between IPF and IR should be aimed for. The variation of
IPF with IR is shown in Figure 6.4 with a correlation indicated as:
IPF = −0.116IR + 1.07
(6.2)
Equation 6.2 indicates that IPF is reducing with increasing IR. However, there is a great
deal of scatter in the graph, and it should therefore not serve as anything more than a
rough guideline until a large database is available.
==PAGE:64==
52
CHAPTER 6. DATA INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.3: Ultimate bearing capacity variation with IR.
Figure 6.4: Variation of IPF with IR.
Step 6:
The predicted bearing capacity qult−predicted, accounting for both scale effect due to non-
linear strength behaviour and progressive failure, was calculated from:
qult−predicted = qult−peak −IPF(qult−peak −qult−cs)
(6.3)
The values are plotted in Figure 6.3 (labeled as "prediction’ values). It is seen that values
predicted from the proposed method compare relatively good with the experimentally
observed values; which is not surprising since IPF was developed from the same tests.
==PAGE:65==
6.2. BEARING CAPACITY OF FOOTINGS ON SAND: A PROGRESSIVE FAILURE
APPROACH
53
Discussion
As described in Section 2.5, two counteracting mechanisms are assumed to occur for the
progressive failure: (1) increased progressive failure due to increased conﬁning stress at
a given relative density, as observed by Yamaguchi et al. (1976); (2) increased potential
for progressive failure with decreasing conﬁning stress, since this leads to an increase
in (φ
′
p −φ
′
cs). Perkins & Madson (2000) found IPF to be slightly increasing with IR,
i.e. mechanism (1) becomes more pronounced when compared to mechanism (2) as IR
increases. However, the opposite was observed in this study with a reducing IPF with
increasing IR.
In Section 5.3, it was pointed out that the bearing capacity term Nγ is difﬁcult to
determine analytically, since it is highly inﬂuenced by the roughness of the footing-soil
interface. With an upper bound limit analysis, Kumar (2004) did a study on the variation
of Nγ with δ. Kumar provided the variation of Nγ with δ/φ′ for different values of φ′. For
a given φ′, the variation of Nγ was shown up to a value of δ beyond which the computed
magnitude of Nγ becomes larger than that given for a perfectly rough footing. This value
of δ, namely δR, is hence the value of which the footing can be assumed to behave as a
perfectly rough footing.
The variation of δR/φ′ with φ′, as determined by Kumar, is shown in Figure 6.5, and
an approximate expression is given as:
δR/φ′ = 1.83e−0.045φ′
(6.4)
With the critical state friction angles for the sands tested in this study being in the range
30.7◦-33.8◦, a value of approximately 14◦for δR is obtained. This indicates that only the
footing tests performed on Leighton Buzzard D can be assumed to perform as a perfectly
rough footing, according to the values given in Table 5.3. Hence, for the remaining four
sands it was unconservative to calculate Nγ with an equation assuming a perfectly rough
soil-footing interface (Equation 2.17). Instead, an intermediate value between a perfectly
smooth footing and a perfectly rough footing would be more suitable for Nγ for these
sands. This could possibly explain why the experimentally observed bearing capacity of
Leighton Buzzard D is signiﬁcantly closer to the calculated Peak bearing capacity when
compared to the other four sands; see Figure 6.3 & 6.4 (where IR=4.87 for Leighton
Buzzard D).
==PAGE:66==
54
CHAPTER 6. DATA INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.5: Variation of δR/φ′ with φ′ (from Kumar, 2004).
6.3
Evaluation of CPT results
qc-Dr correlations
As noted in Section 2.4, several researchers have made attempts to ﬁt the empirical ﬁtting
parameters (C0, C1, C2) in Equation 2.13; some of the outcomes are found in Table 2.2.
However, these parameters tend to overestimate Dr from CPTs carried out in a geotech-
nical centrifuge. This issue is clearly seen in Figure 6.6, which shows a comparison of
the use of the different ﬁtting parameters in Equation 2.13 for Test 6. With the different
ﬁtting parameters, a value of Dr in the range 100-120% was estimated; and a constant Dr
value was not even fully reached.
Sadrekarimi (2016) pointed out that a unique form of Equation 2.13 can not be de-
termined for all sands. This issue is clearly seen with the very wide range of Dr values
in Figure 6.6, where the ﬁtting parameters were estimated from different sands. The rea-
son for this is explained by the difference in sand behaviour for different sands, even at
the same relative density and conﬁning stress; this has been extensively discussed in this
report.
Observations in Section 6.1 indicate that the basic sand behaviour can be explained
quite well with the compressibility of the sand (with the appearing correlation between Q
and A in Bolton’s (1986) expression). It was therefore decided to adopt Equation 2.14 for
the evaluation of Dr in this study, since this expression includes the parameter bx, which
accounts for the compressibility.
==PAGE:67==
6.3. EVALUATION OF CPT RESULTS
55
Figure 6.6: Comparison of ﬁtting parameters for the use of Equation 2.13 for Test 6.
Stress normalisaton method
The stress normalisation exponent C1 has generally been evaluated from calibration cham-
ber tests; and C1 has been estimated at high overburden pressures, where a constant value
is reached. However, C1 is in fact taking increasingly higher values with reducing over-
burden pressure at low stresses, which makes these constant C1 values unsuitable for
shallow depth interpretation (this is the case for centrifuge tests).
In order to make an improved stress normalisation method for this study, which pro-
duces an equal normalised cone resistance (qc/σ′
v
C1) from different depths in the same soil
at the same Dr, the cone end resistance was normalised to a common vertical effective
stress of 100 kPa (Wroth, 1984), and the following expression was considered:
qc1 = qc(pa/σ′
v)C1
(6.5)
where qc1 is equal to qc at σ′
v=100 kPa. The graph in Figure 6.7 was therefore used to
evaluate the increase in C1 with reducing vertical effective stress. The change in C1 was
estimated at increments of σ′
v of 5 kPa in the range σ′
v/pa=0.1-1.65. Test results of Test
6 & 7 were employed for this examination, since these tests had the smoothest curves;
examples of the estimations are shown in Figure 6.8, and the full examination is found in
Appendix H.
==PAGE:68==
56
CHAPTER 6. DATA INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.7: Stress normalisation with qc1/qc.
Figure 6.8: Examples of the determination of the stress normalisation exponent C1 at
different stress levels.
==PAGE:69==
6.3. EVALUATION OF CPT RESULTS
57
Figure 6.9: Variation of C1 with σ′
v/pa of Test 6 & 7.
The variation of C1 with σ′
v/pa plotted in Figure 6.9, indicates a nearly linear correla-
tion given as:
C1 = a(σ′
v/pa) + b
(6.6)
where a=-0.41 and b=1.73 for Test 6 & 7. A rearrangement of Equation 6.5 with C1
deﬁned by Equation 6.6 is superimposed onto all the CPT results in Figure 6.10. It is seen
that very good approximations were obtained by keeping a=-0.41 (similar to Test 6 & 7)
and making small adjustments to the b value for the different sands. The three different
fractions of Leighton Buzzard sand take nearly similar best ﬁt values of b, whereas the
two mixed sands take smaller values. This suggests a signiﬁcant effect of the uniformity
of the sand on the b value. A correlation, despite a relatively small database, is therefore
established in Figure 6.11 (note that some values plot on top of each other) and given as:
b = −0.3Cu + 2.2
(6.7)
Shallow depth interpretation of Dr
The applicability of Equation 2.14 to estimate the relative density at shallow depth in a
geotechnical centrifuge was assessed from the CPT results. Equation 6.6 & 6.7 were used
to determine C1, leaving bx to be the only unknown parameter in Equation 2.14. Since
Dr was carefully monitored for all the samples, an individual approximate estimation of
a best ﬁt value of bx was possible for each sample; this is seen in Figure 6.12.
As mentioned previously in this section, Jamiolkowski et al. (2001) incorporated bx in
Equation 2.14 to account for the compressibility of the sand, and it was argued in Section
6.1 that the compressibility can be described with the Isc factor. A correlation between
==PAGE:70==
58
CHAPTER 6. DATA INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.10: qc variation with σ′
v of all the CPTs performed; and Equation 6.5 with C1
deﬁned by Equation 6.6 with best-ﬁt a and b values superimposed.
==PAGE:71==
6.3. EVALUATION OF CPT RESULTS
59
Figure 6.11: Variation of the b coefﬁcient in Equation 6.6 with Cu.
bx and Isc was therefore aimed for in this study. Since qc was clearly inﬂuenced by the
g level, correlations between bx and Isc were established for 40g and 60g individually in
Figure 6.13. The correlation was at 40g found to be approximately:
bx = −5.5Isc + 92
(6.8)
and at 60g:
bx = −3.4Isc + 78
(6.9)
Discussion
It was shown in this section that Equation 2.14 can be applied for shallow depth interpre-
tation of Dr in a geotechnical centrifuge, when Equation 6.6 & 6.7 are used to determine
C1 and Equation 6.8 & 6.9 are used to determine bx for CPTs carried out at 40g and
60g, respectively. However, it remains blurry how bx varies between different g levels.
Furthermore, the penetration depth that is needed in order to generate a ’steady state’ qc
value (nearly constant value) at a given g level and Dr value is an issue that needs to be
addressed. A way to assist in these regards would be to conduct a similar testing series at
different g levels in order to obtain data from tests performed at no less than 4-5 different
g levels. The testing series should ideally be carried out with at least one fairly low g
level, where deep CPTs would be needed to reach a ’steady state’ qc value.
==PAGE:72==
60
CHAPTER 6. DATA INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.12: Shallow depth interpretation of Dr from centrifuge CPTs with an approxi-
mate estimation of bx.
==PAGE:73==
6.4. RELATING BEARING CAPACITY OF FOOTINGS ON SAND TO CPT qc
61
Figure 6.13: Variation of bx with Isc for CPTs carried out at 40g and 60g.
6.4
Relating bearing capacity of footings on sand to
CPT qc
Based on data from 8 sand sites and over 80 footing tests, Lehane (2013) proposed the
following expression:
q0.1 = 0.16qc,avg
(6.10)
where q0.1 is the applied bearing pressure at w/d=0.1 (similar to qult−experiment in the
previous section) and qc,avg is the average qc within the footing’s depth of inﬂuence (zI),
where zI is given in accordance to the ﬁndings of Burland & Burbridge (1985):
zI(m) = [B(m)]0.7
(6.11)
Lehane showed that Equation 6.10 could predict 80% of the footing test results to within
25% of the measured q0.1.
A clear advantage of Equation 6.10 is that it avoids the two step process of determin-
ing a geotechnical parameter from a CPT qc value and then applying this parameter in a
foundation stability problem. However, Equation 6.10 assumes a proportional relation-
ship between q0.1 and qc,avg and is not structured in a way that allows factors known to
affect bearing capacity to be accounted for explicitly.
Relating q0.1 to CPT qc based on the test results from this study
To obtain realistic prototype scale values of the CPT qc measured in the centrifuge tests, a
stress normalisation of the qc value was needed. Therefore, the variation of qc/σ′
v
C1 with
σ′
v was plotted in Figure 6.14, where C1 was calculated with Equation 6.6 & 6.7. A near
==PAGE:74==
62
CHAPTER 6. DATA INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION
Table 6.2: Values for the correlation between bearing capacity of footings on sand and
the CPT qc.
Test no.
Sand
g level
qc/σ′
v
C1
q0.1
zI
qc,avg
q0.1/qc,avg
(near constant value)
kPa
m
kPa
1
Leighton Buzzard B
40g
29880
1479
1.85
1544
0.96
2
Leighton Buzzard B
60g
22742
1419
1.85
1175
1.21
4
Leighton Buzzard C
40g
30633
1401
1.85
1639
0.85
5
Leighton Buzzard C
60g
25393
1501
1.85
1359
1.10
6
Leighton Buzzard D
40g
35801
1775
1.85
1732
1.02
7
Leighton Buzzard D
60g
27178
1820
1.85
1315
1.38
8
Mix 1
40g
24815
1700
1.85
2608
0.65
9
Mix 1
60g
22210
1732
1.85
2334
0.74
10
Mix 2
40g
27398
1702
1.85
2197
0.77
11
Mix 2
60g
22045
1655
1.85
1768
0.94
constant value was estimated and used to determine the qc within the depth of inﬂuence
zI, of which the qc,avg was calculated; see Table 6.2.
With the estimation of qc,avg, the variation of q/qc,avg with w/d was plotted in Figure
6.15, where the tests performed at 40g are shown in graph (a) and the ones performed at
60g are shown in graph (b). The reason for this separation is that the tests performed at
60g are taking signiﬁcantly larger values of q/qc,avg compared with the ones performed
at 40g.
Quite a large spread in q/qc,avg between the different sands are seen in Figure 6.15.
The terminating values in the graphs, q0.1/qc,avg, are listed in Table 6.2. The average
value of q0.1/qc,avg is calculated as 0.85 at 40g and 1.08 at 60g. These values are clearly
not comparable to the ones of Lehane (2013); this is partly due to scale effects between
the prototype cone diameter employed in the centrifuge and the one employed in a ﬁeld
situation.
However, the plotted variation of q0.1/qc,avg with Isc in Figure 6.16 clearly shows
that the soil classiﬁcation parameters are inﬂuencing q0.1/qc,avg at both 40g and 60g; i.e.
q0.1/qc,avg is decreasing with increasing Isc. This suggests that relating q0.1 to CPT qc
should include additional consideration regarding different soil characteristics in order to
improve the accuracy of the q0.1 predictions. Hence, Equation 6.10 could be improved
with an additional parameter appropriate for a ﬁeld situation.
Discussion
Clearly, the average q0.1/qc,avg values of 0.85 at 40g and 1.08 at 60g are inﬂuenced by
scale effects due to the different prototype diameter cones employed. The prototype cone
diameter at 40g is 452 mm and the one at 60g is 678 mm. Since the area of a circle varies
in direct proportion to the square of the radius, it could be assumed (somewhat arbitrary)
==PAGE:75==
6.4. RELATING BEARING CAPACITY OF FOOTINGS ON SAND TO CPT qc
63
Figure 6.14: Variation of qc/σ′
v
C1 with σ′
v and determination of near constant value
==PAGE:76==
64
CHAPTER 6. DATA INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION
Figure 6.15: Variation of q/qc,avg with w/d for the tests performed at (a) 40g; and (b)
60g.
Figure 6.16: Variation of q0.1/qc,avg with Isc.
that q0.1/qc,avg similarly varies in direct proportion to a given power of the prototype cone
diameter. If that is the case, q0.1/qc,avg can be deﬁned with a power function, which from
the two different g levels in this study is given by:
q0.1/qc,avg = 0.0264d0.5689
c
(6.12)
where dc is the prototype cone diameter. If inserting the diameter of the typical cone used
in the ﬁeld, 35.7 mm, q0.1/qc,avg=0.20 is obtained. This value is very similar to the value
proposed by Lehane (2013) of q0.1/qc,avg=0.16, which was obtained from ﬁeld testings.
However, this approach would ideally need to be veriﬁed with a similar study containing
testing data of at least 2-3 additional prototype cone diameters. Nonetheless, this supports
the proposal of qc being inﬂuenced by scale effects.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions
Basic sand behaviour deﬁned by the A and the Q coefﬁcient in Bolton’s (1986) expression
was evaluated with a systematic study on the inﬂuence of different soil characteristics on
these coefﬁcients in direct shear. With a similar approach to Jensen et al. (2019), A and
Q were redeﬁned in Equation 6.1a & 6.1b with the Isc factor (Equation 2.12c), which was
originally introduced by Jensen et al. Following points of note emerge on review of the
trends indicated by these observations:
(a) The Q coefﬁcient, and hence the crushability, reduces with increasing Cu, increasing
d50, and decreasing ρ, i.e. higher effective stress is required to ensure zero dilation
and (φ′
p −φ′
cs)=0 for uniformly distributed sand with small and rounded particles.
(b) The A coefﬁcient increases with increasing Cu, increasing d50, and decreasing ρ, i.e.
higher levels of dilation are required by sands with large and irregular particles and a
high value of Cu to accommodate shearing, which leads to higher values of (φ′
p −φ′
cs)
at low stress levels.
(c) The A coefﬁcient is reducing systematically with an increasing Q coefﬁcient, i.e.
uniformly distributed sands with small rounded particles take lower values of (φ′
p −
φ′
cs) at low stress levels but require larger stress levels to suppress dilation when
compared to sands with large and irregular particles and a high value of Cu.
With a small database of only four triaxial tests, it was observed that when assuming
the same Q values in triaxial conditions as in direct shear, the A values in triaxial condi-
tions seem to agree very well with the ones of direct shear. Hence, it was proposed that
Equation 6.1a & 6.1b can serve as a means of assessing (φ′
p−φ′
cs) from Equation 1.1 in an
axisymmetric situation. This was particularly useful when evaluating the footing tests in
this study, since circular footings were employed. This way, the classical two step process
of determining φ′
p and then applying this parameter in a foundation stability calculation
(Equation 2.15) could be carried out and compared with the conducted footing tests.
65
==PAGE:78==
66
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSIONS
It was, however, clear that footing capacity is signiﬁcantly overestimated when ap-
plying φ′
p in a standard calculation. This is due to progressive failure, which means that
different parts of a failure surface reach failure at different times. In Section 6.2, an at-
tempt was made to quantify the progressive failure with a factor IPF (Equation 6.2). This
factor describes the relative position of the experimentally observed bearing capacity be-
tween the one calculated with φ′
p and the one calculated with φ′
cs. Originally, IPF was
suggested by Perkins & Madson (2000), and they showed that signiﬁcant improvements
to the predictions of footing capacity can be obtained with a design approach similar to
the one in Section 6.2 over those made in conventional bearing capacity calculations.
In order to estimate φ′
p with a sufﬁcient accuracy, a good estimation of Dr is needed.
Sampling difﬁculties in coarse grained soils have led to a high reliance by practitioners on
CPTs to assess this parameter. This way, the estimations of Dr are made with established
correlations between Dr and the CPT qc. However, all the correlations have a common
limitation due to the fact that they were established from experimental data obtained at
only high stress levels. At shallow penetrations, which is of interest for certain appli-
cations in geotechnical engineering and for tests performed in a geotechnical centrifuge,
the increase in the CPT qc is strongly inﬂuenced by the low conﬁning stresses due to the
overburden. A new stress normalisation method to address the issue of shallow depth
interpretation was proposed in this report with a stress normalisation factor C1 deﬁned by
Equation 6.6 & 6.7.
It was shown that when using the new deﬁnition of C1 in the expression proposed by
Jamiolkowski et al. (2001) (Equation 2.14), excellent predictions of Dr can be achieved
when the bx parameter is determined from a correlation with the Isc factor. The correla-
tion between bx and Isc was found to vary between the two different g-levels employed
(Figure 6.13). However, given the strong correlations observed between bx and Isc at each
individual g level, the author sees a good potential to establish a correlation applicable for
a ﬁeld situation.
In order to avoid the need for interpretation of φ′
p from in-situ test data, a direct corre-
lation between qc and foundation capacity is preferable. This way, the two stage process
of determining a geotechnical parameter from a CPT qc correlation and then use it in a
standard bearing capacity equation is avoided. Lehane (2013) proposed that the bear-
ing pressure required to cause a shallow foundation to settle by 10% of its width (q0.1)
is simply 0.16qc,avg. However, a direct correlation assuming a proportional relationship
between bearing capacity and qc is not structured in a way that allows different soil char-
acteristics to be accounted for explicitly in the calculations. The relationships of q0.1 to qc
established in this study show a clear dependence on the various soil characteristics, and
these relationships are changing approximately linearly with the Isc factor (Figure 6.16).
However, due to scale effects of the different prototype cone diameters, the relationships
==PAGE:79==
67
take signiﬁcantly higher values in comparison to the one of Lehane (2013). The author
believes that with a similar study to the one of this report, including 2-3 additional pro-
totype cone diameters, the scale effects could possibly be quantiﬁed, and relationships
based on centrifuge test data could then assist in creating more repeatable and reliable
relationships between q0.1 and qc for ﬁeld situations.
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
Appendices
69
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A
Raw data of the particle size
distributions
Table A.1: PSD - Leighton Buzzard B.
Size: mm
m: g
Cummulated: g
Passing: %
4.00
0
0
100
2.00
0
0
100
1.00
34.32
34.32
94.10
0.50
542.10
576.42
0.89
0.25
3.44
579.86
0.29
0.125
1.00
580.86
0.12
0.063
0.44
581.30
0.05
<0.063
0.27
581.57
0
Total
581.57
d50
0.76 mm
d10
0.55 mm
d60
0.82 mm
Cu
1.49
71
==PAGE:84==
72
APPENDIX A. RAW DATA OF THE PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS
Table A.2: PSD - Leighton Buzzard C.
Size: mm
m: g
Cummulated: g
Passing: %
4.00
0
0
100
2.00
0
0
100
1.00
0
0
100
0.50
96.45
96.45
82.70
0.25
460.57
557.02
0.10
0.125
0.46
557.48
0.01
0.063
0.04
557.52
0.01
<0.063
0.04
557.56
0
Total
557.56
d50
0.40 mm
d10
0.28 mm
d60
0.43 mm
Cu
1.54
Table A.3: PSD - Leighton Buzzard D.
Size: mm
m: g
Cummulated: g
Passing: %
4.00
0
0
100
2.00
0
0
100
1.00
0
0
100
0.50
0
0
100
0.25
37.44
37.44
92.94
0.125
492.5
529.93
0.09
0.063
0.4
530.33
0.01
<0.063
0.07
530.40
0
Total
530.40
d50
0.19 mm
d10
0.14 mm
d60
0.21 mm
Cu
1.49
==PAGE:85==
73
Table A.4: PSD - Mix 1 (sample 1).
Size: mm
m: g
Cummulated: g
Passing: %
4.00
0
0
100
2.00
0
0
100
1.00
8.28
8.28
98.84
0.50
241.16
249.44
64.93
0.25
224.51
473.95
33.36
0.125
236.91
710.86
0.06
0.063
0.29
711.15
0.02
<0.063
0.11
711.26
0
Total
711.26
d50
0.38 mm
d10
0.16 mm
d60
0.46 mm
Cu
2.84
Table A.5: PSD - Mix 1 (sample 2).
Size: mm
m: g
Cummulated: g
Passing: %
4.00
0
0
100
2.00
0
0
100
1.00
7.03
7.03
98.84
0.50
193.81
200.84
64.93
0.25
198.67
399.51
33.36
0.125
213.95
613.46
0.06
0.063
0.24
613.70
0.02
<0.063
0.09
613.79
0
Total
613.79
d50
0.37 mm
d10
0.16 mm
d60
0.44 mm
Cu
2.76
==PAGE:86==
74
APPENDIX A. RAW DATA OF THE PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS
Table A.6: PSD - Mix 1 (sample 3).
Size: mm
m: g
Cummulated: g
Passing: %
4.00
0
0
100
2.00
0
0
100
1.00
7.29
7.29
98.91
0.50
216.4
223.71
66.64
0.25
211.2
434.9
35.14
0.125
235.3
670.19
0.05
0.063
0.24
670.43
0.01
<0.063
0.09
570.52
0
Total
670.52
d50
0.37 mm
d10
0.16 mm
d60
0.45 mm
Cu
2.79
Table A.7: PSD - Mix 2 (sample 1).
Size: mm
m: g
Cummulated: g
Passing: %
4.00
0
0
100
2.00
0
0
100
1.00
2.78
2.78
99.31
0.50
93.85
96.63
75.91
0.25
220.79
317.42
20.85
0.125
83.47
400.89
0.04
0.063
0.1
400.99
0.01
<0.063
0.06
401.05
0
Total
401.05
d50
0.38 mm
d10
0.18 mm
d60
0.43 mm
Cu
2.31
==PAGE:87==
75
Table A.8: PSD - Mix 2 (sample 2).
Size: mm
m: g
Cummulated: g
Passing: %
4.00
0
0
100
2.00
0
0
100
1.00
2.6
2.6
99.34
0.50
90.95
93.55
76.26
0.25
218.02
311.57
20.95
0.125
82.45
394.02
0.03
0.063
0.09
394.11
0.01
<0.063
0.03
394.14
0
Total
394.14
d50
0.38 mm
d10
0.18 mm
d60
0.43 mm
Cu
2.31
Table A.9: PSD - Mix 2 (sample 3).
Size: mm
m: g
Cummulated: g
Passing: %
4.00
0
0
100
2.00
0
0
100
1.00
2.6
2.6
99.36
0.50
89.75
92.35
77.12
0.25
222.62
314.97
21.97
0.125
88.47
403.44
0.05
0.063
0.15
403.59
0.01
<0.063
0.04
403.63
0
Total
403.63
d50
0.38 mm
d10
0.18 mm
d60
0.42 mm
Cu
2.32
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX B
Calculations for void ratio limits
The maximum and minimum dry densities are calculated from the following equation:
ρd = ms
V
(B.1)
where
ρd=ρdmin for minimum dry density, in g/cm3;
and ρdmax for maximum dry density, in g/cm3
ms=mass of dry material i mould, in grams
V =Volume of mould, in cm3
With ρdmin and ρdmax known, the void ratio limits emax and emin are given as:
emax = Gsρw
ρmin
−1
(B.2a)
emin = Gsρw
ρmax
−1
(B.2b)
where ρw is the density of water, assumed equal to 1 g/cm3. All values are found in Table
B.1 and Table B.2.
77
==PAGE:90==
78
APPENDIX B. CALCULATIONS FOR VOID RATIO LIMITS
Table B.1: Calculations of emax.
Sand
ms : g
V : cm3
ρdmin: g/cm3
Gs
emax
emax (average)
Leighton Buzzard B
102.87
69.48
1.480
2.66
0.797
0.789
Leighton Buzzard B
103.55
69.48
1.490
2.66
0.785
Leighton Buzzard B
103.52
69.48
1.490
2.66
0.785
Leighton Buzzard C
104.08
69.48
1.498
2.66
0.776
0.777
Leighton Buzzard C
103.96
69.48
1.496
2.66
0.778
Leighton Buzzard C
104.03
69.48
1.497
2.66
0.777
Leighton Buzzard D
99.12
69.48
1.427
2.66
0.865
0.865
Leighton Buzzard D
99.09
69.48
1.426
2.66
0.865
Leighton Buzzard D
99.11
69.48
1.426
2.66
0.865
Mix 1 (sample 1)
108.38
69.56
1.558
2.66
0.707
0.714
Mix 1 (sample 1)
107.81
69.56
1.550
2.66
0.716
Mix 1 (sample 1)
107.67
69.56
1.548
2.66
0.718
Mix 1 (sample 2)
108.62
69.56
1.561
2.66
0.704
0.710
Mix 1 (sample 2)
108.20
69.56
1.556
2.66
0.710
Mix 1 (sample 2)
107.75
69.56
1.549
2.66
0.717
Mix 1 (sample 3)
107.76
69.56
1.549
2.66
0.717
0.714
Mix 1 (sample 3)
107.99
69.56
1.552
2.66
0.713
Mix 1 (sample 3)
108.19
69.56
1.555
2.66
0.710
Mix 2 (sample 1)
106.48
69.56
1.531
2.66
0.738
0.737
Mix 2 (sample 1)
106.57
69.56
1.532
2.66
0.736
Mix 2 (sample 1)
106.53
69.56
1.531
2.66
0.737
Mix 2 (sample 2)
106.31
69.56
1.528
2.66
0.741
0.737
Mix 2 (sample 2)
106.71
69.56
1.534
2.66
0.734
Mix 2 (sample 2)
106.54
69.56
1.532
2.66
0.737
Mix 2 (sample 3)
106.49
69.56
1.531
2.66
0.737
0.741
Mix 2 (sample 3)
106.16
69.56
1.526
2.66
0.743
Mix 2 (sample 3)
106.16
69.56
1.526
2.66
0.743
==PAGE:91==
79
Table B.2: Calculations of emin.
Sand
ms : g
V : cm3
ρdmax: g/cm3
Gs
emin
emin (average)
Leighton Buzzard B
115.60
66.41
1.741
2.66
0.528
0.526
Leighton Buzzard B
116.09
66.51
1.745
2.66
0.524
Leighton Buzzard C
117.91
67.65
1.743
2.66
0.526
0.525
Leighton Buzzard C
117.65
67.36
1.747
2.66
0.523
Leighton Buzzard D
111.55
66.46
1.678
2.66
0.585
0.588
Leighton Buzzard D
111.29
67.16
1.672
2.66
0.591
Mix 1 (sample 1)
124.64
66.54
1.873
2.66
0.420
0.426
Mix 1 (sample 1)
121.45
65.35
1.858
2.66
0.431
Mix 1 (sample 2)
120.43
64.75
1.860
2.66
0.430
0.426
Mix 1 (sample 2)
121.73
65.05
1.871
2.66
0.422
Mix 1 (sample 3)
120.35
64.65
1.861
2.66
0.429
0.425
Mix 1 (sample 3)
122.03
65.15
1.873
2.66
0.420
Mix 2 (sample 1)
118.17
65.55
1.803
2.66
0.475
0.474
Mix 2 (sample 1)
118.25
65.45
1.807
2.66
0.472
Mix 2 (sample 2)
118.63
65.55
1.810
2.66
0.470
0.472
Mix 2 (sample 2)
118.13
66.45
1.805
2.66
0.474
Mix 2 (sample 3)
119.95
66.14
1.814
2.66
0.467
0.472
Mix 2 (sample 3)
118.20
65.65
1.801
2.66
0.477
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX C
Binary pictures for quantiﬁcation of
shape parameters
C.1
Binary images of Leighton Buzzard B
81
==PAGE:94==
82
APPENDIX C. BINARY PICTURES FOR QUANTIFICATION OF SHAPE
PARAMETERS
==PAGE:95==
C.1. BINARY IMAGES OF LEIGHTON BUZZARD B
83
==PAGE:96==
84
APPENDIX C. BINARY PICTURES FOR QUANTIFICATION OF SHAPE
PARAMETERS
==PAGE:97==
C.1. BINARY IMAGES OF LEIGHTON BUZZARD B
85
==PAGE:98==
86
APPENDIX C. BINARY PICTURES FOR QUANTIFICATION OF SHAPE
PARAMETERS
C.2
Binary images of Leighton Buzzard C
==PAGE:99==
C.2. BINARY IMAGES OF LEIGHTON BUZZARD C
87
==PAGE:100==
88
APPENDIX C. BINARY PICTURES FOR QUANTIFICATION OF SHAPE
PARAMETERS
==PAGE:101==
C.2. BINARY IMAGES OF LEIGHTON BUZZARD C
89
==PAGE:102==
90
APPENDIX C. BINARY PICTURES FOR QUANTIFICATION OF SHAPE
PARAMETERS
C.3
Binary images of Leighton Buzzard D
==PAGE:103==
C.3. BINARY IMAGES OF LEIGHTON BUZZARD D
91
==PAGE:104==
92
APPENDIX C. BINARY PICTURES FOR QUANTIFICATION OF SHAPE
PARAMETERS
==PAGE:105==
C.3. BINARY IMAGES OF LEIGHTON BUZZARD D
93
==PAGE:106==
94
APPENDIX C. BINARY PICTURES FOR QUANTIFICATION OF SHAPE
PARAMETERS
==PAGE:107==
C.3. BINARY IMAGES OF LEIGHTON BUZZARD D
95
==PAGE:108==
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX D
Calibration of vertical load cell
Figure D.1: All tests.
97
==PAGE:110==
98
APPENDIX D. CALIBRATION OF VERTICAL LOAD CELL
Figure D.2: Test 1.
Figure D.3: Test 2.
Figure D.4: Test 3.
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX E
All direct shear tests
Figure E.1: Leighton Buzzard B
Figure E.2: Leighton Buzzard C
99
==PAGE:112==
100
APPENDIX E. ALL DIRECT SHEAR TESTS
Figure E.3: Leighton Buzzard D
Figure E.4: Mix 1
Figure E.5: Mix 2
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX F
Estimations of ψmax from direct
shear tests
Note that in all the graphs the vertical displacement axis is called the normal displace-
ment.
F.1
Leighton Buzzard B
101
==PAGE:114==
102
APPENDIX F. ESTIMATIONS OF ψmax FROM DIRECT SHEAR TESTS
F.2
Leighton Buzzard C
==PAGE:115==
F.3. LEIGHTON BUZZARD D
103
F.3
Leighton Buzzard D
F.4
Mix 1
==PAGE:116==
104
APPENDIX F. ESTIMATIONS OF ψmax FROM DIRECT SHEAR TESTS
F.5
Mix 2
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX G
Footing Tests
Figure G.1: Leighton Buzzard B
105
==PAGE:118==
106
APPENDIX G. FOOTING TESTS
Figure G.2: Leighton Buzzard C
Figure G.3: Leighton Buzzard D
==PAGE:119==
107
Figure G.4: Mix 1
Figure G.5: Mix 2
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX H
Estimations for new stress
normalisation method
H.1
Estimations of C1 from Test 6
109
==PAGE:122==
110APPENDIX H. ESTIMATIONS FOR NEW STRESS NORMALISATION METHOD
==PAGE:123==
H.2. ESTIMATIONS OF C1 FROM TEST 7
111
H.2
Estimations of C1 from Test 7
==PAGE:124==
112APPENDIX H. ESTIMATIONS FOR NEW STRESS NORMALISATION METHOD
==PAGE:125==
H.2. ESTIMATIONS OF C1 FROM TEST 7
113
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
Notation
a
Parameter in Equation 6.6
(Page 57)
¯a
Centrifugal acceleration
(Page 28)
A
Coefﬁcient in Equation 1.1
(Page 1)
A
Area of triaxial sample
(Page 1)
A0
Area of triaxial sample before consolidation
(Page 28)
Ac
Area of triaxial sample after consolidation
(Page 27)
b
Parameter in Equation 6.6
(Page 57)
bx
Parameter in Equation 2.14
(Page 12)
B
Coefﬁcient in Equation 2.3
(Page 6)
B
Footing width
(Page 12)
B
Cone diameter
(Page 33)
c′
Effective soil cohesion
(Page 12)
C0
Empirical ﬁtting parameter in Equation 2.13
(Page 11)
C1
Stress normalisation exponent
(Page 11)
C2
Empirical ﬁtting parameter in Equation 2.13
(Page 11)
Cr
Empirical constant in Equation 2.5
(Page 7)
Cu
Coefﬁcient of uniformity
(Page 10)
d10
maximum effective particle particle size of the smallest 10% (Page 18)
d50
Mean effective soil particle size
(Page 18)
d60
maximum effective particle particle size of the smallest 60% (Page 18)
dc
Prototype cone diameter
(Page 64)
D
Diameter of container in the centrifuge
(Page 33)
Dr
Relative density
(Page 1)
e
Void ratio
(Page 6)
emax
Maximum void ratio
(Page 6)
115
==PAGE:128==
116
NOTATION
emin
Minimum void ratio
(Page 6)
fs
Sleeve friction
(Page 32)
Ft
Applied vertical force in direct shear
(Page 25)
g
Acceleration due to gravity
(Page 29)
Gs
Soil speciﬁc gravity
(Page 18)
H
Height of sample
(Page 33)
H0
Height of sample before consolidation
(Page 27)
Hc
Height of sample after consolidation
(Page 27)
IPF
Progressive failure index
(Page 15)
IR
Relative dilatancy index
(Page 1)
Isc
Soil classiﬁcation index
(Page 1)
N
Prototype scale factor
(Page 29)
Nc
Bearing capacity factor
(Page 12)
Nq
Bearing capacity factor
(Page 12)
Nγ
Bearing capacity factor
(Page 12)
p
′
Mean effective stress
(Page 1)
p
′
0
Consolidation pressure
(Page 26)
pa
Atmospheric pressure (≈100 kPa)
(Page 12)
p
′
crit
Mean effective stress at which zero dilation is ensured
(Page 7)
p′
f
Mean effective stress at failure
(Page 29)
q
Deviatoric stress
(Page 29)
q
Applied pressure to footing
(Page 45)
q
′
Surcharge existing at the footing base (effective stress)
(Page 12)
q0.1
Applied pressure at w/d=0.1
(Page 61)
qc
CPT end resistance
(Page 2)
qc,avg
Average value of qc within the depth of inﬂuence
(Page 3)
qf
Deviatoric stress at failure
(Page 29)
qult
Ultimate bearing capacity
(Page 12)
qult−cs
Ultimate bearing capacity from the critical state friction angle(Page 15)
qult−experiment
Experimentally observed ultimate bearing capacity
(Page 15)
qult−peak
Ultimate bearing capacity from the peak friction angle
(Page 15)
qult−predicted
Ultimate bearing capacity predicted with Equation 6.3
(Page 15)
Q
Coefﬁcient in Equation 1.1
(Page 1)
Q
Normalised cone end resistance
(Page 33)
r
Radius
(Page 29)
rt
Radius from center of rotation to top of sand surface
(Page 33)
R
Roundness of particles
(Page 19)
RF
Reduction factor
(Page 25)
==PAGE:129==
117
S
Sphericity of particles
(Page 19)
S
Distance from center of CPT to nearest boundary
(Page 33)
Tcs
Critical state shear load
(Page 25)
Tp
Peak shear load
(Page 25)
u
Pore pressure
(Page 32)
V
Volume of triaxial sample
(Page 28)
V0
Volume of triaxial sample before consolidation
(Page 27)
Vc
Volume of triaxial sample after consolidation
(Page 27)
w
Footing settlement
(Page 45)
W
Weight of upper box
(Page 25)
Wwater
Weight of water
(Page 27)
z
Penetration depth
(Page 33)
zI
Depth of inﬂuence
(Page 61)
Z
Normalised CPT penetration depth
(Page 33)
δ
Interface friction angle
(Page 23)
δh
Horizontal displacement in direct shear
(Page 26)
δR
Interface friction angle of which a footing behaves as rough (Page 53)
δv
Vertical displacement in direct shear
(Page 26)
εa
Axial strain
(Page 27)
εp
Volumetric strain
(Page 27)
εq
Shear strain
(Page 27)
εr
Radial strain
(Page 27)
γ
′
Buoyant soil unit weight
(Page 12)
˙θ
Angular velocity
(Page 29)
ρ
Regularity
(Page 1)
ρdmax
Maximum dry density
(Page 18)
ρdmin
Minimum dry density
(Page 18)
ρwater
Density of water
(Page 28)
σa
Axial stress
(Page 27)
σr
Radial stress
(Page 27)
σ′
a
Effective Axial stress
(Page 29)
σ′
r
Effective Radial stress
(Page 29)
σ
′
v
Vertical effective stress
(Page 9)
σ
′
v,crit
Vertical effective stress at which zero dilation is ensured
(Page 9)
τ
Applied shear stress
(Page 24)
τcs
Critical state shear stress
(Page 25)
τp
Peak shear stress
(Page 25)
φ
′
Angle of friction
(Page 5)
==PAGE:130==
118
NOTATION
φ
′
cs
Critical state friction angle
(Page 1)
φ
′
m
Mobilised friction angle
(Page 6)
φ
′
p
Peak friction angle
(Page 1)
φ
′
p,ds
Peak friction angle in direct shear
(Page 6)
φ
′
p,tr
Triaxial peak friction angle
(Page 7)
ψ
Dilation angle
(Page 5)
ψmax
Maximum dilation angle
(Page 5)
==PAGE:131==
References
Acar, Y. B., Durgunoglu, H. T, & Tumay, M. T. (1982). Interface properties of sand.
Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division-Asce, 108(4), 648–654.
Baldi, G., Bellotti, R., Ghiona, V., Jamiolkowski, M., & Pasqualini, E. (1986). Interpre-
tation of CPTs and CPTUs. PartII: drained penetration of sands. In: Fourth Inter-
national Geotechnical Seminar on Field Instrumentation and in situ Measurements.
Nanyang Technological Institute, Singapore 143–156.
Billam, J. (1972). Some aspects of the behaviour of granular materials at high pressures.
In Stress-strain behaviour of soils, pp. 69-80 (ed. R. H. G. Parry). London: Foulis.
Bishop, A. W., Webb, D. L., & Lewin, P. I. (1965). Undisturbed Samples of London Clay
from the Ashford Common Shaft: Strength–Effective Stress Relationships. Géotech-
nique, 15(1), 1–31.
Blaker, Lunne, T., Vestgården, T., Krogh, L., Thomsen, N. V., Powell, J. J. M., & Wallace,
C. F. (2015). Method dependency for determining maximum and minimum dry unit
weights of sands. Frontiers in Offshore Geotechnics Iii - 3rd International Symposium
on Frontiers in Offshore Geotechnics, Isfog 2015, 1159–1166.
Bolton, M. D. (1986). The strength and dilatancy of sands. Geotechnique, 36(1), 65–78.
Briaud, J.-L., & Jeanjean, P. (1994). Load settlement curve method for spread footings
on sand. Geotechnical Special Publication, 2(40), 1774–1804.
BSI (1990). British Standard methods of test for soils for civil engineering purposes:
Part 8 Shear strength tests (effective stress). BS1377. British Standards Institution,
London.
Cho, G. C., Dodds, J., & Santamarina, J. C. (2006). Particle shape effects on pack-
ing density, stiffness, stiffness, and strength: Natural and crushed sands. Journal of
Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 132(5), 591-602.
De Beer, E. E. (1965). Inﬂuence of the mean normal stress on the shearing strength of
sand: Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Soil Mech. Fdn Engng, Montreal 1, 165-169.
119
==PAGE:132==
120
REFERENCES
DGF (2001). Laboratoriehåndbogen - DGF Bulletin 15. Dansk Geoteknisk Forening,
Lyngby, Denmark.
Garnier, J., Gaudin, C., Springman, S. M., Culligan, P. J., Goodings, D., Konig, D., ...
Thorel, L. (2007). Catalogue of scaling laws and similitude questions in geotechnical
centrifuge modelling. International Journal of Physical Modelling in Geotechnics,
7(3), 01–23.
GeoDelft (Delft Geotechnics). (1936). The pre-determination of the required length and
the prediction of the resistance of piles. Proceedings of 1st International Conference
on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Cambridge. 22-26 June. 181-194.
Hamidi, B., Varaksin, S., & Nikraz, H. (2013) Relative density concept is not a reliable
criterion. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers: Ground Improvement,
166(2), 78-85.
Igwe, O., Sassa, K., & Wang, F. (2007). The inﬂuence of grading on the shear strength of
loose sands in stress-controlled ring shear tests. Landslides, 4(1), 43–51.
Jamiolkowski, M., Lo Presti , D. C. F., & Manassero, M., (2001). Evaluation of relative
density and shear strength of sands from CPT and DMT. Germaine, J. T., Sheahan,
T. C., Whitman, R. V. (Eds.), Soil Behavior and Soft Ground Construction, ASCE
Geotechnical Special Publication, 119. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE),
Reston, Virginia, 201–238.
Jensen, M. R., Lehane, B. M., Liu, Q. B., Zania, V., & Butterworth, C. (2019). The
strength of Perth sands in direct shear. 13th Aust. NZ Conf on Geomechanics, (in
press).
Kimura, T., Kusakabe, O. & Saitoh, K. (1985). Geotechnical model tests of bearing
capacity problems in a centrifuge. Geotechnique 35, No. 1, 33–45.
Knappett, J. A., & Craig, R. F. (2012). Craig’s soil mechanics (pp. xxv, 552 s. : ill.).
Spon Press.
Krumbein, W. C. (1941). Measurement and Geological Signiﬁcance of Shape and Round-
ness of Sedimentary Particles. Sepm Journal of Sedimentary Research, Vol. 11.
Krumbein, W. C. & Sloss, L. L. (1963) Stratigraphy and Sedimentation, 2nd edn. San
Fransisco, CA, USA: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Kumar, J. (2004). Effect of footing-soil interface friction on bearing capacity factor Nγ.
Geotechnique, 54(10), 677–680.
Kumar, J., & Kouzer, K. M. (2007). Effect of footing roughness on bearing capacity factor
Nγ . Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 133(5), 502–511.
Kutter, B. L., Abghari, A., & Cheney, J. A. (1988). Strength Parameters for Bearing
Capacity of Sand. Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, 114(4), 491–498.
Landini, G. (2006). Particle8_Plus plugin in ImageJ. Available at:
http://www.dentisty.bham.ac.uk/landinig/software/software.html.
==PAGE:133==
121
Lau, C. K., & Bolton, M. D. (2011). The bearing capacity of footings on granular soils.
II: Experimental evidence. Geotechnique, 61(8), 639–650.
Lehane, B. M. (2013). Relating foundation capacity in sands to CPT qc. Geotechnical and
Geophysical Site Characterization 4 - Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
on Site Characterization 4, Isc-4, 1, 63–81.
Lehane, B. M., & Liu, Q. B. (2013). Measurement of Shearing Characteristics of Gran-
ular Materials at Low Stress Levels in a Shear Box. Geotechnical and Geological
Engineering, 31(1), 329–336.
Liu, Q. B., & Lehane, B. M. (2012). The inﬂuence of particle shape on the (centrifuge)
cone penetration test (CPT) end resistance in uniformly graded soil. Geotechnique,
62(11), 973-984.
Madabhushi, G. (2017). Centrifuge modelling for civil engineers, Centrifuge modelling
for civil engineers. Centrifuge Modelling for Civ. Engineers, 1–292.
Maksimovic, M. (1989). Nonlinear Failure Envelope for Soils. Journal of Geotechnical
Engineering, 115(4), 581–586.
Muhs, E. (1963). Über die zulässige Belastung nichtbindiger Böden. Miteillungen der
Deutschen Forschungsgesellshaft Für Bodenmechanik (Degebo), Berlin, Heft 16, 102-
121 (in German).
Nakata, Y., Kato, Y., & Murata, H. (2001). Properties of compression and single particle
crushing for crushable soil. Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on
Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering Vols 1-3, 215–218.
Ovesen, N. K. (1975). Centrifuge testing applied to bearing capacity problems of footings
on sand. Geotechnique 25, No. 2, 394–401.
Penman, A. D. M. (1953). Shear characteristics of saturated silt, measured in triaxial
compression. Geotechnique, 3(8), 312–328.
Perkins, S. W., & Madson, C. R. (2000). Bearing capacity of shallow foundations on
sand: A relative density approach. Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental
Engineering, 126(6), 521–530.
Ponce, V. M. & BELL, J. M. (1971). Shear strength of sand at extremely low pressures.
Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, 97(4): 625–637.
Potyondy, J. G. (1961). Skin friction between various soils and construction materials.
Geotechnique, 11(4), 339–353.
Powers, M. C. (1953). A New Roundness Scale for Sedimentary Particles. Journal of
Sedimentary Petrology, Vol. 23.
Rasband, W. S. (2004). ImageJ. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health. Available
at: http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/.
Rowe, P. W. (1962). The stress-dilatancy relation for static equilibrium of an assembly of
particles in contact. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathe-
==PAGE:134==
122
REFERENCES
matical and Physical Sciences, 269(1339), 500–527.
Rowe, P. W. (1969). The relation between the shear strength of sands in triaxial compres-
sion, plane strain and direct shear. Geotechnique 19, No. 1, 75–86.
Rowe, P. W. (1971). Theoretical meaning and observed values of deformation parameters
for soil. Proceedings of Roscoe Memorial Symposium, 143-194. Henley-on-Thames:
Foulis.
Sadrekarimi, A. (2016). Evaluation of CPT-Based Empirical Characterization Methods
for Sands. Geotechnical Special Publication, 2016-(272), 507–516.
Santamarina, J. C., & Cho, G. C. (2004). Soil behaviour: The role of particle shape.
Advances in Geotechnical Engineering: the Skempton Conference – Proceedings of
Three Day Conference in Geotechnical Engineering, Organised by the Institution of
Civil Engineers, 604-617.
Schmertmann, J. H. (1976). An Updated Correlation Between Relative Density, Dr, and
Fugro-Type Electric Cone Bearing, qc. Vicksburg, MS, Report Report DACW 39-76
M6646.
Schmertmann, J. H. (1978). Guidelines for Cone Penetration Test: Performance and
Design. Washington, D.C., Report Report FHWA-TS-78-209.
Schneider J.A. (2007). Analysis of piezocone data for displacement pile design. PhD
Thesis, University of Western Australia.
Schoﬁeld, A. N. (1998). Mohr Coulomb error correction. Ground Engineering, 31(8),
30–32.
Simoni. A., & Houlsby, G. T. (2006). The direct shear strength and dilatancy of sand-
gravel mixtures. Geotechnical and Geological Engineering, 24(3), 523-549.
Taylor, D. W. (1948). Fundamentals of soil mechanics (pp. 700 s.). Wiley.
Terzaghi, K., & Peck, R. B. (1948). Soil mechanics in engineering practice (pp. 566 s.).
Wiley.
Vesic, A. S., & Clough, G. W. (1968).
Behaviour of granular materials under high
stresses.
Proc.
ASCE, Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division
94(SM3), 661-688.
Uesugi, M., Kishida, H., & Uchikawa, Y. (1990). Friction between dry sand and concrete
under monotonic and repeated loading. Soils and Foundations, 30(1), 115–128.
Vesic, A. S. (1973). Analysis of Ultimate Loads of Shallow Foundations. Asce J Soil
Mech Found Div, 99, 45–73.
Wadell, H. (1932). Volume, shape and roundness of rock particles. J. Geol. 40, No. 5,
443-451.
Wood, D. M. (1990). Soil behaviour and critical state soil mechanics (pp. 23+462 s.).
Cambridge University Press.
Wroth, C. P. (1984). The interpretation of in situ soil tests. Géotechnique, 34(4), 449–489.
==PAGE:135==
123
Yamaguchi, H., Kimura, T., & Fuji-i, N. (1976). On the inﬂuence of progressive failure
on the bearing capacity of shallow foundations in dense sand. Soils Found, 16(4),
11–22.
Yamaguchi, H., Kimura, T., & Fuji-i, N. (1977). On the scale effect of footings in dense
sand. Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Soil Mech. Found. Engng, Tokyo 1, 759–798.
Youd, T. L. (1973). Factors Controlling Maximum and Minimum Densities of Sands.
Evaluation of Relative Density and Its Role in Geotechnical Projects Involving Co-
hesionless Soils. ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, West
Conshocken, PA 19428-2959.
