==PAGE:1==
Organic Electrochemistry of
Highly Substituted Benzoquinones
Marco Milia
Student No. s161179
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
17 March 2019
Master’s Thesis
Supervisors:
Associate Professor Johan Hjelm
Senior Researcher Roar R. Søndergaard
PhD Student Doris Hoﬀmeyer
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The electrochemical studies were performed on 2,5-Dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone (DHBQ), 1,2,4,5-
tetrahydroxy-benzene (THB) and 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene (DNTHB). DHBQ and
THB showed electrochemical performances similar to those ones found in literature, in particular
DHBQ was found to have Standard Potential of -0.70 V in alkaline media, transfer coeﬃcient of 0.146
and heterogeneous electron transfer of 1.68 ˆ 10´3cm{s. The redox couple DHBQ / THB resulted to
have similar diﬀusion coeﬃcient 1.95ˆ10´7cm2{s for the oxidized specie, DHBQ and 1.03ˆ10´7cm2{s
for the reduced specie, THB.
Experimental attempts showed an unexpected behaviour of one of the intermediate of the synthesis,
the 1,2,4,5-tetramethoxy-benzene (TMB) regarding the Friedel-Craft alkylation. The trials conducted
raised the hypothesis that TMB for its chemical structure being inactivated towards the Friedel-Craft
alkylation.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Thesis is submitted in candidacy for the M.Sc.
degree in Advanced and Applied Chemistry
at the Technical University of Denmark and it is based on the work carried at the Department of
Energy Conversion and Storage at Risø campus from September 2018 to March 2019. The project
was mainly supervised by Associate Professor Johan Hjelm and co-supervised by Senior Researcher
Roar R. Søndergaard and Ph.D Student Doris Hoﬀmeyer.
Risø campus, Roskilde, March 17th, 2019
Marco Milia
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my main supervisor Johan Hjelm for the support along this Master’s project, for
inspiring me with his great passion for science and the wish for innovation.
You introduced me
to electrochemistry and its fascinating applications, I will never forget your inspiration talks made
walking along the campus.
Many thanks to Roar R. Søndergaard, who guided me during my experimental research in organic
chemistry. Your enthusiasm for chemistry boosted me in the lab, to face the most demanding chal-
lenges.
A great thanks to Doris, that spent some time with me in the lab to help me during my experiments
and our conversations in Italian, have made electrochemistry a little more colorful.
A big thanks to Daniel, that shared with me pieces of his life; the campus avenue is a long road to
take in the morning, and it was nice to get to know each other and become friends.
A great thanks to Filippo, that with his powerful tricks, resolved my days when I was having my hard
moments with Python.
A thank you to Mark, for the many hours spent together in the lab that made it a very good time.
A big collective thank you, to the Italian community! For the good time together, for all the lunches
in the canteen, for the countless coﬀees, for the good fun in the Friday Bar and all the stories that we
can now share together. It was nice to meet all of you, good memories with all the friends, the old
and the new. A big thank you, to make Risø an Italian oasis where you can feel at home.
Of course, my greatest thank you, goes to my father and my mother. You gave me such a great support
since when I left home. Thank you for the eﬀorts you made when I needed, thank you Mamma, for
the good lunches that you prepared when I was back, thank you Babbo, to keep aside a good bottle
to open with me. And thank you Michele, for all the funny stories that you waited to tell me, to make
me laugh when we see each other, thank you for the imitations you make of people we know, that
remind me how many characters we have back home.
Thanks to my lovely aunts and uncles who give me good things to eat to pack, so that my suitcase
explodes of hams and spaghetti and ﬁnally my fridge thanks me for ﬁlling it up.
Finally, a very special thanks goes to my girlfriend Anastasiia, who I want to thanks for all the aﬀect
and the sweetness that she had for me in these months. Thank you Amore to smile to me when you
wake up, thank you for the kisses you give me when you prepare the tea, thank you for when you
prepare pancakes in the morning and when then, I put them in the plate and you don’t want because
they get cold. Thank you for this beautiful collection of moments that make my life so special.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theoretical Background and Methodology
2
2.1
General Electrochemistry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Nernst equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Reversible Electron Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Quasi-Reversible Electron Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Irreversible Electron Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
Diﬀusion Coeﬃcient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.7
Voltammetry Techniques for Electrochemical Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7.1
Linear Sweep Voltammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7.2
Cyclic Voltammetry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7.3
Rotating Disk and Rotating Ring-Disk Electrode Voltammetry . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Experimental Part - Synthesis
17
3.1
Synthesis of 1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-benzene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Puriﬁcation of 1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-benzene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Synthesis of 1,2,4,5-Tetramethoxy-benzene.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Synthesis of TMB with Iodomethane in Acetone. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Synthesis of TMB with iodomethane in Tetrahydrofuran.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.3
Synthesis of TMB using dimethyl sulfate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Trials of Friedel-Craft alkylation on TMB substrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.1
Alkylation with diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosponate in dicloromethane. . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Alkylation with Diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosphonate) in nitromethane . . . . .
20
3.3.3
Friedel-Craft Alkylation with 1,3-Dibromopropane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Dehydrogenation with Bu-Li followed by electrophilic alkylation. . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxy-benzene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5.1
Puriﬁcation by continuous distillation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.2
Puriﬁcation by ﬁltration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Experimental Part - Electrochemistry
25
4.1
Voltammetry of DHBQ/THB/DNTHB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.1
Preparation of DHBQ Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.2
Cyclic Voltammetry Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.3
Background Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.4
Cyclic Voltammetry of Dihydroxybenzoquinone and Tetrahydroxybenzene . . .
25
4.1.5
Rotating Ring Disk Electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.6
Electrochemistry of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-Benzene . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results and Discussion
27
5.1
NMR analysis of the intermediates of the synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.1
Synthesis of 1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-benzene.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.2
Synthesis of 1,2,4,5-Tetramethoxy-benzene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.3
Alkylation with diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosponate in dicloromethane. . . . . .
31
5.1.4
Alkylation with Diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosphonate) in nitromethane . . . . .
31
5.1.5
Friedel-Craft Alkylation with 1,3-Dibromopropane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.6
Dehydrogenation with Bu-Li followed by electrophilic alkylation. . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.7
Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetramethoxy-benzene . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.8
Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-benzene . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
iv
==PAGE:6==
5.2
Preliminary studies of the electrochemical behaviour of the redox couple DHBQ/THB
37
5.3
Open Circuit Potential of the Background Solution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Cyclic voltammetries of DHBQ 1mM in KOH 1M.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Cyclic voltammetry of DHBQ and THB in KOH 1M, NaCl 1M . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5.1
Cyclic Voltammetry of DHBQ 1mM in KOH 1M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5.2
Impedance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.6
Randles-Sevcik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.6.1
Levich Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.6.2
Koutecky-Levich Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.6.3
Tafel Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.7
1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Conclusion
50
7
Outlook
51
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Acronyms
CE
Counter electrode
WE
Working electrode
RE
Reference electrode
DHBQ
2,5-Dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone
THB
1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-benzene
TMB
1,2,4,5-Tetramethoxy-benzene
DEBPP
Diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosphonate
DBP
1,3-Dibromopropane
Bu-Li
n-butyllithium
THF
Tetrahydrofuran
TLC
thin layer chromatography
DNTMB
1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxy-benzene
DNTHB
1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene
NMR
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
OCP
Open Circuit Potential
CV
Cyclic Voltammetry
LSV
Linear Sweep Voltammetry
EIS
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
RDE
Rotating Disk Electrode
RRDE
Rotating Ring Disk Electrode
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The need for a sustainable society has arrived.
The demand of energy can now be supplied by
renewable sources of energy. An entire country can be powered by clean energy such as wind or solar.
The technology to use these system are now mature. However, there is still one big obstacle to prevent
from a self-sustainable society; is the achievement of a proper energy storage system, a system that
need to accumulate enough energy to power a country when the primary source is not available.
Research centres and companies all over the world are focusing on promising technologies such as
hydrogen and fuel cells. Other systems are currently under investigation by the research community,
but no technology has so far completely achieved the needs. The Li-ion battery is a mature and
well known technology and is widely used for cars and mobile devices but not the best solution for
Large-storage energy application.
A relatively new technology is the redox ﬂow battery system a technology can provide large storage
of energy with potentially low cost of manufacturing.
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Theoretical Background and Methodology
2.1
General Electrochemistry
Electrochemistry is the science that studies the processes during electron transfer between an electronic
conductor (electrode) and an redox-active compound dissolved in an ionic medium. The electrode is
usually a metal (e.g.
copper, platinum or gold), an allotropic form of carbon (e.g.
graphite), or
a semiconductor (e.g.
silicon) [1].
The behaviour of redox-active species during electron transfer
processes are described by equations discussed further in this chapter.
2.2
Nernst equation
Every electron transfer mechanism can be described by a mathematical correlation between the con-
centration of the species dissolved in solution and the electrical potential generated. A reaction which
involves transfer of electrons is characterized by its standard potential E0, which is a thermodynamic
feature of the redox couple. Consider the following reaction:
Ox ` e´
Ks,f
ÝÝÝá
âÝÝÝ
Ks,b
Red
(1)
(Ox) and (Red) are the activities of the oxidized and reduced species, respectively. The constants
shown in the equation refer to the heterogeneous electron transfer rate constants; Ks,f is the forward
rate constant and Ks,b is the backward rate constant. "s" stands for surface, because the processes
considered happen at the surface of the electrode.
The standard potential E0 refers to the two forms of the analyzed species, the oxidized form (Ox) and
the reduced form (Red). When the activity of these two forms is the same, the potential E is equal to
the standard potential E0 [2]. When the two activities are diﬀerent (due to a diﬀerent concentration),
a new, more general equation, must be used, namely the Nernst equation:
E “ E01 ` RT
nF ln pOxq
pRedq
(2)
A linear correlation exists between activity and concentration, therefore, it is possible to re-write the
activities as the product between concentration and activity coeﬃcient:
(Ox) = fOx[Ox]
(Red) = fRed[Red]
The Nernst equation can be written therefore substituting these products to the equation:
E “ E01 ` RT
nF ln fOxrOxs
fRedrReds
(3)
Then, deﬁning E01 as:
E01 “ E0 ` RT
nF ln fOx
fRed
(4)
The Nernst equation will become:
E “ E01 ` RT
nF ln rOxs
rReds
(5)
2
==PAGE:10==
Here, R is the molar gas constant (8.314 J K´1mol´1), T is the absolute temperature (K), F is the
Faraday constant (96’485 C mol´1), and n is the number of electrons involved in the reaction. The
ratio of the two species (Ox and Red) at the electrode surface is responsible for the measured potential
E [3].
2.3
Reversible Electron Transfer
An electron transfer reaction is deﬁned reversible when the two species (oxidized and reduced form)
are in thermodynamic equilibrium. Because of this equilibrium, the ratio of the two species will change
instantaneously to a change in potential E. In other words, the two species, will follow exactly the
Nernst equation and a quantify value of their ratio is possible to obtain at any E value, using the
following rearrangement of the equation:
rOxss
rRedss
“ exp nFrE ´ E0s
RT
(6)
Since the reaction will only takes place at the electrode surface and not in the bulk solution, the
concentrations are speciﬁed to be those at the electrode surface.
The cyclic voltammetry technique, as explained more in detail later in the text, consists of a sweep
(or scan) from two values of potential. The scan is performed at a deﬁned rate (ν) and therefore the
scan rate is an expression of how fast the potential is changed from E0 to E. In practice, only sweeps
at very low scan rate lead the species to behave in a reversible manner.
It’s possible to summarize some features that deﬁne the reversibility of a electron transfer reaction.
The ﬁrst three deﬁnitions can be applied for both linear sweep voltammetry, which features only one
scan, and cyclic voltammetry, which features back and forward scans:
1. The change of potential (Ep ´ E0) is independent of the scan rate (ν), a correlation that can be
also seen as:
dEp{dplog νq “ 0
(7)
This means that there is no shifting of the peak potential when the scan rate is varied, on a
logarithmic scale.
2. The diﬀerence between the peak potential (Ep) and the half-peak potential (Ep/2) is equal to
56.5 mV divided by the number of electrons transferred in the reaction:
Ep ´ Ep/2 “ ´56.5
n mV
(8)
3. The peak current (ip) varies linearly with the square root of the scan rate (ν):
ip “ 0.4463nFACbulk
c
nFD
RT
?ν
(9)
where D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the species considered (measured in cm2 s´1) and Cbulk is
the concentration of the species in solution (measured in mol cm´3).
Once the reverse scan is applied, other features can be observed. The following equations apply to
the cyclic voltammetry technique, because it has both a back and forward scan, but they cannot be
applied to the linear sweep voltammetry.
4. The ratio between the two peak currents, which are found during oxidation and reduction (re-
spectively ipox and ipred) is found to be independent of ν and equal to 1:
´ipox
ipred “ 1
(10)
3
==PAGE:11==
5. The diﬀerence between the peak potentials is equal to 57.0 mV per number of electrons n involved
in the redox reaction:
Epox ´ Epred “ 57.0
n mV
(11)
6. The formal potential E01 can be determined as the average potential of the two peak values, if
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of both oxidized and reduced specie is equal [4]:
E01 “ Epox ` Epred
2
(12)
2.4
Quasi-Reversible Electron Transfer
A reversible reaction is diﬀusion-controlled because the kinetics are so fast that they don’t have an
impact on the overall speed of the process. For a quasi-reversible reaction, however, the kinetics are
slower and impact the electrochemistry of the redox process. The reaction, in fact, does not respond
instantaneously to a change in potential. [Ox]s and [Red]s are no longer in a simple relation as shown
in Eq. 6. The two species Ox and Red are dependent also on the transfer coeﬃcient α, which measures
the symmetry of the energy barrier of the heterogeneous electron transfer that allows the conversion
between the oxidized specie and the reduced specie, so if α “ 0.5 the energy barrier of the electrode
transfer is perfectly symmetric [1]. The electrochemical reaction is determined also by the standard
heterogeneous electron transfer rate constant K 0, which is an indicator of how fast the species are
converted.
The transfer coeﬃcient is determined empirically by the Tafel plot where the logarithmic value of the
current (i) is plotted against the overpotential µ as shown in Fig.1
Figure 1: Tafel plot for current-overpotential curves with α “ 0.5
The determination of α with this empirical method, requires a constriction on values of the overpo-
tential chosen, the curve in fact, undergoes into a deviation from the linearity for high overpotential
and for very small overpotential, as shown in the plot of Fig.1.
When the overpotential tends to zero, the curve drops quickly because when the backward reaction
cannot be considered anymore negligible. The overpotential generates a straight line in the Tafel plot
for values higher than 118 mV [1], when this condition is applied, α is determined by the slope m of
the curve such as:
4
==PAGE:12==
m “ ´aF
2.3RT
(13)
for the cathodic branch and
m “ p1 ´ aqF
2.3RT
(14)
for the anodic branch
In quasi-reversible electron transfer reactions, the transfer coeﬃcient α plays a role in the heteroge-
neous electron transfer rate constants. When α decreases, the oxidation and reduction peak potentials
(Epred and Epox) are shifted towards more negative values. The opposite situation happens when α
increases; both Epred and Epox are shifted towards more positive values, as shown by the equations
below:
E “ E0 ´ RT
αnF ln k0
ks,f
(15)
E “ E0 ´
RT
p1 ´ αqnF ln k0
ks,b
(16)
For the forward rate constant ks,f and backward rate constant ks,b, respectively.
Furthermore, it is important to notice that, to identify a quasi-reversible reaction, is not enough to
evaluate the peak separation Epox´Epred to be more than 57.0
n
mV, because other factors like electrical
resistance caused by the solution can generate a voltammogram with peak separation larger than ~57
mV.
2.5
Irreversible Electron Transfer
In an irreversible electron transfer reaction, the peak separation becomes so broad that a straight line
is found between the two peak potentials. In this region, no current ﬂows. To better understand the
correlation between the electric potential and the electrochemical processes, such as oxidation and
reduction, the Butler-Volmer equation is presented below:
i “ nFAk0
˜
rOxss ¨ exp
´´αnFrE ´ E0s
RT
¯
´ rRedss ¨ exp
´p1 ´ αqnFrE ´ E0s
RT
¯¸
(17)
The shifting of the peak potentials are so signiﬁcant that the two processes, oxidation and reduction,
happen at diﬀerent values. During the positive scan (oxidation) the reduced species Red requires a
potential E so high that the ﬁrst term of the Butler-Volmer equation becomes negligible, in fact, only
the current of the oxidation is measured. Whereas during the reduction scan, the second term of the
equation becomes negligible.
2.6
Diﬀusion Coeﬃcient
The diﬀusion coeﬃcient is an important parameter of the chemical species investigated under the
electrochemical proﬁle, because it gives a measure of their mobility in solution.
The mass transport in solution can be subdivided into three modes of transport: migration, diﬀu-
sion and convection. Each of them contributes to the ﬂux of the species in solution. Migration is
the movement generated by the applied electrical potential, therefore it concerns the charged species.
5
==PAGE:13==
Convection is the random movement of the species generated by the ﬂux of the medium (the sol-
vent). Lastly, diﬀusion, is the movement of the species generated by a concentration gradient. These
contributions are expressed by the Nernst-Planck equation:
j “ jdiﬀ`jmig`jconv
(18)
j “ ´DdC
dl ´D zF
RT
dφ
dl C`νC
(19)
where D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the species, z is the ionic charge, F the Faraday constant, R the
ideal gas constant, C the concentration, ν is the velocity of the solution.[5]
In electrochemistry, solutions always involve inert electrolytes, the so-called supporting electrolytes,
which carries the charge and allows electrical conductivity in the medium. This duty allows the inves-
tigated species to not feel any inﬂuences from the potential diﬀerence, and therefore the contribution
of migration can be neglected.
In voltammetry performed with a rotating disk electrode, under rotation, also the convection is can-
celled. In fact, at the electrode surface, the liquid and the species as well are drawn radially away from
the centre with a velocity suﬃcient to neglect the contribution of the convection movement generated
by the solvent in the bulk.
The only contribution to the ﬂux is therefore the diﬀusion, generated at the electrode surface by a
concentration gradient, which can be expressed by 100% of Cbulk in the bulk and 0% of Cbulk at
the electrode surface. This model can be applied for those compounds that have a fast kinetics of
conversion (or a high heterogeneous electron transfer coeﬃcient). The Nernst-Planck equation (Eq.
19) then reduces to Fick’s law:
j “ ´DdC
dl
(20)
Close to the electrode surface, we can deﬁne a layer of liquid where the radial velocity is the only con-
tribution to the total velocity of redox-active species, whereas the perpendicular velocity contribution
can be neglected. This layer is called the diﬀusion layer (δ), because the only physical contribution to
the ﬂux of the component (from the bulk to the electrode surface) is due to diﬀusion.
Since the current generated at the electrode is generated by the conversion of the electrochemical
species, this current can be correlated with the diﬀusion process happening at the electrode surface.
More speciﬁcally, when the supply of the chemical to the surface can limit the current itself, it’s
possible to deﬁne another equation related to Eq. 20, the so-called Levich equation. If we integrate
the ﬂux over the thickness of the diﬀusion layer in Eq. 20, we will have:
j “
ż l
l0
p´DdC
dl qdl
(21)
Since the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D is an intrinsic property of the species, it is not dependent of the
distance from the electrode and therefore can be brought outside the integral:
j “ ´D
ż l
l0
dC
dl dl
(22)
j “ ´DCplq ´ Cpl 0q
l ´ l0
(23)
6
==PAGE:14==
Since the concentration at distance l is actually zero, because the species is completely converted and
the product is dragged away from the electrode surface, the concentration at l0 is the same as the one
in the bulk, and therefore we can write:
j “ ´D0 ´ C bulk
l ´ l0
(24)
l and l0 are just the points that deﬁne the diﬀusion layer, therefore:
j “ DC bulk
δ
(25)
Assuming that the diﬀusion is happening over all the area of the electrode, the value of the ﬂux can
therefore be multiplied by the surface area of the electrode A and the charge brought to the electrode,
which is proportional to the electrical charge carried by the species itself, corresponding to the product
of the Faraday constant and the electrical charge of the molecule.
The ﬂux at this point is not only a ﬂux of matter, but a ﬂux of electrical charge, and it’s the maximum
achievable because considered along all the thickness of the diﬀusion layer. The equation can then be
written in the following form:
ilim “ DCbulk
δ
nFA
(26)
This equation is known as the Levich equation. An important correlation between the diﬀusion layer
and the rotational rate of the electrode, shown below, allows the calculation of the current as a function
of the angular rotation rate of the electrode.
δ “ 1.61D1/3vk1/6ω-1/2
(27)
where vk is the kinematic viscosity and ω is the angular rotation rate. Therefore, the Levich equation
can be written as:
ilim “ 0.62nFACbulkD2/3vk-1/6ω1/2
(28)
2.7
Voltammetry Techniques for Electrochemical Characterization
The voltammetry techniques most often take place in unstirred solutions, where the only contribution
to mass transport is provided by diﬀusion. They can be divided in linear sweep voltammetry and
cyclic voltammetry.
2.7.1
Linear Sweep Voltammetry
During linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), the potential, controlled by a potentiostat, is scanned linearly
over time until it reaches a desired value. At the same time, the current is measured and reported as a
function of the potential. The ﬁgure below (Fig. 2) shows on the left the potential varied linearly over
time and on the right the response of the current against the potential. In the left part of the current
plot, a plateau is observed where the current does not change with the potential. At a certain value
of potential, the electrode is polarized enough to start the redox reaction, and the current measured
increases sharply due to the heterogeneous electron transfer between the species and the electrode.
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2: Linear sweep voltammetry. a) Potential applied and b) current response. [6]
2.7.2
Cyclic Voltammetry
In cyclic voltammetry (CV), the potential is scanned linearly over time until a certain value, just like
in LSV. When the potential reaches the highest value, it is reversed and the linear variation takes
place with opposite sign. The potential is usually varied back and forward many times leading to
several scan cycles. This process can be repeated as many times as the operator considers it necessary,
because some redox reactions gain a stable electrochemical conversion only after several cycles and
only when they behave in the same fashion, the current respond to the potential variation with the
same intensity.
Figure 3: Cyclic voltammetry. a) Potential applied and b) current response. [6]
Characteristic points of a cyclic voltammogram are the peak potential during an oxidative scan (Epox)
and peak potential during a reductive scan (Epred). These are the extreme values of potential scanned,
which they generate corresponding values of current: peak current during oxidation (ipox) and peak
current during reduction (ipred).
Experimental setup.
The set-up for a LSV and CV consists of three electrodes placed into a
solution where the compound of interest is dissolved. The solution is kept unstirred in an air-tight
vessel as shown below in Fig. 4. The electrodes used have diﬀerent meanings. The working electrode
(WE) is characterized by a ﬂat surface of known area. At this surface, the electrochemical reaction
takes place, where the redox-active species is reduced or oxidized. The electrode itself does not take
part of the reaction, it provides only electrons. Its change of potential lead the conversion of the
compound toward oxidation or reduction. [3]
The WE is connected to the counter electrode (CE) to complete the circuit. Electrons are ﬂowing
between these two electrodes and through the solution, which is equipped with a supporting electrolyte
8
==PAGE:16==
to increase the electrical conductivity. The counter electrode has the duty to complete the circuit,
without taking part on the reaction, therefore its surface area is not relevant for the chemical compound
analyzed, because the conversion between the two redox forms takes place at the working electrode.
The potential at the WE is measured using a third electrode, called a reference electrode (RE). This
electrode is required to be able to measure the real potential established between WE and CE. In
the three-electrode set-up, the RE is not perturbed by the current ﬂowing, therefore, the potential
measured is not aﬀected by perturbation of the system. Moreover, the chemical reaction happening
at the RE is characteristic of the RE composition itself and is not aﬀected by the chemicals dissolved
in solution. Due to its stability, the RE provides a stable reference from which the potential of the
WE can be measured without being aﬀect by external factor and therefore the values measured are
always accurate.
Every electrode is connected to the potentiostat, which measures the variation of the current and
potential on the WE.
Figure 4: Drawing of a three-electrode set-up for cyclic and linear sweep voltammetry. [7]
Working Electrodes.
The working electrode is made of a rod of electronic conductive material
encapsulated in an insulating material, usually Teﬂon ® [3]. A metal connector ensures the electrical
connection from the rod itself and the potentiostat. An example of working electrode is shown below
in Fig. 5.
Figure 5: Glassy carbon working electrode. [8]
9
==PAGE:17==
Counter Electrode
Counter electrodes are usually made of platinum. Most commonly, the plat-
inum electrode is used in the form of a wire, as shown in Fig. 6, equipped with a metal connector to
allow an easy connection with the potentiostat.
Figure 6: Platinum wire counter electrode.
Reference Electrodes
Reference electrodes can be found in diﬀerent types. The main feature of
these electrodes is their potential stability. These electrodes keep the same potential regardless the
chemical composition of the solution. Diﬀerent types are commercially available, but the most common
are silver- and mercury-based electrodes. A special mention regards the hydrogen based electrodes,
which they can be used also as standards for calibration.
The silver/silver chloride electrode is composed by a ﬁlament of silver coated by its chloride salt, silver
chloride. The redox reaction of this electrode is shown below.
AgCl ` e´ ÝÝá
âÝÝ Ag ` Cl´
(29)
The redox potential of Ag/AgCl is E0 = 0.22233 V against the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)
[9]. The ﬁlament of Ag/AgCl, however, is immersed in a solution of chloride ions and its potential
changes slightly depending on the concentration of the solution of chlorine used as a ﬁller.
Figure 7: Ag/AgCl reference electrode, with double junction and electrical wire. [8]
Potentiostats
The potentiostat is an electronic device used to control the working, reference and
counter electrodes simultaneously in a three-electrode cell. The potentiostat controls and measures
the current between CE and WE. The circuit is completed connecting the counter electrode to the
working electrode. The current ﬂows in the solution due to the presence of a supporting electrolyte
dissolved in large quantity in respect to the compound under investigation.
The potential at the WE surface is measured from the RE, which experiences a very low current, so
low to be considered negligible. This is achieved by increasing the resistance of the reference electrode
10
==PAGE:18==
element. Since no appreciable current ﬂows to this electrode, the RE is not aﬀected by polarization
and therefore its potential remains unchanged. The stability of the RE is crucial, because the potential
measured of the WE is referred to the RE, so to measure small variation of potential of the WE, a
stable voltage of reference is required. A overall scheme of the connection between electrodes and
potentiostat is explained in Fig. 8.
Figure 8: Overall scheme of functioning of a potentiostat. The working electrode Wk, the reference
electrode Ref and the counter electrode Ctr are shown in the scheme. Current ﬂows from Ctr to Wk
throughout the solution (circle). The potential is controlled between Wk and Ref.
2.7.3
Rotating Disk and Rotating Ring-Disk Electrode Voltammetry
Rotating Disk Electrode
The rotating disk electrode used in the homonyms technique eliminates
the eﬀect of convection and led the process to be regulated only by diﬀusion. The set-up consists of a
WE of similar features as the one used in static cyclic voltammetry. The electrode are usually made
of platinum, gold or glassy carbon with circular shape and ﬂat surface. The electrode is embedded in
an holder of insulating material (usually Teﬂon™). The rod is connected to a motor that generates a
rotation of well deﬁned angular velocity (ω). The ﬂat surface of the electrode is immersed in solution
and when the rotation is initiated, the layer of solution adjacent to the surface experience a friction
that drag the liquid away from the centre of the electrode to the edge of the rod as shown in Fig. 9.
The molecules of the solvents and the species dissolved in it have a radial component of velocity with
the positive verse of exit the surface and an angular component with the same verse of rotation of the
electrode. When the liquid ﬂows away from the surface of the rod, another ﬂow of liquid replaces the
one that escaped the electrode surface so that ﬂow that moves toward the electrode surface approaches
it perpendicularly, making the inlet ﬂow vertical and the outlet ﬂow horizontal.
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 9: Flow pattern of liquid during rotation of the rotating ring-disk electrode.
The mathematical treatment of the physical process is valid only in a range of angular velocities,
because at low rotational rates the convection plays a relevant role and is no longer negligible, and at
high rotational rates the ﬂow becomes turbulent. The mathematical description is therefore valid in
the range where the ﬂow can be considered laminar. This window of available rotational rates can be
calculated using the Reynolds number (Re) in the Eq. 30:
Re “ r2 ω
νk
(30)
where r is the radius of the rod (cm), ω the angular velocity (rad s´1), νk is the kinematic viscosity
coeﬃcient (cm2 s´1) and Re is the Reynolds number, which is dimensionless.
Reynolds numbers between 10 and 10’000 confers a laminar ﬂow to the solution; the radius of the rod
can be easily measured and the kinematic viscosity of the solution can be found in literature or for
diluted solutions can be approximated to the kinematic viscosity of the solvent, which for e.g. water
is 9.13ˆ10-7 m2 s-1) [10]. Using Eq. 30, the available angular velocities that produce a laminar ﬂow
are therefore between 12 and 12’000 rpm [3].
An increase in the rotational speed corresponds to an increase of the current measured because a
higher ﬂow of the species is brought to the electrode surface. The current i keeps growing until it
reaches a limiting value, called the limiting current il. The deﬁnition of limiting is due to the fact
that increasing the rotational speed will not produce any increase in current. This physical limitation
occurs because the species cannot move faster than their diﬀusion in the medium (water) and therefore
the process is called as diﬀusion-controlled or limited by mass-transport. For chemical species that
have fast electron transfer reactions, the limiting current is controlled solely by mass-transport and is
calculated using Eq. 28
From the Levich equation, is possible to observe a correlation between limiting current il and an-
gular velocity.
The ﬁrst one in fact, varies with the square root of the latter.
As a consequence
of this relationship, plotting il vs ω1{2 will generate a straight line with a slope corresponding to
0.62nFACbulkD2/3νk-1/6. Since all the parameters are known (number of electrons n, Faraday con-
stant F, area of the surface of the electrode A, concentration in the bulk Cbulk and kinetic viscosity of
the solution (ν´1{6), it is possible to determine the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D [3].
Rotating Ring-Disk Electrode
The rotating ring-disk electrode involves a similar equipment of
the RDE. In this technique, a ring-shaped electrode is placed concentrically to the rod which hosts
12
==PAGE:20==
also the disk electrode. The two electrodes are separated by the insulating material of the rod itself.
A potentiostat controls the potential of the two electrodes (the disk and the ring) and ﬂow current
from the counter electrode. The current measured at the two working electrodes leads to a correlation
between the two electrodes. More speciﬁcally, considering the ratio of the currents measured we have
with the following relationship:
N “ ´ir
id
(31)
where id is the current measured at the disk, ir is the current measured at the ring, and N is the
so-called collection eﬃciency.
The peculiarity of the collection eﬃciency is that the value of N does not depend on the chemical
composition of the solution investigated but only by the geometry of the system (sizes of the electrodes
and diameter of the rod). N is also independent of the rotation rate ω so that in conclusion, the
collection eﬃciency is known from the manufacturer. Typical values of N range from 0.3 and 0.45 but
anyway never over 1 [11]. It is understandable that not all the products of the redox reaction that
occurs at the disk can be re-converted at the ring, and therefore the fraction results to be smaller than
unity.
2.8
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
The nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technique is widely used in organic chemistry to understand
the structure of a compound of interest using the magnetic properties of the nuclei present in the
molecule under investigation. The resulting spectra allows the operator to correlate each peak of the
signal visualized with the atom in the molecule in its surroundings and eventually, with a tiny dose of
luck, to understand the whole structure of the molecule examined. The most common nuclei used in
NMR analysis for organic molecules are 1H and 13C, but also 15N, 31P and 10F [12].
Nuclear Precession
A nucleus, to be sensitive to the application of a magnetic ﬁeld and be visible
to the NMR analysis, needs to have a quantum number of nuclear spin (I) equal to an half-integer
value, such as 1
2, 3
2, 5
2,... Those nuclei generate a spin nuclear magnetic moment not null if placed in a
magnetic ﬁeld. On the atomic level, they start rotating around the axis of the magnetic ﬁeld applied
while rotating themselves on their own rotation axis, a movement known in physics as precession.
This movement is analogous to the characteristic movement of gyroscopes or of spinning tops. Fig.
10 shows the precession of the nucleus around the magnetic ﬁeld axis.
The angular momentum of nuclear spin, or simply spin (ms), can take only quantized values such as
2I ` 1, so for those nuclei that have quantum numbers of nuclear spin I “ 1
2, ms can take only two
values, `1
2 or ´1
2 because 2I ` 1 “ 2. In the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld, there is an equal population
of spin in the two states and the resultant is therefore null, whereas when a magnetic ﬁeld of intensity
H0 is applied, a net resultant is generated by the diﬀerence in population of the two spin states. Since
the lower energy state of the nucleus is ms “ `1
2, the population of the nuclei with low-energy spin
will be larger, which means that the magnetic moment of the nucleus (#»µ) assumes a positive value
that is proportional to the intensity of the magnetic ﬁeld H0 (µ0 “ γ ¨ H0) and same direction of the
magnetic ﬁeld applied, as shown in Fig. 10.
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure 10: Precession of a nucleus around the magnetic ﬁeld applied.
In Fig. 10, #»µ is the nuclear magnetic moment of the nucleus, ω0 is the precession frequency of the
nucleus and #  »
H0 is the magnetic moment of the applied ﬁeld of intensity H0, measured in Tesla (T).
Since #  »
H0 is a vector, it can be written as #  »
H0 “ H0 ¨ Iz, with Iz being the unit vector of the Z-axis.
Figure 11: Frequency of resonance and generation of the NMR signal.
Functioning of NMR Technique.
The NMR technique is provided using a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld generated by a superconductive magnet. To use the superconductive properties of the material,
the magnet is kept at 4 K, the temperature of liquid helium, whereas the sample remains at room
temperature. The magnetic ﬁeld produced results to be very intense, reaching the value of 10 T or
more [13].
The sample is placed in a holder which rotates to homogenize the magnetic radiation
absorbed. The sample, so the molecule to be analyzed, is disposed in a high-intensity magnetic ﬁeld,
which is swiped back and forth by the magnetic ﬁeld generator. The magnetic ﬁeld is directed along
the Z-axis, whereas an alternating magnetic ﬁeld is produced by an oscillating coil and directed along
14
==PAGE:22==
the X-axis. A second coil, the receiver, is placed coaxially with the Y-axis and its function is to
respond to the alternating magnetic ﬁeld. When the continuous magnetic ﬁeld is applied, the nucleus
starts experiencing precession along the Z axis with angular velocity ω0, proportional to the intensity
of the magnetic ﬁeld as with the relation:
ω0 “ γH0
(32)
where γ is the gyroscopic constant.
During the experiment, the alternating oscillator is kept at
constant frequency and the magnetic ﬁeld is swiped in its intensity and therefore the angular velocity
of precession of the nucleus will vary along with the intensity of the magnetic ﬁeld. The nucleus will
eventually have ω0 equal to the frequency of the oscillator and this will generate a resonance. This
resonance induces a current in the receiver coil that generates the NMR signal as shown in Fig. 11
and Fig. 12.
Figure 12: Schematic view of the core of an NMR instrument.
Chemical Shift
The interpretation of the NMR signals is done reading the chemical shift of the
nucleus investigated. The magnetic ﬁeld applied generates a small electronic current in the atom; this
will produce an induced ﬁeld in the nucleus itself that is usually opposed to the applied ﬁeld. The
correlation between the applied ﬁeld and the induced one can be written as:
δH “ ´σH0
(33)
where σ is the shielding constant (dimensionless). The shield eﬀect depends on the surrounding of the
nucleus because the neighbouring atoms that can contribute in diﬀerent ways to the shielding. This
eﬀect can be generated either by the atoms in the same molecule or by the atoms of the solvent. The
local magnetic ﬁeld of the nucleus can be deﬁned as:
Hloc “ H0 ` δH
(34)
Or, using the shielding constant:
Hloc “ H0 ´ σH0 “ p1 ´ σqH0
(35)
15
==PAGE:23==
Larmor Frequency and Chemical Shift
In the previous sections, we introduced the concept of
the frequency of precession of the nuclear spin. As discussed before, when the frequency oscillating
magnetic angular momentum of the nucleus and the oscillating coil are the same, the nucleus goes into
resonance and produces the NMR signal. This frequency of resonance is called the Larmor frequency
(νL) and is correlated with the local magnetic ﬁeld (H0) with the following relation:
νL “ p1 ´ σqγH0
2π
(36)
For a easier reading of the scale where the peaks are found, the frequencies are actually correlated
with the frequency of an internal standard, νo, usually tetramethylsilane (TMS). For 1H NMR, the
frequency of reference is that of the protons of TMS, whereas for 13C the standard frequency is that
of the carbon of the methyl groups in TMS [13]. The mathematical relation between the frequency of
the nucleus an the frequency of the standard is:
δ “ ν ´ νo
νo
¨ 106
(37)
16
==PAGE:24==
3
Experimental Part - Synthesis
1H-NMR and 13C-NMR spectra were recorded with NMR Bruker Instrument. Chemicals were pur-
chased from Sigma-Aldrich or VWR Chemicals unless speciﬁed elsewhere and used without further
puriﬁcation except for several solvents used in this project such as dichloromethane, nitromethane,
tetrahydrofuran and acetone which were dried on molecular sieves.
3.1
Synthesis of 1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-benzene
Figure 13: Reduction of DHBQ
An acidic solution of Tin Chloride was prepared dissolving 13.535 g (0.071 mol) of SnCl2 in 10 ml of HCl
37%, in the meanwhile an acidic solution of the starting compound, 2,5-Dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone
(DHBQ) was prepared dissolving 5.004 g of (0.356 mol) in 50 ml of HCl 37%. The two solutions
were heated to 50°C while under magnetic stirring to facilitate dissolution of the compound in the
acid. When both of them appeared clear, the Tin Chloride solution was poured slowly into the DHBQ
solution while maintaining it under vigorous stirring. Further 10 ml of HCl 37% were used to rinse
glassware and poured into the solution.
The reaction vessel was a conical ﬂask equipped with Vigreux column, the solution was brought to
135°C to obtain re-ﬂux of solvent, the temperature was increased slowly at the ratio of 15° every 10
min. From the time that re-ﬂux started this ﬁnal temperature of 135°C was kept for ~1 hour. It
was possible to follow visually the state of the reaction that changed colour from orange (only DHBQ
present) to grey (when SnCl2 was poured) accompanied by a formation of metallic/solid residuals, to
pale green/yellow. The reaction was eventually stopped when a clear pale yellow colour was observed
and no solid residuals were visible on the reaction vessel. At this point, the conic ﬂask was placed on
the desk and the Vigreux column removed. The ﬂask was also covered with cotton to allow a slow
cooling and after 3 hours some crystals were already visible, anyway the ﬂask was disposed in the
fridge and left overnight for a complete precipitation.
3.1.1
Puriﬁcation of 1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-benzene
The product of the reaction was found in the bottom of the conical ﬂask in the form of white crystals
with a needle shape. A funnel equipped with sintered glass was used to ﬁlter the crystals and a vacuum
gas pump (VWR VP820) was connected to a Buchner ﬂask to allow suction and generate vacuum
for a good removal of the acidic solution. ~5 ml of cold HCl 37% was used to rinse the vessel of the
reaction and wash the crystals in the ﬁlter.
The product of reaction was dried with vacuum pump, allowing air ﬂow for 10 minutes over the crystals
with the aim to remove as much HCl 37% was possible then, the funnel containing the crystals was
placed in vacuum oven overnight. After drying overnight, the weight of the compound was: 4.27 g
(0.03 mol) corresponding to a yield of 85.71%.
A Re-crystallization was performed to obtain higher purity so the crude THB was dissolved in 30 ml
of boiling Tetrahydrofuran (THF) (b.p. of THF: 66°C). The dissolution of the product was observed
to be much faster in boiling THF than in cold THF
17
==PAGE:25==
When the solution became clear and no visible traces of solid particles were present (all the THB was
dissolved) the conic ﬂask was covered with cotton and placed onto the desk to allow a slow cooling.
After 2 hours at room temperature, the ﬂask was moved into the fridge and left there overnight.
The compound was transferred from the conic ﬂask into a funnel equipped with sintered glass. The
crystals were washed this time with cold THF ( 10~15 ml) to avoid further dissolution of the product.
Cold THF was obtained placing its container into a bath of Acetone and solid CO2. The crystals of
THB were therefore washed with the cold THF prepared. The washing of the crystals was performed
connecting the lower Buchner ﬂask to the vacuum pump where suction was provided.
After the washing of the crystals, they were further dried out in a closed system: no air ﬂow was
provided this time in the Buchner to limit degradation by oxygen from air. It was actually observed
in a preliminary test, a browning of the pure crystals when exposed to air, so the funnel this time was
covered with a rubber cork equipped with a central hole to allow gas inlet via a Teﬂon tube. Nitrogen
was the gas chosen for this drying process and it was ﬂew inside the funnel via the tube with a ﬂow
rate of 60-80 mm/s. No suction was provided form the pump at this point, in order to keep a N2
environment without disturbance from Air.
After ﬂushing, the Nitrogen inlet was removed and a full cork was placed instead. Suction was turned
on to create vacuum in the Buchner ﬂask and dry completely the sample. Vacuum was applied for
two hours and the crystals were weighted giving a value of 3.12 g (0.023 mol) corresponding to a yield
of 63.63 %. The crystals were stored in a small container previously ﬂushed with Nitrogen.
3.2
Synthesis of 1,2,4,5-Tetramethoxy-benzene.
3.2.1
Synthesis of TMB with Iodomethane in Acetone.
Figure 14: Attempt of synthesis of TMB using CH3I in acetone.
0.956 g of THB (6.73 mmol) and 10.16 g of iodomethane (CH3I) (74.68 mmol; 11 eq), used as as methy-
lating agent and 9.756 g (70.60 mmol; 10.5 eq) of potassium carbonate (K2CO3) for deprotonation of
THB, were dissolved in 30 ml of dry acetone.
The reaction was set in a 50 ml-round ﬂask connected with condenser (Graham tube) and Nitrogen
inlet. The temperature was set at 60°C and re-ﬂuxed overnight.
The reaction mixture was concentrated by means of rotating evaporator to remove the solvent. The
dry mixture was then transferred into a separating funnel. Water and diethyl ether was used to allow
extraction. A volume of
50 ml of water was used to collect the mixture from the prior vessel and
transfer the content into the funnel.
Aliquots of
20/30 ml of diethyl ether were used as organic
phase to extract the compound of interest (TMB). The extraction consisted in a strong shaking of the
two solvents, water and Et2O, which are immiscible and letting resting the emulsion until complete
separation. The procedure was repeated three times. The ether phase was ﬁnally washed with 10 ml
of water and then dried on MgSO4, the solution was ﬁltered and transferred to a rotating evaporator
for removal of the solvent at reduced pressure. Once the solvent was removed, the compound was
transferred into vacuum oven for a further drying, at 50°C overnight. The yield obtained was: 17.23
% (0.23 g; 1.16 mmol of Tetramethoxybenzene).
18
==PAGE:26==
3.2.2
Synthesis of TMB with iodomethane in Tetrahydrofuran.
Figure 15: Attempt of synthesis of TMB using CH3I in THF.
In this experiment 70 ml of dry Tetrahydrofuran (THF) were used as solvent and 9.757 g (70.60 mmol;
9.55 eq) of potassium carbonate were dissolved along with 9.40 g (66.22 mmol; 8.96 eq) of Iodomethane
and 1.05 g (7.39 mmol) of THB.
The reaction was conducted in a Nitrogen atmosphere and re-ﬂuxed overnight at 50°C. The crude
product was extracted with 2-phase system (water/ether) and the organic phase dried at reduced
pressure in rotating evaporator and subsequently in vacuum oven. The puriﬁed product was obtained
with an amount of 0.34 g (1.71 mmol) corresponding to a yield of 23.14 %.
3.2.3
Synthesis of TMB using dimethyl sulfate.
Figure 16: Synthesis of TMB using dimethylsulfate.
A further synthesis of TMB was performed using a very hazardous methylation agent, the dimethyl
sulfate. For my personal safety, I was not allowed to conduct the reaction in person, so my supervisor,
Roar R. Søndergaard, provided to conduce the reaction in my place 1.
The compound synthesized using dimethyl sulfate, was given to me to use as it is, since produced with
high purity as proved by NMR analysis and the further steps of synthesis were performed from this
intermediate.
1Roar R. Søndergaard, Senior Researcher at DTU Energy, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage.
19
==PAGE:27==
3.3
Trials of Friedel-Craft alkylation on TMB substrate
3.3.1
Alkylation with diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosponate in dicloromethane.
Figure 17: Attempt of synthesis of 1,4-diethyl(propyl)phosponate-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxy-benzene in
chloroform.
First attempt to perform the alkylation was tried with Diethyl (3-Bromopropyl) Phosphonate (DEBPP).
The solvent used was Dicloromethane CH2Cl2 that was previously dried with molecular sieves.
The reaction was conducted in a 50 ml-round ﬂask with air cooled condenser (Vigreux column) which
featured a glass bubbler placed on the upper part of the column, this was connected with nitrogen
and the whole apparatus was heated with hot gun to ensure the water stuck on the glass had left the
equipment.
In the reaction vessel an amount of 0.274 g (1.413 mmol) of TMB was dissolved in 10 ml of dry
CH2Cl2, 0.825g (3.16 mmol; 2.24 eq) of DEBPP was dissolved in 2 ml of dry CH2Cl2 and added to
the solution, heating was provided with an oil bath and the temperature was initially brought to 40°.
which was added in an initial amount of 0.04 g (6.15 mmol; 0.2 eq).
The status of the reaction was monitored by Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC). It was decided
to conduct the reaction in mild conditions but since ﬁrst analysis on TLC showed that no reaction
occurred, a further amount of catalyst was added and the temperature increased to 70°C. Subsequently,
further amount of alkylating agent (DEBPP) was added to the reaction mixture, however TLC analysis
showed negative results, in fact, there were no evidence of formation of the product so it was decided
to stop the reaction. A short summary of the reagent used is summarized here for the beneﬁt of
the readers.
Tetramethoxybenzene was used in the amount of 0.274 g (1.413 mmol).
Diethyl(3-
bromopropyl)phosphonate (DEBPP) in the amount of 1.327 g (5.12 mmol; 3.62 eq.) and aluminum
trichloride in quantity of 0.35 g (2.62 mmol; 1.85 eq.) with a total amount of 12 ml of dichloromethane.
3.3.2
Alkylation with Diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosphonate) in nitromethane
Figure 18: Attempt of synthesis of 1,4-diethyl(propyl)phosponate-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxy-benzene in
nitromethane.
20
==PAGE:28==
Similar to the previous reaction, this attempt involved nitromethane, CH3NO2 as a solvent.
Analogue equipment of the previous reaction was used: 50 ml-round ﬂask connected with a Vigreux
column equipped with gas bubbler to allow an inlet of nitrogen. All the equipment was heated with
hot gun to prevent that water stuck on the inner surface could attack the halogen alkane or destroy
the catalyst (AlCl3)
An amount of 0.106 g (0.547 mmol) of TMB was placed in the reaction vessel and dissolved in 3.5 ml
of nitromethane previously dried and on molecular sieves. 0.715 g (2.76 mmol; 5.05 eq) of DBPP was
added, followed by 0.091 g (0.68 mmol; 1.25 eq) of aluminium trichloride.
The reaction was monitored with TLC. After 3 hours, since no evidence of product was observed,
another aliquot of AlCl3 was added (0.044 g; 0.33 mmol; 0.6 eq) After 2 hours, TLC analysis showed
no improvement, therefore another aliquot of AlCl3 was added (0.806 g; 6.04 mmol; 11.05 eq) for
a total of: Tetramethoxybenzene (TMB) 0.106 g (0.547 mmol; 1.00 eq.); Diethyl (3-bromopropyl)
Phosponate in the amount of 0.715 g (2.76 mmol; 5.05 eq.)
and aluminum trichloride in a total
quantity of 0.940 g (7.05 mmol; 12.89 eq.).
3.3.3
Friedel-Craft Alkylation with 1,3-Dibromopropane
Figure 19: Attempt of Friedel-Crafts Alkylation with Dibromopropane
The equipment for this reaction was a 100 ml-cylindrical ﬂask connected to a Vigreux column equipped
with gas bubbler and N2 as inlet gas. An amount of 0.067 g (0.34 mmol; 1 eq) of TMB was dissolved
in 3.5ml of dry nitromethane. 0.506 g of 1,3-Dibromopropane (2.51 mmol; 7.3 eq) was added after
complete dissolution of TMB, aluminum trichloride, used as a catalyst, was added in the amount of:
0.009 g (0.07 mmol; 0.2 eq) After 1 hour, further amount of AlCl3 was added for a total of 0.188 g
(1.41 mmol; 4.1 eq). The reaction was conducted overnight.
3.4
Dehydrogenation with Bu-Li followed by electrophilic alkylation.
Figure 20: Attempt of synthesis with 1)Bu-Li 2)DEBPP in THF
An amount of 0.201 g of TMB (1.036 mmol; 1.0 eq) was placed in a 3-neck ﬂask and dissolved in
20 ml of THF dried up with molecular sieves, N2 atmosphere was provided with the gas bubbler
directly connected to the 3-neck round ﬂask, the temperature was continuously monitored inserting a
thermometer directly into the reaction vessel in one of the necks of the ﬂask whereas the third inlet was
21
==PAGE:29==
covered with a rubber lid able to be penetrated by a syringe for the supply of reagents. The reaction
vessel was placed inside a cold bath (dry ice in acetone) and the temperature adjusted immersing the
ﬂask at diﬀerent depth into the cold liquid.
When the solution reached the desired temperature (-78 °) The dehydrogenating agent, n-butyllithium
(Bu-Li) was added drop wise (4.20 mmol) using 2.10 ml of a solution of 2M of Bu-Li in n-hexane.
The reaction was kept stirring at this temperature for 10 minutes to allow the deprotonation. The
temperature was raised to -10° and kept at this value for 15 min to ensure the complete consumption of
Bu-li, then the reaction vessel was cooled down back to -78°and Diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosphonate
was added in the amount of 1.252 g (4.83 mmol; 4.66 eq).
4 ml of dry THF were used to dilute the aliquot of DEBPP and eventually added with syringe. The
cold bath was placed slightly underneath the reaction vessel to let the reaction warming up gently to
the room temperature.
TLC analysis showed no evidence of the formation of the product, so the reaction was placed an
oil bath and the temperature raised to 70°, a water-cooled condenser (Graham tube) was connected
and cooling temperature set to 10° to ensure re-ﬂux of the solvent (THF), the reaction was therefore
conducted overnight.
Figure 21: Experimental set-up for deprotonation/alkylation with n-Butyllithium
3.5
Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxy-benzene
Figure 22: Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxy-benzene
22
==PAGE:30==
An amount of 0.5014 g (3.528 mmol) of 1,2,4,5-Tetramethoxy-benzene was placed in a 100 ml-
cylindrical vessel which was placed in a ice-bath. An aliquot of 0.6 ml (1.104 g) of H2SO4 conc. (95%)
was slowly added while mechanical stirring was provided. After dissolution of the compound in the
acid, 0.85 ml (1.52 g) of H2SO4 fuming was added drop-wise followed by 0.5 ml (0.76 g) of HNO3 conc.
gently dropped. The reaction was conducted between 0°C and 30°C, the temperature was continu-
ously monitored via thermometer which was immersed directly in the reaction mixture. Considering
that the reaction was highly exothermic, an active control of the temperature was needed and it was
provided with simple adjustments of the high of the ice bath to regulate the immersion of the vessel
into the ice which could provided suﬃcient cooling.
The reaction was conducted for 3 hours at the end of which, it was quenched on ice: the reaction
mixture was poured in 20/30 ml of crunched ice and then brought to room temperature. When the
ice melted completely, 28 ml of NaOH 2 M was added to neutralize the solution. The variation of pH
was monitored using visual pH-indicators (litmus papers). The solution was eventually made more
basic (unitl pH 9) and then brought to pH 5/6 adding few drops of HCl 37 % .
A ﬁrst attempt of extraction with 2-phase system (ether/water) was done but the complete distribution
of the compound of interest (DTMB) in water, made clarity on the hydrophilicity of this molecule.
Since the extraction in organic phase using a simple approach such as the use of a separation funnel
was not optimal, a diﬀerent approach was chosen and it was opted for a continuous distillation process.
The compound was transferred in a rotating evaporator for a ﬁrst removal of solvent and a further
drying in vacuum oven at 50°C overnight.
3.5.1
Puriﬁcation by continuous distillation
The dry DNTMB, in the form of a yellow powder, was transferred in the apparatus for continuous
distillation and Ether wad added to allow the extraction directly from solid. The process was inter-
rupted after 42/44 h to characterize the compound isolated. The ether of collection was observed to
be coloured of a pale yellow, indication of the presence of DNTMB. The solution was transferred in a
round ﬂask and the solvent was removed using rotating evaporator. The crude (dry) compound was
placed in vacuum oven and dried at 50°for 4 hours.
The sample, afterwards, appeared viscous and oily and with a pale yellow colour. This raised the
hypothesis that, the pure compound, at room temperature is an oil. The compound was obtained
with a yield of 9.60 % (after puriﬁcation).
3.5.2
Puriﬁcation by ﬁltration
The amount of (crude) DNTMB left in the form of powder, in the continuous distillation apparatus,
was collected, dried in rotating evaporator and displaced on a paper ﬁlter. A direct ﬁltration from
powder was intended, considering that the crude compound is composed by ~90% of impurities of
colour-less salts like Na2SO4, NaNO3, and NaCl, the strategy was to collect the compound of interest
(DNTMB) with a good solvent for the compound itself but a non-solvent for the salts which the
compound was adsorbed on.
During the choice of the right solvent, it was possible to observe that Dichloromethane (CH2Cl2) and
Nitromethane (CH2NO2) were collected form the ﬁlter as colourless, meaning that no compound was
collected. Methanol whereas, (CH3OH) gave a bright yellow solution.
The ﬁltrate was eventually collected in a round ﬂask, the solvent removed under vacuum by means of
a rotatory evaporator. The compound was placed eventually in oven at 50°under vacuum overnight
along with the other batch (the pure form) for a further removal of the solvent. The compound made
by continuous distillation appeared a compact solid of pale yellow colour whereas the other one, made
by ﬁltration, appeared like dry salt (probably due to the presence of salt in abundant quantity).
23
==PAGE:31==
3.6
Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene
Figure 23: Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene
For the following step of synthesis, a procedure that involves Hydrobromic Acid was chosen after
literature studies, in particular after ﬁnding relevant examples in the the work of Boovanahalli et al.
[14] and Waghmode et al.[15]. A small cylindrical vessel was chosen to host the reaction mixture
and Acetic Acid glacial (99-100%) was used as solvent in the amount of 15 ml, such volume was
required to collect the total amount of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetramethoxy-Benzene (DNTMB) that was
available from the two vessels, since DNTMB was collected from the two puriﬁcation methods. In
particular, 700 mg were available from the puriﬁcation via ﬁltration and 50 mg from the puriﬁcation
via continuous extraction giving a total quantity of 750 mg (52.047 mmol). HBr 48% was added in
the amount of 4.25 g (52.527 mmol; 20.18 eq).
The reaction mixture was set on magnetic stirring. DNTMB was dissolved in Acetic Acid since this
was the solvent selected was used to collect the compound from the previous vessels. HBr was added
drop-wise to the mixture while stirring. Heating was provided with a oil bath and the temperature
was set to 118°C (boiling point of Acetic Acid). The oil batch was provided to the reaction vessel only
after the complete adding of the Hydrobromic Acid. A condenser was connected before starting the
reaction and Nitrogen was ﬂown in the equipment and maintained during the whole reaction.
A change in the mixture was observed since the ﬁrst drops of Bromidic Acid. The mixture change in
consistency, from an initial suspension (suspension of DTMB in acetic acid) and it moved to a viscous
oily mixture when HBr was added completely.
The reaction was left overnight setting the oil bath at 150°C and water-cooled condenser at 5°C so
a good re-ﬂux was provided while the reaction could perform at high boiling. A TLC analysis was
performed to check the status of completion of the reaction. The best eluent selected for a good
diﬀerentiation of the two chemicals was pure Methanol. CH3OH was able to leave on the baseline
of the TLC, the spot related to the DNTMB and bring all the way up to the front line the spot of
the DNTHB. The reaction was declared ﬁnished and the vessel with its content was left cool down
and subsequently transferred in a 50 ml round-ﬂask and connected to a rotating evaporator for the
removal of the solvent. Once the solvent was evaporated so that visible traces were no longer visible,
the vessel was moved to a vacuum oven and left overnight.
The calculated yield was of 132.45 % due to to many impurities present. Unfortunately, it was not
possible purify the compound due to limitation of time for this project and the compound was tested
for its electrochemical properties in its crude form.
24
==PAGE:32==
4
Experimental Part - Electrochemistry
4.1
Voltammetry of DHBQ/THB/DNTHB
4.1.1
Preparation of DHBQ Solution
A solution of 1 mM of 2,5-dihidroxy-1,4-benzoquinone (DHBQ) in 1 M KOH was prepared by weighing
out an exact amount of compound (0.036g) and dissolving it in 20 ml of 1 M KOH. The molarity
obtained was 0.013 M. A volume of 2.00 ml of this solution was taken with micro-pipette and added to
a volume of 11.98 ml of KOH 1 M to make a ﬁnal solution of 1 mM DHBQ in 1 M KOH. All solutions
of DHBQ were kept in the dark.
4.1.2
Cyclic Voltammetry Set-up
The following set-up was used to conduct the cyclic voltammetry measurements for the preliminary
investigation of DHBQ and THB, in particular on the solution containing the supporting electrolyte
(KOH 1M) and to conduct the cyclic voltammetry on the solution DHBQ 10 mM, KOH 1M, NaCl
1M and on the solution THB 10 mM, KOH 1M, NaCl 1M.
• A 3 mm diameter glassy carbon electrode was used as working electrode
• A Ag/AgCl electrode with 3 M NaCl ﬁlling solution was used as reference electrode (0.214 V vs
SHE)
• A platinum wire was used as counter electrode
4.1.3
Background Solution
To understand the behaviour of the supporting system, a background scan was run on the electrolytic
solution without the redox-active compound. The solution used for the background scan was a solution
of 1 M KOH.
Open Circuit Potential on the Background.
A preliminary measurement of the open circuit
potential (OCP) was run on 30 ml of the background solution (1.00 M KOH) initially purged with
nitrogen for 30 minutes and kept under gentle nitrogen ﬂow during the whole experiment.
Cyclic Voltammetry on the supporting electrolyte solution.
Background scans were run on
the same solution of 1 M KOH at 10, 20, 50 and 100 mV s´1 of scan rate. The window of potential
explored was a range of 1.2 V, with a lower limit of -1.2 V and an upper limit of 0 V vs Ag/AgCl
(0.213 V vs SHE). The voltammetry was decided to be started scanning negatively ﬁrst.
4.1.4
Cyclic Voltammetry of Dihydroxybenzoquinone and Tetrahydroxybenzene
Cyclic voltammetry was performed on two compounds, 2,5-dihydroxybenzoquinone (DHBQ) and
tetrahydroxybenzene (THB), which are the two forms of the redox couple DHBQ/THB. In partic-
ular, DHBQ is the oxidized form and THB the reduced form. The two species were studied separately
and cyclic voltammetry was performed on these two redox-active compounds testing two diﬀerent
solutions.
The ﬁrst system to be studied was DHBQ as redox-active compound in concentration of 10 mM,
supported by 1 M NaCl and 1 M KOH supporting electrolyte. The second one involved the reduced
form, THB, as redox-active compound. The supporting electrolyte was again 1 M NaCl and 1 M KOH.
25
==PAGE:33==
The voltammetry was performed using the same conditions as for the background, such as same scan
rate (10, 25 and 50 mV s´1), same range explored (-1.0;0.0 vs SHE) same scan numbers and same
verse of initial scan (positively).
Equipment
Glassy carbon was used as working electrode material. The electrode was polished on
a polishing cloth with an alumina slurry of 0.05 µm. The electrode diameter was 3 mm, corresponding
to an area of 0.07065 cm2. The reference electrode selected was a ﬁlament of silver/silver chloride in
a solution of 3 M NaCl encapsulated in a glass tube with metal connection and glass frit. A platinum
wire was chosen as counter electrode. The wire was cleaned in a gas burner ﬂame until no trace of
impurities were present.
The container for the experiment was a cylindrical glass vessel of 3 cm diameter and 6 cm height. An
air-tight lid was placed on the top of the cylindrical vessel to ensure no interference from atmospheric
oxygen.
The volume of the solution used for every experiments was 5.0 ml for both the systems
studied. Argon was bubbled inside the solution through a Teﬂon tube of 0.3 mm of section for 10
minutes. Subsequently, the tube was place just above the solution to keep a constant layer of argon
to better avoid possible inﬁltration of air.
4.1.5
Rotating Ring Disk Electrode
DHBQ 1 mM.
A solution of DHBQ was prepared as follows to be tested using RRDE.
120 ml of 1 M KOH was prepared using Milli-DI water. The solution was degassed via a Pasteur pipette
immersed for 30 min with nitrogen ﬂow. DHBQ was weighed in the amount of 0.01698 g (0.00012
mol) producing a molarity of 1.01006 mM. The solution was mixed for 10 min under magnetic stirring
in a closed vessel to keep the N2 environment and degassed further for 15 minutes afterwards. The
solution was stored under nitrogen and kept in the dark until analysis.
Impedance Spectroscopy.
An impedance spectrum was recorded to determine the electrical re-
sistance of the solution and therefore correct the voltage drop. A CHI760E potentiostat was used. A
direct potential of -0.914 V vs Ag/AgCl 3M NaCl was applied meanwhile the AC potential of 5 mV
amplitude was applied as well with frequency varying from (0.1 Hz) to (100000 Hz).
4.1.6
Electrochemistry of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-Benzene
The ﬁnal product of synthesis obtained after nitration of DHBQ was tested in a three-electrode cell
to understand its electrochemical properties. Further in the paragraph, is described how the sample
was prepared and how the test was performed.
Preparation of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-Benzene
A solution of 10 mM of 1,4-Dinitro-
2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-Benzene (DNTHB) in 1 M KOH was prepared as follows: an amount of 0.10562
g (0.455 mmol) of crude compound (DNTHB) was dissolved in 4.551 ml of 1 M KOH resulting in a
solution of 0.1 M DNTHB and 1 M KOH. To dilute 10 times, an amount of 40.959 ml of 1 M KOH
was added, resulting in a ﬁnal solution of 10 mM DNTHB and 1 M KOH. The pH was measured with
visual pH indicators (litmus papers) showing clearly a pH of 14. The solution was transferred into the
apparatus for the experiment and degassed for 1 hour with argon and kept ﬂowing during the whole
experiment in the cell providing an inert atmosphere and avoid interference form the Oxygen of the
Air.
26
==PAGE:34==
5
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the strategic pathways of the synthesis are described. For every successful intermediate
of synthesis a NMR spectrum is reported to discuss the success of the reaction.
5.1
NMR analysis of the intermediates of the synthesis
5.1.1
Synthesis of 1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-benzene.
Figure 24: Reduction of DHBQ
The ﬁrst step of the synthesis regarded the chemical reduction of DHBQ to THB. The reduced com-
pound was conﬁrmed by NMR, as shown in Fig. 25 obtained with yield of 63.63% . The spectrum
was recorded after recrystallization and drying with nitrogen.
Figure 25: 1H-NMR in D2O of THB after recrystallization and drying with nitrogen.
A single peak is shown at 4.69 ppm, characteristic of water, present as an impurity in every NMR
27
==PAGE:35==
analysis, due to the content in air and therefore present in the sample as well. The phenolic protons
were not possible to detect due to the fact that they exchange immediately with the solvent (D2O)
and therefore, their eventual response to the magnetic ﬁeld will generate a signal that belongs to the
water signal [16] [13].
A second peak is observed at 6.376 ppm, slightly overlapped with another peak of smaller intensity
at 6.383 ppm. These not-well deﬁned peak might ﬁnd a reason to exist, if we considered a not-fully
conversion of the starting compound into the reduced form. DHBQ presents a proton in the same
position on the skeleton of the molecule, with analogous shielding, in fact the vinylic hydrogen signal
falls down in the range of 6-8 ppm [13], that might overlap the signal over the H-aromatic of THB.
The overlapping of the peaks is shown in Fig. 26.
Figure 26: Enlargement of the aromatic proton signal of 1H-NMR in D2O of THB / DHBQ (impurity).
To conﬁrm the presence of THB, a 13C-NMR analysis was performed for longer time on the same
sample.
28
==PAGE:36==
Figure 27: 13C-NMR of THB after recrystallization and drying with nitrogen.
From the spectrum it is possible to note two signals, the signal at 137.02 ppm is probably corresponding
to the third carbon of the ring and the intensity of the signal might be explained by the coupling with
the proton that enhance the signal [13]. The peak at 105.16 ppm, might be the ﬁrst and the second
carbon of the ring, which is coupled with oxygen, which decrease the signal of the carbon itself, and
this could explain the lower intensity. Moreover, the ﬁrst and the second carbon of the ring could
resonate at the same frequency because a resonance in the chemical structure would happen in a short
time-frame, which leads the instrument to detect only one signal since the acquisition time is larger
than the time frame of exchange of the proton, as explained in Fig. 28.
Figure 28: Tautomeric equilibrium and rearrangement of the protons in DHBQ.
5.1.2
Synthesis of 1,2,4,5-Tetramethoxy-benzene
The choice to protect the hydroxy functional groups of the THB lays on the fact that, a better solubility
for TMB was observed in organic solvents such as acetone, Tetrahydrofuran (THF) and diethyl ether.
Moreover, THB is very sensitive to air, in fact a grey thin cover is observed onto the crystals when
29
==PAGE:37==
an air ﬂow pass over. This observation raised the hypothesis of a possible oxidation caused by the
oxygen in the air. Considering this possibility, it was decided to start from the methylated compound
which results stable over exposition to air.
The synthetic products of the methylation reaction presented a large number of impurities and the
NMR spectra recorded were not providing enough information to clarify the the eventual success of the
reaction, therefore, given the uncertainty of the results, another reaction of methylation was conducted
on the substrate THB. This alternative method involved a more hazardous chemical, dimethyl sulfate,
a very reactive methylation agent. Its extraordinary reactivity, make this compound extremely toxic,
therefore, for my personal safety, I was not allowed to use it and a more experienced researcher
conducted the reaction in my place 2 . The 1H-NMR analysis of the compound synthesized using
dimethyl sulfate, showed a product of high purity (Fig. 29) and therefore, it was decided to proceed
further with the synthetic strategy from this intermediate.
Figure 29: 1H-NMR of TMB in CDCl3 synthesized using dimethyl sulfate.
The peak at 6.58 ppm in the plot above (Fig. 29) represents the signal of the hydrogen bounded
to the aromatic ring whereas the peak recorded at 3.84 ppm refers to the hydrogen of the methoxy
group which is known to be at ~3.22 ppm in deuterated chloroform (CDCl3) [16], solvent used for this
analysis. A weak signal representing a residual trace of water is found at 7.25 ppm (expected at 7.26
ppm [16]) whereas the signal at 5.58 ppm shows the presence of the aromatic hydrogen (expected at
6.98 ppm [16]).
2Roar R. Søndergaard, Senior Researcher at the Department of Energy Conversions and Storage, Technical University
of Denmark, conducted this reaction.
30
==PAGE:38==
5.1.3
Alkylation with diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosponate in dicloromethane.
Figure 30: Attempt of synthesis of 1,4-diethyl(propyl)phosponate-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxy-benzene in
chloroform.
This attempt of Friedel-Craft alkylation was conducted in dichloromethane and aluminium chloride
as catalyst. The conditions described in the experimental section for this reaction gave negative result
in fact, no production formation was observed with TLC analysis.
5.1.4
Alkylation with Diethyl(3-bromopropyl)phosphonate) in nitromethane
Figure 31: Attempt of synthesis of 1,4-diethyl(propyl)phosponate-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxy-benzene in
nitromethane.
TLC analysis reported negative results also in this conditions, therefore the reaction was stopped and
another alkylating agent was chosen for the next attempt.
5.1.5
Friedel-Craft Alkylation with 1,3-Dibromopropane
Figure 32: Attempt of Friedel-Crafts Alkylation with Dibromopropane
Since the alkylating agent, Dibromopropane (DBP) is provided by two halogens, a possibility of double
attack on the extremities was considered, an issue that can bring to a polymerization. To avoid this
possibility, the reaction was conducted at room temperature to have mild conditions but TLC analysis
31
==PAGE:39==
showed that no product was formed after 1 hour, therefore, the reaction was left to conduct overnight.
However, further TLC analysis showed that the reaction did not happened.
5.1.6
Dehydrogenation with Bu-Li followed by electrophilic alkylation.
Figure 33: Attempt of synthesis with 1)Bu-Li 2)DEBPP in THF
The TLC analysis conducted after performing the reaction overnight at reﬂux, showed a possible
formation of product, so an 1H-NMR was performed but the resulting spectrum was of diﬃcult in-
terpretation, probably due to side reactions from Bu-Li. No clear evidence of the formation of the
compound desired were found.
The overall strategy for this reaction step was to deprotonate the aromatic hydrogen in position 3-6
of the ring, therefore generating the correspondent anion, subsequently, the addition of diethyl(3-
bromopropyl)phosphonate DEBPP, would have led, in principle, to the nucleophilic attack of the
TMB-anion to the carbon in 3rd position of the alkylation chain (DEBPP) as suggest in the work of
Chen et al. [17]
The poor results in term of success rate using Friedel-Craft alkylation or nucleophilic attack on halo-
genated alkylation agent, moved the strategy of synthesis on another direction and nitration of TMB
was performed as discussed below.
5.1.7
Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetramethoxy-benzene
Figure 34: Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxy-benzene
The nitration reaction on the substrate mentioned before, brought to the product : 1,4-Dinitro-
2,3,5,6-Tetramethoxy-benzene (DNTMB) with a yield of 9.60 % (for the puriﬁed product) The relative
spectrum was recorded and interpreted (Fig. 35), the compound was analyzed in deuterated water;
the 1H-NMR showed an intense characteristic peak of residual water at 4.70 ppm probably due to
the contamination of water from the humidity, during the preparation of the sample. A second peak
was visible increasing the resolution of the spectrum recorded, and a signal appeared, as doublet at
3.6 ppm (3.64 and 3.65). The reason of this splitting of the signal is currently under investigation,
since this signal is expected to belong to the hydrogens of the methoxy group, which should generate
a singlet [13].
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 35: 1H-NMR of DNTMB in D2O
A longer analysis has been performed to evaluate the 13C-NMR signal of the compound in the same
solvent of the 1H-NMR test, which is D2O, the resulting spectrum shows a weak signal at 55.50 ppm
and since the peak of the carbon in CH3O- is known to be at 49.37 in D2O [16] it was assumed to be
a valid indication of the present of the methoxy group on the molecule since the signal is a singlet as
expected to be. The spectrum below (Fig.36 )shows the 13C-NMR signal of CH3O-Ar of DNTMB.
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 36: 13C-NMR spectrum of DNTMB in D2O.
5.1.8
Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-benzene
Figure 37: Synthesis of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene
1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene was obtained in a total quantity of 800 mg as crude com-
pound and ~2 mg were used for NMR analysis The 1H-NMR and 13C-NMR analysis. (Fig. 38)
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 38: 1H-NMR of DNTHB in D2O
The peak at 4.70 ppm is the corresponding signal of the residual water, the peak at 1.98 ppm is most
probably the signal of the residual Acetic acid, in particular the proton CH3COOH (that signal is
known to be at 2.08 ppm [?]), whereas the signal recorded at 2.48 ppm, 3.94 ppm and 4.11 ppm are
probably impurities or side-products of the reaction.
A 13C-NMR test was performed for a further analysis but unfortunately, no evidence of the compound
was found, only a peak of small intensity at 26.78 ppm which might be an impurity (Fig. 39)
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 39: 13C-NMR of
The spectrum does not allow to state the presence of the DNTHB, however, two possible speculations
can be made:
1. The compound has not been successfully synthesized and therefore the 1H-NMR previously
examined shows only the signal of residual water in addition to some impurities.
2. The compound has been successfully synthesized but the amount used for the 13C-NMR was
not enough to let the aromatic carbons goes into resonance and therefore they are not detected
by the instrument, and the 1H-NMR previously examined show the signal of the residual water
which intakes the eventual signal of the hydroxy groups of the DNTHB.
36
==PAGE:44==
5.2
Preliminary studies of the electrochemical behaviour of the redox couple
DHBQ/THB
The compound 2,5-Dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone (DHBQ) and its reduced form, 1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-
benzene (THB) were studied to evaluate their electrochemical behaviour in comparison with the
knowledge derived from the scientiﬁc literature.
5.3
Open Circuit Potential of the Background Solution.
A preliminary cyclic voltammetry on a the solution containing the supporting electrolyte was per-
formed in order to estimate the background noise of the measurement.
A solution of KOH 1 M was used for this preliminary evaluation. The Open circuit potential (OCP)
was measured prior to performing the cyclic voltammetry. In the plot below (Fig. 40) is clearly visible
a spike, observed after the ﬁrst 10 seconds. The potential however was observed to be stable after this
initial perturbation, and therefore it was decided to proceed further.
Figure 40: Open circuit potential of supporting electrolyte solution (KOH 1 M).
The value of potential expected for the development of hydrogen in alkaline media such as the solution
investigated (pH 14), is known to be -0.828 V vs SHE [9] and expressed by the redox couple in Eq.
38:
2 H2O ` 2 e´ ÝÝá
âÝÝ H2 ` 2 OH´
(38)
The cyclic voltammetry conducted on the supporting electrolyte solution, shown below in Fig. 41,
showed a increment of current close to the -1.0 V vs SHE probably due to hydrogen evolution.
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 41: Cyclic Voltammetry on the background solution (KOH 1M)
5.4
Cyclic voltammetries of DHBQ 1mM in KOH 1M.
Cyclic voltammetries were performed and compared with their backgrounds. The plots below represent
cyclic voltammetries of DHBQ 1mM in KOH 1.00 M
Figure 42: DHBQ 1mM in KOH 1M. Scan rate performed at 10 mV/s 42a: cyclic voltammetry at 10
mV/s. Fig 42b: cyclic voltammetry at 20 mV/s. Fig 42c: cyclic voltammetry at 30 mV/s. Fig 42d:
40 mV/s
It is reported in the work of Benck et al. [18] that the hydrogen evolution reactions (HER) usually
become considerable at -1.0 V with glassy carbon electrode as working electrode, this phenomenon
might explain why the reduction peak of the solution under investigation (DHBQ 1mM in KOH 1M)
showed an increment in current (Fig.41).
Moreover, the kinetics of the DHBQ appeared slow (plot of Fig.42). The oxidation peak is not well
38
==PAGE:46==
deﬁned, whereas the reduction peak had a more sharp peak. The peak to peak separation is quite
broad (almost 600 mV at 40 mV/s which is in contrast with the results found by Yang et all. [19]
where they obtained a peak separation of 58 mV at pH 14.
Since the peak separation was broader than expected considering literature studied mentioned above,
another voltammetry was performed, introducing the presence of a supporting electrolyte (NaCl 1.0
M) with the aim to increase the electrical conductivity of the solution and brand new glassy carbon
used as working electrode. Furthermore, a higher concentration of 10 mM of electro-active specie
DHBQ was chosen to enhance the diﬀerence between background noise and the current generated by
reduction/oxidation of the DHBQ/THB.
All the potential measurements of the cycling voltammetry recorded, were measured versus the po-
tential of the reference electrode (0.209 V vs SHE). Furthermore, the following cyclic voltammetries
show values of potential adjusted to the Standard Hydrogen Electrode.
5.5
Cyclic voltammetry of DHBQ and THB in KOH 1M, NaCl 1M
A cyclic voltammetry of DHBQ 10 mM in NaCl 1 M and KOH 1 M was conducted and presented
below. (Fig.43)
Figure 43: DHBQ 10 mM in KOH 1 M and NaCl 1M at diﬀerent scan rate: 10mV/s (blue line), 25
mV/ (red line) and 50 mV/s (green line).
The formal potential calculated at diﬀerent scan rates was: -0.699 V at 10 mV/s; -0.686 V at 25 mV/s
and -0.6805 V at 50 mV/s
Cyclic voltammetry of THB were also performed to evaluate the behaviour of the reduced specie
(Fig.44). The formal potential calculated for this compound was: -0.669V at 10 mV/s; -0.663V at 25
mV/s; and -0.654V at 50 mV/s. Eavg showed similar values to the Eavg of DHBQ tested previously.
This behaviour is coherent with the fact that the redox couple converted at the electrode surface, is
the same. This analogue electrochemical response can be also considered as indirect conﬁrm of the
ﬁrst step of synthesis; as described more in details in the relevant chapter (Experimental - Synthesis),
the ﬁrst step in the synthetic process, was the chemical reduction of the compound DHBQ.
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 44: THB 10 mM in KOH 1 M and NaCl 1M at diﬀerent scan rate: 10mV/s (blue line), 25 mV/
(red line) and 50 mV/s (green line).
For a better visualization the cyclic voltammetries of the two system are overlapped in Fig. 45
Figure 45: Overlap of cyclic voltammetry for DHBQ and THB 10 mM in KOH 1M, NaCl 1M at scan
rate: 50 mV/s.
5.5.1
Cyclic Voltammetry of DHBQ 1mM in KOH 1M
A solution of DHBQ 1mM in KOH 1M was used for a RRDE voltammetry. Preliminary, a static
cyclic voltammetry was conducted to evaluate the average potential (Eavg) needed for the subsequent
experiment.
40
==PAGE:48==
The average potential was obtained with a value of Eavg “ ´0.7045V (vs SHE) in accordance with the
value found by Yang et al. in their work [19] where a value of -0.72 V vs SHE was found in alkaline
conditions (pH 14). The average potential was calculate using the equation 12 (Fig.46)
Figure 46: Cyclic Voltammetry of DHBQ 1mM in KOH 1M
The peak to peak separation was calculated and was found to be of 0.0950 V. It is know that for a two-
electron and fully reversible electrochemical process, the peak separation should be 28.5 mV [3]. This
result is in evidence contrast with the theoretical value however, it is important to take into account
the ohmic resistance of the solution itself. The solution is provided by a good electrolyte, KOH in
concentration of 1M nevertheless, a resistance is experienced because the system is not ideal. The
distance between working electrode and reference electrode, in fact, constrained by the construction of
the apparatus, acts negatively on the conduction in the solution. It is known that, the higher distance
between working and reference electrode, the higher the internal resistance will be experienced [7].
To overcome this issue an impedance spectroscopy measurement has been performed to evaluate the
uncompensated resistance Ru
5.5.2
Impedance Spectroscopy
The impedance spectroscopy showed a value of Ru 6.4 Ω, the measurement was performed setting
a DC potential at: 0.914 V vs Ag/AgCl in 3 M of NaCl 3 and applying an AC potential of 5 mV;
this small amplitude was chosen not to signiﬁcantly disturb the balance of the species. Since the DC
voltage applied, is indeed, the average voltage, it was assumed that the concentration of the species
(at the electrode surface) were equal due to the correlation expressed in the Nernst equation 2.
The following results presented in this chapter, were obtained upon electrochemical characterization
of DHBQ 1 mM in KOH 1M. The speciﬁcation of this solution, were decided based on the aim to
realize a comparative study on the starting compound of the synthetic process, DHBQ, from a well
described study conducted by Yang and his collaborators [19] and base the further investigation on
the ﬁnal product of the synthesis, the 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-benzene.
3The reference electrode used, was the reference electrode for calibration and its voltage declared by the manufacturer
is 0.195 V vs RHE [20].
41
==PAGE:49==
5.6
Randles-Sevcik
The following analysis was obtained from a solution of DHBQ 10 mM in KOH 1 M and NaCl 1 M.
Randles-Sevcik analysis gave the value of diﬀusion coeﬃcient (D) for the oxidized specie, DHBQ of
D “ 4.27 ˆ 10´7cm2{s. This result was calculated using the Randles-Sevcik equation:
ip “ 2.686 ˆ 105n3{2ACD1{2ν1{2
(39)
Where, n is the number of electron of the electro-active compound (n “ 2); A is the area of the
electrode (A “ 5.5cm2); C is the concentration in the bulk (C “ 1 ˆ 10´5mol{cm3) and ν is the
scan rate ν “ rV {ss and ip the peak current ip “ rAs. The values of scan rate used in the cyclic
voltammetry were plotted against the peak current at reduction, giving the plot in ﬁgure (Fig. 47
from which was possible to extrapolate the angular coeﬃcient of the straight line and from there the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient.
42
==PAGE:50==
Figure 47: Randles-Sevcik of DHBQ 10 mM in KOH 1 M and NaCl 1 M.
With same experimental procedure was performed another cyclic voltammetry, this time on the re-
duced specie, THB, which was available from the synthesis performed in this work and described in
the experimental chapter.
THB was prepared in solution of 1o mM in KOH 1 M and NaCl 1 M (Fig. 48). The Randles-Sevcik
analysis gave the values of 1.95 ˆ 10´7cm2{s for the diﬀusion specie of the oxidized specie, DHBQ
and 1.03 ˆ 10´7cm2{s for the reduced specie, THB. For this analysis, the value of scan rate and
43
==PAGE:51==
peak current, were obtained by the cyclic voltammetry performed previously on the THB solution
aforementioned.
Figure 48: Randles-Sevcik of THB 10 mM in KOH 1 M and NaCl 1 M
The diﬀusion coeﬃcients calculated from DHBQ solution presented some variations from the coeﬃcient
calculated from THB solution. An explanation of that incoherence, is that the curve, in proximity of
the reduction peak, does not present a ﬂat baseline, and the interpolation method used might be not
absent of error. However, for the estimation of the standard potential, was decided to use the diﬀusion
44
==PAGE:52==
coeﬃcients calculated from the Randles-Sevcik analysis on THB solution.
The equation used was the Nernst equation in the most extended form where it consider the diﬀusion
coeﬃcients.
E1{2 “ E01 ` RT
nF ¨ lnD1{2
r
D1{2
o
(40)
Resulting in E01 “ ´0.700 V vs SHE, a value that present some distance from the standard electrode
potential found by Yang et al. of E01 “ ´0.72V vs SHE.
45
==PAGE:53==
5.6.1
Levich Plot
Figure 49: Levich plot of DHBQ
The value of limiting current found in the Levich Analysis and represented in the plots above, was
calculated taking the last 50 values of current, for each rotation rate, and of those 50 values, the
average was calculated.
The linear regression r2 approaches the theoretical value of 1, meaning that an accurate ﬁt was
obtained from the model.
46
==PAGE:54==
5.6.2
Koutecky-Levich Analysis
Koutecky-Levich analysis was performed to evaluate the kinetic currents ik and the kinetic rate con-
stant K. The current was read oﬀat diﬀerent values of potential, from 0.705 V vs SHE to 0.905 V vs
SHE (200 mV range) every 5 mV, in this range, from the lower limit to the higher one as shown in
Fig.50.
Figure 50: Koutecky-Levich analysis.
The inverse of the current (i´1) was plotted against the inverse of the angular velocity (ω´1) in the
Koutecky-Levich analysis (Fig.51) where it was possible to ﬁnd the kinetic limiting current for each
overpotential considered, using the straight lines obtained with a linear regression. Those currents
were subsequently plotted in function of the overpotential µ in the Tafel plot presented below (Fig.52)
from which was possible to determine the transfer coeﬃcient α.
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 51: Koutecky-Levich analysis.
5.6.3
Tafel Plot
Figure 52: Tafel plot. The straight line in red represent the linear regression used to estimate the
slope of curve in the linear region.
The transfer coeﬃcient was found to be α “ 0.146 and the standard heterogeneous rate constant
was k0 “ 1.68 ¨ 10´3cm ¨ s´1. The rate constant has been compared with the value found by the
comprehensive work of Yang et al. where, a value of k0 “ 2.12 ¨ 10´3cm ¨ s´1 was found[19]
48
==PAGE:56==
5.7
1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene
The results presented below, regards the 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-tetrahydroxy-benzene (DNTHB) that was
tested to evaluate its electrochemical properties. DNTHB is the product of a synthetic process that
was conducted with the aim of protect the unsubstituted positions of DHBQ (positions 3,6 on the
aromatic ring) and therefore confer chemical stability against degradation in alkaline conditions as
reported extensively in the work of Yang et al. [19]
The cyclic voltammetry performed on 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-Benzene, showed no electro-
chemical activity (Fig. 53)
Figure 53: Cyclic Voltammetry of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-Benzene
The cyclic voltammetry obtained, in particular, does not report reduction nor oxidation peak during
the recording of the cyclic voltammogram. The range of potential investigated, covered the whole
window of electrochemical stability of the water (wider than 1.23 V in this case, due to the utilization
of glassy carbon as working electrode4) and the only increase of potential is observed only at high
potential when oxygen evolution is generated (+1.00 V) and at low potential due to the hydrogen
evolution (-1.00 V).
4The glassy carbon expand the stability window of water, wider than the thermodynamic range. [21] [5]
49
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusion
The aim of this project was the synthetic modiﬁcation of 2,5-Dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone into a more
stable compound by providing substituents in the free positions of the aromatic ring of the molecule
(3,6) to protect them from Micheal addition. The synthetic pathway revealed more complicated then
expected due to a reactivity of the starting compound diﬀerent from other substrates of the same
kinds towards Friedel-Crafts alkylation. Many diﬀerent attempts were performed to accomplished the
original overall synthesis planned. The end-product, 1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-benzene, diﬀered from the
aimed one, the 1,2,4,5-Tetrahydroxy-3,6-(3-propyl)phosphonate because the synthesis of the latter was
not successfully. The Friedel-Craft alkylation step, in fact, revealed more complicated than expected.
Considering the structure of the substrate (1,2,3,5-Tetramethoxy-Benzene) it is possible to observe
the presence of 4 methoxy groups on the molecule. Due to the lone pair present on the Oxygen and
the tendency of the aluminium thricloride to accept electrons, a possible coordination of the latter on
the oxygen is reasonable. Assuming this coordination between the two species, an hypothesis of the
unexpected behaviour can be discussed: the oxygen, once bounded to AlCl3 could be withdrawn of its
electronic density and therefore becoming an electron withdrawing group itself for the aromatic ring
which is connected to. The ring would result depleted of electron density and therefore no longer able
to perform the electrophilic aromatic substitution toward the halogen alkane.
The electrochemical behaviour of the compounds analyzed was evaluated in strong alkaline conditions
(pH 14) due to the fact that, most of the relevant studies in literature, reported a well-deﬁned reversible
behaviour for the redox couple DHBQ/THB [19]
50
==PAGE:58==
7
Outlook
An improvement of this project would be a new series of chemical attempts to investigate and even-
tually ﬁnd a successfully methodology to perform alkylation on the substrate DHBQ.
Moreover, further investigation would be necessary in order to investigate the properties of DNTHB
in acid conditions in fact, as explained in the work of Hammerick and Speiser [3], the electrochemical
behaviour of the Nitro group in nitrobenzene and its derivatives is depending on the pH due to the fact
that protons are involved in the reaction mechanism concerning the reduction process as explained in
equation
pAr ´ NO2qH+ ` 4e- ` 4H+ “ Ar ´ NH2OH+ ` H2O
(41)
The reduction of Nitrobenzene in acidic conditions (0 < pH < 5) which leads to Phenylhydroxylamine
(in protonated form) is governed by the following reaction in acidic media:
Ar ´ NH2OH+ ` 2e- ` 2H+ßAr ´ NH3+
(42)
51
==PAGE:59==
References
[1] A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical methods: fundamentals and applications, 2nd ed.
New York: Wiley, 2001.
[2] A. E. Kaifer and M. Gómez-Kaifer, Supramolecular Electrochemistry.
Wiley, Jan. 2000, google-
Books-ID: nusTvgAACAAJ.
[3] O. Hammerich and B. Speiser, Eds., Organic electrochemistry, 5th ed.
Boca Raton London New
York: CRC Press, 2016, oCLC: 933606858.
[4] D. A. C. Brownson and C. E. Banks, The Handbook of Graphene Electrochemistry.
London:
Springer London, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4471-6428-9
[5] J. Hjelm, “Electrochemistry II. - Losses, Eﬃciency, Stability, Methods,” p. 86, 2017.
[6] R. G. Compton, E. Laborda, and K. R. Ward, Understanding voltammetry: simulation of electrode
processes.
London: Imperial College Press, 2014.
[7] N.
Elgrishi,
K.
J.
Rountree,
B.
D.
McCarthy,
E.
S.
Rountree,
T.
T.
Eisenhart,
and J. L. Dempsey,
“A Practical Beginner’s Guide to Cyclic Voltammetry,”
Journal
of
Chemical
Education,
vol.
95,
no.
2,
pp.
197–206,
Feb.
2018.
[Online].
Available:
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00361
[8] “ionode direct - Reference - Electrodes.” [Online]. Available: http://ionodedirect.com/ionode-
electrodes/reference.html
[9] G. Milazzo, S. Caroli, and V. K. Sharma, Tables of Standard Electrode Potentials.
Wiley, 1978,
google-Books-ID: zKh3QgAACAAJ.
[10] K. B. Oldham, J. C. Myland, and A. M. Bond, Electrochemical science and technology
fundamentals and applications.
Chichester, West Sussex, U.K.; Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons,
2011, oCLC: 835895775. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781119965992
[11] V. G. Levich, “Rotating Ring-Disk Electrodes,” vol. 117, no. 2, p. 7, 1970.
[12] J. D. Roberts, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. Application to Organic Chemistry.
The McGraw-
Hill.
[13] P. Atkins and J. d. Paula, Atkins’ Physical Chemistry.
OUP Oxford, 2010, google-Books-ID:
BV6cAQAAQBAJ.
[14] S. K. Boovanahalli,
D. W. Kim,
and D. Y. Chi, “Application of Ionic Liquid Halide
Nucleophilicity for the Cleavage of Ethers: A Green Protocol for the Regeneration of Phenols
from Ethers,” The Journal of Organic Chemistry, vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 3340–3344, May 2004.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1021/jo035886e
[15] S.
B.
Waghmode,
G.
Mahale,
V.
P.
Patil,
K.
Renalson,
and
D.
Singh,
“Eﬃ-
cient
Method
for
Demethylation
of
Aryl
Methyl
Ether
Using
Aliquat-336,”
Synthetic
Communications,
vol.
43,
no.
24,
pp.
3272–3280,
Dec.
2013.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/00397911.2013.772201
[16] “NMR
Chemical
Shifts
of
Common
Laboratory
Solvents
as
Trace
Impurities
-
The
Journal
of
Organic
Chemistry
(ACS
Publications).”
[Online].
Available:
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/jo971176v
[17] F. Chen, G. Zhang, Z. Hong, Z. Lin, M. Lei, M. Huang, and L. Hu, “Design, synthesis, and SAR
of embelin analogues as the inhibitors of PAI-1 (plasminogen activator inhibitor-1),” Bioorganic
& Medicinal Chemistry Letters, vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 2379–2382, May 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960894X14002728
52
==PAGE:60==
[18] J. D. Benck, B. A. Pinaud, Y. Gorlin, and T. F. Jaramillo, “Substrate Selection for Fundamental
Studies of Electrocatalysts and Photoelectrodes: Inert Potential Windows in Acidic, Neutral,
and Basic Electrolyte,” PLOS ONE, vol. 9, no. 10, p. e107942, Oct. 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0107942
[19] Z. Yang, L. Tong, D. P. Tabor, E. S. Beh, M.-A. Goulet, D. D. Porcellinis, A. Aspuru-Guzik,
R. G. Gordon, and M. J. Aziz, “Alkaline Benzoquinone Aqueous Flow Battery for Large-Scale
Storage of Electrical Energy,” Advanced Energy Materials, vol. 8, no. 8, Mar. 2018. [Online].
Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/aenm.201702056
[20] “products/re/aqueous.” [Online]. Available: https://www.als-japan.com/1388.html
[21] Y. Yi, G. Weinberg, M. Prenzel, M. Greiner, S. Heumann, S. Becker, and R. Schlögl,
“Electrochemical corrosion of a glassy carbon electrode,” Catalysis Today, vol. 295, pp. 32–40, Oct.
2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0920586117304972
53
==PAGE:61==
Appendix
Limiting current recorded with Rotating Ring Disk Electrode for DHBQ 1 mM in KOH 1M.
• Reference electrode: Ag/AgCl in NaCl 3M ﬁlling solution (Eref “ `0.195mV ).
• Working electrode: Glassy carbon (A “ 5.5cm2)
• Counter electrode: Platinum foil.
Figure 54: Disk current of DHBQ 1 mM in KOH 1M at diﬀerent rotation rates.
Figure 55: Ring current of DHBQ 1 mM in KOH 1M at diﬀerent rotation rates.
54
==PAGE:62==
Figure 56: Disk and Ring current of DHBQ 1 mM in KOH 1M at diﬀerent rotation rates.
Figure 57: Open Circuit Potential of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-Benzene.
Open circuit potential of 1,4-Dinitro-2,3,5,6-Tetrahydroxy-Benzene 10 mM in KOH 1M. Since the
variation of values of potential over two minutes is minimal, is possible to state that the potentio-
stat and the solution itself are stable. This measurement was conducted prior to perform the cyclic
55
==PAGE:63==
voltammetry on the same solution.
Figure 58: Enlargement of the 1H-NMR signal of the Methoxy group of the Aromatic ring.
Signal of the Methoxy group of DNTMB (CH3O-) expected at ~3.8 ppm in a form of singlet because
generated by protons in equal surrounding and prevented to couple, is actually a doublet as shown in
the enlargement (Fig.58).
56
