==PAGE:1==
Building Information Modelling
and Operation & Maintenance of
buildings
Thuritha Ravindran (s123252)
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Project title:
Building Information Modelling and Operation &
Maintenance of buildings
Author:
Thuritha Ravindran – s123252
Master student in Architectural Engineering
Supervisor:
Per Anker Jensen
Professor - Department of Management Engineering
Co-supervisor:
Flemming Vestergaard
Associate Professor - Department of Civil Engineering
External supervisor:
Poul Ebbesen
Senior consultant – Rambøll
Project type:
Master Thesis
Project period:
03. September 2018 – 03. Marts 2019
Credit points:
35 ECTS
==PAGE:4==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Preface
This thesis is the ﬁnal output of the degree of Master of Science in Architectural
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project is
credited 35 ECTS points and is conducted in collaboration between DTU and
Rambøll.
The project studies how Building Information Modeling (BIM) can be utilized
in the Operating and Managing (O&M) phase of a building.
Thanks to the supervisors Per Anker Jensen (Professor, DTU) and Flemming
Vestergaard (Associate professor, DTU) for their kind guidance and support.
Thanks to the collaborating supervisor Poul Ebbesen (Senior consultant, Ram-
bøll) for his support as well.
Special thanks to the interviewees Esmir Maslesa (Industrial PhD, DTU), Khoa
Dang Ngo (ICT specialitst, DTU Campus service), Niels Treldal (Head of
VDC Business Development, NCC), Clars Nicholas Danvold (Head of subject
for campus service, University of Copenhagen) and Morten Damsgård (FM
consultant, Dalux) for their time and the collaboration.
Thuritha Ravindran
i
==PAGE:5==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Abstract
Today’s world is becoming increasingly depending on technology. Technology
induces digitization, with technology analog data and working procedures can
be transformed to digital form. As technology is growing the world is moving
toward digitization in all ﬁelds. This is also applicable for the building sector.
The sector is transforming slowly with the several digital opportunities the
construction industry have.
Building Information Modelling (BIM) is used increasingly in the building sec-
tor, but mainly in the design and construction phase. This study investigates
how BIM can be utilized through out the entire life cycle especially in the
Operating and Maintaining (O&M) phase with focus on the Danish building
sector.
Firstly a fundamental description of BIM and Facility Management (FM) is
given. Secondly a literature review is conducted on books and papers concern-
ing BIM and FM. Lastly an interview study is conducted.
From the analysis it is derived that we have the opportunities to model base our
buildings throughout the entire life cycle but we don’t utilize it. Both the liter-
ature review and the interview study emphasized that there is an information
gap between the construction phase and the operating phase. Some intervie-
wees meant that it could be solved by improving digital handover while others
meant that matching expectations of the project output should be conducted
from the beginning of the project.
Finally it is conducted that the sector needs to digitize, and that requires
that the entire sector transform. It is conducted that BIM can be utilized
throuthout the life cycle of a building. But it requires much more.
ii
==PAGE:6==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Resume
Vi bliver mere og mere afhængige af teknologien. Med teknologi kan analoge
data og arbejdsprocesser blive gjort digitale. Som teknologien vokser, bliver
alle industrierne digitaliseret herunder også bygningssektoren. Med de mange
digitale muligheder branchen har transformeres der hen mod en digital branche.
Building Information Modellering (BIM) er anvendt i højere grad, men hov-
edsageligt i design og opførelsesfasen. Dette projekt undersøger hvordan BIM
kan anvendes igennem hele livscyklus af et byggeri med større fokus på drift og
vedligeholdelses fasen. Der er taget udgangspunkt i den danske bygningssektor
i projektet.
Projektet er indledt med en grundlæggende beskrivelse af BIM og Facilities
Management (FM). Hvorefter et litteratur studie er foretaget af værker omhan-
dlende BIM og FM. Herefter er et interview studie foretaget.
Fra analysen er det udledt, at der er mulighed for at modelbasere byggeriet
igennem hele livscyklus dog bliver det ikke udnyttet. Både litteratur- og inter-
viewstudiet pointere, at der er et informationstab mellem projekterings fasen
og drift fasen. Nogle informanter mente, at det kunne løses ved at forbedre
digital aﬂevering, mens andre mente, at byggeprojekter burde forventningsaf-
stemmes allerede ved projektindgåelsen.
iii
==PAGE:7==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Acronyms
AEC
Architecture, Engineering and Construction
BBR
Danish building and housing register
BIM
Building Information Modelling
BYGST
Danish Building and Property Agency
CAD
Computer Aided design
CAFM
Computer Aided Facility Management
CCS
Cuneco Classiﬁcation System
CMMS
Computerized Maintenance Management System
DDB
Det Digitale Byggeri
FM
Facility Management
ICT
Information and Communication Technology
IDM
Information Delivery Manual
IFC
Industry Foundation Classes
IPD
Integrated Project Delivery
IT
Information Technology
IWMS
Integrated Workplace Management System
LOD
Level of Development
O&M
Operations and Maintenance
UCPH
University of Copenhagen
VDC
Virtual Design and Construction
iv
==PAGE:8==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Resume
iii
Acronyms
iv
List of Tables
vii
List of Figures
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
4
2.1
Building Information Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Facility Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Literature review on BIM and FM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
BIM for FM managers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Facility Management as digital transformation agent . .
13
2.3.3
Application of ICT in Danish building sector
. . . . . .
15
2.3.4
Towards digitalization of building operations with BIM .
16
2.3.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Empirical analysis
18
3.1
Interview study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
Information gap between construction and operating
phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.2
Digital building sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.3
Digital handover from construction to operating phase .
20
3.1.4
The danish building sector in perspective to the Nordic
countries and Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Discussion
23
4.1
Digitization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Building sector needs to get digitized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Information gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Digital handover
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.1
Challenges according to digitalize the sector . . . . . . .
25
v
==PAGE:9==
Contents
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Conclusion
27
6
Bibliography
29
Appendices
31
A Interview study
32
A.1 Interview guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
A.2 Interview 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
A.3 Interview 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
A.4 Interview 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
A.5 Interview 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.6 Interview 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
vi
==PAGE:10==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
List of Tables
2.1
Beneﬁts of using BIM throughout the building life cycle phases
6
2.2
Maintenance methods and planning of maintenance . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Overview of used material in literature review . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
The four maturity levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1
Overview of interviewees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Overview of opinions regarding digital handover . . . . . . . . .
21
vii
==PAGE:11==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
List of Figures
1.1
Project time plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Concept of Building Information Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The following terms "little BIM", "big BIM", "open BIM" and
"closed BIM" and their correlation is described. . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Information loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
BIM dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
FM activities are support functions for the core business of an
organization.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
FM as integration of the three P’s
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
FM activities aﬀect all levels strategical, tactical and operational 10
2.8
FM activities aﬀect all levels strategical, tactical and operational 10
2.9
Development of quality level of facility according to diﬀerent
maintenance strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.10 Maturity level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1
Information gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
viii
==PAGE:12==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Introduction
Technology and digitization are overruling the world
Today’s world is becoming increasingly depending on technology, as technology
is growing rapidly. In other terms, technology is overtaking the world since
new inventions take over and have a huge impact on human life. Technology
eases our lives in all kind of ﬁelds. From the alarm clock on our mobile phones
waking us up to the type of transportation we use, to the tools we use at
our working place, to the mobile phones we use the entire day – everything is
technology. The same happens with industries. They are getting bigger and
being developed with the help of technology.
Technology induces digitization, with technology analog data and working pro-
cedures can be transformed to digital form. As technology is growing the world
is moving toward digitalization in all ﬁelds. The development of the building
sector started from the analog working methods which was replaced by digital
2D drawings also known as CAD. Later 3D replaced CAD and today VR is
introduced and used. We are continuously met by new technology which can
help us digitalize our buildings. There are plenty of opportunities.
Issues in building sector
The AEC ﬁeld have been slow to adapt the digital evolution. The phenom
of Building Information Modeling (BIM) have been in the talk lately and the
thing about it seems reasonable. In the late 2000’s the BIM concept began
to take oﬀ. BIM is such a complete tool for the AEC industry if it is used
properly. Worldwide the concept is spreading and the industry is taking it
into use, but it takes time. The theory about how a building project can be
fully digital sounds good but in which degree is this happening in reality.
The upcoming building projects have the requirement to be done digitally,
since both the sector, building owners, entrepreneurs and customers request
it. The whole sector begins to get digitized, but some corners are still left.
The sector faces issues according to lack of digital operations and maintenance
(O&M). But how can we make it uniform throughout the sector? How can it
be done so we all speak the same language? There are diﬀerent solutions out
on the market, but there might be a convenient solution for it.
1
==PAGE:13==
1.1. Problem statement
1.1
Problem statement
This project is focusing on how to utilize BIM throughout the entire life cycle
of a building. There is a lack of utilizing the full potential of BIM models
developed under the design and construction phase of buildings. These models
are not used in the O&M phase where the models could meet great beneﬁt.
Many of the tasks in O&M are often repeated, therefor it would be more
convenient to get these tasks automatic.
With this thesis it is desired to achieve an understanding of how Building
Information Models (BIM) can be utilized in the O&M phase and for what
reason it is diﬃcult to make the O&M phase digitized. Furthermore, the paper
will investigate which data set the facility managers need from the design and
construction phase to digitize the O&M phase. The project is delimited by
only concerning the Danish building sector.
On behalf of this the problem statement of the thesis is formed.
How can Operations and Maintenance (O&M) processes be digitalized by uti-
lizing Building Information Models (BIM)?
• How can O&M beneﬁt from BIM models?
• How can digital delivery of buildings beneﬁt O&M processes?
• Which type of information must be included in a BIM model before it
can be applied for O&M processes?
• Will it be possible to codify data in BIM so the data can support O&M
processes?
1.2
Method
The methodologies used to conduct the study are literature review and inter-
view study. Both of them are described shortly in the following. Figure 1.1
shows the time plan of the project.
Literature review of academic books and papers written by relevant ﬁeld en-
trants concerning BIM and FM is conducted to get an understanding of the
lacks and needs of the topic.
To get an understanding of the subject diﬀerent entrants from the industry
is interviewed. Qualitative research interviews were conducted. They were
all semi structured and the interviewees had the main questions before the
interviews.
The report is build up on theory and empirical analysis.
Firstly BIM and
FM is described fundamentally followed by a literature review on BIM and
FM. Secondly an empirical analysis of the interview study is made. Lastly the
theory and empirical analysis are discussed against each other in the discussion
section.
2
==PAGE:14==
1.2. Method
Figure 1.1: Project time plan
3
==PAGE:15==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Theory
This section gives a fundamental description of Building Information Modelling
(BIM) and Facility Management (FM).
2.1
Building Information Modelling
BIM denotes Building Information Modelling in some cases Building Informa-
tion Management in other cases Building Information Method.
BIM is based on the idea of the continuous use of a digital building model
throughout the entire life cycle of a building. This increases the information
ﬂow between each phase which then also increases the eﬃciency of the projects.
A decrease in errors and reentering of data can be identiﬁed compared with
paper based workﬂow [Borrmann et al., 2018].
BIM is not a new concept, virtual building models were mentioned in a research
paper for the ﬁrst time in 1970s. The term BIM was mentioned ﬁrst time in
1992 and from 2003 it began to be widespread [Borrmann et al., 2018].
Figure 2.1 shows how BIM can be utilized through design, construction and
operating phase of a building. The life cycle can be divided into more speciﬁc
phases with several sub phases but in this study these three main phases are
considered.
The most known and obvious feature of BIM is the 3D representation of a
construction. Another feature is that all objects have a purpose, they are all
denoted as an object type, these will have some additional information and
relation to other objects. Object based modelling is required for all types of
analysis. E.g. quantity take-oﬀ, structural analysis, building performance etc.
also for technical drawings. [Borrmann et al., 2018]
Design phase BIM enables simulations and integration of computations ad-
vantageous with geometry and material parameters taken directly from the
model. With the possibility to coordinate and apply computerized simulations
of a construction in design phase, makes room for determine and resolve errors
[Borrmann et al., 2018].
Construction phase When using BIM in the construction phase advantages
according to design is obtained. With the digital representation of the con-
struction the preparation and execution can be planned well. Cost for contrac-
tors can be determined before hand, scheduled construction time and logistics
[Borrmann et al., 2018].
4
==PAGE:16==
2.1. Building Information Modelling
Figure 2.1: Concept of Building Information Modelling
Source: [TMD, 2018]
Operating phase
A prerequisite for utilizing BIM in operation phase, is
organized handover of BIM information including relevant information from
construction phase. High-value digital information can directly be input for
facility or asset management systems contrary to traditional paper based draw-
ings.
When having a "digital twin" all changes have to be modiﬁed and kept up-
dated. When the facility reaches the end phase or renovation all information
regarding the used materials will be reachable and environmental recycling of
materials will be possible [Borrmann et al., 2018].
The beneﬁts of using BIM in the pre-construction, design, construction and
post-construction phase of a building project are described in Table 2.1.
Challenges can also be expected when using BIM. These are described in the
following. In the initial stages challenges with collaboration and teaming would
be met. Even though BIM oﬀers methods for collaboration there will be chal-
lenges initially. Other challenges can be met regarding legal changes, changes in
practise and use of information or implementation issues. [Eastman et al., 2011]
Eastman et al. mention that eﬀective use of BIM requires understanding of
BIM and the related processes most importantly a plan for implementation.
The general steps to follow for an eﬀective implementation are the following:
• Develop a BIM adoption plan
• Implement a plan with cost, time and budget
• Begin using BIM in smaller projects in parallel with existing technology
and produce traditional documents
5
==PAGE:17==
2.1. Building Information Modelling
Pre construction
Design
Construction
Post con-
struction
Early determining
of expected
time and cost
can be meet
Early and accurate
visualisation
of design
Fast reaction to
design changes
Improved
handover of
facility information
Increased building
performance
& quality
Accurate and
consistent
drawings at any
stage of design
Possibility for
discover design
errors before
construction
Better man-
agement and
operation
of facilities
Improved
collaboration
hereby better
understanding of
design and cost
Early collaboration
of multiple
design disciplines
Synchronization
of design & con-
struction planning
Integration with
facility manage-
ment systems
Table 2.1: Beneﬁts of using BIM throughout the building life cycle phases
Based on [Eastman et al., 2011]
• Use initial results to educate and guide continued adoption of BIM
• Extend the use of BIM to new projects and begin working in new col-
laborations
• Integrate BIM capabilities into additional aspects of ﬁrm
• Re-plan the BIM implementation process once in awhile to reﬂect
Transforming the building sector, from the traditional approach, working with
drawings to model based working procedures requires changes both internally
and externally in the organizations.
The terms "Big BIM", "Little BIM",
"Closed BIM" and "Open BIM" are useful to describe this. [Borrmann et al., 2018]
The four types are shown in Figure 2.2
BuildingSMART BuildingSMART is a nonproﬁt organisation established in
2003. It provides vendor independent data format for digital building model ex-
change. Which today is resulted in object oriented data model called Industry
Foundation Classes (IFC). In 2013 the data format was adapted by ISO stan-
dard and it is the basis for many national guidelines today [Borrmann et al., 2018].
Det Digital Byggeri The Det Digital Byggeri (DDB) was a Danish govern-
ment initiative in the years 2005-2011. Later it was handed over by Bips, which
today is called Molio [bips, 2010].
DDB was the initiation to digitize the Danish building sector. The initiative
developed ten requirements for the building owners to follow. These covered
application of 3D models, data sharing on cloud based platforms and digital
handover.
Instead of recording information in drawings BIM stores the information in
the model. [Borrmann et al., 2018]
With BIM the coordination of design activities are improved. The construction
6
==PAGE:18==
2.1. Building Information Modelling
Figure 2.2: The following terms "little BIM", "big BIM", "open BIM" and "closed
BIM" and their correlation is described.
Source: [Borrmann et al., 2018]
Figure 2.3: Information loss
Source [Borrmann et al., 2018]
process can be set up and controlled within the model. Integrated simulations
of the construction can be done with the same model. Handover of building
information to the operators is improved. Hereby the reentering of data can be
reduced signiﬁcantly. Loss of information caused by disruption in the digital
information ﬂow is showed in Figure 2.3 [Borrmann et al., 2018]
BIM Dimensions
BIM can contain several information of a building. When data regarding cost,
sustainability, facilities it is denoted as how dimensional the model is. The
diﬀerent dimensions a model can be is described in the following and showed
7
==PAGE:19==
2.2. Facility Management
in Figure 2.4:
3D describes the geometry of the building and the visualisation of it. Useful
for detection of clashes in the design phase.
4D denotes scheduling to execute the construction.
5D with this dimension estimations can be made both for cost and planning,
prefabrication.
6D sustainability is covered. Energy consumption, analysis.
7D is when FM is included, to reach this level through operations and main-
tenance manuals and warranty information.
[BibLus, 2018]
Figure 2.4: BIM dimensions
Source: [BibLus, 2018]
2.2
Facility Management
Facility or Facilities management (FM) are both the term for the same. Fa-
cilities Management is mainly used in EU and is deﬁned as following in the
European standard. “Facilities Management is the integration of processes in
an organisation to maintain and develop the agreed services, which support and
improve the eﬀectiveness of the primary processes” (EN15221-1, 2006) cited
from [Jensen, 2008].
As the deﬁnition indicates FM is a supply of facility services to support the
demand of the primary activities of an organization. These services can either
be provided internally or externally.
When speaking about FM an organizations primary production and secondary
production are diﬀerentiated. FM is deﬁned as secondary production and can
therefor not be seen isolated, but only in correlation to the primary production
of the organization as shown in Figure 2.5.
The American based International Facility Management Association (IFMA)
8
==PAGE:20==
2.2. Facility Management
Figure 2.5: FM activities are support functions for the core business of an
organization.
Based on [Jensen, 2008]
deﬁnes FM as: “Facility Management is a profession that encompasses multi-
ple disciplines to ensure functionality of the built environment by integrating
people, place, process and technology” cited from [Jensen, 2008]
On behalf of this deﬁnition, FM is considered as an integration of the three
P’s, People, Processes and Places. Organisational function integrates the three
P’s in built environment to improve quality of life of people and productivity
of the core business [Jensen, 2008].
Figure 2.6: FM as integration of the three P’s
Source: [Jensen, 2008]
The interaction of FM activities and the organization is on all levels strategical,
tactical and operational.
The use of external providers to manage FM services has increased.
It is
especially the operative tasks which are outsourced since these are often rou-
tinized. The strategical and tactical tasks are more depended on the actual
development of the organization, why these not are outsourced often.
In that context there is a need to make a distinction between actual FM func-
tions and provision of FM services. Accurate coordination and adaption of the
FM services are required to develop the organization, while provision of FM
services must be ensured, also shown in Figure 2.5.
Regardless of outsourcing, FM functions have many partners both internally
9
==PAGE:21==
2.2. Facility Management
Figure 2.7: FM activities aﬀect all levels strategical, tactical and operational
Based on [Jensen, 2008]
and externally. These are shown on Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: FM activities aﬀect all levels strategical, tactical and operational
Source: [Jensen, 2008]
FM has been evolving with time. Since the society went from being industrial
to information society. Concurrently with the increasing automatizing of the
industrial production, the number of physical production processes were de-
creased. Which lead to the arise of service ﬁrms and oﬃce work. As oﬃces
were the new workplace for the majority of the society, this formed the facility
management discipline [Jensen, 2008].
Maintenance strategies
10
==PAGE:22==
2.2. Facility Management
The goal of maintenance strategy is to ensure the value of the property last
both for the building owner in a ﬁnancial aspect and for the building user in a
usage aspect. The usage value is seen as short term, while the ﬁnancial value
is long term. Long term maintenance must be planned on strategic level in
FM function. This is also applicable in relation to quality, refurbishment and
modernization [Jensen, 2008].
There are three types of maintenance methods, these are described in Table 2.2
along with the principles of maintenance planning.
Maintenance methods
Preventing maintenance
To prevent damage and to prevent dissatisﬁed level
Replacement
Total replacement of entire building systems e.g re-
placement of all windows or entire rooﬁng.
Corrective maintenance
To correct urgent damages or breakdowns
Planning of maintenance
Interval based maintenance
Activities performed with ﬁxed intervals for each
building system
Condition based maintenance
Activities prioritised and determined on basis of con-
dition reports
Risk based maintenance
Activities prioritised and determined on basis of risk
assessment
Table 2.2: Maintenance methods and planning of maintenance
Source: [Jensen, 2008]
The appropriate planning of maintenance would be a combination of them
all. Since for instance interval based maintenance would be too expensive and
unnecessary for the entire facility.
The quality of a building will decrease with time due to usage and climate af-
fection. By maintaining the facility with preventing maintenance and replace-
ments of systems the "as-built" quality can be kept over time. Modernisation
of facility can even be done, in the sense of e.g. new system or installation, then
the quality level will be higher than "as-built" [Jensen, 2008]. In Figure 2.9
the development of quality level of a facility according to diﬀerent maintenance
strategies as time pass is shown.
FM in Denmark and internationally Danish Facilities Management as-
sociation DFM also known as DFM network was established in 1991. The
purpose of the association is to:
• develop the FM area
• spread FM knowledge
• promote the correlation of practice, education and research
• be the connecting link for international FM
DFM want purely to develop FM as a profession. This is both their weakness
11
==PAGE:23==
2.3. Literature review on BIM and FM
Figure 2.9: Development of quality level of facility according to diﬀerent
maintenance strategies
Source: [Jensen, 2008]
and strength. Weakness in the sense of ﬁnancial foundation. Strength as they
stand as a neutral but professional association who works purely for profession.
When speaking of FM internationally, the following associations are notable:
IFMA, EuroFM and NordicFM. Here IFMA, International facility manage-
ment association, is special. The association was established in 1980 in US
with the ambition to represent FM worldwide. IFMA arrange an annual con-
ference in North America, they arrange an annual conference in Europe as well
which is called the European FM Conference (EFMC) [Jensen, 2008].
2.3
Literature review on BIM and FM
In this section the literature listed in Table 2.3 is analysed.
The diﬀerent
opinions from the material is presented.
BIM for FM managers
Facility Management as digital transformation agent
Application of ICT in Danish construction industry
Towards digitalization of building operations with BIM
Table 2.3: Overview of used material in literature review
2.3.1
BIM for FM managers
Current FM ineﬃcient
Teicholz claims that current FM practice is ineﬃcient. Since the delivered FM
data is often paper based and placed in non accessible places. These are often
outdated, because it will be diﬃcult to get them updated. Finding the right
drawing or folder where the information is placed will be a bigger challenge
than updating the information.
He states that to operate and maintain a facility it is necessary with suﬃcient
way of collecting, accessing, and updating FM data. [Teicholz, 2013b]
12
==PAGE:24==
2.3. Literature review on BIM and FM
Teicholz gives a short description of BIM. He states that with BIM reduced cost
and improved eﬃciency can be obtained. Additionally he mentions opportunity
for early decision making, caused by possibility for early evaluating of building
performance. Hereby decision changes can be made with less time and cost
usage.
Owner beneﬁts of BIM FM integration
The main beneﬁt Teicholz mention is that key data regarding space, equipment,
systems, zones etc. can be captured from BIM. Therefor there will be no need
of reentering data. This will entail less cost according to data entry also higher
data quality.
General beneﬁts of BIM FM integration during life cycle of building: accurate
and complete information, cost beneﬁts, improved maintenance and preventing
maintenance planning and procedures which reduces cost of utilities. All these
points contribute to lower the facility total cost of ownership [Teicholz, 2013b].
2.3.2
Facility Management as digital transformation agent
DFM recently published a book about how digitization can be handled in
a structured way while it adds value for FM working procedures while FM
strategies still are supported.
Digital maturity level
When digitizing an organization, it can be a challenge. Ebbesen gives a pro-
posal for viewing the digitization process of a FM organization in four maturity
levels. Where each of them describes how mature a organization is transform-
ing toward digitization. If the focus is on improving the maturity level through
the four levels, then the process can be better managed, hereby the digital
foundation would be structured and restricted.
The four maturity levels are desvribed in Table 2.4.
Maturity level 1
Data collection, preparation and storage of data in
data containers as CAD, BIM, GIS, databases etc.
Maturity level 2
Isolated digitization of speciﬁc processes
Maturity level 3
Implementation of IT systems supporting operating
activities
Maturity level 4
Managing information collection
Table 2.4: The four maturity levels
Source: [Ebbesen et al., 2018]
Most of the Danish public and private organizations will be placed on maturity
level 1 or 2. There is focus on improve digital maturity on level one as it is
commonly realized that the digital foundation of data must be structured and
controlled.
13
==PAGE:25==
2.3. Literature review on BIM and FM
Regardless of which maturity level an organization has, it is necessary to con-
sider the two following questions.
Ebbesen proposes two questions all FM
managers must ask them self according to IT strategic considerations.
• Which FM processes are desired to be supported digitally?
• Which management information is desired produced digitally?
Digital building operation
Ebbesen deﬁnes digitization as increased use of digital media, tools and meth-
ods in this coherence.
"Digital building operations" are not a deﬁned term today, but Ebbesen states
that the term consists of three components digital operation, digital physical
buildings and digital virtual buildings.
These components are independent
since each of them can exist without the other. The terms are described in the
following.
A. Digital operating process
Digitally stored operation related data and documentation. Operating
activities and maintenance activities are managed digitally by FM sys-
tem.
B. Digital physical buildings
Digital indoor environment regulations. Automatic regulations of e.g.
water, cooling, heating etc.
C. Digital virtual buildings
Digital representation of a building often as CAD or BIM model. These
are often used for supporting FM processes
It is stated that digitalization must be performed for one operating process
at the time. Digitization must be performed prioritised, ﬁrst the operation
processes hereafter the physical building if it adds value for the operating
process. Finally only if it adds value can the virtual model of the building be
digitized so it can support operating process of the building.
The full potential of digitization is obtained by correlation. The correlation
can be ensured by interoperability between the digital elements.
The potential value creation by digitize the three components digital operation,
digital physical buildings and digital virtual buildings is given in Figure 2.10.
The components are subdivided and the potential value creation are showed
as high, medium or low. While the current degree of implementation is divided
into four steps.
The term value is concerned. Here it is stated that value can be understood
diﬀerently in diﬀerent contexts. In business, value can be considered in two as-
pects. One as value creating for managerial value and the other as productivity.
E.g. value creation for productivity can be measured as increased productivity
and eﬀectively of a production. While if interoperability of diﬀerent systems
14
==PAGE:26==
2.3. Literature review on BIM and FM
Figure 2.10: Maturity level
Source: [Ebbesen et al., 2018]
is obtained value creation in FM is obtained.
2.3.3
Application of ICT in Danish building sector
Danish Building Research Institute (SBi) presents the results of a study made
to discover the usage of ICT application in the Danish building sector. The
study was made in 2018.
The results concerning classiﬁcation, application
of BIM, reutilisation of models is considered in the following. This source is
focusing on the usage of BIM in Denmark and it does not concern FM or the
O&M phase.
The report begins with stating that digitizing of the building sector often is
linked up with the development and application of tools, software and working
processes. This development can be considered bipartite, one as the develop-
ment of data processing tools and the other as development of tools for data
exchange. The study had investigated how the Danish building sector utilize
digital tools.
When DDB was established digitalization of the construction business was seen
as a remedy for increasing the productivity of the sector. As DDB focused on
the link of drawings and speciﬁcations could ensure consistency and hereby
decrease errors. The prerequisite for this was to digitalize drawings and the
related speciﬁcations. This was primarily achieved by connecting speciﬁcation
to CAD drawings in the beginning. Later it was replaced by BIM and Virtual
Design & Construction (VDC) here speciﬁcation of drawing and models can
be produced within the same software. The study shows that mainly archi-
tects and engineers are using software as CAD, BIM, VDC, visualization and
simulation. So there is still far to go for the potential to increase productivity
hereby. [Sørensen and Gottlieb, 2018]
15
==PAGE:27==
2.3. Literature review on BIM and FM
One of the aims with DDB was also to develop a classiﬁcation system. The
fundamental for CCS classiﬁcation was initiated with the DDB initiative. The
idea behind CCS was to have a "common language" across the building sector
which could be used in the entire life cycle [Sørensen and Gottlieb, 2018].
The study had investigated the application of classiﬁcation systems in the
Danish building sector. This resulted in 28% don’t use any kind of classiﬁcation
system and that 30% don’t know which type of classiﬁcation system is applied.
[Sørensen and Gottlieb, 2018]
The degree of reutilisation by contractors of a BIM model from a engineer
is low. However 30% of big contractor do reutilize BIM models from engi-
neers. Contractors reutilization of BIM models and the use of classiﬁcation is
investigated. Here the study shows that models are reused without a classi-
ﬁcation system. It is stated that maybe the data or models just are used as
visualisation and the convention is not understood as a classiﬁcation system
[Sørensen and Gottlieb, 2018].
Collaboration between disciplines and the use of digital connection of data is
investigated. Here it is shown that mainly engineers agree on collaboration,
considering the entire study 53% agrees. When asking engineers more than
90% agreed on the collaboration, while only 35% of contractors agreed.
Conclusively the study shows a diverse understanding of the sector according
to applied tools and classiﬁcations in diﬀerent disciplines. It is clear that the
engineers are the ones keeping digital improvements. The study shows that
the degree of digital collaboration is decreasing as the life cycle moves. Mainly
the bigger contractor ﬁrms use BIM method. It can be caused by that smaller
ﬁrms either has the resources to invest in it or get enough proﬁt from it.
2.3.4
Towards digitalization of building operations with BIM
The paper is initiated with the statement, that BIM is the most promis-
ing approach for achieving digitalization throughout the entire life cycle of
a building. They claim that in BIM method a digital twin of the building is
used throughout the whole life cycle. Hereby collaboration is optimized and
information exchange between all participants and disciplines are improved.
[Krämer and Besenyi, 2018]
But in reality most projects focus on the planning or construction phase and
not on the operational phase. It is stated that the practical usage of BIM in
FM is still rare. It is stated that even in current projects where BIM is used
there is uncertainties for what information must be included in a "as-built"
model for FM proposes. [Krämer and Besenyi, 2018]
This paper studies a German research project called "BIM-FM". The project
compares diﬀerent digital surveying technologies used in ﬁeld tests to capture
BIM of existing buildings and make them available for FM purposes.
16
==PAGE:28==
2.3. Literature review on BIM and FM
Some of the agreed beneﬁts of using BIM in O&M phase is improved planning
of maintenance and control, handover from construction to FM and improved
start-up management of building operations.
2.3.5
Summary
After the diﬀerent material is presented the main potentials and barriers found
are described in the following.
The current FM practise is outdated, since new technologies and digital op-
portunities have joined the AEC industry.
There are several indication of potentials for using BIM. It is stated that BIM
is the most promising approach for achieving digitalization throughout the life
cycle of a building. Hereby collaboration can be optimized and information
exchange will be improved. Even though the beneﬁts are agreed in reality most
projects focus on the planning or construction phase and not on the operational
phase.
From a study made on the Danish building sector showed that mainly architects
and engineers are using software visualization and simulation. Classiﬁcation is
used and known only in a poor level.
In the litterateur review some tools for digitize an FM organisation is given.
The maturity level of an organization can be mentioned here. Some reﬂection
for the FM managers or the FM organization before going digital is mentioned
as well.
17
==PAGE:29==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Empirical analysis
3.1
Interview study
The interview study was initiated by determining the interviewees. In Table 3.1
a list of the interviewees and their work position is shown.
Semi structured interviews were conducted, therefor the main questions and
subjects were send to the interviewees before the interview so they were pre-
pared. The questions asked varied according to the work position of the inter-
viewee.
Interviewee
Name
Role
Workplace
1
Esmir Maslesa
Industrial PhD
DTU/ KMD
2
Khoa Dang Ngo
ICT specialist
DTU Cam-
pus service
3
Niels Treldal
Head of VDC Busi-
ness Development
NCC
4
Clars Nicholas Danvold
Head of subject
for campus service
University of
Copenhagen
5
Morten Damsgård
FM consultant
Dalux
Table 3.1: Overview of interviewees
All the interviews were voice recorded with the acceptance from the intervie-
wees. The duration of the conducted interviews were approximately an hour
and each of them were conducted personally. After the interviews a summary
was send to the interviewees to get their approval in order to avoid any mis-
understanding. These summaries are placed in Appendix A.
All the ﬁve interviewees have diﬀerent work position and therefor also diﬀerent
responsibilities. Even though they all are working in the same ﬁeld, conﬂict
of interest was met when opinion for the same issue was discussed. In the
following the discussed topics and issues are elaborated.
3.1.1
Information gap between construction and operating
phase
Interviewee 1 stated that there is an issue in the construction industry when
moving from the construction phase to the operating phase.
He explained
that during the project design and construction, data is created and in the
operating phase these data are needed. Typically the handover between these
two phases happens by delivering information as paper based drawings, models,
18
==PAGE:30==
3.1. Interview study
Figure 3.1: Information gap
documents etc. This is how it has been happening for years, until lately where
it has been possible to deliver ﬁles digitally. He claims that no matter if the
delivered data are analog or digital, the delivered information is chaotic. No
one can ﬁnd the needed information. Therefor it often ends up with recreation
of data in the operating phase.
Interviewee 2 agreed that there is an information gap between the two phases
but he did not agree that improved handover would solve it. He meant that it
can be solved by asking the responsible person in the operating phase, about
which data they need for operating the facilities. If they are clear about what
they need and the handover contains the requested data, the recreation of data
will not be necessary.
Interviewee 3 claimed that the information gap is caused by the operating
phase do not know what data is needed. They do not know what data must be
handed over so it will create value for the operating phase. He stated that if
employees from the operating phase were involved in the design phase it would
not be useful since they will not be able to contribute. He mentioned that
it may be caused by the fact that each project varies in working procedures,
demand of data and output.
Interviewee 4 mentioned that the information gap occurs when resources com-
mitted to working with digital information for design is higher than for mainte-
nance. Or if resources committed to working with real world objects according
to maintenance is higher than for designing.
Interviewee 5 agreed that there is an information gap between the construction
phase and the operating phase. He mentioned that data is a challenge. Also
that there is a diﬀerence between the data used in the constructing phase and
data used in the operating phase. He also mentioned that the worst scenario
according to data is when data are not maintained. Therefor he meant that
we have to consider every data included in a model. Even if a small error of
a model is found the model will lose reliability. So rather missing data than
using wrong data.
19
==PAGE:31==
3.1. Interview study
3.1.2
Digital building sector
Interviewee 1 mentioned that it is easy to be caught up by all the upcoming
fancy technology, but at the same time it is important to consider the value
of it. We can make virtual models by using virtual reality, but how necessary
is it and will it create value. He also mentioned that the technology requires
that we spend some time before we earn an output from it.
Interviewee 2 claimed that it is important to have a stance for what data is
needed to operate your facility. This must be formulated and communicated to
the ones who must deliver this data. He also claimed that it is not enough just
to have digital data. It is also important to manage the digital data and have a
common opinion in the organization about where the data is placed. If all the
data are not placed in a common cloud or server the data will be disconnected
to rest of the data. If it is placed in a personal folder of an employee the risk
of loosing it will also be higher. Some data are integrated with other data, and
when the data is disconnected to the FM system the correlation between e.g.
room database and the data is disconnected.
3.1.3
Digital handover from construction to operating phase
Interviewee 1 mentioned that we need to simplify the processes, and select
the most important data for O&M. Often we hear the phrase “we are missing
data” but it can also go the other way around so we have much more data than
desired. That will even be a challenge.
Interviewee 2 mentioned that if the data is digital the working procedures will
be diﬀerent from if the data was analog. The consequences of getting data on
digital, analog or database form will have an aﬀect on how it can be processed.
Interviewee 3 mentioned that it should be the turnkey contractors responsi-
bility to make the subcontractors to deliver the requested information, and
to make requirement for digital data delivery. Therefor he meant that it was
the sector who might make some common instructions or requirement for a
optimal handover. He proposed that by providing preﬁxed packages for digital
handover the process could be simpliﬁed. These packages can vary according
to size of building, activity of facility, end user etc. He also stated that this
should be proposed by the market. It would be easier for both the building
owner and the collaborating project participant to determine which data would
be included in the digital handover. In the project initiations the only need
would be to choose which level of data is expected as output.
Interviewee 4 mentioned that there is a dream for data to just ﬂow from the
construction phase directly to operating phase. But there is not enough focus
on how much personal competences there are in the two phases. In the design
and construction phase there would be a team working day and night on a
digital model.
All relevant data would be added and the model would be
20
==PAGE:32==
3.1. Interview study
centralized. But all that work becomes waste when delivering the model to
the operating team and no one have the competences to operate the model.
He also mentioned that the level of ambition for digital handover is often too
high. We need to know the aim of data which is implemented in the models.
While interviewee 5 claimed that they have sorted it out in their company.
Dalux had lately developed a system which can handle digital handover. The
company already provides a FM system and a BIM system so this newly de-
veloped tool is a platform to work across these two products.
He was not
convinced about a consistent handover tool for the entire sector. He claimed
that it depends on who catches the market ﬁrst, which software providers.
He mentioned that maybe Molio1 could, if they developed a kind of guidance
for digital handover. Otherwise it would be a cocktail of software providers,
biggest building owners and interest groups as Molio, who together could make
a standard, which obviously would be optional and it would be used in circum-
stances of preferences.
In Table 3.2 an overview of the diﬀerent opinions met regarding digital han-
dover and suggestions for improving digital handover is described.
Digital handover
Interviewee 1
Too much information can also be a challenge. Sim-
plify processes, and select the most relevant data for
O&M
Interviewee 2
If the digital handover get some requirements then
O&M can beneﬁt from it
Interviewee 3
It is unclear which data must be included in a digital
handover
Interviewee 4
Often the ambition for digital handover is too high.
If a digital model is handover, no one in the O&M
phase has the competences to manage it.
Interviewee 5
Need common standards and requirements
Table 3.2: Overview of opinions regarding digital handover
3.1.4
The danish building sector in perspective to the Nordic
countries and Europe
Interviewee 3 meant that as Denmark is such a small country it might be
possible to have some common requirements and standards for the building
sector.
Interviewee 4 mentioned that Denmark is known as one of the most digitized
countries in the World. We are often ﬁrst movers, but it is not always beneﬁcial.
Since it requires a lot of time and resources to be ﬁrst movers and to pave the
way, nothing would be ready or prepared. This often induce, that we don’t
1MOLIO is a the Danish research centre for construction business, nonproﬁt organization
[]
21
==PAGE:33==
3.1. Interview study
gain from it. Because we are such a small country, so the eﬀort it self will be
too expensive for us.
He also mentioned that there is too much focus on technology in the sector
and not enough focus on requirements, processes and responsibilities.
The
current working procedures regarding e.g. legal collaborations are outdated
especially for digital collaboration. He stated that: If we had the same focus
on requirements or the culture for actually following requirements as they have
in Germany our foundation for digitization would be much easier.
Interviewee 5 mentioned that one consistent handover tool for the Danish build-
ing sector could be a possibility if software providers, some of the biggest
building owners, and interest groups as Molio went together and made some
standard or requirements, which could be used optionally by the sector. But
he was not convinced about it.
3.1.5
Summary
The interview study points in the direction of improved digital handover to
reduce the information gap between construction and operating phase. Some
interviewees mentioned that it can be improved by involving staﬀfrom the
O&M phase earlier in the process, so they can inﬂuence the delivered data.
Hereby the necessary data for O&M can be ensured through handover.
One interviewee had an opposite opinion then the others. In his opinion the
issue is that nobody knows which data is needed for optimal O&M. He claimed
that even if the staﬀwas involved earlier, they will not be able to contribute.
Therefor he suggested that it was the sector who might make some common
instructions or requirement for a optimal handover.
The study also points out that several decisions have to be made in the initial
stage of a project. Not only design related decisions but also decisions accord-
ing to the O&M phase. Already in the beginning of the building process it has
to be agreed which O&M related data must be included in the handover.
22
==PAGE:34==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Discussion
After both the literature review on BIM and FM and an interview study have
been conducted, diﬀerent opinions of the issue are presented. The following
section will compare and discuss the presented conceptions.
4.1
Digitization
Technology is represented in all types of industries; it is impossible to avoid
technology. Today we are in an era where everyone knows everything. It only
takes a few seconds on a smartphone to ﬁnd information about anything. We
have the world in our hands on our smartphones. The internet is ﬁlled with
all kinds of information, and we have accessibility to the internet all the time
with our smartphones.
Analog working procedures can be transformed to be digital procedures with
the use of technology. This phenomenon is happening for the building sector
as well. Digitization has a great potential for improving productivity of the
sector. When digitalizing an organization, it is necessary to consider which
data have to be digital, since digital data also have to be maintained.
The sector has to transform so both digital foundation of data and digital
working procedures are obtained. This point is agreed in the interview study,
by Interviewee 2. He meant that it could be achieved by changing management.
He mentioned that the digitalization can be considered as tripartite "Digitizing,
digitalization and digital transformation".
4.2
Building sector needs to get digitized
In Denmark the building sector is the less digitized one according to Danish
Statistics from 2017 [Statistik, 2018]. It would be reasonable to wonder why.
The building sector consists of several stakeholders and participants. In each
project, the project team and output will diﬀer, not even one project will be
identical, which also is agreed in Borrmann et al. Therefor it would be extra
diﬃcult to transform from traditional working methods to more digital meth-
ods. There are so many joints that have to be included in this transforming
process. It is necessary for the building sector to transform to be digitalized
and it is not an easy process. To transform the sector from being drawing based
to be model based, it has to be an incremental process with coherent proce-
dures. There is a demand for new enterprises, anchoring and new management
23
==PAGE:35==
4.3. Information gap
directions. Digital anchoring can only be introduced if the management or the
building owners begin to demand it.
At the same time, it would make the process more smooth if all stakeholders
began the process at the same time. So, by pushing the requirement down
through a higher level with other terms by requesting digital requirements as
legal issues the sector would be forced to change their working procedures.
In some cases, it is better to force the change than expecting it to happen
naturally.
In Denmark it has been a legal requirement for building owners to follow a set
of rules to digitize building projects. DDB was the beginning of this initiative.
Here a set of rules were agreed and followed.
Later these rules were non
applicable.
There is a lot of fancy technology available for the AEC business. Taking the
VR glasses into concern various companies provide these. It is mentioned as
suitable for the construction industry. By AR and VR, the design of a con-
struction can already be virtualized under the design phase. Hereby errors
and changes can be identiﬁed and changed already before the actual construc-
tion. Before investing in these technical inventions, we have to consider if it
is creating value for the organization. Maybe it can visualize a project before
construction but if there are not a digital foundation of data, it will not create
value.
4.3
Information gap
Generally, there is potential of losing information between each phase of a
building life cycle. Each workﬂow has its own disciplines of people working,
and when moving from one phase to another the risk of information loss is
applicable for each phase. But the phase between construction and operation
is special since the level of gathered information after the construction phase is
high. Which also was mentioned in Borrmann et al. and shown on Figure 2.3.
The construction phase and operating phase has a distinct diﬀerence. Almost
like it is not part of the same ﬁeld. When completing the construction phase
information about the geometry of the building is fully known. This informa-
tion is relevant for the upcoming phase, but often this data is reentered to the
systems used for operating the build facility. The building owner has to invest
additionally to recreate data for the operating phase. As derivated from the
interview study this might be solved by proper handover.
4.4
Digital handover
There is a beginning for digital data delivery and digital handover of building
projects, but the delivered data are not usable. What is important for usable
24
==PAGE:36==
4.5. Summary
data is foundation of data must be right and correct before the rest of the work
can be reliable.
In the interview study some of the interviewees mentioned that digital handover
could improve the information gap between the construction and operating
phase. When the handover happens digitally the possibility to reuse the data
created in the design and constructing phase is bigger. The possibility for the
delivered data to still be immeasurable will still be there. As described in the
interview study, even if a suﬃcient degree of digital data is delivered, it can
be done in a non-appropriate way for instance a USB key ﬁlled with several
ﬁles, where it almost would be impossible to navigate and ﬁnd the desired
information. This may occur due to no instructions or legal requirements for
project handovers as mentioned in the interview study.
If proper digital handover is performed data regarding building materials can
be used directly in the operating phase without being reentered. Also, that
hereby the operation phase could get digitized better.
4.4.1
Challenges according to digitalize the sector
As Interviewee 5 mentioned the building sector mainly consists of an older
generation and this could have an impact especially when transforming the
sector to be digitized.
The results from the study reviewed in [Sørensen and Gottlieb, 2018] showed
that mainly architects and engineers are using software visualization and sim-
ulation. For a digital sector all stakeholders and participants on a building
project have to be digitized.
The study also showed that almost half of the investigated group either do
not use classiﬁcation or do not know which type of classiﬁcation is used. This
clearly shows that there is a lack of knowledge in the sector. The investigated
group was contractors, engineers, architects and operators/facility managers.
The result can also be understood as an indication for the collaboration be-
tween the entrants.
As interviewee 5 mentioned it might be possible to classify data in the BIM
model so it would be easily accessible when needed, but it might not be easy
to program. This solution requires that it is known which data will support
the O&M phase.
4.5
Summary
This study proves that there is a distinct gap from the design and construction
phase to the O&M phase. The study shows that there is an issue according to
the data needed for O&M a facility. There are several FM systems available
on the market. When implementing them as an input data e.g. space related
25
==PAGE:37==
4.5. Summary
information will be demanded. If the data are available digitally this would
be relatively simple, there could rise issues according to ﬁle formatting. If not
input data for the FM systems have to be reentered, which often is the case.
In the duration of the design and construction phase an increasingly amount
of BIM models are developed.
This model contains information related to
construction, space, materials, material property etc. Therefor it might also
be possible to add the information related to O&M phase in this model. This
was investigated in the study and what became known was that before data
can be codiﬁed or included in a digital model, it is essential to know which
data is needed for the operating phase. From the interview study it can be
derivated that the needed data can vary from project to project, from used
materials and so on.
The ﬁrst initiative in a correcting perspective of this issue might be to include
staﬀfrom the O&M phase in the project initiations. Already from the begin-
ning of the project it has to be aimed to reach an agreement of the project
output, where staﬀfrom all the phases of the life cycle is included. Here it
have to be determined which speciﬁc set of data are demanded at which phases
and what speciﬁcally have to be included in a handover.
Convey what is expected from the project to all participant and all disciplines
of the project. Make a check up after delivery of the project. Make a procedure
where all the agreed points are checked if they are delivered correctly.
By designing model based and plan and collaborate with entire project team
from the beginning solve any expectation conﬂicts from the beginning. Less
eﬀort will be requested in later phases. Hereby better quality of project, build-
ings, facilities will be obtained.
26
==PAGE:38==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Conclusion
According to the conducted literature review on BIM and FM and the con-
ducted interview study it is identiﬁed that there is a potential of utilizing BIM
through out the entire life cycle of a building, however this is not utilized. BIM
is getting implemented in the building sector, it is still a new approach and
not all stakeholders are entirely implemented yet but there is progress.
BIM is known as the most promising approach for achieving digitalization
throughout the entire life cycle of a building.
A BIM model is not just a
digital representation of a construction, it creates value for the project. As
key beneﬁts optimized collaboration is obtained together with improved data
exchange between each discipline and participants.
FM has focus on supporting the core business of an organization. It is often
denoted as a management discipline. For an optimal working environment and
optimal business output eﬀective and eﬃcient O&M and optimal utilization of
the facilities are necessary.
Even though the beneﬁts of using BIM is agreed in the sector, in reality most
projects only use BIM and digital planning and execution in the planning and
construction phase and not in the operational phase. It is almost two diﬀerent
worlds before and after the handover of a building.
In the litterateur review some tools for digitize an FM organisation is given.
The maturity level of an organization can be mentioned here. Some reﬂection
for the FM managers or the FM organization before going digital is mentioned
as well.
From the interview study it is derived that there is an information gap between
the construction and operating phase. Some interviewees mentioned that it can
be improved by involving staﬀfrom the O&M phase earlier in the design phase.
While others did not agree on that.
The study also points out that several decisions have to be made in the initial
stages of a project. Not only design related decisions but also decisions accord-
ing to the O&M phase. Already in the beginning of the building process it has
to be agreed which O&M related data have to be included in the handover.
It is time for a change in the building industry. There is a demand for new
enterprises, anchoring and new management directions. Digital anchoring can
only be introduced if the management or the building owners begin to demand
it.
27
==PAGE:39==
Further Work
This project was concentrated on the Danish building sector. Further work
can be done by expanding the study to the Nordic countries or Europe. The
potential of having a coherent set of requirement for digital handover as dis-
cussed in Section 4. Organisations as buildSMART might be able to make a
set of requirement which optionally can be used cross countries. The study
It is discussed in the sector to introduce a Building Renovation Passport.
Which will have the purpose to include information regarding long term ren-
ovation on digital form.
This will be convenient for all participants of the
project. This initiative will also require digital data of a project.
28
==PAGE:40==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Bibliography
[BibLus, 2018] BibLus
(2018).
Bim
dimensions.
http://biblus.
accasoftware.com/en/bim-dimensions-3d-4d-5d-6d-7d-bim-
explained/. Accessed 2018-10-28.
[bips, 2010] bips (2010). Det digitale byggeri. https://bips.dk/v%C3%A6rkt%
C3%B8jsomr%C3%A5de/det%20digitale%20byggeri#0.
Accessed 2018-10-
17.
[Borrmann et al., 2018] Borrmann, A., König, M., Koch, C., and Beetz, J.
(2018). Building Information Modeling: Why? What? How? Springer.
[Dalux, 2018] Dalux (2018). About dalux. https://www.dalux.com/about-
us-2/. Accessed 2018-10-21.
[Eastman et al., 2011] Eastman, C., Teicholz, P., Sacks, R., and Liston, K.
(2011). BIM handbook: a guide to Building Information Modeling for own-
ers, managers, designers, engineers and contractors. John Wiley & Sons.
[Ebbesen et al., 2018] Ebbesen, P., Andersen, G., Melchiorsen, L., Thorn, T.,
and et al. (2018). Facility Management som digital forandringsagent. Danish
Facility Management Network.
[Jensen, 2008] Jensen, P. A. (2008). Facilities Management for Students and
Practitioners. Centre for Facilities Management - Realdania Research.
[Krämer and Besenyi, 2018] Krämer, M. and Besenyi, Z. (2018). Towards dig-
italization of building operations with bim.
[May and Williams, 2012] May, M. and Williams, G. (2012).
Facility man-
ager’s guide to information technology: an international collaboration. In-
ternational Facility Management Association.
[Statistik, 2018] Statistik, D. (2018). It-anvendelse i virksomheder 2017: Virk-
somhedernes digitalisering.
[Sørensen and Gottlieb, 2018] Sørensen, N. L. and Gottlieb, S. C. (2018).
Byggebranchens anvendelse af IKT: Resultater fra en survey-undersøgelse.
SBi Forlag.
[Talamo and Bonanomi, 2016] Talamo, C. and Bonanomi, M. (2016). Knowl-
edge Management and Information Tools for Building Maintenance and Fa-
cility Management. Springer.
29
==PAGE:41==
[Teicholz, 2013a] Teicholz, E. (2013a). Technology for Facility Managers. John
Wiley & Sons.
[Teicholz, 2013b] Teicholz, P. (2013b). BIM for Facility Managers. John Wiley
& Sons.
[TMD, 2018] TMD (2018).
Integration of architectural design under the
concept of sustainable development.
https://medium.com/studiotmd/
integration-of-architectural-design-under-the-concept-of-
sustainable-development-bb1feb1ec6c2. Accessed 2018-09-07.
30
==PAGE:42==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Appendices
31
==PAGE:43==
BIM and O&M of Buildings
Interview study
A.1
Interview guide
Who:
Where:
When:
Firm:
Work position:
Research before interview:
• Background information about the interview person
• Background information about the ﬁrm
• Background information about the “product/service” the ﬁrm provide
General subject to be discussed:
• Digital handover
• Value creation by using BIM in the O&M phase
• Digital Danish building sector
• Information gap
• Danish building sector in perspective to the Nordic countries and Europe
32
==PAGE:44==
A.2. Interview 1
A.2
Interview 1
Interviewee:
Esmir Maslesa
Firm:
DTU and KMD
Work position:
PhD student
About interviewee
Esmir is an industry PhD student on DTU from KMD. KMD is developing a
FM system for the Danish Building and Property Agency (BYGST). They named
the new system “KMD Atrium“, it is still under development (while interview was
conducted).
Summary
Esmir initiated the interview by mentioning that buildings are like smartphones after
receiving them we have to sit down and modify them according to our preferences
and needs. In a smartphone all applications would be in App store and we have
to download the ones matching our preferences arrange them as we like. It is
the same with buildings. We would receive a building and all related documents
afterwards we have to ﬁnd out how to operate and maintain it according to our
usage and needs.
Information gap
Esmir claims that there is an information gap between the construction phase and
the operation phase, where handover of the building happens. He meant that the
gap could be handled with BIM and better digital handover.
He explains “We end up with several drawings after the construction phase, ﬁles,
models etc. These are often delivered in paper format in folders, in bigger projects
even in card board boxes. Today the delivery is often digital so the handover would
be ﬁles on a USB key. When this is received in the operation phase, we have to
ﬁnd out our self how to use this data, and which is related to what. Often the
delivered data would be chaotic and enormous because there is no standards for
how to deliver data properly.”
He claims that there is no instructions for the delivered data. In his opinion this is
the reason for information gap.
He explained that it always vary how we use and operate our buildings.
The
bigger organizations have much more resources than the smaller ones. In smaller
organizations only one person would be responsible for the O&M while in bigger
organizations there would be a whole O&M department.
Digital handover
Improve digital handover process
Esmir claims that FM managers can contribute with which information have to be
included in delivery.
33
==PAGE:45==
A.3. Interview 2
A.3
Interview 2
Interviewee:
Khoa Dang Ngo
Firm:
Campus Service DTU
Work position:
ICT Specialist
About interviewee
Khoa works as an ICT specialist at DTU Campus service. He is specialised in BIM,
ICT and CAFM. He is the head of the collaboration between DTU and Dalux. DTU
Campus service owns all the buildings at DTU Lyngby campus, these are operated
and maintained by them self, apart from a few activities which are outsourced.
Summary
Digital handover
In Khoas opinion it is important to have a stance for what data is needed to operate
your facility. The stance must be formulated and communicated to the ones who
should deliver this data to you.
In CAS DTU they have tried working with an exercise where the man responsible
for a building element or system, also have the responsibility of the digital data of
this element/system. Taking the man operating a ventilation system in concern,
it will also be his job to take care of the digital data of this system. He would
be the man who will update and maintain this data and make sure it is updated.
Just as he has the responsibility for the physical system. Khoa mentions that it
is a natural way of thinking, if you have the responsibility of a physical thing, you
obviously also have the responsibility of the digital data. You’ll know your system
best, therefore it will not make sense to involve a digital department for that.
Where to keep this data is also an issue, because if it is placed in a personal folder
of the employee, this would be disconnected to the rest of the FM data. If the data
is placed in the personal computer drive or a cloud server of the employee there is
a risk of losing it. Some data are integrated with other data, and when the data
is disconnected to the FM system the correlation between e.g. room database and
the data is disconnected. This may cause data lack for other employees, which is
the reason why connecting or placing all data in one database is essential. He also
mentions matching of expectation as a factor for digital delivery. Who delivers the
data you need as a FM manager, that is a lot of diﬀerent people with diﬀerent
professions and here we have the “responsibility talk”.
Matching of expectation already begins at the beginning of a project. Here it is
necessary to ﬁnd out what the ﬁnal product is going to be, apart from a building
the related documentation. It does not matter if the data is going to be digital
or analog, the foundation will be the same.
If the data is digital the working
procedures will be diﬀerent from if the data was analog. This shows that there is
a need to diﬀerentiate between that as well. Because the consequences of getting
34
==PAGE:46==
A.3. Interview 2
something digital, analog or database form will have an aﬀect.
In continuation of this, the terms Digitizing, digitalization and digital transforma-
tion were mentioned.
Digitizing, digitalization and digital transformation
• Digitizing is when you digitalize your data, but your working method will
remain the same. So shortly digital data with analog working methods.
• Digitalization is when we change our processes on a digital foundation. The
working methods will be optimized on the basis of digital data.
• Digital transformation is when the whole organization’s procedures transform
to be digital.
Khoa mentions that, when we get smarter, we transform our organizations because
we’ll know the consequences of not changing our working procedures. There are
several layers of digitalization.
DTU and Dalux
Khoa has been the head in the collaboration between Dalux and DTU. Khoa men-
tions Dalux as a technical development partner. They supplement each other since
DTU is practitioners while Dalux are software developers. Lately they have been
developing an application for activity-controlled O&M together. Digital activity
control on the basis of needed data for O&M.
Information gap
The "need for data" have to follow some requirements, so it would be able to be
used in any FM system.
In Khoas opinion the gap is not that big. He claims that it only feels big because
of the workﬂow. Because when working with BIM models we (O&M) work with
families. So, when we have an object, we search for a speciﬁc object in the library
but in O&M we’ll work with — The information gap happens because ﬁrst we work
with data according to data type and later we operate the facility unique.
He mentioned that it is important to have a strong foundation of data before it
would be possible to build activity control on top of that. They try to collect this
foundation of data from projects, and also to get the operating people to update
the changes when they occur. When the data foundation is sorted out activities
can be planned on that basis.
35
==PAGE:47==
A.4. Interview 3
A.4
Interview 3
Interviewee:
Niels Treldal
Firm:
NCC
Work position:
Head of VDC Business Development
About interviewee
Niels has a PhD from DTU. His thesis was named "Digitalization as Driver for Stan-
dardized Speciﬁcation and Design of Buildings: In Search of an Eﬃcient Building
Design Management Methodology"
Niels has been part of developing the information levels Dikon has published. NCC
is Swedish entrepreneur company with activity in The Nordic countries.
Summary
Digital handover
When speaking about digital handover Niels stated that: “in reality the digital
handover data is collected and prepared for handover at the last stage of projects
typically 2 months before deadline. No one will concern about it before.”
In Niels’ opinion the issue is not to get digital handover to work. But to know
which data must be handed over is more an issue. Even if the operation employees
were involved earlier they wont know what to contribute with. The people from
the O&M department are not used to work on a abstract level as it would be to
make decision on basis of a 3D model on a screen.
As turnkey contractor it would be our job to make the requirements for data
delivery from the subcontractors.
36
==PAGE:48==
A.5. Interview 4
A.5
Interview 4
Interviewee:
Clars Nicholas Danvold
Firm:
Head of subject for campus service
Work position:
University of Copenhagen
About interviewee
Clars has been part of "Det digitale byggeri" when it was developed in —. He is
working part of the campus service at University of Copenhagen (UCPH). Here the
buildings are owned by BYGST and maintained and operated by campus service
of UCPH.
Summary
Clars initiated the interview by mentioning that he was a supporter for BIM 15 years
ago, but now he changed his stand. When he was part of DDB he used to think:
“in 10 years we would be able to handover a building and related documentations
digitally, but now 12 years later I’m convinced that the wait might last 25 years
more.”
It is impossible to transform to only work with BIM models from one day to another.
Several factors have to be taken into concern before.
In your opinion can BIM add value to the O&M phase of buildings?
Clars answered very conﬁdently on this question, “Of course it can!”
Then he
explained that he sees waste when the level of ambition is too high for digital
handover. There is a dream for data just ﬂowing from project phase directly to
operating phase. But there is not enough focus on how much personal competences
there is in the two phases.
Clars comment that when developing the project there would be a team working
day and night on the digital model. Any conﬂicts would be solved within the model,
decisions would be made in light of the model, the model would be centralised.
The amount of time used on this model measured in money would be sky-high.
When the model is handover to an organisation there would not be anybody with
the right competences to handle it. Partly they won’t have the competences or
the time for it.
Clars explains: “If we want to generate an incitement where the necessary compe-
tences and time is available for operating and maintaining the digital model, we
have to go backward to the beginning of the process and point out "which busi-
nesslike processes in O&M are the most relevant" and "which data can support
them" also "how can that data be created so the data would be easily available in
the particular situation".” In conclusion he mentioned that, we need to know the
aim of data we implement in our models.
The danish building sector in perspective to the Nordic countries and
37
==PAGE:49==
A.5. Interview 4
Europe
Denmark is known as one of the most digitized countries in the World. We are
often ﬁrst movers, but it is not always beneﬁcial. Since it requires a lot of time
and resources to be ﬁrst movers and to pave the way, nothing would be ready or
prepared. This often induce, that we don’t gain from it. Because we are such a
small country, so the eﬀort it self will be too expensive for us.
Clars mentioned that there is too much focus on technology in the sector and not
enough focus on requirements, processes and responsibilities. The current working
procedures regarding e.g. legal collaborations are outdated especially for digital
collaboration.
If we had the same focus on requirements or the culture for actually following
requirements as they have in Germany our foundation for digitization would be
much easier.
University of Copenhagen and digitalization
Clars states that he would not name UCPH as digital but they are in a learning
process. They have an ambition for lifting the digital level. There have been a
tender for FM system.
UCPH have digital ambitions, these have changed with time. E.g. the ambition
was to have the entire building stock as 3D, but this changed. Since it was a
wrong ambition to have at this state of time. Now we require digital models of all
of our large building projects.
diashow In a building portfolio of an organization the resources, competences, data
will be modiﬁed according to a general data level across entire portfolio. When
suddenly
38
==PAGE:50==
A.6. Interview 5
A.6
Interview 5
Interviewee:
Morten Damsgård
Firm:
Dalux
Work position:
FM consultant
About interviewee
Dalux is a Danish company providing digital tools for the construction industry.
The company was established in 2005, and has grown since to seven oﬃces in
Europe. Dalux is a 100% cloud based solution for digital construction business.
They provide three main products named Dalux BIM Viewer, Dalux Build and
Dalux FM. Dalux develops their own products [Dalux, 2018].
Summary
Digital handover
Dalux is developing a system for their product DaluxFM for handling digital han-
dover. The product is still under development and not ready for sale (when the
interview was conducted). The product is developed in collaboration with DTU.
Khoa from Campus service has been testing the product.
Morten mentions that digital delivery actually is very simple, it can be done by
adding several ﬁles into a USB key and hereby a digital data delivery is made. He
explains: “We want to make it more advanced then that but simple. The aim of
this product is to make an easy and convenient digital delivery tool which also can
add value for the building owner at the end.” The product is set up so the data
regarding operating a building component and the related activities for maintaining
the building component is entered at once digitally to the system.
How is you products developed?
When asking Morten how their product is developed he answered following. “We
listen to the industry. We listen to the demand from our clients. We collaborate
with DTU and we get a lot of inputs from them. When we get them we also have
to be critical and consider if this is a DTU speciﬁc requirement or will it match
the market generally.”
Possibilities for one consistent handover tool for the Danish building sector
Morten is not convinced about a consistent handover tool.
He claims that it
depends on who catches the market ﬁrst which software providers. He mentioned
that maybe Molio could, if they developed a kind of guidance for digital handover.
Other ways it would be a cocktail of software providers, biggest building owners
and interest group as Molio. Who together could make a standard, which obviously
would be optional and it would be used in circumstances of preferences.
Information gap
Morten agrees that there is a information gap between the construction phase and
39
==PAGE:51==
A.6. Interview 5
the operating phase. He mention data as a challenge.
“We don’t decide which data is included in our models that’s the clients decision.
We don’t want to be responsible for the data. There is a huge diﬀerence between
the data used in constructing phase and data used when operating a building. The
worst scenario according to data is when data not are maintained. Therefor we
have to consider every data included in models. Even if there is a small error in the
data we insert our models are found the trust of the model will be lost. Therefor
we use to say rather missing data than using wrong data.”
In your opinion can BIM add value to the O&M phase of buildings?
Morten answered: “It would be possible to use the same BIM model throughout the
life cycle of a building but it would not be easy. It will require that we already at the
beginning of a project know which data is needed at the end. In the beginning of
a project we have to make a lot of decisions but the data basis will not be fulﬁlled
at that point. As time pass in a stage we would have a lot of data while the
decisions taken will have a smaller impact on what is going to happened because
a lot already happened.”
Later he explained: “When operating a building we use a simpliﬁed “as built” model.
BIM don’t add direct value for O&M phase. Floor plans and digital representation
of a building can helps appointing damages but not that big impact in operations.”
He continues: “The challenge with O&M phase is the competences of the staﬀ.
Roughly speaking there are to generations. The ﬁrst one is the one born before
the digital age, but they’ll know every detail about the facility, these are typically
grown up with the norm not to share everything you know to your colleagues
because then you’ll risk to lose your job. The other, younger generation would be
low educated but with more technically knowledge. So to get these two people to
meet and work with the common basis of data they have is a current issue.”
The experience and the expertise of the professions working on a project have a
big impact.
The data have to be mapped in correctly so it easily can be pulled out again. We
keep getting new requirements according to ﬁre safety etc. so these information
also neede to be considered in this case.
Dalux on international level
Morten mentioned that according to operating phase currently Dalux only focus on
the market in Denmark. ???? Each country often have some legal issues and they
are trying to comply to it when entering the diﬀerent markets. “E.g. when selling
our product to England there was a legal issue that electronic signature have to be
a possibility in the system, so we could not enter this market before we had that
issue solved.”
40
