==PAGE:1==
Unsupervised pre-training of deep
neural networks
Peter Lunding Jensen
Emilie Knudsen Brun
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Recent advances in deep learning have shown state of the art results for computer
vision tasks. With a high level of model complexity, and many trainable weights,
the models are able to detect highly complicated patterns in the data.
However, one of the disadvantages of these models is indeed the complexity,
which results in very non-convex model structure. In order to produce a highly
complex model that is capable of detecting true discriminative features in the
data it is important to consistently ﬁnd a good local minima of the model.
Therefore, experiments to determine the impact of better initialization via pre
training are presented.
To test the stability of the minima under the given
conditions, measures to determine how much the process of training alters the
model are discussed.
The problem of interest will be segmentation of images. The network imple-
mented is a 9 layer network, implementing some of the modern ideas from
ResNet, U-net, DCAN and others, in order to test if there is still possible gains
from pre-training in segmentation today.
The Gland Miccai 2015 dataset were used in order to demonstrate the perfor-
mance of the proposed setups. It was found, that some methods for unsupervised
pre-training did indeed show potential, and performed at a similar level - or a
bit higher - as training end-to-end methods with no pre-training. However, it
could not be shown that the pre-training outperformed no pre-training on a 95%
conﬁdence level.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The project has been completed in the
period between 27-08-2018 and 20-03-2019 and is rated at 35 ECTS.
The thesis deals with initialization methods for deep neural networks.
The thesis consists of eight chapters excluding appendix and bibliography.
Lyngby, 20-March-2019
Peter Lunding Jensen
Emilie Knudsen Brun
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, we would like to send a huge Thank You to our supervisors.
Tommy Sonne Ahlstrøm and Anders Nymark Christensen. Without you, the
idears and methods developed and discussed during our meetings would not have
been as fruitful. Thank you for providing new ideas and inspiration through the
whole process.
We send a friendly thought to friends and family. Being on the constant roller
coaster ride that is the journey of a master thesis, but all those around us that
accepted, helped and carried us did so simply from the genuine thoughtfulness
of their own. We hope we can repay the favor one day.
Lastly a thanks is sent to Nvidia, and the team behind TensorFlow. This thesis
could literally not have been made without the advances in graphics cards and
graphics cards software, that has been made the last few years.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.0.1
Deep Neural Networks Improves Modelling
. . . . . . . .
3
1.0.2
Our Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.0.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
What is a problem, and why make models?
. . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Deep Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
The Functionality of Deep Neural Networks for Image Seg-
mentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
The Segmentation Journey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Convolutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Residual blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.5
Activation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.6
Batch normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Finding the Optimal Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
Nonconvex Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Model Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.1
The Problem of the Vanishing Gradient . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
Unsupervised Pre-training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.3
Semi-supervised training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.4
Transfer learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
2.4.5
Resemblance, Diﬀerence and Advantage . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5
Methods for Unsupervised Pre-training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5.1
Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.6
Unsupervised Image Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.6.1
Edge Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.6.2
Image Segmentation deploying clustering
. . . . . . . . .
31
2.6.3
Performance of Unsupervised Segmentation . . . . . . . .
34
2.7
Multitask Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3
Experimental Set-up
37
3.1
The Model set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.1.1
Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.1.2
Final Model Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.1.3
Number of trained models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.1.4
Saved Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.1.5
Evaluation Metric
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.1.6
Weight Initialization of Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3
Base experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4
Results of Base Experiments
45
4.0.1
Autoencoder variations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.1
Performance of Individual Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Understanding the Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.1
Why Doesn’t the Autoencoder Improve Performance
. .
48
4.2.2
Results When Using an Auto Encoder without skip-connections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2.3
Performance for Individual Images . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Additional Experiments
51
5.1
Training Unsupervised Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1.1
Proposed Unsupervised Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Multitask Learning Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Results of Explanatory experiments
55
6.0.1
Performance for individual images
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.1
Development of Kernels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.1.1
Varying β . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.1.2
Varying α . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.1.3
From Initialization to Converged Model . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Performance Impact of α and β . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
7
Discussion and Future Work
63
7.1
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.2
Model Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.2.1
Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.2.2
Kernel Movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.3
Unsupervised Tasks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8
Conclusion
67
A Unsupervised Clustering
69
A.1 SLIC Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.2 Mixture Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Intelligence is whatever machines
haven’t done yet.
Larry Tesler, 1970
Models are key to everyday life as we know it.
There are models in most
everything you do. From the advertisements you see on Google, to the detection
of cancer. The overall goal when modelling the world is the ability to predict
and detect. Predict the weather, the risk of someone having a certain disease
or, in the case of self-driving cars, to detect road signs and pedestrians. Image
segmentation, the problem of interest in this thesis, is a subclass of image object
detection. Image segmentation is a way to detect what class every pixel of an
image belongs to. In the case of medical images, the segmentation problem often
consist of determining, which pixels of the image are the cells of interest, and
which are merely background. This is also the case for the thoroughly studied
Miccai Gland dataset, the segmentation of which we will focus. In the world
we all live in, machine learning is becoming ever more important for solving a
multitude of these tasks. However, even though tremendous quality jumps have
been made, there are still no such thing as a perfect model. In this thesis we
want to investigate if the quality of modelling can be improved by implementing
unsupervised pre-training schemes.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
But, how does one understand what will improve modelling, and how does a
computer learn? In order to understand that question, let us step back a couple
of times, and start with how a human learns. If you want to teach a child what
a dog is, as opposed to a cat, you would show the child a cat, and tell her "this
is a cat". You would do the same with a dog. Maybe you choose a German
shepherd as the ﬁrst example. If the next dog the child sees is a Chihuahua, the
logical guess might be "this is a cat". You would then correct the child, giving
the child an extra example of a dog.
The same thing applies to the task of teaching a computer to detect objects.
You simply, by the means of a various amount of diﬀerent techniques, try to
teach the computer to diﬀerentiate between said objects, or decide what is what
in the scene it is to segment.
Let us go back to the example of the child. The child is the overall model,
diﬀerentiating between the cats and dogs is the overall task. The methods you
use to teach the child are the focus of this thesis.
• Do you simply plunge into the task? This is model training without pre-
conditions.
• Do you teach the child what other animals and objects are beforehand, say
sheep, horses and cows? This is model training with transfer learning.
• Or, do you let the child see a lot of cats and dogs, before you tell what is
what? This is model training with unsupervised pre-training.
It is not so much these various techniques that this thesis seek to investigate,
but more the problem of determining how to best aid the process of making a
network learn.
These three approaches can - and should - be used for diﬀerent tasks, some-
times in combination, sometimes in succession. As of now, transfer learning is
used almost always, but we want to determine, if unsupervised pre-training has
something to oﬀer.
Having understood what modelling is, the next question should be: then how
do we model. Here, deep neural networks are at play.
==PAGE:15==
3
1.0.1
Deep Neural Networks Improves Modelling
Ways of improving computer modelling is constantly sought after. With the
introduction of deep learning algorithms, a way of combining low-level features
to a high complexity model was introduced.
Each layer of the deep neural
network contains weights, connected in a simple, yet non-linear way [LBH15].
When introducing these, it was discussed, that deep architectures would be
needed for representing the high-level abstractions involved in speech recognition
and image processing.
When working with such problems, Semantic image
segmentation tasks are one of the most interesting and diverse problems in the
ﬁeld. Hence, if it were possible to ﬁnd a good representation of said problems,
one would expect that a deep neural network should be implemented.
And these predictions seemed true. Deep Learning Neural Networks are now
utterly dominant in the ﬁeld of natural image detection [CGGS12].
Recent
advances have yielded state of the art results in multiple ﬁelds (1.0.3.1).
But deep neural networks are not a new idea [Dec86], so why was it not until
quite recently that the ﬁrst segmentation breakthroughs were to be made? The
problem was to be found in the ability to train in a reasonable amount of
iterations, or in some cases, the failure to converge at all. This is a multi-sided
problem. For one, there is the problem of the activation functions of each layer.
If these are not chosen carefully, the network will face the problem of vanishing
gradient (2.4.1).
When a solution for this was found, a second question arose. There is a problem
of converging to optimal weights for the layers of the network. The initial weights
of the network has a deﬁnite impact on the performance. While the ﬁeld of deep
learning evolved, it was shown that better weight initialization was the key for
being able to train these deep models.
The ﬁrst successful approaches of training deep neural networks and overcoming
said problems were based on layerwise trained unsupervised combinations of
stacked Boltzmann machines and autoencoders. Later, much deeper, non-greedy
architectures have been used. But with these come challenges. In order to train
these variable dense networks, the problem of a good "starting guess" becomes
ever more important. Without it, convergence can be either unfathomably slow,
or the network might fail to converge to a solution at all.
The aim of this thesis is to improve understanding of the initialization heuristic,
and develop a methodology for understanding the impact of diﬀerent initial-
ization schemes for deep neural networks. It is shown that the main problem
from insuﬃcient starting points amount to the restriction of parameters to an
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
insuﬃcient subspace [GB10]. Comparable to being asked to draw a rainbow
only using yellow and blue - you can get some of the features of the rainbow,
but it will never be the full picture.
Before moving on to the actual thesis, a summation is in order: We now know
that deep neural networks are dominant when it comes to segmentation of im-
ages. We also know that these networks do not perform at 100% and hence
there is room for improvement. We need a better understanding as to whether
pre-training can help the deep neural networks to extract more information for
the model. In order to gain this understanding, tools to investigate the model
must be build. Hence, the thesis will contain the following:
• The building blocks for deep neural networks and the understanding of
these, rendering it possible to compose the deep neural network imple-
mented in this thesis.
• In order to determine the performance of the model when pre-trained, a
reliable baseline must be established.
• The new ideas for pre-training must be tested to a level, such that it can
be determined if anything can be gained from implementing said schemes.
• Finally, it must be possible to analyze the reason for model behavior,
whether or not it shows improvement over traditional methods.
The thesis will establish theory for estimating model performance. New ideas
as to how deep neural network initialization can be understood are tested and
evaluated.
1.0.2
Our Contributions
• We show that it is possible to pre-train modern networks for better results
in segmentation tasks.
• Pre-training using unsupervised image segmentation in the form of SLIC
features or GMM does not improve performance.
• Using pre-training for deep neural networks we show the performance is
on the same level as transfer learning.
• Model weights change more during training when initialized using pre-
training, compared to models that are initialized using Xavier-Hé.
==PAGE:17==
5
1.0.3
Related Work
Related work will be considered in diﬀerent categories. First, the development
and the architecture of deep neural networks will be considered, and second,
unsupervised pre-training in general and for image segmentation in particular
will be discussed.
1.0.3.1
Deep Neural Networks
As mentioned, deep neural networks are driving advances in the scene of com-
puter aided modelling [KSH12], [LBH15] and [LHP+15].
[CVMBB14] yield
impressive results with a network with structural resemblance to autoencoders.
The latest developments has been driven from implementation of very deep nets
such as the ResNet[HZRS15], DCAN and U-net [RFB15]. They are all delivering
state-of-the-art results across diﬀerent image classiﬁcation tasks.
In the ﬁeld of segmenting medical images, recent developments of deep neural
networks has shown immense potential. For Gland segmentation implementa-
tions can be found in [CQYH16].
Training multitask focused networks have been yielding promising results for a
decade in multiple ﬁelds, such as natural language processing [CW08]. More
recent work also shows improvement for medical segmentation [RHGS15].
1.0.3.2
Pre-training
Unsupervised pre-training of deep neural networks for image segmentation have
been a key point for the success of deep learning [LGRN09]. It was shown that
the unsupervised pre-training of neural networks improved performance due to
starting conditions closer to a better local minima [BLPL07]. In 2011, a thor-
ough study for unsupervised pre-training for classiﬁcation was done, showing
that unsupervised pre-training will improve performance and act as a regular-
izer [EBC+10].
Quite a few implementations of unsupervised feature learn-
ing for classiﬁcation/object detection have been shown to improve performance
[SKCL13], [RDS+15]. Another paper shows, that stacking convolutional lay-
ers on top of unsupervised layers, or replacing some of the layers will improve
performance [NFS15].
Unsupervised pre-training and transfer learning both beneﬁt from the fact that
it is possible to re-use weights from one type of task to another [YCBL14].
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
Finding ways to describe these weights are discussed in [KSA+17].
As to how this pre-training should be done, denoising autoencoder showed much
promise [VLBM08]. Autoencoders are still the method applied for unsupervised
pre-training of medical images [LKB+17]. In order to link the pre-training with
the multitask decoders, diﬀerent image segmentation schemes must be applied
beforehand. A look at the classical methods lends us GMM [MB88] and other
well investigated methods.
As of today, the concept of unsupervised pre-training of deep neural networks
for the task of segmentation seems to attract little attention. This is most likely
due to the fact that training the very large networks used today is expensive,
combined with the very strong results found when using transfer learning. One
study did however show that pre-training deep neural networks worked as a
regularizer.
Pre-training deep neural networks for segmentation have shown
that it should improve stability [WKDV16].
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
What is a problem, and why make models?
Essentially, all models are wrong,
but some are useful.
George E. P. Box
Oxford dictionary deﬁnes a problem in the mathematical sense as "An inquiry
starting from given conditions to investigate or demonstrate a fact, result, or
law." The general deﬁnition of a problem is given as "A matter or situation
regarded as unwelcome or harmful and needing to be dealt with and overcome".
The problems this thesis revolves around is a combination of both deﬁnitions.
The given conditions are a number of images, from which information should be
extracted. The unwelcome situation is the fact that as of now, this information
can be very expensive or time-consuming to achieve.
Especially if it needs
human annotation!
One example of such a problem is the annotation of cells in medical applications.
Both the number of viable cells, and the cell size are interesting features. Hence,
==PAGE:20==
8
Theory
without the ability for an automatic annotation, not only do the cells need to
be counted but their outline should be traced and from there the size of each
individual cell should be described. Since doctors are a limited resource, this
issue can be deﬁned as a "problem".
2.1.1
Models
Finding patterns in data for retrieving information without explicit knowledge
or annotations of each instance is correspondent to building data-models. A
model is a set of rules that the instance has to pass through, after the end of
which a statement will be reached. In the case of the cat/dog example earlier
introduced, the ﬁnal statement will either be "cat" or "dog". Some insecurity
as to whether it is a cat or a dog can also be part of the model, such that the
ﬁnal statement will be "cat, with 72% probability".
A model is exactly that, a model. It is an estimation and will not always yield
the correct result, thus it will not be true in the mathematical sense. It might
resemble reality, and for it to be useful, it ought to do so on such a level that
it can tell us something we did not know before applying the model. In other
words. It has to be better than random guessing.
In this thesis, an understanding of the model is the goal, and hence the speciﬁc
problem is not of the highest interest. There are many ways to compose models
for prediction, but for this thesis the objective is to gain information of the
evolving of problem solving using deep neural networks.
2.2
Deep Neural Networks
The underlying models used in this thesis are deep neural networks. The idea
behind neural networks, and the reason for the name, is the comparability to
the processes in the brain. The "deep" part origins from the fact that data
passes through at least two hidden layers, arranged after one another, in order
to reach a higher level of abstraction.
The brain is composed as a neural network. For each individual input, neurons
will have a unique response. If this response is above a certain threshold, the
neuron will "ﬁre".
The neurons connected will then receive the notiﬁcation
that the previous neuron has ﬁred, and hence contribute to whether or not the
neuron itself should ﬁre. When watching Lord of the Rings, you will have seen
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Deep Neural Networks
9
the scene of beacons being lit because the previous beacon in the line was lit,
sending a signal from one country to the next over immense distances. This
corresponds to the neurons ﬁring in the brain.
The same pattern can be seen in deep neural networks. Here, the input will be
sent to the ﬁrst layer of neurons, which will then either stay deactivated, or be
activated, resulting in a signal being ﬁred. The intensity of the signal depends
on the stimuli from the incoming input. This process will be progressing through
the layers of the network until the output layer has been reached, and a response
is chosen.
The groundbreaking properties of the deep neural network is their ability to
apply a general-purpose learning procedure.
Instead of handcrafted features
that were the go-to problem solvers of earlier methods, deep neural networks
rely on simple, yet non-linear models for each of the layers, and the training can
be done automatically. The layers will gradually conform to higher abstraction
forms of the input as the layers progress.
Computed neural networks are complex machinery, and looking under the hood
shows that though there are some comparability to physical neural networks,
much is more math than magic, and the automatic training can be formalized
in a way that yields - if nothing more - qualitative results.
2.2.1
The Functionality of Deep Neural Networks for Im-
age Segmentation
There is a number of concepts that need to be understood when working with
development of deep neural networks, and even more when they are applied for
image segmentation. Those will be introduced in the following sections, but the
general conceptual parts can be understood without pre-existing knowledge of
the building blocks that compose the neural network.
The process is as follows: An image is sent through the neural network for
segmentation.
Again, the process resembles the functionality of the human
brain.
When the input arrives, it will be sent to a number of neurons that
can be activated. The level of signal activation depends on how well the image
resonates with the structure sought after in that neuron.
These signals will
be convolved with activations of other neurons before being interpreted in the
next layer of neurons, which will be deactivated or activated depending on the
incoming signal. After having passed through the chosen number of layers for
"data abstraction", the information found will be sent through a number of
==PAGE:22==
10
Theory
neurons designed to take this information, and translate it to be applicable to
the task, which is "segmenting the image".
Deep neural networks can be build in a number of ways, and in order to under-
stand the architecture more thoroughly, some concepts need to be introduced.
The following ideas only reﬂect the chosen building blocks, the combination of
which will yield the deep neural network implemented in this thesis. A number
of other ideas could be applied, and hence this is not an exhaustive list.
2.2.2
The Segmentation Journey
An image going through the segmentation process will pass through a number
of steps, which together will compose the ﬁnal prediction. The steps will be
introduced individually, and the composition of the ﬁnal model will be described
in section 3.1.6.
2.2.2.1
Input
The input for the network when working with image segmentation, is - of course
- an image. The network is not able to process the image as a whole, and will
be fed to the network split across its color channels, each input being composed
by a color channel.
2.2.2.2
Data Augmentation
Data is drawn from a distribution. With images, you hope the images chosen
for training is a reasonable representation of the real problem distribution. Due
to the law of large numbers, the more training data, the more likely it is that
the training data distribution and the real problem distribution are alike. The
aim of data augmentation is to generate artiﬁcial data, which resembles the real
distribution. This will help bring the training data closer to the true problem1.
This will help the generalizing capability of the model.
Data augmentation is always based on assumptions, and can be done in a num-
ber of ways. The processes chosen for this dataset unfolds as follows:
1For instance, closer in the KL-divergence sense
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Deep Neural Networks
11
We subtract the dataset pixel-channel mean, and divide by the pixel-channel
standard deviation, resulting in an image that has close to 0 mean and 1 vari-
ance. The image is then cropped to the largest possible square and then resized
to 480 x 480 pixels. The image can then further be mirrored and/or rotated,
resulting in 8 diﬀerent images from the original one. Note, that this can only
be done for images, which does not have a natural orientation - thus we disable
vertical ﬂipping when training on the VOC people dataset. Then a random crop
of these 8 images of size 384 x 384 pixels is taken. This yields an additional 9.216
possible entries. Multiply by the 8 initial and we have 73728 inputs for each
original training image. Altogether, there are enough similar, yet not exactly
identical input data such that the model should not be memorizing the data.
Using data augmentation causes the images to be highly correlated, however it
has been shown that this helps generalize learning in the model. [WP17]
Later, when working with the autoencoder (2.5.1), noise will be added to the in-
put. This is done by setting 10% of the pixels to black (RGB = 0,0,0) [VLBM08].
2.2.3
Convolutions
When an input is given, a convolution will move it to the ﬁrst layer of hidden
neurons.
A convolution is done when the convolution function C takes the
original, i, image, and outputs a new, i∗. In the convolution process, a section,
s, of size (m × m)2 from i is passed to the internal convolution function, Ci.
This will output a pixel value, p, anchored in accordance to where s was taken.
For ease of anchor points, the section size m is taken to be odd.
The convolution function consists of multiple steps.
Ci(s) = H(K(s)) = p
The kernel function K : (m × n) →(m × n) determines the weight assigned
from the original image section to the new section. K will be represented as
K(s) = s·MK, where MK is a matrix of size (m×n). Note that we are working
with the dot product of matrices.
The shrinkage function H takes the matrix regulated with the weights of the
kernel, and outputs the summation of the entries.
2It is possible to work with non square entries, but it is seldom used
==PAGE:24==
12
Theory
The concepts of convolutions that needs to be determined are
• The size of the input.
• The Kernel function.
• The stride.
The size of the output image will be determined by the stride. Some of the layers
in the neural network has a stride set to 1, which means that no size transfor-
mation is allowed. Instead, these layers lend the ability to mix the information
of the image, rendering it possible to obtain a higher level of complexity. The
stride determines how far apart each of the sections from i are taken.
All together, the convolution function will stride in sectional jumps of stride
length across the original image, and output a new image with size relating to
the stride, where each of the new pixels are a weighted combination of the origin
section. Again, the weight is determined by the kernel function.
A transpose convolution (also known as de-convolution) is the upsampling of an
n dimensional array resulting in a increased size in the feature maps. This is
used for eventually returning an output image of the same size as the original
input.
Feature Maps
After the ﬁrst convolution, the input reaches the ﬁrst layer of hidden neurons.
These are most often referred to as feature maps. The feature maps can be
compared to a number of color channels. Pictures can be distinguished from
one another - and are completely described - from colors. If the level of blue in
one is image is higher than the next, there is no doubt to the fact that they are
not the same.
In the ﬁrst layer of hidden neurons, you will ﬁnd fewer but larger feature maps.
In the later layers, these will have been reduced in size, but there is an increased
number of them. This corresponds to each level of feature maps looking for more
and more speciﬁc traits in the image.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Deep Neural Networks
13
Weight layer
The weight layer or the weight connections are the connections and weighting of
the movement from one layer of feature maps to the next. Not every feature map
is as important as the next when it comes to activating the individual feature
maps of the next layers. Said importance is indulged by the weight layer.
2.2.4
Residual blocks
When working with two connected layers of feature maps, a residual connection
can be created by creating an identity mapping from the input of the ﬁrst layer,
and add it to the output of the second layer. In other words, the model has the
opportunity to retain the information from the previous layer. Such a connection
is named a residual block.
Residual blocks strengthen the gradient signal, and hence the problem of van-
ishing gradient, which will be introduced later (2.4.1), can be averted. This
should help the problem obtaining a better performance [HZRS16], by aiding it
to ﬁnd a better local minima 2.3.1.
Figure 2.1: Architecture of a residual block[HZRS16]
2.2.5
Activation Functions
Nonlinear activation functions are one of the cornerstones of deep neural net-
works. They add the nonlinear component to the model, and it has been shown,
that choosing the right activation function is important for convergence. A num-
ber of diﬀerent activation functions are available, each with their own strengths
and weaknesses.
When the feature maps from the previous layer has been weighted and summed
together, the input is given to the activation function before activating the next
layer of feature maps.
==PAGE:26==
14
Theory
By using positive activation functions, f : R →R+, the activation of each
feature map will be positive. Activation functions and the derived problems will
be discussed in section 2.4.
2.2.5.1
Backpropagation
Backpropagation is a key concept for deep neural networks. When the network
has made a prediction, the outcome of this prediction is compared to the true
target, and from here the network will make updates. This concept gives rise
to the gradient, which is interconnected with the optimization function. The
gradient will be pointing in the direction of largest ascent of the loss function,
and since the goal is to minimize this, a step in the opposite direction will be
taken.
Having found the gradient of a given point in the solution surface, gradient
descent is applied.
This is one of the simplest optimization techniques and
works great in the deep learning framework [LBH15].
The algorithm for backpropagation calculates the gradient of the error function
after each batch of images has been passed through the model. This needs to
be generalized to the overall error function, which would be found after a full
iteration - an iteration determining the outcome of every training image.
2.2.6
Batch normalization
When working with images, the amount of data is very dense.
Hence, it is
not possible to make the model work through the entire training set before
each update, since it would not be impossible to keep the performance and the
variations in memory. Instead, networks are trained by "batches". A batch
is a number of training images - sometimes even as few as one - given to the
network for training, before it updates the variables and moves on to the next
batch. If we were to train a network with a batch containing the entire training
set, the gradient direction and hence the optimization step would be optimal or
the most correct. Since this is not possible, methods are applied such that the
outcome of the smaller batch training resembles the true gradient as much as
possible. These methods are named batch normalization.
The idea is to shift the internal covariate, eﬀectively changing the distribution
of the mini batch to have mean 0 and variance 1 [IS15]. The algorithm works
as follows:
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Deep Neural Networks
15
Input: Values of x over a mini batch B = {x1, ., xm,n}
(2.1)
Parameters: γ, φ
(2.2)
Output: BNγ,φ(xi)
(2.3)
µB ←1
m
m
X
i=1
xi -mini batch mean
(2.4)
σ2
B ←1
m
m
X
i=1
(xi −µB)2 -mini batch variance
(2.5)
ˆxi ←xi −µB
p
σ2
B + ϵ
-normalization
(2.6)
yi ←γˆx + φ -scale and shift
(2.7)
ϵ is a small non-zero value added to avoid dividing by zero.
This make the batch normalization work as a regularizer and makes training
faster.
Batch normalization is applied in each layer, just before the activation functions
has been deployed.
2.2.6.1
Learning rate
The learning rate is the parameter deciding the step length. When the gradient
has been determined. The learning rate determines how far in the chosen direc-
tion the step should be taken. A learning rate of 0.0001 is equivalent of taking
a step of 0.01% of the gradient length. By reducing the learning rate over the
iterations it is possible to move further into a local minima, whereas keeping the
learning rate constant will result in the probability to move to a better minima
but also the risk of jumping "over" a better solution.
2.2.6.2
Optimizer
An optimizer is the chosen form of trying to ﬁnd the best possible local min-
ima. It is, so to say, a way to ﬁnd the direction of the next step. Stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), has been shown to be a relevant choice for a long time.
Using this, it has been possible to ﬁnd meaningful models in the ﬁeld of deep
learning. It is still in use to this day, training modern networks such as resnet
==PAGE:28==
16
Theory
and deeplab. Recent studies show that SGD can not be ruled out as a good
optimizer [DLL+18].
Another choice for an optimizer is the Adaptive Moment Estimation optimizer
(Adam) [KB14]. Adam is a scheme that keeps track of the decaying averages
of past gradients and past squared gradients and then uses these parameters to
automatically adjust the learning rate that should be taken in the update rule
- this corresponds directly to an adaptive learning rate. This is the optimizer
used in this thesis. The main objective when using the Adam optimizer is a
clear speed-up.
Looking at the Adam and SGD there is a trade-oﬀbetween time and accuracy.
Adam converges much faster than SGD, however the ﬁnal accuracy of the model
tends to be a little worse, or in other words, Adam has converged to a worse
minima than SGD. Since the objective of this thesis is comparing the models
performance relative to each other, it was decided that the gain from using
Adam out weights the downs, thus we choose this over SGD.
This section concludes the description of deep neural networks. Having ﬁnished
introducing the building blocks, the model implemented is now to be chosen.
The deep neural network employed in this thesis is described in the experimental
set-up (3.1).
2.3
Finding the Optimal Model
When working with models, the idea is to ﬁnd the best possible set of weights
to discriminate between data instances. This is not a simple task, and the way
it is done today, is by descending via adjustments of the weights towards the
best possible solution.
Even after the work of deciding on the model to train, there are still two very
important parts in this process. The ﬁrst is how the model will train when given
data, and the second is what data is passed to the model.
When asked to solve a problem, using any model in general and deep neural net-
works in particular, the optimal way would be to give the model the opportunity
to learn from data directly generated by, or for, the problem.
If labeled data was an unlimited source, this might be the go-to approach. That
way, each of the rules deﬁning the model could be tested time and time again
with new data to stress test said rules. This is rarely - if ever - the case, and
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Finding the Optimal Model
17
instead ways to extract information without labeling, or reuse information from
similar tasks, is investigated. Even if immense amounts of data is introduced,
the convergence of a model to a usable solution might not be a given. It has even
been shown, that in some cases too complex models without some kind of semi-
optimal starting guess were clearly outperformed by better started processes,
even when the amount of labeled data was arbitrarily large [CBB11].
Speaking in general terms, the process of developing the interior rules of the
model can be split into three additional steps: ﬁrst, the choosing of the initial-
ization features - for neural networks this correspond to the initial weights of
the model parameters - the weight layers and the kernel functions 2.4. Second,
the development of the model, learning to distinguish the features sought. And
third, The post-processing. For this model, no post-processing schemes were
implemented, so the variations that arise can be assigned to the initialization
and the development.
But why is ﬁnding the optimal model so diﬃcult that all of these parts should be
trained multiple times in order to ﬁnd the best version, and thereafter further
ﬁne-tuned? Why is it so hard to ﬁnd the structures that deﬁne the problem
and discriminate between features in an optimal way? And why, even when
going through all these steps, is it diﬃcult to determine what exactly the rea-
sons for better performance were? This question falls back to the concept of
nonconvexity.
2.3.1
Nonconvex Problems
In the process of ﬁnding the optimal solution, or selecting the optimal set of
rules for data discrimination, the model might get "stuck" in a local minima. In
essence, a local minima is a point, where, by changing or adding to the rules by
only a little, the results of the data discrimination will be worse. Hereby, you
cannot conclude that it is the overall optimal solution. Going back to the initial
example, it might be that changing the rules fundamentally will make you able
to distinguish between similar looking cats and dogs, but if you tweak the rules
only slightly, even more cats or dogs will be misplaced.
The above formulation can be formalized, by the introduction of convexity.
Definition 2.1 A set C ⊆Rn is a convex set iﬀ∀x, y ∈C, λ ∈[0, 1] we have
λx + (1 −λ)y ∈C.
Definition 2.2 A function f ∈C(Rn) is said to be convex if the epigraph E
of f is a convex set. E := {(x, r) ∈f × Rn|f(x) < r}.
==PAGE:30==
18
Theory
Or in other words, a set is convex if every point in the space C can be connected
by a line contained in C.A function is convex, iﬀthe set of points above the
graph of the function is convex. A convex function obtains the ability of having
(at most) one minimal value. Nonconvex functions on the other hand can have
many local minima.
Almost every naturally occurring problem does not have a convex problem
surface, and must instead be considered a nonconvex optimization problem
[CHM+15]. The property of nonconvex functions having more than one minima
results in diﬃculties when trying to ﬁnd the globally best solution to a given
problem. A reason for this being that applying standard gradient descent, as
used for back propagation (2.2.5.1) will most likely not converge to the global
minimum.
There are a multitude of approaches as to how one can approach the problem
of nonconvexity [DPG+14]. The main ideas rely on either relaxing the problem
to a convex optimization problem, or trying to solve it directly, using projected
gradient descent, alternating minimization or the EM algorithm (A.2) etc. It
has been shown that working with nonconvex problems directly oﬀer a better
scalability to large problems [JK+17]. A model such as the one implemented
composing a solution space of millions of dimensions must be said to fall in the
"large" category.
Using pre-training for neural network initialization, which often will yield bet-
ter optimization, has been around for quite some time. In 2007 it was shown
that the unsupervised pre-training of classiﬁcation neural networks improved
performance due to starting conditions near a better local minima [BLPL07].
The idea of pre-training is a combination between relaxation of the problem and
working with the global solution. By using pre-training, the complexity of the
problem will either be downsized or the amount of data having to be determined
maximized, and hence the model will more likely have a smoother problem sur-
face, or a larger solution dimensionality. Think of it, as if more gates can be
determined. Hence the theory behind the idea is that this way, when starting
with the weights from the pre-training, the model will be in a much lower level
of error already, and is hence more likely to ﬁnd a better local minima.
It is theorized that pre-training will help with a better initialization when work-
ing with segmentation tasks, since it has already shown vast improvements when
using neural networks for classiﬁcation. It has already shown to help with more
stable models [WKDV16]. But what exactly is initialization, and why is it im-
portant? When talking about initialization, we are talking about the starting
values of the interconnecting weights of the deep neural network.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Model Initialization
19
2.4
Model Initialization
It has been shown that random model initialization can slow down or even
prevent convergence [MM15]. Hence, initializing the weights before training the
network is not only an interesting subject, but a crucial one.
But why is model initialization important in the ﬁrst place? If you have tried
to implement a deep neural network, you will most likely, have experienced
divergence. In the case of image segmentation, you might end up in everything
being predicted as one class. The reason can be found in the activation of the
neurons and the interplay with the weight layers.
Prior to end-to-end training of deep neural networks, layer-wise training with
random weight initialization was used. This layer-wise training was used to ini-
tialize a deep network and trained a denoising autoencoder and showed great
performance for initializing a classiﬁcation network with the denoising autoen-
coder weights [VLBM08].
The reason as to why this worked was explored in later work [EBC+10], and
it was found that using pre-training made it possible to train deeper networks
without exhausting the interconnecting neurons. Exhausting the neurons con-
nects directly to the gradient.
2.4.1
The Problem of the Vanishing Gradient
When introducing backpropagation (2.2.5.1), it was mentioned that the training
was done by stepping in the opposite direction of the gradient. But what if there
is no such thing? In order to understand this, the Sigmoid function is introduced.
The Sigmoid function really does the name "activation function" justice. Given
a small input, the neuron will (practically) not ﬁre, whereas a larger input will
result in a response. Activation functions are important. Choosing the right one
can mean the diﬀerence between fast reliable results or never converging at all.
Two activation functions will be introduced, since these are used in the network
implemented. These are the already shown Sigmoid function along with the
rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) activation. With these, two weight initialization
schemes are introduced.
The Sigmoid function, it should be apparent from the ﬁgure (2.2) that if weights
get very numerically large, the numerical values of the input data for each
passing layer will increase rapidly. Since the Sigmoid function is practically ﬂat
==PAGE:32==
20
Theory
Figure 2.2: The sigmoid function and the derivative
for numerically large values - negative or positive - it will not be possible to
distinguish between diﬀerent inputs, nor ﬁnding the direction in which to move.
This will result in a saturated input and a vanishing gradient - the result of very
small derivatives.
A crucial ingredient of a functional neural network with Sigmoid activations
is weights with zero mean and a variance, which will be constant through the
layers of the network. These weights must be related to the activation function
in order to keep this property through the network training.
Xavier initialization gives rise to such good initial weights that not only have the
properties of zero mean and good variance in relation to the Sigmoid function,
but further keeps this desirable property as a distribution of mean and vari-
ance through the layers. In paper [GB10] they propose a uniform distribution,
however the most common form of the Xavier initialization scheme is a normal
distribution with zero mean and variance
q
2
nin+nout , where nin is the number
of input neurons and nout is the number of output neurons. It can be shown
that this will help stabilizing the centering through diﬀerent layers. It was with
with Xavier Initialization that it was possible to train end-to-end deep neural
networks.
All this being said, there are still some issues when using the Sigmoid activation
function for several layers in a row. The Sigmoid function, even if the weights
are perfectly initialized, will have the maximum value of the derivative of around
0.2. When these weights are being backpropagated through just a few layers,
the values of the gradient will be minimal, and no added value can be found
from adding layers - the gradient will have vanished once again. This brings us
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Model Initialization
21
back to a diﬀerent activation function.
2.4.1.1
Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) Activation
The ReLU activation function is a mapping R : R →[0, inf) by the function
ReLU(x) = max{0, x}. The input to the function is the output from a neu-
ron, hence the ReLU function makes sure that the ﬁring of the feature maps
pixels only gets propagated on if the signal is positive.
The introduction of
this activation function meant a leap in performance for deep neural networks
[HZRS15].
Figure 2.3: The ReLu function and the derivative
The ReLu function still possesses the key concept of a "switch on" characteristic
that was the idea behind the activation functions, making them comparable to
the neurons of the human brain. However, as opposed to the Sigmoid function,
the ReLu function does not suﬀer from the degeneration of the gradient when
using backpropagation . As can be seen (2.3), the derivative is one. There will
however still be some reduction of the gradient, since this property is only found
for input > 0.
It does not suﬀer the same problems as the Sigmoid activation function. There
are, however, still a few things to be considered. If the variance of the input
is very high, the relation between variance and numeric value of the output
will be varied, since the activation is linear in every point besides zero. This
property gives rise to the wish for compressing the values to an area around
0, yielding that half the derivatives will be zero. A solution to both of these
conﬂicts are introduced in the specialised initialization of weights, the Xavier-Hé
initialization.
==PAGE:34==
22
Theory
Xavier-Hé initialization
When working with the ReLu activation function, standard Xavier initialization
is not the optimal choice [Kum17]. This is due to the fact that the negative
output of the signal will be set to zero, thus the assumption of linear activation
that Xavier initialization assumes will have been abolished. The initialization
corrects this by accounting for the non-linearity of the activation. The Xavier-
Hé initialization scheme becomes a normal distribution with zero mean and
variance
q
2
nin , where nin is the number of input neurons.
Having found initialization schemes rendering it possible to train the network
end to end results in being able to establish results directly from data. But can
these results be optimized simply by choosing even better initial weights? In
order to test this, other ideas for initialization must be introduced.
2.4.2
Unsupervised Pre-training
Unsupervised pre-training is a way to obtain knowledge from the data without
explicitly giving the labels.
This can be helpful for many reasons.
For the
intuitive idea, look back at the case of learning the diﬀerence between cats and
dogs. A lot of knowledge can be found from simply observing cats and dogs
- without necessarily knowing which is which.
The same can be said about
observing other animals in general, as will be described in section (2.4.4).
This intuition translates well to the idea of labeled versus unlabeled data.
In most real world applications, a large number of data points are observed.
Whether these has been labeled is a completely diﬀerent matter. Think of an
example: it is relatively easy to take thousands of pictures of a forest when you
ﬂy across it in a helicopter or even with a drone, but if you have to sit down,
and mark each diﬀerent tree afterwards, it will become a tedious job. Or in the
case of medical data, growing a thousand cells or even a million of a certain type
might not be the most labor heavy job, but having someone draw the outline of
each cell is not the most interesting task. Further, even if an unlimited amount
of man-power was available, there might be features in the data that are not
easily accessible, or even fathomable without the ability to "think" like a com-
puter. For instance, computer solutions has progressed to a level high enough
that it has been able to outperform human specialists in multiple applications.
Hence, being able to learn these concepts for image segmentation, might result
in computers outperforming doctors and other specialists.
In order to obtain as much knowledge about the desired domain as possible,
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Model Initialization
23
using as much computer assistance as possible, pre-training can be applied.
Some would argue that there are two main classes of pre-training.
Transfer
Learning and knowledge generation from problem data. Both of these have roots
in the idea of model preconditioning. Further, the concept of semi-supervised
pre-training should be introduced here.
2.4.3
Semi-supervised training
Semi-supervised training builds on the idea of mixing unlabeled and labeled
data, thus obtaining a better segmentation than if only using labeled data. Semi-
supervised training takes labeled data, and then transfers some of the search
for knowledge to the unlabeled data by applying at least one of the following
assumptions. [CSZ09]
• Continuity assumption - Data which are close, are more prone to have the
same label. This can be used together with a distance metric.
• Cluster assumption - The data can form clusters, and data within each
cluster are more prone to have the same label. The clusters can be done
with for instance DBSCAN or K-means.
• Manifold assumption - The data is close in a smaller vector space. This
can be used with for instance PCA projection or a similarity measure.
Semi-supervised training requires domain knowledge of the data and relies on
the assumptions above. It can therefore not be universally used, especially if
the data is diﬃcult to cluster or contains a large amount of variance.
2.4.4
Transfer learning
Transfer learning is the idea of exploiting knowledge in an already explored
domain, the origin domain, and transferring it to an unexplored domain, the
target domain, hereby utilizing pre-obtained knowledge in the origin domain to
ease the learning in the target domain. This is useful in the cases where data is
sparse, or if faster convergence is a matter of interest[RBL+07], [BDBC+10].
It is further a way to push the model in the direction of a better local minima,
since the dimensionality of the training set is large enough to render better
==PAGE:36==
24
Theory
optimization results.
For this reason, it improves stability, since the initial
weights will be more inclined to perform at the same level. Transfer learning
reduces both the training time and the variance of the segmentation in the target
domain. It will also be likely to reduce error.
Transfer learning utilizes commonly shared feature detection from otherwise
unrelated domains, e.g. edges and shapes. Transferring features already learned
from the origin domain to the target domain results in the target domain not
having to learn these features from scratch, again resulting in a better starting
point for a training algorithm. If the origin domain contains much more labeled
data, it is also possible that structures can be found that would otherwise have
been missed by training the target model solely by the direct applicable data.
The value of transfer learning can be fully understood when working with a
small dataset. For example, the number of labeled data containing cats and
dogs vastly dominates the amount of data compared to most other two-class
animal classiﬁcations. E.g., the chosen network can be trained for cats and dogs,
and then the weights can be reloaded for the new model before it is applied to
the task of categorizing elephants and rhinos.
Figure 2.4: Transfer of knowledge between cats and dogs classiﬁer to rhino
and elephant classiﬁer
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Model Initialization
25
Transfer learning has been used in multiple model set-ups and has been shown
to improve performance [CQYH16], [KL16].
2.4.5
Resemblance, Diﬀerence and Advantage
Starting from last idea of transfer learning, it can be observed that the main
concept is the transferring of weights.
Hence, transfer learning is a way to
learn where to start. This is the exact same idea as for the unsupervised pre-
training. As for what separates the two models, the process is of interest. For
transfer learning, the direct application is the same as of the model of interest
- a segmentation of images. For unsupervised pre-training, it is more a general
understanding of the content of the image.
To sum up the two models, it is found:
Transfer learning is letting the model learn from tasks that are not exactly
the one at hand, but might have some resemblance. Then the model will be
applied to the task at hand. For image segmentation this will most likely be
done by locking the ﬁrst layers, expecting these to hold more general structures
of image recognition. The last layers are then trained in a supervised manner,
by the amount of labeled data available. Transfer learning is training directly
for a segmentation model and is able to obtain knowledge of data which is not
generated by or for the model, but which is found from other applications.
Unsupervised pre-training is the idea that the model can learn features about the
data, simply by getting to "look at it". These feature can then be useful when
the model has to learn the actual task. This can, as in this thesis, be done by
letting an autoencoder learn the dominant features. Unsupervised pre-training
beneﬁts from the fact that it allowed to search for structures in unlabeled data.
Therefore the true strengths of the model will be observed when the amount of
unlabeled data is vast. A disadvantage of both the transfer learning and the
implementation of a autoencoder is the risk, that the initialization will have
moved the model weights away from the structures needed for segmentation.
This should be avoided by using a ﬁxed learning rate.
Semi supervised learning, which is not the main focus of this thesis, is something
in between these two. The model is being told exactly what the task is, but it is
shown data that it can try to learn something from, along with the data that it
knows something about. For the semi-supervised idea, it is clear that it is not
directly applicable as a pre-training method, without prior knowledge. It should
be noted that it connects to some of the unsupervised pre-training schemes
implemented for image segmentation, in that manual or very simple experiments
==PAGE:38==
26
Theory
are used in order to ﬁnd structures worth exploring in the unsupervised fashion.
2.4.5.1
Pre Training Can Use Unlabeled Data
The unsupervised pre-training gives room to train the network with all the data
available, even though some of it is unlabeled. This is an idea worth exploring.
By the use of e.g.
autoencoders (2.5.1) or other pre-training methods, it is
deemed possible that the network might be able to extract some information
from the images, even though the network is not explicitly told what to look
for.
Pre-training has shown very promising performance gains in the task of classi-
ﬁcation, but mainly the classic idea of using an autoencoder has been applied
for segmentation tasks.
2.5
Methods for Unsupervised Pre-training
Unsupervised pre-training can be done in a multiple of ways. The very classic
way of employing autoencoders is the main approach of this thesis, but other
ideas, and ideas as to how said ideas could be combined should be interesting
to consider.
2.5.1
Autoencoders
A very classic method for pre-training deep neural networks are autoencoders.
High dimensional data, like images, can be compressed by the use of autoen-
coders [HS06]. As a bi-product of this process, dominant features for the data
is determined. Using autoencoders for pre-training has been shown to improve
performance of classiﬁcation deep neural networks [BLPL07].
Autoencoders are not a new idea, and was introduced under diﬀerent names as
a means for optimizing artiﬁcial neural networks by the use of pre-training as
early as 1987 by both Ballard [Bal87] and LeCun [FW87]. The idea seemed to
develop into the format considered today when applied for feed-forward neural
networks with nonlinear activation functions in 1989 and 1991 [San89] [Kra91].
When working with autoencoders, the take away learning is the possibility to
ﬁnd the key features in an image. Reviving the example of a student having
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Methods for Unsupervised Pre-training
27
to learn a new task, the task in this scenario is to be able to ﬁnd a cutout of
presented images, that represent the image in such a way that when presented
with the same cutouts in a similar image, the child is able to reconstruct the
individual animal. At the same time, a framework for building animals in general
should be learned, such that the reconstruction will not place the ears on the
rear and the tail in the front.
In the case of animals, it would make no sense to look at a cutout of the back-
ground. The middle of the animal might be more giving, but the optimal strat-
egy is most likely looking at the ears, feet, tail and other distinguishing features
of animals.
Figure 2.5: When distinguishing animals from cutouts, it is important to select
the right features.
In reality, the cutouts metaphor is a vast oversimpliﬁcation. The method should
be thought of more as a way to combine and decompose certain parts of the
image, such that as much of an image as possible can be constructed from much
less data. This brings us to the formal description of autoencoders.
2.5.1.1
The Structure of Autoencoders
An autoencoder is composed of two structures; the encoder and the decoder.
Given an input x, the aim of the encoder, f, is to compress the data such
that it can be stored as meaningful components in the internal hidden layers
h. The decoder, g, aims to reconstruct the data, or in other words, to mimic
the original data as well as possible when given the components. The aim of
the autoencoder is to minimize L(x, g(f(x))) with respect to some loss function
L. If our encoder and decoder are too large, there is a chance that both f and
g - or their combination - will learn to represent the identity function, nothing
is gained from this process since it also reconstructs any noise that are in the
==PAGE:40==
28
Theory
image - memorization is not learning. Instead, the functions are restricted. The
restriction can be done simply by restricting the amount of data that is allowed
to be saved in the hidden layer h, described as undercomplete autoencoders, or
by polluting the input data such that it is not exactly identical to the output
data. By doing this, dominant features in the data will have a chance of being
detected.
The way to build an autoencoder is by stacking one or more layers of a feed-
forward network.
First, in the encoder part of the network, the layers are
compressed. The output from this network will have the size of the meaningful
components. The decoder will work the opposite way, adding nodes to the layers
and having the same size output as the original data.
When working with these networks, there are some settings that need to be
determined. These are the number of layers and nodes in the network, and the
loss-function, L, is to be chosen. Working with autoencoders for pre-training a
speciﬁc network, the layers and the code need to be translatable to the target
model. In the case of a segmentation model, the structure is already of the right
dimension for an autoencoder, and the task can thereby be given directly to
the network. When transferring it for the actual segmentation task, only the
compression of the data is of interest, and therefore it is only the encoder layers
that will be transferred.
Since the weights in the network and the dominant features of the data are
learned from the data used for training the autoencoder, the ﬁnal version will
be data-speciﬁc.
Hence, a trained autoencoder is not able to compress and
decompress data of a completely diﬀerent type or structure than what it was
trained on. As can be seen (2.6), training the autoencoder for the Miccai Gland
dataset, and exposing an image from a completely diﬀerent distribution will
yield vastly diﬀerent outcomes.
2.5.1.2
Variations of autoencoders
One of the challenges when using autoencoders, has been the sensibility to local
minima when using rich representation, or in other words, many meaningful
components. If the size chosen is too large, the autoencoder will not learn dom-
inant features of the data and it will overﬁt. In order for the network to obtain
as much information about the images when having to solve the segmentation
task, the problem is reversed. Compressing the data too much will make the
network throw away important features. Thus ideas to balance these opposite
needs are introduced. Numerous implementation tactics have been developed
to tackle these and other problems, and it has been found that the simple de-
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Methods for Unsupervised Pre-training
29
Figure 2.6: Results of the noisy autoencoder, we can see that it learns the
underlying color scheme as well as reconstruction
noising autoencoder seems to be able to yield very stable results for various
classiﬁcation settings.
Denoising Autoencoders
The idea behind this autoencoder is simple, since it is not the actual structure
of the autoencoder that should be changed, rather it is the input data. Instead
of feeding the original image as input while training the autoencoder, a noisy
version is used [VLBM08]. The aim of the decoder is still to recompose the
original, unpolluted image. The pollution of the image is done by setting a ﬁxed
level, νd, of the image pixels to zero. In the 2008 article, maximum performance
was shown with νd in the range between 10% and 40%.
This method showed improvement over classical autoencoders. When visualizing
the weights of the autoencoders, they were shown to be more compact, and
==PAGE:42==
30
Theory
without as many ﬂuctuations in performance. The noisy input is visualized in
the above ﬁgure (2.6).
2.6
Unsupervised Image Segmentation
Unsupervised image segmentation is a way for which an image can be split in
parts based on computable features. Most of the segmentation models are quite
intuitive, and let nature lend them an idea of how the world can be interpreted.
Image segmentation is a way to aid the detection of important features in the
image, making the network able to learn more. It is further a possibility to
render multitask unsupervised pre-training possible 2.7.
2.6.1
Edge Detection
Among the common examples of image features are edge detection, in which
the model detect sudden changes - the edges. These edges can be implemented
for the individual color channel, or simply as a combination of intensity.
This again has a direct connection to the brain. When testing the synapses of
vision, it is shown that neighbouring synapses are negatively correlated. If a
synapse detects a signal, it has to be stronger than the neighbouring in order
for it to carry true weight. This shows that humans are very sensitive to edges,
whereas large uniform areas will be passed over less thoroughly when the infor-
mation is passed to the visual chords in the brain. This phenomena is known
as lateral inhibition, and can be reproduced using a computer.
The problem with edge detection lies in the unsupervised part. There has been
studies showing improvement of performance, after the model was allowed to
detect hand annotated edges of the cells, but these are not obtainable in this
set-up. When working with computer generated edges, some problems arise.
The naive implementation of ordinary edge detection schemes is not showing to
be fruitful for the Miccai Gland dataset.
==PAGE:43==
2.6 Unsupervised Image Segmentation
31
Figure 2.7: Edge detection of Miccai Gland cells
As can be seen, the structure of cells gives rise to detected edges that bears little
resemblance to the true edges of the actual cells.
Instead, the attention should be turned to clustering. Methods for unsupervised
clustering of image pixels have shown potential in many applications. After a
clustering algorithm has been implemented - and shown potential for the model
- it would be possible to use the edges of said clusters as a means of applying
edge detection.
2.6.2
Image Segmentation deploying clustering
It is not directly opposed to edge detection, but the idea of clustering image
pixels will look at each pixel and compare it to the overall image and assign the
segmentation value from this, whereas the edge detection operates from a much
more local framework.
2.6.2.1
Superpixels and SLIC Features
In an ordinary image, each pixel can be assigned a value. It will not be dependent
on the value of its neighbouring pixels. In superpixels, the value of a pixel will
be determined within a group. Think of it as the American political map. Each
individual voter will cast his or her preferred vote, but the overall vote of a
state will be determined as an average. In the voting example, the borders of
the superpixels have already been set, but this is not the general case. SLIC
==PAGE:44==
32
Theory
features are founded in the concept of superpixels, and is a speciﬁc way to
determine areas of superpixels in an image [ASS+12].
Figure 2.8: Implementing SLIC features for Miccai Gland images, with 3 dif-
ferent levels of pixel sizes.
When given an image, the idea is to ﬁnd areas of the image that belongs together.
The idea of superpixels can be implemented in a lot of diﬀerent ways. As for a
more thorough discussion of SLIC features see appendix A.1.
2.6.2.2
Gaussian Mixture Models for Image Segmentation
Clustering into two classes can be done by looking at which class is most likely
for each pixel. For determining the likeliness, Gaussian mixture models can be
applied. The mixture distributions describe the idea that an outcome is the
result of one of several distributions generating data [MB88]. For the Gaus-
sian mixtures, these distributions are assumed to be Gaussian. Note that the
combined distributions should again be a probability distribution and hence
integrate to one.
An example of a GMM is the height of humans. Both the height of males and
females follow a normal distribution, but given data for height in an overall
population the outcome would be the combination of said.
==PAGE:45==
2.6 Unsupervised Image Segmentation
33
The key idea is to ﬁnd the combination of distributions that makes the actual
outcome most likely. If the believed number of distributions is two, and the
data only has a one-dimensional outcome, this is done by determining the two
normal distributions that give the highest accumulated probability to the data
points.
The idea is simple in one or even two dimensions, with a relative low number
of distributions, but becomes much more abstract in more dimensions. It can,
however, still be done.
The general way to describe the mixture model is:
p(x) =
K
X
i=1
πiN(x|µi, Σi)
(2.8)
N(x|µi, Σi) =
1
p
(2π)K|Σi|
e−1
2 (x−µi)T Σi(x−µi)
(2.9)
K
X
i=1
πi = 1
(2.10)
Where K is the number of Gaussian distributions, πi is the proportion of ob-
servations following the i’th distribution and µi, Σi is the mean and standard
deviation of the i’th distribution.
Given K Gaussian distributions, you want to ﬁnd the variables that result in
the outcome of events x ∈X of having the highest cumulated probability. In
order to do so, you need to ﬁnd:
max
π,µ,Σ
p(X)
(2.11)
This is not a convex problem, and as discussed in an earlier section 2.3.1, there
is no simple way to do this. Instead, the EM algorithm is applied - see appendix
A. When a solution for the Gaussian mixture model has been found, the dif-
ﬁcult part is over. Now segmenting the image is simply assigning the pixel to
the Gaussian distribution for which the outcome of the pixel has the highest
likelihood.
It has been found that the classiﬁcations found when using GMM often resemble
==PAGE:46==
34
Theory
the actual annotations. Further, using the automatically segmented images is a
way of letting the network solve an unsupervised segmentation task.
2.6.3
Performance of Unsupervised Segmentation
As can be seen from the images (2.6.2.1), the SLIC features does not capture
much of the true cell features. As will be shown, they are further diﬃcult to
translate to an unsupervised set-up (5.1.1). This method seems to have little
potential. It might be possible to use these features to reduce noise, but more
investigation would be needed to determine this.
GMM features show more promising results, and even though they do not com-
pletely reﬂect the true annotations, some resemblance is apparent (see ﬁgure 5.1
in chapter 5).
2.7
Multitask Learning
Multitask learning is eﬀectively any problem, where two or more tasks are being
optimized simultaneously. Hence, if more than one object is given to the loss
function, or more than one loss function is in play, it is multitask learning.
Multitask learning has been showing great promises in the supervised versions
within a number of ﬁelds in deep learning: speech recognition [DHK13], NLP
[CW08] and of course, image segmentation [MWvdV+16]. There are a number
of ways as to how to apply multitask training for deep neural networks, but it
has been found that as of yet there is no statistical evidence as to not use the
simple idea of hard parameter sharing [Rud17].
Hard parameter sharing is, simply put, letting the model to train a number of
tasks, but reusing or sharing a number of initial layers.
When it comes to the task of segmenting the Miccai Gland dataset, it has
been shown that a multitask set-up, making use of both annotations and edges,
and/or bounding boxes will yield better performance [Li18]. Since The GMM
yielded reasonable representations of the human made annotations given the
raw images, along with edges from the annotations it seems like a promising
idea to use this scheme as a challenger to other initialization schemes.
==PAGE:47==
2.7 Multitask Learning
35
Figure 2.9: Multitask segmentation with shared encoder features.
==PAGE:48==
36
Theory
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 3
Experimental Set-up
In this chapter, the network architecture implemented for this thesis is described
and the baseline experiments are introduced. Further, the evaluation of models
is discussed.
3.1
The Model set-up
Deep neural networks are composed in diﬀerent ways according to the task
at hand. When working with image segmentation, a prediction is needed for
every single pixel, so the size of the output must be the same as the image
that needs to be segmented. Hence, the input layer and the output layer must
be sized accordingly. As discussed when introducing autoencoders, a crucial
element of the subtraction of signiﬁcant features, is the compression of data
in the smaller inner feature maps. Adding these together, it is found that the
overall composition of the network will somewhat resemble a butterﬂy (see ﬁgure
3.1).
What might not be apparent from the ﬁgurative representation of the network,
is the fact that layers not only get smaller, but also thicker. This is due to the
fact that the neurons - or more correctly in this context feature maps (2.2.3) -
==PAGE:50==
38
Experimental Set-up
will have fewer pixels, be smaller and much more specialized. Therefore a higher
number of these are needed in order to contain the image information.
The architecture used in the project is incorporating modern structures in order
to show, whether it is possible to successfully apply unsupervised pre-training
for these. Ideas from DCAN, ResNet, U-net and SegNet can be found. The
choice was made to have a smaller network with few trainable parameters1.
This was decided in order to train faster while still achieving useful results.
This way it is possible to run more experiments and not having to wait too
long for the network to converge. The only interest is the relative performance,
therefore state-of-the-art performance is not the primary objective. However, an
architecture capable of obtaining more knowledge than just the basis is necessary
in order to show that the diﬀerent initializing schemes diﬀer.
3.1.1
Architecture
The ﬁrst block of the network consists of an input layer which is a convolution
with batch normalization and ReLu as activation function, this is followed by
two bottleneck layers. Encoder blocks 2 to 5 consist of three bottleneck layers
with down sampling by having the ﬁrst layer having a stride of 2 and the last two
layers have a stride of 1. The decoder blocks consists of a transpose convolution
of the previous layer, and concatenating it with the layer from the encoder that
has the same debt - the skip connection. This is followed by three convolutional
layers, all with batch normalization and ReLu as an activation function. There
are four decoder blocks in order to match the original input in size. In the end
a convolution is applied with feature maps equal to the number of classes of
interest, in the binary segmentation case, such as Miccai Gland, this is 2. This
layer is followed by a softmax function if the object is segmentation or a sigmoid
function in the case of reconstruction - with number of classes equal to 3, one
for each color channel.
3.1.1.1
Regularization
There are quite a few methods for regularization. One is using early stopping,
however this would make it diﬃcult to test the models relative to each other. K-
fold cross-validation is also an option, however, it would require the training of
k number of models, which with the number of models we want to test becomes
in-feasible.
Further using cross-validation the data available for each model
could be diﬀerent, making model comparisons diﬃcult.
15.521.891 to be exact, with no bias
==PAGE:51==
3.1 The Model set-up
39
Figure 3.1: Architecture of the deep neural network
The option of training the model with a l2 regularizer was chosen, trusting that
the test loss stagnates for some value of the l2 regularizer. If it is too large,
the model is restricted in how much it can learn, resulting in underﬁtting. If
it is too small the model can learn set speciﬁc features, resulting in overﬁtting.
Therefore the task of ﬁnding the optimal value for the regularizer, which results
in the right amount of learning must be done.
The value of 5E−5 for the l2 regularizer which is used in the model has been
empirically found to work well.
3.1.2
Final Model Training
The optimizer used was chosen to be Adam, with an initial learning rate of
1E−4. Cross entropy loss is implemented in the case of segmentation and mean
square error in the case of reconstruction. All models are trained for 440 epocs
or 18700 steps with a batch size of 2 for each step.
It was decided to not use bias in the feature maps. This is inspired from SegNet
[BKC15].
Data augmentation was implemented as described in 2.2.2.2. Data augmentation
==PAGE:52==
40
Experimental Set-up
further acts as a regularizer.
(a) Cross entropy loss
(b) Dice score values
Figure 3.2: Training loss for one model. It is found that the train loss is dimin-
ishing, but the test loss has stagnated. This goes to show that the
regularizer has done the necessary job of preventing overﬁtting.
3.1.3
Number of trained models
In order to determine performance, it is simply not enough to test a single model.
The models will be trained [A×B] times. There are two parameters that can be
changed from each testing. α ∈{0...A −1} determines the initialization of the
model, and β ∈{0...B−1} determines the order of the training data. All models
will see all the training data, but the order in which it is shown to the model
and the randomized crops can be varied. The results found in this thesis can
be directly reproduced, since the variations of the two parameters were chosen
by setting the seed tensorﬂow.seed(alpha) and the batch generator seed with
numpy.seed(beta).
For each initializing, a corresponding pre-training scheme is implemented - ex-
cept in the case of transfer learning from a diﬀerent data domain, where only
one transfer model is trained. This was a choice, resulting in the weights of
the initialization of the pre-training being identical to training with Xavier-Hé
initialization.
This was opposed to taking one initialization, and then do α
pre-trainings from the initialization.
==PAGE:53==
3.1 The Model set-up
41
The model training can be represented as:
(a) Xavier-Hé initialization.
(b) Training with pre-training.
3.1.3.1
Impact of α and β
The overall performance of the models must be understood in reference to the
the two variable α and β. Every model trained will be trained for the variable
span of α, β ∈{0, 1, 2}. Therefore every model will be trained n = 9 times. The
variance for changing the two variables will be determined individually, but the
performance will be given as a combination of all the models.
3.1.4
Saved Parameters
The main feature of interest is the overall performance, along with the perfor-
mance of the individual images, and the trained weights. The feature maps are
merely a realization of the weights, since the option of bias was surpassed. As
the training of the model was progressed, the performance was tested on a single
image for each step. Smoothing this performance curve will lend a picture of
the development of the model.
The loss for the test along with the loss for the training was evaluated in each
step, in order to determine convergence and understand if overﬁtting could be
a factor in the evaluation.
==PAGE:54==
42
Experimental Set-up
3.1.5
Evaluation Metric
For measuring segmentation performance the results presented are represented
by an IoU score, in this thesis we use the dice score. The dice score is calculated
as:
D =
2 · TP
2 · TP + FP + FN
Where the number of true positives (TP), false positives (FP) and false negatives
(FN) are evaluated from the pixel performance.
3.1.6
Weight Initialization of Experiments
As described when introducing the number of models trained with the parame-
ters α and β, the way pre-training is applied, is done by initializing the weights
according to the α-seed, perform a pre-training scheme, and then train the
model β times. This is opposed to transfer learning where only one initializa-
tion is trained.
When testing the performance of the diﬀerent pre-training schemes, along with
the performance of the transfer learning, this is done by training the full model,
and then use the ﬁnal encoder weights as the initialization of the segmentation
network. Note, that none of the layers are locked, but it is merely a way of
initializing the network.
3.2
Data
When a problem is given, it contains data. Data can be highly diﬀerent from
one scenario to the next. First, the type of data must be understood. Data can
be numeric, text, audio or in the form of images - and sometimes - even a mix of
these. The data chosen, or given, depending on the problem, has a big impact
on methods.
The methods applied in this thesis are focusing on images, but even amongst
these, variations is the common denominator. The ﬁrst complication is whether
the topic of interest is detection or segmentation. The object of the two can
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Data
43
be highly similar in the data input, but vary in the objective. The choice was
made to work with semantic segmentation, diﬀerentiating between background
and objects of interest - all of which comes from the same class. This is the
more interesting of the two from a theoretical point of view, since unsupervised
pre-training of deep neural networks for segmentation tasks has not been tested
as thoroughly as pre-training for detection.
The ﬁrst experiments were done using the medical segmentation of cells in the
thoroughly studied Miccai Gland dataset. The reason for the choice was exactly
that it is so well known.
It has been shown time and time again that it is
possible to ﬁnd meaningful models for segmenting this task. The state-of-the-
art performance is more than 90% accuracy. This thesis is not at all aiming for
such results, but are mainly focused on inter-model diﬀerences. Having build
a much simpler model, the hope is not to reach such high performance levels,
but knowing that there exist discriminators on this level, makes it possible to
determine that the data can be segmented on a very high level. That way, we
know that as long as the performance is less than state-of-the-art, there could
be found even better models.
Figure 3.4: Two examples of Miccai Gland cells, with human segmented region
of interests
==PAGE:56==
44
Experimental Set-up
3.3
Base experiments
After having established the method for weight initialization, and described how
the network is build, it is interesting to ﬁnd what the actual outcome of these
diﬀerent initialization schemes yield. In order to ﬁnd the impact of diﬀerent
starting conditions, several solutions can be considered.
In this thesis, pre-
training is the main focus, but in order to establish a reliable baseline, other
schemes are introduced.
For establishing the level of segmentation obtainable by using the same model,
but with diﬀerent initialization schemes, three baseline experiments are con-
ducted. All three of these have been shown to yield results in diﬀerent settings.
The initial three experiments are the following:
• Segmentation training with Xavier-Hé initialization.
• Segmentation training with Transfer learning.
• Segmentation training with Noisy Auto Encoder.
For the ﬁrst experiment, the weights of the network will be initialized using the
Xavier He initialization (2.4.1.1). This is the go-to method for creating a useful
baseline [GB10].
The second experiment will use the autoencoder set up, transferring the weights
used for the encoder part of the autoencoder to the actual segmentation model
[VLBM08]. This is a standard unsupervised pre-training method. The results
from this experiment will be of uttermost interest.
Finally, the third model will be a classic implementation of transfer learning,
training the model on the larger Pascal VOC 2012 dataset. In order to work
with a binary classiﬁcation, the VOC problem was restricted to only segmenting
humans and background. This is both a baseline and an explanatory experiment.
In order to test if maximum capacity for segmentation has been reached using
the network implemented, it is important to understand whether it is possible to
improve performance, and from there conclude if this network is complex enough
to detect the very subtle diﬀerences that compose the intricate model for image
segmentation in the chosen dataset. The idea is to show that obtaining a general
understanding of image segmentation using transfer learning yields statistically
better performance, and hence ﬁnd that there is a practical possibility for pre-
training to yield better results than Xavier initialization. Since performance is
lower than state-of-the-art, there is a theoretical possibility for improvement.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
Results of Base
Experiments
In this chapter, the overall performance of the network is being evaluated. The
initial experiments will yield a baseline, and help determine which experiments
must be done when moving forward. Since the network is much smaller than
state-of-the art performing networks, it is not surprising that the performance
found does not live up to the best Gland segmentations that have been done.
Instead, the area of interest is the relative performance, giving that the found
baselines are of uttermost interest.
4.0.1
Autoencoder variations
To start the experiments, two diﬀerent autoencoders were tested. First, the
classic autoencoder, where both input and output is the true image, and second,
the noisy autoencoder. It is found from the performance of the classic auto
encoder that it has converged and is able to create a reconstruction from a
noisy image.
The ﬁrst experiments with the transferring of the weights from the classic au-
toencoder as initialization were done, but the results were poor. This spoke
==PAGE:58==
46
Results of Base Experiments
to the idea that the pre-training scheme implemented had a bad impact on
performance. This could be because the pre-training had somehow restricted
the initial weights, such that they cannot move into an area of better minima.
This could be due to overﬁtting of the classic autoencoder, eﬃciently learning
the identity function, or it could just be that the weights learned by a classic
autoencoder are a poor choice for initialization. The poor performance of the
classic autoencoder directly led the attention to noisy autoencoders, from where
the results in the following are a realization of.
4.1
Results
The results of the diﬀerent implementations are displayed in the following ﬁgure.
As can be seen, the diﬀerent implementations do not diﬀer much, and hence it
is interesting to understand, on what level there are diﬀerences to be found.
Model Name
Dice mean
Dice std
Xavier-Hé
0.8574
± 0.0177
Noisy Auto Encoder (with skip connections)
0.8450
± 0.0158
Transfer from VOC
0.8696
± 0.0115*
Table 4.1: Results of the baseline experiments. *The transfer model was only
trained once, so the variation when changing α is only an expression
of having changed the initialization of the decoder.
What is somewhat interesting, is the fact that there is room for improvement
cf. the results from the transfer learning, and further, the fact that the variance
is lower for the autoencoder setup.
4.1.1
Performance of Individual Images
When looking at the performance for the individual images, it is interesting to
observe, that the Xavier-Hé initialization yields a high variance across models.
This is something which should be kept in mind when choosing initialization
scheme.
What is also found is, that the claim that pre-training works as a regularizer
[WKDV16] seems reasonable. This can also be seen from the variation of the
models.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Understanding the Performance
47
Figure 4.1: Same image passed to a Xavier-Hé initialized network for the three
initializations α = 1, 2, 3
Figure 4.2: Results of individual images for the baseline experiments.
4.2
Understanding the Performance
There are a number of ideas as to how to test the performance of the diﬀerent
models. First, the performance of the autoencoder must be discussed.
==PAGE:60==
48
Results of Base Experiments
4.2.1
Why Doesn’t the Autoencoder Improve Performance
As mentioned, the classic autoencoder was discarded even before the true testing
began. But when implementing the network, even with the noisy autoencoder,
the results were still underperforming. But why was that?
Note that both the classic and the noisy autoencoder showed promise when
looking at their ability to reproduce the images propagated through. The prob-
lem could not be found in the ability to learn some way to compress the data
through the layers of the network. But an important part of the architecture of
the network was responsible for the errors.
Disabling Skip-connections
As found above, the outcome - even when using the noisy autoencoder - is
not yielding the results of improving training with the weights initialized using
Xavier-Hé. This seemed less optimal, since pre-training has shown such promise
for classiﬁcation tasks. Hence the attention was turned to understanding what
went wrong. First, the evaluation was tested when transferring only a number of
the layers. The performance resembled the training with the Xavier-Hé weights,
as long as only 1-3 blocks were used for initialization. If 4 or 5 blocks were
transferred, the performance dropped.
The problem was found when looking at the feature maps (4.3). As can be seen,
the inner layers are not activated at all. This is due to the weighting being set
to zero. When this happens, and the weights are transferred, they can not be
reactivated - this is due to the backpropagation scheme. It can be considered
as a special case of the vanishing gradient problem. When working the way
backwards in the system, the gradient will always be perpendicular to the zero
weights, and the network is unable to perform changes.
But why does this happen?
The answer was found when going back to the
structure of the network. There was a key ingredient implemented for improving
segmentation performance, but which killed the idea of autoencoders. The skip
connections. Looking back at it, this is a dead giveaway. It should be obvious
that the possibility to send the information of the image directly to the output
layer, will result in the lack of need for compressing the data in a meaningful
way. Hence, the autoencoder experiments were redone, but this time without
training the skip connections.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Understanding the Performance
49
Figure 4.3: The ﬁrst feature map of each layer. Top: autoencoder trained with
skip connections. Bottom: autoencoder trained with skip connec-
tions disabled. Both are trained with the same initializations
4.2.2
Results When Using an Auto Encoder without skip-
connections
When disabling the skip connections in the unsupervised pre-training scheme,
the results of the new autoencoder setup outperformed the one implemented
without this restriction.
When looking at the overall model performance, a clear diﬀerence between the
two implementations were found.
Model Name
Dice mean
Dice std
Xavier-Hé
0.8574
± 0.0177
Noisy Auto Encoder w. skip
0.8450
± 0.0158
Noisy Auto Encoder w.o. skip
0.8628
± 0.0175
Transfer from VOC
0.8696
± 0.0115
Table 4.2: Results of the baseline experiments with the autoencoder without
skip connections. *The transfer model was only trained once, so the
variation when changing α is only an expression of having changed
the initialization of the decoder.
Now, an experimental setup yielding performance similar to that of transfer
learning has been reached. This is very interesting, and of course what should be
researched further. When referring to the autoencoder in the following chapters,
it is to be understood, that it is the noisy version trained without enabling
skip-connections. It is not possible to say that the performance of the noisy
==PAGE:62==
50
Results of Base Experiments
autoencoder is statistically better than the other initializations, but it exactly
is possible to say that it is better than the version with enabled skip-connections
for a 95% conﬁdence. How this test is performed is shown in 6
4.2.3
Performance for Individual Images
Retracing our thoughts from the previous section, the new comparison for indi-
vidual images is found in the following ﬁgure (4.4). Once again, it is observed
that the autoencoder setup yields lower variation than Xavier-Hé initialization.
Figure 4.4: Comparison of baseline models
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Additional Experiments
Having established baselines, it is possible to determine if it is achievable to im-
prove segmentation tasks using unsupervised segmentation techniques in order
to implement an unsupervised pre-training scheme.
5.1
Training Unsupervised Schemes
Pre-training relies on the idea that it is possible to reuse knowledge obtained
from an unsupervised task for the true task of interest. In order for there to
be anything to reuse, some level of performance must be obtained. Hence, it is
important to look at the performance of the individual pre-training tasks before
even considering the value of transferring them. In the case of the more classic
implementation using an autoencoder, the performance can be tested directly
by looking at the recall.
5.1.1
Proposed Unsupervised Tasks
The ﬁrst unsupervised schemes were trained and tested as an individual network.
The training data were the same as for the baseline models, submitted to an
==PAGE:64==
52
Additional Experiments
identical data augmentation, and the performance was evaluated on the test set.
The actual network was also the same. The main diﬀerence was found in the
input and/or output data.
Pre-training using SLIC Features
When working with this idea, it was found that the performance of letting the
network try to reestablish SLIC features is not worth further work. The actual
outcome is either not able to converge or results in a prediction of a black image.
The reason is most likely found in the fact that when SLIC features are applied
as an image segmentation technique, small variances results in large areas of
the image having a diﬀerent color.
Hence, the loss-function will be unfairly
punished for small mistakes, meaning that the model should not only be able
to predict the boundaries of the superpixels, but further needs to understand,
that the prediction should be the average of the color input from these.
It
could be discussed that SLIC features could be implemented as a pre-processing
step before applying a GMM method, in the take that this could work as a
noise-cancelling method.
Instead, one should turn the attention to the GMM image segmentation.
Pre-training using a GMM Segmentation
The GMM features of the images can be found by predicting every image from
the same GMM model found from a decided number of images.
That way,
the same features will be segmented for all the images, and we will not risk a
switching of the classes. When the task is to recreate the GMM segmentation,
some similarities to the actual task can be found. Hence, we theorize that this
approach will yield better results than implementing SLIC features.
The outcomes of GMM have some resemblance to the classes that are sought
after, and it can be concluded that these ideas have yielded information about
the data structure. It is interesting to use this method as a pre-training tool,
and then transferring the weights to the actual task. A problem with GMM
segmentation is the fact that sometimes the classes are switched. Hence, the
hope is that the model has been able to ﬁnd some general features in the data
in spite of the diﬃculties.
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Training Unsupervised Schemes
53
Figure 5.1: Test images from the Miccai Gland dataset. From top to bottom
we ﬁnd: Raw images, Human annotations, GMM output, GMM
after post-processing to binary classes.
==PAGE:66==
54
Additional Experiments
5.2
Multitask Learning Experiments
Having established the results from the single task models, it is interesting to
move on to multitask models.
As discussed (2.7), these models have shown
segmentation improvement in larger networks for the Miccai Gland dataset. An
extra baseline was implemented in order to test the multitask performance of
the network. Human annotated cells and their edges are implemented into a
multi-decoder setup. When the network is tested, the decoder looking for edges
is removed, and only the performance of segmentation is evaluated, making the
only contributions by the edges how the weights in the encoder are developed.
This setup is redetermined in the unsupervised version. Since the true edge
segmentations are not available in this setup, the edges are implemented from
the binary GMM images.
Another GMM approach was to do edge detection of the GMM features. Doing
this without thought, results in very slender edges, and the model risks too much
by trying to detect an edge. Instead, the edges should be broadened, such that
an actual reward for the total outcome is obtainable. This is done by setting
the edges to the speciﬁed thickness of 3 pixels.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Results of Explanatory
experiments
Having concluded the introduction of all the experiments, the performance is
described in the following table.
Model Name
Dice mean
Dice std
Xavier-He
0.8474
± 0.0177
Xavier-He + edge
0.8669
± 0.0137
Noisy Auto Encoder w.o. skip
0.8628
± 0.0126
GMM
0.8363
± 0.0175
GMM + edge
0.8460
± 0.0168
Transfer Learning
0.8696
± 0.0115*
Table 6.1: Results of all experiments.
As can be seen, the performance boost discussed from the literature has been
obtained when implementing a supervised multitask segmentation model. Now,
the majority of the models perform on a statistically comparable level.
It is shown from the results, that the segmentation does not reach a higher
level of performance from the unsupervised segmentation schemes implemented,
whether these has been implemented as a single or as a multitask segmentation
set-up.
==PAGE:68==
56
Results of Explanatory experiments
What is interesting, is the deviation of the models. Besides transfer learning,
which has only been initialized with one set of weights in the encoder, the model
with the lowest deviation is the model initialized by the noisy autoencoder.
In order to rigorously test how the initialization schemes compare, we can do
logit transformation of the dice score in accordance with [ZWB+04]. [Agr18]
shows that this method is the best transformation of dice score, since for large N,
the distribution of the logit transformed dice scores asymptotically converges to
a normal distribution. Therefore a t-test can now be applied to the initialization
schemes.
The transformation is given by:
logit(Dice) = ln

Dice
1 −Dice

Xavier-Hé
Xavier-Hé
Noisy
Transfer
GMM
GMM
edge
autoencoder
learning
edge
Xavier-Hé
1
0.118
0.452
0.123
0.182
0.252
Xavier-Hé edge
-
1
0.354
0.941
0.002
0.027
Noisy autoencoder
-
-
1
0.372
0.025
0.092
Transfer learning
-
-
-
1
0.002
0.028
GMM
-
-
-
-
1
0.817
GMM edge
-
-
-
-
-
1
Table 6.2: p-values from the t-test of the diﬀerent initialization schemes after
logit transformation.
The results are comparable to the ﬁrst table, in the fact that the best models
still can not be separated with a 95% conﬁdence level.
6.0.1
Performance for individual images
As in the previous chapter, the performance of individual images can be de-
picted.
As can be seen, the two implementations making use of the GMM
features yield segmented images that has a score near 0. This result could be
because of the actual cell areas having been swapped in value in some of the
images using the GMM segmentation.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Development of Kernels
57
Figure 6.1: Comparison of implemented models for individual data points.
Note, that transfer learning has only been implemented with one
starting value, and the variation is therefore not directly compa-
rable to the other models.
6.1
Development of Kernels
Since the object of interest is initialization of networks, it is interesting to under-
stand, how much the model will change after training compared to the initial-
ization. This question can be answered by looking at the weights of the network
after full training.
When comparing kernels, it is done in the following way: For each layer of
connected feature maps, kernels will determine the transfer of knowledge. When
working with kernels of size 3x3, the layers can be represented as a matrix A;
size(A) = 9 × fmi · fmo
Where fmi and fmo are the number of feature maps in the input- and output-
layer.
The level of diﬀerence between the diﬀerent layers across models, can be be
==PAGE:70==
58
Results of Explanatory experiments
Figure 6.2: Subset of test images from the Miccai Gland dataset. In order they
are Raw images, Ground truth, Xavier initialization, Noisy auto
encoder initialization with skip, Noisy auto encoder initialization
without skip, Transfer learning initialization, GMM initialization,
Multi decoder segmentation with Xavier initialization, Multi de-
coder segmentation with GMM initialization.
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Development of Kernels
59
measured by the cosine similarity between the entries of the kernels.
In the following plots, all weight development is a description from the same
model. The red line marks where the encoder stops and the decoder begins.
6.1.1
Varying β
Changing β means shuﬄing the dataset and changing the augmentation. This
will have an impact on the optimization direction, and this changes the updates
of the weights. It can be seen that when varying this parameter, the last layers
of the encoder is strongly varying.
It is interesting to observe that the two
unsupervised methods are the initializations which results in the most variation
throughout the layers.
6.1.2
Varying α
Another point of interest is the variations when initializing the starting weights,
or in other words, varying α. In this situation, the weights from the transfer
learning are of little interest, since these have only been trained as one initial-
ization. What is interesting, is the fact that the only model having changed
the parameters further away from the random initialization than the average
diﬀerence, is the one initialized by an autoencoder.
==PAGE:72==
60
Results of Explanatory experiments
6.1.3
From Initialization to Converged Model
In these plots, both α and β are kept constant. Instead, the cosine similarity
between the initial weights of the model and the weights found in the ﬁnal model
are compared.
Once again, it is found that the weights initialized with the autoencoder are
clearly the ones that allows for change in the entire network. Somewhat the
same is the case for the initialization with the weights found from transfer
learning.
This is of uttermost interest, in that as of the start of this thesis, the intuition
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Performance Impact of α and β
61
would have told us that: the less the weights change during training - the closer
to the end point (conversion point) they were started. Hence leading to the
conclusion that the best initialization scheme should be the scheme that moves
the least. But this conclusion is not what can be found here.
6.2
Performance Impact of α and β
When looking at the deviation of the models with respect to α and β, the
following can be observed for the baseline experiments:
std varying α
std varying β
Xavier-He
0.027
0.017
Noisy Auto Encoder w.o. skip
0.009
0.015
Table 6.3: Mean sum of squares for diﬀerent model setup and initializations.
As can be seen, the variations of the models trained directly is mainly found
when varying α. It is very interesting that this variation is lowered substantially
when working with the autoencoder. It must therefore be concluded that the
lower variation found when working with the autoencoder initialization, is due
to the fact that the initialization yields less variance. Now, an intuitive under-
standing would be that this is due to the starting points being more cohesive,
but as has been shown in the previous section (6.1), the autoencoder initial-
ized weights are more adaptive, and change more after the initial initialization.
Combined with table 6.3, it seems that the improvement of performance can be
found in the agility of the autoencoded initialization.
==PAGE:74==
62
Results of Explanatory experiments
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 7
Discussion and Future Work
7.1
Performance
As has been shown, there is no statistical diﬀerence for using pre-training as
opposed to Xavier-Hé initialization for a multitask training set-up. This could
be due to the fact, that the network is not capable of achieving a higher level
of performance. Since the best models perform segmentation on the same level
as transfer learning, this is a reasonable conclusion. In order to test the imple-
mented ideas more thoroughly, either a dataset of higher variation should be
chosen, or a model with a higher level of complexity should be implemented.
It is interesting to observe, that the pre-training methods for unsupervised image
segmentation yields lower performance. This could be due to the segmentation
tasks not being good enough. Using the unsupervised segmentations in a mul-
titask setup - or in other words, the unsupervised edges - seems to improve
performance. It could therefore be interesting to perform a multitask initializa-
tion for which the combination of the noisy autoencoder and the edges from the
GMM features were implemented together.
Initial experiments were conducted as to test the impact of the amount of labeled
data when performing unsupervised pre-training. The time left for making these
tests were limited, and no clear conclusion were reached. Further research should
==PAGE:76==
64
Discussion and Future Work
be committed for this subject.
When turning the attention to the performance of the individual models, the
one performing best for the test set, which would therefore be selected if the
aim of this was application was the supervised multitask setup using Xavier-Hé
initialization with annotated edges. This model achieved a dice score of 0.904
for the test set. Looking at the results for the 2017 competition [SPC+17], a
dice score of 0.904 would have put the model in 2nd place 1. Moving to the
model yielding the worst performance, the GMM initialization, the dice score
was merely 0.803 which would have put the model in 8th place.
Since both models relied on the exact same model structures2, this underlines
the importance of thorough testing of an architecture stressing both the initial-
ization scheme, and the data augmentation scheme. It must be seen that before
claiming that a new architecture is superior to the previous, a higher standard
for good testing practice should be the norm.
7.2
Model Description
7.2.1
Architecture
The Network implemented for this thesis draws - among others - ideas from
the U-net.
The U-net was been developed in order to be able to do shape
recognition [ESO18], which has achieved state of the art performance. Shape
recognition shows resemblance to local invariant features [SM97], which could
be key to better segmentation [Low04]. Shape recognition is the key ingredient
in humans ability to segment visual stimuli, according to the physical studies of
recognition in human brains.
Since the network implemented in this thesis bears resemblance to some of
the ideas extracted from the U-net, it seems a reasonable point that some of
the methods applied for teaching the network a better initialization - or in
other words, trying to do unsupervised pre-training - are unnecessary, since
the network is capable of reaching these states by the interior systems already
developed.
1In the Dice test A category, not overall
2Besides the multitask setup in the training
==PAGE:77==
7.2 Model Description
65
7.2.1.1
Learning Rate and optimizer
It could be interesting to redo the experiments with a diﬀerent optimizer after
pre-training or transfer learning had been done. Choosing a method such that
the local minima found would have been forced to stay in the area very proximate
to the starting conditions. The way the learning rate was chosen, the feature
maps were allowed to develop (6.1), such that the expressions found from the
weight initialization were less dominant.
The paper [DLL+18] published earlier this year, seems to claim convergence
to the global minimum irregardless of the initial starting values. An opposite
result as to what is shown in this thesis, and indeed a diﬀerent result than what
is universally accepted by the deep learning community. It would therefore be
of great interest if it possible to verify the claims given our setup.
7.2.2
Kernel Movement
It has been shown that unsupervised pre-training improved performance due to
the initialization of the network near a better local minima [BLPL07]. This is
not the case for the network implemented in this thesis. Rather, the initializa-
tion using the autoencoder structure is the one for which the weights change the
most. Since this network showed performance at the same level as the network
initialized with transfer weights, it must at the same time be concluded, that
it does indeed improve performance. It could be theorized that the improved
performance is due to the fact that more of the network is changed after the
initialization. Historic networks did indeed fail to perform until each of the lay-
ers were trained individually and then knitted together - the ﬁrst breakthroughs
were the so called stacked boltzmann machines. On the other hand, the super-
vised multi task set-up yield similar performance. For this network, the weights
change the very least.
The understanding could be, that the initialization using the supervised multi
task network does indeed start the network near a good local minima, whereas
the other two initialization schemes results in a network more adaptable to
change. This could be because of the supervised task extraction information
relevant for the speciﬁed task, whereas the unsupervised initialization along
with the transfer learning seeks a broader understanding.
As to the test of whether or not the network develops the same kernel in the
diﬀerent layers for the better performing networks, more work is still neces-
sary. The initial idea of using CCA analysis deemed fruitless, and the level of
==PAGE:78==
66
Discussion and Future Work
correlated kernels using the intercorrelation of the diﬀerent layers of the dif-
ferent networks need to be studied more thoroughly in order to reach stable
conclusions.
The same goes for the implementation of transfer learning implemented in this
thesis. Only one set of weights for transfer learning were trained, giving that the
variance from the initializing α parameter is subdued. Therefore the variation
of this setup is not directly comparable to the other models. This was however
chosen in order to mimic the real life setting for which a single pre-trained
version of the network is often available for the type of task you seek to solve.
7.3
Unsupervised Tasks
The unsupervised tasks did not give the performance boost desired. As dis-
cussed in the performance chapter, the problem with the GMM implementation
could be the opposite cell segmentation in some of the images. It could be pos-
sible, that subtracting the mean of the images, or somehow making the images
more uniform before applying GMM will somehow prevent this from happening.
This needs more thorough analysis, and will count towards moving the problem
further towards the semi-supervised ideas.
It might be time to think outside the box of physical neural networks. Other
forms of pre-training, like the new and quite interesting "jigsaw puzzle" [NF16]
- simply reassembling the image when giving random pieces of it - could be
interesting, since this approach is not directly derived from the understanding
of the physical neural networks and their ability to train. It could be found,
that with this idea deep neural networks might have a better chance of learning
something truly unique and reach new heights of performance.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
In this thesis, the importance of initialization of deep neural networks has been
shown. It can be concluded, that the local minima found at convergence, de-
pends heavily on the initialization scheme. Unsupervised pre-training is shown
to improve performance in the case of implementing an autoencoder. This goes
to show, that there is improvement to be found in an unsupervised scenario. It
was furthermore found, that the model with the lowest variation was the one
initialized with the noisy autoencoder. This is reaﬃrming the results found in
[WKDV16]. Whether implementing the noisy autoencoder will result in per-
formance which is signiﬁcantly better on a statistical level than the multitask
supervised setup, or the transfer learning scenario can not be concluded.
It
can however be concluded, that the unsupervised image segmentation schemes
tested in this thesis, resulted in worse performance. In order to reach useful
improvement from unsupervised image segmentation schemes, more thorough
understanding of the object is needed.
It is shown, that the data augmentation is important for the convergence and
consistency of the model.
It was shown, that implementing an autoencoder
would minimize the variation from the initialization, but the variation found as
a result of the data augmentation would remain the same (6.2).
It is, against initial assumption, shown that how much the weights change doing
training does not aﬀect the ﬁnal accuracy. In other words, it is not the case that
==PAGE:80==
68
Conclusion
the best initialization scheme is the scheme where the weights move the least
during training.
The supervised multitask setup shows the least amount of change, so this model
must have found good initialization weights in order to yield good performance.
As for the unsupervised part - the transfer learning and the noisy autoencoder -
the weights exhibits a very large diversion from the initialization, and the good
performance here must be due to the model being more adaptable.
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Unsupervised Clustering
A.1
SLIC Features
A.1.0.1
SLIC Features
SLIC features are founded in the concept of superpixels. In an ordinary image,
each pixel can be assigned a value, it will not be dependent on the value of
its neighbouring pixels. In superpixels, the value of a pixel will be determined
within a group. Think of it as the political map of America. Each individual
voter will cast his or her preferred vote, but the overall vote of a state will be
determined as an average. In the voting example, the borders of the superpixels
has already been set, but this is not the general case.
Instead, when given an image, the idea is to ﬁnd areas of the image that belongs
together.
The pixels proximity in a ﬁve dimensional space, composed of the three color
channels and the x, y-coordinates is the variables of the model. The distance
measure applied to this data is the interesting part. A simple euclidean distance
measure for the clustering does not yield the results we are looking for, since
distance over more cohesive color segments should be given less impact than
==PAGE:82==
70
Unsupervised Clustering
distances traversing edges.
There are a multiple of ideas as to which distance measure should be used. For
The SLIC features, the key concept is still the euclidean distance measure, but it
is composed of the combination and chosen weighting of the distances as follows:
dc =
p
(r0 −r1)2 + (g0 −g1)2 + (b0 −b1)2
(A.1)
dd =
p
(x0 −x1)2 + (y0 −y1)2
(A.2)
dSLIC = dc + dd · m
S
(A.3)
Where 0 relates to the coordinates of the ﬁrst pixel, and 1 relates to the coor-
dinates of the second pixel.
The SLIC algorithm then optimize the superpixels which minimize the distances
according to the above formulations.
A.2
Mixture Models
The general way to describe a Gaussian mixture model is:
p(x) =
K
X
i=1
πiN(x|µi, Σi)
(A.4)
N(x|µi, Σi) =
1
p
(2π)K|Σi|
e−1
2 (x−µi)T Σi(x−µi)
(A.5)
K
X
i=1
πi = 1
(A.6)
Where K is the number of Gaussian distributions, πi is the proportion of ob-
servations following the i’th distribution and µi, Σi is the mean and standard
deviation of the i’th distribution.
Given K Gaussian distributions, you want to ﬁnd the variables that results in
the outcome of events x ∈X of having the highest cumulated probability. In
order to do so, you need to ﬁnd:
==PAGE:83==
A.2 Mixture Models
71
max
π,µ,Σ
p(X)
(A.7)
Expectation–Maximization Algorithm
The algorithm was introduced under this name in 1977 [DLR77], though it
has been applied at least as early as 1955 [CSS55].
It has been a key tool
for estimating parameters in statistical models like the mixture densities ever
since the development of the ﬁrst computers capable of doing the computations
[RW84].
The idea of the algorithm is, simply put, a two step procedure. For Gaussian
mixtures the process is as follows:
Find optimal parameters for Gaussian mixture model
Given datapoints xi, i ∈I, a Gaussian mixture model can be estimated as:
Initialization
• Choose number of clusters K.
• Initialize parameter mean, µi,0, and covariance Σi,0.
• Initialize the relative proportions of the distributions πi,0.
==PAGE:84==
72
Unsupervised Clustering
while There is no convergence of parameters or log likelihood do
Let n be the step.
E −step For every datapoint xi, evaluate the possibilities for it
belonging to cluster k.
pi,k,n =
πk,n−1N(xi|µk,n−1, Σk,n−1)
P
t = 1Kπt,n−1N(xi|µt,n−1, Σt,n−1)
M −step Using the new probabilities for belonging to a cluster,
update the weight of each cluster. Use this to update the
proportions of data belonging to each cluster πk and the mean µk
and variance Σk of each cluster as:
wk,n =
X
I
pi,k,n
πk,n =
wk,n
PK
t=1 wt
µk,n =
1
wk,n
X
I
pi,k,n
σk,n =
X
I
pi,k,n(Xi −µk,n)T (Xi −µk,n)
end
Algorithm 1: EM algorithm for Gaussian mixture models
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[Agr18] Alan Agresti. An introduction to categorical data analysis. Wiley,
2018.
[ASS+12] Radhakrishna Achanta, Appu Shaji, Kevin Smith, Aurelien Luc-
chi, Pascal Fua, and Sabine Süsstrunk. Slic superpixels compared
to state-of-the-art superpixel methods. IEEE transactions on pat-
tern analysis and machine intelligence, 34(11):2274–2282, 2012.
[Bal87] Dana H Ballard. Modular learning in neural networks. In AAAI,
pages 279–284, 1987.
[BDBC+10] Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza,
Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. A theory of
learning from diﬀerent domains. Machine learning, 79(1-2):151–
175, 2010.
[BKC15] Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall, and Roberto Cipolla. Seg-
net: A deep convolutional encoder-decoder architecture for image
segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.00561, 2015.
[BLPL07] Yoshua Bengio,
Pascal Lamblin,
Dan Popovici,
and Hugo
Larochelle. Greedy layer-wise training of deep networks. In Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, pages 153–160,
2007.
[CBB11] Aaron Courville, James Bergstra, and Yoshua Bengio. Unsuper-
vised models of images by spike-and-slab s.
In Proceedings of
the Twenty-eight International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML’11), 2011.
==PAGE:86==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[CGGS12] Dan Ciresan, Alessandro Giusti, Luca M Gambardella, and Jür-
gen Schmidhuber. Deep neural networks segment neuronal mem-
branes in electron microscopy images.
In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pages 2843–2851, 2012.
[CHM+15] Anna
Choromanska,
Mikael
Henaﬀ,
Michael
Mathieu,
Gérard Ben Arous, and Yann LeCun.
The loss surfaces of
multilayer networks.
In Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics,
pages 192–204, 2015.
[CQYH16] Hao Chen, Xiaojuan Qi, Lequan Yu, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Dcan:
deep contour-aware networks for accurate gland segmentation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 2487–2496, 2016.
[CSS55] By R CEPPELLINI, M Siniscalco, and CAB Smith. The estima-
tion of gene frequencies in a random-mating population. Annals
of Human Genetics, 20(2):97–115, 1955.
[CSZ09] Olivier Chapelle, Bernhard Scholkopf, and Alexander Zien. Semi-
supervised learning (chapelle, o. et al., eds.; 2006)[book reviews].
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 20(3):542–542, 2009.
[CVMBB14] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and
Yoshua Bengio. On the properties of neural machine translation:
Encoder-decoder approaches.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1259,
2014.
[CW08] Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. A uniﬁed architecture for
natural language processing: Deep neural networks with multi-
task learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference
on Machine learning, pages 160–167. ACM, 2008.
[Dec86] Rina Dechter. Learning while searching in constraint-satisfaction
problems.
University of California, Computer Science Depart-
ment, Cognitive Systems . . . , 1986.
[DHK13] Li Deng, Geoﬀrey Hinton, and Brian Kingsbury. New types of
deep neural network learning for speech recognition and related
applications: An overview.
In 2013 IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pages 8599–
8603. IEEE, 2013.
[DLL+18] Simon S Du, Jason D Lee, Haochuan Li, Liwei Wang, and Xiyu
Zhai. Gradient descent ﬁnds global minima of deep neural net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.03804, 2018.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[DLR77] Arthur P Dempster, Nan M Laird, and Donald B Rubin. Max-
imum likelihood from incomplete data via the em algorithm.
Journal of the royal statistical society. Series B (methodological),
pages 1–38, 1977.
[DPG+14] Yann N Dauphin, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun
Cho, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua Bengio. Identifying and attack-
ing the saddle point problem in high-dimensional non-convex op-
timization. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 2933–2941, 2014.
[EBC+10] Dumitru Erhan, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Pierre-Antoine
Manzagol, Pascal Vincent, and Samy Bengio. Why does unsu-
pervised pre-training help deep learning?
Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 11(Feb):625–660, 2010.
[ESO18] Patrick Esser, Ekaterina Sutter, and Björn Ommer.
A varia-
tional u-net for conditional appearance and shape generation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 8857–8866, 2018.
[FW87] Françoise Fogelman-Soulié and Gérard Weisbuch. Random iter-
ations of threshold networks and associative memory. SIAM J.
Comput., 16(1):203–220, 1987.
[GB10] Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the diﬃculty
of training deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceedings of
the thirteenth international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence
and statistics, pages 249–256, 2010.
[HS06] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimension-
ality of data with neural networks. Science, 313(5786):504–507,
2006.
[HZRS15] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delv-
ing deep into rectiﬁers: Surpassing human-level performance on
imagenet classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, pages 1026–1034, 2015.
[HZRS16] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 770–778, 2016.
[IS15] Sergey Ioﬀe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Ac-
celerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate
shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
==PAGE:88==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[JK+17] Prateek Jain, Purushottam Kar, et al.
Non-convex optimiza-
tion for machine learning. Foundations and Trends R⃝in Machine
Learning, 10(3-4):142–336, 2017.
[KB14] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochas-
tic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[KL16] Alexander Kolesnikov and Christoph H Lampert. Seed, expand
and constrain: Three principles for weakly-supervised image seg-
mentation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages
695–711. Springer, 2016.
[Kra91] Mark A Kramer. Nonlinear principal component analysis using
autoassociative neural networks. AIChE journal, 37(2):233–243,
1991.
[KSA+17] Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Kristof T Schütt, Maximilian Alber,
Klaus-Robert Müller, Dumitru Erhan, Been Kim, and Sven
Dähne.
Learning how to explain neural networks: Patternnet
and patternattribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.05598, 2017.
[KSH12] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Ima-
genet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In
Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 1097–
1105, 2012.
[Kum17] Siddharth Krishna Kumar. On weight initialization in deep neu-
ral networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.08863, 2017.
[LBH15] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoﬀrey Hinton. Deep learn-
ing. nature, 521(7553):436, 2015.
[LGRN09] Honglak Lee, Roger Grosse, Rajesh Ranganath, and Andrew Y
Ng. Convolutional deep belief networks for scalable unsupervised
learning of hierarchical representations.
In Proceedings of the
26th annual international conference on machine learning, pages
609–616. ACM, 2009.
[LHP+15] Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nico-
las Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wier-
stra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
[Li18] Bo Li. Active multitask learning for recognizing objects in image
using deep neural network. 2018.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
[LKB+17] Geert Litjens, Thijs Kooi, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi, Arnaud
Arindra Adiyoso Setio, Francesco Ciompi, Mohsen Ghafoorian,
Jeroen Awm Van Der Laak, Bram Van Ginneken, and Clara I
Sánchez. A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis.
Medical image analysis, 42:60–88, 2017.
[Low04] David G Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant
keypoints.
International journal of computer vision, 60(2):91–
110, 2004.
[MB88] Geoﬀrey J McLachlan and Kaye E Basford. Mixture models: In-
ference and applications to clustering, volume 84. Marcel Dekker,
1988.
[MM15] Dmytro Mishkin and Jiri Matas. All you need is a good init.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06422, 2015.
[MWvdV+16] Pim Moeskops, Jelmer M Wolterink, Bas HM van der Velden,
Kenneth GA Gilhuijs, Tim Leiner, Max A Viergever, and Ivana
Išgum. Deep learning for multi-task medical image segmentation
in multiple modalities.
In International Conference on Medi-
cal Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pages
478–486. Springer, 2016.
[NF16] Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. Unsupervised learning of visual
representations by solving jigsaw puzzles. In European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pages 69–84. Springer, 2016.
[NFS15] Kien Nguyen, Clinton Fookes, and Sridha Sridharan. Improv-
ing deep convolutional neural networks with unsupervised feature
learning. In Image Processing (ICIP), 2015 IEEE International
Conference on, pages 2270–2274. IEEE, 2015.
[RBL+07] Rajat Raina, Alexis Battle, Honglak Lee, Benjamin Packer, and
Andrew Y Ng. Self-taught learning: transfer learning from un-
labeled data. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference
on Machine learning, pages 759–766. ACM, 2007.
[RDS+15] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev
Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya
Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al.
Imagenet large scale visual
recognition challenge. International journal of computer vision,
115(3):211–252, 2015.
[RFB15] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox.
U-
net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
In International Conference on Medical image computing and
computer-assisted intervention, pages 234–241. Springer, 2015.
==PAGE:90==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[RHGS15] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster
r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal
networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 91–99, 2015.
[Rud17] Sebastian Ruder.
An overview of multi-task learning in deep
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05098, 2017.
[RW84] Richard A Redner and Homer F Walker. Mixture densities, max-
imum likelihood and the em algorithm. SIAM review, 26(2):195–
239, 1984.
[San89] Terence D Sanger. Optimal unsupervised learning in a single-
layer linear feedforward neural network.
Neural networks,
2(6):459–473, 1989.
[SKCL13] Pierre Sermanet, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Soumith Chintala, and
Yann LeCun. Pedestrian detection with unsupervised multi-stage
feature learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3626–3633, 2013.
[SM97] Cordelia Schmid and Roger Mohr.
Local grayvalue invariants
for image retrieval. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, 19(5):530–535, 1997.
[SPC+17] Korsuk Sirinukunwattana, Josien PW Pluim, Hao Chen, Xiao-
juan Qi, Pheng-Ann Heng, Yun Bo Guo, Li Yang Wang, Bog-
dan J Matuszewski, Elia Bruni, Urko Sanchez, et al. Gland seg-
mentation in colon histology images: The glas challenge contest.
Medical image analysis, 35:489–502, 2017.
[VLBM08] Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-
Antoine Manzagol.
Extracting and composing robust features
with denoising autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 25th interna-
tional conference on Machine learning, pages 1096–1103. ACM,
2008.
[WKDV16] Stiaan Wiehman, Steve Kroon, and Hendrik De Villiers.
Un-
supervised pre-training for fully convolutional neural networks.
In 2016 Pattern Recognition Association of South Africa and
Robotics and Mechatronics International Conference (PRASA-
RobMech), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016.
[WP17] Jason Wang and Luis Perez. The eﬀectiveness of data augmen-
tation in image classiﬁcation using deep learning. Convolutional
Neural Networks Vis. Recognit, 2017.
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
[YCBL14] Jason Yosinski, JeﬀClune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. How
transferable are features in deep neural networks? In Advances
in neural information processing systems, pages 3320–3328, 2014.
[ZWB+04] Kelly H Zou, Simon K Warﬁeld, Aditya Bharatha, Clare MC
Tempany, Michael R Kaus, Steven J Haker, William M Wells III,
Ferenc A Jolesz, and Ron Kikinis. Statistical validation of image
segmentation quality based on a spatial overlap index1: scientiﬁc
reports. Academic radiology, 11(2):178–189, 2004.
