==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Visualization of Personal Data Times Series
Devran Kücükyildiz (s103210)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis I will investigate problems with visualization in personal informatics. I
will try to investigate how can the combination of different types of personal data
be visualized in a way to assist people in identifying potential causes of variations in
symptoms. I will then describe the development of an application prototype that can
visualize personal data, so the user was allow to generate report, as well as to inter-
actively explore the data along different dimensions and assist the user in identifying
patterns.
The application prototype display different aspects and dimensions of the data, anal-
ysis of the data, different temporal levels of showing the data in different ways. The
application consist different visualization techniques to improve the understanding of
the data, to give the users better and easier understanding of the outcome visualiza-
tion. In this way the target group can get the best insight into their own data, it will
help them to better understand the data and take action based on the analysis of the
data.
The prototype has been tested on four different participants, with different back-
grounds. They have been exercised in using the application and interviewed after-
words. The usage of the application and what the participant actually learned by
using the prototype was analyzed and discussed in the thesis and based on these
findings, ideas for improvements on the future was described.
The final prototype was developed and the users are now able to use a tool which
provides them new insights and knowledge about their personal data.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in engineering.
This thesis is going through the design, implementation and evaluation of a web
platform application for visualizing personal data.
Kongens Lyngby, March 15, 2019
Devran Kücükyildiz (s103210)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all the people who was involved and helpful in regards to carry-
ing out this project.
I would like to thank my supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen, for the collaboration, for his
interesting discussions, experience and insights about personal informatics. Jakob
and I has going through an iterative process with meetings to evaluate and discuss
each iteration through the project period. Every meeting ends up with great and
valuable feedback which was big help for this project to been possible.
Secondly I would like to thank Alexander Kaarup, Andreas Sillas, Javaid Hussain
and Ali Salman for being willing to participate in the user evaluation tests. I would
like to thank them for their constructive feedback’s on the prototype. This was valu-
able for the results of this project.
Finally I would like to thank my wife, family and friends for their support throughout
this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal of this Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Visualisation of Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Mobile Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Analysis
9
3.1
Personal Informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Visualising Time Series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Design
15
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Iterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Laying the Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Interactivity and Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Improvements of the Foundation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.6
Tiles, Circles and Violin Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Implementation
23
5.1
The Platform - Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
D3.js - Data Driven Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
User Evaluation
25
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2
Test exercises Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.3
Question/Interview Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
Discussion
31
8
Future Work
33
8.1
General Prototype Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8.2
New Extensions to the Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8.3
Improvement of User Test Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
9
Conclusion
37
A User Evaluation Questionnarie and Exercises
39
A.1 Interview Questionnarie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
A.2 Test Exercises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
B The Prototype
43
C Project Plan
45
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the last decade since ’World Wide Web’ was available to the public a huge change
in human behavior has become a reality. After the internet become an integral part
of everyday life, in the last decade since launch of the first Iphone in 2007, the de-
velopment and usage of smartphones has really taken on1. More than half the world
now uses a smartphone, more than half of the world’s web traffic comes from mobile
phones. In the last years has there furthermore been seen a significant raise in the
wearable devices market2. This types of devices includes smart-watches, fitness track-
ers and so on.
In our modern societies, the smartphone has taken on a central role in communi-
cations as well as entertainment. The smartphone has become such an integrated
part of modern society that many have no overview of how much time of their day
is spent using it, the same for wearable devices.
All these devices becomes more
advanced over the years and it gives the opportunity for the individual to challenge
himself in a way that has not been seen before.
In recent years, tracking personal information and behavior has become more com-
mon and easier. These devices are able to track certain things about us individually,
like smart-phones which can track your locations, steps, sleep cycles, computer usage,
fitness trackers which are often made to track your heart rate, biometric data, such
as blood sugar and blood pressure.
This so called Self Tracking is the act of collecting information on oneself. Later
you can use these information to react on it and learn more about oneself. It can help
people to discover habitual patterns which they were not aware of and maybe reveal
vicious cycles. This technology gives us the opportunities to going into the quantified-
self movement, where many people today track a lot of data about themselves. This
makes people able to exercising different kind of things like improvement of a certain
personal trait, like personal health and so on which you are able to track and quan-
tify. Smartphone applications can automatically monitoring user’s behaviour, using
different sensors present in the most smartphones. This is also possible by using wear-
1 Article on We Are Social, Link: https://wearesocial.com/special-reports/digital-in-2017-global-
overview
2 Article on Forbes, Link: https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2016/03/18/ 15-mind-
boggling-facts-about-wearables-in-2016/
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
able self-tracking devices, they are often small and feature sensors used to monitoring.
Self-tracking collecting information can be useful for oneself. However, others could
also have an interest in this kind of personal data. Scientists can use it to scientific
research, professionals that services you - doctors and psychologists might have an
interest in you personal data. If you track different parameters of yourself, these per-
sonal data can be more useful in hands of professionals. To give an example, a study
conducted in 2016, where a patient suffering PTSD3, got a tracking device in form of
a wristband with a single button. The patient has track one of his symptoms called
hyper arousal, by clicking the button. In a period of 4 months, data was collected
which have been shared with a therapist and together they used the collected data
to find patterns in his symptoms. Which can be helpful for the patient in the end to
know and learn how to handling these symptoms in the future.[LEC17]
This research is a good example of how to use personal data in a very useful way.
It is not enough to collect data, it should also be processed. Different process and
visualization techniques can give more clear picture of what the different data is and
thus provide a better opportunity to find specific patterns in the data. However, it
can be difficult to find the best technique.
1.1
Goal of this Thesis
The main goal of this thesis is to investigate how individuals can understand the
causes of allergy symptoms and symptoms like described in the previous section
about PTSD better through personal data on symptoms, sensor data, contextual
and environmental data. Investigate how can the combination of different types of
personal data be visualized in a way to assist people in identifying potential causes
of variations in symptoms. Trying to find a solution by designing and implement-
ing a software tool that allow individuals to visualize personal data including high
resolution symptoms data, along with passive sensor data, contextual data (such as
location) and environmental data (such as weather and pollen data). The tool will
allow the user to generate a report, as well as to interactively explore the data along
different dimensions and assist the user in identifying patterns.
I will in this thesis describe the development of such an application. The applica-
tion going to be in a web platform to approach as many people as possible. In details,
the goal of this tool or application is to make a research different ways to visualize
data and find out how the different types of visualizations work. Furthermore the soft-
ware tool will consist different visualization techniques to improve the understanding
of the data, to give the users better and easier understanding of the outcome visual-
ization. As mentioned above personal data is the data type I will work with. This
3 PTSD, Link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Posttraumaticstressdisorder
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Report Structure
3
kind of data is typically time dependent and periodic data sets.
The outcome or the final prototype of the applications, should be a software tool
that is user friendly, so the target group can get the best insight into their own data,
as well as professionals who can help people suffering different kind of symptoms to
better understand and to take action based on the analysis of the data.
In an iterative process we will develop several prototype interfaces for interactive
exploration of the above mentioned personal data sources. During the development
phase my supervisor and I, we will by using a iterative process of evaluating and dis-
cussing the prototype as it evolved. The final prototype we will aim to test with po-
tential users in the target group that already engaged in high resolution self-tracking
of symptoms to test the ability of the tool in assisting these users.
1.2
Report Structure
This thesis is structured into chapters that guide the reader through the process of
the project.
• Chapter1: In this chapter the background and motivation behind this project
was described.
• Chapter2: In this chapter description knowledge of these fields as well as
examples of related work withing this fields was made.
• Chapter3: In this chapter, the theory behind the project, personal informatics
systems and different kinds of visualization techniques for time series data was
described.
• Chapter4: This chapter going through the process of developing the prototype.
Description of the iterations of the development, the thoughts about each ele-
ments and the continuous of the evaluation. Each elements of the visualization
was described and screenshot of each element was also presented in this chapter.
• Chapter5: In this chapter description of the technical decisions was made.
Details about which technologies that are used and why these was chosen.
• Chapter6: After the design and implementation part the next focus was to
test the prototype. A user evaluation was conducted of the final prototype. In
this chapter description of which method used for the evaluation and the reason
for why and at the end presentation of the test results.
• Chapter7 and 8: In chapter 7 further discussion of the results from the user
evaluation was made which lead to chapter 8 where the future work and im-
provements will be explored.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
• Chapter 9: Finally the thesis will be concluded in chapter 9.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
In this chapter I will highlight some interesting and relevant work, that have been
done in the fields of visualization of time series data.
2.1
Visualisation of Time Series
Visualization of time series have a long history. In [TGM83] it is described that the
oldest time series graph discovered is almost thousand years old. One of the most
basic and first visualization form is the sequence chart, where the entries are plotted
on a single axis. Later on Scatter, line and bar graphs become a reality. Now of days
graphs can also visualize time series, based on time based data series. Some of the
basic and standard visualization types, done in D3.js(figure:2.1).
(a) Stacked Bar Chart
(b) Line Chart
(c) Grouped Bar Chart
(d) Donut Chart
(e) Bar Chart
Figure 2.1: Standard visualization types in D3.js
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Related Work
Other examples of visualizations of time based data series is plugins like Cubism1
and Event Drops2.
Cubism is a JavaScript library which works as a plugin for D3.js in visualizing time
series. With Cubism, you can show live data time series in form of area and horizon
graphs(figure:2.2).
Figure 2.2: Demo of Cubism
Event Drops is a time based event series interactive visualization tool powered by
d3.js. So this tool visualize series of events and provide an overview with different
kinds of information(figure: 2.3).
Figure 2.3: Demo of Event Drops
1 Link: http://square.github.io/cubism/. Open source library
2 Link: https://github.com/marmelab/EventDrops Created by marmelab
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Mobile Applications
7
2.2
Mobile Applications
Visualization of quantified-self data can be found in many different applications which
also use some of the visualization plugins describe above. There is many sleep track-
ing apps exist for mobile devices which visualize the users sleep patterns, such as
application like, Sleep Cycle3 and Sleepbot4. The SleepCycle app is a very popular
smartphone app, which visualize the sleep pattern of an user and find the perfect
time to wake the user.
(a) The screen shows a cus-
tomization of users alarm
and wake up window.
(b)
This
screen
show
a
overview
of
tracking
the
users sleep pattern.
(c) This screen show detect-
ing trends over time.
Figure 2.4: Screenshot of the different views in SleepCycle app.
Another interesting application fit with a personal informatics, an application
called Moves5. The Moves application basically collects the user’s activities and loca-
tion contentiously and visualize them. Activity like, walking and running, as well as
different routes.
3 Link: http://www.sleepcycle.com/ created by SleepCycle.
4 Link: http://mysleepbot.com/ created by Sleepbot.
5 Link: https://moves-app.com/ created by moves-app.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Related Work
Moves was a great app that uses different and nice colours with smart visualization
techniques gives the user a clear overview of the current days activity. Unfortunately
the app was shutting down for 7 months.
Applications described above is not the only apps which offer personal informatics.
Mood Panda6 which tracks the user’s mood and give a visualizations of patterns over
time, Foodzy7 which is a app that track the user’s food consumption and apps like
RunKeeper8 which tracks the users workout.
6 Link: http://moodpanda.com/
7 Link: https://foodzy.com/
8 Link: http://runkeeper.com/
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
3.1
Personal Informatics
Personal informatics systems is a term that describe systems those that help people
collect personally data for the purpose of self-reflection. So the idea is by using this
system you collect, analyse and reflect upon personal data about ourselves, to make
self-reflection and gaining self-knowledge. This is also called quantified-self. This
definition was defined by Wolf in [Wol09].
To get through the personal informatic systems, a stage based model was proposed
by Li et al. in a paper from 2010 [LDF10]. On figure:3.1 The five stages of personal
informatics model was shown. A more detail description of the model in the different
stages is described in more detail below:
• Preparation: user select which type of personal data to track, how to collect
the data and how to use it.
• Collection: user collects personal data about oneself and storing the informa-
tion.
• Integration: in this stage the collected data is processed and prepared for
reflection. So the idea is to combine and transform data for the user to reflect.
• Reflection: in this stage user reflects on the collected data. Visualization of
collected data help to learn about patterns which help user to understand and
reflect about oneself.
• Action: The user in this stage takes action based on their learnings and knowl-
edge gained from the reflection.
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Analysis
Figure 3.1: The five stages of Personal Informatics and its four different properties:
cascading barriers, iterative, user-driven vs system-driven and uni-faceted vs multi-
faceted.
Each stages has barriers associated with it which hinder the progress. There is
also different properties. All these will be specified below:
• Cascading barriers: barriers in earlier stages affect the later stages. If you
not selecting the right tool or not collecting the right data it will affect the later
on process.
• Iterative: the stages are iterative which means that will users incorporate new
data, tools, and/or processes as they progress through the stages.
• User-driven vs system-driven: in a user-driven stage the users needs to
be active and do something, like which type of tools to use and what type
of data to collect. In system-driven stage is when it is automatised. Instead
of the burden that you have to the process manually as alternative you can
make it system-driven(automatised). Instead of manually registration of data,
in system-driven stage it is automatised. You can also have a system which
consist the both(system with both manually and automatically registered data).
• Uni-faceted vs multi-faceted: Peoples life are in different facets.
They
have their home life, work life, their daily interactions and so on.
Personal
informatic systems can be in Uni-faceted or multi-faceted. Uni-faceted is when
systems only look at specific facet of the user’s life. This system is simplify
the collection and integration of personal information because there is less data.
Multi-faceted systems are more rare which look in different personal facets. But
it can be more complex because of different types of data can give barriers in
several stages.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Visualising Time Series
11
In this project the collection stage is not a big part of this project. Data that I use
in this project was collected on earlier projects where collection stage of the personal
informatics systems was the main focus. In this project it is mostly the reflection
stage, and somewhat the preparation and integration stage that is important. The
preparation stage for this project is user-driven, because the user needs to actively
do something to manually register observations in the collection stage. In order to
avoid in the later process of the project, the system needs to be flexible and has as
few barriers as possible.
In this project as pointed earlier the main focus will be on the reflection stage. This
stage will also be a user-driven stage because a lot of observations collected data will
be registered so the user can reflect on the given information. To help and give the
user as much learning of the pattern in the collected personal data, the application
needs to developing in a way so the given information is make sence, so it is so clear
and understandable, and shows patterns in a way so the user can make conclusions
about it.
The last stage is the action stage. This is the stage where the user act based on
the reflections. In this stage the user will change behaviour or set new goals depends
on the reflections. So the point is which is important, to avoid barriers in the reflec-
tion stage. According to Li et al., some of the main barriers of the reflection stage is
lack of time, visualization, interpretation, missing the context etc. When designing
the application it is important to think about these points from the Li et al., paper
when designing this stage.
3.2
Visualising Time Series
As described above the data collected in the personal informatics systems should
help users to analyse and reflect upon the data. There is a lot of statistical analysis
tools which gives a lot of informations about the collected data of oneself but it is
not always intuitively the best way to handle these data because it doesn’t provide
enough information and because it isn’t easily understandable. Therefore it is not
enough just to make a statistical analysis because the importance of the data can
get lost if you do not make visualizations of it. Matejka et al. in 2017 make a study
and found out that different data sets share the same statistical values, have different
visualization, and all the important information get lost [MF17].
From a user perspective or general people who looking at statistical analysis ev-
eryday, visualization often gives a much more clear and understandable presentation.
As described in the Introduction, these collected data from the personal informatics
systems, have been used for professional like therapist etc. then visualization is much
more interpretable than statistical analysis because they are not used to working with
statistical analysis.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Analysis
In the next sections I will describe how to visualize the personal data comes from
personal informatics system. Describe what properties these data have and how to
utilize this data to create good, understandable and readable visualizations. The out-
come of data from personal informatics systems is foremost time series. The data is
observations of changes to a variable over time or the occurrences of a event over time.
These time series is often periodic, meaning the different patterns in the data repeats
itself over time. In this project the focus is on the reflection of data and therefore the
importance to found out in this thesis is understand the different techniques to use
when you have to visualize time series data. There are four main design heuristics
to consider when you have to design visualization of data from personal informatics
design according to Cuttone et al. [CPL14]. The four heuristics from this paper are:
• Make data interpretable at a glance.
• Enable exploration of patterns in time series data.
• Enable discovery of trends in multiple data streams.
• Turn key metrics into affordances for action.
3.2.1
Visualization Techniques
Considered the four main design heuristics you have to desired visualize techniques
wisely. Different techniques existed for visualization of time series. I will point some
of them and going through advantages and disadvantages of the techniques.
As described in the introduction section, visualization have been used for many years
ago. We already now the standard visualization forms like, bar chart, line chart etc.
Line plot is one of them that a variable changes over time, which was one the first
ways we ever visualized data as charts. One of the disadvantages of using line plots
for data like personal informatics is that the line plots are not good to comparing of
different periods with each other. Therefore it can be hard to see in an application
tool with line plot periodic information in the data [Aig11].
The problem I pointed earlier that it is difficult to see periodic information by looking
at line chart, some extensions was made. This is so-called horizon graph. The idea
with horizon graph is to compare different time-dependent variables. But still it is
not in that way to find periodic patterns with horizon graphs.
There are a special graph type which has been used for specially personal informatics
systems recently is the spiral graph. They have been used to find periodic patterns as
well as variations. Example of spiral graph used can see in these articles and reports
as follows: [CLL13], [LCL13] and [Pal14]. The problem with sprial graph is that it is
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Visualising Time Series
13
limited in the amount of data it is able to show. It is just a graph that can be used
as long as the context data is not in periodic.
(a) This is from the Spiral
Time Visualization.
This
panel shows a period of 24
hours. And Use of colours
and thickness to represent
data in spiral form. Source:
[CLL13]
(b) This is also from the
Spiral Time Visualization.
This panel shows a day pe-
riod of 7 days.
Source:
[CLL13]
(c) This is from a inter-
active spiral graph applica-
tion. This is a period of one
week showing different ac-
tivities as well as locations.
Source: [Pal14]
Figure 3.2: Examples of spiral graph visualization.
Another way to visualize personal informatics data is to make a technique called
heat map or tile map. This is a way that you can visualize time series by set the
observations in different levels. You can group the observations by days, weeks or
months and show the amount of observations on a specific day by colored the tile.
The tile map is like a grid with rows and columns, like showed in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: This figure shows examples of tile maps. Showing observations per day
as colours. The rows show weekdays only, and the columns shows the weeks and
months.
The good thing with tile map is that you can over a time find periodic patterns
and it is give a good overview of building of the collected data. Colors are not the only
way to display the observations, you can also make circles and violins with different
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Analysis
sizes instead of colors. When we visualize we are encoding data using visual cues or
mapping the variations in different size, colors or shapes. A study shows that people
are equally good at accurately compare areas and colour variations [CM85].
Figure 3.4: This figure shows comparison of different cues for data visualization.
Source: [Ald16]
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Design
4.1
Method
Making application like the one introduced in the thesis it is important to know how
the user evaluations can been setting up. Normally when you have to design your
prototype, you can start with mock-ups and then test them using user evaluation.
Making mock-ups poses two problems. The main purpose of the application is to
visualize quantifed-self data where the user feedback should be based on the user’s
own data, otherwise you can not test the applications true function. This application
is based on it’s interactivity in order to allow exploration of the data, which will be
difficult to test without the functioning prototype. All this means that a design pro-
cess based on user testing is not applicable, until the functioning prototype is ready.
The design and development was implemented in a iterative process where each it-
eration was evaluated and discussed between me and my supervisor. These meeting
would provide me with direction in which to move at each time, and at the end
building up a foundation, where the prototype was completed with the required func-
tionality. After that a user evaluation test was conducted to get feedback and find
ideas for future changes.
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Design
4.2
Iterations
In this chapter, the design process of the foundation will be described. Before that
all the versions of each iterations of the prototype development is presented in this
section. In this way an overview of each prototype is presented, and it will be easier
to refereed the prototypes for the rest of this thesis.
(a) Version 1
(b) Version 2
(c) Version 3
(d) Version 4
Figure 4.1: Version 1 to 4 of the prototypes
==PAGE:27==
4.3 Laying the Foundation
17
(a) Version 5
(b) Version 6
(c) Version 7
Figure 4.2: Version 5 to 7 of the prototypes
4.3
Laying the Foundation
Looking at figure 4.1a, this is the very first version of the prototypes that was made.
It is look like a tile map table, showing the data in different forms like day vs date,
day vs hour etc. The data is not showing for a specific month but for the whole period.
The darker colours of blue is a higher concentration of observations presented. The
idea with this first prototype was to show data spread over a period to see if there
are any patterns in the data.
The second version of the prototypes (see figure 4.1b), two different of visualiza-
tions presented. A tile map as version 1 and an addition of chart which shows the
observation concentration in violin plot. In version 3 (see figure 4.1c), line plot of
data set was presented. The idea for these different plots was to investigate whether
it make sense to present the data of period time in different plots. It do not make
sense and therefore I went from doing it this way in the further developed prototypes.
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Design
Further time in the process it was realised that more time periods needed to been
shown at the same time. Iterations (see figures 4.1d, 4.2e and 4.2f) resulted in the
table view shown at figure 4.3.
In this version of tile map it is possible to see several periods at once, like con-
textual information like weekends. They are displayed as the grey area. In this tile
map version there is also added grid lines, to make it easier to focus on a specific time
periods. The colours of squares was standard colors from the D3.js package but in
this last version, the colours was taken from ColorBrewer 2.01, which chooses colours
that fits together and this make it easier to differentiate between the observations.
Figure 4.3: The final version of the tile map design
4.4
Interactivity and Navigation
Having large amounts of data is not always easy to handle and present in the correct
way. As you can see from the first iterations that it was difficult to show all the
1 Link: http://colorbrewer2.org/
==PAGE:29==
4.4 Interactivity and Navigation
19
data at once. It can be hard to see a specific day of data if you put more than just
data from days in the visualization. To show the data in more fine details, to see the
whole period of data and an overview of the whole it was clear that interactivity in
the visualization needed.
The first interactivity implemented in the prototype was a drop-down menu, to select
different levels of the data visualization, like the data should showing per hour, day
and month etc. The level I choose was date over day(date as columns and days as
rows), dates over hours, dates over months and months over years. The reason for
choose the temporal level in this way is because they represented common patterns
in normal human lives. You can of course make this in different ways. It depends on
which data set type you are working with. Patterns like, working and sleeping are
more like in daily or weekly intervals. Other patterns like seasons, allergies, etc. is
more like health related patterns.
In the first version of the prototype the drop-down menu for selecting the different
levels was implemented. It was a simple but useful add on and give the opportunity
to look at different patterns. The problem with this form for presentation of the data
was that it was a current day for the whole data set. To be more precise I will give
an example: In the temporal level date vs hour, the date was as column and hour as
row. The observations presented in the visualization is count for that specific day for
all the months in the period of data set. It is not the correct way to present the data
because you cannot see patterns in this way. To go through a big data set for several
weeks or months will give problems, it can be difficult to understand the patterns.
That is why I choose to implement the tile map for the whole period of the data set
like in the calendar form as you see in figure 4.3. To solve this problem, the time line
was implemented. It was placed below the table and to begin with it was just a time
line from start to finish of the time period. See figure 4.2a. In that way it is possible
to navigate through the whole data, if the user want to look at specific time of the
data. Example on this add on see figure 4.4.
(a) The different
temporal levels
(b) The time line.
The grey are
can be moved, to going through the
whole time period of data.
Figure 4.4: Interaction examples
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Design
4.5
Improvements of the Foundation
As described earlier in this thesis, an iterative process makes it possible to evaluate
continuously and keep improving the prototypes. Different improvements were dis-
cussed to improve the foundation. Legends was implemented to help understand the
values of the data points. The axis was also changed before the final version. These
improvements is as follows: (see figure 4.5)
(a) The first prototypes, from version
1-4. Basic numeric axis showing the
days.
(b) Prototype 7: the different levels
added to the axis. Make it easier to
focus on, dates, month and year.
Figure 4.5: Improvement of axis through the iterations.
Another decision was made to include tooltips on the different data points. This
tooltip appears as a box when leads the mouse over a tile.
The tooltip contains
information about that specific data point. See figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: The tooltip box contain information of specific data point.
Another improvement I decide was to improve the timeline. For now the table
shows the whole time period of the data set. The disadvantage for not showing the
whole period once is that you have to brush through the grey box in the timeline to
switch the current position but not sure to which month/days. That is why I decide
to extend the graph to the time line, so a summarised graph for the whole data set
could be seen at once. In this way it will be very easy to find peaks in the data. (See
figure 4.7).
Figure 4.7: Peak of observations. Clear overview from the time line.
==PAGE:31==
4.6 Tiles, Circles and Violin Plots
21
4.6
Tiles, Circles and Violin Plots
The first prototypes I experimented the plots with squares in different variations of
the same colour. When the value of observations in the given time period increases
the squares got darker and darker. This is a good way to comparing different val-
ues when the task is to find different patterns and variations. But a research shows
that people are not very good at comparing values in different colours compared to
using lengths [Ald16]. That is why I wanted to experiment with different methods
for plotting data. I implemented the same table, but instead of squares, used circles
and violin.
The squares was a different level in colours. The idea with circles is to let the are
of the circle determine the value of the data point. The good thing with circles was
that it was easier to understand the data points. It gave a overview and more room
for context data like the grey grids that showing the weekends. The third way to
visualizing the data, was the violin plot as mentioned. Violin plot is what normally
used in the box plots, like the version 2(see figure 4.1b) in my context. In that way
it is possible to find multiple peaks in the data. In the last version of my prototypes,
the violin plots did not include the box plot information but instead to show the data
more continuously. (See figure 4.8)
(a) Tiles of different colour
intensity as the scale
(b) Violin plots, with size
scale
(c) Circles, with differences
in area size.
Figure 4.8: The different plot types.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
In this chapter I will describe the choice for which different technical tool I used for
developing the prototype.
5.1
The Platform - Web
When you decide to make a software tool it is important to decide which platform
the prototype should be build on. There is different kinds of platforms when it comes
to software. There are web and native form of platforms.
Native applications is what we today now as various applications from IOS, Andriod,
OS X, etc. So the native applications is only constrained to specific devices. Example
IOS applications only works on iphones, OS X applications only works on Macbook
computers.
As described in the Introduction chapter, web platform is used bare more than half
of the worlds population. More and more application are developed for the web. All
kinds of computer devices such as computers, smart phones and tablets, can all ac-
cess the web browser. Web applications as we now today normally used languages as
JavaScript1, CSS2 and HTML3.
When you have choosing the web as a platform, JavaScript is an programming lan-
guage as you can not avoid. JavaScript is one of the core technologies of the World
Wide Web and enables interactive web pages and is an essential part of web applica-
tion. There exists lot of libraries for JavaScript, such as animation and visualizations.
Which was big part of this project in this thesis, and that is why I choose the web
and JavaScript as platform and programming language in this project.
1 JavaScript, Link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript.
2 CSS, Link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CascadingStyleSheets.
3 HTML, link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML.
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Implementation
5.2
D3.js - Data Driven Documents
D3.js4 is one of the most used library for visualizing data of all lbiraries of JavaScript.
This library helps to bring the data to life by using HTML, SVG5 and CSS. D3.js
library gives the full capabilities of modern browsers, where you can represent the
data as table with HTML or use the same data to create an interactive SVG bar
chart. It is working by D3 allows you ti bind the data to a Document Object Model
- DOM 6, and then apply the data-driven transformations to the document.
D3 is not a framework but more like a tool that make dynamic behaviours for the
interaction and animation easier for visualization of data in the DOM. The functional
style of D3 allows code through different collection of modules like HTML elements
and style them with CSS.
On D3 website that I linked to, a lot of many different visualization examples us-
ing the library D3.js. They showed different visualizations techniques as we know it.
(See 5.1).
Figure 5.1: Homepage of D3 website, different visualizations techniques of visualiza-
tions using the library was showed.
The huge D3.js library was chosen as the visualization tool for developing the
prototype in this thesis. The efficiency and different visualization techniques is all
speaks for using D3.
4 Data-Driven Documents, Link: https://d3js.org/.
5 SVG, Link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ScalableV ectorGraphics.
6 DOM, Link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DocumentObjectModel
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 6
User Evaluation
As described in the introduction and the design part in this thesis, there was no user
testing of the prototype in the developing process. As mentioned earlier the iterations
was evaluated between me and my supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen, who is expert in
researcher in the field of personal informatics. The goal before user tests was to make
the prototype ready and to lived up the goals of visualizing personal information in
way so the user can understand, make reflection and give the opportunity to let them
see if there was any patterns in the data set.
6.1
Method
The process end with around seven iterations. Improvements was making so the pro-
totype reach a level to begin with the user tests. Several information aspects on the
UI was improved, like the different labels, contextual data like weekends and so on
to starting the user tests process. The version of the prototype that was used in the
test, is shown in Appendix A.
The test persons got two different data set presented in the application. The first
one is about a person who had recorded each time he felt an itching in his nose. He
got itching in his nose because he had allergy for grass pollen. His pollen count was
very high. The observations was made of itching and not sneeze itself, because the
occurrences of sneezes become low and the itching still remained high and that is why
it was more relevant to observe the itching of nose.
The second data set is about PTSD, which is data that have been collected by a
veteran. The patient suffering PTSD, and he collected the data by tracking device in
form of wristband with a single button. So the test person get the chance to try out
different data set with different types of personal data.
The method for going through the tests was that each participant make the test
individually. The participant got a little brief about what the project is about, what
kind of data used for the projects purpose. The participant was told that the appli-
cation consist two data sets, allergy data, showing occurrences of itching in the nose
and data set for a patient that suffer PTSD. After the introduction, the participant
was assigned tasks to let them to get a feel for what the application is about and how
==PAGE:36==
26
6 User Evaluation
to motivate the users to try and interact and try out different options as well as to see
how much these interactions and the visualizations helped the user to learn about the
data. The task end with question about the data itself to see if the user understand
the presentation of data, if there are able to learn or find any patterns about the data.
There were four partipicants in the test.
I tried to choose person with different
background, people that did not have any relations to the project or the fields of
personal informatics and visualization. The reason for why choose such as different
group of participants is because that the idea was to develop prototype that could
be used by people who do not have any experience in this field, people who are not
professionals or experts in the field of computer science or personal informatics. The
participants was all men, three of them where students, studied, chemistry engineer-
ing, IT engineering and architectural engineering. The last participant was a college
on work who is educated as Business Administration and Organizational Communi-
cation. They are all between 25 and 30 years old, so a young group of participants.
Figure 6.1: Test setup of the prototype
6.2
Test exercises Results
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the participants was assigned tasks to have
an understanding of what the application is about and try to navigate through the
implemented functions.
The tasks lead the participants to navigate through the
==PAGE:37==
6.2 Test exercises Results
27
functions, to found out specific how the data was presented, how to record the data
in the table, how to use the axis for understanding the setup of data. See Appendix A.
The test tasks was overall a great success. All the four participants was able to going
through the given tasks. They were able to use the different navigation functions and
able to use use the different part of the system. The tests took around 30 minutes
for all participant which was enough time to understand the application and have a
great opportunity to get an idea for the reason for why develop such a visualization
tool.
6.2.1
Overall Feedback
For the first task the participant was told to going through the application by own
hand and think aloud, for me to understand how they think to navigate and under-
stand the application. It was a great success, and the feedback during the tasks was
positive. Generel they found the application very useful, the idea with the personal
informatic data and visualization would be useful solution for the future. They were
good to understand how the data was presented, when going through the exercises,
however one of the participant found it difficult. He was confused over how the data
was setup in the table. He could not navigate in the through the table and needed
to explaining before it was clear to move on. Some of them need more labels which
could help them understand and use the application easier. Especially label for the
”clock” axis is needed, one of the participant thought that it was date.
Overall they was impressed of the application, the way the table was setup and how
to show the personal data in such a different way was impressing. They understand
how to navigate, how the data was setup and what the different data means such as
in which periods the occurrences were high, how it was fell over the day, etc. The
only problem was, when they need to go through the data set, two of the participant
found it hard to understand that the timeline with the grey box was used for navigate
through the time period of the data.
6.2.2
Data Table
The participants where generally happy with the visualization of the table present
the data set. There were different opinions on which visualization plot they preferred.
Two of them preferred the circles, one of them preferred the coloured tile and the
last person preferred violin and circles. They arguments for why they thought so was
different. But in general the users who like the circle plot argument that it looks
more clear on the background, especially in relation to the greyed background that
shows the weekend. It is different how people look at the values, some likes when the
concentration of data point got darker other like when the circles got bigger.
==PAGE:38==
28
6 User Evaluation
6.3
Question/Interview Results
After the test I have an interview/question session with question for each main feature
of the application, as well as some general questions. Some of the question was rating
of how much they agreed from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). There
was also question where the participant could choose several choices and at the end
question that are more open minded where they have to give an explanation of their
answer.
As I mentioned some of the questions were asked as a statement they should rate
on a scale from 1 to 5. The Participant were asked about how clear and easy-to-
understand was the produced data on the table, the same question for the timeline
and in general their ratings for the application as a whole. General was the ratings
positive. The participant found the table very understandable, that the data was
presented very clear. They rated in average the table about 4.25, none of the rating
was below 4. Participant found the timeline easily understandable with a average
score of 4.75, but still one them mentioned that they need improvement of the labels
presented in timeline, clarify the existing labels more. They were furthermore asked
the same for the application as a whole, here they in average rated the application
4.25 for easily understandable/manageable and rating of 4.75 rating for that the ap-
plication was easy to use.
The participant were furthermore asked to write and rate about specific parts of
the application. One of these question was which visualization plot method worked
best. 50 % liked the circles, 25 % for the coloured tiles and 25 % for both circles and
violin plots.
The participants that like the circle plots thought that it was easier to get an overview
visually. They argument that it was easier to see a difference in the data variations
when plots get bigger. The one that like tiles plot think that it was clear with shade
change, that you quickly loss track of many plots so the colour give better glance.
The one that also like the violin plot argument that you visually capture the data
quickly.
The timeline in my opinion was a great idea to give an overview of the data.
It
seemed that it also work very well for the participants. It was easier for them to
see what period of time period was with greatest fluctuations and to see where they
currently looking at. One of the participant pointed that it will be difficult or takes
more time for find, when in the time period that have the greatest fluctuations with-
out the timeline.
The participant was asked to answer question about how difficult it will be if this
type of personal data was visualized in well known visualization types like bar chart,
etc. They where all agreed that periodic data will be difficult to read on a normal
==PAGE:39==
6.3 Question/Interview Results
29
known visualization graphs and was impressed that it can be shown in this way in this
application. Bar charts will be great to show an overview of the data they suggest
like the bars shown in timeline.
At the end of the interview the participant gave some general feedback.
Overall
they liked the way the time periodic personal data was presented in the visualization.
Some repeated the need of labels especially in the axis showing hour, to better explain
the different elements of the visualization. Some suggest that click on the timeline
will be great instead of the brush function. One of the participant suggest to make
a bigger table to give and better overview of the whole data set. They like the way
the table was setup and the navigation was intuitively and great that the application
was not crowded with lot of unnecessary informations.
==PAGE:40==
30
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
Tracking personal data, information and behavior has become more common and eas-
ier, especially thorugh self-tracking. You can use these information to react on it and
learn more about oneself. However analyzing these data is not easy. The reason for
that is that it is normal people that collect these data and try to reflect on it and not
professionals and experts.
The goal for this thesis was to try to investigate how individuals can understand
their allergy symptoms. The goal was to try make a visualization that could help
them with this problem. The idea was that the visualization should allow the user to
generate report, as well as to interactively explore the data along different dimensions
and assist the user in identifying patterns.
This resulted in a prototype (see figure 4.2c) that was tested on four different partici-
pants. The results from the tests was in general and the overall feedback was positive.
The application works fine, there was no bug in the visualization. The participants
try to use the application by own hands and learn a lot about the data itself in this
way. After the user test interview was performed constructive feedback was given by
the participant. They thought that the application worked very well, but there was
of course some point for improvements.
Different parts of the prototype worked very well. Especially the time line worked
very well. The time line showed important information that would have been hard
to extract from the data otherwise. The different temporal levels of the plots worked
fine, however the most of the participant likes the circle plots.
The results of the user evaluation could be different if the amount of participants
was higher. Four participants is not always enough especially not in a visualization
like this project. One of them did not understand the application before I give him
some information and introduction for the application. If I tell all the participants
an introduction before start the test it might have influenced how they perceived
he visualization. Another thing with the test was that the participant did not test
it with their own data. This does not show how they would evaluate the data and
prototype if it was their own data.
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
Under the user test interviews and exercise, several possible improvements was dis-
cussed. In this chapter I will describe the most interesting improvements, discussing
extensions and general future work for this project.
8.1
General Prototype Improvements
As described in the user evaluation section, the overall feedback was positive. The
problem was that it was confusing for some of them to understand the system without
a short introduction by me. To solve that problem, as one of the participant suggest,
improvement of labels, info boxes etc. could help. Another improvement in this case
could be to make a user manual, to going through the application step by step as it
is known from other software systems.
As the participant mentioned, it was easy to navigate in the application without
lot of unnecessary informations, so it was not confusing for them. The idea for just
show them what they are needed is to not make them confused. But in generally the
prototype could benefit from using UX1 techniques to improve the users usage of the
application.
By improve the application using UX might even increase the users motivation and
the usage of the system, if it was not just using for professionals but also free to
use for the public. The visualization could be improved by the design, make it more
attractive, beautiful and user friendly in that way this could improve the usage and
the motivation for the users, to act on the informations.
8.2
New Extensions to the Prototype
The application was made as web platform solution. As an extension to include the
UX and the usability for the user, an extension could be to allow the prototype to
work on tablets and smart phones. To make that happened different design forms
that changed accordingly to the size of the screen is needed.
1 User Experience. Link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Userexperiencedesign.
==PAGE:44==
34
8 Future Work
A new extension to the prototype could be to go in depth with the time zone prob-
lem. The problem is when you have big data sets there is almost always periods
with observations in other time zones. The reason for this could be the person that
collecting personal data travels or because of the change too and from daylight saving
time. This means that every observation should be shown in local time or coordinated
universal time. The problem could be if the observations was shown in UTC, what
the user would read as nighttime, might not be nighttime in the local time zone. To
solve this problem, Google Calendar solve this problem where they showing the time
zones with multiple axes for each time zone.
Another new extension to the prototype could be adding graphs that summarising
and analysing the data. To give the users more thorough description and explanation
implement a graph that summarised every visible column of the data, and show the
result as bar chart or any kind of chart. In that way it is give the user opportunity
to quickly see patterns that were otherwise more hidden such as which days of the
week that had most activity. I have already make some in the time line, but a bigger
summarizing graph could be more helpful to better understand the patterns.
A new extension could also be adding contextual data. It could be something like
present context information to the main data set. As described in the analysis of the
personal informatics system, that there are big potential in multi-faceted systems,
that shows data from different facets of the peoples life. In that way, it would give
the user opportunity to explore connections between the data and find possible corre-
lations between different variables. In this case, the correlation between pollen count
and allergy symptoms.
A final extension could be that the end product of this prototype should be to al-
low the user to load their own data into the system. There is no way to upload a file
yourself to the prototype but you have to keep that in mind for the end product.
8.3
Improvement of User Test Evaluation
Some of the extensions that could be implemented in the prototype in the future was
discussed in the previous sections. The status of the prototype is that a well devel-
oped prototype was completed and it is usable for visualizing and analyzing most
personal information data. To keep the further development in the right direction, it
is important to conduct more ongoing test of the newly developed features to make
sure that the development is made in relation to the needs of users.
This can be done by expanding the current prototype so that you can load the user’s
own personal data, and then can test the prototype for a continuous period of time.
By doing this will the developers be able to developing new versions of prototype
==PAGE:45==
8.3 Improvement of User Test Evaluation
35
and testing these new features. Advantage of this form for development would be to
analyse the behaviour of the users, instead of just sticking to only interviews and tests.
Another improvement could be interesting to try some tests with more context data.
Example of this could be test with the allergy and pollen data, as well as heart rate
and location data. It could also be other kinds of data. This developed system could
hopefully give the opportunity to show these kind of data with informations about
the data, that has not been seen before. This will hopefully provide another form of
understanding of personal data.
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this thesis I have described the goal and motivation behind a personal informatics
system and develop an application that explored new ways of visualizing personal
information data in a easier and smarter way than with previous and older visualiza-
tion techniques and tools.
There have been different attempts to developing such a system using new tech-
niques and methods. Visualization of personal informatics is a field that growing
continuously, different visualization techniques is used but many of current personal
informatics system still use less than ideal visualizations. The problem is that there
need systems that allows user to interact with data, and explore different types of
data in more depths.
The need is that visualization of personal informatics data
should give more insight into their own data, so they can clearly reveal information
and patterns, that were difficult ti find with existing visualization technieques and
software tools. All this has lead to I have develop an application about visualization
of personal informatics system, that solves some of the points described above. The
process of development and the different design decisions throughout this process has
been described in Chapter 4 - Design.
After the prototype have been further develop the prototype has then been tested
on four test participants. It was a success, the participants have try to make some
exercises to understand and have a feeling by used it by own and interviewed about
their thoughts of the prototype, and also try to give explanation of what they learned
about the data by using a visualization tool like this. The result of test with par-
ticipant showed that the prototype visualize the data in a way that give learning
about the data, new insights into the analysis, and in general gives new ways to learn
anything about the data. The test participant have never worked with personal data
or have any knowledge about it, however they were able to use it and it was useful
knowledge about data in their opinion although they have never seen an application
like this before.
Based on the test results from the participants, have been found several possibili-
ties for future work on the project. As described in the Future work chapter, there
is opportunity to make improvements of the application and that lead us to that we
could continue work on this project. The project has potential to further development
==PAGE:48==
38
9 Conclusion
but in my case, I can conclude that I have reached the goal of the project as described
in the introduction.
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIX A
User Evaluation
Questionnarie and
Exercises
In this Appendix the questions used for the interview session and exercise question
was presented. As described in the User Evaluation section, the question through the
interview session was split into, The table, The timeline and General. The different
question was stated in scale, multiple choice and text form.
• Scale: Rate the questions on scale from 1 to 5.
• Multiple choice: Had one or more possible answers.
• Text form: User free to write an answer in text form.
A.1
Interview Questionnarie
A.1.1
The Table
• Scale: The table produced the data in a clear and understandable way.
• Multiple choice: Which plot method worked best for you?
– Squares with the different colour scale
– Violinplots with the size scale
– Circles with the size scale
A.1.2
The Time Line
• Scale: The time line chart produced the data in a clear and understandable
way.
==PAGE:50==
40
A User Evaluation Questionnarie and Exercises
• Scale: The time line was easy to interact with.
• Scale: By using this informations on the time line, allowed you to find patterns
and other informations that would be diffucult to find otherwise.
• Text form: To which of the listed task earlier was the time line and time line
graph especially useful for?
A.1.3
General
• Scale: The visualization as a whole was clear and easily understood.
• Scale: The application as a whole was easy to use.
• Text: Did you think you discovered patterns, variations or informations in the
data, that would be difficult to find in other known visualization graphs as, bar
chart, etc.?
• Text: Do you have any general feedback or ideas?
==PAGE:51==
A.2 Test Exercises
41
A.2
Test Exercises
1. Start to look at the visualization to get a picture of what it consist and try the
different features.
2. Read and understand the navigation
a) You a now looking at data set 1 - Find the time period, where the greatest
activity appears - how do you do?
b) Find the day 21. June 2017, 12.00 clock.
c) Move the mouse over a square plot - What did it shows?
d) What day are we in?
e) What do you think, the different colours in the squares indicates?
f) Look at 24 June 2017, What day are we in? Did you notice a differences
from the other days?
g) In over how long of time period does the dat aset reach? - How did you
found out?
h) Try to switch between data set, how many are there?
i) Try to switch plot type, how did you do? And which types of plots can
you see?
3. Understanding of Data
a) You are looking at data set 2 now - Can you tell me by looking at the
different observations - when and in what time frame of the day typically
occurs activity?
b) Can you by looking at the observations, the different data points tell me,
which days of the week typically occur the most fluctuations?
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX B
The Prototype
The implemented prototype in this thesis can be found at http://www.student.dtu.
dk/~s103210/master-thesis/Prototype7/prototype7.html. This is the last ver-
sion of the prototype, that was used for the user evaluation.
The prototype is a
visualization of personal informatics data, that showed observations of itching in the
nose, and data set about a veteran who suffer from PTSD.
More detailed description of the Prototype and reasons for implemented functions
can be found in section for Design. The y-axis is show hours and x-axis show the
dates. The data points was showed in different form as circles, violin and tiles. See
figure B.1 for better understanding of each component in the application.
==PAGE:54==
44
B The Prototype
Figure B.1: A screenshot of the final prototype, that describes each elements.
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX C
Project Plan
Below you can see the initial project plan, with the different milestones for the itera-
tions, writing the thesis and user tests. However the development was not distributed
in that way at the end because of the different challenges through the project progress.
Figure C.1: The initial project plan.
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[Aig11]
Wolfgang Aigner. Visualization of Time-oriented Data. Springer London,
2011. isbn: 978-0-85729-078-6. doi: 10.1007/978-0-85729-079-3. url:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-0-%2085729-079-3..
[Ald16]
Peter Aldhous. “”Data visualizations: basic principles.”” In: (2016). url:
http:%20//paldhous.github.io/ucb/2016/dataviz/week2.html..
[CLL13]
Andrea Cuttone, Sune Lehmann, and Jakob Eg Larsen. “”A mobile per-
sonal informatics system with interactive visualizations of mobility and so-
cial interactions.”” In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop
on Personal data meets distributed multimedia PDM ’13 (2013), pages 27–
30. doi: 10.1145/2509352.2509397. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?doid=2509352.2509397.
[CM85]
W.S. Clreveland and R. McGill. “”Graphical Perception and Graphical
Methods for Analyzing Scientific Data.”” In: Science 229.4716 (1985), pages 828–
833. doi: 10.1126/science.229.4716.828.. url: http://www.sciencemag.
org/cgi/doi/10.1126/%20science.229.4716.828..
[CPL14]
Andrea Cuttone, Michael Kai Petersen, and Jakob Eg Larsen. “”Four data
visualization heuristics to facilitate reflection in personal informatics.”” In:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2014), pages 541–552. url: http :
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-%2084903443844&
partnerID=tZOtx3y1.
[LCL13]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Andrea Cuttone, and Sune Lehmann. “”QS Sprial : Vi-
sualizing Periodic Quantified Self Data””. In: Personal Informatics in the
Wild: Hacking Habits for Healt and Happiness - CHI 2013 Workshop (2013).
[LDF10]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “”A stage-based model of personal
informatics systems””. In: Proceedings of the 28th international conference
on Human factors in computing systems. (2010), pages 557–566. url: http:
//portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1753326.1753409.
[LEC17]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen.
“”Active Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One-Button Wear-
able: A Case Study in Military PTSD””. In: (2017). url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1703.03437.
==PAGE:58==
48
Bibliography
[MF17]
Justin Matejka and George Fitzmaurice. “”Same Stats, Different Graphs””.
In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comuting
Systems (2017), pages 1290–1294. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?%20doid=3025453.3025912.
[Pal14]
Tomas Palsson. “”Visual Exploration of Quantified Self Data Using Sprial
Visualizations.”” In: (2014).
[Wol09]
Gary Wolf. “”Know Thyself: Tracking Every Facet of Life, from Sleep to
Mood to Pain, 24/7/365”. In: Wired Magazine (2009), pages 1–4. url:
https://www.wired.com/2009/06/lbnp-knowthyself/.
