==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A Data Management Platform for Scien-
tificProjects: Design of a ContinuousInfras-
tructure and Integration of Codebase
A Master Thesis
Henrik Smith (s133976)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis is about EmpiRes, a general data management platform for empirical re-
search projects. This thesis will focus on integrating a diverged codebase from two
previous projects related to the EmpiRes platform, as well as providing a continuous
infrastructure in order to ensure efficiency of the further development process and
decrease the possibility, that students create their own independent project.
This thesis will cover the optimization of EmpiRes’ development infrastructure and
explain all the important steps of the optimization. The main goal of this thesis is
to optimize the time and quality of future development for this platform by mak-
ing it easy for new developers to start developing features within the development
environment.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master’s Degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, April 5, 2019
Henrik Smith (s133976)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to give my utmost gratitude to Ekkart Kindler, my thesis
supervisor, who through regular meetings and e-mails has guided me and provided
valuable feedback throughout the period of this thesis. Without your guidance and
feedback, this thesis would not have been possible.
There should also sound gratitudes towards Kwong Chuang Zu and Bjarki Stefánsson,
the authors of the heavily referenced previous projects.
These guys were always
available for meetings and chats where they helped me understanding their respective
systems and answered all my questions, both good and bad.
Last but not least, a big thank you to my family and friends for supporting me
through this challenging time.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Data Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Previous and Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Research Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Software Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Technical Concepts and Proposed solution
31
4.1
Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Containers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Solution Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Integration of Codebase
41
5.1
Design architecture of the previous systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Solution idea
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.5
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6
Continuous infrastructure
65
6.1
CI/CD tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.2
Solution Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Contribution Policies and Guidelines
83
7.1
Git work-flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
7.2
System set up and GitLab pipelines management . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
7.3
General system workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
8
Evaluation
93
8.1
Research Questions Revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
8.2
Further development and future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
9
Conclusion
95
A Eyetracking React component
97
B Gitlab CI/CD files
99
B.1
EmpiRes frontend
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
B.2
EmpiRes backend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
B.3
Neuro adaptive system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
C Docker Compose
103
D Remote servers
105
E System set up
107
E.1
EmpiRes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
E.2
Neuro Adaptive Sytem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
F GitLab runner set up
113
G Manual deploy through ssh
115
Bibliography
117
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Starting a research project for scientific experiments often requires collection and
analysis of data. Since most research projects have a similar way of handling data,
setting up such research projects often means repeating much of the work done for
previous projects. Therefore, having a general data management platform could help
such projects by handling data for them so that the researchers do not need to spend
time on such tasks, but instead can focus on their actual research.
To address this problem, a former student aimed to develop a general data manage-
ment platform for empirical research projects, EmpiRes for short, through his master
thesis [31]. This thesis laid the foundation for the platform and encouraged further
development through two other students master thesis’ [29, 42], but this further devel-
opment did also lead to a separation of key features of the platform across separate
projects.
This occurred since the features for the EmpiRes platform where devel-
oped independently and without cooperation between the students. Due to the lack
of both time and scope of the master thesis projects, the implementations of each
project where never integrate with each other, leading to a diverged codebase, placed
into separate repositories.
The situation mentioned above has led to a separation of the full feature set meant
for EmpiRes, divided into two different systems, each containing a subset of the over-
all features for this platform. This solution is not ideal for further development and
management of the platform, where developers will have to familiarise themselves
with two completely different systems instead of one. The diverged codebase could
also lead to repeated work between the systems, where similar features might be de-
veloped for each system due to the lack of cooperation between the systems.
EmpiRes is an on-going project, where the complete solution hasn’t been fully de-
fined yet. This makes it hard to predict when the completion of the platform will
take place, or if it remains an ongoing project, constantly evolving to upcoming re-
quirements through time. For the time being, further features are still wanted for the
EmpiRes platform which will keep being developed through students and the contri-
butions they make for the platform, within the scope of their master thesis. Therefore,
having features for the platform split between systems does not exactly encourage fur-
ther development of the platform, which is why the development environment of the
platform must be optimized, in order to increase the efficiency of future work.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
In order to optimize the further development of the EmpiRes platform, choices re-
garding the development infrastructure need to be made. The divided source code
for the different projects must be collected and integrated with each other in order
to archive a shared repository containing all source code concerning the platform.
This will unite the diverged projects into one, illustrating the overall progress of the
platform and make it easier to retrieve for new developers. The development infras-
tructure should also encourage cooperation between students. Contributions should
be easy to implement, without fear of merge conflicts and changes interfering with
other students work. This will not only improve the efficiency of the development
process but also decrease the possibility, that students create their own independent
project, developing valuable features for EmpiRes.
This thesis is about EmpiRes and will focus on integrating the diverged codebase
as well as providing a continuous infrastructure in order to ensure efficiency of the
further development process and decrease the possibility, that students create their
own independent project. This will be done by using the previous projects of Em-
piRes [29] as the foundation for the EmpiRes platform itself, where the feature-set
and codebase of the other project [42], which is separated, will be unified, which will
extend the feature set of the EmpiRes platform to include features from the separated
project [42]. Once the integration of the codebase is complete, we move on to opti-
mizing the development environment by implementing principles and concepts found
in modern software development.
This thesis will cover the optimization of EmpiRes’ development infrastructure and
explain all the important steps of the optimization. The main goal of this thesis is to
optimize the time and quality of future development for this platform by making it
easy for new developers to start developing features within the development environ-
ment. The infrastructure must make it convenient for developers to cooperate, share
and merge new code changes with each other as well as deploying to shared remote
servers running within the safe environment of the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
Researchers will also benefit from this solution, due to the increased feature set of
the EmpiRes platform, which will bring EmpiRes one step closer to help as many
researchers focusing on actual research, rather than setting up the infrastructure for
similar research projects.
We will now move on to have a look at the overall structure of this thesis which
is given as an outline. The outline explains each chapter in a few words, providing
the reader with a clear image of the structure of this theses, as well as what to expect
from each chapter.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Outline
3
1.1
Outline
The outline for this thesis has been divided to represent the chapters found in this
thesis, each giving a brief introduction to what aspects of the thesis will be covered
by the current chapter. The first three chapters besides this one, will have a more
analytically approach and set the scene by providing the knowledge needed, for the
following two chapters which will have more of a practical approach and document
the implementation parts of this thesis. Lastly, this thesis will include an evaluation
of, and a conclusion to, the overall various aspects of this thesis.
Chapter 2 - Background will explain the general background of EmpiRes and
dive into the previous projects associated with it. Furthermore, this chapter will look
at some related work of EmpiRes.
Chapter 3 - Methodology will start off by introducing a problem statement for
this thesis, which will give rise to the research approach used for this thesis along
with the objective and research questions, providing the main motivation of this the-
sis. Furthermore, different software development methodologies are explained and
discussed to find the chosen software methodology for this thesis.
Chapter 4 - Technical Concepts and Proposed Solution introduces some tech-
nical concepts helpful for achieving the objective set for this thesis. This chapter will
also provide a solution overview, for achieving the objective and answer the research
questions.
Chapter 5 - Integrating of code base explains how the previous project will be
unified as well as implemented.
Chapter 6 - Continuous Infrastructure explains how a continuous development
infrastructure for the EmpiRes platform is implemented.
Chapter 7 - Contribution Policies and Guidelines will introduce a policies and
guidelines for contributing to the shared repositories of EmpiRes as well as manage
the implemented CI/CD pipelines.
Chapter 8 - Evaluation will evaluate the overall work presented in this thesis
Chapter 8 - Conclusion will conclude this thesis by a short recap of what has been
achieved.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This thesis is based on previous projects regarding the EmpiRes platform, and this
chapter will describe the background for this project as well as introduce the previ-
ous projects which make up the foundation for this thesis along with related work of
similar projects to EmpiRes.
The EmpiRes platform is a software platform for empirical research purposes and
aims to aid researchers with the management of projects, users and data associated
with research projects. As mentioned in Chapter 1, the platform should reduce the
time spent on repetitive work such as setting up similar research projects and data
management of these projects. This should improve the quality of the researchers
work, by enabling them to focus on actual research related work, and management of
data, instead of trivial tasks like project setup.
The original idea behind the platform was made at the Danish Technical Univer-
sity (DTU) by the software and process engineering section at DTU Compute who
found themselves spending to much time preparing for research projects, time which
optimally should have been used on actual research instead.
The development of the platform has then been made by students, through their mas-
ter thesis projects.
Before explaining the previous projects regarding the EmpiRes platform, a short
description of the concepts behind the data management principles associated with
EmpiRes will be introduced. This should provide the reader with a general knowledge
of what the EmpiRes platform working to achieve, along with the related projects
associated with EmpiRes.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
2.1
Data Management
Data management in empirical science is a broad topic, but some general aspects like
collecting, analysing and sharing of data are essential to the research aspects which
must be included.
Having data correctly collected and stored should enable easy
access to the data in order to utilise and analysis it. Furthermore, data should be
accessible for reproduction purposes by other researchers who may want to reproduce
the result of a particular experiment.
These aspects need to be met by the EmpiRes platform and is do so, through the in-
corporation of the FAIR principles [51]. The FAIR principles are basic guidelines and
are a term based on managing data so that it is Findable, Accessible, Interoperable
and Reusable. Each of the terms in FAIR are explained below.
The data must be findable and enable easy retrieval of specific data; this includes
that researchers can search and find specific data. This can be obtained through data
being associated with specific keywords or a unique identifier. Data and related meta-
data should be associated and have a unique and persistent identifier. Furthermore,
researchers should be able to search for the data. This indicates that data is stored
in a central place, which can be used for look-up.
The data must be accessible both by humans and machines through well-defined
protocols which enables easy and universal access, anytime. Authorisation and au-
thentication must be considered and included for data protection.
The data must be interoperable in order to ensure the common use of data. To do
so, data could be stored in an open format, which can be understood both by human
and machine, where such a format could be CSV or XML. Data stored in a different
format should include an explanation of the data relation.
The data must be reusable and should include metadata which should contain suffi-
cient information in order to ensure that others can understand and use the data for
their research purposes.
Besides the principles of FAIR, EmpiRes’s vision is to integrate and let researches
use the full pipeline of the data management plan [32], which describes the ”data life
cycle” which also aids in obtaining the FAIR principles. Aspects of the data life cycle
through fallowing the data management plan’s pipeline can be viewed in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1 shows the life cycle of data management, which consists of three main
phases: research planning, the active state of research and sharing results. These
phases must be considered carefully before each research project, leaving the re-
searchers manually planning the data management.
EmpiRes aims to relieve re-
searchers from the task of manually planning, as specific standards are implemented
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Data Management
7
Figure 2.1: Data Life Cycle [32].
to accommodate the various phases of the data life cycle pipeline showed in Figure 2.1.
EmpiRes are working to incorporate the full life cycle of data management, and for
now, it only supports parts of it, namely the first two processes, collect data and an-
alyze data, of the second phase, Active State of Research, from Figure 2.1. However,
parts of the last processes of the Research Planning phase, along with the last process
of the Active State of Research phase has been considered and partly implemented.
Now that we have a general idea of the principles, which EmpiRes are trying to ac-
commodate as a general data management platform for empirical research purposes,
we can take a look at the related work of EmpiRes made by previous projects.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
2.2
Previous and Related Work
So far, we have discussed the overall background which relates to the EmpiRes plat-
form, which is the focal point of this thesis, and how the vision of EmpiRes, is to
relieve researchers from manually planning data management and setting up the in-
frastructure for research projects over and over again.
This section will explain the development contributions made for EmpiRes, which
consists of three previous projects, made by made by three independent DTU stu-
dents, through the work of their master thesis. Once the previous work of EmpiRes
has been explained, we will move on to related work associated with EmpiRes, which
will include a description of both similar projects to EmpiRes, but also projects, in-
troducing interesting concepts which may be used to improve EmpiRes.
2.2.1
Previous Work
This section will provide the background of the previous projects associated with the
development of EmpiRes.
This section starts by introducing the original project for the general data manage-
ment platform, EmpiRes. This project will lay the foundation for the second project,
which is about fixing issues left from the original project and further develop Em-
piRes, by introducing new features to the platform. Lastly, this section will include a
project which includes features, intentionally meant for EmpiRes, but unfortunately
was made as a separate project. These three previous projects will be one of the
cornerstones for this thesis, so a proper introduction and explanation are appropriate
to ensure a satisfying understanding of chapters to come.
2.2.1.1
Design and Implementation of an Extensible Framework for Securely
Collecting and Sharing Health-related Data from Wearable Devices, by
Lykkegaard [31].
The original project regarding the general data management platform was made by
Lykkegaard [31], and was focusing on creating a data collecting and sharing system
for research projects. This project created the foundation for the platform, which in-
cludes features for managing projects, users and data. The main focus of this project
was to collect data from wearable devices such as Fitbit1 and Empatica2. The system
consists of three parts; a frontend, a back-end, and an Android application. The fron-
tend is made up from a web interface, and it is through this interface that users can
interact with the system. It supports the following: Signing Up, signing In, signing
out, creating a new project and data collection the wearables Fitbit and Empetica.
The back-end is made op of a server which contains most of the logic used to manage
the users, projects and collected data from wearables. Furthermore, the back-end
1https://www.fitbit.com/dk/home
2https://www.empatica.com/en-int/
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Previous and Related Work
9
includes data-storage in two different databases, a relational database for project and
user management, and a time-series database for handling time-series data collected
from the wearables sensors. The Android application was developed in order to live
stream data from an Empatica device to the back-end server, where Fitbit data is
retrieved through their API for Fitbit data.
This system consists of basic functionality regarding user and project management
along with the collection of health-related data. However, even though this system
contains a lot of useful functionality, some of these implementations require some
fine-tuning in order to work as expected [29].
Luckily this architecture was made with further development in mind, leading to
another master thesis project about EmpiRes, namely the one described below.
2.2.1.2
A Platform for Collecting, Processing and Analyzing Data in Scientific
Projects, by Chuang [29].
This thesis made by Chuang [29] extends upon the existing solution made by Lykkegaard
[31].
Therefore, the structure of this system is much like the one mentioned in
Lykkegaards project, which consists of a front-end, a back-end and an Android appli-
cation and provides the collection of the same wearables sensors.
Chuang’s project was focusing on extending the back-end as well as implementing
significant fixes and improvements to the front-end, where the official goal of the
thesis is stated as follows; ”to assist researchers in automating parts of their manual
labour while making sharing of their work possible” [29, p. 2].
To do so, Chuang introduces three significant improvements to the back-end, namely
a file management service and a build automation tool and offline data processing.
The file management service allows researchers to archive and manage research-related
files. Even though this file system is separated from the actual relational database,
metadata of each file, containing their path and versions, are kept in the relational
database for references. [29, p. 64].
The file management service was chosen over the traditional relational database op-
tion, for better performance and support when archiving larger experimental files,
which may include audio and video files. The file management service is implemented
storage files on the hosting operating system.
The build automation tool is used to perform builds and run source code for file
processing. This tool uses the file management service for accessing and storing pro-
cessed files.
The data processing itself includes personal tailoring of a processing pipeline. This
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
pipeline can consist of multiple smaller processes, which is chosen by the researcher,
and performed in the given sequence. Quang’s system has already some predefined
process included, but the idea is that researchers themselves can upload their own
execution processes and use them along with existing once to tailor a specific process-
ing pipeline.
These pipelines can then be saved, for other researchers to reuse. To do so, each
process and processing pipeline are given a definition, which makes it easy for other
researchers to understand the purpose of each process and processing pipeline. To
ensure consistency, each process definitions must follow a standardised file hierarchy,
which in Quang’s system reflects a standard Maven project directory, with the addi-
tion of in and out subdirectories, which is used for importing files to process, as well
as output the result. [29, p. 67-68]
2.2.1.3
Architectural blueprint for a neuro-adaptive system, by Stefánsson [42].
This project is not directly associated with the development of EmpiRes, but since
the features introduced in this project originally was meant for EmpiRes, this project
should be considered as previous work due to the high correlation.
The main focus of this thesis made by Stefánsson [42], was to develop an architectural
blueprint for a neuro-adaptive system i.e. a system for determining and adapt to the
mental state of its users by collecting data inputs associated with eye tracking and a
skin sensor for measuring the GSR (Galvanic Skin Response)3.
The motivation for Stefánsson’s thesis was mental state detection and how measure-
ment of a psychological state can be used for productivity and motivation purposes
both for workplaces, the educational sector, but also for research purposes [42].
The primary goal of this project was to:
”develop an architectural blueprint and implement the architecture in a prototype fol-
lowing a microservices structure to improve modularity, that can be furthermore be
used as a neuro-adaptive system, i.e. a software system that can adapt to the mental
state of its users” [42, p. 2].
So, Stefánsson’s goal was to implement a system, which can be used for mental state
detection. This system does not do the actual mental state detection but contains
essential parts such as the overall architecture, collecting, processing and storing of
data, which prepares for the actual mental state detection to be implemented in the
future.
Having this system connected to two sensor devices, respectively an eye-tracking
device called a Tobii 4C Eye tracker [45] and a device for measuring GSR namely the
Shimmer 3 GSR+ [41], which collects research data which later goes through cleaning,
pre-processing and feature extraction in order to be processed which can serve as a
3https://imotions.com/blog/gsr/
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Previous and Related Work
11
classifier for future online mental state detection [42].
The system consists of three main components; data collection, processing server and
database server. The data collection component consists of a client which connects
and collects data from the associated sensors. The data is then sent to the processing
server, which determines if the data needs processing. If the data needs processing, it
goes through a cleaning, pre-processing and feature extraction process before being
sent to the database server component. If the data does not need processing, it gets
sent right through to the database server. It is the database server which handles
all data going to and from the database and ensures storing of the collected and
processed data. One important aspect of this project is that the processing server
and database server both are deployed to and run on DTU servers, which enables
remote access to the system as well as online data processing. This approach also
optimises resource allocation, since potentially heavy data processing is done in its
own environment.
The reader might notice that this system does not consist of a web interface for
interaction. The scope of this system does not allow user interactions within the
system but is strictly for researchers who want to perform mental state detection
experiments and look at either the raw or processed data.
Stefánsson did not manage to implement the actual mental state detection component
within the period of his master thesis. So mental state detection and adaptiveness of
the system is not implemented, however, what Stefánsson did implement has prepared
the system for the actual mental state detection component, by collecting, processing
and storing the associated data. The processed data can then, later on, be used for
mental state detection, which could be developed later on.
The functionality behind Stefánsson’s master thesis was intentionally meant for the
general management platform, but the scope of the thesis had to be limited to a
separate project, due to the lack of some general factors.
One of these factors was, that another student, see Section 2.2.1.2 [29], was working
on further development of the platform and since the development environment of
the platform do not encourage collaboration, having two students working on the
platform at the same time, could cause version control issues, even though they are
working on their separate features. Furthermore, the period of the thesis did not
allow integration of the features into the general management platform.
This concludes the previous work associated with EmpiRes, and we will now take
a look at related work in addition to EmpiRes and see what others have done.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background
2.2.2
Related Work
The previous section explained the previous projects contributing to the development
of the EmpiRes platform, or with a direct connection to EmpiRes.
Now we will look at some related work, and so this section starts by explaining related
projects associated with data collection and management and therefore viewed as
related to EmpiRes. We will do so, to get an idea if what we want to achieve through
EmpiRes, has been done before through related systems. We can learn from these
related systems and their documentation might introduce interesting knowledge and
concepts, which could be useful for the further development of EmpiRes. Lastly, we
are able to evaluate the vision of EmpiRes according to related projects, discussing
the differences and purposes between the projects.
2.2.2.1
Electronic Research Data Archive (ERDA), by University of Copenhagen
[9, 31].
Like the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) wants to develop EmpiRes for
general data management of research projects, another Danish university, namely
the University of Copenhagen (UCPH) has developed a related data management
system named Electronic Research Data Archive (ERDA). ERDA aims to provide
scientist with a system enabling storing, accessing, sharing and archiving of research
data related to their faculty of Science. However, the main idea is to extend the
system to support all research data related to UCPH. ERDA differs from EmpiRes
since ERDA’s main focus is to store and share data and files, and can be used by
employees and students of UCPH to store and share their data locally and securely at
the UCPH environment. It includes a file synchronisation service similar to Dropbox
[9], and so it can be viewed more like a file sharing service for UCPH employees and
students other than a general data management system for research purposes like
EmpiRes.
2.2.2.2
Chiminey: Reliable Computing and Data Management Platform in the
Cloud [52].
Chimney is a data management platform which aims to solve implementation and
computational issues when a researcher needs to perform complex computation and
processing of data. In order relieve the researcher from learning High-Performance
Computing (HPC) and implement it themselves on to their local system, Chimney
introduces a platform with HPC capabilities, where a researcher can run their ex-
periments, visualise execution outputs, share data with collaborators and search for
publicly available data.
Chimney is trying to solve a lot of the same problems as EmpiRes as it too tries
to relieve the research community of both the management and infrastructure prob-
lems associated with research projects. Having a slightly different focus, namely the
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Previous and Related Work
13
HPC and cloud computing infrastructure, Chimney proposes some very interesting
ideas for how EmpiRes could make use of HPC and cloud computing for online data
processing.
2.2.2.3
The development of data collection tool on spreadsheet format, by
Nurdiantoro, Asnar, and Widagdo [33, 29].
This project is about the development of a tool which enables a spreadsheet format,
like Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets to be used for data collection. In this project,
Nurdiantoro, Asnar, and Widagdo built a tool able to import data given in a spread-
sheet format and map it to relational databases, the tool is also to perform data
validation. This tool introduces capabilities which until know has been missing when
working with spreadsheets as a data collector[33].
Given that spreadsheets are among the most popular standards when working with
data, such as data collection, processing, management and collaborations where es-
pecially Google Spreadsheets and Microsoft Excel are widely known and used, Nur-
diantoro, Asnar, and Widagdo’s tool is very interesting, since it offers possibilities
for systems to incorporate the spreadsheet format as a data collection source easily.
Such a system could be EmpiRes, as it introduces a new data collection format for
researchers to use.
2.2.2.4
Increasing quality and managing complexity in neuroinformatics
software development with continuous integration, by Zaytsev and
Morrison [53].
This project is also about a similar system used for research purposes within neu-
roinformatics. However, this project takes on a more development-oriented approach,
focusing on improving system development, rather than what the system actually
does. This project is therefore also more related to development environment of Em-
piRes, rather than its users, and do introduce some interesting concepts regarding
that matter.
Zaytsev and Morrison have created an article about how continuous integration (CI)
can improve further development of a neuroinformatics research software platform.
This study demonstrates that integrating concepts of CI to the system ”enabled a sub-
stantial increase in productivity for a major neuroinformatics project and additional
benefits for three further projects” [53]. They showed that implementing concepts of
CI do improves the quality of the contributed development with a research platform,
by making sure every implementation a tested and ready for release before they hit
the shared code base, rather than just before the actual release.
Even though Zaytsev and Morrison’s project may not have the actual researcher
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background
in mind, it does provide some ideas for improving the actual development of the
platform as it focuses on the increasing quality and managing the complexity of a
growing research platform. Since EmpiRes still are in its early stages and are likely
to increase both in size and complexity as the functionality of the platform increases,
Zaytsev and Morrison’s project bags up the use of CI for improving quality of further
development and the theories behind it[38, 40, 53] and must be considered for Em-
piRes.
We have now evaluated various project related to what EmpiRes are trying to achieve
or the development phase of it. It is clear that even though the related projects might
have similar parts or aspects as EmpiRes, none of the related projects describes a so-
lution, which includes all aspects of what EmpiRes want to achieve. However, they
did introduce some interesting idea, which could be used in the further development
of EmpiRes.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter will describe methodologies including design science and software method-
ologies used within this thesis and should provide the reader with a better understand-
ing of the methodologies we plan to use throughout this thesis.
To do so, we start this chapter by introducing the problem statement for this the-
sis. This problem statement recaps the relevant issues mentioned in Chapter 2. The
problem statement helps derive the objectives and research questions which then are
explained, as they’ll serve as the main driving force throughout this thesis.
After the problem statement, we move on to explain the research approach and de-
sign science of this thesis, which includes the research objective and research questions
mentioned above, which this thesis aims to achieve and answer, by the end of this
thesis. Then we move on to software development methodologies, where we introduce
some of the most popular methodologies used in software development. This helps
us decide on a software development methodology to use, in order to optimise the
conditions for achieving our objective.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Methodology
3.1
Problem statement
With a general knowledge established in Chapter 2, about the background of this
thesis, this section will summarize the issues discovered and will do so, by a problem
statement. This section will contain two different problem statements, one associated
with the overall purpose of EmpiRes and what it tries to solve. This problem state-
ment is mentioned in order to get an overall idea behind the issues EmpiRes tries
to address and solve, even though this won’t be the focus of this thesis. The overall
problems statement of EmpiRes is given below:
“For each new project in empirical research, researchers often need to set up new
infrastructures, to manage the project and experimental data associated with it. Set-
ting up this infrastructure is a time-consuming task, which distracts the researcher
from performing the actual research.
There is no system which can assist researchers organising, managing and share their
experimental projects and the associated data. Due to the lack of such a system,
researchers remain faced with the inconvenience of repeatedly setting up a similar
infrastructure for each new project started.”
What this thesis is focused on, is a more development-oriented problem statement
concerned with the future work and development of EmpiRes.
This problem statement mentions the issues associated with the development infras-
tructure of EmpiRes:
”The development infrastructure of the EmpiRes platform does not yet encourage
cooperation between multiple students. The features for the platform are located in a
diverged codebase associated with separate systems. A shared repository containing
the entire set of features for the platform is missing along with a policies to support
its use, making it difficult for new developers to start contributing to the platform.”
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Research Approach
17
3.2
Research Approach
Now that we have established a clear problem statement for this thesis, we will now
move on to a more scientific point of view, explaining the research approach for this
thesis. This involves introducing design science and discuss the research objective
of this thesis, which will derive from the problem statement. The objective is split
into research questions for a more tangible and explanatory representation. These
research questions will be the motivation for this thesis and will be returned to and
answered in the end of this thesis.
To ensure and increase the scientific value of this thesis, design science research is
introduced. Design science and the associated research approach described later on
in this section, will aid the research aspect of this thesis, and evolve it into something
more than a software development projects.
The research approach will be explained according to Hevner and Chatterjee’s ”design
science research cycles” [20] model, see Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Design science research cycles [20].
The model consists of three building blocks, Environment, Design Science Re-
search and Knowledge Base and three cycles which bridges the building blocks.
The first building block, Environment, represents the application domain, which
covers the problems and opportunities associated with the research. Furthermore, it
describes the environment which the problem relates to and affect. The environment
involves both the people and systems interacting and working towards a goal [20].
In our case, the environment represents researchers doing empirical research with
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Methodology
data-collecting from sensors, and developers involved with the further development
of EmpiRes. The environment does also, in our case, involve the preliminary version
of the platform, EmpiRes itself, and its current functionality.
The second building block, Design Science Research, represents the development
and evaluation of an artefact, which are related to the problems associated with the
environment, and should provide some form of a solution to the problem. In our
case, the artefact is EmpiRes itself, and the Design Science Research will, therefore,
correspond to the development and evaluation of this artefact. The development of
this artefact is both related to the actual software being developed to solve a problem,
but also the elaboration of this thesis which documents the processes done and the
knowledge obtained in order to solve the problem, which others have the possibility
to learn from.
Lastly, the third building block is the Knowledge Base and represents the knowl-
edge available doing the research. This knowledge base contains the foundations of
the research which are theories and methods, experience and expertise and design
products and design processes which are used and/or acquired doing the research pro-
cess. In our case, the knowledge base will correspond to previous and related work
of EmpiRes as discussed in Chapter 2 Section 2.2, both development and documen-
tation, the authors own experiences and expertise, along with knowledge obtained
during the preparation of this thesis.
Now that we understand each of the three building blocks and what they represents,
it is time to look at the research cycles, which ties everything together.
The first cycle is the Relevance Cycle which is a process which aims to identify
the problems and opportunities within the environment and discuss the requirements
of how these problems and opportunities can be solved or improved. Field testing
is also part of this cycle which aims to evaluate the result of the produced design
science research. To do so, associated acceptance criteria for the solution can be set
up to help evaluate if the designed artefact improves the environment [20]. This cycle
will evaluate the need for further development of the artefact, or if it’s relevant to do
another iteration of design science research to improve the environment further. The
requirements for this thesis can be found in the fallowing section, see Section 3.2.1,
and is given as research questions. These research questions will be evaluated at the
end of this thesis and will cover whether or not the artefact developed in this thesis
improves the associated environment. Furthermore, the relevance cycle is used within
this thesis whenever a new solution idea or requirement occurs doing the development.
This cycle is then used to evaluate the relevance of it and dictate whether or not it
should be implemented.
The second cycle is the Rigor Cycle which grounds the knowledge base to the
design science research. This process reflects the use of past knowledge being used
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Research Approach
19
to derive new knowledge which can be used doing the research. The Rigor Cycle is
often presented as relevant existing literature read, and existing theories and models
used doing the research, along with additions to the knowledge base in the form of
new obtained and documented knowledge, which should provide new value to the
knowledge base. In our case, the rigour cycle will reflect the use of the knowledge
base, as all relevant knowledge obtained and used for this thesis has been referred
to and documented. In return, the knowledge base receives new contributions in the
form of new information derived from the use of existing work within design science
research, which is another use of the rigour cycle.
Finally, the Design Cycle is the heart of the research process and is where the
actual design science research is done. The Design Cycle reflects the inputs it gets
from both the Relevance Cycle and the Rigor Cycle which respectively constitutes of
requirements from the Relevance Cycle and related knowledge from the knowledge
base, including existing work, methods and theories[20] from the Rigor Cycle. In re-
turn, the Design Cycle provides an artefact which is heavily based on the inputs given
by the two other cycles. Hevner and Chatterjee [20] emphasises the importance of a
balance between performing the design and evaluating it, with the argument: ”having
a strong, grounded argument for the construction of an artefact, is insufficient if the
subsequent evaluation is weak” [20]. In our context, the design cycle corresponds to
the development of the actual artefact along with periodically evaluating the process
in order to ensure the direction of the development stays relevant.
3.2.1
Research Objective and Questions
Now that we have clarified the research approach, it is time to define the objective of
the associated research. The objective is stated according to the problems statement
from Section 3.1, and should reflect what the research of this thesis is supposed to
solve. Once the objective is stated, it is broken down into research questions, each
associated with a sub-problem which should be solved in order to achieve the objective.
The research questions are then elaborated to provide a better understanding of the
issues it involves.
3.2.1.1
Research Objective
The objective of the work done in this thesis, the development of an artefact, is to
unify existing previous projects related to the EmpiRes platform and enlarge the
overall feature set of the platform. This will bring it one step closer to its intended
goal of appealing to empirical researchers who, by using the platform, reduce time
spent, setting up similar infrastructure when starting a research project. Furthermore,
the development infrastructure of EmpiRes should be optimised so that it will make it
easier for new students to get started and help them focus on developing new features
for the platform. The development infrastructure should also encourage cooperation
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Methodology
between multiple students simultaneously, which will prevent a diverge of codebase
related to EmpiRes in the future.
3.2.1.2
Research Questions:
The objective stated in the section above is broken down into more tangible research
questions which aim to achieve the objective:
RQ1: How can the existing previous development for EmpiRes be unified, so that
all features are retained?
RQ2: What can be done to the development infrastructure so that it will make
it easier for new students to start developing features for EmpiRes?
RQ3: How do we prevent new students, who work on features for EmpiRes, from
starting their own separate code project.
The above research questions each corresponds to issues found from the problem
statement from Section 3.1.
RQ1 focuses on the current implementations for EmpiRes where it addresses the is-
sues found with the current state of the platform. To fully explain this question, let’s
recall the previous work of EmpiRes from Chapter 2 and more specifically Chuang’s
project from Section 2.2.1.2, it was about EmpiRes and his contributions to further
develop it. This makes Chuang’s project [29] the most updated version of the current
EmpiRes platform. However, Stefánsson’s project [42], Section 2.2.1.3, contains fea-
tures such as collection and processing of eyetracking and GSR data, which originally
was functionality intended for EmpiRes. These to projects are currently separated
and the issues associated is what RQ1 aims to address.
Stefánsson’s project was intended for EmpiRes, but as explained in Section 2.2.1.3,
his scope had to be limited to a separate project. One of the factors for this decision
was the short time period of a master thesis.
RQ2 addresses this issue, by focusing on the further development of EmpiRes, which
is a project where it should be easy for new students to make contributions within
a short period of time, which often corresponds to a time-frame of a bachelor or a
master thesis project.
RQ3 is quite similar to RQ2, where an easier way to make development contri-
butions to EmpiRes might also help students from creating a separate project as
Steffánsson did. However, RQ3 is also addressing the issues of cooperation where it
should be easier for multiple students to work on the EmpiRes platform simultane-
ously and where a student doesn’t constantly has to be aware of new changes made
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Research Approach
21
by others, which might interfere with one’s own work, which is the consequence of
missing policies regarding both contributions and the supporting infrastructure of the
system.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methodology
3.3
Software Development
The previous Section 3.2 introduced the research approach used for this thesis. Fur-
thermore, it stated the problem statement and presented the objective and research
questions which this thesis will achieve and answer. To do so, an artefact is developed,
which in our case is a software product, where this section will explain the software
methodologies considered for developing that artefact.
When it comes to software development, many methodologies exist to aid developers
with developing the best software solution for the needs be. These methodologies
specify particular patterns and concepts for the developers to follow, in order to en-
sure the progress of the product. Each methodology has its pros and cons and should
be carefully chosen according to the requirements of the product itself and the asso-
ciated development and maintenance as it implies.
This section will focus on the software methodologies, starting with the waterfall
model and then moving into agile development and DevOps. This chapter focuses
especially on the agile development methodology, which has been used doing the
previous work of EmpiRes, and the DevOps methodology, which introduces some in-
teresting concepts and should be considered incorporated for EmpiRes. This section
will conclude with a discussion of the methodologies covered which will lead to an
explanation of the methodology chosen for the software development found in this
thesis.
3.3.1
Waterfall Model
The waterfall model is one of the most common traditional software development
methods and perhaps also one of the simplest to understand, which is why this model
will be the starting point of the software methodologies described in this chapter.
The waterfall model is a top-down approach, where a process phase must be com-
pleted before the beginning of the next phase can start. The different phases of the
waterfall model are shown in Figure 3.2. The general purpose of the waterfall model
is to carefully plan and design all aspects of the system, before starting the actual im-
plementation. This process is done in the first two phases, requirement analysis, and
system design. This leads to a well-defined product where all initial requirements are
carefully considered. The result of the well-defined system is a final product, which
often satisfies all initial requirements within the given time-frame.
The waterfall model implies that all requirements of the final product are known
and included in the initial planning phase, which further implies that the product
customer has a clear vision of the end result since the initial requirements set are
essentially what they’ll get.
However, the waterfall model rarely success in having the right never-changing initial
requirements, and since this model is allergic to changes in the original product idea,
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Software Development
23
this causes trouble. Once the initial planning of the requirements and system design
is done, changes on the fly and the way the system needs to adapt to them will set
back the overall development process, to an earlier phase and potentially mess with
the overall design structure of the entire system. These setbacks are causing massive
delays of the overall process, and is the main drawback of the waterfall approach,
due to the rigidity of this model. The mentioned main drawback then leads to an
uncompleted product or a product which is either over-budget, over the time estimate
and/or offering fewer features and functions than initially planned. [39]
Figure 3.2: Waterfall model [46].
3.3.2
Agile development
Changes are inevitable in most real-world software development scenarios, which laid
the grounds for other software development methodologies, which aimed to resolve
the issues of the waterfall model, namely the challenge of adapting the system to
continuous incoming changes.
Many methodologies aim to make the software development process ”agile” by split-
ting up the total development process into smaller more tangible iterations. These
iterations each include a similar process flow as seen in the waterfall model, but in-
stead of considering the whole system in every phase, only small parts or components
of the system are considered according to what the costumer values at that time.
Each iteration are completed before moving on to the next one, ensuring continuous
incorporation of complete parts of the overall product doing through the whole devel-
oping process. [39]
Splitting up the development process into separate iterations, makes the system re-
sponsive to changes at any given time since new changes to the system can be easily
integrated into the flow, simply by adding it as another iteration. Unlike the wa-
terfall model, working code is continuously delivered which may be in the interest
of the customer or management, instead of reports and documentation, which were
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Methodology
delivered in the waterfall approach until the end. [36]
A more comprehensive statement of the objectives for agile development can be found
in the Manifesto for Agile Software development [28]:
”We are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and helping others
do it.
Through this work we have come to value:
Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
Working software over comprehensive documentation
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
Responding to change over following a plan
That is, while there is value in the items on the right,
we value the items on the left more.”
These statements indicate that the objectives of agile development are the solution
to the drawbacks found in the waterfall model.
In agile development, each iteration is associated with the requirements of the sys-
tem and is formulated as user stories. These user stories are then categorised into
a specific time-frame called a ”sprint”. These sprints are then prioritised into the
order of which they will be developed before the actual implementation begins. The
implementations made doing a sprint is associated with the functionality needed to
satisfy a given user story. Many user stories can be developed doing a sprint, and
the development of each user story is tested and reviewed in order to evaluate if the
requirements of that specific user story are satisfied. If the requirements are satisfied,
the developer moves on to another user story, if not, the user story can be postponed
to the following sprint, saved for later sprints or even discarded in order to optimise
the development process flow.
At any given point, new changes may be introduced either as new features or modifi-
cations. These changes can always be made into user stories and prioritised into the
following sprint or saved for a late sprint.
Figure 3.3 shows the different agile development process, where each sprint contains
similar phases as seen in the waterfall model, Figure 3.2. Each sprint has a fixed du-
ration, where shorter time-spans such as 1 to 2 weeks are preferred and even though
the duration of a sprint can exceed a couple of weeks, one should remember, that the
purpose of a sprint is to ensures frequently delivery of working software.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Software Development
25
Figure 3.3: Agile Methodology[37].
3.3.3
DevOps
In the previous section, we learned how agile development could help developers over-
come the drawback of the waterfall model from Section 3.3.1. The agile development
methodology explained above, is mainly focusing on the planning and development
phase, making the life of developers much easier, as new changes easily can be adapted
into the software system. The agile methodology leaves us at the developers, in a
phase where sprints are delivered continuous, and frequently, however, the cycle does
not end there.
DevOps is a concept found in software development methodology and can be viewed
as an extension to the agile methodology mentioned above in Section 3.3.2.
DevOps is short for a merge of Developers and Operations and has become a software
development concept which aims to bridge and blend development and operations
tools and staff to ensure frequent deployments and thereby a faster time to market
process [48].
DevOps include the same values found in the agile development methodology and
extend its focus to include deployment as well as development, to overcome issues
and misunderstandings between developers and operations. These issues are often
configuration and infrastructure related, meaning that the development environment
differs from the deployment environment leading to conflicts and issues which first is
found doing the actual code deployment.
The conflicts referred to above are usually a mismatch between the configurations
found in the development environment and the deployment environment, which could
be different technologies used or versions of them.
These issues lead to a unsuccessful deployment, even though the implementations
might work on the local machine used for the actual development.
These conflicts and issues need to be resolved, which can lead to a series of time-
consuming tasks both for the developer and operation team and thereby postpones
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Methodology
all other tasks and the actual deployment. In DevOps, developers and operations col-
laborate in the shared overall service life-cycle of the product, from the planning and
designing phase, through the development process and to production support [14], to
ensure a consistent life-cycle pipeline of the product which encourages frequently and
easy deployments.
Figure 3.4 visualize the differences between the agile development pipeline and the De-
vOps pipeline and clarifies, that DevOps tend to encapsulate the agile development
methodology, but further evolve it to contain both the deployment and operation
phases which introduces the release, deploy and operate phase as part of the pipeline.
In this pipeline, system monitoring and support is part of the operation phase, which
may be a ongoing process through the lifetime of the system.
Even though some of the phases might have slightly different names, Figure 3.4 should
provide the reader with an illustration of the conjunction between the agile develop-
ment methodology from Figure 3.3 and the DevOps methodology from Figure 3.5 and
further illustrate how DevOps, inspired by agile development, aims to further extend
the pipeline to all phases associated with software development.
Figure 3.4: DevOps and agile development (inspired by [30]).
A core concept of DevOps is described by Ebert, Gallardo, Hernantes and Serrano
in their article named ”DevOps” [13] and is stated below:
”Quality deliveries with short cycle time need a high degree of automation.”
This statement clarifies how DevOps suggest a high degree of automation in order
to ensure the quality of frequent deliveries. More specifically, automation of builds,
tests, deployments and performance monitoring is key aspects of the DevOps pipeline
and should encourage and reflect an automating infrastructure set up with consistent
configurations through the pipeline.
A high degree of automation across various processes associated with developing, de-
ploying and monitoring the performance of a product, will aid developers producing
code which are ready for deployment and can be deployed easily consistently. Having
an automated build and test process which reflects the configurations of the produc-
tion environment will produce instant feedback of success or failure of newly pushed
code and will only be integrated if both build and tests are completed without any
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Software Development
27
conflicts between existing functionality or the configuration environment set up to
match the deployed environment.
Automated deployments relieve the team of doing it manually and encourage fre-
quently deployments of minor changes instead of having to manually deploy changes,
which then in exchange often is done with larger chunks of software changes. Auto-
mated deployments once again provide feedback about the success or conflicts associ-
ated with the deployments and will serve as the last line of defence for detecting any
conflicts.
Lastly, automated performance monitoring will aid the operations team with live feed-
back of the system which aids the operations team to do better system support and
maintenance of the system. [49].
Figure 3.5 displays how the DevOps pipeline encourages collaboration between
the dev’s and ops’. Automation aside, the reader might notice that the DEV flow
circle looks familiar to the sprint iteration circle from agile development, found in
Figure 3.3.
In extent, the OPS flow circle illustrate the evolution which includes
deployment and monitoring of the released code.
Figure 3.5: The DevOps concept pipeline [48].
3.3.4
Discussion
This sub-section will conclude the software development methodologies section with
a discussion of the methodologies covered above, and will explain which methodology
is chosen for the software development found in this thesis.
For a brief recap of the three software development methodologies mentioned in this
section, Figure 3.6 shows a simplified version of the development process and their
sequence.
As the Figure shows, the waterfall model is a top-down approach, where the first
process must be completed before another can begin. The total set of requirements
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Methodology
Figure 3.6: Comparison of the software development methodologies discussed in
this chapter.
are predefined and planning and design of the entire system is made before the entire
system is coded in one go. Then, a comprehensive test process is executed, where the
entire system gets tested and corrected. Lastly, the entire system is deployed.
The agile development methodology draws inspiration from the waterfall model, but
the design, code and test process is split up into iterations, each containing a set of the
overall functionality for the system. Requirement changes are more manageable in
this approach since only a small iteration of the system is effected or another iteration
can be integrated doing development, unlike the waterfall model, where new changes
are a drawback which sets the development process back to the design process, leading
to delays of the overall development. The agile development methodology that we
discussed in Section 3.3.2 does however still contain a larger deployment phase at the
end of the development process, which might contain conflicts if the infrastructure
or the configuration environment used for development aren’t aligned with the one it
gets deployed on.
To overcome the conflicts between the development and deployment environment,
DevOps encapsulate the benefits of agile development and through a high degree of
automation, introduce the deployment phase as part of each development iteration.
In DevOps, the high degree of automation is often utilised through automating
the build, test and deployment process which each change needs to successfully go
through.
Agile development was the choice of software development methodology used for the
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Software Development
29
previous development of EmpiRes and for good reasons. EmpiRes do not have a prede-
fined final set of requirements, which makes agile development a suitable methodology
in contrast to the waterfall model since EmpiRes is an ongoing project where changes
occur frequently.
The agile development methodology does also align with the development process
of EmpiRes, where new students need to make their contributions through a short
period of time.
Contributions to EmpiRes needs to be easily integrated into the existing codebase
without interfering with existing functionality. For this purpose, concepts from De-
vOps, especially automation of builds and tests could be useful for maintaining the
functionality and align configuration environments. Automated deployments could
also be useful for a remote test server, which automatically and continuously will
deploy all new changes made from the contributing developers, making it easy for
developers to acknowledge what other developers have been working on.
Based on the description above, this thesis will extend upon the agile development
foundation used to build the current version of EmpiRes. This will include imple-
menting concepts found in DevOps, which seems to solve the problems associated
with our problem statement from Section3.1 along with answering some of the asso-
ciate research questions from Section 3.2.1.
Before we are able to achieve the benefits of DevOps, we first need to introduce
some technical concepts which, if implemented correctly, could help us achieve these
benifits. These technical concepts, along with a overall proposed solution, will be the
topic of the next chapter.
==PAGE:40==
30
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Technical Concepts
and Proposed solution
Now that we have an understanding of the research approach and software develop-
ment methodology used in this thesis, this chapter can be viewed as an extension to
the software development section from Chapter 3, Section 3.3, and describes some
technical concepts which can be used to achieve the benefits of the DevOps method-
ology.
These software development concepts will be included in a solution proposal of the
overall further development of EmpiRes. The proposed solution concluding this chap-
ter will also conclude the more conceptual approach of the thesis which we have used
so far, for a more practical approach explaining the actual implementation made
to achieve our objective from Chapter 3, Section 3.2.1 and answer related research
questions.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Technical Concepts and Proposed solution
4.1
Continuous Integration and Continuous
Deployment
Continuous Integration (CI), Continuous DElivery (CDE) and Continuous Deploy-
ment (CD) are three popular software development practices within the DevOps
software development methodology for building software products. Modern develop-
ers seek to choose these practices to aid in achieving DevOps when building software
products. These practices will be described in the following sub-sections.
4.1.1
Continuous Integration
Continuous Integration (CI) is a development practice which builds upon the concepts
of frequently integrating changes made to the code, in order to detect issues as early
as possible. Furthermore having frequent commits enables the team of developers
to have an updated shared repository at all times, minimizing merge conflicts and
increase productivity.
The reader might notice the similarities of this practice, as it builds upon the concepts
of DevOps, described previously in Section 3.3.3 from Chapter 3, only now we are
looking at the actual development implementation practice, rather than the concept.
This practice includes an automated build tool as well as an automated test frame-
work.
These automated tools aim at providing useful feedback for the developer
regarding error detection in both build or tests. This will decrease the number of
merge conflicts as well as maintaining existing functionality without new changes in-
terfering. Each commit to the shared code base needs to run through these processes
and are only integrated if the build and tests succeed [40, 24].
The automated build tool and test framework are running in a separate remote envi-
ronment to ensure a common configuration environment for contributing developers.
This is to avoid the ”works on my machine” scenario, where newly released changes
runs flawlessly on the local machine it was developed on but fails to deploy to the
remote instance due to a mismatch between the two configuration environments.
Every commit needs to go through the build and test process and since this prac-
tice encourages changes to be integrated frequently, developers are provided with the
feedback needed in order to fix conflicts before they become a common problem [38].
The CI practice should increase the production speed and quality by frequently in-
tegrating tested changes into a shared repository, leaving the developers with a fre-
quently updated code base [40].
An image visualising the CI practice is shown in Figure 4.1, where the flow starts
at the developers, who commit a change to the shared source repository containing
the code base. A continuous integration server automatically fetches the changes,
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment
33
builds and tests the changes and send feedback back to the developers about the
result. The changes are only committed to the shared source repository if both build
and tests of the changes succeed.
4.1.2
Continuous Delivery Deployment
This section will explain the two practices, Continuous DElivery (CDE) and Continu-
ous Deployment (CD). Both practices are an extension of CI and are concerned with
the last phases of the development to production pipeline.
CDE is the first step in of the CD pipeline and as the name suggests, aims to ensure
that the application always is at a production-ready state, which should provide easy
and confident deployments to production environment, whenever it is needed [24].
This is achieved by integrating an automated release management tool, which pack-
ages the build and tested application into some kind of executable file, which later on
can be used for deployment. Doing this automatically ensures that the latest updated
versions of the application always will be ready for deployment. CDE introduces a
new automated process of the overall continuous development pipeline, see Figure 4.4.
CDE is only automating the process concerning the delivery of an application release
which should be ready for deployment, not the deployment itself, which at this point
still needs to be done manually [40].
An image visualising the CDE practice is shown in Figure 4.2, where the main differ-
ence from CI, see Figure 4.1, is the release management phase, where CDE automat-
ically takes changes from CI and do acceptance test and make the application ready
for deployment.
Having CDE integrated, provides the development infrastructure with a continuous
delivery of an application state, release ready for deployment. As mentioned above,
the deployment are still done manually, a task which now is ready to be automated.
Figure 4.1: Continuous Integration (inspired by [40]).
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Technical Concepts and Proposed solution
Figure 4.2: Continuous Delivery (inspired by [40]).
Automatically updating the production environment with new changes for the applica-
tion is called continuous deployment, which extends upon CDE simply by automating
deployment [40].
Figure 4.3: Continuous Deployment (inspired by [40]).
An image visualising the CD practice is shown in Figure 4.3, where the main dif-
ference from CDE, see Figure 4.2, is the automated part of deploying to production.
To clarify the relationship between CDE and CD we first look at CDE. To obtain
CDE, CI must be integrated which provides the build and tested application which
should become ready for deployment. To fully automate the production pipeline, CD
must be integrated, which implies that CDE is integrated as well, since it is the in-
tegration of CDE which provides the application which should be deployed. If we
take look at Figure 4.4 again, it should be clear, that CI extends upon agile develop-
ment, automating the build and test phases. CDE extends upon CI, introducing a
new automated phase, namely the release phase. Lastly, we have CD which extends
upon CDE and once again, further extend the automation of phases to include the
deployment phase.
In CDE, it is up to the business itself to decide when and what should be deployed,
wherein CD the deployment is fully automated and therefore deploys the application,
every time a new version is ready for release.
Because of the continuous deployment, CD is only suitable for certain systems, where
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment
35
Figure 4.4: Relationship between CI, CDE and CD(inspired by [30]).
enrollment of all new changes automatic and continuously are wanted. This could for
instance be a test server, where developers want to see all current changes made to a
system, but CD should perhaps not be integrated on to the production server, since
the deployments might only include a sub-set of coherent features which should only
be displayed to users when the complete set of features are completed and evaluated.
In this case, CDE might be sufficient so that developers and managers can control
the deployments themselves.
So while CDE practice might be suitable for all types of systems and organizations,
CD practice may only be suitable for certain types of organizations or systems, who
intend to roll out all possible development changes to the users, whenever they are
implemented.
For a quick recap of the three concepts mentioned above, lets inspect Figure 4.4
which explains how they each introduces automation to a new phase of the pipeline;
CI which automatically build and test newly pushed code to minimize issues and
streamline new initiatives for the code base, CDE which takes the build code and
package it up, making it ready for release, and lastly, CD which automatically de-
ploys the released code to the production environment.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Technical Concepts and Proposed solution
4.2
Microservices
Continuous integration and development introduced some interesting concepts to aid
achieving concepts from the DevOps methodology, by automating processes within
the phases of development and deployment. Another useful technological concept for
achieving our objective is microservices which can make use of the concepts of CI and
CD. Microservices is therefore briefly explained in this section.
Microservices are a development architecture with the intent of providing a system,
which is easier for new developers to understand and develop upon. In a microservice
architecture, modularity and loosely linked services are key. Therefore, a system/ap-
plication is broken down into separate loosely coupled services, each responsible for
a specific part of the system. This allows developers to work on different services at
the same time and enables switching services in or out when needed.
Services communicate with each other and do so by well-chosen protocols which should
be compatible between the services [7, 19, 42]. The microservices architecture can
integrate the concepts of CI and CD into each service, making development and
deployment of new features or changes for each service a lot easier.
4.3
Containers
The last technological concept which we want to touch in this in this chapter, is con-
tainers. Containers fit perfectly into the infrastructure concepts earlier described, all
introducing ideas that will help us achieve our objective and answer the associated
research questions.
This section will give a brief introduction to the concept of containers, and then take
a deeper look into one of the major players in container services, namely Docker.
Moving a software application or service from an environment to another can some-
times be a challenging task.
Problems often occur when the supporting software
environment of a product isn’t identical to the environment it was developed on.
This could be if the targeted operating system isn’t identical and the product does
not support that system or version of the system, or it could even be the installed
versions of the framework or even plugins used within the product which may be
different and therefore leading to issues.
These environmental configuration issues has been mentioned both in Chapter 3, Sec-
tion 3.3.3 explaining DevOps and in this chapter, Section 4.1.2 explaining continuous
deployment, where each addresses these problems with ideas of how they can be fixed.
Another useful solution to not only avoid these problems, but also includes enhanced
reliability, portability and scalability, are containers.
Containers are standardized units, which can contain a application or service along
with every configuration file needed in order for it to run. These containers can then
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Containers
37
be run, paused, deleted, shipped, copied or replaced across different software environ-
ments, and since the container contains all the initial configuration, the application
or service continues to run reliably regardless of the underlying supporting software
environment. The concept of containers will be further explained by looking at a
specific container service called Docker, a popular container service.
Docker is also the container technology of choice in this thesis, since it has been
used within the previous projects for EmpiRes and therefore associated with this
thesis.
4.3.1
Docker
Docker is a company who has developed an open source technology, designed to let
you package software into the standardized units called containers. A container is
made from what is called a Docker image, which is a standalone, executable package
of software that includes everything needed to run the associated application: source
code, libraries, runtime, and other associated tools and settings [34].
The Docker image becomes a Docker container during runtime which means when
executed by a Docker engine. The Docker engine is installed when installing Docker,
which is available for both Windows, Mac and Linux instances [12]. Docker must be
installed on the operating system which wishes to run or manage Docker containers.
The Docker image makes it easier to ship and deploy an application by having it as
a lightweight, standalone, executable package of software which during runtime will
transform into a container, ensuring that the application always runs it the same, in
its own separate environment, regardless of the supporting software environment of
the host, as long as the host system has installed and are running Docker [11].
Figure 4.5 displays how multiple containerized applications, are able to share the
same operating system as well as infrastructure as long as it runs Docker.
The benefits of having the system containerized like with the use of Docker is, that a
Docker image can be used for reproduction of a container, which also improves scal-
ability, since multiple instances of the same container can be booted up in a matter
of seconds if needed and shut down just as fast once they are no longer useful. So
having a containerized system improves modularity, scalability, and reliability of ser-
vices, as long as the targeted system supports the container service used, e. g Docker
which ensures that no matter the underlying infrastructure, a Docker container runs
identically on all systems.
An application or service within a container can be connected through messaging
such as REST, JMS or whatever protocol wanted, as long as the contained software
supports that protocol. Furthermore, the container needs to expose the necessary
ports which allow the information to pass through the container and to the receiving
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Technical Concepts and Proposed solution
Figure 4.5: Containerized Application using Docker [11].
service. In Docker, Docker containers are also provided with an internal link system
called a bridge which is automatically set up when installing Docker and creating
containers. This allows all docker containers to be linked to each other, within the
local network, without exposing any ports externally on the container [10].
The explanation of the concept containers and the service Docker, concludes the
technical concepts of this chapter. We will now introduce the proposed solution for
this thesis, with relation to the concepts explained in this chapter.
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Solution Overview
39
4.4
Solution Overview
Based on the knowledge obtained from the previous chapters, this section will include
a high-level explanation of the general solution overview, before diving we introduce
a more technical and practical solution in the chapters to follow.
This general solution overview of this thesis will explain how this thesis aims to achieve
the objective and answer the research questions from Chapter 3, Section 3.2.1. This
section will establish a general understanding of how we can develop a relevant arte-
fact for this thesis, based on knowledge explained in previous chapters.
The first step of the overall solution overview for this thesis will be to unify and
integrate the previous projects of Stefánsson [42], discussed in detail in Chapter 2 see
Section 2.2.1.3 and Chuang [29], see Section 2.2.1.2. This will provide an integrated
codebase, retaining all features of the current version of EmpiRes and introduce new
features to EmpiRes, such as accessing and displaying data collected by Stefánssons
system. Furthermore, this will provide a solution which can be used to answer the
first research question, RQ1.
The second step of this solution is to implement concepts of continuous integration
(CI) and continuous deployment (CD), see Section 4.1, to extend the agile develop-
ment methodology previously used, towards DevOps (explained in Chapter 3, Sec-
tion 3.3.3). In this process, the benefits of microservices and containers should be
considered, as they to some extent already are integrated into the existing solutions.
This solution will help answer the second research question, RQ2. Furthermore, it will
introduce the benefits from microservices and containers to the development infras-
tructure of the unified system implemented by the first step of the solution, mentioned
above.
The third and last step of this solution is provided to help answering the last research
question, RQ2. In conjunction with the second step of this solution, this step includes
introducing contribution policies for new students to follow. These policies should
include a guideline for how to contribute to the shared repository which contains the
overall codebase. These policies should help new developers making changes without
interfering with changes made by other students. This could increase the potential of
students contributing to this platform, instead of starting their own separate project,
because the foundation for the project infrastructure is already set up for them and
ready to use. The policies and the implementations from the second step, will then
decrease the number of interferences and merge conflicts from other students, and
provide them with a sort of guarantee, that they will be having a clean work-flow
throughout their period of development. Examples of such policies could be associ-
ated with the use of a shared repository along with documentation and guidelines to
how the implemented concepts from RQ2 work, including their and the overall system
configuration setup.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Technical Concepts and Proposed solution
A more thorough explanation of specific implementations parts associated with this
general proposed solution is given later on in the following chapters.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Integration of
Codebase
This chapter will elaborate on the ”Solution Overview” presented in the previous
Section 4.4, from Chapter 4. This chapters gives a more concrete solution to the
first step of the overall solution, namely unifying and integrate the previous projects,
Section 2.2, of Chuang [29] and Stefánsson [42].
We established a general knowledge of the design choices and architecture of the two
systems in Chapter 2, Section 2.2, from a high-level point of view.
This chapter
starts by explaining the design choices and architecture of the two systems, which
will provide the reader with a better technical understanding of the two systems. This
understanding is then put to use in the following discussion, where the two systems
technologies, differences and similarities, along with design strategies for the imple-
mentation are discussed. This will result in a design approach explaining how these
systems can be unified and integrated as a shared codebase. The design approach
will lead to an explanation of the implemented solution in Section 5.4. The overall
solution and implementation is evaluated in Section 5.5 and will conclude this chapter.
At this point, it should be clear to the reader, that Chuang’s system is reflecting
and representing the EmpiRes platform itself, where Stefánssons system, representing
mental state detection, would be a great addition to the platform, so that researchers
are able to reach data associated with mental state detection, through the EmpiRes
platform.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Integration of Codebase
5.1
Design architecture of the previous systems
The previous systems of Chuang [29] and Stefánsson [42] and their overall purpose
was described in Chapter 2, Section 2.2. This section will give a more technical ex-
planation to these projects, by explaining the components and design architecture
for each system. This explanation will provide the reader with knowledge of the two
systems architecture, which is needed to better understand the following discussion
and implementation section to come.
We will start off by revisiting Chuang’s system representing the current version of
EmpiRes, followed by Stefánsson’s system which represents the mental state detec-
tion addition to EmpiRes.
5.1.1
A Platform for Collecting, Processing and Analyzing Data in
Scientific Projects, by Chuang [29] (Revisited).
This system represents the current version of EmpiRes which is the product of both
Lykkegaard’s [31], see Section 2.2.1.1 and Chuang’s [29], see Section 2.2.1.2, linked
project work as described in Chapter 2, Section 2.2.
EmpiRes is the main topic of this thesis and therefore it is important to understand
the design architecture of the system. To do so, we will explain the three main com-
ponents of the system, namely: the user interface, a container platform for hosting
associated containers and the overall framework. The three components is shown in
Figure 5.1 and are further described bellow.
The User Interface acts as the frontend of the system and handles the interac-
tion between the user and the system. It is through the user interface, users are able
to authorize, access and insert data into the system as well as provide the users with
visualizations of stored data, which could for instance show statistics or graphs over
time series data. The user interface component is a web application, which is accessi-
ble to the user through their web browser. It is written in React1 and the system gets
build and run by NodeJS2. Furthermore, it connects to the framework component
and sends and receive data from that component through a RESTfull-API.
The user interface component may be referred to as the frontend of EmpiRes through-
out this thesis.
The Framework components acts as the backend server for this system and is re-
sponsible for the systems overall data management and data processing. It connects
and receives REST-requests from the user interface component, but is also connected
to the container platform component and thereby the hosted databases.
1https://reactjs.org/
2https://nodejs.org/
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Design architecture of the previous systems
43
The Framework component is a single Java project, made as a Spring Boot3 applica-
tion, booted up using Gradle4 and run as a Tomcat5 application server.
The framework component will be referred to as the backend server of EmpiRes
throughout this thesis, which is more descriptive for the actual component behaviour.
The Container Platform is a component consists of multiple Docker containers,
which hosts the various services used within this system. This system has four docker
containers running, namely a relational database (Postgres database, PostgreSQL6),
time series database (Influx database, InfluxDB7), a build automation tool and data
visualizer (Grafana8). The backend server component (the framework) is connected
to both the Postgres and Influx database, as well as the build automation tool for
code build and execution. The data visualizer component is connected to the time
series database to retrieve and display graph representations of the data.
A component diagram of how the components mentioned above are connected are
shown below in Figure 5.1.
This system design was made with the benefits of having loosely coupling between
components in mind. This enhances the extensibility of the system since each com-
ponent easily can be replaced or used in another scenario.
The system design does also contain functionality for collecting data from wearables
sensors, Fitbit and Empatica, through an Android application as mentioned in Sec-
tion 2.2.1.2, but since this functionality is not the focus of this thesis, and because it
hasn’t been further described in Chuang’s project [29] project, these functionalities
are left out of this explanation for simplicity.
3https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot
4https://gradle.org/
5http://tomcat.apache.org/
6https://www.postgresql.org/
7https://www.influxdata.com
8https://grafana.com/
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Integration of Codebase
Figure 5.1: Component Diagram of the Data Management Platform [29].
5.1.2
Architectural blueprint for a neuro-adaptive system, by
Stefánsson [42] (Revisited).
This system represents the current version of a mental state detection system which
is the product of Stefánsson’s project work [42], see Chapter 2, Section 2.2.1.3.
This system includes the collection and processing (feature extraction) of data from
an eye-tracking and a GSR device for mental state detection experiments, but for the
moment, does only include collecting and processing the data. The system is made
up of three main components; a data collection component, a data-processing server
and a database server. The three main components and how they are connected is
shown in Figure 5.2.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Design architecture of the previous systems
45
The data collection component consists of two sensores, the Shimmer 3 GSR+9
and the Tobii 4C Eye tracker10 for collecting mental state related data. Futhermore,
the component consist of a PC client. The devices collect sensory data and sends it
to the PC client. The PC client handles the synchronization of the collected data
through LSH (Lab Streaming Layer) and sends it to the data-processing server.
The PC client is written in Python and does not contain a specific user interface to
interact with, but is a script which should be run in order to collect the data from
the sensors and sent it to the data-processing server component.
The data-processing server component consists of two running Docker containers,
a Wildfly11 application server, and a Python web framework. The Wildfly applica-
tion server receives requests from the PC client within the collected data, along with
additional configurations found in a JSON string. The configurations specify whether
the data should be further processed. Regardless of the configurations, the raw data
is always sent to the database server in order to save it to a database. If the JSON
configuration string specifies that the data needs further processing e.g. feature ex-
traction, it gets sent to the Python web framework for data processing.
The response from the Python Web Framework is a JSON string, with updated con-
figuration and processed data. The responded JSON string will then be sent to the
database server for storage.
The database server does also host two running Docker containers, a Wildfly appli-
cation server, and a Cassandra12 database. The Wildfly application server receives
messages containing data from the processing server, raw or processed, along with
their configurations, which should be stored in the Cassandra database. The Wildfly
application server handles the communication to and from the Cassandra database
and is responsible managing data to and from the database.
The data collection components are communicating with the data-processing server
through REST, where the data-processing server and database server are connecting
through JSM as shown in Figure 5.2.
The data-processing server is using a REST connection in between the associated
Wildfly application server and the python web framework, where the database server
is using an integrated Docker IP communication protocol in between the associated
docker containers being the Wildfly application server and the Cassandra database
which, though this Docker protocol, allows Docker containers on the same host to con-
nect with each other. The connections between the various components as described
above can be seen in Figure 5.2.
9http://www.shimmersensing.com/products/shimmer3-wireless-gsr-sensor
10https://gaming.tobii.com/product/tobii-eye-tracker-4c/
11http://wildfly.org/
12http://cassandra.apache.org/
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Integration of Codebase
Both Wildfly application servers are writen in Java, but are hen packaged as a web
application resource file(.war-file, respectively a ProcessingServer.war and a databas-
eServer.war), which can be run by Wildfly.
In order to run Wildfly in a Docker container, Stefánsson made his own Docker im-
age13, where the Cassandra database was run as a Docker container through its official
repository from Docker hub14.
A component overview of the system is shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: System component overview [42].
This system design was made with the benefits of a micro-services methodology
in mind, where each service is running separately in their own environment, which
enhance maintainability and further development, but also makes them easily replace-
able. Microservices was further explained in Chapter 4, Section 4.2.
13https://hub.docker.com/r/beemmess/wildfly
14https://hub.docker.com//cassandra/
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Discussion
47
5.2
Discussion
Now that we have established a better understanding of the two systems design choices
and architectures, we can begin to compare and discuss the differences and similar-
ities of the two systems along with possible design strategies for a unification and
integration of the two systems.
As mentioned in the previous section, see Section 5.1, both Stefánsson’s project (re-
garding mental state detection) and Chuang’s project (regarding EmpiRes), contains
a lot of different components. So to get a better perspektive when discussing the dif-
ferent parts of each project, the various components are categories into a respective
mutual component.
The three categories are: a client component, a server com-
ponent and a database component. These mutual components should make it easier
to compare the two systems, which will be done according to each mutual component.
For simplicity, the following sections throughout this chapter will refer the project
regarding the EmpiRes platform to Chuang’s [29] project, where the project regard-
ing the mental state detecting will be referred to as the project of Sefánsson’s [42]
project.
Through the following discussion, one should keep in mind that Chuang’s system
representing EmpiRes, is a overall framework which can be used as a platform for re-
searchers to manage empirical research projects, where Stefánsson’s system regarding
mental state detection, only includes collection and processing of associated sensory
data. Not only are the main purpose of the two systems very different, both their
architecture and use of technology are different too, which we will explain in the
fallowing sub-sections.
5.2.1
Client
The fist mutual component is the Client. In this section we will briefly introduce the
client component of each system and then explain the unification possibilities.
The client from Chuang includes a client written in React which will display as a
web application. This makes perfect sense since the purpose of this project was to
establish a platform to manage research projects. So the web application enables its
users to interact with the system and make use of all its features.
The client from Stefánsson’s project includes a pure python client with no user in-
terface. The main reason for the python client is to have an easy way to connect
to local sensors and send it with the help of Flask15, a micro framework for python,
15http://flask.pocoo.org/
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Integration of Codebase
which enables a REST-api. For this project, no visual components to interact with
the system has been necessary since the clients only purpose is to collect and send
sensory data to the connected server.
For EmpiRes, a user interface implemented as a web client is without a doubt the
best way to interact with the platform and provides the needed interface for manag-
ing research projects so it is a crucial part of the platform. The two clients purpose
is therefore completely different, since the python client’s only task, is to provide
an easy way for sensory data associated with mental state detection to be collected,
however, in the current version of Stefánsson’s project, this functionality can only be
used if the physical sensor is connected to the local computer running the client.
With the differences between the two client components mentioned above, it becomes
clear, that a unified client wouldn’t make much sense. This will involve a researcher
who wants to collect and process mental state related data, to go through Stefánsson’s
client. This may seem a bit strange, but if we take into account, that Stefánsson’s
client is more of a local program which has to be run on the same local system as
the sensors, in order to connect to them, it might be better to leave it be instead
of integrating it into the user interface of the EmpiRes platform. Furthermore this
solutions may both offer the easiest way of running an eye-tracking session without
posing risks of failure to the integration process, which could jeopardize the final im-
plementation product of this thesis.
A alternative approach achieve a unified client, is to integrate Stefánsson’s client
into Chuang’s, and be so, either by incorporate the python code in Chuang’s client
and make functionality which is able to run the python code through the user in-
terface.
This might be possible if we don’t take the running environment of the
client into account. However, the running environment of the client does have some
constraints to this solution, due to the connectivity of sensors to Stefánsson’s client.
These sensors must be connected to the local computer of which the python code
is running on, making it difficult to integrate into a global environment where the
client should be running on a remote server for global access. This could be possible
if Stefánsson’s client was set up as a local server listing to request from the web client.
But either way, the researcher and subject must be presents at the local computer at
which the sensors are connected to in order to activate and apply the sensors properly.
Even though this solution might involve a user interacting with a single client, much
work needs to be done in order to establish the connection between the two clients,
so the functionality can be run through the user interface of Chuang’s client. The
redundancy of the hard work associated with this solution should be considered, since
it may be just as easy for the user to shift to Stefánsson’s client and run it as it is, in
order to collect the desired data.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Discussion
49
5.2.2
Server
This section will consider the possibilities of unifying the server components of the
two systems. We will start by briefly Introducing the two server components and then
move on to a discussion introducing possible solutions for a unified server component.
Chuang’s server component is a single server, written in Java, run a embedded Tom-
cat server and use Gradle for build and dependency management. Chuang’s server
works much like a traditional backend server, which contains most of the business
logic of the system. Its main purpose is to handle and respond to requests from the
user interface (Chuang’s client) and managing data to and from the database.
Stefánsson’s server component, consists of tree servers all run in their own Docker
container. These servers are split into two different server-environments, one for data-
processing management and one for databases management.
The data-processing
environment consists of a Wildfly application server and a Python processing server.
The Wildfly application server in the data-processing environment is connected and
distributes the data from the Python client (Stefánsson’s client), to the Python pro-
cessing server and the database environment.
The processing server handles the
feature extraction.
The database environment also consists of two Docker containers: a Wildfly applica-
tion server and a Cassandra database. The Wildfly Server in the database environ-
ment handles and manages all data received from the data-processing environment
store it in the conneced Cassandra database.
Stefánsson’s architecture is quite interesting because he chose to deploy multiple
servers in different environments in order to distribute the workload. Furthermore,
every service but the python client is run as a Docker container which contributes to
achieving the benefits of microservices.
When it comes to unifying the server components, there is little to no benefits associ-
ated with merging or messing with the data-processing environment. It fits perfectly
into the architecture where Stefánsson’s client can send data directly to be processed.
With the benefits of microservices and Docker, it makes perfect sense to leave it as it is.
The Wildfly server in the database environment, on the other hand, constitutes some
exciting opportunities.
The Chuang’s server component and the Wildfly server in the database environment
some similarities, which is managing data to and from the database. Merging the
two servers, could eliminate a server component and integrate the functionality into
a single server.
Both servers a written in Java, but the two servers still have some significant differ-
ences:
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Integration of Codebase
1. Chuang’s server is built and managed by Gradle, where Stefánssons’s are using
Maven.
2. Chuang’s server is run using Tomcat, where Stefánssons’s are run through Wild-
fly in a Docker container.
3. Chuang’s server is using a Spring Boot dependency in order to run it on an
embedded Tomcat server, where Stefánssons’s does not and are run through
the Wildfly container as exported and deployed .war file.
4. Stefánsson’s server contains a JMS connection to the data-processing server
environment.
The first difference is the use of dependency and build-management tool. The biggest
inconvenience associated with this difference is the dependency-management. The
dependencies between the two projects cannot be directly unified due to syntax, pos-
sible changes in, or absence of the specified dependency associated with the current
dependency management tool. Incorporating dependencies from Stefánssons server
into Chuang’s server could potentially be a time-consuming task where each depen-
dency needs to be investigated in order to find a corresponding dependency across
the management tool.
Furthermore, newly added dependencies used for another
server configuration might interfere with existing ones, leading to yet another time-
consuming task of debugging and potential restructuring major parts of the system.
The second and third difference are each concerned about the runtime environment
of their respected server. Decisions about the desired runtime environment, where
choosing between Wildfly and Tomcat, along considering having the service container-
ized or not, must be made. When these decisions have been made, a fair amount of
time but be used in order to ensure that the solution is successfully integrated and
contains the same functionality and connectivity as the two servers combined.
The fourth and final difference is the JMS connection integrated into Stefánsson’s
server.
This connection is an essential part of storing the data sent by the data-
processing environment and should be included in the final product in a similar way,
which ensure the data transfer.
The above differences between the two servers do not exclude a possible unification,
but indicates that careful considerations must be done before a possible unification
can be integrated successfully.
With these considerations in mind, a possible solution could be to unify the servers,
convert the Chuang’s runtime to support excluding to a .war file and run it in the
Wildfly container like Stefánsson’s server did. This will ensure the connection to the
data-processing environment as well as the Cassandra database. However, this means
that the runtime environment of Chuang’s server completely changes and should be
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Discussion
51
configured to support these changes. This includes the connectivity to all other com-
ponents in Chuang’s system, being the client component and the database component,
which includes multiple Docker containers.
Another solution could be to go with Chuang’s runtime environment, using Spring
Boot and the embedded Tomcat server. However, this solution removes the bene-
fits of Stefánssons runtime environment where the server runs in a Docker container,
which enhances the flexibility of the service. Furthermore, the connection to both
the data-processing environment and the Cassandra database must be configured to
support the new environment.
5.2.3
Database
In this section, we will consider the possibilities of unifying the database components
of the two systems. We will start by briefly introduce the two Database components
and then move on to a discussion introducing possible solutions for a unified Database
component
Chuang’s database component consists of two databases each running in their own
Docker container, an InfluxDB for time-series sensor data and a PostgreSQL database
for handling everything else in relational data (users, projects ext.).
As for Stefánsson’s database component, a single database running in a Docker con-
tainer is used, namely a Cassandra database, which has been chosen to handle time-
series data.
The main concern here is the two time-series databases. It might seem inconvenient
to have two time-series databases with generally the same purpose, namely storing
data from sensors. It could make sense to merge these two databases together, into
a single unit for placing time-series data, however, having two time-series databases
might not be a bad idea, since they both are run as a Docker container, the flexibility
and reliability of having them separate could be a better option, as if one goes down,
parts of the system will continue to function, which may bring more benefits to the
system, over the hassle of maintaining two different databases.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Integration of Codebase
5.3
Solution idea
The previous section discussed the differences and similarities of the two systems along
with the best unification possibilities between the mutual components of Chuang and
Stefánsson’s systems.
This section will present the overall solution idea for the unification of the systems
as well as result in a integrated shared codebase. This solution idea has derived from
the solution proposals and arguments found in the discussion, see Section 5.2, but
will also include new initiatives in order to achieve the best possible outcome.
5.3.1
Main solution idea
As mentioned in introduction to this chapter, the goal of this solution is focused on
the first step mentioned in the solution overview from Chapter 3, Section 4.4, which
is to unify and integrate the previous projects of Stefánsson and Chuang, and provide
an integrated codebase, retaining all features of the current version of EmpiRes and
introduce new features to EmpiRes, such as accessing and displaying data collected
by Stefánssons system.
To achieve this goal, multiple steps needs to be taken. First the code base for each of
the two systems must be collected and the separate code-bases should be placed in a
shared location, which will make it easy accessible for further development. For this
solution, Gitlab16 will be used. Gitlab will be explained in more detail in Chapter 7,
but for now some essential key points is mentioned for why this technology is used.
Gitlab is the version control system of choice since it includes all the essential func-
tionality of a version control system, and it allow us to locate the code-base within
the DTU network, as DTU has their own specified gitlab environment only accessible
within the DTU network called ”lab.compute.dtu.dk”. Furthermore, Gitlab provides
DevOps facilities such as continuous Integration and delivery, which will be further
explained in the next chapter.
Having successfully placed the code-bases in a shared Gitlab environment provides a
single, shared place for further developers to access the code. The code-bases might
still reflect two separate systems, but they now reflect a connection to some extend,
as they now will be observed as parts of the same overall purpose and will now be
observed as a single shared integrated code-base.
Now that we have a shared integrated code-base located at Gitlab, a version con-
trole system, it is time to look at how the Stefánsson and Chuangs system can be
connected, so that new features such as accessing and displaying data regarding men-
tal state detection, collected by Stefánssons system can be accessed and displayed
through EmpiRes, Chuang’s system.
To do so, multiple solution ideas was proposed in Section 5.2, which should be consid-
16https://about.gitlab.com/
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Solution idea
53
ered. However, timecontraints for this project period must also be considered, which
is why an alternative solution chosen.
One of the key points of the goal stated for this solution is to access and display data
regarding mental state detection, through EmpiRes. The best way to ensure that this
is possible within the time-frame of this project, is to establish a connection from Em-
piRes, to the mental state detection system, allowing mental state detection data to
be retrieved from EmpiRes. This is done by establish a connection from the backend
server of EmpiRes, to the Cassandra database in the database-server environment of
Stefánssons system.
This connection can then be used through the user interface (Chuang’s client compo-
nent) of EmpiRes, to access and display desired mental state detection data to the
users of EmpiRes. This solution does not unify any specific mutual components, but
it proposes the best solution for achieving the goal within this project time-frame.
This solution does also encourage flexibility of the system, since EmpiRes now can
make use of the data stores in the Cassandra database, but without using resources
on the functionality for running mental state detection experiments, since this func-
tionality only will be used occasionally.
A component diagram visualizing the proposed solution is shown in Figure 5.3, and
should provide the reader with a visiable presentation of how the component struc-
ture for this solution.
In the top part of the figure is representing Stefánssons system which should look
very simulir to Figure 5.2 from Section 5.1.2, since the architecture from Stefánsson’s
system are kept, where we still have a data collection component which connects to
the processing server environment through REST. The architecture of the mental
state detection is kept completely as it was, and since it runs on separate server, this
component should not interfere with any of the changes made in EmpiRes.
The bottom part of the Figure 5.3 represents the EmpiRes platform system, and
does introduce a small change, namely the connection to from the EmpiRes backend
server to the Cassandra DB. We still have the same user interface for the platform,
which connects through REST with the backend server component. The backend
server component is also still connected to the Influx and Postgres database. Even
though this might be a small change to the overall system structure, this change en-
able us to access data across the systems and display then in the user interface.
With the solution mentioned above will achieved the goal stated for this solution,
however, if time permits, further unification’s of the systems should be performed,
therefore, an extended solution idea is presented in Section 5.3.2.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Integration of Codebase
Figure 5.3: Component Diagram of main solution idea.
5.3.2
Extended solution idea
The further unification’s should focus on integrating the Wildfly server from Stefáns-
son’s database server environment into Chunag’s backend server. The two servers do
contain similar functionality regarding data management to and from a time-series
database. In order to unify these servers, Chuang’s server project is chosen as the
core project from where Stefánssons functionality should be implemented into. This
choice is made based on the following arguments:
1. Chuang’s server project contains a lot more code than Stefánssons, leaving less
code to be modified.
2. Chuang’s server project represents the backend server of EmpiRes, which should
be prioritized over an addition to the platform. Integrating Stefánssons project
into Chuang’s will, therefore, help prevent loss of functionality within EmpiRes
and thereby ensuring the reliability of the platform.
3. Chuang’s server includes connectivity to more instances than Stefánssons.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Solution idea
55
While integrating Stafánssons server functionality into Chuang’s, connectivity to the
data-processing environment as well as the Influx database must be ensured.
Stafánsson’s server functionality should be carefully integrated into Chuang’s as
the two servers do contain significant differences as mentioned in Section 5.2.2. These
differences could pose a great threat to the overall progress of this implementation
as they might include some modification to take a longer time to implement than
estimated, or even present dead-ends, making a simple modification into a time-
consuming workaround.
Another unification which should be considered if time permits, is the unification of
the two time-series databases, Cassandra and Influx. As mentioned in Section 5.2.3,
the two databases share a common goal, which is to store sensory data in a time-
series format. For this unification, Influx should be chosen over Cassandra which is
explained in the sub-section 5.3.2.1.
An alternative component diagram for a future state of system is shown in Figure 5.4,
which will be the extended version of this solution, if time permits.
Figure 5.4: Component Diagram of the extended solution idea.
As shown in this component diagram, much more focus has been placed on unifying
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Integration of Codebase
the various mutual system components. In this system, we have merged the EmpiRes
backend server with the Wildfly server from the database environment in Stefánsson’s
system, and made use of the microservice architecture from it, as it is now container-
ized and run as a Wildfly server. Another change is that the Cassandra database has
been eliminated, proposing that all time-series data is stored in the Influx database.
5.3.2.1
Influx over Cassandra for time-series data
Apache Cassandra is a NoSQL database. It was originally created at Facebook
but is now open source. It is especially good at handling huge volumes of records
spread across multiple commodity servers. It offers clusters to meet effectively scale
the resources to meet the availability requirements. Furthermore, it ensures no single
point of failure.[23]
InfluxDB is NoSQL database designed for handling time series data with high write
and query loads. InfluxDB is especially meant to be used for storing large amounts
of timestamped data like IoT sensor data and real-time analytic.[22]
The Influx database was chosen over Cassandra because InfluxDB is a specialized
database for handling time-series data. It is possible to handle time-series data in
Cassandra, but its forces lay when handling huge volumes of records and you want a
decentralized architecture with high availability, fault-tolerance and no single point
of failure.[23] However the intention for this database is to handle time-series data,
and studies show that InfluxDB outperformed Cassandra for time-series workloads[8],
so for further development of this platform, InfluxDB will be the solution for handling
time-series data.
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Implementation
57
5.4
Implementation
This section will explain how the main solution idea presented in Section 5.3.1 has
been implemented.
The implementation explained in this section, is made for EmpiRes, which allows it to
access and display mental state detection data, collected through Stefánsson’s system.
This section will focus on the three main components implemented and consists of: a
Cassandra client, a Cassandra controller and a visual component.
The Cassandra client and controller are both implemented into the backend server
project of EmpiRes, where the visual component is implemented into the frontend
(i.e the user interface) project of EmpiRes.
These implementations will be explained in detail in the following subsections.
5.4.1
The backend implementation
As previously mentioned, the backend implementation consists of two main compo-
nents, the Cassandra client and a Cassandra controller. This subsection will explain
the implementation of these main components in more detail. Both component im-
plemented into the backend server of EmpiRes, are implemented using Java, which is
the programming language of choice for this project.
The Cassandra client component, is the component which establishes the connec-
tion to the Cassandra database and contains the actual methods for querying and
receiving the desired data. The Cassandra client connection itself is made with a
use of the Datastax17 driver dependency[43] which allow us to connect with the Cas-
sandra database by only specifying the IP-address and port number of where the
Cassandra database can be accessed. In our case, the IP-address is set to http://hbl-
cassandra.compute.dtu.dk which is the DTU server hosting our Cassandra database.
The port number is set to 9042, which is the default port of Cassandra, and what the
Docker container running the database is set to listen to. The implemented methods
for connecting to the Cassandra database can be view below in Listing 5.1.
1
public Cluster getCluster(){
2
String remoteAdress = "http://hbl-cassandra.compute.dtu.dk";
3
Cluster cluster = null;
4
try{
5
cluster = Cluster.builder()
6
.addContactPoint(remoteAdress)
7
.withPort(9042)
8
.build();
9
return cluster;
10
}catch(Exception e) {
11
return null;
12
}
17https://www.datastax.com/
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Integration of Codebase
13
}
14
public Session getSession() {
15
Session session = getCluster().connect("data"); //keyspace
16
return session;
17
}
Listing 5.1: Cassandra client connection.
The query methods implemented in the Cassandra client, make use of this connec-
tion, by establishing a session between the client and the database, which can be used
to execute queries. The implemented query types implemented are only associated
with eye-tracking data for simplicity. These queries allow us to access and receive
all eye-tracking data from the database, or specify a specific data-id for receiving
more specific eye-tracking data. The use of the Datastax driver, lets us execute the
Cassandra Query Language (CQL) statements directly from the client, which is the
default query language of Cassandra [2].
Our Cassandra client components receive the data from the database as a ”Re-
sultSet” object, which we then convert into a more specific data type which only
contains the desired information. This converting is done through an implemented
converter, which converts the ResultSet into a list of EyeTrackingRawData objects,
which matches the data fields from the data objects found in the database. This con-
version makes it easy to view and control the desired data received from the database.
The query methods from the Cassandra client can be viewed below in Listing 5.2.
1
public ArrayList<EyeTrackingRawData > getAllEyetrackingRawData() {
2
Session session = getSession();
3
ResultSet rs = session.execute("select * from eyetracker_raw");
4
ArrayList<EyeTrackingRawData > eyeTrackingRawDataList = converter(rs);
5
session.close();
6
return eyeTrackingRawDataList;
7
}
8
public ArrayList<EyeTrackingRawData > getAllEyetrackingRawDataById(String id
) {
9
String query = ("select * from eyetracker_raw where dataid = '"+ id + "
'");
10
Session session = getSession();
11
ResultSet rs = session.execute(query);
12
ArrayList<EyeTrackingRawData > eyeTrackingRawDataList = converter(rs);
13
session.close();
14
return eyeTrackingRawDataList;
15
}
16 }
Listing 5.2: Cassandra query methods.
After each query is finished, we close the connection session between the client and
the database, before returning the results. There is no need for a constantly running
session between the client and database, so for performance and resource optimiza-
tion, these sessions are only established whenever needed.
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Implementation
59
The Cassandra controller component, is a classic controller component, as its main
purpose is to answer requests from the frontend of Empires regarding data located in
the Cassandra database. The Cassandra controller is implemented to receive requests
regarding eye-tracking data and is then using the Cassandra client and its query meth-
ods, to access and retrieve the requested data. This data is then sent back as a JSON
object to the frontend of EmpiRes. The Cassandra controller implementation can be
viewed below in Listing 5.3.
1 @RestController
2 @RequestMapping("cassandra")
3 public class CassandraController {
4
5
private CassandraClient cassandraClient = new CassandraClient();
6
7
@RequestMapping(value = "/getAll", method = {RequestMethod.GET}, produces =
"application/json")
8
public @ResponseBody ArrayList<EyeTrackingRawData > getAllEyetrackingData()
throws Exception {
9
ArrayList<EyeTrackingRawData > eyeTrackingRawDataArrayList =
cassandraClient.getAllEyetrackingRawData();
10
if(eyeTrackingRawDataArrayList != null){
11
return eyeTrackingRawDataArrayList;
12
}
13
return null;
14
}
15
@RequestMapping(value = "/getAllById", method = {RequestMethod.GET},
produces = "application/json")
16
public ArrayList<EyeTrackingRawData >
getAllEyetrackingDataById(
@RequestParam String id) throws Exception {
17
ArrayList<EyeTrackingRawData > eyeTrackingRawDataArrayList =
cassandraClient.getAllEyetrackingRawDataById(id);
18
if(eyeTrackingRawDataArrayList != null){
19
return eyeTrackingRawDataArrayList;
20
}
21
return null;
22
}
23 }
Listing 5.3: Cassandra controller component.
As shown in Listing 5.3, is very similar to the query methods from the Cassandra
client in Listing 5.2, and depending on the request, it either calls the getAllEyetrack-
ingRawData or the getAllEyetrackingRawDataById query method. In order to get
eye-tracking data with a specified data-id, the data-id must be provided in the request
from the EmpiRes frontend.
5.4.2
The frontend implementation
The frontend implementation’s purpose is to allow users to access and view data from
the Cassandra database through the user interface of EmpiRes. The frontend project
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Integration of Codebase
of EmpiRes is made using React, where a specific component for receiving and dis-
playing data from the database was made. This component is called ”Eyetracking”
which is a React class component, which allows us to both display and receive data
from the Cassandra controller, but also handle user interactions, e.g do something
when a button is clicked. The Eyetracking React class component can be viewed in
Appendix A, where the implemented result can be viewed in Figure A.1, displaying
the user interface for the component. The user interface presented in Figure 5.5 in
Figure 5.5: User interface of the Eyetracking React component.
Appendix A is made for further development, as it is kept very simple for demon-
strating purposes only since the requirements for this functionality has not yet been
specified. Therefore, a simple choice of two buttons, an input field and a JSON dis-
playing object was chosen, to demonstrate the overall functionality purpose, which is
to request, receive and display desired data located in the Cassandra database, which
for this particular implementation has been limited to eye-tracking data only.
The ”GET DATA” button represents all eye-tracking data in the database, where
the ”GET DATA ID” button requests eye-tracking data with the dataid specified by
the input field.
The JSON displaying object then displays the received data as a simple JSON object.
5.4.3
Docker Compose
A small but useful implementation was made to the Docker enviroment, which presents
a easy way to start and stop multible containers.
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Implementation
61
Docker compose is a tool for defining and running multi-container Docker applica-
tions C. Docker compose is a great tool when working with multiple Docker contain-
ers. It specifies the configurations of multible Docker containers in a single file, which
enables multible Docker containers to be start or stopped, by a single command.
EmpiRes consist of three Docker containers, Postgres, InfluxDB, Grafana, so instead
of start, stop and remove each Docker container separately, a docker-compose.yml file
has been implemented and added to the EmpiRes project. The docker-compose.yml
file is shown in Appendix C. Docker compose let us start all containers specified in
the docker-compose.yml file, by simple run a ”docker-compose up -d” command the
root of the EmpiRes backend project. This compose file is therefore also pushed to
git, and available for use in GitLab, as well as on the Ubuntu server. To stop all
containers a single ”docker-compose down” command should be run in the root of
the EmpiRes backend project, but notice that this will stop and remove all containers
specified in the compose file.
5.4.4
Test
The tests made for verifying the implementation for accessing, receiving and display-
ing data from the Cassandra database, has mostly been done as ad-hoc testing each
part of the implementation as it progresses, where both the connection, query methods
and controller, has been verified and changed in order to function as it was supposed
to. A simple JUnit test has been implemented in order to check if we can estab-
lish a successful connection to the Cassandra database through the Cassandra client,
which can be used before any querying methods are called. Through these ad-hoc
test, EmpiRes has been verified to continue functioning even though no connection
to the Cassandra database could be established. This is important, as it supports
the flexibility of the system, so that even though Stefánssons mental state detec-
tion system isn’t running, or the Cassandra database is down, only the functionality
regarding the receiving eye-tracking data gets unavailable, instead of a system failure.
More test cases should be implemented whenever a more specific requirement specifi-
cation, to what this data should be used for, is presented.
5.4.5
A single place for the code-base
During the implementation the collected code has been placed in Gitlab, in a group
named EmpiRes, which consists of two sub-groups. A sub-group containing two repos-
itories, one for the EmpiRes frontend project, and another for the EmpiRes backend
project.
The other sub-group contains a shared repository for Stefánsson’s system, regarding
mental state detection, and the various sub-projects it consists of. The Gitlab reposi-
tory is used both for version control as implementation progresses, but should also be
viewed as a shared common place where students are able to collect and contribute
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Integration of Codebase
to the projects concerning EmpiRes. A more detailed explanation of the benefits of
Gitlab is given in Chapter 6, Section 6.1.1.
5.5
Evaluation
This chapter gave a more concrete solution to the first step of the overall solution
from the solution overview presented in Chapter 4, Section 4.4.
The first step of the overall solution overview for this thesis was to unify and in-
tegrate the previous projects of Stefánsson [42], discussed in detail in Section 2.2.1.3,
and Chuang [29], see Section 2.2.1.2, from Chapter 2.
The goal of this step was
to provide a shared integrated codebase, which should reflect unification of the two
projects and retain all features of the current version of EmpiRes as well as introduce
new features, such as accessing and displaying data collected by Stefánsson’s system.
This proposed solution was further specified into the main solution idea in Sec-
tion 5.3.1, which was then a successful implementation according to the explanation
from Section 5.4.
The main solution idea proposed a fairly simple but effective solution for achiev-
ing a shared and unified codebase, which introduced possibilities for accessing and
displaying eye-tracking data collected by Stefánsson’s system. A solution which has
been successfully explained, implemented and tested throughout this chapter.
The implementation of the main solution reflects an MVP (Minimal Viable Prod-
uct) which easily can be further developed, which will allow EmpiRes to include and
use all data objects collected and stored in the Cassandra database.
The main problems encountered when implementing the backend implementation
from Section 5.4.1, was figuring out the right way to establish the connection. As the
backend of EmpiRes heavily relies on the Spring Boot and its associated dependency,
the first solution for connecting and accessing data from EmpiRes and the Cassan-
dra database was implemented using a specified Spring Boot dependency for working
with Cassandra [5]. However once this solution was implemented, I turned out that
the connection was tested doing runtime, leading to a system failure if the Cassandra
database was unavailable. This behaviour is not wanted in EmpiRes since it should
continue running even though the Cassandra database is unavailable. Error handling
was implemented for this issue, but after many attempts, the implementation was
set aside for a current solution using the Datastax Cassandra dependency [43], which
was found easier to understand and control.
Both the Cassandra client and controller in the EmpiRes backend project can easily
be extended to include more functionality and could be so, by using the current im-
plementations as a template.
Since the requirements for EmpiRes regarding the use of mental state detection data
==PAGE:73==
5.5 Evaluation
63
from the other system has not yet been specified, made it difficult to implement useful
functionality both to the backend and frontend project of EmpiRes. The lack of re-
quirements may be more reflected in the frontend implementation from Section 5.4.2,
where both styling and the use of data has been implemented to a bare minimum, with
the only purpose of demonstrating the connection between EmpiRes and the Cassan-
dra database from Stefànsson’s system. Even though the frontend implementation
does not put the received data to great use, it still includes the main functionality for
receiving and process the data through the React system flow, leaving only styling
for further development.
5.5.1
The extended solution
This section will explain some of the actions, which has been attempted in association
with the extended solution idea from Section 5.3.1 As suggested in the main solution
idea, further unification to the system should be performed if time permits. Doing
the implementation for a unification of the Stefánsson’s Wildfly server located in the
database server environment and Chuang’s backend server for EmpiRes, a serious
attempt was made, with the purpose of successfully implement the extended solution
idea from Section 5.3.2, but due to time constraints for the project period of this
thesis, the implementation was unsuccessful, as parts of the solution failed to be com-
pletely implemented.
The main issues discovered while implementing this solution was associating with
migrating from using a Tomcat application server to package and deploy the applica-
tion to a .war file which should be run in a Wildfly container.
WildFly is a lightweight open source application server, written in Java that is usable
on any operating system that supports Java and can run any Application Resource
(war-file) [50].
Following documentation and tutorials, like [44] and [21] makes it fairly simple to
convert a Gradle project to package our application as a .war file. However deploying
the packaged .war file to the Wildfly Docker container resulted in back-to-back issues
regarding either dependencies, connections or runtime issues. The issue was associ-
ated with Spring Boot dependencies which relied on an embedded Tomcat server and
therefore did not functioning properly in the new runtime environment. Another issue
was the connectivity and between the EmpiRes’ Postgres database connection. As
the application now was running in a Docker container, the host IP-address changes
to match the local Docker environment. This change mess up the connections previ-
ously set for the application, which took some valuable time to lean.
As an alternative solution, deploying the application to a Tomcat Docker container18
was attempted. This attempt was made to avoid the issues associated with the vari-
18https://hub.docker.com//tomcat
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Integration of Codebase
ous Spring Boot dependencies relying on the embedded Tomcat server to run. Most
of the work implemented was made in relation to [4], which explains and suggest
implementations for deploying a Spring Boot .war file to Tomcat. However, this ex-
planation does only explain how to run a local instance of a Tomcat server and does
not provide information about how to do it using Docker.
Other guidelines were
followed [6, 35], but without much luck.
For deployment of the .war file, two different Gradle plugins were used. For deploying
the packaged .war file to the Wildfly Docker container, the following plugin was used:
https://github.com/Ingwersaft/wildfly-deploy-gradle-plugin, where for deploying to
Tomcat, the Gradle Cargo plugin19 was used and is recommended for further devel-
opers who want to give this solution another shot.
The attempt to implement the extended solution idea from Section 5.3.2 resulted
in a time-consuming and unsuccessful implementation. The main reason for the fail-
ure of this implementation will be placed on three crucial factors:
1. Interfering with code implemented by other developers is a dangerous area due
to the lacking knowledge of the implemented code.
Understanding another
developers code and context completely is a time-consuming task, which leads
us to the third factor.
2. Lack of experience using and deploying to applications servers such as Wildfly
and Tomcat, as well as hosting applications in Docker containers.
3. The time constraints associated with the project period of this thesis was not
enough for a successful solution to arise.
The first two factors have to some extent become less crucial during this project
period, as a greater understanding and experience is gained working with on the im-
plementation, however, the time constraints mentioned in factor three, did not allow
successful solution to arise as the gained experience during this project period was
proven insufficient by the unsuccessful implementation, which otherwise might have
been successful if this solution was to be implemented again or was given more time.
If this solution is chosen for further development by other developers or students,
I strongly recommended reading up on Docker, Spring Boot, Tomcat and Wildfly,
and try to gain some experience with these technologies, as well as of course read the
previous projects of Chuang[29] and Stefánsson [42].
19https://github.com/bmuschko/gradle-cargo-plugin
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6
Continuous
infrastructure
This chapter will elaborate on the solution overview presented in the Chapter 4, Sec-
tion 4.4. This chapter will elaborate and present a more concrete solution to the
second step of the overall solution, namely to implementing a DevOps development
pipeline, explained in Chapter 3, Section 3.3.3, and do so, through the concepts of con-
tinuous integration(CI) and continuous deployment (CD). Continuous infrastructure
will in this chapter refer to, as a development infrastructure with the combination of
CI and CD integrated.
The implemented solution in this chapter will improve further development of Em-
piRes through the benefits of DevOps and aid students as they contribute to the
shared GitLab repositories containing the EmpiRes platform.
Continuous integration(CI) and continuous deployment (CD) was discussed in detail
in Chapter 4, Section 4.1, where this chapter will focus on two useful tools available
for integrating a continuous infrastructure into the existing development infrastruc-
ture of EmpiRes. The two tools are Gitlab and Jenkins, which will be explained in
the following section.
Once we have reviewed the two tools, a decision of which one to use is made along
with an explanation of the solution idea followed by the implementations made in
order to achieve a continuous development infrastructure for EmpiRes.
Finally, this chapter will evaluate the implemented result.
==PAGE:76==
66
6 Continuous infrastructure
6.1
CI/CD tools
This section will explain the two tools considered for implementing CI/CD into Em-
piRes. The two tools which will be explained in this section are Gitlab and Jenkins,
as they both introduce possible ways of achieving DevOps, through a continuous
development infrastructure.
6.1.1
Gitlab
GitLab1 is an online application for managing software products. It contains a version
control system, where source code can be uploaded to repositories and shared with
others. GitLab is already the technology of choice as mentioned in Chapter 5, Sec-
tion 5.3.1, as it contains all the essential functionality of a version control system, and
it allow us to locate the code-base within the DTU network, at lab.compute.dtu.dk.
The essential functionality of a version control system is to make it easy for developers
to manage, maintain and collaborate through the development of source code. This
functionality is often obtained through pulling, branching, committing, merging and
pushing changes to a repository, with the possibility of viewing all changes made as
well as roll back and forth between versions.
How such a version control system should be used, is one of the topics of Chapter 7,
where it will be further explained.
GitLab is not only an online application for version control of uploaded source code,
it does also functionality and tools for achieving the DevOps lifecycle through CI/CD
capabilities [16].
GitLab allows jobs such as builds, tests, releases and deployments to be automated
through integrated pipelines, specified in a ”.gitlab-ci.yml” file, for each repository.
Gitlab provides a user interface for running, monitor and managing each pipeline,
and provides useful feedback if a pipeline fails.
Since GitLab already has the source code allocated in the associated repositories,
tasks and pipeline are automatically hook to the repository and can be automatically
started, whenever new changes appear to the repository.
In order to execute the different jobs of a pipeline, GitLab uses ”runners”. GitLab
runners are an open source project, which is built-in to GitLab [17]. A GitLab runner
is designed to run in most environments. It reads the ”.gitlab-ci.yml” file and exe-
cutes the jobs specified for that runner. A job can be specified for a specific runner,
through tags.
A GitLab runner can be installed and run either locally or in a remote environment,
however, GitLab does also provide ”shared runners” for users on https://gitlab.com/
which lets you use their infrastructure for execution. The shared runners enable jobs
and pipelines to be executed out of the box, if another runner isn’t specified, however,
by using shared runners, small wait times can occur, as jobs are queued and run when
1https://about.gitlab.com/what-is-gitlab/
==PAGE:77==
6.1 CI/CD tools
67
a shared runner is available [18], which also encourages the use of installing your own
specific runners.
GitLab’s capabilities regarding CI/CD is considered since we already use GitLab
for version control. Enabling CI/CD through GitLab would provide a single place for
managing our source code and possibly eliminating the need of an automation server,
through the shared runners built-in to GitLab.
6.1.2
Jenkins
Jenkins 2 is the leading open source automation server [25], which supports various
plugins for automating builds, tests and deployments of any projects [25]. Jenkins
provides integration through GitLab [26], where Jenkins allows you, through their
built-in web interface, to set up triggers for build, tests and deployments, which is
hooked to the repositories on GitLab [27]. So much of the same functionality found
in the built-in GitLab CI is possible through Jenkins. The main difference is that
with Jenkins is a stand-alone automation server for the continuous integration and
deployment, which should be set up and maintained, much like the specified runners
of GitLab.
Jenkins capabilities regarding CI/CD is considered because it provides a very trans-
parent way of managing an automation server, and allow us to specify the resources
and infrastructure of the server our-self, unlike GitLab’s built-in shared runners. Fur-
thermore, Stefánsson [42] used a Jenkins server for his project, see Section 2.2.1.3,
which is available for changes and extension during the work of this thesis.
The Jenkins server that Stefánsson used, already contains jobs and pipelines for
achieving a continuous development infrastructure, which then can be extended to
further include EmpiRes and the newly shared codebase, located in the EmpiRes
group from lab.compute.dtu.dk.
2https://jenkins.io/
==PAGE:78==
68
6 Continuous infrastructure
6.2
Solution Idea
The previous section explained the two possible tools considered, for improving fur-
ther development of EmpiRes and achieving a continuous development infrastructure.
This section will explain the chosen tool as well as the necessary steps in order to
implement a CI/CD development flow for EmpiRes and its associated system.
GitLab is the chosen tool for managing the shared codebase through version con-
trol. In order to structure the associated systems, the main group called ”EmpiRes”
has been set to contain all our systems associated with the EmpiRes platform. This
main group contains a sub-group and a repository.
The sub-group is also called
”EmpiRes”, as it contains the ”EmpiRes Frontend” project and ”EmpiRes Backend”
project from Chuang’s system [29]. The last repository is Stefánsson’s system [42],
”A Neuro Adaptive System”. The ”Neuro Adaptive System” is a single repository,
containing the various sub-projects of Stefánsson’s system.
The GitLab group structure is shown below:
EmpiRes (main group)
EmpiRes (sub group)
Empires Frontend (repository)
Empires Backend (repository)
Neuro Adaptive System (repository)
-
GitLab comes with CI/CD built-in capabilities as described in Section6.1.1 and will
be the continuous infrastructure tool of choice for this thesis, as the convenience of
having a single place for managing the shared codebase is beneficial.
Furthermore, this choice of tool will also make it easier for further development, as
new students only need access to the EmpiRes group on GitLab in order to access
and control the CI/CD pipeline.
Setting up continuous integration (CI) for EmpiRes is done in a ”.gitlab-ci.yml” file,
which belongs to and specifies the CI process of a repository. Therefore, a .gitlab-
ci.yml file must be specified and implemented for each repository.
This file will
contain a CI pipeline which consists of a build and test job and will provide feedback
from the result to the contributors.
The CI pipeline should be run each time new changes appear in the master branch
of the corresponding repository and thereby ensuring continuous integration through
automation.
The next step will be to set up continuous deployment for EmpiRes. This will add
another step to the CI pipeline, as it will include a deployment job in order to become
a CI/CD pipeline. For this task, a Ubuntu server is available for hosting both the
front and backend project of EmpiRes and will be the server we deploy to. These
projects do not contain any deployment methods and have been manually zipped,
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Solution Idea
69
copied and run on another remote server in the past.
This should be automated
either by available deployment plugins. As a last resort, the remote server could pull
the latest changes from the GitLab repository and started, all done through an ssh
connection which will run automatically by the deployment job in the CI/CD pipeline
specified in the gitlab-ci.yml file.
Gitlab runners, explained in Section 6.1.1, will be specified if not already provided by
lab.compute.dtu.dk, in order to execute the jobs and pipelines of the ”.gitlab-ci.yml”
file.
Stefánsson system does already include continuous integration and development (CI/CD),
but will be migrated from using a Jenkins automation server to GitLab and thereby
be hooked to the corresponding repository for mental state detection found in GitLab,
instead of Stefánsson’s own private repository. This will trigger the CI/CD pipeline
for the ”Neuro Adaptive system” whenever contributions are made to our shared
repository in Gitlab.
Since the mental state detection system operates somewhat independently from Em-
piRes, it will continue to run on its current servers but will be deployed from the
shared GitLab repository when new changes are ready.
==PAGE:80==
70
6 Continuous infrastructure
6.3
Implementation
This section will explain the implementation made for achieving a continuous de-
velopment infrastructure through the implementation of continuous integration and
deployment (CI/CD) and will do so by explaining how such a pipeline can be imple-
mented through GitLab.
GitLab provides a user interface, which is easy to understand. It Comes with the pos-
sibilities of setting up a ”.gitlab-ci.yml” file for each repository, where the associated
jobs and pipelines are specified for achieving continuous integration and deployment.
6.3.1
GitLab CI/CD files
In order to implement a continuous infrastructure for the EmpiRes platform, three
gitlab-ci.yml files have been implemented, one for each repository in the shared Em-
piRes GitLab group. For simplicity, a brief explanation of the general structure of
such a gitlab-ci.yml file will be given along with an example. The actual implemen-
tations of the gitlab-ci.yml files can be viewed in Appendix B.
The general structure of a gitlab-ci.yml file contains the following keywords: stages,
jobs, images and execution.
Stages are specifying the pipeline of what order, specific jobs have to be executed.
In a general CI/CD setup, a stage would include jobs in the following order: build,
test, release, deploy.
Jobs includes the image and execution of that should be performed in that job. It
is the job which specifies what scripts to execute in order to perform e.g the actual
build or test.
Images specifies what Docker image the GitLab runner who perform the job, should
run the job in. This is convenient, as it allows to use multiple Docker images in a
CI/CD pipeline.
Execution is the actual commands used in order to execute commands or scripts
and allows the actual job to be executed.
To better understand this behaviour, let’s consider the gitlab-ci.yml file for the Em-
piRes backend repository in Listnin 6.1
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Implementation
71
1 stages:
2
- build
3
- test
4
5 build:
6
tags:
7
- empiResBuildRunner
8
stage: build
9
image: java:8-jdk
10
script:
11
- ./gradlew build
12
13 test:
14
...
Listing 6.1: EmpiRes backend gitlab-ci.yml file.
The example above starts by specifying the stages of the CI/CD pipeline. In this
case, the stages include a build and a test stage. The order of the stages is important,
as the pipeline, in this case, will perform a build stage, before a test stage.
Next is the specification of a job. In this case, the first job specified is called ”build”.
The job name can be anything, but for simplicity, we named it after its behaviour.
For this particular job, a specific runner has used through the tags keyword, which
will use the GitLab runner called ”empiResBuildRunner”, a self-created runner.
Each job must be associated with a stage, where in this case, we want our ”build”
job to be performed at the ”build” stage of the pipeline.
A job can be associated with multiple stages and thereby reused multiple times
throughout a pipeline.
We further specify that during execution of the ”build” job, the runner will use a
Java 8 JDK Docker image for executing the following script section.
A Java 8 image is chosen for this job, as it reflects the source code environment, which
was written using Java 8.
The only command executed doing this job, is the ”./gradlew build” command, which
will build the project from the source code located in the associated repository.
Once the build job is done, the pipeline will continue with the next stage, namely the
test stage, then the deploy stage, and so on, for all specified stages of the pipeline.
The complete The gitlab-ci.yml file for the EmpiRes backend repository is shown in
Appendix B, Section B.2.
With the above information in mind, we will now explain the actual implementa-
tion steps taken in order to implement a CI/CD pipeline for EmpiRes as well as
migrating Stefánsson’s system to use a CI/CD pipeline through the shared repository
in GitLab.
==PAGE:82==
72
6 Continuous infrastructure
6.3.2
Implementing a CI/CD pipeline to EmpiRes
This sub-section will explain the various implementation steps taken in order to
achieve a CD/CD pipeline in EmpiRes. This will be done by two steps, one rep-
resenting the CI pipeline, and another for the CD pipeline.
6.3.2.1
Implementing CI to EmpiRes
In order to ensure continuous infrastructure (CI), a pipeline including a build and a
test stage must be specified.
As the EmpiRes frontend project does not include any functioning tests and since
none was implemented doing this thesis, implementing continuous integration seems
impossible. However, the EmpiRes frontend project do consist of a rather compre-
hensive build process, which is implemented in order to achieve the first step of a CI
pipeline, leaving a possible test stage to be implemented in the future.
The implementation of the somewhat CI pipeline for the EmpiRes frontend project
is shown in AppendixB, Section B.1. The pipeline is fairly simple as it presents two
stages, a prepare state and a build state.
Both stages are using the NodeJS Docker image to execute commands, as it is the
build and dependency manager of the project itself.
The prepare stage ensures that all needed dependencies are installed which prepare
the project to be build and consists of two script executions which are shown below.
1 - unset CI
2 - npm install
.
By default, GitLab treats all warnings, during execution, like errors, which allows a
pipeline or a job to fail, if it contains warnings. In order to bypass this behaviour,
the command unset CI is used to allow warning, as the EmpiRes frontend project
contains a very strict compiler, which easily will displays warnings even though the
project can be built just fine.
The npm install command install all needed dependencies located specified in the
package.json file located in the root of the project.
The build stage contains two script executions as well which is shown below.
1 - unset CI
2 - npm run build
.
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Implementation
73
We start by allowing warnings to occur in our build stage. The actual build is per-
formed by the npm run build command which builds and checks that the code does
not contain errors found by the compiler.
The EmpiRes backend project does contain tests, so both a build and a test stage
is implemented into this CI pipeline. The EmpiRes backend implementation can be
viewed in AppendixB, Section B.2.
The implementation for CI pipeline regarding the EmpiRes backend project consists
of two stages, build and test.
For both stages, a Java Docker image since we are working with a Java project. The
build stage builds the project by executing the following command.
1 - \gradlew build
.
Which build and checks that the code does not contain errors found by the compiler,
as well as ensuring there is a connection to a running Postgres database.
The test stage runs the command
1 - \gradlew test
.
Which will run all tests provided in the projects src/test folder.
These test will ensure the functionality of the code and will only result in success if
all tests pass. This step is important as it somewhat provides a safety net which will
notify the contributors if important functionality gets interfered with, by incoming
changes to the repository.
6.3.2.2
Implementing CD to EmpiRes
The next step for achieving a continuous development infrastructure is to extend the
CI pipeline to include CD.
As suggested in the solution idea in Section 6.2, this should be achieved by automati-
cally deploy both the EmpiRes frontend and backend project to the available Ubuntu
server (vms133976.compute.dtu.dk).
A CD stage could not be implemented regarding both the EmpiRes front and backend
projects, as the multiple different attempts turned out unsuccessful. These attempts
are highly related to the unsuccessfully implemented extended solution from Chap-
ter 5, Section 5.3.2 which was evaluated in Section 5.5.1.
==PAGE:84==
74
6 Continuous infrastructure
Different plugins for automating the remote deployment of the projects were imple-
mented but without luck.
Then as a last resort, an attempt to automatically set up an ssh connection from a
GitLab CD stage in execution to the remote server was made. This attempt should
be able to pull the latest changes from the GitLab repository and start the services
automatically, but turn out unsuccessful as well. A Further explanation of various
attempts is made in Section 6.4.
Both the EmpiRes front and backend project are running on the remote server as a
manual ssh connection could be established between the remote server and a local
instance. The steps in order to connect to the remote server over ssh is shown in
Appendix G, which also shows how to pull the latest changes from GitLab and run
the respected projects.
6.3.3
Migrating the Neuro Adaptive System to use a CI/CD
pipeline through the shared repository in GitLab
This section will explain how Stefánssons system [42], the neuroadaptive system, gets
migrated from using continuous integration and development (CI/CD) through an
automated Jenkins server, to use GitLab for CI/CD instead.
The motivation for this migration the CI/CD pipeline from Jenkins to GitLab is to
have the entire codebase associated with the GitLab platform, located in GitLab and
use GitLabs CI/CD capabilities, where only GitLab is used as the only place for man-
aging projects and pipelines associated with the EmpiRes platform.
The Jenkins server in Stefánsson system consists of two main sub-projects which are
being deployed through CD in the automated Jenkins server, namely the database
server and the processing server (recall from Chapter 2, Section 2.2.1.3). Each project
has a single job specified in the Jenkins server, located at
http://hbl-jenkins.compute.dtu.dk:8080, for deploying the individual projects to their
respective servers, namely
http://hbl-wildfly.compute.dtu.dk for hosting the processing server and
http://hbl-cassandra.compute.dtu.dk for hosting the database server.
The single job provided for each project is handling everything in one go, build, test
and deployment in a single job, but do contain commands which can be migrated to
run in a GitLab CI/CD pipeline.
Since we already have the Neuro Adaptive system located in the EmpiRes group in
GitLab, setting up a gitlab-ci.yml file will automatically hook the CI/CD pipelines
specified in that file, to the associated repository.
The implementation of the gitlab-ci.yml file can be viewed in Appendix B, Section B.3.
During the implementation, the pipeline was split up to include two stages instead of
==PAGE:85==
6.3 Implementation
75
doing everything in one go, as it was implemented in Jenkins. This is best practice,
as it allows us to automatically run the build stage, but control whether the deploy-
ment stage should be manual or automatic (hence, continuous delivery or continuous
deployment).
The implementation is a bit more complex, as it contains a CI/CD pipeline for build-
ing and deploying two separate server components located in the same repository, but
the jobs use similar commands, so for simplicity, we will only run through the build
and deploy stages for one of the servers projects.
This implementation starts by specifying that a Maven Docker image with a Java
8 JDK installed will be used through the execution processes throughout the whole
gitlab-ci.yml file. This is useful when we are working with a Java project which uses
Maven as a build and dependency manager.
Then the two stages, build and deploy are set up. In this case, the build stage is
also set up to run associated tests.
The build stage executes the following script commands.
1 - mvn install -f ./ProcessingServer
.
This command calls the Maven manager and executes the build and tests from the
associated project which in this case is the ”ProcessingServer”. Since the associated
repository contains multiple projects, we need to specify what project we want to
execute the command on, which is done by the ”-f” flag.
The next stage is the deployment stage which executes the following script command:
1 - mvn clean install -f ./ProcessingServer wildfly:deploy
Dusername=admin -Dpassword=admin Dhostname=hbl-wildfly.
compute.dtu.dk
.
This command rebuilds a clean project which includes packaging the project as a
”.war” file which is then deployed to the Wildfly Docker container running with the
hostname: ”hbl-wildfly.compute.dtu.dk” which in this case, is the processing server
environment (recall Chapter 2, Section 2.2.1.3).
The deploy stage do also contain the following procedure commands:
1
- when: manual
2
- allow_failure:false
.
==PAGE:86==
76
6 Continuous infrastructure
The first command, ”when: manual” specified that we only want to start the deploy-
ment stage manually. This can easily be removed if the deployment stage should
start directly after the build stage, but for the time being, manually controlling when
to deploy is the chosen solution.
The second command, ”allow_failure:false” specifies that we do not allow the deploy-
ment to go through is any failures occur doing the execution.
This concludes the implementation of the migrated CI/CD pipeline from Jenkins
to GitLab, as the build and deployment stage for both the database server project
and the processing server project is similar.
6.3.4
Runners
GitLab comes with free, out of the box, shared runners for running jobs and pipelines
specified in gitlab-ci.yml files for repositories located at Gitlab.com. However, GitLab
does not provide this functionality out of the box, when working within DTU’s own
domain lab.compute.dtu.dk. The administrators of the lab.compute.dtu.dk domain
are able to create their own shared runners, which can be used for all projects located
within the domain, but for the time being, no shared runners have been created.
Without a GitLab-runner our pipeline in the gitlab-ci.yml files will not be executed.
Runners work as small virtual machines, which reads the gitlab-ci.yml files and exe-
cute the specified jobs in a given Docker image. These runners can either be created
to run locally or on a remote server. In our case, we want runners to be available at
all times, which is why they are implemented on the same Ubuntu server available
for the hosting the EmpiRes platform.
Multiple runners can be created in order to ensure that various repository CI/CD
pipelines can run for at the same time, without being queued [17].
In our case, two runners were specified for the EmpiRes sub-group (usable by both
EmpiRes front and backend repository), see Figure 6.1 and two separate runners for
the Neuro adaptive system repository, see Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.1 shows the ”empiResBuildRunner” which was used in Listing 6.1 from
the previous chapter.
A further explanation of how to create and use GitLab runners are given in Ap-
pendix F.
6.3.5
Test
Testing the implemented CI/CD pipelines in GitLab had to be done ad-hoc, since this
was the only way to verify that the pipeline for an associated repository automatically
starts, once a new change has been pushed to the master branch. GitLab provides a
nice, easy understandable user interface which provides visual feedback of both the
history of, but also currently running pipelines and jobs, and let you view their job
==PAGE:87==
6.3 Implementation
77
Figure 6.1: EmpiRes sub-group runners.
Figure 6.2: Neuro adaptive system runners [42].
log, which reveals the execution made during the job.
The job log was proven very useful for testing implementation to the gitlab-ci.yml
file, as it showed the log of every executed script commands during a job, which then
could be used for debugging the implementation.
Whenever a pipeline fails, an e-mail is sent to the contributors, providing useful
feedback of the failed pipeline, which also is a benefit of concepts found in CI, see
Chapter 4, Section 4.1.
==PAGE:88==
78
6 Continuous infrastructure
As a visual indicator to the pipelines which was successfully implemented and run are
shown below, where Figure 6.3 shows the successfull EmpiRes frontend CI pipeline,
Figure 6.4 shows the successful EmpiRes backend CI pipeline and Figure 6.5 shows
the successful Neuro Adaptive system CI/CD pipeline.
Figure 6.3: EmpiRes frontend CI pipeline (without test stage).
Figure 6.4: EmpiRes backend CI pipeline.
==PAGE:89==
6.4 Evaluation
79
Figure 6.5: Neuro adaptive system CI/CD pipeline.
6.4
Evaluation
This section will evaluate the implemented solution from the previous section. This
evaluation will start by explaining what has been achieved in this chapter. This sec-
tion will conclude by explaining some of the problems encountered throughout the
implementation phase associated with this chapter.
This chapter explained how concepts of continuous integration (CI) and development
(CD) has been implemented to the EmpiRes platform through GitLab pipelines im-
plemented in dedicated gitlab-ci.yml files. These files are run by specified runners
which have been created to run on a remote Ubuntu server made available for the
work made in this thesis.
EmpiRes consist of two main projects, a frontend and a backend project, where con-
cepts of CI has been implemented successfully for each project through GitLab. The
frontend project has an automated build process, where a complete CI pipeline is
implemented for the backend project, which contains an automated build and test
process.
The Neuro Adaptive System has successfully been migrating its CI/CD pipeline from
being run through a Jenkins automation server to GitLab, where a complete CI/CD
pipeline has been implemented, which listen to changes made in the shared Neuro
Adaptive System repository located in GitLab, and deploys to two additional remote
servers.
GitLab runners have been created on a remote server, which is used to execute all
the GitLab pipelines located within the shared EmpiRes GitLab group.
Even though continuous deployment hasn’t been implemented into the front and
==PAGE:90==
80
6 Continuous infrastructure
backend projects of EmpiRes, and we, therefore, did not succeed with implementing
a complete continuous infrastructure, it is still believed that further development
of the EmpiRes platform has been improved through the given implementations ex-
plained in this chapter.
This is believed as we have extended the agile development methodology previously
used, towards DevOps, see Chapter 3, Section 3.3.2 and 3.3.3, which will make it
easier for new students to start developing features for EmpiRes.
For future work of EmpiRes, tests should be implemented into the EmpiRes frontend
in order to fulfill the CI pipeline in GitLab. There are already jest3 tests implemented,
but many of them fail and due to time constraints for this thesis, these tests were not
fixed.
Finally, a way to implement CD into the EmpiRes pipelines should be investigated
and implemented in order to obtain a complete continuous development infrastructure
for the EmpiRes platform.
6.4.1
Problems encountered
As explained in Section 6.3.2.2 the implemented solution does not contain continuous
deployment the EmpiRes frontend and backend projects as various attempts were
made, but turned out being unsuccessful. Some of these attempts will be explained
in this section so that others can learn from the experience obtained throughout this
implementation phase.
For the EmpiRes frontend project, a plugin should be the optimal deployment so-
lution as they often provide most of the functionality out of the box, leaving only
configurations to be specified in order to deploy to a remote instance. Some of the
more promising plugins attempted are deploy-app4, PM25 and flightplan6.
The deploy-app plugin offers the most simple solution, but the commands specified
in the guideline could not be found and therefore, the plugin was proven useless.
The other two plugins, PM2 and Flightplan are more complex and provide a wide
range of configurations which can be altered. These plugins seem to be better sup-
ported by a community but did not lead to a successful implementation either, even
though respective guidelines were followed closely.
For the EmpiRes backend project, the best solution seemed to be deploying it to
a Docker docker container which should host the server. This solution has already
been attempted in Chapter 5 where Section 5.5.1 explains the problems encountered
through this solution.
3https://jestjs.io/
4https://www.npmjs.com/package/deploy-app
5http://pm2.keymetrics.io/docs/usage/deployment/
6https://www.npmjs.com/package/deploy-app
==PAGE:91==
6.4 Evaluation
81
Another solution was to deploy the project through ssh (a solution which could be
used for the frontend project as well). The GitLab pipeline could be set up to atom-
ically connect to the host and make it pull the latest changes and run the system.
This seems to be a well-known method for deploying to a remote host. GitLab has its
own guide for setting up an ssh connection from GitLab [47] which uses variables [15]
to set up the connection through the GitLab runner executing the pipelines from
gitlab-ci.yml file, but without luck. Other third-party guides [1, 1] was attempted as
well but turned out with a ”permission denied” error in the job log, which is displayed
in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Error while connecting to remote server.
The Permission Denied error can occur for many reasons, the general suspicions lied
on permissions for the user used to access the remote server. Then there is the con-
nection between the remote server and GitLab, and finally the connection between
the runner executing the GitLab pipeline and the remote server.
A solution might have been implemented in collaboration with the hosting team at
DTU, but as this error occurred with little time left of this thesis period, this solution
must be postponed to future development.
==PAGE:92==
82
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 7
Contribution Policies
and Guidelines
This chapter will focus on the third and final step of the solution overview from
Chapter 4, Section 4.4.
This chapter will establish and explain some general contribution policies for working
with the EmpiRes platform. In this chapter, we will focus on contribution policies
for the implemented continuous infrastructure from Chapter 6.
This chapter starts by explaining the Git workflow used for developing new features
for the EmpiRes platform. This will explain the chosen workflow for contributing to
the shared repositories in GitLab, and should be respected for further development.
This is followed by a brief guideline to managed and run the CI/CD pipelines in
GitLab, which has been implemented and explained in Chapter 6.
Before the evaluation of this chapter, a recap of the overall system flow is explained,
which should provide any missing pieces to the overall system design along with
guidelines using the various components.
==PAGE:94==
84
7 Contribution Policies and Guidelines
7.1
Git work-flow
Up until now, previous projects associated with EmpiRes has been developed as sepa-
rate independent projects, by a single student at a time. This has left the development
workflow completely up to the individual student.
Through a shared GitLab repository, EmpiRes is now enabling multiple students to
work on features for the platform, at the same time. This new contribution behaviour
needs a generalized contribution work-flow in order to optimise and ensure the further
development of EmpiRes and should prevent conflicts between contributions.
Gitlab uses Git1, a commonly known version control tool, for software development.
Multiple variations of Git work-flows exists, but for simplicity, we will only focus on
the work-flow which should be used for contributing to the EmpiRes’ shared repos-
itories in GitLab, a work-flow called ”feature branching”, which should serve as a
guideline for new students to contribute to EmpiRes through GitLab.
7.1.1
Feature Branch
Feature branching is a git workflow, for this sub-section, it will be expected that the
reader has a basic understanding of git and common git commands2.
The main idea behind feature branching is to keep the master branch clean by com-
mitting and pushing changes to dedicated branches for the current feature which is
being developed [3]. Only when a feature is fully developed and tested the dedicated
feature branch can be merged with the master branch and update the main codebase.
This workflow has a range of benefits, as it allows multiple developers to work on
their separate feature without disturbing the main codebase, which otherwise could
result in conflicts. Furthermore, this workflow causes the master branch to be clean
and only contain fully developed working features throughout the development pe-
riod. This is an advantage for developers as they at any time can pull the latest
working version of the codebase. Furthermore, it helps continuous integration and
deployment, as it is easy to control the latest working version, which at all times
would be in the master branch, where rules can be applied to only run the CI/CD
pipeline whenever new changes appear to the master branch.
Though feature branching, it is easy for developers to exchange work through pull
requests and allow developers to hand over tasks and features for others to either
comment on, test or take over.
1https://git-scm.com/
2https://documentation.cpanel.net/display/CKB/Guide+to+Git+-+Common+Git+Commands
==PAGE:95==
7.1 Git work-flow
85
7.1.1.1
Workflow guideline
Each time a developer starts working on a new feature, a dedicated branch should
be created with a descriptive name [3]. This feature is to be used throughout the de-
velopment phase of that feature. Commits on this branch should be made frequently
along with pushing the current state of the feature to the shared central repository.
This will allow others to see the current state of the feature as well as serve as a
backup for the source code. Pushing changes to feature branches should not pose any
problems, as they are kept aside from the master branch until a potential merge.
The following example should serve as a guide as well as explain the life cycle of
a feature branch [3].
Suppose that a student wants to work on a new feature for the EmpiRes platform
and that the corresponding repository has been cloned to the local machine.
The following commands set the working branch to master, fetches the latest changes
from the central repository and update the local master branch to contain the latest
changes.
1 git checkout master
2 git fetch origin
3 git reset --hard origin/master
.
Now that we have the latest changes from the central repository, we can create
a new local branch, which will be used for the new feature. The -b flag tells Git to
create the branch if it doesn’t already exist [3]. Notice that ”new-feature” is the name
of the branch, which should be changed for a more descriptive name for the feature.
1 git checkout -b new-feature
.
The command above can also be used to check out current branches in the shared
central repository. Here the ”-b” tag should be left out.
With our newly created branch, we can now start implementing the feature. While
developing, frequently commits should be made for version control. The following
commands get the status of the current branch, adds the changed file (or files) to the
commit and finally commits the changes to the local branch.
1 git status
2 git add <some-file>
3 git commit
.
==PAGE:96==
86
7 Contribution Policies and Guidelines
While developing the local branch it is important to frequently push the changes to
the central repository. This serves as a backup, as well as allow others to see and
use your changes. This is done with the following command, which pushed the local
feature branch to the remote central repository (origin) in its very one branch with
the same name. The -u should only be used the first time the branch is pushed, as
it sets the remote branch to be tracked, so that all future pushed within the local
branch, pushes the changes to the remote branch in the central repository.
1 git push -u origin new-feature
.
So in the future, ”git push” will push changes made in the ”new-feature” branch to
the remote ”new-feature” branch at origin (the central repository).
As a final step, once the feature is complete and perhaps tested by other develop-
ers, it is time to add it to the master branch.
Merging new feature branches sometimes results in merge conflicts, as the new feature
might include changes to the existing codebase. These conflicts need to resolved in
order to add the new feature into the master branch.
1 git checkout master
2 git pull
3 git pull origin new-feature
4 git push
.
The commands above changes the local working branch to master, pulls the latest
changes to the local branch is up to date with the remote. Now we pull the new fea-
ture into the master branch. It is at this point possible conflicts will arise and should
be resolved. Finally, we can push the master branch including the functionality of
the new feature, to the shared central repository and the new feature is now a part
of the latest version of the shared codebase.
EmpiRes contain three central repositories, namely: ”Neuro adaptive system”, ”Em-
piRes Backend” and ”EmpiRes Frontend”. Regardless of the repository used, feature
branching respected and used throughout the development of future features.
==PAGE:97==
7.2 System set up and GitLab pipelines management
87
7.2
System set up and GitLab pipelines management
This section will briefly run through some of the guidelines made in order to run the
various parts of the overall system which has been explained throughout this thesis.
This system of this thesis can be split up into three main components: EmpiRes
frontend, EmpiRes backend and the Neuro adaptive system.
Since each component requires its own unique set up, a specific guide for each com-
ponent can be found in Appendix E.
Each component represents a GitLab repository which handles the associated CI/CD
tasks through the corresponding gitlab-ci.yml file located in the project root. This
can be modified either opening it through the project root or through ”CI/CD con-
figuration” button located just above the project root in the GitLab repository.
To modify the file, click ”edit”.
When done modifying the file, press the ”commit changes” in the bottom of the page.
This file can also be modified and committed through a cloned project by editing the
gitlab-ci.yml file, commit and push the changes.
All CI/CD pipelines in this thesis are triggered by changes only in the master branch.
GitLab provides a useful user interface for managing jobs and pipelines and allows
the user to browse the history and look at the job log associated with a job or pipeline.
Manually start, stop and redo’s can be made through this interface as well.
The following examples are based on the Neuro adaptive jobs and pipelines, as it
contains more steps than EmpiRes.
Figure ?? shows how GitLab displays pipelines where it is easy to see the associated
jobs and their status. In this example, the build stage is automatically started once
new changes hit the master branch, but deploy stage is set to be done manually, and
can be started by pressing the ”play” button.
Figure 7.1: Neuro adaptive system pipeline [32].
The Next Figure shows the history of pipelines run for this repository, see Fig-
==PAGE:98==
88
7 Contribution Policies and Guidelines
ure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: History of Neuro adaptive system pipelines [32].
A specific job or a history of jobs is also displayable by simply by pressing the
”Jobs” tab in the navigation bar as shown in Figure 7.3
Figure 7.3: Neuro adaptive system Jobs [32].
==PAGE:99==
7.3 General system workflow
89
7.3
General system workflow
This section will give an overview of the general system workflow and explain how the
Git workflow from the previous section, contributes to the implemented continuous
development infrastructure from Chapter 6.
This general system workflow will use the Neuro Adaptive system, as an example
since it was successfully migrated to use the whole CI/CD pipeline in GitLab.
As mentioned in Section 7.1, new features should be developed with respect to the
chosen git workflow ”feature branching”, see Section 7.1.1. This is the first step of
the overall system workflow, as students should use the feature branching workflow,
to clone the desired repository and start developing features. This first link in the
general system flow and is shown in Figure 7.4.
Figure 7.4: New features pushed to repository.
Once a new feature is pushed to master branch, GitLab automatically runs the first
steps of the CI/CD pipeline, namely the concepts of continuous integration, which
automatically builds and tests the newly pushed changes in order to eliminate possi-
ble conflict’s. The result of this process is reported back to the developers as shown
in Figure 7.5. In our case, the build and test process of the pipeline is implemented in
the corresponding gitlab-ci.yml file and are run by the GitLab runners instantiated
in the vms133976.comput.dtu.dk server as explained in Chapter 6, Section 6.3.4.
The next step is continuous deployment. For this step our GitLab CI/CD pipeline
includes a deployment job, which can be set to either start manually (continuous
delivery) as in Figure 7.6 or automatically (continuous deployment) as in Figure 7.7.
Whether or not the deployment is done automatically or manually is specified in the
gitlab-ci-yml file.
For this example, we have used the ”EmpiRes Backend” project, so in this case, we
deploy the new changes to the ”vms133976.compute.dtu” server. Regarding the Em-
piRes frontend project, the workflow would be the same, wherein the Neuro adaptive
==PAGE:100==
90
7 Contribution Policies and Guidelines
Figure 7.5: Implemented CI in GitLab.
system project, the changes would deploy to their associated server, namely, hbl-
wildlfy.compute.dk for the processing server project and hbl-cassandra.compute.dk
for the database server project.
Figure 7.6: Implemented CDE in GitLab .
The attentive reader will notice the similarities from Chapter 4, Section 4.1 where
the Continuous Integration (CI), Continuous DElivery (CDE) and Continuous De-
==PAGE:101==
7.4 Evaluation
91
Figure 7.7: Implemented CD in GitLab .
ployment (CD) software development practices were explained.
These similarities
are no coincidence, as achieving a continuous infrastructure which included concepts
from DevOps such as CI/CD was one of the main goals of the implementations made
throughout the work of this thesis.
7.4
Evaluation
The focus of this chapter was to explain how the third and final step of the solution
overview from Chapter 4, Section 4.4 can be achieved by general contribution policies
for working with the EmpiRes platform.
The policies regarding the git feature branching workflow will provide students work-
ing within the same GitLab repository with a sort of guarantee, that they will have
minimal conflicts throughout their contribution period. The shared repositories in
GitLab, information obtained throughout this thesis, guidelines presented in this
chapter and the underlying implemented continuous infrastructure will make it eas-
ier for new student to get started working on new features for the EmpiRes platform
instead of starting their own separate projects, as the project infrastructure is already
set up for them and ready to use.
==PAGE:102==
92
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 8
Evaluation
This chapter will evaluate the scientific contribution of this thesis as well as the
implementations made for this thesis. This will be done by revisiting and answer the
research questions stated in Chapter 3, Section 3.2.1.
This chapter concludes by proposing further development topics which could improve
the current state of the EmpiRes platform.
8.1
Research Questions Revisited
This section will revisit and answer each of the stated research questions from the
Methodology chapter according to the contributions made throughout this thesis.
RQ1: How can the existing previous development for EmpiRes be uni-
fied, so that all features are retained?
The previous projects of Chuang [29] and Stefánsson [42] has been unified to rep-
resent an overall EmpiRes platform where all features are retained. These projects
have been unified through connecting Chuang’s system to the Neuro Adaptive sys-
tems database, namely the EmpiRes backend to the Cassandra database. This allows
the data collected and processed through the Neuro Adaptive system to be displayed
and used through the EmpiRes user interface.
RQ2:
What can be done to the development infrastructure so that it
will make it easier for new students to start developing features for Em-
piRes?
The previously divided codebase of the two previous projects has been collected and
stored in GitLab, which provides a single shared location of the total codebase associ-
ated with the EmpiRes platform. GitLab does also provide a version control system,
which makes it easy to clone the desired project from its associated repository and
start developing.
This repository has additionally also continuous integration and development capa-
bilities which have been implemented through CI pipelines for the EmpiRes front
and backend project and a fully implemented CI/CD pipeline for the Neuro Adaptive
system. The CI pipeline will automatically build and test the changes made to a
==PAGE:104==
94
8 Evaluation
repository and provide feedback of the results to the contributors, where the addi-
tional CD extension to the Neuro Adaptive system pipeline enables easy manual or
automatic deployment of the newest changes.
The above-mentioned implementations improve the development infrastructure as we
have extended the agile development methodology previously used, towards DevOps
which will make it easier for new students to start developing features for EmpiRes.
RQ3: How do we prevent new students, who work on features for Em-
piRes, from starting their own separate code project?
The unified system along with the improved development infrastructure which in-
corporates concepts from the DevOps methodology will help prevent new students
from starting their own separate code project when developing features for the Em-
piRes platform, as the infrastructure already is provided and ready for receiving new
features. Furthermore, policies and guidelines are provided within this thesis, which
will make it easy for the new student to get started with the system and ensures that
the student will have a clean workflow throughout their contribution period, with
minimal conflicts and interference’s with features made by other students.
8.2
Further development and future work
Not all the indented concepts and functionality was successfully implemented in this
thesis, leaving room for further development and future work.
• Fix Jest1 in the EmpiRes frontend projects and extend the continuous integra-
tion pipeline to include a test stage.
• Extend the continuous integration pipeline for both EmpiRes’ front and backend
project to include continuous deployment to the remote Ubuntu server.
• Make use of the Cassandra database connection through both the EmpiRes
front and backend project to start to incorporate data collected by the Neuro
Adaptive system in research projects and experiments.
1https://jestjs.io/
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this thesis, we explained how existing previous projects related to the EmpiRes plat-
form was unified and thereby enlarged the overall feature set of the platform, which
will bring it closer to its intended goal, by appealing to more empirical researchers
who will reduce time spent by using the EmpiRes platform, instead of setting up
similar infrastructure, when starting a research project.
The development infrastructure of EmpiRes has been optimised so that it is easier for
new students start develop new features for the platform. The improved development
infrastructure does also encourage cooperation between multiple students simultane-
ously, which will prevent a future divergence of the EmpiRes codebase, as it now is
easier and more beneficial for new students to start implement new features into the
EmpiRes platform instead of setting up their own separate projects.
==PAGE:106==
96
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX A
Eyetracking React
component
1 class Eyetracking extends React.Component {
2
state = {eyetrackingId: null}
3
4
getData(){ this.props.dispatch(getEyetrackerData());}
5
getDataById(id){this.props.dispatch(getEyetrackerDataById(id));}
6
7
updateIdValue(evt) {
8
this.setState({
9
eyetrackingId: evt.target.value
10
});
11
}
12
render() {
13
return (
14
<div style={{margin: "5%"}}>
15
<div>
16
{
17
this.props.eyetracking.eyetrackingData !== [] ?
18
<pre style={{height:"500px"}}> {JSON.stringify(this.
props.eyetracking.eyetrackingData , null, 2)} </pre>
19
: []
20
}
21
</div>
22
<div>
23
<Button onClick={() => this.getData()}>GET DATA</Button>
24
<Button onClick={() => this.getDataById(this.state.
eyetrackingId)}>GET DATA BY ID</Button>
25
<input value={this.state.id} onChange={(evt) => this.
updateIdValue(evt)}/>
26
<p style={{display: "inline-block", marginLeft: "10px"
}}>Id: {this.state.eyetrackingId}</p>
27
</div>
28
</div>
29
)
30
}
31 }
Listing A.1: Eyetracking React component.
==PAGE:108==
98
A Eyetracking React component
Figure A.1: User interface of the Eyetracking React component.
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX B
Gitlab CI/CD files
B.1
EmpiRes frontend
1 image: node:latest
2
3 cache:
4
paths:
5
- node_modules
6
7 stages:
8
- prepare
9
- build
10
11 prepare:
12
tags:
13
- empiResBuildRunner
14
stage: prepare
15
script:
16
- unset CI
17
- npm install -g serve
18
19 build:
20
tags:
21
- empiResBuildRunner
22
stage: build
23
script:
24
- unset CI
25
- npm run build
Listing B.1: EmpiRes frontend gitlab-ci.yml file.
==PAGE:110==
100
B Gitlab CI/CD files
B.2
EmpiRes backend
1 stages:
2
- build
3
- test
4
5 build:
6
tags:
7
- empiResBuildRunner
8
stage: build
9
image: java:8-jdk
10
script:
11
- ./gradlew build
12
13 test:
14
tags:
15
- empiResBuildRunner
16
stage: test
17
image: java:8-jdk
18
script:
19
- ./gradlew test
20
21 after_script:
22
- echo "End CI"
Listing B.2: EmpiRes backend gitlab-ci.yml file.
==PAGE:111==
B.3 Neuro adaptive system
101
B.3
Neuro adaptive system
1 image: maven:3.5.3-jdk-8
2
3 cache:
4
paths:
5
- ./m2/repository
6 variables:
7
MAVEN_OPTS: "-Dmaven.repo.local=.m2"
8
9 stages:
10
- build
11
- deploy
12
13 build.processingServer:
14
stage: build
15
tags:
16
- empiResMentalStateRunner
17
18
script:
19
mvn install -f ./ProcessingServer
20
artifacts:
21
paths:
22
- target/~.jar
23
24 build.databaseServer:
25
stage: build
26
tags:
27
- empiResMentalStateRunner
28
script:
29
mvn install -f ./dataBaseServer
30
31 deploy.processingServer:
32
stage: deploy
33
tags:
34
- empiResMentalStateRunner
35
script:
36
mvn clean install -f ./ProcessingServer wildfly:deploy -Dusername=
admin -Dpassword=admin -Dhostname=hbl-wildfly.compute.dtu.dk
37
when: manual
38
allow_failure: false
39
40 deploy.databaseServer:
41
stage: deploy
42
tags:
43
- empiResMentalStateRunner
44
script:
45
mvn install -f ./dataBaseServer wildfly:deploy -Dusername=admin -
Dpassword=admin -Dhostname=hbl-cassandra.compute.dtu.dk
46
when: manual
47
allow_failure: false
Listing B.3: Neuro adaptive system gitlab-ci.yml file.
==PAGE:112==
102
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX C
Docker Compose
1 version: '3.3'
2 services:
3
4
postgres:
5
image: postgres
6
ports:
7
- 5432:5432
8
environment:
9
- POSTGRES_DB=backend
10
- POSTGRES_PASSWORD=DetErGodt
11
container_name: backend-psql
12
13
influxdb:
14
image: influxdb
15
ports:
16
- 8086:8086
17
volumes:
18
- "./influxdb.conf"
19
container_name: influxdb
20
21
grafana:
22
image: grafana/grafana
23
ports:
24
- 3000:3000
25
container_name: grafana
Listing C.1: EmpiRes docker-compse.yml file.
==PAGE:114==
104
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX D
Remote servers
The EmpiRes platform consists of three remote Ubuntu servers, one for EmpiRes
itself and two for the neuro adaptive system.
The specifications for the server hosting both the EmpiRes front and backend project,
as well as the GitLab runners are:
vms133976.compute.dtu.dk
Hardware
Specification
Operating System
Ubuntu 16.04.5 LTS
Processor
2.4 GHz
RAM
4GB
Space
65GB
The specifications given for the two servers hosting the neuro adaptive system are [42]:
Server
Operating System
Processor
RAM
Space
hbl-wildfly.compute.dtu.dk
Ubuntu 16.04.5 LTS
4 cores 2.4GHz
8 GB
30 GB
hbl-cassandra.compute.dtu.dk
Ubuntu 16.04.5 LTS
6 cores 2.4GHz
6gb
100gb
hbl-cassandra.compute.dtu.dk server corresponds to the database server environment.
hbl-cassandra.compute.dtu.dk server corresponds to the processing server environ-
ment.
All servers are hosted by the department of DTU compute and can thereby only
be accessed within the DTU network. A VPN is very usefull in this case.
Access to these server is granted by the hosting department at DTU compute.
==PAGE:116==
106
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX E
System set up
In this appendex, we will have a look at the system set up of both EmpiRes and the
associated ”Neuro adaptive system”.
E.1
EmpiRes
This section will contain a step by step guide to install and run the EmpiRes system.
E.1.1
Install
Before EmpiRes can run, the following software needs to be installed [29].
• Java 8 JDK
• Gradle
• npm
• Docker
• Docker compose
• git
Once the software is installed, go ahead and clone the relevant repository from
https://lab.compute.dtu.dk/empires.
Notice that lab.compute.dtu.dk can only be accessed within the DTU network.
Be sure to have the hosting department at DTU granting you access to the GitLab
group.
E.1.1.1
Running EmpiRes frontend
The following guideline is highly inspired to the one provided by Stefánsson [42] in
his project but do contain updates for running in the updated environment.
clone the project from GitLab.
==PAGE:118==
108
E System set up
1 git clone https://lab.compute.dtu.dk/empires/empires/empires-frontend.git
.
navigate to project root.
1 npm install -g serve
2 npm run build
3 sudo serve -s build -p 80
.
E.1.1.2
Running EmpiRes backend
clone the project from GitLab.
1 git clone https://lab.compute.dtu.dk/empires/neuro-adaptive-system/neuro-
adaptive-system.git
.
navigate to project root.
1 git clone https://lab.compute.dtu.dk/empires/empires/empires-frontend.git
.
Note that the ”docker-compose up -d” starts all the associated Docker containers.
A connected Postgres database must be connected before the backend can be run.
Individual start-up commands for the associated Docker containers are given below:
1 docker run -p 8086:8086 \
2 -v $PWD/influxdb.conf:/etc/influxdb/influxdb.conf:ro \ influxdb -config /etc/
influxdb/influxdb.conf
.
Postgres databas
1 docker run --name backend-psql \ -p 5432:5432 \
2 -e POSTGRES_DB=backend\
3 -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=DetErGodt \ -d postgres
.
Grafana:
1 docker run -d --name=grafana -p 3000:3000 grafana/grafana
.
==PAGE:119==
E.1 EmpiRes
109
E.1.1.3
Connection Configurations
Connection configurations:
The EmpiRes project is by default connected to the running instance on vms133976.compute.dtu.dk.
In order the Frontend project’s connection to the backend, navigate to ”src/action-
s/index.js” and change the ”API_URL”.
To change the backend project connection to the Postgres database, navigate ”sr-
c/main/resources.application.properties” file and change the ”spring.datasource.url”.
The connection from the backend project to the Cassandra database can be found in
”src/main/java/empiRes/cassandra/CassandraClient.java.
Before working with the EmpiRes platform it can be a good idea to read Chuang’s
project [29].
==PAGE:120==
110
E System set up
E.2
Neuro Adaptive Sytem
The following guideline is highly inspired to the one provided by Stefánsson [42] in
his project.
E.2.1
Install
Before the Neuro Adaptive Sytem can run, the following software needs to be in-
stalled [42] but do contain small updates.
• Java 8 JDK
• Maven
• Docker
• git
Once the software is installed, go ahead and clone the project from GitLab.
1 git clone https://lab.compute.dtu.dk/empires/neuro-adaptive-system/neuro-
adaptive-system.git
.
Notice that lab.compute.dtu.dk can only be accessed within the DTU network.
Be sure to have the hosting department at DTU granting you access to the GitLab
group.
E.2.1.1
Processing server
In order to run the processing server stat by running the fallowing Docker containers:
1 docker run -d -p 9990:9990 -p8080:8080 -p5445:5445 -p5455:5455 --name wildfly
beemmess/wildfly
2 docker run -d -p5000:5000 --name dataprocess beemmess/dataprocessing
.
As the project is hosted on by the Wildfly Docker container, we now need to deploy
our project to it.
Make sure the different connections are set properly. These can be found in:
• ”ProcessingServer/src/main/java/api/PathConstants” file and change the IP
address in REMOTE_SERVER_IP value to Database Server IP address: hbl-
cassandra.compute.dtu.dk.
==PAGE:121==
E.2 Neuro Adaptive Sytem
111
• ”ProcessingServer/pom.xml” file and change the IP address of the host in the
swagger-maven-plugin which is found in build plugins to the Processing Server
IP address: hbl-wildfly.compute.dtu.dk.
• ”ProcessingServer/src/webapp/SwaggerUI/index.html file and change the IP ad-
dress on line 43 to the Processing Server IP address: hbl-wildfly.compute.dtu.dk.
In order to deploy the the project navigate to the project root and run the following
command:
1 mvn install wildfly:deploy -Dusername=admin -Dpassword=admin -Dhostname=hbl-
wildfly.compute.dtu.dk
.
Note that the above command will deploy to ”hbl-wildfly.compute.dtu.dk”, but can
be changed to match the hostname of the running Wildfly container.
E.2.1.2
Database server
Stat by running the fallowing Docker containers:
1 docker run -d -p 9990:9990 -p8080:8080 -p5445:5445 -p5455:5455 --name wildfly
beemmess/wildfly
2 docker run -d -p 9042:9042 --name cassandra cassandra
.
As the project is hosted on by the Wildfly Docker container, we now need to
deploy our project to it.
Make sure the different connections are set properly. These can be found in:
• ”DataBaseServer/src/main/java/beans/PathConstants file and change the IP
address in REMOTE_SERVER_IP value to Processing Server IP address: hbl-
wildfly.compute.dtu.dk.
In order to deploy the the project navigate to the project root and run the following
command:
1 mvn install wildfly:deploy -Dusername=admin -Dpassword=admin -Dhostname=hbl-
cassandra.compute.dtu.dk
.
Note that the above command will deploy to ”hbl-cassandra.compute.dtu.dk”, but
can be changed to match the hostname of the running Wildfly container.
==PAGE:122==
112
E System set up
For more information about the neuro adaptive system and how to run the Phython
web framework, see Stefánssons project [42].
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX F
GitLab runner set up
GitLab runners are used to read and execute the pipelines and jobs specified in a
repository gitlab-ci.yml file.
GitLab runner must be installed on the instance the runner should be run on. For
this thesis, runners was installed on the provided Ubuntu server which also hosts both
EmpiRes frontend and backend project.
If runners should be created on another machine, make sure to install GitLab runner:
https://docs.gitlab.com/runner/install/index.html.
Once the software is installed, the runner needs to be registered. Follow GitLabs own
guide here: https://docs.gitlab.com/runner/register/index.html
Notice that both a url and a registration token is needed in order to register a runner.
These information can be found within a group or a specific repository in GitLab
by going into sittings -> CI / CD and expand the tab called runners as shown in
Figure F.1
Figure F.1: Runner tab inside sittings -> CI / CD.
The expanded tab reveals the values which should be used for the runner registration
as showed in Figure F.2.
Notice that the registered runner only can be used for executing jobs and pipelines
for the group or repository it has been registered for.
==PAGE:124==
114
F GitLab runner set up
The runner executing jobs it is ”tagged” for, within the gitlab-ci.yml file of the repos-
itory. The tag name of the runner is used for this purpose.
Figure F.2: Runner registration values.
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX G
Manual deploy
through ssh
This appendix will show how to set up a manual connection to the remote Ubuntu
server provided by DTU compute, which is available for hosting the EmpiRes front
and backend.
• Your internet connection is within DTU network, this can either be achieved
by using the internet provided at campus, or through a VPN.
• You have been granted access to a user on the remote server, vms133976.compute.dtu.dk.
• software from Appendix E is installed and available for the Ubuntu user access-
ing through ssh.
The following examples are made through the terminal of your local machine.
connecting, cloning and running EmpiRes frontend
1 - ssh <user>@vms133976.compute.dtu.dk
2 - git clone git@lab.compute.dtu.dk:empires/empires/empires-
frontend.git
3 - cd empires-frontend
4 - npm run build
5 - npm start
.
connecting, cloning and running EmpiRes backend
1 - ssh <user>@vms133976.compute.dtu.dk
2 - git clone git@lab.compute.dtu.dk:empires/empires/empires-
backend.git
3 - cd empires-backend
4 - docker-compose up -d
5 - gradle build
==PAGE:126==
116
G Manual deploy through ssh
6 - gradle test
7 - gradle bootRun
.
Notice that the -ssh command will prompt you for your password unless you have
exchanged a ssh-keygen pair with your local machine.
If the project should pull the latest changes and run the project, use the same com-
mands as above, but instead of
1 - git clone <repository>
.
Use the following commands
1 - cd <project-name>
2 - git pull origin master
.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
[1]
A gitlab-ci config to deploy to your server via ssh. url: https://medium.com/
@hfally/a- gitlab- ci- config- to- deploy- to- your- server- via- ssh-
43bf3cf93775.
[2]
Apatche Cassandra team. Documentation. url: http://cassandra.apache.
org/doc/latest/cql/.
[3]
Atlassian. Git Feature Branch Workflow | Atlassian Git Tutorial. url: https:
//www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing- workflows/feature-
branch-workflow.
[4]
baeldung. Deploy a Spring Boot WAR into a Tomcat Server | Baeldung. url:
https://www.baeldung.com/spring-boot-war-tomcat-deploy.
[5]
baeldung. Introduction to Spring Data Cassandra | Baeldung. url: https://
www.baeldung.com/spring-data-cassandra-tutorial.
[6]
Build and Deploy a Tomcat-War Web App on Docker - Pipelines for Applications
team | Puppet. url: https://puppet.com/docs/pipelines-for-apps/team/
docker-tomcat-war.html.
[7]
Lianping Chen. “Microservices: Architecting for Continuous Delivery and De-
vOps”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA).
IEEE, 2018, pages 39–397. isbn: 978-1-5386-6398-1. doi: 10.1109/ICSA.2018.
00013. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8417115/.
[8]
InfluxData Chris Churilo. InfluxDB Tops Cassandra in Time Series Data Met-
rics Benchmark. 2018. url: https://www.influxdata.com/blog/influxdb-
vs-cassandra-time-series/ (visited on February 8, 2019).
[9]
University of Copenhagen. ERDA. url: http://www.erda.dk/.
[10]
Docker. Legacy container links | Docker Documentation. url: https://docs.
docker.com/v17.09/engine/userguide/networking/default_network/
dockerlinks/.
[11]
Docker. What is a Container? url: https://www.docker.com/resources/
what-container (visited on January 24, 2019).
[12]
Docker Docs. About Docker CE. url: https://docs.docker.com/install/
(visited on January 24, 2019).
==PAGE:128==
118
Bibliography
[13]
Christof Ebert et al. “DevOps”. In: IEEE Software 33.3 (May 2016), pages 94–
100. issn: 0740-7459. doi: 10.1109/MS.2016.68. url: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/7458761/.
[14]
Ernest Mueller. What Is DevOps? | the agile admin. 2019. url: https://
theagileadmin.com/what-is-devops/.
[15]
GitLab CI/CD environment variables | GitLab. url: https://docs.gitlab.
com/ee/ci/variables/README.html.
[16]
GitLab Continuous Integration &amp; Delivery | GitLab. url: https://about.
gitlab.com/product/continuous-integration/.
[17]
GitLab Runner | GitLab. url: https://docs.gitlab.com/runner/.
[18]
GitLab.com Shared Runners use Autoscaling | GitLab. (Visited on April 2, 2019).
[19]
Felipe Gutierrez. “Microservices”. In: Spring Boot Messaging. Berkeley, CA:
Apress, 2017, pages 179–192. isbn: 9781484212240. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-
1224-0{\_}11. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4842-
1224-0_11.
[20]
Alan R. Hevner and Samir. Chatterjee. Design research in information systems
: theory and practice. Springer, 2010, page 320. isbn: 9781441956538.
[21]
How to deploy a Spring Boot WAR to Wildfly, JBoss or Tomcat. url: https:
//thepracticaldeveloper.com/2018/08/06/how-to-deploy-a-spring-
boot-war-in-wildfly-jboss/.
[22]
InfluxDB. InfluxDB 1.7 documentation. url: https://docs.influxdata.com/
influxdb/v1.7/ (visited on January 31, 2019).
[23]
Intellipaat. What is Cassandra? url: https://intellipaat.com/blog/what-
is-apache-cassandra/ (visited on January 31, 2019).
[24]
DZone Izzy Azeri. What is CI/CD? 2017. url: https://dzone.com/articles/
what-is-cicd (visited on February 14, 2019).
[25]
Jenkins. url: https://jenkins.io/.
[26]
Jenkins CI service | GitLab. url: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/integration/
jenkins.html.
[27]
Jenkins User Documentation. url: https://jenkins.io/doc/.
[28]
Kent Beck et al. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. url: http://
agilemanifesto.org/iso/en/manifesto.html.
[29]
Chuang Kwong Zu. A platform for collecting, processing and analysing data in
scientific projects - DTU Findit. 2019. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/2445374259.
[30]
Lucidchart Content Team. Understanding the DevOps Process Flow | Lucidchart
Blog. 2018. url: https://www.lucidchart.com/blog/devops-process-flow.
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
119
[31]
Nikolaj King Lykkegaard. “Design and Implementation of an Extensible Frame-
work for Securely Collecting and Sharing Health-related Data from Wearable
Devices”. In: The Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[32]
DTU Management. Data Management Plan. url: http : / / www . dtu . dk/ -
/media/DTUdk/Forskning/Om_DTUs_forskning/DTU_Data_Management_
Plan-folder.ashx (visited on February 20, 2019).
[33]
Feryandi Nurdiantoro, Yudistira Asnar, and Tricya Esterina Widagdo. “The de-
velopment of data collection tool on spreadsheet format”. In: 2017 International
Conference on Data and Software Engineering (ICoDSE). IEEE, November
2017, pages 1–6. isbn: 978-1-5386-1449-5. doi: 10.1109/ICODSE.2017.8285889.
url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8285889/.
[34]
Opensource. What is Docker? url: https://opensource.com/resources/
what-docker (visited on January 24, 2019).
[35]
Packaging and serving your Java application with Docker | The Geeky Platypus
Blog. url: http://geekyplatypus.com/packaging- and- serving- your-
java-application-with-docker/.
[36]
Aswin Pranam. “Software Development Methodologies”. In: Product Manage-
ment Essentials. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2018, pages 65–74. isbn: 9781484233023.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-3303-0{\_}9. url: http://link.springer.com/
10.1007/978-1-4842-3303-0_9.
[37]
Reasons why we Trust Agile for our Mobile App Development Process. url:
https://medium.com/@AppInventiv/reasons-why-we-trust-agile-for-
our-mobile-app-development-process-72e673bf7682.
[38]
Julia Naomi Rosenfield Boeira. “Continuous Integration”. In: Lean Game De-
velopment. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2017, pages 67–75. isbn: 9781484232163. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4842-3216-3{\_}7. url: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-1-4842-3216-3_7.
[39]
Sakshi Sachdeva and Sakshi Sachdeva. “Agile Methodologies”. In: (). url: http:
//citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.736.6792.
[40]
Mojtaba Shahin, Muhammad Ali Babar, and Liming Zhu. Continuous Integra-
tion, Delivery and Deployment: A Systematic Review on Approaches, Tools,
Challenges and Practices. 2017. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2685629.
[41]
Shimmer. Shimmer3 GSR+ Unit. url: http://www.shimmersensing.com/
products/shimmer3-wireless-gsr-sensor (visited on January 31, 2019).
[42]
Bjarki Már Stefánsson. Architectural blueprint for a neuro-adaptive system -
DTU Findit. 2019. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2444215427.
[43]
The Datastax team. Java Driver for Apache Cassandra - Manual. url: https:
//docs.datastax.com/en/developer/java-driver/3.7/manual/.
[44]
The War Plugin. url: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/war_
plugin.html.
==PAGE:130==
120
Bibliography
[45]
Tobii. Tobii Eye Tracker 4C. url: https://gaming.tobii.com/product/
tobii-eye-tracker-4c/ (visited on January 31, 2019).
[46]
Tutorialpoint. SDLC Waterfall Model. url: https://www.tutorialspoint.
com/sdlc/sdlc_waterfall_model.htm.
[47]
Using SSH keys with GitLab CI/CD | GitLab. url: https://docs.gitlab.
com/ee/ci/ssh_keys/.
[48]
Ryan Ververs-Bijkerk. How can there be a DevOps engineer? - Logit Blog.
2016. url: https://www.logitblog.com/how-can-there-be-a-devops-
engineer/.
[49]
Matt Watson. Defining the Dev and the Ops in Devops. 2014. url: https:
//devops.com/defining-the-dev-and-the-ops-in-devops/.
[50]
Wildfly. What is WildFly? url: http://wildfly.org/about/ (visited on
January 31, 2019).
[51]
Mark D. Wilkinson et al. “The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data
management and stewardship”. In: Scientific Data 3 (March 2016), page 160018.
issn: 2052-4463. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2016.18. url: http://www.nature.
com/articles/sdata201618.
[52]
Iman I. Yusuf et al. “Chiminey: Reliable Computing and Data Management
Platform in the Cloud”. In: (July 2015). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1507.
01321.
[53]
Yury V. Zaytsev and Abigail Morrison. “Increasing quality and managing com-
plexity in neuroinformatics software development with continuous integration”.
In: Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 6 (January 2013), page 31. issn: 1662-5196.
doi: 10.3389/fninf.2012.00031. url: http://journal.frontiersin.org/
article/10.3389/fninf.2012.00031/abstract.
