==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Golf Club Detection and Classification us-
ing Deep Learning for Embedded Devices
Jacob Jon Hansen (s134097)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This work is a feasibility study in detecting and identifying golf clubs from a camera
feed. A complete data annotation pipeline is constructed using the software Beaver-
Dam. Methods for artificial data generation is suggested together with active learning.
Different detection networks are suggested and benchmarked. Methods such as Opti-
cal Character Recognition (OCR) is incorporated to improve identification accuracy.
Techniques from facial recognition is explored and the models are optimized for infer-
ence speed. The application of methods to other domains is tested, showing synergies
with the problem of detecting baseball players in Major League Baseball games. A
discussion is included, outlining future work and the conclusion contains a concrete
work plan for the company to implement the researched methods into production.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This work is dedicated to my dear step mother through the last 20 years, Ingelise
Loft, who passed away 2 weeks into the project. Ingelise has been like a mother to
me and was always very supportive and proud of me.
Kongens Lyngby, May 15, 2019
Jacob Jon Hansen (s134097)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Anders and Shihav for providing me with
continual and useful feedback throughout the project. I would like to thank Anders
in particular for his engagement in the last part of the project, helping me pull through
and for out interesting discussions of ideas at the office.
I would like to thank the Vision Team at TrackMan for providing me with a nice work
environment. It has been fun being a part of the team and I enjoyed trying my hand
at playing golf on the Thursdays. Johan has been a good support throughout the
whole project, especially when I lost my step mother. He has always given positive
feedback on the project and motivated me to do some great work.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Golf Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
MobileNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Residual Networks (ResNets) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Faster Regional Convolutional Neural Networks (Faster R-CNN)
. . .
13
2.6
Single Shot Detector (SSD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7
FaceNet and Triplet Loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Data
27
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Data Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Artificial Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Method and Results
37
4.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
OCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Embedding Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5
Optimizing for embedded devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5
Application to player tracking in Baseball
79
5.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.3
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Discussion and Future Work
87
7
Conclusion and recommendations for TrackMan
93
Bibliography
97
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
TrackMan is a danish company that has been making tracking products for the golf
industry for the last 15 years. Their primary offering is extremely accurate tracking
of the trajectory of golf balls using radar technology. 4 years ago TrackMan began
including cameras in their units which has greatly expanded the capabilities of the
system.
TrackMan would like to explore the possibilities for using cameras and AI to both
detect and classify golf clubs. Currently the users have to use the app to register
which type of club they are using.
It would be much easier for the user, if they
could just present the club to the unit and it could figure out the club type itself.
This is not an easy problem; great variation in the appearance of the clubs from
different manufactures and a great variation in environments requires flexible models
and renders classical image analysis techniques useless, since a solution that works
in any condition is required. Additionally, the limited computing capabilities of the
embedded unit poses restrictions on the size of applicable models when real time
performance is required.
The club type is a very important information for many of the algorithms running on
TrackMan’s systems. Additionally TrackMan is investigating which hardware should
be included in their upcoming TrackMan V. Having had good experience with their
inclusion of a camera, they would like to explore use cases for deep learning where
this project is one of several ideas.
Additionally this project will serve as a guideline for TrackMan in managing deep
learning projects, which includes data collection, annotation, model experimentation
and hardware.
Chapter 2 presents the relevant theory, chapter 3 gives an introduction to the data,
chapter 4 dives into the various methods used and their results and chapter 5 shows
an extension of the used methods to another domain. Chapter 6 is a discussion of the
results and future work and chapter 7 is the conclusion. This work is intended as a
feasibility study and as such, we explore a lot of different methodologies, so for ease
of reading, results will be shown directly after each method has been introduced.
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This section includes some basic terminology in the golf field as well as a detailed
write-up of some of the neural network architectures used throughout the project.
Miscellaneous software:
Docker: A widely used tool to make it easier to deploy and run software using
containers. Containers are much like virtual machines, except they share the host
level kernel with other containers. So instead of having to spin a whole kernel up, we
just spin up an instance. For this particular project, much of the code has different
dependencies and needs to run both on local machines, embedded hardware and cloud
machines. Wrapping it all into a docker container makes it much easier to get it to run
on everything, since we don’t have to set up working environments on every machine
the code needs to be used on. It is also easier to recover, since nothing is saved when
the instance is restated. This allows us to break things and return to our image (a
container is an instance of an image), if everything works we can create a new image
with the working configuration and use this as a checkpoint for spinning up future
containers. https://www.docker.com/.
Tesseract: An optical character recognition (OCR) engine, originally developed at
Hewlett-Packard between 1985 and 1994. Since 2006 is has been developed by Google.
It offers in easy to use API, and is able to recognize more than 100 languages. In
version 4 they introduced a LSTM (Long short-term memory) based OCR engine. It
is especially well suited for detecting text in documents, e.g for scanning PDFs and
images of documents. It is quite configurable with many command line arguments to
specify how it should expect the text, for instance as a single line or a block of text.
It is however quite biased towards characters and thus digits has a tendency to be
classified as characters. Code: https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract.
2.1
Golf Terminology
This sections contains golf terminology needed to understand the report, it uses ele-
ments from [18, 41, 28].
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Theory
Tee: The area of a golf hole where the ball is first struck.
Putting Green: The area of very low cut grass where the hole is located and putting
is done.
Fairway: The center, short-mown portion of a golf hole in between the teeing ground
and the green.
2.1.1
Golf Club Types
An illustration of the different club types can be seen on figure 2.1
Driver/Wood: Long-distance clubs with a large head and a long shaft used to drive
the ball a great distance. A golf set usually has two to three fairway woods and a
driver. The fairway woods are, as their names suggest typically used in the fairway,
where the irons are out of reach. The driver usually has a loft between 7-11° and the
woods has loft between 12-20° to produce higher shots.
Iron: Club with a solid metal head, with a flat angled face and shorter shaft than
a wood. Irons are very versatile, but are generally used from the fairway or tee on
short holes. Typically numbered from 1 to 9 where the shafts are getting shorter, loft
angles higher and club heads heavier as the number increases.
Wedge: A subclass of irons with a greater loft. They usually start at a loft of 47-48°,
where the 9 iron ends at 44-45°. They are used for short-distance, high-altitude and
high-accuracy shots, usually getting the ball onto the green from tricky position. In
golf terms they are typically broken into 4 categories: pitching wedge, gap wedge,
θloft;d
Figure 2.1: Left: Golf Club Categories. Source: http://blog.vootygolfcounty.com
Right: The loft of a golf club. Image provided by Janus Jensen.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Neural Networks
5
sand wedge and lob wedge. For classification, they are usually marked with either
their loft, e.g ”60” for a 60° loft or a letter like ”P” for pitching wedge.
Hybrid: Newest category of club and is a cross between a wood and an iron. Num-
bered like irons, but doesn’t go that high because the number corresponds to the iron
that they replace. Most typical hybrids is a 2-hybrid and a 3-hybrid. Used to hit
semi-long distance shots, and the design makes it easier to hit shots (like irons), while
having the more long-range features of the wood.
Putter: A flat faced club used on or around the green as the last club to get the
ball into the hole. They are designed to roll the ball along the green and thus have
very little loft (typically 5°). Putters have a large variance in shapes and sizes, since
choosing a putter is very much up to personal preference.
2.2
Neural Networks
The reader of the paper is expected to have a basic understanding of neural networks
and the training process of these. This includes the standard feed forward network,
convolutional layers and stochastic gradient descent. Below are defined some terms
used in this work.
ReLU: Rectified Linear Unit. Used as an activation function in neural networks and
is the most used one today. It has been found empirically to perform better than the
before popular sigmoid and tanh activation functions. The deep learning community
is waiting with excitement on more thorough research on activation functions from a
theoretical point of view.
ReLU = max(0, input)
Batch Normalization: Layer used before activation to give the input to the acti-
vation function zero mean and unit variance. Helps significantly when training deep
neural networks because it prevents the input (provided as mini batches) in the dif-
ferent layers from changing distributions, also known as internal covariate shift. In
essence we have for a long time normalized the input to our neural networks; now we
have figured out it is a smart idea to do in between layers as well, since the process of
propagating the input through the network will denormalize it. Batch Normalization
is shown in figure 2.2.
SoftMax: Activation used mostly for the last layer in classification tasks.
It is
essentially a sigmoid activation function for multiple outputs.
Has the ability in
multi-class classification to give us the probability of a given class, zi.
softmax(zi) =
exp(zi)
∑
j exp(zj)
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theory
Figure 2.2: Batch Normalization [14].
Intersection Over Union (IOU): Evaluation metric used in object detection prob-
lems to measure, how accurately we are able to localize our object. It gives a qual-
itative measure of how well the predicted bounding box fits with the ground truth
bounding box, essentially just describing, how large a proportion of the combined
area is overlapping.
See figure 2.3.
This metric is sometimes referred to as the
Jaccard overlap.
Figure 2.3: Intersection Over Union [30].
2.3
MobileNet
MobileNets [11] is a class of efficient conv.
neural network models developed by
Google. They are very efficient and specifically developed for mobile and embedded
vision applications.
They introduce two global hyper-parameters α and ρ, which
lets the user fine-tune the model size for their specific use.
MobileNets are very
popular, since they can be tuned to the exact use case, while they are not as accurate
as larger networks, they are able to achieve a high frame rate on limited hardware.
Especially mobile applications where a developer wishes to run his model on phones
with vastly different hardware. MobileNets, as supplied by Google, are pretrained on
==PAGE:17==
2.3 MobileNet
7
the ImageNet dataset, and thus one can remove the last fully connected classification
layers and thus use the network as an image feature extractor. This is often referred
to as a ”backbone” network, where we then build a task specific network on top for
our specific use case. This can be classification, detection, face attributes, landmark
recognition etc.
”The MobileNet model is based on depthwise separable convolutions which is a form
of factorized convolutions which factorize a standard convolution into a depthwise
convolution and a 1×1 convolution called a pointwise convolution. For MobileNets
the depthwise convolution applies a single filter to each input channel. The pointwise
convolution then applies a 1×1 convolution to combine the outputs the depthwise
convolution. A standard convolution both filters and combines inputs into a new set
of outputs in one step. The depthwise separable convolution splits this into two layers,
a separate layer for filtering and a separate layer for combining. This factorization
has the effect of drastically reducing computation and model size.” [11]
The depthwise separable convolution is probably best explained by example. This
example uses material from [40]. Let’s say that we have a 12x12x3 image and want
to use a standard convolutional kernel of size 5x5x3 with no padding and create 256
feature maps. The resulting output will be of shape 8x8x256 because we don’t do
any padding. Figure 2.4 shows the standard convolutional operation.
Using depthwise separable convolutions instead, we would first apply depthwise con-
volution (DC) as a 5x5x1 kernel to each of the input channels. Since we have 3 input
channels (RGB), we would end up with 3 feature maps of size 8x8x1. Combining
these 3 feature maps into a single output, we would get an intermediate output of
size 8x8x3. Figure 2.5 shows this process. Now we will apply pointwise convolu-
tions (PC) to this output. The pointwise convolution kernel has the shape 1x1x3
(same depth as the number of channels in the intermediate output). To generate 256
feature maps, we need 256 pointwise convolution kernels, so essentially we combine
the 3 channels of the intermediate output in 256 different ways. Using 256 1x1x3
convolutions, we get the output shape of 8x8x256, which is the same as our standard
Figure 2.4: Standard Convolution, stride 1, no padding [40].
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
convolution approach. Figure 2.6 shows the pointwise convolution operation.
Figure 2.5: Depthwise Convolution. One kernel is applied to each input channel.
The feature maps are combined [40].
Figure 2.6: Pointwise Convolution. 1x1 convolutions are applied across all channels
to generate an 8x8 feature map. This process is repeated 256 times in this example,
resulting in 256 8x8 feature maps [40].
Now if we look at the number of weights of each approach (ignoring bias terms):
Standard Convolution:
We apply 256 different 5x5x3 kernels: (5 · 5 · 3) · 256 = 19200
Depthwise Separable Convolution:
We apply 3 5x5x1 depthwise convolutions to the input image and 256 1x1x3 pointwise
convolutions to the inptermediate output. (5·5·1)·3+(1·1·3)·256 = 75+768 = 843
We see a massive drop in the amount of weights that we have to store and thus
the model size is heavily reduced. For efficiency in hardware, we want to load all
of the weights into RAM. Mobile and embedded device typically have quite limited
hardware with little available RAM, so being able to store the model weights in RAM
is of crucial importance for doing efficient inference on a stream of images. On the
==PAGE:19==
2.3 MobileNet
9
other hand, we can also look at the number of multiplications needed for each network
to compute a forward pass:
Standard Convolution:
Each of the 256 5x5x3 kernels are moved 8x8 times: 256 · 5 · 5 · 3 · 8 · 8 = 1228800
Depthwise Separable Convolution:
Each of the 3 5x5x1 kernels are moved 8x8 times: 3 · 5 · 5 · 1 · 8 · 8 = 4800
Each of the 256 1x1x3 kernels are moved 8x8 times 256 · 1 · 1 · 3 · 8 · 8 = 49152
Total = 4800 + 49152 = 53952
So in our example we see that by using depthwise separable convolutions, we get a
model which is 23 times smaller and requires 23 times fewer multiplications. Fewer
parameters give rise to less flexibility, so the smaller model will be less accurate but
the researchers from Google have shown that MobileNets are able to shrink the models
significantly without taking a proportional significant hit to performance [11]. If we
consider 1x1 stride with padding and square input we can generalize our example:
Standard convolutions have the computational cost:
DK · DK · M · N · DF · DF
Where DK is the kernel size, M is the number of input channels, N is the number of
output channels and DF is the input feature map size.
Depthwise Separable Convolutions have the computational cost:
DK · DK · M · DF · DF
|
{z
}
Depthwise Convolution
+ M · N · DF · DF
|
{z
}
Pointwise Convolution
Comparing the two, depthwise separable convolutions with 1x1 stride and padding
introduces a reduction in computation of:
DK · DK · M · DF · DF + M · N · DF · DF
DK · DK · M · N · DF · DF
= 1
N +
1
D2
K
Figure 2.7(a) shows the difference between a standard convolution and the separable
depthwise convolution. As per the standard approach, each convolutional layer is
followed by a batchnorm layer and a ReLU activation.
2.3.1
Tuneable parameters α and ρ
The baseline MobileNet has α = 1 and ρ = 1. If a smaller network is required, these
two parameters can be turned to the task at hand. The baseline MobileNet body
architecture is seen in figure 2.7(b).
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
(a) Standard convolution compared to the fac-
torized separable depthwise convolution
(b) The baseline MobileNet Body Architecture
Figure 2.7:
Comparison of standard convolutions vs.
depthwise separable con-
voluions and the architecture of the MobileNet network [11].
Width multiplier α: This multiplier is able to thin the network uniformly at each
layer. For a given layer, the number of input channels M becomes αM and the number
of output channels becomes αN. Fewer channels gives fewer kernels which in turn
reduces the number of parameters we have to store and the number of multiplications
we have to perform in a forward pass.
Resolution multiplier ρ This multiplier reduces the resolution of the input image.
By reducing the size of the input image, the internal representation of the image in
every layer is also reduced by the same multiplier due to the nature of convolutional
networks.
The computational cost in regards to the introduction of these two global hyperpa-
rameters becomes:
DK · DK · αM · ρDF · ρDF + αM · αN · ρDF · ρDF
The big contribution from MobileNet is thus that we got a very small and fast network
with decent performance and most importantly one that we can design using the α
and ρ hyperparameters to an appropriate size for our application.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Residual Networks (ResNets)
11
2.4
Residual Networks (ResNets)
Residual Networks (ResNets) were introduced in [9] and aims to solve the problem
of degradation in convergence of deep networks as seen on figure 2.8. It has been
known for a long time that deeper networks leads to more complex abstractions, as
it is observed [8], that the early layers typically learn simple features with deeper
layers learning more abstract and task specific features. Deep networks experience a
problem with vanishing gradients, because the error is backpropagated through many
layers. This problem is however mostly solved by using batch normalization, however
the degradation problem still persists. The authors of ResNet argue that one should
be able to simply make a network larger, by inserting extra layers which functions
as identity mappings. I.e they just pass on the input, not altering it. If the neural
network learned the identity mapping, there should be no degradation in performance
for a larger network, since it could just approximate the smaller one by settings its
extra layers to the identity mapping.
Figure 2.8: Training and test error on CIFAR-10 with ”plain” networks. We see a
degradation in performance for the larger network [9].
In practice we don’t observe this happening during the optimization phase of the
training. They key idea by the authors is then that instead of learning the direct
mapping H(x), it is easier to learn the residual F(x) := H(x) −x, i.e the difference
between the identity and the target. Figure 2.9(a) illustrates this. If the identity
mapping is indeed the optimal, then the weights of the residual layers will just be set
to 0 and the identity will be passed on by using shortcut connections. if it is not, the
network will try to learn the residual function to correct the output. As noted by
the authors: ”In real cases, it is unlikely that identity mappings are optimal, but our
reformulation may help to precondition the problem. If the optimal function is closer
to an identity mapping than to a zero mapping, it should be easier for the solver to find
the perturbations with reference to an identity mapping, than to learn the function as
a new one.” [9]. The residual building block is shown in figure 2.9(b). An example
34-layer network is shown in figure 2.10 in comparison with a plain 34-layer network
and the popular VGG-19 architecture.
ResNets are available pretrained on imagenet in a lot of differenct sizes, most common
being ResNet-18, Resnet-34 and Resnet-50.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
(a) Learning the residual instead of the
mapping. If our prediction is equal to
the actual, the residual (error) will be
0 and we will just pass the identity. If
it is not, the residual will correct the
difference between the prediction and
the actual. It should be easier to learn
the residual than the direct mapping
[33]
(b) Residual building block.
Shortcut
connections are added between every few
layers to forward the identity [9]
Figure 2.9: The residual building block.
Figure 2.10: Resnet-34 architecture compared with a plain 34-layer architecture
and the VGG-19 architecture.
These architectures were trained on imagenet and
therefore have a FC-layer with 1000 outputs and the end [9].
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Faster Regional Convolutional Neural Networks (Faster R-CNN)
13
2.5
Faster Regional Convolutional Neural Networks
(Faster R-CNN)
Faster R-CNN was introduced by Ross Girshick, et. al. in 2015 [29] and builds on
top of Fast R-CNN (2015) [6] which in turn builds on top of R-CNN (2013) [7], all
released by the same group. To really understand Faster R-CNN, we need to take a
look at both of the previous projects to see the development of the method. Mask-
RCNN is a further extension to Faster R-CNN, but is not considered here because,
as the name implies, it needs a label MASK instead of a bounding box which is much
more time consuming to produce.
2.5.1
R-CNN
The core of R-CNN [7] is quite simple: We have previously been able to run a whole
image through a CNN to classify the object present in the image and also do local-
ization through 4 bounding box coordinates [8]. However, this only works for images
containing a single object, and now we would like to extent this approach to correctly
detect multiple objects of different classes in a single image. The overall idea is to
simply take regions of an image, run it through a CNN to determine a class of object
present in that region as well as a precise bounding box for that object if it exists.
R-CNN thus requires an input image and some region proposals and will output an
object score and bounding box for each region. The regional proposals is in the paper
generated with an algorithm known as selective search (SS) [39], but any algorithm
can in practice be used, as long as it just generates regions og interest (ROIs) that
we use as input for the CNN. Figure 2.11 shows an overview of the R-CNN method
and below the algorithm is described.
1. Use selective search to extract 2000 regional proposals
2. For each regional proposal:
a) Wrap the region to a fixed input size for a CNN.
b) Run the wrapped region through a pretrained CNN to generate image
features.
c) Using the computed features, do classification using a support vector ma-
chine (SVM) and linear bounding box regression (ridge regression). The
bounding box regression tries to tighten the bounding box (defined by the
wrapped region) to better fit the object.
Ridge Regression: To tighten the bounding box, defined by Px, Py, Pw, Ph (x,y-
coordinate of the center and width, height of the bounding box), the authors used
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theory
Figure 2.11: RCNN overview [7].
the following method to generate tightened bounding box parameters G∗
ˆGx = Pwdx(P) + Px
ˆGy = Phdx(P) + Py
ˆGw = Pwexp(dw(p))
ˆGh = Phexp(dh(p))
”Each function d∗(P) where ∗is one of (x, y, h, w) is modeled as a linear function of
the pool5 features of proposal P, denoted by ϕ5(P). Thus we have d∗(P) = wT
∗ϕ5(P),
where w∗is a vector of learnable model parameters. We learn w∗by optimizing the
regularized least squares objective (ridge regression):
w∗= argmin
θ
f(x)
N
∑
i
(ti
∗−ˆwT
∗ϕ5(P i))2 + λ∥ˆw∗∥2
This method became state of the art of its time [7], but it was also super slow (49
seconds per image) since it does a forward pass through a CNN for each region
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Faster Regional Convolutional Neural Networks (Faster R-CNN)
15
proposal, resulting in 2000 forward passes.
Furthermore it is also quite complex
because it uses a lot of different non deep learning elements such as selective search,
support vector machines and standard ridge regression. Since we can’t backpropagate
a loss through ridge regression and SVM, we aren’t updating the CNN either but just
default to use a pretrained one for feature extraction. In essence this method is just
building an advanced HOG (history of oriented gradients) + linear SVM classifier
[31].
2.5.2
Fast R-CNN
The bottleneck of R-CNN was as described the extreme number of forward passes
through the CNN. To combat this, the authors of R-CNN developed Fast R-CNN [6].
The main idea is that instead of feeding each single ROI into a CNN, we feed the
whole image to a CNN once to create a feature map, and then we extract regions from
this feature map corresponding to the ROIs generated by the proposals, see figure
2.12. In other words: we project the ROI into the convolutional (conv) feature map
and then we run this region of the feature map through a pooling layer such that we
get a fixed size that can be fed into a series of fully connected layers for classification
and bounding box regression. This way the computation of the conv feature map is
shared across all the region proposals instead of being generated for each one.
Using this ROI feature vector from the fully connected layers, we make two heads of
the network, namely a classification head with softmax activation and a regression
head with linear activation.
Now a loss can be defined as a multi-task loss over
the classification and regression head and this way, the network becomes end-to-end
trainable as we no longer rely on older methods such as SVMs or ridge regression.
The algorithm is described below.
1. Extract region proposals with (for instance) selective search to generate n re-
gional proposals.
2. Run whole image through a CNN once, to generate a conv feature map.
a) For each extracted region, use a ROI pooling layer to extract features from
the conv feature map corrosponding to the region.
b) Pass this new feature map through some FC layers to generate a RoI
feature vector.
c) Use a new FC layer to do softmax classification of the object in the region.
d) Use a regression layer to do bbox regression.
This method was much faster, taking the time to run detection on an image from
49 seconds to 2.3 seconds. The time excluding region proposal was actually down to
0.32 seconds, meaning that the majority of the time (2 seconds) is spent generating
proposals [5].
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theory
Figure 2.12: Fast RCNN overview. Top and left: Overall architecture from two
views. Bottom right: Visualization of the end-to-end trainability of the network [6].
2.5.3
Faster R-CNN
Fast R-CNN had a main bottleneck of relying on an external proposal generator,
which were posing challenges in terms of speed and furthermore, no learning was
happening at this stage [29]. To combat this, the authors of the two first papers
now introduced a Region Proposal Network (RPN). The RPN uses the conv
feature map to generate proposals used for the later stages, see figure 2.13(b). It
uses a sliding window approach over the conv feature map in combination with k = 9
predefined anchor boxes. The anchor boxes acts as a prior to common object shapes
at 3 different scales. For the anchors, the authors use 3 different object ratios (1:1,
1:2, 2:1) at 3 different scales (128, 256 and 512 pixels), leading to 9 different anchors.
The authors note that for a convolutional feature map of size W ×H (typically 2400),
there are WHk anchors in total” [29]. The overall algorithm is described below.
1. Run whole image through a CNN to generate a conv feature map
2. Generate region proposals using a Region Proposal Network (RPN):
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Faster Regional Convolutional Neural Networks (Faster R-CNN)
17
a) Using conv5-layer from the CNN as input, slide a 3x3 spatial window over
the feature map to compute an intermediate layer with 256 features.
b) From the intermediate layer, compute scores (cls layer) and bounding box
(reg layer) coordinates for k anchor boxes. For each anchor box ai
i ∈0..k,
the score has two values (object / not object) and the bounding box layer
has 4 values, one for each coordinate. In total we get 2k scores and 4k
coordinates for each stride in the sliding window.
c) Use non-max suppression to limit the number of proposals.
d) Use the top N proposals based on the objectiveness score. In the paper,
N = 2000 is used for training which equals the number of proposals used
in the two previous papers.
3. Using the 2000 proposals generated by the RPN, use same procedure as in Fast
R-CNN.
Objectiveness: A score between 0 and 1 which measures objectiveness of the region,
i.e how likely is it that the ROI contains an object and is not just background. For
the training process, a binary class label is assigned to each anchor. It is positive, if
(i) the anchor has the highest Intersection-Over-Union (IoU) overlap with a ground-
truth box or (ii) if the anchor has an IoU overlap higher than 0.7 with a ground truth
box. A negative label is assigned to an anchor, if its IoU is lower than 0.3 for all
ground-truth boxes. Anchors that are not assigned a positive or negative label do
not contribute to the loss and thus not to the training process [29]. Using this binary
(a) Faster RCNN
(b) Regional Proposal Network: Scores and coordinates are
generated by using k anchor boxes as references to regions
extracted from a sliding window on the conv layer feature
map.
Figure 2.13: Faster RCNN overview with Regional Proposal Network [29].
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theory
objectiveness assignment, the network will learn over time how likely an anchor is to
contain an object of interest.
Loss: The loss function for an image is defined as
L({pi}, {ti}) =
1
Ncls
∑
i
Lcls(pi, p∗
i )
|
{z
}
classification loss
+ λ
1
Nreg
∑
i
p∗
i Lreg(ti, t∗
i )
|
{z
}
localization loss
”Here, i is the index of an anchor in a mini-batch and pi is the predicted probability of
anchor i being an object. The ground-truth label pi is 1 if the anchor is positive, and is
0 if the anchor is negative. ti is a vector representing the 4 parameterized coordinates
of the predicted bounding box, and ti is that of the ground-truth box associated with
a positive anchor.
The classification loss Lcls is log loss over two classes (object
vs. not object). For the regression loss, we use Lreg(ti, t∗
i ) = R(titi)) where R is
the robust loss function (smooth L1). The term piLreg means the regression loss is
activated only for positive anchors (pi = 1) and is disabled otherwise (pi = 0). The
outputs of the cls and reg layers consist of {pi} and {ti} respectively. The two terms
are normalized by Ncls and Nreg and weighted by a balancing parameter λ. In our
current implementation (as in the released code), the cls term is normalized by the
mini-batch size (i.e., Ncls = 256) and the reg term is normalized by the number of
anchor locations (i.e., Nreg ￿2,400). By default we set λ = 10, and thus both cls and
reg terms are roughly equally weighted.”[29]
This method is a lot faster, because there is no selective search being performed any-
more, as shown on figure 2.14. Furthermore it is fully end-to-end trainable including
proposal generation (for actual details on training, refer to the paper [29]). In the
paper, the authors used N = 300 proposals at test-time. For many applications, this
number can be significantly reduced without a real loss in performance [12], which
further increases the inference speed.
Figure 2.14: Speed comparison of RCNN, Fast RCNN and Faster RCNN (SPP-Net
is not discussed in this report)[5].
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Single Shot Detector (SSD)
19
2.6
Single Shot Detector (SSD)
SSD [22] is designed for running real time object detection. It adopts many elements
from faster RCNN, but deal away with the RPN and does a few other tricks to
achieve a very high detection speed. Faster R-CNN uses a region proposal network
to generate proposals which it then use to do a ROI pooling from the conv feature
map. This can be seen a feature resampling, where SSDs completely eliminates this
stage. This is also the reason for the naming, single shot referring to only processing
the input once without any resampling.
It does so by using feature maps at multiple scales, smaller feature maps is used to
detect large objects and large feature maps is used to detect smaller ones. Firstly,
SSD extract feature maps (in the paper, using a VGG16 network) to which it applies
convolutional filters to detect the objects. The architecture is seen on figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15: Overview of SSD. TOP: Architecture. Bottom: For each detection
from the SSD we get 4 bounding box coordinates and k + 1 class confidence scores.
One score for each class plus one for ”no class” Image sources: [22] [13].
Similar to Faster-RCNN, SSDs uses anchor boxes, see figure 2.16. These boxes are
evaluated as priors at every cell of the feature map and the SSD will then regress the
bounding box to fine tune it to the object, as well as calculate a confidence score for
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Theory
each class. These anchors are manually designed for each feature layer, details can
be found in the paper [22].
Matching: Following the approach above with running convolutional predictors over
multi-scale feature maps, the SSD produces 8732 detections, which is obviously far
more detections than there is objects in the image. Therefore we divide the detection
in to two categories: Positive and negative matches. The pseudocode for a positive
match is described below:
For each ground truth box:
Match with the anchor with highest IOU
For each anchor box:
Match anchor to any ground truth box with an IOU > 0.5
A matching example is seen on figure 2.17.
Hard negative mining: After the matching procedure we will have a lot more
negative boxes than positive boxes, giving a highly unbalanced dataset. Training on
such a dataset would yield a model, which is able to detect foreground/background
but not individual classes (as they are very rare). To combat this, instead of using all
the negative matches the authors sorts them based on the confidence loss and then
they pick the top ones to make the ratio between negatives and positive matches 3:1.
It is called hard negative mining because we pick the hardest negative because we
sort them by the confidence loss, i.e we pick the negative examples where the model
is very certain that it should actually be positive.
Figure 2.16: SSD anchors. For each cell in the feature maps, we use multiple anchor
boxes as priors [13].
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Single Shot Detector (SSD)
21
Figure 2.17: SSD matchings with anchors. We have multiple anchors for each cell
in each feature map. The cat is detected in two of the anchors in the large feature
map and the dog is only detected in one anchor in the small feature map. Large
feature maps is detecting small objects, small feature maps is detecting large objects.
[22].
Loss: With xp
ij = {1, 0} being an indicator for matching the i-th anchor box to the
j-th ground truth box of category p:
L(x, c, l, g) = 1
N (Lcon f(x, c) + αLloc(x, l, g))
Where N is the number of matching anchors. l is the predicted box, g is the ground
truth box and c is the class confidences outputtet by the model.
The localization loss is similar to the one used in faster R-CNN, i.e it regress the
offsets for center coordinates and width and height of the box. The confidence loss
is a standard softmax loss of the multiple class confidences. The weight term α is in
the paper set to 1 using cross validation.
SSD is a very fast network, by removing any region proposals and instead using
multiple feature maps at different scales with little additional computational overhead.
Some metrics of SSDs is shown in figure 2.18.
Figure 2.18: Results on Pascal VOC2007 test. SSD models are shown to be capable
of running real time with above 70% mAP. [22].
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Theory
2.7
FaceNet and Triplet Loss
Face recognition and verification is a long studied problem in computer vision [34].
Face verification is looking at an image of a face, and verifying that the person present
in the image is indeed the intended person. Face recognition is looking at an image
of a face, and identifying which person is in the image.
The challenge is getting face recognition to work at scale, i.e for thousand of faces.
A normal classification network will have k neurons in the output layer to identify k
persons. If a new person comes along, a new neuron will have to be added and the
network will need to be retrained and this becomes intractable for a large number
of persons. Instead, we try to learn an embedding of faces, a low dimensional latent
space that we can use to measure the similarity of faces based on a distance metric,
e.g euclidean distance. The idea is that the embeddings of two images of the same
person should be close to each other in this latent space. This network architecture
where we try to learn similarity instead of discrete classes is called siamese networks,
because we run two different images through the same neural network in order to
compare them. This is most often used in tasks that requires one shot learning, i.e
we have to learn a representation by one example - Normally in machine learning we
will have a lot of training samples for each class (person), here we have to learn who
a person is based on one single sample (image).
The real breakthrough in face recognition came in 2015 when researched from Google
published FaceNet: A Unified Embedding for Face Recognition and Clus-
tering [34]. The method ”directly learns a mapping from face images to a compact
Euclidean space where distances directly correspond to a measure of face similarity”
[34]. It does so by using a convolutional network trained to optimize a 128 dimen-
sional embedding, where previous approaches used a bottleneck approach inspired by
auto encoders and UNets. An overview of the model structure is seen on figure 2.19.
The key contribution is that they developed a method that makes it possible to
Figure 2.19: Top: Triplet Model Structure. A batch of images is fed into a deep
CNN followed by L2 normalization, giving the face embeddings. Under training the
model is trained using a triplet loss. Bottom: Training process [34].
==PAGE:33==
2.7 FaceNet and Triplet Loss
23
directly optimize the embedding vector under training by using a triplet loss.
Triplet Loss: A special loss function used to train the embedding layer of siamese
networks, figure 2.20.
Let the embedding be represented by f(x) ∈Rh, which
embeds image x into a h-dimensional vector. The vector is normalized for performing
measurements in euclidean space, i.e ∥f(x)∥2 = 1 [34]. Where a standard loss can
normally be calculated from one sample, a triplet loss needs 3 distinct samples:
• xa
i (anchor): An image of a specific person.
• xp
i (positive): An image of the same person.
• xn
i (negative): An image of a different person.
From the formulation, we want the the two matching images (anchor and positive)
to be closer in the latent embedding space than the non-matching images (anchor
and negative). Therefor we construct a loss, which tries to seperate the postive and
negative pair by a distance margin.
Separating the pairs by a margin can be mathematically defined as trying to fulfill:
∥f (xa
i ) −f (xp
i )∥2
2 + α < ∥f (xa
i ) −f (xn
i )∥2
2
∀(f (xa
i ) , f (xp
i ) , f (xn
i )) ∈T
(2.1)
Where α is the margin and T is the set of all positive triplets in the dataset. The
reason for the distance term will become obvious in the next section.
Using this
Figure 2.20: Triplet loss visualization [26].
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Theory
formulation, the loss that we want to minimize is:
L =
N
∑
i
[
∥f (xa
i ) −f (xp
i )∥2
2 −∥f (xa
i ) −f (xn
i )∥2
2 + α
]
+
Where N is the number of possible triplets. For simplification, we can let the distance
in euclidean space by given by d and the triplet by (a, p, n) [26]:
L =
∑
max(d(a, p) −d(a, n) + α, 0)
∀(d(a, p), d(a, n)) ∈T
That is, it pushes d(a, p) towards 0 and makes d(a, n) > d(a, p)+α, for every possible
triplet in the dataset.
Since we take the max, the loss will become zero when it
becomes an easy triplet.
Triplet mining
There are three categories of triplets, as shown on figure 2.21.
• Easy triplets: Has a loss of zero, since d(a, p) + α < d(a, n)
• Hard triplets: Triplets where the negative is closer to the anchor than the
positive, i.e d(a, n) < d(a, p).
• Semi-hard triplets: triplets where the negative is not closer to the anchor than
the positive, but which still have a positive loss: d(a, p) < d(a, n) < d(a, p) + α
Figure 2.21: Three categories of triplets, given an anchor and a positive, the type
depends on the placement of the negative [26].
==PAGE:35==
2.7 FaceNet and Triplet Loss
25
Quickly we will have a lot of triplet that satisfies the constraint in (2.1), these are
easy triplets and will not contribute to the training and improve the model. Therefore
hard triplet are needed for fast convergence [34], on the other hand, hard triplets can
lead to bad local minima early in training, so semi-hard triplets are desired.
However, it is infeasible to calculate the semi-hard triplets for the whole dataset under
each update, so instead triplets are generated online from minibatches, as illustrated
in figure 2.22.
Figure 2.22: Online triplet mining [26].
The online sampling technique in [34] made the method work, however the triplet
loss fell out of favor for some time due to the process of sampling not always gen-
erating good results.
The paper In Defence of the Triplet Loss for Person
Re-Identification, proposed an altered version of the online sampling approach
which broke state of the art and is the one presented in this section [10].
From a batch of B = PK images, we will generate B embeddings that we will use
to generate triplets. The batch will have P different persons with K images of each
person.
The authors of [10] propose a method of forming the triplets that they call Batch
Hard:
LBH(X) =
all anchors
z }| {
P
∑
i=1
K
∑
a=1

α +
hardest positive
z
}|
{
max
p=1...K D
(
f
(
xi
a
)
, f
(
xi
p
))
−
hardest negative
z
}|
{
min
j=1...P
n=1...K
j̸=i
D
(
fθ
(
xi
a
)
, fθ
(
xj
n
))


+
For minibatch X where xi
j corresponds to the j-th image of the i-th person. So this
loss sums over the hardest triplet for each anchor. They also have an alternative
called Batch all, which just averages the loss of all the valid triplets in the batch. The
authors show that the Batch Hard approach works best for their case [10].
Using this approach, they show that they can achieve state of the art results, by
training a convolutional network with the triplet loss and batch hard mining. [10].
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Data
3.1
Data Collection
3.1.1
Initial Data Collection
When a player is playing golf, he will usually have his clubs standing in a bag with
the heads facing upwards, see figure 3.1. Thus the golf club is usually designed with
identification marks printed on the bottom of the head. For irons, we usually have the
number of the iron, e.g a ’5’ for a 5-iron. Pitching wedges and sand wedges will have a
’P’ and ’S’ respectively, although a pitching wedge can also have a ’W’. For the other
wedges, the angle of the loft of the wedge is usually printed, e.g ’58’ for a 58° wedge
loft. Drivers, woods and putters are more ambiguous in their markings; some have
very elaborate marks, others none at all. A golfer does not need any markings to tell
apart a wood from a driver as they look quite different just from physical appearance,
thus they don’t need to be particularly well marked. When a player needs a putter,
he does not need to have the word ’putter’ printed on the bottom of the club, he can
just see it from physical appearance and grab it from the bag.
(a) Golf clubs in a bag.
The
bottom of the head of the club
is designed such that golfers can
easily identify their clubs when
it is standing in the bag.
(b) Closeup of a 7-Iron
Figure 3.1: Bottom of the head of golf clubs are used for identification.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Data
Identifying a club using a vision based system thus relies on the information present
on the bottom of the club, therefore we need a dataset where this information is
presented visually to the unit. For this project, there were little to no prior data of
high quality with proper annotations of this kind. Google images has some pictures
of the clubs, but since these are product pictures, these are very rarely of the bottom
of the club. Furthermore these pictures are often taken in an unnatural environment,
so training on these images will give little in regards to performance for real world
data, since we would then train on a training set, which comes from a completely
different distribution than our test set.
We had little choice but to go out and collect our own data. For the data collection
we used the TrackMan IV tracking unit to record small videos of 8 seconds duration
with a specific club. During the 8 seconds, we wanted to record a routine where the
player would show the bottom of the club to the unit. The routine should be simple
and emulate how the final product should work, e.g the player quickly presenting
the club to the unit for identification. However, we would also like our dataset to
be multipurpose and thus we would also like to see the club being shown at address
(shooting position), since it could also be relevant to try and identify the main club
category from the address position alone. The following routine was developed:
1. Mark a spot two large steps away from the unit as the address position.
2. Start a recording on the TrackMan device. The recording will begin a count-
down. The player has 3 seconds to get ready at the address position.
3. After standing in the address position for 2 seconds, point the bottom of the
club towards the unit and slowly walk towards it.
4. After the video has stopped recording, the file will be downloaded to the com-
puter. Name the file according to this scheme: <clubtype><number>.mp4
• If a 4 Iron was used, call the file iron4.mp4
• If an 8 Wood was used, call the file wood8.mp4
• If a 7 Hybrid was used, call the file hybrid7.mp4
• If a 54° Wedge was used, call the file wedge54.mp4
• If a Pitching Wedge was used, call the file pitchingwedge.mp4
• If a Driver was used, call the file driver.mp4
If there are multiple recording of the same club, call the second clip <club-
type><number>_2.mp4, e.g. iron4_2.mp4 for the second clip with a 4
iron.
The routine is shown on figure 3.2, and a YouTube video has also been made:
https://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=1Ltk6quUXYg&vq=hd1080
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Data Collection
29
(a) Address Position
(b) Presenting the club
(c) Club statistics
Figure 3.2: Routine for data recording.
Following this approach, we recorded a total of 142 videos over several different envi-
ronments with different people.
3.1.2
Data collection by TrackMan sales representatives
To increase variety in both the clubs and the environments, we sent out a detailed
guide as outlined above to TrackMans retail sellers around the globe and some of
them sent us back some data with their own clubs. In total the sales reps recorded 9
sessions giving us an addition 157 videos. The sales reps did not follow the naming
guide very well, so we made a script capable of renaming their files in accordance
to the naming scheme. Using the first detection model (as outlined in the method
section) to help annotate the new dataset, the process of annotation was significantly
faster. Instead of using 35 minutes to annotate one minute of data, it now only took
around 12 minutes. A small sample of the dataset is seen on figure 3.3. An overview
of the complete dataset used for this project can be seen in figure 3.2(c).
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Data
Figure 3.3: Sample of the dataset with annotations and the respective croppped
clubhead.
3.2
Data Annotation
The goal of the project is to do both localization and classification of the clubs.
Since all clubs belong to the overall same object category, creating a localization
module can actually help the classification task since the classification module will
then be fed cropped images of the clubhead, meaning that it does not have to also
learn ignoring the background.
Furthermore, since some of the data is recorded
in a golf setting, the background in some of the videos also contain other clubs
which could confuse the classifier if a proper localization of the relevant object to
be classified has not been performed prior to the classification operation. The club
category is encoded into the filename of the video as per the previous section, however
we have no information about where the head of the golf club are in each frame
of the video.
This information needs to be provided in forms of annotations to
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Data Annotation
31
both have data for training a localization model and also have data to verify this
model.
There exists many great tools for annotating bounding boxes in images,
labelImg (https://github.com/tzutalin/labelImg) being one of the most popular used
in machine learning guides. However for video, there are much fewer tools. Since
video has a sequential property between frames, an annotation tool exploiting this
property is desired. I.e an annotation from the previous frame should be somewhat
usable for the next frame etc. After some research, the tool select for this project
was BeaverDam (https://github.com/antingshen/BeaverDam). The tool is made by
Anting Shen from Berkeley in 2016 and it takes inspiration from other annotation
tools and removes most of their pain points. Most notably it emulates many of the
good things about another tool called VATIC, developed at Columbia University,
which was the previous best in class but still had a few pain points. In table 3.1, a
list of pros and cons of BeaverDam is made.
It has a very nice interface, where you can skip through the video frame by frame
using keyboard shortcuts and various other shortcuts like deleting an annotation. It
stores all of the information in a sqlite3-database, but it does not store the video
itself, only its location. I.e when a user is using the tool through the browser, the
browser will load the video with the new HTML5 video player (no buffering), from
the location specified in the BeaverDam database. This location can both be local,
but also on an external webserver. This is quite important, because often the data
will be placed in the cloud because it’s too massive to have on a personal computer.
Since only information about the video location and annotation for each videos are
Pros
Cons
✓Will do automatic interpolation be-
tween annotated frames
✓Annotations are version controlled
✓Optimized for ease of use for both
annotator and job creator
✓Has options to publish directly to
Mechanical Turk
✓Better than VATIC system which
was previous best in class.
Removes
most of the pain points
✓Great
user
interface
and
using
HTML5 video for bufferless experience
✗Have to know a bit of Django to get
it up and running. Took me around 4
hours to master the tool
✗Documentation is not always elabo-
rate
✗does not store the actual videos
Table 3.1: Pros and cons of BeaverDam annotation tool.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Data
stored, the database can be easily version controlled. Furthermore if the data is stored
on a webserver, BeaverDam supports creating a HIT (Human Intelligence Task) on
Amazon Mechanical Turk, which essentially means that we can get other people to
help annotate the dataset for a fee that we define. For instance, we can put up a
HIT for 1$ per video, and if anyone is willing to take the assignment, we will get
their annotations and can then approve or dismiss them based on the quality of the
annotation. Since the price of a HIT is supply and demand and often based on how
long a task takes to accomplish versus how well it pays, it is important that we have a
very efficient and easy to use tool. Efficiency will mean more annotations per second,
lowering the cost. Ease of use will result in less frustration for the annotators, helping
them focus on the task of creating high quality annotation and not fighting the tooling.
Furthermore BeaverDam does interpolation between frames, so only a small number
of frames of the video has to be annotated (keyframes), all frames in between these
keyframe will have an annotation that is generated through interpolation. Thus if
there is little movement in a section of the video, the annotation density will be low
and if there is high movement, we need more dense annotations (more keyframes),
to do accurate interpolation. In figure 3.4, the BeaverDam annotation interface is
shown. In listing 1 a minimal code example is shown for getting a video into the
BeaverDam database using Python.
The process of annotating all the initial 142 videos took about 1.5 days of work. In
other words it took around 35 minutes to annotate one minute of video data.
from annotator.models import Video
video_object = Video()
video_object.host = 'https://s3-us-west-2.amazonwas.com/beaverdam/videos/'
video_object.filename = 'trafic_2018_06_06'
video_object.save()
Listing 1: Minimal code for creating a video in the BeaverDam database. BeaverDam
will combine the host and filename to fetch the video from an online storage option
or from localhost.
3.3
Artificial Data Generation
Golf, being an outdoor sport, is played in a lot of different weather and lighting
conditions with a large variety of clubs from many different manufactures. We want
our method to work for any club in any condition, yielding a very large possibility
space, which has the size of the product between all possible clubs (both now and
in the future) and all possible environments/conditions. As shown in figure 3.5, our
data only covers a tiny part of this possibility space. All we ever care about for our
machine learning algorithms is the ability to generalize to new data, which in turn
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Artificial Data Generation
33
Figure 3.4: BeaverDam annotation interface. The keyframe scheduling interface is
integrated with the video player, and each little orange circle is a keyframe annotation
with interpolation between keyframes.
means that we should not optimize our model for performing well on a small subset of
the possibility space represented by the dataset. However, machine learning models
will learn what they see if they a unconstrained [8] and a model, which has only ever
seen day, will have no knowledge of night. To cover more of the possibility space
without acquiring more data, we try to artificially expand our data in this space by
using both data augmentation and artificial data generation.
For data augmentation, one can use one of the many frameworks such as the Im-
gAug library [17]. This provides us with a way to set up an augmentation pipeline,
which will perform a predefined number of augmentations in a random fashion. It
is important to not only augment the images but also augment the annotation when
dealing with object detection, which such frameworks handles for us. I.e, when we
apply an augmentation to the image, the same augmentation needs to be applied to
the bounding box defined in the annotation of the image. One idea for artificial data
generation is to replace the background of some recorded videos to simulate different
environments (see figure 3.6). This was done by recording a session in a neutral
environment with constant lightning and then applying background subtraction as
described below:
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Data
Figure 3.5: The possibility space and our dataset. We try to cover a larger part
of it using data augmentation and generation techniques, to the right is shown data
augmentation results using the ImgAug library https://github.com/aleju/imgaug.
Background subtraction approach:
1. Get the first frame f0 of the video. The first frame should be a still of the
background and not contain neither player nor club.
2. Apply Gaussian blur to f0 to smooth any noise. Kernel size = (5,5), σ = 1.
3. For all the following frames fi
i > 0:
a) Apply Gaussian blur to fi
b) Calculate the absolute difference of τ between the blurred f0 and fi. Use
this difference as a mask with a threshold of τ <= 35, i.e if the pixel
difference is larger than 35 (in grayscale uint8 format), the pixel will be
considered as foreground.
c) Replace the background pixels with pixels from a reference image, simu-
lating the player and the club in a new environment.
This technique worked quite well if the session was recorded somewhere with constant
lighting. Problems occurred if the movement of the player altered the environment
by for instance casting shadows, since the shadows would then also be considered
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Artificial Data Generation
35
Figure 3.6: Artificial data generation by replacing the background of some of the
videos.
foreground. Optimally one would record such a session in front of a green screen,
making the background subtraction step very easy.
Extending the method, we can also adjust the lighting of fi or apply color shift to
simulate different light conditions in a new scene. Furthermore, we can also move the
player around in the scene when we have the foreground information available. This
is not a perfect replacement for more data, since it is quite hard to perfectly simulate
different environments naturally without relying on more advanced methods, such as
GANs (generative adversarial networks) [8]. However, we do get a lot of annotated
data for free, since we only have to annotate one session to acquire a vast amount of
data. We could also use a video as the background to create more variety.
One can also consider methods for image modification, adding things such as rain,
snow or shadows as shown in figure 3.7.
These methods all assist the ability to generalize to new data in the object detection
step of our pipeline, making it more robust to never before seen data by artificially
covering a larger part of the possible environments.
However, the real challenge
is in the classification step and there is no straight forward approach to artificially
generate new clubs, without incorporating some learning, which in turn requires a
larger dataset.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Data
Figure 3.7: Image modification. Using code from
https://medium.freecodecamp.org/image-augmentation-make-it-rain-make-it-snow-
how-to-modify-a-photo-with-machine-learning-163c0cb3843f.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Method and Results
4.1
Analysis
The problem that this work seeks to solve essentially boils down to the following
formulation: Given an image of a player presenting the club, identify which club
type the player is presenting. To identify a club, we need to look at the available
information on the bottom of the head as outlined in previous sections. Since all the
information we care about is in this small part of the image, a standard approach is
to have a localization step to crop out the clubhead from the image. This will make
the identification task much easier for the rest of the pipeline, because it does not
have to also learn to avoid identifying based on the background which contains no
information about the task. Furthermore, learning to be invariant to the background
requires a large dataset, where there is a great variation in the backgrounds and since
our dataset is small, this task will be hard.
After having cropped the image, we need to do the actual task of identification. As
mentioned earlier, sometimes it is possible to do identification based on the text on
the club, but many times this is not an option. The most straight forward approach
from a deep learning perspective is to use a standard convolutional neural network,
with some fully connected layers at the end, and a number of neurons in the last
layer corresponding to the number of different club categories using softmax as the
activation function. This approach works great for many applications but in this
case, we have a very limited dataset to learn from. Some classes are very sparsely
represented, having as little as 1 or 2 videos for a category. Furthermore there is
significant variation between the clubs of a single category, due to a very different
appearance of the club between manufactures, which in turn requires even more data
for the learning process to generalize.
The difference between classes is also very
subtle between some types of clubs, for instance the difference between a 5-iron and
a 6-iron is tiny compared to the difference between a 5-iron and a driver.
Due to these problems, the standard approach will not yield great results for this
task. We can, however, easily train a network as described above to train a more
simple network, which just predicts the main category (iron/wedge/putter, hybrid,
wood, driver) with great success, because there are far fewer classes and they are very
distinguishable. To find the difference between an iron and a driver on the cropped
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Method and Results
image of the head, one only has to look at the dimensions of the image, the driver be
nearly a square and the iron will be much longer on one edge.
Chosen Approach: Since direct classification is not an option and reading the text
on the club is neither always a valid option, this project takes a different direction:
Use the cropped image to create an embedding (lower dimensional representation) of
the club, and compare this embedding to a database of similar embeddings for already
known clubs using some distance metric. This approach is outlined in FaceNet [34],
where the authors trained a neural network to make embedding of human faces for
identification.
This approach is widely used for facial recognition, for instance in
most online services like Facebook, but also in facial verification systems of mobile
phones. The player will have to register his clubs with the unit and once registered,
the system can save the encoding of the club internally and use these saved encodings
to re-identify the clubs.
Training networks like FaceNet traditionally requires a lot of data and a lot of training
time [34]. Fortunately, we are not required to tell the difference between thousands
of faces but just 14 clubs, which is the allowable amount to carry in a bag. Thus the
ambition is that the harsh requirement of a huge dataset and long training time is
relaxed in this case. To assist our identification we will perform an additional step:
If the identification based on embeddings predicts an iron or wedge, then we will
perform text localization and OCR on the cropped image to accurately identify digits
or characters that might help us in the identification process. The motivation is that
the embedding approach will most likely be able to detect if the club is a driver or an
iron, but it might not have a very high accuracy in predicting the exact type of iron,
so this last step should alleviate this problem. A complete overview of this described
pipeline is shown in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the pipeline, left to right: A localization network is run on
the input image to crop out the club. The cropped image of the club is then fed into a
network which constructs an embedding (64 dimensions) of the club. This embedding
is then matched up with known embeddings in a database. If the closest match is an
iron or wedge, we perform text localization and OCR to be sure to identify the club
correctly. Else we just use the matched entry in the database as the prediction of the
club.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Object Detection
39
4.2
Object Detection
The localization task is essentially equivalent to single class object detection, where
we want to both localize and identify an object. An object detection pipeline consists
of a feature extractor network followed by a meta architecture. It is very beneficial to
be able to iterate over different architectures for a problem, since they all come with
different speed vs. accuracy tradeoffs. For this purpose, TensorFlow has a convenient
Object Detection API, which was used for this project. The API has a rather large
model zoo, where we are able to select and train different model architectures.
For this project, we wish to be able to run club detection in real time thus an SSD
network with a MobileNet feature extractor would be desirable. However SSDs are
notoriously bad at detecting small objects [12], which the golf club typically is in the
image. Therefore we also experiment with a ResNet50 backbone in combination with
a faster R-CNN meta architecture. The larger network serves two purposes: First
of all, it tests if the task is at all learnable, if the larger architecture is not able to
fit the data the smaller one will not be able to either.
Secondly, we have a very
limited amount of data in this project and data annotation takes a long time. Thus
to help this problem, we train a larger and more accurate model to help annotate
newly collected data. Then we only have to fix the larger model’s mistakes on the
newly annotated data instead of having annotate it from scratch. This is a way of
bootstrapping ourselves to make the data collection and annotating process much
easier. This can be done any number of times, each time the model is retrained on
newly annotated data (which has been validated by a human), we will have a better
model that in turn can be used to do even more accurate annotation, leading to
decreasing time spent on data annotation. At the end, it should be so precise that
only a very few corrections on edge cases are needed.
For model selection, [12] has a very good breakdown as shown in figure 4.2, which also
illustrates the choice of SSD and Faster-RCNN in this work. This work covered the
state-of-the-art from two years ago, newer architectures exists which further improve
the performance such as feature pyramid networks (FPN), ResNeXt and RetinaNet
[2]. However, more code and support exists for the Faster-RCNN and SSDs and as
such is a more suitable place to start. Once a working pipeline has been set up, one can
always analyze the bottlenecks and experiment with newer and better architectures.
To get started, it is often advantageous to use something more accessible and tested
and then afterwards try to optimize.
Since we are working with tracking in video, it can be useful to detect misclassifcations.
One robust approach to this is to put a constraint on a detection, defining how far it
can be from previous detections. This is shown on figure 4.3, where the flow of the
clubhead is tracked through the videos.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Method and Results
Figure 4.2: Comparison of different object detection networks. Each network con-
sists of a backbone feature extractor as well as a meta architecture for performing the
actual detection. The dashed line is the optimal frontier, which is an estimation of
the optimal possible accuracy for a given GPU time. It is seen that in general SSDs
are fast and Faster R-CNN is accurate.
(a) Frame-to-frame flow of the golf club, raw
data
(b) Frame-to-frame flow of the golf club, out-
liers removed
Figure 4.3: Flow of the clubhead calculated from frame to frame. If we remove the
outliers, we see that the average difference between frames is around 2.3 pixels. In a
large fraction of the frames, the club is stationary. This information can be used to
disqualify a misdetection that is too far from the clubhead in the previous frame.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Object Detection
41
Training and performance
The dataset is a collection of videos with annotations and to train a model with
TensorFlow object detection API, it needs to be converted into images with annota-
tions. For this, a simple frame extraction script was made, able to extract the frames
from the videos and create an .xml-file for each image containing the annotation with
bounding box information. The annotations are saved in the standard PascalVOC
format (http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/). Video frames will have a lot of
natural redundancy to them, since there is high correlation and little variation be-
tween individual frames. Having two identical samples in our training set will not help
in training the model, so to combat this, we only sample a fraction of the frames of
the videos. For these experiments, we use every 7th frame, giving enough spacing in
between frames to allow for some variation without making the dataset unnecessarily
large.
Splitting into a test- and trainset: The dataset has 22 recorded sessions, most of
which share environments (recorded under same conditions) and clubs. Optimally we
would have a large set of never before seen data, both clubs and environments. In this
case there is simply too little data to both train a model and also give an accurate
estimate of its generalization performance through a test set. In this case, we split
the videos into a train- and test set in a ratio of 80:20. This does mean, that our test
set will only contain environments that are also present in the training set, however
the exact video will not be present in both sets. Alternatively we could select a few
sessions and keep them as test data, but then the generalization performance, reported
by the test set, will also be really unreliable. Cross validation is an alternative, but
for deep learning that quickly becomes intractable because of the long training times.
The following performance metrics are thus presented as is. For production, more
precise estimates must be calculated to ensure robustness of solution, meaning that
TrackMan will have to collect a larger and more diverse dataset, if they wish to
thoroughly verify the solution.
Training configuration: The default batch size for most configuration files in the
TensorFlow object detetion API is 1. In these experiments it is increased to 4, since
this ensures a more stable gradient and the batchnorm layers also need more samples
to be effective.
Stochastic gradient descent is used with a learning rate schedule
starting at 0.001, decaying to 0.0003 at 12000 steps and decaying to 0.00005 at 18000
steps.
The training pipeline was implemented on a laptop to ensure that it works as expected,
afterwards it was moved to the cloud using Docker containers for faster training on
more powerful hardware. The service provider chosen was Paperspace because they
have a very easy interface that lets us spin up multiple parallel containers. Each
container can be run from a configurable machine, so one can choose a machine with
an appropriate graphics card, matching model complexity and budget. In this case a
P100 with 16GB ram was used. Getting data onto persistent storage on Paperspace
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Method and Results
turned out to be a bit complicated, so after having found a solution an extensive blog
post has been created to help others: https://medium.com/@jacobjonhansen/getting-
your-data-onto-paperspace-gradient-176c97fb176e.
Results: We trained 5 different models, with the 80-20 split train/validation set.
Unless otherwise specified, the model was trained on all of the training data.
rcnn_resnet50_init: Faster R-CNN with 50 layer ResNet backend, trained on
the training data from the initial 142 videos.
rcnn_resnet50: Faster R-CNN with 50 layer ResNet backend.
rcnn_resnet50_50/10 proposals: Faster R-CNN with 50 layer ResNet backend,
the region proposals network is reduced to only output 50 or 10 proposals instead
of the default 300.
ssd_mobilenetv1: SSD with MobileNet backend.
The loss during the training phase can be seen on figure 4.4, the models were stopped
once they seemed to have converged. An overview of the performance and comparison
of the trained detection models can be seen in table 4.1. It is not important that the
crop is super tight (high IOU), since it is mainly used for making the classification
task easier and thus its most important job is just to remove the majority of the
background through cropping. In the end, we will expand the crop a bit to be sure to
have the whole clubhead is inside the crop - however, this is of little use if the model
completely misses the clubhead (IOU = 0).
The SSD model does a poor job of detecting the club in a reliable fashion, missing
the clubhead completely in as much as 47% of the cases. The model was trained
multiple times and troubleshooted, but we were not able to generate a better model
with SSD. The ResNet models however performed very nicely, and we were able to
more than double the inference speed by reducing the number of region proposals
from the default 300 to 50. The ResNet model is thus sufficient to help us annotate
new data, however for real time performance it leaves some to be desired.
Model
Test IOU
Train IOU
FPS
Complete Miss
Top1
Top5
Top1
Top5
(IOU = 0)
rcnn_resnet50_init
0.666
0.738
0.726
0.764
2.56
18.9%
rcnn_resnet50
0.786
0.794
0.814
0.822
2.55
4.3%
rcnn_resnet50_50proposals
0.756
0.769
0.774
0.785
5.61
7.1%
rcnn_resnet50_10proposals
0.672
0.682
0.724
0.726
6.99
18.9%
ssd_mobilenetv1
0.401
0.489
0.407
0.77
25.4
47%
Table 4.1: Performance of trained detection models.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Object Detection
43
Figure 4.4: Loss during training of the 5 different detection models.
Some sample predictions of the rcnn_resnet50_50proposals model is shown on figure
4.5.
Figure 4.5: Predictions done by the rcnn_resnet50_50proposals model.
An alternative to running an expensive object detection algorithm on every frame of
a video is to use this algorithm to initially find objects and then use more classic and
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Method and Results
faster object trackers to track the objects as it moves in the video. This way, we can
run a more precise and slower object detection model periodically to check, that our
object tracker is still correctly tracking the object. This yields more frames tracked,
giving more data to the classification step so that the majority vote will be over a
larger batch of samples and hopefully more accurate. OpenCV has a set of build in
object trackers, which takes a frame fi and a bounding box of an object to track, and
given a new frame fi+1, it updates the bounding box to track the translation of the
object across frames. Some of these objects trackers rely on older methods and they
all perform differently in terms of accuracy and speed. Adrian Rosebrock has a quite
nice overview of them on his blog [32]:
1. BOOSTING Tracker: Based on the same algorithm used to power the machine
learning behind Haar cascades (AdaBoost), but like Haar cascades, is
over a decade old. This tracker is slow and ’doesnt work very well.
Interesting only for legacy reasons and comparing other algorithms.
2. MIL Tracker: Better accuracy than BOOSTING tracker but does a poor job of
reporting failure.
3. KCF Tracker: Kernelized Correlation Filters. Faster than BOOSTING and MIL
. Similar to MIL and KCF, does not handle full occlusion well.
4. CSRT Tracker: Discriminative Correlation Filter (with Channel and Spatial
Reliability). Tends to be more accurate than KCF but slightly slower.
5. MedianFlow Tracker: Does a nice job reporting failures; however, if there
is too large of a jump in motion, such as fast moving objects, or
objects that change quickly in their appearance, the model will fail.
6. TLD Tracker: ’Im not sure if there is a problem with the OpenCV
implementation of the TLD tracker or the actual algorithm itself, but
the TLD tracker was incredibly prone to false-positives. I do not
recommend using this OpenCV object tracker.
7. MOSSE Tracker: Very, very fast. Not as accurate as CSRT or KCF but a good
choice if you need pure speed.
8. GOTURN Tracker: The only deep learning-based object detector included in
OpenCV. It requires additional model files to run.
My suggestion is to:
Use CSRT when you need higher object tracking accuracy and can tolerate
slower FPS throughput
Use KCF when you need faster FPS throughput but can handle slightly
lower object tracking accuracy
Use MOSSE when you need pure speed
Listing 4.1: Overview of the object trackers in OpenCV. Source: [32].
To analyze performance of these object trackers, we took a few sample videos and
hardcoded an initial bounding box around the clubhead and then recorded the FPS
of the tracking algorithm - The results are reported in table 4.2.
The tracking
performance was judged visually, the difference in performance is so significant that
it does not make sense to calculate IOU metrics etc.
to compare them.
Simply
judging by visual performance showed, that much in line with Adrian’s findings, the
CSRT algorithm performed very well with good FPS and MOOSE was much faster
and still performed ok. The rest of them either completely fails the tracking or lacks
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Object Detection
45
acceptable FPS. Surprisingly, the neural network tracking model GOTURN had a
bad performance, it might be that it is just simply trained on a very different dataset.
Correctly preprocessing was applied to the inputs to ensure it was as GOTURN
expected.
Wrap up of object detection: We have trained a few different models on the data
and evaluated their performance in terms of IOU and speed. We have used an initial
model to help annotate a larger part of the dataset, making the annotation task easier.
For now it seems that using a ResNet50 with Faster R-CNN is the way to go, it gives
the best performance and if we reduce the number of generated proposals we also
get a decent speed. If more speed is needed, we can further try to develop the SSD
detector or use more classic video tracking techniques to help with frames in between
our big object detector.
If the smaller and faster models continues to show bad performance, an alternative
could be to use the embedding network (already loaded into memory during infer-
ence) and use either the direct embedding output or some intermediate early layer
activations as input to a binary classifier. The binary classifier should simply tell if
it is a good crop or bad crop. Since a lot of bounding box annotations are available,
it is straight forward to generate such a dataset. If the binary classifier is accurate,
then even if the fast object detector has low accuracy, a lot of cropped frames is still
generated of which the binary classifier can determine which to use for identification.
Algorithm
Performance
(Visual inspection)
FPS
MIL
OK
16.5
GOTURN
Bad
21.3
TLD
Bad
24.6
Boosting
Bad
30.6
CSRT
Good
41.8
MedianFlow
Bad-Ok
153
KCF
Bad-OK
204
MOSSE
Ok
1084
Table 4.2: Performance of OpenCV object trackers. It is judged solely from visual
inspection on a small set of videos.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Method and Results
4.3
OCR
Optical Character Recognition is simply the conversion of images of text into text.
In short, we want to know what text is present in the image and what is says. In
this section, we will explore 2 approaches: Classify the clubs using a very popular
out of the box OCR tool, and classify the clubs using a model trained on an external
dataset.
For validation, we hand pick 54 cropped images of the number / letters on the clubs
in varying conditions.
Tesseract
We try to use Googles Tesseract OCR tool, using cropped images of the number on
some of the clubs to evaluate the performance of this method. Tesseract has multiple
page segmentation modes (shown below). Using all of them (except mode 1 and 2
which does not work for LSTM in Tessseract 4), gave a combined accuracy of 70%
(figure 4.7(a)). Combined in this sense means that if one of the modes gives the
correct output, we say that we have correctly classified the character/digit. This is
equivalent to doing model ensembling of 11 models with an optimal ensemble picker,
i.e always choosing the correct model output for classification. However 11 models
seems quite a lot, especially seeing as some of them have very low accuracy.
By
pruning the models, we found that only using model 8 and 10, which both have an
individual accuracy of 55%, we were able to obtain a combined accuracy of 70%, as
good as the previous result using all 11 models! See figure 4.7(b).
Page segmentation modes:
0
Orientation and script detection (OSD) only.
1
Automatic page segmentation with OSD.
2
Automatic page segmentation, but no OSD, or OCR.
3
Fully automatic page segmentation, but no OSD. (Default)
4
Assume a single column of text of variable sizes.
5
Assume a single uniform block of vertically aligned text.
6
Assume a single uniform block of text.
7
Treat the image as a single text line.
8
Treat the image as a single word.
9
Treat the image as a single word in a circle.
10
Treat the image as a single character.
11
Sparse text. Find as much text as possible in no particular order.
12
Sparse text with OSD.
13
Raw line. Treat the image as a single text line,
bypassing hacks that are Tesseract-specific.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 OCR
47
SVHN Classifier
We can train a model specifically for digits in natural environments, however we have
quite little data ourselves and it will take even more time to accurately annotate it.
Instead we try to leverage an external dataset (Street View House Numbers, SVHN),
which we suspect will be very similar in nature to the task of identifying the numbers
on the bottom of clubs. A sample of the dataset can be seen on figure 4.6(a), it
contains ”73257 digits for training, 26032 digits for testing, and 531131 additional,
somewhat less difficult samples, to use as extra training data” [27]. The model used
is a simple CNN model where each symbol (up to 5) has its own FC layer as output
with 10 outputs (9 digits + ”no digit” class). Additionally we have an extra softmax
output layer, which determines the number of symbols (0-5). It is trained using cross
entropy loss, combining all 6 individual output layers. This model achieves around
95% accuracy on the SVHN validation set. The evaluation accuracy during training
can be seen on figure 4.6(b)
Using this model on our golf club validation set, we attain an accuracy of 70%. Do
note that this model is only trained on digits, so by design it fails on all pitching
wedges, sand wedges etc. Considering the dataset, the maximum accuracy for clas-
sifying all digits correctly and all charecters incorrectly is 77%. This is without any
test time augmentation or transfer learning to our specific problem.
Combining this SVHN trained model with Tesseract in similar fashion as previous,
we are able to get an optimal accuracy of 92.6% (figure 4.7(c)) assuming a perfect
ensemble picker. Designing an actual ensemble picker can be of arbitrary complexity.
We could look at the confidence score from both the two Tesseract models and the
SVHN model to determine which model is most confident in its result. However in our
experience, the confidence of a network is a quite weak indicator for precision, often
a neural network can be very confident in a result which is a obvious misclassification
to us. We have done some analysis as to the confidence score of this model, and our
findings are that in more or less all cases where the model is wrong (e.g seeing the
difference between an 8 and a 9), it gives a confidence of 99+% for the incorrect result.
Furthermore comparing confidences of different neural networks is not necessarily
apples to apples, so a more simple and greedy approach is suggested: Since the SVHN
model is specialized for digits and Tesseract is specialized for text, if the Tesseract
model predicts text containing either a ’p’, ’s’ or ’w’, that will be our prediction.
Otherwise we use the prediction made by the SVHN model. Using this simple greedy
algorithm, we attain an accuracy of 90.7% which is quite close to our optimal accuracy
of 92.6%. More elaborate approaches can be implemented to improve this result, but
since we are utilizing video data and can afford to make classifications over multiple
frames with majority vote, a single frame accuracy of 90.7% is deemed acceptable.
Optimally we should retrain the model on this data and also expand the SVHN model
to include the characters, but for characters we will need to leverage yet another
external dataset since our data does not have enough datapoints of pitching wedges,
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Method and Results
(a) SVHN dataset
(b) Accuracy on the eval set of the SVHN
trained model. The training was done over
3 sessions as indicated by the colors
Figure 4.6: SVHN trained model.
sand wedges etc than can be used for training. For now, using Tesseract to help
with character recognition is sufficient. We do note that Tesseract is mostly geared
towards reading text in images of documents, which is also one of the reasons that a
lot of the Tesseract modes fail, because it applies binarization (separating foreground
from background) to the images. This approach works nicely for documents, since
the text is generally separable from the background, even in uneven lighting, but for
natural scenes the binarization step can often destroy the information by, for instance,
marking segments of the character/digit as background.
For visualization, figure 4.7(d) shows a true/false matrix for the 3 different models
and the 54 images. A subset of predictions and images are shown on figure 4.8.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 OCR
49
(a) Tesseract: All models
(b) Tesseract: Pruned models
(c) Neural Net and Tesseract combined
(d) Accuracy matrix, yellow is correct. Notice that the SVHN trained model fails on all characters
but is mostly correct on the digits
Figure 4.7: Comparison of Tesseract and SVHN classifier.
Figure 4.8: Predictions on cropped golf club images using two Tesseract models and
a neural network.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Method and Results
4.4
Embedding Network
An embedding network needs a feature extractor as well as an embedding layer on
top. For feature extractors we can use a simple 2-3 layer CNN or alternatively a
pretrained model such as a ResNet18. For the embedding layer we need a few FC
layers after the feature extractor where the last FC is the embedding. In the FaceNet
paper [34], the authors use a dimensionality of 128 for their embedding layer. This
proved to work nicely for faces but for our application we might not need as high a
dimensionality, since we don’t have to learn thousands of faces but instead only have
to be able to accurately separate a bag of 13 clubs from one another.
The network should be trained using the triplet loss function [26], however our dataset
of cropped clubheads is very messy. Many of the images are in really bad lighting
condition, making it completely impossible to identify the club, with some of the
clubs being halfway out of frame etc. To make sure that we have a working model, we
therefore investigate the embedding approach on a different dataset of similar nature
(same objects in different environments). If we can show that a FaceNet approach
can be used to correctly reidentify natural objects in different environments, we have
a promising model to be used for the golf club data. Furthermore, utilizing a much
more complete and annotated dataset also gives us enough validation data to give
accurate estimates of performance, something that is not possible for our golf data,
without using cross validation, which quickly becomes intractable for deep learning
models that takes hours or days to train.
As a first attempt, we tried to take the FaceNet network and apply it directly to our
clubs, computing the distance from an anchor to all other cropped clubhead images.
The result is shown in figure 4.9, fortunately the closest match actually turned out to
be the another image of the same club. However we should not expect facial features
to translate very well to golf club features, this does indicate that we might be able
to use the FaceNet model as a checkpoint and finetune our own model from here so
we don’t have to train one from scratch.
4.4.1
Analysis of triplet loss applied to Core50
Our suggestion for a separate dataset of the same nature is the dataset Core50
https://vlomonaco.github.io/core50/. ”CORe50, specifically designed for (C)ontinuous
(O)bject (Re)cognition, is a collection of 50 domestic objects belonging to 10 categories:
plug adapters, mobile phones, scissors, light bulbs, cans, glasses, balls, markers, cups
and remote controls. Classification can be performed at object level (50 classes) or at
category level (10 classes). The first task (the default one) is much more challenging
because objects of the same category are very difficult to be distinguished under certain
poses.” [23].
The dataset has 11 distinct sessions with different background and lighting. 8 sessions
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Embedding Network
51
Figure 4.9: FaceNet applied to the cropped clubhead images, showing the distance
to the anchor image.
are indoor and 3 are outdoor. Each session has 15 second videos recorded for all the
objects with them being rotated around. A sample of the dataset is shown in figure
4.10. This is very similar to our golf club case, we have distinct objects (like a 5-iron,
7-iron, driver, wood-2 etc), belonging to an overall category (like iron, wedge, driver
etc). Making an embedding approach work on this dataset or a subset of it will be a
good prior to ensure our method works before we try to adapt it to the golf data.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Method and Results
Figure 4.10: Sample of the Core50 dataset. Each row is one unique object and each
column is one unique environment.
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Embedding Network
53
To validate the method, we will perform a systematic and rigorous test of hypothesis
of increasing difficulty.
4.4.1.1
Overview of training setup and architecture
All the following experiements follow the same training configuration unless specified
otherwise: The backbone network is a ResNet50, pretrained on the imagenet dataset.
The fully connected layers at the end is removed and a new fully connected layer is
added with 1024 neurons. Following this layer is our fully connected embedding layer
with dimensionality of 128. Following is the training hyperparameters:
flip_augment: True
crop_augment: True
embedding_dim: 128
batch_p: 5 %Number of unique identities per batch
batch_k: 4 %Number of images per identity per batch
pre_crop_height: 288, pre_crop_width: 288
net_input_height: 256, net_input_width: 256
margin: soft
metric: euclidean
loss: batch_hard
learning_rate: 3e-4
train_iterations: 25000
decay_start_iteration: 15000 %exponential decay, rate 0.001
4.4.1.2
Hypothesis 1: A siamese net will be able to maximize the distance
between objects (identities) belonging to the same category on the
core50 dataset.
This task is equivalent to fine-grained classification.
Test setup: We take all images of objects belonging to the category remote control
across 10 environments as training data and use the last environment as test data.
After training, we can feed images of the remote controllers to the network and it
will transform the images to embeddings with a dimensionality of 128. To get a sense
of the quality of the embeddings, we can use different dimensionality reduction tech-
niques. Some of these are shown on figure 4.11. We will have a short look at each
of them and determine the best one for our use case by visual inspection. Going into
detail about the individual technique is beyond the scope of this work, but familiarity
with basic techniques such as PCA and LDA is assumed.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Method and Results
Figure 4.11: Core50: Trained on 5 remote controllers in 10 different scenes. Here
is visualized the embeddings of the training set data.
PCA: The principal components analysis shows that roughly 58% of the variation
in the training data can be explained in the first two components of the PCA. Even
though PCA is an unsupervised technique (i.e, it does not know anything about
the labels), we get a very nice separation. In other words: PCA tells us how many
components we need, in order to explain the variation in the data.
LDA: Linear discriminant analysis is a supervised algorithm that tries to find a
subspace of features that maximizes the class separability, hence it is a bit unfair to
compare it directly to unsupervised algorithms such as PCA, which tries to maximize
the variance in data. However we see an even nicer separation in the LDA plot.
ISOMAP: Isometric mapping, combines K-Nearest Neighbours, shortest graph path
and multidimensional scaling. ”Isomap is a non-linear unsupervised dimensionality
reduction method based on the spectral theory which tries to preserve the geodesic
distances in the lower dimension. Isomap starts by creating a neighborhood network.
After that, it uses graph distance to the approximate geodesic distance between all pairs
of points. And then, through eigenvalue decomposition of the geodesic distance matrix,
it finds the low dimensional embedding of the dataset”[4]. The ISOMAP looks quite
weird, but in fact it looks like it does a quite good job at separating the data, even
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Embedding Network
55
when mapping all the datapoints of a single object into one point. ISOMAP is very
sensitive to its parameters (number of neighbours), which is a huge downside since
multiple hyperparameter tests have to be carried out to find the best representation.
ICA: Independent component analysis is closely related to PCA, but where PCA
tries to compress data ICA tries to separate it. For instance if we have a video signal
that is a sum of two overlapped signals, ICA can help us in separating the two signals
into independent components. For this task, we get almost the exact same result as
the PCA.
NNMF: Non-Negative matrix factorization is a technique which factorizes a matrix
into two matrices, one feature matrix and coefficient matrix where the feature matrix
represents some archetypes and the coefficient matrix represents the coefficient we
have to multiply onto our feature matrix to get our data. It is commonly used in
NLP but for this task it doesn’t give a good result.
Factor Analysis: Is also closely related to PCA, which is also obvious from the plot,
but it is measuring a latent variable which gives rise to certain relationships in the
data. In all practicalities it does not perform any different than PCA on this task.
CDA: Canonical decomposition analysis explores the correlation between two datasets,
in this case the features and the one-hot encoded labels. I.e CDA tries to project all
features into a subspace and all the labels into another subspace such that the pro-
jection of the data into these two subspaces have maximum correlation. The imple-
mentation in sklearn seems to be bad, it is rarely used and we experienced it working
just fine for the standard IRIS-dataset but on this task it places one cluster right on
top of the other. It should be similar to LDA.
PLSRegression: Partial least squares regression, closely related to CDA and PCA
and extract the directions of covariance, the components that explain most shared
variance between data and targets. It shows a little better separation between re-
mote47 and remote49, but is overall very similar to PCA.
T-SNE: t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding, is similar to PCA in that it
is an unsupervised machine learning algorithm used for dimensionality reduction.
However, T-SNE is a non-linear transform which minimizes divergence between two
distributions. In practice, T-SNE gives better visual results than PCA, since PCA
simply maximizes the variance, but sometimes we need a lot of components to explain
a large amount of the variance, so projecting the dataset onto the first two components
does not give the right picture of how the data is separated in high dimensions. Since
the whole point of the visualization is to confirm visually that we can separate data
in high dimensional space, T-SNE is the best option and is what we will be using
moving forward.
Figure 4.12 shows some training metrics and the T-SNE of the train and the test
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Method and Results
(a) Training metrics
(b) T-SNE of embeddings, training data
remote46
remote47
remote48
remote49
remote50
(c) T-SNE of embeddings, test data
Figure 4.12: Training logs and visualisation of embeddings for hypothesis 1.
data embeddings. The training data shows a near perfect separation and we also see
nice separation for the test data, however some points are clustered together. This
is mainly because that in specific rotations (for instance when viewed from the back,
shown in figure 4.13), some of the remotes are indistinguishable.
From the plot
we can visually confirm that we are able to maximize the distance between different
objects, and minimize the distance between similar objects of the same subcategory
in embedding space, proving hypothesis 1.
Table 4.3 shows accuracy metrics of the training and test set. We use the training set
as the query dataset, matching an image to its closest n neighbours in the embedding
space. The image can not be its own neighbour. The test accuracy shows that from
some angles the remotes look identical, which we also previously confirmed visually
in the T-SNE plot.
4.4.1.3
Hypothesis 2: A siamese net will be able to correctly re-identify objects
it was trained on in an unseen environment on the core50 dataset
Test setup: We take one object from each category, giving 10 in total and take all
images of these objects over 10 environments as training data. The test data is the
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Embedding Network
57
Figure 4.13: Remote controllers are hard to tell apart from some angles.
Hypothesis 1
Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 3
Train
Test
Train
Test
Train
Test
Accuracy Top 1
1.0
0.857
1.0
0.995
0.992
X
Accuracy Top 2
1.0
0.866
1.0
0.996
0.996
X
Accuracy Top 3
1.0
0.886
1.0
0.996
0.996
X
Accuracy Top 4
1.0
0.893
1.0
0.996
0.996
X
Accuracy Top 5
1.0
0.895
1.0
0.996
0.997
X
Table 4.3: Accuracy metrics of the hypotheses.
images of these objects on the hold-out environment. I.e we aim to re-identify the
objects that is used for training on a never before seen environment.
Figure 4.14 shows the training metrics and T-SNE of the train and test data. We
see perfect separation of the training data and close to perfect separation of the test
data. Accuracy metrics presented in table 4.3 furthermore shows that we are able to
have perfect separation of the classes in the test-set, thus showing that we are able
to re-identify objects of different categories on a never before seen environment.
4.4.1.4
Hypothesis 3: A siamese net will be able to cluster never before seen
objects from core 50 on a never before seen environment
Test setup: We take 4 out of 5 objects from every category across 10 environments,
giving 40 objects in total for training data. The test data is the remaining 10 objects
(1 from each category) on the hold-out environment. I.e we aim to show, that we
can separate never before seen objects on a never before seen environment. Since the
objects in the test data is not represented in the training set, we don’t have query
images and will not compute a test accuracy but will be solely focused on visual
clustering ability.
To show the effectiveness of the T-SNE algorithm, we show in figure 4.15 T-SNE
together with alternative dimensionality reduction methods such as PCA. We see that
PCA only captures 25% of the variance in the first 2 components, thus visually we
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Method and Results
(a) Training metrics
(b) T-SNE of embeddings, training data
plug
mobile
scissor
bulb
can
glasses
ball
marker
cup
remote control
(c) T-SNE of embeddings, test data
Figure 4.14: Training logs and visualisation of embeddings, hypothesis 2.
might conclude, that our network does not seperate the objects well in embedding
space.
However, looking at the accuracies presented in table 4.3, we see almost
perfect seperation. This shows how much T-SNE can help us in understanding and
interpreting the high dimensionality transform our network performs.
Figure 4.16 shows training metrics and T-SNE of the train and test data for hypoth-
esis 3. The training data looks very nicely clustered. It is interesting to see some
of the similar objects being clustered together (for instance the plugs), while others
such as the bulbs have cluster centers further apart. The plots and the accuracy
metric shows, that we are perfectly capable of clustering never before seen objects on
a never before seen environment. We have now proved the 3 hypotheses, extending
the method originally developed for facial recognition to wild objects in various en-
vironments. This gives us certainty that the method works and could be suitable to
apply to the golf data, since the datasets share many similarities.
4.4.1.5
Embedding layer dimensionality reduction
The previous networks were trained with an embedding dimensionality of 128 fol-
lowing the results from the FaceNet paper [34]. In this section we examine what
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Embedding Network
59
Figure 4.15: Core50: Trained on 40 objects in 10 different scenes. Here is visualized
the embeddings of the training set data. T-SNE provides far the best visualisation,
ISOMAP looks decent but the dataset had to be cut by 80% before it could complete
the computation with 16GB of memory..
happens, when we try to reduce the dimensionality of this embedding layer. Since it
is a fully connected layer, reducing embedding dimensionality will result in significant
reduction of network parameters, which is very desirable for embedded applications.
The training setup is the same as previous, we just modify the number of neurons in
the embedding layer and retrain our network. The dataset is the same used to test
hypothesis 3 above, that is, we use 40 objects across 10 environments as training data
and the remaining 10 objects on a hold-out environment as test data.
Figure 4.17 shows the embeddings of different dimensionalities for the train and test-
set. It is very clear, that for 2 dimensions the method completely breaks down and
we in turn also get very low accuracies (presented in table 4.4).
6 dimensions and above looks good with incremental improvements for higher dimen-
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Method and Results
(a) Training metrics
(b) T-SNE of embeddings, training data
plug
mobile
scissor
bulb
can
glasses
ball
marker
cup
remote control
(c) T-SNE of embeddings, test data
Figure 4.16: Training logs and visualisation of embeddings, hypothesis 3.
Embedding Dim
2
3
4
5
6
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
Top 1 acc train
0.04
0.88
0.94
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Top 1 acc test
0.04
0.81
0.85
0.91
0.90
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.93
0.92
0.93
0.94
PCA #Comp 90%
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
10
10
11
11
10
Table 4.4: Top 1 accuracy on the train and test set of hypothesis 3 data with different
embedding dimensions. We also show the number of PCA components needed to
explain at least 90% of the variance in the embeddings..
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Embedding Network
61
sions, where we begin to see diminishing returns and small improvements. Figure
4.18 shows the top 1 accuracy plotted as a function of the embedding dimension,
which proves what is observed from the visual inspection of the embeddings, namely
that we quickly rise to a test accuracy of 90+% for an embedding layer size of 5 and
above. This shows, that given the constraints on the size of the network, one can
have a high accuracy while keeping the size of the embedding layer small, resulting in
fewer parameters in the network. We also note, that given just 8 dimensions we are
able to achieve a train accuracy of 99+%, thus for this problem we are able to overfit
quite easily and do not need a lot of dimensions to capture the variation in the data.
We can also see in the table, that the number of PCA components needed to explain
at least 90% of the variance in the embeddings converges to around 10-11.
Note on matrix distance calculations: A rather amusing and absolutely rele-
vant observation is that, while the new deep learning libraries such as PyTorch is
empowering us to create deep learning solutions, they can also be used as drop-in
replacements for many traditional tasks. One huge advantage of Pytorch is that it
can be used as a replacement for the more classical numpy, making linear algebra
computations on the GPU instead of the CPU. This is especially useful for distance
calculations and in figure 4.19, we have made a small sample to show that simply
using the GPU instead of the CPU, to do distance calculations between a 1000x1000
matrix and 1000 1x1000 samples, we get a speedup of almost 1000x.
4.4.2
Triplet Loss on golf club data
Now that we have shown that a method using triplet loss solves a problem of similar
nature (but with cleaner data), we will try to apply the method to our golf data.
We have at our disposal 5 sessions in different environments with the same clubs, 4
of these will be used as training data while one will be used as a hold-out environ-
ment. Furthermore we will also have 2 additional test-sets, which is two session with
completely unknown clubs in a new environments. We will thus test the ability to
re-identify already known clubs in a new environment and cluster unseen clubs in
an unseen environment. This is equivalent to hypothesis 2 and 3 tested earlier on
the core50 dataset. The two test sets with unknown clubs will be references as Test
Unknown1 and Test Unknown2 respectively.
For picking the frames of the videos for the dataset, we take all the videos and only
consider the frames in the normalized timespan 0.5-0.8, i.e each video is 8 seconds long
so we pick the frames between 4 and 6.4 seconds. This is roughly when the bottom
of the clubs is most visible, since the start of the videos have the player standing in
address position and is thus not usable for identifying the exact club. The last few
seconds of the videos is also often not usable since the club tends to get too close
to the camera and either overfills the whole image or is completely missing, turned
upside down or other miscellaneous user errors. Since there is a lot of redundancy
frame-to-frame, we only pick every 5. frame.
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Method and Results
Figure 4.17: Visualization of embeddings for different embedding layer sizes. Top:
Embeddings of the 40 objects in the training set on the hold-out environment. I.e
known objects on a never before seen environment. Bottom: Embeddings of then
10 objects in the test set on the hold-out environment, I.e never before seen objects
on a never before seen environment..
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Embedding Network
63
Figure 4.18: Top 1 accuracy for the train and test set of hypothesis 3 with different
embedding dimensions.
Figure 4.19: Comparison of Numpy (CPU) vs PyTorch (GPU) for matrix distance
calculations.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Method and Results
The hyper-parameters are the same as used previously but we use an embedding
dimension of 32, since we showed in the previous section that it was adequate for
tasks of this nature. Figure 4.20 shows the training metrics. We experienced a quite
quick convergence, so we reduced the number of steps and also readjusted the learning
rate decay to start earlier.
In figure 4.21 we show T-SNE of the training and test sets. It is immediately obvious
that we are perfectly capable of fitting to the training data (4.21(a)), and furthermore
we are also able to re-identify the known clubs in a new and unseen environment
on the test set (4.21(b)), meaning that we do not overfit to the training data. It
is also seen, that we in one case are able to cluster unknown clubs in an unseen
environment (4.21(c)), while in another case (4.21(d)) it does not go as well. There
is still some structure but the datapoints are mixed together. The results overall look
very promising and we were very surprised by these results considering the dataset.
We had to recheck everything to make sure that the training and test sets were not
mixed, but after thorough testing, everything checks out. If TrackMan gathers a larger
and more neatly cleaned dataset, this method should absolutely provide great results.
In fact we see that it is very capable of even separating the different irons from each
other, so the OCR technique outlined earlier above might not be as important for the
performance of the method as previously anticipated. We also tried to increase the
dimension of the embedding layer to the original 128, but with no visual improvement.
To show some of the challenges of the dataset, we show a sample of the data in figure
4.22. The first 4 rows are the training data, the 5. is the test data of the same clubs
in the training data but on a new environment. Row 6 and 7 is test data on 2 sets
of unknown clubs in an unknown environment. We see that the distribution of the
training datasets is quite far apart for the unknown test sets, so it is to be expected
that it will be difficult to have great generalization, however even in this case with a
quite small training set we still get a surprisingly good clustering ability. If we had
a much larger and more diverse training set, with hundreds of unique club identities,
Figure 4.20: Training metrics for the club dataset.
==PAGE:75==
4.4 Embedding Network
65
(a) Train Embeddings
(b) Test Embeddings
(c) Test Unknown1 Embeddings
(d) Test Unknown2 Embeddings
(e) Labels
Figure 4.21: T-SNE of training and test embeddings for the golf club dataset.
then we should see a very good generalization ability.
From the figure we also see that some clubs are turned upside down, some have a quite
aggressive angle, some have bad crops and some clubs are completely missing from a
session. Generally working with the data has been quite cumbersome and especially
the data coming from the sales representatives have been troublesome. Even with
a thorough guide, we experienced many videos where the sales reps presented held
the club upside down or in other various ways. Furthermore there was quite a lot
of mislabeling so in retrospect what has been gained time wise in ”outsourcing” the
data collection, has been penalized heavily in the data cleaning process. However
having users try to use the system as we intend gives important insight into what
their behaviour might be and thus we can design the system accordingly, meaning
that while the data we got is questionable, the insights we got from the process is
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Method and Results
very valuable.
The motivation for having the players standing in the address position and then
presenting the club was that we with one dataset, we could examine two problems;
That of club identification during presentation and also to identify which overall
category of club the player is using when he is about to shoot. In retrospect this
duality in the dataset gives rise to problems in splitting it into two different parts for
each task, and it would most likely have been better to keep them separate during
collection to minimize the cleaning process afterwards.
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Embedding Network
67
Figure 4.22: Golf Club dataset sample. Not every club is included in every session
and many of them a very hard to see. .
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Method and Results
4.5
Optimizing for embedded devices
This section includes a short overview of hardware options for edge computing and an
analysis of methods, which will optimize the performance of the models on embedded
devices.
4.5.1
Hardware
Many deep learning applications needs to be run on large hardware and is typically
hosted externally at cloud providers such as AWS, GCP and Azure. However, many
applications have low latency requirements and relying on sending and receiving data
from an external cloud solution is too slow and sometimes complicated. Having mod-
els served on local (and often embedded) hardware is referred to as Edge computing.
There exists a whole field of different devices, targeted at different industries, appli-
cation and price points. The embedded devices targeted running ”AI”-applications
are eloquently named EdgeAI-devices.
To implement our methods in production, Trackman essentially has 3 options:
1. Cloud Solution: One option is to use the unit to gather images and then
send them to the cloud (using the externally connected device which is either
a PC or an iPad). This is not a valid option since sending information back
and forth to the cloud introduces a big latency, which is not suitable for real
time applications. Furthermore golf courses does not mix well with high speed
internet connections.
2. Computing on external but local device: A second option is to use the
device which is connected to the TrackMan unit through WiFi to do the neural
network inference. The upside to this is that many users are connected through
an iPad, which in newer versions has a dedicated neural engine in the processor,
specialized for accelerating machine learning application. One big downside is
that we then rely on the user having specific external hardware and if they
connect through a PC (or an older iPad) the solution might not work.
3. Edge computing on embedded device: The last and best solution would
be to do the computations on the device itself, removing any reliabilities on
external devices, whether that is cloud or local hardware. This does pose some
problems, the biggest being finding embedded hardware which is strong enough
in computing capabilities, while also having a sufficiently small power consump-
tion. Currently the units are equipped with Intel CPUs and a redesign would
either need to go to a whole other architecture, or alternatively incorporate a
ML accelerator in the form of a System-On-Moduel (SOM).
==PAGE:79==
4.5 Optimizing for embedded devices
69
This field of edge devices specially designed for neural network inference is quickly
expanding with constant new offerings, reflecting a field in rapid progress. Here we will
conduct a small field study of current offerings, targeting our specific application of
performing inference on videos or a subset of frames from these videos. As mentioned
previously, we do not require every frame of the videos to be processed but on the
other hand we need multiple samples over the course of the player presenting the club,
to get an accurate guess at which club they are presenting.
Currently the two most obvious providers of such edge solutions are Nvidia with their
Jetson series, and Google with their Coral series. Like many fields in tech, popular
options quickly acquire a monopoly-like state. Both Nvidia and Google have made
it easy to get set up, and if one run into troubles, having a popular edge device will
make it significantly easier to troubleshoot; since more people use it, more people
experience the same problems and more people have come up with clever and open
source solutions.
An important consideration is the power requirements of these units, since Track-
Man’s units are battery powered, we can not choose an inefficient option.
Both offerings from Nvidia and Google are packaged as a System-On-Module (SOM)
connected to a development board with various input/outputs such as HDMI and a
camera connector.
Nvidia Jetson Nano:
Nvidias latest iteration of their Jetson line, super compact embedded device with a
power draw of 5-10W. Includes a full desktop Linux environment so it can be used
as a stand alone product with all the utilities one normally has in a full operating
system. It has a 128-core NVIDIA Maxwell™architecture-based GPU for neural
network acceleration. Base size of SOM is 69.6 mm x 45 mm with dev kit being
100mm x 80mm. The unit is shown on figure 4.23 together with the Coral TPU.
Google Coral TPU:
Google’s take on an EdgeAI device, featuring their custom made TPU (tensor pro-
cessing unit) ASIC for neural network inference, in addition to a standard quad core
ARM processor for general computing. It also features a GPU with a built in H.264
decoder. The development board has some neat options such as bluetooth and WiFi
included. The datasheet [3] specifies power input as 2 - 3A at 5V DC which gives a
power consumption of 10-15W. Base size of the SOM is 48 mm x 40 mm, with the
whole dev kit being 88 mm x 60 mm.
It does have one big limitation: ”It supports only TensorFlow Lite models that are fully
8-bit quantized and then compiled specifically for the Edge TPU” [3]. This is a quite
severe limitation, as it restricts the models that we can run since some models have
operations which is not available in Tensorflow Lite. Furthermore every model has to
be trained using quantization-aware training and can not be quantized post training
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Method and Results
(more on quantization in the next section). The Coral TPU only supports forward
propagation and can not be used for active learning, i.e if we at some point wanted
the unit to fine-tune the models to the player’s clubs we will not be able to update
the weights of the neural networks since it does not support back1 propagation. It
also has a requirement that: Tensors are either 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional. If a tensor
has more than 3 dimensions, then only the 3 innermost dimensions may have a size
greater than 1 [3]. This essentially just means that it will not do batch size > 1 for
color images.
A comparison of the Jetson Nano and the Coral TPU is shown in figure 4.24, showing
both hardware differences on the development board as well as some throughput of
commonly used neural networks.
Because of these reasons, the Jetson Nano is the best option as an embedded deep
learning accelerator for TrackMan’s applications.
The Jetson Nano dev board is
available for purchase at the time of writing and the SOM module will be available
June 2019. TrackMan does not currently have a Jetson Nano available for the project
but they have a Jetson TX2 which is a bigger and earlier model based on Nvidia’s
pascal architecture (Nano is maxwell based).
Flashing the Jetson with firmware
and installing all the software is a convoluted process, and since the targeted device
(Jetson Nano) is not available, we instead run the optimizations on a desktop with a
Nvidia Geforce RTX 2070 and use these results to give some reasonable estimate of
performance on the Jetson Nano.
4.5.2
Optimization
After training has converged, our models are optimized for accuracy. On embedded
devices with limited computing capabilities, we want to have models with are both
accurate but also small and fast. Size and speed are thus the two metrics that can be
optimized post training and this optimization has to keep the accuracy of the model
high.
For size it is obvious, that an embedded device will have limited memory so smaller
models are preferred. The size of a neural network is essentially determined by the
number of parameters and the size of these parameters, so to make the network
smaller the 2 most popular options are:
• Pruning: The act of removing nodes and channels from the network. The
theory is, that a lot of the nodes are ”dead” and can thus be pruned away
with minimal loss on accuracy. This is an old idea, going back to the famous
1990 paper/method ”Optimal Brain Damage” (ODB) [19]. In ODB and simi-
lair pruning methods, they try to find weights with low ”saliency”, meaning if
the weight is set to 0 it will have minimal impact on the test error. A formula
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Optimizing for embedded devices
71
(a) Jetson Nano development board (b) Coral TPU development board
(c) Jetson Nano SOM
(d) Coral TPU SOM
Figure 4.23: Jetson Nano and Google Coral TPU boards and SOMs.
(a) Development board comparison [36]
(b) FPS comparison, source NVIDIA
Figure 4.24: Jetson Nano vs Coral TPU.
similar to backpropagation is formulated, the saliency of the weights calculated
and ranked, removing the least important weights and retraining the network.
Since many of these methods revolves around finding least impactful weights, it
is needed to find some gradient and retraining the network so it is a very compu-
tationally expensive process, furthermore we need better tools for sparse matrix
calculations to draw the full benefit of weight pruning. A neater alternative is
channel/width pruning as demonstrated in MobileNets. In our work we argue
that our models are not mature enough (too little data), to have any meaning-
==PAGE:82==
72
4 Method and Results
ful benefit from weight pruning given the added complexity and resources for
retraining. At a later point with a more stable neural network it might make
sense, but as of now we will not consider this option.
• Quantization: Converting the weights to a smaller binary format, cutting off
precision. Typically networks as trained using 32 bit floating point precision
(FP32), but it is possible to instead use half precision (FP16), resulting in half
the model size. 8bit precision (INT8) is also an option, but due to extreme
scale changes between FP32 and INT8, models can break down when they are
converted to INT8.
Quantization is the option that we will use to make our networks smaller, and it will
also make them faster, since multiplication is faster in half-precision [24].
Batch size, FPS and latency: An important consideration for neural network
inference is which batch size to choose. Per default, running a batch through a neural
net is done by calling some .inference()-function of the neural net and this function
has a blocking behaviour. This just means that one can not interact with the neural
network, until it is done processing the batch and therefore not feed a new batch
before the current one is done processing. For real time applications, we often want
to have an answer to a decision as soon as possible, so we choose a batch size of
1, which essentially means that as soon as an image is ready, it is fed through the
neural network to produce a prediction. This approach does not utilize the efficiency
of batching and for this specific application, we do not require hard real-time. For
this problem, a decision about club category is made on the basis of majority vote
of multiple images, thus more images makes a more robust decision. Batching can
therefore be utilized to more efficiently run inference on multiple images, disregarding
the performance hit on latency.
Batching is more efficient because it allows us to do multiple layer propagations in
parallel. For each layer n in the network, the activations of the previous layer n −1
is needed, before the computation can be run.
As an example, let us consider a
50-layer ResNet (ResNet50). For simplicity it is assumed that the computation time
of each layer is 1 second. For a batch size of 1 it has to be propagated through the
50 layers, each layer ”waiting” for the activations from the previous layer giving a
total inference time of 50 seconds. After the image has been propagated through
the whole network, we can feed another image in, resulting in a throughput/FPS of
1img/50sec = 0.02FPS. If we instead use batching with a batch size of 50, then
while img0 is being propagated through layer n, img1 can be propagated through
layer n −1 in parallel. Feeding the network with constant batches of size 50 will
result in computations running in all layers simultaneously. The time for feeding one
batch of size 50 through the network will be as follows: It takes 50 seconds for img0
to be propagated through the network, after the first 50 seconds the last image img49
is fed through the first layer and 50 seconds later it has it has been propagated to
==PAGE:83==
4.5 Optimizing for embedded devices
73
the final output. This gives a total of 100 seconds for the 50 images which results in
an FPS of 50imgs/100sec = 0.5FPS exactly 25 times the FPS of the single batch
approach.
In reality, the layers will NOT have the same computation time as different layer
types and number of parameters affect the timing. Usually most of the computations
will be in the fully connected layers at the end so even though layer activations run
in parallel, there will be some natural bottlenecks in some layers. Furthermore to
utilize the parallelization that bathing introduces, the hardware needs to be powerful
enough to run these computations in parallel. These effects result in decreased real
world efficiency, but batching is still more efficient than batch size 1.
While FPS increases with batch size, the latency will also increase because it has to;
1. wait for enough images to fill up a batch 2. run the whole batch through the
network and wait until all the images have been propagated before the results are
available, which will be in the form of the final layer activations for ALL the images
in the batch.
For showing the relationship between latency, FPS and batch size, we have plottet
data from a ResNet50 running on a Nvidia AGX Xavier in figure 4.25. The data
was taken from [15]. Figure 4.25(a) shows the FPS and latency as a function of the
batch size and it is seen that diminishing returns is experienced on the throughput, as
the batch size increases for reasons explained above. What is also seen is that latency
increases linearly with the batch size, which makes perfect sense as the time until the
result is acquired depends on how many images has to be propagated through the
whole network. Figure 4.25(b) shows latency as a function of FPS, using datapoints
from distinct batch sizes. The figure essentially shows the latency that the system
experiences for a specific choice of batch size and the resulting throughput. While
large batch sizes gives diminshing returns it is obvious from the plots that choosing a
batch size of 4-8 gives a FPS increase of 4-5x. For the golf club case, we can do a quick
estimate of desired performance: If the player has to present the club for more than 3
seconds, it starts to become tedious and annoying to use the feature. 3 seconds of 30
FPS gives a total of 90 frames. There needs to be time to do the actual computations
so if the 2 first seconds is spent collecting frames, the last second can be used to
generate the prediction. This gives 60 frames, many which are almost identical so
only every 5. frame is considered giving 12 frames total. Some of these frames will
most likely be bad, but having 12 frames collected over a timespan of 2 seconds will
hopefully result in enough high quality frames to make a correct prediction based on
majority vote.
From a user perspective, we can also consider an alternative solution if more compu-
tation time is needed: It is annoying having to present the club to the unit for more
than 2-3 seconds. After these few seconds, the unit could produce a loud beep, letting
the user know that he can now stop presenting the club. While the unit is taking some
seconds to process the images, the user can return to the address position and get
==PAGE:84==
74
4 Method and Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.25: FPS and latency for different batch sizes. ResNet50 running on Jetson
AGX Xavier [15].
ready to shoot. Upon computation completion, the unit can produce a pre-recorded
voice line, informing the user which club it has detected or alternatively just show it
on the external device which is often monitored by a coach. This is a subtle change,
but having the beeping sound when enough images has been collected and not when
the prediction is ready will make the system feel much faster, giving an early indica-
tion of progress and the player the ability to do other things, so he doesn’t get the
feeling of having the wait on the unit processing the frames. This will obviously only
work if the final method is accurate, otherwise the player will get ready to shoot after
the beep sound and then hear the unit producing the wrong prediction and he thus
has to present the club yet again.
4.5.2.1
Optimizing using TensorRT
For speeding up the models we will be using a combination of quantization and net-
work optimization provided by Nvidia’s TensorRT. From TensorRT documentation:
”The core of NVIDIA TensorRT is a C++ library that facilitates high performance
inference on NVIDIA graphics processing units (GPUs). TensorRT takes a trained
network, which consists of a network definition and a set of trained parameters, and
produces a highly optimized runtime engine which performs inference for that network.
... TensorRT includes an infrastructure that allows you to take advantage of the high
speed mixed precision capabilities of Pascal, Volta, and Turing GPUs as an optional
optimization” [37]. It essentially just takes a trained neural network, performs opti-
mizations (elimination of layers whose outputs are not used, fused convolution, bias
and ReLu operations, aggregation of operations and merging of concatenation layers)
and returns an optimized inference engine. This is shown in figure 4.26
The optimizations is platform specific, i.e optimized for the exact GPU that it is built
on. The engine is built once and is stored as a plan file for later use. Plans are specific
==PAGE:85==
4.5 Optimizing for embedded devices
75
Figure 4.26:
TensorRT optimizes trained neural network models to produce a
deployment-ready runtime inference engine [37].
to the exact GPU that they are built on as well as the exact version of TensorRT. An
in depth explanation of how TensorRT works is not in the scope of this project, but
Nvidia’s documentation [37] gives an excellent overview.
In the following we optimize our embedding network with a ResNet50 backend and
compare its accuracy and FPS across different precisions. Creating a TensorRT op-
timized inference engine is quite simple and is done with the Python code in listing
4.2.
1 create_inference_graph(getEmbeddingNetwork(),
2
"head/out_emb",
3
max_batch_size=batch_size,
4
max_workspace_size_bytes=workspace_size ,
5
precision_mode="FP16",
6
minimum_segment_size=20)
Listing 4.2: Creating a TensorRT optimized inference engine using the Python API,
here creating an engine with 16 bit precision (half-precision).
Breaking down what happens at each line of the API call [37]:
1. getEmbeddingNetwork() fetches the GraphDef file from a frozen graph stored
in protobuff-format
2. ”head/out_emb” is the name of the output node in the graph
3. The inference engine is optimized for a select batch size, smaller batch sizes are
supported at run time (but not optimized) but the batch size at run time can
not exceed the max batch size set in the API call.
==PAGE:86==
76
4 Method and Results
4. The workspace size is how much of the GPU memory we allocate for temporary
operations. If set too small, an optimal implementation for a given layer may
not be found.
5. The precision mode just sets the precision of the inference engine. FP16 uses
Tensor Cores or half precision hardware instructions if possible.
INT8 uses
integer hardware instructions.
6. The minimum_segment_size determines the minimum number of TensorFlow
nodes in a TensorRT engine, which means the TensorFlow subgraphs that have
fewer nodes than this number will not be converted to TensorRT. Therefore, in
general smaller numbers such as 5 are preferred. This can also be used to change
the minimum number of nodes in the optimized INT8 engines to change the
final optimized graph to fine tune result accuracy. From the TensorFlow docu-
mentation it has a rather amusing way to be tuned: Start with a high number
such as 50 and keep halving it until the program crashes. Alternatively: Start
with a small number, and keep doubling it until the program stops crashing.
Turning the model into INT8 gives some problems because the scaling is vastly dif-
ferent compared to the original model trained in FP32. For it to work, the model
either needs to be trained using quantize-aware training (the weights are updated
such that they are easier to convert to INT8 after training) or the optimized graph
needs to be calibrated. Calibration takes a long time because it has to be fed with the
images from a training set, which matches the distribution of the data. ”TensorRT
uses a calibration process that minimizes the information loss when approximating the
FP32 network with a limited 8-bit integer representation” [37]. Figure 4.27 shows
the difference in dynamic range between the 3 used precisions.
Model
TF-Native
TF-TRT FP32
TF-TRT FP16
TF-TRT INT8
Size (Mb)
98
98
49
31
FPS
145
335
462
651
Test Accuracy
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.43
Table 4.5: Metrics for different precisions of the embedding network with 32 dime-
nions..
Figure 4.27: Dynamic range and minimum precision [37].
==PAGE:87==
4.5 Optimizing for embedded devices
77
Metrics for our optimized models running with batch size 1 are shown in table 4.5.
As expected, the model size is the same for the native graph and the one optimized
using FP32 precision. It is halved in FP16 and under 1/3 in INT8. Depending on
parameters, not every node of the TensorFlow graph can be converted to INT8 so
it is not a guarantee that it will be exactly 1/4 the size of the full FP32 model.
The optimization from native TensorFlow to TensorRT doubles the FPS and running
in FP16 gives an increase in FPS of more than 3x compared to native TensorFlow.
Running in IN8 precision makes it almost 4.5x faster, but the performance is also
serverely affected, even with the graph having been calibrated. This is most likely
due to the fact that instead of having a classification head we have an embedding
head and the embeddings (which are just n-dimension vectors), are quite sensitive
to the change introduced by lowering the precision. I.e if an element in the vector
changes with 10% it might be quite significant when using distance matching. For
these reasons FP16 is used because it provides a significant speed-up with no added
complexity or significant drawbacks.
To see the effect of batching, we have shown the FPS for different batch sizes on the
FP16 optimized embedding model in table 4.6. This shows the same finding that the
data we previously learned from the plotted data from Nvidia; FPS scales linearly
with batch sizes in the start, but quickly converges to match the maximum possible
throughput of the model and the hardware.
Batch Size
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
FPS
462
801
1203
1606
1847
2011
2104
Table 4.6: FPS vs batch size for our optimized FP16 embedding model.
If we have 12 frames that needs to be processed, then they will neatly fit into 3 batches
of 4, which is not a huge batch size if limited hardware is to be considered. Running
the model with a batch size of 4 using FP16 precision and TensorRT optimizations
ultimately gives a throughput increase of 8x, compared to the native TensorFlow
implementation using batch size 1.
Estimating performance on the Jetson Nano:
This resource [35] shows that a GTX 1080 is about 10 times faster than a Nvidia
Jetson Nano. A RTX 2070 as used in this work is about 20% faster than a GTX 1080
for deep learning workloads [42]. In total that is a power factor of 12, so dividing the
FPS numbers with this factor should give a ballpark estimate of performance:
462FPS/12 ∼= 38.5FPS.
Nvidia reports a ResNet50 with a input resolution of
(224x224) running at 36 FPS on the Jetson Nano [16]. Our network has an input
dimension of (256x128) and is running the exact same backbone with an embedding
==PAGE:88==
78
4 Method and Results
head instead of a classification head. ∼38FPS seems like a reasonable and realistic
estimate.
If 1 second is used for processing the 12 frames that is collected over the first 2 seconds,
then the FPS requirement is 12FPS. Our reasonable estimate is 3x higher than this
requirement, and is even using a batch size of 1. Using a higher batch size such as 4,
could increase the Jetson Nano FPS to 1203FPS/12 = 100FPS. This depends on the
compute capabilities of the Nano and its ability to handle batching. This result gives
a very strong indication that the embedding network will not have any throughput
problems for soft real time identification. It easily hits the target of evaluating enough
frames within the specified 3 seconds (including frame collection) to produce a more
robust identification.
The performance is essentially so high that batching is not
even required, since over the span of 3 seconds it can produce 12FPS · 3seconds = 36
embeddings, if it is using a batch size of 1 and is constantly fed with the newest frame.
This does not take into account the distance computation, but if the query dataset is
sufficiently small this process is almost instant.
Converting a Faster R-CNN is a bit more difficult because it contains some ROI-
pooling layers and dynamic input resizing layers which requires the optimized model
to be built from scratch using 3. party packages. We have not considered doing this
for this work, since we previously stated that it would be better to spend more time
making a faster object detector work. We can note, that while the native implemen-
tation of this network gets 145 FPS, the Faster R-CNN detection model runs at 9
FPS on the same hardware. If the Faster R-CNN detection model is retrained using
a fixed input dimension of 300x300 the FPS increase to 21, but the IOU drops a lot.
That is around 7 times slower than the native embedding network. Using the same
methology it would hypothetically run at 5 FPS on the Jetson Nano if it could be
converted to FP16 in TensorRT. The object detection module is therefore the current
bottleneck in the system and it makes sense to find a faster model.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5
Application to player
tracking in Baseball
Because of the troubles with our golf dataset, we experiment with our models in
another domain to explore their useability for similar problems at Trackman. To
see the value of these methods in another context, we try to apply some of the same
methods to another one of TrackMans projects, namely identifying players in baseball
videos using their jersey number. This is of crucial importance for a real time tracking
system, being able to know which players are on the field and where they are.
All baseball players wear a big number on their jersey that helps identifying them. A
computer vision system for detection should therefore be able to detect the players
in a baseball video feed, extract their jersey numbers, and do accurate identification.
The detection, extraction and classification is very similar to the golf club problem
studied previously.
5.1
Data
The data is obtained from the MLB stats API. Each video is 8 seconds around the
pitch (the throw from the pitcher to the batter at the home plate).
Extracting
metadata from the MLB API, we are able to extract the jersey number using the
pitcher names, giving us a rich and labelled dataset. Some examples are shown on
figure 5.1.
We imported the videos into BeaverDam to annotate a bounding box around the
numbers. We did this for 150 videos to have an evaluation set, some of the images
are shown in figure 5.2. Some cases are very hard because the player has his side
to the camera, so a part of the number is hard to read. It is also difficult when the
player is throwing, because their backs are in a weird angle to the camera. Extracting
frames from the annotated videos yields a validation set of around 1600 frames across
150 videos.
==PAGE:90==
80
5 Application to player tracking in Baseball
Figure 5.1: Baseball video feed recording the pitching mound. Frames have been
cropped to zoom in on the pitcher.
The way the MLB plays are organized, each game has a game_id and in each game,
each play (pitch) has a play_id and each player has a unique player_id in the database.
The filename of the extracted frames has been encoded to contain all this information.
General structure and an example is shown below.
Stadium_jerseyNumber_gameId_playId_pithcerId_frameNumber.png
Arlington_67_531741_328_670036_frame_105.png
So this frame is from Arlington stadium and the pitcher throwing has the jersey
number 67.
5.2
Analysis
As opposed to golf, we do not have to spend time annotating the persons in the video,
since person detection is easily solved using a pretrained model from the TensorFlow
Object Detection API, where people are one of the pretrained classes from COCO
(Common Objects in Context dataset). The result of this tracking applied to the
cropped pitcher cam are shown on figure 5.3. For practical purposes we use a pre-
==PAGE:91==
5.2 Analysis
81
(a) Easy
(b) Hard
Figure 5.2: Baseball cropped jersey numbers - Hard and easy cases.
trained MobileNet + SSD model to run real time inference. A better model such as a
ResNet with Faster R-CNN could be used instead for more accurate person detection.
Like golf, we can run inference on the whole video and use majority vote to classify
the player. Thus we don’t need to classify the jersey number correctly in every frame,
but just need to predict the correct number æin the majority of the frames.
Since a lot of the frames are hard or impossible to classify correctly, using these for
validation will not give a meaningful accuracy when we compare to humans. So to
combat this, we take a toy sample of 32 images that should be identifiable for initial
analysis. Later in the performance section, we see what the actual performance is on
a frame-by-frame basis and also for player identification using majority vote over the
whole video segment.
Using the SVHN trained model and resizing the images to 54x54 pixels, we obtain an
accuracy of 81% on our little toy sample. The predictions and images can be seen on
figure 5.5(a). The images it gets wrong is often when the player is throwing and the
jersey number becomes rotated. Using test-time augmentation (for instance using 4
slightly rotated versions of the image and taking majority vote), one could help this
problem. Also retraining on the jersey dataset would help a lot.
Figure 5.3: Baseball player tracking using SSD.
==PAGE:92==
82
5 Application to player tracking in Baseball
5.2.1
Analysis of digit size
One of the challenges from a computer vision stand point is that some of the players
in the video will be very small, making their number very hard to see. To combat
this, TrackMan is installing 4K cameras on all stadiums to have better resolution and
clarity. However, TrackMan wants to have some metrics as to how the classification
performs when the size of the number falls. To simulate this in a controlled environ-
ment, we take a set of cropped jersey number images and first scale them down in
size and then scale them up again. This way, we can simulate an image of a digit
with a set size in pixels.
Running over a set of sizes, we get the result shown in figure 5.4. The result is quite
promising, even for cases where we only have 10 pixels as in figure 5.5(b) we still
attain an accuracy of 64% even though many of the numbers are very distorted. We
see that anything below 5 pixels is impossible and we rise very rapidly to and accuracy
of 70%+ for sizes above 11-12 pixels and at around 20 pixels we are optimal. This is
a very important piece of information for TrackMan, since they will need to design
their system and camera setup such that players, that are to be identified, satisfies
this minimum resolution constraint.
5.3
Performance
To assess the identification performance we run our classification model on the an-
notated frames of our 150 videos in the eval set. Identifying the player based on
majority vote of these frame-by-frame classifications we get the following results:
Accuracy, whole video, majority vote: 0.813
Accuracy, per frame: 0.726
Number of vids with frame acc < 0.3: 29/150
Figure 5.4: Baseball jersey identification accuracy as function of number size.
==PAGE:93==
5.3 Performance
83
(a) Resolution of 54x54 pixels, giving an accuracy of 81%
(b) Resolution of 10x10 pixels, giving an accuracy of 66%
Figure 5.5: Cropped baseball jersey numbers - Variable resolution.
==PAGE:94==
84
5 Application to player tracking in Baseball
So it is seen that with a frame-by-frame accuracy of 72.6%, we get an identification
performance of 81.3%. We also see that there are some videos where we have a low
frame accuracy and these are also the videos which severely impacts the identifica-
tion performance. This is proved by looking at figure 5.6. Here we see, that the
wrongly classified videos generally have a lot less frames to base their identification
on. Furthermore for some of them, in the frames where the number does finally show,
the number is very hard to see because the player is pitching. For instance, a video
might have the player with the side to the camera for the whole duration of the video
until he throws where we get a few frames with a distorted number. For real world
performance, we don’t only have 8 seconds of video footage, we would have much
longer to identify the player when he is walking to the pitch, standing around etc.
This method therefore seems extremely promising if TrackMan wishes to implement
player identification in their current tracking offering. It can be much improved by
retraining the SVHN model to the baseball data. Like the golf case, a digit localization
model must be constructed to crop out the digits on the back of the players. One
could also experiment with different pose estimation networks to detect when the
player has a pose (e.g pitching) that makes identification difficult.
==PAGE:95==
5.3 Performance
85
Figure 5.6: Overview of the distribution of annotated frames (frames that are used
for classification) for videos that were classified correct and wrong. It is seen, that
the method works best when the number is clearly visible in many frames (40+).
This plot show, that when we are wrong in determining the number (orange), it is
often because the number of frames with a visible player number is very low. The
distribution of the number of frames in the correctly identified videos (blue) generally
have a lot more frames with a visible number. .
==PAGE:96==
86
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion and Future
Work
This section includes a discussion of the work presented in this report, the way the
work itself was carried out, as well as consideration for the next step in potential
future work.
Data: The biggest bottleneck of the project is without a doubt the dataset. Initially
we had no data and we had estimated we would get a lot more data from the sales
representatives compared to what we ended up getting. A simpler model with more
data often beats an advanced model with less data.
The biggest impact for the
method would simply be, to collect and annotate more data. However we also have
to strike a balance between an academic aspect of the project and a practical one,
thus spending a lot more time collecting data would be the ”real world” solution to
the project, but not a solution which yields interesting results for academic research.
Machine learning projects are, at its core, an iterative process. During this project we
got valuable insights into how we would go about data collection in a second round
and it is now clear, that collecting data in a much more targeted way for the final
task is the way forward. While having a general purpose dataset with multiple uses
is nice, cleaning it for the individual tasks can be cumbersome and even intractable.
Our suggestion for TrackMan for collecting more data would simply be, to gather a
selection of clubs in the order of 200-400 and with a mobile phone, simply holding
the club with the hand, facing the bottom of the clubhead upwards and pointing the
camera at it while turning around. By turning around in an environment, we get a lot
of different lighting conditions and one can optionally increase the distance between
camera and club a bit during the recording to also capture the club at different
scales. Since the problem of cropping the clubhead is largely solved by the previous
object detection network, the task of generating cropped images from videos will be
automated.
It is very important to have a wide variety of different environments represented
in the dataset. One could draw inspiration from the Core50 dataset and have 12-20
environments. So in short; 200-400 different clubs over 12-20 environments gives 2400-
==PAGE:98==
88
6 Discussion and Future Work
8000 videos, which is more than an order of magnitude larger than the current dataset.
Such a varied dataset will yield much better performance, both for transfer learning
for the SVHN trained model but also for the embedding approach. Furthermore, a
large and clean dataset, without missing clubs, impossible angles, etc. will make us
able to have a distinct train and test set which will give us good estimates for real
world performance. This model could be sufficient as a beta version and TrackMan
could then potentially push this beta as a software update and begin collecting user
data, retraining the model on the user data, push a new model etc, so we have
this active learning aspect. This is very similar to Tesla’s fleet learning approach
[38], where they use the data generated by the units to train an even better model.
Over time, one can be very specific in only choosing difficult data, determined by
user correction, to improve the model performance on hard examples and not spend
resources re-optimizing the network on already solved cases.
Models: We use a lot of different models in this project and as mentioned earlier,
more data beats a better model. We have used extensively tested models such as
ResNet, MobileNet and FaceNet (which is just a ResNet trained with triplet loss).
Newer and incrementally better models exist, which we could also have considered,
however if data is the problem a better model will not help as perfectly fitting to
bad data ultimately gives a perfectly bad model. Making the methods work with the
most commonly used models is a much simpler engineering task, as we do not have
to both debug the data and the model, and if debugging is needed, the amount of
online resources for troubleshooting commonly used models is much larger. For object
detection we would have liked to use some of the newer models utilizing feature pyra-
mid networks [20] and focal loss [21] (RetinaNet), the methods have proved to solve
the problem MobileNet has in recognizing small objects. As mentioned in the object
detection section, we were not able to get satisfactory results from the MobileNets
models and we suspect that is mainly because the clubs are quite small in many of
the frames. It would thus have been a nice result to have these new networks tested
on this task and in fact they have been added to the TensorFlow Object Detection
API, which we utilized in this work, but they are currently bugged with open issues
on GitHub. Alternatively we could have used some other implementation, but time
used getting another implementation to work was better spent elsewhere, but it is a
very obvious step that TrackMan could take in the project to get a smaller, and most
importantly faster, model capable of detecting the golf clubs.
Reproducibility: Following good engineering (and academic) practices, a signifi-
cant amount of time was used on documenting the code and making it reproducible
with tools such as Docker. This process obviously takes time away from generating
more results for the report, but a result which we are not able to reproduce is not a
scientifically correct result. In this day and age, there are no excuses (set for privacy)
to not include the code that reproduces a claimed result. This effort is not shown
in the report, but it is perhaps the most important effort if this work is to be used
by TrackMan moving forward. We have needed to strike a balance between perfect
==PAGE:99==
6 Discussion and Future Work
89
documentation and none, but as a rule of thumb we have tried to provide code that
transforms raw data into processed data, code that trains models on the processed
data (tuned by included hyper parameters) and code that evaluates the model pre-
diction in comparison with the ground truth labels. In general machine learning as
a field has a lack of distinct software design best practices. The nature of the work
lends one do to a lot of prototyping which in turns gives widely varied folder structure
and file organisation on a project-to-project basis. We have tried to enforce some kind
of order by having distinct data/ model/ etc/ folders and used notebooks for grunt
testing and model wrangling with distinct scripts for training and validation.
Embedded performance: An initial focus of the project was to use methods which
could be run in real time on embedded hardware. Data problems however was a
contributing factor to us using a lot of time on standard (and typically larger) neural
networks . Furthermore in a lot of the external code we used, smaller networks were
not available pretrained, at least for TensorFlow Object Detection API the minimum
size resnet is ResNet50 and the smaller alternative MobileNet did not work so well.
PyTorch has more open implementation of smaller models such as ResNet18, which
would have been nice to use for the project.
On the other hand, embedded devices is a very liberal definition, ranging from a
smaller C-microcontroller with 8MB of storage to Teslas [38] new specially designed
drive computer, with dedicated architecture for matrix multiplication, ReLu activa-
tions, etc, specialized for convolutional neural network inference. The current Track-
Man IV unit is most likely too compute limited for real time neural network inference,
so an alternative could be to utilize a device such as an iPad, which is typically used
in conjunction with the unit anyway and newer iPad models actually have a neural
engine [1] built into the processor for use by machine learning applications. In a
newer and upcoming TrackMan V unit, including a dedicated chip for neural network
inference could be an option. There is a lot of emerging options in this space and it
would provide TrackMan’s customers with a complete solution, not relying on pro-
cessing on any external unit. The sensors are there, camera, radar etc, the unit just
needs sufficient compute to make sense of it.
Time management: Time is the most valuable resource and thus it is important
to be time efficient, especially in industry where the whole survivability of a business
depends on creating more value per unit of time than it costs. Adopting the same
approach in this project, we have tried to always make sure that our time and effort
is spent on tasks, which yields the most results.
Breadth vs depth: It was quickly obvious early on in the project, that the amount
and quality of the data would not be sufficient to construct and show a final working
model so instead, we turned the project into a feasibility study. In short, this just
means that we have tried to apply a lot of different possible solutions on the toy
dataset to show which directions would be promising, if TrackMan decides to collect
a larger dataset and carry out this project in full scale. This also means that instead
==PAGE:100==
90
6 Discussion and Future Work
of spending a lot of time diving deep into a specific method, trying to get the last
incremental improvements, we have instead tried to capture the lowest hanging fruit
on a lot of trees. This is the most valuable information for TrackMan, and ultimately
also what generates the most interesting project.
Triplet Loss: We were completely blown away by the performance of the models
trained using the triplet loss. The ability to do so well on such a limited amount of
training data was quite surprising. Our initial results using standard image classifi-
cation networks did not show anything remotely working for accurate classification
for subclasses, i.e it did easily separate irons from woods and drivers, but it did not
accurately predict subcategories such as the individual irons. The article introducing
the triplet loss is from 2015 and is therefore quite recent. It seems especially useful
for applications with a low amount of training data and for tasks such as ”one-shot”
learning. There is no doubt that it is an insanely strong and a completely different
paradigm, to train a network to maximize a low dimensional spacial class distance,
versus classical classification approaches, where we learn explicitly which features
constitutes a class such as a cat. In the classical approach, the error is found as the
deviation between the output probabilities, and the actual class (one-hot encoded)
and this error is back propagated to update the weights. We also know that in many
application, if we want a feature extractor we can throw away the last layer of a
classification network (usually trained on ImageNet) and use the second last layer as
feature vector. However, this layer is not DIRECTLY optimized for class separation,
due to the above formulation of the error signal. A triplet loss directly optimizes
this layer. We are now seeing great results in tasks such a Kaggle’s whale identi-
fication challenge, where a network is first pretrained with the hard-mining triplet
loss and then a classification layer is added on-top and fine-tuned [25]. We assume
that the triplet loss is useable in a lot of other applications, for instance in unsu-
pervised learning: Take a unique image in the dataset xa, augment it in some way
xp = Augment(xa) and use the triplet loss to optimize the network f(x) such that
|f(xa) −f(xp)| < |f(xa) −f(xn)| for another unique image xn ̸= xa.
We would also like to investigate, in a secondary project, how we can use the triplet
loss to train a general feature extractor. Until now, the triplet loss has been used in
narrow domains such as faces, golf clubs, MNIST etc, but we propose that we can use
it to optimize a network trained on EVERYTHING. By everything we mean images of
every picturable noun. The triplet loss is modified such that a term is added, weighing
the similarities of objects using a similarity measure such as a WordNet-embedding of
the nouns. The motivation behind this is that the original triplet loss maximizes the
distance between two dog breeds and a pineapple equally. Adding in a similarity term
will make the distance proportionally smaller between the two dog breeds, compared
to any of the dog breeds and the pineapple. We hypothesize that such a network will
be able to take as input an image of anything and output an embedding, which can
be used as features for use in e.g classification. Using this approach, transfer learning
suddenly becomes trivial: No learning is obligatory, just transform the query images
==PAGE:101==
6 Discussion and Future Work
91
into embeddings and match new images (test set) to the closest query images. Humans
can be shown a single image of a object, obj0 and correctly re-identify similar objects
from a collection of candidate images. Traditionally a neural network needs to be
presented with thousands of images of obj0 in different conditions to essentially learn
to match the pixel intensities to the correct class. Using the embedding approach, we
can use the same method as humans: take the image and condense the information
into concrete features that constitutes a golden retriever and use this information
to match the features of future images to our new understanding. So in short the
difference in approach is: Instead of collecting thousand of images of each class for
the application and retraining a classification layer, just take a few images of each
class, embed them into a low dimensional representation and take the average of the
images as our new mean class feature and use this feature vector to match future
images. We can retrain to fine-tune the embedding layer to our new problem, but it
is not strictly mandatory as it is for a traditional classification network. Furthermore
for a traditionally classification network, adding one more class (1 neuron in the
output layer), means retraining the whole network again even though it has already
learned all the other classes.
To be more specific, in the following the proposed constraints for our idea are defined.
The following is some early ideas and not a rigours deviation, it simply serves the
purpose of showing the ideas in a mathematical form.
Like the triplet loss introduced in the theory section we define: Let the embedding be
represented by fθ(x) ∈Rh, which embeds image x into a h-dimensional vector using
a neural network with parameters θ. Let d(x, y) = ||fθ(x) −fθ(y)||2
2 be the distance
between image x and image y in embedding space. Let S(x, y) ∈[0, 1.0] define the
similarity between the labels of image x and image y with S(x, y) = 1 indicating
minimum similarity and S(x, y) = 0 indicating maximum similarity.
Now we propose 3 different formulations of incorporating the similarity measure into
the constraint. One of them has the similarity measure as an explicit factor, the two
others has it implicitly.
Explicit similarity triplet loss:
The similarity measure (defined by e.g word embeddings) is multiplied onto the anchor
and negative distance. This means that similar objects (S →0) must be closer than
dissimilar objects (S →1). From a loss perspective, d(xa, xp) is still minimized and
d(xa, xn) is still maximized, but because of the similarity term it is done in a more
extreme degree for dissimilar objects.
d(xa, xp) + α < d(xa, xn) · S(xa, xn)
Implicit similarity quadlet loss:
==PAGE:102==
92
6 Discussion and Future Work
This extends the triplet loss and introduces a second negative example, giving 4 total
examples resulting in a quadlet loss. We mine the two negative samples xn_1, xn_2
such that
S(xa, xn_1) < S(xa, xn_2)
For instance, if the anchor xa and the positive xp are two pictures of a golden retriever,
the first negative xn_1 could be a border collie and the second negative xn_2 could be
a pineapple. Now we propose a constraint which implicitly incorporates the similarity
by ranking the terms:
d(xa, xp) + α < d(xa, xn_1) < d(xa, xn_2)
Implicit similarity n-let loss:
This is a generalisation of the similarity quadlet loss, where instead of mining 2
negative samples, n−2 negative samples is mined. The overall idea is the same, with
the samples fulfilling:
S(xa, xn_1) < · · · < S(xa, xn_i)
Where i = 1, . . . , n
d(xa, xp) + α < d(xa, xn_1) < · · · < d(xa, xn_i)
This is as stated some broad suggestions for future work. The basic idea is simply
to train a network which maps similar objects closer and does so in a large scale
using word embeddings as a measure of similarity. The extension of the triplet loss
to quadlets and n-lets might speed up training and is an alternative to having the
similarity term directly multiplied onto the constraint. Direct multiplication can pose
some issues, since different weights might have to be put on the distance and similarity
parts. It is also very possible that quadlets and n-lets are asymptotically the same,
with no real benefit in mining larger samples of negatives. We have not found anyone
using word embeddings as a general similarity measure to train networks with a triplet
loss, and neither have we found work using triplet loss at the scale we suppose.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion and
recommendations for
TrackMan
Through this work, we have demonstrated the feasibility of implementing a system
capable of detecting and classifying golf clubs. We have shown that a precise and fast
detection algorithm can be trained on the data and the crop from this detection can
be used for club identification. This method has proven to also extend to another
one of TrackMans projects, namely player identification in baseball videos. For the
baseball application we have shown that for their camera setup in MLB stadiums, they
need a resolution of player jersey numbers of at least 11-12 pixels to make accurate
predictions.
We have proposed creative solutions for artificial data generation and set up a scal-
able pipeline for future data collection and outsourcing of annotations. Alternative
approaches for classification has been explored, using both OCR and methods from
facial recognition, namely training networks using a triplet loss. The embedding ap-
proach has shown extremely good results and is a very promising option for TrackMan
to use in the final system.
We have also shown how the models can be optimized for embedded applications, if the
parameters of the neural networks are quantizized. In combination with batching this
gave a throughput increase of 8x compared to a native TensorFlow implementation.
We have shown that the optimized embedding model is well within the requirements
of running real time identification.
Recommendations for TrackMan
Following are the steps we advise Trackman to take if they want to implement the
proposed system into production. These steps are ranked in terms of what gives most
”bang for the buck”. This project would be perfect for a student assistant; it contains
==PAGE:104==
94
7 Conclusion and recommendations for TrackMan
enough work to keep them busy once a week and it gives experience in setting up a
real-world machine learning project for production.
1. Pipeline: The most important part of any machine learning project is to be
able to have a high iteration speed. The most important thing to do for Track-
Man is to take the provided code and construct a clean pipeline, taking in new
data, training on it, validating performance of the different models at the dif-
ferent stages of the pipeline. Having clear performance metrics for each part of
the pipeline allows TrackMan to focus on the most critical parts first.
2. Dataset: A severe limitation of the project was the size and quality of the
dataset, therefore we advise Trackman to
a) Collect a larger dataset. This can be done iteratively but an estimate of
the data needed for a production ready/beta version would be 200-400
unique clubs over 12-20 sessions.
b) Annotate dataset with bounding boxes: This is optional since the detection
model works quite well, but more data will give a better detection model.
TrackMan can use the existing detection model to create bounding box
annotations for the new dataset and then fix the created annotations which
are off. In our work, this technique proved to be much faster, reducing the
annotation time to 1/3 and further improvement of the detection model
will reduce the time needed to fix bad annotations even more.
3. Faster object detector: The compute bottleneck of the system is the Faster
R-CNN running the object detection. The original SSD with a MobileNet back-
bone did not provide good results, but now the issues with the other fast object
detectors, in TensorFlow Object Detection API, seems to be resolved. It there-
fore makes sense to try the faster models such as the SSD using feature pyramid
networks.
Alternatively: If the fast object detectors still give a poor performance, then add
a binary classifier on top of the embedding network (that is already loaded into
memory), which determines if a crop is good or bad. That way the system can
have a high FPS of mediocre crop quality but it just needs to determine, which
of the many crops from the detection model it should use for identification.
4. Embedded device: Modify the constructed pipeline and run all the models
on an embedded device.
Buy a Jetson Nano and use this platform to test
the performance of the methods. Some problems will undoubtedly arise when
running the pipeline on an embedded device and these need to be addressed.
5. Embedding network: It works super well, just retrain it and optionally use a
dimensionality of 32 instead of 128. The default head is currently from FaceNet
and is connected to the output of the ResNet50 backbone using a FC layer with
==PAGE:105==
7 Conclusion and recommendations for TrackMan
95
1024 neurons followed by the embedding output layer (of 128 dimensions). Try
to reduce the size of the 1024 neuron FC layer and see how it affects perfor-
mance. Try to use another backbone than ResNet50, for instance MobileNet or
ResNet18.
6. OCR model: The results from our works shows that the OCR model most
likely is optional.
It will only be used to reinforce predictions for the irons
by using the number on the club. Current model is not fine-tuned to the golf
club problem but is trained on the SVHN dataset.
Take the trained model
and retrain it on the larger dataset (collected in step 1), to specialize it to the
problem of identifying the club numbers. The same is true for the problem of
player identification. Collect a dataset of player jersey numbers and fine-tune
the SVHN model to be optimized for this problem.
==PAGE:106==
96
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[1]
Apple A11. en. Page Version ID: 886578569. March 2019. url: https://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apple_A11&oldid=886578569 (visited
on April 24, 2019).
[2]
Karanbir Singh Chahal and Kuntal Dey. “A Survey of Modern Object Detec-
tion Literature using Deep Learning”. In: arXiv:1808.07256 [cs] (August 2018).
arXiv: 1808.07256. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.07256 (visited on
December 6, 2018).
[3]
Dev Board datasheet. en-us. url: https://coral.withgoogle.com/docs/dev-
board/datasheet (visited on May 14, 2019).
[4]
Dimension Reduction - IsoMap. en. April 2018. url: https://blog.paperspace.
com/dimension-reduction-with-isomap/ (visited on April 24, 2019).
[5]
Rohith Gandhi. R-CNN, Fast R-CNN, Faster R-CNN, YOLO — Object De-
tection Algorithms. July 2018. url: https://towardsdatascience.com/r-
cnn-fast-r-cnn-faster-r-cnn-yolo-object-detection-algorithms-
36d53571365e (visited on November 22, 2018).
[6]
Ross Girshick. “Fast R-CNN”. In: arXiv:1504.08083 [cs] (April 2015). arXiv:
1504.08083. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.08083 (visited on Novem-
ber 21, 2018).
[7]
Ross Girshick et al. “Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection
and semantic segmentation”. In: arXiv:1311.2524 [cs] (November 2013). arXiv:
1311.2524. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1311.2524 (visited on November 21,
2018).
[8]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT
Press, 2016.
[9]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: arXiv:1512.03385
[cs] (December 2015). arXiv: 1512.03385. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.
03385 (visited on November 19, 2018).
[10]
Alexander Hermans, Lucas Beyer, and Bastian Leibe. “In Defense of the Triplet
Loss for Person Re-Identification”. In: arXiv:1703.07737 [cs] (March 2017).
arXiv: 1703.07737. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.07737 (visited on
November 13, 2018).
==PAGE:108==
98
Bibliography
[11]
Andrew G. Howard et al. “MobileNets: Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks
for Mobile Vision Applications”. In: arXiv:1704.04861 [cs] (April 2017). arXiv:
1704.04861. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.04861 (visited on Novem-
ber 19, 2018).
[12]
Jonathan Huang et al. “Speed/accuracy trade-offs for modern convolutional ob-
ject detectors”. In: arXiv:1611.10012 [cs] (November 2016). arXiv: 1611.10012.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.10012 (visited on October 9, 2018).
[13]
Jonathan Hui. SSD object detection: Single Shot MultiBox Detector for real-
time processing. March 2018. url: https://medium.com/@jonathan_hui/ssd-
object- detection- single- shot- multibox- detector- for- real- time-
processing-9bd8deac0e06 (visited on November 26, 2018).
[14]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep
Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift”. en. In: arXiv:1502.03167
[cs] (February 2015). arXiv: 1502.03167. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.
03167 (visited on November 19, 2018).
[15]
Jetson AGX Xavier: Deep Learning Inference Benchmarks. en. November 2018.
url: https://developer.nvidia.com/embedded/jetson-agx-xavier-dl-
inference-benchmarks (visited on May 12, 2019).
[16]
Jetson Nano: Deep Learning Inference Benchmarks. en. April 2019. url: https:
//developer.nvidia.com/embedded/jetson-nano-dl-inference-benchmarks
(visited on May 15, 2019).
[17]
Alexander Jung. Image augmentation for machine learning experiments.: ale-
ju/imgaug. original-date: 2015-07-10T20:31:33Z. May 2019. url: https : / /
github.com/aleju/imgaug (visited on May 3, 2019).
[18]
Learning the Lingo: Golf Slang. en-US. July 2018. url: https://www.golf-
drives.com/blog/golf-slang/ (visited on November 28, 2018).
[19]
Yann LeCun, John S. Denker, and Sara A. Solla. “Optimal Brain Damage”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2. Edited by D. S.
Touretzky. Morgan-Kaufmann, 1990, pages 598–605. url: http : / / papers .
nips.cc/paper/250-optimal-brain-damage.pdf (visited on May 14, 2019).
[20]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Feature Pyramid Networks for Object Detection”. In:
arXiv:1612.03144 [cs] (December 2016). arXiv: 1612.03144. url: http : / /
arxiv.org/abs/1612.03144 (visited on April 24, 2019).
[21]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Focal Loss for Dense Object Detection”. In: arXiv:1708.02002
[cs] (August 2017). arXiv: 1708.02002. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.
02002 (visited on April 24, 2019).
[22]
Wei Liu et al. “SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector”. en. In: arXiv:1512.02325
[cs] 9905 (2016). arXiv: 1512.02325, pages 21–37. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
46448-0_2. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325 (visited on Novem-
ber 26, 2018).
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
99
[23]
Vincenzo Lomonaco and Davide Maltoni. “CORe50: a New Dataset and Bench-
mark for Continuous Object Recognition”. en. In: (), page 10.
[24]
MAD\pkonsor. Performance Benefits of Half Precision Floats. en. url: https:
//software.intel.com/en-us/articles/performance-benefits-of-half-
precision-floats (visited on May 14, 2019).
[25]
Dmytro Mishkin. Thanks Radek 7th place solution to HWI 2019 competition.
March 2019. url: https://medium.com/@ducha.aiki/thanks-radek-7th-
place - solution - to - hwi - 2019 - competition - 738624e4c885 (visited on
May 14, 2019).
[26]
Olivier Moindrot. Triplet Loss and Online Triplet Mining in TensorFlow. en.
March 2018. url: https://omoindrot.github.io/triplet-loss (visited on
November 28, 2018).
[27]
Yuval Netzer et al. “Reading Digits in Natural Images with Unsupervised Fea-
ture Learning”. en. In: (), page 9.
[28]
Don Patton. List of Different Types of Golf Clubs & Their Uses. en-US. url:
https://www.livestrong.com/article/139541-list-different-types-
golf-clubs-uses/ (visited on November 28, 2018).
[29]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection
with Region Proposal Networks”. In: arXiv:1506.01497 [cs] (June 2015). arXiv:
1506.01497. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497 (visited on Novem-
ber 21, 2018).
[30]
Adrian Rosebrock. Intersection over Union (IoU) for object detection. en-US.
November 2016. url: https : / / www . pyimagesearch . com / 2016 / 11 / 07 /
intersection-over-union-iou-for-object-detection/ (visited on Novem-
ber 26, 2018).
[31]
Adrian Rosebrock. Mask R-CNN with OpenCV. en-US. November 2018. url:
https://www.pyimagesearch.com/2018/11/19/mask-r-cnn-with-opencv/
(visited on November 22, 2018).
[32]
Adrian Rosebrock. OpenCV Object Tracking. en-US. July 2018. url: https:
//www.pyimagesearch.com/2018/07/30/opencv-object-tracking/ (visited
on December 10, 2018).
[33]
Anand Saha. Decoding the ResNet architecture. url: http://teleported.in/
posts/decoding-resnet-architecture/ (visited on November 20, 2018).
[34]
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. “FaceNet: A Uni-
fied Embedding for Face Recognition and Clustering”. In: 2015 IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (June 2015). arXiv:
1503.03832, pages 815–823. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298682. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1503.03832 (visited on November 19, 2018).
==PAGE:110==
100
Bibliography
[35]
Sam Sterckval. Google Coral Edge TPU vs NVIDIA Jetson Nano: A quick deep
dive into EdgeAI performance. April 2019. url: https://blog.usejournal.
com/google-coral-edge-tpu-vs-nvidia-jetson-nano-a-quick-deep-
dive-into-edgeai-performance-bc7860b8d87a (visited on May 15, 2019).
[36]
Manu Suryavansh. Google Coral Edge TPU Board Vs NVIDIA Jetson Nano Dev
board — Hardware Comparison. April 2019. url: https://towardsdatascience.
com/google-coral-edge-tpu-board-vs-nvidia-jetson-nano-dev-board-
hardware-comparison-31660a8bda88 (visited on May 14, 2019).
[37]
TensorRT Documentation. en-us. concept. url: http://docs.nvidia.com/
deeplearning/dgx/tf- trt- user- guide/index.html (visited on May 14,
2019).
[38]
Tesla. Tesla Autonomy Day. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_
continue=4177&v=Ucp0TTmvqOE (visited on April 24, 2019).
[39]
J. R. R. Uijlings et al. “Selective Search for Object Recognition”. en. In: In-
ternational Journal of Computer Vision 104.2 (September 2013), pages 154–
171. issn: 0920-5691, 1573-1405. doi: 10.1007/s11263- 013- 0620- 5. url:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11263- 013- 0620- 5 (visited on
November 22, 2018).
[40]
Chi-Feng Wang. A Basic Introduction to Separable Convolutions. August 2018.
url: https : / / towardsdatascience . com / a - basic - introduction - to -
separable-convolutions-b99ec3102728 (visited on November 19, 2018).
[41]
What are the Different Types of Golf Clubs Available? en-US. September 2018.
url: https://golfsupport.com/blog/what-are-the-different-types-
of-golf-clubs-available/ (visited on November 28, 2018).
[42]
Which GPU(s) to Get for Deep Learning. en-US. April 2019. url: https://
timdettmers.com/2019/04/03/which-gpu-for-deep-learning/ (visited on
May 15, 2019).
