==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Investigating the understandability of the
fragment-based case management approach
Skúli Skúlason
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Business process management (BPM) uses various methods to discover, model, anal-
yse, measure, improve, optimise and automate business processes. The BMP com-
munity has concentrated on modelling and executing processes that have a known
structure and processes with a high degree of variability have limited support. Case
management is a promising approach to overcome that deficiency.
One variation
of case management is to dynamically combine process fragments at runtime (also
referred to as fragment-based case management approach). That hybrid approach
allows for more flexible case modelling. However, so far research on how people read,
understand, and engage with the models created following the fragment-based case
management approach is in its early stages. This project aims at investigating how
people approach and engage these kinds of models using an eye-tracker, and what the
advantages and inconveniences of such a representation are.
The results show that fragment-based case modelling is seen to reduce complexity
and improve the readability of business process models. Results also show that the
models are clear and understandable to people with no prior knowledge to BPM.
The conclusion is that fragment-based case modelling with Gryphon is on the right
path and with further improvements to Gryphon and Chimera such as full support
of BPMN 2.0 it is well suited to model variable business processes.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engineering. The thesis was su-
pervised by Professor Barbara Weber with additional help from PhD student Amine
Abbad Andaloussi. This work summarises the thesis project that was carried out in
the period of January to April 2019.
April 17, 2019
Skúli Skúlason
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The process of this thesis has been long and difficult. It has taught me a lot about
my self and showed how I am surrounded by good people. People that are willing to
help and assist in any way so I can follow my dreams. There are a lot of people that
I ow gratitude to.
I want to think my supervisor Barbara Weber for all the support and feedback. I also
want to think Amine Abbad Andaloussi for his help in every aspect of this project,
all the feedback and guidance he gave to me during this project.
My deepest gratitude to the consultant company Efla and specially to the manager
Einar Andrésson for giving me an office space, coffee, and most important companion
and friendly environment to work in. With out the help from you I would not have
been able to finish this project from Iceland.
And lastly I want to think my family for their love and support through out this
journey. This would have been impossible with out your help.
April 17, 2019
Skúli Skúlason
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Report structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Fragment-based Case Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Modelling tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Eye tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Qualitative data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Disco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Method
12
3.1
The experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
The Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
From a scenario to a model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Experiment questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Experiment stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Pre-experiment form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.7
Familiarisation task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.8
Think-aloud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.9
Preparing the data for analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.10 Analysing the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Results
61
4.1
Performance results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.2
Question analysis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.3
Fixation duration results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.4
Repetition results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
4.5
Think-aloud results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.6
Question classification results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.7
Galvanic skin response results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.8
Expected vs actual reading pattern results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.9
Results summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.10 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5
Conclusion
81
5.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A Images of experiment ready questions
84
B Pre-experiment form
97
C Script TSV to XES
101
D Question analysis
105
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
112
F Online Appendix
127
G Modelling with Gryphon
128
H Transcription of participants answers
131
I
Transcription of the think-aloud recordings
162
Bibliography
169
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Business Process Management (BPM) is a way to oversee how work is done in an
organisation, to make sure that the desired outcome is consistent, and to realise im-
provement opportunities[5]. BPM uses various methods to discover, model, analyse,
measure, improve, optimise and automate business processes[13].
Those improve-
ments include, e.g. reducing costs, reducing execution times, and reducing the error
rate. BPM is not about improving only activities. Instead, it is about managing
all individual components that together built up a process. Those components are,
e.g. events, activities and decisions[5]. The BPM community has been focusing on
developing tools to model and execute business processes that have a known struc-
ture and limited variation[9]. A highly variant process, e.g. event-driven processes
are challenging to model in a structured way because there is no certainty when or
if an event occurs. The BPM model quickly becomes large and complex when trying
to model variable processes.
To make up for the shortcomings of BPM regarding variable processes a case manage-
ment system that uses process fragments and dynamically combines them at runtime
has been developed. This approach is also known as fragment-based case management
(fCM) and the main difference from traditional workflow approaches is the dynamical
combination of fragments at runtime[9]. The fragments are meant to be simple and
easy to add, but there can be many fragments. The fragments are combined with
data objects. Each data object has a lifecycle that is built up like a state machine to
ensure that the progress rules of the process are followed. Knowledge workers then
handle the progression of the process. The Business Process Technology Group has
developed a formal method that uses fCM at Hasser Plattner Institut in Potsdam
Germany1. The formalisation of the approach has also helped to develop tools to
model and execute fCM models, Gryphon2 is a modelling tool and Chimera3 is a case
engine where the models modelled in Gryphon are executed, for details see Chapter
2. Researches about models that are modelled with fCM are still in its early stages.
With the help of an eye-tracker, this project aims at investigating how people read,
understand, and approach these types of models. The research question thus is:
1https://hpi.de/
2https://bpt.hpi.uni-potsdam.de/Gryphon
3https://bpt.hpi.uni-potsdam.de/Chimera
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Report structure
2
How do people read and understand fragment-based case models?
A scenario that is variant-rich, goal-oriented, and data-driven was designed for this
exploratory study. Those kinds of scenarios are well suited to be handled by knowl-
edge workers [9]. The scenario is explained in (cf. Section 3.2). From the scenario,
questions were developed for the participants to answer while they were monitored
by eye-tracking equipment and a galvanic skin response sensor (GSR). The questions
were designed to grasp all the major components of fCM as well as be suitable for
people with no prior knowledge of BPM. The data gathered in the exploratory study
is analysed with process mining tool and with qualitative data analysis. The results
from the questions together with the data analysis show that fCM is on the correct
path, the participants found it understandable and some of them thought it could be
useful to reduce complexity and add clarity to the models of business processes. It
is suitable for experienced as well as inexperienced engineers who want to model a
business process.
1.1
Report structure
The report is structured as follows, in Chapter 2 the background and the necessary
technologies and tools to create a fCM model and analyse data are explained. In
Chapter 3 the exploratory study design is described, a scenario is introduced, and
the model and questions that were created based on the scenario are outlined. It also
describes how data was collected, prepared, and analysed. In Chapter 4 the results
of the exploratory study are outlined and the results are discussed. Finally Chapter
5 concludes the thesis with a discussion about the results as well as future work.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This section gives an overview of the fragment-based Case Modelling (fCM) approach
as well as the components used to perform this exploratory study. It starts by ex-
plaining the fCM approach and lists an overview of the concepts used by fCM. It then
explains the tools used to execute the scenario. Three main tools are used for that,
an event processing and monitoring platform called Unicorn (cf. Section 2.2.3), an
engine for executing fragment-based case models called Chimera (cf. Section 2.2.1)
and a case modeller tool called Gryphon (cf. Section 2.2.2). It then explains the
components used for the eye-tracking exploratory study, it has two fundamental com-
ponents, an eye-tracker called Tobii (cf. Section 2.3.2), and a Galvanic Skin Response
(GSR) (cf. Section 2.3.3) tool from Shimmer. Finally it briefly explains the tools (cf.
Section 2.5) that are used to analyse the data as well as preparing the data for the
exploratory study.
2.1
Fragment-based Case Modelling
Case models are specified by several process fragments, which are structured pieces
of work that are dynamically combined during case execution based on data objects
and their states[9]. This approach is suitable for the flexible nature of knowledge
work and at runtime multiple valid executions paths of a process can be executed
from case instantiation to case termination[9].
2.1.1
Case Model
Business scenarios are captured in a case model that consists of a domain model,
process fragments, object lifecycles, and a goal state[9]. A case model is instantiated
into a case. The case represents the scenario at runtime and case exhibits the notation
case state that changes over time, mainly through knowledge workers performing
activities[9]. Cases are like process instances in traditional workflow systems. The
difference is cases are made up of several fragments instances and data objects[9].
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Fragment-based Case Modelling
4
2.1.2
Data and Lifecycles
The data in this approach is encapsulated in data objects. These data objects make
up the domain model. The domain model is then a part of the case model. The data
objects all have a data class. The associations of the data classes can be depicted
in an UML diagram. When the relation of the data classes is organised one of the
data classes will become the so called case class and hold reference to all the other
data classes[9]. The behaviour of the data classes is then handled by a transitioning
system called lifecycle. The lifecycle of each data class specifies the valid states the
data class can be in and transition to and from. The graphical notation of lifecycles
is represented by the usual notation for state transition systems.
2.1.3
Fragments and Activities
The main difference from traditional workflow approaches is to split the process into
smaller fragments and then combine them at runtime[9]. Each fragment consists of
events, gateways, activities, and data objects just like BPMN process models. The
fragments are controlled by pre-conditions. The pre-condition is then met by chang-
ing the states of data objects. Many instances of the same fragment can run in parallel.
Individual fragments are meant to be simple and straight forward and then their in-
terplay allows for complex behaviour[9]. Activities perform the work in the processes.
When activities are executed they manipulate the data objects by switching their
states. Activities can also have a pre-condition and they are not enabled until the
pre-condition is met. A case finishes when particular data objects have reached the
desired state.
To better explain how the concept and components of fCM work together lets look
at an example. The example comes from the paper A Hybrid Approach for Flexible
Case Modeling and Execution[9]. The example is built up on organising seminars at a
university. The example shows two data objects and two fragments. The data objects
are Seminar and Topic. The first fragment is for the seminar setup and uses the data
object Seminar. The other fragment is for topic proposals and uses the data object
Topic. Based on the different states of the Seminar data object the topic fragment
can be instantiated and it can be instantiated multiple times so multiple topics can
be suggested for each seminar. Figure 2.1 depicts the seminar fragment.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Fragment-based Case Modelling
5
Figure 2.1: The seminar fragment. Source: [9].
The boxed paper items in the figure are the data objects. It shows the name of the
data object and the state of the data object on the square bracket. The arrows in
and out of the data objects show if it is a pre-condition or a post-condition. If it is a
pre-condition the activity that has the arrow in is not enabled for execution until the
data object is in the state specified in the square brackets. If it is a post-condition
the activity that has the arrow out will alter the state of the data object to the state
specified in the square brackets.
When the Seminar data object is in the state ”in planning” the topic fragment can
be instantiated because Seminar in ”in planning” state is the pre-condition for the
topic fragment. When the topic fragment starts and the Topic data object gets to
the state ”proposed” the seminar fragment can continue and the ”discuss and select
seminar topics” activity can be executed. Figure 2.2 depicts the topic fragment.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Fragment-based Case Modelling
6
Figure 2.2: The topic fragment. Source: [9].
The possible states and transitions of the data objects in the example are depicted in
Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: The lifecycles of Seminar and Topic data objects.
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Modelling tools
7
2.2
Modelling tools
This section briefly explains the tools used to create the model from the scenario,
the execution engine used to execute the model, and the platform used to create the
events so the model could be tested in a real life scenario.
2.2.1
Chimera
Chimera is an engine for executing fragment-based case models. These case-models
are modelled using Gryphon. Once a case-model has been deployed to Chimera the
case-model can be instantiated into a case. Cases can be started with events and
they can also be started manually. Chimera offers a case overview page. In that page
you can follow the case that was deployed to Chimera. The page has three panels,
”Processing status” panel, ”Log” panel, and ”Case Conditions” panel. Those panels
are displaying necessary information to the user such as active data objects and their
current state, state transitions of tasks and data objects, changes in attributes, and
the termination condition for the case. When that condition has been reached the
case can be terminated with a ”Terminate” button[7]. Figure 2.4 depicts an example
of the case overview page in Chimera.
Figure 2.4: Case overview page in Chimera.
2.2.2
Gryphon
Gryphon is a tool to create the fragment-based case models that are used in Chimera.
It is powered by bpmn.io1 to model business processes. Gryphon has its own seman-
1https://bpmn.io/
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Modelling tools
8
tics, definitions, and rules that can differ from other BPMS systems. The formalisa-
tion of Gryphon is only a subset of the BPMN specification, the formalisation can be
found in [9]. Being a subset of BPMN there are limits to what Gryphon has to offer,
e.g it does not support all types of events or gateways. The basics of the case models
that Gryphon creates are fragments that hold the execution steps, a domain model
that holds the data definitions, a start conditions that defines the beginning of the
case, and termination condition that defines the end of a case[8]. Figure 2.5 depicts
the user front page for a case in Gryphon.
Figure 2.5: Gryphon user interface.
The front page of Gryphon shows the fragments and the data model that have been
created for the case in the left panels. In the middle you can add a description, a
termination condition, and start triggers. The start triggers can, e.g. be events that
are generated from Unicorn. In the upper right corner you can deploy the model to
Chimera.
2.2.3
Unicorn
Unicorn2 allows one to capture real-world events from different sources. It processes
those events from unstructured raw events to process events with aggregation or
transformation rules that the user defines. The user can then set rules to those process
events to correlate them to process instances. Furthermore, Unicorn can monitor
processes. The user creates process models with BPMN that includes monitoring
points. Those monitoring points then allows the monitoring processor of Unicorn
to keep track of running process instances and their progress. Another part of the
monitoring capabilities of Unicorn is the query processor. It utilises complex event
processing (CEP) to monitor streams of events, and it can detect query patterns that
have been specified by the user using an event processing language (EPL) called Esper
Query Language3.
2https://bpt.hpi.uni-potsdam.de/UNICORN/EventGenerator
3http://www.espertech.com/esper
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Eye tracking
9
2.3
Eye tracking
This section briefly explains the methodology behind eye-tracking, what eye-tracker
was used in the exploratory study as well as how Galvanic Skin Response (GRS) was
incorporated.
2.3.1
Eye-tracking
Eye tracking is the recording of eye position (gaze point) and movement on a 2D
screen or in 3D environments based on the optical tracking of corneal reflections. Eye
tracking reflects visual attention as it objectively monitors where, when, and what
respondents look at. Eye tracking defines different types of eye movement to help
with the analysis of the data collected with the eye tracking equipment. Algorithms
with in the eye tracking software calculate and define these eye movements. One of
those eye movements are fixations. They are the most common feature of looking at
when performing an eye tracking experiment. Fixations are defined as when our eyes
stop scanning and we start to take in the detailed information about what we are
looking at[1].
For further analysis the stimulus showed to the participants is often split into areas
of interest (AOIs). It defines regions in the stimulus allowing for events to be created
such as: dwells, transitions, and AOI hits. Dwell time is defined as the time one visits
an AOI, from entry to exit. Dwell time is known by many names one of them being
gaze duration. Dwell time can only be calculated if the stimulus has been divided by
AOIs. Often the definition of a dwell time is the sum of all fixation durations during
a dwell in an AOI [10].
2.3.2
Tobii eye-tracker
The eye-tracker used in the exploratory study was Tobii Pro TX300. It is a screen-
based eye-tracker that captured the gaze data at 300Hz. The exploratory study itself
was then created in Tobii Pro Lab, a software that supports the entire research process
from test design and recording to analysis[17]. The collected eye-tracking data can
be analysed individually as well as aggregated and exported for quantitative analysis
and visualisation. It is also possible to combine other data streams such as a GSR
for physiological data.
2.3.3
Galvanic skin response
Galvanic skin response (GSR) is one of the most sensitive measures for emotional
arousal[11]. GSR response reflects the variation in the electrical characteristics of
the skin. Identifying skin conductance responses (SCRs) and take out their main
characteristics is a well known procedure in GSR research[20]. SCRs are responses to
a stimulus onset known as event-related skin conductance responses (ER-SCR)[20].
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Qualitative data analysis
10
GSR is measured in micro-Siemens (µS) and it is a strong predictor of attention and
memory because it can capture emotional arousal or the level of stimulus[20].
2.3.4
Shimmer
Shimmer is a GSR sensor and because it is a non-invasive device it requires little
preparation or calibration[19].
Figure 2.6: Shimmer GSR sensor. (Source: https://www.ashokcharan.com/Marketing-
Analytics/images/image312-18.png).
Figure 2.6 depicts how the Shimmer sensor looks and how the measurement electrodes
are put on the fingers. Low voltage is applied and the electrodes measure the current
between them so the skin conductance can be computed[19].
2.4
Qualitative data analysis
Coding is a technique to make data quantifiable, codes in qualitative research can
give as vital information as quantitative numbers in a study[18]. When raw data
is coded the goal is to identify concepts and finding relationships between them[21].
The codes then allows one to organise the data so it can be examined in a structured
way[21]. From the raw data one can start to identify preliminary codes which then
results in a final code that is a combination of all the preliminary codes.
2.5
Disco
Disco is a process mining tool. Process mining aims to discover, monitor, and improve
processes. Using event logs from organisations it can extract knowledge easily. By
==PAGE:18==
2.5 Disco
11
doing that it is possible to detect and diagnose problems with in processes based on
facts[14]. Disco creates process maps directly from raw data that displays activities
with information such as absolute frequency, max repetitions, and max duration if
the data includes those attributes. With Disco it is also easy to visualise the data
so the users can spot bottlenecks in their processes. Disco also shows statistical data
about the raw data that was imported. With the filters that are built into Disco you
can filter out unwanted data as well as categorised the data for better analysis[6].
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Method
In this chapter, the exploratory study is outlined and explained. It starts by giving
an overview of the eye-tracking experiment, what the experiment was and how it was
performed. It then describes the scenario that was used throughout this project and
then how the model is created from the scenario. Then it explains how the questions
were designed from the model. It then describes how the model and the questions
were used as a stimulus in the experiment. Then it talks about the pre-experiment
form so background information could be gathered about the participants. It then
shows the familiarisation task to get participants familiar with fCM. Then the think-
aloud is outlined. It then explains how the data gathered had to be processed to
make the analysis more manageable, and lastly, it shows how the data collected in
the experiment were analysed.
3.1
The experiment
To investigate how people read and understand fragment-based case models an eye-
tracking experiment was designed and performed. The experiment was held at the
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark (DTU). It was conducted from the 14Th of February until the 19Th
of February 2019 at building 322 room 211.
3.1.1
Participants
To get participants to participate in the experiment few approaches were used. First,
a small text about the experiment and what background participants had to have
to participate was created. Then an invitation to participate in the experiment was
sent out to groups of people, former business process management students as well
as to other groups in my network such as the Icelandic student community at DTU.
To get some participants with a knowledge in business process management people
from the Software and Process Engineering department at DTU were also invited.
The background of the participants did no matter as long as they were or had been
studying some field of Engineering or Computer Science. The aim though was to get
some experienced participants within the BPM field so they could be compared to
the participants that had no prior knowledge. Before the participants could partic-
==PAGE:20==
3.1 The experiment
13
ipate, they all had to sign a consent form. Twelve participants participated in the
experiment.
3.1.2
Experimental procedure
The experiment was built up with an eye-tracking software that collected the eye-
tracking data. In the software the experiment is designed by adding stimuli to a
timeline which is then presented to the participants in the same software. The stimuli
in the experiment included a model that was modelled from the scenario in (cf. Section
3.2) and a question about the model that was mostly created from the constraints
that were added to the scenario. The experiment displayed twelve questions to the
participants; three of them had a and b part so in total it was fifteen questions. The
participants would then answer the questions out loud, and that was recorded with a
voice recorder. The answer to the questions could be found by looking at the different
sections of the model. After the participants gave a solution, they could progress to
the next question by pressing a key on the keyboard. Some participants accidentally
pressed a key, or they pressed a key before answering the b part of a question which
leads to some questions being invalid in the analysis. The questions came in a random
order to avoid that the participants could learn from previous questions. Participants
were also asked to put on a GSR (cf. Section 2.3.3) sensor to collect data about their
cognitive load regarding the questions.
3.1.3
Instrumentalization
The software that was used in the experiment is designed to handle all aspects of
an eye-tracking experiment. The experiment is first designed, then it is recorded,
and then it can be analysed and the recording data can be exported. Tobii Pro Lab
(cf.Section 2.3.2) provides all these features.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 The experiment
14
Figure 3.1: The design panel in Tobii Pro Lab.
Figure 3.1 depicts how the experiment was designed in Tobii Pro Lab. A new
timeline is created and stimuli is added. The first stimuli in the experiment was the
calibration of the eye-tracker, then question one because that question always had
to be first as it asked the participants to describe the scenario that the model was
showing, and then a group stimuli [3] was added so the questions could be shuffled.
Each question is then added to the group stimuli.
After the experiment has been designed it can be recorded. In the record section
of Tobii Pro Lab a participant is created and the eye-tracker that is connected is
selected and the GSR sensor as well if that is used.
It is also possible to record
another recording for the same participant.
Figure 3.2: The record panel in Tobii Pro Lab.
==PAGE:22==
3.1 The experiment
15
Figure 3.2 depicts how record panel in Tobii Pro Lab looks. The timeline that was
created it the design panel is shown as well as the eye-tracker and the GSR sensor.
The final panel of Tobii Pro Lab is the Analyse panel. In the Analyse panel all the
data from the recording can be analysed and exported. The analysis offers an area of
interest tool (AOI) (cf. Section 3.9.1), a visualisation with heat maps and gaze plot,
a metrics export, and data export.
Figure 3.3: The analyse panel in Tobii Pro Lab where a recording can be analysed.
Figure 3.3 depicts an example of how the analyse panel allows one to visualise the
recording after it has been recorded. It shows where the participant looked at the
stimuli, it shows a red circles connected with lines. The circles represent the point
where the participant was looking and the line shows how they connect so one can see
the path of the participants eye movement. The Analyzis panel also shows a graph
of the data collected with the GSR sensor, that graph is explained in (cf. Section
3.10.7).
==PAGE:23==
3.1 The experiment
16
Figure 3.4: The analyse panel in Tobii Pro Lab where heat maps of recordings can
be analysed.
Figure 3.4 depicts an example of how the analyse panel allows one to visualise a
recording by showing heat map of the gaze data. In the right upper corner one can
also select to see the gaze plot of the same data.
Figure 3.5: The analyse panel in Tobii Pro Lab where metrics of a recording can
be exported.
Figure 3.5 depicts an example of how the metrics export looks in the analyse panel
of Tobii Pro Lab. The metrics can be exported for all or a single recording as well as
for all or a single stimuli. The metrics export allows one to export different measures
from the recording data[2].
==PAGE:24==
3.2 The Scenario
17
Figure 3.6: The analyse panel in Tobii Pro Lab where recording data can be ex-
ported.
Figure 3.6 depicts an example of how the data export looks in the analyse panel
of Tobii Pro Lab. The data can be exported for all or a single participant as well as
for all or a single stimuli. What data was exported and how it was analysed can be
seen in (cf. Section 3.10).
3.2
The Scenario
The Scenario is inspired by container ships that carry all of their load in truck-sized
intermodal containers from port to port. When the container ship arrives at the port
the containers have to be offloaded and scanned for illegal substances such as drugs
or illegal firearms. The scenario is as follows:
When a vessel arrives at a foreign port, each container is offloaded from the ves-
sel using a quay crane.
Containers often carry fragile goods, so an accelerometer
(sensor) is attached to each container. After the accelerometer is attached, a Robot
drives the container to a scanning platform. The container waits in a queue before
being scanned by the customs for contraband, explosives, weapons, etc. After the con-
tainer has been scanned, a robot drives the container from the scanner to the dispatch
terminal. The container is then labelled if the accelerometer detected a shake. The
accelerometer is then removed from the container. Finally, the container is loaded
onto a delivery truck before leaving the port.
The constraints are as follows:
A shake can happen at any moment after the accelerometer has been attached to
==PAGE:25==
3.3 From a scenario to a model
18
the container until the accelerometer is detached.
If a shake occurs, the event is
recorded in the information system, and a dock-worker is assigned to stick a label on
the container to mark it as being shaken. If a labelling request has been sent out and
another shake is detected the dock-worker receives a reminder to label the container.
In case a shake event is recorded in the information system, the container cannot be
loaded for delivery before being labelled by a dock-worker. The robot responsible for
driving to the scanning platform, to the dispatch terminal, and loading the container
to the delivery truck can break down at any time. In case the robot breaks down, a
technician is called to repair the robot. A breakdown event cannot happen if the robot
is already in a broken state.
3.3
From a scenario to a model
A challenge was to design the model so it was simple to understand but still fulfilled
all the constraints that were set. Activities, events, and constraints are identified
in the scenario (cf. Section 3.2). After analysing the scenario eight activities, two
fragments, and four Data objects are detected. The model is split into three major
parts.
The Main process is the most critical part that is then supported by two
fragments to handle the events that can happen. Those fragments are called Shake
fragment and Breakdown fragment. It then has the lifecycles of the data objects to
help the user to see valid states and state transitions. The data objects are Container
which is the case class, Label, Accelerometer, and Robot. The end goal, so called
termination condition is that the Container is in a delivered state. These components
are all created in the modelling tool Gryphon (cf. Section 2.2.2). How the different
parts are built can be found in Appendix G. The model is then deployed to the case
engine Chimera (cf. Section 2.2.1) where it can be executed. Figure 3.7 depicts the
final version of the model with all the components together.
==PAGE:26==
3.3 From a scenario to a model
19
Figure 3.7: The final version of the model.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Experiment questions
20
When the model had been deployed to Chimera it was ready for testing. To simulate
the events from the Shake or the Breakdown, Unicorn (cf. Section 2.2.3) was used.
The execution of the model was then tested in Chimera with and without events.
After the tests the model was sound, that means that it applies with the formal
definition of Gryphon and now the questions for the experiment could be created.
3.4
Experiment questions
When the model is ready questions about the model can be developed. To make full
use of all the benefits of fCM the questions had to touch on all major parts of fCM.
Those parts are mainly the Data Objects and their states. Combining those two parts
can produce complicated conditions, and it is interesting to see how people read and
understand those conditions. Four types of questions classes were created, those are:
• Single state change
• Combinational state change
• Condition
• State
The first question was different and did not follow the classification. That question
was created to see if participants were able to figure out the scenario just by looking
at the model. The questions were twelve but three of the questions had a sub question
so they were fifteen in total. The questions and their class in parenthesis after each
question is listed below:
• Q1. Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing? (You have 5 min
for that)
• Q2. Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working state to
broken state? (Single state change)
• Q3. Under which circumstance(s) cab the Label change from initial state to
requested state? (Single state change)
• Q4. Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle state and
the Label in labelled state? (Combinational state change)
• Q5. Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned state and
the Accelerometer in sleep state? (Combinational state change)
• Q6. In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that should be exe-
cuted prior to ”Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity? (Condition)
==PAGE:28==
3.4 Experiment questions
21
• Q7. In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can be exe-
cuted prior to ”Detach the accelerometer” if one shake occurs and there is no
breakdown event? (Condition)
• Q8.
No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs and the ”Call
technician” activity is executed, what activities can then be executed after the
”Drive container to dispatch terminal” activity in the Main process? (Condition)
• Q9. A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event occurs, the ”Record
the shake into it-system” activity is executed as well as the ”Assign dock-worker
to label the container” activity. When the queue is over, and the Container is
in a ”Scanned” state.
– a) What activities are executed until the Container is in the state ”Deliv-
ered”? (Condition)
– b)
What are the state(s) of the Label during the Main process after the
scan? (State)
• Q10. A Container arrives at the dock and the ”Offload container from vessel”
and ”Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are executed. A breakdown event
is received and the ”Call technician” activity is executed.
– a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label, Container, and the Accelerom-
eter? (State)
– b) In order for the Main process to continue, what activity has to be executed
next? (Condition)
• Q11. What are all possible states for the Container? (State)
• Q12. The following activities are executed in this order: ”Offload container from
vessel”, ”Attach accelerometer sensor”, ”Record the shake into the it-system”,
”Call technician”, ”Repair robot”.
– a) What states are the Label and the Robot in? (State)
– b) What activity is executed next in the Shake fragment? (Condition)
After the questions had been created the expected reading pattern for each questions
was outlined. It is based up on the knowledge I had gained when working with the
fCM approach. After the experiment was conducted an analysis that compared the
expected reading pattern to the actual reading pattern was done and the results from
that analysis can be seen in (cf. Section 4.2).
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Experiment stimuli
22
3.5
Experiment stimuli
When the model and the questions had been created the images that were used as the
stimuli in the experiment could be constructed. To construct the stimuli a drawing
tool called Gimp1 was used to create an image that showed the question, the model,
and boxes around the different sections of the model along with text label displaying
the name of the section. An example stimuli of question twelve that is ready for the
experiment is depicted in Figure 3.8.
1https://www.gimp.org/
==PAGE:30==
3.5 Experiment stimuli
23
Figure 3.8: Stimuli of question 12.
==PAGE:31==
3.6 Pre-experiment form
24
All the images can be seen in Appendix A
3.6
Pre-experiment form
Before the experiment participants would fill out a pre-experiment form, the form
is used to collect data about the participants to gain knowledge and insight about
them. That knowledge can then be used in the analysis both for statistical measures
as well as for categorising and grouping. The form was split into three sections. The
first section was necessary information, background, profession, and experience. The
second section was for screening the participants to asses their physical ability to
participate in the eye-tracking experiment. That section asked mostly about their
vision, if they used glasses, were colour blind, and so on.
The third section was
about participants familiarity with the subject. It asked about their knowledge and
experience with business process management as well as their modelling experience
within the business process management field. The full pre-experiment form can be
seen in Appendix B. The answers from the participants can the be found in the online
Appendix F in a CSV file called Pre experiment form.
3.7
Familiarisation task
Because fragment-based case modelling (fCM) is a new approach to handle business
scenarios no prior knowledge of fCM was required of participants. Some participants
did not have any knowledge about business process management as well. For this
reason, a familiarisation task was introduced to all the participants before starting
the experiment. The task started by showing a simple example of a business process;
the process was explained to the participants. It then introduced BPMN 2 sequences
that showed different types of start nodes, activities, and end nodes. Next came the
introduction of control flow; it only showed XOR and AND gateways. The XOR
gateway was the only control flow relevant for the experiment, and the AND gateway
was used to have a comparison to the XOR. Next part of the task displayed an image
of a rather complicated business process. Figure 3.9 depicts that process.
2http://www.bpmn.org/
==PAGE:32==
3.7 Familiarisation task
25
Figure 3.9: Example BPMN process in familiarisation task. Source [15].
==PAGE:33==
3.7 Familiarisation task
26
The participants were told that this is how a business process quickly becomes large
and unreadable when he is modelled with conventional business process workflow soft-
ware. The task then showed an example of the fragment-based approach emphasising
about that splitting a complex process like they just saw into smaller fragments was
the main idea of fCM. After that more details about fCM followed. Those details
included the introduction of Data objects (cf. Section 2.1.2) that would be used for
control flow. The pre and post conditions of data objects as well as how the arrows
work when they point in or out of the data objects were explained. The control flow
by data objects was then further explained, and an image showed an example of how
they can start new fragments. After the introduction of data objects their lifecycles
(cf.Section 2.1.2) were explained, how they display the possible states and state tran-
sitioning of each data object. Lastly, the task had a small example that looked like
the model in the experiment. It had four trial questions, and the participants were
helped with answering the first question and then they had to answer the following
three questions them self. Figure 3.10 depicts the familiarisation question model.
==PAGE:34==
3.7 Familiarisation task
27
.
Figure 3.10: Trial questions with a model. Source: [9].
==PAGE:35==
3.8 Think-aloud
28
The full familiarisation task can be seen in a power point presentation file called
”Familiarisation task.pptx” in the online Appendix F
3.8
Think-aloud
To gain insights from the participants about the model a think-aloud dialogue was
performed after the experiment. The think-aloud asked questions about all the as-
pects of fCM such as fragments and lifecycles. The information gathered from the
think-aloud can then be analysed, and it can become a vital part of understanding
how people make sense of fCM. The think-aloud was presented as a power point slide
show to the participants, one slide with six questions and one slide with the model
so they could reference what they were talking explaining in their answers.
The
questions were:
• Can you describe the strategy you have followed to answer the questions?
• Was the main process enough to get an understanding of the process?
• For what purpose have you used the lifecycles?
• For what purpose have you used the different fragments?
• Do you see any benefits in combining the main process, with fragments and
lifecycles?
• Do you see any challenges in combining the main process, with fragments and
lifecycles?
And the image of the model from the think-aloud is depicted in Figure 3.11.
==PAGE:36==
3.8 Think-aloud
29
.
Figure 3.11: Trial questions with a model.
==PAGE:37==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
30
3.9
Preparing the data for analysis
In this section the preparation of the data before it could be analysed is explained. It
starts by explaining where the data came from. It then explains how and why areas
of interest were created. And finally it explains how the participants were split into
groups and how their background was analysed.
The experiment collected a lot of data. The data came from the pre-experiment form,
the think-aloud, the eye-tracking software, and the recordings of participants answer-
ing the questions. To make use of some of the data it had to be transformed, and the
voice recordings had to be transcribed, those are the think-aloud and the participants
answering the questions.
Participant four (P4) is not included in the transcription of the questions.
The
recording for the participant failed but was realised before the think-aloud, so the
transcription for that is included. The answers to the questions were marked while
the experiment was ongoing, so the solutions for the participants are valid, but they
could not be confirmed with the transcription data like for the other participants.
The transcribed data of the participants answering the questions can be found in
the Appendix H and the transcribed data from the think-aloud can be found in the
Appendix I.
To be able to use Disco (cf. Section 2.5) to analyse the gaze data the data exported
from Tobii Pro Lab (cf. Section 2.3.2) had to be processed with a script that gen-
erated Extensible Event Stream (XES)3 log files. The data from Tobii came as a
tab-separated value file (TSV) file. The script was a modified version of tsv2xex[4].
The modification that I did was to add a new attribute to the log file so the questions
could be analysed separately with Disco and to get the gaze event duration working
I had to sum up the duration from the data. The attributes that the script extracted
from the TSV file and into the XES log file was the gaze event duration, the partici-
pant name (id), and the question. The script can be found in the Appendix C. From
the XES log file, it is possible to filter the data for each attribute. Figure 3.12 depicts
how the groups were filtered with Disco.
3http://xes-standard.org/
==PAGE:38==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
31
.
Figure 3.12: Filtering participants in Disco.
This filter is filtering the participants by using the Case ID. The Case ID is the
participants id. After applying this filter disco will only show data for the selected
values (highlighted in blue) thus only showing the participants selected. To also filter
out the question that I wanted to analyse another attribute filter was added. Figure
3.13 depicts how that filter is added.
==PAGE:39==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
32
.
Figure 3.13: Filtering by each question in Disco.
This filter is filtering out the data by the question attribute. That allowed me to see
data for one question at a time.
More of the data had to be processed before it could be analysed. The Tobii Lab
Pro software that collected the gaze data for each participant did not group all the
areas of interest (AOI) so, for each AOI hit on each question data was exported. The
AOI is explained in (cf. Section 3.9.1). In Excel the AOI hits were merged into one.
The eye movement type Fixation was the only eye movement type that was used to
the exported data was filtered by that as well. The eye movement type index then
allowed for removing all the duplicated data that was exported. The final and ready
for processing file then had fifteen headers, those are:
• Participant name
• Recording start time
• Presented Media name
• Eye movement type
• Gaze event duration
• Eye movement type index
• AOI hit [Accelerometer LC]
==PAGE:40==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
33
• AOI hit [All LC]
• AOI hit [Breakdown fragment]
• AOI hit [Container LC]
• AOI hit [Label LC]
• AOI hit [Main process]
• AOI hit [Question]
• AOI hit [Robot LC]
• AOI hit [Shake fragment]
All the files can be found in the online Appendix F . They are named after the
participant name (P1-P12) and are in TSV format in a folder called TSV files.
After the script had processed the TSV files for all the participants one XES file
had to be created. The XES file is a XML file so in a text editor all the files were
opened and merged to one large XES file. The final XES files can be found in the
online Appendix F, they are named AllLC.xes and LCSplit.xes. Figure 3.14 depicts
a snapshot of the XES log file that was used in Disco.
Figure 3.14: XES log file snapshot.
The XES file is built up by traces and events. Each participant had a trace that
then included a lot of events. The final file thus included twelve traces, one for each
participant. The events were then built up by the presented media name (Q1.png),
the AOI (Main process), a start or a complete transition, and a time stamp so the
gaze event duration could be seen in Disco.
==PAGE:41==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
34
3.9.1
Area of Interest
To prepare the data that the eye-tracker recorded the model was split up by to AOIs.
The AOIs are artefacts that can give valuable statistical data to analyse. The data
that it gives is the fixation duration (cf.
Section 3.10.2) and the repetitions (cf.
Section 3.10.3).
The Tobii Pro Lab software has a built-in tool which allows you to create AOIs.
Figure 3.15 depicts how the tool looks in Tobii Pro Lab.
Figure 3.15: The AOI tool in Tobii Pro Lab.
The AOI split is twofold, the difference is that in one of them the lifecycles are divided
and in the other, the lifecycles are together. The AOI split with lifecycles together is
depicted in Figure 3.16.
==PAGE:42==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
35
Figure 3.16: The AOI split with the lifecycles combined.
The artefacts for the AOI split with the lifecycles combined are:
• Main process
• Question
• Shake fragment
• Breakdown fragment
• All LC
Figure 3.17 depicts the AOIs where the lifecycles are split.
==PAGE:43==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
36
Figure 3.17: The AOI split with the lifecycles divided.
The AOI split with the lifecycles combined gave an overview of the fixation duration
as well as the repetitions for each artefact of the model but to get more detailed
analysis the AOI split with the lifecycles divided was used. The artefacts for the AOI
split with the lifecycles divided are:
• Main process
• Question
• Shake fragment
• Breakdown fragment
• Container LC
• Accelerometer LC
• Robot LC
• Label LC
3.9.2
Groups
The performance of the the participants was used to split them into two groups. How
the performance was evaluated is explained in (cf. Section 3.10.1). By examining
the behaviour of the two user groups, we can understand the reasons why those who
did well, did well. From the performance, a score for each participant was calculated.
One point was given for correct answer, a half point was given for correct answer with
a hint, and no point was given for incorrect or invalid answers. Based on the median
==PAGE:44==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
37
score participants are either added to group A or group B. Figure 3.18 depicts the
table where the score is calculated, and the groups are formed.
Figure 3.18: Calculation of the score to split the participants in groups.
Figure 3.18 shows that the median score was 0.65, group A had an average score of
0.81 and group B had an average score of 0.50. You can also see the participants who
performed best by looking at the Score column on the right. The AV score row then
shows what question was answered most often correctly. For both of these statistics
the green colour indicates a positive value.
3.9.2.1
Background
I analysed the pre-experiment form (cf. Section 3.6) to gain more background knowl-
edge of the two groups. The background and experience can be a big factor in the
difference in performance of the groups. The information I wanted to extract from
there is the participants age, gender, profession, experience, and familiarity with the
subject. This information could be give some indication of why participants in group
A performed better in the experiment. Figure 3.19 depicts the average age of the
participants in each group shown in years.
Figure 3.19: The average age of each group in years.
==PAGE:45==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
38
The average age of the participants is very similar, group B is slightly older, about
one year. When I look at the gender split of the groups the results are not similar at
all. Figure 3.20 depicts the gender split for each group.
Figure 3.20: The gender split for both groups.
Group A has 83% females but group B is 100% males. This is an interesting insight
that is further discussed in (cf. Section 5.1).
Next thing to analyse is the groups profession and the experience in that profession.
Figure 3.21 depicts a pie chart of the professions for both groups.
Figure 3.21: The profession of both groups.
In group A there are only students, five master students and one PhD student. Group
B has four master students, a software developer and security engineer. Because the
majority of the participants are students I also analysed their study line. In group
A two participants are studying Mathematical Modelling and Computation, and the
other four participants are split to; Computer Science and Engineering, Biomedical
Engineering, Industrial Engineering and Management, and Software Process Engineer-
ing. In group B the participants study line is as follows; two Software Engineering
students, two Digital Media Engineering students where one is graduated, one Com-
==PAGE:46==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
39
puter Science graduate, and one Mechanical Engineering student. Both groups have
a strong background in Engineering related fields. The experience with in a field is
also important. Figure 3.22 depicts the profession experience for each group shown
in years.
Figure 3.22: The profession experience of both groups in years.
The profession experience is slightly higher for group A, two participants say that they
have more than 5 years of experience in their profession. In general the experience of
both groups is similar and can not be considered as a clear indication of the difference
in performance of the groups.
Next step is to look at the familiarity of the subject. The first thing to look at is if
the groups were familiar with BPMN 2.0 before they participated in the experiment.
Figure 3.23 depicts the results for that question.
Figure 3.23: The familiarity of BPMN 2.0 before the experiment.
==PAGE:47==
3.9 Preparing the data for analysis
40
Like the graph shows the participants in the groups were equally divided when asked
if they were familiar with BPMN 2.0 before starting the experiment. Group A had
two participants that were familiar with BPMN 2.0 and group B had two participants
as well.
To further see the familiarity the participants were asked to answer approximately
how many BPMN 2.0 models they had read in the last 5 years. Figure 3.24 depicts
the results from that question.
Figure 3.24: How many BPMN 2.0 models the participants have read in the last 5
years.
Although the inexperience of BPMN models in general is high for both groups, group
B states that he has a slightly more experience of reading BPMN 2.0 models.
After analysing the background of the participants in both groups there is no clear dif-
ference that could be influencing the fact that the participants in group A performed
better. The background knowledge and experience is almost the same for both groups
and group B is even showing a little more experience with BPMN in general but still
performed worse.
3.9.2.2
Three group split
The participants were also split into three groups to focus more on those who per-
formed good and to those who performed poorly. Leaving out the middle will hope-
fully show a more detailed difference in how the participants read and understood the
fCM approach. I used the interquartile range to make three groups, group A, group
B, and group C. In group A participants that had a score above the third quartile,
group B had participants that scored lower than then the third quartile but higher
than the first quartile, and finally, group C had participants that scored lower than
the first quartile. Following this procedure made the groups uneven, group A had 3
participants, group B had 6 participants, and group C had 3 participants. To even
out the groups the highest scored participant from group B was moved to group A,
==PAGE:48==
3.10 Analysing the data
41
and the lowest scored participant from group B was moved to group C. Figure 3.18
depicts the table where the score is calculated, and the three groups are formed.
Figure 3.25: Calculation of the score to split the participants in three groups.
3.10
Analysing the data
This section explains how the data gathered in the experiment was analysed. To help
the investigation of how people read and understand fCM models the analysis starts
by answering how the overall participant’s performance was. Then it shows how the
questions were analysed between the groups. After that the fixation duration and
repetitions on the areas of interest is analysed. It then shows the analysis of the
think-aloud data. Then the performance of the participants based on the question
classification is analysed. It then shows the analysis of the data gathered from the
galvanic skin response sensor and finally it shows the result from the expected vs
actual reading pattern analysis.
The analysis part excludes question 1 and question 7. Question 1 did not have a
quantitative answer, it asked the participants to describe the scenario that the model
showed so the answer from that question can be used for qualitative research and that
is discussed in (cf. Section 4.10). Question 7 was excluded because the experiment
had a bug in the beginning and it displayed question 6 two times instead of displaying
question 7.
3.10.1
Performance
The performance of the participants in the experiment can give an indication of how
understandable the fCM approach is. I noted down the participant answers in the
experiment and I used the transcribed data from the voice recordings to confirm the
results that I had noted down. Figure 3.26 depicts the document that I used to note
down while the experiment was on going.
==PAGE:49==
3.10 Analysing the data
42
Figure 3.26: The question order for each participant.
I coloured the cells with different colours to see how the participant answered the
question.
Their answers are split into four categories; Correct, Correct with hint,
Wrong, and Invalid. Correct is the category where the participants answered correctly,
Correct with hint is the category where the participant was hinted about where he
could find the answer, Wrong is the category where an incorrect answer was given to a
question, and Invalid is the category where the participant did not answer a question.
The blue colour is for question 1 because that question did not have a correct or wrong
answer. After I had validated the answers, I added all the participant’s responses
together in one table. That table is depicted in Figure 3.27.
Figure 3.27: Answers for all categories by question.
==PAGE:50==
3.10 Analysing the data
43
The green colour in the table always shows the positive outcome.
In the correct
column it is good to have a high score but in the wrong column it is positive to have
a low score.
3.10.2
Fixation Duration
The fixation duration analysis is summing up the dwell time of each AOI hit (cf.
Section 2.3.1). I want to see what AOIs the participants were spending most of their
time looking at, that can give some indication about how they read and understand
the model. The fixation duration is split into two tables based on the groups. Figure
3.28 depicts the total duration for each AOI by different question for group A.
Figure 3.28: Total fixation duration for group A.
Figure 3.29 depicts the total fixation duration for each AOI by different question for
group B.
==PAGE:51==
3.10 Analysing the data
44
Figure 3.29: Total fixation duration for group B.
For a better visualisation and easier visual comparison the values have been coloured.
Red means the highest duration and green means lower duration. Disco was then
used to see the total fixation duration for all questions combined for both groups.
Figure 3.30 depicts the total fixation duration for group A.
Figure 3.30: Total fixation duration with questions combined for group A.
Figure 3.31 depicts the total fixation duration for group B.
==PAGE:52==
3.10 Analysing the data
45
Figure 3.31: Total fixation duration with questions combined for group B.
The comparison of the total duration between the groups shows that Group B spent
32.6 minutes more on the artefacts than group A did. Table 3.1 shows the fixation
duration in minutes for all questions between group A and group B and the difference
also in minutes.
Artefact
Group A
Group B
Difference
Main process
34.1
49.2
15.1
Question
10.8
20.7
9.9
Shake fragment
9.3
13.3
4
Breakdown fragment
4.7
8.3
3.6
All LC
3.8
5.6
1.8
Table 3.1: Fixation duration difference in minutes between group A and group B.
3.10.3
Repetitions
Disco also gives another parameter to analyse, repetitions.
“The max repetitions
numbers give us an idea how many times the most frequently churned or reworked
case looped through a particular activity or path”[16].
What the analysis of the
repetition can show is how the participants read the model. If the repetition is high
it means that participants were looking again and again at the same AOI. That can
give an indication of how participants understand and understand the model. Figure
3.32 depicts the repetitions for each AOI by each question for group A.
==PAGE:53==
3.10 Analysing the data
46
Figure 3.32: Repetitions for group A.
Figure 3.33 depicts the repetitions for each AOI by each question for group B.
Figure 3.33: Repetitions for group B.
The analysis of the repetitions show that group A has fewer repetitions for all the
AOIs (Total row) and the total repetitions are almost twice as high for group B. With
the values coloured the comparison is more comfortable to visualise, the red colour
is for the higher values meaning more repetitions. The colour distribution is very
similar between the groups. But it can be noticed that group B has more repetitions
on each AOI.
==PAGE:54==
3.10 Analysing the data
47
3.10.4
Question analysis
The question analysis is based on the two-group split, and it uses the AOI data where
the lifecycles are divided. Trying to understand the difference how participants read
through the model I have been attempting to analyse each question both with Disco
(cf. Section 2.5) and with heat maps from Tobii Pro Lab (cf. Section 2.3.2). By
analysing the reading pattern of the participants I can see how they approach fCM
models. To be able to create the images in this analysis the log files (cf. Section 3.9)
were imported to Disco, and then two filters were applied. Both filters are Attribute
filters, one that filters out participants so the groups can be examined individually,
and one that filters out the question that I currently want to analyse. The heat maps
that are used in this analysis come from Tobii Pro Lab, the software that was used
to create the eye-tracking experiment. When the heat maps are exported from Tobii,
they can be exported for each question based on data from multiple users, so they
were exported based on the groups.
The analysis involved comparing images taken from Disco of the Fixation duration
for each AOI and comparing the exported heat maps from Tobii. Figure 3.34 depicts
how the comparison image looked for comparison with Disco for question 2. This
section only shows an example of how the questions were analysed. All the images
from the analysis can be seen in Appendix D.
Figure 3.34: Comparison of images from Disco of question 2.
And Figure 3.35 depicts the heat map for question 2 split between the groups.
==PAGE:55==
3.10 Analysing the data
48
Figure 3.35: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question 2.
Figure 3.34 shows a snapshot of the process map that Disco created from the data.
Data from participants in both groups for question 2 is displayed. It shows the fixation
duration for each activity and the max-repetitions is revealed in the parenthesis after
the time. Figure 3.35 then shows the same data displayed as a heat map for both
groups. The red colour indicates areas where the participants were looking the most
at it then fades out to yellow and green for lower viewed spaces.
3.10.5
Think-aloud
The analysis of the think-aloud uses the three group split (cf. Section 3.9.2.2). That
means it only includes the top four best performers and the bottom four performers.
The data from the Think-aloud (cf. Section 3.8) is qualitative data. By using the
coding technique (cf. Section 2.4), I analysed the think-aloud data. The transcription
of the recordings is coded, and categories or themes are identified. The coding is done
in a word document (Think-aloud coding first step.docx) and an excel sheet (Think
aloud analysis.xlsx), these documents can be found in the online Appendix F. The
outcome of the coding analysis is shown in a findings summary table for each think-
aloud question, where the category, the meaning of the category, and the evidence
from the data is outlined. The evidence from the data is only an example. The full
data from the think-aloud can be found in the documents mentioned here above.
Table 3.2 shows the findings for think-aloud question 1.
==PAGE:56==
3.10 Analysing the data
49
Category or theme
Meaning
Evidence
from
data
Clear strategy
Answered
with
a
clear strategy.
P4. “First, I looked
at the lifecycles to
figure
out
where
it was in relation
to
the
questions
then if it was any-
thing
breakdown
or
shake
related,
I
cross-referenced
them
with
the
current state”
No clear strategy
Did not give a clear
strategy
P9.
“I didn’t´t re-
ally have a strategy,
I tried to follow the
words in the ques-
tions and to follow
the process”.
Table 3.2: Findings summary table for think-aloud question 1.
For think-aloud question 1 two categories identified and used as the final codes. The
first one is Clear strategy, that is identifying those that had a strategy. The second
one is No clear strategy, that is identifying those that did not say a clear strategy or
said that they did not have a strategy at all.
Table 3.3 shows the findings for think-aloud question 2.
==PAGE:57==
3.10 Analysing the data
50
Category or theme
Meaning
Evidence
from
data
Enough
Participants
thought the main
process was enough
P3. “Yes, it was, at
least that is what I
think”.
Not enough
Participants
that
thought the main
process
was
not
enough
P11.
“No, I don’t
think so”.
Information missing
Missing
some
in-
formation from the
fragments that are
important
P4. “The main pro-
cess is a good way
to get a rough un-
derstanding of the
process”.
Table 3.3: Findings summary table for think-aloud question 1.
for think-aloud question 2 three categories are identified and used as the final codes.
The first is Enough, that code identifying those who stated that the Main process was
enough, some participants in that category also said that some information could be
missing. The second is Not enough, that is identifying those who thought that the
Main process was not enough with out giving any reason why. And the third code
is Information missing, that identifies those who said something about information
could be missing from the fragments if they would not be shown regardless of what
they stated about the previous codes.
Table 3.4 shows the findings for think-aloud question 3.
==PAGE:58==
3.10 Analysing the data
51
Category or theme
Meaning
Evidence
from
data
Used them
Stated
that
they
used the lifecycles
P8.
“Yes, I used
them when I was
searching for some-
thing”.
P4.
“I
specifically
used
them
to
see
how
the
transitioning
works and I used
them to figure out
the default states”.
Did not use them
Stated
that
they
did not use the life-
cycles
P11.
“Honestly
nothing”.
P5.
“I
didn’t´t really use
them at all… yeah I
didn’t´t use them”.
Table 3.4: Findings summary table for think-aloud question 3.
For think-aloud question 3 two categories are identified and used as the final codes.
The first is Used them, that is identifying those who stated that they used the life-
cycles, some participants gave more details about how they used them as well. The
second is Did not use them, that is identifying those who stated that they did not
use the lifecycles at all.
Table 3.5 shows the findings for think-aloud question 4.
==PAGE:59==
3.10 Analysing the data
52
Category or theme
Meaning
Evidence
from
data
Question related
If a question asked
about
them
or
participants
said
“only
when
ques-
tion
asked
about
them”
P9.
“To answer
questions
about
them”.
P11.
“Mainly
when
a
question
asked
specifically
about
the fragments”.
See more details
To
see
more
ac-
tivities and execu-
tion of them, to see
what happens when
event occurs
P1.
“To see what
activities were exe-
cuted”. P2. “To re-
alise what happens
if the robot breaks
down or if there is
a shake event”.
Table 3.5: Findings summary table for think-aloud question 4.
for think-aloud question 4 two categories are identified and used as the final codes.
The first is Question related, that code is identifying those who only stated that they
used the fragments if a question asked about them. The second is See more details,
that code is categorising those who stated that they used the lifecycles for more de-
tails about some part of the overall process.
Table 3.6 shows the findings for think-aloud question 5.
==PAGE:60==
3.10 Analysing the data
53
Category or theme
Meaning
Evidence
from
data
Beneficial
Participants
that
said
fCM
was
beneficial in some
way
P1.
“It helps to
break
it
down
into fragments,
it
would
be
much
more
crowded
if
it would all be in
the
same
process,
it makes it clearer,
it
is
cleaner
and
better
organised”.
P7.
“You can get
a
better
under-
standing about the
main
process
and
how it works and
how it connects to
the
data
objects.
You can get more
details this way”.
Negative mentions
Participants
that
said
something
negative
about
fCM
P11.
“It can be
quite
disorienting
to
use
them
all”.
P4.
“But you lose
some information “.
Table 3.6: Findings summary table for think-aloud question 5.
For think-aloud question 5 two categories are identified and used as the final codes.
The first is Beneficial, that code is identifying those who said something related to
fCM being beneficial in some way or another. The second code is Negative mentions
that code is identifying those who mentioned a negative thing about fCM.
Table 3.7 shows the findings for think-aloud question 5.
==PAGE:61==
3.10 Analysing the data
54
Category or theme
Meaning
Evidence
from
data
Event challenges
Challenging to inte-
grate events when
not using fCM
P3.
“It could also
get
complex
and
the events can hap-
pen at any time so
that is a challenge
to make it fit with
the main process”.
Integration challenges
Challenging to see
how and where frag-
ments
connect
to
the main process
P5.
“it could be
difficult
to
under-
stand
where
and
what fragments con-
nect to the main
process”.
Information loss
Some
information
could be lost
P4. “You could lose
some information”.
Table 3.7: Findings summary table for think-aloud question 6.
For think-aloud question 6 three categories are identified and used as the finale codes.
The first is Event challenges, that code is identifying those who said something about
that it would be challenging to model the events into the main process. The second
code is Integration challenges, that is identifying those who said something about
that it is challenging to see in the main process where and how the fragments connect
to the main process. And the third code is Information loss, that is identifying those
who said that it could be challenging to not lose information when the processes are
combined.
3.10.6
Question classification
When analysing the questions classes, I want to be able to figure out what class is
the most difficult one by knowing that suggestions for improvements of fCM could be
focused on those classes. I grouped the questions together in the classes and summed
up the correct answers, correct answers with hint, wrong answers, and invalid answers
for each question in each class. Then I divided the sum with how many questions
each class had to get a final score for all the outcomes of the answers. Table 3.8 shows
the questions in each class and the final score for each outcome of answers.
==PAGE:62==
3.10 Analysing the data
55
Question
Class
Correct
Correct
with hint
Wrong
Invalid
Q2, Q3
Single
state
change
9.5
1
1
0.5
Q4, Q5
Combinational
state change
7
2
2.5
0.5
Q6,
Q8,
Q9a,
Q10b,Q12b
Condition
6.2
0.6
5
0.2
Q9b, Q10a, Q11,
Q12a
State
7.25
0.75
3.75
0.17
Table 3.8: The question classification and their scores.
3.10.7
GSR data
When looking at the GSR (cf. Section 2.3.3) data, the focus was on event-related
SCRs (ER-SCR). They can be interpreted as direct measures of arousal and engage-
ment[12]. That can mean that if an ER-SCR peak event occurred the participant
showed symptoms of stress that could indicate that he found the question difficult.
The GSR data, the analysis of the performance, and the analysis of the performance
based on question class could give a more concrete answer of what questions and
classes the participants found most difficult.
The analysis was done by using the GSR data chart that Tobii Pro Lab software has
built in. The graphical view shows SCRs events, ER-SCR events, and Figure 3.36
depicts an example images from Tobii showing the GSR data graph.
Figure 3.36: GSR data chart from Tobii Pro Lab.
==PAGE:63==
3.10 Analysing the data
56
The ER-SCR peak events are shown in blue just above the GSR sensor signal line in
the graph. The ER-SCR peak events always happened when a participant got a new
question in the experiment.
I also analysed the signal line from the data chart. I exported the GSR data from To-
bii and created tables for each participant that shows the average value, the maximum
value, and the minimum value of the signal from the GSR sensor.
Figure 3.37: Table of GSR signal for four participants. Displayed in micro-Siemens
(µS).
Figure 3.37 depicts an example table for four participants. The full table can be
found in a document called GSR_Data.xlsx in the online Appendix F. The values in
the table are micro-Siemens (µS), and they are shown for each question but excluding
question seven. The non-coloured values at the bottom show the total, average, stan-
dard deviation, and median. Participant eight (P8) was the most stressed participant,
and participant seven (P7) was with another participant the least stressed. After I
had created those tables, I could calculate the same values for the groups to compare
them with each other.
Both the ER-SCR peak event data and the GSR signal data is shown for each ques-
tion that allowed me also to analyse what questions were the most stressful for the
participants, and then I compared that analysis with the performance for each ques-
tion.
3.10.8
Expected vs actual reading pattern
When I designed the questions, I wrote down the expected reading pattern based on
my own experience with fCM. By doing this, it helped me to see if the question I was
going to present to the participants would make sense, cover all the different parts of
the model, and touch up on all the crucial components that fCM has to offer. When
I had written down the expected reading pattern for each question an expert with
==PAGE:64==
3.10 Analysing the data
57
extensible knowledge of fCM validated the expected reading pattern. The approach I
used to analyse the reading patterns was similar to the method I used when analysing
the questions. I used process maps from Disco (cf. Section 2.5) and heat maps from
Tobii (cf. Section 2.3.2). The difference is that there is no group split just question
split. Question four, seven, and question twelve are excluded from the analysis of the
expected reading pattern because those questions were changed after the expected
reading pattern was created for each question and I forgot to update the expected
reading pattern after I changed these questions.
The second question in the experiment was: Under which circumstance(s) can a
Robot change from working state to broken state?. The expected reading pattern was:
Here I expect the participant to skim through the whole model, looking at the data
objects, read the robot lifecycle and stop at the breakdown fragment where they will
answer, after “Call technician” activity. To analyse the reading pattern process map
from Disco was analysed. Figure 3.38 depicts an image of that model.
Figure 3.38: Total duration and absolute frequency for question two.
Figure 3.39 depicts the heat map for question two.
==PAGE:65==
3.10 Analysing the data
58
Figure 3.39: Heat map of question two.
By analysing these two images and comparing the actual reading pattern to the ex-
pected reading pattern I can see that the expected reading pattern was accurate, the
fixation duration was highest for the Breakdown fragment, second highest for the
Main process, third highest for the question and the Robot lifecycles had the most
extended length of all the lifecycles. The most top repetitions also were between the
Main process and the Breakdown fragment.
Question nine in the experiment had two parts. It started by giving a trace. The
trace was: A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event occurs, the “Record
the shake into the it-system” activity is executed as well as the “Assign dock-worker
to label the container” activity. When the queue is over, and the container is in a
“Scanned” state. It then first asked: What activities are executed until the Container
is in the state “Delivered”? And then it asked What are the state(s) of the Label
during the main process after the scan? The expected reading pattern for both parts
was: Here participants should be looking at the main process after the scan, stopping
at the XOR and read the Label data object state, then continue until the end where
they see the Delivered state for the container. To analyse the reading pattern process
map from Disco was analysed. Figure 3.40 depicts an image of that model.
==PAGE:66==
3.10 Analysing the data
59
Figure 3.40: Total duration and absolute frequency for question nine.
Figure 3.41 depicts the heat map for question nine.
==PAGE:67==
3.10 Analysing the data
60
Figure 3.41: Heat map of question nine.
By analysing these two images and comparing the actual reading pattern to the ex-
pected reading pattern I can see that the expected reading pattern was accurate to
some extent. If the prediction had mentioned the Shake fragment, it would have been
very accurate. The primary fixation duration was spent in the Main process and al-
most all of it after the scan activity. The second most was the question, and that
can be explained by the question having a and b part, as well as the question, was
difficult for participants to answer correctly, only four out of twelve had this question
correct. The heat map of question nine further confirms that the predicted reading
pattern was accurate. You can see that the Main process after the scan has a lot of
weight as well as the activities after the XOR.
This is only an example of the expected vs actual reading pattern analysis, the anal-
ysis for the other questions can be found in the Appendix E.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In this chapter, the results from the different analysis are reported. It first shows the
results from the performance of the participants. It then shows the duration of the
fixation on each are of interest. It then shows the results of the repetitions between
the areas of interest.
Next it explains the results from the question analysis and
then it shows what question class participants found the most difficult one. Then the
results from the galvanic skin response sensor is outlined. It then explains the results
from the think-aloud and the results from the expected vs actual reading patterns.
And finally the results are summarised and then they are discussed.
4.1
Performance results
The results from the analysis of the performance shows that the participants did a
good job overall. Approximately 60% of the questions asked were answered correctly
and approximately 68% were correct if we count the Correct with hint category as
well. To better visualise how the overall performance was the outcome is depicted in
Figure 4.1 as a pie chart.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Question analysis results
62
Figure 4.1: Total answers for each category.
The good overall performance and the fact that the majority of the participants
had no experience in business process management is an indication of that fCM is
understandable and people can be taught the basics in a short time.
4.2
Question analysis results
The question analysis results show that group A had a more focused view and group B
had a more distributed view. The focused view of group A can be seen by comparing
the hottest areas in the heat maps to the components that are asked in the questions,
e.g. question two asks about how the Robot can change from working to the broken
state. If the heat maps 3.35 are compared for question two it shows that group A is
focused on the Breakdown fragment where the answer to the question is but group
B is looking at the lifecycles as well as at the data objects in the Main process a lot.
The distributed view of group B can further be seen in the heat maps of question 10
D.14, question 11 D.16, and question 12 D.18.
4.3
Fixation duration results
With the focused view of the participants in group A, they spent less time figuring
out the answers to the questions which the fixation duration analysis confirms. Table
4.1 shows the fixation duration sum and total from all the questions on each AOI and
the difference between the groups in percentage.
==PAGE:70==
4.4 Repetition results
63
AOI
Group A
Group B
Difference
Main process
1050.6
1669
58.86%
Question
454.9
952.6
109.41%
Shake fragment
228.05
577.85
153.39%
Breakdown fragment
144.4
396.2
174.38%
All lifecycle
113.91
160.4
40.82%
Total
1991.86
3756.05
88.57%
Table 4.1: Fixation duration sum of all questions in seconds on each AOI for both
groups.
Group B spent 88.57% more time overall on answering the questions in the experiment.
Because group B had such a long fixation duration on the question, they were looking
more distributed around the model and since they performed worse that indicates that
the participants in group B were guessing more than participants in group A.
4.4
Repetition results
The same pattern is seen when the results from the repetition analysis are outlined.
Table 4.2 shows the repetition sum from all the questions on each AOI and the
difference between the groups in percentage.
AOI
Group A
Group B
Difference
Main process
206
320
55.34%
Question
152
256
68.42%
Shake fragment
106
174
64.15%
Breakdown fragment
56
121
116.07%
All lifecycles
57
92
61.40%
Total
577
963
66.90%
Table 4.2: Repetition sum of all questions on each AOI for both groups.
Group B had 66.90% more repetitions in total. The fixation duration difference and
the repetition difference is related in a way. The highest values are for the question
AOI and the fragments AOIs. Most of the difference is in the fragments, and it seems
like participants in group B had a difficult time figuring out how the fragments work
and how they connect to the main process. The results from the think-aloud analysis
support that by showing that participants in group A talked about the importance
of the fragments but participants in group B said that they were not as important.
These results show participants in group B were looking more around the whole model
searching for the answer and possibly guessing while group A seems to have had a
better understanding of where to find the answers in all of the AOIs.
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Think-aloud results
64
4.5
Think-aloud results
This section reports the results from the analysis of the think-aloud data. The data
from the think-aloud was in the form of qualitative data. The recorded think-aloud
was transcribed and coded to extract usable knowledge from it.
The first question in the think-aloud was: Can you describe the strategy you have
followed to answer the questions?.
The results of the coding gave two codes. The codes were Clear strategy and Not
clear strategy. All participants from group A stated that they followed a strategy,
but two participants from group C stated that they did not have a strategy or it was
not clear to them what their strategy was. That indicates that it is better to have
a strategy when reading through the fCM models. The strategy group A mentioned
they used was to read the question carefully and try to locate the things mentioned
in the question and to have a clear overview of the states and how the states change
from one state to another and how that affects the process. One participant also from
group A specifically mentioned that it was good to think about the scenario in real life.
The second question in the think-aloud was: Was the main process enough to get
an understanding of the process?.
The results of the coding give three codes. Participants that state that the Main Pro-
cess was enough, participants that state that it was not enough, and participants that
state it was enough, but some information was missing. When analysing the answers,
participants in group A specifically mentioned that it was missing the fragments for
crucial information. That indicates that the fragments are an essential asset of the
process, they hold vital information about how the Main process progresses based on
changing data object states and they should not be left out when fCM models are
explained.
The third question in the think-aloud was: For what purpose have you used the
lifecycles?.
After coding this question, two codes are used. The first code is Used them and the
second is Did not use them. It was interesting to see that participants from group
A all stated that they used them and some of them mentioned what they used them
for but the participants from group C except for one stated that they did not use
them at all or only for one question that specifically asked about states (Q11). Its an
indication of how useful the lifecycles are and how they can simplify the process of
understanding and reading fCM models. They are not just beneficial when one must
know all possible states for a given data object, they provide an overview and are a
quick way to see if some transactions in the process are possible or not.
The fourth question in the think-aloud was: For what purpose have you used the
different fragments?.
From the coding of this question, two codes are identified. They are Question-related
==PAGE:72==
4.5 Think-aloud results
65
and See more details. The first code identified three participants from group C. They
all stated that they only used the fragments when a question asked about them. The
second category had all participants from group A, they stated that it was not just
for answering questions, it is also for seeing more details and that they are used when
the Main Process needs them. It indicates that the fragments are a vital part of the
model and they are necessary not just to answer questions about them but also for
an overall understanding of the scenario.
The fifth question in the think-aloud was: Do you see any benefits in combining
the main process, with fragments and lifecycles?.
The results of coding this question gave two codes, Beneficial and Negative mentions.
Overall participants found fCM beneficial compared to conventional BPM. In the
familiarisation task 3.7 I showed participants a complex BPM model so they would
have something to compare too. All the participants said that it was beneficial in
some way and only two participants said a negative thing. Those two participants
came from separate groups, the participant from group A stated that you could lose
some information by using fCM and the participant from group C states that it
could become disorienting to use all the fragments. Since all the participants said
that fCM is beneficial, I further coded that down. The results from that show that
three participants from group A stated that it reduces the complexity of modelling
business processes and participants from group C stated that it is clearer and more
understandable than the model I showed them in the familiarisation task. What this
analysis indicates is that in general, all participants saw a benefit from using fCM, so
the development of this new approach is on the correct path.
The sixth and the final question in the think-aloud was: Do you see any challenges
in combining the main process, with fragments and lifecycles?.
After coding this question, the codes I found were Event challenges, Integration Chal-
lenges, and Information loss. Two of the participants from group A talked about
that it would be difficult to model the events into the Main Process, they can only
happen at a particular stage in the process as well as they can happen at any time
when the process is in that specific stage. The participants from group C were a
lot less informative about why it would be challenging, and two of them stated that
they could not see any challenges. It indicates a deeper understanding of modelling
business processes from group A despite that most of the group had no previous expe-
rience with BPM or BPMN in fact group C had members that had previously worked
with BPM and BPMN. It indicates that fCM is simple enough for people that have
a general engineering background; they can understand and make sense of the fCM
approach with ease.
==PAGE:73==
4.6 Question classification results
66
4.5.1
Think-aloud results summary
To summarise the results from the think-aloud these are the main parts that I found
out:
• It is better to have a strategy when reading through the fCM models
• The fragments are an important asset of the process, they hold vital information
about how the main process progresses based on changing data object states
and they should not be left out when fCM models are explained.
• Lifecycles are useful and they can simplify the process of understanding and
reading fCM models.
• Lifecycles are not just beneficial when one must know all possible states for a
given data object. They provide an overview and are a quick way to see if some
transactions in the process are possible and valid.
• The fragments are a vital part of the model and they are needed not just
to answer questions about them but also for an overall understanding of the
scenario.
• In general all participants saw a benefit from using fCM, so the development of
this new approach is on the correct path.
• In general fCM is simple enough for people that have a general engineering
background, they can understand and make sense of the fCM approach with
ease.
4.6
Question classification results
Results of the analysis of the questions classes show which question class the partici-
pants found the most difficult to answer. Figure 4.2 shows a clustered bar chart with
the question classes and their score for each answer outcome.
==PAGE:74==
4.7 Galvanic skin response results
67
Figure 4.2: Total fixation duration for group B.
The chart shows that the Single state change class had the most correct answers and
the condition class had the fewest correct answers. The Combinational state change
class had the highest score in the correct with hint answer outcome. Those results
show that the participants found the Condition class the most difficult, the Single
state change the easiest one, and the Combinational state change one was the most
confusing.
These results indicate that if a fCM model has a lot of fragments that are controlled
by pre and post conditions the explanation and the model need to be very clear.
4.7
Galvanic skin response results
After analysing the GSR data the results are that group B can be considered more
stressed. Group B had more than one peak event for all the questions except for
question one. That means that more participants of group B generated peak events.
The reason for most of the peak events for group A is that one participant in that
group generated a peak events in eight questions out of eleven and was the highest
in total peak events of all the participants. If that participant is excluded from the
data the total peak event for group A would be eight in stead of sixteen. Figure 4.3
depicts the ER-SCRs peak distribution on each question as well as the total for both
groups.
==PAGE:75==
4.7 Galvanic skin response results
68
Figure 4.3: ER-SCR peak events for both groups.
The results from the signal of the GSR sensor also show that participants from group
B were more stressed. Table 4.3 shows the average Micro-Siemens value for each
question for both groups. Group B had a higher average value for nine questions out
of eleven and 0.27 µS higher total average value.
Question
Group A
Group B
1
2.67
1.62
2
3.16
3.56
3
2.87
3.94
4
3.04
3.74
5
2.82
2.95
6
2.77
3.03
8
2.99
3.71
9
2.81
3.39
10
2.87
3.04
11
2.96
2.71
12
2.90
3.14
Total AV
2.90
3.17
Table 4.3: Average Micro-Siemens value for each question for both groups.
To show the relation between the high average value from the sensor and a high total
number for ER-SCR peak events Figure 4.4 depicts a graph with two lines. The blue
==PAGE:76==
4.7 Galvanic skin response results
69
line is the total number of peak events for all the participants and the orange line is
the average value from the GSR sensor.
Figure 4.4: Total ER-SCR peak events with the average GSR sensor value.
The result for each question show that most of the ER-SCR peak events happened
when question twelve appeared to the participants for a total of seven events, then
question ten and question three followed with five each. Figure 4.5 depicts the total
peak events for the questions with the groups combined.
==PAGE:77==
4.7 Galvanic skin response results
70
Figure 4.5: ER-SCR peak events for the questions with combined groups.
If we look at the results from the performance of the participants and take the wrong
answers and compare them with the number of ER-SCR peak events for each question
one can see that there is not a strong connection of giving a wrong answer and having
many ER-SCR peak events.
Figure 4.6 depicts the comparison of ER-SCR peak
events against wrong answers.
Figure 4.6: ER-SCR peak events compared with wrong answers given to a question.
==PAGE:78==
4.8 Expected vs actual reading pattern results
71
4.8
Expected vs actual reading pattern results
In this section the results of the analysis of expected vs actual reading patterns is
outlined.
Table 4.4 shows the results for question two.
Question
Expected
Actual
Under
which
circum-
stance(s)
can
a
Robot
change
from
working
state to broken state?
Here I expect the partici-
pant to skim through the
whole model, looking at
the data objects, read the
robot lifecycle and stop at
the breakdown fragment
where they will answer, af-
ter “Call technician” activ-
ity.
The fixation duration was
highest for the Breakdown
fragment, second highest
for the Main process, and
third highest for the ques-
tion. The Robot lifecycles
had the most extended du-
ration of all the lifecy-
cles.
The most top repe-
titions also were between
the Main process and the
Breakdown fragment.
Table 4.4: Summary table for question two.
The data here is indicating that the expected reading pattern was accurate because
the Robot lifecycle has the most duration of the lifecycles and the Breakdown frag-
ment has the highest duration overall just like the expected reading pattern predicted.
Table 4.5 shows the results for question three.
==PAGE:79==
4.8 Expected vs actual reading pattern results
72
Question
Expected
Actual
Under
which
circum-
stance(s) can the Label
change from initial state
to requested state?
Here I expect the partici-
pant to skim through the
Main process, looking at
the data objects, read the
Label lifecycle and stop at
the Shake fragment where
they
will
answer,
after
“Assign dock-worker activ-
ity is executed” activity.
The fixation duration was
highest for the Main pro-
cess,
second highest for
the Shake fragment, and
the Label lifecycle had the
most duration of all the
lifecycles.
The most rep-
etitions were between the
Question and the Main
process, the second most
between the Main process
and the Shake fragment,
and the third most be-
tween the Shake fragment
and the Breakdown frag-
ment.
Table 4.5: Summary table for question three.
The data here is indicating that the expected reading pattern was to some extent
accurate. The mentioned components in the expectations had the highest duration.
The heat map E.4 of the reading pattern for question three shows an unexpected dwell
time on the XOR in the Main process; that is something that was not considered in
the expected reading pattern prediction. But this is understandable in a way because
the Label is a pre-condition for the activities after the XOR.
Table 4.6 shows the results for question five.
==PAGE:80==
4.8 Expected vs actual reading pattern results
73
Question
Expected
Actual
Under
which
circum-
stance(s)
can
the
Con-
tainer be in scanned state
and the Accelerometer in
sleep state?
Here I expect to see the
participants trying to find
the
Container
data
ob-
ject and where it changes
it state to scanned, then
they will look for the ac-
celerometer and try to fig-
ure out where it changes it
state to sleep. After they
find it in the main pro-
cess, I expect them to look
at the other fragments to
make sure they are not
there as well and then they
will give an answer.
Participants
were
stop-
ping at the location where
the container changes to
scanned state and most of
the fixation duration was
at the end of the Main pro-
cess where the accelerom-
eter changes it state to
sleep state. The Main pro-
cess had the highest dura-
tion and the second high-
est was the Question.
Table 4.6: Summary table for question five.
From the data you can see that the expected reading pattern was close to the actual
reading pattern. The heat map E.6 shows that participants had a longer duration
on the activity where the container changes to scanned state, the Accelerometer life-
cycles has the highest duration of the lifecycles, and there is extensible duration on
both of the fragments. The prediction did not mention that in the main process the
participants looked more at the place where the accelerometer changes it stated than
where the container changed it state.
Table 4.7 shows the results for question six.
Question
Expected
Actual
In all fragments, what is
the minimum set of ac-
tivities that should be ex-
ecuted prior to “Assign
dock-worker to label the
container” activity?
Here I expect participants
to find the activity men-
tioned, then to look at the
pre-condition for the frag-
ment that has the activ-
ity then read the main pro-
cess until they find the pre-
condition and then say the
answer.
The fixation duration was
pretty evenly distributed
between the Main process,
the Shake fragment, and
the Question.
The Main
process still had the high-
est duration.
The lifecy-
cles had a very low dura-
tion
Table 4.7: Summary table for question six.
The expected reading pattern prediction was not thorough enough so it can not be
==PAGE:81==
4.8 Expected vs actual reading pattern results
74
said that it was accurate. The difficulty of the question was highly underestimated in
the prediction. The question was difficult for people to answer based on the results,
only four out of twelve had this question correct. Participants were looking more
at latter part of the Main process but it was predicted that they would stop at the
pre-condition which is in the beginning of the Main process. These results are based
on all participants, the prediction could be more accurate if one would look at the
heat maps for the groups separately.
Table 4.8 shows the results for question eight.
Question
Expected
Actual
No shake event has oc-
curred, a breakdown event
occurs, and the “Call tech-
nician”
activity
is
exe-
cuted, what activities can
then be executed after the
“Drive container to dis-
patch terminal” activity?
Here I expect the partic-
ipant to skim the model
for the mentioned activ-
ity.
Then to look at
the breakdown fragment
to see what happens in
that fragment and after
the “Call technician” ac-
tivity. Then I expect par-
ticipants to find the state
of the label and then look
at the main process after
the mentioned activity to
see what activities can be
executed.
Most of the fixation du-
ration was in the Main
process, then in the Ques-
tion, and the third most in
the Breakdown fragment.
The Shake fragment and
the lifecycles had a low fix-
ation duration
Table 4.8: Summary table for question eight.
From the data you can see that the expected reading pattern was accurate. Most of
the fixation duration was in the Main process and the third most in the Breakdown
fragment. The long dwell time for the question can be explained by the outcome,
participants found the question difficult, only four out of twelve could answer this
question correctly. The heat map E.10 further shows how the expected outcome was
accurate. The focus is on the last part of the Main process and the Breakdown frag-
ment.
Question nine first gave a trace to the participants.
The trace was: A container
is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event occurs, the “Record the shake into the it-
system” activity is executed as well as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity. When the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state. Then it
asked two questions. Table 4.9 shows the results for question eight.
==PAGE:82==
4.8 Expected vs actual reading pattern results
75
Question
Expected
Actual
Q9a) What activities are
executed until the Con-
tainer is in the state “De-
livered”? Q9b) What are
the state(s) of the Label
during the main process af-
ter the scan?
Here participants should
be looking at the main pro-
cess after the scan, stop-
ping
at
the
XOR
and
read the Label data ob-
ject state, then continue
until the end where they
see the Delivered state for
the container.
The most fixation dura-
tion was spent in the Main
process and almost all of
it after the scan activ-
ity.
The Question had
a high duration and the
Shake fragment as well,
both counted in minutes.
The breakdown fragment
and the lifecycles had less,
counted in seconds.
The
Label lifecycles was the
highest and the Container
second highest,
both of
them were mentioned in
the question.
Table 4.9: Summary table for question nine.
From the data you can see that the expected reading pattern was accurate to some
extent. If the prediction had mentioned the Shake fragment it would have been very
accurate. The main fixation duration was spent in the Main process and almost all of
it after the scan activity. The place where the Container is changed to delivered state
(end of the main process) also got a high fixation duration. The heat map E.12 of
question nine further confirms that the predicted reading pattern was accurate. You
can clearly see that the Main process after the scan has a lot of weight as well as the
activities after the XOR.
Question ten also gave a trace before asking two questions. The trace was: A container
arrives at the dock and the “Offload container from vessel” and “Attach accelerom-
eter sensor” activities are executed.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call
technician” activity is executed.. Table 4.8 shows the results for question ten.
==PAGE:83==
4.8 Expected vs actual reading pattern results
76
Question
Expected
Actual
Q10a)
What
are
the
state(s)
of
the
Robot,
Label, Container, and the
Accelerometer? Q10b) In
order for the main process
to continue, what activity
has to be executed next?
Here participants should
be looking at the first
two activities and then at
the Breakdown fragment,
then back up to the third
activity.
The
main
process
had
the most duration closely
followed
by
the
ques-
tion.
The
Breakdown
fragment had an exten-
sible
fixation
duration
as
well.
The
fixation
duration for the lifecycles
was
evenly
distributed.
Participants were looking
mostly from the question
to the Main process and
from the Question to the
Breakdown fragment.
Table 4.10: Summary table for question ten.
From the data you can see that the expected reading pattern was accurate to some
extent. What was missing was the part for question a, there participants are looking
at the lifecycles which is understandable because the question is about the states of
the data objects. The Main process has the most fixation duration and second is the
Question. Third most is the Breakdown fragment and that was expected. The heat
map E.14 further confirms that the expected reading pattern was accurate. The pro-
cess model E.13 from Disco then shows the highest repetitions between the Question
and the Main process and between the Question and the Breakdown fragment. That
fits somewhat to the expected reading pattern.
Table 4.11 shows the results for question eleven.
Question
Expected
Actual
What
are
all
possible
states for the container?
Here participants should
just look at the lifecycles
and answer.
The
Main
process
had
the highest fixation dura-
tion, the Container lifecy-
cle had the second high-
est, and the question third
highest. Participants were
quick and did not spend
much time on this ques-
tion but some distributed
viewing pattern is noticed.
Table 4.11: Summary table for question eleven.
==PAGE:84==
4.9 Results summary
77
From the data you can see that the expected reading pattern was accurate. The
fixation duration was very low for all the artefacts. The Main process was highest,
and the Container was the second highest. Some fixation duration is noticeable as
well in the Main process, that can be explained by the fact that some participants
were searching for the states of the Container in the Main process as well as in the
fragments. That can be seen in Section 3.10.4 where each question is analysed based
on participants performance.
4.9
Results summary
So what do all these results from the different analysis mean and how are they an-
swering the question of how people read and understand fragment-based case models.
To answer that question I have summed up the results from the different sources.
The sources that I used to answer that question are the performance, the question
analysis, the fixation duration, the repetitions, and the think-aloud.
The results from think-aloud show that people read the models differently. Some
had a strategy, and some created a strategy along the way, and others did not have a
strategy at all. Then two participants said they read the model from left to right. The
visual recordings of the participants though show that most of them were jumping
around the model. The question analysis then shows a more individual difference in
how people read fCM models. Some had a focused view, and others had a distributed
view. The fixation duration and the repetitions then confirm that. The fixation du-
ration for people with a targeted view was higher on the places where the answer
could be found, and the people with a distributed view had higher fixation duration
on areas that did not have a connection with the answer. The repetitions were much
higher for people with the distributed view that shows that those people were looking
around in the model. The people with the focused view performed better and had a
better understanding of the model that was asked about.
Based on the results from the performance it shows that the fCM approach is well un-
derstandable and the different components it has are being used as intended. Those
components are fragments, data objects, and lifecycles.
The question class and the GSR data were not directly involved in answering the re-
search question. The results from these sources were intended to get an understanding
of what aspects of modelling with the fCM approach could be improved. The results
from those sources show that if the model has a lot of conditions (pre and post), it
gets more complicated to read and understand. The results from the GSR data did
not show that the most stressful questions were also the most difficult to answer.
The final source, the expected vs actual reading pattern was created to be sure that
all the aspects of fCM would be covered with the questions. The expected reading
pattern was then presented to a person with expert knowledge of fCM for validation.
The result from the analysis of that show that I was pretty accurate most of the time
and that is an indication of fCM being understandable and straightforward because
of my limited experience.
==PAGE:85==
4.10 Discussion
78
Based on the results from the participants it shows that the advantages of the fCM
approach are that it adds clarity and reduces the complexity of business process mod-
els. All of the participants found the idea of splitting extensive processes into different
smaller fragments useful. The inconveniences are that it might get complicated to
figure out where and when the fragments come to use if the process is extensive with
a lot of fragments.
4.10
Discussion
This section discusses the results of the experiment. The overall results show that
fragment-based case modelling (fCM) is an approach that is well readable and easily
understood even to people with no prior experience with business process manage-
ment (BPM). The majority of the participants in the experiment did not have any
BPM experience, but the performance showed that it was not an issue regarding the
understanding of the model. Some parts of the fCM approach were more challenging
to understand. Participants found questions classified as a condition question the
most difficult. Those questions required the participants to know how a data object
is used as a pre-condition for fragments and activities. Participants also reported in
the think-aloud that some information could be lost and that it could be challenging
to see how the main process connects to the fragments and where the fragments help
the main process. These arguments fit with the fact that the condition questions were
the most difficult ones. When the participants were split into groups based on their
performance it showed a clear difference in how they read the model. The group that
performed better had a more focused view, and the group that performed worse had
more distributed view. The fixation duration on the question artefact as well as more
fixation duration overall for the group that performed better and the fact that the
same group had more repetitions between the artefacts confirm what the heat maps
show that this group had a more distributed view and it seems that this group was
guessing more on the answers. The group that performed better and had a focused
view was focusing on the components that were asked about in the question, they
approached the model with a clear strategy, and they used the lifecycles for the data
objects to validate the state transitions. The result from the GSR then showed that
participants in the group that performed worse were also more stressed and more
emotional aroused when answering the questions thus finding them more difficult. A
participant in the group that performed better was the most stressed one but was
also the participant the performed the best.
The reason for the stress of the participant could be that the calibration of the eye-
tracker took a very long time or that the participant wanted to perform well and
therefore read the questions and the model carefully before answering the questions.
It is difficult to validate how that participant read the model because the eye-tracker
collected low gaze samples for him. That brings me to the limitations of such an
experiment. The reason for the low gaze samples could be that the participant had
mascara on her eyes[10]. It could also be because the participant was looking away
==PAGE:86==
4.10 Discussion
79
from the eye-tracker a lot. There were participants in the experiment with much
lower gaze samples overall and this could be a factor in the results as they were not
left out of the analysis of the data. Table 4.12 shows the gaze samples collected in
percentage for each participant.
Participant
Gaze samples %
P1
97
P2
96
P3
85
P4
90
P5
59
P6
94
P7
99
P8
39
P9
99
P10
34
P11
49
P12
96
Table 4.12: Gaze samples collected for each participant in the eye-tracking experi-
ment.
Like the table shows some of the participants had a low percentage and because of
that I calculated the interquartile range to see if they would be outliers from the
data set. What that calculation showed was that they were well within range, so
no participant was left out from the analysis of the data although 39% and 49% are
generally very low gaze samples. Another limitation of this experiment is that people
could have found the questions confusing. I noticed some indications of that. When
I gave a hint or explained the problem better the participants almost answered cor-
rectly. What people found confusing, for example, was question six. It asked about
the execution of activities in all fragments. Some participants then did not consider
the main process in that question and therefore did not answer correctly, or at least
what I said was correct based on how I designed the question. Another limitation
to the validity of the experiment is how detailed I explained the fCM concept to the
participants in the familiarisation task. It is very likely that I was more focused on
teaching all the details to participants that I knew that they did not have any prior
experience with BPM.
What I think could have been done better in the experiment is that I should have had
more focus on the think-aloud to get more detailed results. The think-aloud showed
some difference between the participants, but if I would have asked the participants
for more detailed answers, I think more visible results would have shown. The answers
in the think-aloud were most often concise and superficial. Another thing was that
due to time restrictions I could not get any more experienced people to participate.
==PAGE:87==
4.10 Discussion
80
It would have been nice to have people with extensible BPM knowledge joining. That
could have shown if there were a big difference in how experienced people read and
understand fCM models compared to how inexperienced people do.
The conduction of the experiment did not go as smooth as I would have liked it to be.
Some mistakes were made. The first one was that question six appeared twice in the
experiment for the first two participants. The first participant did not notice it and
gave the wrong answer again to the problem. I found the question familiar, and they
are, question six and seven both start with the same text but I did not realise that
it was question six again until participant two. Participant two did not notice that
the question was the same again and gave a different answer. When participant two
had finished, I changed the design of the experiment, removed the duplicate question
and added correct question seven in. When the data was analysed to keep it fair and
straightforward, I removed question seven from the data. The second mistake I did
was that I forgot to start the voice recordings for participant four. It is unbelievable
how I could forget that because I had three devices recording the answers for extra
safety but forgot to turn on any of them. Luckily I noted down the questions order
and answers while the experiment was ongoing so I got the participants performance
but could not validate the scores with voice recordings. I realised the mistake before
we did the think-aloud, so the recording of that was at least recorded.
The improvements that need to be done on Gryphon and Chimera were realised
when the model was being created from the scenario and the constraints. To be able
to fulfil all the constraints an XOR needed to be used. Gryphon is relying on data
objects for the control flow, but it still isn’t complete enough to completely remove
the gateways.
As you can see in Figure 3.11 of the model, there were two XOR gateways. The
XOR gateway in the Main process had to be there because the Label data object
had to be created at the beginning of the Main process so the same instance would
be used in the Shake fragment if a shake event occurs. So for the Main process to
be able to finish the XOR gateway was added otherwise it would mean that a shake
event always had to occur for the Main process to complete. The XOR gateway in
the Shake fragment had to be there to handle the possibility of multiple shake events
happening when moving the same Container. It is understood that the XOR gateway
could have been removed and another fragment instance would always be created but
that did not fit with the thought of having one label for each container like you would
do in real life.
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The exploratory study aimed at investigating how people read, understand and ap-
proach fragment-based case models (fCM). A research question was asked that drove
the development of this project. First, a scenario was developed that fitted with the
possibilities of what fCM can do best, that is to handle variant rich processes. By
combining fragments at runtime and using data objects for the control flow. Then
the model was modelled with Gryphon and executed in Chimera for validation.
Questions were conceived from the model and participants were asked to answer the
questions. An eye-tracking experiment was then conducted with the model and the
questions as the stimuli. Participants also wear a GSR sensor to grasp the emotional
experience from the experiment as well. After the eye-tracking experiment, a lot of
data had been created. To analyse that data statistics and heat maps were used
from the eye-tracking software, process mining was used with a tool called Disco, and
qualitative data analysis method known as coding was used on the transcribed data
from voice recordings. The voice recordings came from participants answering the
questions and from a think-aloud that was done after the eye-tracking experiment.
First, to get an overview of how all the participants understood the model the perfor-
mance of the answers from the questions was analysed. Then the participants were
split into two user groups. By examining the behaviour of the two user groups, we
can understand the reasons why those who did well, did well and based on those
results suggestions of improvements can be outlined.
Based on the performance of the participants the overall understanding of fCM is
good.
No prior business process management experience is required to learn the
basics of fCM. The participants found the fragments valuable, and they used the
lifecycles for the data objects as indented.
The fragments hold vital information
about how the main process progresses based on changing data object states, and
they should not be left out when fCM models are explained. Lifecycles are not just
beneficial when one must know all possible states for a given data object. Lifecycles
provide an overview and are a quick way to see if some transactions in the process
are possible or not. When the groups were split, and the difference in how they read
the model was analysed it showed that the group that performed better had a more
focused view and the group that performed worse had a more distributed view. The
data also indicated that the group that performed worse were guessing more on the
answers instead of figuring out the solution by looking through the model. It also
==PAGE:89==
5.1 Future Work
82
showed that having a strategy when reading the model is beneficial.
In this exploratory study, the focus was on the overall understanding and to see
if people found fCM understandable and easy to grasp so from the results of the anal-
ysis it is difficult to find aspects of fCM that could be improved. A more thorough
experiment would have to be conducted about specific parts of fCM. Results have
shown that fCM is on the correct path but Gryphon and Chimera are only a subset
of BPMN 2.0 so there is some development that needs to be done.
5.1
Future Work
There are different possibilities for future work for this project. First, one being that
the data from the transcribed answers could be coded. Specifically, question one that
asked the participants to describe the scenario. In that transcription, some valuable
information could lie, and they could shed more light on how people read fCM models.
The second possibility would be to get more participants to take the eye-tracking
experiment, especially people with more knowledge about the subject.
The third possibility is to investigate the gender aspect further. Is it just a coin-
cidence that the group that performed better was almost all female and the group
that performed worse were all males. That is a question that could be interesting to
follow, but it would maybe not improve the possibilities of fCM, but instead, it could
add some value to the argument that females are better at multitasking than males.
The fourth possibility would be not always to show the same model but develop
different scenarios and create more questions with them. That could eliminate the
learning possibility, and I think it could give better results about how people read
the model.
The fifth possibility is to use the data gathered in the second section of the pre-
experiment form (cf. Section 3.6). In that section, a screening of the participants
to asses their physical ability to participate in the eye-tracking experiment was done.
With the data from that screening, one could look into if some physical limitations
or capabilities affect the reading and understanding of fCM.
The sixth possibility is to listen again to the recordings of the answers from the par-
ticipants to confirm the theory of participants that were in the group that performed
worse were guessing more and were more reckless or careless in their answers.
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX A
Images of experiment
ready questions
==PAGE:91==
A Images of experiment ready questions
84
==PAGE:92==
A Images of experiment ready questions
85
Figure A.1: Question 1 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:93==
A Images of experiment ready questions
86
Figure A.2: Question 2 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:94==
A Images of experiment ready questions
87
Figure A.3: Question 3 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:95==
A Images of experiment ready questions
88
Figure A.4: Question 4 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:96==
A Images of experiment ready questions
89
Figure A.5: Question 5 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:97==
A Images of experiment ready questions
90
Figure A.6: Question 6 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:98==
A Images of experiment ready questions
91
Figure A.7: Question 7 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:99==
A Images of experiment ready questions
92
Figure A.8: Question 8 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:100==
A Images of experiment ready questions
93
Figure A.9: Question 9 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:101==
A Images of experiment ready questions
94
Figure A.10: Question 10 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:102==
A Images of experiment ready questions
95
Figure A.11: Question 11 ready for experiment.
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX B
Pre-experiment form
==PAGE:104==
B Pre-experiment form
97
Figure B.1: Pre-experiment form.
==PAGE:105==
B Pre-experiment form
98
Figure B.2: Pre-experiment form.
==PAGE:106==
B Pre-experiment form
99
Figure B.3: Pre-experiment form.
==PAGE:107==
B Pre-experiment form
100
Figure B.4: Pre-experiment form.
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX C
Script TSV to XES
1 package tsv2xesSectionDemo;
2
3 import java.io.File;
4 import java.io.FileInputStream;
5 import java.io.FileOutputStream;
6 import java.io.IOException;
7 import java.io.InputStreamReader;
8 import java.io.Reader;
9 import java.text.ParseException;
10 import java.text.SimpleDateFormat;
11 import org.joda.time.DateTime;
12 import tsv2xes.utils.XLogHelper;
13
14 import java.util.Calendar;
15 import java.util.Date;
16 import java.util.HashMap;
17 import java.util.Map;
18 import java.util.regex.Matcher;
19 import java.util.regex.Pattern;
20
21 import org.apache.commons.csv.CSVFormat;
22 import org.apache.commons.csv.CSVParser;
23 import org.apache.commons.csv.CSVRecord;
24 import org.apache.commons.io.input.BOMInputStream;
25 import org.deckfour.xes.model.XEvent;
26 import org.deckfour.xes.model.XLog;
27 import org.deckfour.xes.model.XTrace;
28 import org.deckfour.xes.out.XSerializer;
29 import org.deckfour.xes.out.XesXmlSerializer;
30
31 public class tsv2xes {
32
33
private static Pattern AOIpatternsAllLC = Pattern.compile(Constants.
AOI_PATTERN_ALL_LC);
34
private static Pattern AOIpatternsLCSplit = Pattern.compile(Constants.
AOI_PATTERN_SPLIT_LC);
35
private static XSerializer serializer = new XesXmlSerializer();
36
private static boolean generateEndEvent = true;
37
38
public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException , ParseException
{
39
==PAGE:109==
C Script TSV to XES
102
40
File path = new File("C:\\Users\\skuli\\Documents\\DTU\\Meistaraverkefni
\\Experiment\\Exports\\New");
41
int fileCount = 0;
42
for (File inFile : path.listFiles()) {
43
if (!inFile.getName().endsWith(".tsv")) {
44
continue;
45
}
46
47
System.out.println(++fileCount + ". Processing `" + inFile.getName() +
"'...");
48
49
XLog combinedLifecyclesLog = XLogHelper.generateNewXLog(inFile.getName
() + " - AllLC");
50
XLog splitLifecyclesLog = XLogHelper.generateNewXLog(inFile.getName()
+ " - LCSplit");
51
Map<String, XTrace> participantsToAllLCTraces = new HashMap<String,
XTrace >();
52
Map<String, XTrace> participantsToSplitLCTraces = new HashMap<String,
XTrace >();
53
54
Reader reader = new InputStreamReader(new BOMInputStream(new
FileInputStream(inFile)), "UTF-8");
55
CSVParser parser = new CSVParser(reader, CSVFormat.TDF.withHeader());
56
Map<String, String> AOIfieldsAllLC = new HashMap<String, String >();
57
Map<String, String> AOIfieldsSplitLC = new HashMap<String, String >();
58
long sumGazeEventDurasionSplitLC = 0;
59
long sumGazeEventDurasionAllLC = 0;
60
System.out.println("
> parsing...");
61
for (CSVRecord record : parser) {
62
// identify all aoi fields from headers
63
if (AOIfieldsAllLC.isEmpty()) {
64
for (String header : parser.getHeaderMap().keySet()) {
65
Matcher matcher = AOIpatternsAllLC.matcher(header);
66
if (matcher.find()) {
67
AOIfieldsAllLC.put(header, matcher.group(1));
68
}
69
}
70
}
71
if (AOIfieldsSplitLC.isEmpty()) {
72
for (String header : parser.getHeaderMap().keySet()) {
73
Matcher matcher = AOIpatternsLCSplit.matcher(header);
74
if (matcher.find()) {
75
AOIfieldsSplitLC.put(header, matcher.group(1));
76
}
77
}
78
}
79
80
String participantName = record.get("Participant name");
81
Date startDate = findTimeStamp(record);
82
83
// add aois using combined lifecycles
84
XTrace currentSubjectTraceAllLC = participantsToAllLCTraces.get(
participantName);
85
if (currentSubjectTraceAllLC == null) {
==PAGE:110==
C Script TSV to XES
103
86
currentSubjectTraceAllLC = XLogHelper.insertTrace(
combinedLifecyclesLog , participantName);
87
88
participantsToAllLCTraces.put(participantName ,
currentSubjectTraceAllLC);
89
}
90
for (String AOIField : AOIfieldsAllLC.keySet()) {
91
if (record.get(AOIField).equals("1")) {
92
93
XEvent eventStart = XLogHelper.insertEvent(
currentSubjectTraceAllLC ,
94
AOIfieldsAllLC.get(AOIField), startDate);
95
XLogHelper.decorateElement(eventStart , "lifecycle:transition", "
start", "Lifecycle");
96
97
String mediaName = record.get(Constants.MEDIA_NAME);
98
XLogHelper.decorateElement(eventStart , "Question", mediaName);
99
100
if (generateEndEvent) {
101
int gazeEventDuration = Integer.parseInt(record.get("Gaze
event duration"));
102
sumGazeEventDurasionAllLC += gazeEventDuration;
103
Date endDate = new Date(startDate.getTime() +
sumGazeEventDurasionAllLC);
104
XEvent eventComplete = XLogHelper.insertEvent(
currentSubjectTraceAllLC ,
105
AOIfieldsAllLC.get(AOIField), endDate);
106
XLogHelper.decorateElement(eventComplete , "lifecycle:
transition", "complete", "Lifecycle");
107
XLogHelper.decorateElement(eventComplete , "Question",
mediaName);
108
}
109
110
}
111
}
112
113
// add aois splitting the lifecycles
114
XTrace currentSubjectTraceSplitLC = participantsToSplitLCTraces.get(
participantName);
115
if (currentSubjectTraceSplitLC == null) {
116
currentSubjectTraceSplitLC = XLogHelper.insertTrace(
splitLifecyclesLog , participantName);
117
participantsToSplitLCTraces.put(participantName ,
currentSubjectTraceSplitLC);
118
}
119
for (String AOIField : AOIfieldsSplitLC.keySet()) {
120
if (record.get(AOIField).equals("1")) {
121
XEvent eventStart = XLogHelper.insertEvent(
currentSubjectTraceSplitLC ,
122
AOIfieldsSplitLC.get(AOIField), startDate);
123
XLogHelper.decorateElement(eventStart , "lifecycle:transition", "
start", "Lifecycle");
124
125
String mediaName = record.get(Constants.MEDIA_NAME);
126
XLogHelper.decorateElement(eventStart , "Question", mediaName);
==PAGE:111==
C Script TSV to XES
104
127
if (generateEndEvent) {
128
int gazeEventDuration = Integer.parseInt(record.get("Gaze
event duration"));
129
sumGazeEventDurasionSplitLC += gazeEventDuration;
130
// System.out.println("Gaze event duration = " +
gazeEventDuration + ". Eye
131
// movement type index = " + eyeMovementTypeIndex);
132
DateTime jodaDate = new DateTime(startDate);
133
DateTime newTime = jodaDate.plus(sumGazeEventDurasionSplitLC);
134
XEvent eventComplete = XLogHelper.insertEvent(
currentSubjectTraceSplitLC ,
135
AOIfieldsSplitLC.get(AOIField), newTime.toDate());
136
XLogHelper.decorateElement(eventComplete , "lifecycle:
transition", "complete", "Lifecycle");
137
XLogHelper.decorateElement(eventComplete , "Question",
mediaName);
138
}
139
140
}
141
}
142
143
}
144
parser.close();
145
146
XLogHelper.sortXLog(splitLifecyclesLog);
147
System.out.println("
> dumping xes file");
148
// export quadrant log
149
serializer.serialize(XLogHelper.mergeEventsWithSameName(
combinedLifecyclesLog , generateEndEvent),
150
new FileOutputStream(inFile + "-AllLC.xes"));
151
// export graph log
152
serializer.serialize(XLogHelper.mergeEventsWithSameName(
splitLifecyclesLog , generateEndEvent),
153
new FileOutputStream(inFile + " -LCSplit.xes"));
154
System.out.println("File processing complete!\n\n");
155
System.out.println("Total gaze event duration Split lifecycles = " +
sumGazeEventDurasionSplitLC);
156
System.out.println("Total gaze event duration All lifecycles= " +
sumGazeEventDurasionAllLC);
157
}
158
System.out.println("Done! " + fileCount + " file(s) were processed");
159
}
160
161
public static Date findTimeStamp(CSVRecord record) throws ParseException {
162
SimpleDateFormat dateParser = new SimpleDateFormat("yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss"
);
163
String expstart = record.get("Recording start time");
164
Date expstartDate = dateParser.parse("2019-03-12 " + expstart);
165
return expstartDate;
166
167
}
168
169 }
.
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX D
Question analysis
This Appendix shows the images used to compare how the participants read the
model. It shows the process map from Disco and the heat map from Tobii for each
question that was used in the analysis. Because the images are relatively small in the
document they the image files are also included in the online Appendix H.
Figure D.1: Comparison of process model images from Disco for question three.
==PAGE:113==
D Question analysis
106
Figure D.2: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question three.
Figure D.3: Comparison of process model images from Disco for question four.
Figure D.4: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question four.
==PAGE:114==
D Question analysis
107
Figure D.5: Comparison of process model images from Disco for question five.
Figure D.6: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question five.
Figure D.7: Comparison of process model images from Disco for question six.
==PAGE:115==
D Question analysis
108
Figure D.8: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question six.
Figure D.9: Comparison of process model images from Disco for question eight.
Figure D.10: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question eight.
==PAGE:116==
D Question analysis
109
Figure D.11: Comparison of process model images from Disco for question nine.
Figure D.12: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question nine.
Figure D.13: Comparison of process model images from Disco for question ten.
==PAGE:117==
D Question analysis
110
Figure D.14: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question ten.
Figure D.15: Comparison of process model images from Disco for question eleven.
==PAGE:118==
D Question analysis
111
Figure D.16: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question eleven.
Figure D.17: Comparison of process model images from Disco for question twelve.
Figure D.18: Comparison of heat maps from Tobii for question twelve.
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX E
Expected vs actual
reading pattern
This Appendix shows the images from the analysis of the expected vs the actual read-
ing patterns. Those are images of process models from Disco and heat maps from
Tobii.
==PAGE:120==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
113
Figure E.1: Process model from Disco of the fixation duration for question two.
Figure E.2: Heat map from Tobii of the fixation duration for question two.
==PAGE:121==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
114
Figure E.3: Process model from Disco of the fixation duration for question three.
Figure E.4: Heat map from Tobii of the fixation duration for question three.
==PAGE:122==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
115
Figure E.5: Process model from Disco of the fixation duration for question five.
==PAGE:123==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
116
Figure E.6: Heat map from Tobii of the fixation duration for question five.
==PAGE:124==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
117
Figure E.7: Process model from Disco of the fixation duration for question six.
==PAGE:125==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
118
Figure E.8: Heat map from Tobii of the fixation duration for question six.
==PAGE:126==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
119
Figure E.9: Process model from Disco of the fixation duration for question eight.
==PAGE:127==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
120
Figure E.10: Heat map from Tobii of the fixation duration for question eight.
==PAGE:128==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
121
Figure E.11: Process model from Disco of the fixation duration for question nine.
==PAGE:129==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
122
Figure E.12: Heat map from Tobii of the fixation duration for question nine.
==PAGE:130==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
123
Figure E.13: Process model from Disco of the fixation duration for question ten.
==PAGE:131==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
124
Figure E.14: Heat map from Tobii of the fixation duration for question ten.
==PAGE:132==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
125
Figure E.15: Process model from Disco of the fixation duration for question eleven.
==PAGE:133==
E Expected vs actual reading pattern
126
Figure E.16: Heat map from Tobii of the fixation duration for question eleven.
==PAGE:134==
APPENDIX F
Online Appendix
Below is a link to a Google drive folder where the online Appendix can be found. The
Appendix includes material referenced in the thesis as well as all figures in a folder
called Figures.
https://drive.google.com/open?id=1B5r6uNwRGiSQ0p5lvSHq3F0O60yirl8t
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX G
Modelling with
Gryphon
Figure G.1 depicts the front page of Gryphon after all the components have been
created
Figure G.1: The front page of Gryphon when the model is ready.
Figure G.2 depicts the model of the Main process in Gryphon.
Figure G.2: The Main process in Gryphon.
Figure G.3 depicts the model of the Shake fragment in Gryphon.
==PAGE:136==
G Modelling with Gryphon
129
Figure G.3: The Shake fragment in Gryphon.
Figure G.4 depicts the model of the Breakdown fragment in Gryphon.
Figure G.4: The Breakdown fragment in Gryphon.
Figure G.5 depicts the data object Container in Gryphon.
Figure G.5: The Container data object with attributes and lifecycles.
==PAGE:137==
G Modelling with Gryphon
130
Figure G.6 depicts the data object Robot in Gryphon.
Figure G.6: The Robot data object with attributes and lifecycles.
Figure G.7 depicts the data object Label in Gryphon.
Figure G.7: The Label data object with attributes and lifecycles.
Figure G.8 depicts the data object Accelerometer in Gryphon.
Figure G.8: The Accelerometer data object with attributes and lifecycles.
==PAGE:138==
APPENDIX H
Transcription of
participants answers
Participant one (P1).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“It is most likely that they are offloading some container of a ship. Then they
physically attach a sensor. Then there is a robot working on this, it drives
the container. The container then waits to be scanned. The container is in
offloaded state which is a pre-condition and then he is scanned and changes to
scanned state which is a post-condition. Next step is to drive the container to
the dispatch terminal and the robot is working on that and when that is done,
we arrive at the XOR that is checking if the label on the container is okay
or not… In the shake fragment we check if the product… no, the container is
damaged or not. Then they main process continues, and we need to manually
detach the accelerometer. Then it loads the container on to a truck that drives
it to its destination”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“I would say it is six activities, “Offload container from vessel”, “Attach ac-
celerometer”, “Drive the container to the scanning platform”, ”Scan the con-
tainer”, “Drive the container to the dispatch terminal”, and then in the Shake
fragment it is “Record the shake into the it-system””.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
==PAGE:139==
H Transcription of participants answers
132
“After the “Label the container as okay” activity”.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“Offloaded, scanned, and delivered”.
Q9: A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event occurs,
the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as well
as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity. When
the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“It starts with “Drive the container to the dispatch terminal” activity, then
it goes to “Label the container as okay”, then it goes to the shake fragment
to the “Assign dock-worker to label the container”, then it goes back to the
loop and executes “Label the container as shaken”, then it executes “detach
the accelerometer”, and then finishes with the “Load the container on to the
delivery truck”, so I would say seven activities are executed”.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the process after
the scan? “Requested”.
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“There is no activity executed because the robot is broken”.
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a) What states are the Label and the Robot in?
==PAGE:140==
H Transcription of participants answers
133
“The robot is in a broken state and the label is in a requested state”
b) What activity is executed nest in the Shake fragment?
“Assign dock worker to label the container activity is executed next”.
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“It is when the container is okay and he can go through to the delivery truck”.
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state?
“After the Call technician activity”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed.
a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label, Container, and the
Accelerometer?
“The robot is broken, the label is in labelled, the container is in scanned,
and the accelerometer is in idle”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next?
“Repair robot has to be executed next”.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
“The container has to be shaken, something has to wrong with the container”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
==PAGE:141==
H Transcription of participants answers
134
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“Seven activities, the first five in the main process and two in the Shake frag-
ment”.
Participant two (P2).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“The process is about taking containers of a ship. And there is some robot
that is driving the container to its place but before it does that there is an
accelerometer attached to the container that is checking for how much the
container shakes while the robot is driving. When the container arrives at the
terminal where it leaves the container there is a check for how much it has
been shook, if it has been shook then it is registered into the system. It seems
that it doesn’t matter how bad the shake was it is always labelled”.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“Offloaded, scanned, or delivered”.
Q9: A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event occurs,
the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as well
as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity. When
the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“Those activities are executed: Drive the container to dispatch terminal, Label
the container as shake, Detach the accelerometer, Load the container on to
delivery truck and in the Shake fragment, Record the shake into the it-system
and Remind assigned dock worker”.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the process after
the scan?
==PAGE:142==
H Transcription of participants answers
135
“Initial, requested, and labelled”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“Offload container, Attach accelerometer sensor, Drive the container to scan-
ning platform, Scan the container and Record the shake into the it-system, so
5 activities”.
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state? “After Call technician activity”.
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“Only after Detach the accelerometer activity”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed.
a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label, Container, and the
Accelerometer?
“Robot is broken, accelerometer is idle, label is initial, and container is of-
floaded”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next?
“Repair robot”.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
“Detach the accelerometer”.
==PAGE:143==
H Transcription of participants answers
136
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“Robot is broken, and label is initial”.
b) What activity is executed next in the Shake fragment?
“Assign dock-worker to label the container”.
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“Label the container as okay and Detach the accelerometer”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“Record the shake into the it-system, Drive the container to the scanning
platform, Attach the accelerometer sensor, and Offload the container from
vessel, so five activities”.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
“After Assign dock-worker to label the container”.
Participant three (P3).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“The process is about taking container of a ship.
Then we attach an ac-
celerometer to check if it shakes while it is handled by us. Then there are
==PAGE:144==
H Transcription of participants answers
137
robots that are doing the work and we regularly check if the robots are okay
or not. Then we have the shake fragment to check if the containers have had
any shakes, if they have then we label them as shaken, then we put the con-
tainers on to a delivery truck”.
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state?
“That is when there is a breakdown event. Then we can call a technician
and he can change the state to broken”.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
“That is after the “Assign dock-worker to label the container”, after a shake
has happened”.
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“After we label the container the label can be in labelled state and before
the detach the accelerometer both states mentioned occurs”.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
Participant skipped over this question by pressing the space bar.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“I would say three, “Offload container from vessel”, “Attach the accelerom-
eter sensor”, and “Record the shake into the it-system””.
Q7: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that
can be executed prior to “Detach the accelerometer” if one shake
occurs and there is no breakdown event?
==PAGE:145==
H Transcription of participants answers
138
“They are eight, “Offload container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer”,
“Drive the container to scanning platform”, “Scan the container”, “Drive the
container to dispatch terminal”, “Label the container as shaken”, so six in the
main, then because a shake occurs we need to execute “Record the shake into
the it-system”, and “Assign a dock-worker to label the container””.
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“We can label the container as okay and detach the accelerometer nothing
else”.
Q9: A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event occurs,
the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as well
as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity. When
the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“Then we need “Scan the container”, “Drive container to dispatch terminal”,
and because we have the label in requested state we go to “Label the container
as shaken”, then we got to “Detach the accelerometer”, and finally “Load the
container on to the delivery truck” and the state will be delivered”.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the process after
the scan?
“It is requested until we execute “Label the container as shaken” then it will
be labelled”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed.
==PAGE:146==
H Transcription of participants answers
139
a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label, Container, and the
Accelerometer?
“The container is offloaded, accelerometer is idle, then we receive a break-
down event, the robot is broken, and the label is initial”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next? Participant forgot to answer this question.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“He can be offloaded, scanned, and delivered”.
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“The label is in initial, because we haven’t executed the next activity and
the robot is in working because we have fixed it”.
b) What activity is executed nest in the Shake fragment?
“Assign dock-worker to label the container”.
Participant five (P5).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“There is some robot that is fetching a container but first there is some sensor
that needs to be attached to the container. Then it needs to be driven by some
robot, it needs to be scanned… there is some condition there. The condition
off the robot needs to be working. The container is then scanned, then it is
driven to a terminal, then it needs to be labelled, either as shaken or as okay.
Then when that is finished the sensor is removed and the container is taken
and put on to the truck”.
==PAGE:147==
H Transcription of participants answers
140
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state?
“I don’t know, at least there is a breakdown fragment, I don´t know under
which circumstances it goes there”. Then I give him a hint that it is after a
specific activity. “Okay then it is after “Call technician” activity”.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
“Isn´t it when the container is shaken, after “Assign dock-worker to label
the container” activity”.
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“Is it after “Label the container as okay”, then the accelerometer is idle, and
the label is labelled”.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
“Isn’t it after the “Load the container on to the delivery truck”, then the
accelerometer is in sleep and the container is in scanned state. No, it is before
that activity, so after “Detach the accelerometer” activity”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“I´m going to say seven”.
Q7: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that
can be executed prior to “Detach the accelerometer” if one shake
occurs and there is no breakdown event?
“is it nine… no, eight”.
==PAGE:148==
H Transcription of participants answers
141
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“Isn’t it just “Label the container as shaken”, no “Label the container as
okay” because there was no shake”.
Q9:
A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event oc-
curs, the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as
well as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity.
When the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“Detach the accelerometer and load the container on to the delivery truck”.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the process after
the scan? “Labelled”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed. a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label,
Container, and the Accelerometer?
“Container is offloaded, Robot is working, label is initial, accelerometer idle”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next?
“Drive container to dispatch terminal is executed next but the Robot has
to be working”.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“That is offloaded, scanned and delivered”.
==PAGE:149==
H Transcription of participants answers
142
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“I´m a bit confused, the activities are not in order… is this a trick?”. “The
label is in requested and the robot is in working”.
b) What activity is executed nest in the Shake fragment?
“Isn´t it “Assign dock-worker to label the container””.
Participant six (P6).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“The main process is about a container that has something in it, it is offloaded.
Then we have a shake fragment to asses if something has happened and then
there is another fragment that is for the robot, to check if the robot breaks
down or not. So, in the beginning a container arrives and that puts the robot
in a working state. Then I think if the robot does not work the breakdown
fragment starts but if it the robot works then the main process continues.
Also when the container arrives the label goes to initial, the label can also be
in requested or labelled state. The container is offloaded and the container
data object gets created. Then we go and attach the accelerometer sensor and
the accelerometer becomes idle state which leads to the shake fragment being
started, but we wait for a shake event. We either assign a dock-worker or if
the label is in requested then we can remind the worker. Then to continue
with the main process we drive the container to the scanning platform, then
the robot has to be working. We then wait for the container to be scanned.
The container then is offloaded and scanned. The container can be offloaded,
scanned, and delivered. After the scan it becomes scanned. Then we drive the
container to the dispatch terminal and again we use a robot to do that. Then
we either label the container as shaken or as okay, so either it has been dam-
aged or it hasn´t. If he has not been damaged, then we use the initial label,
if it has been damaged then we use the requested label. The outcome of both
of them is that the label becomes labelled. Then we detach the accelerometer
that was attached previously to the container, the container was idle after
==PAGE:150==
H Transcription of participants answers
143
we attached it and when we take it off it goes to sleep state. Then we go to
“Load the container on to the delivery truck”, then the label needs to be in
labelled, the container needs to be scanned and the robot needs to be working,
so, if one of those states are not fulfilled we need to execute the breakdown
fragment or the shake fragment. Then the container becomes delivered and
the scenario ends”.
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state?
“I don´t understand, he can do that whenever…”. I then told P6 that it is
after a specific activity. “The robot is working and then we execute “Call
technician” and it will be broken”.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
“That happens after “Assign dock-worker to label the container””.
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“Okay that is “Label the container as okay”, and “Label the container as
shaken””.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
“That is only in “Load the container on to the delivery truck”, no, it is before
that, after “Detach the accelerometer” activity”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“They are three, “Offload container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sen-
sor”, and “Record the shake into it-system””.
==PAGE:151==
H Transcription of participants answers
144
Q7: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that
can be executed prior to “Detach the accelerometer” if one shake
occurs and there is no breakdown event?
“I´m going to say eight”.
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“it goes to ”Label the container as okay”, from there it goes to “Detach the
accelerometer”, then we need to wait until the robot is working again, so it is
those two”.
Q9:
A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event oc-
curs, the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as
well as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity.
When the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“it goes to “Drive container to dispatch terminal”, then it goes to “Label
the container as shaken”, then it goes to the “Detach the accelerometer”, and
finally it executes “Load the container on to the delivery truck” and the con-
tainer will be left in delivered state”.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the process after
the scan?
“It is going to be requested and labelled”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed. a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label,
Container, and the Accelerometer?
==PAGE:152==
H Transcription of participants answers
145
“The robot is in broken state, the label is still in initial, the accelerometer
is idle, and the container is offloaded”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next?
“That is repair robot”.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“He can be offloaded, scanned, and delivered. This one was easy”.
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“The robot is working, and the label is in initial”.
b) What activity is executed nest in the Shake fragment?
“That is “Assign dock-worker to label the container””.
Participant seven (P7).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“So the main process of this one is scan the container, if the container is
shaken or not the business process can make sure of that. The main process is
actually scanning the container and we are checking if the container is shaken
or okay”.
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state?
“It is after “Call technician””.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
==PAGE:153==
H Transcription of participants answers
146
tial state to requested?
“There are two circumstances, one is after “Assign dock-worker to label the
container”, and the other is “Record the shake into the it-system””.
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“I think after “Label the container as shaken”, and after “Label the container
as okay” activities”.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
“After the “Detach the accelerometer””.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“It should be “Record the shake into it-system”, “Drive container to dispatch
terminal”, and “Label the container as shaken”, those three”.
Q7: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that
can be executed prior to “Detach the accelerometer” if one shake
occurs and there is no breakdown event?
“They are nine, “Offload container from vessel”, “Attach the accelerometer
sensor”, “Drive the container to scanning platform”, “Scan the container”,
“Drive the container to dispatch terminal”, “Label the container as shaken”,
“Record the shake into it-system”, “Assign dock-worker to label the container”,
ahh okay no they are eight because it is an XOR condition”.
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
==PAGE:154==
H Transcription of participants answers
147
“We can do the “Label the container as okay”, then “Detach the accelerome-
ter”, and then “Load the container on to the delivery truck””.
Q9:
A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event oc-
curs, the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as
well as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity.
When the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“We have only one, “Load the container on to the delivery truck””.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the main process
after the scan?
“Initial, we have three of them, initial, requested and labelled I can see that
from the lifecycle”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed. a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label,
Container, and the Accelerometer?
“The state of the robot becomes working to broken, the label becomes ini-
tial, and the container is still offloaded, and the accelerometer idle”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next?
“The activity should be “Call technician””.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“All the possibilities for the container are three, offloaded, scanned, and deliv-
ered”.
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
==PAGE:155==
H Transcription of participants answers
148
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“The label is initial, and the robot is working”.
b) What activity is executed next in the Shake fragment?
“I think “Assign a dock-worker to label the container””.
Participant eight (P8).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“It is about taking containers from a ship and they are loaded on to a truck.
First we have to attach an accelerometer that is a sensor. Then we need to
drive it to some platform, then we need to scan it, then we need to drive it to
some dispatch terminal, then we need to label it somehow, either we label it
as shaken or not shaken, then we detach the accelerometer and finally we load
it on to the truck. While this is happening we can go through a breakdown
fragment and a shake fragment”.
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state?
“After “Call technician”, there it changes from working to broken”.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
“It is either after “Assign dock-worker to label the container”, is there some-
thing else, no, it is only after that one”.
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“That is after we have labelled the container, both activities included”.
==PAGE:156==
H Transcription of participants answers
149
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
“After “detach the accelerometer”, then they are both in the states stated”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“I say that they are three”.
Q7: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that
can be executed prior to “Detach the accelerometer” if one shake
occurs and there is no breakdown event?
“They are eight, six in the Main process and two in the Shake fragment”.
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“We can label the container as okay, then we need to detach the accelerometer,
and then we can´t do anything else because the robot is broken”.
Q9:
A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event oc-
curs, the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as
well as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity.
When the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“Then we have to execute “Drive container to dispatch terminal”, then we
need to execute “Label the container as shaken”, then we go to “Detach the
accelerometer”, and then we execute “Load the container on to the delivery
truck”, then the container will be delivered”.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the main process
==PAGE:157==
H Transcription of participants answers
150
after the scan?
The participant skipped over this question
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed. a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label,
Container, and the Accelerometer?
“The robot is in broken state, the label is in initial because we haven´t la-
belled yet, and the containers have been offloaded so they are in offloaded
state, and the accelerometer is in idle”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next?
“Repair robot needs to happen next”.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“The container can be offloaded, scanned, and delivered”.
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“The robot is in working state, and the label is in initial state”.
b) What activity is executed next in the Shake fragment?
“I would say “Assign a dock-worker to label the container””.
Participant nine (P9).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
==PAGE:158==
H Transcription of participants answers
151
“Some container arrives at the dock and then a process starts.
First, if a
robot is working the breakdown fragment can start, then it goes to offload
the container, then we attach the accelerometer and the shake fragment can
start, then it is driven, then it is scanned, and then it is moved to a terminal,
then we check if it is the correct container, it is either correct or… no, no, it is
either shaken or not then we take it off and it is loaded on to a delivery truck
and the process ends ”.
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state?
“When it is repaired, so after the “Repair robot” activity”.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
“That is after “Assign a dock-worker to label the container””.
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“it is after “Label the container as okay” or “Detach the accelerometer”, no,
only after “Label the container as okay””.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
“That is after “Detach the accelerometer” activity”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“I think it is only one, “Record the shake into the it-system””.
Q7: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that
can be executed prior to “Detach the accelerometer” if one shake
occurs and there is no breakdown event?
==PAGE:159==
H Transcription of participants answers
152
“You can execute two activities, either “Label the container as shaken” or
“Label the container as okay””.
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“It goes straight to the “Label the container as okay”, then it goes to “De-
tach the accelerometer”, and then it goes to “Load the container on to the
delivery truck” and the process ends”.
Q9:
A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event oc-
curs, the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as
well as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity.
When the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“what is executed is “Drive container to dispatch terminal”, “Label the con-
tainer as shaken”, “Detach the accelerometer”, and “Load the container onto
the delivery truck””.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the main process
after the scan?
“The label is in requested”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed. a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label,
Container, and the Accelerometer?
“The robot is working, accelerometer is idle, initial for label, and the con-
tainer is offloaded”.
==PAGE:160==
H Transcription of participants answers
153
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next?
“We need to repair the robot”.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“There are three states, offloaded, scanned, and delivered”.
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“I think the robot is in working and the label in initial”.
b) What activity is executed next in the Shake fragment?
“The next activity is “Assign a dock-worker to label the container””.
Participant ten (P10).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“It is about checking containers, if they are okay or not. In the beginning
a robot check if it is okay or not. If it is not okay it goes through another
process”.
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state?
“After “Call technician” activity”.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
“That is just when you have to “Assign a dock-worker to label the container””.
==PAGE:161==
H Transcription of participants answers
154
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“It has to be before the “Detach the accelerometer”, so it is after either “Label
the container as shaken” or “Label the container as okay””.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
“At least the container has to be scanned and we need to detach the accelerom-
eter so, it is before the final step(activity)”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“That is three, two in the Main process and one in the Shake fragment”.
Q7: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that
can be executed prior to “Detach the accelerometer” if one shake
occurs and there is no breakdown event?
“If it is prior to, then they are eight”.
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“It is just “Label the container as okay” activity”.
Q9:
A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event oc-
curs, the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as
well as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity.
When the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
==PAGE:162==
H Transcription of participants answers
155
“it needs to go through “Scan the container”, “Drive the container to dispatch
terminal”, “Label the container as shaken”, “Detach the accelerometer”, and
“Load the container on to the delivery truck””.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the main process
after the scan?
“The label is in requested”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed. a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label,
Container, and the Accelerometer?
“The robot is broken, the label is initial, the container is offloaded, and the
accelerometer hasn´t got any state yet… oh no, attach is executed so the ac-
celerometer is idle”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next?
“Repair robot”.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“The container Is first offloaded, and then scanned, and delivered”.
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“The label is in initial state and the robot is back into working state”.
b) What activity is executed next in the Shake fragment?
“If the state is initial for the label then the next activity is “Assign a dock-
==PAGE:163==
H Transcription of participants answers
156
worker to label the container””.
Participant eleven(P11).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“So what I think the scenario is, is that a container arrives at a dock and
it is offloaded and there is a process for the robot to attach an accelerome-
ter to it and then it drives the container to a scanning platform there the
container is scanned, then it is driven to a dispatch terminal, that is some
cargo shipping area. Then there is a process for the labelling. There is some
labelling that determines if it is shaken or okay and if it gets shaken it means
it got corrupted somehow according to the accelerometer and then the ac-
celerometer is detached and the container is loaded and sent off. Then there
is different fragments for different parts, like the shake fragment showcases
what events should occur for the label to be considered as shaken or shook.
And then there is a breakdown fragment which refers to I guess a breakdown
of technology. Then we can see different lifecycles. Basically it shows us if
things are broken or not in short”.
Q2: Under which circumstance(s) can a Robot change from working
state to broken state?
“it is “Call technician””.
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
The participant skipped over this question
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“Both label activities”.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
==PAGE:164==
H Transcription of participants answers
157
“If the container has been scanned and the accelerometer has been detached
then we would have both of these states together”.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“Five activities in the Main process and in the Shake fragment it must be
one activity”.
Q7: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that
can be executed prior to “Detach the accelerometer” if one shake
occurs and there is no breakdown event?
“Repair robot”.
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“First we do “Label the container as okay”, then we can only do “Detach
the accelerometer”, only those two”.
Q9:
A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event oc-
curs, the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as
well as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity.
When the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“So, it has been labelled, scanned and robot working”.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the main process
after the scan? “Idle and labelled”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
==PAGE:165==
H Transcription of participants answers
158
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed. a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label,
Container, and the Accelerometer? “The robot has to be broken, the
label is in initial, the container has to be scanned, and the accelerometer idle”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next? “Repair robot”.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“Offloaded, scanned, delivered, yeah, offloaded, scanned, and delivered”.
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“Labelled and the robot is working”.
b) What activity is executed next in the Shake fragment?
“It is
“Remind assigned worker””.
Participant twelve (P12).
Q1: Can you describe the scenario that the model is showing?
“Okay so there is a robot and its main job is to receive containers. It will
take the containers from a vessel and then it waits until it has an accelerome-
ter attached then after that it will start to scan it and after it finishes scanning
it will take all these items it collected from the container to somewhere else…
to a terminal okay. It checks if the container is shaken or not. Then someone
will detach the accelerometer and the container will be loaded to a truck and
then the container will be delivered”. Q2: Under which circumstance(s)
can a Robot change from working state to broken state?
“Well at any time… after every activity… In the breakdown fragment, after
“Call technician” activity”.
==PAGE:166==
H Transcription of participants answers
159
Q3: Under which circumstance(s) can the Label change from ini-
tial state to requested?
“The circumstance is that it has been assigned a doc-worker to label the con-
tainer”.
Q4: Under which circumstance(s) can the Accelerometer be in idle
state and the Label in labelled state?
“So after we attach the accelerometer it becomes idle, so after that we are
waiting for the time when the label becomes labelled, there are two options
there, either we label the container as shake or we label it as okay, during this
procedure the accelerometer is already idle and the label becomes labelled, so
only after those two activities”.
Q5: Under which circumstance(s) can the Container be in scanned
state and the Accelerometer in sleep state?
“Okay so I think after we detach the accelerometer the accelerometer goes
to sleep, and the container is scanned so it is just after the “Detach accelerom-
eter””.
Q6: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that can
be executed prior to “Assign dock-worker to label the container”
activity?
“The system should start, that is the minimum thing, so a container arrives”.
Q7: In all fragments, what is the minimum set of activities that
can be executed prior to “Detach the accelerometer” if one shake
occurs and there is no breakdown event?
“Ten activities… that´s a maybe. I would say nine, offload container, attach
the accelerometer, drive the container, scan the container, drive container to
dispatch terminal, and we are at label the container as shaken so those six
and then I have three extras in the shake fragment, record the shake, assign
a dock-worker or remind dock-worker. So, I guess what is happening here is
that we execute this twice… Ahh so they are ten… at least ten”.
==PAGE:167==
H Transcription of participants answers
160
Q8: No shake event has occurred, a breakdown event occurs, and
the “Call technician” activity is executed, what activities can then
be executed after the “Drive container to dispatch terminal” activ-
ity?
“Nothing can be executed because the robot is broken, we have to wait until
the robot is repaired”.
Q9:
A container is in a queue to be scanned, a shake event oc-
curs, the “Record the shake into it-system” activity is executed as
well as the “Assign dock-worker to label the container” activity.
When the queue is over, and the container is in a “Scanned” state.
a) What activities are executed until the container is in the state
“Delivered”?
“So, there is two activities that should be executed until we deliver the con-
tainer, those are “Detach the accelerometer” and “Load the container on to
the delivery truck””.
b) What are the state(s) of the “Label” during the main process
after the scan?
“It is just labelled”.
Q10: A container arrives at the dock and the “Offload container
from vessel” and “Attach accelerometer sensor” activities are ex-
ecuted.
A breakdown event is received and the “Call technician”
activity is executed. a) What are the state(s) of the Robot, Label,
Container, and the Accelerometer?
“So, the robot is in broken state and the label is in initial state, the con-
tainer is offloaded, and the accelerometer… oh it has been executed so it is
idle”.
b) In order for the main process to continue, what activity has
to be executed next?
==PAGE:168==
H Transcription of participants answers
161
“Yeah it should be repair the robot so it becomes working and it can continue”.
Q11: what are all possible states for the Container?
“There is three states and they are offloaded, scanned, and delivered”.
Q12: The following activities are executed in this order: “Offload
container from vessel”, “Attach accelerometer sensor”, “Record the
shake into the it-system”, “Call technician”, “Repair robot”.
a)
What states are the Label and the Robot in?
“After they have been executed the robot is in working condition and the
label… it is in initial state”.
b) What activity is executed next in the Shake fragment?
“So we execute the “Assign a dock-worker to label the container””.
==PAGE:169==
APPENDIX I
Transcription of the
think-aloud recordings
Question 1.
Can you describe the strategy you have followed to
answer the questions?
P1. “I started by reading the questions. Then I tried to locate the things
mentioned in the questions to try to figure out where everything was. Then
if I didn’t find anything I would read the question again and try searching
again”.
P2. “It was dependent on if the question was about the boxes (data objects)
or the other thing (activity). I looked at the name of the states in the square
brackets to figure out the state”.
P3. “Hmm I don´t know, I tried to follow what was happening and tried to
imagine what would happen and when some state changed what affects would
that have. After some time, I knew where the process was so I was quicker to
find the answer, I also tried to think what would happen in real life”.
P4. “First, I looked at the lifecycles to figure out where it was in relation
to the questions then if it was anything breakdown or shake related, I cross-
referenced them with the current state, then I would go to the main process
to try to figure out where I´m currently at. Sometimes I first looked up the
activity that was performed or needed to be performed but looking at the life-
cycles or the labels (data objects) gave a quick overview of where the lifecycle
of the data was”.
P5. “Started by reading the question, then I looked at the activities mentioned
in the question, or the label and that, and tried to find some connection be-
tween the question and the model… yeah I don´t know, something like that”.
P6. “I usually went to the event that was asked about or I searched for that
by looking from left to right and went outside of the main process if it stated
something about the robot for example I would go to that fragment and ex-
==PAGE:170==
I Transcription of the think-aloud recordings
163
plore it, I would say that I used a linear approach when I searched the model”.
P7. “I used what you told me about how activities and data objects work and
how they connect”.
P8. “I just did something random… I think… I tried to follow and jump around,
if it said container something, I tried to find it but that´s maybe not a strat-
egy”.
P9. “I didn’t really have a strategy, I tried to follow the words in the questions
and to follow the process”.
P10. “At the end I had come up with a strategy but first I thought I would
get a new model each time, so I was just scanning the whole model. I looked
mainly at the Main process”.
P11. “I’m not that familiar with this so my strategy was to look for keywords
and passwords and then look through the main process, if I recognised a key-
word, I would look at the different fragments. I usually looked at the Main
process from left to right”.
P12. “It was basically the different things names that were mentioned in the
questions, I was looking for them, what their names was, what activities then
I looked directly at the activities and what their names were mentioned then I
looked directly at the files and I was just looking directly at the files (probably
means fragments here)”.
Question 2.
Was the main process enough to get an understand-
ing of the process?
P1. “Yes, I would say it was enough and it was really nice to have the model
broken down in fragments”.
P2. “I think so”.
P3. “Yes, it was, at least that is what I think”.
P4. “The main process is a good way to get a rough understanding of the
process. It is not immediately clear weather or not… Like the naming of the
labels (data objects) specifically they are points for Label initial, requested,
and labelled is a bit unclear sometimes, specifically in the XOR when you are
choosing to label the container as okay or as shaken, but that is mostly from…
Ahh yeah, I think there is a bit of a… some information is lost specifically
between the shake events, the connection between the shake events and the
label lifecycle if you are just looking at the main process it is a bit unclear.
But with the Robot it makes a perfect sense, either it is working, or it is not
working… yeah that makes sense for the context”.
==PAGE:171==
I Transcription of the think-aloud recordings
164
P5. “I would say mostly, the fragments then helped to get a better under-
standing”.
P6. “No, I think it was not enough. A crucial part missing from there is the
breakdown fragment, because in there you can see how it changes to broken
state, if it wasn’t there you could think that the robot could never break down.
It is good to have all the details, at least that is what I think is nice to have”.
P7. “I can understand the whole thing, but the fragments are inner processes
of the main, so they are good to have for more details”.
P8. “Hmmm yes that was nice I was just a little reluctant in the beginning…
Yes I think it was enough, I didn’t need the repair robot”.
P9. “Yes, I think I got the overall picture of what was going on, but some
details are missing”.
P10. “It takes a longer time to understand, it is better to also show the frag-
ments”.
P11. “No, I don’t think so”.
P12. “Yes”.
Question 3. For what purpose have you used the lifecycles?
P1.
“To see what states the data objects were in, the Robot and the La-
bel”.
P2. “I used them very little, just to validate the state transitioning’s”.
P3. “I didn’t use them much, there was one question that asked about them,
I used them then but not for the other questions”.
P4. “I specifically used them to see how the transitioning works and I used
them to figure out the default states for the data objects, like for the ac-
celerometer it doesn’t specifically say whether or not it sleeps, or it is idle as
the default state”.
P5. “I didn’t really use them at all… yeah I didn’t use them”.
P6. “I have never worked with this before so I… (then I tell the participant
that it is just about how you used them to answer the questions) … I used
them when the questions asked about states and I used them to see how the
states can go from one state to another. So, I clearly used them 100%”.
P7. “Only to see what states the data objects can have. Some questions were
targeted at them. I used them, they are easy to understand”.
P8. “Yes, I used them when I was searching for something, but I don´t know
why… one of the questions asked about possible states… I was trying to use
them because I found one state but not the next one so I looked at the lifecycle
==PAGE:172==
I Transcription of the think-aloud recordings
165
so I didn’t need to go through the whole model to find it… so at least I used
them a little bit”.
P9. “I think I used them once, that was for one question that asked about
them. But I glanced at them as well occasionally”.
P10. “Never”.
P11. “Honestly nothing”.
P12. “I used them at some point to answer some questions about the states.
In general I looked around what they have in the brackets”.
Question 4.
For what purpose have you used the different frag-
ments?
P1.
“To see what activities were executed in them for example when the
container needed to be labelled.
I used them specially when the question
asked about the circumstances”.
P2. “To realise what happens if the robot breaks down or if there is a shake
event”.
P3. “When the question was about the fragments, I used them to see what
goes on in the fragments, they were both event based so if it was about that
I used them”.
P4. “I specifically looked at the shake fragment to figure out what happens…
what a hell a shake event is... and figure out why a label would be initial or
requested. I barely needed to look at the breakdown fragment because it was
pretty intuitive”.
P5. “When a question asked about them, I had to use them to see what goes
on inside of them”.
P6. “I used them when it was their turn in the main process, e.g. when the
accelerometer was idle, I would look through the shake fragment and if the
question was about a broken robot, I would look through the breakdown frag-
ment”.
P7. “How the data objects work inside of the fragments, how the state changes,
and to see more activities than those in the main fragments. So, to see more
details about the main process”. P8. “Firstly, to answer the questions, and
you needed to jump… working, working … should I have used them for some-
thing else?...”.
P9. “To answer questions about them”.
P10. “Almost in every question, except for maybe three of them or some-
thing”.
==PAGE:173==
I Transcription of the think-aloud recordings
166
P11. “Mainly when a question asked specifically about the fragments, if it
was about the robots, I would look more in the fragments then I would look
in the main process”.
P12. “I used the different fragments when I was asked to answer under which
circumstances and also about the minimum set of activities that have been
executed so I would know how much of them are executed”.
Question 5.
Do you see any benefits in combining the main pro-
cess, with fragments and lifecycles?
P1. “It helps to break it down into fragments, it would be much more crowded
if it would all be in the same process, it makes it clearer, it is cleaner and bet-
ter organised”.
P2. “The shake can happen anywhere between here (points at the screen). I
think it would be difficult to model the shake into the main process”.
P3. “Yes, I can see benefits, especially with the fragments but not so much
for the lifecycles, the lifecycles are still good to have, when the model gets
more complicated, they can really help. Splitting the process up to makes it
easier to model and to follow. The fragments seem to be something that is
not always running in a company, but the main process is, so I think it could
be difficult to model them in with the main process, they would have to figure
out all possible scenarios and that could be challenging. The fragments are
more like a contingency plan”.
P4. “I´m specifically certain on how to phrase it but you gain… you get a
more abstracted level that is more intuitive to understand but you lose some
information if you don’t do the quotation marks correctly, specifically around
the labels (data objects) where it is a bit unclear”.
P5. “I would say doing it this way helps. I would say it makes it clearer to
read and it gives you deeper understanding by including the fragments”.
P6. “I would say it makes it simpler, the lifecycles are really good to show
in a simple way the different states of the data objects and they give you an
overview of what can be done so you don´t have to remember that. It would
be difficult to model the shake fragment into the main process I think other-
wise it would become way to complicated. It is nice that the processes are
only one line, it is very good to have it broken down like this into fragments”.
P7. “Some of the benefits are that you can get a better understanding about
the main process and how it works and how it connects to the data objects.
You can get more details this way”.
==PAGE:174==
I Transcription of the think-aloud recordings
167
P8. “I think it is better to do it this way, it is easier to understand… it is
better to break it down like this instead of having it all twisted around”.
P9. “I think it is better to break it down like that, it is easier to understand
and quicker to read”.
P10. “I can see the benefits of using the fragments but not the lifecycles, I
didn’t use them at all”.
P11. “Yes and no, it can be quite disorienting to use them all but it is an
advantage if I’m looking for the purpose of how they connect to one another”.
P12. “I think it helps, it gives an understanding between what I should expect
this object other to do… yeah so for example I expect the label object to be in
initial, requested, and labelled state at some point so I know where to look at”.
Question 6. Do you see any challenges in combining the main pro-
cess, with fragments and lifecycles?
P1. “I would say it is more complicated to combine the process and frag-
ments because of all the rules about lines cannot cross each other, I would not
combine them”.
P2. “Just what we talked about, it would be difficult to integrate the shake
into the main process because it can happen when ever”.
P3. “It could also get complex and the events can happen at any time so that
is a challenge to make it fit with the main process. It could become complex,
but it could also simplify other things. Specially if you have many lifecycles,
it would be difficult to look them all up”.
P4. “You could lose some information”.
P5. “No there is nothing that comes to mind… One thing though, it could be
difficult to understand where and what fragments connect to the main process
is the only thing I can think of”.
P6. “I think it is difficult because it can go so often to robot working to the
robot broken, then it would have to be beneath the main process and it would
have so many inputs from different places so it would be more complicated
than having it standalone, and the shake fragment is happening over a long
period of time so it doesn’t fit with the timeline of the main process, and if
it would be integrated beneath the main process you would think it would be
happening at the same time”.
P7. “Yeah it is going to be complicated sometimes because when you are
going to put those fragments into the main process scenario the scenario be-
comes more complicated and also if the user wants to read it then it is more
==PAGE:175==
I Transcription of the think-aloud recordings
168
complicated, so it takes more time and you use more energy. When you have
the fragments and processes split you can magnify them when you want”.
P8. “It could lead to that you forget to repair the robot, if you forget to look
at it… like if you don´t realise that you need to go here (breakdown fragment)
to repair the robot… but if you know how this works then I think there is no
problem with this… if you do it yourself then you know what you are doing…
if you explain this to others then there is no problem”. P9. “I´m not sure… It
could become confusing… I can´t really think of any challenges”.
P10. “No, I don´t see any challenges, I think it could be used for more com-
plex modelling as well”.
P11. “Well it can be disorienting”.
P12. “I can see a lot of stress in the diagram I would say, there are many
things that need to be considered. It would be nice to have some indication
where the fragments can happen in the main process… It would be nice to
have more connection with the items… yeah of course the shake fragment can
happen somewhere in the process but if it was a bigger process how can I just
navigate to this shake fragment from what I see in those activities. Yeah that
is the main challenge I think.”
==PAGE:176==
Bibliography
[1]
Tobii AB. Types of eye movement. url: https://www.tobiipro.com/learn-
and-support/learn/eye-tracking-essentials/types-of-eye-movements/.
(accessed: 04.04.2019).
[2]
Tobii Pro - Tobii AB. Calculating and exporting eye tracking metrics in Tobii
Pro Lab. url: https://www.tobiipro.com/learn- and- support/learn/
steps-in-an-eye-tracking-study/data/calculating-and-exporting-
eye-tracking-metrics-in-tobii-pro-lab/. (accessed: 16.04.2019).
[3]
Tobii Pro - Tobii AB. Tobii Pro lab users manual. url: https://www.tobiipro.
com/siteassets/tobii-pro/user-manuals/Tobii-Pro-Lab-User-Manual/
?v=1.111. (accessed: 15.04.2019).
[4]
Andrea Burattin. tsv2xes. https://github.com/DTU-SPE/tsv2xes. 2019.
[5]
M. Dumas et al. Fundamentals of Business Process Management. Second edition.
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2018. Chapter 1, page 1. isbn: 978-3-662-
56508-7.
[6]
Fluxicon. Fluxicon, Process mining for professionals. url: https://fluxicon.
com/disco/. (accessed: 04.04.2019).
[7]
Hasso-Plattner-Insitut. a Case Engine | Case Modeler for fragment-based Case
Management (fCM). url: https://bpt.hpi.uni- potsdam.de/Chimera/
GettingStarted. (accessed: 07.04.2019).
[8]
Hasso-Plattner-Insitut. a Case Modeler for Fragment-based Case Management
(fCM). url: https://bpt.hpi.uni-potsdam.de/Gryphon/GettingStarted.
(accessed: 07.04.2019).
[9]
Marcin Hewelt and Mathias Weske. “A Hybrid Approach for Flexible Case
Modeling and Execution”. In: Business Process Management Forum. Edited by
Marcello La Rosa, Peter Loos, and Oscar Pastor. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2016, pages 38–54. isbn: 978-3-319-45468-9.
[10]
Kenneth Holmqvist et al. Eye Tracking: A comprehensive guide to methods and
measures. Great Clarendond Street, Oxford OX2 6DP: Oxford University Press,
2011. Chapter 5, 6, 11. isbn: 978-0-19969708-3.
[11]
IMotions. Galvanic Skin Response: The complete pocket guide. url: https:
//imotions.com/blog/galvanic-skin-response/. (accessed: 25.03.2019).
==PAGE:177==
Bibliography
170
[12]
IMotions. What is GSR (galvanic skin response) and how does it work? url:
https://imotions.com/blog/gsr/. (accessed: 05.04.2019).
[13]
John Leston and Johan Nelis. Business process management - Practical guide-
lines to successful implementations - Third edition. 711 Third Avenue, New
York, NY 10017: Routledge, 2014. Chapter 1. isbn: 9781136172984.
[14]
Pedro Robledo Medium. Process Mining plays an essential role in Digital Trans-
formation. url: https://medium.com/@pedrorobledobpm/process-mining-
plays-an-essential-role-in-digital-transformation-384839236bbe.
(accessed: 04.04.2019).
[15]
The artful modeller. Fixing a ‘look-at-me’ diagram – the artful modeller. url:
https://theartfulmodeller.com/2015/11/09/fixing- a- look- at- me-
diagram/. (accessed: 03.04.2019).
[16]
Preben Ormen. Process Mining with Disco Part 2: How does the real process
perform? url: https://prebenormen.com/commentary/reviews/process-
mining-disco-part-2-real-process-perform. (accessed: 05.04.2019).
[17]
Tobii Pro. Software for eye-tracking and biometrics. url: https://www.tobiipro.
com/product-listing/tobii-pro-lab/. (accessed: 25.03.2019).
[18]
Medium | Data Science. Themes Don’t Just Emerge — Coding the Qualitative
Data. url: https://medium.com/@projectux/themes-dont-just-emerge-
coding-the-qualitative-data-95aff874fdce. (accessed: 06.04.2019).
[19]
National University of Singapore. Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) — Marketing
Analytics | Online Guide for Marketing Professionals. url: https : / / www .
ashokcharan.com/Marketing-Analytics/~bm-galvanic-skin-response.
php. (accessed: 11.04.2019).
[20]
Tobii pro - Tobii Group. GSR data filtering and analysis in Pro Lab. url:
https://www.tobiipro.com/learn-and-support/learn/steps-in-an-eye-
tracking-study/data/gsr-data-filter-analysis-pro-lab/. (accessed:
11.04.2019).
[21]
cessda Training - Consortium of European Social Science Data Archives. Quali-
tative coding. url: https://www.cessda.eu/Training/Training-Resources/
Library / Data - Management - Expert - Guide / 3. - Process / Qualitative -
coding. (accessed: 09.04.2019).
==PAGE:178==
