==PAGE:1==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Large scale CFD simulation of 
breaking waves and sediment 
transport 
Georgios Azorakos  
Master Thesis
==PAGE:2==
.
==PAGE:3==
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Mechanical Engineering
Large scale CFD simulation of breaking waves and
sediment transport.
MSc Project report
Author :
Georgios Azorakos
s162699
Supervisors :
David R. Fuhrman
Bjarke Eltard Larsen
April 15, 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis consists the ﬁnal project of the Master of Science program in Civil Engineering,
with a specialization in Marine Technology and Coastal Engineering at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark (DTU). The project was carried out partly through the fall semester
of 2018 and partly through the spring semester of 2019 at the section of Fluid Mechanics,
Coastal and Maritime Engineering at DTU Mechanical Engineering department. The work
has been credited with 30 ECTS points and was supervised by Professor David R. Fuhrman
and Bjarke Eltard-Larsen.
I would like to extend my gratitude to both of my supervisors for their invaluable
guidance throughout this project. Furthermore I would like to thank my fellow students
Lasse, Thue, Patso and Grith for all the useful insight, brainstorming and joy they provided
all through this project.
I
==PAGE:6==
.
II
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
A CFD study of the ﬂow and sediment transport beneath large scale plunging breaking
waves over ﬁxed and mobile barred proﬁles has been conducted using a coupled hydrody-
namic and sediment transport model in the OpenFOAM environment. The hydrodynamics
are simulated by solving the incompressible Reynolds -averaged Navier-Stokes equations.
Three diﬀerent turbulence closure formulations have been used, namely the Larsen and
Fuhrman (2018) formulation of the k - ω and two newly implemented k- ω formulation
based on the same principle. The newly implemented formulations are devised in the form
of ﬂow dependent linear varying coeﬃcients of the k - ω formulation of Wilcox (2006).
The variations is controlled by the ratio of the rotation over the strain rate and a deﬁned
limit value to determine the transition between nearly potential ﬂow regions such as the
wave propagation and shoaling to shear ﬂow regions regions such as the surf zone. The
two newly implemented closure formulations just as the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) clo-
sure, illustrate great performance in accurately predicting turbulence levels prior to and
at wave breaking. Furthermore an investigation on the value of the stress limiter, devised
by Menter (1994) to constrain the eddy viscosity in high strained ﬂows and incorporated
into the k - ω turbulence closure formulation by Wilcox (2006), was undertaken. The in-
vestigation showed that a reduction of the value proposed by Wilcox (2006) to the value
proposed by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) is justiﬁed, while further reduction only slightly
improves model’s performance. The model is found to perform exceptionally well in the
tasks of propagating, shoaling and breaking of the waves, while the predictions start to
deviate from laboratory observations in the surf zone. The model predictions illustrate an
exaggeration in the undertow proﬁle which is ampliﬁed with distance from the breaking
point towards the inner surf zone, however both the turbulence levels and the undertow
proﬁles remain within acceptable levels. Finally the model has been used to simulate sed-
iment transport as a passive process, where again the same discrepancies seemed to aﬀect
the model’s predictions. Nonetheless, the predicted sediment transport rates are very close
to the observation.
III
==PAGE:8==
.
IV
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Mechanics of plunging breaking waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Limiters in turbulence closure modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Thesis objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Model presentation
9
2.1
Governing equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Turbulence model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Stability analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Flow dependent α stabilization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Flow dependent β stabilization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Flow dependent α and β stabilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Stability analysis of the ﬂow dependent model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7
Sediment transport model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.7.1
Bed load transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.7.2
Suspended load transport
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Plunging breaking waves over a ﬁxed bar
30
3.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Simulation setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Stabilization of the k - ω model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) model, λ1 dependency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Plunging breaking waves over a mobile barred bed
52
4.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
Simulation setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Simulation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Discussion
82
6
Conclusion
85
References
91
V
==PAGE:10==
Nomenclature
δij
Kronecker delta
γ
Scalar ﬁeld used to track the two phases (air and water) in the CFD model
µ
Dynamic molecular viscosity
ν
Kinematic viscosity
νT
Eddy viscosity
ω
Turbulence speciﬁc dissipation rate
Φ
Any ﬂuid property in the CFD model
ρ
Density
τij
Reynolds stress tensor
Co
Courant number
gj
Gravitational acceleration
k
Turbulent kinetic energy density
N
Brunt-V¨ais¨al¨a frequency
p∗
Pressure in excess of hydrostatic
Pω
Speciﬁc dissipation rate ω production
Pb
Buoyancy turbulence production
Pk
Shear turbulence production
Sij
Mean strain rate tensor
t
time
ui
Mean components of the velocity
ur
j
Relative velocity used to compress the interface between air and water in the CFD
simulations
xi
Cartesian coordinates
VI
==PAGE:11==
1. INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
1.1
Report structure
This section is an outline of the structure of the thesis.
First a brief discussion of the mechanics of plunging breaking waves as found in the
literature, followed by a brief discussion on the use of limiters and inequalities in turbulence
closure modelling.
Both these subsection are used to facilitate the analysis conducted
throughout this thesis and presented in this report. A statement of the objectives addressed
in the present work concludes the introduction section.
In section 2 the model that will be used is presented. In § 2.1 the governing equations
are presented, followed by a description of the turbulence model that will be used to close
the system in § 2.2 followed by a stability analysis illustrating the formal stability of the
Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) closure formulation in § 2.2.1. Further in this section three new
turbulence closure formulations are presented in the subsections § 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5, followed
by a numerical demonstration of the stabilization in § 2.6. The ﬁnal part of this section
consists of the presentation of the sediment transport model that will be used throughout
this study in subsection § 2.7.
The subsection is divided in a presentation of the bed
load transport formulation, followed by a description of the suspended sediment transport
formulation.
Section 3, consists of the ﬁrst case study that is considered in the present work. A
brief description of the large scale plunging breaking experiment of van der A et al. (2017)
is found in § 3.1. Thereafter the simulation setup is brieﬂy presented in § 3.1, followed
by the results of the simulation using four diﬀerent closure formulations to demonstrate
the formal stability of the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) as well as the newly implemented
aforementioned formulations. Finally the section is concluded by an investigation of varying
the stress limiter proposed by Wilcox (2006) in the simulation of the van der A et al. (2017)
experiment using the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) closure formulation.
Section 4, is a presentation of the second case study considered in the present. Firstly
the experimental setup of van der Zanden et al. (2016), who studied the ﬂow and sediment
transport beneath large scale plunging breaking waves over a mobile barred proﬁle is found
in subsection § 4.1. The ﬁnal part of this section is a comparison between the experimental
observations using theLarsen and Fuhrman (2018) closure formulation.
Finally sections 5 and 6 consist of a discussion and conclusion respectively, summarizing
the ﬁndings of the present work.
Page 1 of 92
==PAGE:12==
1. INTRODUCTION
1.2
Mechanics of plunging breaking waves
This section deals with the hydrodynamics and turbulence structure beneath plunging
breaking waves. The focal point here is to give an introduction on the theory covering the
hydrodynamics and turbulence structure of plunging breaking waves based on examples
from the literature, leading to an understanding on the processes involved in cross-shore
sediment transport beneath plunging breaking waves.
When waves approach the coast, breaking occurs once the acceleration on the peak
of the wave crest cannot be counteracted by gravity anymore. The breaking process can
be characterized as the transformation of well-ordered wave energy into turbulent kinetic
energy and successively dissipation into heat. Based on Basco (1985) wave breaking can
be deﬁned as the transformation of particle motion from irrotational to rotational motion
generating vorticity and turbulence.
The surf zone can be divided in three characteristic regions, starting right after the
shoaling zone where the incoming waves undergo signiﬁcant transformation from their deep
water form, where waves are almost sinusoidal, into highly non-linear waves with steeper
asymmetric proﬁles that pitch forward. Once waves reach the breaking point, where wave
heights are at their largest, breaking occurs in the form of an overturning jet whose strength
depends on the type of breaker, e.g. spilling or plunging. Further shoreward in the inner
surf zone, the wave front evolves into a moving bore until it reaches the ﬁnal section of
the surf zone, the swash zone where the toe of the wave moves forth and back creating an
oscillating coastline.
Four distinct breaking types have been identiﬁed, deﬁned by the steepness of the wave
relative to the steepness of the bottom close to the coast. Short waves on mild sloping bot-
tom result in spilling breakers which are characterized by steep wave proﬁles with relatively
small asymmetry. Longer waves (less steep) on steeper beach proﬁles generate plunging
breakers, which can be characterized by their mild wave proﬁle pitching forward showing
large asymmetry. Further increasing the steepness of the beach and the length of the wave,
will result to the so called collapsing breakers which are very similar to the plunging break-
ing wave however they usually break closer to the shore and the plunging jet begins at a
lower elevation than from the crest. Lastly if the beach slope becomes very steep and the
wave very long (mild wave steepness), the waves don’t really break rather form a slightly
turbulent standing wave surging on the beach face resulting to very high run-up values and
turbulence production is conﬁned at the bottom boundary layer (Basco (1985)). In ﬁgure
1 a schematic representation of the aforementioned breaking wave types is illustrated. The
type of the breaker has been parameterized in the form of the surf similarity parameter or
Iribarren number
Page 2 of 92
==PAGE:13==
1. INTRODUCTION
ζ0 =
s
p
H0/L0
ζb =
s
p
Hb/L0
(1)
where s is the nearshore bed slope and the subscript 0 and b, represent deep water and
breaking conditions respectively. The following values determine the type of wave breaking
on a plane sloping bottom based on the classiﬁcation of Battjes (1974).
Spilling breaker
→
ζ0 < 0.5,
ζb < 0.4
Plunging breaker
→
0.5 < ζ0 < 3.3,
0.4 < ζb < 2
Surging/ reﬂection
→
3.3 < ζ0,
2 < ζb
Figure 1: Various types of breakers developing in the surf zone, each caused by a diﬀerent
combination of wave characteristics and nearshore slope. Figure modiﬁed from U.S. De-
partment of Transportation – Federal Highway Agency (FHWA) by: S.L. Douglas and J.
Krolak, FHWA.
Numerous small scale experiments studied plunging or spilling breakers over a horizontal
bed (Chang and Liu (1999); Drazen and Melville (2009)), or plane sloping bed proﬁles (Ting
and Kirby (1994); (1995); (1996); Govender et al. (2002); Stansby and Feng (2005); De Serio
and Mossa (2006); Kimmoun and Branger (2007); Sumer et al. (2013)). Ting and Kirby’s
studies on turbulence production and transport in the surf-zone, reported the diﬀerent
mechanisms observed under diﬀerent breaker types. Plunging breakers lead to an injection
of turbulent kinetic energy into the water column which is rapidly advected downward
by the plunging jet. Turbulence under plunging waves was further characterized by the
strong dissipation leading to large temporal variations in the turbulence kinetic energy
Page 3 of 92
==PAGE:14==
1. INTRODUCTION
throughout the wave cycle. The largest transport rates of the turbulent kinetic energy
occur right after the injection of the plunging jet during the wave crest, leading to net
onshore transport of turbulence under plunging breakers. Under spilling breakers however
turbulence is gradually entrained into the water column by diﬀusion throughout the entire
wave cycle and dissipation rates are lower leading to somehow constant temporal variation
of the turbulent kinetic energy. Thus net transport of turbulence under spilling breakers
is directed oﬀshore due to the undertow proﬁle. These observations lead to the argument
that sediment transport should be directed oﬀshore under spilling breakers and onshore
under plunging breakers, assuming that suspended sediment transport is correlated with
the turbulence transport. These particular mechanisms may partly explain the onshore
bar migration during calm wave conditions (plunging waves) and oﬀshore migration during
storm conditions (spilling waves) (Ting and Kirby (1994)).
In ﬁgure 2 a schematic sequence of a plunging breaking wave procedure over a plane
sloping bed is depicted and described in a qualitative manner in what follows. Initially
the peak of the wave crest begins to overturn starting to form the plunging jet structure
(panel 1). Successively the overturning jet translates to strike the oncoming trough at the
plunge point (panel 2). Jet momentum creates an initial surface disturbance (panel 3)
followed by a penetration of the surface (panel 4) caused by the weight and momentum
of the overturning jet. Oﬀshore directed trough ﬂow deﬂects the submerged jet further
downward and backward against the wave direction. The tendency to initiate a rotating
plunger motion is created by the sustained onshore directed particle motion at the crest of
the overturning wave and the oﬀshore directed trough motion combined with overturning
jet. The trapped air core compresses as the clear water (no turbulence) wall under the crest
translates horizontally relative to a stationary observer, with air bubbles forming within
the water (panel 5). The initially disturbed surface from the splash point falls in front of
the wave forming the so called surface roller quite similar to the roller formed in a hydraulic
jump. Fluid particles in the trough beneath the surface naturally are directed oﬀshore while
surface particles in the roller move shoreward with the speed of the propagating wave (panel
6). Consecutively the plunger vortex translates horizontally and pushes on the advancing
wave trough generating a secondary wave disturbance and increasing the size and strength
of the surface roller (panel 7). Following that, the toe of the surface roller slides down the
face of the wave towards its equilibrium position generating more vorticity (panel 8). The
plunging vortex slows down and stops as it rotates, enlarges and drifts downward, while the
secondary wave generated by the splash when the jet hit the surface propagates shoreward
(panel 9). Finally the inner surf zone has been reached when the surface roller reaches its
stable equilibrium position and the secondary wave propagates shoreward until it reaches
a new breaking point probably in the form of a depth limited spilling breaker (panel 10)
(Basco (1985)).
Page 4 of 92
==PAGE:15==
1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 2: Schematic sequence of a plunging breaking wave event. Figure taken from Basco
(1985).
Smith and Kraus (1991) reported in their studies that the breaking characteristics of
Page 5 of 92
==PAGE:16==
1. INTRODUCTION
a wave may diﬀer signiﬁcantly on a barred proﬁle compared to on a plane sloping bottom.
Despite that conclusion, relatively few laboratory studies exist examining velocity and
turbulence structure of waves breaking over a barred proﬁle. Laboratory studies including
turbulence measurements of breaking waves over ﬁxed bed barred proﬁles in small scale
wave ﬂume (Govender et al. (2011)) and in large scale wave ﬂumes (Scott et al. (2005);
van der A et al. (2017)), or mobile barred bed proﬁles (Brinkkemper et al. (2016); van der
Zanden et al. (2016)) have been conducted. These studies show a strong spacial variation
of the undertow and the time averaged turbulent kinetic energy proﬁles across the surf
zone, with the highest values observed on or slightly shoreward of the bar crest coinciding
with the breaking of the waves. The largest values of the turbulence kinetic energy on
the shoreward side of the bar can be attributed to the injection of turbulence from the
plunging jet in the water column, consequently increasing ﬂow resistance thus resulting to
stronger undertow. Furthermore the lowest values of turbulence are observed in the bar
trough (shoreward of the crest), probably due to the mixing of the turbulent kinetic energy
over a greater depth.
Time dependent turbulent kinetic energy over barred proﬁles, show a high level of
residual turbulunce when comparing to similar cases (Froude-scaled) of plunging waves
over plane beach proﬁles. This high residual turbulence is likely caused by the presence of
the bar, which reduces local turbulence dissipation and increases local production within
the water column. Time averaged turbulence production and dissipation, have been found
to be of similar magnitude in the breaking area, while dissipation dominates in the shoaling
and inner surf zones (van der A et al. (2017)). Furthermore Reynolds shear stress in the
near-bed region is dominated by the wave-related Reynolds shear stress, except on the
shoreward side of the bar where breaking generated turbulent Reynolds shear stress aﬀects
the near bed region (van der Zanden et al. (2016); van der A et al. (2017)).
As mentioned previously and argued by Ting and Kirby (1994), since turbulent vortices
keep sand grains in suspension, the transport of turbulence kinetic energy should resemble
the transport of suspended sediment. The ﬁndings of both van der Zanden et al. (2016)
and van der A et al. (2017) support this argument, with the time averaged advection of
turbulence kinetic energy being dominated by the strong undertow in the shoreward side
of the bar, resulting in strong oﬀshore ﬂux.
1.3
Limiters in turbulence closure modelling
The well known turbulence closure problem is simply the fact that there are four equations
describing the mean ﬂow, e.g., the continuity equation (2.1) and the three Reynolds equa-
tions (2.1) whereas there are ten unknowns namely, the three components of the velocity,
the pressure and the six components of the Reynolds stress, hence the system is not closed.
While in the case of laminar ﬂows where there is no Reynolds stress, thus the problem
Page 6 of 92
==PAGE:17==
1. INTRODUCTION
consists of four equations with four unknowns, therefore the system is closed. To close the
system enough number of equations have to be found to solve for the unknowns, which
is done through turbulence modelling. A solution to the problem is found in each most
advanced form in the so-called simulation models. Simulation models such as the direct
numerical simulation DNS, directly address the turbulence process itself by resolving all
the necessary scales, therefore eliminating the aforementioned closure problem. In a DNS
study, a complete time dependent solution of the Navier- Stokes and the continuity equa-
tions is sought. The solution provides the time series of the three velocity components and
pressure in 3-D space. A DNS solution however as mentioned requires a resolution of the
dissipative scales of turbulence motion. For high Reynolds numbers the dissipative part of
turbulence motion becomes so small that practically cannot be resolved in a numerical sim-
ulation even with today’s advanced available computational power (Sumer (2013);Wilcox
(2006)). The last century signiﬁcant research has been undertaken in the ﬁeld of turbulence
and turbulence modelling in an endeavor to understand and predict the temporal and spa-
tial evolution of turbulence ﬂows. Several of turbulence models have been devised, such as
the simple algebraic models which compute the eddy viscosity in terms of a mixing length,
the more advanced turbulence equation models, where the eddy viscosity is formulated in
terms of the kinetic energy of turbulence and the aforementioned simulation models.
In the present work the focus is on the use and improvement of the k-ω model in the
simulation of plunging breaking waves over barred proﬁles. The k-ω model is in the family of
the two-equation turbulence energy equation models, which are considered advanced models
and have proven to be very successful in the simulation of turbulent ﬂows in many diﬀerent
contexts through the last almost hundred years. In the k-ω model the eddy viscosity is
computed in terns of the kinetic energy of turbulence and the speciﬁc dissipation rate.
Several versions of the k-ω model exist, starting from the original version of Wilcox (1988),
where each modiﬁcation is derived in an attempt to improve the model’s applicability in
the ﬂow of interest while maintaining it’s already established performance. In general many
of the modiﬁcations incorporated in the k-ω model are in the form of an inequality such as
to constrain anomalies produced by the model.
Constrains on model coeﬃcients have become an indispensable component of turbulence
closure modelling and they usually derive either from empirical evidence or mathematical
conditions. A notable example is the shear stress limit devised by Menter (1994) who noted
that the stress-intensity ratio predicted by two equation models scales with the square
root of the ratio of turbulent production to dissipation multiplied by some coeﬃcient of
proportionality (Durbin (2009)). The inspiration for the work of Menter (1994) was the
fact that most common, general purpose, scalar eddy viscosity models are subject to a
spurious overproduction of turbulent kinetic energy in highly strained ﬂows. Although this
was termed as the ’stagnation point anomaly’ (Durbin (1996)), it arises generally under
Page 7 of 92
==PAGE:18==
1. INTRODUCTION
high rates of strain and can be seen in the overturning jet of a breaking wave as well.
On purely mathematical grounds Durbin (2009) showed that turbulence production should
increase linearly with the absolute value of the rate of strain at large strain rates, however
with the eddy viscosity constitutive model (equation (11)), production appears to increase
quadratically with rate of strain.
Under this consideration a stress limiter was devised restricting the eddy viscosity
in regions where the dissipation rate was not large enough to constrain this unphysical
overproduction of turbulence in highly strained ﬂows. After numerous studies in the ﬁeld
of turbulence modelling, this stress limiter has taken the form of λ1 (18) as seen in Larsen
and Fuhrman (2018) in the modern version of the k- ω model. Originally the value of the
λ1 stress limiter for the k - ω model proposed by Wilcox (2006) was 0.875, however several
values have been found in the literature such as the 0.2 value that was suggested by Larsen
and Fuhrman (2018) and is more in line with the value found from equation (9) in Durbin
(2009).
Similarly however in a diﬀerent context Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) devised a limiter to
constrain the erroneous overproduction of turbulence in potential ﬂow regions. The prob-
lem originally identiﬁed by Mayer and Madsen (2000) and further investigated by Larsen
and Fuhrman (2018), was that all known commonly used two-equation turbulence closure
models are unconditionally unstable and result in exponential growth of the turbulence
kinetic energy and eddy viscosity in potential ﬂow regions. This result is highly unphysical
when compared with experimental observations both in controlled laboratory environments
as well as in ﬁeld cases. Therefore they proposed a new modiﬁed formulation of the k -
ω model in the form of a limiter in the eddy viscosity, which stabilizes the model in po-
tential ﬂow regions while remaining passive in sheared ﬂow regions. Their formulation of
the model is used throughout this study to simulate the ﬂow under large scale plunging
breaking waves, in an attempt to improve the performance of the model in this highly
complicated ﬂow region.
1.4
Thesis objective
The objective of the present work is to use the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) formulation
of the k- ω model in CFD simulation of the ﬂow and sediment transport below large scale
plunging breaking waves over barred proﬁles. The model was already successfully imple-
mented in their work in CFD simulations of propagating waves as well as the small scale
spilling breaking wave experiments of Ting and Kirby (1994). Through their work they
illustrated a clear qualitative correction of the existing k-ω formulations in wave propaga-
tion. Furthermore the new formulation was found to signiﬁcantly improve the performance
in the simulation of breaking waves, however some discrepancies are still observed in the
inner surf zone.
Page 8 of 92
==PAGE:19==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
Initially the model will be used to simulate large scale plunging breaking waves over ﬁxed
bed barred proﬁles, to asses its performance in a more physical environment. Successively
the simulation of large scale plunging breaking waves over mobile barred proﬁles will be
executed in an attempt to predict turbulence and sediment transport rates such as to
evaluate the model’s performance in an even more natural environment.
As an extension of the work of Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) one of the focal points
in this study is to attempt a modiﬁcation of the existing formulation such as to improve
it’s performance in the breaking region and inner surf zone. The modiﬁcation will target
the formulation of the stress limiters implemented in the speciﬁc dissipation rate in order
to limit the eddy viscosity. This approach is sought to improve the model’s performance
by modifying the transition between production and dissipation dominating regions of the
turbulence closure model. Such an attempt if proven successful will allow the model to
abruptly generate turbulence in the breaking region and convect it onshore and downward,
will dissipate it with distance from the breaking point in agreement wit experimental obser-
vations. Any modiﬁcation however has to has to maintain the model’s already established
performance prior to and at the breaking region as well as in the simulation of ﬂows where
the model has been proven to predict accurate results.
2
Model presentation
The advantages of utilizing a formally stable closure model were demonstrated in the work
of Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) through the CFD simulation of surface water waves. Details
of the computational model used in their study as well as in the present work are provided
in the following sub-sections.
The governing equations are solved within the open-source CFD environment Open-
FOAM (version foam-extend 3.1), making use of the waves2FOAM toolbox developed by
Jacobsen et al. (2012) for wave generation/absorption or speciﬁcation of initial conditions.
This toolbox is built upon the widely used interFoam solver which utilizes the volume of
ﬂuid method (VOF). Unless stated otherwise, in all the governing equations as well as the
turbulence model equations, time derivatives are discretized using a ﬁrst-order implicit Eu-
ler scheme. Convection terms are discretized using a blend of central diﬀerence and upwind
schemes, depending on the ratio of successive gradients. Remaining schemes are second-
order accurate central diﬀerence schemes. For further details on the interFOAM solver the
reader is referred to Deshpande et al. (2012).
The SediMorph code was developed by Jacobsen et al. (2014) as a solver to incorpo-
rate sediment transport and morphological modelling in OpenFOAM. In SediMorph the
hydrodynamics are coupled with the morphology so that instability in sediment transport
ﬁeld leads to a morphological change in the bed level and successively in the computational
Page 9 of 92
==PAGE:20==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
mesh.
2.1
Governing equations
For the purposes of CFD simulation, surface water waves will be considered in the context
of two-phase (air and water) ﬂow. The aforementioned turbulence k - ω model will be used
to close the system of equations in a CFD model solving incompressible RANS equations:
∂ρ ui
∂t
+ uj ∂ρ ui
∂xj
= −∂p∗
∂xi
−gj xj
∂ρ
∂xi
+ ∂
∂xj
(2 µ Sji + τij)
(2)
and the local continuity equation
∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(3)
In the above, ui are the mean components of the velocity ﬁeld , xj the cartesian coordi-
nates , p∗is the pressure in excess of the hydrostatic , ρ is the density , gj is the acceleration
due to gravity , µ = ρ ν is the dynamic molecular viscosity , ν is the kinematic viscosity
and t is time. A scalar ﬁeld γ is used to track the two ﬂuids, where γ = 0 represents pure
air and γ = 1 pure water, with any intermediate value representing a mixture of the two.
The distribution of γ is governed by an advection equation
∂γ
∂t + uj
∂ui γ
∂xj
+ ur
j
∂ur
j γ (1 −γ)
∂ur
j
= 0
(4)
where ur
j is a relative velocity used to compress the interface, as documented in Berberovi´c
et al. (2009). Any ﬂuid property Φ in the ﬂow is assumed to be given by
Φ = γ Φwater + (1 −γ) Φair
(5)
In all simulations the time step has been adjusted such as a Co of 0.05 is maintained
at all times. Such a low Courant number is not typical but it ensures accurate velocity
kinematics. Boundary conditions will be clariﬁed on each individual case.
2.2
Turbulence model
The turbulence model used to close the system, is the modiﬁed version of the widely used k
- ω model proposed by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018). The generalized version of the widely
used k - ω model, is comprised of the following transport equations for the turbulent kinetic
energy density
Page 10 of 92
==PAGE:21==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
∂ρ k
∂t + uj
∂ρ k
∂xj
= ρ Pk −ρ Pb −ρ β∗k ω + ∂
∂xj

µ + ρ σ∗k
ω
 ∂k
∂xj

(6)
and the speciﬁc dissipation rate ω
∂ρ ω
∂t
+ uj
∂ρ ω
∂xj
= ρ Pω −ρ β ω2 −ρ σd
ω
∂k
∂xj
∂ω
∂xj
+ ∂
∂xj

µ + ρ σ k
ω
 ∂ω
∂xj

(7)
Where the turbulent kinetic energy is deﬁned as
k = 1
2 u
′
iu
′
j
(8)
and the speciﬁc dissipation rate ω is deﬁned by the dissipation of turbulent kinetic
energy
ϵ = ν ∂ui
∂xj
∂uj
∂xi
(9)
as
ω =
ϵ
k β∗
(10)
The superscript denotes turbulent ﬂuctuating components and the overbar signiﬁes time
ensemble averaging.
τij = −u
′
iu
′
j = 2 ντ Si,j −2
3 k δij
(11)
is the Reynolds stress tensor , expressed in accordance with the Boussinesq approxima-
tion. δij is the Kronecker delta,
Sij = 1
2
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi

(12)
is the mean strain rate tensor and
νT = k
˜ω
(13)
is the eddy viscosity . The shear production term for turbulence kinetic energy k is
Pk = τij
∂ui
∂xj
= p0 νT,
p0 = 2 Sij Sij
(14)
and similarly the buoyancy term is
Pb = −gi
ρ ρ′ u′
i = pb νT,
pb = α∗
b N 2,
N 2 = gi
ρ
∂ρ
∂xi
(15)
Page 11 of 92
==PAGE:22==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
where N is the Brunt-V¨ais¨al¨a frequency and α∗
b is an additional closure coeﬃcient
introduced in Larsen and Fuhrman (2018). The production of ω is
Pω = α ω
k
˜ω
˜˜ω Pk = α ˜ω
˜˜ω p0
(16)
As stated in Larsen and Fuhrman (2018), the basic form of the shear production term
Pk in (14) should be considered sacred, as it can be theoretically derived from the Reynolds-
averaged Navier- Stokes equations. Whereas the buoyancy production term Pb in (15) and
the production of ω, Pω in (16) can not be theoretically derived, rather have been devised
to account for unknown correlations as part of the closure, thus necessitating the use of
closure coeﬃcients.
The model presented in this section is a generalized version of the Wilcox (2006) tur-
bulence closure model. In addition to his basic model, Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) have
included the buoyancy production term Pb in (15) for potential application of the model in
two-phase ﬂows and the newly introduced ˜˜ω in (15) which gives additional freedom to the
model as will be demonstrated in what follows. This generalized form is very convenient as
it can be reduced to a number of common variations of the k −ω model in the literature,
with proper selection of ˜ω and ˜˜ω and closure coeﬃcients. Throughout this study, unless
stated otherwise, the closure coeﬃcients of Wilcox (2006) will be adopted, namely:
α = 0.52,
β = 0.0708,
β∗= 0.09,
σ = 0.5,
σ∗= 0.6,
σd0 = 0.125,
σT = 0.85,
σd = H
 ∂k
∂xj
· ∂ω
∂xj

σd0
(17)
H(·) is the Heaviside step function, which takes the value of unity if the argument is
positive and zero otherwise.
Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) have introduced a modiﬁcation in the Wilcox (2006) k −ω
model, to tackle the un-physical production of turbulence in potential ﬂow regions. The
modiﬁcation is introduced in the form of a stress limiting coeﬃcient acting on the eddy
viscosity (13). First they generalized ˜˜ω such that
˜˜ω = max

ω, λ1
rp0 −pb
β∗

(18)
where they have included buoyancy production for potential two-phase ﬂow application
of the model. As seen from (18) and (16), in the case of constant density (pb = 0) the
model will take the form of the standard k −ω model proposed by Wilcox (2006). Second
and more important, to tackle the problem of the overproduction of turbulence in potential
ﬂow regions, they introduced a simple modiﬁcation to ˜ω
Page 12 of 92
==PAGE:23==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
˜ω = max

˜˜ω, λ2
β
β∗α
p0
pΩ
ω

(19)
where λ2 << 1 is an additional stress limiting coeﬃcient and pΩis
pΩ= 2 Ωij Ωij,
Ωij = 1
2
∂ui
∂xj
−∂uj
∂xi

(20)
Where Ωij is the mean rotation rate tensor. As stated in Larsen and Fuhrman (2018)
this new addition is by design un-intrusive, as it will become active only in a region of
nearly potential ﬂow where p0 >> pΩ. Furthermore it is apparent from (18) and (19), that
for single-phase incompressible ﬂows the model becomes equivalent to the Wilcox (2006)
model by setting λ2 = 0 and by setting λ1 = λ2 = 0 the model becomes equivalent to the
standard k −ω model proposed by Wilcox (1988).
Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) demonstrated in their work that without the use of the
stress limiting coeﬃcient the model was unconditionally unstable in potential ﬂow regions.
Meaning that the model would produce turbulence even in potential ﬂow regions, which
contradicts the physics and experimental observations. Whereas inclusion of their proposed
modiﬁcation will render the model formally stable, provided that
pΩ
p0
≤λ2
(21)
This provides a clear physical meaning for the added stress limiter by deﬁning the
threshold of pΩ/p0, identifying a region as eﬀectively potential ﬂow. As can be seen by
(13), (18) and (19) the newly proposed coeﬃcient limits the production of turbulence in
potential ﬂow regions by acting on the eddy viscosity.
2.2.1
Stability analysis
To illustrate the problem as well as the stability of the new model, a brief review of the
production of turbulence beneath potential ﬂow progressive waves is presented. Following
the work of Mayer and Madsen (2000) who originally identiﬁed the problem and for the
sake of simplicity, the velocity ﬁelds given by Stokes ﬁrst-order wave theory are considered
with the vertical coordinate having its origin at the bed.
u = H σw
2
cosh (kw z)
sinh (kw h) cos (kw x −σw t)
(22)
w = H σw
2
cosh (kw z)
sinh (kw h) sin (kw x −σw t)
(23)
Where u and w are the horizontal and vertical velocities respectively, σw is the angular
Page 13 of 92
==PAGE:24==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
frequency, kw is the wave number, h is the water depth and H is the waveheight. Inserting
these velocity ﬁelds into (14), after period averaging there will be turbulent kinetic energy
production corresponding to
⟨p0⟩= k2
w H2 σ2
w
2
cosh (2 kw z)
sinh2 (kw h)
(24)
and after further depth averaging this becomes
⟨⟨p0⟩⟩=
k2
w H2 σ2
w
2 kw h tanh (kw h)
(25)
The above demonstrates that there will be a non-zero production of turbulent kinetic
energy in a potential ﬂow region beneath surface waves, provided that the eddy viscosity is
ﬁnite. To illustrate the stability of the new model a region of nearly potential ﬂow has to
be considered such that pΩ<< p0, in a ﬂuid of constant density thus Pb = pb = 0 and p0
is assumed ﬁxed to some ﬁnite value. Following Mayer and Madsen (2000) and Larsen and
Fuhrman (2018) diﬀusive and convective terms will be neglected for the sake of simplicity,
which is a valid assumption in the region above the bottom boundary layer. The turbulence
model equations (6) and (7) reduce to
∂k
∂t = k
˜ω p0 −β∗ω k
(26)
∂ω
∂t = α ω
˜˜ω p0 −β ω2
(27)
Setting λ1 =λ2 = 0, the model takes the form of the standard k −ω model of Wilcox
(1988) with (26) and (27) reducing to
∂k
∂t = k
ω p0 −β∗ω k
(28)
∂ω
∂t = α p0 −β ω2
(29)
In agreement with Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) from inspection of (29), it is obvious
that this equation is decoupled from the k-equation, eq. (28). Thus, regardless of the initial
value, ω will ultimately evolve to a constant and ∂ω/∂t will go to 0, corresponding to the
asymptotic value of:
ω = ω∞=
rp0 α
β
≈2.71 √p0
(30)
Mayer and Madsen (2000) proved conditional instability of this model, stating that if
at any instant
Page 14 of 92
==PAGE:25==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
ω ≤
r 1 −α
β∗−β p0 = 5 √p0
(31)
the turbulence model will become unstable, leading to exponential growth of the eddy
viscosity. Since (30) satisﬁes (31), as concluded by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) the model
is unconditionally unstable. Once the speciﬁc dissipation rate reaches its asymptotic value
ω = ω∞, the k equation becomes linearized, leading to equations of the form
1
k
∂k
∂t = 1
νT
∂νT
∂t = Γ∞
(32)
having solutions such as k ∼νT ∼exp (Γ∞t), where Γ∞is the unstable growth rate,
witch for the standard k −ω model of Wilcox (1988) under consideration works out to be
Γ∞= (β −α β∗)
r p0
α β ≈0.125 √p0
(33)
Since the growth rate is positive the model will result in an exponential growth of
turbulence in potential ﬂow regions.
If instead the Wilcox (2006) limiter is used and the second argument in (18) dominates,
equations (26) and (27) become
∂k
∂t = k
λ1
p
β∗p0 −β∗ω k
(34)
∂ω
∂t = α ω
λ1
p
β∗p0 −β ω2
(35)
As in the preceding analysis, by setting ∂ω/∂t to zero the asymptotic value for ω will
become
ω∞=
α
λ1 β
p
β∗p0 ≈2.52 √p0
(36)
Inserting (36) into the k equation (34) leads to a linearized expression with the unstable
growth rate being reduced compared to the Wilcox (1988) k-ω model though still remaining
positive
Γ∞= β −α β∗
λ1 β
p
β∗p0 ≈0.116 √p0
(37)
As proven in Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) the k - ω model is unconditionally unstable
in potential ﬂow regions and the unphysical growth rate of turbulence can be determined.
Both models have been solved numerically as a separate conﬁrmation of the above and
their temporal evolution together with their predicted asymptotic ω value and the unstable
Page 15 of 92
==PAGE:26==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
growth rate are plotted in the upper panels of ﬁgure 5 below.
2.3
Flow dependent α stabilization
Drawing inspiration from the work of Larsen and Fuhrman (2018), an attempt is made in
this study to try and stabilize the model using a ﬂow dependent linear varying α coeﬃcient
instead of the proposed zeroth order inequality (19) that limits the eddy viscosity. This way
instead of limiting the eddy viscosity in a potential ﬂow region as proposed by Larsen and
Fuhrman (2018) and presented in § 2.2, the problem is tackled by amplifying the production
term Pω (16) in the ω equation (7). Additionally a linear ﬂow varying α coeﬃcient will allow
the model to transverse between potential and shear ﬂow region more smoothly, compared
to the zeroth order transition implemented by the inequality in (19).
Starting from equations (28) and (29) and solving for the growth rate as seen in (33),
the growth rate is generally
Γ = 1
k
∂k
∂t = p0
ω −β∗ω
(38)
which will stay negative (hence stable model) as long as ω is above the threshold
ω ≥
r p0
β∗
(39)
Combining the stability criteria in (39), with the asymptotic value of ω∞in (30) corre-
sponds to an α value of
α ≥β
β∗
(40)
Meaning that the model will remain stable in a potential ﬂow region, as long as the α
coeﬃcient is above the threshold value in (40). For clarity and consistency related reasons
from this point and onward the new coeﬃcient will be referred to as αflow and unless stated
otherwise α is the coeﬃcient in (17). Setting αflow to depend linearly on the ratio pΩ/p0
which indicates the ﬂow region, yields an expression of the form
αflow = m pΩ
p0
+ b
(41)
where m and b are arbitrary linear coeﬃcients that can be determined by ensuring the
following two conditions
αflow = β
β∗,
if
pΩ
p0
→λ3
and
αflow = α,
if
pΩ
p0
→1
(42)
where the new limiter λ3 << 1 functions exactly like λ2 in (21) identifying a ﬂow region
Page 16 of 92
==PAGE:27==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
as eﬀectively potential ﬂow region and (41) becomes
αflow = p0 (β −α β∗λ3) + pΩ(α β∗−β)
p0 β∗(1 −λ3)
(43)
where all the coeﬃcients here are considered to be as presented in (17).
The asymptotic value of the speciﬁc dissipation rate of the new αflow model in a po-
tential ﬂow region pΩ/p0 →0 works out to be
ω∞=
rp0 αflow
β
≈3.36 √p0
(44)
and the growth rate
Γ∞= (β −αflow β∗)
r
p0
αflow β ≈−5.3 10−3 √p0
(45)
If the Wilcox (2006) limiter is included (λ1 = 0.875) and the second argument in (18)
dominates then the model equations take the form of (34) and (35), while the stabilization
is still valid and the new asymptotic value of the speciﬁc dissipation rate ω∞becomes
ω∞= αflow
λ1 β
p
β∗p0 ≈3.88 √p0
(46)
and the corresponding growth rate becomes
Γ∞= β −αflow β∗
λ1 β
p
β∗p0 ≈−6.1 10−3 √p0
(47)
It is shown by the analysis that both versions of the model have a negative growth rate
in potential ﬂow regions hence actual a decay. Furthermore the variation of αflow and Γ∞
as a function of pΩ/p0 is depicted in ﬁgure 3 for a λ1 = 0.
2.4
Flow dependent β stabilization
Similarly to the stabilization presented in § 2.3, another approach to the problem of the
overproduction of turbulence in potential ﬂow regions, is to limit the dissipation term
(second term in the right hand side) in the ω equation (7).
This can be achieved by
introducing a ﬂow dependent β coeﬃcient. By combining the asymptotic value of ω, ω∞in
(30) and the stability threshold in (39) and solving for β this time, the threshold value is
determined as
β ≤α β∗
(48)
Meaning that the model will remain stable in a potential ﬂow region, as long as the β
Page 17 of 92
==PAGE:28==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
coeﬃcient is below the threshold value in (48). For clarity and consistency; from this point
and onward the new coeﬃcient will be referred to as βflow and unless stated otherwise, β
is the coeﬃcient in (17). Setting βflow to depend linearly on the ratio pΩ/p0 in an identical
manner as for the αflow coeﬃcient in § 2.3 the following expression is obtained
βflow = m pΩ
p0
+ b
(49)
where again m and b are arbitrary linear coeﬃcients that can be determined by ensuring
the following two conditions
βflow = α β∗,
if
pΩ
p0
→λ3
and
βflow = β,
if
pΩ
p0
→1
(50)
inserting (49) in (50) and solving for m and b, yields the following expression for the
new βflow coeﬃcient.
βflow = pΩβ + p0 α β∗−pΩα β∗−p0 β λ3
p0 (1 −λ3)
(51)
The asymptotic value of the speciﬁc dissipation rate of the new βflow model in a po-
tential ﬂow region pΩ/p0 →0 as expected works out to be almost identical to the αflow
version
ω∞=
r p0 α
βflow
≈3.38 √p0
(52)
and similarly the growth rate
Γ∞= (β −α β∗)
r
p0
α βflow
≈−8.2 10−3 √p0
(53)
Similarly with the preceding analysis of the αflow model, if the Wilcox (2006) limiter
is included and the second argument in (18) dominates then the model equations take the
form of (34) and (35), while the stabilization is still valid and the new asymptotic value of
the speciﬁc dissipation rate ω∞becomes
ω∞=
α
λ1 βflow
p
β∗p0 ≈3.92 √p0
(54)
and the growth rate becomes
Γ∞= β −α β∗
λ1 βflow
p
β∗p0 ≈−9.5 10−3 √p0
(55)
Again, both versions of the model, no matter the choice of a zero or non zero λ1 limiter
will be formally stable since the growth rate is negative hence actual a decay. Furthermore
Page 18 of 92
==PAGE:29==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
it can be seen by examining equations (30) and (36), that when the asymptotic value of
the speciﬁc dissipation rate is reached, for any value of λ1 < 0.813, the ﬁrst argument in
(18) will dominate and the model will behave as the stabilized version of the Wilcox (1988)
model.
Figure 3: The upper panel illustrates the variation of αflow and βflow with pΩ/p0. The red
dashed lines correspond to the threshold value of αflow (40) and βflow (48) respectively. In
the lower panel, the variation of the turbulence growth rate Γ∞from equations (45) and
(53) for the two models are depicted. The red dashed line in this case is used to highlight
the zero crossing.
The linear variation of both αflow (43) and βflow (51) with λ3 = 0.05 as a function of
pΩ/p0 is illustrated in the upper panel of ﬁgure 3. While in the lower panel the varying
ﬂow dependent growth/decay rates for the two new models calculated from equations (45)
and (53) respectively are depicted. As can be seen in ﬁgure 3 initially in the potential
ﬂow region where pΩ/p0 < λ3 the growth rate of turbulence is negative and thus actually
a decay. Successively the growth rate becomes zero right at the threshold, rendering the
model neutrally stable and ﬁnally as the ﬂow region moves further and further away from
the potential ﬂow threshold pΩ/p0 >> λ3 the growth rate becomes positive and both models
Page 19 of 92
==PAGE:30==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
tend towards the Wilcox (1988) or Wilcox (2006) k −ω model, depending on the choice of
the λ1 stress limiter.
2.5
Flow dependent α and β stabilization
As a ﬁnal approach to the problem, a third alternative of the ﬂow dependent coeﬃcient
model, is to combine both αflow and βflow to stabilize the model in potential ﬂow regions.
This way both the production of ω, Pω (16) will be ampliﬁed and the dissipation (second
term on the right hand side of (7)) will be suppressed in a potential ﬂow region.
The model is derived in an identical manner as the αflow in section § 2.3 and βflow in
section § 2.4, only this time the combined threshold for the two coeﬃcients is deﬁned as
α
β ≥1
β∗
(56)
Which ensures that the model will remain stable in potential ﬂow regions as long as the
threshold (56) is satisﬁed. For the sake of clarity and consistency, hereafter the notation
used for the newly introduced ﬂow dependent coeﬃcients from sections §2.3 and 2.4 will be
kept with the addition of a prime α
′
flow and β
′
flow, to distinguish between the combined α
and β model version and the two aforementioned model versions.
By ensuring the following boundary conditions,
α
′
flow
β
′
flow
= 1
β∗,
if
pΩ
p0
→λ3
and
α
′
flow
β
′
flow
= α
β ,
if
pΩ
p0
→1
(57)
The two following expressions for the ﬂow varying α
′
flow and β
′
flow can be derived in a
similar manner as done in the previous sections.
α
′
flow = (pΩ/p0 −1) β + α β∗(λ3 −1)
β∗(pΩ/p0 + λ3 −2)
(58)
β
′
flow = (pΩ/p0 −1) α β∗+ β (λ3 −1)
pΩ/p0 + λ3 −2
(59)
The asymptotic value of the speciﬁc dissipation rate of the new α
′
flow, β
′
flow model in
a potential ﬂow region pΩ/p0 →0 as expected works out to be almost identical to the two
preceding versions
ω∞=
s
p0 α
′
flow
β
′
flow
≈3.35 √p0
(60)
and similarly the growth rate
Page 20 of 92
==PAGE:31==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
Γ∞= (β
′
flow −α
′
flow β∗)
s
p0
α
′
flow β
′
flow
≈−3.1 10−3 √p0
(61)
Again just as in the two previous versions, if the Wilcox (2006) λ1 limiter is included,
and the model equations become of the form of (34) and (35), again the stabilization is still
valid and the new asymptotic value of the speciﬁc dissipation rate ω∞becomes
ω∞=
α
′
flow
λ1 β
′
flow
p
β∗p0 ≈3.85 √p0
(62)
and the growth rate becomes
Γ∞= β −α
′
flow β∗
λ1 β
′
flow
p
β∗p0 ≈−6.1 10−3 √p0
(63)
The variation of both α
′
flow (58) and β
′
flow (59) as well as the exponential growth rate
for the model (61) with λ1 = 0 are depicted in ﬁgure 3 as a function of pΩ/p0. The upper
panel of ﬁgure 4, illustrates the variations of the two coeﬃcients α′
flow and β′
flow with pΩ/p0
for a λ3 = 0.05. As can be seen from ﬁgure 4, the range of α′
flow and β′
flow is smaller than
the range of αflow and βflow, since they act together to ensure stability of the model and the
variation is not linear. The growth rate of turbulence Γ∞/√p0, is within the same range
in all three models, with the latter showing a linear variation and located in between the
lines of the two other versions of the model.
Page 21 of 92
==PAGE:32==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
Figure 4: The upper panel illustrates the variation of α′
flow (58) and β′
flow (59) with pΩ/p0.
The red dashed lines correspond to the threshold value of α′
flow and β′
flow respectively. In
the lower panel, the variation of the turbulence growth rate Γ∞(61) for the combined model
is depicted.
2.6
Stability analysis of the ﬂow dependent model.
As an independent check and to better illustrate the the problem and it’s solution, numerical
simulations of (28) and (29), as well as (34) and (35) with λ2 = 0 and λ1 = 0.875 (Wilcox
(2006)), in a potential ﬂow region (pΩ/p0 →0) have been performed. For demonstration
purposes, a case with initial conditions ω = ω0 = 100 √p0, such that the turbulence scales
are initially well separated from those of the mean ﬂow and k = k0 = 10 ν √p0 such
that initially νT/ν = 0.1. Figure 5 shows the temporal evolution of k/k0 together with
the predicted asymptotic exponential growth rate Γ∞for all three versions of the model
presented in this section as well as for the two Wilcox versions of the model Wilcox (1988)
and Wilcox (2006). The unconditional instability of the Wilcox (1988) and Wilcox (2006)
k- ω models, is clearly depicted in the upper panel of ﬁgure 5. Turbulence kinetic energy
is initially decaying, however once the asymptotic value of the speciﬁc dissipation rate ω∞
is reached, k starts to grow exponentially at exactly the growth rate predicted. All three
Page 22 of 92
==PAGE:33==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
stabilized cases, as was expected from the analysis behave very similar with only minor
variations in the decaying slope (Γ∞, see ﬁgures 3 and 4) and the asymptotic value of the
speciﬁc dissipation rate ω∞. It is obvious to see from ﬁgure 5, that once the asymptotic
value of the speciﬁc dissipation rate ω∞is reached, turbulence kinetic energy is decaying
with the exponential growth rate predicted Γ∞.
Figure 5: Simulated temporal evolution of equations (28), (29), (34) and (35), plotted
together with the predicted exponential growth Γ∞for each case (dashed lines in the upper
panel) and the asymptotic ω∞value for each case (dashed lines in the lower panel).
Page 23 of 92
==PAGE:34==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
2.7
Sediment transport model
The sediment transport is divided into two main mechanisms, namely; bed load and sus-
pended sediment transport. Both transports are formulated in terms of the instantaneous
forces acting on the sediment grains, hence leading to a phase-resolved sediment transport
description. The bed load is deﬁned as the part of the load that is more or less in continuous
contact with the bed during transport. At small transport rates the bed load occurs in one
single layer of particles moving over the ﬁxed bed. At larger transport rates however, some
particles go into suspension while other particles move as bed load in several layers (sheet
ﬂow regime).
A distinction between bed load and suspended load can be made based on Wilson
(1966), where bed load is deﬁned as the part of the load which is travelling immediately
above the bed and supported by intergranular collisions rather than by ﬂuid turbulence.
The suspended sediment load must then be the part of the transported particles which are
mainly supported by ﬂuid turbulence.
2.7.1
Bed load transport
Since bed load transport is taking place in conjunction with the bed, a separate mesh for
computing the bed load, is constructed. This mesh is using the ﬁnite volume methodology
implemented for general curved surfaces in three- dimensional space and called the ﬁnite
area method (FAM), see Tukovi´c and Jasak (2012) for details.
FAM is well suited for
sediment transport and morphological updating, as the latter is controlled by a partial
diﬀerential equation on the curved interface between ﬂuid and soil. The bed load transport
is formulated based on Engelund and Fredsøe (1976).
β
W
Fs
FD
~U
Figure 6: Forces acting on a sediment grain lying on a bed with longitudinal slope.
Taking a force balance between the driving and stabilizing forces acting on the grain in
ﬁgure 6 yields
FD + W sin β = Fs
(64)
where FD is the sum of the driving forces, containing the ﬂow induced drag and lift
force and W is the weight of the grain, while Fs is the stabilizing force
Page 24 of 92
==PAGE:35==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
Fs = µs W cos β
(65)
in which µs is the static friction coeﬃcient between the grain and it’s surrounding
grains. This is taken equal to
µs = tan φs
(66)
where φs is the static friction angle (angle of repose) of the sediment. FD and W can
be described as
FD = 1
2 ρ CD
π
4 d2 (α U ′
f)2
(67)
W = ρ g (s −1) π
6 d3
(68)
where U ′
f is the friction velocity due to the friction acting directly on the bed surface
(skin friction), while cD and α are non-dimensional coeﬃcients. α U ′
f is the ﬂow velocity
at a distance of the order of magnitude d (grain diameter) from the bed. Assuming the
ordinary velocity in rough channels to be valid, α should be in the order of 10. The factor
cD stands for drag (and lift) coeﬃcient. The variable s is the relative density of sediment
and is expressed as the ratio of the speciﬁc gravity of the sediment grain over the speciﬁc
gravity of water (γs/γ). For natural sediments that typically consist of quartz the relative
density is usually s = 2.65. Obviously the sediment grain will remain resting on the bed
as long as the driving forces, left hand side in (64) will remain smaller than the stabilizing
forces (65).
Inserting (65), (67) and (68) in the force balance (64) the critical friction
velocity Ufc at which incipient motion of the sediment grains will occur can be determined
through the following expression
U 2
fc
(s −1) g d =
4 µs
cD 3 α2

cos β −sin β
µs

(69)
The left hand side is called the critical Shields parameter θc
θc =
U 2
fc
(s −1) g d
(70)
The parenthesis in the right hand side of (69) will become unity in the case of a plane
bed, thus invoking (70), equation (69) can be written as
θc = θc0

cos β −sin β
µs

(71)
where the index c0 indicates the critical Shields parameter on a bed without slope
Page 25 of 92
==PAGE:36==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992). In all simulation throughout this project the modiﬁed formula
proposed in Roulund (2005) is used to calculate the instantaneous critical Shields parameter,
which in the absence of a transversal slope reduces to (70). A critical Shields parameter of
θc0 = 0.045 has been chosen and a static friction coeﬃcient of µs = 0.65, corresponding to
an angle of repose for the sediment of φs = 33◦, which is a value often assumed for sand.
If the value of the critical Shields parameter is exceeded the bed load particles are
transported with a mean velocity UB and the model equation for stabilizing and agitating
forces becomes
1
2 ρ CD
π
4 d2 (α U ′
f −UB)2 + ρ g (s −1) π
6 d3 sin β = ρ g (s −1) π
6 d3 µd cos β
(72)
where µd represents the dynamic friction coeﬃcient coeﬃcient given by
µd = tan φd
(73)
and φd is the dynamic friction angle of the bed load sediment. From (72) the mean bed
load velocity UB can be formulated as
UB = α U ′
f

1 −
s
θ0
θ′

cos β −sin β
µd

(74)
where θ0 is given by
θ0 =
4 µd
cD 3 α2
(75)
and θ′ is the instantaneous Shields parameter given by
θ′ =
U ′
f
2
(s −1) g d
(76)
As a particle lying on the bed is easier to move than a particle located in the bed, it
should be expected that θ0 < θc. Through experiments, Luque and van Beek (1976) found
that
θ0 ≈1
2 θc0
(77)
Inserting this into (74) yields
UB = α U ′
f

1 −0.7
s
θc0
θ′

cos β −sin β
µd

(78)
Having obtained an expression for the mean particle velocity UB, an expression for
Page 26 of 92
==PAGE:37==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
the rate of bed load transport qB can be derived (Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992)) under the
assumption that the bed load is the transport of a certain fraction p of the particles that
lie in the top layer of the bed. The total number of surface grains per unit area is expressed
as 1/d2, leading to the following expression for the rate of bed load transport
qB = π
6 d3 p
d2 UB = π
6 d p UB
(79)
Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992) suggest the following expression for the probability p
p =

1 +
π/6 µD
θ −θc
4−1
4
(80)
where p will go towards unity as θ increases, hence as the ﬂow increases all the particles
that lie in the top layer of the bed are set in motion.
Inserting (78) into (79), taking α = 10 and invoking (71) yields
qB = 10 π
6 d p U ′
f

1 −0.7
r
θc
θ′

(81)
This can be made non-dimensional by dividing with
p
(s −1) g d3
ΦB =
qB
p
(s −1) g d3
(82)
Utilizing (76), gives the bed load formula
ΦB = qB
√
θ′
U ′
f d
≈5 p (
√
θ′ −0.7
p
θc)
(83)
While Engelund and Fredsøe (1976) arrived at the following non- dimensional bed-load
formula for a plain bed case
ΦB = 30
π µd
(θ′ −θc) (
√
θ′ −0.7
p
θc)
(84)
For µd = 1 this becomes similar to the widely used semi-empirical formula proposed by
Meyer-Peter and M¨uller (1948)
ΦB = 8 (θ′ −θc)3/2
(85)
Most bed load formula found in the literature (Meyer-Peter and M¨uller (1948);Engelund
and Fredsøe (1976);Wong and Parker (2006)) are essentially of the form of (85) and the
factor in front of the parenthesis shows a deviation of up to a factor 5 depending on the
choice of formula. As seen from (84) the choice of µd will deﬁne the magnitude of the bed
Page 27 of 92
==PAGE:38==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
load sediment transport rate predictions. In the literature µd is ranging from 0.5 all the
way to 1, which will make the factor in front of the parenthesis in (84) range between 10
and 20. Although the choice has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the predicted transport rates, some
freedom is allowed since the choice of µd in (84) will actually be a choice of bed load formula
with a large value of µd turning (84) into (85). In the present work a value of µd = 0.7 has
been chosen.
2.7.2
Suspended load transport
The conservation equation for suspended sediment is modelled using an advection- diﬀu-
sion type equation (Jacobsen et al. (2014)). The diﬀerential equation is derived from the
continuity equation for the sediment concentration:
∂c
∂t + ui
∂c
∂xi
= ws
∂c
∂x2
+ ∂
∂xi

ϵs
∂c
∂xi

(86)
where the index i takes the values of 1,2 corresponding to the horizontal and vertical
direction respectively, c is the concentration of sediment, ws is the fall velocity of the
sediment grains and ϵs is the diﬀusion of sediment particles given by
ϵs = β νT
(87)
The β factor describes the diﬀerence in diﬀusion between a sediment particle and a
ﬂuid ”particle” (or small coherent ﬂuid structure) and the value of β depends on the grain
size and level of turbulence (Van Rijn (1984)).
Assuming that the gradient in concentration in the horizontal direction is much smaller
than in the vertical direction and the vertical velocity is very small, the continuity equation
for the suspended sediment (86) reduces to
∂c
∂t = ws
∂c
∂x2
+ ∂
∂x2

ϵs
∂c
∂x2

(88)
The bed boundary conditions for suspended sediment concentration is speciﬁed at some
distance from the bed, utilizing the reference concentration concept cb. Several formulations
for the variation of the reference concentration as a function of the skin friction θ′ exist in the
literature. The formulations by Einstein (1950), Engelund and Fredsøe (1976) and Van Rijn
(1984) are based on theoretical considerations, while Zyserman and Fredsøe (1994) used
experimental data to make a ﬁt of the suspended sediment transport thereby estimating
cb. In the present work the approach of Engelund and Fredsøe (1976) has been adopted.
cb =
c0
(1 + 1/λb)3
(89)
Page 28 of 92
==PAGE:39==
2. MODEL PRESENTATION
where c0 is the maximum attainable volumetric concentration and λb is the linear con-
centration of suspended sediment at bed level.
λb = κ α1
s
θ′ −0.3
0.013 s θ′

θ′ −θc −π
6 µd p

(90)
α1 d is the distance above the bed where the velocity gradient at this deterministic
approach is evaluated and p is the fraction of particles that move in the top layer of the bed
given by (80). Usually α1 takes the value of 2 (Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992)), throughout
this work however a value of α1 = 3.5 is used. The choice of the higher value was made
based on several occasions in the literature where a value of 3.5 is adopted instead of 2 such
as Fuhrman et al. (2014) and more importantly based on the work of Sumer and Deigaard
(1981) who found that bed load particles travel as high as 3 d to 3.7 d above the bed. Thus
making the choice of 3.5 d as the reference level for the suspended sediment an appropriate
one.
This formulation of cb is dependent on the value of θ′ in such a way that whenever
θ′ →0 , cb →0 as well, which will generate a nonphysical accumulation of sediment in the
lowermost computational cell. A solution to this problem is suggested by Justensen et al.
(1987)
cb = max

cb(θ′), c(b d + ws ∆t, t −∆t)

(91)
where b = α1 d. Hence if the concentration close to the bed exceeds cb, cb will take the
value of c in the water column. Practically due to a Courant number (C0 < 1) limited time
step the value is taken from the cell adjacent to the boundary.
The fall velocity is formulated as in Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992)
ws =
s
4 (s −1) g d
3 cD
(92)
cD is the drag coeﬃcient, which for a single spherical particle in an extended ﬂuid,
depends on the grain’s Reynolds number
R = ws d
ν
(93)
and can be expressed by
cD = 1.4 + 36/R
(94)
Page 29 of 92
==PAGE:40==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
3
Plunging breaking waves over a ﬁxed bar
The advantages of utilizing a formally stable closure model have already been demonstrated
by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) through CFD simulation of surface water waves. In their
work they managed to successfully implement the stable model and simulate the small
scale spilling breaking wave experiment of Ting and Kirby (1994), which can be considered
a benchmark for computational surf zone studies.
Throughout this section the results
of the CFD simulation of plunging breaking waves over a ﬁxed bar, as well as a mobile
barred proﬁle are presented. In addition to the formally stable closure model of Larsen
and Fuhrman (2018), the newly implemented closure models that were presented in the
previous section have been used and their performance is presented and discussed in what
follows.
3.1
Experimental setup
The ﬁrst case that will be considered is the large scale wave ﬂume experiment of van der
A et al. (2017) where they studied the hydrodynamics of breaking waves over a ﬁxed bar.
The experiment was conducted in a 100m long 3 m wide and 4.5 m deep wave ﬂume at
the Polytechnic University of Catalunya in Barcelona (see ﬁgure 7). The wave generation
system consists of a wedge type wave paddle and the steering signals were based on ﬁrst
order wave generation. The coordinate system used in the experiment had it’s x origin at
the toe of the wave paddle in its rest position as depicted in ﬁgure 7 with the y coordinate
having its origin on the right wall of the ﬂume while facing the beach and is positive toward
the center of the ﬂume.
The wave conditions consisted of a regular wave with wave period T = 4 s and a target
wave height of H = 0.85 at the wave paddle. The surf similarity parameter was ξ0 = 0.44
which is consistent with the plunging breaker realized in the ﬂume and in agreement with
Smith and Kraus (1991) classiﬁcation of barred proﬁles. Water surface elevations were mea-
sured with sidewall mounted resistive wave gauges (RWG) at 19 locations along the ﬂume
within the constant depth and shoaling zone (see ﬁgure 7). Inside the surf zone pore pres-
sure transducers (PPT) were deployed along the ﬂume sidewall with approximately 0.5m
spacing. Additionally the mobile frame used to obtain the experimental measurements,
was also equipped with a PPT Water surface elevations were retrieved from the pressure
measurements after correcting for pressure attenuation due to depth using linear wave the-
ory. However since the scope of the present work is to compare the model’s performance
with the experimental observations it is more coherent to directly compare the pressure
such as to avoid introducing uncertainties. Both the RWG and PPT were sampled at 40
Hz. Furthermore to exploit the potential of the newly introduced method by Bonneton
et al. (2018), for deriving surface elevations from near bottom pressure measurements, the
Page 30 of 92
==PAGE:41==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
PPT measured surface elevation have been included in the wave envelope comparisons after
applying the Bonneton et al. (2018) method to derive the instantaneous surface elevation.
A validation of their formula against the RWG measured pre-breaking elevations at the two
coinciding locations (two last RWG locations in the upper panel of ﬁgure 7) showed very
good agreement.
Figure 7: Sketch of the experimental setup. Upper panel depicts the ﬂume bathymetry as
well as the location of the resistive wave gauges and pressure transducers. The lower panel
is a close-up of the test section around the breaker bar, showing the positions of the ADV
and LDA velocity measurements.
Velocities were measured at 12 cross- shore locations along the bar region (see lower
panel in ﬁgure 7) by a laser Doppler anemometer (LDA) and two acoustic Doppler ve-
locimeters (ADV) deployed from a measurement frame attached to a carriage on top of
the ﬂume. The two component LDA measured the ux and uz velocity components with a
sampling frequency depending on the velocity magnitude, therefore ranging from 100 to 600
Hz throughout the wave cycle. The ADVs measured all three components of the velocity
with a sampling frequency of 100 Hz. In addition to the two ADVs and the LDA, a PT was
ﬁtted on the mobile frame as well to obtain surface elevations in the location of the velocity
measurements. The location of the velocity measurements is illustrated in the lower panel
of ﬁgure 7. A total of 150 waves for each (x, z) velocity measurement location were used
for ensemble averaging while the ﬁrst 100 waves of each run were discarded because the
Page 31 of 92
==PAGE:42==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
hydrodynamics were still developing in the ﬂume.
3.2
Simulation setup
A sketch of the computational domain used in all simulations is depicted in ﬁgure 8. As can
be seen from the ﬁgure, a 20m relaxation zone has been used, which serves to absorb any
waves reﬂected by the slope, thus the incoming waves do not change over time. Otherwise
the rest of the domain is identical to the experimental ﬂume geometry depicted in ﬁgure
7.
A stream function wave has been given as a boundary condition, with H = 0.8 m
(corresponding to the observed experimental wave height on the ﬂat section of the ﬂume)
and T = 4s with zero net volume ﬂux. For the purpose of consistent comparison, the origin
has been placed at the same location as in the experiment. The roughness was indicated to
be in the order of 1 - 2 mm along the entire ﬂume bed, besides the lee side of the bar which
was reported by van der A et al. (2017) to be approximately twice as that. For the sake
of simplicity in all simulations of the ﬁxed bed experiment, the model bed was assigned a
Nikuradse equivalent sand roughness of ks = 1.5 10−3 m. A no-slip boundary condition has
been imposed at the bottom, which will allow for the development of a boundary layer near
the bed. Turbulence quantities in the ﬁrst cell near the bed are prescribed using the wall
functions presented in Fuhrman et al. (2014), which build upon the generalized van Driest
proﬁle of Cebeci and Chang (1978). A varying resolution has been used to discretize the
vertical dimension with the near bed cell size having a ∆z = 6.7 10−4m and logarithmically
increasing to a value of ∆z = 0.04 m at an elevation of z = 0.4 m above the bed (blue
dashed line in ﬁgure 8). From that point and further upwards the spatial discretization has
been kept constant with ∆x = ∆z = 0.04 m.
Figure 8: Layout of the computational domain for the simulation of the plunging breaking
wave experiment of van der A et al. (2017).
Page 32 of 92
==PAGE:43==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
3.3
Stabilization of the k - ω model
To illustrate the stabilization of the model, ﬁve cases have been simulated using the four
diﬀerent formally stable models and the Wilcox (2006) version of the k - ω model. The
diﬀerent models are presented in table 1 and their performance is illustrated by the eddy
viscosity snapshots in ﬁgure 9 and the following analysis.
Unfortunately the combined
model presented in § 2.4 was found to completely dissipate turbulence even at the breaking
process and resulted in a turbulent free breaking region and surf zone.
This model is
therefore omitted from the analysis. The reason for this behaviour of the model remains
unknown and is still investigated. The naming convention used for the cases presented in
table 1 is adopted for the sake of consistency throughout the whole report, with the ﬁrst
value indicating the choice of the model as seen in table 1 and the second number indicating
the the choice of the λ1 limiter value in the model. With a value of zero corresponding to a
λ1 = 0 and a value of two (e.g. all cases in table 1) corresponding to a λ1 = 0.2 as proposed
by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018). For example a case named 0.0 corresponds to the Wilcox
(1988) model, since the ﬁrst number indicates that the model used is the Wilcox (2006)
model and the second corresponds to a λ1 = 0. However, this will be made evident in the
following sections.
Case
0.2
1.2
2.2
3.2
k-ω model
Wilcox 2006
Present
αflow
βflow
λ1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
λ2
0
0.05
0
0
λ3
0
0
0.05
0.05
Table 1: Summary of parameters used in the four diﬀerent simulations of the van der A
et al. (2017) plunging breaking wave experiment, presented in ﬁgure 9.
In ﬁgure 9 computed snapshots, illustrating the surface elevation and the eddy viscosity
νT/ν from the simulation of the ﬁxed bed experiment of van der A et al. (2017), using the
four models presented in table 1, after 100 periods such that steady state (repeatable)
conditions have been reached are depicted. Each snapshot is taken when the wave is right
at breaking, to make the location of the surf zone evident. As seen in table 1 and in the
ﬁgure, the same λ1 limiter has been used in all simulations such as to make them directly
comparable.
From ﬁgure 9 it is obvious to see that the Wilcox (2006) k-ω model (upper panel),
results in uniformly high eddy viscosity in the entire domain, even in the pre-breaking
region where turbulence should be conﬁned in the two boundaries of the domain (free
surface and bottom). Such high turbulence values prior to breaking are totally unphysical
and are a product of the inherent instability of the existing turbulence closure models (see
Page 33 of 92
==PAGE:44==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
§ 2.2.1 and 2.6 as well as Larsen and Fuhrman (2018)) in nearly potential ﬂow regions,
such as a propagating wave prior to breaking. This conclusion can be backed by several
examples in the literature, such as the measured turbulence levels in the plunging breaking
wave experiments of van der Zanden et al. (2016) and van der A et al. (2017), considered
in this study, as well as the measured turbulence levels of Ting and Kirby (1994), the
particle image velocimetry (PIV) experiments of Chang and Liu (1998), Grue and Jensen
(2006), Kimmoun and Branger (2007), Belden and Techet (2011) and the dye experiment of
Duncan et al. (1999). Additionally, as illustrated from the analysis in § 2.2 and by Larsen
and Fuhrman (2018), regardless the choice of λ1 if the λ2 limiter, or the newly introduced
versions with the λ3 limiter (see § 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5) is not included, the model will result
in unphysical overproduction of turbulence in nearly potential ﬂow regions given enough
time to develop. This inherent instability of the existing turbulence closure models results
in severely polluted results prior to wave breaking, which is a phenomenon of great interest
in CFD studies.
Figure 9: Snapshots of νT/ν at t/T = 100 with the wave right before the plunging jet hits
the surface, in order to illustrate the location of the breaking point. The model used in
each panel is indicated by the text inside the ﬁgure.
Page 34 of 92
==PAGE:45==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
Furthermore from ﬁgure 9 it can be seen that all three stabilized versions of the model
(the three lower panels, corresponding to cases 1 to 3 in table 1), predict negligible turbu-
lence levels prior to breaking. In agreement with the observations in van der Zanden et al.
(2016) and van der A et al. (2017) in all three stabilized versions of the model, pre-breaking
turbulence is either conﬁned in the wave boundary layer or convected oﬀshore by the ﬂow
near the surf zone. This illustrates a clear qualitative correction over existing models, as
concluded by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018). In addition the eﬀect of the buoyancy term
(15) in the k equation (6), is highlighted by the low eddy viscosity near the surface, clearly
visible in the upper panel of ﬁgure 9. Due to the density gradient in (15), near the interface
of the two ﬂuids, the buoyancy production term, acts in a dissipating manner.
Figure 10: Snapshots of the turbulence kinetic energy corresponding to the four instances
of the breaking process computed with the four diﬀerent models. The model used in each
panel is indicated by the text inside the ﬁgure.
In ﬁgure 10 computed snapshots of the breaking process are depicted at the four in-
stances identiﬁed in the experimental observations of van der A et al. (2017), with the
color scale illustrating the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) in the water. The four instances
Page 35 of 92
==PAGE:46==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
are the overturning of the wave at x = 52 m, followed by the plunging jet hitting the wa-
ter surface at the crest of the breaker bar (x = 54.5 m) generating a disturbance. This
disturbance results in a volume of water being brought into suspension and subsequently
hitting the surface shoreward of the plunge point (x = 58 to 59 m) at the so-called splash
region. All models manage to reproduce the observed breaking process both in space and
in time. Despite the overproduction of turbulence in the pre-breaking region case 0.2 shows
very similar behaviour to the three stabilized versions with a slightly weaker splash region,
which is due to less energy arriving in the surf zone as a result of the overproduction of
turbulence.
As seen also by the eddy viscosity snapshots in ﬁgure 9 the unstable case 0.2 shows
a signiﬁcant amount of TKE already at the overturning point of the wave away from
the forming jet. This result is highly unphysical considering the observations found in the
literature. The three stabilized cases on the other hand show negligible TKE at the shoaling
region which is seen to be convected oﬀshore from the breaking region. All three stabilized
cases show a good qualitative agreement with the experimental observations of van der A
et al. (2017) up to the plunging point. From this point and further onshore results start to
deviate slightly from the observations. The observations of van der A et al. (2017) suggest
that breaking generated turbulence was spread through the entire water column reaching
the bed at the crest and shoreward trough of the breaker bar. Further onshore dissipation
dominates and turbulence produced in the wave boundary layer was conﬁned in the near
bed region, while turbulence produced at the surface by the propagating bore (surface
roller), generated at the splash region, did not spread in the water column as seen in ﬁgure
10. However the focus of this section is to illustrate the formal stability of the Larsen and
Fuhrman (2018) as well as the two new models used here, therefore no further analysis will
be conducted. A thorough qualitative and quantitative comparison between the model and
the experimental observations is found in the following analysis.
3.4
Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) model, λ1 dependency
In this section the inﬂuence of the λ1 shear stress limiter, which was originally devised by
Menter (1994) and then incorporated by Wilcox (2006) in his version of the k - ω model, is
studied. The reason for this is in an attempt to propagate the model from the pre-breaking
zone, where it has proven to yield accurate predictions by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) and
conﬁrmed in this study (see section § 3.3), further towards the inner surf zone. The ﬁve
cases (case 1.0 to 1.4) presented in table 2, are used to investigate the eﬀect of varying the
stress limiter λ1. The choice of the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) model for this investigation,
was made because it has already been proven to perform very well in the pre-breaking region
which should be considered a prerequisite of turbulence closure models aiming to study the
ﬂow under breaking waves. Additionally Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) illustrated that the
Page 36 of 92
==PAGE:47==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
model performed very well in the simulation of the spilling breaking wave experiment of
Ting and Kirby (1994).
Case
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
k-ω model
Present
Present
Present
Present
Present
λ1
0
0.05
0.2
0.5
0.875
λ2
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
λ3
0
0
0
0
0
Table 2: Summary of parameters used in the 5 diﬀerent simulations of the van der A et al.
(2017) plunging breaking wave experiment, presented in ﬁgure 11.
Figure 11: Snapshots of νT/ν at t/T = 50 with the wave right before the plunging jet hits
the surface, in order to illustrate the location of the breaking point. The modiﬁed model
by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) is depicted in the ﬁgure for ﬁve diﬀerent values of the λ1
limiter as shown by the text inside each plot.
In ﬁgure 11 snapshots of the simulated eddy viscosity for the six cases presented in
Page 37 of 92
==PAGE:48==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
table 2 are depicted after 50 periods of simulation. The eﬀect of the varying values of the
λ1 stress limiter is qualitatively illustrated in ﬁgure 11. As seen from the ﬁgure a large
value of λ1 will highly restrict turbulence production even in the breaking wave region
compared to a low value of the limiter. If the limiter is set to zero, thus making the model
more equivalent to the Wilcox (1988) k - ω model, will result in spurious overproduction
of turbulence starting from the breaking region of the wave and propagating further inside
the surf-zone. Additionally from ﬁgure 11 it is seen that outside the surf zone, the limiter
has a similar eﬀect with lower values of λ1 allowing for turbulence to be convected further
and reach higher values in the shoaling region of the wave ﬂume. While when the limiter is
set to zero turbulence is quickly dissipated in regions where turbulence production doesn’t
occur (as seen from the lower panel in ﬁgure 11), due to a more sharp deﬁnition of the
limit between high and low strain ﬂow regions resulting in an exponential decay of the eddy
viscosity prior to breaking. Finally all models show turbulence production near the bed, in
the waves’ boundary layer, in both the ﬂat part and the shoaling region of the domain as
expected.
In ﬁgure 12 a comparison of the computed and measured surface elevation envelopes for
all simulations presented in table 2 is depicted. Solid lines correspond to mean ensemble
averaged values, while the errorbars indicate ± one standard deviation, to illustrate the
wave to wave variability within the model. As clearly seen from the ﬁgure, all ﬁve models
managed to capture the evolution of the mean surface elevations very well, with a consistent
overestimation of the wave height in the middle of the shoaling region (x ≈45 m) as well
a slight deviation in the splash region. Despite that discrepancy all models performed very
well in predicting both the horizontal location of the breaking point and the surface eleva-
tion, as well as the subsequent decay of wave heights in the inner surf zone. Additionally
all models with a non zero stress limiter show similar wave to wave variability, while case
1.0 (lower panel) where the limiter is set to zero, shows very little to none wave to wave
variability in the inner surf zone. This distinct deviation of case 1.0 from the rest of the
models after further inspection is attributed to the fact that waves in this case where not
even breaking properly. The large eddy viscosity computed in the crest of the overturning
wave (see lower panel in ﬁgure 11) resulted in turbulent dissipation of the wave energy at
the overturning point instead of a proper plunging breaking sequence. This is illustrated in
the lower panel of ﬁgure 13, where snapshots of the breaking process corresponding to this
case (λ1 = 0) are shown and visually compared with the rest of the cases (λ1 > 0). The
failure of the waves to properly plunge when the limiter is set to zero, leads to very small
deviation in the surface elevation of successive waves in the surf zone. Conversely when the
limiter is larger than zero plunging breaking occurs introducing large variability and result-
ing in a more dynamic surf zone. This conclusion is also in agreement with the ﬁndings of
Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) in their simulation of the spilling breaking experiment of Ting
Page 38 of 92
==PAGE:49==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
and Kirby (1994). Thus as an extension from their ﬁndings, it can be concluded that the
wave won’t be able to maintain it’s form and break properly if the Wilcox (2006) limiter is
set to zero, for both plunging and spilling breaking waves.
Figure 12: Comparison of computed and measured surface elevation envelopes and mean
water level for the ﬁve cases presented in table 2. Solid lines represent the mean surface
elevation while the shaded area corresponds to ± one standard deviation.
Figure 13 provides a very clear qualitative illustration of the eﬀect the λ1 stress limiter
has on the breaking sequence of the wave. A high value of the limiter restricts turbulence
production more thus allowing for the wave to maintain it’s shape and form further closer
Page 39 of 92
==PAGE:50==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
to the plunge point. This is clearly illustrated by the two upper panels in ﬁgure 13, where
the wave is able to maintain its form and shape very well up to the plunge point. This
leads to a strong plunge on the water surface in front of the wave resulting in a very intense
splash region and a large surface roller that moves signiﬁcantly faster compared to the rest
of the cases that use a smaller value of the stress limiter. A similar behaviour is seen with
the limiter set to 0.5 (second panel). By further decreasing the stress limiter, the model
results in slightly milder plunging but still manages to reproduce the breaking process very
well with the formation of a bore in the end of the sequence. The ﬁgure suggests that
the choice of the limiter will deﬁne the structural integrity of the overturning jet, with a
higher value maintaining a more laminar ﬂow structure. Consequently the angle of the jet
hitting the surface is also inﬂuenced by the value of the stress limiter, with a higher value
resulting in a more vertical impact of the plunging jet on the water surface compared to
a lower value of the limiter. Finally the severity of the plunge impact, will inﬂuence the
intensity of the splash point and magnitude of the generated bore (surface roller), with a
higher value of the limiter generating a stronger and faster surface roller as indicated by
the right panels (t = t0 + 0.45 T) in ﬁgure 13. The reason for the increased velocity of the
surface roller with the larger values of the limiter could be explained by the eddy viscosity
illustrated in ﬁgure 11. The increased eddy viscosity indicates higher ﬂow resistance which
eventually slows down the ﬂow near the surface. Thus a large limiter further restricts the
eddy viscosity, resulting in faster propagating surface rollers.
All four models with a non-zero stress limiter manage to predict the overturning point
of the wave (x = 52 m) quite accurate, with the larger limiter being closer to the reported
value. Propagating further in the surf zone, again all four models manage to predict both
the plunge point (x = 54.5 m) and the splash zone (x = 58 m - 59 m) accurately. These
model predictions agree with the observations reported in van der A et al. (2017). If the
limiter is set to zero however, the wave deteriorates that much at the overturning point,
due to the overproduction of turbulence in this highly strained region, that does not even
plunge. This might be the reason for the distinct limit between the potential and shear
ﬂow region seen in the lower panel of ﬁgure 11. Since no plunge occurs most of the energy
of the wave is dissipated into turbulence in the overturning of the wave, not allowing for
turbulence to spread in the water column and successively get convected further oﬀshore
by the undertow proﬁle. In agreement with Larsen and Fuhrman (2018), the inability of
the model when the Wilcox (2006) limiter is set to zero, to properly reproduce the wave
breaking sequence for both spilling (as found in their simulations of the Ting and Kirby
(1994) experiment) and plunging breaking waves is considered an important qualitative
shortcoming of the model. Additionally it is emphasized by the comparison in this section
that both the nature of the breaking sequence and consequently the intrawave variability
are highly dependent on the Wilcox (2006) limiter.
Page 40 of 92
==PAGE:51==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
Figure 13: Breaking sequence snapshots from the simulation of the ﬁve cases presented in
table 2. The domain is divided in four parts, capturing the wave at the overturning point
x ≈52 m, the plunge point at x ≈54.5 m, and the splash zone ranging at 58 m ≤x ≤59
m. The domain is also divided in time starting with t0 at the overturning of the wave and
following with the normalized time as shown above each space/time quadrant.
To further explore the dependency of the model in the value of the λ1 stress limiter, a
more quantitative comparison between the four cases 1.1 to 1.4 in table 2 and the experimen-
tal observations is found in what follows. For the sake of clarity in the visual comparisons,
case 1.0 has been omitted from the following plots. This is argued by the aforementioned
behaviour of this simulation, where as illustrated in ﬁgure 13, the wave does not even plunge
Page 41 of 92
==PAGE:52==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
due to the overproduction of turbulence in the overturning point. In addition the results
showed severe overproduction of turbulence going in the surfzone right from the overturning
point (x = 52 m) which is unphysical based on the observations of van der A et al. (2017)
and highly pollutes the results in the inner surfzone. In ﬁgure 14 the normalized period
averaged velocity proﬁles in the twelve locations around the breaker bar are depicted for all
the cases with a λ1 > 0. As can be seen all cases manage to propagate the wave through
the ﬂat and shoaling part of the domain and arrive at the breaking point very accurately.
Furthermore all cases start to deviate signiﬁcantly from the observed velocity proﬁles at
the lee side of the bar and in the inner surf zone (x ≥56 m). The underestimation of the
computed undertow at the lee side of the bar (56 m ≥x ≤58 m) could be attributed to
two reasons. One is that the roughness in the model doesn’t match the reported roughness
in that speciﬁc region of the domain and secondly in the model turbulence generated at
the surface during the breaking process didn’t reach the bottom in contrast to the exper-
imental observation. Both the increased roughness and the turbulence from the surface
reaching the bed, would increase ﬂow resistance leading to stronger undertow. This will be
made more evident in what follows. While the model underpredicts the magnitude of the
undertow proﬁle at the lee side of the bar, it overpredicts the magnitude of the undertow
in the inner surf zone (x≥58 m). The reason for the discrepancy of the model on the lee
side of the bar is probably due to the aforementioned reasons, the deviation of the model
with the experimental observations in the inner surf zone however is diﬀerent. As seen from
the entire proﬁle the velocities are overestimated through the entire water column with the
model predicting higher onshore velocities near the surface and oﬀshore near the bottom
compared to the observations. The transition however from oﬀshore to onshore matches
that of the observed velocities. The overestimation of the undertow in the inner surfzone,
is due to the higher velocities at the surface. The model obviously generates a larger and
faster bore (surface roller) propagating onshore compared to the experimental observations
which has to be compensated by a stronger undertow, promoting the exaggeration seen in
the inner surf zone. This is also the reason why cases 1.3 and 1.4 (λ1 = 0.5 & λ1 = 0.875
respectively) show greater magnitude in the undertow proﬁles compared to the other two
cases and the experimental observations. As previously discussed and illustrated in ﬁgure
13, the larger value of the λ1 limiter yields a stronger plunge and a more intense and fast
propagating bore in the inner surf zone which results in a faster near bed ﬂow to satisfy
mass conservation. Moreover the model shows a very good agreement between observation
and simulation at x = 57 m. This however should not be regarded as an accurate result,
since the good agreement at that location is due to the transition of the model from under-
predicting to overpredicting the undertow proﬁle, when compared with the neighbouring
locations.
Page 42 of 92
==PAGE:53==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
x =51m
x =53m
x =54.5m
x =55m
x =55.5m
x =56m
x =56.5m
x =57m
x =58.1m
x =59m
x =60.2m
x =63m
Figure 14: Comparison plot of the normalized period averaged horizontal velocity proﬁles in
the twelve measurement locations around the breaker bar, for the four models corresponding
to Cases 1.1 to 1.4 from table 2. The location of each plot is indicated by its title. The
horizontal dotted line, represents the lowest trough level as observed in the experiment and
the solid horizontal black line at the bottom represents the local bed elevation.
The cases start to deviate from each other after the plunging point (x = 54.5 m), where
the eﬀect of the limiter is more pronounced as discussed previously in this section. Case
1.1 (λ1 = 0.05) shows a better agreement with observation at least in the ﬁrst part of the
surf zone (x ≤56 m), while after the trough (x ≥58) it collapses with the line of case 1.2
(λ1 = 0.2) and both cases overestimate the undertow from this point onwards. Case 1.2
and 1.3 show very similar behaviour in almost the entire domain while they start to deviate
at the very last measurement location (x = 63 m), in the inner surfzone. At this point case
Page 43 of 92
==PAGE:54==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
1.3 shows a more similar behaviour to case 1.4 which yields the poorest match with the
observed values especially at the lee side of the bar and the trough compared to the rest
of the cases. Cases 1.3 and 1.4 compute the largest undertow proﬁles, as a result of the
faster surface ﬂow due to the inﬂuence of the larger value of the limiter. Figure 14 indicates
that a choice of a smaller value for the stress limiter λ1 compared to the one proposed by
Wilcox (2006) (case 1.4) or even that proposed by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) (case 1.2)
is justiﬁed and maybe an even smaller value than the one used here (λ1 = 0.05) would
provide a better ﬁt with the experimental observations. However to better understand the
behaviour of the model, the computed and measured normalized period averaged turbulent
kinetic energy proﬁles are compared in ﬁgure 15 at the same locations and discussed in
what follows aiming to explain the behaviour of the velocities.
As in the velocity proﬁle comparisons in ﬁgure 14, all four computed turbulence proﬁles
depicted in ﬁgure 15, show very good agreement with observed values at the pre-breaking
location (x ≤52 m). In contrast to the velocity comparisons however, the computed and
observed turbulence proﬁles start to deviate earlier at the crest of the bar (x = 54.5 m)
which is also the location of the plunge. Observations suggest that breaking generated
turbulence at the surface, carried by the momentum of the plunging jet and the velocities
at the plunge point reaches the bed at the lee side of the bar (x ≈55.5 - 56 m). The model
however fails to reproduce this result, while manages to capture the turbulence at the upper
part of the water column from the plunge point and onwards to the lee- side of the bar (x ≤
56.5) when using a small value for the stress limiter λ1 as seen by the behaviour of case 1.1.
At the lee side of the bar (x = 56 m), is where the largest turbulence values are observed
from the experiment. A combination of both surface and bed generated turbulence was
observed at that location as suggested by van der A et al. (2017), however the model failed
to reproduce this. Again, the same two reasons mentioned in the velocity comparison are
likely to be responsible for the model’s discrepancy at that speciﬁc location. Besides the
fact that the plunging jet in the model failed to reach the bed, the model also failed to
generate the near bed turbulence at the lee side of the bar, probably due to the erroneous
roughness length of the model at that location. Further onshore (x ≥57 m) turbulence
kinetic energy in the model is still rising indicating that turbulence production exceeds the
dissipation up to the ﬁrst measurement location on the ﬂatter part of the inner surf zone
(x = 59 m) where the model reaches it’s maximum value. From that point onwards the
computed turbulence kinetic energy proﬁle tends towards the measured one for the two
cases with a smaller limiter (case 1.1 and 1.2) while the other two continue to increase
in magnitude. Figure 17 in van der A et al. (2017) indicates that turbulence production
dominates dissipation in the region 55.5 m ≤x ≤56.5 and vice versa from the trough
of the bar and onwards to the inner surf zone (x ≥58 m), while the model shows that
dissipation start to dominate approximately a meter shoreward (x > 59 m) compared to
Page 44 of 92
==PAGE:55==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
the observation.
x =51m
x =53m
x =54.5m
x =55m
x =55.5m
x =56m
x =56.5m
x =57m
x =58.1m
x =59m
x =60.2m
x =63m
Figure 15: Comparison plot of the normalized period averaged turbulence proﬁles in the
twelve measurement locations around the breaker bar, for the four models corresponding
to Cases 1.1 to 1.4 from table 2. The location of each plot is indicated by its title.
Case 1.1 is the only one that manages to reasonably capture the behaviour of the
turbulence proﬁle up to the lee side of the bar (x ≤56.5 m). From that point onwards
it starts to overpredict the kinetic energy of turbulence at the entire water column. All
other cases fail to capture the magnitude of the turbulence kinetic energy along the entire
domain and water column beyond the breaking point. The eﬀect of the stress limiter is
clearly demonstrated in ﬁgure 15 with the proﬁles being distinctly sorted by the value of
the limiter used in each case. Cases 1.1 and 1.2, both reach their maximum value at x =
Page 45 of 92
==PAGE:56==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
59 m, while the other two cases continue to increase in magnitude beyond that point. This
observation further suggests that a large value of the limiter (λ1 > 0.2) highly restricts
turbulence production during the breaking process. Furthermore the computed proﬁles
suggest that a signiﬁcant amount of turbulence in the model is generated at the splash
region (58 m ≤x ≤59 m) probably by the surface roller motion. For cases 1.3 and 1.4 this
point is moved deeper in the surf zone which could be due to the intensity of the plunge
and splash region, as discussed previously and illustrated in ﬁgure 13. To further analyze
and explain the behaviour of the model, the computed Reynolds stresses are compared with
the observations obtained in the experiment of van der A et al. (2017) in ﬁgure 16.
x =51 m
x =53 m
x =54.5 m
x =55 m
x =55.5 m
x =56 m
x =56.5 m
x =57 m
x =58.1 m
x =59 m
x =60.2 m
x =63 m
Figure 16: Comparison plot of the period averaged Reynolds stresses proﬁles in the twelve
measurement locations around the breaker bar, for the four models corresponding to Cases
1.1 to 1.4 from table 2. The location of each plot is indicated by its title.
Page 46 of 92
==PAGE:57==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
The observed Reynolds stresses are highest at the lee side of the bar and are positive
over the biggest part of the water column, in agreement with the positive vertical gradient
seen in the undertow proﬁles (see ﬁgure 14). The high and positive Reynolds stresses at
that region contribute to the strong oﬀshore directed undertow velocity along the lee side
slope of the breaker bar. The strange peak observed in case 1.1 at x = 58 and 59 m, is
probably due to the way the Reynolds stresses are calculated in the model. Air trapped in
the water column during the breaking process, must have been treated as water by the ”R”
utility of OpenFOAM which is the function that calculates the Reynolds stresses, leading to
that strange result. The computed results show the same behaviour as was observed in the
turbulence kinetic energy proﬁles in ﬁgure 15. The model agrees very well both in sign and
magnitude with the observed Reynolds stresses until the the crest of the breaker bar, where
the computed Reynolds stresses underestimate the magnitude of the observation near the
bed. At the shoreward slope of the bar, the Reynolds stresses are overestimated near the
surface and through the entire column beyond the bar trough towards the inner surf zone.
The maximum values of the computed Reynolds stresses are for cases 1.1 and 1.2 at the
location of the splash point (x = 59 m) while cases 1.3 and 1.4 still grow in magnitude
beyond that point. The sign of the computed Reynolds stresses for x ≥55.5 m, suggests
that momentum transfer is dominated by the breaking induced stresses and is downward
and onshore or upward and oﬀshore.
To further investigate the inﬂuence of the shear stress limiter λ1 the time dependent
velocities and turbulence kinetic energy for the two cases 1.1 and 1.2 are compared with
the measured values from the experiment at 0.4 m above the bed, which corresponds to
approximately the middle of the water column. The choice of these two cases was made for
two reasons. One is because these two cases show the best performance, as was made obvious
by the preceding analysis, while still deviate from each other illustrating the inﬂuence of
the stress limiter. The second reason is for illustrative purposes, since the other cases don’t
contribute qualitatively to the following comparison thus they would only introduce noise
in the plots.
From ﬁgure 17 it is seen that both cases show identical behaviour in the pre-breaking
region, with both slightly overestimating the horizontal velocities during the crest and
trough phase of the wave. The characteristic secondary trough seen in the measured signal
starting at the plunge point (x = 54.5 m) and carrying towards the initial part of the lee
side of the breaker bar (x = 56 m), is due to the plunging jet penetrating the surface and
reaching deeper than halfway through the water column inﬂuencing the velocities. From
the shoreward slope of the bar and onwards (x ≥56.5 m) the inﬂuence of the plunging jet
in the measured signal vanishes. Case 1.2 manages to reproduce that behaviour, however
with a distinct shift towards the inner surf zone, while the computed horizontal velocity at
that elevation from case 1.1 seems to be unaﬀected by the plunging jet. Both cases manage
Page 47 of 92
==PAGE:58==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
to reproduce the observed velocity signals in the inner surf zone (x ≥57 m) where the eﬀect
of the plunging jet is no longer observed. However there is a slight phase shift between the
computed and observed velocities.
x =51m
x =56.5m
x =53m
x =57m
x =54.5m
x =58.1m
x =55m
x =59m
x =55.5m
x =60.2m
x =56m
x =63m
Figure 17: Comparison of time dependent wave-related component of the horizontal velocity
approximately in the middle of the water column (z = zbed + 0.4 m). Only cases 1.1 (dotted
lines) and 1.2 (solid lines) are shown here.
In the computed horizontal velocity for case 1.2, the inﬂuence of the plunging jet is
ﬁrstly observed 1 m shoreward compared to the observation at x = 55.5 m and the last
point where the inﬂuence of the plunging jet is observed is also shifted by a meter, located
at the last part of the shoreward slope of the bar at x = 57 m. In the vertical velocities
shown in ﬁgure 18 both cases seem to capture the eﬀect of the plunging jet, already from
the plunge point, although the eﬀect quickly wears oﬀfor case 1.1 one meter shoreward. In
addition to the spatial shift, the magnitude of the inﬂuence is also largely underestimated
in the model. The model manages to reproduce the plunging instance correctly despite
the magnitude discrepancy. The spatial shift observed in case 1.2, since the location of the
plunge is accurately predicted in the model at x = 54.5 m (see ﬁgure 13), suggests that
the angle of the plunging jet should be more vertically directed or that it’s eﬀect should
wear oﬀfaster, ergo a smaller limiter than 0.2 could be used. A Case 1.1 shows a more
abrupt dissipation of energy once the wave reaches the plunge point with the magnitude of
the horizontal velocity being less than that of case 1.2 and closer to the observation. This
Page 48 of 92
==PAGE:59==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
is due to the wave energy being dissipated into turbulence faster once the wave overturns,
as a result of the smaller limiter. Furthermore the fact that in case 1.1 the eﬀect of the
plunging jet is only slightly visible in the vertical velocity signal, supports the argument
that the intensity of the plunger is inﬂuenced by the value of the stress limiter as suggested
by the analysis in this section.
x =51m
x =56.5m
x =53m
x =57m
x =54.5m
x =58.1m
x =55m
x =59m
x =55.5m
x =60.2m
x =56m
x =63m
Figure 18: Comparison of time dependent wave-related component of the vertical velocity
approximately in the middle of the water column (z = zbed + 0.4 m). Only cases 1.1 (dotted
lines) and 1.2 (solid lines) are shown here. Velocities are normalized with the shallow water
wave celerity and time is normalized with the period.
In ﬁgure 19 the time evolution of the computed turbulent kinetic energy from case 1.1
and 1.2 are compared with the observations, at the twelve locations around the breaker
bar, at 0.4 and 0.05 m above the bed. Figure 19 brings useful insight to the analysis, since
it illustrates the discrepancy of the model both in space and time very well. The observed
turbulent kinetic energy is highly inﬂuenced by the plunging instance at the location of
the plunge and slightly shoreward (x = 54.5m - 55 m) across the entire water depth as
seen by the match in magnitude and phase for the two diﬀerent vertical locations. Further
shoreward (x ≥55.5 m) the observed near-bed turbulent kinetic energy seems to be more
or less constant throughout the entire wave cycle. As expected the maximum turbulent
kinetic energy is observed in the shallowest part of the breaking region at the locations
where the eﬀect of the plunging jet is more pronounced, while decreases with distance both
Page 49 of 92
==PAGE:60==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
onshore and oﬀshore from the bar. The maximum turbulent kinetic energy is in phase
with the primary crest of the velocity and the plunging instance at x ≤56 m, while at the
shoreward slope of the bar (56.5 m ≤x ≤57 m) the largest value of k is observed during
the trough phase of the wave cycle. This is due to the turbulence being transported onshore
and downward from the plunging region exceeding the turbulence produced under the wave
crest. Furthermore the minimum value of k is observed at the trough of the breaking bar (x
= 58 m), due to the mixing over a larger water depth. Beyond the trough of the breaking
bar, turbulent kinetic energy is practically constant in time and space, with a slight increase
at the beginning of the step at x = 59 - 60 m while again decreases further onshore.
x =51m
x =56.5m
x =53m
x =57m
x =54.5m
x =58.1m
x =55m
x =59m
x =55.5m
x =60.2m
x =56m
x =63m
Figure 19: Comparison of time dependent turbulence kinetic energy approximately in the
middle of the water column (z = zbed + 0.4 m) and near the bed (z = zbed + 0.05 m). Only
cases 1.1 (dotted lines) and 1.2 (solid lines) are shown here. The grey line plotted above in
all panels, is the measured velocity and its zero value at the the middle of the water column
plotted on the right axis of the ﬁgure for reference.
The model manages to capture the qualitative behaviour of the observed turbulent
kinetic energy quite well at the entire domain, however it underestimates the magnitude
from the pre-breaking region to the trough of the breaker bar, while it overestimates from
Page 50 of 92
==PAGE:61==
3. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A FIXED BAR
this point and further onshore. From the pre-breaking to the plunging point (x < 54.5),
the model is perfectly in phase with the observed turbulence kinetic energy, while it un-
derestimates the magnitude by a factor of 1.5 and 2 for cases 1.1 and 1.2 respectively. The
computed near bed turbulent kinetic energy is totally in phase with the observed temporal
evolution at all locations besides the shoreward slope of the bars (56.5 m ≤x ≤57 m) for
both cases. The discrepancy at the near-bed turbulent kinetic energy between the model
and the observations, could be ampliﬁed by the smaller roughness length used in the model
at this location. At the locations where turbulence kinetic energy is mainly inﬂuenced by
the plunging jet penetrating the water column (55 m ≤x ≤56 m), the model fails to follow
it’s behaviour and the computed maximum turbulence kinetic energy is observed at the
trough phase of the wave cycle. This is due to the model failing to reproduce the intensity
of the plunge as previously discussed. For the same reason the model fails to match the
observations at the shoreward slope of the bar. From this point and further onshore the
model shows a similar behaviour with the observations while constantly over estimates the
magnitude in the splash region and in the inner surf zone at both vertical locations.
From the simulations it was made evident that the value of λ1 will deﬁne rate and
magnitude of turbulence production in high strained regions, by limiting the eddy viscosity
(see (18)). With a small value of λ1 allowing for the ﬁrst argument in (18) to dominate
more easily resulting in an abrupt increase in turbulence production once the model enters
a highly strained ﬂow region, such as the surf zone. Additionally it was found that the
inclusion of the λ1 stress limiter is essential in order to avoid an unphysical overproduction
of turbulence kinetic energy in the overturning jet of the breaking wave, way before this hits
the surface. Furthermore the experimental observations suggest that the main mechanism
that inﬂuences turbulence production in the surf zone, is the plunging jet penetrating
the water column where in the model this mechanism does not show the same dominant
behaviour. The choice of a smaller value for the stress limiter than the one suggested by
Wilcox (2006) is justiﬁed by the simulations, however whether or not this should be further
decreased from the value suggested by Durbin (1996) and Larsen and Fuhrman (2018)
remains debatable.
Page 51 of 92
==PAGE:62==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
4
Plunging breaking waves over a mobile barred bed
As a natural next step for the new stabilized model of Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) is to
use it in sediment transport simulation and evaluate its performance. Although the model
doesn’t manage to accurately compute the turbulence in the inner surf zone, the study of
sediment transport under breaking waves is a topic of great signiﬁcance. Therefore it would
be interesting to see how the model performs in the simulation of a mobile bed experiment.
However due to time limitations in the present work the sediment transport is calculated as
a passive agent with the sediment transport model presented in § 2.7 and the morphological
update turned oﬀ. Thus some discrepancy with the experimental observations is already
introduced prior to the simulation, however it is believed that the model can perform quite
well in predicting transport rates and concentration proﬁles below plunging breaking waves.
4.1
Experimental setup
The case that will be considered is the large scale wave ﬂume experiment of van der Zanden
et al. (2016) where the focus was on near-bed hydrodynamics and turbulence measurements
and van der Zanden et al. (2017a) where the focal point was the contribution of bed-load
and suspended load in the morphodynamics of the breaker bar. This experiment is the
predecessor of the van der A et al. (2017) experiment used as a study case in the previous
sections § 3.3 and 3.4 and the barred proﬁle used in their ﬁxed bed experiment was generated
by the van der Zanden et al. (2016) mobile bed experiment. Thus all coordinate systems
used are the same, with a slight shift in the vertical axis due to a shallower bed in the wave
paddle region of the mobile bed case. The wave generation systems and the ﬂume specs
are otherwise identical in both cases.
The wave conditions are identical as well with a regular wave being generated by the
paddle with a period of T = 4 s and a target wave height at the paddle H = 0.85 m
where the depth was 2.55 m compared to the 2.65 m depth in the van der A et al. (2017)
ﬁxed bed experiment. The wave conditions correspond to a surf similarity parameter ξ0
= 0.54 which matches the Battjes (1974) resulting in plunging breaking waves. The bed
proﬁle consisted of medium grained sand with a median sediment diameter d50 = 0.25
mm (obtained by sieving tests). The degree of uniformity was quantiﬁed by the geometric
method of moments (Blott and Pye (2001)) and was classiﬁed as well sorted. The mean fall
velocity of the sand grains was ws = 0.034 m s−1 and the relative density of the sediment
s = 2.65. The reference bed proﬁle consisted of a bar trough conﬁguration as depicted in
the upper panel of ﬁgure 20. The ﬁxed part of the proﬁle was covered with geotextile and
consisted of permeable concrete slabs to promote wave energy dissipation. The breaker bar
and trough region were deliberately separated from the ﬁxed beach to assure that inner surf
zone and swash processes won’t aﬀect the hydrodynamics and sediment transport processes
Page 52 of 92
==PAGE:63==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
around the breaker bar. A detailed sketch of the experimental setup is depicted in ﬁgure
20.
Figure 20: Sketch of the experimental setup. Upper panel depicts the ﬂume bathymetry
as well as the location of the resistive wave gauges and pressure transducers. The middle
panel is a close-up of the test section around the breaker bar, showing the positions of
the ADVs, Transverse Suction System nozzles (TSS) and the measuring windows of the
Acoustic Concentration and Velocity Proﬁler (ACVP). The lower panel is again a close-up
of the test section around the breaker bar, illustrating the bed evolution after the ﬁrst 30
minutes of the experiment.
Water surface elevation measurements were obtained as in the van der A et al. (2017)
experiment, by a combination of pore pressure transducers (PPT) in the breaking region
and inner surf zone and resistive wave gauges (RWG) in the shoaling region. All measur-
ing instruments were deployed from a custom built mobile frame except some PPTs which
were deployed at the ﬂume’s wall. At outer ﬂow elevations velocities were measured using
ADV’s, just as in the van der A et al. (2017) experiment. Near the bed an acoustic con-
centration and velocity proﬁler (ACVP) was used to measure both sediment concentrations
and the two component particle velocity (x,z). The ACVP sand concentrations were cali-
brated using measurements of a six nozzle transverse suction system (TSS) and an optical
Page 53 of 92
==PAGE:64==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
backscatter sensor. In addition time-varying sediment concentrations in the sheet ﬂow layer
were measured using conductivity-based concentration measurement (CCM) tanks, located
at the bar crest (x = 53 m and x = 54.5 m). A detailed sketch of the experimental setup
can be found in ﬁgure 20.
One experiment consisted of 90 minutes of waves divided in six 15 minute intervals
during which the proﬁle evolved. The proﬁle was measured every 30 minutes (every second
run). After the sixth run (90 min) the ﬂume was drained and the bed proﬁle was restored
so the experiment could be repeated with the mobile frame positioned at a new location.
The experiment was repeated 12 times and the bed proﬁle evolution and hydrodynamics
were very similar for each experiment. This procedure resulted in a high spatial resolution
of velocity and concentration measurements (see ﬁgure 20). The bed level of each run is
deﬁned as the average between the pre- and post-run measured proﬁle. Throughout this
study the ﬁrst run 0 - 15 minutes will be used to compare with the simulation.
4.2
Simulation setup
The domain set-up in ﬁgure 8 has been kept identical with only minor modiﬁcations to
match the reported depth of the mobile bed experiment of van der Zanden et al. (2016).
The domain’s bed proﬁle corresponds to the initial bed proﬁle measured in the experiments
(black line in ﬁgure 20). A stream function wave has been given as a boundary condition,
with H = 0.8 m (corresponding to the observed experimental wave height on the ﬂat sec-
tion of the ﬂume) and T = 4s with zero net volume ﬂux. For the purpose of consistent
comparison, the origin has been placed at the same location as in the experiment. The
roughness has been kept the same for the entire domain and assigned a Nikuradse equiv-
alent sand roughness of ks = 2.5 d50 = 6.25 10−4 m. A varying resolution has been used
to discretize the vertical dimension with the near bed cell size having a ∆z = 9 10−4 m,
which is slightly diﬀerent than the near-bed resolution used in the ﬁxed bed case in §3.3
and 3.4. The vertical resolution varies logarithmically rising to the value of ∆z = 0.04 m at
an elevation of z = 0.4 m above the bed (blue dashed line in ﬁgure 8). From that point and
further upwards the spatial discretization has been kept constant with ∆x = ∆z = 0.04 m.
Besides these minor changes and the addition of the sediment transport model presented
in § 2.7, the setup is identical to the ﬁxed bed case.
4.3
Simulation results
In this section the results of the mobile bed experiment (van der Zanden et al. (2016))
simulation are compared with the observations and discussed in detail. The focal point
is to evaluate the model’s performance in computing sediment transport and identify the
origin of any shortcomings. The turbulence model of Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) has been
Page 54 of 92
==PAGE:65==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
used for this simulation with λ1 = 0.2 and λ2 = 0.05, identical to case 1.2 in table 2.
In ﬁgure 21 the computed and measured surface elevation envelope for the entire domain
is depicted. As in sections §3.4 and 3.3 the solid lines correspond to mean ensemble averaged
values while the shaded areas represent ± one standard deviation, illustrating the wave to
wave variability within the model. The distinct peak/trough seen in all three lines at x ≈
37 m is due to a fault in the speciﬁc numerical wave gauge and should be disregarded. The
model managed to capture the evolution of the mean surface elevation quite well, while in
the pre-breaking region of the domain the wave heights were slightly overestimated. Despite
that discrepancy the model managed to predict the horizontal location of the breaking
point and the corresponding surface elevation, along with the subsequent decay of the wave
heights in the breaking region and inner surf zone.
Figure 21: Comparison of computed and measured surface elevation envelope and mean
water level. Solid lines represent the mean surface elevation, while the shaded area is ± one
standard deviation. Open circles correspond to the RWG and dots to the PPT pressure
measurements converted to elevation using the Bonneton et al. (2018) method.
Although the model managed to reproduce the observed envelope, considering only the
RWG measured elevations there is a constant overestimation of the wave heights over the
entire domain. As stated previously the input wave height matches the observed waveheight
at the location x ≈10 m from the paddle where the ﬁrst RWG was placed in the experiment
while the computed and measured waveheights already deviate at the next RWG (x ≈27
m). This observation suggests that there is some dissipation in the experiment that is not
represented in the model. The only diﬀerence between the two experimental/simulation
set-ups, is the mobile bed part of the ﬂume (see ﬁgures 7 and 20). In van der Zanden et al.
(2017a) they report that bed forms were generated during each run, which is one discrepancy
between the live bed experiment and the model where no morphological update is enabled.
Four snapshots illustrating the breaking sequence in the model at the 60th period of the
Page 55 of 92
==PAGE:66==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
simulation, are depicted in ﬁgure 22. The model manages to reproduce the breaking process
very well, however there is a slight shift in the horizontal locations of the overturning and the
plunge point by one and half meter oﬀshore respectively, compared to the reported locations
in van der Zanden et al. (2017a). This spatial shift between the computed and observed
locations is probably due to the aforementioned waveheight discrepancy, since a larger
wave will start to overturn earlier compared to a smaller wave. Despite that discrepancy
the splash zone matches the reported observations as do the time scales indicated at each
panel.
Figure 22: Breaking sequence snapshots from the simulation of the mobile bed experiment.
The temporal evolution is indicated by the normalized time relative to the overturning of
the wave t0 in each panel.
The model comparison with the measured proﬁles, was identical with the previous com-
parisons found in §3.3 and 3.4, therefore in this case the analysis of the outer ﬂow quantities
is omitted since it doesn’t provide any new insight. Instead the focus will be on near bed
velocities and turbulence. During the van der Zanden et al. (2017a) very detailed near-bed
velocity and concentration measurements were obtained with the ACVP, which are com-
Page 56 of 92
==PAGE:67==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
pared with the simulation results in what follows. As previously, the aim is to understand
which mechanisms inﬂuence the ﬂow and subsequently the sediment transport ﬁeld and
how well are these mechanisms represented in the model. To facilitate the forthcoming
analysis, a comparison of the time averaged velocity proﬁles follows at the twelve locations
around the bar along the entire water column.
x =51m
x =56.5m
x =53m
x =57m
x =54.5m
x =58m
x =55m
x =59m
x =55.5m
x =60m
x =56m
x =63m
Figure 23: Undertow proﬁles obtained from the ADV (open circles) and ACVP (dots)
compared with the computed proﬁles (solid lines) at the twelve locations around the breaker
bar. The dotted line in each panel represents the lowest observed trough level and the
horizontal black line represents the local bed level averaged over the ﬁrst 30 minutes of the
experiment.
In ﬁgure 23 time averaged velocity proﬁles are compared at the twelve locations around
the breaker bar. Just as in the ﬁxed bed case, velocities are positive at the crest indicating an
onshore mass ﬂux near the surface and negative below trough level due to the compensating
return current. The undertow magnitude gradually increases towards the trough of the
breaker bar where the largest velocities were observed (x = 57 m). Further onshore towards
the inner surf zone they decrease again. Note the diﬀerence in elevation between the model
and the experimental observations at the shoreward side of the bar due to the erosion of the
Page 57 of 92
==PAGE:68==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
proﬁle, which is not represented in the model. In addition the largest observed undertow
velocities have shifted from x = 56 m in the ﬁxed bed case to x = 57 m in the mobile
bed case. Since the mobile bed experiment of van der Zanden et al. (2017a) was used to
generate the bed of the ﬁxed bed experiment of van der A et al. (2017), it is obvious that
stronger undertow would coincide with the future shoreward trough of the bar where the
largest erosion was observed, while after a point the proﬁle reaches an equilibrium and the
strongest undertow shifts by approximately a meter oﬀshore. It is interesting to notice the
onshore directed progressive wave streaming velocities enhanced by the converging eﬀects
of the bed slope, observed in the furthest oﬀshore location in ﬁgure 23 (three dots lying in
the bed). Due to the mobile bed and the intrawave variability, some of the measurements
such as the ones discussed were obtained at negative distance from the bed as low as 8 mm
below the deﬁned bed level. Further shoreward onshore directed boundary layer streaming
is only evident at the lee side of the breaker bar (55.5 m ≤x ≤56 m) and is signiﬁcantly
weaker in strength compared to the shoaling region, due to the large undertow magnitude.
The model manages to accurately predict the undertow proﬁles from the shoaling region
to the shoreward slope of the breaker bar, where it initially underpredicts the velocities.
Shoreward of the breaker bar trough the model overpredicts the velocities, while totally
fails to capture the streaming eﬀects observed in the time averaged proﬁles. The origin
of the model’s discrepancy as discussed in § 3.4, lies in the intensity of the plunging jet
not being accurately captured. As will be shown in the forthcoming analysis turbulence
generated from the plunging jet motion reaches the bed at the shoreward trough of the bar
increasing ﬂow resistance, resulting in stronger undertoe. In addition, visual observations
from the experimental studies reported in van der Zanden et al. (2016), conﬁrm shoreward
facing lunate-shaped features in the bar trough (57 m ≤x 59 m) gradually transitioning to
quasi 2-D features in the inner surf zone (59 m ≤x 62 m) and ﬁnally irregular 3-D vortex
ripples were observed further onshore (x > 62 m). Quasi 2-D ripples were also observed at
the lee side of the bar migrating oﬀshore and up-slope. The absence of bed forms at the
bar crest and the pre-breaking region suggests that sediment transport at this region is in
the sheet ﬂow regime. The presence of bed forms will increase the roughness length and
subsequently ﬂow resistance. Moreover velocity proﬁles are aﬀected by the sheet ﬂow and
follow a power-law distribution within the sheet ﬂow layer rather than a logarithmic one
as concluded in Sumer et al. (1996). These features are not represented in the model since
sediment transport is modelled as a passive process and the roughness length is set to a
constant of 2.5 d50, which is signiﬁcantly smaller compared to values of the roughness length
found in the literature for non-plane beds. Hence some discrepancy is already introduced
in the model by the ﬁxed plane bed assumption. To better investigate the near bed ﬂow
properties, the following analysis is conﬁned within the near bed elevations 0 ≤ζ/δ ≤
5, where ζ is the distance from the bed and δ is the local wave boundary layer thickness
Page 58 of 92
==PAGE:69==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
deﬁned as the vertical locations of the velocity overshoot.
Near bed ﬂow properties
In ﬁgure 24 the computed near bed time averaged velocities are compared with the ACVP
obtained velocities on a logarithmic vertical axes. Velocities are normalized with the free
stream value of the time averaged velocity u0 at an elevation ζ = 0.10 m above the bed
(ζ/δ ≈5−10). The vertical coordinate in the following ﬁgures is the distance from the bed
ζ normalized with the local boundary layer thickness δ. The boundary layer thickness has
been deﬁned as the vertical location of the velocity overshoot as observed by van der Zanden
et al. (2017a). Note that due to the mobile bed, intrawave variations occurred of O(mm)
during the experimental runs. For consistency ζ = 0 is set to a constant throughout the
wave cycle taken as the maximum intrawave bed level, which generally occurred around
near-bed ﬂow reversal (van der Zanden et al. (2016)). For the computed results ζ = 0
corresponds to the computational domain’s bed level which is the initial proﬁle from the
experiment (black line in lower panel of ﬁgure 20).
The proﬁle at the shoaling region x = 51.0 m shows a logarithmic increase towards
oﬀshore in the ﬁrst half of the boundary layer followed by a local maximum slightly below
the boundary layer height (ζ/δ = 1). This local maximum could be explained by oﬀshore
directed wave shape streaming based on the ﬁndings of Kranenburg et al. (2012), while the
minor trough observed above that point could be attributed to onshore directed progressive
wave streaming (van der Zanden et al. (2016)). Further up in the water column a nearly
uniform velocity is observed. The model fails to reproduce the vertical variations of he
proﬁle near the bed and shows a constant velocity from right above the bed to the outer
ﬂow elevations. Further onshore the proﬁles show a constant increase in magnitude with
distance from the bed, mainly inﬂuenced by the large undertow seen in ﬁgure 23.
At
pre-breaking and near breaking positions 53 m ≤x ≤54.5 m the proﬁles show a double
logarithmic shape with a deﬂection point around the boundary layer height. Such proﬁles
are observed in wave current conditions as shown in Fredsøe (1984) and in ﬁgure 3.4 in
Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992). In the inner surf zone (x ≥60 m) the double logarithmic
proﬁle seems to reestablish. Near the bed (ζ/δ ≤0.5) the measured proﬁles don’t follow
the logarithmic distribution which is in agreement with Sumer et al. (1996) who found that
the velocities inside the sheet ﬂow layer (which is the case for the oﬀshore slope of the
breaker bar) follow a power-law distribution rather than a logarithmic. The model fails
to reproduce the observed near bed velocities with most of the locations having a depth
uniform boundary layer velocity, while there is a logarithmic increase above the boundary
layer. Shoreward of the breaker bar crest (x ≥56.5 m) the computed near bed proﬁles
increase constantly in magnitude with distance from the bed under the inﬂuence of the
undertow. The reestablishment of the double logarithmic proﬁle in the inner surf zone at
Page 59 of 92
==PAGE:70==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
the observed proﬁles, suggests that the wave related orbital velocities have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence. The model however fails to reproduce this observation due to the exaggerated
undertoe proﬁle in the inner surf zone (see ﬁgure 23).
x =51m
x =56.5m
x =53m
x =57m
x =54.5m
x =58m
x =55m
x =59m
x =55.5m
x =60m
x =56m
x =63m
Figure 24: Near bed time averaged velocities at the twelve locations around the breaker
bar obtained with the ACVP (see ﬁgure 20) plotted on a logarithmic vertical scale. The
location of each proﬁle is indicated by the title above each panel and the local boundary
layer thickness is indicated in the label underneath each panel. Red dots represent the
measured velocities while solid black lines the computed. All velocities are scaled with the
free stream velocity at ζ ≈0.10 m.
In the following ﬁgures (25, 26 and 27) the wave component of the velocities (˜u = ⟨u⟩−u)
is compared at the same twelve locations and near bed elevations as in ﬁgure 24 for the
entire wave cycle. The domain for the upcoming analysis has been divided in three regions
for illustration purposes. First, the computed and observed velocities in the shoaling and
breaking region 51 m ≤x ≤55 m are compared in ﬁgure 25. This is followed by a comparison
at the shoreward slope and trough of the bar 55.5 m ≤x ≤57 m in ﬁgure 26 and in the
inner surf zone x ≥58 m in ﬁgure 27. In all three ﬁgures, the outer ﬂow wave velocity
at ζ = 0.4 m above the bed is depicted in the upper panel for reference on the wave
Page 60 of 92
==PAGE:71==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
cycle, normalized with the local shallow water wave celerity. The observed outer ﬂow wave
velocity is represented by red dots, while the computed is illustrated by a solid black line.
Although the measured velocity signal (in the upper panel) seems to be plotted in a line
rather than the aforementioned dots, it is the high temporal resolution of the ACVP (having
a measuring frequency of 1 MHz) that generates that signal. The middle and lower panel
depict the observed and computed near bed phase averaged wave velocities respectively,
with the magnitude and sign indicated by the colour.
Figure 25: Near bed phase averaged wave component of the velocity at the shoaling and
breaking locations. In the upper panel the observed (red dots) and computed (solid black
line) outer ﬂow phase averaged wave component of the velocity is depicted at ζ = 0.4 m
(ζ/δ ≈40). The observed and computed near bed wave velocities are depicted in the middle
and lower panel respectively.
In ﬁgure 25 the near bed velocities are shown at the oﬀshore slope of the breaker bar.
As seen, the computed and simulated velocities have very similar behaviour with the main
discrepancy lying in the near bed velocity gradient. While the observations show a mild
gradient inside the boundary layer at all phases of the wave cycle, the model computes a
Page 61 of 92
==PAGE:72==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
more abrupt transition from near the bed to an almost depth uniform velocity right above
the bed. The reason for this discrepancy might be the sheet ﬂow layer which was observed
at the experiment, especially at the shoreward slope of the breaker bar (51 m ≤x ≤55 m).
In the model, sediment transport is simulated as a passive process, therefore the velocity
proﬁle is not aﬀected by the moving layer of sediment near the bed which would alter the
velocity distribution as stated previously. Furthermore the model manages to capture the
velocity overshoot at the boundary layer (ζ/δ = 1) however with a slight overprediction of
the crest-phase velocity and an underprediction of the trough-phase. As observed in ﬁgure
17 and discussed in the ﬁxed bed case § 3.4, the model again fails to reproduce the intensity
of the plunging jet which is made evident by the trough located in the crest phase of the
measured velocity signal in the upper panel of ﬁgure 25 at the breaking locations.
Figure 26: Near bed phase averaged wave component of the velocity at the shoreward slope
and trough of the breaker bar. In the upper panel the observed (red dots) and computed
(solid black line) outer ﬂow phase averaged wave component of the velocity is depicted at
ζ = 0.4 m (ζ/δ ≈40). The observed and computed near bed wave velocities are depicted
in the middle and lower panel respectively.
Page 62 of 92
==PAGE:73==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
In ﬁgure 26 the phase averaged wave velocities are depicted in the region of the shore-
ward slope and trough of the breaker bar. The colour scale has been kept identical to
ﬁgure 25 to facilitate the comparison. It is evident that the wave has lost a signiﬁcant
amount of energy at breaking from the smaller magnitude of the velocities in the shore-
ward slope of the breaker bar. At this region both crest and trough phase velocities are
slightly overpredicted by the model. This could be attributed to the failure of the model
to accurately reproduce the plunging intensity and introduce turbulence into the ﬂow since
the agreement improves at the bar trough (x = 57 m) where the plunging motion is no
longer inﬂuencing the velocity signal (see upper panel). Although in the ﬁxed bed case
the plunging jet motion was felt by the model at the shoreward trough of the bar, in this
case the velocity signal seems totally unaﬀected. This is caused by the diﬀerent steepness
of the oﬀshore slope of the bar in the two cases. The mobile bed experiment was used to
generate the bed for the ﬁxed bed case, which corresponds to the proﬁle generated after 90
minutes of wave breaking (N = 1350 waves) depicted in ﬁgure 7. As reported in van der
Zanden et al. (2016), during the experiment the breaker bar increased in height, the trough
deepened and the oﬀshore slope of the bar crest gradually increased in steepness. The bar
growth and steepening induced enhanced shoaling and an increase in the surf similarity
parameter, resulting in an increasing plunging intensity from t = t0 to t = t0 + 90 min.
As seen by the comparison between the two cases the model is capable of reproducing the
varying plunging intensities caused by the varying slopes, however the computed plunging
intensity is underestimated in both cases.
Figure 27 suggests that in the inner surf zone the waves have reformed, however sig-
niﬁcantly weaker in magnitude due to the energy dissipated at breaking. The agreement
between measured and computed proﬁles has improved, probably due to the absence of
breaking. The crest phase computed velocity proﬁles demonstrate a slight underprediction
while the computed velocities during the trough phase are slightly overpredicted. Although
the absence of bed forms in the model alters the near bed velocity gradient and introduces
a discrepancy between the measured and observed proﬁles, the reduced velocity magnitude
weakens the inﬂuence of the bed forms and improves the agreement between measured
and computed proﬁles. The weak wave velocities combined with the strong undertow cur-
rent (see ﬁgures 23 and 24) in the inner surf zone, resulted in constant negative velocities
throughout the entire wave cycle. The measured velocities show that behaviour at the
shoreward slope and the trough of the bar where the strongest undertow was observed,
while the model predicts negative near bed velocities for almost the entire wave cycle in
the inner surf zone due to the exaggerated undertow magnitude.
Page 63 of 92
==PAGE:74==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
Figure 27: Near bed phase averaged wave component of the velocity at the inner surf zone.
In the upper panel the observed (red dots) and computed (solid black line) outer ﬂow
phase averaged wave component of the velocity is depicted at ζ = 0.4 m (ζ/δ ≈40). The
observed and computed near bed wave velocities are depicted in the middle and lower panel
respectively.
The remaining part of this section, is a comparison between the measured and computed
near bed turbulence kinetic energy (TKE). The normalized near bed phase averaged TKE
is plotted in the following ﬁgures (28, 29 and 30). Consistent with the previous plots, the
lower panel corresponds to the computed TKE, while the middle panel to the observed. In
the upper panel of all three ﬁgures the phase averaged velocity at the boundary layer limit
⟨u(δ) ⟩is plotted for reference on the wave cycle. Note that in what follows the velocity
signal diﬀers from the previous comparison as it includes the time averaged velocity u.
This choice was made to analyze the behaviour of the TKE’s temporal variation near the
bed, inﬂuenced by the combined motion of wave orbital velocities and undertow current.
Normalized TKE magnitude is indicated by the colorbar.
Page 64 of 92
==PAGE:75==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
Figure 28: Near bed phase averaged TKE. The computed (solid black line) and measured
(red dots) phase averaged velocity at the boundary layer’s upper limit ⟨u(δ)⟩is depicted in
the upper panel for reference on the wave cycle. Note that the velocity signal in the upper
panel is ⟨u⟩= ˜u + u. The middle (measured) and lower (computed) panels depict the near
bed phase averaged turbulent kinetic energy.
A dominance of bed generated turbulence is observed on ﬁgure 28 prior to breaking (x
≤54.5 m), which for the very oﬀshore location appears to be conﬁned inside the boundary
layer.
At the breaking locations, large turbulent events occur at the crest and trough
instances of the wave cycle, while the magnitude shows a signiﬁcant drop once the lee side
of the bar’s crest is reached (x = 55 m). This decline in near bed TKE is due to the
diverging eﬀects at the lee side of the bar’s crest. The measured bed generated TKE at x
≥54.5 m shows large diﬀusion outside the wave’s boundary layer into the water column.
The model manages to reproduce the TKE generation at the crest and trough instances
of the wave cycle, as well as the upwards diﬀusion of the trough phase generated TKE
during the crest half cycle for x ≥54.5 m. In general it can be seen that the qualitative
Page 65 of 92
==PAGE:76==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
behaviour of the near bed TKE is well captured by the model, however it fails to reproduce
the magnitude of the large turbulent events observed at x ≥53 m, while it does show the
diﬀusion pattern observed. Additionally in the furthest oﬀshore location the model shows
an exaggeration in the bed generated turbulence. Furthermore, the TKE increase in the
upper part of the water column during the trough phase of the wave cycle at x ≥54.5 m,
suggests that in both the experiment and the model some breaking generated turbulence
arrives at the near bed elevations above the boundary layer. Finally it should be noted that
the plunging jet motion is not strong enough to inﬂuence the velocity signal at the upper
limit of the boundary layer as it did in higher elevations such as ζ/δ = 10 to 20.
Figure 29: Near bed phase averaged TKE. The computed (solid black line) and measured
(red dots) phase averaged velocity at the boundary layer’s upper limit ⟨u(δ)⟩is depicted in
the upper panel for reference on the wave cycle. Note that the velocity signal in the upper
panel is ⟨u⟩= ˜u + u. The middle (measured) and lower (computed) panels depict the near
bed phase averaged turbulent kinetic energy.
Further onshore at the shoreward slope and trough of the breaker bar, large amounts of
Page 66 of 92
==PAGE:77==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
breaking generated turbulence highly inﬂuence the time varying near bed TKE, as observed
in the measured TKE in ﬁgure 29. While still large turbulent events occur during the trough
and crest half cycle, that appear to diﬀuse outside the wave’s boundary layer at x ≤56.5
m. In addition, the measured velocity signal seems to be aﬀected by the breaking generated
turbulence infusion at the location where this is most pronounced (x = 56 m). The model
fails to reproduce the breaking generated TKE’s arrival at the near-bed region. Although
some breaking generated turbulence seems to enter the near bed region in the model results,
it’s magnitude is negligible compared to the measurements and instead of showing a spatial
decay as observed in the measurements it becomes more and more pronounced with distance
from the breaking location.
The discrepancy between the model and the experimental
observations in the breaking generated turbulence arriving at the near bed region, lies in the
underestimation of the plunging intensity. The underestimation of the bed generated TKE
in the model could be due to the absence of bed forms which would increase the roughness
of the bed. Finally in the trough of the breaker bar (x = 57 m) the underestimation of
the computed bed generated TKE is attributed to the weaker undertow compared to the
observation, resulting in weaker near bed velocities as seen from the upper panel in ﬁgure
29.
The measured bed generated TKE in the inner surfzone seen in ﬁgure 30 is enhanced
by the presence of bed forms increasing form roughness. In this region bed generated TKE
is seen to occur throughout the entire wave cycle, with the intensity being ampliﬁed at the
crest phase instance. The computed results on the other hand, show near bed generation
of TKE only during the trough phase of the wave cycle at the entire inner surf zone. This
feature is associated with the exaggerated computed undertow in the region, which results
in negative velocities throughout the entire wave cycle. The exaggeration of the undertow
is a product of the strong surface ﬂow (surface roller) and the overestimated TKE which
increases ﬂow resistance. Contradicting the experimental observations large amounts of
turbulence generated near the surface, are seen to arrive at the near-bed region in the
inner surf zone. This defect of the model is better explained by examining ﬁgure 31, where
snapshots of the TKE during ﬁve instances evenly spread through the wave cycle covering
the entire test section are depicted illustrating the spatial and temporal variation of TKE.
Page 67 of 92
==PAGE:78==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
Figure 30: Near bed phase averaged TKE. The computed (solid black line) and measured
(red dots) phase averaged velocity at the boundary layer’s upper limit ⟨u(δ)⟩is depicted in
the upper panel for reference on the wave cycle. Note that the velocity signal in the upper
panel is ⟨u⟩= ˜u + u. The middle (measured) and lower (computed) panels depict the near
bed phase averaged turbulent kinetic energy
As seen from the ﬁgure turbulence generated on the surface at the plunging instance
doesn’t reach the bed rather gets convected onshore during the splash process. In the inner
surf zone turbulence generated at the surface by the splash process and the propagating
bore, is spread throughout the water column.
Furthermore after the plunging jet hits
the water surface, a secondary wave is generated at the splash region in the form of a
propagating bore (surface roller). This secondary wave re-breaks in the inner surf zone (x
≈62 m - 64 m ) generating turbulence that subsequently gets convected downwards by
the wave’s orbital motion. The experimental observations from both experiments (van der
Zanden et al. (2016); van der A et al. (2017)) show that breaking generated turbulence
reached all the way to the bed, which is made evident in ﬁgures 29 and 19, while away
Page 68 of 92
==PAGE:79==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
from the breaking point dissipation of turbulence prevailed over production as illustrated
in ﬁgure 17 of van der A et al. (2017). Therefore as stated previously, the major defect
of the model lies in the failure of the plunging jet motion to reach the bed. In addition
turbulence produced on the surface in the inner surf zone by the splash and the surface
roller motion should be dissipated before reaching the bed as suggested by the experimental
observations. However it is believed that if the plunging jet discrepancy is ﬁxed the model
performance will improve in the entire domain, since energy will be dissipated at the plunge
point and convected downwards instead of the parallel convection seen in all cases, which
ampliﬁes the TKE in the inner surf zone.
Figure 31: Computed snapshots of the breaking process at ﬁve instances evenly spread
through the wave cycle, illustrating the temporal and spatial variation of TKE at the entire
experimental test section.
Page 69 of 92
==PAGE:80==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
Sediment transport
The experimental observations of van der Zanden et al. (2016) suggest that bed forms where
present at the shoreward slope and trough of the breaker bar and in the inner surf zone,
while a plane bed was observed at the oﬀshore slope and crest of the breaker bar (see lower
panel in ﬁgure 32). The absence of bed forms at the oﬀshore slope and crest of the breaker
bar indicates sediment transport in the sheet ﬂow regime in this region, while a lower regime
is indicated by the oﬀshore migrating quasi-2D ripples at the shoreward slope and trough
of the breaker bar as well as in the inner surf zone. Although a ﬁxed bed is assumed in the
model, the sediment transport regimes can be related to the magnitude of the computed
Shields parameter.
In ﬁgure 32 the time varying Shields parameter ⟨θ⟩from equation (76) is plotted in the
upper panel scaled with the local value of the critical Shields parameter θc from equation
(71), illustrating the temporal and spatial variation of the instantaneous Shields parameter
throughout the wave cycle at the entire test section. As expected the highest values of
the Shields parameter reaching 35×θc, are computed in the shoaling region and crest of
the breaker bar during the crest-phase of the wave cycle where near bed velocities are
highest (see ﬁgure 25). Subsequently the instantaneous Shields parameter drops to zero
momentarily during the deceleration and zero down-crossing phase from which point on
gradually increases during the trough-phase of the wave cycle to a little less than half
the maximum computed value. Finally the instantaneous Shields parameter drops again
to zero and abruptly increases with a far steeper gradient compared to the deceleration
phase, due to the asymmetric wave shape, to the maximum computed value. A similar
behaviour is observed at the shoreward slope and trough of the breaker while the magnitude
is considerably down scaled with the maximum values being approximately half the ones
computed in the shoaling region.
The reason for the distinct depression in the spatial
variation of the instantaneous as well as the time averaged θ/θc (middle panel in ﬁgure
32) Shields parameter observed at the trough of the breaker lies in the diverging geometry
of the bed, resulting in reduced near bed velocities. In addition a signiﬁcant amount of
energy is dissipated during the breaking process, which also contributes to the decrease of
the near bed velocity signal (see ﬁgure 26). In the inner surf zone the maximum values
of the instantaneous Shields parameter are observed during the trough phase of the wave
cycle, gradually rising with distance from the breaker bar to approximately 20×θc at x ≥
63 m. The ﬂuctuation of the instantaneous Shields parameter from zero during the crest
phase to maximum during the trough phase is due to the exaggerated undertow resulting
in negative near-bed velocities throughout the entire wave cycle. This behaviour suggests
that the computed bed load is directed onshore prior to breaking and oﬀshore in the inner
surf zone in agreement with the observation. However an exaggeration is expected in the
oﬀshore directed bed load transport in the inner surf zone due to the overestimation of the
Page 70 of 92
==PAGE:81==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
undertow magnitude in the region. In addition an underestimation of the onshore bed load
transport rates due to the failure of the model to reproduce the onshore directed WBL
streaming in the shoaling region and crest of the breaker bar (see ﬁgure 23).
Figure 32: Spatio-temporal variation of the Shields parameter ⟨θ⟩/θc (upper panel). Spatial
variation of the time averaged Shields parameter θ/θc, plotted on a logarithmic vertical axis
(middle panel). Bed proﬁle of the test section.
Consulting ﬁgure 10.3 in Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992), it is seen that transition from a
proﬁle where bed forms are present to a plane bed proﬁle, ergo sheet ﬂow regime, occurs at
values of the Shields parameter 18 to 22×θc. Combining this with the computed values of
the Shields parameter in ﬁgure 32, suggests that the computed sediment transport regimes
agree with the experimental observations of van der Zanden et al. (2016) from the shoaling
region to the trough of the breaker bar. While as expected from the exaggerated undertow
proﬁles the sediment transport regime in the inner surf zone will be overestimated as well
since a value of θ > 20×θc is computed which indicates a plane bed contradicting the
experimental observations.
Page 71 of 92
==PAGE:82==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
Bed load
Bed load in the experimental dataset was obtained indirectly by subtracting the measured
suspended load obtained from he ACVP and CCM+ instruments from the total load. Sev-
eral deﬁnitions exist in the literature for the the distinction between bed load and suspended
load, ranging from the bed level to some roughness dependent elevation above the bed. The
distinction between bed load and suspended load in the experimental measurements was
deﬁned at the elevation of ζ = 5 mm above the bed, which corresponds to an α1 value of 20
(see eq: (89)). Such a high α1 value is highly unusual, however due to the very high vertical
concentration gradient near the bed and the strong temporal variability of the intrawave
bed level the measuring limitations of the ACVP were met and measurements for ζ < 5mm
had to be truncated. In the model however the choice of α1 to deﬁne the reference level
was 3.5 based on the ﬁndings of Sumer and Deigaard (1981) as described in § 2.7. The
total load was obtained from bed proﬁle measurements by solving a mass balance equation.
Some estimates were subjected to considerable scatter as reported in the data descriptor,
therefore the comparison between computed and measured bed load transport is omitted.
In ﬁgure 33 the computed time varying and time averaged bed load transport is plotted in
the upper and lower panel respectively.
Figure 33: Computed phase averaged bed load transport rates are depicted in the up-
per panel. In the lower panel the computed time averaged bed load transport rates are
compared.
Page 72 of 92
==PAGE:83==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
As seen from the ﬁgure the computed time averaged bed load transport rate follows
the aforementioned behaviour of the time varying Shields parameter, while the gradient
in the time averaged bed load transport rate agrees with the erosion/accretion pattern
observed in the experiment and depicted in the lower panel of ﬁgure 32. It should be stated
however that considering the observed velocity signals from ﬁgures 23 and 25, a larger
onshore bed load transport rate would be expected in the locations x = 51 m, 55.5 m and
56 m where onshore directed boundary layer streaming was observed. Especially in the
further oﬀshore location where the near bed velocity was positive for almost 80 % of the
wave cycle (see ﬁgure 25) and the time averaged velocity proﬁle in ﬁgure 23 shows a period
averaged WBL streaming magnitude of approximately 0.3 m/s. Furthermore the bed load
transport rates in the inner surf zone (x ≥58 m ) are surely overestimated in magnitude
based on the exaggerated undertow proﬁle. In addition the shift in sign of the computed
bed load transport rate could be shifted by half a meter shoreward based on the WBL
onshore streaming velocities observed at x = 56 m which the model failed to reproduce.
In ﬁgure 34 the time varying sheet ﬂow layer concentrations measured by the CCM+
are plotted in the middle panel for the two measuring locations. The solid black lines in the
ﬁgure indicate the upper sheet layer interface and the lowest intrawave erosion depth, while
the red dashed lines represent the reference concentration elevation α1 d50 and the dotted
red line the limit between the bed load and suspended load as deﬁned in the experiment.
The phase averaged velocities ⟨u(δ)⟩at the upper limit of the WBL is plotted in the upper
panel for reference on the wave cycle. The lower panel depicts the computed time varying
concentrations at the same locations. The measured time varying sheet layer thickness was
determined by van der Zanden et al. (2016) as the diﬀerence between the intrawave time
varying bottom and the top of the sheet ﬂow layer, which was deﬁned as the elevation with
⟨C⟩= 0.08. As expected the upper limit of the sheet ﬂow layer has a distinct peak under
the wave crest then goes almost to zero during the zero down crossing, while for the rest
of the wave cycle is approximately equal to the reference concentration level α1 d50. This
observation justiﬁes the choice of the α1 = 3.5 value in the model over the value of 2 that is
usually found in the literature (Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992)). The fact that the sheet ﬂow
layer thickness becomes almost zero during the crest to trough ﬂow reversal, suggests that
sediment entrained in the upper sheet ﬂow layer during the crest phase has settled down once
the ﬂow reverses. The model manages to reproduce the observed concentrations at both the
trough and crest phase of the wave cycle quite successfully with a slight underestimation
in the upper part ζ/δ ≥0.2 at x = 53 m. Moreover the model manages to capture the
settling of the sediment grains during ﬂow reversal as well.
Page 73 of 92
==PAGE:84==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
Figure 34: Measured (middle panel) and computed (lower panel) phase averaged concen-
trations in the sheet ﬂow layer. The red dashed and dotted lines indicate the reference bed
concentration from the model and experiment respectively, the solid black lines represent
the upper sheet layer interface and the intrawave erosion depth. The computed (solid black
line) and measured (red dots) phase averaged velocity ⟨u(δ)⟩is plotted in the upper panel.
For the rest of the measuring locations concentrations were obtained with the ACVP
proﬁler, by inverting the acoustic backscatter intensity as described in van der Zanden et al.
(2017b). The inversion however was considered accurate for elevations above 5 mm or 20
d50 as mentioned above. The sheet ﬂow layer concentrations obtained for the ACVP are
provided in the experimental dataset for the ﬁve oﬀshore locations from shoaling to the
shoreward slope of the breaker bar (x ≤55.5 m). A comparison between the two diﬀerent
instruments was done and the ACVP measurements show signiﬁcant deviation both in
phase and magnitude from the CCM+ obtained sheet ﬂow layer concentrations, which are
considered more reliable. Therefore a comparison between the ACVP obtained sheet ﬂow
layer concentrations and the experimental results is omitted in this section.
Page 74 of 92
==PAGE:85==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
Suspended load
In ﬁgures 35 to 37 the time varying ACVP obtained concentrations are shown inside the
WBL at elevations larger than ζ = 5 mm above the bed. Consistent with the near bed ﬂow
comparison in the previous section, the domain is divided in the same three regions, namely
shoaling and breaking (x ≤55 m), shoreward slope and trough of the breaker bar (55.5 m
≤x ≤57 m) and inner surf zone (x ≥58 m). The log10 ⟨C⟩of the measured and computed
time varying concentrations are plotted in the middle and lower panel respectively. The
black dashed lines represent the experimental limit between bed load and suspended load
and the red dashed lines in the lower panel represent the model’s reference concentration
level. Furthermore the velocity signal ⟨u(δ)⟩at the elevation of the upper limit of the WBL
is plotted in the upper panel for reference on the wave cycle.
Figure 35: Measured (middle panel) and computed (lower panel) log10⟨C⟩of the phase
averaged suspended sediment concentrations. Black dashed lines represent the experimental
limit between bed load and suspended load and the red dashed lines represent the model’s
reference concentration level. The computed (solid black line) and measured (red dots)
phase averaged velocity ⟨u(δ)⟩is plotted in the upper panel.
Page 75 of 92
==PAGE:86==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
Consistent with the TKE plotted in ﬁgure 28 in the previous section, the observed con-
centrations in the shoaling and breaking region depicted in ﬁgure 35 show negligible values
at the further oﬀshore location (maximum values of ⟨C⟩< 0.1 %) throughout the entire
wave cycle. The magnitude of the suspended sediment concentrations is rising towards the
crest of the breaker bar. Just as in the TKE, the time variation shows a global maximum
at the crest phase of the wave cycle in the order of 1 to 3 % inside the WBL, which drops
to zero with distance from the bed. Prior to breaking suspended sediment concentration
drops to almost zero during the crest to trough phase of the wave cycle, indicating that
the sediment that was entrained in the water column at the crest phase settles during ﬂow
reversal. A secondary peak is observed during the trough phase of the wave cycle however
signiﬁcantly lower in magnitude and extent. At the crest of the breaker bar (x = 54.5 m)
concentration levels are very similar to the previous locations while they no longer drop
during ﬂow reversal, which was expected considering the high TKE levels throughout the
entire wave cycle shown in ﬁgure 28. Finally right after the crest of the breaker bar, follow-
ing the TKE evolution, concentrations levels drop to zero during the crest to trough phase
of the wave cycle. The computed concentration levels are overestimated inside the WBL
at the further oﬀshore location with the model predicting suspension of sediment one order
higher compared to the observation. In the rest of the domain the model follows the ex-
perimental observations quite close, however fails to reproduce the observed concentration
levels during ﬂow reversal at x = 54.5 m. In addition the computed concentration levels are
slightly exaggerated during the crest phase of the wave cycle and underestimated during
the trough phase. This discrepancy carries from the identical discrepancy of the model in
the computed time varying TKE.
At the shoreward slope of the breaker bar (55.5 m ≤x ≤56 m) the observed suspended
sediment concentrations plotted in ﬁgure 36 show a constant value of approximately 3%
throughout the entire wave cycle at the lower levels. This is a product of the high residual
turbulence levels inside the WBL seen in ﬁgure 29, keeping sediment in suspension through-
out the entire wave cycle. Concentration levels decrease with distance from the breaking
point and periodicity reestablishes at the trough of the breaker bar (x = 57 m). Due to
the strong undertow observed at the trough of the breaker bar resulting to negative veloc-
ities throughout the entire wave cycle, higher concentration levels are observed during the
trough phase. The model just as in the TKE comparison fails to reproduce the observed
behaviour at the shoreward slope of the breaker bar, while the agreement improves with
distance from the bar as the high residual turbulence observed in the experiment is dissi-
pated and periodicity reestablishes. It is interesting to notice the connection between the
near bed velocity and concentration level discrepancy observed for x ≥56.5 m. Especially
pronounced at the trough location where the inﬂuence of breaking generated turbulence has
worn oﬀthe temporal gradient of the concentration level deviation follows directly from
Page 76 of 92
==PAGE:87==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
the diﬀerence in the velocity signal.
Figure 36: Measured (middle panel) and computed (lower panel) log10⟨C⟩of the phase
averaged suspended sediment concentrations. Black dashed lines represent the experimental
limit between bed load and suspended load and the red dashed lines represent the model’s
reference concentration level. The computed (solid black line) and measured (red dots)
phase averaged velocity ⟨u(δ)⟩is plotted in the upper panel.
In ﬁgure 37 the suspended sediment time varying concentration in the inner surf zone is
compared. The eﬀect of breaking generated turbulence has completely worn oﬀas seen in
the TKE plot in ﬁgure 30, however the observed results show constant concentration levels
throughout the entire wave cycle in the order 0.3%. This is due to the strong undertow in the
region resulting in almost constant velocities throughout the entire wave cycle. However
due to the energy lost at breaking the velocity signal has become signiﬁcantly weaker
resulting in lower concentrations at the measured elevations compared to the pre-breaking
region. The model shows good agreement with the the observed results very close to the
bed however due to the exaggerated undertow, fails to capture the nearly uniform in time
concentration level as a result of the zero velocity at the crest phase. Furthermore the
Page 77 of 92
==PAGE:88==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
undertow exaggeration becomes stronger with distance from the trough of the breaker bar,
resulting in stronger negative velocities and in conjunction with the larger duration of the
trough phase more sediment gets entrained in the water column. In addition the inﬂux of
turbulence generated at the surface inside the WBL keeps suspended sediment from settling.
Consecutively suspended sediment get advected upwards by the periodic velocities during
the crest phase as seen in the further onshore location. Moreover the exaggerated undertow
in the inner surf zone results in an inﬂation of the maximum computed concentration level
at x = 63 m by an order of magnitude compared to the observation.
Figure 37: Measured (middle panel) and computed (lower panel) log10⟨C⟩of the phase
averaged suspended sediment concentrations. Black dashed lines represent the experimental
limit between bed load and suspended load and the red dashed lines represent the model’s
reference concentration level. The computed (solid black line) and measured (red dots)
phase averaged velocity ⟨u(δ)⟩is plotted in the upper panel.
As was expected the time varying suspended sediment concentrations follow very closely
the observed temporal and spatial variation of the TKE near the bed. Again it is found that
the same shortcoming of the model carries further into the sediment transport calculations.
Page 78 of 92
==PAGE:89==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
The spatial delay in the incoming surface generated turbulence in the near bed region, re-
sults in underestimation of the suspended sediment concentrations at the shoreward slope
of the bar and overestimation in the inner surf zone. In addition the exaggerated undertow
in the inner surf zone further contributes in the erroneous entrainment of sediment in the
water column. Besides the big discrepancy between the computed and observed concentra-
tions at the shoreward slope of the breaker bar, the qualitative behaviour of the model is
quite good. In the ﬁgure 38 that follows a comparison of the time averaged concentration
proﬁles is shown.
x =51m
x =55.5m
x =58m
x =53m
x =56m
x =59m
x =54.5m
x =56.5m
x =60m
x =55m
x =57m
x =63m
Figure 38: Computed (solid black lines) and measured (red dots) time averaged concentra-
tion proﬁles at the twelve locations around the breaker bar.
As was observed in the previously discussed time varying concentrations, besides the
exaggerated proﬁle in the further oﬀshore location, prior to breaking the model shows a
good agreement with the measured proﬁles. The aforementioned underestimation of the
Page 79 of 92
==PAGE:90==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
concentration proﬁles at the shoreward slope of the breaker bar is depicted in the middle
panel of ﬁgure 38. Furthermore the computed concentration proﬁles gradually increase
with distance from the breaker bar. The gradual increase results in an exaggeration of the
predicted time averaged suspended sediment concentrations in the inner surf zone. The
overestimation of the concentration proﬁles in the inner surf zone however is not that much
pronounced, as the overestimation at the shoreward slope of the breaker bar. A comparison
of the total net suspended sediment ﬂuxes is found in what follows.
x =51m
x =55.5m
x =58m
x =53m
x =56m
x =59m
x =54.5m
x =56.5m
x =60m
x =55m
x =57m
x =63m
Figure 39: Computed (solid lines) and measured (dotted line) time averaged total sediment
ﬂux proﬁles at the twelve locations around the breaker bar. Please note the diﬀerent x-axis
scaling in the subplots.
Page 80 of 92
==PAGE:91==
4. PLUNGING BREAKING WAVES OVER A MOBILE BARRED BED
In ﬁgure 39 the total suspended sediment ﬂux proﬁles are shown at the same twelve
locations around the breaker bar. Please note the diﬀerent x- axis scaling in the ﬁgure.
The diﬀerent scales have been chosen to facilitate the visual comparison. In addition the
pale colours, namely grey and pink indicate oﬀshore computed and measured sediment ﬂux
respectively while the black and red colours represent the onshore computed and measured
sediment ﬂux respectively.
As seen from ﬁgure 39 despite the previously discussed discrepancies, the sign of the
computed and measured sediment ﬂuxes is accurately predicted by the model in almost
all locations. The large discrepancy seen immediately shoreward of the breaker’s bar crest
(x = 55.5 m), is due to the breaking generated turbulence arriving at the near bed region
resulting in large suspended sediment concentrations and increasing ﬂow resistance. The
combination of the increased ﬂow resistance, which will amplify the undertow magnitude,
with the large concentrations leads to signiﬁcant oﬀshore suspended sediment ﬂux. The
model fails to reproduce the observed arrival of the breaking generated TKE at the near
bed region as previously discussed, resulting in erroneous prediction of the ﬂux direction.
At all other locations the model accurately predicts the direction of the suspended sediment
ﬂux.
At the oﬀshore slope of the breaker bar (x ≤55 m) the model manages reproduce the
observed spatial variation in the suspended sediment ﬂux both in the horizontal and vertical
direction, with the agreement improving closer to the crest of the breaker bar’s crest. At
the further oﬀshore locations (x ≤53 m) the overestimation of the WBL ﬂuxes is due to the
overestimation of the WBL concentration during the crest phase of the wave cycle as seen in
ﬁgure 35. The shift in sign seen at x = 53 m from oﬀshore very close to the bed (ζ/δ < 0.5)
to onshore right at the midpoint of the WBL and then to oﬀshore again for elevations above
ζ/δ ≈0.7 is a product of the velocity proﬁle’s behaviour depicted in ﬁgure 24 and discussed
at the corresponding section. As shown in Kranenburg et al. (2012) this behaviour can
be explained through contributions of oﬀshore directed wave-shape streaming and onshore
directed progressive wave streaming interchanging inﬂuence at these elevations. The model
fails to reproduce this result as a result of slightly overestimated velocities during the crest
phase of the wave cycle, where concentrations are higher compared to the trough phase.
Further onshore the model manages to capture the observed behaviour very well, with
the onshore directed sediment ﬂux extending slightly above the WBL in contrast to the
observed ﬂuxes where the shift in sign is seen slightly below the WBL’s upper limit. This
is due to the slightly over estimated velocities inside the WBL during the crest phase of
the wave cycle, which could be attributed to the absence of the sheet ﬂow layer’s inﬂuence
on the velocity proﬁle in the model as previously discussed.
Further onshore in the shoreward slope and trough of the breaker bar (55.5 m ≤x ≤
57 m), the agreement is not that good due to the underestimated TKE and concentrations
Page 81 of 92
==PAGE:92==
5. DISCUSSION
in the region. However besides the discrepancy in the WBL ﬂux direction in x = 55.5
m due to the underestimated undertow the sign of the ﬂux is correctly predicted by the
model. The increase in the suspended sediment ﬂux with distance from the WBL seen in
x = 56 m follows the logarithmic increase in the velocity proﬁle seen in ﬁgure 24 and it is
that pronounced in this location, due to the high concentration levels throughout the entire
wave cycle seen in ﬁgure 29 caused by the inﬂux of breaking generated TKE in the near bed
region. In the inner surf zone the magnitude of the suspended sediment ﬂux is exaggerated
by the model at the entire water column. The deviation between computed and measured
suspended sediment ﬂuxes increases with distance from the breaker bar. The discrepancy
is a product of the aforementioned erroneous increase in TKE near the bed in the region,
which ampliﬁes both the suspended sediment concentrations as well as the strength of the
undertow.
5
Discussion
Throughout the present work the already established stable formulation of the k-ω model
proposed by Larsen and Fuhrman (2018), has been used in the simulation of large scale
plunging breaking waves over ﬁxed and mobile barred proﬁles. In addition three new for-
mulations based on the same idea have been implemented in an attempt to stabilize the
model using ﬂow dependent linear varying coeﬃcients to amplify/constrain the produc-
tion/dissipation of the speciﬁc dissipation rate of turbulence ω in potential ﬂow regions.
The reasoning behind the new ﬂow dependent formulations, was that the restraining of
turbulence using a limiter implemented through an inequality was considered somehow vi-
olent. Instead the implementation of the same exact idea through a varying coeﬃcient as
shown in § 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5, is considered to be a more elegant approach, since it allows
the model to transition in a more smooth manner compared to the zeroth order transition
based on an inequality which will deﬁne two distinct regions with no transition between
the two. However no signiﬁcant improvement of the already existing model was found.
The fact that the results of the two newly derived by David Fuhrman and implemented
in this study k- ω formulations, show that they managed to reproduce the already estab-
lished performance of the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) formulation prior to breaking as
found and shown in §3.3 is promising. Furthermore the fact that the combined suppression
of the dissipation of ω and ampliﬁcation of it’s production totally dissipates turbulence even
in the breaking region, suggests that further investigation of this approach might provide a
more universal turbulence model, that will be able to handle the complex ﬂow under plung-
ing breaking waves. The combined formulation of the k-ω model presented in § 2.5 resulted
in strong turbulence suppression even in the breaking region, although it was found in the
analysis that the turbulence production in the region should be more in line with Larsen and
Page 82 of 92
==PAGE:93==
5. DISCUSSION
Fuhrman (2018) formulation. This observation suggests that despite the predicted growth
rate, depth and phase varying eﬀects which were discarded in the analysis due to the time
and depth averaging of the strain modulus (see § 2.2.1), aﬀect the behaviour of the model
signiﬁcantly. Further investigation of the combined formulation is conducted and proposed
for future work such as to correctly implement it and evaluate it’s performance.
The modiﬁcation of the stress limiter, originally devised by Menter (1994) and incor-
porated in the k- ω model formulation of Wilcox (2006), was investigated in an attempt to
improve the model’s performance in high strain ﬂows such as the overturning jet of a plung-
ing wave and the breaking region. The inspiration behind this endeavour was the erroneous
overproduction of turbulence from the model in the overturning jet of the wave prior to the
impact with water surface. Although the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) formulation seemed
to manage this with the use of the proposed limiter (λ1 = 0.2, see ﬁgure 10), the remaining
formulations presented in § 3.3 needed a reduced value. From the simulations run using all
three formulations of the k-ω it was seen that a smaller value of the limiter improved the
results slightly shoreward of the breaker bar’s crest while the performance in the inner surf
zone seemed unaﬀected. A larger value of the limiter on the other hand showed a minor
improvement of the performance at the overturning and breaking region. This observation
in conjunction with the measured production and dissipation of turbulence in van der A
et al. (2017) indicate a dominance of the dissipation in locations away from the breaker
bar and vice versa right at the breaking point where the plunging jet penetrates the water
column. This spatial transition suggests that a ﬂow varying limiter could be the solution
to the problem. However no such conclusion was made through this study.
The erroneous overproduction of turbulence results in signiﬁcant energy dissipation,
which weakens the plunging jet making it incapable of reaching the near bed region and
spread the breaking generated turbulence as seen in several experimental studies cited in
this work. Furthermore the technological evolution of the last thirty years has enabled
numerous detailed studies of breaking waves in experimental facilities suggesting a laminar
ﬂow in the overturning jet of the wave prior to the impact with the surface. Especially
the use of PIV techniques clearly illustrates this observation. In addition the model was
found to dissipate the waves’ energy in a more parallel direction, meaning that instead of
predicting a jet ﬂow penetrating the water column and dissipating the wave’s energy into
turbulence spread downwards, an intense splash region was observed. The intense splash
region in the model generated a fast propagating bore (surface roller) in the inner surf
zone which resulted in exaggerated undertow magnitude. Moreover turbulence generated
at the surface during the breaking process showed a spatio- temporal delay in it’s arrival
in the near bed region.
The breaking generated turbulence initially remained near the
surface and in combination with the turbulence generated by the propagating bore got
convected downwards and onshore several meters later compared to the observation. The
Page 83 of 92
==PAGE:94==
5. DISCUSSION
inﬂux of turbulence in the near bed region, ampliﬁed ﬂow resistance and resulted in stronger
undertow in the inner surf zone, which is already exaggerated by the faster near surface
ﬂow. It is thought that if a proper description of the overturning plunging jet motion of the
wave is devised through a modiﬁcation in the stress limiter implemented in the ω equation
(7), the model results will signiﬁcantly improve in the entire breaking region and inner surf
zone.
As a future work, an approach based on the reasoning behind the formulation of the
λ1 stress limiter by Menter (1994) could be investigated.
The inclusion of the limiter
was devised to tackle the erroneous overproduction of turbulence in high strain ﬂows. As
stated in Durbin (2009), Menter (1994) found that turbulence production should increase
linearly with the rate of strain in high strain ﬂows while in the existing two-equation closure
formulations, a quadratic increase was observed. Based on this observation a limiter was
devised where the square root of the strain rate was used to limit the eddy viscosity in high
strain ﬂows (see equation (18)). Following from that an investigation of a λ2 type limiter
using the square root of the ratio between the rotation and the strain rate could improve
the model’s performance.
The aforementioned investigations were conducted using the large scale plunging break-
ing wave over a ﬁxed barred proﬁle experiment of van der A et al. (2017). The choice of this
experiment was made due to the high spatial and temporal resolution of the measurements
around the breaker bar, which provided a unique dataset for the validation of the model.
While the choice of the ﬁxed bed over the mobile bed proﬁle was made to take advantage
of the controlled environment which would allow for a more accurate representation of the
experimental domain in the simulations.
Finally the model was used to simulate the mobile bed experiments of van der Zanden
et al. (2016). Although the same discrepancy as previously discussed was observed the
model was found to perform very well and correctly represented the physical processes
involved. The simulation of ﬂows over mobile bed proﬁles using a ﬁxed bed computational
domain and simulating sediment transport as a passive process, introduces a discrepancy
between the observation and simulation. The ﬂow over a mobile bed composed of non
cohesive sediment such as the one considered in this study, molds the morphology of the
bed which successively alters the roughness and increases ﬂow resistance.
Additionally
sediment transport in high ﬂow regimes occurs in the sheet ﬂow regime. High concentration
of sediment such as the ones observed inside the sheet ﬂow layer reaching as high as C =
0.3 m3/m3 inﬂuence the velocity proﬁle near the bed and alter the logarithmic distribution
observed to a power law distribution in the velocity proﬁle inside the moving layer of
sediment (Sumer et al. (2013)).
Page 84 of 92
==PAGE:95==
6. CONCLUSION
6
Conclusion
In this work the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) formally stable formulation of the k - ω
model has been used as a closure to a CFD model solving Reynolds- averaged Navier-
Stokes equations. The focal point of the study was the simulation of the ﬂow and sediment
transport beneath large scale plunging breaking waves over ﬁxed and mobile barred proﬁles.
In addition three new stable formulation have been devised and implemented to address
the instability problem.
Just as the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) formulation the new
closure formulations were devised such as to maintain the form of the standard k -ω model
of Wilcox (2006) in sheared regions, stay true to the theoretically based terms in the k
- equation, do not violate the Boussinesq approximation and maintain all the standard
closure coeﬃcients of Wilcox (1988). The unconditional stability of the newly implemented
closure formulations was demonstrated analytically and numerically and their exponential
growth rate/decay of the eddy viscosity in potential ﬂow regions has been derived. All
three formulations show identical performance, therefore no quantitative improvement over
the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) formulation was found.
All three formulations, namely the Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) and the two newly im-
plemented closure formulations, presented in § 2.3 and 2.4, have been proven successful in
the simulation of large scale plunging breaking waves over barred proﬁles. In agreement
with observations the models predicted negligible turbulence levels prior to breaking con-
ﬁned in the WBL and the near breaking region as a result of oﬀshore convection. This
qualitative correction over existing closure formulations enabled the study of ﬂow and sed-
iment transport beneath plunging breaking waves. In the absence of the pollution caused
by the over-production of turbulence prior to breaking, the models were able to correctly
predict the evolution of the undertow from the shoaling region to the breaking region and
outer surf zone.
In the inner surf zone undertow predictions start to deviate from the
observation, however this region is far from potential ﬂow, therefore the eﬀect of the sta-
bilization is negligible and predictions of both stabilized and unstabilized models become
similar. The new closure formulations illustrate accurate predictions of the surface elevation
envelopes in the entire surf zone, as well as acceptable turbulence and undertow proﬁles.
The Larsen and Fuhrman (2018) formulation has been used in the simulation of large scale
plunging breakers over mobile bed barred proﬁles. The model demonstrated the aforemen-
tioned performance despite the discrepancies introduced by the ﬁxed bed assumption in
the model. The model illustrated reasonable predictions of near bed ﬂow properties and
sediment transport rates, despite the previously mentioned discrepancy.
Finally the investigation of the λ1 stress limiter provided useful insight in the origin of
the model’s discrepancy observed in the breaking region and the inner surf zone. It was
found that a reduction of the limiter from the 0.2 value proposed in Larsen and Fuhrman
Page 85 of 92
==PAGE:96==
6. CONCLUSION
(2018) to 0.05 improves the model’s performance at the shoreward slope of the breaker
bar, in the inner surf zone however both values of the limiter yield identical results. The
problem is not fully addressed with a reduction of the limiter, rather a diﬀerent formulation
allowing for transition between turbulence production and dissipation dominating regions
is believed to be the key.
Page 86 of 92
==PAGE:97==
REFERENCES
References
Basco, D. R. (1985). A Qualitative Description of Wave Breaking. Journal of Waterway,
Port, Coastal, and Ocean Engineering, 111(2):171–188.
Battjes, J. (1974). Surf similarity. Coastal Engineering Proceedings, 1(14).
Belden, J. and Techet, A. H. (2011). Simultaneous quantitative ﬂow measurement using
PIV on both sides of the air–water interface for breaking waves. Experiments in Fluids,
50(1):149–161.
Berberovi´c, E., Van Hinsberg, N. P., Jakirli´c, S., Roisman, I. V., and Tropea, C. (2009).
Drop impact onto a liquid layer of ﬁnite thickness: Dynamics of the cavity evolution.
Physical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics, 79(3).
Blott, S. J. and Pye, K. (2001). GRADISTAT: a grain size distribution and statistics pack-
age for the analysis of unconsolidated sediments. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms,
26(11):1237–1248.
Bonneton, P., Lannes, D., Martins, K., and Michallet, H. (2018).
A nonlinear weakly
dispersive method for recovering the elevation of irrotational surface waves from pressure
measurements. Coastal Engineering, 138:1–8.
Brinkkemper, J., Lanckriet, T., Grasso, F., Puleo, J., and Ruessink, B. (2016). Observations
of turbulence within the surf and swash zone of a ﬁeld-scale sandy laboratory beach.
Coastal Engineering, 113:62–72.
Cebeci, T. and Chang, K. (1978). Calculation of incompressible rough wall boundary layer
ﬂows. AIAA J., 16(7):730–735.
Chang, K.-A. and Liu, P. L.-F. (1998). Velocity, acceleration and vorticity under a breaking
wave. Physics of Fluids, 10(1):327–329.
Chang, K.-A. and Liu, P. L.-F. (1999). Experimental investigation of turbulence generated
by breaking waves in water of intermediate depth. Physics of Fluids, 11(11):3390–3400.
De Serio, F. and Mossa, M. (2006). Experimental study on the hydrodynamics of regular
breaking waves. Coastal Engineering, 53(1):99–113.
Deshpande, S. S., Anumolu, L., and Trujillo, M. F. (2012). Evaluating the performance of
the two-phase ﬂow solver interFoam. Computational Science & Discovery, 5(1):014016.
Drazen, D. A. and Melville, W. K. (2009). Turbulence and mixing in unsteady breaking
surface waves. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 628:85–119.
Page 87 of 92
==PAGE:98==
REFERENCES
Duncan, J. H., Qiao, H. B., Philomin, V., and Wenz, A. (1999). Gentle spilling breakers:
Crest proﬁle evolution. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 379:191–222.
Durbin, P. (1996). On the k-3 stagnation point anomaly. International Journal of Heat
and Fluid Flow, 17(1):89–90.
Durbin, P. A. (2009). Limiters and wall treatments in applied turbulence modeling. Fluid
Dynamics Research, 41(1):012203.
Einstein, H. (1950). Bed-load function for sediment transportation in open channel ﬂows.
United States Department of Agriculture – Technical Bulletin.
Engelund, F. and Fredsøe, J. (1976). A Sediment Transport Model for Straight Alluvial
Channels. Hydrology Research, 7(5):293–306.
Fredsøe, J. (1984). Turbulent Boundary Layer in Wave-current Motion. Journal of Hy-
draulic Engineering, 110(8):1103–1120.
Fredsøe, J. and Deigaard, R. (1992). Mechanics of Coastal Sediment Transport, volume 3
of Advanced Series on Ocean Engineering. WORLD SCIENTIFIC.
Fuhrman, D. R., Baykal, C., Sumer, B. M., Jacobsen, N. G., and Fredsøe, J. (2014).
Numerical simulation of wave-induced scour and backﬁlling processes beneath submarine
pipelines. Coastal Engineering, 94:10–22.
Govender, K., Michallet, H., and Alport, M. (2011). DCIV measurements of ﬂow ﬁelds
and turbulence in waves breaking over a bar. European Journal of Mechanics - B/Fluids,
30(6):616–623.
Govender, K., Moche, G. P., and Alport, M. J. (2002). Video-imaged surf zone wave and
roller structures and ﬂow ﬁelds. Journal of Geophysical Research, 107(C7):9–1– 9–12.
Grue, J. and Jensen, A. (2006). Experimental velocities and accelerations in very steep
wave events in deep water. European Journal of Mechanics - B/Fluids, 25(5):554–564.
Jacobsen, N. G., Fredsoe, J., and Jensen, J. H. (2014). Formation and development of a
breaker bar under regular waves. Part 1: Model description and hydrodynamics. Coastal
Engineering, 88:182–193.
Jacobsen, N. G., Fuhrman, D. R., and Fredsøe, J. (2012). A wave generation toolbox for the
open-source CFD library: OpenFoam R⃝. International Journal for Numerical Methods
in Fluids, 70(9):1073–1088.
Page 88 of 92
==PAGE:99==
REFERENCES
Justensen, P., Fredsøe, J., and Deigaard, R. (1987). Bottleneck problem for turbulence in
relation to suspended sediment in the surf zone. In Proceedings of the Coastal Engineering
Conference, volume 2, pages 1225–1239. American Society of Civil Engineers.
Kimmoun, O. and Branger, H. (2007). A particle image velocimetry investigation on lab-
oratory surf-zone breaking waves over a sloping beach.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
588:353–397.
Kranenburg, W. M., Ribberink, J. S., Uittenbogaard, R. E., and Hulscher, S. J. (2012). Net
currents in the wave bottom boundary layer: On waveshape streaming and progressive
wave streaming. Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface, 117(3):1–18.
Larsen, B. E. and Fuhrman, D. R. (2018). On the over-production of turbulence beneath
surface waves in Reynolds-averaged Navier – Stokes models. Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
853:419–460.
Luque, R. F. and van Beek, R. (1976). Erosion and transport of bed-load sediment. J
Hydraul Res, 14(2):127–144.
Mayer, S. and Madsen, P. A. (2000). Simulation of Breaking Waves in the Surf Zone using
a Navier-Stokes Solver. In 25th International Conference on Coastal Engineering, volume
276, pages 928–941. American Society of Civil Engineers.
Menter, F. R. (1994). Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering ap-
plications. AIAA journal, 32(8):1598–1605.
Meyer-Peter, E. and M¨uller, R. (1948). Formulas for Bed-Load Transport. In Interna-
tional Association of Hydraulic Structures Research, volume 2nd Meeting, pages 39–64,
Stockholm.
Roulund, A. (2005). Numerical and experimental investigation of ﬂow and scour around a
circular pile. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 534:351–401.
Scott, C. P., Cox, D. T., Maddux, T. B., and Long, J. W. (2005). Large-scale laboratory
observations of turbulence on a ﬁxed barred beach. Measurement Science and Technology,
16(10):1903–1912.
Smith, E. R. and Kraus, N. C. (1991).
Laboratory study of wave-breaking over ﬁxed
bars and artiﬁcial reefs. Journal of Waterway, Port, Coastal, and Ocean Engineering,
117(4):307–325.
Stansby, P. K. and Feng, T. (2005). Kinematics and depth-integrated terms in surf zone
waves from laboratory measurement. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 529:279–310.
Page 89 of 92
==PAGE:100==
REFERENCES
Sumer, B. M. (2013). Lecture notes on turbulence. Technical University of Denmark - DTU
Mekanik, section for Fluid Mechanics, Coastal & Maritime Engineering.
Sumer, B. M. and Deigaard, R. (1981). Particle motions near the bottom in turbulent ﬂow
in an open channel. Part 2. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 109(1):311–337.
Sumer, B. M., Guner, H. A. A., Hansen, N. M., Fuhrman, D. R., and Fredsøe, J. (2013).
Laboratory observations of ﬂow and sediment transport induced by plunging regular
waves. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 118(11):6161–6182.
Sumer, B. M., Kozakiewicz, A., Fredsøe, J., and Deigaard, R. (1996). Velocity and Concen-
tration Proﬁles in Sheet-Flow Layer of Movable Bed. Journal of Hydraulic Engineering,
122(10):549–558.
Ting, F. C. and Kirby, J. T. (1994). Observation of undertow and turbulence in a laboratory
surf zone. Coastal Engineering, 24(1-2):51–80.
Tukovi´c, ˇZ. and Jasak, H. (2012). A moving mesh ﬁnite volume interface tracking method
for surface tension dominated interfacial ﬂuid ﬂow. Computers and Fluids, 55:70–84.
van der A, D. A., van der Zanden, J., O’Donoghue, T., Hurther, D., Caceres, I., McLelland,
S. J., and Ribberink, J. S. (2017). Large-scale laboratory study of breaking wave hydro-
dynamics over a ﬁxed bar. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 122:3287–3310.
van der Zanden, J., van der A, D., Hurther, D., C´aceres, I., O’Donoghue, T., Hulscher,
S., and Ribberink, J. (2017a). Bedload and suspended load contributions to breaker bar
morphodynamics. Coastal Engineering, 129:74–92.
van der Zanden, J., van der A, D., Hurther, D., C´aceres, I., O’Donoghue, T., and Ribberink,
J. (2017b). Suspended sediment transport around a large-scale laboratory breaker bar.
Coastal Engineering, 125:51–69.
van der Zanden, J., van der A, D. A., Hurther, D., Caceres, I., O’Donoghue, T., and
Ribberink, J. S. (2016). Near-bed hydrodynamics and turbulence below a large-scale
plunging breaking wave over a mobile barred bed proﬁle.
J. Geophys. Res. Oceans,
121:6482–6506.
Van Rijn, L. C. (1984). Sediment Transport Part II: Suspended Load Transport. Journal
of Hydraulic Engineering, 110(11):1613–1641.
Wilcox, D. C. (1988). Reassessment of the scale-determining equation for advanced turbu-
lence models. AIAA Journal, 26(11):1299–1310.
Page 90 of 92
==PAGE:101==
REFERENCES
Wilcox, D. C. (2006). Turbulence modelling for CFD. DCW Industries, Inc., La Canada,
California, 3rd edition.
Wilson, K. (1966). Bed-load transport at high shear stress. J. Hydraul. Div., 92:49–59.
Wong, M. and Parker, G. (2006).
Reanalysis and Correction of Bed-Load Relation of
Meyer-Peter and M¨uller Using Their Own Database. Journal of Hydraulic Engineering,
132(11):1159–1168.
Zyserman, Julio, A. and Fredsøe, J. (1994). Data Analysis Of Bed Concentration of Sus-
pended Sediment. Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 120(9):1021–1042.
Page 91 of 92
==PAGE:102==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Nils Koppels Allé, Bygn. 403
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Tlf.: 4525 1360
Fax: 4525 1961
April 2019
www.mek.dtu.dk
