==PAGE:1==
Simulation and Measurement of Flow 
Patterns in Atlantic Salmon RAS Culture 
Tank and the Eff ect of Inlet Nozzle 
Velocities at a Constant Massﬂ ow 
Uni Sofus Gaardlykke   
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Uni S. Gaardlykke
Simulation and Measurement of Flow
Patterns in Atlantic Salmon RAS
Culture Tank and the Eﬀect of Inlet
Nozzle Velocities at a Constant
Massﬂow
Master Thesis, May 2019
==PAGE:3==
Simulation and Measurement of Flow Patterns in Atlantic Salmon RAS
Culture Tank and the Eﬀect of Inlet Nozzle Velocities at a Constant Massﬂow
Author:
Uni S. Gaardlykke
Supervisors:
Jens H. Walther
Henrik Mikkelsen
Øystein Pæturson
Jógvan Juul Olsen
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 13 60
Fax: (+45) 45 25 19 61
www.mek.dtu.dk
Release date:
15.05.2019
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master of
Mechanical Engineering at Technical University of Denmark. The
report represents 35 ECTS points.
Rights:
Uni S. Gaardlykke, 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
This thesis serves as the ﬁnal 35 ECTS points required to complete the Master of Engineering
degree at the University of Denmark. Thesis is written for the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering and is carried
out in collaboration with Fiskaaling, Aquaculture Research Station of the Faroes.
With this thesis the aim is to use numerical modelling to analyse the ﬂow patterns and
determine the eﬀect of nozzle velocity in Aquaculture Recirculation System rearing tanks.
For this purpose the commercial CFD software ANSYS FLUENT version R18.0 will be
utilized. The objective is to analyse ﬂow characteristics of a 30 m3 tank at Bakkafrost P/F
RAS facility located in Norðtoftir, Faroe Islands, and determine a relationship between
nozzle velocity and rotational velocity. Furthermore the water exchange will be evaluated
to ensure a good environment for the ﬁsh.
Firstly i would like to thank my supervisors Prof. Jens Honore Walther and Ph.D. student
Henrik Mikkelsen for invaluable guidance and advice. The weekly Skype meetings have
been very helpful in providing answers to my questions and also serving as motivation
throughout the project period.
I would also like to thank my external supervisor Ph.D. Øystein Pæturson for guidance
in aquacultural research, setting up arrangements with the industry, and helping when
experiment was carried out. And external supervisor Jógvan Juul Olsen with guidance
in ANSYS FLUENT and countless discussions regarding software speciﬁc problems.
Furthermore a special thanks to Steﬀan Kalsø for providing technical inside to the examined
tank, and serving as my correspondent for Bakkafrost P/F. And of course my employer
MEST P/F, NB-113 department for allowing me to take the necessary leave to ﬁnish my
studies amidst largest project in company history.
Lastly i would like to thank my family, my newborn son for providing a source of distraction
when i needed it, my girlfriend’s patience specially at the later stage of the project period,
and my father for his continuous encouragement and interest.
Kongens Lyngby, May 15, 2019
Uni S. Gaardlykke
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
Recent developments in North Atlantic Salmon aquaculture industry has incentivised
companies to extend the time spent in RAS rearing facilities. Because of this juvenile
salmon today can be up to 1.6 kg when released into on-sea farming cages, compared to
industry standard of 80 −100 g ten years ago. These developments have lead to a large
focus on the environment in rearing tanks to ensure good ﬁsh growth and welfare.
In this thesis, an experiment was carried out on a 30 m3 RAS rearing tank with no biomass,
where a Acoustic Doppler Velocimeter was used to determine velocity distribution across
cross section of the tank. Experiment served as validation for a numerical model which
was created using the CFD software ANSYS FLUENT. Numerical results showed good
agreement with experimental data.
To evaluate the quality of the water exchange in the tank, model was deﬁned to simulate
the transport of fresh water in to the tank, and monitored at deﬁned times. Also the water
exchange computed for each time step was compared to an analytical approach used in
the industry. Results show no dead zones in the tank, and a slightly better performance
than predicted by perfect mixing. However it is predicted that the presence of biomass
would increase mixing and reduce the water exchange rate.
Furthermore models were created to simulate blocking nozzles at the inlet to increase
nozzle velocity while maintaining a constant massﬂow, with the aim to observe what eﬀect
it would have on the rotational velocity in the tank with nozzles pointing 45 ◦from tangent.
Results showed a substantial increase in rotational velocity, and indicating that nozzle
velocity is proportional to tangential velocity squared.
ii
==PAGE:7==
NOMENCLATURE
Symbol
Deﬁnition
A0
Oriﬁce opening area
Anoz
Total nozzle cross sectional area
BL
Base length of salmon
Cd
Nozzle discharge coeﬃcient
Cnoz
Courant Number at nozzle
Cwake
Courant Number in wake
Ctank
Courant Number in tank
dnoz
Nozzle diameter
EADV
ADV precision
Fi
Nozzle impulse force
gj
Volume force
HRT
Hydrailic retention time
I
Turbulent Intencity
n
Number of observations
nnoz
Number of nozzles
P
Pressure
Qin
Inlet volumetric ﬂow
Qnoz
Nozzle volumetric ﬂow
rtank
Tank radius
Renoz
Characteristic Reynolds Number for nozzles
Retank
Characteristic Reynolds Number for tank
RSE¯vi
Relative error of the mean
Sφk
Scalar source term
SE¯vi
Standard error of the mean
t
Time
u∗
Dimensionless velocity
ui
Velocity tensor
ui
Mean velocity tensor
u′
i
Fluctuating velocity tensor
¯vnoz
Mean inlet nozzle velocity
¯vt
Mean tank rotational velocity
¯v∗
noz
Nomalized mean inlet nozzle velocity
¯v∗
t
Nomalized mean tank rotational velocity
vrv
Resulting radial and vertical velocity magnitude in measurement plane
vin
Inlet velocity
vsafe
Salmon safe non-fatiguing water velocity
Vtank
Volume of ﬂuid body
xi
Spatial vector
y+
Dimmensionless wall distance
iii
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Deﬁnition
β
Nozzle diameter to pipe diameter ratio
µ
Dynamic viscosity
µt
Eddy viscosity
ν
Kinematic viscosity
φin
Fresh water ratio of inﬂow
φnum
Volume averaged numerical fresh water ratio in tank
φpm
Perfect mixing fresh water ratio
φpm
Perfect displacement fresh water ratio
δij
Kronecker delta function
λs
Bulk Viscosity
Γ
Diﬀusion coeﬃcient
τij
Viscous stress tensor
σ¯v
Standard deviation of the mean velocity
ρ
density
∂
Patial derivative
iv
==PAGE:9==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Nomenclature
iii
Table of Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Study
4
2.1
Flow patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
The eﬀects of biomass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Water exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Rotational velocities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Numerical approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Numerical modelling
7
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Governing equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Turbulence model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Wall Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5
Scalar Transport Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.6
Other parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Experimental analysis
11
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Site
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Numerical Validation
22
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Setting up mesh
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Physics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.5
Sample size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.6
Time sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.7
Mesh convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.8
Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
v
==PAGE:10==
Table of Contents
5.9
Validation of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.10 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Water Exchange Modelling
38
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Physics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Nozzle Modelling
43
7.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.3
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8
Conclusion
50
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
References
52
A Tank Assembly Drawing
54
B Tank drawing
56
vi
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
Aquaculture is the fastest growing food production industries in the world, with 47 %
of the global ﬁsh production and a estimated value of DKK 1.6 trillion in 2016. This
impressive growth is largely due to an 3.2 % annual increase in ﬁsh food consumption and
the sustainable constraints of traditional capture production [1].
Figure 1.1: World capture ﬁsheries and aquaculture
production [1].
Of the global aquacultural industry the Atlantic salmon production accounts for 4 %, and
from 2006 to 2017 increased from 13% to 46% of the annual exports value of the Faroe
islands. This growth was largely due to revised permits, environmental requirements, and
restructuring of the industry. The lack of structure and guidelines had previously lead to a
disease outbreak in the industry and appropriate measures were taken, to make sure that
this did not happen again. The immense interest and growth in the Faroese produced
Atlantic salmon has sparked incentives to massive expansion, optimization and quality
assurance in salmon farming.
One of the key problems today in the salmon farming cages at sea is the sea louse, a
parasite which attaches itself on the on the salmon, and contributes to lower welfare,
and premature death of the ﬁsh. This has lead to large commercial incentives to ﬁnding
solutions to this problem.
The most eﬃcient way to reduce contamination by these parasites is to reduce the time spent
in open sea farming cages, and therefore more time in on-shore recirculated aquaculture
systems rearing facilities. This has lead to massive expansions of on-shore facilities to
increase capacity, with companies investing billions of DKK in Recirculated Aquaculture
Systems RAS. As a result juvenile salmon today can be up to 1.6 kg when released into
farming cages, compared to industry standard of 80 −100 g ten years ago.
With the increase in on-shore production capacity focus has shifted towards bigger tanks to
1
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction
(a) RAS rearing tanks.
(b) Farming cages.
Figure 1.2: Salmon farming consists of farming juvenile salmon in RAS rearing tanks, and
farming cages for ﬁnal stage of production.
better suit the environment for larger smolt, and better water quality. One of the critical
parameter that needs to be well established to yield good production is the rotational
velocity in the tank. A good rotational velocity contributes to welfare by exercising the
ﬁsh, removal of biosolids, ensuring good water exchange for an even oxygen distribution,
and ensures the removal of other waste products such as CO2 and NH3.
Another key note is that in another eﬀort to reduce sea lice and environmental impact
companies are planning on having farming cages placed in locations with higher currents
and waves loads, therefore also introducing the salmon to higher ﬂow speeds. For the
salmon to survive these harsh conditions when released in the cages high ﬁtness of the
juvenile salmon is of paramount importance, thus ﬁsh need to be properly exercised before
released. To exercise the juvenile salmon in rearing tanks appropriate ﬂow speeds need to
be introduced, the required ﬂow speeds are based on the base length BL of the salmon,
and are expressed as base length pr second BLs−1. Normal practice is to have rotational
velocities in the range of 1 −1.5 BLs−1 [2] and therefore velocity needs to be controlled as
the ﬁsh grows.
This study is done in collaboration with Fiskaaling (Aquaculture Research Station of
the Faroes), and will investigate measure to increase rotational velocity in rearing tank
while maintaining same hydraulic retention time HRT. This has been shown by trial-and-
error-approaches to ensure similar self-cleaning eﬀects, which is important for growth and
welfare of the smolt. Furthermore the water exchange will be investigated to ensure good
mixing and distribution of oxygen in rearing tank and that no dead zones are present.
Computational ﬂuid dynamics which has proven to provide good results in the ﬁeld will be
applied to create model of tank, which will be veriﬁed with experiments to ensure validity
of simulations. The software used in this thesis can be seen table 1.1. Computational
resources used for the simulations will be the Niﬂheim Cluster Supercomputer [3].
2
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction
Procedure
Software
2D CAD
AUTODESK AUTOCAD 2018
3D CAD
ANSYS DESIGN MODELLER R18.0
Meshing
ANSYS MESHING R18.0
Modelling
ANSYS FLUENT R18.0
Post processing
ANSYS POST R18.0
Data processing
MATLAB R2018b
Table 1.1: Software used in study
3
==PAGE:14==
2
LITERATURE STUDY
Aquacultural engineering is a relatively new ﬁeld of study and specially when it comes
to RAS, and the hydrodynamic behaviour in commercial salmon rearing tanks. Recent
developments in the industry have lead to a massive increase in time spent in on-shore
rearing tanks as a way to limit exposure to diseases and pathogens, which increases the
demand for eﬃciency and encourages the exploration of new knowledge. The design
of aquaculture tanks has generally been highly dependent upon trial-and-error-based
approaches by the industry [4], which is one of the reasons that there is a limited amount
of research published on ﬂuid mechanic optimization in rearing tanks.
2.1
Flow patterns
Desired ﬂow patterns in commercial RAS rearing tanks is well deﬁned, where a tangential
velocity (primary ﬂow) simulates the free stream river from the salmons natural habitat
and thereby stimulates growth and welfare. In addition the radial and vertical velocities
(secondary ﬂow) collectively contribute to self-cleaning of the tank [5].
(a) Primary ﬂow.
(b) Secondary ﬂow.
Figure 2.1: Correct design of tank induces primary and secondary ﬂow [5].
Traditional aquaculture engineering suggests that the retention time should be between
30 min and 100 min to achieve adequate self-cleaning given that inlet and outlet are correctly
designed [5]. However a "correct design" of inlet is loosely deﬁned and therefore varies a
lot throughout the industry, with the main focus on retention time and diameter - depth
ratio for optimal ﬂow patterns.
More recently the work of Gorle et al. [6] has shown that inlet nozzle design plays a large
role when it comes to achieving self cleaning by varying nozzle orientation and therefore
4
==PAGE:15==
2. Literature Study
provoking a strong secondary ﬂow pattern.
2.2
The eﬀects of biomass
Work on predicting the hydrodynamic eﬀects of biomass in rearing tanks is very limited,
however work has been done showing that presence of biomass generates additional
turbulence to the ﬂow. The increased turbulence in rearing tanks induced by the ﬁsh
contributes to self-cleaning condition by resuspension and preventing sedimentation of
biosolids. The increased turbulence also contributes to better mixing of dissolved oxygen
[7].
Gorle et al. [2] investigated the tangential velocity eﬀects of biomass in commercial rearing
tanks, and found that the presence of ﬁsh in tanks was a major source of turbulence
and non-linearities. Furthermore study reviled that the tangential velocities were more
uniform throughout the tank with the presence of biomass, and that ﬁsh decreased the
water velocity by approximately 25 % when compared to experiments with empty tanks.
2.3
Water exchange
To achieve a good environment in a closed production unit a good mixing of fresh water
with the old water must take place. This will provide biomass with oxygen and also remove
waste products excreted by the ﬁsh, reduce CO2, and NH3 levels [5].
To describe the water exchange rate in culture tanks a simpliﬁed method is used, it is
based on theory of perfect mixing and therefore assumes that the fresh water immediately
is mixed with old water in the tank. This method is normally referred to as "Ideal water
exchange" and is expressed as:
φpm = 1 −e−t/HRT
(2.1)
Where φpm is the freshwater ratio, t is the time, and HRT is the hydraulic retention time.
However this might not be the case, as some areas of the tank may have slower water
exchange rate or so called dead zones, or short cuts could be present because of poorly
designed inlet and outlet, making the fresh water run directly to outlet [5]. Figure 2.2
illustrates this:
2.4
Rotational velocities
The tangential velocity in culture should be as uniform as possible and swift enough to
ensure self-cleaning. However it should not be faster than what is required to exercise the
ﬁsh. Rotational velocities in such tanks are based on the length of the smolt also referred
to as the base length BL. Water velocities of 1.0 −1.5 BLs−1 are generally recommended
for Atlantic Salmon Smolt for maintaining ﬁsh health [2], where the safe non fatiguing
water velocity can be expressed as:
vsafe < 5.25/(BL)0.37
(2.2)
5
==PAGE:16==
2. Literature Study
Figure 2.2: Amount of water exchanged in culture tank
However for circular tanks the velocities are reduced away from the walls, which allow the
ﬁsh to select a variety of water velocities [8].
The rotational speeds in tanks are largely controlled by varying the inlet impulse force Fi,
which can be expressed as:
Fi = ρQnoz(vnoz −vt)
(2.3)
Where ρ is density, Qnoz is the nozzle ﬂow rate, vnoz is the nozzle velocity, and vt is the
tangential velocity in the tank. The rotational impulse force and therefore the rotational
velocity is regulated by controlling the ﬂow rate or number/sizes of nozzles [8].
The eﬀect of nozzle angle on the ﬂow pattern in circular culture tanks has been investigated
by Venegas et al. [9]. He introduced a jet-mixing eductor mounted on the nozzle and
investigated two diﬀerent angles which he compared to a traditional inlet without nozzles.
The study showed that a inlet angle of 45◦from tank tangential preformed substantially
better than inlet angle of 0◦. The case with nozzles at 45◦showed an increase in tangential
velocity, lower mixing times, and better secondary ﬂow patterns which ensures self-cleaning
of solid waste.
2.5
Numerical approach
Computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) has made signiﬁcant contributions to a wide range
of theoretical and applied science. Also recently in aquaculture the trial-and-error based
approaches have been overtaken by studies employing CFD to predict self cleaning, mixing,
and hydrodynamic performance [4]. Gorle et al. [6] Investigated eﬀect of nozzle angle by
use of Finite Volume method, single phase, realizable k-ϵ turbulence, transient simulation,
and concluded that nozzle orientation has great eﬀect on hydrodynamic behaviour in RAS
tanks. Klebert et al. [10] investigated the three-dimensional ﬂow structures in an ellipsoid,
closed sea ﬁsh cage using Finite Volume, single phase, k-ω SST / k-ϵ turbulence, transient
simulation. Other studies such as Gorle et al. [11] and Rasmussen et al. [4] have also take
similar approaches.
The attraction of CFD as an alternative to physical tank modelling is the ﬂexibility and
ease of testing new designs, eliminating the need to rebuild physical models.
6
==PAGE:17==
3
NUMERICAL MODELLING
3.1
Introduction
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is the simulation of ﬂuids using modelling and
numerical methods to solve complex ﬂuid dynamic problems. CFD software works by
applying physical properties to a ﬂuid domain subdivided into smaller cells, and solving
the governing equations for each individual cell.
3.2
Governing equations
The governing equation used for CFD is the Navier-Stokes equations (NS). It is a analytical
representation of the law of conservation for ﬂuids, which generally states that the properties
of a isolated physical system does not change over time. The NS equation describes the
changes of physical properties in a ﬂuid by monitoring input and output to the system.
By applying mass and momentum conservation the continuity equation and momentum
equation are derived.
Continuity equation The continuity equation is deﬁned as:
∂ρ
∂t + ρ∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(3.1)
Where ρ is density, t is time, ui is the velocity tensor, and xi is the spatial vector.
If the density of a ﬂuid is considered constant, the ﬂuid is considered to be incompressible.
This is very useful when modelling as it simpliﬁes the calculations, and results in a faster
computational time. When the incompressible criteria is applied to equation 3.1 it reduces
to:
∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(3.2)
This in essence means that for a incompressible ﬂuid, the ﬂuid entering the system is
always equal to the ﬂuid leaving the system.
Momentum equation
The momentum equation is based on Newton’s famous second law of motion, and is stated
as follows:
ρ∂uj
∂t
| {z }
I
+ ρui
∂uj
∂xi
|
{z
}
II
= −∂P
∂xj
| {z }
III
+ ∂τij
∂xi
| {z }
IV
+ ρgj
|{z}
V
(3.3)
Where term I refers to the local change with time or unsteady acceleration, term II is the
momentum convection, III is the pressure term, IV is the diﬀusion term, and V is the
7
==PAGE:18==
3. Numerical modelling
gravitational body force. Furthermore P is the pressure, gj is the volume force, and τij is
the viscous stress tensor formulated as:
τij = −µ
 
∂uj
∂xi
+ ∂ui
∂xj
!
+ δijλs
∂uk
∂xk
(3.4)
Where δij is the kronecker delta and λs is the bulk viscosity. Because the ﬂuid is considered
incompressible, the bulk viscosity can be set to λs = 0, as it is important only when ﬂuid
compressibility is essential. This reduces the viscus stress tensor (eq 3.4) to:
τij = −µ
 
∂uj
∂xi
+ ∂ui
∂xj
!
(3.5)
3.3
Turbulence model
The momentum equation is a non-linear equation and is therefore a very computationally
heavy equation to solve. A measure to simplify the turbulence problems was proposed
by Osborne Reynolds, where by use of Reynolds decomposition the Reynolds-averaged
Navier-Stokes RANS equations were developed. Applying Reynolds decomposition is
to decompose the velocity into a mean velocity component and a ﬂuctuating velocity
component, as shown here:
ui = ui + u′
i
(3.6)
Where ui is the mean component, and u′
i is the ﬂuctuating component. Furthermore the
same procedure can be applied to pressure. By applying this method to the Navier-Stokes
equations (eq 3.3) and some simpliﬁcations, Reynold developed the Reynolds-Averaged
Navier-Stokes equations seen below:
ρ∂uj
∂t + ρui
∂uj
∂xi
= −∂P
∂xj
+ ∂
∂xi
(τij −ρu′
ju′
i)
(3.7)
If compared to equation 3.3 it is very similar, however a new term has occurred namely
−ρu′
ju′
i. This additional stress is called Reynolds stress, and is a second order tensor.
This means that for a turbulent ﬂow there are four equations and ten unknowns, thus the
system is not closed. This problem is also known as the closure problem of turbulence [12].
To solve the closure problem, turbulence models need to be applied. There are several kinds
of models that do this, most common are one equation models such as Spalart-Allmaras
and two equation models such as standard k-ϵ, k-ω. Each turbulence model has weaknesses
and strengths, therefore choosing a turbulence model has to be done wisely as it might
have great eﬀects on the solution. For this study the standard k-ω is chosen as it provides
excellent results when modelling jets and free shear ﬂows [13].
3.4
Wall Treatment
It is important to accurately model the near wall region when resolving turbulent ﬂow.
This is normally done by splitting the wall treatment into high y+ and low y+ regions.
8
==PAGE:19==
3. Numerical modelling
When treating a surface as a low y+ wall (y+ < 1) the aim is to fully resolve the viscous
sublayer, while treating a surface as a high y+ wall (y+ < 30) wall functions will be utilized
to estimate the eﬀect of the wall. The wall-y+ is deﬁned as:
y+ = yu∗
ν
(3.8)
Where y is the distance from the cell to the wall u∗is the reference velocity, and ν is the
kinematic viscosity. ANSYS FLUENT uses wall function based on the work of Launder and
Spalding. The log-law is known to be valid for 30 < y+ < 300 and is employed in ANSYS
when y+ > 11.225. If y+ < 11.225 ANSYS FLUENT applies the laminar stress-strain
relationship (U∗= y+) [13].
3.5
Scalar Transport Functions
Most CFD software can solve the transport equation for an arbitrary scalar in the same
way the transport equation is solved for a scalar such as mass friction. The assumption
is that the scalar that is transported within the ﬂow does not aﬀect the ﬂuid ﬂow and is
therefore referred to as a passive scalar. Adding a passive scalar transport equation might
be useful in cases when for example oxygen is transported within a water ﬂow [13]. The
scalar transport function for transient problem is deﬁned as:
∂ρφk
∂t
| {z }
I
+ ∂
∂xi
 
ρuiφk
| {z }
II
−Γk
∂φk
∂xi
| {z }
IV
!
= Sφk
| {z }
V
k = 1, ..., Nscalars
(3.9)
Where φk is the scalar, Γk is the collective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, and Sφk is the source term.
See term descriptions in equation 3.3.
In this study scalar transport function will be applied to simulate the transport of
recirculated fresh water into the tank and thereby investigating the water quality as
time progresses. Literature study showed that biomass in the tank increases turbulence
[7], which increases turbulent diﬀusivity. Therefore determining an accurate diﬀusivity
constant with biomass present calls for a separate study and is not in the scope of this
thesis. By eliminating diﬀusivity constant the model will be simpliﬁed and results will
better highlight dead zones and short cuts in the domain which is the primary focus of the
analysis. Because of this diﬀusion coeﬃcient for the passive scalar function will be set to
Γ = 0.
3.6
Other parameters
3.6.1
Courant Number
When a transient numerical model is solved, the governing equations are solved for a set
time step, each consisting of a set number of iterations to ensure an accurate result. A
valuable parameter to evaluate when determining the time sensativity of a given model,
is the Courant Number. In a CFD simulation it is deﬁned as the amount of cells which
a ﬂuid particle travels through for the set time step. This means that the value of the
9
==PAGE:20==
3. Numerical modelling
parameter depends largely on the cell size, time step, and the ﬂuid velocity which may
vary throughout the domain. The Courant Number is deﬁned as:
C = ∆t

n
X
i=1
uxi
∆xi

≤Cmax
(3.10)
Where ∆t is the time step, uxi is the velocity vector, ∆xi is the spatial length of a cell
in the i’th direction, and Cmax is the allowed Courant Number for the speciﬁc problem.
The value of Cmax depends largely on the type of solver used. ANSYS FLUENT like most
CFD software uses implicit solvers which are less sensitive to numerical instability than
explicit solvers, and therefore larger Cmax can be accepted.
3.6.2
Reynolds number
Evaluating the Reynolds number Re in the domain is beneﬁcial, because it is a easy way
to determine if the inspected ﬂow has a laminar or turbulent behaviour and thus applying
the correct measures when solving the problem. Reynolds number is deﬁned as the ratio
of inertial forces to the viscous forces and is expressed as:
Re = ρuL
µ
(3.11)
Where ρ is the density, u is the reference velocity, L is the characteristic length, and µ is
the dynamic viscosity. For this analysis the main ﬂow characteristics that are of interest
is the ﬂow behaviour at the nozzles, and in the tank. For the nozzles the characteristic
length is set to the nozzle diameter dnoz and for tank the length is set to tank radius rtank.
This results in following Reynolds numbers:
Renoz = 38, 800
and
Retank = 248, 800
(3.12)
Reynolds numbers show that both regions should be treated as fully developed turbulent
domain, and turbulence models are therefore needed in the CFD simulation to predict
results.
3.6.3
Mean retention time
The mean hydraulic retention time (HRT) is a very commonly used parameter in aquaculture
engineering, as it is often used to describe the ﬂow in commercial rearing tanks. Commonly
it is described as the time it takes to ﬁll an empty tank to its production stage with the
set inlet volumetric ﬂow, and has the unit min. The retention time can be expressed as:
HRT = Qin
Vtank
(3.13)
Where Qin is the inlet volumetric ﬂow, and Vtank is the volume of the ﬂuid body. The
tank inspected in this thesis has a mean hydraulic retention time of HRT = 53 min when
in operation.
10
==PAGE:21==
4
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
4.1
Introduction
In order to validate the CFD model, an experiment was set up at one of Bakkafrost’s
RAS rearing facilities located at Norðtoftir. By the use of an acoustic Doppler velocimeter
the velocities in chosen points are monitored, and the mean velocities computed. The
experiment will then be reproduced numerically so the results can be compared.
4.2
Equipment
4.2.1
Acoustic Doppler Velocimeter
Measuring the velocity of the ﬂuid in chosen points is done with an acoustic Doppler
velocimeter (ADV) of type Vector - 300m. The signal is processed in the processing
unit, and sent to a computer which is running the data acquisition software (Vectrino
Proﬁler). The software then saves data in ASCII format, which can then be post processed
in software such as Matlab. The ADV can measure velocities in all three directions, with a
precision of EADV = ±1.0 % at 16 Hz, and has a range of sampling rate of 1 −64 Hz. The
velocimeter measures the velocity of the ﬂuid by transmitting a pair of short sound pulses
with a known time lag and of a speciﬁc frequency into the water column.
Figure 4.1: Image of Vector-300 m Velocimeter used in experiment
The velocimeter does not work in clean still water, because pure water does not reﬂect the
sound pulses. For this reason, suspended particles with density similar to water need to be
present within the ﬂuid. These particles or "scatters" are typically suspended sediment
which move with the same average speed as the water. When a particle reﬂects the signal,
velocimeters can determine the Doppler induced phase shift, which is commonly known as
the pulse-to-pulse coherent method. By using this method, the instrument can determine
relatively small diﬀerences in velocities [14].
11
==PAGE:22==
4. Experimental analysis
Figure 4.2: Two pulses transmitted by central transducer on ADV, with time lag. Phase
diﬀerence ∆ϕ is used to calculate velocity
The illustrated phase diﬀerence of the reﬂected signals, shown in ﬁgure 4.2, is a direct
measure of the velocity, which is expressed as:
V =
∆ϕC
4πFsource∆t
(4.1)
Here, V is the velocity, ∆ϕ is the phase diﬀerence, C is the sound velocity in the water
at current temperature, Fsource is the frequency of the source signal, and ∆t is the "Lag"
between the two pulses [14].
12
==PAGE:23==
4. Experimental analysis
4.2.2
Ultrasonic Flow Meter
For determining the ﬂow rate through the inlet pipe an external ultrasonic ﬂow meter is
utilized. These types of ﬂow meters consist of two ultrasonic transducers connected to a
microprocessor. see ﬁgure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Ultrasonic Flow Meter items
Ultrasonic ﬂow meters measure the diﬀerence between the transit time of ultrasonic pulses
propagating with and against the ﬂow direction within a pipe. See illustration in ﬁgure 4.4.
This measured time diﬀerence is an expression of the average velocity of the ﬂuid and is
then computed in the microprocessor to result in a mean velocity and volume ﬂow. In
addition to the measurements, the data shown in table 4.1 entered in to the processor.
Ultrasonic ﬂow meter input
Medium
Temperature
Pipe outer diameter
Wall thickness
Pipe material
Fresh water
T = 14.3 ◦C
110 mm
5 mm
Polyethylen
Table 4.1: Ultrasonic ﬂow meter input.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of Ultrasonic Flow Meter
13
==PAGE:24==
4. Experimental analysis
4.3
Site
The experiment was conducted at Norðtoftir smolt farming facility, which is one of many
smolt farming facilities in the Faroe Islands and facilitates a large range of tanks of diﬀerent
dimensions. In order for the experiment to take place ﬁrstly the tank had to be empty
of water so that measurements could be taken and geometry recreated in a CAD model.
Tanks are only empty for approximately a week every 3 months, which means that the
selection of tanks for the experiment was limited to one type when the experiment was to
take place. This procedure also meant that the all the equipment used for the experiment
had to be ready once the tanks were emptied. Dimensions for the tank shown in table 4.2.
Tank characteristics
Tank mat
Tank dia
Tank h
Water vol
Inlet pipe
Outlet pipe
Nozzle
Glas ﬁber
5 m
1.8 m
29.22 m3
160 x 5, 0 mm
197 x 3.5 mm
ø25 mm
Table 4.2: Main dimensions of tank, inlet, and outlet pipe. Pipe dimensions are in the
form outer diameter x wall thickness.
The tank has one vertical inlet pipe located at 0, 84 r where 12 nozzles are located equally
spaced through the height of the pipe, an outlet pipe lead from bottom center of the tank
up to a box where waste biomass is ﬁltered from the ﬂuid, and one secondary outlet pipe
which leads the ﬂuid from the box to the bioﬁlter to be recirculated into the tank. See
ﬁgure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Inlet and outlet in tank used for the experiment, with indications to described
parts.
In order for the outlet system to work, the free water surface within the box is adjusted to
desired height, lower than the free surface within the tank. This ensures a lower static
14
==PAGE:25==
4. Experimental analysis
pressure within the box and the outlet. In ﬁgure 4.6 the adjustable pipe can be seen on
the left.
Figure 4.6: Outlet box when experiment was carried out, pipe to right is leads to tank
bottom, and pipe to left leads to bioﬁlter.
4.4
Experimental Setup
When setting up the experiment ﬁrstly a beam and housing had to be constructed for the
ADV. The beam would to allow the ADV to travel along the cross section on a slider and
the housing would allow for diﬀerent vertical positions. In addition a secondary beam was
fastened to the housing and would be perpendicular to the ﬁrst beam, this was to improve
the stiﬀness of the construction, and stability of the ADV when measurements were taken.
The construction had to be of plastic, stainless steel, or aluminium due to company policy
for containment of bacteria.
Figure 4.7: Picture showing experiment in progress with indications to the diﬀerent parts.
The beam along the cross section of the tank was reused from a former experiment [15],
and was made of stainless steel. To reduce the weight of the construction and minimize
the deﬂection, the second beam and housing was constructed of aluminium. See ﬁgure 4.7.
For determining the plane at which the measurements were to take place, the following
evaluations were made. The plane should be far from the nozzles, so that the jets would
be dispersed when reaching the measuring instrument. This would yield a more accurate
15
==PAGE:26==
4. Experimental analysis
picture of the primary and secondary ﬂow and reduce velocity ﬂuctuations. The plane
should be clear of any other objects in the tank, ensuring that objects such as outlet
box and pipe would have least possible eﬀect on the ﬂow in the plane. Based on stated
conditions the plane was placed at a suitable distance from the inlet, but not to close to
the outlet box. See tank layout in ﬁgure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Tank layout
The hydrodynamic behaviour in the tank is heavily aﬀected by the inlet nozzle angle, it
is therefore important to settle on a reasonable angle. During Kalsø’s study [15] of the
same tank, he determined by trial and error with the use of a propeller ﬂowmeter, that
the highest tangential velocity was obtained with nozzles at 45◦from the tank tangential,
this also agrees well with the ﬁndings of Venegas et al [9]. Therefore it is assumed that
inlet nozzle angle at 45◦is optimal for this study.
A cartesian coordinate system was created for the velocity measurements in the tank,
with origin located at the center and 1.505 m depth, and x direction perpendicular to the
measurement plane away from nozzles. See also coordinate system indicated in ﬁgures 4.8
and 4.9. The ADV can only measure point velocities if the transmitter is below the water
surface. In addition there might be interference with the echoing signal if transmitter is
to close to the bottom [6]. Because of this the highest measurement point was located at
0.88 h and the lowest at 0.17 h, with two additional rows in between. Similarly to the ADV
constraint close to the bottom, disturbance might occur in the signal if to close to the walls.
With this in mind ﬁrst eight measurement points were evenly distributed horizontally at
each row, with the addition of two more to better capture the ﬂow characteristics close to
the walls. See ﬁnal distribution of points illustrated in ﬁgure 4.9.
The inlet ﬂowrate was adjusted with a valve located next to the tank and was monitored
16
==PAGE:27==
4. Experimental analysis
Figure 4.9: Illustration of measurement point location and numbering
with the ultrasonic ﬂow meter. See table 4.1 for ﬂow meter input. The recommended ﬂow
rate was 0.55 m3/min which results in a HRT of 53.13 min [15], this is also the normal ﬂow
rate used by the facility for these tanks.
The sample rate of the ADV was set to 64 Hz in order to capture the velocity ﬂuctuations
as much as possible. The system was turned on and set to run for an hour, this to ensure
that the ﬂow in the tank had reached a steady state before data was collected. Initially
sample size was then set to approximately 120 s [2], however after monitoring outputs to
ensuring that all frequencies were captured, decision was made to increase sample size to
240 s at points in columns 1, 2, and 3 due to large ﬂuctuations induced by the inlet jets.
See table 4.3 for overview of experimental setup.
Table 4.3: Operational condition of the RAS tank while experiment took place.
Water depth at center
1.61 m
Water volume
29.22 m3
Water depth at perimeter
1.51 m
Flow rate
0.55 m3/s
Dia/depth
3.17
Mean hydraulic retention time
53.13 min
Inlet nozzles
12 pc
Sample size
120/240 s
Nozzle diameter
25 mm
Sampling rate
64 Hz
17
==PAGE:28==
4. Experimental analysis
4.5
Results
The raw data from the experiment consists of 40 ﬁles, one for each measurement, and each
ﬁle containing 3 velocity components corresponding to deﬁned coordinate system. Data
is then post processed in Matlab to show the ﬁndings, example of raw timeseries from
produced data can be seen in ﬁgure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Raw timeseries showing velocity in X-direction according to deﬁned Cartesian
coordinate system [section 4.4] in of points 7, 6, & 11
The mean velocities is found for every measurement point, and transformed to show
tangential, radial, and vertical velocities in the tank.
Figure 4.11 illustrates mean
transformed components across the measurement plane. Figure shows a clear asymmetry
with a maximum tangential velocity of 0.167 m/s at point 22 and only 0.129 m/s at point
10. The reasoning behind this, is that jets from the nozzles are not fully dispersed in
the ﬂow when reaching the plane, this was observed as well while the experiment took
place with large ﬂuctuations in the velocities at point columns 1, 2, and 3. See example in
ﬁgure 4.10(c).
Furthermore it is observed in ﬁgure 4.11(a) that the center of rotation is shifted
approximately 0.25 m to the left. This is because the outlet box is located on the inside of
the tank. It was further veriﬁed during the experiment by the occasional appearance of
a bath tub vortex oﬀset slightly from the center (ﬁgure 4.12), in the direction opposite
outlet box. The presence of the bath-tub vortex can also be observed in ﬁgure 4.11(b)
indicated as high radial velocity region at point 5. The radial and vertical component
of measured velocities show only slight indication of a secondary ﬂow in the tank with a
positive vertical velocity in point column 7 and negative closer to the wall.
18
==PAGE:29==
4. Experimental analysis
Figure 4.11: Contours showing experimental mean velocities vt, vr, and vv. Measurement
points indicated with red circles.
Figure 4.12: Bath-Tub vortex appearing in the tank during the experiment.
To evaluate the the quality of the measurement at each point, the standard error of the
mean was computed. The standard error of the mean can be expressed as:
SE¯vi =
σ¯vi
√ni
(4.2)
Where the σ¯v is the standard deviation of the mean velocity ¯vi, n is number of observations,
and i refers to direction.
Figure 4.13 shows largest errors in the nozzle area, with the maximum error reaching
4.8 × 10−4 m/s at point 2 in ﬁgure 4.13(b). Also the error seem to be higher close to the
wall on the right side, indicating the presence of vortex structures on the right side as
well. By analysing the the errors further and relating it to the velocities in ﬁgure 4.11 the
19
==PAGE:30==
4. Experimental analysis
Figure 4.13: Standard Error of the mean in measurement plane. Measurement points
indicated with red circles.
relative errors can be computed. Relative error is expressed as:
RSE¯vi = SE¯vi
|¯vi|
(4.3)
The relative error (eq: 4.3) is useful because it gives indication if the sample size is high
enough for the velocities measured.
Relative Standard Error
Average velocity magnitude
Mean RSE
Max RSE
Tangential
89.0 × 10−3 m/s
0.36 %
1.58 %
Radial
12.7 × 10−3 m/s
5.84 %
95.8 %
Vertical
5.6 × 10−3 m/s
4.15 %
16.3 %
Table 4.4: Relative standard errors of the mean, mean RSE is found by averaging RSE
values for all measurement points for each direction respectively. Max RSE is the maximum
RSE measured at a single point.
Table 4.4 shows that the mean Relative Standard Error is more than one order of magnitude
higher for radial and vertical component than tangential. The main reason for this is that
radial and vertical component are close to zero, which will give extremely high Relative
Errors. For example at point 19 in ﬁgure 4.11(b) the radial velocity is observed to be very
close to zero, this yields a 95.8 % relative error.
20
==PAGE:31==
4. Experimental analysis
4.6
Discussion
The results from section 4.5 good show alignment with expected values, with higher
ﬂuctuations on left side which are close to the nozzle, and slightly shifted center of rotation.
However some care should be taken to values of radial velocities from the experiment. This
is because when setting up the experiment the ADV orientation was adjusted by hand,
and held into position with clamps. If ADV was not oriented perfectly with x direction
being perpendicular to the measurement plane, a component of the tangential velocity
would be measured as a radial velocity. This might be signiﬁcant because the primary ﬂow
is approximately 1 order of magnitude higher than the secondary ﬂow. Estimating the
worst case scenario and orientation was of by 2◦would result in 3.5 % of the tangential
velocities would be would be translated into radial velocity.
The experiment was conducted with ADV sample rate set to 64 Hz, however determining
the accuracy and precision of the unit at this sampling rate proved to be very diﬃcult.
After researching user manual, correspondance with supplier and still no deﬁnitive answer
decision was made to assume same precision as for 16 Hz, i.e. EADV = ±1.0 %.
Also the point at which the ADV measures is located approximately 17 cm below the
transmitter. Therefore it was an estimation of the height at which the measurements were
taken. However, given the large scale of the tank and the small velocity gradients it was
assumed that the setup was suﬃciently accurate, and any errors caused by this could be
neglected.
Another potential source of error was the precision of Ultrasonic ﬂow meter. Unfortunately
it was not possible to determine the error that could be imposed by this, even though a
small inaccuracy by the ﬂow meter could result in a large error of the measurements, and
would have a direct impact on simulation as it would be the basis for determining the inlet
velocity. For simplicity it is assumed no error in the ﬂow meter.
The nozzle angle was adjusted by hand and checked with the help of a measuring tape. If
the angle was of slightly it could cause diﬀerent ﬂow patterns and an error in the measured
velocity. Again for simplicity and because of a certain conﬁdence in the setup the angle is
assumed to be 45.0 ◦.
There are many potential errors in the measurements, specially when it comes to the radial
and vertical components because of the low magnitude. Tangential velocities are shown
to have a higher accuracy than radial and vertical components given the larger relative
errors, but overall the results are found suitable for validating the numerical model.
21
==PAGE:32==
5
NUMERICAL VALIDATION
5.1
Introduction
By utilizing results obtained in chapter 4 the validity of the CFD model can be checked,
this will be done by recreating the same exact geometry and conditions numerically and
monitoring measurement points while running for set amount of time.
5.2
Geometry
As described in section 4.3 there was no CAD model available for the tank and thus needed
to be created for the numerical modelling to take place. Tank assembly drawing was
acquired from Bakkafrost employee, and main dimensions of tank were drawn based on
this, see drawing in Appendix A. However both inlet and outlet had to be measured on
site with the use of a folding ruler and tape measure. This might impose some inaccuracies
in the model, but given the scale of the tank, measurements are deemed to be suﬃciently
reliable for this study.
Based on the measurements and supplied assembly drawing, a 2D drawing was created in
Autocad to properly illustrate the geometry before the 3D model was created. Created
drawing is shown in appendix B.
For the 3D modelling ANSYS own modelling software Design Modeler was used, this is to
avoid known errors that might occur when meshing CAD ﬁles such as STEP or IGES in
ANSYS Mesher. Inlet surface is deﬁned at height equal to water level in tank. The reason
for not deﬁning inlet at the nozzles instead, is that the ﬂow distribution is not necessary
equal for all 12 nozzles. The outlet surface highlighted in ﬁgure 5.1 shows that the ﬂow
in the outlet box will not be modelled to simplify the model, this is because it is not the
focus of this study.
Figure 5.1: 3D model of solid created in ANSYS Design Modeller.
Inlet and outlet
highlighted with green ﬁlled and unﬁlled circle respectively.
22
==PAGE:33==
5. Numerical Validation
5.3
Setting up mesh
When applying CFD to a problem it is essential for a model that the results are as accurate
as possible. At the same time solving ﬂuid dynamic problems numerically can be very
expensive, depending on the complexity and mesh resolution. This means that when
creating a mesh for a given case, the aim is to ﬁnd a suitable balance where the size of
the mesh is ﬁne enough to resolve the important ﬂow phenomena, while maintaining a
reasonable computation time. Therefore the goal is to get a solution that is independent
of the mesh to a certain tolerance.
One key factor in determining a good balance, is to select the right mesh type for the
problem. For this analysis an unstructured polyhedral mesh has been chosen. Polyhedral
mesh is well suited for complex geometries, while still yielding a accurate result. Meshing
software used for this study was ANSYS Meshing R18.0, however in order to get a
polyhedral mesh the "convert to polyhedral" function was used in ANSYS FLUENT.
5.3.1
Wall Treatment
When deﬁning the prism layer thickness the choice has to be made if the viscous sublayer
should be resolved or if wall functions should be applied. When making this choice it is
important to evaluate what eﬀect the wall has on the parameters that are investigated. The
main purpose here is to investigate the tangential velocities and water exchange which both
are not sensitive to the eﬀect of the wall, given the large scale of the tank. Additionally
choosing to resolve the viscous sublayer requires a lot of computational resources. Based
on these arguments the aim is to reach a wall-y+ value higher than 30 for all surfaces.
To reach a wall-y+ > 30, the thickness of the ﬁrst prism cell is deﬁned accordingly in
ANSYS. However seeing as the reference velocity varies greatly throughout the domain the
surfaces are divided into areas of similar reference velocity. See ﬁgure 5.2 for deﬁned areas.
Generated areas are then treated with a ﬁrst layer thickness constraint individually, and
by iterating several trial simulations the following values were obtained:
Tank
Inlet
Nozzles
Outlet
Sides
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
1.Layer
0.015 m
0.005 m
0.02 m
0.0004 m
−
0.005 m
0.02 m
Avg.Wall-y+
53
17
37
43
18
49
49
Table 5.1: First layer thickness for prism layers in the domain, and corresponding area
averaged Wall-y+.
The aim was that most of the cells should have a y+ value more than 30. However when
increasing the layer thickness, the result was often elements with high skewness and low
orthogonal quality. Where the aim was to have no cells with skewness over 0.9, and
orthogonal quality lower than 0.01 [13]. This issue made it very diﬃcult to achieve desired
values, and as a result a lot of time was spent on balancing the wall-y+ versus quality of
elements. Finally decision was made to go on with layer thickness shown in table 5.1, even
though desired % cells were not over 30. Also notice that there are no prism layers on
region "Nozzles outside". The reason here is that if activated there would be no control
23
==PAGE:34==
5. Numerical Validation
over thickness inside nozzles, and would therefore result in a average wall-y+ = 7 in nozzles.
Figure 5.3 shows contour values for ﬁnal setup, where 92.6 % of wall area has y+ > 30,
however this only amounts to 49.1 % of cells. Furthermore 0.5 % of cells have y+ < 1.
Figure 5.2: Deﬁnition of surfaces for wall treatment.
Figure 5.3: Wall-y+ contour plotted on geometry walls, 92.6% of wall area y+ > 30
5.3.2
Reﬁnements
To save computational power and accurately capture the physics of the system it is
important to reﬁne regions in the domain where complicated ﬂow structures will occur.
Figure 5.4 shows the reﬁnement regions, where the nozzle reﬁnement is created to capture
the high velocity gradients created by the jets. The wake region follows the path of
the jet down stream and will have slightly coarser mesh than the nozzle region.
In
addition the outlet region was created, while meshing. This is due to very poor quality
elements surrounding the outlet pipe entrance, which was solved by reﬁning a narrow
region surrounding the pipe entrance.
5.4
Physics
When determining the physics that should apply to the model, it would be ideal to run a
steady state simulation, because of the time eﬃciency it provides. However after a few
24
==PAGE:35==
5. Numerical Validation
Figure 5.4: 3D model of solid, including reﬁnement regions Nozzle, Wake, and Outlet.
trial it quickly showed that there were convergence issues. This is due to the inlet jets
ﬂuctuating in the domain, which resulted in the case being more suitable for the transient
solver when moving on to the convergence analysis. Solver used was pressure based and
without gravity, also a ﬁrst order implicit transient formulation was used as it is the default
for FLUENT, and recommended for most use cases [13].
For modelling the turbulence, standard k-ω was used with the default settings provided by
FLUENT. Standard k-ω is known to yield good results when computing for example jets,
which are the main contributor to the ﬂow velocity in the tank [section 3.3]. In addition
an y+-insensitive formulation of the ω-equation was used, for better wall treatment.
Inlet was deﬁned as a velocity inlet and outlet of type pressure outlet. Top wall, was
modelled as a slip wall, with shear stresses set to 0 in all directions. All other walls were
modelled as smooth walls, with a shear stress condition set to no-slip.
Other constant parameters used in the simulation are listed below:
Description
Notation
Value
Water Density
ρw
998.2 kg/m3
Dynamic viscosity
µ
1.003 × 10−3 kg/ms
Inlet velocity
vin
0.52 m/s
Turbulent intensity
I
5 %
Turbulent viscosity ratio
µt/µ
10
Table 5.2: List of parameters used in FLUENT for analysis.
25
==PAGE:36==
5. Numerical Validation
5.5
Sample size
When determining the sample size a parameter needs to be chosen to monitor, that best
represents the ﬂow state. Firstly the parameter will be monitored from t = 0 until the ﬂow
has reached a steady state, secondly in this section the aim is to determine the sample
size in order to get a reasonable result, and make sure that all periods of the velocity
ﬂuctuations are captured by the sample. This will ensure a reliable time averaged result.
Because the focus of this chapter is to validate the velocity distribution in a predeﬁned
plane in the model, measurement points were deﬁned to conveniently and directly monitor
the velocities at the same locations as deﬁned in the experimental setup [section 4.4].
Furthermore it is not deemed necessary to monitor all 40 points and all three velocity
components, as long as the chosen points represent the ﬂow well. The assumption is made
that a good measure of representation is to monitor three points in the tank center, this is
because the impulse from the nozzles will travel along the perimeter of the tank, slowly
advance to the central region. Based on these arguments the chosen parameter to monitor
when determining the sample size is the tangential velocity at points 14, 15, and 16.
Figure 5.5: Transient case with 909, 000 cells run with a time step
∆t = 1 s from t = 0 to t = 4000 s, timeseries for points 14, 15, and 16.
Mean value for the last 1000 s shown as black line.
Figure 5.5 shows velocities increasing to reach a steady state after approximately 1500 s
and is therefore deﬁned as t0. After this the velocities seem to be stable, ﬂuctuating around
a mean value shown as black line. Furthermore by visual inspection it is determined that
a reasonable time average result can be obtained with a sample size of minimum 500 s.
26
==PAGE:37==
5. Numerical Validation
5.6
Time sensitivity
Before ﬁnding the mesh independent solution, it is a good practice to determine how time
sensitive the model is. This is done by gradually decreasing ∆t and monitoring the eﬀects
it has on the ﬂow, in addition the Courant Number will be inspected. The model used for
this analysis has 909, 000 cells. See cases in table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Time convergence cases
Case no.
1
2
3
∆t
1.00 s
0.25 s
0.05 s
Iter. pr step
30
15
10
The cases start at t0 and run for 500 s each [section 5.5]. Also the velocities will be time
averaged to analyse the ﬂowpatterns in the measurement plane. Figures 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8
show the ﬁndings.
Looking at the vortex structures in the measurement plane for cases, there are very little
changes with the decreasing time step. However most notable is the reduction of the large
structure on the right side in ﬁgures. To further analyse ﬁgure 5.9 shows convergence plot
for tangential and radial velocity at point 11. In addition Courant Numbers have also been
inspected and are seen in table 5.4.
Based on the secondary ﬂow patterns alone there is only indication of slight time sensitivity,
with the reduction of described vortex structure. Table 5.4 shows signiﬁcantly high Courant
Numbers inside nozzles, however a quite low average for all cases. This distinct diﬀerence
in values occurs because there is a large variation of the velocity in the domain, with
the inlet nozzle velocity approximately one order of magnitude higher than the primary
tangential velocity in the tank. Furthermore in ﬁgure 5.9 convergence can be observed.
According to ﬁgure 5.9 the most accurate case would be case with ∆t = 0.05, however
because of computational constraints and a satisfactory result obtained with case 2 with
regards to secondary ﬂow patterns and velocities the choice is made to continue with a
time step of ∆t = 0.25 s.
Figure 5.6: Case with ∆t = 1 s, showing streamlines on top of velocity magnitude contour
plot.
27
==PAGE:38==
5. Numerical Validation
Figure 5.7: Case with ∆t = 0.25 s, showing streamlines on top of velocity magnitude
contour plot.
Figure 5.8: Case with ∆t = 0.05 s, showing streamlines on top of velocity magnitude
contour plot.
Figure 5.9: Time convergence at point 11, showing velocities as function of sampling
frequency. Errorbars indicate the Standard Error.
Table 5.4: Key Courant Numbers for each of the cases
Case no.
Cnoz
Cwake
Ctank
Cavg
1
800
10
3
2.8
2
200
2.5
0.75
0.7
3
40
0.5
0.15
0.14
28
==PAGE:39==
5. Numerical Validation
5.7
Mesh convergence
To ensure that the model provides reasonable results while using the least amount of
resources, a mesh independent solution has to be found. This is done by gradually increasing
the mesh resolution while monitoring the important parameters. Furthermore the ﬂow
patterns will be visually inspected to make sure that all vortex structures are captured.
In this case tangential and radial velocity are monitored. Because experimental data was
collected for the velocities in the tank, and the intent is to compare with simulated values,
it is logical to base the convergence study on the same points. To simplify the study
further, the following points were focused on, point 7, 11, and 36. See points highlighted in
red in ﬁgure 5.13 - 5.16. The reasoning behind the choices of points is that they all have
secondary ﬂow present in all cases.
In order to determine when the solution becomes independent of mesh resolution, it is
reccomended that the cell count ranges approximatly one order of magnitude. With the
aim to increase in cell count 8 fold, from the lowest to highest, four cases were created,
ranging from ≈0.5 mil to ≈4.0 mil. See table 5.5.
List of cases, and element sizes
Case no.
Cells
Nozzle region
Wake region
Outlet region
Max tet size
1
512, 000
0.02 m
0.04 m
0.008 m
0.2 m
2
909, 000
0.01 m
0.02 m
0.008 m
0.1 m
3
2, 304.000
0.005 m
0.015 m
0.008 m
0.08 m
4
3, 875.000
0.005 m
0.01 m
0.008 m
0.05 m
Table 5.5: List of cases, with gradually decreasing element sizing in reﬁnement regions and
max for entire domain.
DTU policy stated that students are allowed to use 24 ANSYS HPC licenses (this was
changed to 48 licenses during the later part of thesis periode). This meant that simulation
of 4 million cells had to run for approximately 72 hr, and was therefore not realistic to
create more reﬁned model for convergence study.
All simulations were initially run for 1500 s before the velocities were monitored, sample
size for the convergence study was set at 500 s. [Section 5.5] The convergence plots are
shown in ﬁgures 5.10 - 5.12. In order to get a representation of the error as a result of
sample size, the standard error is shown as errorbars. The error for all monitored velocities
is relatively low, with the exception of the radial component corresponding to point 7. In
conclusion the convergence plots indicate that velocities tend to converge at approximately
2 million cells.
In addition to inspect the ﬁndings further and validate results from convergence plots, the
secondary ﬂow patterns at cross-section are inspected for each case. Figures 5.13 - 5.16
show that as mesh resolution is increased, number of vortices in the left side are increased
from four to six pcs. Furthermore the big central vortex in ﬁgure 5.13 and 5.14 seems to
dissipate with higher number of cells.
The ﬁndings from convergence plots, combined with the visualization of streamlines for all
cases, both indicate convergence for case 3 at 2.3 mil cells.
29
==PAGE:40==
5. Numerical Validation
Figure 5.10: Convergance analysis at point 07 showing velocities as function of number of
cells. Standard error is represented as errorbar at each measurement.
Figure 5.11: Convergance analysis at point 11 showing velocities as function of number of
cells. Standard error is represented as errorbar at each measurement.
Figure 5.12: Convergance analysis at point 36 showing velocities as function of number of
cells. Standard error is represented as errorbar at each measurement.
Figure 5.13: Case 1 cross section, showing streamlines on top of velocity magnitude contour
plot. Figure shows four vortex structures on the left side, one big vortex in the center, and
one small structure in the right side of tank.
30
==PAGE:41==
5. Numerical Validation
Figure 5.14: Case 2 cross section, showing streamlines on top of velocity magnitude contour
plot. Figure shows ﬁve vortex structures on the left side, one big vortex in the center, and
one small structure in the right side of tank.
Figure 5.15: Case 3 cross section, showing streamlines on top of velocity magnitude contour
plot. Figure shows six vortex structures on the left side, one vortex in the center, and one
small structure in the right side of tank.
Figure 5.16: Case 4 cross section, showing streamlines on top of velocity magnitude contour
plot. Figure shows six vortex structures on the left side, none in center, and one structure
in the right side of tank.
31
==PAGE:42==
5. Numerical Validation
5.8
Mesh
Based on the mesh convergence analysis mesh used for Case 3 is used for further work.
The mesh contains 2.3 million cells, with reﬁnements in nozzle, wake and outlet region
[section 5.3.2]. Figures 5.17 - 5.20 show the ﬁnal mesh.
Figure 5.17: Mesh at measurement plane.
Figure 5.18: Mesh at horizontal section, height equal to nozzle 4 height (z = 1m).
32
==PAGE:43==
5. Numerical Validation
(a) Vertical section through inlet and nozzles.
(b) Close up view of nozzle.
Figure 5.19: Mesh at inlet pipe and nozzle.
(a) Vertical section through outlet pipe.
(b) Close up view of outlet entrance.
Figure 5.20: Mesh at outlet.
33
==PAGE:44==
5. Numerical Validation
5.9
Validation of model
To validate the model, the time averaged mean velocities from simulation are analysed
and compared to results from the experimental analysis. Figure 5.21 shows contours of
tangiental, radial, and vertical velocities calculated from points equal to experimental data
points. Generally the numerically found results show slightly higher tangential velocities.
However the trends are similar, with a slightly shifted center of rotation in the tank and
highest tangential velocity achieved at point 22 and lowest at point 5. Figure 5.21(b),
and (c) show some similarities with experimental data in ﬁgure 4.11 but not as distinct
ﬁgure 5.21(a). For 5.21(b) a local high is located in point 22 and global low located at
point 36 which is close to the outlet, furthermore a positive radial ﬂow is observed ranging
from approximately point 15 to point 22. Figure 5.21(c) shows a few local minimums
similar to ﬁgure 4.11.
Figure 5.21: Numerical mean velocities vt, vr, and vv at measurement plane. Measurement
points indicated with red circles.
Furthermore plots were computed at the four depths equal to experimental measurement
points, that show velocity measurement as a function of radial distance across the
measurement plane. It is important to address the potential error of the experiment,
to determine the quality of the measurements, when validating the model. This is done by
enabling errorbars for each individual point, as the standard error SE¯vi added with the
measurement precision of the ADV EADV [section 4.2.1] and estimated error by orientation
of ADV [section 4.6]. Results are shown in ﬁgure 5.22 - 5.24.
Again here the CFD tangential velocities show slightly higher values at all four depths,
34
==PAGE:45==
5. Numerical Validation
however the overall trend is similar. Furthermore CFD result show negative vt at r = −0.1,
for z = 0.88h and z = 0.62h. This also shows that center of rotation is slightly shifted to
the left. Figure 5.22 also show that there is better correlation close to the tank sides, than
close to the center. One possible explanation for this is the presence of the Bath-tub vortex
in the experiment. Figure 5.23 (a) and (b) also conﬁrms this by a very large deviation
in radial velocity at points 5 and 15, which are the points closest to where the vortex
was observed. Overall for the radial component, ﬁgure 5.23 shows good agreement with
experimental data with singular large deviations. Also ﬁgure 5.24 shows some similarities,
however not as distinctly as for radial and tangential component.
Figure 5.22: Numerical tangential velocity compared with experimental data, for four
depths across measurement plane. Errorbars show corresponding standard error (eq 4.2)
added with ADV precision [section 4.2.1].
35
==PAGE:46==
5. Numerical Validation
Figure 5.23: Numerical radial velocity compared with experimental data, for four depths
across measurement plane. Errorbars show corresponding standard error (eq 4.2) added
with ADV precision [section 4.2.1] and estimated error by orientation of ADV [section 4.6].
Figure 5.24: Numerical vertical velocity compared with experimental data, for four depths
across measurement plane. Errorbars show corresponding standard error (eq 4.2) added
with ADV precision [section 4.2.1].
36
==PAGE:47==
5. Numerical Validation
5.10
Discussion
Results show overall that simulation agrees well with experimental data, this is specially
true for tangential component with very similar trend and magnitude. For the radial
component ﬁgure 5.23 shows some correlation, with the trend being similar, and for vertical
component ﬁgure 5.24 some correlation in trend can be observed. Furthermore walls in
simulation are considered as smooth, this is most likely not the case and would the wall
roughness contribute to lower tangential velocities, which would result in better correlation.
The error in ﬁgures 5.22 - 5.24 are based on standard error (eq 4.2) and assumptions made
in experimental discussion [section 4.6]. Some of the errors that are unknown and therefore
not taken into consideration further in the project, could have a large eﬀect on the results,
such as ﬂow meter precision. However because of the good correlation assumptions are
considered valid.
The geometry which was created in Design Modeller was to a large extent based on
measurements taken with a folding ruler and measuring tape. These instruments are not
ideal for accuracy and it is very likely that some of the measurements are of by quite a
bit, specially when it comes to inlet and outlet distance from wall and height, also nozzle
heights and total water surface elevation. This is mainly because of the curved shape of the
tank and the challenges it presents when measurements are taken. This could present some
inaccuracies in the model, but given a certainty that no measurements are oﬀmore than
1 cm, it is assumed that the inaccuracies this would cause are minuscule when compared
to the large scale of the tank.
The eﬀects of the bath tub vortex in experimental data is clearly visible in ﬁgure 5.23.
This indicates that in order to get a better correlation in center of tank, it would have to
be modelled as a two-phase problem. However for determining eﬀect nozzle velocity on
the tangential velocity in the tank, the model is deemed suﬃciently accurate.
37
==PAGE:48==
6
WATER EXCHANGE MODELLING
6.1
Introduction
In recirculating aquacultural systems the quality of the water is of utmost importance
for the growth and wellfare of the ﬁsh. Parameters such as dissolved oxygen are closely
monitored and systems are in place to ensure that these do not drop below critical levels.
More recently focus has shifted to also include the removal of dissolved carbon dioxide,
and ammonia to improve the water quality.
The water exchange rate indicates how quickly the water in a closed unit is exchanged,
this depends on a series of factors such as design and location of inlet and outlet. Also
the tank geometry aﬀects the water exchange rate, for example square tanks have shown
to have large "dead zones" close to the corners which will reduce the eﬀectiveness of the
exchange rate. However most commonly used geometries are circular and octagonal tanks
which both show a good water exchange provided they have properly designed inlet and
outlet [5].
Normally a simpliﬁed method is used to determine the water exchange rate, which is based
on theory that the old water is diluted slowly by perfect mixing of the old and recirculated
water (eq 2.1). However this might not be the case, as some areas of the tank may have
slower water exchange rate. On the other hand water can also be exchanged faster because
old water close to the outlet does not get mixed with the fresh water entering the tank.
If the fresh water does not at all get mixed with old water, it would be considered perfect
displacement. Here the fresh water completely displaces the old water, and therefore
reaching freshwater ratio 1 at t = HRT = 53 min. The exchange of water could then be
expressed as:
φpd =
t
HRT
for
t ≤HRT,
else
φpd = 1
(6.1)
This analysis will focus on the transport of fresh water to the tank, and how the distribution
of of fresh water advances throughout the domain. Furthermore it will be investigated
if there are any dead zones or short cuts within the domain and determine appropriate
measures to improve the ﬂow in such a case.
6.2
Physics
To investigate the transportation of fresh oxidised water into the circular tank and the
removal of the old carbon dioxide rich water, the gasses need to be included in the model.
This is often solved with a multicomponent ﬂow approach to account for the accurate
physics of the dissolved gasses. However a simpler and suﬃciently accurate approach is
to consider the dissolved oxygen passive parameter that has no physical dimension and
38
==PAGE:49==
6. Water Exchange Modelling
does not aﬀect the ﬂow [13]. The solution will therefore be simulated with the use of the
scalar transport equation and adding a passive scalar to the domain that represents the
fresh water ratio. This will allow for monetisation of the freshwater ratio in the tank, and
a direct comparison can be made with the analytical solution of perfect mixing (eq: 2.1)
used in traditional aquaculture engineering.
The scalar value is set to a constant φnum = 0 in the domain at t0, while boundary value
at inlet is set to constant φin = 1. No ﬂux of scalar is at the walls and water surface. Also
the diﬀusivity constant Γ is set to 0 for reasons described in section 3.5. Furthermore the
spatial discretization scheme used for scalar transport equation was set to second order
upwind for a more accurate result. Furthermore simulation does not include the presence
of ﬁsh, therefore assuming no continuous consumption of oxygen throughout the tank.
6.3
Results
The model is set to run with ∆t = 0.25 s, starting at t0 and stopping at t = 240 min
[section 5.6]. The volume average is computed for each time step and exported to a *.out
ﬁle for further processing. In addition the fresh water distribution state will be inspected
visually at t = 500 s, 3000 s, 5500 s, and 8000 s.
To analyse the water exchange rate and the performance compared to the case of perfect
mixing, plot is computed with data exported by volume averaging scalar value every time
step. Furthermore the perfect mixing and perfect displacement curves are plotted as well.
Computed curve for water exchange shows a slightly higher freshwater ratio than predicted
by perfect mixing, this is to be expected because old water near the outlet will not get
mixed with the fresh water entering the tank.
Figure 6.1: Freshwater ratio as a function of time. Blue line shows φpm
(eq 2.1) and red line indicates perfect displacement of ﬂuid.
To further compare the results to the case of perfect mixing, ﬁgure 6.2 has been computed
to show the diﬀerence as a ratio to perfect mixing curve, expressed as:
∆φr = φnum −φpm
1 −φpm
(6.2)
39
==PAGE:50==
6. Water Exchange Modelling
It shows that the freshwater ratio of the numerical results tend to 1 faster than perfect
mixing predicts. This indicates that the least diluted old water always leaves the tank, at
the same time it also indicates that no dead zones are present.
Figure 6.2:
Numerically found freshwater
ratio compared to perfect mixing.
To further verify this claim contour plots are examined, that show the fresh water ratio
distribution at the measurement plane for t = 500 s, 3000 s, and 5500 s. Also to inspect the
distribution at diﬀerent depths three horizontal sections are shown for t = 8000 s. Figures
6.3 - 6.6 show how the distribution of water progresses throughout the tank, with least
amount of fresh water in the center, furthermore in ﬁgure 6.6 (c), a section of the outlet
can be seen as a green area slightly oﬀcenter at 4 O’clock, this shows that ﬂuid exiting
the tank is mostly from the central region where the freshwater ratio is lowest. This is
explained by a negative vertical velocity at the center region which also can be observed in
ﬁgure 5.21 (c).
Figure 6.3: Freshwater distribution at crosssection after 500 s.
Where Scalar-0 = 1 refers to 100 % fresh water. Colorbar range
0.0 −1.0.
40
==PAGE:51==
6. Water Exchange Modelling
Figure 6.4: Freshwater distribution at crosssection after 3000 s.
Where Scalar-0 = 1 refers to 100 % fresh water. Colorbar range
0.0 −1.0.
Figure 6.5: Freshwater distribution at crosssection after 5500 s.
Where Scalar-0 = 1 refers to 100 % fresh water. Colorbar range
0.0 −1.0.
(a) Horizontal section, z =
0.82h.
(b) Horizontal section, z =
0.47h.
(c) Horizontal section, z =
0.12h.
Figure 6.6: Freshwater distribution at cross-section after 8000 s. Where Scalar-0 = 1 refers
to 100 % fresh water. Colorbar range 0.8 −1.0.
41
==PAGE:52==
6. Water Exchange Modelling
6.4
Discussion
Results show that the low velocity region in the center of tank is latest to be exchanged
with fresh water, at the same time, the water in this region is the ﬁrst to exit the tank.
However experiment indicate higher overall velocities in center top region which would
contribute to more mixing in this area.
The presence of ﬁsh has shown to increase the turbulence in the tank [7]. This would
increase the mixing of the fresh water throughout the tank, hence eﬀectively reducing the
water exchange ratio to become closer to case of perfect mixing. Also the eﬀect of diﬀusion
would increase mixing of the ﬂuids if Γ ̸= 0. Furthermore continuous consumption of
oxygen in the tank, and generation of waste products such as CO2 would contribute to
lesser quality water.
42
==PAGE:53==
7
NOZZLE MODELLING
7.1
Introduction
In modern Atlantic salmon RAS facilities one thing which has shown to increase the growth
and welfare of the juvenile salmon, is to keep it exercised. This is done circulating the
water in the tank at a certain speed, dependant on the size of the ﬁsh. This means that
as the salmon grows, it is necessary to increase the mean tangential velocity in the tank
proportionally to the base length BL. A common rule of thumb within the industry is
to keep the mean tangential velocity in the tank at approximately 1.0 BL s−1. This is
normally applied by approximating the mean velocity in the tank and controlling the inlet
velocity to a certain extent, however the desired secondary ﬂow in most tanks is sensitive
to the retention time, thus simply increasing inlet volume ﬂow Qin has to be done with
care. To counter this smolt is then pumped to a larger tank with higher rotational speeds,
to maintain the desired BL s−1. In recent developments within the industry, smolt is now
kept in land based tanks a lot longer and quickly exceeds the initial design length criteria
of the production tanks. Expanding facilities with bigger tanks is very costly and time
consuming, and the developments often out scale facility expansions.
One proposed solution for this is to reduce the number of nozzles and thereby eﬀectively
reducing the nozzle area, and increasing the inlet nozzle velocity, while still maintaining
the same retention time. This measure is simple to execute and therefore very desirable if
proved to be an eﬀective way to adjust the mean rotational velocity.
The increased nozzle velocity would contribute to a pressure increase over the nozzle. The
oriﬁce equation describes the ﬂow and pressure loss for a given ﬂuid ﬂow through an oriﬁce
or a nozzle, and can for incompressible, 0 gravity case be expressed as:
Q = CdA0
s
2(∆P)
ρ(1 −β4)
(7.1)
Where Q is the volumetric ﬂow, Cd is the discharge coeﬃcient which characterizes type
of nozzle, A0 is the area of the nozzle, ∆P is the pressure loss, ρ is density, and β is the
nozzle diameter to pipe diameter ratio.
This case study will investigate the eﬀects that reducing the number of nozzles has on the
tangential ﬂow while maintaining the same volume ﬂow, and try to determine a correlation
between the mean tangential ﬂow and the mean velocity inside inlet nozzle.
43
==PAGE:54==
7. Nozzle Modelling
7.2
Cases
Three cases will be considered in this case study, where the original case will serve as the
control. For simplicity the total nozzle cross sectional area Anoz will be divided by two
and four, and Qin will be 0.55 m3/min for all cases. Case data can be seen in table 7.1.
Case
Nozzles, nnoz
Total nozzle area, Anoz
Mean nozzle velocity, ¯vnoz
1
12 pc
5.89 × 10−3 m2
1.56 m/s
2
6 pc
2.95 × 10−3 m2
3.11 m/s
3
3 pc
1.47 × 10−3 m2
6.22 m/s
Table 7.1: List of case data for nozzle velocity eﬀect investigation
Figure 7.1: Nozzle
numbering
The simplest way to reducing nozzle area is to block the nozzles not
in use, table 7.1 shows how a reduction in number of nozzles achieves
desired area, and also the resulting mean nozzle velocity for all cases.
The remaining nozzles will be distributed so that the jet impulse is even
throughout the depth of the tank. Figure 7.1 shows nozzle numbering
and below bulletins state nozzles that are not blocked for the individual
cases.
Case 1:
All nozzles open
Case 2:
1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 are open
Case 3:
3, 7, and 11 are open
7.3
Modelling
All models were initially set to run t = 1825 s to reach steady state, where the ﬁrst 1500 s
were with a very high ∆t then gradually lowering to ∆t = 0.25 s to ensure a accurate
starting point. Furthermore given that the highest Courant numbers occur within the
nozzle, it is a cause for concern that ¯vnoz is four times higher for case 3, as it might cause
some instability. For this reason, all cases in this analysis will be run with ∆t = 0.05 s and
10, 000 time steps to reach recommended sample size [section 5.5]. Also in order to estimate
the increased elevation at the periphery the time averaged static pressure at z = 1.0h for
the measurement plane will be exported, and used to compute equivalent head to compare.
44
==PAGE:55==
7. Nozzle Modelling
7.4
Results
To get a good representation of the tangential velocities, the velocity distribution across
the measurement plane are shown in ﬁgure 7.2 at four diﬀerent depths for all three cases.
Figure 7.2: Tangential velocity distribution at depths equal to measurement points for the
cases with inlet volume ﬂow entering tank through 12, 6, and 3 nozzles. h = 1, 505 m
Figure shows a substantial increase in rotational velocity in the tank as the number of
nozzles are reduced. Also the impulse from inlet nozzles creates a disturbance in the plot,
and do not seem to be a good characterization of the rotational ﬂow. Therefore for further
analysis of the rotational velocity, only data in the range r = 0 to r = 2.5 is considered in
the rest of this section. The average tank tangential velocity in stated range is computed
and corresponding pressure loss over nozzle is read from simulation, results are shown in
table 7.2. It is observed that there is a substantial diﬀerence in pressure loss over nozzle for
the three cases, this relates well with theory as equation 7.1 shows that pressure loss over
a nozzle is proportional to the velocity squared. Furthermore the normalized velocities
are plotted, and by use of polynomial and power regression approximate functions are
determined that describe correlation between nozzle velocity and tank tangential velocity.
Figure 7.3 shows data and ﬁtted functions are listed below.
Normalized tank mean tangential velocity as a function of normalized mean nozzle velocities,
estimated by polynomial regression.
¯v∗
t ≈−0.059(¯v∗
noz)2 + 0.625(¯v∗
noz) + 0.494
(7.2)
45
==PAGE:56==
7. Nozzle Modelling
Normalized tank mean tangential velocity as a function of normalized mean nozzle velocities,
estimated by power regression.
¯v∗
t ≈1.0125(¯v∗
noz)0.5
(7.3)
In order to determine if the secondary ﬂow patterns that ensure self-cleaning gets aﬀected
by increased tangential velocity, streamlines are plotted on top of vrv contour deﬁned as:
vrv =
q
v2r + v2v
(7.4)
Figures 7.4 to 7.6 show the an inward ﬂow at the bottom on both sides, and that this ﬂow
magnitude increases from case 1 to case 3. The presence of a vortex induced by jets in left
side disturbs this ﬂow, and would inject the solid waste particles back in to the tank. On
the right side however particles will be lead towards the outlet. Overall these ﬁgures show
that the self cleaning eﬀect in the tank does not get aﬀected much when blocking nozzles
to increase tangential velocity in tank.
To estimate the increase in water surface elevation at the periphery as the tangential
velocity is increased, the surface pressure at measurement plane is used to compute the
equivalent head. Figure 7.7 shows head at perimeter quadruples from case 1 to case 3,
which implies a proportional relationship to nozzle velocity.
Case
Mean tangential velocity, ¯vt
Pressure loss, ∆Pnoz
1
0.100 m/s
2, 480 Pa
2
0.144 m/s
9, 630 Pa
3
0.199 m/s
41, 000 Pa
Table 7.2: Results from nozzle analysis, normalized with results from original case.
Figure 7.3: Normalized mean tangential velocities in tank as function of normalized
nozzle velocity, including functions found by power and polynomial regression.
Note that polynomial regression is the better ﬁt to the data, however it is not
considered valid below ¯v∗
noz = 1.
46
==PAGE:57==
7. Nozzle Modelling
Figure 7.4: Case 1 streamlines at cross section on top of 2D velocity magnitude contour in
plane. Note that no clear rotating secondary ﬂow patterns occur, however desired ﬂow
occurs towards center close to bottom on right side.
Figure 7.5: Case 2 streamlines at cross section on top of 2D velocity magnitude contour in
plane. When compared to case 1, overall contour shows higher radial velocities, and the
disappearance of several small voices.
Figure 7.6: Case 3 streamlines at cross section on top of 2D velocity magnitude contour in
plane. Figure shows two clear vortex structures on the left side, with a high magnitude.
No vortex structures in center on the right side. Inwards ﬂow at bottom right magniﬁes.
47
==PAGE:58==
7. Nozzle Modelling
Figure 7.7: Computed water surface elevation across measure-
ment plane
7.5
Discussion
When exploring the eﬀect of nozzle velocity on the ﬂow in the tank it and determining a
relation between vnoz and vt only three cases were considered. This might not be enough
data to conclude on the relation. As an example of this, the polynomial regression shows in
ﬁgure 7.3 it does not show realistic results as vnoz tends to zero. In addition the assumption
that the average velocity from r = 0 to r = 2.5 in ﬁgure 7.2 is a good representation
of the mean velocity might not be valid. A more accurate representation for this would
be to average the tangential velocity for the entire half of the tank. However taken into
consideration that rough estimates are often used to determine vt in the industry, the
determined correlation should be suﬃciently accurate.
Nozzle type used for rearing tanks vary, and could potentially aﬀect the vnoz / vt relationship
when applied to other tanks. This would mainly be if the nozzle had diﬀerent geometries
such as diameter/length ratio, which would result in diﬀerent jet characteristics. Another
typical nozzle used in the industry is of similar length diameter ratio, but ﬂushes inside
inlet pipe. This would mainly lead to a lower ∆P as the pressure loss is proportional to
the discharge coeﬃcient of the nozzle squared (eq 7.1). Discharge coeﬃcient for nozzle
used in analysis was found to be Cd = 0.7.
It is important to consider that when applying equation 7.2 or 7.3 pumps should be able
to provide the same ﬂow at the increased pressure requirements. However by monitoring
Qin, ¯vnoz can be scaled accordingly. Normally pumps used for these applications provide a
pressure of P = 0.7 Bar which should be suﬃcient for a similar increase in nozzle velocity.
Figures 7.4 - 7.6 show how the secondary ﬂow patterns develop when reducing number of
nozzles. Assumption was made before starting analysis that lowering ∆t by a factor of 5
would counteract the increased nozzle velocity. This might not be the case, as ﬁgures 7.4 -
7.6 show a substantial reduction in number of vortex structures in the measurement plane
as the velocity increases. For this an additional time sensativity analysis should be made,
to determine how time dependant case 3 is. However given that limited computational
resources and that the cases each simulated for 28 hrs at 48 cores to achieve a sample
size of 500 sec at ∆t = 0.05 s, it was not deemed feasible given the scope of the study.
48
==PAGE:59==
7. Nozzle Modelling
Another consideration to make when applying this solution might be that the increased
impulse from the jet will contribute to increased vorticity in the tank, which might aﬀect
the wellfare and growth of the ﬁsh.
49
==PAGE:60==
8
CONCLUSION
This thesis has shown that by use of CFD software good predictions can be made on the
hydrodynamics in RAS culture tanks.
The literature study showed optimal ﬂow patterns in RAS tanks with correctly designed
inlet and outlet. However a "correctly designed" inlet was very loosely deﬁned. Some
more recent published articles have studied the eﬀect of nozzle orientation, while work on
nozzle geometry is limited. literature also showed that industry standard for exchange rate
assumed perfect mixing, and that this is not always the case with some regions having
faster and some slower exchange of water. In order to get more inside into design rotational
velocities in culture tanks, article were found that that showed safe non-fatiguing water
velocity for salmon, furthermore literature showed that better ﬂow patterns and higher
rotational velocities occurred with nozzle angle at 45 ◦compared to 0 ◦.
An experiment was carried out at Bakkafrost RAS rearing facility at Norðtoftir, Faroe
islands, to serve as validation for CFD model. Experiment was carried out using an
Acoustic Doppler Velocimeter ADV measuring velocities in 40 points spread across the
cross section of a tank. Results showed velocity distribution in the measurement plane, and
standard errors were computed to estimate the quality of the experiment. Other potential
errors were discussed where an estimation was done on some and others were neglected.
The experiment was recreated numerically, with the geometry created based on on-site
measurements. Time and mesh convergence studies were performed to determine time
and mesh independent solutions. Results from validation showed good agreement with
experimental data with similar trends for all velocity components. In addition the tangential
and to some extent radial velocity also showed good agreement in magnitude, which further
validiﬁes the model.
To determine the quality of the water exchange in the tank, model was deﬁned to simulate
the transport of fresh water and monitored as it advanced in the tank. Results were
compared to analytical approach used in traditional aquaculture engineering. Results
showed a good exchange with no "short cuts" or "dead zones" indicating a correct design of
inlet and outlet. Furthermore results showed slightly better performance than predicted
by perfect mixing and it was observed that water exiting the tank was mainly from the
lowest velocity region with lowest fresh water ratio.
To investigate a possible correlation between the nozzle velocity and tank rotational velocity
three cases were considered. The original 12 nozzle inlet, a 6 nozzle inlet, and 3 nozzle
inlet. All cases had same inlet volume ﬂow, therefore eﬀectively doubling the the nozzle
velocity for each case. Results showed a substantial increase in tank rotational velocity
with the increase in nozzle velocity, indicating the nozzle velocity is proportional to the
tangential velocity squared (eq eq:powerreg). This approach may show promise, however
50
==PAGE:61==
8. Conclusion
there is an increased pressure that needs to be overcome for approach to be applied.
8.1
Future work
During thesis period it became clear that there are many ways where current tank, inlet and
nozzle designs can be improved, and that research done in this area is limited. There are
many speciﬁc problems where the current understanding of the hydrodynamic behaviour
in rearing tanks can not predict the outcomes, and therefore the industry often relies on
trial-and-error-based approaches to ﬁnd an acceptable solution. Here are some relevant
paths for further investigation:
• Inlet nozzle angle
The eﬀects of inlet nozzle angle are in this thesis set to 45◦based on trial-and-error
approach [15] and [9]. However no CFD approach has been found that studies the
eﬀect of inlet angle on primary and secondary ﬂow patterns.
• Eﬀect of free surface on secondary ﬂow patterns
Results from experimental analysis indicated that considering the water surface as a
0 shear slip surface is a good approximation when investigating rotational velocities,
however results also indicated large deviances in radial velocity which have a large
eﬀect on secondary ﬂow in the tank. No published relevant studies were found that
took a two-phase approach to secondary ﬂow investigation, and with the recent
developments where land based RAS tanks are getting very large these eﬀects might
be crucial to hydrodynamic behaviour in the tank.
51
==PAGE:62==
REFERENCES
[1]
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The state of world
ﬁsheries and aquaculture. Report, 2018.
[2]
Gorle J.M.R., Terjesen B.F., Summerfelt S.T., and Mota V.C. Water velocity in
commercial ras culture tanks for atlantic salmon smolt production. Aquaculture
Engineering, 81:89–100, 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.aquaeng.2018.03.001.
[3]
Technical University of Denmark: Department of Physics. Niﬂheim linux
supercluster, 2019. URL https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/niﬂheim/.
[4]
Rasmussen M.R. and McLean E. Comparison of two diﬀerent methods for evaluating
the hydrodynamic performance of an industrial-scale ﬁsh-rearing unit. Aquaculture,
242:397–416, 2004. doi: 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2004.08.045.
[5]
Lekang O.I. Aquaculture Engineering, 2nd Edition. Blackwell Publishing, 2007.
[6]
Gorle J.M.R., Terjesen B.F., and Summerfelt S.T. Hydrodynamics of atlantic salmon
culture tank: Eﬀect of inlet nozzle angle on the velocity ﬁeld. Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture, 158:79–91, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.compag.2019.01.046.
[7]
Masaló I., Reig L., , and Oca J. Study of ﬁsh swimming activity using acoustical
doppler velocimeter (adv) techniques. Aquaculture Engineering, 38:43–51, 2007. doi:
10.1016/j.aquaeng.2007.10.007.
[8]
Timmons M.B., Summerfelt S.T., , and Vinci B.J. Review of circular tank technology
and management. Aquaculture Engineering, 18:51–69, 1998. doi:
10.1016/S0144-8609(98)00023-5.
[9]
Venegas P.A., Narváez A.L., Arriagada A.E., , and Llancaleo K.A. Hydrodynamic
eﬀects of use of eductors (jet-mixing eductor) for water inlet on circular tank ﬁsh
culture. Aquaculture Engineering, 59:13–22, 2014. doi:
10.1016/j.aquaeng.2007.10.007.
[10] Klebert P., Volent Z., and Rosten T. Measurement and simulation of the
three-dimensional ﬂow pattern and particle removal eﬃciencies in a large ﬂoating
closed sea cage with multiple inlets and drains. Aquaculture Engineering, 80:11–21,
2017. doi: 10.1016/j.aquaeng.2017.11.001.
[11] Gorle J.M.R., Terjesen B.F., and Summerfelt S.T. Hydrodynamics of octagonal
culture tanks with cornell-type dual-drain system. Computers and Electronics in
Agriculture, 151:354–364, 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.compag.2018.06.012Re.
[12] Sumer B.M. Lecture notes on turbulence. Technical University of Denmark, 2007.
[13] ANSYS Inc. Ansys user manual, release 18.0, 2016.
52
==PAGE:63==
References
[14] Nortek AS. The comprehensive manual for velocimeters, 2018. Vector, Vectrino,
Vectrino Proﬁler.
[15] Kalsø S. Eﬀects of applied exercise on growth, welfare and robustness in juvenile
atlantic salmon salmo salar l reared in commercial sized rearing tanks. University of
Copenhagen, 2018. Master Thesis.
53
==PAGE:64==
A TANK ASSEMBLY DRAWING
54
==PAGE:65==
A ( 1 : 10 )
B-B ( 1 : 25 )
E ( 1 : 1 )
A-A ( 1 : 25 )
C ( 1 : 1 )
B ( 1 : 5 )
Iso Top Right ( 1 : 50 )
A
B
B
E
A
A
C
B
 
Full Thread bolt, A4
 
M8x40
108
8
 
Lock nut, A4
 
M8
128
7
 
Full Thread bolt, A4
 
M8x50
20
6
 
Washer, A4
 
M8
256
5
 
Gasket cord, NBR70
3602 mm
T10
4
4
MD-16-305182
Wall Tank Ɔ5.0 mtx1.8 1-4
 
 
4
3
 
Gasket cord, NBR70
3140 mm
T10
1
2
MD-16-305183
Botton tank Ɔ5.0 mt - 2
 
 
1
1
Part List
Dwg.no
Item.
Length
Dim.
Pcs.
Pos.
Drawing Number:
A2
1 /1 
1 : 25
MD-16-3051180-pr-1 
Appr:
Date:
Check:
Revision:
JFR
Drawn:
00
BLU
08-01-2015
08-01-2015
Copyright :
Scale:
Date:
Sheet Number:
Size:
 Master
Fish Tanks
Detail:
T5x1.8 Fish Tank
Project:
Aquatec Solutions A/S
Denmark
Phone: +45 75880222
www.aquatec-solutions.com
Date:
CCG
13-04-2014
00
20-08-
2015
Approved for Construction TTA
Rev History
Rev.
Date
Description
Rev.
In the site, put
Seal Band between fins
8
7
5
8
7
5
1954
2605
T
1954
90Σ
1918 Int.
2505
R
1800
176
1000
3
6
5
7
4
2
1
3
==PAGE:66==
B TANK DRAWING
56
==PAGE:67==
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#7
#8
#9
#10
#11
#12
#13
#14
#15
#16
#17
#18
#19
#20
#21
#22
#23
#24
#25
#26
#27
#28
#29
#30
#31
#32
#33
#34
#35
#36
#37
#38
#39
#40
2365
R180
1505
1611
379
105
172
105
105
105
105
105
105
105
105
105
105
øu160 x 5 PVC Pipe
25
35
14
Nozzles, 12 pce
98
1279
594
2024
135
R250
685
230
720
467
R85
197
160
37
89
2112
367
335
340
392
280
638
638
319
319
559
Measurement
Plane
Outlet box
850x750
45°
nozzle
direction
73,7°
43,6°
62,7°
Inlet
x
y
37,9°
68,3°
210
230
220
200
z
y
5000
2491
==PAGE:68==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Tlf.: +45 4525 1360
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk
May 2019
