==PAGE:1==
Guillermo Botella Barthelemy
Thermal Modelling and Optimized
Transformer Utilization for Oﬀshore
Windfarms
Master Thesis, April 2019
==PAGE:2==
Guillermo Botella Barthelemy
Thermal Modelling and Optimized
Transformer Utilization for Oﬀshore
Windfarms
Master Thesis, April 2019
==PAGE:3==
Thermal Modelling and Optimized Transformer Utilization for Oﬀshore
Windfarms
Author:
Guillermo Botella Barthelemy
Supervisor(s):
Joachim Holbøll (DTU)
Syed Hamza Hasan Kazmi (Ørsted)
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
2019-04-29
Class:
Conﬁdential
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve a MSc. in
Energy at Technical University of Denmark. The report repr
35 ECTS points.
Rights: Guillermo Botella Barthelemy, 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
The current document oﬀers a presentation of the work realized and results obtained after
a 6-month long Master Project carried out as the culmination towards the completion of a
MSc. in Wind Energy at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The Project was
done in the frame of a collaboration between the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Ørsted A/S.
Most of the work displayed in this thesis, both research and experimental, was done in
DTU. DTU facilities used in the project include a variety of computer rooms in buildings
101, 325 and 329 of Lyngby Campus; the High Voltage (HV) Lab in building 329a for
the experimental part of the project; and several meeting rooms for the various meetings
and discussions held during the project. On the other hand, Ørsted is the company who
provided the in-ﬁeld transformer data used for the project, as well as insight and greater
knowledge about transformer oﬀshore utilization.
The scope of the thesis is the development of a model for estimation of temperatures
inside the tank of oil-ﬁlled transformers, and its validation for diﬀerent load scenarios.
The explanation of this work in this thesis extents along 4 main chapters, divided by
thematic; and a series of ﬁnal appendices, where topic-related information and side-research
done during the project are included. Also, if any formal documentation is required for
consultation, reader is referred to the appendixes.
i
==PAGE:6==
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
From an academic point of view, I would like to particularly thank two people. First,
my supervisor, Professor Joachim Holbøll, for putting his time and wide knowledge at
my disposal all throughout the project. The feedback I kept receiving from him during
our meetings to discuss the technical aspects of my work; as well as the practical help he
provided in the experimental part of the project carried out in the HV Lab at DTU (work
which Bjarni í Dali and Flemming Juul Petersen also facilitate by leaps and bounds) are in
great part responsible of this thesis looking as what it is now. On the other hand, I would
like to thank Syed Hamza Hasan Kazmi, working towards an Industrial PhD. in Ørsted
and initiator of the larger Project within which this MSc. Project is encompassed. From
the very beginning, he got involved to address me in the good direction. He provided me
guidance and advice, as well as more concrete help in the form of useful papers to read and
feedback about my work. He is also who provided the transformer data used in Chapter 4
of this report for the validation of the model under dynamic load conditions. For all this,
thank you.
From a more personal perspective, I would like to thank my family, friends and colleagues
at work for the support they brought me during the half year plus I dedicated to this
project. Obviously, my parent’s and brother support was priceless, as the constant interest
they had on my progress motivated me more than they know. Keeping me updated about
aﬀairs back home during our long Skype calls helped me to disconnect every Sunday. From
my DTU friends, Dimitris Patso’s right amount of insanity, which feed-backs well with
mine, brought always a good laugh to our (often long) breaks for a cup of tea (or often
two). Also, although he might not know (and he will not know, as I will not tell him about
this acknowledgment, waiting for him to ﬁnd it by himself in hopefully 25 years time at
least), I would like to sincerely oﬀer my gratitude to my friends André Bernal García, if
only for acting as a referent on how NOT to act during the development of a MSc. Project.
Witnessing his long sleepless nights towards the end of his own MSc. Project, together
with the appreciation I have for my own resting hours, made me get to work from the
very beginning, developing habits I can proudly say I maintained throughout the whole
project. I can doubtless say that he acted as a behavioural pathﬁnder for me on what MSc.
Projects are concerned.
ii
==PAGE:7==
ABSTRACT
An accurate estimation of top-oil temperature (TOT) and particularly hot-spot temperature
(HST) is required if the utilization of transformers for oﬀshore wind farms wants to be
improved. This improvement would be reﬂected in an adequate overloading of the asset
without provoking damage in the insulation; as well as in the potential reduction in the
rating used for transformers at oﬀshore substations in oﬀshore wind farms. To do so, this
thesis aims to develop a tool to calculate those temperatures, robust enough to be reliably
used under the dynamic load conditions inherent to oﬀshore windfarms.
The thesis introduces a model in MATLAB/Simulink which is deﬁned for the dynamical
computation of TOT and HST. It is based on the Thermal-Electrical Equivalence, an
analogy that represents the transformer as a simple RC circuit whose solutions for voltage
reproduce the temperature at the clariﬁed points. Thereby, the theoretical characterization
of the model and its consecutive construction; as well as its dissection for a thorough
analysis of its parameters and required inputs, constitute the ﬁrst part of the thesis.
The model is subsequently subjected to a two-level validation. First, the model is compared
with temperature curves obtained by the author through experimental work carried out in
the HV Lab in DTU. This provides information about the acceptability of the model as a
tool to predict internal temperatures of the transformer, inasmuch as the comparison is
done with highly reliable temperature measurements, obtained under controlled conditions.
A further validation based on data provided by Ørsted from a 6 MW WTG transformer
currently operating in one of its oﬀshore wind farms is realized. The model performance
under dynamic load conditions is hereby scrutinized for validation purposes. Considerations
for improvement in the transformer utilization based on HST estimations are also provided
at this point.
The work conducted throughout the project established a robust model which accurately
predicts dynamic internal temperatures in transformers, with the limitation of bearing a
high degree of complexity in the parameter characterization process. Thus, its application
to in-ﬁeld environments is subordinate to a correct and comprehensive parametrization of
the asset.
iii
==PAGE:8==
SYMBOLS
Symbol
Unit
Deﬁnition
q
W
Heat transfer rate
Θ
◦C
Temperature
i
A
Current
v
V
Voltage
Rth
◦C/W
Thermal resistance
Rel
Ω
Electrical resistance
Cth
J/◦C
Thermal capacitance
Cel
F
Electrical capacitance
Cwdn
J/◦C
Equivalent thermal capacitance of the windings
Coil
J/◦C
Equivalent thermal capacitance of the transformer oil
Ctank
J/◦C
Equivalent thermal capacitance of the transformer tank
Cair
J/◦C
Equivalent thermal capacitance of the air close to the tank
Rth−wdn−oil
◦C/W
Winding to oil thermal resistance
Rth−oil−tank
◦C/W
Oil to tank thermal resistance
Rth−fe−oil
◦C/W
Tank to close atmosphere thermal resistance
Rth−closeair−ambient
◦C/W
Close atmosphere to ambient thermal resistance
ν
m2/s
Kinematic viscosity
ρ
kg/m3
Density
cp
Ws/kg◦C
Speciﬁc heat
k
m◦C
Thermal conductivity
β
1/◦C
Expansion coeﬃcient
h
W/(m2 ◦C)
Heat transfer coeﬃcient
A
m2
Area
L
m
Characteristic dimension
g
m/s2
Gravitational constant
µ
kg/ms
Dynamic viscosity
Θamb
◦C
Ambient temperature
Θoil
◦C
Top-oil temperature (TOT)
Θhs
◦C
Hot-spot temperature (HST)
qst
W
Heat generated by the stray losses
qfe
W
Heat generated by the core losses
qwdn
W
Heat generated by the windings losses
mmp
kg
Tank mass
mfe
kg
Core mass
mwdn
kg
Winding mass
moil
kg
Oil mass
τth,oil
s
Oil time constant
τth,wdn
s
Winding time constant
K
-
Load factor
R
-
Load to No-load ratio
Θe
◦C
Temperature at which losses are estimated (mean HST)
iv
==PAGE:9==
Symbols
Symbol
Unit
Deﬁnition
Θk
◦C
Temperature factor for the loss correction
n
-
Non-linearity oil exponent
n
′
-
Non-linearity winding exponent
∆θoil,rated
◦C
Rated oil temperature rise over ambient
∆θhs,lv,rated
◦C
Rated LV winding rise over oil
∆θoi,hv,rated
◦C
Rated HV winding rise over oil
Pst
W
Stray losses in the transformer
Peddy
W
Eddy current losses in the transformer
Pcu
W
Joule-Lenz losses in the transformer
v
==PAGE:10==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
i
Acknowledgments
ii
Abstract
iii
Symbols
iv
Table of Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Formulation of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Methodology, scope and conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis structure and readability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
The Thermo Electric Model
5
2.1
Power Transformer Description and Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
TEE model for TOT and HST calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3
TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
38
3.1
The testing facility and asset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2
Transformer parametrization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3
Heat run test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4
Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Trans-
former
65
4.1
The Transformer and its Operational Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.2
Parametrization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.4
Considerations for Improving the Transformer Utilization Using HST
Estimations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5
Conclusions and Further Work
81
References
84
A Project plan
88
B Further information about the TEE model
91
B.1
Mathematical Validation TEE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B.2
TEE model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
vi
==PAGE:11==
Table of Contents
C Setup in the HV Lab
97
C.1
OC and SC test connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
C.2
Heat run test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
D Parametrization of Ørsted Transformer
103
vii
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Background
Transformers are generally the most expensive assets in most electric networks networks
[1] [2] [3] [4]. Besides, oil ﬁlled transformers have to be replaced relatively often, due to
potentially dangerous events that can come into play in old transformers-in addition to
untimely power outages. The reason for that is that many power transformers are exposed
to very high operating internal temperatures that can damage the insulation(a power
transformer operating at the rated level continuously results in a typical insulation life of
20.55 years [5]) and cause a breakdown, and assets are replaced before that occurs, typically
having a life cycle of 20 years [2]. In recent years, however, this traditional approach to
the transformer life cycle based in its plate rating has shifted towards a concept known
as "dynamic rating" [2], deﬁned as "the maximum loading which the transformer may
acceptably sustain under time varying load and/or environmental conditions" [6].
The main argument for a change from plate rating towards dynamic rating is that,
conceptually, if a transformer can be operated beyond its rating for a certain time, big
monetary savings could be achieved due to a delayed purchase of a new transformer for
end-of life cycle or loading constraints. In theory, a transformer can be overloaded without
causing overheating damage in the insulation when the operating ambient temperatures are
low. Due to: a) the highly ﬂuctuating nature of the load inherent to wind energy, where
load levels change rapidly depending on wind conditions, and b) generally low ambient
temperatures present at oﬀshore windfarms located in Nordic countries; transformers in
the grid side of oﬀshore windfarms are highly susceptible to be a natural application for
dynamic rating.
However, attempting to blindly overload the transformer without knowing the impact of
that overload on the internal temperature of the transformer, and in turn on its insulation,
can increase the mentioned risks by leaps and bounds, as temperatures beyond 110 ◦C will
increase the aging accelerator factor of the cellulose, which undergoes a depolymerization
process [5] [7]. Thus, if dynamic rating wants to be implemented, knowing at all times of
the overload the temperatures of the insulation and other internal parts of the asset is a
requirement.
Thus it is clear that knowing the internal temperatures on power transformers is nowadays of
capital importance within the wind energy industry [8]. Unfortunately, direct temperature
measurement is not currently a feasible option during the normal operation of the
transformer, since factory transformers do not generally come equipped with embedded
probes nor temperature sensors for all the relevant temperatures [9]. Moreover, optic
ﬁber sensors are often misplaced and their measurements could be misleading. Direct
measurement is then typically relegated to testing [5].
On the other hand, internal
1
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction
temperatures can be calculated instead of measured. This has to be done in a way such the
operational conditions (ambient temperature, load proﬁle) and asset particularities (cooling
mode, transformer type) are taken into account. In [8], Wallnerstrom et al. conducted a
research about the concept of dynamic rating applied to power systems. They spot thermal
models of power and distribution transformers as the most interesting research application
in dynamic rating, particularly to facilitate wind power integration in power systems. The
construction and validation of a thermal model is, thus, the topic researched in this MSc
Project.
1.2
Formulation of the problem
The ﬁnal objective of this MSc Project has been the development and construction a
computer-based model in MATLAB/Simulink that, from a series of inputs deﬁning the
operational conditions of a transformer, calculate two internal temperatures. These are the
top-oil (TOT, θoil), deﬁned as the temperature at the top of the oil, corresponding to the
highest oil temperature; and the hot spot temperature (HST, θhs), which is the highest
temperature on the winding surface. HST is particularly critical, since it is the ultimate
responsible on insulation damage [9], and thus required an accurate estimation.
After its construction based on literature-based acquired knowledge, the models have been
subjected to a two step validation. The ﬁrst one is based on data provided by Ørsted
from one of its currently operating transformers in Westermost Rough (WMR) Oﬀshore
Wind Farm, located in the Northern Sea in England. This data set refers to temperatures
(ambient, nacelle, top oil) and load (load factor, current, voltages), and covers a whole year
of operation of the transformer, making it an incredibly extensive and detailed database.
The second level validation is based on experimental work conducted in the High Voltage
Lab, located at the facilities of PowerLabDk at DTU. This work has been the testing and
measurement recording of two transformers. By directly taking the measurements in a
controlled environment, the higher degree of uncertainty inherent to any data set provided
by a third party is possible to be eliminated. Last, the already validated TEE model has
been used to predict hot spot temperature in the Ørsted transformer, and the potential
improvements on the transformer utilization based on the potential extra heating before
the insulation starts sustaining damage, considered.
Therefore, the sequence of objectives followed in this MSc Project is as follows:
• Research among current literature to spot suitable and adequate means to calculate
internal temperatures.
• Developing of a computational model based on thermo-electrical equivalence (TEE)
to estimate top oil temperature (TOT) and hot spot temperature (HST).
• Validation of the thermal model by means of real life temperature measurements
from heat run tests conducted in the High Voltage Lab at DTU.
• Validation of the thermal model through in-ﬁeld temperature measurements provided
by Ørsted from one of its oﬀshore wind farms.
• Provide a series of suggestions and considerations about transformer loadability based
on TEE model temperature estimations.
2
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction
Figure 1.1. Block diagram depicting the general structure followed in the construction and
two-step validation of the thermal model.
A more detailed explanation of the project structure can be found in Appendix A, where
it is attached the original Project Plan wrote at the beginning of the project, as well as a
Gantt Chart where an overview of the chronological distribution of the tasks is provided.
1.3
Methodology, scope and conditions
The simple structure depicted in Figure 1.1 above shows a schematic of the general
procedure followed throughout the MSc Project.
As per the approach followed to successfully progress through each block, it has been as
follows. The initial construction of the thermal model (uppermost yellow block) has been
done based on cases found in the literature research. These cases, which are described
in a series of reports and papers, and are a mixture of experimental, theoretical and
mathematical analysis work. The model itself has been constructed in MATLAB/Simulink,
with the bulk of the calculations coded in independent MATLAB functions and integrated
in the Simulink block model through the common workspace they share.
The "HV Lab Work Validation" block (third yellow one from the top in Figure 1.1) represents
the experimental work made by the author to take a set of temperature measurements in
transformers whose internal parameters are known. It encompasses both the preliminary
tests carried out to ﬁnd out the mentioned parameters (load and no load losses) and the
heat run tests themselves. Through this experimental validation, the uncertainty inherent
to any data set obtained from a third party is eliminated, as the measure of temperatures
is done under controlled and at-all-times-known conditions.
The second validation of the thermal model ("Ørsted Data Validation", intermediate yellow
block in Figure 1.1 has been done by feeding the thermal models with load proﬁles and
ambient temperatures from the data provided by Ørsted, and comparing the obtained
results with the corresponding TOT and HST in the data set. Diﬀerent periods through
the year, representing a complete sample of the environmental conditions in which the
transformer is operating, have been chosen. Also, periods with odd load proﬁles (cold
starts, overloads, sudden changes) have been preferred over stable load ones, since they
challenge the models robustness, thus helping to pinpoint the weakness to be addressed.
A major limitation of this validation is that, although the temperature and load data is
3
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction
highly reliable, the data regarding the transformer itself is scarce at the best. This made
necessary the use of regressions and extrapolations to ﬁnd the missing internal parameters
(specially losses), thus making the validations less reliable.
1.4
Thesis structure and readability
The Thesis is divided in 4 diﬀerent chapters and a set of appendixes at the end of it.
The present Chapter works as an introduction to the Thesis, where project framework
and problem formulation are provided. Also, the scope of the project and methodology
followed are deﬁned here.
Chapter 2 deals with two main tasks: the deﬁnition of the Thermal Electrical Equivalence
and how it is applied to transformers; and the construction of a model based upon it. Also,
the model results are compared with temperature curves from heat run tests found in
the existing literature for a ﬁrst step validation. Finally, the Chapter wraps up with a
sensitivity analysis of the model, where the inﬂuence in the estimation of temperatures of
diﬀerent parameters is studied.
In Chapter 3, a summary of the experimental activities carried out in the Project is provided.
These were done in the High Voltage Lab of DTU, and include three preliminary test
(windings resistance measurement, open circuit and short circuit) planned to characterize
the transformer losses; and a subsequent heat run test where the rest of the parameters
were obtained, as well as temperature curves for validation purposes.
Chapter 4 oﬀers a presentation of a set of data consisting on measurements from an in-ﬁeld
WTG transformer located in an operational wind farm; and the use made out of it in order
to validate the model for a dynamic load proﬁle.
As a clariﬁcation remark for the reader, the thesis was written using LaTex, so the
referencing and citation system is the one generally found for most of LaTex packages.
Thus, numbers between square brackets refer to cites from the bibliography, in order
of appearance- i.e.[6] refers to the sixth cited paper in the thesis, and will keep that
number regardless how many other times is cited. On the other hand, Tables, Figures and
Equations follow their own separated counting systems, being them two numbers; where
the ﬁrst one refers to the Chapter where they are found, and the second the number of the
Table/Figure/Equation within that Chapter. For example, Table 3.4 refers to the fourth
Table in Chapter 4, and Equation 2.20, to the twentieth Equation on Chapter 2. Also,
it is important to notice that a number of acronyms and abbreviations were used along
the theses. They are clarify the ﬁrst few times they are mentioned, using the acronym
afterwards.
4
==PAGE:17==
2
THE THERMO ELECTRIC MODEL
This chapter deals with two main tasks: the description of the theoretical framework in
which the construction of the thermal model have been based; and the development process
and construction of such model.
First, an investigation and analysis of the transformer is carried out, in order to gain
deeper knowledge of the equipment which is being investigated in this project. This
investigation is done both from an electrical and from an structural point of view; thus
encompassing electrical characterization of transformers, as well as its construction and
internal architecture.
Also, the concept of Thermal Electrical Equivalence (TEE) is
introduced and analyzed here.
Next, the TEE model is described. Using diﬀerential equations, it calculated Top Oil
Temperature (TOT) from ambient temperature; and, in a cascade calculation, used TOT
to calculate Hot Spot Temperature (HST).
Note: A more extensive research among existing Thermal Models to calculate internal
temperatures in transformers has been the main topic of the Special Course [10] which
preceded this MSc Project. It covered both the IEEE and IEC standards, as well as some
other more detailed models proposed by other authors (i.e. Swift model and Susa model)
which are based in the Thermal-Electrical Equivalence (TEE). Therefore, if more detailed
information about thermal models is required, the reader is addressed there.
A section in the Appendix A covers the development and results of a second TEE model,
used to compute HST directly from ambient temperature making use of exponential
equations. This model was initially intended to be included in this Chapter, but was
considered to better belong in the Appendix section, as temperature estimations were
poorer and was not ﬁnally used for the project.
2.1
Power Transformer Description and Characterization
This section provides a contextualization of the project through the description and
characterization of the transformer type researched in this project. Basic information about
purpose and use of transformers will not be included here, since the present document will
most likely be read by people with a medium to high knowledge on transformers. If more
information about transformers is needed, the reader is referred to [11], [12], [13] and [14].
A thorough description of the internal architecture of the modelled transformers is necessary
as a ﬁrst step to understand the transformer heating process and how to model it.
5
==PAGE:18==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
2.1.1
Three-legged Core Type Oil Immersed Power Transformers
The subject of the analysis in this project is, as said, a three legged oil immersed transformer.
These transformers are the most commonly use type of transformers in power systems,
as they yield a high performance with relatively low costs when compared with other
transformer architectures [14].
As per the the actual construction of these transformers, they are composed of a series
of diﬀerent elements with separate functions. Speciﬁcations for particular transformers
will come in further chapters of this report, serving this one as a broad explanation of the
transformers building and general operation of the diﬀerent parts.
Figure 2.1. Internal architecture of a three legged laminated core transformer. Diagram of the
core and windings obtained from [15]
1. Tank. Acts as both container for the oil and insulator. Structural steel with a high
tensile strength in sheet and plate form is used in its fabrication. The same material
is used for the radiator and the expansion tank, if the transformer equips them.
2. Transformer Oil. Acts as both dielectric and coolant. It is generally Transformer Oil
Base Stock (TOBS), with diﬀerent speciﬁcations (variations obtained by carefully
controlling the reﬁning process) depending on the transformer requirements- i.e. a
high concentration of saturated paraﬃns and none of oleﬁnes will make the oil to
have great insulating properties; while for better stability of properties, to have
6
==PAGE:19==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
aromatic and naphthenic hydrocarbons in the oil is necessary [12].
3. High Voltage (HV) windings. Insulated copper conductor of various types (spiral,
helical, continuous disc, etc.), depending on the transformer design, with paper
insulation.
4. Low Voltage (LV) windings. Same as for HV windings, with the diﬀerence that the
number of turns is lower.
5. Laminated core. Structural and magnetic functions. Cold rolled grain oriented silicon
steel is (CRGO) is preferred over other types of steel, as it has a higher magnetic
performance-i.e. maximum magnetic induction to obtain a high induction amplitude
in an alternating ﬁeld, minimum losses for low no load loss, with good mechanical
processing properties-.
The weights and materials of the diﬀerent transformer parts shown in Figure 2.1 and listed
above are obviously of capital importance on the thermal performance of the transformer,
thus being a requirement in the development of any thermal model. This will be further
explained in forthcoming sections.
2.1.2
The Thermal Electrical Equivalence (TEE)
In order to build a valid model to predict internal temperatures in a transformer, the use
of an analogy between thermal and electrical magnitudes, ﬁrst introduced by Swift in [16],
has been done. This thermal-electrical analogy between magnitudes (known as Thermal
Electrical Equivalence, or TEE, from now on) is possible to be made thanks to a similar
performance of variables [16] [17], as reﬂected in Table 2.1 below:
Thermal
Electrical
Through Variable
Heat transfer rate
q [W]
Current
i [A]
Across Variable
Temperature
θ [◦C]
Voltage
v [V ]
Dissipation Element
Thermal resistance
Rth [◦C/W]
Electrical resistance
Rel [Ω]
Storage Element
Thermal resistance
Cth [J/◦C]
Electrical capacitance
Cel [F]
Table 2.1. Analogy between thermal and electrical magnitudes [16].
The use of TEE allows the transformer to be modelled as a RC circuit whose voltages at
diﬀerent point of the circuit represent temperatures at diﬀerent points of the transformer.
Thus, if the equivalent circuit is accurately established and its parameters properly deﬁned,
solving the circuit voltages is the aim of models based in TEE, as they represent the
temperature at the point the voltage is calculated.
In order to establish the TEE RC circuit for a transformer, the ﬁrst step is to deﬁne the
transformer from a thermal point of view. To do so, it is a requirement to understand how
the heat transfer is carried out from the heat sources (mainly windings, with a small core
participation) to the heat sink (ambient) during the transformer operation .
7
==PAGE:20==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.2. Schematic showing the diﬀerent thermodynamic layers/barriers the heat ﬂow passes
through inside the transformer. The red arrow represent the heat ﬂow, schematically
represented as originating from a current source providing current equal to qtot. The
thermal storage element is represented in each layer with a capacitor Cth. The
resistances between layers represent the thermal dissipation element in the heat ﬂow
Rth.
Figure 2.2 above shows a schematic of the transformer from a thermal perspective. On it,
the heat ﬂow inside the transformer is represented with a red arrow passing through a series
of overlapping layers with diﬀerent thermal properties depicting the diﬀerent transformer
elements listed in Figure 2.1. These layers, noted with numbers, represent, respectively:
1. Windings.
2. Oil.
3. Tank.
4. Close atmosphere.
5. Ambient.
The capability of each layer to store heat has been represented by a thermal capacitor
placed inside the layer. This heat-storing ability lies in the heat capacity (c) of the material,
and when made speciﬁc for a certain volume is known as thermal capacitance (Cth) [16]
[18]. The thermal capacitances shown in Figure 2.2 are, from the inside out:
C1 = Cwdn = equivalent thermal capacitance of the windings;
C2 = Coil = equivalent thermal capacitance of the transformer oil;
C3 = Ctank = equivalent thermal capacitance of the transformer tank;
C4 = Cair = equivalent thermal capacitance of the air close to the tank;
C5 = Cfreeair = equivalent thermal capacitance of the atmosphere. Thermal sink in
terms of the transformer;
8
==PAGE:21==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Between two adjacent layers -i.e. oil and windings- , a series of resistors have been placed.
They represent the heat dissipated while the heat ﬂows within one of the layers before
reaching the following one, and are the responsible for the fainting red in the heat-ﬂow
arrow. It is directly related to the thermal conductivity (k) of the material the layer is made
of, and it is known as thermal resistance (Rth) when made speciﬁc to a particular volume
of material [16] [18]. The thermal resistance shown in the general heat ﬂow schematic of
Figure 2.2 are, from the inside out:
Rth−1−2 = Rth−wdn−oil = winding to oil thermal resistance;
Rth−2−3 = Rth−oil−tank = oil to tank thermal resistance;
Rth−3−4 = Rth−fe−oil = tank to close atmosphere thermal resistance;
Rth−4−5 = Rth−closeair−ambient = close atmosphere to ambient thermal resistance;
Note that the schematic of the thermal performance of a transformer shown in Figure 2.2
is just a very simpliﬁed graphic used to illustrate the idea of thermal capacitances and
resistances, and where are they located inside the transformer. In reality, transformers are
highly complex systems from a thermal point of view, so, in order to establish a suitable
TEE RC circuit for them, diﬀerent authors have used diﬀerent approaches during the years.
As an example of this diversity of approaches, most of the authors dismiss the thermal
impact of the close atmosphere in the transformer heat ﬂow, thus leaving it out of their
models. This layer is most outstandingly used by Rosenlind in [19], where the impact of
external factors and weather eﬀects in TOT is studied.
Therefore, within a TEE modelling framework, diﬀerent authors and organizations have
tackled the construction of the equivalent circuit diﬀerently, resulting in a diversity of
models. These are analyzed more in depth in the report [10], corresponding to the Special
Course preceding this MSc. Project.
For this MSc. Project, the equivalent circuit and set of equations proposed in [17], [20] [21]
and [22] were the ones chosen to base the TEE models upon, including modiﬁcations to
incorporate oil viscosity changes, diﬀerence in LV-HV windings temperature and diﬀerent
tank geometries and oil cooling. The outcome has been two TEE models which are
explained and analyzed in the two subsequent sections and the Appendix A.
If more thorough knowledge about the TEE is required, the reader is addressed to the
mentioned Special Course report, found in the bibliography under the reference number
[10].
2.2
TEE model for TOT and HST calculation
The ﬁrst proposed model is based on TEE, thus making use of the general schematic
presented in Figure 2.2, with a series of modiﬁcations and assumptions to make the model
more accurate [17] [20] [21].
9
==PAGE:22==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
2.2.1
The Oil-Air System. TOT calculation
As explained above, the concepts of thermal resistance Rth (ability of the material to resist
heat ﬂow) and thermal capacitance Cth (capability to store heat) are directly related with
the thermal conductivity k and heat capacity c. Both of them are thus dependant on
the thermal characteristics of the material. The study of these thermal characteristics is
fundamental in order to implement a reliable and accurate TEE.
Particularly, due to temperature-dependant convection eﬀects of the thermal ﬂuid taking
part in the heat ﬂow, Rth has to be modelled as having a nonlinear behaviour with
temperature. This is because of the mentioned change in thermal characteristics of the
materials, which have a repercussion on the thermodynamics .When it comes to the actual
thermal performance of the transformer materials, there is one of them whose thermal
characteristics variance with temperature is outstanding: the transformer oil. In fact, the
drastic changes in oil circulation with temperature are due to the the severe variation
that one of its thermal properties experiment with temperature. That is the viscosity µ.
This behaviour is registered in Table 2.2.1 below, where the change of a series of thermal
characteristics for a temperature range from -15 ◦C to 100 ◦C is listed.
ν = oil kinematic viscosity [ν = µ/ρ] ;
Temperature
Density
Speciﬁc
heat
Thermal
conductivity
Expansion
coeﬃcient
Kinematic
viscosity
θ
(◦C)
ρ
(kg/m3)
cp
(Ws/kg◦C)
k
(m◦C)
β
(1/◦C)
ν
(m2/s)
-15
902
1700
0.1341
6.2·10−4
450·10−6
-5
896
1740
0.1333
6.4·10−4
180·10−6
5
890
1785
0.1326
6.7·10−4
85·10−6
15
884
1825
0.1318
6.9·10−4
45·10−6
25
879
1870
0.1310
7.15·10−4
27·10−6
35
873
1910
0.1303
7.40·10−4
17·10−6
45
867
1950
0.1295
7.65·10−4
11.5·10−6
55
861
1995
0.1287
7.8·10−4
8.2·10−6
65
855
2040
0.1280
7.9·10−4
6.1·10−6
85
844
2120
0.1264
8·10−4
3.8·10−6
100
835
2180
0.1253
8·10−4
3·10−6
Table 2.2. Thermal characteristics of transformer oil at a [-15 to 100 ◦C] range of temperatures
[17].
If the values shown in Table 2.2.1 above are converted into the per-unit system and
represented in a graphic, it can be clearly observed the mentioned diﬀerent behaviour of
µ at temperature changes. Thus, the non-linear behaviour of Rth can be assumed to be
entirely caused by changes in oil viscosity, modelling the rest of oil properties as constant.
10
==PAGE:23==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.3. Close up view of the change of oil
properties with temperature (µ not
included) [17].
Figure 2.4. Zoom out of Figure 2.3, where big
changes in µ with temperature can
be appreciated [17].
Once the variation of oil properties with temperature have been analyzed, the calculation of
the nonlinear oil thermal resistance Rth−oil can be tackled. According to [17], the thermal
resistance for a given area is:
Rth−oil =
1
h · A
(2.1)
Where
h = heat transfer coeﬃcient;
A = Area;
Therefore, being Rth inversely proportional to h, the dependency on temperature of this
coeﬃcient h is what has to be analyzed in order to clarify Rth dependency on temperature.
Based on heat transfer theory [23], natural convection oil ﬂow around horizontal, inclined
and vertical cylinders and plates follow the empirical correlation:
h · L
k
= C
"cp · µ
k
L3 · ρ2 · g · β · (∆θoil)
µ2
#n
(2.2)
where
L = characteristic dimension, length, width or diameter;
g = gravitational constant [9.81 m/s2];
C = constant [Laminar = 0.59; Turbulent = 0.1];
n = constant [Laminar = 0.25; Turbulent = 0.33];
All oil properties other than viscosity µ can be considered constant with temperature in
Equation 2.2, as explained above. This behaviour can be observed in Figure 2.4 and Table
2.2.1, where all properties aside µ remain almost constant after 40◦C, the normal range of
operation of transformers. Thus, they are treated as constants and Equation 2.2 solved for
the heat transfer coeﬃcient h:
h = C1
∆θoil
µ
n
(2.3)
11
==PAGE:24==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Where C1 is a term constant with temperature and expressed as
C1 = C
ρ2 · g · β · k( 1−n
n ) · L( 3n1
n ) · cp
n
(2.4)
and the viscosity as a function of oil temperature is described by
µ = 1.3573 · 10−6 · e
[
2792.3
θoil+273 ]
(2.5)
The ﬁnal expression for the thermal resistance Rth for every oil temperature is obtained
by substituting Equation 2.3 in Equation 2.1:
Rth−oil =
1
C1 · A

µ
∆θoil
n
(2.6)
Particularizing for rated conditions, Equation 2.6 can be expressed as:
Rth−oil,rated = ∆θoil,rated
qtot,rated
(2.7)
On the other hand, for this Project the TEE RC circuit for the oil-to-air system in a three
legged oil immersed transformer has been deﬁned as:
Figure 2.5. Complex TEE circuit for TOT calculation for a three-legged oil immersed transformer
[20].
12
==PAGE:25==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Where
θamb = ambient temperature;
θoil = top-oil temperature (TOT);
Rth−mp−oil = nonlinear tank to oil thermal resistance;
Rth−fe−oil = nonlinear core to oil thermal resistance;
Rth−wdn−oil = nonlinear winding to oil thermal resistance;
Rth−oil−air = nonlinear oil to air thermal resistance;
Coil = equivalent thermal capacitance of the transformer oil;
Cmp = equivalent thermal capacitance of the transformer tank;
Cfe = equivalent thermal capacitance of the transformer core;
Cwdn = equivalent thermal capacitance of the copper;
qst = heat generated by the stray losses;
qfe = heat generated by the core losses;
qwdn = heat generated by the winding losses;
The three heat sources shown in Figure 2.5 correspond to the eddy and stray losses in the
metal parts (core and tank) plus the DC losses in the copper (windings). In order to have
only one heat source in the TEE circuit, representing the total heat added to the system,
each thermal capacitance is multiplied by an adimensional factor Y . Y is deﬁned as the
percentage of the total heat with which each heat source contributes to the system, thus
resulting in three Y with the form:
Yx = qx
qtot
(2.8)
where x is replaced by Winding (wdn), Stray (st) and Eddy (fe), respectively; and qtot is
the heat generated by total losses. Knowing that the main source of heat generation in
transformers are copper losses [24] (Joule-Lenz losses), that mean the following relationships
between Yx’s:
Ywdn >> Yst;
with
Yst << 1
(2.9)
Ywdn >> Yfe;
with
Yfe << 1
(2.10)
Combining Equation 2.8 with the fact that thermal resistances in the winding-to-oil
Rth−wdn−oil, tank-to-oil Rth−mp−oil and core-to-oil Rth−fe−oil interphases have extremely
low values [20] so can be neglected;
Rth−mp−oil
≈0 , Rth−fe−oil
≈0
&
Rth−wdn−oil
≈0
(2.11)
the TEE circuit for TOT calculation shown in Figure 2.5 can be simpliﬁed to one with
just one heat source and one thermal resistance, Rth−oil−air, which follows Equation 2.6:
13
==PAGE:26==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.6. Simpliﬁed TEE circuit for TOT calculation for a three-legged oil immersed transformer
[20].
The ﬁnal simpliﬁcation to the TEE RC circuit of the transformer before solving it at
θoil is to integrate the four parallel capacitances shown in the circuit of Figure 2.6 into
one equivalent thermal capacitance named Cth−oil. In order to do that, the thermal
capacitances for the ﬁrst three branches in Figure 2.6 -corresponding to the transformer
tank, core and windings, respectively- are corrected by their equivalent contribution to the
total heat.
C′x = YxCx
(2.12)
where, analogously to Equation 2.8, x is replaced by Winding (wdn), Stray (st) and Eddy
(fe), respectively. By doing so, the TEE circuit can be further simpliﬁed to:
Figure 2.7. Further simpliﬁed TEE circuit for TOT calculation for a three-legged oil immersed
transformer [20]. This is the ﬁnal RC circuit to be solved in order to compute TOT.
Where an equivalent thermal capacitance for the transformer oil Cth−oil is put in place of
the four parallel thermal capacitances.
Cth−oil = C′
wdn + C′
mp + C′
fe + Coil
(2.13)
By substitution of Equation 2.12, and particularizing if for certain materials and masses;
the expression for the thermal capacitance of the oil is turned into the expression which
will be used for the model:
Cth−oil = Ywdnmwdncwdn + Ympmmpcmp + Yfemfecfe + Ooilmoilcoil
(2.14)
14
==PAGE:27==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
where
mx = weight of the x material in [kg]. X takes the values of the diﬀerent transfomer
elements contributing to cth: winding, tank, core and oil, respectively.;
cx = speciﬁc heat capacity of the materials in [Wh/kg◦C].
Where, according to [5]:
cwdn,cu = 0.11;
cwdn,al = 0.25;
cfe = cmp = 0.13;
coil = 0.51;
Ooil = correction factor for the oil [ONAF, ONAN, OFAF = 0.86; ODAF = 1];
Once both Rth−oil−air and Cth−oil have been deﬁned, the TEE circuit for TOT calculation
takes the form of a simple RC electric circuit, whose diﬀerential equation is for any time is:
qtot = Cth−oil
dθ
dt + (θoil −θamb)
Rth−oil−air
(2.15)
In order to obtain a model implementable equation out of Equation 2.15, a series of
modiﬁcations are done, including the deﬁnition of time constants and the conversion of
equation variables into ﬁxed parameters, by the use of rated values and the p.u. system.
One characteristic of RC circuits is that they have a parameter known as time constant,
represented by the letter τ, which gives the time required to either charge the capacitor to
63.2% of its full charge or to discharge it to 36.8% of its initial value. This time constant
equal to the product of the circuit capacitance and the circuit resistance. Analogously, the
TEE circuit for TOT calculation from Figure 2.7 has its own time constant, deﬁned as the
product of the thermal resistance Rth−oil−air and the thermal capacitance Cth−oil.
τth,oil = Rth−oil−air · Cth−oil
(2.16)
If Equation 2.16 above is particularized for rated conditions
τth,oil,rated = Rth−oil−air,rated · Cth−oil,rated
(2.17)
By the inclusion of this rated oil time constant τoil,rated into Equation 2.15, together with
the load to no-load losses ratio R, deﬁned as
R = qcu
qfe
(2.18)
and the load factor K as the load per unit
K =
I
Irated
(2.19)
render the following diﬀerential equation for the TEE circuit for TOT calculation:
dθoil
dt
=
1+R·K2
1+R
· µn
pu · ∆θoil,rated −(θoil−θamb)1+n
∆θn
oil,rated
µnpu · τoil,rated
(2.20)
The last step in order to obtain the diﬀerential equation used in this Project, Equation
2.20 is further modiﬁed to include the dependence on temperature of the load losses. As
15
==PAGE:28==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
explained above, resistance increase as temperature rises, thus also rising the losses. The
temperature at which load losses are evaluated (θe) is, obviously, the winding temperature,
as load losses are for the most part due to Joule-Lenz in the windings.
In order to make the model closer to reality, since both Low Voltage and High Voltage
windings contribute to rise the temperature, the average of LV and HV hot spots is used
for the calculation
θe = θhs,lv + θhs,hv
2
(2.21)
The expression that takes into account the load losses dependence on temperature P1,pu(θe)
is as follows:
P1,pu(θe) = Pdc,pu

θe + θk
θe,rated + θk

+ (Pst,pu + Pfe,pu)
θe,rated + θk
θe + θk

(2.22)
where
Pdc,pu = per unit value of DC (ohmic) losses at rated mean HST;
Pst,pu = per unit value of stray losses at rated mean HST;
Pfe,pu = per unit value of Eddy losses at rated mean HST;
θe = temperature at which losses are estimated (mean HST);
θe,rated = rated mean HST [if unknown: IEC = 98◦C; IEEE = 110◦C];
θk = temperature factor for the loss correction [Copper = 225◦C; Aluminum = 235◦C];
The inclusion of Equation 2.22 as a multiplication factor in the loss ratio R in Equation
2.20 gives the ﬁnal form of the diﬀerential equation used for TOT calculation.
Note that oil temperature rise over ambient and time constant are referred to rated
conditions, thus not being variables but model parameters.
dθoil
dt
=
1+R·P1,pu(θe)·K2
1+R
· µn
pu · ∆θoil,rated −(θoil−θamb)1+n
∆θn
oil,rated
µnpu · τoil,rated
(2.23)
2.2.2
The Winding-Oil system. HST calculation
In a similar way as for TOT, HST model is also represented as a TEE RC circuit. On it,
reﬂecting the fact that only winding losses are responsible for the temperature rise on the
windings, there is only one heat source: the heat produced by the windings qwdn. Also, as
the winding-to-oil inter-phase has only one stage in the heat ﬂow diagram (Figure 2.2), the
RC circuit has also only one thermal capacitance Cth−wdg. This simpliﬁes the diﬀerential
equation formulation process, as the TEE RC circuit is directly deﬁned as:
16
==PAGE:29==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.8. TEE circuit for HST calculation for a three-legged oil immersed transformer [20]
where
θhs = hot-spot temperature (HST);
θoil = top-oil temperature (TOT);
Rth−hs−oil = nonlinear winding to oil thermal resistance;
Cth−wdn = equivalent thermal capacitance of the winding;
qwdn = heat generated by the winding losses;
The non linear winding to oil thermal resistance Rth−hs−oil is as follows:
Rth−hs−oil = Rth−wdn + Rth−insul + Rth−oil ≈Rth−oil
(2.24)
The approximation of Rth−hs−oil to Rth−oil shown in Equation 2.24 above is possible to be
made due to the comparative negligible value of the winding (Rth−wdn) and the insulation
(Rth−insul) thermal resistances to the oil thermal resistance (Rth−oil) [17] [25].
This relation allows to make use of Equation 2.1 to deﬁne Rth−hs−oil, thus establishing a
completely analogous expression to 2.3 for the heat transfer coeﬃcient h in the winding-to-
oil system:
h = C1
∆θhs
µ
n
(2.25)
And also a corresponding expression to Equation 2.15 for the diﬀerential equation that
solves the TEE circuit for HST calculation shown in Figure 2.8:
qwdn = Cth−wdn
dθhs
dt
+ (θhs −θoil)
Rth−hs−oil
(2.26)
However, although this approach to HST following a conventional heat-transfer theory
for oil convection around vertical plates is proven to be valid in [17] and [16], it can be
improved. This is important as the approach shown in Equation 2.25 does not take into
account speciﬁc designs of the windings and their potential inﬂuence on the oil circulation,
nor diﬀerent cooling modes. By deﬁning a new non-linearity exponent n
′ for the HOT rise
over ambient, this is addressed. This exponent is empirically derived, and the method to
derive it can be consulted in [20].
17
==PAGE:30==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Constant
Cooling modes
with external cooling
without external cooling
OFAF/ONAF/ONAN
ONAN
n
0.5
0.25
n
′
0.1
0.25
Table 2.3. Values for the empirical constants n and n
′ for the diﬀerent cooling modes.
This new non-linearity exponent n
′ is deﬁned in [20], and it improves the models from the
industry standards set by IEEE [5] and IEC [26] in that it deﬁnes the rated hot spot rise
over ambient ∆θhs,rated with a non-linear method, rather than the linear approach posed
in them.
Analogously as for TOT (Equation 2.22), the winding losses for HST calculation are
aﬀected by temperature. This loss dependence enters the diﬀerential equation with the
term pwdn,pu(θhs), and is given as:
Pwdn,pu(θhs) = Pdc,pu

θhs + θk
θhs,rated + θk

+ Peddy,pu
θhs,rated + θk
θhs + θk

(2.27)
where
Pdc,pu = share of the DC (ohmic) losses in the windings losses in the p.u. system;
Peddy,pu = eddy current losses in the windings losses in the p.u. system;
By substituting in Equation 2.26, following a similar procedure as the one described for
TOT, the diﬀerential equation for HST calculation used in the construction of the models
for this Project is found. It is:
dθhs
dt
=

K2Pwdn,pu(θhs)

µn
pu∆θhs,rated −(θhs−θoil)1+n
′
∆θn′
hs,rated
µnpuτwdg,rated
(2.28)
2.2.3
Model Parameters.
Along the previous sections of this chapter, an analysis of three-legged power transformers
was carried out, both from a structural and from a thermal-electrical point of view. Also, a
model to calculate both TOT and HST was mathematically described. Along this section,
a report of how this knowledge was put together to create a functional model in MATLAB
Simulink, will be presented.
First of all, in order to solve the diﬀerential equations for TOT (2.23) and HST (2.28),
the elements required for its calculation are organized and classiﬁed as either constants or
variables. This classiﬁcation is critical, as is deﬁnes the parameters required by the TEE
model to calculate temperatures. This is shown in Table 2.2.3 below.
18
==PAGE:31==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Constants
Variables
Independent
variable
From
Heat Run Test
From SC & OC
Preliminary Tests
From
Datasheet
Inputs
Outputs
TOT
n,
∆θoil,rated,
τoil,rated
R, Pdc,
Pst, Peddy
mmp,
mcore,
mwdn,
moil
K, θamb,
µ
θoil
t
HST
n
′,
∆θhs,lv,rated,
∆θhs,hv,rated,
τwdn,hv,rated,
τwdn,lv,rated
Pdc,
Peddy,
K, θoil,
µ
θhs
Table 2.4. Diﬀerential equation elements for TOT and HST calculation classiﬁed in function of
their type.
Independent variable.
The ﬁrst thing to notice from Table 2.2.3 is that the independent variable of the diﬀerential
equations is time t, thus all the variables being a function of it. This is obvious since the
model has been deﬁned to provide a dynamic solution for the internals temperatures of
the transformer, and the best variable to deﬁne and measure change is time.
Constants.
These are the elements of the model whose value does not change at any time. They are
divided in three subcategories, depending on the method followed to obtain them. The
process of deﬁning these constants is critical, and it is known as Model Parameterization.
The forthcoming explanation serves as an introduction to the parameterization of the
model, with broader information in Chapters 3 and 4:
• From Heat Run Test: here are included those elements which require of a heat run
test to be obtained. The values of the non-linearity exponents n and n
′ are given in
[16] and [20] for the diﬀerent cooling modes, so they do not require to be computed
from heat run temperature measurements, as their value depend on the cooling mode.
The rated temperature rises and rated time constants, however, change for every
transformer. Thus, unless they are provided by the manufacturer, they require its
own heat run test for their values to be determined. The process to determine them
from the heat run temperature measurements will be described in Chapter 3, and
can be also found in [27].
• From SC & OC Tests: the losses of the transformer losses are as a general rule
included among the data provided by the manufacturer in the transformer data sheet.
However, as they play such an important role in the model -being responsible of
the heat injection to the system- , it is recommended to perform a series of simple
preliminary tests to measure the actual value of the losses. The reason to do so
is that the original value of the losses provided in the datasheet could have been
aﬀected by external factors and change since they were measure by the manufacturer.
The load losses are measured by performing a Short Circuit test; and the no-load
losses through an Open Circuit test.
19
==PAGE:32==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
• From Datasheet: the masses from the diﬀerent elements of the transformer can
not be obtained without dismantling the asset. Thus, the value provided by the
manufacturer of the transformer in the datasheet is used in the model for the
calculation of the equivalent capacitances (Equation 2.14). This can be considered a
reasonable assumption for all the three metal components whose mass is required
(tank, core and windings), as they are closed systems from a mass point of view.
Concerning the oil, however, some ﬂuctuations in the provided mass could have
happened during the transformer life -i.e oil mass loss during revisions- so the
transformer history is to be reviewed before relying in the provided weight.
Variables.
They are the time-changing elements in the equations, and are divided into inputs and
outputs. The model is organized following a calculation structure in cascade: starting from
an ambient temperature input, TOT is calculated. In turn, the calculated TOT is used as
an input for the calculation of HST. This process takes place in the same Matlab function;
thus being simultaneous in that one TOT-HST pair -coupled with the corresponding load
factor and viscosity- is calculated for each time interval/partition.
It is important to notice here that, in order to solve the diﬀerential equations, an iterative
process has been followed, thus being necessary to use the outputs of iteration n as inputs
to the solving function in iteration n + 1.
2.2.4
Architecture and Construction.
Up to this point, the TEE model has been deﬁned mathematically. Hence, a digital model
which solves its diﬀerential equations is ready to be built. As explained above, the software
used to do so, is MATLAB Simulink, given its suitability for the Project.
Figure 2.9. Simple block schematic of the Simulink TEE model architecture.
The actual
MATLAB/Simulink model can be found in Appendix A.
The general model which solve calculates TOT by solving Equation 2.23 and, in turn,
20
==PAGE:33==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
HST by solving Equation 2.26 is built. A series of its general layout and close-up views
can be consulted in the Appendix. Figure 2.9 above shows an schematic representation of
the model architecture, as it represents the wiring and signal routing between blocks with
diﬀerent purpose.
These blocks have been coloured depending on its function.
Yellow blocks represent
those conditions at which the transformer is operating, while blue blocks refer to the
mathematical bulk of the model. Finally, the green block is a representation of the number
of scopes used to display the temperature curves. These blocks are:
Model Inputs.
This block contains the time variation curves of the conditions at which the transformer is
operating. This is, K(t) and θamb(t).
K(t) is the Load Proﬁle (Load Factor K evolution with time), a function representing the
current-to-rated current ratio at which the transformer is operating (Equation 2.19). The
RMS value of the current is used for the ratio. The load proﬁle is the most critical of
the model inputs, since the highest impact in the winding insulation, and in turn in the
transformer life, happens when the transformer is overloaded (K above 1). This is obvious,
since the higher K is, the more heat is dissipated due to joule losses in the windings, thus
increasing the heat injected in both the Winding-Oil system and the Oil-Air system.
θamb(t) is the Ambient Temperature, and it is used both as a input to the TEE
Differential Equation block and to add it to the computed TOT rise over ambient in
order to in turn obtain TOT. As explained above, weather and air convection eﬀects in
the tank surface are disregarded in the model, neglecting the close atmosphere-to-ambient
thermal resistance shown in Figure 2.2. Thus, the temperature reading of the ambient
temperature can be taken from a thermometer in the proximity of the transformer, not
necessarily in the transformer tank or nacelle itself.
Initial Conditions.
Mathematically speaking, the solution of a ﬁrst order ordinary diﬀerential equation -as
the TEE model equations are- is known as the general solution. In order to particularize
the solution, a constant (representing the initial condition of the variable) is added to the
general solution. These initial conditions are, in the model, ∆θoil−air,init and ∆θhs−oil,init.
The impact of initial conditions on the calculated variables is only relevant during the
ﬁrst iterations, being the system capable to self regulate itself afterwards and ﬁnd reliable
solutions even in the extreme case of having unknown initial conditions. However, the
closer the initial conditions that are fed to the model are to the real ones present in the
transformer, the faster the model will start rendering reliable values for TOT and HST.
However, even though the impact of initial conditions is limited in time, unfortunately,
the transient state during which this impact is relevant is unknown. For that reason, to
carefully set initial conditions in a way they are as close as possible to reality has capital
importance in the reliability of the model.
TEE Diﬀerential Equation
21
==PAGE:34==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
This block contains a Matlab function named differential_rises which is in charge
to solve the instantaneous values of viscosity and the diﬀerential rises of temperatures in
the oil and in the LV and HV windings for each iteration (time step). These diﬀerential
temperature rises are in turn fed to an Integration block which, together with the
Initial Conditions, calculates the actual value of the three temperature rises.
As
pointed out before, after adding the corresponding temperature to the rises -i.e. θamb to the
oil temperature rise over ambient to obtain TOT; and TOT to the HV and LV windings
temperature rises over oil to compute HSTHV and HSTLV - the calculated temperatures
for a time t corresponding to iteration n are feedbacked as inputs to the function for
the iteration n + 1, corresponding to a time t + 1. Same applies for µ, which is directly
feedbacked into the function as an input for the next iteration. This internal use of the
model outputs as model inputs is characteristic of any iterative process, and is reﬂected in
Equations 2.23 and 2.26. As noted above, the closer to reality the Initial Conditions are,
the sooner the model will start yielding accurate results.
The function’s inputs signal, thus, is formed by 6 elements. The ﬁrst two elements are the
instantaneous ambient temperature θamb and load factor K, both coming from the Model
Inputs block. The rest are the updated values of the system outputs, as explained above.
In the ﬁrst iteration, these inputs are the values provided by the Initial Conditions
block. This treatment given by the function to the input signal can be observed in Figure
B.2.
As per the calculation process itself, the function does it as follows. First, the transformer
parameters have to be stated. These are listed in Table 2.2.3, and they provide a deﬁnition
of the transformer whose operation is being simulated, including losses, weights, cooling
mode and time constants of the windings. With that information, the function computes
Cth,oil,rated from Equation 2.14 and Rth,oil,rated from Equation 2.7, thus obtaining the rated
oil time constant τoil,rated with Equation 2.17. Using that and the losses dependence on
temperature for both the oil-air system (Equation 2.22) and the two winding-oil subsystems
-i.e. HV and LV- (Equation 2.27); together with the updated model inputs, the diﬀerential
oil temperature rise over ambient δθoil is computed from Equation 2.23. The diﬀerential
temperature rise in both HV δθhs,HV and LV δθhs,lV windings are also calculated, by the
use of Equation 2.26.
The complete code of this MATLAB function can be consulted in the Appendix A.
Output Display
Finally, the values estimated by the model are displayed in a scope. A very basic block, it
is included in the Thesis to give an idea of the format with which the results will be shown
in the subsequent sections. The curves displayed are the top oil temperature TOT; the
hot spot temperature of the low voltage and high voltage windings HSTLV and HSTHV ;
the load factor K; and the ambient temperature θamb.
It must be remarked here that the load factor K is multiplied by a gain X in order for it
to have the same magnitude order as the other values (temperatures) shown in the same
graphic. The dimension of this gain will change for diﬀerent transformers, to make for a
visually relevant display of results.
22
==PAGE:35==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
2.2.5
Model Results and Literature-Based Validation
It was mentioned at the beginning of the section that, once built, the TEE model was
going to be subjected to a ﬁrst validation based on cases found in reports and papers. By
using transformer data and temperature curves found in [16], [18], [17], [20], [21] and [28],
the TEE model has been tried for 4 diﬀerent power transformers, and the obtained results
compared with those found in the literature.
The structure used in the display of the results is similar for the 4 transformers: starting
with a parametrization and the display of the operational (model inputs) and initial
conditions, a ﬁgure with the curves from the Output Display block is presented. Finally,
a comparison between the calculated curves and those found in the literature -if found-
wraps up each transformer subsection.
80MVA transformer.
The ﬁrst transformer is a 80 MVA with a ONAN cooling mode. Though, natural, oil ﬂow
through the windings guided in a zigzag pattern by the oil guiding rings. Measurements
obtained with ﬁber-optic sensors for the HST readings in the LV and HV windings; and
with thermocouples for the rest of the readings -θamb and oil temperature. Unfortunately,
no TOT readings were available in the literature, as the authors decided to follow a Bottom
Oil approach in the paper [21].
The transformer parameters which need to be added as input data to the MATLAB
Function are:
Unit
Constant
TOT
HST
LV
HV
Losses
[W]
Pdc
145907
Peddy
17340
Pst
24796
-
Masses
[kg]
mmp
19833
mfe
51010
mwdn
11322
moil
34800
Rated Temperature
Rises
[℃]
∆θoil−air,rated
34.2
-
∆θhs−oil,rated
-
21
25.6
Rated Time
Constantes
[min]
τoil,rated
Equation 2.17
-
τwdn,rated
-
8
7
Non-linearity
Exponents
-
n
0.5
n
′
0.1
Table 2.5. 80 MVA transformer internal parameters for the TEE model
The initial temperature rises in the oil and windings are, assuming a initial ambient
temperature of 25 ◦C:
23
==PAGE:36==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Magnitude
Initial Value [◦C]
∆θoil−air
-3.7
∆θhs,LV −oil
0.2
∆θhs,HS−oil
0.2
Table 2.6. Initial conditions for the 80MVA transformer.
Figure 2.10. Temperature curve yielded by the TEE model for the 80 MVA ONAN transformer.
Both TOT and HV and LV winding HST are shown, together with ambient
temperature and a scaled-up K to provide a reference of the transformer operation.
Starting from a cold start, the transformer is energized to a 1.1 K for 11 hours and
45 minutes. During all that time θamb is assumed to be constant, even though that is
not realistic for such a long testing time. This assumption is made due to lack of more
information in the literature concerning test ambient conditions.
The load proﬁle of the transformer during the heat run test have been just maintaining
a constant overload during the whole test. For such long times, it was expected for the
temperatures to stabilize (it is considered stable if temperature does not change more
than 2.4% or 1 ◦C, whatever is higher, in a time period of three consecutive hours [28])
for the three calculated temperatures. Eﬀectively, by observing Figure 2.10 above it
can be appreciated how TOT and HST for both HV and LV windings rise to a value
slightly higher to its rated temperature rise -coherent with K = 1.1>1- , maintaining that
temperature for the rest of the operation, as the model inputs K and θamb remain stable.
The diﬀerences between curves is due to oil and windings having diﬀerent time constants
and rated temperature rises: diﬀerent time constants give diﬀerent rates of change, the
higher the time constant, the slower the change; while diﬀerent rated temperature rises set
the magnitude of the change, being it bigger the higher the rated temperature rise is. The
plotted curves in Figure 2.10 are consistent with this, as shown in the parameters table 2.5.
In the literature, only the heating curve of the Low Voltage winding Hot Spot is provided:
24
==PAGE:37==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.11. HST LV winding for the 80 MVA
transformer by the TEE model.
Figure 2.12. HST LV winding for the 80 MVA
transformer by the literature.The
ﬁgure is obtained from [21]
Results obtained by the TEE model (Figure 2.11) thoroughly follows the expected
temperature curve (Figure 2.12), both in shape (which implies a well deﬁned time
constant) and in magnitude (indicating a well deﬁned rated temperature rise). Despite
both τhs−lv,rated and θhs−lv,rated being provided, HST calculation relies con TOT, whose
time constant is not provided and has being estimated by the TEE model. This gives a
good ﬁrst impression of the accuracy of the model, still remaining further validation to
check its reliability and robustness.
250MVA transformer.
Next, a 250 MVA power transformer with an ONAF (natural ﬂow of oil inside the tank,
though oil convection directed with guiding rings; fans to cool the tank down in the outside)
cooling mode.
The parameters found in [21] which are included in the TEE model to deﬁne the transformer
are:
Unit
Constant
TOT
HST
LV
HV
Losses
[W]
Pdc
411780
Peddy
29469
Pst
43391
-
Masses
[kg]
mmp
44096
mfe
99389
mwdn
29181
moil
73887
Rated Temperature
Rises
[℃]
∆θoil−air,rated
38.3
-
∆θhs−oil,rated
-
20.3
12.5
Rated Time
Constantes
[min]
τoil,rated
Equation 2.17
-
τwdn,rated
-
6
7
Non-linearity
Exponents
-
n
0.5
n
′
0.1
Table 2.7. 250 MVA transformer internal parameters for the TEE model
25
==PAGE:38==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Oil and windings are at the same temperature initially.
Assuming a initial ambient
temperature of 25 ◦C, their initial temperature rises are:
Magnitude
Initial Value [◦C]
∆θoil−air
13.3
∆θhs,LV −oil
0
∆θhs,HS−oil
0
Table 2.8. Initial conditions for the 250MVA transformer.
Ar per the model inputs, θamb is assumed to remain constant during the whole test. This
assumption is made due to a lack of numerical data regarding ambient temperature in the
lab during the test, but is considered a good approximation (Figure 2.15). On the other
hand, K changes to 6 diﬀerent load levels during the whole 12 hours and 30 minutes (750
minutes) of testing time. These are:
Time [min]
0-187
187-365
365-503
503-710
710-735
735-753
K
1
0.6
1.5
0.3
2.1
0
Table 2.9. Load proﬁle for the 250MVA transformer.
Adding a gain of 80 to the load factor produce the following curves in the result display
block:
Figure 2.13. Temperature curve yielded by the TEE model for the 250 MVA OnAF transformer.
Both TOT and HV and LV winding HST are shown, together with ambient
temperature and a scaled-up K to provide a reference of the transformer operation.
26
==PAGE:39==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Given the shorter time range of the load proﬁle stepping compared with that of the 80
MVA transformer, the temperatures curves for the 250 MVA transformer do not have
time to stabilize before another load change is applied. Then, whenever one of these load
changes (Table 2.2.5) occur, temperature in the windings and oil is still rising, if the change
is a load decrease; or decreasing, if the load change is an increase. However, it can be
appreciated in Figure 2.13 that after a time, TOT and HST curves have the same shape.
The reason is that, despite all them three being still changing, the the rise of HST for
both LV and HV windings over TOT stabilized relatively early, given their smaller time
constants. Thus, the temperature diﬀerence between the three curves remain constant
after a time. After that given time, the change in HST curves is only due to changes in
TOT curve, which is still heating up or warming up, depending on the part of the load
proﬁle being looked at.
Two temperature curves for comparison were found [20] for the 250 MVA transformer: the
TOT curve and the HST curve for the 118 kV winding (LV).
In order to facilitate the comparison, the plots from the TEE model corresponding to those
two temperature curves have been edited to match the format of the expected temperature
curves, which are displayed below.
Figure 2.14. TOT for the 250 MVA transformer
by the TEE model.
Figure 2.15. TOT for the 250 MVA transformer
by the literature.The ﬁgure is
obtained from [21]
Figure 2.16. HST LV winding for the 250 MVA
transformer by the model.
Figure 2.17. HST LV winding for the 250 MVA
transformer by the literature. The
ﬁgure is obtained from [21]
From the limited position that any analysis based merely in visual comparison can provide,
27
==PAGE:40==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
the TEE model can be conﬁrmed as valid for the 250 MVA transformer, as no outstanding
deviations are observed between the yielded results (Figures 2.14 and 2.16) and the
expected ones (Figures 2.15 and 2.17). However, there is actually one segment at which the
TEE model overestimates hot spot temperature. That is for K = 2.1. The overshooting
behaviour of thermal models for sudden and steep load changes is well known, and the
load factor change from 0.3 to 2.1 at t=710 min in an extremely severe one, specially for
a 250MVA power transformer. In addition, these kind of load changes will rarely occur
on the actual operation of the transformer, where even such high load factors as 2.1 are
extremely rare, thus probably being programmed by the test conductors as a test for the
model robustness. In any case, the model overestimating HST for high load factors is not
a problem but a positive behaviour, since temperatures overestimation are preferable as
they entail a safer operation of the asset [3].
400MVA transformer
The third asset to be validated with literature-based data is a 400 MVA 120/410 kV ONAF
cooled transformer. The transformer deﬁning constants are:
Unit
Constant
TOT
HST
LV
HV
Losses
[W]
Pdc
637100
Peddy
59778
Pst
65772
-
Masses
[kg]
mmp
67252
mfe
161400
mwdn
53800
moil
91347
Rated Temperature
Rises
[℃]
∆θoil−air,rated
38
-
∆θhs−oil,rated
-
20.3
18.6
Rated Time
Constants
[min]
τoil,rated
Equation 2.17
-
τwdn,rated
-
5.3
8.2
Non-linearity
Exponents
-
n
0.5
n
′
0.1
Table 2.10. 400 MVA transformer internal parameters for the TEE model
Oil and windings initial temperature rises are, for an ambient temperature of 25 ◦C:
Magnitude
Initial Value [◦C]
∆θoil−air
5.9
∆θhs,LV −oil
3.5
∆θhs,HS−oil
0.7
Table 2.11. Initial conditions for the 400MVA transformer.
Equally as for the two previously evaluated transformer, the testing θamb for the 400 MVA
asset has been assumed to be stable at 25 ◦C. The load proﬁle, on the other hand, is
28
==PAGE:41==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
composed of three diﬀerent load factor steps spread along a 13 hours long heat run test.
These load steps are:
Time [min]
0-300
300-600
600-780
K
1
0.65
1.6
Table 2.12. Load proﬁle for the 400 MVA transformer.
After adding a gain of 85 to the Load Factor K signal for displaying purposes, the following
results are yielded by the TEE model:
Figure 2.18. Temperature curve yielded by the TEE model for the 400 MVA ONAF transformer.
Both TOT and HV and LV winding HST are shown, together with ambient
temperature and a scaled-up K to provide a reference of the transformer operation.
The heat run test for the 400 MVA transformer is started oﬀa cold start, which have a
repercussion on the ﬁrst segment of the temperature curves, as they do not completely
stabilize despite the long time at which the ﬁrst load step is maintained (5 hours). However,
once the transformer is under on-load conditions, with a smooth oil ﬂow creating an
eﬃcient temperature distribution inside the tank, temperature changes take place faster
and temperatures stabilize faster too. This can be appreciated in the 5 hours long cooling
and subsequent 3 hours long heating segments in Figure 2.18. For example, the heating
segment of the curves ranging from t 600-750 min, where a load change of almost nominal
K -0.95, from 0.65 to 1.6- produces a fast heating in the oil and windings, stabilizing after
merely 2 hours.
In [17] the curves for the HV winding HST and for TOT, with loading and ambient
29
==PAGE:42==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
conditions as those loaded in the TEE model, are available for comparison with the TEE
model results. However, there is a limitation in the comparison, which is that the curves
from the article reﬂect the results from a thermal model which does not take into account
the losses dependence on temperature nor design diﬀerence between transformers; thus
lacking the terms P1,pu(θe) in Equation 2.23 and n
′ in Equation 2.26, respectively.
Figure 2.19. TOT for the 400 MVA transformer
by the TEE model
Figure 2.20. TOT for the 400 MVA transformer
by the literature.
The ﬁgure is
obtained from [21]
Figure 2.21. HST HV winding for the 400 MVA
transformer by the model
Figure 2.22. HV winding HST for the 400 MVA
transformer by the literature. The
ﬁgure is obtained from [21]
The eﬀect that the noninclusion of the terms P1,pu(θe) in the TOT calculation (Equation
2.23) can be observed in the side-by-side comparison of Figures 2.19 and 2.20. By not taking
into account the impact of the temperature in the load losses, the maximum temperature
reached is aﬀected, as the higher the temperature is, the higher the losses due to joule-lenz
eﬀect will be, in spite of a lower in the losses due to eddy currents in the material (Equation
2.22).
On the other hand, the impact on the HST curve of the omission of the winding non-
linearity exponent n
′ in Equation 2.26, which is replaced by the oil non-linearity exponent
n (with a value equal to 0.5, instead of 0.1, for an ONAF cooling mode) can be observed
in Figures 2.21 and 2.22. HST curve deviates more than TOT one from the expected curve
because of how the TEE model is constructed (Figure 2.9): being HST an addition of
ambient temperature plus the top oil rise over ambient PLUS the hot spot rise over oil,
HST curve inherits any mismatch from TOT curve (due to the omission of the load losses
temperature dependence), and adds it on top of its own ﬂaws (due to the absence of n′).
Given its position in the diﬀerential equation, n′ deﬁne the shape of the thermal curve for
30
==PAGE:43==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
hot spot. Thus, shape discrepancy between the curve yielded by the TEE model and the
one found in [17] can be attributed to the diﬀerent non-linearity exponents used, being the
curve obtained by the Project’s thermal model the one closed to the real temperature in
the transformer windings.
This comparison between the temperatures curves yielded by the TEE model with the
results obtained from a simpler model proves useful as it asserts the improvement of the
model when P1,pu(θe) and n′ are included in it, thus working as another conﬁrmation of
the model validity in its current updated form.
605MVA transformer.
The last transformer found in the literature [21] is a 605 MVA transformer OFAF (both oil
and air ﬂow is forced, by pumps in the case of oil and fans for the air) cooled transformer.
In order to characterize the transformer in the TEE model, the following parameters are
included in the MATLAB function:
Unit
Constant
TOT
HST
LV
HV
Losses
[W]
Pdc
929800
Peddy
285000
Pst
71000
-
Masses
[kg]
mmp
50153
mfe
139448
mwdn
48900
moil
79746
Rated Temperature
Rises
[℃]
∆θoil−air,rated
33.4
-
∆θhs−oil,rated
-
23.5
31.9
Rated Time
Constantes
[min]
τoil,rated
Equation 2.17
-
τwdn,rated
-
10
5.5
Non-linearity
Exponents
-
n
0.5
n
′
0.1
Table 2.13. 605 MVA transformer internal parameters for the TEE model.
The initial temperature conditions at which the transformer is when ﬁrst energized are, for
an ambient air temperature of θamb = 25 ◦C:
Magnitude
Initial Value [◦C]
∆θoil−air
5.1
∆θhs,LV −oil
2.8
∆θhs,HS−oil
1.9
Table 2.14. Initial conditions for the 250MVA transformer.
Equally as for the rest of the tested transformers, the air temperature is considered to be
constant during the whole test. K follows a proﬁle of three diﬀerent load levels followed
by a long cooling at no load, as follows:
31
==PAGE:44==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Time [min]
0-300
300-600
600-650
650-1250
K
1
0.65
1.3
0
Table 2.15. Load proﬁle for the 605 MVA transformer.
Figure 2.23. Temperature curve yielded by the TEE model for the 605 MVA OFAF transformer.
Both TOT and HV and LV winding HST are shown, together with ambient
temperature and a scaled-up K to provide a reference of the transformer operation.
There are several remarks to be made about the results obtained for the 605MVA
transformer.
This transformer presents the higher discrepancy between temperature
curves from the TEE model and those obtained from the literature [21]. The changing
ambient temperature observable in Figure 2.25, and whose values are unknown is one of
the causes, but deﬁnitely not the most relevant one.
Also, the long cooling period at the end of the curves, during which the transformer is left
to cool with no applied load for 10 hours is not a behaviour which is described in the paper
from where the graphic shown in Figure 2.25 is obtained. So, as no information whatsoever
about the conditions in that period is contained in [21], the model simply stabilizes back
to initial conditions, instead of cooling down below initial temperature. In the possession
of more information, this behaviour would be possibly be explained and addressed.
32
==PAGE:45==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.24. HV winding HST for the 605 MVA
transformer by the TEE model
Figure 2.25. HV winding HST for the 605MVA
transformer by the literature. The
ﬁgure is obtained from [21]
In the scope of this Project, the most remarkable diﬀerence lies in the diﬀerent shapes of
the curves in Figures 2.24 and 2.25. In the sensitivity analysis carried out in the Project
(covering the next section) a higher time constant in the TEE model temperature curves was
found to be blamed for this behaviour. This, together with some other minor discrepancies
found in the comparison between obtained and expected temperature curves for the other
three transformers realized in this section, leads to the necessity of further validation of
the model with more reliable data. By doing so, it will be possible to identify the observed
discrepancies as being caused by a a inadequate parametrization of the transformers in the
model, or by a ﬂawed model itself.
2.3
Sensitivity Analysis
In order to spot the inﬂuence that the diﬀerent model parameters have in the temperatures
estimated by the TEE model, a sensitivity analysis is carried out. This helps to gain a
deeper understanding of the models itself; as well as to identify those parameters that are
critical for a reliable temperature estimation, and diﬀerentiate them from those whose
importance is secondary.
The 250 MVA transformer temperature curves present the most complete sample of any of
the transformers analyzed throughout the previous section, presenting an even distribution
of cooling and heating periods, with overloads and periods of K ≤1 as well. Thus, this is
the transformer chosen to characterize the TEE model for the sensitivity analysis.
The parameters chosen for the evaluation are: masses, losses, rated time constants and
rated temperature rises.
Component Masses.
In order to establish the degree of the impact that the magnitude of the masses of the
transformer elements have on the estimated temperatures, temperature is recalculated for
two cases: one where all parameters remain constant except masses, which are doubled;
and one where masses are halved, also keeping the other parameters at their normal value
(Table 2.7).
33
==PAGE:46==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.26. Eﬀect of the increase and decrease
of transformer masses in TOT
estimation
Figure 2.27. Absolute % of error in the esti-
mation of TOT for increased and
decreased transformer mass.
Figure 2.28. Eﬀect of the increase and decrease
of transformer masses in HST
estimation
Figure 2.29. Absolute % of error in the esti-
mation of HST for increased and
decreased transformer mass.
It is observed that for both TOT and HST calculation, an overestimation of the masses
(green curves in Figure 2.26 and 2.28) create an error by aﬀecting the shape of the curve,
which varies slower and thus causes and underestimation of temperature at high temperature
points.
This makes sense, as higher masses imply higher capacitances and thermal
resistances, thus the temperature changes being slower. This is reﬂected mathematically
in Equation 2.14, where the equivalent thermal capacitance of the equivalent transformer
RC circuit is deﬁned.
Also, it is observed that a change in the transformer masses has a heavier impact on
TOT calculation than in HST one, with a 6% less maximum error for the evaluated
case. Also, considering the smaller errors, an overestimation of the mass is preferred to an
underestimation. If other aspects are taken into consideration, as the model suitability for in-
ﬁeld temperature estimation, then the case is opposite, being preferred an underestimation
of the masses, as an overestimation of TOT and especially HST at high temperatures is
safer for the transformer operation.
In any case, as masses are generally stated in the transformer plate and/or datasheet, to
characterize them accurately in the TEE model should not be an issue.
Transformer Losses.
Equally as for the masses, the impact that losses have on the estimation of temperatures
by the model is analyzed by doubling and halving them, keeping the rest of the model
parameters constant at its original value, reﬂected in Table 2.7.
34
==PAGE:47==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.30. Eﬀect of the increase and decrease
of transformer losses in TOT
estimation.
Figure 2.31. Absolute % of error in the esti-
mation of TOT for increased and
decreased transformer losses.
Figure 2.32. Eﬀect of the increase and decrease
of transformer losses in HST esti-
mation..
Figure 2.33. Absolute % of error in the esti-
mation of HST for increased and
decreased transformer losses.
It surprises to observe how the variation of losses aﬀect the estimation, in the sense that the
aﬀect is inversely proportional to that of the masses. In fact, is Figures 2.31 and 2.33 are
compared with 2.27 and 2.29, it can be observed that they have basically the same shape,
but swapping positions of the curves. Thus, an overestimation in the characterization of
the losses will be reﬂected in the model yielding TOT and HST higher than the actual
internal temperatures.
Transformer losses required for the TEE model (copper losses, eddy currents losses and
stray losses) are more diﬃcult to obtain than transformer masses, as some assumptions
are to be done. Thus, in order to obtain smaller errors in the model, losses should be
underestimated; but, in order to be on the safe side of the transformer operation (HST
overestimated at high temperatures, and actually lower than the TEE model estimation),
then an overestimation of transformer losses is recommended.
Rated Time Constants.
Next up, the impact of a miscalculation by excess or defect in the model time constants
is evaluated. Due to how oil time constant is calculated (as a product of the equivalent
thermal resistance Rth by the equivalent thermal capacitance Cth in the oil-air system
equivalent circuit shown in Figure 2.7), together with how Cth itself is calculated (Equation
2.14), a ﬁxed change in the oil time constant has the same impact on TOT estimation as
that same change in the masses; or inversely as that same applied to transformer losses.
This is why Figure 2.34 and 2.26 look alike.
35
==PAGE:48==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.34. Eﬀect of the transformer increase
and decrease of rated time con-
stants in TOT estimation.
Figure 2.35. Absolute % of error in the esti-
mation of TOT for increased and
decreased rated time constants.
Figure 2.36. Eﬀect of the transformer increase
and decrease of rated time con-
stants in HST estimation.
Figure 2.37. Absolute % of error in the esti-
mation of HST for increased and
decreased rated time constants.
On the other hand, for the case of HST calculation, the pattern is the same, with a faster
changing (and hence an overestimation of HST until stabilization of temperature is reached)
curve for a τhs,rated higher than the actual one. Errors are, in any case, not particularly
high if the percentage of error is used as an indicator, as the change in the rated time
constant mainly aﬀect the shape of the curve more than the range of temperatures.
Rated Temperature Rises.
Applying the same evaluation criterion to assess the repercussion that rated temperature
rises have on the estimation of the temperature by the THEE model, a change in the
observed pattern is noticed.
Now, instead of being aﬀected mainly the shape of TOT and HST curves, is the temperature
range what experiences a substantial variation. In this manner, when rated temperature
rises are doubled, both TOT and HST curves double its size (green curves in Figures 2.38
and 2.40); and when they are halved, the curves develop at half the range of the original
ones instead (red curves).
36
==PAGE:49==
2. The Thermo Electric Model
Figure 2.38. Eﬀect of the transformer increase
and decrease of rated temperature
rises in TOT estimation.
Figure 2.39. Absolute % of error in the esti-
mation of TOT for increased and
decreased rated temperature rises.
Figure 2.40. Eﬀect of the increase and decrease
of transformer rated temperature
rises in HST estimation.
Figure 2.41. Absolute % of error in the esti-
mation of HST for increased and
decreased rated temperature rises.
This is rather obvious, as rated what temperature rises do is to establish the order of
magnitude of the curves or, in other words, set "checkpoints" through which temperature
curves have to pass. Thus, the higher they are, the higher will be the temperatures
estimated by the TEE model. They are then particularly critical parameters in the TEE
model, and need to be established very carefully if a reliable and accurate temperature
estimation is wanted for both TOT and HST.
37
==PAGE:50==
3
TEE MODEL VALIDATION IN HV LAB
In this chapter, a record of the activities carried out in the HV Lab of DTU and aimed
towards the validation of the TEE model presented in the preceding Chapter is provided.
This work is performed since it is necessary to try out the model with ﬁrst-hand experimental
data, which by nature is more reliable than the obtained from a third-party, since all the
conditions are controlled (see, for example, Figure 2.23 for divergence between expected
and obtained results obtained in the 605 MVA transformer, in section 2.2.5, which arose
doubts about the time constants provided in [21]).
Starting with an introduction to the tested asset and the testing facilities, the chapter is
then divided in two thematic blocks: parametrization of the testing transformer, comprising
sections 3.2 and part of 3.3; and temperature measurements and comparison with TEE
model temperature estimations, which covers most of section 3.3.
3.1
The testing facility and asset.
3.1.1
The testing facility
The whole of the experimental work carried out for this Project has been conducted within
the facilities of the High Voltage Lab. This lab is located in Lyngby Campus of DTU,
building 329A, as part of the greater PowerLabDK facilities.
The lab oﬀers a platform which counts with equipment and setups able to deliver
high voltage and high current conditions, enabling experimental investigation on power
components. The voltage and current levels the HV Lab can provide (by the months of
January-March 2019, when its facilities were used for this MSc. Project) are available on
the Lab web site (http://www.powerlab.dk/facilities/highvoltagelab/technical-speciﬁcations),
and are:
Type
Deliverable
AC
2 x 400kV (45-60Hz)
DC
Up to 300kV (+/−)
Impulse Voltage
Up to 1200kV (+/−), pulse shape i.e. 1.2/50 s, 250/2500 s
Impulse Current
Up to 100kA (+/−), pulse shape i.e. 8/20 s
Table 3.1. List of High Voltage Lab facilities.
Apart from the deliverable voltages and current ranges listed in Table 3.1 above, the lab
also counts with a series of other facilities for speciﬁc tests such as:
• EMC shielded room.
38
==PAGE:51==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
• Material lab for sample preparation.
• Dielectric analysis.
• Tan measurements.
• Partial discharges measurements.
• Transient measurements.
• Space charge formation in cables and dielectrics.
• Aging tests, tracking resistance.
• Insulation withstand voltage.
Relevant for this Project have been the AC and DC voltage sources, as well as the available
measurement equipment and material for set-up preparation. In the bigger PhD. research
this MSc. Project is included, aging tests in insulation and diﬀerent equipment for higher
power than the used for this Project is likely to be used.
The physical space in HV Lab is divided in diﬀerent working areas, depending on the
activities done and the voltage level involved. For activities dealing with hazardous voltage
levels, safety measured in the Lab dictate that they should be carried out inside special
working spaces named "cages" from now on in this report. This cages are spacious areas
isolated from the rest of the lab by a cage, hence its name. The cage incorporates a door
which, apart from granting access to the enclosed area, also acts as a switch for the power
supply from the LabCell: when the door is opened, and entry to the cage is possible, power
is cut. In addition to this, a grounding rod is placed next to the door. This is a long pole
with a copper hook at its further end, connected to ground, and that it used to ground
all energized assets after opening the cage, in order to send to ground all remnant power
stored in the capacitance of the devices.
3.1.2
The tested transformer
To perform the necessary tests aimed to retrieve a ﬁrst hand experimental series of
temperature measurements to try the TEE models, a transformer owned by DTU Elektro
has been used. This is obviously a three legged core oil immersed transformer, as that is
the transformer type the TEE models are built for.
The chosen transformer has been an old unit manufactured by the now extincted Thrige
Electric (renamed as T-T Electric) in Odense, Denmark. The transformer has a rated
power of 100 KVA, thus being most likely used as a distribution transformer during its
(hypothetical) useful life outside the HV Lab. It has a Dy5 connection, with the primary
side windings connected in a Delta connection and the secondary windings in Wye (or
Star) connection and being its corresponding phases currents and voltages 150◦apart. As
it is generally the case in transformer of such relatively low rating, it has a ONAN cooling
mode, relying on the natural convection of oil and air and in the tank radiators for the
asset’s cooling.
39
==PAGE:52==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
Figure 3.1. Plate of the 100 KVA oil-immersed transformer tested in the HV lab
For a clearer sight, the nominal values of each winding shown in Figure 3.1 above are:
MAGNITUDE
VALUE
HV
LV
Nominal Voltage [V]
10000
400
Nominal Current [A]
5.77
144.5
Table 3.2. Primary and secondary voltage and current nominal values for the tested transformer.
Before starting with the experimental work -the testing itself-, following the procedure
established for any project undertaken in the HV Lab, careful planning of the projected
work is to be done. This include meeting with the responsible and authorized parties, in
order to get access granted to the facilities.
Finally, the last step before moving into lab work is the formulation of a Work Site Permit
(WSP), a document containing information about the test, including its purpose, equipment,
safety regulations and an overview of the person/persons responsible for the set up. Once
this document has been approved and signed by the authorized person responsible for the
laboratory, an administrative coordinator and the authorized expert, it has to be placed in
a visible place close to where the actual set up is going to be located.
The WSP for this Project, ﬁlled, signed and approved, can be found in the Appendix.
3.2
Transformer parametrization
As explained in Chapter 2, a transformer is characterized in the TEE model with a
series of constants. The process to establish these transformer constants is known as
parametrization, and that is the process this section deals with.
40
==PAGE:53==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
3.2.1
Masses
In Table 2.2.3, TEE model constants are divided in three categories based on how are they
obtained. In this manner, the masses of the diﬀerent thermally-relevant elements of the
transformer (tank, core, windings and oil) are obtained directly from the datasheet. For
the project, a physical copy of the transformer datasheet was not available, thus being
used the plate values (Figure 3.1) instead. The limitation is that the core and windings
are presented as a joint weight (i.e. kærne&vikl in the plate).
Given that the TEE requires of separate mass values for winding and core and weighting
core and windings separately in the lab is not a feasible option; to overcome this obstacle
a series of assumptions are made. First, a linear regression using the weights available in
the literature [17] [21] -which were used to parametrize the model in Chapter 2- is done. A
4.2:1 core to winding mass ratio is found. Next up, as the sample used for the regression
is too small to consider the result reliable, a research within the catalogues of diﬀerent
transformer manufacturers is conducted, which lead to various results in the same order
to those yielded by the regression. Thus, a 4:1 ratio has been assumed, leading to the
following masses to characterize the 100KVA transformer in the TEE model:
Element
Tank
Oil (olie)
Core (kærne)
Windings (vikling)
Weight
70
185
340
85
Table 3.3. Masses of the elements of the 100 KVA tested transformer.
3.2.2
Losses
The second of the categories for the model constants listed in Table 2.2.3 is composed by
the losses of the transformer, which are obtained from Short-Circuit and Open-Circuit
tests conducted prior to the Heat Run test from which the temperature measurements will
be obtained. In addition to this two test, the transformer has been subjected to a Winding
Resistance Measurement test, to conﬁrm that the advanced age and long operational life
have not had a negative repercussion on the asset’s validity.
Winding Resistance Measurement Test.
Although not having a direct impact on the investigation of the transformer losses, this
preliminary test is performed in order to conﬁrm whether or not the transformer can still
be considered as a symmetrical load, or on the contrary its life service time has caused
defects on the materials leading to an asymmetrical load. The ultimate fault would be
if one of the windings had experienced a breakdown. The goal of the test is to isolate
and measure the winding resistance for a speciﬁc phase at a time. To do so, the following
set-up is used:
41
==PAGE:54==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
Figure 3.2. Simple diagram of the set up to measure the winding resistance.
As can be appreciated in Figure 3.4 above, the resistance of the windings is identiﬁed by
the use of Ohm’s law. By applying a DC voltage (M3), measured by a voltmeter (M2)
connected in parallel, a current measured with a series ammeter (M1) is fed to the generic
load (R1) connected between 1 and 2. Those points 1 and 2 represent two of the terminals
in each of the transformer sides, being the generic load R1 a representation of the resistance
between them.
Figure 3.3. Picture of the rack used for the winding resistance test.
42
==PAGE:55==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
Figure 3.4. Picture of the DC supply, Ammeter and Voltmeter .
In order to guarantee having reliable resistance values, three diﬀerent measurements for
three diﬀerent load levels are taken for each terminal. To avoid magnetization eﬀects,
these measurements are taken after applied current becomes stationary, and so core is
saturated. The value of R1 for each terminal is then the average value in Ohms of the
three measurements.
The transformer LV side is star (Wye) connected, thus being the connection points 1 and
2 from Figure 3.4 each of the terminals u, v, w and the neutral point n, respectively. By
doing so, the measured resistance R1 is directly the winding resistance of each phase.
Obtained results are displayed in Table 3.4 below, and show a quite symmetrical 3-Phase
load, with the expected small diﬀerences withing the tolerable margins.
LV (wye)
u
v
w
I [mA]
V [mV]
R [Ω]
I [mA]
V [mV]
R [Ω]
I [mA]
V [mV]
R [Ω]
99.966
8.295
0.0829
99.9658
8.197
0.0819
99.97
8.099
0.0810
199.917
16.575
0.0829
199.914
16.337
0.0817
199.927
16.231
0.0811
399.9
33.156
0.0829
399.9
32.657
0.0817
399.9
32.498
0.0812
Table 3.4. Low Voltage winding resistances.
Phase resistance in LV windings are:
Ru = 0.0829 Ω
Rv = 0.0818 Ω
Rw = 0.0811 Ω
Concerning the HV side, windings are Delta connected, thus non existing a neutral terminal.
Therefore, connection points 1 and 2 in diagram 3.4 are the terminals themselves, in couples
U −V, V −W, W −U. This causes the measured resistance R1 not to be the winding
resistance of each of the three phases, but a compound resistance composed of the resistance
of a phase connected in parallel with the resistance of the other two phases in series.
43
==PAGE:56==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
Figure 3.5. Measured R1 between terminals in Delta connection, where R1, R2 and R3 are the
resistances for phases U, V and W.
Where measured phase-to-phase resistances are expressed as:
RU−V = RU(RV + RW )
RU + RV + RW
RV −W = RV (RU + RW )
RU + RV + RW
RW−U = RW (RV + RU)
RU + RV + RW
(3.1)
Therefore, equally as for the LV side, three measurements for each phase-to-phase resistance
is taken, in order to obtain accurate and reliable results. Then, RU, RV and RW are
mathematically derived using the set of equations 3.1.
HV (Delta)
U-V
V-W
W-U
I [mA]
V [V]
R [Ω]
I [mA]
V [V]
R [Ω]
I [mA]
V [V]
R [Ω]
249.911
4.419
17.683
249.908
4.426
17.71
249.825
4.45
17.814
399.931
7.072
17.682
399.916
7.082
17.71
399.94
7.122
17.808
499.82
8.838
17.682
499.813
8.852
17.71
499.825
8.9
17.809
Table 3.5. Resistances between HV terminals 100 KVA transformer.
Phase resistances in HV windings are:
RU = 26.55 Ω
RV = 26.55 Ω
RW = 26.55 Ω
These result are coherent with a 400/10000 kV STEP-UP transformer, as HV (secondary)
side has higher resistance than the LV (primary) side. Not only that, they also show that
the 100 KVA asset still present a balance load, thus being valid for testing.
Short Circuit Test.
The rated load losses of the transformer are clarify by performing a Short Circuit test.
This test consist on short-circuiting one of the two transformer windings and supplying the
other one with increasingly higher voltage until rated current of the supplied winding is
44
==PAGE:57==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
reached, when power measurements are taken. These measured power corresponds entirely
to copper losses in the two windings, which include ohmic losses as the mayor contributor
and losses due to eddy currents in the windings. Iron losses in the core are negligible in the
measured losses given that magnetizing current, and in turn ﬂux in the core, are negligible
due to the the low voltage applied in the SC test.
PLOAD = Pcu,dc + Pcu,eddy
(3.2)
In order to measure rated load losses -the ultimate goal of this test, as they are required
as parameters for the TEE model-, industry standards dictate it is indiﬀerent to energize
from the primary or the secondary side of the transformer. However, in practice it was
decided for this Project to supply the HV side, as by doing so the current level that has to
be reached is lower (25 times lower, equal to the turn ratio n), thus facilitating the process.
Figure 3.6. Single line diagram showing the set up used to perform the Short-Circuit test in the
100KVA transformer.
A schematic of the set-up used for the Sc test is shown in Figure 3.6 above. It makes use
of the series ammeter (M2)-parallel voltmeter (M1) set-up to control current and voltage
being supplied to the transformer (T1). It is evident, however, than the set-up has to be
changed from that used for measuring the winding resistance, as now the transformer is
supplied with AC voltage (M4). Both M1 and M2 are tuned to measure average RMS
value. If the system were supplied with DC instead, no Eddy currents would appear in
the primary nor secondary conductors, and the recorded losses would not be the real
transformer load losses, but only the ohmic component of them. Finally, power is measured
by a wattmeter (M3), which is composed of a series inductor (L3) and a shunt resistor
(R1).
45
==PAGE:58==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
Figure 3.7. Spitzenberger&Spies PAS7500 4-Quadrant Ampliﬁer.
In the Lab, the supply comes directly from the 400/230 V busbar of the Labcell, and is
injected to a Spitzenberger&Spies PAS7500 4-Quadrant Ampliﬁer. This device can control
each of the phases independently, or synchronize them to have a symmetrical voltage
supply.
From there, current is directed through a Keysight PA2204A IntegraVision Power Analyzer,
which counts with 4 channels and the capacity to measure power, current and voltage.
Therefore, M1, M2 and M3 from the diagram in Figure 3.6 are all integrated into a single
device for this test.
Figure 3.8. Front view of the Keysight PA2204A
Integra
Vision
Power
Analyzer
screen.
Figure 3.9. Wiring and connections of the three
phases to the Power Analyzer.
The voltage and current injected to the HV side of the transformer can be visualized both
in a numerical and wave shape format in the power analyzer screen (Figure 3.8). In Figure
3.9 a detail of how the 630 KVA transformer is connected is shown. This asset has the
46
==PAGE:59==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
same connection Dy as the 100 KVA one, so the connection to the terminals for the test
is exactly the same. In addition, the pictures look clearer and more information can be
obtained from them than from the 100 KVA ones, which are included in Appendix B.
As can be appreciated, there are three channels in use, each one corresponding to one of
the phases. For each channel, the input current coming from the ampliﬁer is injected in
the lowermost input port, which is used as input for current measurements in the power
analyzer. Subsequently, the current is directed to the neutral (-) point of the voltage
inputs, which are of course interconnected for the three phases, working as one electrical
point and making the voltage measurement to be parallel connected. Finally, the current
is outputted from the device through the (+) ports of the voltage ports, and directed to
the HV terminals of the transformer. From this point on, the set-up takes place inside the
safety cage in the Lab.
Figure 3.10. Connection to the HV terminals
side during the SC test.
Figure 3.11. Short circuit in the LV side during
the test.
The cables coming from the power analyzer are connected to the transformer HV terminals,
each to its corresponding phase (Figure 3.10). As the transformer has a Dy connection,
there is no neutral in the HV side. The LV terminals, on the other hand, are connected
together with a piece of cable as shown in Figure 3.11. The neutral terminal is included in
the short circuit in order to ground it, thus evening any potential load unbalance between
phases.
Phase
Current [A]
Voltage [V]
Power [W]
cosΦ
1
5.74
250.5
564.8
0.393
2
5.77
250.5
579.2
0.4
3
5.77
250.5
567.1
0.39
Table 3.6. Short Circuit Test measurements for each of the three phases.
Table 3.6 above shows that rated current I1n = 5.77A was reached for the three phases at
a voltage V1 = 250.5V , or 2.5%V1n. At that moment, the active power readings from the
power analyzer were recorded (fast enough to avoid temperature changes in the windings,
which as explained above aﬀect the losses). The average value of the three phase losses
47
==PAGE:60==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
was taken as the 1-phase value of load losses. The 3-phase load losses are taken as input
for the TEE model, as:
PLOAD = 1711.2W
Open Circuit Test.
The other kind of losses present in the transformer are No-Load losses. These losses occur
in the transformer core, and are voltage dependant. They are present in the transformer
whenever it is energized, even is the secondary circuit is kept open. Thus, to characterize
them, an Open Circuit (OC) Test is performed.
PNO LOAD = Pcore,hysteresis + Pcore,eddy
(3.3)
No-Load losses are composed of hysteresis losses (frictional movement of the magnetic
domain in the core by magnetization-demagnetization cycles) and eddy current losses in
the core laminations. The ratio between them range from 50-50 to 80-20, being closer to
an even distribution the older the transformer is. Since, as said, the tested unit is quite
old, a 60-40 distribution between hysteresis (stray) and eddy losses has been assumed for
the measured No-Load losses.
The test set-up to measure these losses is represented in Figure 3.12 below, and involves
supplying one of the transformer sides with rated voltage (LV side is chosen for its lower
voltage requirements) and measure power when voltage shape is acceptable.
Figure 3.12. Single line diagram showing the set up used to perform an Open Circuit test in the
100KVA transformer.
AC voltage source M1, average RMS voltmeter M4, average RMS ammeter M3 and
wattmeter M2 are the same as for the SC test. However, since now the LV side is being
supplied, the current (magnetization current) is extremely low -i.e. in the order of ≈1% the
rated current- which causes the appearance of harmonics. These harmonics will cause the
RMS value of the waveform (measured by M4) to diﬀer from the eﬀective value (measured
by extra voltmeter M5). So, according to IEC 60076-1 [26], in order to obtain valid and
reliable measurements, power readings are taken only when the diﬀerence between the
48
==PAGE:61==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
two voltmeters scope is less than 3 %, which is when the shape of the wave is considered
appropriate for measurements.
All the measurement equipment included in the set-up (M2, M3, M4 and M5) are integrated
in the Keysight PA2204A IntegraVision Power Analyzer (Figure 3.8) used previously already
for this Project. In the same manner, voltage level is escalated up to nominal value from
zero using the Spitzenberger&Spies PAS7500 4-Quadrant Ampliﬁer (Figure 3.7).
Figure 3.13. Open HV terminals side during the
OC test.
Figure 3.14. Connection to the LV side during
the OC test.
Figures 3.13 and 3.14 show the HV and LV side of the 630 KVA transformer during the
open circuit test, respectively. Same as for the short circuit, these are preferred over the
100 KVA pictures since the connections look clearer, being virtually the same (same cables
connected to analogous terminals). Pictures from the actual connection of the 100 KVA
transformer can be found in Appendix B.
Phase
Current [A]
Phase Voltage [V]
Power [W]
cosφ
1
0.773
229.65
46.57
0.262
2
0.516
229.66
44.46
0.375
3
0.739
229.6
100
0.589
Table 3.7. Open-Circuit Test measurements for each of the three phases.
Rated phase voltage (230V) is applied on the LV side and, when voltage waveform validity
criteria is fulﬁlled, power is recorded. Obtained results are shown in Table 3.7 above. Two
phases, 1 and 2 (u and v), show similar value for the losses, with a big diﬀerence in the
third phase. Given the lack of a reference value for the load losses due to the explain
unavailability of the transformer’s datasheet, the value for the No-Load losses taken as the
per-phase no load losses has been the average of the measure losses for each of the three
phases. Then, the 3-phase no load losses are taken as an input for the TEE model as:
PNO LOAD = 191W
49
==PAGE:62==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
3.3
Heat run test.
Up to this point, the 100KVA transformer has been parameterized for masses and losses
using diﬀerent methods. Masses were obtained from plate values, and necessary losses by
conducing a series of tests in the HV Lab facilities aimed to clarify load and no load losses.
Next up is to prepare and perform a heat run test in the transformer. This test consists on
load the transformer at diﬀerent load factors and record temperatures after the placement
of a number of temperature sensors. It has two main purposes:
• Measurement of rated temperature rising for top oil ∆θoil,rated and hot spot ∆θhs,rated
• Procurement of a set of temperature curves for top oil and hot spot, as well as any
other wanted temperature in the transformer. These curves will be used to validate
the TEE model by comparing them with the temperatures estimated by the model.
The whole of the work described in this section has been carried out in the HV Lab
facilities, in the same safe cage where losses estimation tests were realized.
3.3.1
Test Preparation: Set-Up and Equipment
As mentioned, the test set up is implemented in the same working space (safety cage) as
the previous tests. Also, all the preliminary work and preparatory tasks explained in this
section are done there.
The power supplying set-up reproduces that of the SC test: 3-phase power supplied by the
grid via the PowerCell is controlled by an ampliﬁer and directed through a power analyzer
before reaching the HV side of the transformer. The transformer has in turn its LV side
terminals short-circuited.
Figure 3.15. Single line diagram showing a schematic of the set up used in the lab to perform
the heat run test in the 100KVA transformer and take the relevant measurements.
The set up shown in Figure 3.15 above is composed by the same equipment as the used for
the SC test, plus some extra devices to measure temperatures. In particular, those are
the measurement device M5 represented as H in the diagram, which is a multi-channel
data logger whose function is to record and store the temperature data measured by the
thermal sensors (depicted as a discontinuous line in the diagram). A Hioki data-logger
50
==PAGE:63==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
model LR8400 has been used for that function, which has the capability of logging data at
10 ms speeds across 30 channel simultaneously. It is also protected against unexpected
power outages and can write recorded data to a USB memory in csv. format in real-time
or after, from the internal memory of the device. In addition, it also plots the curves on its
5.7" screen, which enables to keep a very visual tracking of the temperature evolution from
outside the cage while the test is running. Due to its direct connection with high-voltage
elements, the device has to be placed inside the safety cage, and is running autonomously
until the end of the test, when data is retrieved from it.
One important remark to make here is that the LV terminals of the 100 KVA transformer
are short-circuited with thicker cables than in the SC test. The reason is that higher
currents are sustained for far more extensive time ranges, which caused an overheating in
the cable the ﬁrst time the new set-up was tried. Thus, three clamp-ended cables are used
instead, as shown in Figures 3.16 and 3.17. In this last picture, the overheated cable used
in the SC test can be observed.
Figure 3.16. Short circuit in the LV terminals of
the transformer using three clamp-
ended cables. On the right, the
thermocouples can be observed.
Figure 3.17. Close
up
view
of
the
short-
circuited LV terminals where the
overheating of the cable used for
SC test can be observed.
Table 3.8 below shows a list of the equipment used during the heat run test. Pictures and
explanation about the devices themselves have been provided before along the Report.
Equipment
Function
Model
Voltage Source
Provide voltage for the test
LabCell 20
Ampliﬁer
Control voltage level
supplied to the transformer
Spitzenberger&Spies PAS7500
4-Quadrant Ampliﬁer.
Power Analyzer
Take and record Power, Voltage
and Current measurements.
Keysight PA2204A Integra
Vision
Thermal sensors
Measure temperature
Thermocouple type K
Multi-channel
Data Logger
Record temperature data from
thermal sensors.
Hioki Memory HiLogger
LR8400 Series.
Table 3.8. Equipment used for the Heat Run test of the 100KVA transformer.
51
==PAGE:64==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
The use of the set-up shown in 3.15 for the heat run test poses a series of challenges that
need to be addressed. First and most clear one is that no load losses will not appear with
the transformer under SC operation. No-Load losses -which need to be reﬂected in the
test if measurements taken during the test want to be used for validation of the TEE
model, as they are indeed taken into account by the model itself-, are simulated during
the test by increasing the supply to a higher current that the one corresponding to a given
K. By doing so, the heat produced by No-Load losses is artiﬁcially added to the system
by increasing the load losses. This solution is a compromise solution, but for validation
purposes it is an elegant and solid one. This is so because from the temperature rise point
of view, it does not matter where does the heat producing the increase comes from, as
long as the amount of heat injected to the system is accurate and consistent with reality.
This can be observed in Figure 2.5, where diﬀerent heat sources in the oil-air system are
simpliﬁed into a single one with their combined heat generation in Figure 2.6.
Figure 3.18. Curve to determine Inj, the percentage increase in load curve to be added to the load
current so that test losses equal total losses. Obtained from IEEE Std. Guide[27]
The percentage to be added to the injected current for K ≥1 can be calculated from the
curves represented in Figure 3.18 above, each one corresponding to a diﬀerent no-load to
load ratio 1/R. The ﬁgure is obtained from [27], the IEEE Standard Guide to perform
temperature rise tests on oil immersed transformers, which is the standard used as guideline
for the heat run test in this Project.
At loads equal or lower than rated, applied current is calculated as:
IT1 = IL1
s
PL1
PL1 −PNL
(3.4)
52
==PAGE:65==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
where
IT1 = Actual current to apply to the transformer to simulate its real operation at a given
load factor K including heat generated by No-Load losses;
IL1 = Current corresponding to a given load factor K;
PL1 = Load losses at applied current I = IL1;
PNL = No-Load losses in the transformer;
3.3.2
Placement of the Thermal Sensors.
Second and most troublesome challenge is the placement of the thermal sensors. These
need to be ﬁxed in a number of places both inside and outside the transformer tank, in a
way that recorded temperature curves can be used as a tool to validate the TEE model.
Table 3.9 below shows a list of the 8 thermal sensors used to take temperature measurements
during the heat run test, as well as a short description of where are they located.
Sensor
Number
Temperature
Measurement
Placement
1
HST Phase w
Gap between core and top of LV winding on
phase w. Further side to LV terminals
2
HST Phase w
Gap between core and top of LV winding on
phase w. Closer side to LV terminals
3
Core butt-joint
In contact with the upper corner of the iron
core on the end limb of phase w-W
4
HST Phase v
Gap between core and top of LV winding on
phase v
5
TOT
Uppermost part of the transformer
TOT measurement probe
6
TOT
Lowest part of the transformer
TOT measurement probe
7
Tank temperature
On top of the transformer tank,
in contact with the expansion tank
8
Ambient temperature
Attached to the safety cage, in
the proximity of the transformer
Table 3.9. List of thermal sensors, together with its location in the transformer and temperature
measured.
The list of thermal sensors shown in Table 3.9 above can be further divide in two depending
on whether the measuring end of the sensors is located inside or outside the tank of the
transformer.
Sensors outside the tank.
The placement of sensors 7 and 8 outside the transformer tank is not a complex task, as
the only requirement is to ensure the proper functioning of the thermocouples type K
before installing them, as well as guarantee they are properly ﬁxed.
53
==PAGE:66==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
Figure 3.19. Sensor 7 on top of the expansion
tank.
Figure 3.20. Sensors 8 ﬁxed to the safety cage
next to the transformer.
Sensor 7 is installed attached to the oil level scope on the side of the expansion tank (Figure
3.19), and sensor 8 ﬁxed with a bridle to the safety cage (Figure 3.20)at approximately 1.5
meters from the transformer.
Sensors inside the tank.
Thermocouples 1-6 measure internal temperatures of the transformer, thus needing to be
placed inside the tank. To do so, oil is drained and allocated in a metallic barrel and
the lid is unscrewed and lifted with the help of the HV Lab crane. After waiting for the
remaining oil to drain from the core and windings, these are placed besides the tank, in a
plastic-sealed wooden framed specially constructed for the Project and that guarantees
that no potential oil leakages spill the Lab work place.
Figure 3.21. Internal layout of the temperature sensors in the transformer tank, with every sensor
1-6 identiﬁed by numbers tags.
54
==PAGE:67==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
With the core and windings of the transformer exposed, only a simple preliminary step
needs to be taken before moving to the placement of the sensors. This is, the installation
of a duct to take the receiving end of the sensors out from the interior of the tank and
connect them to the Hioki once the lid is placed again. A plastic tube introduced through
the expansion tank of the transformer is used for this purpose. This plastic tube not
only provides a channel to the tank interior, but also protects the sensors from damage
during the installation. 6 thermocouples properly tagged are lead through the tube to the
transformer core and windings, where are ﬁxed in the spots listed in Table 3.9.
A series of pictures showing the process described above can be found in Appendix B.
Figure 3.21 shows a general view of the thermal sensors placement in the core and windings
of the transformer. It can also be appreciated the bottom end of the plastic tube used to
introduce the sensors through the expansion tank. Sensors in the interior of the tank can
be divided in three categories, depending on the temperature of which element are they
measuring the temperature.
A) Winding sensors:
Sensors 1,2 and 4 are set in spots where they measure temperatures in the windings. In
particular, sensors 1 and 2 (Figure 3.22) are placed in LV winding of phase w. They are
duplicated as a result of being phase w the easiest spot to access to LV windings in the
transformer. There are two gaps where the layers in the core increase its size (to adapt to
a higher ﬂux density in the central area of the core), where the thermocouple’s measuring
end have been ﬁxed. They are not expected to measure the transformer HST, as that is
expected to appear in the middle limb windings, where both ﬂux density is higher and oil
convection more diﬃcult, thus slowing the cooling process down.
Sensor 4 is placed so it measure temperature in the LV winding of phase v, in the middle
limb of the transformer (Figure 3.23). Its installation proved to be complicated, as there is
no easy access to the middle phase LV winding, as there is for one of the end limb phases
of the transformer. For that reason, despite being here where HST of the transformer is
expected to be register, it was only possible to place one sensor in this spot.
Figure 3.22. Sensors 1 and 2 on LV winding of
phase w.
Figure 3.23. Sensor 4 placement spot on LV
winding of phase v.
55
==PAGE:68==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
B) Core sensor:
Sensor 3 measure temperature from the core in the point where horizontal layers meet
vertical ones at butt-joint at the end limb where phase w is winded. This temperature has
no relevance from a TEE model validation point of view, as this only computes HST and
TOT, and yet it was considered to be an interesting point from where to take temperature
measurements.
Figure 3.24. Sensor 3 on the butt-joint of the core on the end limb close to phase w.
As explained in Chapter 1, the core is constructed using overlapped layers of cold rolled
grain oriented (CRGO) steel, choosing the orientation of the grain for it to follow the
magnetic ﬂux and thus have a higher magnetic performance (lower hysteresis losses).
However, the orientation of the grain sharply changes in the core corners, where core layers
with a 90◦diﬀerence in the predominant orientation of their grain meet. This produces
higher losses, and thus more heating. More extensive studies on the topic are carried out
in[29] and [30]. On the scope of this Project, the analysis of the recorded temperature from
sensor 3 will not be a thorough one, as it will suﬃce just to observe where its temperature
measurements place in relation with TOT and HST curves.
C) TOT sensors:
Sensors 5 and 6 measure TOT of the transformer. Attaching the sensors to the thermal
probe with which the transformer comes equipped to measure TOT (unfortunately proving
itself faulty during the subsequent heat run test) was considered to be, at the moment of
the placement, the most reliable place to take TOT measurements (Figure 3.25). Since
the probe is large (≈10cm) and it was unclear where TOT was exactly measured by the
double metallic helix of the transformer thermal probe, two sensors were installed: sensor 6
at the bottom of it and sensor 5 at its top (Figure 3.26). The two readings were expected
to diﬀer only marginally, and the highest of the pair of measurements would be taken for
comparison with TOT estimations made by the TEE model.
56
==PAGE:69==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
Figure 3.25. General view of the TOT probe in
the 100 KVA transformer.
Figure 3.26. Sensors 5 and 6 ﬁxed to the TOT
probe of the transformer.
It is important to make notice of the fact that one problem arose about the chosen location
for the sensors after the transformer was sealed back (thus not being feasible to change
the sensors). It occurs that, due to the proximity of sensors 5 and 6 with the metallic
thermal probe of the transformer, the oil temperature they measure is probably not TOT,
but slightly lower. This is because temperature is dissipated along the probe itself (as it
has a diﬀerent thermal conductivity than oil, and it goes far down into the oil, as can
be appreciated in Figure 3.25), as well as the convection of the oil not being the same
as in the rest of the transformer due to the interference of the probe with the convection
streams. This will be further analyzed later in the Results section.
After the placement of sensors 1-8 at the indicated positions, the core and windings are
placed back inside the tank with a sealing layer of silicone applied between lid and tank to
prevent leaking in both direction: oil from the interior of the transformer and humidity
from the atmosphere to the tank. Then, oil is pumped back into the tank (through the
top of the expansion tank) making use of a centrifugal water pump with oil-pumping
capabilities, which injects the oil from the storing barrel into the transformer through a
rubber tube. Once the oil has reached its previous level, which can be checked through the
oil level-indicator on the side of the expansion tank, the tube is retired and the transformer
is ready to be loaded.
A number of pictures registering this process are included in Appendix B, where the reader
57
==PAGE:70==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
is addressed if more visual information is wanted.
3.3.3
Test Execution, Transformer Parameters and Results.
Once all the temperature sensors are placed and the transformer tank is sealed back, the
next step is to establish all the necessary connections to replicate the test set-up represented
in Figure 3.15.
Using formula from Equation 3.4 to calculate currents to apply for a certain K, the load
proﬁle chosen for the test is:
Time
0-17’
17’-5h30’
5h30’-8h15’
8h15’-11h
11h-12h
K
0
0.95
0.7
≈1
0
Applied current
0 A
5.85 A
4.2 A
5.97 A
0 A
Table 3.10. Load proﬁle and applied currents for the 100KVA transformer Heat Run test.
The ﬁrst 17 minutes at K = 0 account for the time between the Hioki started recording
temperature measurements and the moment when power was started to be supplied from
the PowerCell. It includes the time taken to double check the whole set up before closing
the cage and the few minutes of slow power ramp-up before reaching the aimed K. The
transformer is not energized sharply due to any possible component damage taken during
the placement of the sensors, a task highly intrusive. A load step-up to K = 0.95 follows,
which is maintained until 5 hours 30 minutes into the test. During this time the transformer
is expected to heat until almost rated conditions, as the time range at which the load is held
is long enough for that. Next, load is brought back down to K = 0.7 and maintained at
that level for 2 hours 45 minutes. A cooling stage with the transformer operating on-load is
judged important for TEE model validation purposes, which is provided during this period.
Following up, current is increased to maximum load (K ≈1) for 2 hours 45 minutes, until
hour 11 of the test. This stage’s temperature readings, with some modiﬁcations explained
later, are used to obtain rated temperature rises and time constants for the transformer
characterization in the TEE model. The test is ﬁnalized with a 1 hour long stage without
current being supplied to the transformer (K = 0), to record eﬀects of sharp cooling due to
drastic load decrease in the transformer and how accurately the TEE model can estimate
them.
Regarding the conditions at which the test was performed, during the 12 hours of testing,
no continued presence in the HV Lab was required, and instead an approach based on
monitoring visits every hour was followed. A heater fan was in function in one of the
HV Lab corners, close enough to the cage to have an impact in the ambient temperature
measurements taken by sensor 8.
Finally and most importantly, observing the load
proﬁle shown in Table 3.3.3 it is immediately noticed that no load factor beyond 1 (rated
conditions) is reached during the test. This is due to the voltage limitation in the ampliﬁer,
which can only provide up to 6 Amps at 270 Volts for the 100KVA transformer’s load.
By Equation 3.4, this accounts for a K of approximately 0.985. Thus, rated conditions
are not actually reached in the test. Still, in order to obtain rated maximum temperature
58
==PAGE:71==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
rises ∆θoil−air,rated and ∆θwdg−oil,rated and rated time constants τoil,rated and τwdg,rated,
reasonable extrapolations are made from that point.
Time constants are measured from the temperature curves both in the cooling from rated
conditions and heating up to rated conditions. They are deﬁned as the time taken by the
variable (for the case oil or winding) for to reach 66.2 % of the ﬁnal temperature change
for a heating period; or as the time to change its temperature down to 36.8 % of its initial
temperature rise value. Oil and winding time constants calculated from both increase and
decrease segments of the temperature curves are coincident, and are contained in Table 4.3
below. This table also shows rated temperature rises for top oil, LV hot spot and HV hot
spot. These are deﬁned as temperature rises in the temperature curves at time t = 11h,
plus a small percentage to account for the slight discrepancy with rated conditions existing
at that point due to equipment limitation.
Unit
Constant
TOT
HST
LV
HV
Losses
[W]
Pdc
1500
Peddy
300
Pst
100
-
Masses
[kg]
mmp
70
mfe
340
mwdn
85
moil
185
Rated Temperature
Rises
[℃]
∆θoil−air,rated
51
-
∆θhs−oil,rated
-
12.5
8
Rated Time
Constants
[min]
τoil,rated
191.67
-
τwdn,rated
-
9.17
33.3
Non-linearity
Exponents
-
n
0.5
n
′
0.1
Table 3.11. Parameters used to characterize in the TEE model the 100 KVA transformer being
tested.
Sampling time at which temperature measurements were recorded by the Hioki data-logger
was 1 second, thus existing 43000 temperature points in the test. Raw temperature readings
are included in Appendix B. These include a lot of noise in ambient (sensor 8) and tank
(sensor 7) temperatures, and some in both TOT (sensors 5 and 6) curves. However, for
comparison purposes, recorded data was treated so noise was eliminated. This was done
by constructing the MATLAB script LABvalidation.m, which can be found in Appendix
C. It loads the .cvs ﬁle with the temperature readings from the Hioki and sorts out the
data by columns, the ﬁrst one being time and the others corresponding each of them to an
individual sensor. It also applies a Low Pass FIR ﬁlter to the signals, by computing its
moving average value for a time period that can be tuned in the script. That has been 60
seconds for TOT sensors 5 and 6; and 240 seconds for sensors 7 and 8. The time intervals
for the ﬁlters have been chosen so they are as small as possible without relevant ripple
noise appearing in the curve. Finally, signals are converted and deﬁned in the Workspace
as time series variables in order for them to be exportable to Simulink, and the TEE model
is run.
59
==PAGE:72==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
TOT Results and Comparison with TEE estimation
Temperature measurements recorded from sensors 5 and 6 is ﬁltered and plotted. It is
observed that it is not clearly deﬁned which sensor is recording TOT, as the position of
the curves change with time: at times temperature measured by sensor 5 (oil temperature
on the top of the TOT probe) is higher than the measurement obtained from sensor 6
(oil temperature at the bottom of the TOT probe). Thus, TOT is taken as the average
of the two measurements, and is represented with a red line. Additionally, the ﬁltered
measurement of ambient temperature Tamb is represented with a pink line. For visualization
purposes, the load proﬁle described in Table 3.3.3 is also included in the graph, in order to
provide an observable reference of why temperature changes occur. Obviously, as K is in
p.u., a convenient gain is added in order for the load proﬁle to have the same scale as the
rest of the represented magnitudes.
Figure 3.27. Mean measured TOT (red) vs TEE model TOT (blue) during the heat run test,
together with the load proﬁle (discontinuous black), ambient temperature (pink)
and absolute error (green).
First thing to notice from Figure 3.27 is that the top oil estimated temperature curve (blue
line) yielded by the TEE model has a similar shape to the measured one, but tends to
overestimate temperature by a few degrees. This seems to indicate a correct functioning of
the model and a good parametrization with maybe some potential improvements in the
rated temperature rise, in order for the observable discrepancy to be addressed. However,
as indicated in the previous section, there is an alternative explanation for this observable
diﬀerence. Due to the chosen location of Sensors 5 and 6 attached to the TOT probe of the
transformer (Figures 3.25 and 3.26), is is suspected that the measured oil temperature is
not actually TOT, but slightly lower. Thermal dissipation along the probe and interference
of the probe in the oil convention currents are considered the causes for this possible lower
temperature in the proximity of the probe.
Despite being measured temperature probably lower than actual TOT in the 100 KVA
60
==PAGE:73==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
transformer, thus increasing errors in the TEE estimation, these errors are in any case
assumable. 5.08 ◦C is the highest absolute error during the whole test, appearing 4 hours
28 minutes into the test. This maximum error means merely 7.15% of rated TOT, and a
8% of measured TOT at that instant. In fact, if the ﬁrst period of the test is obviated
(which for analysis of percentage errors is recommended, as the low value of temperature
during that period produces very high percentage errors for small absolute errors, thus
resulting misleading), 8% is the highest percentage that instantaneous error represents of
the measured value TOT. (Figure 3.28).
Figure 3.28. Errors in TOT estimation. The green line represents the absolute error in the
estimation. The percentage this absolute error mean over the total measured (blue
line) and estimated (red line) TOT is also represented. Maximum and average (red
intermittent line)) absolute error in the estimation are shown as well.
The absolute error over the test is also represented in Figure 3.28. Its calculation is rather
direct, (total accumulated error over time divided by the testing time), and it is included
in the function differential_rises : the absolute error value is subtracted and stored
in each iteration, adding its accumulated value to observe how is the evolution of the error
in the estimation.
The fairly low average error (2.5◦C, 3,52% of TOTrated) allow to aﬃrm that the TEE
model estimates TOT accurately for a stepped load proﬁle and a proper and thorough
transformer parametrization.
HST Results and Comparison with TEE Estimation
Temperature measurements obtained from sensor 4 are taken as HST readings from the
transformer. As anticipated in previous sections, this ﬁts the expected in that readings
from sensor 4, installed in the middle limb, are always higher that those from sensors 1
and 2, places in the end limb of phase w. However, the discrepancy between sensor 1 and 2
measurements was not something predicted before the test. Given that is the temperature
61
==PAGE:74==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
curve from sensor 1 the dissonant one, it can be presumed that the oddity is there, being
sensor 2 the actual HST of phase w. A number of reasons could be behind the failure in
sensor’s 1 measurements. A faulty thermocouple can be discarded, as all of them were
tried and validated before proceeding to the placement. It is then caused by either a
misplacement of the sensor of by a displacement of it during the transformer resealing.
The measuring end of the thermocouples were equipped with heat shrinkable caps which
gave them rigidity, and ﬁxed with bridles to the chosen spots. Thus, the reason for the
abnormal measurement by sensor 1 is likely to be a misplacement of the sensor itself at
the moment of the installation, and not a posterior error.
Figure 3.29. Schematic showing the temperature gradient in the oil-ﬁlled gap between core and
LV winding.
A simple schematic of how temperature is distributed in a cross section of the gap between
the core and the windings is shown in Figure 3.29 above. As temperature is a continuous
magnitude, and core is at a lower temperature than windings, then it is obvious that a
horizontal gradient of temperatures appear in the gap together with the vertical one caused
by convection. It is in this gap were sensors 1,2 and 4 are placed (Figures 3.22 and 3.23).
The width of the gap, lgap, is extremely low at the top of phase v winding, where sensor 4 is
placed. Thus, no problem arise with this particular sensor. However, as mentioned before,
sensors 1 and 2 are placed in a -seemingly- very advantageous position, using a change in
the cross section size of the core layers which create a rather wide gap to place them. This
enables the measuring end of thermocouple 1 to have wiggle room, which probably caused
it to be in contact with the core, or very close to it, instead of with the hot spot; thus
measuring a temperature close to θcore with resemblances to θoil curve shape (Figure 3.30).
62
==PAGE:75==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
Figure 3.30. Zoom in to sensors 1-6 measurements. The described resemblance of sensor 1 (blue)
curve to core temperature recorded by sensor 3 (pink) is observed here. Also,
presence of transformer HST in middle phase v LV winding temperature curve (red).
Apart from the described behaviour of the temperature curve measured by sensor 1, Figure
3.30 also serves to conﬁrm that winding temperature measured by sensor 4 in the middle
phase v is indeed the HST of the transformer. Thus, it is separated from the other curves
and plotted together with the TEE HST estimation in order to corroborate the validity of
the model.
Figure 3.31. Measured HST (red) vs TEE model HST (blue) showing load proﬁle, together with
the load proﬁle (discontinuous black), ambient temperature (pink) and absolute
error (green).
The HST estimation yielded by the model does in fact follow the measured temperature
curve to a high degree of accuracy during the whole 12 hours of testing and for all the 4
63
==PAGE:76==
3. TEE Model Validation in HV Lab
load steps.
A separate plotting of the errors of the estimation shows a maximum absolute error of
3.07 ◦C at time t = 4h 33min. This is, almost simultaneously as when maximum absolute
TOT error appeared. The cascade calculation the model is based upon might cause an
accumulation of errors, which might lead to the apparition of critically sensitive points. In
any case, this maximum absolute error is comparatively low, accounting only for 3.8% of
measured HST at the point, and 3.6% of rated HST.
Figure 3.32. Errors in HST estimation. The green line represents the absolute error in the
estimation. The percentage this absolute error mean over the total measured (blue
line) and estimated (red line) TOT is also represented. Maximum and average (red
intermittent line)) absolute error in the estimation are shown as well.
Figure 3.32 demonstrates what was previously roughly observed in Figure 3.31, that the
estimation of HST made by the TEE model is more accurate than the TOT estimation.
Speciﬁcally, the calculation proves to average a 50% less error, with a value of 1.292◦C for
the average error. This is true when the precision of the estimation is evaluated by looking
at the absolute error values. If percentage errors are considered, then the estimation of
HST conﬁrms itself as even more accurate than TOT, as the eﬀective range and scale of
temperatures is higher.
64
==PAGE:77==
4
PRACTICAL VALIDATION AND APPLICATION
ON ØRSTED’S WIND FARM TRANSFORMER
The present chapter deals with the validation of the TEE model in a dynamic load
operational scenario. Typically, transformers operating on-site do not operate under a
stepped load proﬁle (as the one used in the heat-run tests in the lab), but are subjected
to a less stable load proﬁle. This rapidly changing load proﬁle is even more marked in
transformers placed in windfarms, as both input power from the wind turbines and grid
power requirements change greatly with time. [8][31].
The Chapter starts with a description of the transformer and its operational conditions,
which covers the ﬁrst section of the chapter. Section 4.2 is dedicated to the parametrization
of the asset. Finally, section 4.3 presents a comparison between measurements and obtained
results.
4.1
The Transformer and its Operational Conditions
In order to try the dynamic performance of the TEE model for temperature calculation,
the TOT measurements taken from a 6.8 MVA transformer operating in a 6MW wind
turbine have been used for comparison with the estimated TOT.
The transformer is placed in the back side inside the nacelle of the wind turbine, and
acts as a LV-MV step-up transformer to change the voltage level from 690 V at output of
wind power to 34 kV at the inner grid before connecting to the oﬀshore substation, where
the voltage is subsequently stepped up to HV (at voltage level of the external grid) by a
MV-HV transformer and sent to the onshore substation via the export cable [32]. (Figures
4.2 and 4.1).
Plate values of the transformer are obtained from [33], an internal DONG Energy (now
Ørsted) report where the the performance of the transformer type for Westermost Rough
(WMR) WTG 6.0 was assessed through a series of tests and inspections to the asset.
Value
Unit
Rated Voltage HV
34
kV
Rated Power
6.8
MVA
Rated Voltage LV
690
V
Connection
Dy11
-
Cooling
OFAF
-
Table 4.1. WTG Ørsted transformer plate values.
65
==PAGE:78==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
The 6MW wind turbine is part of a larger wind farm operated by Ørsted in the UK,
Westermost Rough (WMR) Oﬀshore Wind Farm. Figure 4.1 below shows an schematic of
the Westermost Rough (WMR) Oﬀshore Wind Farm. It is located oﬀthe western coast of
England, 8 km from the Holderness coast, approximately 25 km north of Spurn Head at
the estuary of river Humber. Inaugurated in the year 2015, it comprised 35 6MW turbines
covering an area of 32 km2, for a total capacity of 210 MW. The WMR Project was the
ﬁrst commercial deployment of 6 MW turbines with a 154m rotor span, the biggest oﬀshore
wind turbines at the time.
Figure 4.1. Schematic of Westermost Rough Oﬀshore Wind Farm. Image obtained from Ørsted
[34]
That turbine type had been already been deployed two years before for testing at Gunﬂeet
Sands 3 Demonstration Project, also operated by Ørsted. The success of the Demonstration
(which is used to write [33]), with highly eﬃcient operation being proved through the
acquired data, made 6MW turbines to be subsequently deployed in numerous other wind
farms from the year 2015. These include Westermost Rough, with virtually the same wind
turbines as those from Gunﬂeet Sands 3, and from where most of the parameters for the
models are obtained.
66
==PAGE:79==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
Figure 4.2. Location of the wind turbine WMR01 within Westermost Rough Oﬀshore Wind Farm
highlighted by a red circle. Image obtained from 4cOﬀshore.
For this Project, it was possible to access to some of the very detailed data that is being
measured by Ørsted to monitor the operation of its turbines in WMR Oﬀshore Wind Farm.
In particular, the data ﬁle contains measurements obtained from the ﬁrst of the turbines
at the Wind Farm, WMR01. The location of the turbine in the wind park is shown in
Figure 4.2.
The set of measurements correspond to data retrieved during the normal operation of the
wind turbine from January 3th 2017 at 22:10 to December 31st 2017 at 23:50. One whole
year of measurements taken every 10 minutes, for a total of 52385 data points. Together
with TOT, for every point information about external conditions -i.e. ambient temperature
(Tamb), nacelle temperature (Tnac), wind speed- and load -i.e. 3-phase grid voltage and
current, active and reactive power- is provided.
4.2
Parametrization
In the the highly detailed and reliable set of measurements provided by Ørsted, all inputs
(Tamb and Load factor K) required for the TEE model are included. Also one of its outputs
(TOT) is. The fact that HST is not included is due to the diﬃculty (mentioned above)
of having temperature probes located in the hot spots during the normal operation of
the transformer; which is the main reason why TEE models are needed. However, this
lack of HST measurement do not prevent the data to be used as a tool to validate the
TEE model constructed in Chapter 1. The reason is that analogous calculation methods
are used for TOT and HST rises estimation (Equations 2.23 and 2.26), next using in a
cascade calculation by adding the immediately preceding temperature (from the ambient
temperature Tamb inwards) to obtain the absolute temperature value (Figure 2.9). Thus,
if TOT readings from the WMR WTG transformer are reliably estimated by the TEE
model, it can be assumed that HST would also be.
67
==PAGE:80==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
4.2.1
Estimation of WMR WTG Transformer Masses and Losses.
There is an issue to overcome before loading the TEE model with the transformer inputs.
it also is a critical one, and this is the scarcity of information about the asset itself. This
poses a challenge, as obviously the model will not yield solid outputs if the transformer
whose operation is being simulated is not properly characterized by its internal parameters
(Table 2.2.3).
Masses.
No information whatsoever regarding weights is provided in the mentioned WMR WTG
trafo report [33]. This applies both to total weight of the transformer and to weights of
its elements -windings and core, oil, tank. On top of that, an intensive research on the
WWW yielded noting but dead-ends. Thus, the situation was an absolute lack of data to
load the TEE model concerning masses in the transformer.
To overcome this, a number of assumptions are made. First, a series of extrapolations
and interpolations using diﬀerent regression methods have been made, and thereafter the
obtained results are compared with the scarce information found in the prior Internet
research, to spot suitable values. In order to construct a data set to use for the extrapolations
and interpolations, the only reliable data relative to power transformer element’s masses
comes from 3 sources: a)existing literature -i.e. [17][20][21][18]-; b) catalogues from industry
manufacturers -i.e.[35]-; and own data from the current Project obtained during the Lab
work explained in Chapter 3 of this same report.
If more information about the regressions is required, the reader is addressed to Appendix
C, where both data and ﬁgures explaining the process are included.
Losses.
Similarly as for the masses, not suﬃcient information regarding the transformer losses
can be found in [33]. However, for the losses case, there is not an absolute information
blackout, and some information can be retrieved to be used as the foundations for the
losses characterization.
In particular, sections 10.3 and 10.4 from [33] deal with the measurement of load and
no-load losses in the transformer, yet they fail in provide comprehensive results. In the
load losses case, it is stated that Pk = 3.3% were measured for an applied current equal to
50% In. Knowing that for the WMR WTG transformer In = 5690A, a data point with a
current measurement corresponding to 50% of that value can be looked up in the data ﬁle
provided by Ørsted. That is done, and the data point corresponding to the measurement
taken at 01:00 on January the 29th 2017 is:
Ir = 2845A ;
Vr = 395.5V ;
cosφ = 0.9996
Assuming a symmetrical distribution of load for the three phases, then the load losses data
provided in [33], together with the values found in the data set can be translated to:
I2Rsc = 0.033(V Icosφ)
(4.1)
68
==PAGE:81==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
From where Short Circuit resistance is clariﬁed. Knowing that the transformer has a Dy
connection, and assuming that the transformer has been supplied from the high voltage
side for the SC test, then
Rsc = Rwdg = 4.5 · 10−4Ω
(4.2)
Finally, knowing an estimation for the winding resistance, and assuming the copper Joule-
Lenz losses contribution to be to be way higher than Eddy current losses contribution to
load losses, the following rough estimation for the load losses at rated load is obtained:
PLOAD,RATED ≈3(I2
nRwdg) = 43708W
(4.3)
Now, that value is compared with those obtained following the same interpolation technique
as for the masses (see Appendix C) and with similar transformer’s data sheets [35], in
order to have a visual comparison between diﬀerent estimation methods.
Catalogue
Ørsted report
Regressions
Load Losses [W]
45000
43708
44009
No load losses [W]
6000
-
7096
Table 4.2. Comparison between diﬀerent methods to estimate transformer losses
4.2.2
TEE Model Validation with TOT.
Having estimated masses and losses, the rest of the parameters required to characterize the
transformer in the TEE model are derived from [33]. Thus, non-linearity exponents n and
n
′ are derived from Table 2.3, knowing that the trafo has a OFAF cooling mode. On the
other hand, rated temperature rises for oil ∆θoil−air,rated and windings ∆θhs−oil,rated are
found in section 11.3 of DONG’s report, where also rated time constants for the windings
τLV wdn,rated and τHV wdn,rated are stated in minutes.
Unit
Constant
TOT
HST
LV
HV
Losses
[W]
Pdc
43708
Peddy
4600
Pst
4600
-
Masses
[kg]
mmp
2846
mfe
6078
mwdn
1569
moil
2895
Rated Temperature
Rises
[℃]
∆θoil−air,rated
52.2
-
∆θhs−oil,rated
-
15.5
11.6
Rated Time
Constantes
[min]
τoil,rated
Equation 2.17
-
τwdn,rated
-
7.04
8.14
Non-linearity
Exponents
-
n
0.5
n
′
0.1
Table 4.3. Parameters used to characterize Ørsted WMR 6.8 MVA transformer in the TEE model.
69
==PAGE:82==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
4.3
Results
It has been explained that the set of measurements provided by Ørsted to help with the
TEE model validation correspond to data retrieved during the normal operation of the
wind turbine during the whole year 2017. During that period, measurements were taken
and recorded every 10 minutes. The data obtained from the measurements is arranged in
a 52385x18 matrix, where each of the 18 columns correspond to the measured values of a
particular magnitude for each of the 52385 measurement point.
To utilize that information, a Matlab script is constructed, with the objective of shaping
the data into a format which the TEE Matlab SIMULINK model can handle. This script,
named validation.m, can be found in Appendix C. It loads the 52385x18 matrix and,
using speciﬁc parts of it, translates the following variables into timeseries variables and
includes them in the Workspace: wind speed (Vwind), time (t), instantaneous grid voltage
(Vgrid) and current (Igrid), measured TOT, measured ambient (Tamb) and nacelle (Tnac)
temperature, and Load Factor (K).
These timeseries variables are fed to the TEE model, which in turns runs simultaneously,
making its own temperature estimations. These are made using as model inputs the
timeseries values of K and Tamb, to which TO rise over ambient calculated with the
internal parameters estimated in the previous section (4.2), are added. Figure 4.3 below
shows a comparison between measured TOT (red) and estimated TOT by the TEE model
(blue), for the measured load proﬁle (black) and ambient temperature (pink) at which the
WMR trafo operated.
Figure 4.3. 6.8 MVA WTG temperature results for the whole 2017 year period. The top graph
shows the load proﬁle during the whole year. The bottom chart shows a comparison
between measured TOT (red) and TOT estimated by the model (blue), as well as
the absolute error in the estimation (green) and the evolution of Tamb during the
year (pink).
Considerations on how wind speed and load factor are interconnected, despite observing a
clear correlation between their plotted curves, is out of the scope of this Project, which
focuses merely on how load factor aﬀects internal temperatures of the transformer, and
thus will not be analyzed here. To see more about the relationship between K and Vwind
70
==PAGE:83==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
the reader is addressed to Appendix C.
Due to the large extent of the data, for TEE validation purposes, the Matlab script is
subsequently written so data is selected from the bigger ﬁle for one week at a time. This
is done by selecting speciﬁc rows from the bigger data Matrix, where every 1294 rows
represent the measurement points of each of the year’s weeks. By narrowing down the
scope from one year to one week, obtained results can be analyzed more in detail, while
still being a long enough time range to be representative of the WMR WTG transformer
operating under dynamic load. 4 diﬀerent weeks are chosen for the comparison, evenly
spread around the year and with diﬀerent load proﬁles, to provide a representative sample
of the whole period.
The last action performed by the validation.m script is to deﬁne the initial conditions
for the TEE model on each of the time periods (4 weeks), and specify them as Workspace
variables.
Note that since the time between measurements is 10 minutes, the simulation needs to
be conﬁgured so the TEE model reﬂects this sampling time. This is done by turning all
time-dependant variables -i.e. oil and windings time constants, simulation time, sampling
time- from their former time range into the tenth minutes order.
Validation for Winter Week 04: 23 January - 30 January
First selected week is week 04, the last week of January. It can be observed in Figure 4.4
below that it present a highly unstable load proﬁle, with short segments where K remains
constant. A Figure showing the Load Factor K evolution with the Wind Speed can be
consulted in Appendix C.
Figure 4.4. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer TOT results for week 04. The top graph shows the load
proﬁle during the week. The bottom chart shows a comparison between measured
TOT (red) and TOT estimated by the model (blue), as well as the absolute error in
the estimation (green) and the evolution of Tamb during the week (pink).
It can immediately be observed that TOT estimated by the TEE model (blue line) closely
follows the measured TOT curve (red line), with bigger errors at sustained high load
71
==PAGE:84==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
factors (i.e. at t = 7600-8000min), a well known overshooting behaviour in the model
estimation for sudden load increases studied in [18], [21] and [36].
Figure 4.5. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer absolute error over time for week 04. Maximum error
and average error during the week are also represented.
The temperature deviation of the estimation from the measured one never surpasses a 10%,
and reaches a peak of 6.79 ◦C at t = 8000, after a sustained high load period. Despite this
punctually high value, the average error for the whole week remains low, at 2.44 ◦C.
Validation for Spring Week 12: 19 March - 26 March
Second selected week is week 12, at the end of March.
This week’s load proﬁle is
characterized for being divided in maximum-load plateaus separated by low-load periods.
By the end of the week, the pattern changes and the transformer serves under very low-load
factor conditions -i.e. K<0.2- (Figure 4.6).
Figure 4.6. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer TOT results for week 12. The top graph shows the load
proﬁle during the week. The bottom chart shows a comparison between measured
TOT (red) and TOT estimated by the model (blue), as well as the absolute error in
the estimation (green) and the evolution of Tamb during the week (pink).
Highest registered error in TOT estimation, equal to 8◦C, occurs at the end of the ﬁrst
of the mentioned high load ’plateaus’, due to the mentioned overshooting behaviour of
the TEE model. However, after that initial relatively overshooting, the model seems to
perform better for similar load factors -i.e. from t= 7800-8800min, where the absolute
72
==PAGE:85==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
error is several degrees lower than in the ﬁrst high load plateau, for a similar load and
duration. Perhaps this is caused by a higher Tamb during this ﬁrst plateau, which has an
immediate eﬀect on TOT value (Figure 2.9). In any case, the average absolute error of
estimated TOT remains at a feasible value of 2.73 ◦C for week 12.
Figure 4.7. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer absolute error over time for week 12. Maximum error
and average error during the week are also represented.
Validation for Summer Week 21: 22 May - 29 May
Third week chosen for the comparison is week 21, at the end of May. The selection of
this week in particular is done due to how steadily the measurements curves ﬁt each
other: starting with the high degree of correspondence between K and Vwind (the reader is
referred to Appendix C), and of course the coincidence between TOT and K. Although
this correlation between curves is obvious, it can be very clearly visually appreciated in
week 21.
Figure 4.8. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer TOT results for week 21. The top graph shows the load
proﬁle during the week. The bottom chart shows a comparison between measured
TOT (red) and TOT estimated by the model (blue), as well as the absolute error in
the estimation (green) and the evolution of Tamb during the week (pink).
Observed errors are in the line with those noted in foregoing weeks. Again, the maximum
value of the absolute error is recorded when the transformer operated at maximum load
factor, which is consistent with the previously observed behaviour of the TEE model.
73
==PAGE:86==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
Average error for week 21 is 2.59 ◦C, a reasonable value considering the temperature range
that the transformer operates (<5% TOTrated).
Figure 4.9. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer absolute error over time for week 21. Maximum error
and average error during the week are also represented.
Validation for Autumn Week 49: 04 December - 11 December
Finally, week 49 contains the point at which the highest error between measured and
estimated TOT is recorded. Therefore, it is included in this section for analysis. The point
in question occurs at simulation time t = 6390 min, which corresponds to 2017-12-09 at
13:50. At that moment, the transformer is demanded K = 0.8 after being out of operation
(K = 0) since 8:50. (Figure 4.10
Figure 4.10. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer TOT results for week 49. The top graph shows the load
proﬁle during the week. The bottom chart shows a comparison between measured
TOT (red) and TOT estimated by the model (blue), as well as the absolute error in
the estimation (green) and the evolution of Tamb during the week (pink).
The impact this sudden re-energizing of the transformer has in the TEE model is clear,
as the absolute error rises to 18.23◦C. Typically, TEE models based on Susa’s work
[17][20][21] struggle to provide accurate temperature estimations at low K. This, combined
with the overshooting behaviour mentioned before, which applies to sudden load changes
both as increases and decreases, provoke the big error. If this high value were sustained in
74
==PAGE:87==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
time, then the temperature estimation yielded by the model should be considered faulty
or at least unreliable. However, average error for week 49 is 3.31◦C, which, despite being
higher than in previously analyzed weeks, is an assumable error(6.3% TOTrated), thus
proving the critically high error recorded at t = 6390 min to be an odd point in TOT
estimation.
Figure 4.11. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer absolute error over time for week 49. Maximum error
and average error during the week are also represented.
Recap and Conclusions for the Validation.
Along this chapter, the TEE model has been loaded with the operational conditions
corresponding to a WTG transformer during the year 2017, shown in Figure 4.3. The
obtained results have been compared with real in-site measurements during that period.
The analysis was tackled from a weekly long approach, as that way discrepancies can be
closely looked at for a thorough evaluation of the validity of the model. A representative
sample of the year round operation was chosen, including rather average weeks -i.e. weeks
04 and 12- and weeks where an odd or particular behaviour of the estimation curve can be
observed -i.e. weeks 21 and 49-.
It was found that the estimated temperature proﬁle yielded by the model follows the
measurement uniformly for most of the operation, yet presenting occasional discrepancies
falling way far from the mean recorded error. This odd error points appear in segments
where load proﬁle is either very low or it experiences a sharp and very steep change. If
those two phenomena concatenate, very big errors appear. That is the case at time 13:50
2017-12-09, when the highest error occurs, accounting for 18.23◦C. In other words, 40%
of measured TOT. Such a big error is obviously non acceptable for a TOT estimation,
and would make for a poor operation of the transformer if apply for real-life temperature
estimations. Fortunately, only 7 punctual measurement points out of a total of 52385 yield
an error higher than 15 ◦C, as can be observed in Figure 4.12. This is about 1.33 ‰,
making them practically irrelevant; specially since, as mentioned, they appear in low K
conditions. Thus, as temperature is low, the estimation error does not compromise the
components integrity, .
75
==PAGE:88==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
Figure 4.12. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer absolute error (top graph) and accumulated absolute
error (bottom graph) over time for the whole year 2017 period. Maximum error
and average error during the year are also represented.
In addition to the high instantaneous absolute errors recorded at certain spots not being a
handicap for the validation of the TEE model, also the average error over the whole year
is low: 3.11◦C. This is merely a 5.96% of the rated TOT rise over ambient.
Results seem to point toward a functional TEE model capable to reliably estimate TOT
for a dynamic load proﬁle. As proved in Chapter 3, a reliable estimation of TOT means
in turn a reliable estimation of HST as well, as long as the parametrization process for
both systems is done using the same methodology. However, due to the limitations of this
validation process, the author recommends to be conservative about the results. These
limitations are as follows.
First and most important, despite the set of measurements being very exhaustive and
complete, the information regarding the internal parameters of the WMR WTG transformer
was insuﬃcient and in cases inadequate. This left no choice than to make a series of
assumptions for the parameter estimation (Section 4.2 and Appendix C), which inevitably
leads to a higher degree on uncertainty about the model results.
Second, the measurement data provided for the study also includes a certain degree of
uncertainty into the system. This is always the case for data provided by a third party,
as conditions at which the measurements were taken are unknown to the person making
use of the data. Thus, information about sensor placement, sensor type or any treatment
given to the data are unknown variables which increase the degree of how cautious one
have to be when looking at the otherwise very positive results.
4.4
Considerations for Improving the Transformer
Utilization Using HST Estimations
Up to this point, along this Chapter the model has been validated for dynamic load
conditions, by comparing its TOT estimation with actual TOT measurements from an
operational WTG transformer. Results show that errors in the estimation are suﬃciently
76
==PAGE:89==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
low to be considered tolerable, with an average error lower tan 6% rated TOT rise
over ambient, meaning around 4.5% for the International Standard Atmosphere (ISA)
temperature at sea level of θamb = 15 ◦C.
It was demonstrated in Chapter 3 that a validation for TOT implies in turn a validation
of HST for the TEE model developed in this Project. This is true, of course, only if the
transformer parametrization process is carried out in equal conditions both TOT and HST.
Being that the case for the WTG transformer studied in this Chapter, it can be assumed
that the estimation of HST yielded by the model diﬀers only marginally from the actual
HST in the transformer, and thus can be used to deliver a series of considerations about
the current utilization of the transformer.
It can be observed in Figure 4.3 that the WTG transformer is never operating over rated
conditions, as the higher load factor it reaches is K = 0.9, and thus the analysis will focus
on the changing ambient temperature, which has indeed an impact on HST value.
Two scenarios are considered from those used for the model validation using TOT
measurements: the winter and summer scenarios. These represent the two extremes
of the transformer operation from an ambient temperature point of view, thus constituting
a representative sample to provide recommendations on how the utilization of the asset
could be improved.
Winter Operation
Computing the HST of the LV winding and plotting it together with the TOT and
ambient temperature for week 04 yield the chart shown in Figure 4.13. On it, a maximum
temperature of 79◦C appears in the winding at week time t = 7900 min, corresponding to
11:40 of 2017-01-28 in absolute time, and corresponds to a point when the transformer has
been operating at almost rated conditions (K = 0.89) for a sustained time period. This
point of high load is coinciding with a relatively high ambient temperature (θamb = 7.2◦C),
which is why it has a higher HST than other high load periods during the week.
77
==PAGE:90==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
Figure 4.13. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer temperature results for week 04. The top graph shows
the load proﬁle during the week. The bottom chart shows the estimated curves for
HST (beige) and TOT (blue); and the evolution of Tamb during the week (pink).
As mentioned before (along Chapters 1 and 2, and reﬂected analytically in Equation
2.22), IEEE deﬁnes 110 ◦C as the rated temperature beyond which the transformer solid
insulation aging factor starts growing exponentially, sustaining damage and thus shortening
the life cycle of the transformer. Thus, 110 ◦C sets the upper temperature limit that HST
of a transformer does not have to surpass.
Observing Figure 4.13, one can immediately determine that there is still a huge room for
HST to increase before the insulation starts sustaining damage. In fact, this room is in
any case at least 30◦C, which is the diﬀerence between the highest estimated HST and the
maximum acceptable HST. This means that the transformer is being greatly underutilized,
as it can withstand temperatures almost 40% higher than the maximum temperatures
experienced in the period.
Maximum
estimated
temperature
Maximum
acceptable
temperature
Potential
improvement
[°C]
[°C]
[°C]
%
79
110
31
39
Table 4.4. Maximum estimated and acceptable HST for the winter operation scenario, as well as
the improvement room allowed between them.
During winter time, for the same loading conditions, lower ambient temperatures lead to
lower HST than during the summer. For this reason, the very high potential extra heating
noted on the transformer for the winter scenario will be reduced during summer operation,
when ambient temperature is higher.
In any case, it is determined that the transformer installed in the 6 MW WTG at WMR
78
==PAGE:91==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
Wind Farm is overrated, since a transformer with reduced size (see sensitivity analysis in
section 2.3 of Chapter 2) and/or rating could withstand the operation without incurring
in damage on the solid insulation.
Obviously this does not mean that it would be
recommendable to replace the installed transformer in the 35 WTG of the Wind Farm, but
that for further projects smaller and cheaper transformers should be considered instead.
The cost reduction this entails is important, as transformers are highly expensive assets
and the lower the rating, the cheaper they generally are [35].
Summer Operation
Maximum LV winding temperature equal to 87.5 ◦C appears at week time t = 5210
minutes, corresponding to 15:20 on 2017-05-27. This point corresponds to the beginning
of a high load period at K = 0.89 after a sharp load increase; at simultaneously high
ambient temperature (θamb = 23◦C). As explained in Chapter 1, the TEE model tends to
overestimate HST after a sudden load increase, so probably actual HST in the transformer
is lower than the TEE estimation, if only slightly.
Figure 4.14. 6.8 MVA WTG transformer temperature results for week 21. The top graph shows
the load proﬁle during the week. The bottom chart shows the estimated curves for
HST (beige) and TOT (blue); and the evolution of Tamb during the week (pink).
From the maximum estimated HST temperature to the upper limit established by IEEE
there is still a considerable range, even considering that probably actual HST in the
transformer is lower than the estimation, which would only increase that range. Particularly,
22 ◦C, or 20% of maximum HST, is the extent of the potential temperature rise the
transformer could potentially experience before suﬀering damage in the paper insulation.
79
==PAGE:92==
4. Practical Validation and Application on Ørsted’s Wind Farm Transformer
Maximum
estimated
temperature
Maximum
acceptable
temperature
Potential
improvement
[°C]
[°C]
[°C]
%
88
110
22
20
Table 4.5. Maximum estimated and acceptable HST for the summer operation scenario, as well
as the improvement room allowed between them.
It is observed that the percentage of the improvement range has fell to half of its value
during the winter operation, from 40% to 20 %, which is caused by a higher θamb in
the summer. This, or its absolute value of 22 ◦C, is regardless a very large room for
improvement. As said before, the improvement is not intended to come as a replacement
of any of the already operative transformers by one with a lower rating; but to serve as
a indication for future installations about the fact that the transformers placed in the 6
MW WTG are being underutilized, and thus the placement of smaller transformers could
be considered for further installations. These would be able to withstand the WTG load
proﬁle without being subjected to HST temperatures above the maximum acceptable one
of 110 ◦C. Of course, the degree of the reduction in the rating of these transformers should
be the matter of a whole new and thorough study. In this analysis, only the fact that there
is an ample room for improvement is identiﬁed.
A diﬀerent approach to the potential use of HST estimation would be its application for
transformers which are already installed and in operation, as the WTG one studied here.
For these, the underused thermal capacity of the transformer could be exploited by loading
the transformer beyond its rated conditions in case of system contingency. Of course,
this has to be done carefully, and a lack of information about the 6MW WTG where the
transformer is places, as well as about the grid (both the internal WMR grid and the
general grid) is accused for not to deepen the study in this project, leaving it as an open
possibility for further studies.
80
==PAGE:93==
5
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
This thesis is based on the work carried out during a MSc Project which, in turn, is
part of a wider collaboration between DTU and Ørsted in the frame of researching the
implementation of dynamic rating in transformers for oﬀshore wind farms. This is, the
operation of the transformer based on an optimal use of its loading capabilities without
incurring in damage to its solid insulation. The use of this type of optimize rating instead
of the traditional, more conservative, one allows to reduce the size and weight (and hence
the price) of the transformer. A requirement for the implementation of this optimization
in the operation of the transformer is to know at all times the internal temperatures in the
tank. This, together with careful insight about the impact of temperature in transformer
lifetime, would allow to operate the transformer even at overloads in a comprehensive
way, without incurring in a shortening of the asset lifetime. The ﬁrst of the two was
responsibility of the project, and its ultimate goal: the development of a valid tool to
provide a dynamic estimation of internal temperature on transformers.
To accomplish this objective, the project was started oﬀwith an investigation among the
existing methods to estimate internal temperatures, in order to spot a suitable one to start
the development process of the tool based on it. It was chosen to construct a model making
use of the Thermal-Electric Equivalence (TEE), which represent the transformer as a RC
thermal circuit with a number of series thermal resistances and shunt capacitances equal to
its thermal element (windings, core, oil and tank). To calculate these thermal resistances
and thermal capacitances, a series of parameters from the asset are necessary, which are the
inputs to characterize a transformer in the TEE model. In order to judge its performance,
at the end of the model design phase the model was loaded with parameters from cases
found in the literature, and the obtained temperature estimations compared with those
provided in the papers. It was found that the model was consistent at providing an accurate
estimation for both TOT and HST, but further validation with more reliable data was
required. A sensitivity analysis of the model revealed which parameters are critical for a
proper curve shape and which for a correct temperature range in the estimation.
With that information, the investigation was moved to an experimental environment,
provided by the High Voltage Lab at DTU. There, a 100 KVA transformer was subjected
to a number of tests aimed to a proper parametrization of the asset; and then equipped
with thermal sensors and tested for long enough operation under a stepped load proﬁle.
The comparison between temperature readings obtained from this heat run test and
temperature estimations from the TEE model loaded with the experimentally-obtained
parameters showed a highly precise estimation for HST, and a suﬃciently accurate one for
TOT. Still, the TEE overestimates both temperatures, which is in fact a preferred error
than an underestimation, as it would entail a safer operation of the transformer in the case
the model is being used to monitor internal temperatures. The higher error yielded for
81
==PAGE:94==
5. Conclusions and Further Work
TOT is coherent with a misplacement of the thermal sensors, which are probably recording
a oil temperature marginally lower than actual TOT.
Last, in order to put to test the validity of the model for dynamic temperature estimations
in an in-ﬁeld environment, a comparison with temperature measurements from a 6MW
Wind Turbine Generator (WTG) was carried out. It was demonstrated a high degree
of accuracy in TOT estimations, with the observed errors attributable to the scarcity of
information about some of the transformer parameters, as well as to the overestimation
inherent to the model itself. Due to the inbuilt structure of the model, the validation
of TOT estimation for a dynamic load and ambient temperature proﬁle indicated an
equally valid HST estimation. Therefore, by examining the HST curves estimated by the
model for winter and summer operation scenarios, it was observed a signiﬁcant margin for
extra heating before the solid insulation started sustaining damage. There remains, thus,
considerable scope for further improvement in the operation of the transformer in order to
optimize its utilization. It was suggested to use smaller transformers in future installations,
and to utilize more intensely and even beyond its rated load the already installed assets,
since that overuse would not induce a damaging heating in the LV windings (specially
during the winter, when ambient temperature is lower), if done in a comprehensive way.
The work and objectives accomplished in this project can be then chronologically
summarized in:
• A MATLAB/Simulink model for dynamic calculation of TOT and HST was
constructed based on TEE.
• A sensitivity analysis showed a potentially lacking parametrization in the literature
cases, which prevent the model to be validated from them alone.
• An own parametrization was carried out for a 100 KVA transformer. Temperature
measurements from the asset were experimentally obtained through heat run tests
as well. These were used to validate the model for a stepped load proﬁle.
• Using TOT measurements from a WTG transformer currently operating in an oﬀshore
wind farm, the model was validated for a dynamic load proﬁle and diﬀerent ambient
conditions.
• Based on observations in HST curves estimated for the WTG transformer, comments
on the transformer under-utilization, and on how its operation could be optimized,
were made.
Further Work
The project ﬁnished with a discussion on how the developed model could be applied to
improve the utilization of transformers in oﬀshore wind farms, where a dynamic load proﬁle
and low ambient temperatures are characteristic features of the operation. It was asserted
that there was signiﬁcant room for improvement in the transformer operation, in order to
better capitalize on its loading capability. Therefore, the next step should be to deepen in
the analysis on the degree of this improvement. This can be done in diﬀerent ways:
a)Investigation on the actual temperature at which solid insulation starts sustaining life-
shortening damage, which might be diﬀerent than the rated 110 and sets the upper limit
up to which HST can rise.
82
==PAGE:95==
5. Conclusions and Further Work
b) Investigation on ways to capitalize on the transformer capability to heat up to 20 degrees
more in the summer and 30 in the winter (in other words, dynamic rating). I.e. overload
the asset at times of system contingency. This involves investigation on WTG generation
capabilities, as well as deeper knowledge on the grid.
c) Investigation on relationship between transformer magnitudes (i.e. rating) and HST
curves. Somewhat of a sensitivity analysis for the whole asset in regard to hot spot heating.
Through it, optimize the selection of WTG transformers in that it has minimum -yet still
safe- requirements to heat up to the limit set by the minimum HST which damages the
insulation. This would be done by using the TEE model to predict HST in the transformer
using expected load proﬁle and ambient temperature in the installation location.
In fact, research on the impact of temperature on the acceleration in the depolymerization
process in the cellulose from the paper insulation, and thus on its lifetime; together with
the thermal testing of higher rated transformer (i.e. a 630 KVA transformer), is currently
being investigated by fellow student Konstantinos Giannikas in his own Master Project.
The complexity of the parametrization process required to obtain the very detailed
parameters needed to characterize a transformer in the TEE model currently limit its
applicability to wider scenarios outside a controlled testing environment. However, the
great beneﬁts associated with dynamic rating, which require from an accurate prediction
of HST, will be hopefully a game-changer factor which will help to overcome the challenges
and implement reliable HST estimations in the everyday operation of oﬀshore wind farms
transformers.
83
==PAGE:96==
REFERENCES
[1]
Bouazabia S. Bouhaddiche R. and Fofana I. Thermal modelling of power transformer.
2017.
[2]
Rashid N Jalal T. S. and van Vliet B. Implementation of dynamic transformer rating
in a distribution network. 2012.
[3]
Geldenhuis L.M. Power transformer life management. 2005.
[4]
Ciulavu C and Helerea E. Power transformer incipient faults monitoring. 2014.
[5]
IEEE. Ieee guide for loading mineral-oil-immersed transformers and step-voltage
regulators. 2012.
[6]
Yang J. and Strickland D. Thermal modelling for dynamic transformer rating in low
carbon distribution network operation. 2014.
[7]
Berube J.N. and Aubin J. Transformer winding hot spot temperature determination.
2007.
[8]
Hilber P et al. Wallnerstrom C.J. Potential of dynamic rating in sweden. 2014.
[9]
McNutt W.J. et al. Direct measurement of transformer winding hot spot
temperature. 1984.
[10] Botella G. Thermoelectric modelling of power transformers. 2018.
[11] Kingsley Jr. C. Fitzgerald A.E. and Umans S.D. Electric Machinery 6th edition.
McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2003.
[12] Singh M.P. and Ganguli T.K. Transformers 2nd edition. McGraw Hill Education,
2003.
[13] Kreuger F.H. Industrial High Voltage. Delf University Press, 1991.
[14] Sarma M.S. Glover J.D. and Overbye T.J. Power Systems Analysis and Design 5th
edition. SI, 2012.
[15] Olivares-Galan J.C. Hernandez I., Cañedo J.M. and Betancourt E. Novel technique
to compute the leakage reactance of three-phase power transformers. 2016.
[16] Swift G. et al. A fundamental approach to transormer thermal modelling - part i:
theory and equivalent circuit. 2001.
[17] Susa D. et al. Dynamic thermal modelling of power transformers. 2005.
[18] Swift G. et al. A fundamental approach to transormer thermal modelling - part ii:
Field veriﬁcation. 2001.
84
==PAGE:97==
References
[19] Rosenlind J. Investigation of transformer top-oil temperature considering external
factors. 2012.
[20] Susa D. and Lehtonen M. Dynamic thermal modelling of power transformers:
Further development-part i. 2006.
[21] Susa D. and Lehtonen M. Dynamic thermal modelling of power transformers:
Further development-part ii. 2006.
[22] Susa D. and Nordman H. A simple model for calculating transformer hot-spot
temperature. 2009.
[23] Incropera F.D. and DeWitt D.P. Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer 4th
edition. New York: Wiley, 1995.
[24] Poienar M. et al Olariu E.D. Interactive system for optimizing the operation of a
transformer with continuously adjustable voltage. 2016.
[25] Nordman H. and Lehtonen M. Thermal overload tests on a 400 mva power
transformer with a special 2.5 pu short time loading capability,. 2003.
[26] IEC. Iec 60076-7 power transformers – part 7: Loading guide for oil-immersed power
transformers. 2005.
[27] IEEE. C57.119tm ieee recommended practice for performing temperature rise tests
on oil-immersed power transformers at loads beyond nameplate ratings. 2002.
[28] Fleming K.J. et al Tuli S. Ieee recommended practice for performing temperature rise
tests on oil-immersed power transformers at loads beyond nameplate ratings. 2008.
[29] D.M.M. Ahmad. Evaluation of the localised loss transformer core lamination. 2010.
[30] Daut I. Investigation of ﬂux and loss distribution in transformer cores assembled
from amorphous powercore material. 1992.
[31] McCarthy J. Analysis of transformer ratings in a wind farm environment, 2010.
[32] Robak S. and Raczkowski R.M. Substations for oﬀshore wind farms: a review from
the perspective of the needs of the polish wind energy sector. 2018.
[33] Siemens Transformers Austria. Wtg qa/qc - report. 2013.
[34] DONG Energy Power (UK). Westermost rough. oﬀshore wind farm. 2015.
[35] ABB. Distribution transformers abb catalogue. 2013.
[36] Liu Q. Villaroel R. and Wang Z. Experimental study of dynamic thermal behaviour
of an 11 kv distribution transformer. 2017.
[37] Jauregui-Rivera L. et al. Improving reliability assessment of transformer thermal
top-oil model parameters estimated from measured data. 2009.
[38] Jauregui-Rivera L. and Tylavsky D.J. Acceptability of four transformer top-oil
thermal models: Pt. 1: Deﬁning metrics. 2008.
85
==PAGE:98==
References
[39] Jauregui-Rivera L. and Tylavsky D.J. Acceptability of four transformer top-oil
thermal models: Pt. 2: Comparing metrics. 2008.
86
==PAGE:99==
A
PROJECT PLAN
87
==PAGE:100==
A. Project plan
88
==PAGE:101==
A. Project plan
89
==PAGE:102==
A. Project plan
Figure A.1. Gantt chart showing the time range of the tasks and chronological development of
the project.
90
==PAGE:103==
B
FURTHER INFORMATION ABOUT THE TEE
MODEL
B.1
Mathematical Validation TEE model
Analysis of the acceptability of the model from an analysis of its metrics point of view.
A forward Euler discretization rule is applied to deﬁne the metrics, and the consistency,
adequacy and accuracy of the model are analyzed in regard to them. It is based on the
work developed in [37], [38] and [39]
k = discretization points (time-step index)
θtop(k) = K1I2(k) + K2θamb(k) + (1 −K2)θtop(k −1) + K3
(B.1)
if
Y (k) = θtop(k) −θtop(k −1)
X1(k) = I2(k)
X2(k) = θamb(k) −θtop(k −1)
Then (B.1) can rewritten as:
Y (k) = K1X1(k) + K2X2(k) + K3
(B.2)
The next step consist on average Y and X over time for a m number of independent X
measurements (discretization points), being an overline the notation used to represent
averaged variables.
Xi = 1
m
m
X
k=1
Xi(k)
i = 1, 2
(B.3)
Y = 1
m
m
X
k=1
Y (k)
(B.4)
With equations (B.3) and (B.4), equation (B.2),
Y = K1X1 + K2X2 + K3
(B.5)
If equation (B.5) above is subtracted to equation (B.2) for k = m points, in the following
way (the tilde represents variables of zero mean):
eY =

Y (1) −Y
Y (2) −Y
· · ·
Y (m) −Y
T
91
==PAGE:104==
B. Further information about the TEE model
f
Xi =

Xi(1) −Xi
Xi(2) −Xi
· · ·
Xi(m) −Xi
T
i = 1, 2
Then:
eY = eXK
(B.6)
Where:
f
Xi = [ f
X1
f
X2]
K = [K1
K2]T
Least-squares method is used to calculate K1 and K2 coeﬃcients, following the formula:
K = ( eXT eX)−1 eXT eY
(B.7)
Once K1 and K2 are obtained, K3 can be easily calculated from equation (B.5)
θtop(k) = θtop(k −1)+ ∆t
To
"I2(k)R + 1
R + 1

θfl −
1
µ(k)θfl
 1−n
n

θtop(k)−θamb(k)
1/n#
(B.8)
From an accuracy point of view, it is found that the model is nearly independent of oil
viscosity, which makes sense given that its change with temperature is included in the
equations. This makes it more accurate than previous models.
Concerning the consistency, the model presents consistency and convergence issues, due
to its large XT X. Still, more consistent than previous non-linear TEE models (Swift
[16], non-linear IEEE [5]). Also, Variance Inﬂation Factors (VIF’s) place the model above
previous non-linear models in terms of consistency.
The change in placement of the non-linearity exponent n may be the cause of its better
adequacy compared with other non-linear TEE models.
The authors concluded that the model seems to be acceptable, but training with larger
datasets is required to accept it for all transformers.
92
==PAGE:105==
B. Further information about the TEE model
B.2
TEE model
Model General Layout
Figure B.1. General layout of the MATLAB/Simulink model, with thematic blocks highlighted
with diﬀerent colours.
93
==PAGE:106==
B. Further information about the TEE model
Model Inputs block
Figure B.2. Inputs Block in the Simulink model (as a subsystem and unmasked), which deﬁnes
the conditions at which the transformer operates.
Initial Conditions.
Figure B.3. Integrator Block in the Simulink model (as a subsystem and unmasked), where
’Initial Conditions’ is fed to the model.
TEE Diﬀerential Equation
Figure B.4. Diﬀerential block in the TEE model.
94
==PAGE:107==
B. Further information about the TEE model
Matlab function contained in it the diﬀerential block.
1
function [delta_theta_oil, delta_theta_hs_lv, delta_theta_hs_hv, mu,
2
Accum_error_oil, accum_error_hslv] = fcn(inputs)
3
%transformer: 250KVA/ONAF (250/118) 118kV winding
4
theta_amb = inputs(1); K = inputs(2) ; theta_oil = inputs(3);
5
mu = inputs(4) ; theta_hs_lv = inputs(5); theta_hs_hv = inputs(6);
6
error_1 = inputs(7); error = inputs(8); errorhs_1 = inputs(9);
7
errorhs = inputs(10);
8
9
%INTRODUCE NON-LINEARITY EXPONENTS
10
n = ; %0.5 with external cooling ONAF,ONAN and OFAF
11
nprime = ; %0.1 with external cooling ONAF,ONAN and OFAF
12
13
%INTRODUCE RATED TEMPERATURE RISES, IN CELSIUS
14
deltatheta_oil_rated = ;
15
deltatheta_hs_rated_lv = ;
16
deltatheta_hs_rated_hv = ;
17
18
%INTRODUCE RATED WINDING TIME CONSTANTS, IN MINUTES
19
tconst_wdg_rated_lv = ;
20
tconst_wdg_rated_hv = ;
21
22
%INTRODUCE COMPONENT MASSES, IN KG
23
m_fe = 6078; m_mp = ; m_oil = ; m_wdg = ;
24
25
%INTRODUCE TRANSFORMER LOSSES, IN W
26
P_eddy = ; P_stray = ; P_wdg = ;
27
28
theta_oil_rated = theta_amb + deltatheta_oil_rated;
29
theta_hs_rated_lv = theta_amb + deltatheta_oil_rated + deltatheta_hs_rated_lv;
30
theta_hs_rated_hv = theta_amb + deltatheta_oil_rated + deltatheta_hs_rated_hv;
31
%% CALCULATION OF RATED OIL TIME CONSTANT(SUSAfurther1, section3)
32
33
%SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY [Wh/KgC]copper winding, 0.25 for Al
34
c_fe = 0.13; c_mp = 0.13; c_oil = 0.51; c_wdg = 0.11;
35
O_oil = 0.86; %for ONAF, ONAN and OFAF. 1 for ODAF
36
37
P_tot = P_eddy+P_wdg+P_stray;
38
39
Cth_oil_rated = (P_wdg/P_tot)*c_wdg*m_wdg+(P_eddy/P_tot)*c_fe*m_fe+
40
(P_stray/P_tot)*c_mp*m_mp+O_oil*c_oil*m_oil;
41
Rth_oil_rated = deltatheta_oil_rated/(P_tot);
42
tconst_oil_rated = (Cth_oil_rated*Rth_oil_rated); %IN SECONDS
43
%% Load loss dependence on temperature
44
theta_k = 235; %for Cu. 225 for aluminium
45
46
%TO
47
theta_e_rated = 8; %110 for IEEE. 98 for IEC
48
theta_e = (theta_hs_lv+theta_hs_hv)/2;
49
theta_TO = (theta_e+theta_k)/(theta_e_rated+theta_k);
50
P1_pu = (P_wdg/P_tot)*(theta_TO)+ ((P_eddy+ P_stray)/P_tot)*(1/theta_TO);
95
==PAGE:108==
B. Further information about the TEE model
51
52
%HS_LV
53
thet_LV = (theta_hs_lv+theta_k)/(theta_hs_rated_lv+theta_k);
54
P_wdg_pu_LV = (P_wdg/P_tot)*(thet_LV)+ (P_eddy/P_tot)*(1/thet_LV);
55
56
%HS_HV
57
thet_HV = (theta_hs_hv+theta_k)/(theta_hs_rated_hv+theta_k);
58
P_wdg_pu_HV = (P_wdg/P_tot)*(thet_HV)+ (P_eddy/P_tot)*(1/thet_HV);
59
60
%% DTHETA_OIL/DT
61
mu_rated = 0.0000013573*exp(2797.3/(theta_oil_rated+273));
62
mu_pu = mu/mu_rated; %viscosity/viscosity rated
63
R = P_wdg/P_stray;
64
65
A = ((1+R*(P1_pu)*(K^2))/(1+R))*(mu_pu^n)*deltatheta_oil_rated;
66
B = ((theta_oil-theta_amb)^(1+n))/(deltatheta_oil_rated^n);
67
C = (mu_pu^n)*tconst_oil_rated;
68
69
delta_theta_oil = (A-B)/C;
70
71
%% DTHETA_HS/DTlow
72
D = (P_wdg_pu_LV*(K^2))*(mu_pu^n)*deltatheta_hs_rated_lv;
73
E = ((theta_hs_lv-theta_oil)^(nprime+1))/(deltatheta_hs_rated_lv^nprime);
74
F = (mu_pu^n)*tconst_wdg_rated_lv;
75
76
delta_theta_hs_lv = (D-E)/F;
77
78
%% DTHETA_HS/DThigh
79
G = (P_wdg_pu_HV*(K^2))*(mu_pu^n)*deltatheta_hs_rated_hv;
80
H = ((theta_hs_hv-theta_oil)^(nprime+1))/(deltatheta_hs_rated_hv^nprime);
81
I = (mu_pu^n)*tconst_wdg_rated_hv;
82
83
delta_theta_hs_hv = (G-H)/I;
84
85
mu
= 0.0000013573*exp(2797.3/(theta_oil+273));
86
Accum_error_oil = error_1+error;
87
accum_error_hslv = errorhs_1+errorhs;
96
==PAGE:109==
C SETUP IN THE HV LAB
C.1
OC and SC test connections
100 KVA OC Test Connections
Figure C.1. Connection to the LV side of the 100 KVA transformer during the OC test.
Figure C.2. HV side during the OC test of the 100 KVA.
100 KVA SC Test Connections
97
==PAGE:110==
C. Setup in the HV Lab
Figure C.3. View from the short-circuited LV side during the SC test of the 100 KVA.
Figure C.4. Connection to the HV side during the SC test of the 100 KVA.
C.2
Heat run test
Transformer tank re-sealing
The process of putting the transformer back together, explained in Section 3.3, is shown
here sequentially.
98
==PAGE:111==
C. Setup in the HV Lab
Figure C.5. Silicone sealing to guarantee proper sealing and avoid oil leakings.
Figure C.6. Transformer core put back inside the tank, with sensors in place.
99
==PAGE:112==
C. Setup in the HV Lab
Figure C.7. Oil pumped back into the tank from the barrel where it was stored.
Figure C.8. Comprobation that oil level is at its original level.
100
==PAGE:113==
C. Setup in the HV Lab
Raw Unﬁltered Temperature Measurements
Figure C.9. Unﬁltered measurements obtained from the heat run test developed along section
3.3 of the main body text of the Report.
LABvalidation.m scrip
Script used to load the csv. temperature measurements in the TEE model, for comparison,
as well as to apply a noise-reduction ﬁlter to the measured curves.
1
clear all
2
clc
3
filename = ’14hours.TXT’;
4
M = csvread(filename);
5
seconds = 60; %period to do the average for inside trafo
6
coeff = ones(1, seconds)/seconds;
7
seconds1 = 140; %period to do the average for outside trafo
8
coeff1 = ones(1, seconds1)/seconds1;
9
Delay = (length(coeff)-1)/2;
10
11
Sensor1 = M(:,2);
12
AvgSensor1 = filter(coeff, 1, Sensor1);
13
SIMSensor1 = timeseries(AvgSensor1);
14
Sensor2 = M(:,3);
15
AvgSensor2 = filter(coeff, 1, Sensor2);
16
SIMSensor2 = timeseries(AvgSensor2);
17
Sensor3 = M(:,4);
18
AvgSensor3 = filter(coeff, 1, Sensor3);
19
SIMSensor3 = timeseries(AvgSensor3);
20
Sensor4 = M(:,5);
21
AvgSensor4 = filter(coeff, 1, Sensor4);
22
SIMSensor4 = timeseries(AvgSensor4);
23
Sensor5 = M(:,6);
24
AvgSensor5 = filter(coeff, 1, Sensor5);
25
SIMSensor5 = timeseries(AvgSensor5);
101
==PAGE:114==
C. Setup in the HV Lab
26
Sensor6 = M(:,7);
27
AvgSensor6 = filter(coeff1, 1, Sensor6);
28
SIMSensor6 = timeseries(AvgSensor6);
29
Sensor7 = M(:,8);
30
AvgSensor7 = filter(coeff1, 1, Sensor7);
31
SIMSensor7 = timeseries(AvgSensor7);
32
Sensor8 = M(:,9);
33
AvgSensor8 = filter(coeff1, 1, Sensor8);
34
SIMSensor8 = timeseries(AvgSensor8);
35
36
dT_oil_inic = Sensor5(1,1)-Sensor7(1,1);
37
dT_LV_init= Sensor4(1,1)-Sensor7(1,1);
38
dT_HV_init = Sensor4(1,1)-Sensor7(1,1);
102
==PAGE:115==
D
PARAMETRIZATION OF ØRSTED
TRANSFORMER
WMR Wind Speed vs Load Factor
Figure D.1. Recorded measurements of Wind Speed vs Load Factor at WMR for week 04
Figure D.2. Recorded measurements of Wind Speed vs Load Factor at WMR for week 12
103
==PAGE:116==
D. Parametrization of Ørsted Transformer
Figure D.3. Recorded measurements of Wind Speed vs Load Factor at WMR for week 21
Figure D.4. Recorded measurements of Wind Speed vs Load Factor at WMR for week 49
Validation.mat used for the model validation from Ørsted data
MATLAB script used to load the dataset provided by Ørsted into the Simulink model.
1
clear all
2
clc
3
S = load(’matlab.mat’);
4
Strafotot=sqrt(S.ActPower.^2+S.ReactPower.^2);
5
S_base = 6800; %(6.8 MVA Trafo)
6
%% Period to load, from 1 to 52385 measurement spot. Each week
7
% corresponds to 1294 points
8
9
Strafo = Strafotot(1:52385);
10
Ptrafo = S.ActPower(1:52385);
11
Tx =S.Ts(1:52385);
12
TxSIM =timeseries(S.Ts(1:52385));
13
Wind = timeseries(S.WindSp(1:52385));
104
==PAGE:117==
D. Parametrization of Ørsted Transformer
14
15
T_amb = S.Tamb(1:52385);
16
T_nac = S.Tnac(1:52385);
17
TOT = S.TraOilTF(1:52385);
18
T_ambSIM = timeseries(S.Tamb(1:52385));
19
TOTSIM = timeseries(S.TraOilTF(1:52385));
20
T_nacelleSIM = timeseries(S.Tnac(1:52385));
21
22
Vgrid_r = S.Vgrid_r(1:52385);
23
Igrid_r = S.Igrid_r(1:52385);
24
25
%%
26
Load_factor = Strafo/S_base;
27
Load_factorSIM = timeseries(Strafo/S_base);
28
29
for i = 1:1294
30
Z_r(i,1) = (Vgrid_r(i,1)/Igrid_r(i,1));
31
powerfactor (i,1) = Ptrafo(i,1)/Strafo(i,1);
32
R_r (i,1) = Z_r(i,1)*powerfactor(i,1);
33
Loadlosses(i,1) = Igrid_r(i,1)^2*R_r(i,1);
34
R_r (i,1) = Z_r(i,1)*powerfactor(i,1);
35
end
36
37
SSIM = timeseries(Strafo);
38
PSIM = timeseries(Ptrafo);
39
%INITIAL CONDITIONS
40
dT_oil_inic = TOT(1,1)-T_amb(1,1);
41
dT_LV_init= 50-TOT(1,1);
42
dT_HV_init = 50-TOT(1,1);
105
==PAGE:118==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Write ISBN XX-XXXXX-XX-X (or delete)
