==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Data Augmentation of CT scans
Anne Sofie Talleruphuus (s162860)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis is about a deep learning segmentation task on a data set consisting of only 10 CT scans
and according annotations.
A 3D fully convolutional network based on the V-NET architecture is
implemented and tuned to fit the particularly imbalanced spine data set. Learned data augmentation
is - for the first time - applied to a spine data set. The concept of learned data augmentation is to
learn the most common variations from the data and use these when creating the augmented data. The
segmentation network is trained and tested on the original data set as well as the augmented data set
in order to evaluate the effect of learned data augmentation. The average segmentation performance is
evaluated to be 81.7% ± 2.9% when using learned data augmentation and 80.3% ± 2.8% on the original
data set. Hence the use of learned data augmentation leads to a small, but not statistically significant,
increase in performance. The high uncertainty of these results is due to the small amount of data and
slow network training.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at DTU Compute, the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark, in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a M.Sc. degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
The supervisor is Søren Hauberg.
Kongens Lyngby, May 1, 2019
Anne Sofie Talleruphuus (s162860)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Tak til min familie for støtte og tak til mine skønne venner - særligt Karen, Martin, Mathilde, Naya og
Tobias. I er guld værd.
Tak til Pola for at bakke op, relatere, komme med gode råd og selvfølgelig den faglige indsigt. Også
tak til alle andre på kontoret - Martin, Costy, Nicki og Cilie - for at lade mig blive en del af ”familien”.
Sidst men ikke mindst:
Tak til min vejleder, Søren, for at give mig opbakning og blod på tanden. Jeg kan ikke forestille mig
en bedre vejleder.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
I
1
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Project outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Medical Terminology and Anatomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Data and Preprocessing
7
2.1
Raw data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Processed data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
II
11
3
Learned Data Augmentation
13
3.1
Conventional Data Augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Learned Data Augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Transformations
17
4.1
Diffeomorphisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
CPAB transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Aligning image pairs
19
5.1
Alignment of spines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Sanity Check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Sampling Data
27
6.1
Sampling New Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
III
35
7
Segmentation Network
37
7.1
Fully Convolutional Networks for segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.2
V-NET implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.3
Cross Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
8
Performance of Segmentation network
49
8.1
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.2
Test performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
IV
59
9
Conclusion
61
9.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:11==
Part I
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the past years some of the hottest buzzwords have been big data, machine learning and deep learning.
These three topics usually go hand in hand, since big amounts of data are required in order to train
models with number of parameters in the order of millions.
The modern society uses a great deal
of resources collecting and storing massive amounts of data, but one obstacle in the field is still the
lack of access to high quality data in a descent amount. The World Economic Forum has released
8 fascinating and fearsome frontiers in science, where the ”fascinating” concept of Machine Learning
through small data is presented as a ”game-changer” [7] and a way to boost performance of machine
learning algorithms, since it will require less resources and thus be more accessible. Being able to train
machine learning models on small data will of course also limit the problem of lack of high quality data.
The Frontiers article leaves it to the future how exactly to do this.
One way to train big models with small data is to augment the data set and ”cheat” the model to think
the data amount is big. Although data augmentation does not add any new information it usually leads
to an increase in performance [8].
The aim of this project is to apply learned data augmentation to a deep learning segmentation task
and to examine if this leads to an increase in performance compared to the segmentation task on the
raw data alone. Data augmentation is the enlargement of a data set by adding transformed samples of
the data set to the data set. Traditionally, data augmentation schemes are predefined for the type of
problem at hand and does not depend on the data itself. Examples of traditional data augmentation
schemes for image analysis are image translation and rotation.
The idea of learned data augmentation is introduced by Hauberg et al. in the article ”Dreaming More
Data: Class-dependent Distributions over Diffeomorphisms for Learned Data Augmentation” [8], which
proposes that the transformations used for data augmentation should be dependent on the data itself and
not decided on prior to the data augmentation process. The article suggests that the transformations
can be sampled from a statistical model built upon alignments of all data points. According to the
article, the learned data augmentation will capture the real variance of the data better than the prior
defined augmentations and thus, in the end, result in better performance in a learning task.
In this thesis the hypothesis is tested on a 3D segmentation network using a data set consisting of 10
CT scans.
1.1
Project outline
Figure 1.1: The four main stages of this thesis: (1) introduction, (2) learned data augmentation, (3)
segmentation network and (4) conclusion.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
The work presented in this thesis is split into four parts as illustrated in figure 1.1. The two middle
parts (the learned data augmentation and segmentation network part) may at first seem independent,
but they are equally important when telling the overall story.
The first part consists of an introduction to the data set and the segmentation task as well as stating
the need of data augmentation and presenting the idea of learned data augmentation.
The second part is providing a framework for expressing the transformations needed to align
the images. For convenience the transformations are assumed to be diffeomorphic. This part also deals
with the practical implications of this assumption. Then it is time for actually aligning the image
pairs and make a statistical model of the variations. Finally the data set is augmented by
sampling a transformation and using it on a random image.
The third part is implementing a neural network which solves the spine and vertebra segmentation
task provided by SpineWeb at [16]. The segmentation network is a fully convolutional neural
network with 3D filters using the V-Net architecture [10]. The segmentation network is then trained
and tested on the augmented data set as well as the original data set in order to test the hypothesis
that learned data augmentation provides stability and improves performances. It is not given that the
performance will be improved, since the amount of information from real world examples stay constant
and all the additional information is interpolated and thus not new.
The fourth and final part is a wrap up of the results and conclusions reached in the earlier parts.
Furthermore this part also contains a brief discussion of future work.
1.2
Medical Terminology and Anatomy
In this section some medical terminology and basic anatomy will be introduced in order to ease the
later discussions of the data.
1.2.1
CT scan
CT is short for Computed Tomography and is a method of constructing 3D scans using multiple 2D
scans from different angles. Within medical imaging, the target is of course a scan of a human body
or body parts. By convention a person is always (if possible) scanned lying on his back with the head
furthest from the control room and the feet closest to the control room. This ensures that all scans
have the same orientation.
Figure 1.2: Full spine divided into the different regions [1].
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Medical Terminology and Anatomy
5
1.2.2
Spine and vertebra
The spine can be divided into 5 parts; the cervical spine, the thoracic spine, the lumbar spine, the
sacrum spine and finally the coccyx spine. This thesis focuses on segmenting only the thoracic and
lumbar spine, which are shown as the blue and yellow parts in figure 1.2. The thoracic spine consists of
12 vertebra and the lumbar spine of 5 vertebra. Approximately 10 % of people have a spinal anomaly
and have a 6th lumbar vertebra [18].
The shape and size of the vertebra changes throughout the spine. But they do share the material (bone)
as well as the hollow core to make space for the spinal cord. A lumbar vertebrae is shown from above
in figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3: Lumbar vertebra seen from above [2].
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Data and Preprocessing
The data set consisting of 10 spinal CT scans as well as annotations are available as Dataset 2 at
the SpineWeb website [16]. The data set was originally made available as training data in connection
with the segmentation challenge of the CSI 2014 workshop. The information in the following section is
available at the SpineWeb website and at [9].
2.1
Raw data
The data set consists of 10 CT scans of the torsos of 10 people between the ages of 16 to 35. The
scans have been performed without intravenous contrast at a trauma clinic as part of common routine
work. The scans were created using Philips or Siemens multidetector CT scanners with an in-plane
resolution between 0.31mm and 0.45mm with a slice thickness of 1 mm. The scans are acquired from
the Department of Radiological Sciences, University of California, Irvine, School of Medicine.
Furthermore, the data set contains the annotations of the 10 scans (all semi automatically segmented
and afterwards manually verified). In the annotated images the vertebrae are labeled after their position
in the spine, and the labels have values 100, 200, ..., 1900, where the first vertebra has label 100, the
second vertebra has label 200 and so on. Not all CT scans show all 19 vertebra, some only show from
vertebra 200 and some only show until vertebra 1800 for instance. The number of vertebrae in each
scan is shown in table 2.1.
The scans and annotations are available in a MetaImage file format (mhd/raw files). The scans are of
different sizes, but all in the order of magnitude (560,512,512) voxels.
A cross section of a scan and its according annotations are shown in figure 2.1 .
In figure 2.2 and 2.3 the spines from scan 8 and 9 are shown. Both spines in the figure are viewed from
the same angle and it is obvious that the spines vary in curvature and size.
2.2
Processed data
The images and labels need to be of the same size when inputted to the convolutional network. Hence
the images and labels have to be resized. In order to reduce computation time and prevent the GPU
from running out of memory the image size is reduced by a factor of 2 in all 3 dimensions. This reduces
the size of the images with a factor of 23 = 8.
The fixed size of the images and labels are set to
(280,256,256) voxels. The images are resized using bilinear interpolation and the labels using nearest
neighbour interpolation to preserve the labels.
CT
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Min
200
200
100
100
200
200
200
200
200
200
Max
1900
1800
1700
1900
1900
1800
1800
1900
1900
1800
Table 2.1: Annotated vertebrae in scans
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Data and Preprocessing
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: (a) Cross section of CT scan in transverse plane showing the spine (b) the same cross section
of the annotated image.
CT
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Signal [%]
3.77
3.58
4.91
4.27
4.22
4.79
3.92
3.08
3.34
4.41
Table 2.2: Data class imbalance
2.2.1
Class imbalance
The problem is simplified by treating the segmentation task as a binary problem of segmenting spine
from background. Although the problem is reduced to having only 2 classes instead of around 20, the
segmentation task is still highly imbalanced. Table 2.2 shows the percentage of signal (spine) in each
of the 10 images (downsized to (280,256,256)). As can be seen, the signal amounts to no more than
maximum 5 % of the entire image in all of the cases.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Processed data
9
Figure 2.2: Scan 8
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Data and Preprocessing
Figure 2.3: Scan 9
==PAGE:21==
Part II
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Learned Data
Augmentation
This part of the thesis is dedicated to the development of a data augmentation scheme that will allow
the data set to be enlarged in a sensible way. This is necessary, because having only a small number of
images to train the segmentation network on is a challenge. Although the task is not image classification
but segmentation, the size of the data set still poses a great limitation. For each image the goal is to
predict the class of around 18 million voxels of which approximately 900 thousands (= 5%) are signal.
This is clearly a large number of data points and a lot of information on a local scale, but all the data
points are highly correlated. On a global scale there is only 8 images from which the neural network
can learn about the general variations in spines (2 images saved for validation and testing respectively),
and the need for data augmentation is obvious. One way to go about is to apply conventional data
augmentation e.g. by rotating the images. Another way would be to apply learned data augmentation,
which on MNIST outperforms conventional data augmentation [8]. With this result in mind, we set
out to explore if learned data augmentation is a feasible option when dealing with the more complex
3D images.
3.1
Conventional Data Augmentation
Conventional data augmentation is simple, since the same transformations can be applied to all data
points independent of class. The data augmentation scheme is as such not dependent on the individual
data point itself, but is merely an overall assessment of which transformations are label conserving.
According to an article by Perez and Wang the most efficient form of (conventional) data augmentation
for (coarse grained) images is geometrical, which in this setting is confined to affine transformations
[13].
Affine transformations include translation, scaling, shearing and rotation as well as combinations of
these [19]. Common for affine transformations is that they preserve colinearity, parallelity and ratios
of distances on straight lines. That means that parallel lines will remain parallel, points on a line will
remain on line, and the length ratios along straight lines are constant under the transformations. Four
objects, which are all related by affine transformations, are shown in figure 3.1.
The only computationally expensive aspect of this affine data augmentation scheme is the interpolation
required in order to keep the input image sizes fixed (convolutional neural networks usually require
fixed input sizes). However this is negligible compared to the training time of the neural network.
This data augmentation scheme is limited, because the rigid transformations probably do not represent
the real variation in the data. In the present case with the spine scans, this data augmentation scheme
will not be able to model how the spine varies in curvature, thickness etc.
This is where the concept of learned data augmentation comes in handy!
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Learned Data Augmentation
Figure 3.1: These four objects are all related by affine transformations, which preserve colinearity,
parallelity and rations of distances on straight lines.
3.2
Learned Data Augmentation
The idea of learned data augmentation was first introduced by Hauberg et al. [8]. The idea of learned
data augmentation is, as the name suggests, to learn the data augmentation scheme from the data
itself. The goal is that the augmented data will represent the variations in data and thus will provide
the neural network more realistic information.
There are four steps to learned data augmentation, namely choosing a framework for expressing the
variations between images, compute transformations needed to align image pairs, building a statistical
model of said transformations, and sampling and applying transformations in order to create new
images.
3.2.1
Framework for expressing transformations
When learning the data augmentation scheme, it is essential to define a framework and thus a way
to express the variations in the data. The framework must be very expressive in order to include the
small variations in the spinal scans, but it must also be feasible to implement. When assuming the
spines belong to a class of diffeomorphisms, it is possible to parameterize the transformations by θ,
a multidimensional vector, via a method called CPAB transformations and a library named libcpab.
The assumption of diffeomorphisms and the implementation will be discussed in further detail in the
upcoming chapter.
3.2.2
Aligning image pairs
Aligning the image pairs means to find the transformation that makes one image similar to another
one. In other words, we want to find θ∗which minimizes the following expression:
θ∗= arg min
θ
xm ◦T θ −xn
2
(3.1)
How similar the images become after the transformation is dependent on how ’crazy’ the transformation
is allowed to behave. The transformations are already constrained to be diffeomorphic, but other means
of restricting the transformations are discussed in further details in a later chapter.
3.2.3
Building Statistical Model of transformations
The different transformations, parameterized by θ, resulting from the alignment of image pairs follows
a distribution, which we are interested in defining in order to be able to sample new transformations.
The transformations are assumed to follow a normal distribution [8].
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Learned Data Augmentation
15
We set:
T θnm = T θ ∼p(T θ|xn, xm)
(3.2)
The distribution has been found to fit well to a normal distribution [8] with mean µ = 0:
θ ∼N(0, Σ)
(3.3)
The covariance matrix can then be computed as:
Σ = 1
N
∑
n
(θn)(θn)T
(3.4)
Hence it is possible to estimate the covariance matrix and sample transformations from the according
normal distribution.
3.2.4
Sample transformation and image
Now it is possible to sample transformations from the distribution described above. Each sampled
transformation is then applied to one of the original images, which in return is sampled from a uniform
distribution. This way, the variation originally seen between one image pair can then be applied to a
different image.
Examples of sampled transformations applied to already existing images is presented in a later chapter.
These images, among others sampled using the same method, constitute the learned data augmentation.
==PAGE:26==
16
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Transformations
In this chapter, we are interested in defining a transformation, T θnm from one image, xn into another,
xm, which maximizes the similarity between the images when applied to the first image so that
xn ◦T θnm ≈xm. The transformations need to be able to capture the variation in spine and surrounding
organs, but still be smooth and gentle enough to preserve the human anatomy. The transformation
has to be highly expressive, since one can imagine that certain parts of the spine needs rotation or
stretching while other parts of the image might not. In particular the outer parts of the body might
not require as big a transformation as the areas close to the spine. This chapter is based on the articles
[8, 6, 5].
4.1
Diffeomorphisms
It is assumed that the transformations belong to a class of diffeomorphisms.
A diffeomorphism has the following properties:
• The mapping is differentiable.
• The mapping is invertible.
• The inverse is differentiable.
The differentiability of the mapping makes optimization via gradient descent possible. This is very
useful when aligning the image pairs by minimizing the squared errors and it is also useful when using
this framework as a spatial transformer layer in a neural network as proposed by Detlefsen et al. in [5].
The invertibility of the mapping is convenient for implementation purposes. Furthermore empirical
results show that the invertibility ensures much more robust results when used as a spatial transformer
layer in a neural network, because they are less prone to diverging [5] . It also seems intuitive for these
real world data that a transformation from one image to another can be reversed by the exact opposite
transformation. Finally the differentiability of the inverse ensures the possibility of reversing a bad
step during the optimization [5].
It is debatable whether this assumption of diffeomorphisms is appropriate when modelling human
anatomy. For instance the transformations in [8] preserve the topology of the input images. This will
cause trouble when dealing with scans of humans with one more vertebra than the average person,
because the transformation cannot remove or add a vertebra. On the other hand it seems reasonable
to restrict the transformations to being smooth and not introducing holes or other artifacts into the
transformed image. To sum up: a crucial argument for choosing the transformations to be diffeomorphic
is convenience with respect to implementation and expressiveness.
4.2
CPAB transformations
Although the idea of the transformations all belonging to a class of diffeomorphisms is simple, it is by
no means intuitive how to implement it in an algorithm. One way to implement these transformations
is proposed by Freifeld et al. in [6], where they introduce the CPAB transformations. CPAB is short for
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Transformations
Continuous Piecewise Affine Based, because the transformations are based on integration of continuous
piecewise affine velocity fields with respect to some tessellation.
Tessellation means that the image is divided into smaller equal-sized pieces that fill up the entire image
without overlapping or having gaps between them. The tesselations used in this project is shown in
figure 4.1.
A velocity field, vθ, is introduced. The velocity fields has to be continuous over the entire image, must
vanish on the image boundaries and be affine within each ”pyramid” of the tessellated image.
The trajectories of the transformations can be found by integrating the velocity field under aforemen-
tioned constraints. The transformation, T θ, defined by these trajectories, is a diffeomorphism. The
θ-vector is low dimensional representation of this transformation. In this project the dimension of θ
is dim(θ) = 96. This particular number is a result of the choice of tessellation (a finer tessellation
would have increased the dimensionality further) and the constraint of continuity on the edges of the
tessellation.
Figure 4.1: Tetrahedra combined into a cube [3].
4.2.1
Implementation
The algorithm is implemented in Pytorch by Detlefsen [4, 5], which itself is based on the implementation
by Freifeld et al. [6].
The image transforming algorithm has 3 steps. The first step is creating a grid, G, consisting of evenly
spaced points and size [0;1] in in each dimension.
This grid is then transformed according to the
transformation, T θ. The last step is interpolating the transformed image using the transformed grid
and the original image. In the implementation used for this project, the interpolation is performed using
the inverse transformation, T −θ, for practical reasons and thus support the fact that it is convenient
with an invertible transformation.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
Aligning image pairs
5.1
Alignment of spines
A computationally and conceptually simple way to align the spines is to compute the center points
of each vertebra and minimize the squared distances between all the vertebral center points for two
different spines. When this alignment is computed for the center of masses only, the transformation can
be applied to the full image and hopefully yield a new image closely similar to the ”destination image”.
This approach makes the alignment very fast computationally, since the optimization only involves in
the order of 102 points instead of 2 full spines with in the order of 105 points to be aligned. The
computation of course has to involve all voxels in a full image once, namely after the alignment when
producing the transformed image.
One might ask if it would be better to align the full spines. This could lead to overfitting and would
also heavily increase computation time.
5.1.1
Vertebral Center of Mass
Using the annotated images, the center points for each vertebra can be computed as the center of mass.
The center of mass can be computed for each vertebra using the position, ri, and mass, mi, for each of
the N voxels in the vertebra:
R = 1
M
N
∑
i=1
mi · ri
(5.1)
Assigning the same mass to each voxel reduces the equation to being a simple average of the voxel
positions:
R = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
ri
(5.2)
The center of masses are be computed using the Scipy library in Python, but follows the above equations.
Figure 5.1 shows the vertebral center of mass for all spines available. It is evident from the figure that
the spines are differently located in the CT scans but also that the curvature and spacing between the
vertebral center of masses differ.
5.1.2
Pairwise alignment
A simple way to align image pairs is minimizing the squared distance between the center of masses they
share (e.g. when aligning scan 3 and 8 only vertebrae 200 to 1700 are considered). The loss is defined
as:
ε =
xm ◦T θ −xn
2
(5.3)
The minimization of distances between the center of masses of the vertebra only imposes constraints on
the area close to the vertebral center of masses. This means that the transformations are free to ”act
==PAGE:30==
20
5 Aligning image pairs
Figure 5.1: An overview of all vertebral center of masses for all spines
out” in the outer areas of the scans and distort the images dramatically. Since these transformations
of images are to be used to create synthetic images this might be unwanted behavior, because it will
create non-realistic cases to be used in the segmentation network.
5.1.3
Regularization
Regularization is an intuitive way to control the ”acting out” of the transformations. The dramatic
transformations can be penalized when minimizing the loss by adding a factor of λ∥θ∥2 to the loss
function, because the bigger the θ, the bigger the transformation.
The loss function then becomes:
L =
xm ◦T θ −xn
2 + λ∥θ∥2 = ε + λ∥θ∥2
(5.4)
We denote the θ, that minimizes the distance between xn and xm, θmn. The minimization is an iterable
process, which is initialized with the identity transformation T 0 where θ = 0.
To check if regularization is needed at all, two images are aligned using 4 different values of λ, including
λ = 0. The size of λ turns out to have great significance with respect to convergence of the alignment
as shown in table 5.1.
λ
0
0.001
0.01
0.1
Iterations
> 500
200
100
< 100
Table 5.1: Number of iterations required for convergence as a function of λ.
It is evident from the table that the regularization ensures quick convergence and will thus be used.
The next step is choosing the optimal λ parameter, which is a trade off between allowing non-trivial
flexible transformations that gives great likeness between image pairs and restraining the transforma-
tions such that the transformed images do not become unnatural and non-representative. This means
that part of the process of choosing a good λ parameter is visual inspection, but it would be preferable
to make a decision grounded in something measurable. One idea is to inspect the loss without regular-
ization, ε, as a function of λ. The loss without regularization is a measure of the distance/difference
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Sanity Check
21
between the images. Plotting it against λ could unveil boundaries for λ if the function is somewhat
sigmoid-shaped. The lower plateau would be the result of no or very little regularization allowing the
difference between images to be very small. The higher plateau would be the result of high regulariza-
tion not allowing the images to be aligned. Given that regularization is needed, the optimal λ would
be found between the two plateaus.
Trying to align an image pair with different λ parameters in the optimization yields following plots:
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: Image similarity, ε, as a function of regularization parameter, λ.
Unfortunately, the loss without regularization as a function of λ does not appear to have a sigmoid-shape
and thus the graphs will only be of little use when determining the optimal regularization parameter.
Figure 5.2 (a) shows that a regularization parameter of λ > 0.2 will heavily restrict the allowed trans-
formation keep it fixed and thus we look for a smaller value.
Hence the optimal λ parameter can only be evaluated by looking at the transformed images after
minimizing the loss, since there is no mathematical measure of when a scan is ”too messed up”. The
criteria for a ”good” λ is transformed images where the surroundings of the spine look smooth and
nothing catches the eye.
We are interested in finding the smallest possible regularization parameter and thus begin to in-
vestigate transformed images with regularization parameter in the range [0.001, 0.002, ..., 0.009] and
[0.01, 0.02, .., 0.09].
A few examples of alignments (transformations) are shown in order to illustrate the process of choosing
a suitable regularization parameter.
The figures 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 show the cross section of two scans as well as the alignment between
them when using λ = 0.003. Even though the initial and the source image appear to be symmetrical
(especially visible in the x and y cross section), the transformed image does not have this property.
Using the regularization parameter, λ = 0.01, the behavior of the transformation looks more smooth
and yields more symmetrical results. Examples of this is shown in figures 5.6 5.7 and 5.8. For this
reason the regularization parameter is chosen by visual inspection to be λ = 0.01.
5.2
Sanity Check
An overview of the first principal component of the transformations is given by transforming an image
with following transformations:
θα = α
√
λmaxVmax,
α = −3 . . . 3
(5.5)
==PAGE:32==
22
5 Aligning image pairs
Figure 5.3: Image pair aligning using λ = 0.003
where λmax is the biggest eigenvalue (not to be confused with the regularization parameter above) and
Vmax is the according eigenvector.
The transformations for the 5 different α-values are shown in figure 5.9. The figure shows a short thick
spine being stretched into a longer and thinner spine. This illustrates the main variations in the data
set and seems reasonable and intuitive. Simulations of these variations can be found at:
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/behkidxrjcmvasf/AAAN8FA4udbyGln6x00_9CdKa?dl=0
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Sanity Check
23
Figure 5.4: Image pair aligning using λ = 0.003
Figure 5.5: Image pair aligning using λ = 0.003
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Aligning image pairs
Figure 5.6: Image pair aligning using λ = 0.01
Figure 5.7: Image pair aligning using λ = 0.01
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Sanity Check
25
Figure 5.8: Image pair aligning using λ = 0.01
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.9: First principal component of variations applied to an original spine image. The images show
from -3 to 3 standard deviations.
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6
Sampling Data
6.1
Sampling New Data
As described in chapter 3, new transformations can be sampled from the statistical model built from
the alignments described in the previous chapter. These sampled transformations are then applied to
random images from the original data set and yield the learned data augmentation. The rest of this
chapter is devoted to showing some learned data augmentation samples. The images come in pairs;
showing the synthetic scan and the synthetic label. Each figure show three different samples based
on the same original image, that is three sampled transformations applied to the same original image
yielding three new images. Figure 6.1 and 6.2 show three examples of synthetic data based on original
image 4. Figure 6.3 and 6.4 show another three examples of the synthetic data based on image 6.
Finally figure 6.5 and 6.6 are based on image 1. It is evident from looking at these images that the
variation in the augmented data is subtle.
==PAGE:38==
28
6 Sampling Data
Figure 6.1: Each row shows one sampled image (but different cross sections). These images are based
on image 4.
==PAGE:39==
6.1 Sampling New Data
29
Figure 6.2: Labels for sampled images in figure 6.1.
==PAGE:40==
30
6 Sampling Data
Figure 6.3: Each row shows one sampled image (but different cross sections). These images are based
on image 6.
==PAGE:41==
6.1 Sampling New Data
31
Figure 6.4: Labels for sampled images in figure 6.3.
==PAGE:42==
32
6 Sampling Data
Figure 6.5: Each row shows one sampled image (but different cross sections). These images are based
on image 1.
==PAGE:43==
6.1 Sampling New Data
33
Figure 6.6: Labels for sampled images in figure 6.5.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
Part III
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 7
Segmentation Network
The aim in this chapter is to build and train a segmentation network using only the original data set
(10 images in total) as well as the augmented data set developed in the previous part. The underlying
assumption is that the segmentation network will train and perform better when using the augmented
data set. This assumption will be tested in this part of the thesis, thus the overall goal of determining
the need of learned data augmentation will be reached.
In a segmentation task the aim is to classify each voxel, so the output is of the same size as the input
image and is a probability map of the voxel belonging to foreground or background. This is different
from the more typical image classification task, where the aim is to classify if an image belongs to a
certain class or whether an image contains a certain object. Accordingly a segmentation task requires a
different network architecture than e.g. the well known image classification network VGG16 [15], which
is dependent on its fully connected layers to classify.
7.1
Fully Convolutional Networks for segmentation
The network architecture used in this thesis is an end-to-end fully convolutional network (FCN). A
FCN contains only convolutional layers and no fully connected layers as seen in classification CNNs.
Convolutional layers usually have the effect of down-sizing the input and thus reduce the size of the
problem. In order to end up with output dimensions matching input dimensions, the network needs
to contain layers with the opposite effect: namely up-sizing. These layers are in daily speech called
deconvolutional.
After choosing an appropriate network architecture for segmentation, it is time to choose how to deal
with the volumetric data. There are two approaches to choose between. Either the volumetric data is
sliced into 2D images, on which the network is trained and tested using 2D filters, or a 3D convolutional
network is implemented with 3D filters. U-NET is an example of the former approach; an end-to-end
fully convolutional segmentation network for sliced volumetric data [14], whereas the newer architecture,
V-NET, proposed by Milletari et al. is a 3D implementation [10]. According to the authors, V-NET is
currently state-of-the-art within medical image segmentation.
7.1.1
U-NET
U-NET is a fully convolutional segmentation network, which works on 2D images [14]. The network
consist of multiple succeeding convolutional layers, which extract information and reduce the dimensions
of the problem (in the article referred to as the contracting path). The dimensions have to be increased
again in order to provide a segmentation of the same size as the input image. This is done via an
expansive path, which consists of deconvolutional layers. Since the V-NET architecture is utilized in
this project, the U-NET will not be discussed in more depth.
7.1.2
V-NET
V-NET is an end-to-end fully convolutional neural network, which works in 3D and has volumetric
filters. Its architecture is heavily inspired by the U-NET and hence it also consists of a contracting
path and an expansive path. It goes without saying that a 3D implementation is to be preferred when
==PAGE:48==
38
7 Segmentation Network
dealing with 3D data. This makes the V-Net most relevant for medical images, because these often are
3D (such as MRI, CT scans, PET scans etc.).
Figure 7.1 shows a schematic overview of the V-NET architecture. The following description is based
on the original article by Milletari et al. [10].
The left side consists of convolutional layers that reduce the dimensions and the right side consists of
de-convolutional layers that increases the dimensions until the image reaches its original size. With
some effort one can see that the blue blocks in the figure form a V, which might just be the reason for
the choice of name...
The network consists of 4 stages with down-convolutions (left) and 4 stages with up-convolutions (right).
The up/down-convolutions are performed with kernel size 2 × 2 × 2 voxels and a stride of 2. Each of
these operations reduces the dimensionality of a factor 2. After each up/down-convolution a PRelu-
nonlinearity is applied. In each stage a number of convolutions are applied in order to extract features
before the respective change of dimensionality. The in-stage convolutions are performed using kernel
size 5 × 5 × 5 and stride 1 and thus the dimensionality is preserved. No pooling or de-pooling is applied
and all convolutions have appropriate padding, according to the article. V-NET is a so-called residual
neural network as fine grained features are forwarded just as in U-NET.
The number of in-stage convolutions are as follows: 1, 2, 3, 3 (left side) and then 3 convolutions (bottom)
and then 3, 3, 2, 1 (right side).
The V-NET article introduces and uses a novel loss function, the generalized dice loss, which is a loss
function inspired by the dice score. This loss function deals with the data imbalance without having to
assign weights to the different classes and yields better performance when tested experimentally [10].
7.2
V-NET implementation
The entire training program - including managing data splits, defining placeholders, training operations,
performance testing and tuning of hyper parameters - has been implemented from scratch, whereas the
V-NET class and convolutional layers are implemented by Monteiro in Tensorflow [11]. The model
development was performed on the augmented data set and later applied on the original data set.
The main differences between the network described in the V-NET article and the current implemen-
tation are the choices of loss function and optimizer. Furthermore there is a big difference in image
sizes. The V-NET article deals with MR scans of size (128,128,64) voxels, whereas the data dimensions
in this thesis are (256,256,280) - a factor of 17.5 larger. This introduces new challenges to deal with in
the implementation, primarily due to memory issues. For this particular reason the batch size is chosen
to be 1 image.
The ADAM optimizer has been chosen for this implementation of the V-NET architecture and relu is
used as activation function.
The number of channels needs to be reduced to avoid memory issues on the used GPUs. For that reason
the number of channels is set to 8, which is exactly half of the original 16 channels.
7.2.1
Weighted Loss function
The loss function has great importance when training a neural network and since the data is greatly
imbalanced, a default cross entropy loss will not suffice. One option is to implement the well known
weighted cross entropy loss function, which - as the name suggests - applies different weights to different
classes. In that way the biggest class is penalized much harder than the smaller class and hence the
network is ’forced’ into taking the small class into account.
The weighted cross entropy loss function is based on the sigmoid cross entropy loss function [17].
The sigmoid cross entropy with logits loss is defined as:
loss = −z · log(σ(x)) −(1 −z) · log(1 −σ(x))
(7.1)
==PAGE:49==
7.2 V-NET implementation
39
Figure 7.1: VNET example model diagram. [11].
where z is the label (either 0 or 1) and x is the logit in range x ∈] −inf; inf[ and σ(x) =
1
1+exp{−x} is
the sigmoid function.
The weighted cross entropy with logits loss function is just a weighed version of the sigmoid cross
entropy loss function:
loss = −q · z · log(σ(x)) −(1 −z) · log(1 −σ(x))
(7.2)
where z is the label (either 0 or 1) and x is the logit in range x ∈] −inf; inf[, q is the weight and
σ(x) =
1
1+exp{−x} is the sigmoid function.
The weights are calculated as inversely proportional to the class size and are then normalized.
Just as the sigmoid cross entropy loss function, this function is also rephrased in TensorFlow to ensure
numerical stability [17].
7.2.2
Dice score
The Dice Score (also known as Sørensen-Dice Coefficient or Dice Similarity Coefficient) is a measure of
spatial overlap especially suited for segmentation tasks [12, 20]. The dice score can be expressed as a
==PAGE:50==
40
7 Segmentation Network
function of true positives (TP), false positives (FP) and false negatives (FN):
F1 =
2 · TP
2 · TP + FN + FP
(7.3)
It can also be expressed as a function of precision and recall:
F1 =
(recall−1 + precision−1
2
)−1
= 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall.
(7.4)
Where precision is defined as:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(7.5)
and recall as:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(7.6)
7.3
Cross Validation
It is important to design the cross validation scheme with the small amount of data in mind. We want
to maximize the amount of training while still saving data to test performance. Disk usage is also a
limitation when performing data augmentation, since each image take up around 70 MB of space. It is
important to test the model performance based on the exact same images both with and without data
augmentation. In order to do so, the learned data augmentation can only be based on the images in
the training set and must be created for each validation split.
The evaluation of the performance of the segmentation network is done using 10-fold cross validation
(in the case with only 10 images in total this is also leave-one-out cross validation), so for each fold the
performance is tested on a single original image.
This decision might introduce some biases in the performance measurements if the models are sensitive
to the training/test split.
7.3.1
Using learned data augmentation
The data augmentation must be learned from the training data and not the test data. This alone
requires 10 different augmentation sets. Doing the same thing for the validation data would require
even more storage space and bring many struggles of managing big data. The comprise favours both
the need for independent validation data and the limitations in storage space by allowing the learned
statistical model to be based on 9 images. The validation image is chosen among the original images
(excluding the test image of course) as well as 10 random transformations applied to this image. This
brings in total 11 validation images. This process is shown in figure 7.2 and 7.3.
7.3.2
Using original data
The cross validation when training is straight forward. 8 images are used for training, 1 for validation
and finally 1 for testing.
7.4
Experiments
Different combinations of number of layers and convolutions in each layer are tested to make sure that
the optimal setting found in [10] also applies in this case. Furthermore the hyper parameters, such as
learning rate, is fine-tuned.
==PAGE:51==
7.4 Experiments
41
Figure 7.2: Sampling data using different splits of original data set.
Figure 7.3: Division of data for training, validation and testing the segmentation network. The dotted
lines represent the amount of data used for the two different models.
==PAGE:52==
42
7 Segmentation Network
7.4.1
Number of layers and convolutions
Two different combinations of layers and convolutions are tested.
The first combination is with 2 up/down-convolutions and respectively 4 and 5 in-stage convolutions and
1 bottom-convolution. The second combination is as the VNET article with 5 up/down-convolutions
and respectively (1,2,3,3) in-stage convolutions and 3 bottom convolutions. The network learns faster
when using the same architecture as the article, hence this is used.
7.4.2
Regularization
Regularization is tested out to see if it stabilizes the training. Dropout is a form of regularization, where
a certain amount of the weights are deleted at each iteration and forcing the network to become more
robust. The network training is tested with dropout rates of 0 %, 10 %, 25 % and 50 %.
The tendency is that adding dropout to the training of the networks is reducing the training ability.
Hence the further work in this thesis will be without dropout.
7.4.3
Learning Rate and convergence
The learning rate is another hyper parameter to be tuned. At first a learning rate of 10−4 is tried out.
Training the network on the augmented data set sometimes fails with respect to predicting a descent
segmentation. One example is shown in figure 7.4. The network is learning, since the training loss is
reduced, but the training dice score does not increase and is even reduced. It is also evident, that the
network does not manage to predict any segmentation, as illustrated in figure 7.5. This is because the
network finds the local minimum of predicting everything to be background, which is quite reasonable
when keeping the very imbalanced data in mind (more than 95 % of the data is background). Although
this behavior is not unreasonable it is still unwanted in this setting and the networks showing this
behavior is terminated. Based on the training dice score this behavior can be detected after training for
around 10 epochs, and the network can then be terminated in order to save computational resources.
Figure 7.4: Training loss and dice score of experiment without image 2, learning rate of 10−4.
Training the same model again (using a different cross validation fold and a new random initialization
but keeping all other parameters fixed) yields a nice training loss decrease and training dice score increase
as well as reasonable segmentation for the first 130 epochs, see figure 7.6. Then something happens
and the training loss increases significantly as well as the training dice score drops. The network has
==PAGE:53==
7.4 Experiments
43
Figure 7.5: Prediction for validation image trained without image 2, learning rate of 10−4.
obviously taken a (too big) training step in the wrong direction. The big training steps are also visible
when looking at the validation predictions. Figure 7.7 shows the predictions of the model at epoch 50,
60, and 70 respectively. The changes are very noticeable. This could suggest that the network would
profit from a smaller learning rate.
Training the same model - this time on a different fold and with the learning rate of 10−5 - yields
another stable training throughout the first 70 epochs as well as more subtle changes in the predictions
at epoch 50, 60 and 70 as shown in figures 7.8 and 7.9.
On this basis, it is decided to proceed with a learning rate of 10−4 for the first 70 epochs and then
update to 10−5. The bigger learning rate is kept for the first 70 epochs, so that the training is not
slowed further down.
==PAGE:54==
44
7 Segmentation Network
Figure 7.6: Training loss and dice score of experiment trained without image 2, learning rate of 10−4.
==PAGE:55==
7.4 Experiments
45
Figure 7.7: Prediction for validation image trained without image 2, learning rate of 10−4.
==PAGE:56==
46
7 Segmentation Network
Figure 7.8: Training loss and dice score of experiment trained without image 3, learning rate of 10−5.
==PAGE:57==
7.4 Experiments
47
Figure 7.9: Prediction for validation image trained without image 3, learning rate of 10−5.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 8
Performance of
Segmentation network
The model has to be trained and evaluated twice for each test split in order to make a fair comparison
of the performance. Due to time constraints (training a model takes in the order of 5 days), the test
performance is evaluated on 5 out of 10 folds for both the augmented and original data set.
The learning rate is updated from 10−4 to 10−5 after 70 (with data augmentation) or 700 epochs
(without data augmentation), because the augmented data set is around 10 times bigger than the one
without data augmentation, which in return is 10 times faster per epoch. Apart from that, the models
are trained with the exact same parameters.
8.1
Training
The training does not always converge towards a reasonable segmentation as mentioned in chapter 7.
When this behavior is detected in the testing setting - usually after 24 hours of training - the model is
terminated and restarted with a different random initialization. The training is run for 5 days, which
equals 200-300 epochs for the augmented data set or around 3300 epochs for the original data set.
If the loss functions increases dramatically and the training score decreases dramatically at the same
time, the training is terminated and the test performance is computed using the model saved just before
the ”wrong step”, which is where the highest training performance is found.
8.1.1
With data augmentation
Figure 8.1 shows the training loss, dice score and validation loss for the model trained on augmented
data and later tested on scan 2. It is evident, that the peak in the training and validation loss coincides
with the drastic decrease in training score. Furthermore the model does not seem to be able to ’recover’
and hence the model from epoch 40 (just before the peak) is used to evaluate the test performance.
Figure 8.3 shows the training loss and dice score as a function of epochs for the model trained with
data augmentation and tested on scan 6. This model also has a peak in the training loss and training
score, but the model quickly recovers and continue to increase performance. Hence the testing happens
when the model has trained for the allowed time of 5 days. The remaining 3 splits will not be discussed
in detailed, since they behave similarly and is evaluated after the entire training time.
8.1.2
Without data augmentation
As seen on figure 8.4 the training loss and training score without data augmentation behaves just as
the training with data augmentation, except that the number of epochs is increased with a factor of 10.
Common for training both with and without data augmentation is the massive peaks in loss functions,
which might lead to convergence issues. It seems that lowering the learning rate after a fixed amount
of epochs has not been sufficient to stop the training instability and thus a learning rate of 10−5 is
suggested for future work.
==PAGE:60==
50
8 Performance of Segmentation network
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.1: (a) Training loss and training dice score for model with data augmentation and test scan 2.
(b) Validation loss for model with data augmentation and test scan 2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.2: (a) Training loss and training dice score for model without data augmentation and test scan
2. (b) Validation loss for model without data augmentation and test scan 2.
8.2
Test performance
The test performance for the folds trained with data augmentation is shown in table 8.1 and the test
performance for the folds trained on the original data set is shown in table 8.2. The average performance
is shown in table 8.3. A visual representation of the results is shown in figure 8.5.
Test Image
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Restarts
2
0
0
0
0
Epochs
40
306
193
193
293
Test Performance
0.7727
0.7859
0.8975
0.7381
0.8908
Table 8.1: Performance with learned data augmentation
There are several things to note when looking at the results. First of all, the learned data augmentation
does not lead to a statistically significant increase in performance (within one standard deviation). The
average performance is higher, but the variation is too large. The uncertainty on the average could be
reduced by testing on all 10 splits if time had not been limited.
==PAGE:61==
8.2 Test performance
51
Figure 8.3: Train loss and score for model trained on augmented data set with test image 6.
Figure 8.4: Train loss and score for model trained on original data set with test image 6.
Test Image
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Restarts
3
1
1
0
0
Epochs
908
3064
2919
3277
3234
Test Performance
0.8630
0.8119
0.8297
0.6819
0.8277
Table 8.2: Performance without learned data augmentation
The number of necessary restarts also tells a story about the performance of the network. Training on
the original data set required 5 restarts in total, whereas the number of restarts for the augmented data
set was kept at 2. This shows that training on the augmented data set is more stable than training on
the original data set.
Another thing worth noticing is the sensitivity to the train/test split. This is especially notable for the
models tested on image 2. The train performance just passes 70 % when trained on the original data
set, but the test performance reaches an astonishing 86 %! This is sheer ”luck” as the image is unknown
to the network until the point of testing. The same pattern is seen when trained on the augmented
data set, although the difference is smaller (from just below 70 % when training to 77 % when testing).
Cross sections of the predictions for the test images are shown in figure 8.6, 8.7, 8.8, 8.9 and 8.10.
In summary, the tendency is that learned data augmentation has a small positive effect on training
stability and performance, but more experiments are required in order to determine the magnitude of
the improvement.
==PAGE:62==
52
8 Performance of Segmentation network
With Data Augmentation
Without Data Augmentation
Average Performance
81.7% ± 2.9%
80.3% ± 2.8%
Table 8.3: Average performance
Figure 8.5: Test results on the different test splits. The dotted lines represent the average performances.
Performance of the augmented data set is red and performance of the original data set is blue.
==PAGE:63==
8.2 Test performance
53
Figure 8.6: Test image 2 with and without data augmentation. Row 1: Input image. Row 2: Predictions
using data augmentation. Row 3: Predictions without data augmentation. Row 4: Ground truth.
==PAGE:64==
54
8 Performance of Segmentation network
Figure 8.7: Test image 4 with and without data augmentation. Row 1: Input image. Row 2: Predictions
using data augmentation. Row 3: Predictions without data augmentation. Row 4: Ground truth.
==PAGE:65==
8.2 Test performance
55
Figure 8.8: Test image 5 with and without data augmentation. Row 1: Input image. Row 2: Predictions
using data augmentation. Row 3: Predictions without data augmentation. Row 4: Ground truth.
==PAGE:66==
56
8 Performance of Segmentation network
Figure 8.9: Test image 6 with and without data augmentation. Row 1: Input image. Row 2: Predictions
using data augmentation. Row 3: Predictions without data augmentation. Row 4: Ground truth.
==PAGE:67==
8.2 Test performance
57
Figure 8.10: Test image 7 with and without data augmentation. Row 1: Input image. Row 2: Pre-
dictions using data augmentation. Row 3: Predictions without data augmentation. Row 4: Ground
truth.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
Part IV
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
This thesis presents unprecedented results on learned data augmentation for spinal CT scans. Learned
data augmentation has been shown to proficiently capture the variation in spinal curvature while still
preserving the surrounding human anatomy and hence create realistic images to use in the segmentation
task.
A 3D fully convolutional neural network based on the V-NET architecture has been implemented and
tuned to work on the spine data set. This work included choosing a suitable loss function and optimizer
and building the training and testing program as well as fine tuning hyper parameters such as learning
rate.
The V-NET architecture has been shown to work well on highly imbalanced data sets as depicted in
the original article [10]. Both training on the original data set, consisting of only 8 training images, as
well as training on the augmented data set yield sensible segmentation results.
The segmentation results are evaluated on 5 out of 10 cross validation folds using the dice score as
similarity measure. The results of 81.7% ± 2.9% when using learned data augmentation versus 80.3% ±
2.8% on the original data set. Although this is not statistically significant, it points in the direction of
improvement when using learned data augmentation.
Several issues hinder a strong conclusion about the effect of learned data augmentation for the seg-
mentation task. The training instability and sensitivity to train/test splits are both important factors.
The high training time indirectly contributes as well, because it poses limitations to the amount of
experiments and model evaluations. The small amount of data - which is the very foundation of this
thesis - of course also plays a role.
9.1
Future work
The main work for the future evolves around the segmentation network. Given more time, the training
could be stabilized further and more results produced. This would provide firmer grounds for concluding
the necessity of learned data augmentation.
It would also be interesting to experiment with the generalized dice loss as implemented in the original
V-NET article [10].
The next step within learned data augmentation would be to incorporate the learning part of the
data augmentation in the network optimization.
This could lead to true end-to-end learned data
augmentation.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spine#/media/File:Gray_111_-_Vertebral_column-
coloured.png.
[2]
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gray94.png.
[3]
https://www.ics.uci.edu/ẽppstein/projects/tetra/fivecube.gif.
[4]
Nicki S. Detlefsen. libcpab. https://github.com/SkafteNicki/libcpab. 2018.
[5]
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen, Oren Freifeld, and Søren Hauberg. “Deep Diffeomorphic Transformer Net-
works”. In: Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2018).
[6]
Oren Freifeld et al. “Transformations Based on Continuous Piecewise-Affine Velocity Fields”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2017).
[7]
David Gleicher. 8 fascinating and fearsome frontiers of science you should know about. https:
//www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/11/frontiers-of-science-research-global-future-
councils-2018. 2018.
[8]
Søren Hauberg et al. “Dreaming More Data: Class-dependent Distributions over Diffeomorphisms
for Learned Data Augmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1510.02795 (2015). arXiv: 1510.02795. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1510.02795.
[9]
Hector Muñoz Jianhua Yao Joseph E. Burns and Ronald M. Summers. Detection of Vertebral
Body Fractures Based on Cortical Shell Unwrapping. International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, Volume 7512, 2012, pp 509-516.
[10]
Fausto Milletari, Nassir Navab, and Seyed-Ahmad Ahmadi. “V-Net: Fully Convolutional Neural
Networks for Volumetric Medical Image Segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1606.04797 (2016). arXiv:
1606.04797. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.04797.
[11]
Miguel Monteiro. VNet-Tensorflow. https://github.com/MiguelMonteiro/VNet-Tensorflow.
2018.
[12]
Nigel M. Parsad. Deep Learning in Medical Imaging V. https://medium.com/datadriveninvestor/
deep-learning-in-medical-imaging-3c1008431aaf. 2018.
[13]
Luis Perez and Jason Wang. “The Effectiveness of Data Augmentation in Image Classification
using Deep Learning”. In: CoRR abs/1712.04621 (2017). arXiv: 1712 . 04621. url: http : / /
arxiv.org/abs/1712.04621.
[14]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomed-
ical Image Segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1505.04597 (2015). arXiv: 1505.04597. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
[15]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale
Image Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1409.1556 (2014). arXiv: 1409.1556. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1409.1556.
[16]
SpineWeb. SpineWeb Datasets. http://spineweb.digitalimaginggroup.ca/spineweb/index.
php?n=Main.Datasets.
[17]
tf.nn.weighted_cross_entropy_with_logist. https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/
tf/nn/weighted_cross_entropy_with_logits.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[18]
Zawn Villines. The Sixth Lumbar Vertebrae: The Anatomy Behind the Rare Extra Bone. https:
//www.spinalcord.com/blog/the-sixth-lumbar-vertebrae-the-anatomy-behind-the-
rare-extra-bone.
[19]
Eric W. Weisstein. Affine Transformation. From MathWorld–A Wolfram Web Resource. http:
//mathworld.wolfram.com/AffineTransformation.html.
[20]
Kelly H et al. Zou. Statistical validation of image segmentation quality based on a spatial overlap
index. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1415224/. 2004.
