==PAGE:1==
Optimizing Visualization of 3D printed Organoids
Aikaterini Trilyraki (s161402)
==PAGE:2==
Optimizing Visualization of 3D
printed Organoids
Master Thesis, May 2019
Supervisors:
Niels Bent Larsen
Emil Boye Kromann
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby
Project Period: September 2018 - May 2019
ECTS: 35
Field: Photonics Engineering
Remarks: This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for
graduation in the above mentioned education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Aikaterini Trilyraki
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Background: Organoids are 3D tissue models comprised of stem cells and poly-
meric scaffolds that mimic its pertinent in vivo organs. The structural and dynamic
complexity modelled by oganoids can be probed by light microscopy techniques that
enable volume and live imaging.
The limiting factor in tissue and thus organoid
volume imaging regardless of the microscopy method used is loss of contrast due to
scattering.
Method: This thesis seeks to investigate how far the established workhorse in deep
tissue imaging (i.e two-photon fluorescence microscopy) can get you in organoid imag-
ing where you have a scaffold that introduces more scattering. The scaffolds that were
studied are hydrogels printed via stereolithography (SLA) utilizing poly(ethylene gly-
col) diacrylate (PEGDA). A finite element model is developed so that to set the
fundamental understanding of how the optical properties of these scaffolds affect the
illumination path of a two-photon (2P) microscope.
Result: SLA-printed PEGDA hydrogels were characterized via confocal imaging and
a model was developed on how refractive index varies in such materials. The effect of
PEGDA hydrogels on the two-photon illumination path was studied within a finite
element framework. A one-layer thick (i.e. 20 um) PEGDA slab will scatter light
away from the 2P focal spot making it weaker. Increasing the slab thickness (up to
five layers) does not result in a monotonic change in the focal spot shape. For a five-
layers thick PEGDA slab, the focal spot becomes stronger and it is surrounded by
stronger side lobs. A complementary to the simulations task was the participation in
the building of an open-source 2P microscope which will be used in organoid imaging.
Conclusion: The simulation developed offers valuable insights on how the 2P focal
spot is affected by the introduction of SLA-printed PEGDA hydrogels in the illu-
mination path. In its current state, though, it is limited by its high computational
requirements not allowing it to reach its full potential as a tool to study organoid
imaging.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Initially, I would like to thank my supervisors, Niels B. Larsen and Emil Boye Kro-
mann for their enthusiasm, guidance and support throughout this project. My ap-
preciation also goes to the entire Polycell group for being more than willing to help
and effortlessly creating a nice working environment. Next, I would like to thank the
people behind DTU’s cluster support for their invaluable help and guidance. Special
thanks goes to Kristian Julius Moltved for the fun during the microscope building.
Closing, I would like to thank the people of master students room 115 that I have
been sharing an office with during this thesis. It has been a pleasure to be with such
good company during this busy time.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Framework & Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement & Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
4
2.1
Deep Tissue Fluorescent Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Scattering in Excitation and Detection Light Path . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
The Two-photon Depth Limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The Two-photon Point Spread Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Numerical Modeling of Light Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Ray Tracing Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Monte Carlo Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
Finite Element Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.4
Challenges Associated with Modelling SLA-printed PEGDA-
based Scaffolds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.5
Rationale for Pursuing Finite Element-based Modelling
. . . .
11
3
Optical Behaviour of PEGDA-based Hydrogels
13
3.1
Photopolymerization & Projection Stereolithography Printing . . . . .
14
3.2
Projection SLA Printing & Refractive Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Axial Refractive Index Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Lateral Refractive Index Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
PEGDA & Refractive Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
PEGDA-based Hydrogels: Printing & Characterization
19
4.1
The Contrast Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Test structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Resin Solution & Printer Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:6==
Contents
v
4.4
Sample Preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5
Confocal Imaging Set Up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
The RI Model for PEGDA-based Hydrogels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.6.1
Axial Refractive Index Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6.2
Lateral Refractive Index Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
An Open-source Two-photon Microscope
28
5.1
Wiring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Signal Acquisition/Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.2
Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.3
Scanning Mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.4
3-axis Moving Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.5
Laser
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.6
Control Computer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
COMSOL Simulation: a Two-photon PSF Meets a Slab of PEGDA
in Water
33
6.1
Two-photon PSF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
The Modelling Domain Conceptually-wise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.1
The Rectangle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.2
The Spherical Wavefront . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.3
The Point Emitters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.4
PEGDA Slab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
The Modelling Domain COMSOL-wise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Meshing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Results & Discussion
42
7.1
PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation Predictions . . . .
42
7.1.1
The Two-photon PSF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.1.2
The Two-photon PSF Gets Distorted by a PEGDA-based Hy-
drogel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.1.3
Single PEGDA Layer: An Array of Micro-sized GRIN Elements
47
7.1.4
Multiple PEGDA Layers: A Stack Of Micro-sized Aligned Ar-
rays of GRIN Elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8
Conclusion & Outlook
59
8.0.1
Microscope Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.0.2
Finite Element Modeling: PEGDA-based Hydrogels vs Two-
photon PSF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A Stereolithography Printing
62
A.1 Stereolithography Printer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 Printing Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:7==
vi
Contents
B High Performance Computing
64
B.1
Cluster Infrastructure at DTU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.2
An Example Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B.3
Computational Resources for Different Mesh Sizes
. . . . . . . . . . .
66
C PSF & Axial Symmetry
67
Bibliography
68
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Framework & Motivation
Organoids are 3D in vitro tissue models that mimic its pertinent in vivo organs
[1]. This makes them a promising platform to study the underlying mechanisms of
processes such as tissue homeostasis, organ function and organogenesis [1].
With
organoids having been reported for a range of tissues such as brain, stomach, lung,
liver, kidney or intestine [2], they could potentially serve as an in vitro, non-controversial
animal testing substitute.
The structural and dynamic complexity modelled by oganoids can be probed by
established and novel light microscopy techniques that enable volume (3D) [3] and
live (4D) [4] imaging.
This means that the synergy between organoids and light
microscopy makes it possible to visualize fine cellular details as well as overall tissue
architecture within a single biological sample.
As the complexity of organoids is increased so that highly compartmentalized organs
(e.g. hairy skin or muscle) can be modeled, it is expected that volume imaging will be
an essential companion to develop organoid architectures and study cell positioning
and differentiation [5]. Volume organoid imaging is mediated by noninvasive optical
sectioning methods such as confocal imaging, multi-photon [6] and recently light-
sheet [7] microscopy. While each method has its advantages and limitations and is
rendered more suitable or not depending on what a researcher seeks to visualize, all
off them are ultimately limited by loss of contrast due to light redirection, put in one
word; scattering [8].
Light propagation in tissue depends on the scattering and absorption properties
of its constituents which are cells, organelles, and the extracellular matrix (ECM). In
the relevant to optical microscopy region (visible and near-IR) the tissue constituents
have sizes comparable to the wavelength of light. In this way, scattering is directed
in the forward (i.e. light propagation) direction and its effect is stronger than that
of absorption, making it the reason why light can only penetrate a few hundreds of
micrometers into the tissue [9]. In intact tissue, confocal fluorescence laser scanning
microscopy yields an imaging depth of 200 um while two-photon-excited fluorescence
laser scanning microscopy has set the depth limit to a few millimeters. Imaging depth
of 1 mm in brain tissue and 3 mm in murine small intestine (SI) have been reported
in [10] and [11] respectively.
Before migrating from 3D tissue imaging to organoid imaging, one has to consider
==PAGE:9==
2
1 Introduction
the peculiarities of the 3D tissue models that the term organoid describes. The term
organoid is commonly used to describe 3D tissue models that (i) are derived from
stem cells (either pluripotent or adult stem cells from various organs) [1] and (ii)
are accompanied by scaffolds that serve as a proxy for the non-cellular component
of tissue (i.e the extracellular matrix) so that cell self-organization is promoted [2].
These scaffolds are made of synthetic [12] (e.g.
polyurethanes and poly(ethylene
glycol) diacrylate) or naturally-derived polymers (such as collagen [13] and gelatin
[14]). Consequently, organoids bear all the 3D tissue imaging challenges while adding
some extra spatial and optical thickness to them. This essentially means that more
scattering events will be introduced, yielding an even poorer contrast making volume
organoid imaging even more challenging.
1.2
Problem Statement & Contribution
Combining the aforementioned information, plausible questions would be: How far the
established workhorse in deep tissue imaging (i.e two-photon fluorescence microscopy)
can get you in organoid imaging where you have a scaffold that contributes to the
optical thickness of the tissue sample? Or, can one design organoid scaffolds in a way
that the light that probes them is hindered as little as possible? This thesis seeks
to take a first step towards answering such questions via setting the fundamental
understanding of how scaffolds used by the researchers of DTU’s Polycell group behave
optically.
The optical behaviour of a material is derived from the material’s inherent optical
properties and the spatiotemporal profile of the light that you shine on to them. In
the Polycell group case, scaffolds are printed via stereolithography (SLA) utilizing
poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) and the light that will be shined on to
them is coming from a homebuilt two-photon microscope.
The relevant tasks to
study the above-mentioned, pursued in this thesis, are summarized as follows:
• SLA printing of a PEGDA structure so that to inspect via confocal imaging how
the refractive index (RI) varies within an elementary printed PEGDA volume.
• Development of a simple model for the optical properties of SLA printed PEGDA-
based scaffolds. The model is built around how the macroscopic quantity that
captures light redirection within a medium (i.e. refractive index variation) is
affected by the material (PEGDA) itself and the printing procedure used (Pro-
jection Stereolithography Printing).
• Participation in the building of the homebuilt two-photon microscope; a replica
of the open-source two-photon microscope termed as TIMAHC [15].
• Finite element-based simulation of how PEGDA-based hydrogels affect a two-
photon point spread function (PSF).
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Outline
3
1.3
Outline
The thesis text sets the background with Chapter 2 where, initially, some basics
on scattering and imaging depth are presented. A brief description of the available
options to model light propagation follows along with the reasoning for choosing
the appropriate one for the problem at hand. In Chapter 3 it is introduced how the
refractive index of a PEGDA-based hydrogel is affected by the PEGDA monomer itself
and the stereolithography printing process. In Chapter 4 a PEGDA test structure is
inspected under a confocal microscope and a simple model for the axial and lateral
refractive index gradient in PEGDA-based hydrogels is presented. In Chapter 5, we
present a side-task of this thesis; participation in building a two-photon microscope.
The finite element model which seeks to answer the question on how light coming
out of a two-photon microscope interacts with PEGDA-based hydrogels is described
in Chapter 6.
Chapter 7 includes the results along with the relevant discussion.
Chapter 8 concludes the work done within the thesis.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Deep Tissue Fluorescent Imaging
In the introduction it was implicitly introduced that the contrast mechanism for tissue
imaging is fluorescence. While not being the only one -second harmonic generation
and coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering have their fair share- it is the most well-
established in tissue imaging and therefore of our focus in this work. So when we refer
to confocal microscopy (CM) or two-photon microscopy (2PM) within this document
the prefix word fluorescence is implied. Another prefix that is implied when will refer
to CM and 2PM is laser scanning. The laser scanning prefix implies that the sample is
scanned point-by-point using a focused laser beam to allow for a 3-D reconstruction.
In order to set the basics for deep fluorescent imaging (and thus volume imaging), it
is essential to introduce the parameters that describe how tissue affects the path of
light.
Tissue being a mixture of molecular and supramolecular structures having different
polarizabilities acts as an optically inhomogeneous medium, meaning that it exhibits
various refractive index variations [9]. Refractive index variation in a medium implies
that the light that will travel through it will get scattered. With tissue constituent
sizes ranging from 0.1 um to few micrometers the way the light is redirected is ex-
pected to be in the Mie regime and therefore it will be scattered mainly towards
the forward direction [16].
How and how much tissue scatters light is described by three macroscopic parameters
that are routinely used to evaluate the in-depth penetration performance of optical
microscopes. These parameters are defined for turbid media (not only tissue) and are
presented in the bullets that follow as defined in [17]:
• the mean free path (ls) is the average distance travelled by light between
scattering events.
• the anisotropy parameter (g) is defined as the average angle by which pho-
tons are scattered and is given by g =< cos θ > where θ is the scattering angle.
Its values range in [0, 1] with 1 indicating high scattering anisotropy.
• the transport mean free path (lt) is given by lt = ls/(1 −g) and is the
distance after which light has experienced so many scattering events that it has
lost its direction memory, meaning that its propagation direction is randomized.
A visual aid for ls and lt is illustrated in Figure 2.1. What is essentially shown is
the transition from the ballistic regime to the diffusive regime. The ballistic regime
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Deep Tissue Fluorescent Imaging
5
corresponds to 1 mean free path (MFP), while the diffusive regime starts after one
transport mean free path (TMFP).
Figure 2.1: MFP indicates the mean propagation distance between scattering events.
TMFP indicates the mean propagation distance that it takes for photons to lose
their propagation memory. CM and 2PM operate at penetration depths that are
smaller than 1 TMFP. Figure from [18].
2.1.1
Scattering in Excitation and Detection Light Path
In order to understand why scattering is the limiting factor in tissue volume imag-
ing, it is useful to resort to the ideal (non-existent) imaging case. In such a case,
all the photons leaving the objective of a microscope will arrive at the focal point
without encountering any scattering (leftmost sketch in Figure 2.2). Analogously, all
the photons emanating from the focal point that fall into the collection cone of the
microscope’s objective will arrive unperturbed -again no scattering- to the objective’s
front aperture (third from the left sketch in Figure 2.2).
Getting back in the realistic imaging case. In the excitation path, the photons exiting
the objective’s front aperture will be redirected due to scattering event(s) and some of
them will never arrive in the focal region. In the detection path some of the photons
that are generated by the excited fluorophores at the focal region will experience
scattering on their way to the objective’s front aperture and part of them will never
find their way to it.
2.1.2
The Two-photon Depth Limit
Having an understanding of the effect of scattering in both the excitation and detec-
tion paths, we can describe the in-depth limitations that plague a 2PM. Before doing
that, with the aid of Figure 2.3 we will briefly refer to the way that a CM and a 2PM
achieve optical sectioning. In this way, we will be able to illustrate the attributes of
==PAGE:13==
6
2 Background
Figure 2.2: On the left: photon’s trajectories in the excitation path in a
non-scattering and scattering scenario. On the right the detection equivalent is
shown. Figure from [9].
2PM that make it a prominent candidate for deep imaging in scattering specimens
and then proceed to the limitations it encounters in doing that.
Figure 2.3: The confocal and two-photon illumination (blue and red lines
respectively) and detection (green lines) light paths. A CM relies on a pinhole that
rejects out-of-focus photons to achieve optical sectioning. In contrast, a 2PM relies
on its non-linear nature to achieve optical sectioning and thus collects all
fluorescence photons. Figure from [19].
Confocal microscopy achieves optical sectioning by placing a pinhole before its de-
tector, in this way it prohibits out-of-focus photons to reach it. The shortcoming of
this practice is that from-focus photons that were scattered on their way back to the
microscope objective, front aperture will also be rejected. This means that a portion
of the useful signal is rejected. Two-photon microscopy achieves optical sectioning
due to its non-linear nature. Using an objective of high numerical aperture and a
==PAGE:14==
2.2 The Two-photon Point Spread Function
7
femtosecond laser, high spatial and temporal confinement is achieved. This ensures
that two-photon effects will take place in a well-confined volume. This implies that
a 2PM will collect all fluorescence photons (both ballistic and scattered) that will
make it to the objective’s front aperture since they constitute useful signal coming
from the well localized excited volume. Another favourable for deep tissue imaging at-
tribute of 2PM is that it operates on longer wavelengths for which tissue endogenous
chromophores exhibit less scattering and absorption [20].
A qualitative definition of the two-photon depth limit given in [21] states that the limit
is at the focal depth where the out-of-focus fluorescence (background signal) equals the
perifocal fluorescence (useful signal). The maximum achievable imaging depth in 2PM
is proportional to the scattering mean-free-path and depends logarithmically on
the available laser power, two-photon advantage and collection efficiency. Eventually,
however, fluorescence generated near the sample surface becomes the limiting factor
[10] before that ultimate imaging depth is even reached.
2.2
The Two-photon Point Spread Function
Before moving into the light propagation modeling section it is relevant to present how
the light coming out of a two-photon microscope is distributed at the focal region in
the ideal case that it propagates unperturbed (that is experiencing neither absorption
nor scattering).
In order to give the expressions that approximately describe the two-photon intensity,
it is essential to describe the intensity distribution around the focus. The intensity
in the focal region is given by the so-called point spread function (here denoted as
PSFill(v, u)).
The following equation gives the intensity distribution in the focal
region of an aberration-free lens of circular aperture of radius α [22].
PSFill(u, v) =| 2
∫1
0
J0(uϱ) exp(1
2iuϱ2)ϱdϱ |
2
,
(2.1)
where u = 4kz sin2(α/2) the axial normalized optical coordinate and v = kr sin α
the radial normalized optical coordinate with k = 2πλ/2 being the wavenumber and
sin(α) the numerical aperture when imaging in air. J0 denotes the zero-order Bessel
function. Equation (2.1) is derived from the Kirchhoff diffraction formula under the
Fraunhofer approximation in pg. 12-20 of [23] and depicted in Figure 2.4.
For two-photon microscopy PSF2P = PSF 2
ill(u/2, v/2) with u/2 and v/2 indicating
the doubled illumination wavelength compared to the confocal microscopy case where
PSFCM = PSF 2
ill(u, v) holds.
For large Fresnel numbers N >> u2/4, where N = πα2/λf is the Fresnel number for
a lens of half-aperture α and focal length f, the confocal PSF along the focal plane
and optical axis are given as follows.
In the focal plane, the confocal PSF is given by (pg. 18 of [23]):
==PAGE:15==
8
2 Background
Figure 2.4: Contour lines of equal intensity of the PSF in a meridonal plane close to
the focus. Figure from [23].
PSFCM(u) ∝
(2J1(u)
(u)
)4
(2.2)
In the optical axis the confocal PSF is proportional to (pg. 20 of [23]):
PSFCM(u, 0) ∝
(sin(u/4)
u/4
)4
(2.3)
For the two-photon case, the PSF in the focal plane and the optical axis are given by
equations (2.4) and (2.5) respectively [22]:
PSF2P (u) ∝
(2J1(u/2)
(u/2)
)4
(2.4)
PSF2P (u, 0) ∝
(sin((u/2)/4)
(u/2)/4
)4
(2.5)
Concluding, the two-photon intensity profile is approximately given by a sinc function
on the fourth along the optical axis and a jinc function on the fourth along the focal
plane. These two function have zeros in different locations and the jinc function has
lower secondary maxima compare to the sinc function.
2.3
Numerical Modeling of Light Propagation
Light propagation can be described with different means depending on what one seeks
to study. There are three main approaches as to how light is described:
• light can been seen as rays and its propagation as how these rays change direc-
tion and position due to the different optical properties that they encounter in
their trajectories.
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Numerical Modeling of Light Propagation
9
• light can be treated as photons carrying energy that is altered due to their
interaction with the medium that they travel through.
• light can be seen as a wave that disturbs the medium that it propagates through
and the way it disturbs it, affects its amplitude and phase.
Each of the aforementioned approaches is paired with a numerical method to approx-
imate it as accurately as it afforded and required.
The following subsections will
briefly refer to those methods.
2.3.1
Ray Tracing Approach
Ray tracing, stemming form geometrical optics, treats light as rays with direction and
position. It is routinely used in designing optical devices such as monochromators
or lens assemblies for microscopes or telescopes. It is also an approach for creating
realistic illumination of virtual scenes extensively used in computer graphics. The
idea behind ray tracing algorithms is that given an initial ray position and direction,
the algorithm initially determines the new position of the ray in the next interface that
it will encounter. Afterwards the ray direction will be updated by means of applying
a boundary condition, such as reflection or refraction. In this way, the ray is traced
to the next interface that it encounters. Although ray tracing algorithms have greatly
improve to account for gradients in refractive index and high angles of incidence [24],
it is challenging for such an approach to accurately track phase information.
2.3.2
Monte Carlo Approach
Monte Carlo (MC) is the numerical counterpart of the radiative transfer equation
(RTE). The radiative transfer equation is derived from energy conservation within
Maxwell’s (Poynting’s theorem) [25] and it describes analytically the transport of
photons. Monte Carlo is a statistical method that treats light as a sequence of photons
and the medium that it propagates in as a set of macroscopic parameters that will
determine the fate of the generated photons. MC simulations have been extensively
used to model light propagation in tissue and readily available solutions are in place
[26]. Monte Carlo Multi-Layered (MCML) is an example of a well-established MC
simulation program which offers a steady-state 3D simulation for multi-layered turbid
media with an infinitely narrow photon beam as the light source. Each layer has its
own optical properties of absorption, scattering, anisotropy, and refractive index [27].
Due to the stochastic nature of fluorescence there are plenty MC approaches to model
fluorescence in scattering media [28, 29].
One advantage of the method is its great flexibility, while its most pronounced draw-
back is that the solution is of statistical nature, making its convergence to the desired
accuracy slow and computationally demanding. This is due to the statistical error
of the results being inversely proportional to the square of the number of simulated
photons [30].
==PAGE:17==
10
2 Background
Since photon transport is a highly parallelizable problem much effort have been put
on developing computationally efficient MC implementations. For example, CUD-
AMCML is an implementation of MCML that takes advantage of the presence of
NVIDIA graphics cards to run much faster [31].
2.3.3
Finite Element Approach
The finite element method (FEM) is a numerical technique for obtaining approximate
solutions to boundary value problems. Light propagation, as all other Physics prob-
lems, is described by differential equation(s) and the relevant boundary conditions.
The concept behind a finite element simulation is that you build up a 1D, 2D or 3D
physical domain which you partition in small parts, in each small part simple basis
functions (typically low order polynomials) can be combined to approximate the so-
lution to the local to element boundary problem. Applying the Galerkin or the Ritz
method for each element and summing over all elements, a linear system of equations
is obtained. The process of constructing this system, including the enforcement of
boundary conditions, is referred to as assembly. The FEM can thus be summarized
in three main steps:
• Discretization of the domain into elements.
• Assembly of the linear system of equations.
• Solution of the system.
The light propagation simulations within a FEM framework span from studying the
optical properties of nano-sized materials [32] to how light propagates in waveguides
with “exotic” refractive index profiles termed as photonic crystal fibers (PCFs) [33].
Finite element implementations of light propagation in tissue via the diffusion equa-
tion (i.e. the simplified case of RTE) are also in place such as the Photodynamic
therapy-related study in [34].
Apart from being flexible and versatile, FEM is a tool where one can easily char-
acterize its accuracy.
Its major drawback can be its high computational resource
requirements. There are several ways developed to address this, usually by FEM sim-
ulations supporting different forms of parallelization in the way the problem is solved
(e.g.
using the conjugate gradient method) or the way its computed (e.g.
using
domain decomposition methods) [35].
2.3.4
Challenges Associated with Modelling SLA-printed
PEGDA-based Scaffolds
Prior to concluding to the method that it was chosen to model light coming out
of a two-photon microscope, propagating in SLA-printed PEGDA-based organoid
scaffolds, it is essential to refer to the main challenges that this pursuit entails:
• we want to model a material that exhibits a systematic inhomogeneity in refrac-
tive index which is continuous. In other words, a SLA-printed PEGDA-based
material has a defined RI gradient in all spatial directions (see Chapter 3).
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Numerical Modeling of Light Propagation
11
• we are interested in modelling a specific light spatial profile, i.e. the point
spread function of a two-photon microscope.
• our targeted system requires simulation at multiple length scales. In more
detail, the refractive index variations are in the order of the elementary build-
ing blocks of the organoid scaffolds which translates into ∼10 −20 um (see
Chapter 3) while the size of the scaffolds ranges in ∼100 um.
If we were to put the aforementioned challenges in a picture, adapting Figure 2.2, we
would get the sketch of Figure 2.5. A PEGDA-based organoid scaffold is introduced
into the illumination path of a two-photon microscope. As it will be explained in the
following two chapters, the SLA-printed PEGDA-based material exhibits continuous
RI gradients in all spatial directions. In Figure 2.5 this is illustrated as a vertical
gradient only. The introduced scaffold will contribute to the scattering phenomena
that are present due to the turbidity of the tissue that comes with the organoid
scaffolds. In Figure 2.5 we can regard the tissue as being the dotted pattern around
the PEGDA-based scaffold.
The fact that we are interested in studying light propagation in a material which
exhibits continuous refractive index variation in all spatial directions necessitates
phase tracking.
Else, we will not be able to capture the optical behaviour of a
material with continuously varying refractive index.
Figure 2.5: Introduction of a PEGDA-based organoid scaffold in the illumination
path of a two-photon microscope. The PEGDA-based material exhibits a
continuous RI variation in all spatial directions and it will make the already present
scattering phenomena even more pronounced. This makes the need of tracking
phase a requirement for the light propagation modelling to be developed.
2.3.5
Rationale for Pursuing Finite Element-based Modelling
Ray tracing can be crossed-off the list of the candidate methods due to its difficulty in
following phase information in non-well defined sharp boundaries. In more detail, the
==PAGE:19==
12
2 Background
fact that the ability to describe interference or diffraction is not there in ray tracing,
makes the method inappropriate for gaining an understanding of how a diffraction
pattern will be affected by the introduction of a forwardly scattering medium.
On the other hand, both MC and FEM offer phase information. Additionally, both
methods are quite developed and versatile, offering commercial and open-source so-
lutions that would serve as an appropriate basis to develop our model. In terms of
computational requirements, it is a priori known that both methods are quite com-
putationally demanding. “Quite” translates into that both methods require access to
a high performance computing infrastructure so that to be executed at all or to be
executed in a reasonable amount of hours.
Despite MC and FEM modelling being very close regarding their suitability to what
we seek to model, there are two arguments in favour of FEM:
• we will have to deal with a inhomogeneous medium (PEGDA scaffold) that
exhibits a systematic inhomogeneity. MC treats each photon individually and
thus does not account for coherence effects.
• it would be quite challenging to introduce a set of statistical parameters that
would end up describing a two-photon PSF in the focus location.
Concluding, we opt to go by FEM modeling. This does not mean that an MC-based
approach would be inappropriate, it just seems less suitable for the requirements of
the model that will be developed. A commercial FEM solution was used, namely
COMSOL Multiphysics. This FEM tool is a generic one and not targeted solely to
light propagation applications (e.g. Lumerical [36]). Consequently, it is relevant to
mention that our model was developed using the Electromagnetic Waves, Frequency
Domain (ewfd) interface of COMSOL’s Wave Optics module.
Since, eventually the model that will be developed would require some form of par-
allelization so that to be executed in a reasonable amount of time, it is relevant
to also state here the parallelization chosen within COMSOL. COMSOL supports
two modes of parallel operation: shared-memory parallel operations and distributed-
memory parallel operations both paired with cluster support. Both modes were tried
out on DTU’s cluster infrastructure and due to high memory requirements we ended
up using the distributed-memory option. When COMSOL is instructed to run in
such a mode, it can distribute computations on a cluster using the message passing
interface (MPI) [37] for node-to-node communication. In this way, one large problem
can be distributed across many compute nodes. Each compute process gets assigned
parts of the data and parts of the total workload.
This lowers the memory foot-
print per host, gives more total accumulated memory, and speeds up the simulation
time for sufficiently large models. For details, on how COMSOL was executed in
distributed-memory mode under DTU’s cluster refer to Appendix B.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3
Optical Behaviour of
PEGDA-based
Hydrogels
The optical behaviour of a material can be broadly attributed to three phenomena,
namely reflection, propagation, and transmission (see Figure 3.1). The optical co-
efficients associated with each phenomenon are reflectivity (R), refractive index (n)
together with absorption coefficient (α) and transmissivity (T) respectively. Within
the content of this work, the relevant phenomenon is propagation and thus the refrac-
tive index and absorption coefficient are of interest.
Figure 3.1: Optical phenomena and optical coefficients associated with light
interaction with solid-state materials.
Hydrogels being 3D cross-linked polymeric networks that can retain a substantial
amount of water [38] have been found to be excellent candidates for a wealth of ap-
plications in tissue engineering. The hydrogels of our interest are the PEGDA-based
ones due to apart from being biocompatible and non-fouling, they additionally are
optically transparent.
Consequently, the first thing that we can say regarding
modelling PEGDA-based hydrogels’ optical behaviour is that the absorption coeffi-
cient can be left out of the study, so all we are left to work on is the refractive index
(RI).
The refractive index of a hydrogel does not solely depend on the RI of the monomers
that is made of, but also on the fabrication method used. A common technique to fab-
ricate hydrogels is photopolymerization. In the context of this thesis, the monomer
used is PEGDA and it was photopolymerized via projection stereolithography (SLA).
==PAGE:21==
14
3 Optical Behaviour of PEGDA-based Hydrogels
With these facts at hand, we will describe in the sections to follow how the photopoly-
merization printing process affects the refractive index of PEGDA-based hydrogels.
3.1
Photopolymerization & Projection
Stereolithography Printing
Photopolymerization is a photo-induced chemical reaction in a liquid photosensitive
medium consisting of a bath of monomers and reactive species (free radicals or ions).
Upon irradiation of appropriate energy, the reactive species of the liquid medium
are excited and thus enabled to start a chain reaction whereby a large number of
monomers are cross-linked to yield an infusable and insoluble 3D polymeric network
[39].
Projection stereolithography printing is a additive manufacturing (AM) fabrication
process based on photopolymerization whereby a 3D microstructure is fabricated in
a layer-by-layer fashion [40]. The main parts of a typical projection SLA printer can
be seen in Figure 3.2 and are:
• a control computer,
• a digital micromirror device (DMD) - often termed dynamic pattern generator,
• a light source,
• a light projection system,
• a vat containing the photosensitive medium,
• and a motorized stage on which the model is built.
Figure 3.2: Generic schematic of a projection stereolithography printer. Figure from
[41].
The object to be built is described by a set of slices derived from its CAD design. Each
slice is a black and white bitmap file which is projected to the surface of the liquid
photosensitive medium. The white areas of the bitmap are “written” to the surface
via photopolymerizing a set of elementary volumes (i.e. voxels). The projection is
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Projection SLA Printing & Refractive Index
15
achieved by the computer translating each slice to a micromirror configuration in
the DMD. The resulting light pattern is then projected by the projection system on
the surface of the liquid medium. After a layer is printed, the stage that bears the
structure is immersed to the liquid medium so that a thin layer of liquid rests on top
of the current layer serving as a photosensitive film for the next layer to form.
3.2
Projection SLA Printing & Refractive Index
The projection SLA printer used in this work is the in-house built printer used in
[42]. The printer yields voxels (see Figure 3.3a) that their dimensions in x and y
direction are determined by the pitch of the digital micromirror device used and their
dimensions in the z direction are determined by the step height used in printing. The
DMD of the printer is the DLP9500 from Texas Instruments which has a pitch size
of 10.8 um [43] and the step size is set to 20 um which is a value that corresponds
to a value lower than the penetration depth for the absorber concentration chosen in
our printing solution (the solution consistency is given in Appendix A.2).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: (a) The dimensions of an elementary photopolymerized volume (i.e. a
voxel). (b) Refractive index variation in XY, XZ and XY planes in a voxel.
Having defined the dimensions of the elementary printed volume (i.e.
the voxel),
we are going into more details regarding the refractive index within this elementary
volume. SLA printing yields voxels with a refractive index that varies spatially,
since not all the parts of the voxel receive the same amount of irradiation intensity
(see Figure 3.3b). As a result, there is a different degree of cross-linking within a
voxel which will cause a variation of the refractive index in the x, y and z dimensions
of it. In the next two sections, we will go a bit more into the causes of the spatial RI
variation inherent to SLA-based fabrication.
==PAGE:23==
16
3 Optical Behaviour of PEGDA-based Hydrogels
3.2.1
Axial Refractive Index Profile
The reason that the refractive varies in the z direction (axial dimension) is due to
the Beer-Lambert law governing light penetration. The irradiation at any point zo
within the resin is given by:
E(x, y, z) = Eo(x, y, zo) exp(−zo/Dp),
where Dp is the penetration depth.
In the printer used, photopolymerization is initiated from the bottom of the structure
which is moved upwards as each layer is produced. This means that the bottom of
each voxel will receive the maximum amount of irradiation energy and the more
upwards we get, the less intensity is received which in turn results in a lower degree
of polymerization and thus a lower refractive index. It has been stated in Section 3.2
that the voxel length in the z dimension (i.e. 20 um) is defined by the printing step
height. Ultimately though, the maximum voxel height is given by the height from
the vat bottom at which the light dose (flux multiplied by time) is just sufficient to
cause gelation of the liquid solution into a solid gel. This is controlled by the absorber
concentration and with the printing protocol used this corresponds to ∼25 um. By
choosing a step height for printing, one then defines the effective voxel height which
should be smaller than the maximum voxel height if the targeted structure is to be
printed as a continuous solid.
3.2.2
Lateral Refractive Index Profile
The DMD pitch size (see Figure 3.4) is not only defining the x and y dimensions of a
voxel, but also the amount of irradiation intensity in the x and y direction that the
voxel receives. The DMD is a 1920×1080 micromirror array. Each square micromirror
is 10 um × 10 um and is surrounded by a 0.4 um non-reflecting area.
As a result, the surface (xy plane or lateral dimension) of the photosensitive medium
that will be cross-linked to yield voxels, will receive an alternating pattern of high
to low intensity coming from the micromirror perfectly reflecting area and the non-
reflecting area that surrounds it respectively.
3.3
PEGDA & Refractive Index
Having described how RI varies within a voxel due to the way it is fabricated, we
will proceed to calculate the expected average refractive in a voxel produced by pho-
topolymerizing a PEGDA monomer solution.
The various factors influencing the
refractive index of PEGDA hydrogels have been revisited/studied in [44] and can be
summarized as follows:
• molecular weight of PEGDA monomer: the longer the macromolecule, the
higher the refractive index [45].
==PAGE:24==
3.3 PEGDA & Refractive Index
17
Figure 3.4: The MxN micromirror array. The zoomed area shows the pitch (P) of
the DMD. Figure adapted from [43].
• irradiation intensity and time: higher irradiation intensity and time results
in higher cross-linking and consequently in higher RI.
• PEGDA monomer content: the higher the weight percentage of PEGDA
used in the liquid medium to be photopolymerized, the higher the RI of the
hydrogel [46].
In our case, molecular weight (Mn), irradiation time (τir), PEGDA monomer content
(CP EGDA) are fixed to Mn = 700 gmol−1, τir = 3 s and CP EGDA = 20% w/v
respectively (see Appendix A). We will focus on the PEGDA monomer content factor
and using the data from [46], we will built up the rationale around getting a value
for the average refractive index within a voxel.
Initially, we calculate the refractive index of the solution used in printing (precursor)
as a linear weighted sum of the refractive indices of its constituents. Using that the
RI of the pure PEGDA used (Mn = 700 gmol−1) is nP EGDA700 = 1.46 [46] and
that nwater = 1.333, then nP EGDA precursor = 0.80 ∗nwater + 0.20 ∗nP EGDA700 =
1.3584. If we assumed that the PEGDA hydrogel resulting after photopolymerizing
the precursor solution is homogeneously cross-linked, then we would get a hydrogel
with nP EGDA hydrogel = nP EGDA precursor.
However, we have already discussed in Section 3.2 that a voxel is not cross-linked
homogeneously due to its fabrication procedure, consequently nP EGDA hydrogel ̸=
nP EGDA precursor.
Swelling ratio measurements for the printed hydrogels were carried out in the PhD
thesis of the colleague Rujing Zhang [47]. In Figure 3.8 of [47], one can see that
after 4 hours the printed PEGDA hydrogel stored in water will reach its equilibrium
state (it will uptake as much water as it can). At equilibrium, the swelling ratio Q of
PEGDA hydrogels ranges between 4 and 4.3 (Figure 3.8 of [47]). The refractive index
==PAGE:25==
18
3 Optical Behaviour of PEGDA-based Hydrogels
can then be calculated as nP EGDA hydrogel = (1 −(1/Q)) ∗nwater + Q ∗nP EGDA700.
For Q = [4, 4.3], nP EGDA hydrogel = [1.3648, 1.3625]. Comparing with the refractive
index of the precursor, we see that nP EGDA hydrogel > nP EGDA precursor. This is
due to the fact that the PEGDA hydrogel cross-linking has created less voids in the
hydrogel network, meaning that more water has been excluded and as a result, the
printed hydrogel has a higher refractive index.
The above-mentioned is found to be consistent with the results plotted in Figure 1b
of [46] depicted in Figure 3.5. The refractive index of the solution to be photopoly-
merized along with the refractive index of the resulting hydrogel are plotted against
the PEGDA (with Mn = 700 gmol−1) concentration. The figure suggests that the
RI of the printed PEGDA hydrogels is higher than the RI of the solution used as a
precursor. Additionally, the value for the RI of the printed hydrogel using a 20% w/v
precursor (i.e. 1.37) is close to what we have calculated above.
Figure 3.5: The refractive index of PEGDA hydrogel is plotted against the
precursor (i.e. PEG Mn = 700 gmol−1) concentration. We routinely print with a
precursor of 20% w/v PEGDA, according to the figure the resulting PEGDA
hydrogel should have a RI of around 1.37. Figure from [46].
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4
PEGDA-based
Hydrogels: Printing &
Characterization
Having set the scene on how the stereolithography printing process and the consis-
tency if the photopolymerized solution affect the refractive index of PEGDA-based
hydrogels, it is relevant to visualize that dependence in a printed test structure. In
order to achieve that, two things are essential:
• we need a reliable contrast mechanism. Refractive index variance means
scattering, scattering means that light is redirected.
One of the parameters
affecting this redirection in a dispersive medium is wavelength and thus white
light illumination will result in a superposition of the redirection of its different
colors. Consequently, brightfield imaging is not an option.
• we need a defined contrast mechanism. The consistency of the resin used in
printing results in an autofluorescent PEGDA hydrogel. Although, this could
serve as a contrast mechanism to inspect cross-linking and thus RI gradient, the
origin of this autofluorescence has not been determined yet. As a result, it may
not be an appropriate proxy to tract RI gradients.
The aforementioned requirements led us to think about employing an exogenous
contrast agent.
The requirements for that agent would be to act as a proxy for
cross-linking density (and thus the resulting RI gradient) without obscuring it.
4.1
The Contrast Mechanism
The labeled acrylate Acryloxyethyl thiocarbamoyl Rhodamine B was chosen. This
acrylate has only one reactive site as opposed to PEGDA which has two, as a result
it is a chemical component that can participate in a chain forming procedure without
being a network forming chemical like PEGDA. In other words, it will label the
cross-linking procedure without obscuring it, fulfilling the requirement set for the
exogenous contrast agent. If a sufficient amount of the labelled acrylate is added
to the solution to be photopolymerized, then the probability (see Figure 4.1) that a
==PAGE:27==
20
4 PEGDA-based Hydrogels: Printing & Characterization
PEGDA monomer reacts with another PEGDA monomer or the labeled acrylate is
equal (this holds for each of the two PEGDA reactive site). As a result, it is expected
that we will get to observe a spatially changing fluorescence pattern within each
voxel and that the fluorescent pattern will follow (without being equivalent) the cross-
linking density pattern in both the lateral and axial dimensions and consequently the
RI variance within a voxel.
Figure 4.1: The polymerization process of PEGDA is initiated by a free radical from
the decomposition of LAP. The free radical breaks the C=C bond of the acrylate
group and then PEGDA can form a covalent bond with another monomer with a
broken C=C bond which can be either a PEGDA monomer ((a) case) or a
Rhodamine B labeled acrylate ((b) case).
4.2
Test structure
The CAD design of the SLA-printed test structure that we used is depicted in Fig-
ure 4.2.
4.3
Resin Solution & Printer Parameters
The test structure was printed by the homebuilt printer using a 3.2 mL aqueous solu-
tion consisting of the prepolymer PEGDA MW 700 [48], the absorber quinoline yel-
low (QY) [49], the photoinitiator (lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate,
LAP) [50] and the fluorophore Acryloxyethyl thiocarbamoyl Rhodamine B [51]. All
chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and Polysciences.
The printer step
height was set to 20 um and the exposure time to 3 sec. For a detailed description of
==PAGE:28==
4.4 Sample Preparation
21
Figure 4.2: The CAD design of the test structure that will be SLA-printed and
inspected with a confocal microscope so that to experimentally observe the axial
and lateral refractive index variation within a voxel. The dark red arrow points
approximately to the area for which a stack was recorded.
the printing protocol along with the exact consistency of the solution used, refer to
Appendix A.
4.4
Sample Preparation
The test structure was manually removed from the cover glass and afterwards im-
mersed in a Milli-Q water-filled PMMA square container which was glued on a 150 mm
treated petri dish (see Figure 4.3). The square water bath served as a mean to restrict
the structure -we would not want the structure to free-float in the petri dish- and as
a support for the cover slip. The cover slip used was 150 um thick.
4.5
Confocal Imaging Set Up
The test structure was inspected with the laser scanning confocal unit Zeiss LSM700
mounted on a ZEISS Axio Imager 2 microscope [52]. The appropriate filter settings
to excite and detect fluorescence when the fluorophore used is Rhodamine B were
selected; the fluorophore was excited at 555 nm and all emitted light ≥560 nm was
collected. Since we wanted to image the structure in an aqueous solution, a water
immersion objective was used (Objective C-Apochromat 40x/1.20 [53]).
The XY,YZ and XZ views of the acquired stack are depicted in Figure 4.4. It is
essential to take two notes regarding the correspondence between the CAD design of
Figure 4.2 and the images of Figure 4.4. The dark red arrow in Figure 4.2 points
==PAGE:29==
22
4 PEGDA-based Hydrogels: Printing & Characterization
Figure 4.3: Sample preparation for confocal imaging. The test structure is placed in
the PMMA water bath.
(approximately) to the area for which the stack was recorded.
The XY view of
Figure 4.4 does not correspond to the top-most part of the structure but instead to
a XY view for which we got a good contrast.
In the XY view (center picture of Figure 4.4), one can identify the checkered pattern
to be the DMD pattern projected into every PEGDA layer upon printing. Each bright
square corresponds to the area that was UV-illuminated and thus cross-linked. The
dark areas surrounding the bright ones correspond to the non-reflecting areas of the
DMD. In the YZ and XZ views one can see almost four layers of PEGDA; the fourth
layer is partly cropped.
Inspecting some line plots of the XZ view (see Figure 4.5) we are going to discuss
our observations regarding the axial and lateral refractive index variation within a
voxel.
Both figures of Figure 4.6 show that there is a difference on the intensity
levels between the last printed layer and the two layers underneath it. This suggests
that there is a ‘spill-over” of light between layers. In more detail, the top-most layer
exhibits lower fluorescence intensity values since it is the one that was printed last
and thus did not receive any further irradiation other than that that was associated
with its exposure. Although the printing step height (i.e. 20 mu) is set so that it is
lower than the maximum penetration depth (i.e. ∼25 um) defined by the absorber
concentration of the printing solution, the second-to-last printed layer receives light
when the last printed layer is being exposed. This means that it is more cross-linked
and thus exhibits higher fluorescent intensity levels upon confocal inspection. The
same holds for the third-to-last printed layer, since it will receive some light during
the second-to-last printed layer exposure.
Inspecting Figure 4.6a, one can see in all three layers (marked by dark red lines) that
the upper part of a voxel has higher intensity values compared to its lower part. This
agrees with the decaying profile of intensity that the voxel receives along its depth
when it is photopolymerized (see Section 3.2.1).
Looking at the right part of Figure 4.6b (this is where the contrast is better) one can
see marked by dark red lines three voxels in the last printed layer (blue line in figure).
==PAGE:30==
4.5 Confocal Imaging Set Up
23
Figure 4.4: The XY, YZ and XZ views from the acquired stack. In XY the checkered
appearance of the printed structure corresponds to the lateral RI profile in each
printed layer. Almost four layers of PEGDA can been seen in the YZ and XZ views.
The high to low intensity transitions at approximately 10 um agree with the DMD
intensity pattern (see Section 3.2.2 ).
Closing the analysis of the data derived via confocal imaging, we will extract from
Figure 4.6a the range of refractive index values within a voxel. We will focus to the
second-to-last printed layer. This should yield a reliable model since most of the
layers (expect for the last printed one) in a bulk SLA-printed PEGDA-based material
will have been more cross-linked due to the fact that they received some light during
the exposure of the layer that is printed after them. Assuming that the top part of the
voxel is the one that is more homogeneously cross-linked, we will proceed in assigning
to its intensity level the maximum refractive index value calculated in Section 3.3
for a SLA-printed PEGDA hydrogel (i.e. nP EGDAmax = 1.365). In this way, we can
obtain the refractive index value nP EGDAmin = 1.354 which corresponds to the RI of
the voxel’s lower part which has received less intensity and thus was less cross-linked.
These values will be used in Section 4.6 upon defining the functions that will model
==PAGE:31==
24
4 PEGDA-based Hydrogels: Printing & Characterization
Figure 4.5: The cut lines in XZ view will produce Figure 4.6a and Figure 4.6b used
to discuss the axial and lateral RI variations observed.
the axial and lateral RI profile of a voxel.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: (a) Plot from vertical cut line of Figure 4.5. (b) Plot from the horizontal
cut lines of Figure 4.5. Both figures show the there is a ‘spill-over” of light between
two consecutive layers, since the intensity levels of the last printed layer is lower
than that of the second-to-last and third-to-last printed layers.
4.6
The RI Model for PEGDA-based Hydrogels
In this sections, we will proceed on suggesting a simple model on how refractive index
varies in a SLA-printed PEGDA-based hydrogel.
This model will be used in the
finite element simulation to be developed. Let us note here, that it is not our goal to
==PAGE:32==
4.6 The RI Model for PEGDA-based Hydrogels
25
build an exact model, but rather to capture how RI variations in a PEGDA hydrogel
distorts the light path within a organoid imaging framework. With that said, it is
essential to stress out that although refractive index is a quantity that varies with
wavelength, temperature and material density, we have not conducted any absolute
RI measurements and we are going to use the closest data available from literature
combined with our observations from confocal imaging of a PEGDA-based structure.
4.6.1
Axial Refractive Index Profile
Prior presenting the axial RI profile, it should be noted that although the penetration
depth spans in more than one voxel, we will model it as if it spans only one voxel,
meaning that we assume that a layer will not be further cross-linked in the z direction
when the next layer is being printed. This assumption is in contrast to the the fact
that the confocal analysis in Section 4.5 showed a distinct difference in fluorescence
(the proxy for cross-linking) between the last printed layer and all underlying layers.
Thus, the approximation of no “spill-over” of light between layers is not fully justified.
However, modeling using the RI profile of voxels below the last printed layer should
provide a reliable model since most of the voxels (expect for ones on the last printed
layer) in a bulk SLA-printed PEGDA-based material are in the same “situation” as
the ones below the last printed layer.
In Figure 4.7 the RI exponentially decays from its maximum value (i.e nP EGDAmax =
1.365) to its lowest value (i.e nP EGDAmin = 1.354). The highest RI value corresponds
to the top part of a voxel, while the lowest to its bottom.
Figure 4.7: The axial intensity and the resulting axial RI variation profile within a
voxel. The pattern is the result of the Beer-Lambert law governing light penetration.
The effective voxel height (defined by the printing step) is 20 um while the actual
maximum height is 25 um, which corresponds to how deep in the resin the absorber
will allow light to penetrate.
==PAGE:33==
26
4 PEGDA-based Hydrogels: Printing & Characterization
4.6.2
Lateral Refractive Index Profile
We have seen that the surface (xy plane or lateral dimension) of the photosensitive
medium that will be cross-linked to yield voxels, will receive an alternating pattern
of high to low intensity coming from the micromirror perfectly reflecting area and
the non-reflecting area that surrounds it. The quanta of this intensity pattern can
be seen in Figure 4.8. The pattern is here approximated to have sigmoid intensity
variation due to the limited spatial resolution of the projection optics. For any point
(xo, yo) the intensity is given by:
E(xo, yo, z) = Eo(xo, yo, z)
(
1
1 + exp(−α(xo −µ1)) −
1
1 + exp(−α(xo −µ2))
)
,
where α = 5.4 um and µ1 = 1.2 um µ2 = 9.6 um. The refractive index will follow the
intensity pattern. The arguments in the exponential are chosen so that the sigmoid-
like transition occurs between 0 um and 0.4 um and between 10.4 um and 10.8 um.
In the interval from 0 um to 0.4 um the RI transitions from low to high values in
a sigmoid fashion. In the interval from > 0.4 um to < 10.4 um (reflecting area of
the DMD’s micromirrors) the RI remains constant at its highest value that being
nP EGDAmax = 1.365. Finally, from 10.4 um to 10.8 um RI transitions again in a
sigmoid-like manner from high to low values.
Figure 4.8: The of lateral intensity profile that a voxel surface receives. The
resulting RI pattern is a sigmoid difference. The lower RI values correspond to the
areas that are under the non-reflecting areas of the DMD, while the higher values to
the ones that are under the micromirrors.
Let us comment here on the gel point annotation of Figure 4.8 and Figure 4.7. The
gel point is the point during photopolymerization where the solution of monomers
undergoes an abrupt increase in viscosity (see Figure 4.9). From this point and on
we can say that we get a hydrogel (a solid) and thus we can talk about its optical
properties and plot its refractive index.
==PAGE:34==
4.6 The RI Model for PEGDA-based Hydrogels
27
Figure 4.9: Transition of a solution of monomers to a 3D polymeric network. Figure
from [39].
This chapter will close with Figure 4.10 where the refractive index profile along the
xz/yz (Figure 4.10a) and xy (Figure 4.10b) planes of a voxel is depicted. Looking at
Figure 4.10a one can see the lateral RI profile of Figure 4.8 to be enveloped by the
axial RI exponentially decaying profile. Let us note here that the RI profile is the
same for both the xz and yz voxel planes. In Figure 4.10b the RI profile for the xy
plane is plotted; a square-like profile (coming from the square mirrors of the DMD)
with the highest refractive index in the top of the square.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: (a) Refractive index profile along the xz/yz plane of a voxel. (b)
Refractive index profile along the xy plane of a voxel. White corresponds to the
highest refractive index.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
An Open-source
Two-photon
Microscope
One of the tasks of this thesis was to contribute to the realization of a custom-built
two-photon microscope. Since part of this work was to simulate the spatiotemporal
profile of the light coming out of a two-photon microscope and the plans of the
associated laboratories involved the building of a custom 2P microscope, participating
in this was a well-suited complementary to the simulations experimental work.
From the first experimental realization of a two-photon microscope realized back
in 1990 by the authors of [54] until today, things have evolved to such a degree
whereby the authors of [15] have made available a step-by-step recipe for a two-
photon microscope referred to as TIMAHC which stands for Two-photon Imaging
that is Modular, Adaptable, High-performance and Cost-effective.
The 2P microscope built (depicted in Figure 5.1b) is a replica of the TIMAHC build
(depicted in Figure 5.1a) and included minor modifications which can be briefly sum-
marized as:
• no custom-sized dichroic mirrors were used
• a different stage design was implemented to accommodate a platform for organoid
imaging.
• extra support was added in the turning mirror that directs the beam onto the
scanning mirrors and in the Z scanning head so that to increase stability and
minimize motion artifacts while recording respectively.
• the microscope is housed in a genetically modified organism (GMO)-compatible
light shielding enclosure made of PMMA.
• the photomultipliers used had an integrated pre-amplifier.
• the power control was integrated in the femtosecond laser used.
• the objective that was chosen is XLPLN25XSVMP2 from Olympus [55]. It is
designed for mutliphoton imaging and the combination of its low magnification
(×25) and high numerical aperture (NA=1) yields better fluorescence collec-
tion performance [56]. Another reason that the specific lens was chosen is its
==PAGE:36==
5.1 Wiring
29
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: (a) CAD model of the TIMAHC build. Figure from [15]. (b) The build
developed for the GMO lab in its enclosure.
large working distance (wd = 8 mm) which is a requirement imposed by the
dimensions of the samples to be imaged.
My main contribution was made in the hardware interfacing both in terms of wiring
and software configuration and this is what it will be briefly documented in the rest
of this chapter.
5.1
Wiring
Figure 5.2 depicts a block diagram of how the laser, the detectors, the scanning
mirrors and the moving stage are interfaced to the microscope control computer.
==PAGE:37==
30
5 An Open-source Two-photon Microscope
Before moving on with the description of Figure 5.2, the parts that are used are
listed and briefly described in the subsections that follow.
5.1.1
Signal Acquisition/Generation
The PXI Chassis PXIE-1073 from National Instruments (NI) is interfaced to the
control computer via the PCI-6110 data acquisition (DAQ) card. The chassis has five
slots, three of which are termed as Hybrid and the rest two as PXI Express. The slots
used are the PXI Express slots. In more detail, slot 2 bears the PCIe‑6341 card used
for sending signals to the scanning mirrors and slot 3 bears the PXIe-6356 card used
for sending and receiving the signals from the detectors. Both PCIe‑6341 and PXIe-
6356 are connected to two SCB-68A break-out boards from National Instruments
to which the cables carrying the signals to the scanning mirrors and from/to the
detectors are inserted.
5.1.2
Detectors
Three Photomultiplier (PMT) detectors are employed:
• two non-cooled PMTs (PMT2101(/M)) by Thorlabs each one housing a GaAsP
PMT (H10770PA-40 by Hamamatsu) along with an amplifier. They are used
for the short and long fluorescent wavelength epicollection paths and they are
chosen due to their greater sensitivity compared to standard bialkali or multi-
alkali PMTs.
• one multialkali NIR-sensitive PMT (PMM02) by Thorlabs used in the condenser
subassembly.
5.1.3
Scanning Mirrors
The scanning mirrors used are the 5 mm galvanometric scanners (6210H) by Cam-
bridge Tech. They are interfaced to the 673 driving board by Cambridge Tech which
is in turn connected to a SCB-68A break-out board. The scanning mirrors driving
board is powered by the power supply RPE3323 and is in touch with a computer fun.
5.1.4
3-axis Moving Stage
The 3-axis movement is achieved via combining the XYR-8080 XY stage by Dover
Motion and a Z stage (SA-MP285-1Z-M) from Shutter Instruments. Both stages are
interfaced to the control computer via the MP-285A stage controller from Shutter
Instruments. The stage controller comes with a user control device (285ROE) and
the user can opt control motion in X, Y and Z through it or through the software
GUI provided by Scanimage.
==PAGE:38==
5.1 Wiring
31
5.1.5
Laser
The laser used is the Chameleon Discovery from Coherent [57]. It is a tunable (660 −
1320 nm) femtosecond laser with integrated power control.
5.1.6
Control Computer
The control computer used is the Precision 5820 Tower from Dell configured to have
32GB of RAM and a processor from the Intel Xeon W series.
Figure 5.2: The wiring sketch for the hardware of the two-photon microscope build.
The description starts with the control computer (Precision 5820 Tower) located
on the top middle part of the figure.
On the top left part one can see the laser
which is connected to the control computer via USB. Below the laser, the MP-285A
stage controller is depicted and is connected via custom made cabling (from Shutter
Instruments) to (i) the user control device (285ROE), (ii) the XYR-8080 XY stage
and (iii) the SA-MP285-1Z-M Z stage. MP-285A communicates with the control
computer via USB.
Moving to the signal acquisition/generation, first we have to introduce the PC1-6110
DAQ which sits in one of the PCIe slots of the control computer. The DAQ card
is connected via the SH68-68 cable (from NI) to the PXI Chassis PXIE-1073 which
has at slots 2 and 3, PCIe‑6341 and PXIe‑6356 respectively. Both PCIe‑6341 and
PXIe‑6356 are connected to one SCB-68A break-out board via the SH68F-68F-EPM
cable (from NI).
==PAGE:39==
32
5 An Open-source Two-photon Microscope
At the lower left part of the figure, one can see the 673 driving board which controls
the scanning mirrors. The broad is powered by the power supply RPE3323 and is
connected to the two scanning mirror heads.
It receives the relevant signaling to
control the mirrors by two analog outputs (one for the x and one for the y mirror
head) coming from the SCB-68A break-out board.
In the lower right part of the wiring sketch one can see the three PMTs. PMM02
sends its signals via a SMA cable to an analog input channel of the SCB-68A break-
out board. Gain control for PMM02 is achieved by the PMT receiving an analog
output from the SCB-68A via a BNC cable. Each PMT2101(/M) sends its signals
via SMA to an analog input channel of the SCB-68A break-out board and receives
its gain control signals via a USB connection with the control computer.
5.2
Software
The software used to control the detectors, the moving stage, the scanning mirrors
and ultimately to record data from microscope is the MATLAB-based Scanimage [58]
by Vidrio Technologies. In particular, the 5.5 open-source version of Scanimage (SI
5.5) was installed as an add-on to MATLAB 2018.
The driver-level communication with the signal acquisition/generation cards and the
moving stage is transparent to the user and the only actions required to communicate
with them are (i) to install National Instruments and Shutter Instruments relevant
drivers and (ii) afterwards to run Scanimage and modify the so-called machine con-
figuration file. This is done by a relevant graphical user interface (GUI) in which the
user can insert the devices that are present and adjust the relevant to each hardware
component control/configuration parameters.
The laser is controlled by a software provided by Coherent which provides control
over the wavelength, the output power and the dispersion compensation.
Although Scanimage controls the signals acquired by both the PMT2101(/M) detec-
tors. The gain settings of these detectors are controlled via a software provided by
Thorlabs.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 6
COMSOL Simulation: a
Two-photon PSF Meets
a Slab of PEGDA in
Water
What we ultimately want to model is how a PEGDA-based organoid scaffold will affect
the optical sectioning ability of a two-photon microscope. This means that we will
model the microscope’s excitation path and place in it as a sample a PEGDA-based
organoid in a water and nutrient bath. We need to build a model simple enough to be
simulated, yet capable of giving us some realistic insights. The initial intention was
to design and study a 3D model, but small scale proof-of-concept simulations made
us see at an early development state that this would be computationally infeasible.
As a result, the very fist simplification would be to study a 2D slice of our problem.
Figure 6.1a depicts the basic blocks of what we want to simulate, Figure 6.1b shows
the stripped-down version of Figure 6.1a and finally Figure 6.1c depicts the bare-bones
version of Figure 6.1a.
Starting with the middle component of Figure 6.1b; a microscope in it’s simplest form
is comprised of a lens assembly called objective lens. Since the medium of the sample
to be imaged is water, then the objective should be a water immersion objective.
The light that is shined upon the objective comes from a laser, meaning that is of
harmonic time dependence and that its transverse to the optical axis intensity profile,
is Gaussian. Regarding the harmonic time dependence of the electric field, we need
to consider that we are ultimately modelling for a two-photon fluorescent microscope
that will be used for organoid imaging. This doesn’t impose any particular limitations,
but it has two consequences: (i) the relevant wavelengths are the ones associated with
the palette of fluorophores used in cell staining and (ii) we have to consider the double
of these wavelengths, since the fluorophore will be excited by a two-photon effect. As
for the organoid (i..e the rightmost component of Figure 6.1a), we will limit ourselves
in modelling a PEGDA slab at a defined distance from a focal plane containing
==PAGE:41==
34
6 COMSOL Simulation: a Two-photon PSF Meets a Slab of PEGDA in Water
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.1: (a) Simulation block diagram of how a PEGDA-based organoid scaffold
affects the optical sectioning ability of a two-photon microscope. From the left: the
light source; a femtosecond pulsed laser, the two-photon microscope and the
organoid in the water and nutrient bath. (b) Stripped-down version of the block
diagram above. From the left: the light source; monochromatic light with a
Gaussian-shaped beam profile, the microscope’s water immersion objective lens and
a simplified organoid comprised of a PEGDA slab and fluorescent beads in water.
(c) Bare bones version of the block diagram above. From the left: the light source; a
plane wave, a high numerical aperture convex lens and the PEGDA slab in water.
fluorescent beads. The water and nutrient bath can be reduced to a water bath since
nutrients won’t interact with light.
Going one step further, in terms of simplification (see Figure 6.1c):
• the spatial profile of the light that arrives in the objective is modelled as a plane
wave. This comes from the fact that the more homogeneous the light that arrives
in the back aperture of an objective, the better the resolution we get since there
NA is not underutilized [9]. Consequently, one can use a Gaussian with a beam
waist that is larger than the diameter of the objective’s back aperture. The
quantity that describes how much bigger is the beam waist with respect to the
objective’s back aperture, is the so-called fill factor, defined as T = Dbeam/DBA
where DBA the back-aperture diameter and Dbeam the 1/e2-intensity width [9].
We are going to use T = 1, meaning that the objective essentially “sees” a plane
wave at it’s back aperture.
• the objective lens is reduced to a single convex lens of high numerical aperture.
• as for the last part of the diagram, we can loose the fluorescent beads since we
==PAGE:42==
6.1 Two-photon PSF
35
are only modelling for the excitation path.
Closing the comments on Figure 6.1c, it should be noted that conceptually the plane
wave and the high NA convex lens will yield the spatial distribution of light in the
focus point of the two-photon microscope. The piece of PEGDA will serve for the
simplest structure that can be modelled, namely a slab under which the fluorescent
targets reside.
6.1
Two-photon PSF
Before translating Figure 6.1c into a COMSOL simulation, it is essential to step back
and consider the dimensions of the geometry that we intend to model. The “bulkiest”
component is the convex lens and thus it will get to determine the dimensions of the
whole modelling domain. That would mean that we need a couple of millimeters in
both spatial dimensions (see Table 1 of [56] for objectives dimensions). Additionally,
we have to consider the fact that modelling within the COMSOL Wave Optics module
implies that we are interested in keeping track of the evolution of the propagating
electromagnetic (EM) fields. Tracking the amplitude and the phase of an EM field
requires sub-wavelength resolution. Putting it all together, in terms of length scales
without making any calculations, we can safely conclude that the amount of mesh
elements needed would be computationally prohibitive.
Rethinking of what is essentially to capture by modelling a lens, we can understand
that what we want to model is the focusing ability of the lens. From a wavefront
point of view, this would translate into how this lens have managed to turn a planar
wavefront arriving into it’s back aperture to a spherical one that emerges from it’s
front aperture and converges to its focus. So, our simulation will reduce to tracking
the light that emanates from a spherical wavefront present at some distance after the
objective’s front aperture (see Figure 6.2).
Figure 6.2: The dashed square will be modelled so that to have a two-photon PSF.
As to how light emanates from a wavefront, resorting to Huygens-Fresnel principle,
we can imagine that each point on a wavefront acts a generator of secondary spherical
wavelets. If the wavefront is spherical, then all the point emitters’ waves are expected
to interfere constructively at the wavefronts’ center of curvature.
==PAGE:43==
36
6 COMSOL Simulation: a Two-photon PSF Meets a Slab of PEGDA in Water
6.2
The Modelling Domain Conceptually-wise
The following picture illustrates the FEM modelling domain that we will create in
COMSOL. A rectangle filled with water that houses at its leftmost side a spherical
wavefront which bears point emitters. The interference of the light emanating from
these point emitters will result in a focus spot. Before this focus spot a PEGDA slab
of varying thickness will be introduced.
Figure 6.3: FEM modelling domain sketch. A rectangle filled with water that
houses at its leftmost side a spherical wavefront which bears point emitters. A
PEGDA slab of varying thickness will be introduced before the focus.
6.2.1
The Rectangle
The material of the rectangle is water, because this is the medium where organoids
get to live. As for its dimensions, the height is determined by the cord of the spherical
wavefront and its width by the spherical wavefront’s radius of curvature or equiva-
lently its radius -the radius of curvature of a circle is its radius.
6.2.2
The Spherical Wavefront
The spherical wavefront is coming out of a high numerical aperture water immersion
lens, this will get to determine the ratio of its chord to its radius. In more detail,
(consult Figure 6.4) requiring NA=1 in water (nwater = 1.333 ) and setting a focal
length of f = 300 um (large enough to accommodate a couple of PEGDA layers ∼
100 um and small enough to be computationally feasible) we can derive the following:





NA = 1
f = 300 um
⇒







θNA = arcsin
NA
nwater
tan(θNA) = D
f
⇒
D = 340.36 um
==PAGE:44==
6.2 The Modelling Domain Conceptually-wise
37
Figure 6.4: Relevant parameters for defining a spherical wavefront coming out of a
high numerical aperture water immersion lens.















D = 340.36 um
f = 300 um
r =
√
D2 + f 2
⇒
r = 453.70 um
The chord D is the half aperture of the maximum cone of light that can enter and
exit the objective lens that we are modelling.
6.2.3
The Point Emitters
The point emitters are equally spaced in the spherical wavefront and their number
(Npoint emitters) is set so that to have enough of them, so that all phases are sampled
well. Since we will be working within a FEM framework this means that it is essential
to have one point emitter per mesh element. We will come back to mesh element sizing
in Section 6.4. This can be calculated as follows:







lengtharc = 2θNAr
sizemesh element = λwater
6
⇒
Npoint emitters =
⌈
lengtharc
sizemesh element
⌉
= 6158
6.2.4
PEGDA Slab
The PEGDA hydrogel will be introduced to the model as a custom material with
spatially varying refractive index. The shape of the PEGDA will be that of a slab
with variable thickness depending on how many layers we want to introduce (each
layer is 20 um thick). The height of the slab will cover the entire field of view. All
we have to do is to define in COMSOL the periodic version of the functions that
describe RI variance in x and z directions (defined in Section 4.6.2 and Section 4.6.1)
==PAGE:45==
38
6 COMSOL Simulation: a Two-photon PSF Meets a Slab of PEGDA in Water
and use them to define the material’s RI. Before continuing, it is essential to note
the correspondence between the printing and the simulation coordinate systems. The
z direction in printing corresponds to the x direction in the simulation, while the x
direction in printing is the y direction of the simulation. The periodic RI profiles for
x and y direction of the simulation are shown in Figure 6.5 for five voxels. Let us
note here that the refractive index values are normalized in the following graphs.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.5: (a) The periodic RI profile for 5 voxels in y direction. (b) The original
along the smoothened periodic RI profile for 5 voxels in x direction. The RI values
are normalized.
The refractive index profiles have to be: (i) sharp enough to capture the abrupt RI
changes present between voxels (ii) smooth enough (i.e. having a continuous second
order derivative) to be incorporated in second order partial differential equations.
==PAGE:46==
6.3 The Modelling Domain COMSOL-wise
39
Consequently, a smoothing operation was applied to the axial RI profile (see Fig-
ure 6.5b) so that the transitions between voxels are differentiable.
6.3
The Modelling Domain COMSOL-wise
Figure 6.6a depicts the developed geometry in COMSOL. For demonstration purposes
we have introduced a one layer-thick PEGDA slab. This geometry is the domain in
which, after discretization, we are going to study light propagation via combining the
numerical solutions of the wave equation for each domain element.
The wave equation for the electric field will be the defining differential equation for
the formulation of all boundary value problems in this COMSOL simulation and let
us now present, in short, the relevant mathematical formulations used.
Embarking from the macroscopic set of Maxwell’s equations in their harmonic
form, assuming a linear and isotropic material, the constitutive relations (6.2) along
with the wave equation (6.3) read:
D = ϵoϵrE
(6.1)
H =
1
µoµr
B,
(6.2)
where ϵo and ϵr are the permittivities of the vacuum and the material respectively
while µo and µr are their corresponding permeabilities.
∇×
( 1
µ∇× E
)
= iω
(
∇× H
)
= iω(Jfree −iωD)
(6.3)
If Jfree is solely due to a material’s linear (i.e. follows Ohms law) response (6.3) is
rewritten as follows:
∇×
( 1
µ∇× E
)
= iω(σ −iωϵoϵr)E = ϵo
(
ϵr + i σ
ωϵo
)
ω2E
(6.4)
Defining the complex permittivity as ˜ϵ = ϵo
(
ϵr + i σ
ωϵo
)
(6.4) becomes:
∇×
( 1
µ∇× E
)
= ˜ϵω2E
(6.5)
In an optics framework it is common to work with the refractive index which assuming
non-magnetic media (µr = 1) is written as ˜n2 = ˜ϵr.
With these (6.5) takes the
following form:
∇×
(
∇× E
)
= ˜n2k2
oE
(6.6)
where ko is the vacuum wavenumber and since we are in a 2D case E(x, y, z) =
˜E(x, y, z)e−ikzz, where kz the out-of-plane wave number. Its should be noted here
that the vacuum wavelength used in the simulation is 1000 nm.
==PAGE:47==
40
6 COMSOL Simulation: a Two-photon PSF Meets a Slab of PEGDA in Water
The part for the relevant to the simulation Physics formulations ends with the bound-
ary conditions used for the interfaces between different media. These conditions can
be derived directly from Maxwell’s equations and are:
(D2 −D1) · ˆn = σs
(B2 −B1) · ˆn = 0
ˆn × (E2 −E1) = 0
ˆn × (H2 −H1) = Js
where ˆn is the surface normal vector and σs and Js are the surface charge and current
density respectively.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.6: (a) COMSOL geometry annotated with domain numbers. (b) The same
COMSOL geometry whereby all points are visible as small black squares. Inset:
zoom in the spherical wavefront so that its comprising points are visible.
The main properties for the developed geometry are described as follows:
• domains & material: all domains except for domain 10 have water as a
material. Domain 10 has the user-defined material PEGDA.
• domains & properties: domains 1-4, 6 and 13-15, (highlighted in blue in
Figure 6.6a) are perfect matching layers (PMLs). A PML is a fictitious ab-
sorber used as an aid to truncate modelling geometries corresponding to open-
boundary problems. In continuous space, if it is thick enough a PML is reflec-
tionless (i.e. it can attenuate any plane wave independent of incidence angle).
In discretized space though, there will be back reflections [59]. Nevertheless
PMLs are the best option available in COMSOL.
• points & properties: the spherical wavefront (see Figure 6.6b) has been
constructed by a polygon line in which every point bears a line current (out-of
plane) with I0 = 1A. These currents will act as source terms and will kick-start
the electromagnetic oscillations in the simulation.
==PAGE:48==
6.4 Meshing
41
6.4
Meshing
The discretization of a FEM geometry is crucial since it determines both the solu-
tion accuracy and the computational requirements. Ideally, the so called Physics-
controlled mesh provided as an out-of-the box option by COMSOL should be used.
This option creates a free triangular mesh and can take as an input several tuning
parameters such as refractive index variations (this is the relevant option in our case).
Unfortunately, the dimensions of the develop modelling domain were so large that
the automated Physics-controlled meshing failed to be executed informing us that
the computational resources that it requires are practically infinite. This resulted in
a hand-tuned mesh that required a reasonable amount of computational resources
while yielding a solution with an acceptable inaccuracy. The meshing policy used
(see Figure 6.6a for domain numbers) was a free-triangular mesh around the spheri-
cal wavefront (domains 5 and 7) and near and inside PEGDA (domains 9-11). The
rest of the domains were meshed with a mapped-mesh. All meshes had second-order
elements (quadratic elements) and shared the same mesh element size that being
λmedium/5 (by the term medium we refer to either water or PEGDA). Closing let
us note that there was not variation in mesh element size, meaning that both the
maximum and minimum element size was set to λmedium/5.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 7
Results & Discussion
7.1
PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation
Predictions
This chapter includes the presentation of the COMSOL simulation results, along with
the relevant discussion. In the sections that follow, we are going to:
• evaluate the accuracy of the simulation that was set up.
• describe the limitations that arose due to the approach that was chosen to create
the two-photon PSF.
• go through the different scenarios for which we quantified how a one-layer or
several-layers thick PEGDA slab affects the two-photon excitation light path.
7.1.1
The Two-photon PSF
The left part of Figure 7.1 is a colormap of the intensity in the whole simulation
geometry. Although, it offers no information, the reason for including it in the figure,
is to give the whole view of the simulation geometry. In the rest of this report, all the
images that are intensity colormaps are the result of a zoom-in view in the simulation
geometry around the focus. On the right part of figure Figure 7.1, we can see two
such zoom-in views. The upper part depicts the intensity distribution around the
focus (i.e. one-photon point spread function) while the lower part depicts the square
of the intensity distribution around the focus (i.e. two-photon point spread function).
It should be noted that the intensities are normalized to their maximum values.
We designed the simulation so that to obtain a PSF with NA = 1 focused (i.e. having
its maximum intensity) at 300 um. Looking at Figure 7.1 two observations can be
made: (i) the focus point is not at 300 um, in fact it is at 305.06 um and thus ∼1.69
% off the expected location (ii) the PSF is not symmetric in the axial direction and
in Section 2.2 an axially symmetric two-photon PSF was presented. These results
initially came as a surprise to us, but they are expected due to two simulation design
choices that were made presented and discussed in Section 7.1.1.1 and Section 7.1.1.2.
7.1.1.1
Mesh Granularity & Focus Location
In this section, we are going to address the fact that the simulated focus location
deviates from the expected one. In short, the reason for that is numerical error due
==PAGE:50==
7.1 PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation Predictions
43
Figure 7.1: The left part depicts a colormap of the intensity in the whole simulation
geometry. The right upper part shows the intensity distribution around the focus
(i.e. one-photon point spread function). The right lower part depicts the square of
the intensity distribution around the focus (i.e. two-photon point spread function).
to discretization.
The common guideline to evaluate your mesh is to solve a simple problem for which
you have at hand the analytical solution. In this way, you can evaluate the error that
is introduced when coarser discretization is used. As it has been stated in Section 6.4,
the mesh element size is set to λmedium/5 and this had been accurate enough for
proof-of-concept simulations that for brevity we won’t show here. On the contrary,
a mesh element size of λmedium/5 is not sufficient to yield a focus at 300 um. In
the following figure the deviation from focus is plotted against the mesh element
size. As the mesh size element is reduced, the focus location slowly converges to the
expected focus location. The coarsest element size (λmedium/3) results in a 29.13 um
deviation, while the finest (λmedium/6) in a 1.94 um. The reasonable question here
would be why we haven’t included smaller mesh element sizes in Figure 7.2. While
it is common for Wave Optics simulations to have mesh element sizes that go down
to λmedium/10, it is not common to have modelling domains of dimensions similar
to ours (the simulation domain is a 577.70 um × 696.73 um rectangle) meshed with
such a fine mesh.
Concluding, the mesh quality used may not be the optimal in
terms of accuracy, but it is in terms of accuracy and computational resources.
Let us deviate a bit here, and give a feeling for the computational requirements of
the simulations. For simulations with a mesh size of λmedium/5, like the ones that
will be presented in the next sections, 8 cores of 110GB or 180GB RAM each were
used. Under these settings, a simulation would take approximately five and half hours
to run with an average memory usage of 350GB and a maximum memory usage of
1150GB. For more details on the computational requirements of the simulations for
==PAGE:51==
44
7 Results & Discussion
the different mesh element sizes refer to Table B.1 in Appendix B.
Figure 7.2: Mesh element size used for simulation discretization versus the deviation
from the expected focus location. As the mesh element size is reduced, the deviation
from the focus location is smaller. The coarsest element size (λmedium/3) results in
a 29.13 um deviation, while the finest (λmedium/6) in a 1.94 um.
7.1.1.2
High Numerical Apertures & Axial Symmetry
Let us now address the fact that the simulated point spread function is not symmetric
along the optical axis. In short, the reason for that is that we are simulating a high
numerical aperture system (non-paraxial case study) where the distance between the
observation and the source plane is not large enough (not large enough Fresnel number
see Section 2.2 for definition). The widely accepted approach to describe the point
spread function of a microscope, given in the classical articles [60] and [61], is build
on three assumptions (i) a scalar field (ii) the paraxial approximation and (iii) the
Debye approximation [62]. In [62] the focusing theory is revisited to amend the gap
introduced when a scalar treatment is used for high NA systems, where the vector
character of the EM fields is more pronounced. The findings of [62] amount to that
the PSF is not symmetric along the optical axis and a description of that asymmetry
is given. The profile of the PSF that we have simulated agrees with these findings,
but we will not proceed to further analysis on that.
The set of figures in Figure 7.3 depicts the two-photon intensity distribution along
the focal plane (lateral profile) and along the optical axis (axial profile). The profiles
are plotted against the PSF profiles presented in Section 2.2. As expected, along the
==PAGE:52==
7.1 PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation Predictions
45
optical axis the theoretical and the simulated two-photon PSFs do not match in terms
of shape and in terms of the zero locations. On the contrary, along the focal plane
the theoretical and simulated PSFs match.
Measuring the distance from the peak to the first minimum in both Figure 7.3a and
Figure 7.3b, we can approximately calculate the numerical aperture of the simulated
PSF to be NAlateral=1 and NAaxial=0.88 respectively. The calculations were done
using that daxial = (2 ∗nwater ∗λwater)/NA2 for the distance along the optical axis
and that dlateral = 0.61 ∗λwater/NA for the distance along the focal plane.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.3: (a) The two-photon intensity distribution along the focal plane (lateral
profile) against the expected jinc4 function. (b) The two-photon intensity
distribution along the optical axis (axial profile) against the expected sinc4 function.
7.1.1.3
Simulation Design & Axial Symmetry
Further analysis on the form of the PSF was left out of the scope of this thesis and
instead the focus was set to investigate how this issue could be overcome by altering
the developed simulation. Revisiting the design choices made for the simulation, the
axial asymmetry observed could have been circumvented if either the observation
plane was far enough from the point emitters or if the spherical wavelets were
substituted by plane waves.
Let us note here that axial symmetry could have
also been obtained if we were to simulate a lower numerical aperture system (see
Section 7.1.1.4), so that we are not in a non-paraxial case.
If we were to develop a simulation with an observation plane far enough, then we could
either increase the dimensions of the geometry or keep the same dimensions and act
as if we are far enough by instructing COMSOL to regard the simulation domain
as a Far-field domain. The option to increase the simulation dimensions was ruled
out since we were already using a considerable amount of computational resources in
==PAGE:53==
46
7 Results & Discussion
a cluster environment. Regarding COMSOL’s Far-field option: it was implemented
but we were not able to extract the computed results and that’s due to limitations
imposed by the way the far-field calculations are carried out in COMSOL. In more
detail, when a domain in a simulated geometry is denoted as a Far-field domain, then
COMSOL integrates the near field solution of the electric filed in the boundaries of
the selected domain and derives the far-field solution. The limitation of this approach
is that it does not scale well in a geometry of high dimensions. This means that it
requires a practically infinite computation time. It should be noted that this piece of
information was obtained after communication with the COMSOL support team.
As for the option to substitute the spherical waves with plane waves, it was imple-
mented but did not yield the desirable results. More analytically, the point emitters
in the spherical wavefront were substituted by Port boundary conditions. Each of
them launching a plane wave in a small part of the spherical wavefront. Although, a
Port boundary condition is a way to introduce a plane wave in a boundary. Introduc-
ing plane waves in small parts of a boundary will truncate them. This means that
the plane waves will lose their plane wave nature in the sense that they won’t span
in the whole simulation domain.
Concluding, with the help provided by the COMSOL support team, we understood
that due to the way the simulation was designed, we would have to either make other
design choices (see Appendix C) or live with the limitations that this simulation
design comes with. Due to time limitations (mainly) and due to the fact that we
were interested on non-absolute comparisons of how the intensity around the focus
is affected by PEGDA hydrogels, we went on with our simulation scenarios, keeping
the simulation design as it was.
7.1.1.4
The PSF Of A Conveniently Low NA
Although, we can not alter our simulation so that the observation plane is conveniently
far away, we can alter the simulation so that we have a conveniently low numerical
aperture. The simulation was altered so that to have a numerical aperture of 0.4. In
this way, we are in a paraxial case and thus the fact that the observation plane is
not far enough won’t have have such a pronounced impact that would lead to PSF
asymmetry along the optical axis (see Figure 7.4).
This section and the previous one served as complementary information so that to
illustrate the challenges/limitations that came with our design choices. In the next
section, we are getting back to the NA=1 two-photon PSF and bring PEGDA hydro-
gels into the picture.
7.1.2
The Two-photon PSF Gets Distorted by a PEGDA-based
Hydrogel
So far, we have presented and commended on the simulated profile of the light that
comes out of a 2PM. So, what we have in place is a simulation of a two-photon
==PAGE:54==
7.1 PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation Predictions
47
Figure 7.4: The left part depicts a colormap of the intensity in the whole simulation
geometry for NA = 0.4. The right upper part shows the intensity distribution
around the focus (i.e. one-photon point spread function). The right lower part
depicts the square of the intensity distribution around the focus (i.e. two-photon
point spread function). Contrary to the NA = 1 non-paraxial case, axial symmetry
is obtained for NA = 0.4.
PSF focused in a rectangular water-filled domain. The next step, is to add a slab of
PEGDA hydrogel before the focus location. In Sections 7.1.3, 7.1.3.1 and 7.1.3.2 a
one-layer thick slab of PEGDA hydrogel is introduced to the simulation and in 7.1.4
the behaviour of a multiple-layers thick slab of PEGDA hydrogel is studied.
Before proceeding to the results, it is useful to state that since a PEGDA voxel has a
systematic radial and axial RI gradient, it can be viewed as a gradient-index (GRIN)
optical element. The distinct feature of GRIN optical elements is that light travels in
a curved fashion, as opposed to homogeneous optics where light travels in a rectilinear
fashion [63]. Consequently, we can a priori say that each voxel of a PEGDA hydrogel
will scatter light in a curved way. In the sections that follow, we will try to get an
understanding of how the fact that each voxel scatters light in a curved way affects
the 2P excitation light path.
7.1.3
Single PEGDA Layer: An Array of Micro-sized GRIN Elements
A one-layer thick PEGDA slab is introduced at 160 um, that is 145 um before the
focus location. Figure 7.5 depicts a colormap of the refractive index of the modelling
domain. Black corresponds to the minimum refractive index present which is that
of water (nwater = 1.333), while white corresponds to the maximum refractive index
which is the maximum RI of PEGDA ( nP EGDAmax = 1.365). The striped layer along
==PAGE:55==
48
7 Results & Discussion
the y direction is the one-layer thick (i.e. 20 um) PEGDA slab. In the zoom in view
of Figure 7.5 one can see 1 × 15 voxels.
Figure 7.5: A colormap of the refractive index of the modelling domain. Black
corresponds to the minimum RI (i.e. nwater = 1.333), while white corresponds to
the maximum RI (i.e. nP EGDAmax = 1.365). The striped layer along the y direction
is the one-layer thick PEGDA slab. In the zoom in view one can see 15 voxels.
The following figures depict the intensity along with the two-photon intensity (inten-
sity squared) around the focus when there is no PEGDA (Figure 7.6a and Figure 7.6c)
and after the insertion of the one-layer thick (i.e. 20 um) PEGDA slab (Figure 7.6b
and Figure 7.6d). Inspecting the intensity colormaps one can understand that the
insertion of PEGDA resulted in energy to be redistributed around the focus. This
means that PEGDA had scattered some portion of the light away from the focus.
Nevertheless, the relevant quantity for the two-photon intensity, is intensity squared
and the only reason that we commented on intensity is because when there is no
squaring effect, one can observe how the light pattern changes more easily. In or-
der to evaluate the impact of PEGDA on the two-photon PSF, the axial and lateral
profiles of the PSF at its focal point are presented in Figure 7.7.
Looking both Figure 7.7a and Figure 7.7b one can see that the two-photon intensity
at the focus has been decreased.
Additionally, one can observe in Figure 7.7a a
small displacement (i.e. 0.1842 um) of the point where the maximum intensity occurs
after PEGDA was added. This translates into the displacement of the focus point
since with the insertion of PEGDA the optical path is altered. Closing, let us note
that the intensities in the colormaps (Figure 7.6) and the profile plots (Figure 7.7)
are normalized to the maximum intensity value obtained when there is no PEGDA
present.
In the next two sections, two simulation scenarios will be set up with a one-layer thick
PEGDA slab so that to investigate further its impact to the two-photon PSF.
7.1.3.1
Single PEGDA Layer: Focal Position vs Voxel’s Lateral RI Profile
In this section we are going to investigate if the light path experiences a different
distortion depending on whether the optical axis (x direction) coincides with the
==PAGE:56==
7.1 PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation Predictions
49
(a) Intensity - no PEGDA
(b) Intensity - one layer of PEGDA
(c) Intensity Squared - no PEGDA
(d) Intensity Squared - one layer of PEGDA
Figure 7.6: Comparing (a) and (b) one can see how PEGDA had scattered some
portion of the light away from the focus. This is not obvious in (c) and (d) since the
squaring effect suppresses small changes.
middle part (highest voxel RI) or the edge (lowest voxel RI) of a voxel. This scenario
basically corresponds to the question: “Does the position of the objective lens on
a PEGDA slab affects the PSF differently?”. In order to realize this scenario, the
refractive index profile of the PEGDA slab is displaced in the y direction so that the
focus location each time coincides with a different part of the PEGDA voxel and thus
a different RI. Since a voxel is of 10.8 um in its y dimension, we simulated 10 steps
of 1.08 um each, starting form the focus initial position which was set as the 0 um
displacement case. The different positions that the focus will “hit” the PEGDA voxel
is shown in Figure 7.8.
In Figure 7.9 the intensity and intensity squared colormaps are presented for the case
(0 um displacement) where the focus coincides with the highest voxel (i.e. nP EGDAmax =
1.365) and for the case (5.4 um displacement) where the focus “hits” the PEGDA voxel
at its lowest RI value that being nP EGDAmin = 1.354. Inspecting Figure 7.9c and
Figure 7.9d one cannot identify a difference between them.
Investigating further, we present the cross-sections of the 2P intensity in the x (axial
profile) and y (lateral profile) direction at the focus point. Let us note that the all
intensities in Figure 7.9 and Figure 7.10 are normalized to the maximum intensity
value which occurred for the 1.08 um PEGDA displacement case. Looking at the
figures of Figure 7.10 we can conclude that for a one-layer thick PEGDA whether the
focus “hits” a voxel at its highest refractive index or at its lowest, that has no impact
on the 2P PSF.
==PAGE:57==
50
7 Results & Discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.7: (a) The axial profile of the PSF at its focal point. (b) The lateral profile
of the PSF at its focal point. Both figure suggest that the two-photon intensity at
the focus has been decreased after PEGDA was added.
Closing this section, it is essential to note here that this scenario would be interested
to be investigated for PEGDA slabs that are multiple-layers thick.
7.1.3.2
Single PEGDA Layer: PEGDA Slab Distance from Focus Location
In this section, it is investigated whether the distance of the one-layer thick PEGDA
slab from the focus point is affecting differently the light path.
This corresponds to the question: “Does the distance of the point of interest from
the PEGDA slab matters?”. This is studied by placing the one-layer thick PEGDA
slab at different distances from the focus. In Figure 7.11 one can see the different
locations that the PEGDA slab will be inserted marked with red lines. We start with
the PEGDA slab at 35.06 um, which is 250 um away from the focus location. Then
we move closer to the focus with a 50 um step, with the final position for the PEGDA
slab to be at 285.06 um.
Again, we start the discussion about this question with intensity and intensity squared
colormaps (Figure 7.12) and finally resort to Figure 7.13 where the axial and lateral
profiles of the 2P PSF at the focus are presented. Intensities are normalized to the
maximum intensity value which occurred for the 50 um distance case.
Inspecting Figure 7.12c and Figure 7.12d we can see that the closer the PEGDA layer
is placed to the focus, the more pronounce the effect of scattering is. However, if we
look at Figure 7.12e and Figure 7.12f, the central part of the focus spot of the 2P
PSF (i.e. orange ellipse at focus) seems to be the same when the PEGDA layer is
==PAGE:58==
7.1 PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation Predictions
51
Figure 7.8: A colormap of the refractive index of the modelling domain. Black
corresponds to nwater = 1.333, while white corresponds to nP EGDAmax = 1.365. The
red lines along the x direction correspond to the different positions that the focus
will “hit” the PEGDA voxel so that to address the question: “Does the position of
the objective lens on a PEGDA slab affects the PSF differently?”. The first red line
is at 340.36 um and the last is at 351.16 um , corresponding to a 0 um and a
10.8 um PEGDA displacement respectively. In 0 um displacement the focus hits a
point with the highest RI. In the 5.4 um displacement case the focus hits the point
with the lowest RI.
250 um away from the focus and when it is 50 um away. This is further investigated
in Figure 7.13 and we can conclude that if we move a one-layer thick PEGDA away
from the focus deeper into the illumination cone, there is no impact on the 2P PSF
central focal spot. Consequently, we can say that for a one-layer thick PEGDA slab,
placing a point of interest (i.e. fluorescent target) at 50 um or 250 um under it, won’t
affect how this target will be excited by the two-photon PSF.
Closing this section, it is essential to note that it is required to experiment further
with larger distances, so that to come to conclusive results. Unfortunately, this was
not feasible due to the computational requirements that this would impose, since
supporting a greater range of distances would enlarge the simulated geometry.
7.1.4
Multiple PEGDA Layers: A Stack Of Micro-sized Aligned
Arrays of GRIN Elements
In this section we progressively make the one-layer thick PEGDA slab thicker. We
start with a one-layer thick PEGDA slab at 160 um and add layers one-by-one, ending
with a five-layers thick PEGDA slab which ends at 260 um (see Figure 7.14).
Instead of presenting the intensity colormaps for the two corner cases (i.e. one layer
case and five layers case) of this simulation scenario Figure 7.15, depicts the intensities
for two and five layers of PEGDA. The intensity and intensity squared colormaps
==PAGE:59==
52
7 Results & Discussion
(a) Focus “hits” the highest RI
(b) Focus “hits” the lowest RI
(c) Intensity
(d) Intensity
(e) Intensity Squared
(f) Intensity Squared
Figure 7.9: Intensity and intensity square colormaps. Whether the focus “hits” a
voxel at its highest refractive index or at its lowest has no impact on the intensity
distribution around the focus.
for one layer of PEGDA can been seen in Figure 7.6b and Figure 7.6d respectively.
Comparing Figure 7.6b, Figure 7.15c and Figure 7.15d we can see that the thickening
of the PEGDA slab results in more scattering which manifest itself as a stronger
patterning of the intensity distribution. Inspecting Figure 7.6d, Figure 7.15e and
Figure 7.15f, we can see that the effect of thickening the PEGDA slab is strong
enough so that to be apparent in the two-photon PSF shape. In order to get into more
details on how the two-photon PSF is altered we resort to Figure 7.16. Intensities
in Figure 7.16 are normalized to the maximum intensity value which occurred for
the five-layers thick PEGDA slab. Figure 7.16c depicts the axial profile of the 2P
intensity at the focus while Figure 7.16d depicts the same thing only that all the
intensities are centered about the focus location obtained when the illumination PSF
is not perturbed by the introduction of a PEGDA slab (i.e. 305.06 um). The same
==PAGE:60==
7.1 PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation Predictions
53
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.10: (a) Cross-section of the 2P intensity in the x direction. (b)
Cross-section of the 2P intensity in the y direction. 2P intensities are normalized to
the maximum 2P intensity value which occurred for the 1.08 um displacement.
From both (a) and (b) one can conclude that for a one-layer thick PEGDA whether
the focus “hits” a voxel at its highest refractive index area or at its lowest has no
impact on the 2P PSF.
Figure 7.11: A colormap of the refractive index of the modelling domain.The green
line corresponds to the focus point while the red lines correspond to the different
distances that the PEGDA slab will be placed so that to address the question:
“Does the distance of the point of interest from the PEGDA slab matters?”.
rationale holds for Figure 7.16a and Figure 7.16b where the lateral profiles of the 2P
intensity at the focus are depicted.
Combining the information from Figure 7.16b, Figure 7.16d and Figure 7.17, the
following can be observed: for a one-layer thick PEGDA slab the intensity in the
focus is lowered and a minor displacement of the focus point is observed. When a
==PAGE:61==
54
7 Results & Discussion
(a) One PEGDA layer at 250 um from focus. (b) One PEGDA layer at 50 um from focus.
(c) Intensity
(d) Intensity
(e) Intensity Squared
(f) Intensity Squared
Figure 7.12: Intensity and intensity square colormaps. Comparing (c) and (d) one
can see how the PEGDA layer scatters light in a different way depending on its
distance from the focus point. This is not so obvious in (e) and (f) since the
squaring effect suppresses small changes.
two-layer thick PEGDA slab is introduced, the focus displacement is the maximum
observed and the intensity is higher compared to the intensity of a one-layer thick slab.
When the three, four and five -layers thick slabs are introduced, the intensity gets
higher compared to the one observed for the two-layers thick slab. As for the focus
displacement, it gets lower compared to the displacement observed for the two-layers
thick slab.
Closing, we should point out that even though for a 5-layers thick slab the intensity in
the focus spot is higher compared to that of a 2-layers thick slab, that doesn’t mean
that having five layers of PEGDA instead of two will yield a stronger focus and thus
==PAGE:62==
7.1 PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation Predictions
55
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.13: (a) Cross-section of the 2P intensity in the x direction. (b)
Cross-section of the 2P intensity in the y direction. 2P intensities are normalized to
the maximum 2P intensity value which occurred for the PEGDA slab being at a
50 um from the focus location. From both (a) and (b) one can conclude that for a
one-layer thick PEGDA, placing a point of interest (i.e. fluorescent target) at 50 um
or 250 um under it, won’t affect how this target will be excited by the two-photon
PSF.
Figure 7.14: A colormap of the refractive index of the modelling domain. Black
corresponds to nwater = 1.333, while white corresponds to nP EGDAmax = 1.365. The
two red lines correspond to the beginning of the the first layer of PEGDA and the
end of the fifth and last PEGDA layer.
a better visualization of a fluorescent target. The more “confined” focal spot after
the 5-layers thick slab comes with stronger side lobes that will hinder the contrast
(see Figure 7.18).
==PAGE:63==
56
7 Results & Discussion
(a) Two layers of PEGDA
(b) Five layers of PEGDA
(c) Intensity
(d) Intensity
(e) Intensity Squared
(f) Intensity Squared
Figure 7.15: Intensity and intensity squared colormaps for a two and a five -layers
thick PEGDA slab. Comparing (c) and (d) one can see that for the thicker slab, the
patterning of the intensity distribution is more pronounced and affects the shape of
the focal spot. Comparing (e) and (f) one can see that for the thicker slab two
elongated side lobes appear above and below the focal spot along the x direction.
==PAGE:64==
7.1 PEGDA vs Two-Photon PSF: COMSOL Simulation Predictions
57
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.16: Plots (c) depicts the axial profile of the 2P intensity at the focus. Plot
(d) depicts the same thing only that all the curves are centered about the focus
location obtained when there is no PEGDA (i.e. 305.06 um). The same rationale
holds for plots (a) and (b) which depict the 2P lateral profile. Both the axial and
lateral profiles show that a one-layer thick PEGDA slab decreases the 2P intensity
peak at the focus. As the slab gets thicker the intensity peak gets higher at the
focus. In the lateral 2P profiles, the maximum intensity occurs at the same point for
all slab thicknesses. This is not the case for the 2P axial profiles since the different
in thickness PEGDA slabs alter the optical path length and thus alter the focus
location.
==PAGE:65==
58
7 Results & Discussion
Figure 7.17: Distance from the focus point obtained when the two-photon PSF is
not obscured by a PEGDA slab (i.e. 305.06 um) versus the number of PEGDA
layers. The maximum distance from the focus occurs for a 2-layers thick slab. For a
3, 4 and 5-layers thick PEGDA slabs the focus displacement is gradually reduced.
Figure 7.18: On the left a zoom-in view of Figure 7.15e. On the right a zoom-in
view of Figure 7.15f, looking a bit after the focus location (marked with a dark red
line) the side lobs above and below the focal spot (in the x direction) can be
discerned. On the left no such lobes can be seen. This means that although for the
5-layers thick slab the focal spot is more confined yielding a higher effective NA, the
stronger side lobs around the focal spot will hinder the contrast obtained.
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion & Outlook
We embarked on studying within a finite element framework the optical behaviour of
PEGDA-based scaffolds under two-photon illumination and on the way took part in
the building of a two-photon microscope. The next two sections will briefly summarize
the conclusions drawn from these tasks.
8.0.1
Microscope Building
Even though the optical design of the light path is crucial for the performance of a
microscope, when it comes to its construction this is the less demanding part. Parts
that involve (i) custom machined components used to bring optical components close
enough while not obscuring the 3-axis scanning capabilities of the microscope and
(ii) efficient hardware interfacing so that the stringent timing constraints imposed by
laser scanning are met, are the ones that tend to be time consuming and demanding.
8.0.2
Finite Element Modeling: PEGDA-based Hydrogels vs
Two-photon PSF
Studying the optical behaviour of PEGDA-based hydrogels adopting a finite element
approach implies that we had to make an appropriate mapping to a COMSOL model
of (i) the theory about how light is distributed in the focal spot of a two-photon mi-
croscope and (ii) the suggested model on how refractive index varies in a SLA-printed
PEGDA hydrogel. While modelling the spatial refractive index gradients of PEGDA
hydrogels was quite smooth. In contrast, modelling the two-photon PSF made us
to realize that it’s not enough to translate the theory to a simulation. One should
keep in mind what are the simulation capabilities upon this translation. In our case:
translating the Huygens-Fresnel principle in point emitters on a wavefront should
have yielded the expected PSF profile, but the computational limitations imposed by
the simulation did not allow us to have an observation plane far enough to see that.
After communication with COMSOL support, we understood that the way to get the
expected PSF profile while keeping the simulation dimensions the same, is to imagine
that these point emitters are infinitely far away and start tracing them when they
have become plane waves.
Regrading the scattering behaviour of PEGDA hydrogels, the first thing that we
did was to assign to them a term that would microscopically describe their opti-
==PAGE:67==
60
8 Conclusion & Outlook
cal behaviour. Each voxel of a PEGDA hydrogel due to its RI gradients acts as a
gradient-index (GRIN) optical element, meaning that it scatters light in a non-
rectilinear fashion.
As a result, a layer of a PEGDA hydrogel can be viewed as
an array of micro-sized GRIN elements. In analogy, multiple layers of PEGDA are
basically a stack of arrays of micro-sized GRIN elements.
The results obtained from the simulation scenarios as to how PEGDA hydrogels
distort the two-photon illumination path can be summarized as follows:
• a one-layer thick PEGDA slab due to the scattering it introduces, takes energy
away from the focal spot and redistributes it around it, yielding a weaker focal
spot.
• regrading the question: “Does the position of the objective lens on a PEGDA
slab affects the PSF differently?”. To address this question, a one-layer thick
slab was displaced so that the focus would “hit” each time a part of it with a
different refractive index. The answer is that it doesn’t matter. Let us note
that this should be further investigated with simulations for thicker slabs.
• regrading the question: “Does the distance of the point to be imaged from the
PEGDA slab matters?”. To address this question, a one-layer thick slab was
placed at 50 um, 100 um, 150 um, 200 um and 250 um far away form the focal
plane (this is where the object to imaged would be). The answer is that it
doesn’t matter, because although the position of the slab does affect the way
the light is scattered, the squaring effect of the two-photon light suppresses
the changes introduced. Due to computational limitations carrying out more
simulations for thicker slabs and larger distances so that to come to conclusive
results was not feasible.
• simulating a multiple-layers thick PEGDA slab, showed that the way the PSF
is affected by adding more PEGDA layers is not monotonic. For a one and
a two -layers thick slab the focus location was altered and the focal spot was
weaker. Making the slab three, four and five -layers thick resulted in the focus
location to progressively come to its original (when there is no PEGDA at
all) position and the focal spot to its original (when there is no PEGDA at
all) intensity. Interestingly enough, for the five layered slab, the intensity in the
focal region was higher but surrounded by more pronounced side lobs that would
hider the acquired contrast. The aforementioned could indicate that interesting
interference effects take place and this should be further investigated by adding
more than five layers of PEGDA.
Finally, regarding our approach on the parallelization form offered by COMSOL,
we opted to go with the most transparent to the user option, that being running
COMSOL on a distributed memory mode in a cluster. However, since the length
scales of the problem will be on the order of hundreds of micrometers, the simulation
domain is condemned to be large and thus the most prominent parallelization form
would be using domain decomposition methods [35].
Although finite element simulations offer valuable insights in problems where the
analytical approach is unattainable and adjusting the analytical solution of a simpler
problem fails to capture the phenomena of the complex problem. These insights come
==PAGE:68==
8 Conclusion & Outlook
61
at the price of high computational resources and computation time. As a result, a
considerable part of the development of such a simulations is devoted to make them
less computationally intensive.
This is the direction that the future work related
with this thesis should take in order for it to reach its full potential as a tool to study
organoid imaging. Of course, before that the simulation design should be revised to
yield the expected (far-field form) of the PSF (see Appendix C).
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Stereolithography
Printing
A.1
Stereolithography Printer
The custom built printer [42] is a top-down projection SLA printer controlled via a
in house MATLAB-based software. It has a pixel pitch of 10.8 um and is equipped
with an LED emitting at 365 nm. It uses a metallic fabrication platform and has a
printing area of 20.73 × 11.66 mm.
A.2
Printing Protocol
CAD Model Input
The desired CAD design is exported in a .stl format and sliced using the open-source
slicing program called Slic3r [64].
Solution Preparation For a 3.2 ml PEGDA solution:
• 800 µl PEGDA (MW 700) from a 800 mg/ml stock solution
• 800 µl LAP from a 20 mg/ml stock solution
• 800 µl QY from a 48 mg/ml stock solution
• 768 µl Milli-Q water
• 32 µl Acryloxyethyl thiocarbamoyl Rhodamine B from a 1 mg/ml stock solution
This will result in a printing solution with 200 mg/mL PEGDA, 5 mg/ml LAP,
12 mg/ml QY and 10 µg/ml Acryloxyethyl thiocarbamoyl Rhodamine B.
Pre Printing Procedures
• Turn on the printer and the printer control computer.
• Start MATLAB and set the desired printing parameters.
In this work the
relevant parameter was the step height which was set to 20 um.
• Add printing solution into the printer vat.
• Fixate the vat onto the printer using screws.
• Fixate with adhesive tapes the treated cover glass onto the printer stage.
==PAGE:70==
A.2 Printing Protocol
63
• Fixate the stage onto the printer using screws.
• Close the lid of the printer.
• Start the printer program in MATLAB.
Post Printing Procedures
• Remove print from printer stage.
• Remove remaining printing solution from vat.
• Clean the printer stage and vat and place them back to the printer.
Immediately after printing, prints are immerse in Milli-Q water which should be re-
newed so that the absorber residues to be washed away. In order to use a print, it
should be manually detached from the cover glass.
Cover Glass Treatment
Microscope cover glass slides (22×22 mm) bought from VWR were used for printing.
The cover glasses were treated as follows:
• to remove all organic contaminants, place the glass slides in a plasma champer
for 5 minutes
• prepare a 96% (v/v, in water) ethanol solution and adjust pH with a 30% (w/v)
acetic acid solution to about 5 (indicated by pH sticks).
• immerse the clean glass slides in a 2% (v/v) solution of 3(-trimethoxysilyl)
propyl methacrylate made with the prepared ethanol solution for 10 min.
• remove the solution and wash the cover slides three times with pure ethanol.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
High Performance
Computing
B.1
Cluster Infrastructure at DTU
DTU offers a High Performance Computing (HPC) infrastructure which can be ac-
cessed with (via the ThinLinc client) or without (via secure shell (SSH)) graphical
user interface (GUI).
A user can login (via ThinLinc or SSH) to the so-called login node in the cluster
which acts as a reception. From there the user switches to a so-called application
node whereby he/she can run their jobs. Additionally, the user can browse to their
dedicated storage space. Depending on how the user opts to interact with the appli-
cation node - with or without GUI- he/she can have an interactive session with GUI
to run their program or can have an unattended session whereby he/she run their
program as a job, meaning that he/she submits a script in a terminal.
A cluster is a number of interconnected nodes with a node being a physical self
contained computer. Each node has one or more processors, different amount of
RAM and supports different hardware. Each processor has many cores, with a core
being the basic unit that performs calculations. The cluster resources are managed
by the scheduler.
A scheduler assigns jobs to nodes trying to allocate the available resources to the in
queue jobs optimally. The scheduler tasks are summarized as:
• place the job in a queue.
• allocate resources and decide which job to start.
• report back any relevant logging (i.e output and error messages logs).
The order in which the jobs are started depends (i) on how the jobs are ordered (in
the queue), (ii) the currently available resources (iii) and how many resources the jobs
are requesting. Therefore it is essential for each user to build up a understanding of
the resources that the program he/she seeks to run require. This will guarantee that
The program will not run out of resources or will not take an infinite amount of time
to execute. In parallel, this will result into proper utilization of a common source
that being the cluster.
To submit a job to the queue, the user must give the scheduler a set of information
==PAGE:72==
B.2 An Example Script
65
(e.g. how many nodes they request) that will help so that the job acquires the proper
amount of resources. This is done by creating a job script; a text file with directions
to the scheduler and the commands/program one wants to execute.
B.2
An Example Script
An example script used for most of the simulations of Chapter 7 follows. In this script
8 cores of 180GB memory each are requested. Two cores (or more if possible) will
be assigned to each node. The model named input_model will run in COMSOL v5.4
using MPI.
1 #!/bin/sh
2 ### General options
3 ### -- specify queue --
4 #BSUB -q hpc
5 ### -- set the job Name --
6 #BSUB -J job_name
7 ### -- specify that we need 180GB of memory per core (total memory aksed
8*180 = 1440GB)--
8 #BSUB -R "rusage[mem=180GB]"
9 ### -- specify that we want the job to get killed if it exceeds 2048GB per
core/slot
(I will never kill it with this option and that's on purpose
.)--
10 #BSUB -M 2048GB
11 ### -- set walltime limit: hh:mm --
12 #BSUB -W 24:00
13 ### -- set the email address --
14 # please uncomment the following line and put in your e-mail address,
15 # if you want to receive e-mail notifications on a non-default address
16 #BSUB -u s161402@student.dtu.dk
17 ### -- send notification at completion --
18 #BSUB -N
19 # -- parallel environment requests: 8 cores --
20 #BSUB -n 8
21 ### -- specify how the cores must be assigned: 2 on each node --
22 #BSUB -R "span[block=2]"
23 ### -- Specify the output and error file. %J is the job-id --
24 ### -- -o and -e mean append, -oo and -eo mean overwrite --
25 #BSUB -o job_name_%J.out
26 #BSUB -e job_name_%J.err
27
28 # -- end of LSF options --
29
30 # -- commands you want to execute --
31 unset JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS
32
33 # Set IntelMPI environment variables
34 export I_MPI_HYDRA_BOOTSTRAP=lsf
35
36
==PAGE:73==
66
B High Performance Computing
37 comsol54 batch -nn $LSB_DJOB_NUMPROC -np $OMP_NUM_THREADS
-inputfile
input_model.mph
-outputfile input_model_out.mph
-tmpdir /work3/$USER/
comsoltmp -recoverydir /work3/$USER/comsolrecovery
Listing B.1: An example of a job script
B.3
Computational Resources for Different Mesh Sizes
Mesh element
size
RAM MB
max
File size
(GB)
Computation
time
Cluster scheme
λ/2
187186
1.5
32 min
4 nodes of 2 cores
of 110 GB RAM each
λ/3
418230
3.6
1h 18 min
4 nodes of 2 cores
of 110 GB RAM each
λ/4
759425
6.3
2h 52 min
4 nodes of 2 cores
of 110 GB RAM each
λ/5
1191258
9.5
3h 48 min
4 nodes of 2 cores
of 110 GB RAM each
λ/6
2133665
13.6
5h 7 min
6 nodes of 2 cores
of 180 GB RAM each
Table B.1: Computational resources for different mesh sizes.
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX C
PSF & Axial Symmetry
The way to get a symmetric PSF along the optical axis, while keeping the simulation
geometry dimensions the same, is to replace the point emitters in our spherical wave-
front with a so-called background field that spans the whole modeling domain. This
background field will be a sum of plane waves given by:
Eb =
N
∑
n=−N
exp
(
−ik
(
cos
(An
N
)
x + sin
(An
N
)
y
))
where k is the wavenumber, n is the outward unit normal vector to the boundary, N
is the number of plane waves and A = arcsin
NA
nwater
.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Natalie de Souza. “Organoids”. In: Nature Methods 15 (2018).
[2]
Eliah R. Shamir and Andrew J. Ewald. “Three-dimensional organotypic culture:
experimental models of mammalian biology and disease”. In: Nature Reviews
Molecular Cell Biologys 15 (2014).
[3]
Timothy Ragan et al. “High-resolution whole organ imaging using two-photon
tissue cytometry”. In: Journal of Biomedical Optics 12.1 (2007), pages 1 - 9 - 9.
[4]
David J. Stephens and Victoria J. Allan. “Light Microscopy Techniques for Live
Cell Imaging”. In: Science 300.5616 (2003), pages 82–86. issn: 0036-8075. doi:
10.1126/science.1082160.
[5]
Anne C Rios and Hans Clevers. “Imaging organoids: a bright future ahead”. In:
Nature Methods 15 (2018).
[6]
Abed AlFatah Mansour et al. “An in vivo model of functional and vascularized
human brain organoids”. In: Nature biotechnology 36 (2018).
[7]
Jordi Andilla et al. “Imaging tissue-mimic with light sheet microscopy: A com-
parative guideline”. In: Scientific Reports (2017).
[8]
Catalin Chiritescu and Gabriel Popescu. “3D Imaging of Live Specimens,Quantitative
Phase Imaging with SLIM and GLIM”. In: Imaging and Microscopy (2018).
[9]
Fritjof Helmchen and Winfried Denk. “Deep tissue two-photon microscopy”. In:
Nature Methods 2 (2005). issn: 1548-7105.
[10]
Patrick Theer, Mazahir T. Hasan, and Winfried Denk. “Two-photon imaging to
a depth of 1000 µm in living brains by use of a Ti:Al2O3 regenerative amplifier”.
In: Opt. Lett. 28.12 (June 2003), pages 1022–1024.
[11]
Crosignani Viera et al. “Deep tissue fluorescence imaging and in vivo biological
applications”. In: Journal of Biomedical Optics 17.11 (2012), pages 1 - 7 - 7.
[12]
Guo BaoLin and Peter X Ma. “Synthetic biodegradable functional polymers for
tissue engineering: a brief review”. In: Science China. Chemistry (2014). issn:
0036-8075.
[13]
Ying Zheng et al. “In vitro microvessels for the study of angiogenesis and
thrombosis”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109.24 (2012),
pages 9342–9347. issn: 0027-8424.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
69
[14]
David B. Kolesky et al. “Three-dimensional bioprinting of thick vascularized
tissues”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113.12 (2016),
pages 3179–3184. issn: 0027-8424.
[15]
David G. Rosenegger et al. “A High Performance, Cost-Effective, Open-Source
Microscope for Scanning Two-Photon Microscopy that Is Modular and Readily
Adaptable”. In: PLOS ONE 9.10 (October 2014), pages 1–16.
[16]
Min Gu et al. “Comparison of penetration depth between two-photon excita-
tion and single-photon excitation in imaging through turbid tissue media”. In:
Applied Physics Letters 77.10 (2000), pages 1551–1553.
[17]
Scott A. Prahl, Martin J. C. van Gemert, and Ashley J. Welch. “Determining
the optical properties of turbid media by using the adding–doubling method”.
In: Appl. Opt. 32.4 (February 1993), pages 559–568.
[18]
Vasilis Ntziachristos. “Going deeper than microscopy: the optical imaging fron-
tier in biology”. In: Nature Methods 7 (2010).
[19]
MicroscopyU. Multiphoton Microscopy. url: https://www.microscopyu.com/
techniques/multi-photon/multiphoton-microscopy (visited on April 11,
2019).
[20]
Karel Svoboda and Ryohei Yasuda. “Principles of Two-Photon Excitation Mi-
croscopy and Its Applications to Neuroscience”. In: Neuron 50.6 (2006), pages 823–
839. issn: 0896-6273.
[21]
Patrick Theer and Winfried Denk. “On the fundamental imaging-depth limit
in two-photon microscopy”. In: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 23.12 (December 2006),
pages 3139–3149.
[22]
C.J Sheppard and M. Gu. “Image formation in two-photon fluorescence mi-
croscopy”. In: Optik (1990), pages 104–106.
[23]
Tony Wilson and Colin S Sheppard. Theory and Practice of Scanning Optical
Microscopy. ACADEMIC PRESS, 1984.
[24]
Yosuke Mizuyama. How Does the Choice of Ray Tracing Algorithm Affect the
Solution? 2017. url: https://www.comsol.com/blogs/how- does- the-
choice- of- ray- tracing- algorithm- affect- the- solution/ (visited on
April 11, 2019).
[25]
Jorge Ripoll. “Derivation of the scalar radiative transfer equation from energy
conservation of Maxwell’s equations in the far field”. In: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A
28.8 (August 2011), pages 1765–1775.
[26]
Scott Prahl. Monte Carlo Light Scattering Programs. 2018. url: https://omlc.
org/software/mc/ (visited on April 11, 2019).
[27]
“MCML—Monte Carlo modeling of light transport in multi-layered tissues”. In:
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 47.2 (1995), pages 131–146.
issn: 0169-2607.
==PAGE:77==
70
Bibliography
[28]
A. Leray et al. “Spatially distributed two-photon excitation fluorescence in scat-
tering media: Experiments and time-resolved Monte Carlo simulations”. In: Op-
tics Communications 272.1 (2007), pages 269–278. issn: 0030-4018.
[29]
A. Leray, C. Odin, and Y. Le Grand. “Out-of-focus fluorescence collection in
two-photon microscopy of scattering media”. In: Optics Communications 281.1
(2008).
[30]
Nitai D. Mukhopadhyay et al. “Estimating statistical uncertainty of Monte
Carlo efficiency-gain in the context of a correlated sampling Monte Carlo code
for brachytherapy treatment planning with non-normal dose distribution”. In:
Applied Radiation and Isotopes 70.1 (2012), pages 315–323. issn: 0969-8043.
[31]
Alerstam Erik, Tomas Svensson, and Stefan Andersson-Engels. “Parallel com-
puting with graphics processing units for high-speed Monte Carlo simulation of
photon migration”. In: Journal of Biomedical Optics 13.6 (2008), pages 1 - 3 -
3.
[32]
Jun Dai et al. “Competition between second harmonic generation and two-
photon-induced luminescence in single, double and multiple ZnO nanorods”. In:
Opt. Express 21.8 (April 2013), pages 10025–10038.
[33]
A. Cerqueira et al. “A Powerful Tool Based on Finite Element Method for
Designing Photonic Crystal Devices”. In: Telecommunications and Networking
- ICT 2004. Edited by José Neuman de Souza, Petre Dini, and Pascal Lorenz.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004, pages 287–295.
[34]
Emily Oakley et al. “A new finite element approach for near real-time simulation
of light propagation in locally advanced head and neck tumors”. In: Lasers in
Surgery and Medicine 47.1 (2015), pages 60–67.
[35]
Boguslaw Butrylo et al. “A survey of parallel solvers for the finite element
method in computational electromagnetics.” In: The International Journal for
Computation and Mathematics in Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Emer-
ald 23.2 (2004), pages 531–546.
[36]
Lumerical. 2019. url: https://www.lumerical.com/ (visited on April 11,
2019).
[37]
William Gropp. “MPI (Message Passing Interface)”. In: Encyclopedia of Par-
allel Computing. Edited by David Padua. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2011,
pages 1184–1190. isbn: 978-0-387-09766-4. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-09766-
4_222. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-09766-4_222.
[38]
Manju Rawat Singh, Satish Patel, and Deependra Singh. Nanobiomaterials in
Soft Tissue Engineering. Chapter 9 Natural polymer-based hydrogels as scaf-
folds for tissue engineering. Elsevier, 2016.
[39]
Paulo Jorge Bártolo. Stereolithography Materials, Processes and Applications.
Chapter 1 Stereolithographic Processes Pages 1-17. Springer, 2011.
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
71
[40]
C. Sun et al. “Projection micro-stereolithography using digital micro-mirror
dynamic mask”. In: Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 121.1 (2005), pages 113–
120.
[41]
Paulo Jorge Bártolo. Stereolithography Materials, Processes and Applications.
Chapter 4 Microstereolithography, Pages 81-112. Springer, 2011.
[42]
Rujing Zhang and Niels B. Larsen. “Stereolithographic hydrogel printing of 3D
culture chips with biofunctionalized complex 3D perfusion networks”. In: Lab
Chip 17 (24 2017), pages 4273–4282.
[43]
Texas Instruments. DLP9500 DLP® 0.95 1080p 2x LVDS Type A DMD. 2018.
url: http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/dlp9500.pdf (visited on April 11,
2019).
[44]
Zhi Feng Zhang et al. “Influence of polymerization conditions on the refrac-
tive index of poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) hydrogels”. In: Applied
Physics A 124.4 (March 2018), page 283.
[45]
Françoise Candau, Jeanne François, and Henri Benoit. “Effect of molecular
weight on the refractive index increment of polystyrenes in solution”. In: Poly-
mer (1974).
[46]
Myunghwan Choi et al. “Step-Index Optical Fiber Made of Biocompatible Hy-
drogels”. In: Advanced Materials 27.27 (2015), pages 4081–4086.
[47]
Rujing Zhang. Stereolithographic hydrogel printing of 3D microfluidic cell culture
chips. PhD Thesis. 2017.
[48]
Sigma-Aldrich. Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate. url: https://www.sigmaaldrich.
com / catalog / product / aldrich / 455008 ? lang = en & region = DK & gclid =
CjwKCAiAyrXiBRAjEiwATI95mTx8hdS1PzPAorpmA4 _ BwE (visited on April 11,
2019).
[49]
Sigma-Aldrich. Quinoline Yellow. url: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/
catalog/product/sial/234133?lang=en&region=DK&gclid=CjwKCAiAyrXiBRAjEiwATI95m
[56 (visited on April 11, 2019).
[50]
Sigma-Aldrich. Lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate. url: https:
//www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/aldrich/900889?lang=en&
region=DK (visited on April 11, 2019).
[51]
Polysciences. Acryloxyethyl thiocarbamoyl Rhodamine B. 2018. url: http://
www.polysciences.com/german/catalog-products/monomers-polymers/
monomers/fluorescent-acrylic-monomers/acryloxyethyl-thiocarbamoyl-
rhodamine-b (visited on April 11, 2019).
[52]
Zeiss. ZEISS Axio Imager 2. url: https://www.zeiss.com/microscopy/int/
products/light-microscopes/axio-imager-2-for-biology.html (visited
on April 11, 2019).
==PAGE:79==
72
Bibliography
[53]
Zeiss. Objective C-Apochromat 40x/1.20 W Corr M27. url: https://www.
micro - shop . zeiss . com / en / ch / shop / objectives / 421767 - 9971 - 000 /
Objective-C-Apochromat-40x-1.20-W-Corr-M27 (visited on April 11, 2019).
[54]
W Denk, JH Strickler, and W Webb. “Two-photon laser scanning fluorescence
microscopy”. In: Science 248.4951 (1990), pages 73–76. issn: 0036-8075.
[55]
Olympus. Multiphoton Objectives. url: https://www.olympus-lifescience.
com/en/objectives/multiphoton/#!cms[focus]=cmsContent1161 (visited
on April 11, 2019).
[56]
Avtar Singh et al. “Comparison of objective lenses for multiphoton microscopy
in turbid samples”. In: Biomed. Opt. Express 6.8 (August 2015), pages 3113–
3127.
[57]
Coherent. Chameleon Discovery. 2019. url: https://www.coherent.com/
lasers/laser/chameleon-discovery (visited on April 11, 2019).
[58]
Vidrio Technologies. Scanimage. 2019. url: http://scanimage.vidriotechnologies.
com/display/SIH/ScanImage (visited on April 11, 2019).
[59]
Jian-Ming Jin. The Finite Element Method in Electromagnetics, 3rd Edition.
Wiley-IEEE Press, 2014.
[60]
E. Wolf. “Electromagnetic diffraction in optical systems - I. An integral repre-
sentation of the image field”. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.
Series A. 253 (1959), pages 349–357.
[61]
B. Richards and E. Wolf. “Electromagnetic diffraction in optical systems, II.
Structure of the image field in an aplanatic system”. In: Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London. Series A. 253 (1959), pages 358–379.
[62]
Taco D. Visser and Sjoerd H. Wiersma. “Spherical aberration and the electro-
magnetic field in high-aperture systems”. In: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 8.9 (September
1991), pages 1404–1410.
[63]
Michael Bass et al. Handbook of Optics, Third Edition Volume I: Geometri-
cal and Physical Optics, Polarized Light, Components and Instruments(Set).
3rd edition. Chapter 24, Gradient Index Optics (Duncan T. Moore). New York,
NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 2010. isbn: 0071498893, 9780071498890.
[64]
Open source 3D printing toolbox. url: https : / / slic3r . org/ (visited on
April 11, 2019).
==PAGE:80==
