==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Contact Resistance in Graphene Devices
Kasper Thue Langkjer (s162880)
Supervisors:
Peter Bøggild, Professor
Lene Gammelgaard, Ph.d.
Aske Nørskov Gejl, Ph.d.stud.
Bjarke Sørensen Jessen, Ph.d.
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Physics
NanoMADE, Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 5700
info@fysik.dtu.dk
www.fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In the present study, two different hypotheses are been investigated, both aimed at
obtaining lower contact resistances in metal-graphene interfaces. The investigated
systems one-dimensional edge contacts to hBN/graphene/hBN van der Waals het-
erostructures. The first hypothesis proposes a correspondence between contact re-
sistance, and the chirality of the contacted graphene edge. The second hypothesis
suggests a correlation between increasing the effective length of the graphene-metal
1D interface, and observing lower contact resistances. None of the proposed hypothe-
ses are confirmed, due to an insufficient amount of data points, however for the same
reason, neither hypothesis is rejected. The thesis introduces a new scheme for reusing
van der Waals heterostructures, by reshaping the active graphene channel using nano-
lithography, allowing a significant time save as well as a reduction in material waste.
Furthermore, the work identifies an improvement in contact resistance behaviour cor-
related to a minimisation of the device fabrication time.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis by the title ’Contact Resistance in Graphene Devices’ was pre-
pared as the culmination of my education as Master of Science in Engineering, at the
department of Physics at the Technical University of Denmark in partial fulfillment
of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc.Eng degree in Physics and Nanotechnology.
The thesis constitutes 30 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, May 17, 2019
Kasper Thue Langkjer (s162880)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Background
1
1.1
Graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Societal Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Electronic transport in graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Electronic contact to graphene and why low contact resistance is im-
portant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.5
One dimensional contacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.6
Hypothesis 1: Chirality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.7
Hypothesis 2: Roughness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2
Fabrication
25
2.1
van der Waals heterostructure assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2
Device design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3
Device fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.4
Electron beam lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.5
Etching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.6
Defining leads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.7
Metal deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.8
Reuse of stacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3
Characterisation
39
3.1
Raman Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2
Optical Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
3.3
Atomic Force Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4
Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5
Electrical characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.6
Two terminal measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.7
Three terminal measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.8
Four terminal measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4
Methods
51
4.1
Validity of lead contribution subtraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
R2p - R4p = Rc1 + Rc2? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3
SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4
Details of contact resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Results
61
5.1
Graphene edge chirality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Devices made with CVD graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Devices made with exfoliated graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.4
Analysis of device Exf1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.5
Ageing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.6
Roughness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6
Discussion
79
6.1
Low quality CVD stacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.2
Edge chirality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.3
Reuse of stacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.4
Switching of CNP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.5
Ageing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.6
Nanopatterning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
7
Conclusion
89
A FWHM(2D) of stacks
91
B Lead resistance
93
Bibliography
95
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Background
1.1
Graphene
Graphene is a two-dimensional crystalline carbon allotrope. It consists of a mono-
layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice, bearing the resemblance of a
honeycomb, see figure 1.1. It was first experimentally isolated by Andre Geim and
Konstantin Novoselov at the University of Manchester in 2004 [74]. The two famously
used scotch tape to exfoliate layers off a slab of graphite, until they eventually had
managed to isolate a single atom layer. Prior to its discovery, isolated graphene was
thought to be thermodynamically unstable and therefore likely to roll up, as described
by the Mermin-Wagner theorem [71].
The successful characterisation of graphene quickly created ripples [33] within
the scientific community. The low barrier to entry (as evident by the success of the
scotch tape method), combined with graphene’s unique range of properties, meant
that the number of published papers took off exponentially. Geim and Novoselov
were awarded the Nobel Prize for physics for ”groundbreaking experiments regarding
the two-dimensional material graphene” in 2010. To this day graphene remains a
hot research topic. In 2018 graphene was among the most published on scientific
subject, when measured in number of published peer reviewed articles. The evolution
in published articles on graphene is shown in figure 1.2.
The explanation behind the large amount of attention, lies in the fact that graphene
possesses a range of extraordinary properties. The following provides a brief overview
of some of the properties of graphene, and serves as an illustration of the versatility
of graphene.
Mechanical properties: Graphene is the strongest material ever tested [61][62].
With a breaking strength of 46 N/m and an intrinsic strength of 130 GPa, it is roughly
50 times stronger than high strength steel[19].
It is highly rigid, with a Young’s
modulus of 1 TPa, comparable to that of diamond.
The two-dimensional nature
of graphene means that it’s both lightweight and flexible. One gram of graphene
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Background
Figure 1.1: Artistic impression of a graphene sheet. The hexagonal lattice resembles
a honeycomb. Figure adapted from [3].
theoretically has a surface area of 2630 m2[104], meaning that two grams of a single
layer graphene sheet is enough to cover a football pitch.
Thermal properties: Graphene has an excellent thermal conductivity, superior
to that of diamond or copper, with values of 2000-4000 Wm−1K−1 measured for
suspended graphene [17][23][4]. Its melting point, estimated by a 2015 paper to be
4510 K [105], is higher than that of tungsten.
Electrical properties: Graphene is an exceptional conductor of electricity, with
room temperature carrier mobilities upwards of 180.000cm2V −1s−1 obtained in hBN
encapsulated graphene [83]. The strong carbon bonds and the low resistance of pure
graphene makes it possible to make devices which can sustain current densities up to
109A/cm2 [15] The low atomic number of carbon, means that the carbon atoms in
graphene have a low spin-orbit interaction and a long spin coherence length [46].
Optical properties: Optically, a single layer of graphene absorbs 2.3% of light
over the visible spectrum [14]. On one hand this means that it is nearly transparent
to the human eye, yet on the other hand this is a quite high absorption for a material
consisting of a single atomic layer.
Impermeability: In addition to all these intrinsic properties, defect-free graphene
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Societal Impact
3
Figure 1.2: Articles published on graphene per year, as of March 20th 2019. ISI
Web of Science search using the keyword ’graphene’.
has also been found to be impermeable to molecules. The π-orbitals form a dense
delocalised cloud, which blocks the holes in the aromatic rings, meaning that even
the smallest molecules, such as hydrogen and helium are not able to pass through
graphene [70].
All this is just a selection of graphene’s many intriguing properties; the list con-
tinues. A point that must be made at this stage, which is maybe just as important,
when trying to illustrate the allure of graphene, is the fact that a such combination of
properties as the ones listed above, cannot be found in any other material [35]. This
is truly what has lead graphene to be dubbed a wonder material by scientists [54]
and public media alike [60].
1.2
Societal Impact
1.2.1
Graphene Application
Naturally, this smorgasbord of extraordinary properties means that a lot of potential
applications have been proposed for graphene, both within the commercial sphere as
well as within the scientific realm. The following section outlines some of the more
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Background
exciting prospects of graphene commercialisation. The list is far from extensive, but
aims to demonstrate the broad range of possible graphene applications. Figure 1.3
provides an overview of the different sectors of graphene application.
1.2.1.1
Water desalination
The low permeability of graphene, means that graphene-based membranes have been
used to mimic biological membranes, in hopes of finding application in water filtration
and desalination. The prospect is that graphene based membranes can be used to
transform sea water into drinkable fresh water. Abraham et al. demonstrate a method
based on a graphene oxide membrane sieve, capable of rejecting 97% of NaCl ions
[1]. This could have immense implications for the 1.2 billion people around the world
currently suffering from a shortage of water [47].
1.2.1.2
Supercapacitor
Graphene’s high surface area per unit mass, combined with its high electrical con-
ductivity, high mechanical strength and low cost, are very desirable properties for
achieving fast charge and discharge rates, high capacity and energy density. This
makes graphene a desirable component for use in supercapacitors [64].
Graphene
incorporating supercapacitors could represent a significant step forward towards the
realisation of sustainable devices by allowing efficient use of energy.
1.2.1.3
Transparent electrodes
Graphene’s high optical transmittance combined with its high electrical conductance,
makes it a useful candidate for transparent electrodes to be used in e.g. touchscreens,
where it could replace the currently used material indium tin oxide, which absorbs
17% and contains the expensive and brittle rare earth element indium. On the other
hand absorbing 2.3% of light, is a lot for a single atom layer, meaning that graphene
components could potentially also find use in solar cells or within other branches of
optoelectronics.
1.2.1.4
Other uses
Other potential applications for graphene and its related materials include flexible
electronics, which could be used for wearable devices, or as ’clever’ barcodes on e.g.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Societal Impact
5
Figure 1.3: Possible applications of graphene in different sectors. The wide range
applicability includes solar cells, chemical sensors and high frequency
transistors. Figure adapted from [35].
food products, containing info on health and safety. Ultra-sensitive gas sensors, ultra-
fast lasers [35], corrosion protection and spintronics utilising the long spin coherence
length of graphene, to use the spin degree of freedom instead of the electronic charge,
to carry information. Recently graphene was integrated with a complimentary metal-
oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)-circuit, to function as a broadband image sensor, which
was used as a digital camera capable of detecting both ultraviolet, visible and infrared
wavelengths (300 nm to 2,000 nm) [43]. This could potentially be valuable in e.g. help-
ing self-driving cars navigate through foggy conditions. Graphene could also hope for
a great future within 5G telecommunications, as 5G communication requires high
speed and low power consumption, which is exactly what graphene excels at [86].
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Background
1.2.2
Graphene scientific perspective
As will be elaborated on later, the charge carriers close to the Fermi level in graphene
behave as massless relativistic particles. This means, that graphene provides a cheap
and accessible tabletop system, in which to study the physics of quantum electro-
dynamics, a regime otherwise normally restricted to high energy accelerators such
as the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. Examples of exotic physical phenomena ob-
served in graphene-based devices include Klein tunnelling, where carriers entering an
infinite potential barrier at the right angle will pass through the barrier with a 100
percent probability [56] [52]. It includes observation of the unconventional fractional
quantum Hall effect[13], and it includes discovery of cuprate-like superconductivity
is twisted bilayer graphene [18].
Besides possessing a range of intriguing properties itself, graphene is of general im-
portance to the understanding of electron transport in carbon structures. Graphene
can be thought of as the building block of carbon allotropes of other dimensionalities.
A block of multiple AB-stacked (also known as Bernal stacked) graphene sheets held
together by the weak van der Waals forces, make the three dimensional structure
graphite, commonly known for its use in pencils. A rolled up sheet of graphene cre-
ates the one-dimensional carbon nanotube, and via introduction of pentagons in the
hexagonal lattice of a graphene sheet it can fold up to become a buckminsterfullerene,
a zero-dimensional structure[20].
1.2.3
Investments in graphene research
The large interest in graphene along with the high expectations resting upon its
predicted future applicability, is reflected in the large amount of private as well as
public funding, that graphene research has been able to attract. A notable example
of public funding is the Graphene Flagship. The Graphene Flagship is a European
Commission project, launched in 2013, and set to run over 10 years. With a budget
of 1 billion €, it represents the biggest research initiative in Europe to date.
It
encompasses over 150 research groups, and with its stated mission to commercialise
graphene, and through this commercialisation promote economic growth and create
jobs, it speaks of the great trust that has been put into graphene research. Private
spending on graphene research has been no less impressive, with large international
companies such as Samsung, Intel, IBM, Sony and Nokia all investing money in
graphene research [44], with Samsung being the top patent applicant as of 2017 [78],
the most recent publicly available numbers.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Electronic transport in graphene
7
1.2.4
Graphene commercialisation
While the commercial graphene revolution is still not upon us, a range of graphene
products are available on the market. Watch manufacturer Richard Mille has launched
a luxury watch ’50-03’, which contains graphene for its lightweight and durable prop-
erties. In the same vein, ski manufacturer Head offer a series of ski named ’Kore’,
which integrates graphene into the nose and tail of the ski, in order to create a lighter
ski, whilst maintaining durability. Italian tyre manufacturer Vittoria has launched
the ’Corsa’ series of bicycle tyres, reinforced by graphene to increase durability of
the tyres. Finally as recent as October 2018, Chinese tech company Huawei launched
the ’Mate 20 X’ smartphone, which cools the cell phone battery by utilising the
high thermal conductivity of a graphene film in combination with a vapour chamber
functioning as a heat sink, to transport heat away from the battery.
1.3
Electronic transport in graphene
The electron configuration of carbon is 1s22s22p2. A single carbon atom, in other
words, has four valence electrons and four valence orbitals. The 2s orbital is close
in energy to the 2p orbital, so one of the 2s electrons can rather easily be promoted
to occupy the empty 2pz orbital. The remaining 2s electron hybridises with the 2px
and 2py orbitals, to form planar sp2 orbitals. These sp2 orbitals form strong covalent
bonds in a plane, separated by a 120 °angle, to their three equidistant neighbouring
atoms. These bonds are called σ-bonds. The planar nature of the sp2 orbitals, means
that the bound carbon atoms form a planar sheet. The remaining electron, called
the π-electron, occupies the pz-orbital located perpendicular to the plane. Just like
the sigma electrons form covalent bonds with their neighbouring sigma electrons, the
π-electrons form covalent bonds with their neighbouring π-electrons. These bonds
are called π-bonds. The length of the σ- and π-bonds is what determines the carbon-
carbon distance. For graphene this is 1.42 Å[20]. The π-bonds interact with their
neighbours, to form energy bands. These bands are called π and π∗bands. As each
pz orbital has one electron, this means that at zero temperature the bonding π bands
are filled and the anti-bonding π∗bands are vacant.
The hexagonal lattice of graphene can be thought of as consisting of two intersect-
ing triangular sublattices. Each atom in sublattice A has three atoms from sublattice
B as its nearest neighbours, see figure 1.4, and each atom in sublattice B has three
atoms from sublattice A as its nearest neighbours. Each unit cell has a basis consist-
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Background
Figure 1.4: Left: The graphene honeycomb lattice, constructed from two interleav-
ing triangular sublattices marked by either blue or yellow atoms. a1
and a2 mark out the lattice vectors. δi where i = 1,2,3, mark out the
nearest-neighbour vectors.
Right: The corresponding Brillouin zone.
The graphene Dirac points are located at K and K’. Adapted from [20].
Figure 1.5: The graphene dispersion relation.
The right hand side zoom-in il-
lustrates the linear dispersion relation around the K and K’ points.
Adapted from [20].
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Electronic transport in graphene
9
ing of two carbon atoms, one from each sublattice. The lattice vectors, spanning the
crystal lattice, can be chosen as
⃗a1 = d0
2
(
3,
√
3
)
and
⃗a2 = d0
2
(
3, −
√
3
)
(1.1)
where d0 is the carbon-carbon distance.
The electronic structure of graphene can be approximated by a basic tight-binding
model description, considering only nearest- and next nearest neighbour hopping.
This description is originally due to Wallace, who considered the problem back in
1947 [96].
The model considers only the π-electrons, since π-electrons are higher
in energy than the σ-electrons. The π-electrons are therefore located energetically
close to the Fermi level, meaning that they are the electrons responsible for charge
transport. The model assumes that the π-electrons spend most of the time ’tightly
bound’ in an orbital around the nuclei, and less time in between the atoms. Electrons
hopping between orbitals pay a ’hopping energy’ penalty to move between nuclei.
Solving the tight-binding model restricted to only nearest neighbour hopping,
yields the following energy band structure for graphene:
E(⃗k) = ±
√
γ2
0(1 + 4 cos2 kya
2
+ 4 cos kya
2
· cos kx
√
3a
2
(1.2)
where γ0 ≈2.8 eV, is the hopping energy between nearest neighbour π-orbitals. Here
the plus sign refers to the upper π-band and the minus sign refers to the lower π∗-band.
A plot of the solution to the tight-binding model (figure 1.5), shows that the π
bonding and π* anti-bonding orbitals are not separated by a gap, but cross each other
at six points, called Dirac points. From symmetry arguments, these points can be
reduced to two nonequivalent points of the Brillouin zone, the ⃗K and ⃗K′ points. The
⃗K and ⃗K′ points are described by the following vectors:
⃗K = 2π
3a
(
1, 1
√
3
)
and
⃗K′ = 2π
3a
(
1,
1
−
√
3
)
.
(1.3)
The Fermi energy of pristine graphene is located exactly at the Dirac points. The
combination of a filled valence band and zero bandgap, means that graphene is classi-
fied as a zero-bandgap semiconductor, or alternatively as a semi-metal. Close to the
Dirac points, roughly within an energy distance of 1 eV [24] (shown in the right hand
side zoom in of figure 1.5), the dispersion relation can be written as
E(⃗k) = ±¯hvF
√
⃗kx
2 + ⃗ky
2 = ±¯hvF |⃗k|
(1.4)
==PAGE:18==
10
1 Background
where vF , the slope of the cone, is the Fermi velocity, which describes the velocity
of carriers located at the Fermi level, and ⃗kx and ⃗ky are the wavevectors measured
relative to the Dirac point for the x- and y-directions respectively. The Fermi velocity
is given by:
vF = 3
2
γ0d0
¯h .
(1.5)
From the dispersion relation it is evident, that the energy of carriers located
close to the Dirac point, changes linearly with momentum. The linear region of the
dispersion relation is well described by the Dirac equation for massless fermions. This
means that the charge carriers in this region mimic relativistic particles, with a rest
mass which is zero, and an effective speed of light c∗≈106 m/s
For all 2D systems, the Fermi wavevector is given by:
kF =
√4πn
gsgv
(1.6)
where n is the charge carrier density, gs is the spin degeneracy and gv is the valley
degeneracy. For graphene both gs and gv are equal to 2, which reduces the above
expression for kF to:
kF = √πn.
(1.7)
This means that the Fermi energy can be expressed in terms of charge carrier density,
as:
EF = ¯hvF
√πn
(1.8)
indicating that it is possible to tune the Fermi energy, by tuning the charge carrier
density.
1.3.1
Mobility
Charge carrier mobility, µ, is given by the ratio of carrier drift velocity to an applied
electric field:
µ = vd
E
(1.9)
where vd is the carrier drift velocity, and E is electric field strength. Mobility quan-
tifies the scattering strength of charge carriers in a sample [11].
Graphene, as it has already been mentioned, has an extraordinarily high carrier
mobility. All the way back in 2008, a group at Columbia University reported room
temperature mobilities in excess of 200,000 cm2/Vs in a suspended graphene sample
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Electronic transport in graphene
11
[12]. However, though the potential graphene mobility is very high, the experimental
reality of graphene is something different. The effective mobility of graphene is ex-
tremely sensitive to its surroundings, and the mobility will decrease due to scattering
mechanisms introduced by its surroundings, such as defects or adsorbates. When
graphene for example is placed on Si/SiO2, its room temperature mobility is sig-
nificantly lower than the number mentioned above, typically around 10,000-15,000
cm2/Vs [74]. The overall charge carrier mobility can be estimated from Matthiessen’s
rule[95], where the influence from all the different mobility limiting scattering mech-
anisms sum up to give an expression for the mobility:
1
µ =
1
µLA
+
1
µph
+ 1
µC
+
1
µsr
+
1
µBoundary
+ . . . .
(1.10)
Here the subscripts refer to the following different scattering events:
• LA: Longitudinal acoustic phonons
• ph: Optical surface phonons.
• C: Long-range Coulomb scattering. Due to charged impurities.
• sr: Short-range scattering.
• Boundary Scattering off the boundaries of the graphene sheet.
In general, short-range scattering off of defects, boundary scattering and longitudinal
acoustic phonon scattering are considered intrinsic scattering mechanisms, as they
are associated with the graphene sheet itself [11]. While scattering from longitudinal
acoustic phonons represents a fundamental limitation to the graphene mobility, scat-
tering from defects and boundaries can be decreased by improving the quality of the
graphene itself.
On the other hand, long-range Coulomb scattering and optical surface phonon
scattering represent extrinsic scattering mechanisms, related to the immediate sur-
roundings of the graphene sheet. Decreasing scattering from these sources, can thus
be accomplished by considering the environment around the graphene sheet, e.g. the
substrate upon which it is placed. Traditionally, this substrate has been SiO2.
A lot of the scattering in graphene on SiO2 samples, stems from charged impu-
rities trapped in the SiO2 substrate, from the surface roughness, or from substrate
surface phonons of the SiO2 substrate. To decrease scattering from these extrinsic
mechanisms, and improve effective mobility in graphene samples, encapsulation of
graphene in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has emerged as a useful option. In the
==PAGE:20==
12
1 Background
following hBN is introduced, and advantages of hBN encapsulation and related issues
will be discussed.
1.3.2
Hexagonal Boron Nitride
Boron nitride (BN) is a III-V compound, consisting of boron and nitrogen. The BN
compound is isoelectronic to carbon. BN exists in three different crystalline forms.
One is the rare wurtzite BN, and the other two, more common forms, are cubic BN
which has a crystal form similar to diamond, and hexagonal BN, which has a similar
crystal structure to graphene. This latter form is the one which is of interest to the
present work.
The similarity in crystal structure between graphene and hBN, has made hBN
an integral part of graphene electronics. Like graphene and graphite, the bulk hBN
crystal consists of covalently bound layers of one atom thick two-dimensional sheets
held together by van der Waals forces. This means that, similarly to graphite, hBN
can be exfoliated to create two-dimensional flakes with atomically flat surfaces. The
crystal structure of hBN is similar to the honeycomb lattice of graphene, with a
boron and a nitrogen atom each covering one of the spots in the unit cell. Each
boron atom is bound to three nitrogen atoms on the nitrogen-sublattice, via strong
in-plane covalent bonds, and each nitrogen atom is in turn bound to three boron
atoms on the boron-sublattice. An illustration of the hBN crystal structure is shown
in figure 1.6. Just like in the case of graphene, the three bonds from each atom, are
separated by an angle of 120°. The lattice constant of hBN is 1.44Å [79], which is just
1.7% larger than the lattice constant of graphene. Unlike the semi-metallic graphene,
hBN is a wide bandgap semiconductor, with a bandgap size of approximately 5.5 eV
[91].
Encapsulation of graphene in hBN protects graphene from various sources of scat-
tering, leading to an increase in graphene carrier mobility. When graphene is placed
on SiO2 it is subject to substrate scattering, which stems from phonons as well as
the roughness of and charged impurities in the SiO2 substrate.
Hexagonal boron
nitride is atomically flat and its surface is free of dangling bonds. Dangling bonds
occur when a crystal surface is terminated (e.g. from bulk in 3D), and certain bonds
remain without a bond partner due to the termination of the crystal. As hBN sheets
are bound in-plane, there are no dangling bonds on the surface (dangling bonds do
however occur at the edges).
When graphene is placed upon hBN, it adheres to the surface, by rearranging
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Electronic transport in graphene
13
Figure 1.6: The crystal structure of hexagonal boron nitride. In-plane atoms are
held together by strong covalent bonds, individual layers are held to-
gether by the weaker van der Waals forces. Figure adapted from [55].
its sigma bonds, and therefore adapts the flat surface of hBN[49]. The root mean
square (RMS) roughness of graphene placed on SiO2 is roughly one order of magni-
tude higher than the RMS roughness of graphene on hBN [101]. In fact the RMS
roughness of graphene on hBN is similar to the RMS roughness of graphene on highly
oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), indicating that a limit for graphene on a surface
is being reached [103] [67]. When graphene is placed on hBN it is thus decoupled
from scattering due to roughness. Another important benefit of placing graphene on
hBN, is that the scattering due to surface optical phonon emission is suppressed by
the higher energy of hBN optical phonons (≈102 meV)[102], compared to the SiO2
phonons (≈59 meV)[80]. Additionally, the high thermal conductivity of hBN[88] may
limit self-heating, leading to a further decrease in electron-phonon scattering[102].
For graphene encapsulated in hBN, the main scattering mechanism at room tempera-
ture comes from intrinsic (longitudinal acoustic) electron-phonon scattering. Finally,
hBN encapsulation of graphene also helps isolate the surface of graphene from water
molecules and other contaminants that may both dope graphene and scatter charge
carriers.
Another way of obtaining even lower roughness in graphene, is by suspending
==PAGE:22==
14
1 Background
the graphene sheet on a microfabricated scaffold [72]. Suspended graphene however,
in addition to being more difficult to form satisfactory electrical contact to [7], is
also susceptible to spontaneous doping from particles landing on the graphene. An
interesting way of obtaining a low roughness, combining the best of both worlds, has
been presented recently, where an RMS roughness of merely 12 ± 5pm was obtained,
by suspending a hBN/graphene/hBN stack over a hole cut in a TEM chip [92]. The
devices fabricated for this report are however simply based on hBN encapsulated
graphene.
1.3.3
Van der Waals heterostructures
Encapsulating graphene in hBN and in this sense creating three dimensional struc-
tures from the stacking of two-dimensional materials, is part of a larger field by the
name of van der Waals heterostructures (vdWH’s) [41], named after the weak van der
Waals forces holding together the individual layers. Graphene and hBN are but two
members of the family of two-dimensional materials, which currently holds more than
3,500 members, according to the ’Computational 2D Materials Database’ [45]. Van
der Waals heterostructures is the field concerned with picking and mixing materials
with different properties from the range of available 2D materials, and stacking them
on top of each other in such a way as to obtain three-dimensional structures forming
new ’artificial’ materials, possessing as it were tailor-made properties. The ambition
of vdwH’s, is to provide materials which could in theory be designed to solve a given
problem in an optimal manner.
While this work, in terms of used materials, is only concerned with the stacking of
graphene and hBN, obtaining clean and contaminant-free interfaces is a prerequisite
for the successful assembly of vdWH’s containing any type of 2D material.
Any
insight gained into the task of obtaining clean interfaces between graphene and hBN
can therefore potentially be of benefit to the broader field of vdWH research.
1.4
Electronic contact to graphene and why low
contact resistance is important
Many of the predicted uses of graphene involve integrating the graphene sheet in an
electrical circuit in the form of a field effect transistor (FET). The FET is the most
==PAGE:23==
1.4 Electronic contact to graphene and why low contact resistance is important
15
successful device concept in electronics, and most work on graphene devices has been
related to FETs [87].
A FET is a three terminal device, consisting of two electrodes, the source and drain
electrodes, connected by a semiconducting channel. The semiconducting channel is
capacitively coupled to a third electrode, the gate electrode, which is used to control
the current in the channel.
A graphene field effect transistor (GFET), is a FET
where the semiconducting channel is replaced by graphene. In a GFET it is possible,
due to the gapless nature of graphene, to move the Fermi energy through the charge
neutrality point (CNP), and thus tune the system from being electronlike to being
holelike, by changing the external gate voltage [27].
Semiconductor electronics are typically divided into two categories: Digital logic
devices and radio-frequency devices [87]. The high intrinsic mobility and saturation
velocity of graphene, make graphene particularly useful for high-frequency analog
transistors, as high mobility can lead to high cutoff frequencies [24], the cutoff fre-
quency being the highest frequency at which a FET is useful for radio-frequency ap-
plications. Graphene-based devices with cutoff frequencies in the hundred gigahertz
region have been demonstrated[99].
Another application which has been suggested, is that graphene could find use as
on-chip interconnects, where the small volume combined with the great thermal and
electrical properties, such as the ability to sustain a high current density[9], would
make graphene an excellent contender.
The use of graphene in logic circuits is limited by the lack of bandgap in graphene,
combined with an always present minimum conductance [75], which means that it
is difficult to obtain a current on/off ratio of more than 10 [24][42]. However, a lot
of effort is being put into introducing bandgaps in graphene. A typical approach is
by using graphene nanoribbons, where the need for electron wavefunctions to fulfil
boundary conditions across the ribbons, results in the creation of bandgaps [15]. Re-
cently a milestone was achieved, when the ability to controllably engineer a bandgap
in graphene, by lithographically defining a precise pattern of lattice antidots in hBN
encapsulated graphene, was demonstrated [51]. This means that graphene realisti-
cally has the potential to become an integral part of logic circuits at some point in
the foreseeable future. The adoption of systems based on other 2D materials, often
also relies on using graphene-metal interfaces [32].
To realise the suggested uses and take advantage of the extraordinary transport
properties described above, at the most basic level calls for the need to be able to
inject and extract carriers from the graphene. This is naturally achieved by contacting
==PAGE:24==
16
1 Background
the graphene sheet to an external circuitry, via the use of metal electrodes. However,
bringing graphene and a metal into contact alters the electrical characteristics of
graphene in the vicinity of the contact, which gives rise to contact resistance. Contact
resistance arising at the metal-graphene interface is a limiting factor to graphene
device performance.
A high metal-graphene contact resistance can specifically be
detrimental to the device transconductance gm. The transconductance is defined as
the change in source-drain current in response to a change in applied gate voltage at
constant source-drain bias:
gm = dID
dVGS

VDS=const
(1.11)
Considering an electronic circuit, it is intuitive to suggest that a high contact resis-
tance will decrease the amount of current that is allowed to run to the drain (ID), in
comparison to the amount allowed by a low contact resistance. A high contact resis-
tance therefore results in a lower transconductance. By extension a lower transconduc-
tance will put a limit to the device cutoff frequency fT , because fT changes linearly
with gm [87]. In short channel GFETs it is necessary to have a small RC because con-
tact resistance doesn’t drop off with length, and the RC therefore becomes dominant
with short length. Additionally, in order for graphene based technology to compete
with the current market of silicon based devices, as for example on-chip interconnects,
it is necessary to bring down the metal-graphene contact resistance towards the val-
ues obtained for metal-semiconductor contacts [42]. The current technological node
of metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFET), demand a contact
resistance of less than 80 Ωµm per contact [53].
The above discussion demonstrates that a high contact resistance is detrimental
to successful integration of graphene in electronic circuits.
Controlling the metal-
graphene interface to reproducibly obtain low contact resistances, is therefore a piv-
otal challenge faced on the quest to optimise device performance. In the following
we shall look at the aspects of the graphene-metal interface that govern contact re-
sistance.
1.4.1
Aspects of contact resistance
When a metal and a semiconductor are brought into contact, their Fermi levels (or
electrochemical potentials) must align. This alignment results in a charge transfer
from the material with the higher Fermi level, to the material with the lower Fermi
level. The alignment of Fermi levels causes the energy bands to bend in the region
==PAGE:25==
1.4 Electronic contact to graphene and why low contact resistance is important
17
close to the contact interface. The band bending creates a potential barrier at the
metal-semiconductor interface, which is called the Schottky barrier. The height of the
Schottky barrier, determines whether a contact is Ohmic or rectifying. Ohmic contact
is a prerequisite for a device to function as a transistor. If the Schottky barrier is high
enough that a depletion region is created between the metal and the semiconductor,
the contact is rectifying. If the Schottky barrier is sufficiently low, and the potential
difference between the metal and the semiconductor is insufficient for a depletion
region to occur, the contact is said to be Ohmic. For graphene however, the absence
of a bandgap means that no Schottky barrier can form. Instead the current injection
from metal to graphene is limited by the low graphene density of states close to the
Dirac point.
When graphene and metal form a contact, figure 1.7, the graphene Fermi level
is fixed to the metal Fermi level. This is not true when we move a large distance
away from the metal-graphene interface. In order to accommodate the difference in
Fermi level between the two regions of graphene, there is a charge transfer between
the contacted and the free region. This results in band bending. The area in which
the band bends, can be either p- or n-doped depending on the Fermi level difference,
which in turn depends on the work function of the metal. The work function, ϕ, is
the minimum energy it takes to move an electron from the Fermi level of a material
to the vacuum immediately outside the material surface. The Fermi potential is the
difference in potential between the Fermi level and the intrinsic (bulk) Fermi level.
The carrier transport across a 1D metal-graphene contact is described by the Lan-
dauer approach, which suggests, that 1D transport can be considered a transmission
problem[59]. The Landauer approach states that the conductance across the contact
is given by the conductance quantum times the number of available modes, multiplied
by the transmission probability [28]:
G = 4e2
h TM
(1.12)
where 4e2
h
is the conductance quantum G0, which for graphene includes the factor 4
due to spin and valley degeneracies (2 for spin degeneracy and 2 for valley degeneracy),
T is the transmission probability, and M is the number of available transport modes,
given by
M = kF
π w =
√nπ
π
w =
√n
π w
(1.13)
where kF is the Fermi wavevector and w is the width of the 1D interface.
==PAGE:26==
18
1 Background
Improving the conductance across a metal-graphene interface, according to the
above description thus comes down to two options: Either improving the number of
available transport modes, M, or increasing the transmission coefficient, T.
Increasing M can be done by either increasing w, the width of the contact, or
n, the charge carrier density. Increasing the width of the contact is often times not
desirable. Increasing n can be accomplished by choosing a contact metal with a work
function which differs from graphene work function. Choosing a metal with a different
work function, dopes the metal at the contact interface, moving the EF away from
the Dirac point, thus providing more available transport modes and lower contact
resistance (at low backgate voltage). Improving T, is a function of graphene-metal
orbital overlap. It is thus determined by the chemical bonds, the electronic structures
and the interface geometry, including both the surface and edges of the graphene [42].
For example, chemisorbed metals are found to give a lower contact resistance than
physisorbed metals [53].
1.4.2
Chirality
The graphene edge termination can be in either armchair, zigzag or of a mixed chiral-
ity. The configurations are shown in 1.8 (a), with mixed chirality edge termination
describing the edges terminating at angles in between the zigzag and armchair config-
urations. The honeycomb structure lattice of graphene, means that the characteristic
angle between armchair and zigzag configurations is 30°.
Mechanically exfoliated
graphene tend to tear along one of these two chiralities. An example of graphene
tearing along the two main chiralities is shown in figure 1.8 (b).
For graphene grown by chemical vapour deposition things are slightly different.
CVD graphene grows from a nucleation point and outwards to form large hexagons.
The edge chiralities of these hexagons are either armchair or zigzag.
1.5
One dimensional contacts
Two different types of contact geometries can be created between a graphene sheet
and a metal electrode. Surface contacts, which are two-dimensional in nature and the
contact is between the metal surface and the graphene basal plane, and edge contacts
which are one-dimensional in nature, where the metal is contacting the graphene
edge (perpendicular to the graphene basal plane). In conventional metal-on-graphene
==PAGE:27==
1.5 One dimensional contacts
19
Figure 1.7: Schematic showing the energy band diagram of a metal-graphene inter-
face. (a) Metal and graphene separated in space. (b) When the metal
and graphene are brought into contact, their individual Fermi levels
must align. This creates a charge transfer region. In this schematic, the
metal has a higher work function than graphene, resulting in a charge
transport away from the interface. This leads to the graphene being p-
doped in the region close to the contact. In the present work, contacts
are made with Cr which has a lower work function than graphene. The
graphene is therefore n-doped close to the interface. Away from the
interface, the Fermi energy is at the Dirac point of graphene. Adapted
from [42].
surface contacts, contact resistance has been high, due to weak bonding across the
large spatial overlap between the graphene π-system and the metal [57]
An approach which has emerged to combat this problem, is the use of one-
dimensional (1D) edge contacts, where the graphene edge is connected directly to
the metal instead of via surface contact.
Edge contacts were first suggested as a
superior alternative to surface contacts, in a 2010 paper by Matsuda et al[69]. They
use ab initio quantum mechanical calculations to demonstrate a decrease in contact
resistance for edge contacts, ranging from a factor 8.8 for Ti contacts, up to a factor
6751 for Au contacts. The first experimental realisation of 1D edge contacts was
reported in 2013 [97], in a hBN/graphene/hBN system. Edge contact is obtained,
by encapsulating graphene in hBN and etching away the outer parts of the stack to
obtain a desired device pattern. The paper finds that contact resistance scales inverse
linearly with contact width, indicating that longer graphene edge is equal to lower
contact resistance. Covalent bonds equal better transport, and since 1D contacts use
==PAGE:28==
20
1 Background
Figure 1.8: (a) Schematic showing the zigzag and armchair edge chiralities of
graphene. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of a graphene flake.
The majority of tears are along either zigzag (blue lines) or armchair
(red lines) edges. (Image by T.J. Booth, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novolselov
and P. Blake (unpublished work)).
the graphene σ-bond as well as the πbond to form contact, this results in a better
contact.
The contact resistance of edge contacts has been found to be largely independent
of temperature [97], unlike surface contacts where it scales linearly with temperature
[100]. Thus edge contacts could also provide a way to make devices function reliably
over larger temperature ranges.
The advantage of using 1D edge contacts over using surface contacts, is caused
by the fact that for surface graphene-metal interfaces, only the graphene pπ-electrons
can contribute to bonding (to the metal surface d-orbitals), whereas for edge contacts
both the pπ-electrons as well as the in-plane carbon pσ-electrons can partake in
cohesion. The free σ-electrons, resulting from the edge termination of the graphene,
act as highly reactive dangling bonds, giving a high edge energy. The existence of
bond-ready pσ-electrons in addition to the pπ-electrons means that edge contacts in
comparison to surface contacts should be able to former stronger bonds, supporting
a higher carrier transmission. Literature indicates that improved transmission due to
the addition of σ-orbital transport modes, is only seen for some metals such as Au
and Cu, whereas it does not affect transport for Ti, Pd and Pt [69].
==PAGE:29==
1.6 Hypothesis 1: Chirality
21
Figure 1.9: The contact resistance as a function of gate voltage for clean Ni-
graphene contacts, for armchair and zigzag edge configurations respec-
tively. Results obtained from DFT calculations. Adapted from supple-
mentary material of [57].
Based on the discussion above, we can now formulate two hypotheses, both moti-
vated by and aimed at reproducibly lowering the metal-graphene contact resistance:
1.6
Hypothesis 1: Chirality
Hypothesis: The contact resistance of a 1D metal-graphene contact
varies with the chirality of the graphene edge termination.
Graphene
contacted at zigzag edges have lower contact resistance than graphene
contacted at armchair edges.
The edge energy is a measure quantifying the disruption of interatomic bonds [65].
The higher the edge energy, the more costly it is for an edge to exist, and thus the
more likely an edge atom is to form a bond. The armchair edge of graphene is more
==PAGE:30==
22
1 Background
tightly packed than the zigzag edge, by a factor of
2
√
3 = 1.15, in terms of edge atoms
per unit length.
If all dangling bonds in graphene edges were equal, this would mean that the edge
energy of armchair configurations would be higher than the edge energy of zigzag.
However, precisely the difference in atomic spacing allows armchair edge atoms to
saturate their dangling bonds, by forming triple bonds to each other, and in this way
lower their energy in comparison to zigzag edges. This means that:
ϵac < ϵzz
[76]
(1.14)
Liu et al [65] list the edge energies per unit length, γ, of the two edge chiralities as:
γzz ≈1.01eV/Å
and
γac ≈1.18eV/Å
(1.15)
The edge energies of angles in between the two chiralities, follow a sinusoidal curve
[65].
The difference between zigzag and armchair termination, in terms of the number
of bonds the graphene edge σ electrons are already partaking in, prior to bonding to
the metal, indicate that the zigzag edge configuration should exhibit lower contact
resistance than the armchair configuration. Specifically one would expect that the
zigzag edge which has a higher edge energy should be able to form stronger bonds,
which means shorter bonding distance, meaning a larger orbital overlap, increasing
the transmission coefficient in equation 1.12, and thus resulting in a lower contact
resistance.
Kretz et al.
[57] use density functional theory, to calculate the influence of
graphene edge termination on contact resistance. The modelled system is clean Nickel
based contacts on armchair or zigzag graphene edges. The contact resistance as a
function of gate voltage is shown in figure 1.9. While the qualitative behaviour of
the contact resistance is similar for the two types of edge terminations, the actual
contact resistance is close to a factor two lower for zigzag edge contacts. In addi-
tion to the above, differences in the distance between carbon atoms between the two
edge configurations, could also influence contact resistance, insofar as they would
result in different local metal-graphene bonding distances, and possibly induce dif-
ferent amounts of strain near the metal-graphene interface, which could also affect
transmission properties.
==PAGE:31==
1.7 Hypothesis 2: Roughness
23
1.6.1
Experimental considerations
The chirality dependence is tested by creating segmented devices which bend 5°be-
tween each segment. Each segment contains four contacts in total, two on each side.
The total curvature of a device is 30°. One end of a device is aligned to either a
zigzag or an armchair graphene edge. We expect to see a contact resistance which
is high in one end of the device, and low in the other end of the device, as well as a
gradual increase with increase of angle, from the lowest resistance end, towards the
highest resistance end. The edges of the graphene are easily identified using optical
microscopy.
1.7
Hypothesis 2: Roughness
Hypothesis: A rough contact edge will exhibit lower contact resistance
than a smooth contact edge.
The electrical conductance across a metal-graphene interface is, among other fac-
tors, governed by the number of available carrier transport modes, as described by
the Landauer approach. This number increases with w, the width of the 1D contact.
Thus the contact resistance of a 1D contact falls inversely with 1D contact width,
meaning that a 2 µm wide 1D contact has has the contact resistance compared to 1
µm wide contacts (when measured in units of Ωand not Ωµm). This is supported
through experimental observations by Wang et al [97]
In nanoelectronics geometry is a limiting factor, as physical space on an inte-
grated circuit is costly and so the contact width cannot just be increased indefinitely.
Therefore, the idea is to pack more effective contact width into the same amount of
’actual’ contact width, or in other words increase the length of the metal-graphene
1D contact area per µm contact width.
Introducing contact roughness, by using
nanolithographical techniques to etch into the contact edges of devices, would make
it possible to increase the effective metal-graphene contact edge length of a 1D con-
tact (corresponding to the width included in the definition of M in the Landauer
approach), whilst keeping the actual spatial width of the contact to the same length.
We expect that contacts with a high effective contact width per µm contact will
display a lower contact resistance than contacts with a low effective contact width.
==PAGE:32==
24
1 Background
1.7.1
Experimental considerations
For the roughness measurements, nanopatterned device edges are created, by etching
an array of holes close to the edge of the stack, the extent of the nanopatterning is
controlled by varing the distance from the array of holes to the edge of the device..
This is done to obtain increased ’edge contact length per contact width’ ratios. We
expect to see a decrease in contact resistance with an increasing ’edge contact length
per contact width ratio’.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2
Fabrication
Two different assembly methods for the production of van der Waals heterostructures
are utilised during the course of this work. The difference between the two meth-
ods is that one is used for exfoliated graphene, whereas the other is used for stack
assembly using graphene via chemical vapour deposition (CVD). This chapter con-
tains a detailed stepwise description, of only the method used for assembly of van
der Waals heterostructures containing graphene grown via CVD. A lot of time was
spent trying to master and optimise this method, and since the overall flow of the
two methods is rather similar, in the interest of avoiding excessive repetition, the
method for assembling stacks based on exfoliated graphene stacks is left out. Stack
assembly using exfoliated graphene is based on ’The hot pick-up technique’ [82]. A de-
tailed fabrication description can be found in that paper. Stack assembly using CVD
graphene is based on a paper by Banszerus et al. [6]. This method will be referred to,
throughout the rest of this study, as the Aachen method. The terms ’stacking’ and
’vdW-heterostructure assembly’ are used interchangeably.
Stacks fabricated using
CVD graphene and the Aachen method are given the prefix ’CVD’, whereas stacks
fabricated using exfoliated grpahene and the hot pickup method, are given the prefix
’Exf’.
2.1
van der Waals heterostructure assembly
The stacking process can be broken down into nine separate steps. Figure 2.1 illus-
trates this classification. The stacking process is listed chronologically from the begin-
ning steps, to the finished stack. The method is, with a few modifications, based on
the process reported by Banszerus and colleagues from the Stampfer group at RTWH
Aachen [6]. The Stampfer group developed this recipe for assembly of large area CVD-
graphene heterostructures, and have used it to fabricate hBN/CVD-graphene/hBN
heterostructures, in which they measure ballistic transport over a length of 28 µm.
[5]
==PAGE:34==
26
2 Fabrication
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the van der Waals heterostructure assembly recipe, bro-
ken down into process steps.
(A) PVA and PMMA is spun onto a
tape-covered glass slide. (B) hBN flakes are exfoliated. Exfoliated hBN
flakes are transferred to (C1:) the polymer covered glass slide for the
top hBN layer (C2:) a Si/SiO2 substrate for the bottom hBN layer.
(D) Using optical microscopy suitable hBN flakes are located on the
polymer glass slide and Si/SiO2 substrate (not shown). (E) Suitable
graphene flakes are located on Cu substrate. (F) A slice of polymer film
from the polymer glass slide made in step A, containing a suitable top
hBN flake, is cut out and transferred to a PDMS block. (G) The top
hBN flake is brought into contact with graphene, heated to 125°C, held
for 30 s, then picked up at 95°C. (H) The structure is dropped down
on a suitable bottom hBN flake. The system is heated to 125 °C, and
held for 30s. The heating is switched off, and the glass slide is retracted
when T = 75°C, leaving the heterostructure on the substrate. (I) Left
over polymer residues are dissolved in DI water (PVA) and acetone
(PMMA).
==PAGE:35==
2.1 van der Waals heterostructure assembly
27
Transfer polymer glass slide preparation:
The assembly process begins by
creating double-polymer layer covered glass slides, for exfoliation of hBN which is to
be used as top layer in the finished stack (top hBN). Prior to glass slide preparation,
a 13% w/w polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) (363081, Sigma Aldrich solution is prepared, by
letting PVA pellets dissolve in de-ionised(DI) water on a hotplate at 90 °C for 48
hours. A glass slide is cut in half along the long edge, and covered with a piece of
Pritt tape, to ensure that the polymer will detach from the glass slide. The PVA
solution is applied liberally to the glass slide, and spread by blowing with a nitrogen
gun until the polymer solution covers the entire tape part. The glass slide is spun at
1000 rpm (200 r/s2 acceleration) for 30 seconds, then baked at 95 °C for 5 minutes,
and finally at 110 °C for 5 minutes to drive out remaining water.
Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) 50K 4% in ethyllactate (Allresists ARP639.04)
is added onto the dried PVA layer, and the slide is again spun at 1000 rpm (200r/s2
acceleration) for 30 seconds, before baking at 110°C for 5 minutes.
hBN exfoliation and transfer:
Mechanical exfoliation of hBN is performed by
placing a bulk hBN crystal (HQ Graphene) on a 2 x 2 cm piece of Nitto Denko elp-bt-
150etd tape. Another piece 2 x 2 cm piece is placed on top. The tape pieces are then
separated, using tweezers, and put back together in a different spot, until the entire
tape surface is covered by hBN, and no large bulk pieces of hBN crystal are visible.
The tape pieces are then separated, and placed in contact with a thin blue Nitto
Denko SWT 20+ dicing tape. Top hBN flakes are transferred to the polymer covered
glass slides, by placing the thin blue tape on a PVA/PMMA glass slide, applying a
light pressure, and slowly peeling the tape off.
Bottom hBN flakes are transferred to a Si/SiO2 (300 nm oxide) chip. Prior to
transfer of hBN, the Si/SiO2 chip is prepared by sonication for 10 minutes in acetone,
and 10 minutes in isopropyl alcohol(IPA), before being exposed to an oxygen plasma
inside a plasma asher, for eight minutes at a pressure of 300 mTorr and a power of 40
W. Plasma ashing has previously proven to increase yield and flake sizes [48]; these
findings are consistent with what was observed in the present studies.
After plasma ashing, the tape is placed as quickly as possible on top of the chip,
to minimise the amount of contaminants from the air adsorbing to the chip. Using
the dull side of a pen, a few raster scans are done across the tape top surface, to
promote adhesion between the chip and hBN. The chip-and-hBN-tape is then placed
on a heater at 80°C for one minute, to further improve adhesion. Finally, while the
chip is kept on the heater, the tape is peeled off as slowly as possible using a set of
==PAGE:36==
28
2 Fabrication
tweezers, keeping a 10°lift angle between chip and tape. As an anecdotal note, a slow
peel-off speed generally appears to be the most important factor in obtaining a high
hBN coverage.
hBN flake selection:
Flakes are selected based on a range of criteria, to ensure the
highest possible stack quality. Flake surfaces must be smooth. This is to minimise the
number of high-affinity contaminant adsorption sites on the flake, and to ensure that
the encapsulated graphene is kept as flat as possible, as discussed earlier. Secondly,
surfaces should be free of contaminants, such as organic material or residual tape-glue
from the exfoliation process, to obtain clean and bubble-free interfaces between stack
layers. Thirdly, flakes must be free of visible cracks, as cracks more often than not
turn into tears during the fabrication process, and hence set a limit to the possible
device area/geometry.
Generally flakes with the largest possible area are chosen.
Finally the flakes should have a uniform thickness across the surface, to ease device
fabrication and ensure uniform mechanics.
Flakes are photographed as described
under the ’Optical Microscopy’ section, and the images are kept for later reference.
Bottom hBN flakes with a thickness between 15-30 nm are selected, as flakes
thinner than 10 nm do not properly screen out the roughness of the underlying SiO2
[31], and furthermore may not sufficiently screen out charged impurities[16][106][83],
whereas thicker flakes unnecessarily diminish the strength of the electric field lines
from the back gate. Flake thicknesses are estimated from optical images, using the fact
that the flake colour of hBN on SiO2 changes with thickness, due to light resonance.
Optical images are then simply referred to a local document, mapping colour to
thickness via AFM measurements. Estimating the thickness of top hBN flakes, is
more a matter of experience, as hBN exfoliated on PMMA shows a more subtle colour-
thickness correlation. Flakes all fall in the dull-blue/white spectrum, and thickness
is instead determined by the intensity of the flake reflection. This is demonstrated in
figure 2.2
Graphene selection:
The graphene used is CVD graphene grown on commercially
available copper foil (Alfa Aesar no.
46365) by Zachary Cole Michael Winter at
RTWH Aachen, similar to the graphene used in ref. [6]. Prior to pickup, the graphene-
clad Cu foil is left in ambient conditions for at least a few days. This causes the copper
under the graphene to oxidise, enabling a high graphene pickup rate. CVD graphene
is typically impossible to pick up from non-oxidised copper. The oxidation also makes
it easy to identify the graphene flakes on the copper substrate. Flakes with a six fold
==PAGE:37==
2.1 van der Waals heterostructure assembly
29
Figure 2.2: Differences in the optical presence of hBN dependent on substrate. (A)
hBN flakes exfoliated on a SiO2 substrate. The colours range from dark
blue for thin flakes, to burning yellow for the thick flake near the bottom
of the image. (B) hBN flakes exfoliated on PVA/PMMA. The thickness
of a flake has to be deduced from the intensity of the flake instead.
symmetry are chosen, to avoid grain boundaries. The graphene flakes typically have
sizes ranging in the hundreds of micrometres.
Graphene pickup:
Once a top hBN flake is chosen, the PVA/PMMA film sur-
rounding the flake is cut with a scalpel, and the part of the film containing the flake,
is transferred using a set of tweezers, onto a thin 2 x 2 mm polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) block placed on a glass slide. The adhesion between PDMS and glass is
sufficient to keep the block in place without the need for any kind of glue. The end
result is a PDMS/PVA/PMMA/hBN stamp. The glass slide carrying the stamp is
mounted, stamp facing downwards, on a micromanipulator with micrometer precision
control in the x-, y- and z-directions.
A graphene-containing piece of copper, is pressed flat between two glass slides,
using manual force, before it is placed on a glass slide on top of a custom-built
microscope stage, with built in heater and vacuum suction. The stage is heated to
40°C, before the pickup process is begun, to ensure a comparable starting temperature
from experiment to experiment.
The hBN flake is aligned with the graphene, and the hBN/polymer stamp is low-
ered slowly, until a Newton’s rings interference pattern passes over the flake, signifying
a close proximity between the hBN and the graphene.
The temperature is then raised to 125°C. The temperature increase causes the
==PAGE:38==
30
2 Fabrication
polymer stamp to expand, resulting in contact between hBN and graphene. As 125°C
is above both the 105°C glass transition temperature (Tg) of the 50K PMMA [2] and
the 85°C Tg of PVA [89], the polymer stamp liquefies. The liquefaction combined with
the added force from the stamp expansion, pushes the hBN and graphene together.
Once the stage reaches the set temperature, the system is held for 30 seconds, to
ensure that the entire system has reached a uniform temperature. During this process
step an imaged is recorded, documenting the alignment between the hBN crystal and
the graphene flake. See figure 2.3. This is used to determine the chirality of the
graphene edge in the finished stack.
Once the 30 seconds have passed, the heater is switched off, to let the polymers
to re-solidify. When the temperature reaches 75°C, which is below the glass transi-
tion temperature of both PVA and PMMA, the stamp is quickly retracted, and the
graphene is lifted off the copper substrate. In some cases, retraction of the stamp
causes the copper to lift off the glass slide along with the graphene. For these cases,
a heater set to 75°C, is kept in immediate vicinity of the microscope stage.
The
polymer/hBN/graphene/Cu stamp in then placed on this heater, before the copper
is removed using a set of tweezers. This precaution is taken to ensure a comparable
separation temperature from stack to stack.
Figure 2.3: Top hBN crystal on graphene. The yellow circle marks out the hBN
crystal.
The dark orange hexagon underneath is a graphene crystal,
under which the copper has oxidated properly, enabling a high graphene
pickup success rate. The alignment between the hBN crystal and the
graphene flake edge is used to determine the chirality of the graphene
edge in the finished stack.
==PAGE:39==
2.1 van der Waals heterostructure assembly
31
Graphene/hBN drop-down:
The Si/SiO2 chip carrying the bottom hBN flake,
is placed on the vacuum suction microscope stage, and heated to 40°C. The polymer
stamp with the top hBN and graphene is placed in the micromanipulator, and aligned
with the bottom hBN. The stamp is lowered slowly until Newton’s rings appear over
the bottom hBN flake. The temperature is raised to 125°C, and is yet again held for
30 seconds, before it is switched off. Once the temperature reaches 90°C-95°C, the
stamp is quickly retracted. At this temperature, the PMMA has solidified, whereas
the PVA is still liquid. The PVA therefore easily lets go of the PDMS stamp, leaving
the hBN/graphene/hBN heterostructure on the chip.
Polymer removal:
After dropdown, the polymer residue left on top of the vdW
heterostructure, is removed. The PVA is dissolved by leaving the chip in DI water
on a hotplate heated to 110°C for 20 minutes, followed by a quick rinse by IPA.
Subsequently the PMMA is removed by placing the chip in acetone on a hotplate
set to 80°C for 5-10 minutes. The vdW-heterostructure left on the bottom Si/SiO2
is now ready for quality inspection via Raman and optical microscopy. The typical
length and width of a finished stack falls in the range between 20 µm and 100 µm.
2.1.1
Transfer of the finished stacks
Once the stacks are assembled, they are transferred to a chip with a 300 nm thick
high quality thermally grown SiO2 oxide layer on top.
This type of chip is used
as a substrate for measurements. The stacks are transferred using the hot pickup
technique [82]. A polypropylene carbonate (PPC) covered PDMS stamp on a glass
slide mounted on a micromanipulator, is brought into contact with the stack at 45°C,
the temperature is lowered to 40°C, which is below the glass transition temperature
of PPC [82], the stamp is retracted, and the stack is picked up. The stack is then
brought into contact with the high-quality oxide chip, the temperature is raised to
110°C, then lowered to 80°C, before the stamp is slowly retracted, leaving the stack
on the high-quality oxide chip.
The chip has pre-defined alignment marks.
The location of the stack is pho-
tographed through an optical microscope. The image is then fed into L-Edit, where
the alignment marks are used to place the stack on a pre-designed template resembling
the high quality oxide chip, allowing design of devices.
==PAGE:40==
32
2 Fabrication
2.2
Device design
All devices are designed using the software Tanner EDA L-Edit IC Layout (L-Edit).
As finished stacks have arbitrary shapes, every design (i.e. device rotation and place-
ment of leads) must be custom made to fit the stack.
A typical device design is
shown in the left hand side of figure 2.4. Devices are made up of segments containing
four contacts each, Each new segment is connected to the previous segment with a 5
degree rotation angle between the two segments. Each device consists of 7 segments
in total, giving a 30 degrees overall bend angle. The graphene channel width is 8
µm. Contacts are one-dimensional edge contacts, with a width of 1 µm, giving a
graphene-metal effective contact length of 1 µm. Contacts on the same segment are
spaced by 500 nm.
2.3
Device fabrication
All device fabrication steps involving advanced equipment, such as electron beam
lithography, etching and metal deposition, were conducted by Aske Nørskov Gejl and
Lene Gammelgaard. A detailed technical description of the device fabrication process
is therefore beyond the scope of this thesis, and only a brief description detailing the
most important characteristics of the fabrication process will be given.
An overview detailing the fabrication steps along with images of device Exf4, taken
at the corresponding steps during the fabrication process, is shown in figure 2.5
2.4
Electron beam lithography
Electron-beam (e-beam) lithography is used to shape the device architecture as well
as define the pattern of leads contacting the device. The system used for e-beam
lithography is a 100 keV JEOL JBX-9500FS. Before loading the chip into the e-beam
system, the chip is covered by a positive e-beam resist, a 5% w/w solution of 996k
PMMA and spun at 2000 rpm for 1 minute, with an acceleration of 500 rpm. A 5
minute pre-bake of the chip at 180°C is done before depositing PMMA, to promote
adhesion between PMMA and the chip. After deposition, the PMMA covered chip
is baked for 10 minutes at 180°C. The chip is loaded into the e-beam system, and
e-beam lithography is performed using a dose of 750 µC/cm2, with a current of 0.8
nA. After the e-beam pattern is written, the chip is submerged in a 1:3 IPA:H2O
solution for 30 seconds, developing the exposed PMMA.
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Etching
33
Figure 2.4: L-edit device designs. The central white areas represents the final de-
vice shape. Left: Design of device Exf1 round 1. The light green colour
represents the part of the stack that is etched away during the first part
of fabrication. The brown colour is the pattern that is exposed during
the second part of the fabrication, for deposition of metal contacts. The
width of the device/graphene channel is 8 µm. Right: Design of device
Exf1 round 2. The same device is reshaped to create a new set of con-
tacts. The stripy light green colour is the area of the stack that is etched
away. The grey colour indicates where new contacts are deposited. The
new device width is 6 µm.
2.5
Etching
Etching is used to etch away any undesired parts of the stack, leaving only behind
the chosen device architecture. Etching is done using a SPTS III/V Pro ICP etcher.
The etching method ethes away the top hBN layer and the graphene layer, leaving
behind the bottom hBN layer. Table 2.5 lays out the technical specifications of the
etching process.
The top hBN is etched by sulfur hexafluoride (SF6). SF6 is a highly selective etch
which does not etch graphene at all. The graphene layer thus functions as a hard
mask for the SF6 etch. The graphene is etched by an O2/Ar plasma, which also is
highly selective, and does not etch hBN at all. The highly selective etch processes
allows for a large flexibility in device design. Both etchants etch PMMA, which is
used as the resist. It is therefore necessary to ensure that the PMMA layer is thick
enough, to avoid etching in unwanted areas. Etch rates of different materials, when
==PAGE:42==
34
2 Fabrication
Figure 2.5: Overview of the fabrication process from assembled stack to finished
device. Images on the right are of device Exf4. (a) Illustration of the
hBN/graphene/hBN stack. (b) Sketch of developed PMMA mask used
for etching. (c) Stack after first E-beam exposure, PMMA is developed.
(d-e) Etching of top hBN and graphene. (f) Stack after etching. Device
shapes are visible in yellow. (g) Illustration of the situation shown in
(f).
(h) 1D mezzanine edge contacts are deposited on to the device.
Graphene is only contacted from the edge. (i) Image of the finished
device. 3D figures adapted from [38].
==PAGE:43==
2.6 Defining leads
35
using SF6 and O2/Ar as etchants are shown in 2.2.
2.6
Defining leads
After the desired device architecture has been created via etching, the PMMA layer
is stripped using acetone, IPA and blow drying with a nitrogen gun.
The device
then enters the second part of the fabrication process. This part has the purpose
of creating metal leads. A PMMA layer is spun onto the chip, following the same
procedure as above. The e-beam procedure is now split into two doses. Fine features
are defined using a dose of 900 µC/cm2, with a current of 0.8 nA, coarse features are
defined using a dose of 750 µC/cm2, with a current of 30 nA. The exposed resist is
then developed following the same procedure as above.
2.7
Metal deposition
After the metal lead patterns have been defined using E-beam lithography, and the
exposed resist has been developed, metal contacts are deposited on to the exposed
area, using an E-beam evaporation system. E-beam evaporation is conducted using
a Ferrotec Temescal E-beam evaporator. To minimise the amount of contaminants,
and obtain as uniform contacts as possible, the vacuum chamber of the Temescal is
Process step
Details
PMMA Descum (O2)
5s, 120s stabilisation,
80mTorr, O2/Ar 5/15 sccm,
Coil/Platten 0/20 W
Etch (SF6)
15s, 120s stabilisation,
80mTorr, SF6 40 sccm,
Coil/Platten 0/75 W
Etch (O2/Ar)
5s, 120s stabilisation,
80mTorr, O2/Ar 5/15 sccm,
Coil/Platten 0/20 W
Table 2.1: Technical overview of the etching process used for shaping devices. An
initial descum is performed to remove potential polymer residue. The
top hBN layer is etched using SF6. The graphene layer is then etched
using O2/Ar. Etched are highly selective, meaning that the bottom hBN
layer is left untouched by the etch.
==PAGE:44==
36
2 Fabrication
Material
hBN etch
SF6 [nm/min]
Graphene etch
O2/Ar [nm/min]
Graphene
0
15
hBN
400
0
PMMA
31
80
SiO2
7
0
Table 2.2: Etch rates in nm/min of the materials in the left column, for the two
different etch methods used during fabrication. Adapted from [38].
left to pump down over night, before contacts are deposited. The contacts are Cr/Au
contacts, consisting of a 5 nm chromium layer with 100 nm gold on top. Several
sources report that chromium is the best contact metal for edge contacts [57] [97].
This is due to the fact, that unlike an idealised straight theoretical contact, a real life
contact is subject to roughness induced by e.g. defects, and/or non-uniform chemical
contamination. Chromium contacts, unlike e.g. another often used contact metal Ni,
show a weak variance in contact resistance both under the influence of contamination
and defect formations[57].
2.8
Reuse of stacks
After all desired measurements have been completed on a stack, a new design built
upon the old device is created in L-edit. These devices are referred to by the suffix
’Round 2’ throughout the report. Round 2 devices are of the same shape as ’round
1’ devices, except from the width of the graphene channel, which has been etched by
1 µm on both sides, to give a ’round 2’ channel width of 6 µm. The L-edit design
for a round 2 device is shown in the right hand side of figure 2.4. Etching away 1
µm on both sides of the device, disconnects the device from all contacts of the first
fabrication round. This means that the device gets a completely new set of contacts
for the second round. Due to this, devices fabricated on the same stack in different
rounds, are considered and analysed as independent devices.
Reusing devices has a lot of benefits, and is to the best of my knowledge not
a strategy that has been employed previously.
First of all reusing devices allows
the extraction of more data points from a single stack. The stacking process is a
laborious, often tedious and time-consuming process, with many steps that can go
wrong and consequently a lot of waste. More importantly, reshaping stacks allows for
the creation of in theory completely new device shapes, e.g. different contact angles,
==PAGE:45==
2.8 Reuse of stacks
37
whilst keeping the variation of all other variables, introduced for example during stack
assembly, to a minimum. Additionally it helps with ruling out whether a variation in
contact resistance is simply due to spatial variations in device quality.
An idea, which unfortunately it was not possible to test within the limited time
scope of this study, is to shift the angle of contacts in between fabrication rounds, by
rotating the device design. This would mean that e.g. the left (right) side of the device
contains all the zigzag (armchair) contacts during the first measurement round, and
then after the device is rotated, the left (right) side contains all the armchair (zigzag)
contacts. This again would be done to help reveal whether a difference in contact
resistance is due to difference in graphene edge termination, or is simply caused by
spatial variations in device quality. This idea unfortunately wasn’t brought to fruition
during this work, partly due to the limited time span and partly due to the obtained
results not encouraging it. The idea is nonetheless mentioned here, as it was a large
motivator behind choosing the device reshaping approach. By mentioning it, it can
hopefully contribute to inspiring any future investigators of similar problems.
2.8.1
Nanopatterning
To test the effects of increasing contact edge roughness, nanopatterned contacts are
designed using L-edit, and created using E-beam lithography. Figure 2.6 shows an
illustration of the nanopatterning design, used to determine the optimal nanopattern-
ing of a contact, measured as the maximum effective contact length per 1 µm contact
width. The red dots represent a dual e-beam shot1, dose = 700,000
µC
cm2 . The dot
size is 1 x 2 nm = 2 × 1014 cm2. The delivered dose per dot is therefore:
0.7C/cm2 · 2 × 1014cm2 = 14fC/dot.
(2.1)
The distance between the edge of the device and the dot is dubbed the nanopatterning
length. The nanopatterning length is marked by d in figure 2.6. Nanopatterning
lengths are tested in increments of 1 nm, from 0 nm (corresponding to an e-beam
shot directly on the device edge) to 39 nm. The dots are spaced by 50 nm. The
resulting pattern is characterised using atomic force microscopy and scanning electron
microscopy. Results of testing different nanopatterning lengths, are described in the
Methods chapter.
1Dots were meant to be a single shot, however in order to deliver a high enough dose to each
dot, it was necessary to use two shots.
==PAGE:46==
38
2 Fabrication
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the structure designed for testing the effect of nanopat-
terning on effective contact length (Top view).
Red dots indicate a
dual e-beam shot of a dose of 14 fC/dot. Dot sizes are 1 by 2 nm. The
distance, d, between the edge of the device and the dot is dubbed the
nanopatterning length. Nanopattern lengths are tested in increments
of 1 nm, from 0 nm (corresponding to an e-beam shot directly on the
device edge) to 39 nm. Dots are spaced by 50 nm (Illustration is not
representative of this).
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3
Characterisation
Before devices are designed, the fully assembled hBN/graphene/hBN stacks are char-
acterised using Raman spectroscopy and optical microscopy. These methods provide
insight about the uniformity of the stack, high quality areas, areas not containing
graphene, areas covered by large bubbles etc. They are thus of significant value when
deciding how to place the device and contacts on the stack.
3.1
Raman Spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy is a powerful characterisation method used as a standard tool
in graphene research. It provides a fast and non-invasive method for graphene char-
acterisation [34]. The Raman spectrum of graphene is used to obtain information
about a range of properties, such as the number of layers, thermal properties or the
density of defects[8].
In Raman spectroscopy, the sample is illuminated by monochromatic light, typ-
ically from a laser. A photon excites a hole-electron pair to a virtual energy state.
The excited particle scatters inelastically off a phonon before it relaxes back to its ini-
tial state, sending out a photon of lower (Stokes shift) or higher energy (anti-Stokes
shift) than the incident photon. This shift is recorded in a Raman spectrum, and
provides a fingerprint of the rotational and vibrational modes of the sample. In a
Raman spectrum the x-axis represents the Raman shift, and the y-axis represents
intensity. As the inelastic scattering (Raman scattering) signal is weak compared
to the elastic scattering (Rayleigh scattering), the Rayleigh scattering is filtered out
from the signal.
A Raman spectrum consists of a number of peaks, which are classified according to
peak position (Pos), the full width at half maximum (FWHM) and the peak intensity
(I). The main peaks of interest when using Raman spectroscopy to analyse graphene,
are typically referred to as the G, D and 2D peaks. A typical Raman spectrum for a
defect free, encapsulated piece of graphene, is shown in figure 3.1, with the main peaks
==PAGE:48==
40
3 Characterisation
Figure 3.1: Example of a Raman spectrum of a damaged graphene flakes, showing
the primary bands G and 2D, as well as the D band indicating the
presence of defects. A few other secondary bands are indicated as well.
Figure adapted from [8].
labelled. The G-peak, Pos(G) ≈1582cm−1 [5], is doubly degenerate and corresponds
to the in-plane acoustic and optical stretching of C-C sp2 bonds [94]. It originates
from phonons located close to the Γ-point (at the first Brillouin zone center) [8]. The
D-peak, Pos(D) ≈1345cm−1, is caused by the breathing mode of the six-atom carbon
ring. It corresponds to the in-plane optical phonon mode around the ⃗K (or ⃗K′) point.
It requires a defect or a boundary to provide the momentum needed to occur. A
D-peak will therefore not be observed in pristine graphene. The absence of a D-peak
is thus indicative of low-defect density graphene. The 2D peak, Pos(2D) ≈2690cm−1,
is an overtone to the D-peak. It is the sign of a two-phonon process, that can be both
double and triple resonant [8]. In the double resonant 2D process, the excited electron
(or hole) undergoes intervalley scattering by an in-plane transverse optical phonon
==PAGE:49==
3.1 Raman Spectroscopy
41
at the ⃗K-point, then, as momentum and energy must be conserved, scatters off a
phonon with opposite momentum back to the K-valley, where the hole and electron
recombine. In the triple resonant process, both hole and electron undergo intervalley
scattering off equal momentum phonons, and recombine in the other valley. The 2D
peak is typically the strongest peak in the graphene raman spectrum [8]. A sketch of
the phonon vibrations corresponding to the three major Raman peaks in graphene,
is shown in figure 3.2
The I(D)/I(G) ratio is used as a measure of how defected the sample is. The D-
peak intensity increases as the graphene becomes more defected, whereas the G peak
intensity is more or less constant since it as mentioned corresponds to the stretching
of the C-C sp2 bonds [38] [94]. However, the hBN E2g peak is located at ≈1364
cm−1 [29], and it can therefore be difficult to distinguish the graphene D-peak from
the hBN peak. The I(D)/I(G) ratio is therefore not used in this analysis.
The line width of the 2D peak, as measured by the full width at half maximum,
FWHM(2D), is an indicator of nanoscale strain variations in the graphene sheet[73].
The spatial resolution of a Raman measurement is of the order of the spot size,
which in the present work is 0.5 µm. Raman laser spot size is thus larger than these
individual Raman processes, and the measurement will therefore be an average of all
processes within the spot area. Yet all the individual Raman processes will contribute
to broadening the peak, and the peak width therefore is indicative of nanoscale strain.
Hence low values of the FWHM are a direct indicator of uniform strain within the
laser spot size [73]. As nanoscale strain variations have been found to be the largest
contributor to decreased electron mobility in graphene on h-BN heterostructures [25],
the FWHM of the 2D peak is used as an indicator of stack quality.
All Raman spectroscopy data presented in the present work, is obtained using
a Thermo Fisher Scientific DXR xi Raman Microscope equipped with a 532 nm
laser. The Raman system is controlled using Thermo Scientific OMNIC xi software.
Data treatment and analysis of Raman data is performed using Spyder (the Scientific
Python Development Environment) for Python.
Peak fitting of raw Raman data is done using a Python script provided by Bjarke
Sørensen Jessen. It works by searching through the raw Raman spectra for peaks in
the region ± 100 cm−1 around the typical peak positions of the three major graphene
Raman peaks: The G-peak at 1582 cm−1, the 2D peak at 2690 cm−1 and the D
peak around 1345 cm−1. Simultaneously a linear function is fitted to the background.
The most likely peak candidate within the defined respective regions, is fitted with
a Lorentzian function, with the fitted background subtracted. If the peak candidate
==PAGE:50==
42
3 Characterisation
Figure 3.2: Illustration showing the phonon vibrations corresponding to the major
Raman peaks in graphene. (a) The G-peak vibration mode in graphene
comes from in-plane transverse optical (iTO) and longitudinal optical
(iLO) phonons located at the Γ point of the Brilluoin zone. (b) The 2D
and D peaks are caused by the breathing mode of the six-atom carbon
rings, which corresponds to the in-plane optical phonon mode around
the ⃗K (or ⃗K′) point. Figure adopted from [8].
within a region has an intensity above a threshold of 3σ of the standard deviation of
the linear background, the candidate is accepted as a peak. Peak candidates with an
intensity less than this threshold are considered background noise. The script takes
as input the data obtained from a Raman map, and runs through every single point
iteratively. Finally it outputs the intensity, position and the FWHM of the G, 2D
and D peaks to a .txt-file, which is used for further data treatment.
3.2
Optical Microscopy
Optical microscopy is used to identify hBN flakes suitable for use as top and bottom
layers of vdW-stacks.
All optical images are recorded on a Nikon Eclipse L200N
microscope, connected to a computer running NIS-Elements BR software.
For each suitable/interesting flake, three different images are recorded. A standard
bright field image at 100x magnification, used mainly to easily identify the flake at
a later point. A bright field image with the contrast enhanced through the software,
helpful in identifying uneven surfaces and making contaminants stand clearly out.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Atomic Force Microscopy
43
Figure 3.3: Typical set of optical images obtained for each flake, to assess the flake
suitability and quality. Left: Bright field image of an hBN flake. Mid:
Enhanced contrast image of the same flake. Right: Darkfield image of
the hBN flake.
Finally dark field imaging is used to ease the identification of cracks.
Dark field
imaging only lets scattered light through the filter, and therefore makes edges stand
out clearly. Both bright field images are obtained using 40 ms exposure time. Dark
field images are recorded using 4 seconds exposure time. Different software settings
are used for bright field and dark field images, however the software settings are kept
consistently for all images within the same category. For flakes located on wafers
without alignment marks, a bright field image at low magnification, typically 10x,
taken in addition to the three images mentioned above, to help with identifying the
position of the flake at a later stage. A typical set of images recorded for a suitable
flake, is shown in figure 3.3
3.3
Atomic Force Microscopy
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a very high resolution scanning probe microscopy
technique, in which a sharp probe on a cantilever is scanned across the surface of
a sample. The position of the cantilever is controlled using a piezoelectric element,
allowing tiny, but precise movements. When the tip and the surface are brought in
close proximity, they interact via repulsive Coulombic forces and attractive van der
Waals forces [77]. The deflection of the cantilever is measured by a laser which is
reflected off the top of the cantilever, and recorded by a photodiode. The two most
common modes of operation are contact mode and tapping mode.
In contact mode, the tip is scanned across the surface, whilst being kept in contact
with the sample through the adsorbed fluid layer on the sample surface. The deflection
of the cantilever is recorded in the photodiode. The height of the cantilever is adjusted
==PAGE:52==
44
3 Characterisation
through a feedback circuit, which enables the piezoeletric actuator to maintain a
constant force or distance between the tip and the surface [50]. Contact mode allows
high scan speeds, but the lateral forces resulting from moving the tip across the
surface, may be destructive to both sample and AFM tip, as well as distort the
features of the recorded image. Therefore, the slower, but less damaging tapping
mode is often used.
In tapping mode the tip is driven to oscillate at or slightly below its resonant fre-
quency[77]. The tip is lowered until it lightly taps the sample surface at the bottom
of its oscillation cycle. Changes in surface topography encountered during scanning
causes either a damping of the oscillation amplitude, when the tip is close to the sur-
face, or an increase when the tip-surface distance increases. Changes in the oscillation
amplitude are detected by the optical system[50], and can thus be used to measure
the distance between surface and tip. The changes in oscillation amplitude is fed into
the feedback circuit, which adjusts the tip-surface separation to keep the amplitude
constant.
AFM scans have been used to check the results of dose testing for determining
the right e-beam dose to use for nanopatterning of device edges. In conjunction with
SEM images, AFM has also been used to measure the effects of various nanopatterning
lengths. AFM scans have been used to determine the widths of deposited leads, which
are used when subtracting the lead contribution from measured contact resistances,
allowing us to obtain more precise results. Finally, AFM scans have been used to
determine the exact metal-graphene edge contact length of the device Exf3, which
had contacts etched into the device (see more on this in the Results chapter). This
data has been used to compensate for the increased contact length, and thus allow
comparison between this device and others. AFM scans are performed using a Bruker
AFM Dimension Icon-Pt operating in tapping mode. AFM data is visualised and
analysed using Gwyddion software.
3.4
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is used to characterise test devices exposed to
varying e-beam patterns, in order to identify the optimal pattern for creation of
nanopatterned contacts, and determine the effective edge length of a nanopatterned
device edge. SEM uses a focused electron beam, to obtain information about the
surface topography of a sample. The shorter wavelength of electrons in comparison
to visible electromagnetic radiation, gives SEM a higher resolution, ≈1 nm, than
==PAGE:53==
3.5 Electrical characterisation
45
conventional optical microscopes.
A four step process constitutes the principle behind a functioning SEM. First elec-
trons must be extracted from a material to create an electron beam used for imaging.
This typically occurs via either thermionic emission from a Tungsten filament or by
a field emission gun.
The extracted electron beam is collimated in the direction
of the sample by a set of condenser lenses. Before it hits the sample, the electron
beam passes through pairs of deflector coils, which deflects the beam in the x- and
y-directions, allowing the microscope to perform a scan of the sample. The sample is
typically scanned in a raster scan pattern. The beam interacts with the sample, and
the returning signal, most commonly secondary electrons, is detected by an electron
detector. The SEM images presented in the results chapter, are obtained on a Carl
Zeiss Supra 40 VP SEM.
3.5
Electrical characterisation
The following section describes the various measurement techniques utilised to obtain
the results. The techniques include two-, three- and four terminal measurements.
3.5.1
Probe Station
All electronic characterisation, is conducted on an EPS150Triax probe station located
at the DTU Nanolab cleanroom facilities. The atmosphere in the cleanroom is kept
under controlled ambient conditions. The probe station is mounted with tungsten
probes, which are aligned to contact pads on the chip using micromanipulators. The
contact pads are designed as part of the device design in L-edit. The probe station
is connected via a breakout box to two Keithley 2400 SourceMeters controlling the
backgate voltage and measuring the voltage drop V+−for four probe measurements,
as well as to a Keithley 2450 SourceMeter which sources a current and measures the
source-drain voltage drop VSD. All measuring equipment are connected using coaxial
cables, to minimise the amount of electrical noise.
For all measurements, a backgate voltage is swept, including both negative and
positive gate voltages, to obtain the transport characteristics as a function of carrier
density. The backgate is made from heavily doped silicon, located under the insulating
SiO2 and hBN layers.
==PAGE:54==
46
3 Characterisation
3.6
Two terminal measurements
In the two-terminal measurements conducted in the present work, a current (ISD) is
sourced from a source (S) contact to a drain (D) contact. The voltage drop (VSD)
between the two contacts is measured, and using Ohm’s law, the resistance (R2p) can
be found as:
R2p = VSD
ISD
.
(3.1)
The two terminal resistance, in addition to the channel resistance, includes contri-
butions from the leads and the contact resistance from the two contacts. Accordingly,
the total expression for R2p is:
R2p = Rch + 2RC + 2Rlead
(3.2)
where Rch is the channel resistance, RC is contact resistance and Rlead is the con-
tribution to resistance from the metal leads connecting the device to the contact
pads.
3.7
Three terminal measurements
Three terminal measurements are used to accurately determine the contact resistance
of a device. A schematic of a three terminal setup is shown in figure 3.4. A current ISD
is sourced between the source (S) and drain (D). ISD is measured with an ammeter.
A third contact (V−) is chosen, so that the path between S (also called V+) and V−
coincides as little as possible with the path between S and D. The voltage drop V+−
between the source and V−is measured. Since the paths only coincide in the contact,
any measured voltage drop V+−must occur in here, given that this is the only part
of the path where a current is running. Using Ohm’s law, the contact resistance can
now simply be extracted as:
R+−= Rcontact = V+−
ISD
.
(3.3)
A three point measurement in this manner allows direct determination of the
resistance of a single contact.
The measured resistance will also include a small
contribution from the metal leads.
The size of this contribution depends on the
dimensions and material of the contacts and leads. This contribution is in most cases
sufficiently small in comparison to the contact resistance, that it can be neglected. In
the present case, however, we are interested in characterising the contact resistances
==PAGE:55==
3.7 Three terminal measurements
47
Figure 3.4: Schematic showing the three-terminal measurement used to determine
contact resistance of the probe marked S. A current is sourced between
S and D, and the voltage drop is measured between V+ and V−. By
choosing a terminal for V- that does not coincide with the current path
from S to D, the contact resistance can be determined, since the voltage
drop must occur only in the contact, as this is the only spot where the
two paths coincide. Yellow: Contacts. Black: Graphene channel. Blue:
Dielectric (hBN and SiO2). Grey: Si.
as precisely as possible. An estimate of the resistance contribution from the leads is
therefore calculated, and subtracted from the contact resistance.
3.7.1
Lead contribution
The resistivity of the chromium/gold (Cr/Au) leads, is determined through electrical
measurements on Cr/Au Hall bars. The Hall bars are deposited on a remote location
on the chip during the same process step as Cr/Au lead deposition. In this way it is
ensured that the Hall bars are deposited at the same pressure and in general are as
similar in composition to the leads as possible. The resistivity of the leads is found
from:
ρ = hw
L R
(3.4)
==PAGE:56==
48
3 Characterisation
where h = 100 nm is the thickness of the gold leads, w and L are the width and
length of the Hall bar, predefined to be 20 µm and 60 µm respectively, and R is the
resistance found as:
R = Vxx
ISD
.
(3.5)
To determine an exact contribution to resistance from the leads, the dimensions
of each lead are measured in L-edit. A typical lead consists of segments of differing
lengths and widths. The individual segments are measured and summed up to yield
an effective L/w value for each individual lead:
L
w effective = L1
w1
+ L2
w2
+ . . . .
(3.6)
The effective L/w ratio is multiplied by the derived lead resistivity, to find the contri-
bution to resistance coming from each lead. An example of a lead resistivity contri-
bution calculation and L/w segment measurements and ratio determination is given
in appendix B.
3.8
Four terminal measurements
Four terminal measurement configurations are used to extract the charge carrier mo-
bility. A schematic demonstrating a four terminal measurement is shown in figure
3.5.
A current ISD is sourced between the source and drain, and the voltage drop
between the two is measured. Simultaneously the voltage drop, Vxx, between two
leads along the current path is also measured. The resistivity of the device channel
is found from Vxx and ISD, as:
ρ = R4p
w
L = Vxx
ISD
w
L
(3.7)
where Vxx is the voltage drop, ISD is source drain current, R4p is resistance, ρ is
resistivity, L is the length of the channel between the voltage probes and w is the
width of the channel. From this the conductivity, σ, is found from its relation to
resistivity
σ = 1
ρ.
(3.8)
The carrier mobility, µ, is related to conductivity via the Drude expression of con-
ductivity:
==PAGE:57==
3.8 Four terminal measurements
49
Figure 3.5: Schematic demonstrating the four terminal measurement setup.
σ = neµ
(3.9)
where n is the charge carrier density and e is the carrier charge. To find the mobility,
an expression for n is therefore needed. This can be found from the definition of
capacitance, C:
Q = qn = CV
(3.10)
where Q is the total charge and q is the elementary charge. In the present case V is
the gate voltage Vg, and C is the total capacitance of the system Ctot. The charge
carrier density, n, is therefore given by
n = CtotVg
q
.
(3.11)
The capacitance Ctot of the system can be modelled as a series of capacitors,
consisting of a 300 nm thick layer of SiO2 in series with a 30 nm layer of hBN
1
Ctot
=
1
CSiO2
+
1
ChBN
.
(3.12)
The capacitance of the individual layers can be found from the following equation
Cr = ϵ0ϵr
dr
(3.13)
==PAGE:58==
50
3 Characterisation
where the subscript r represents either SiO2 or hBN, ϵ0 is the vacuum permittivity,
and d is the thickness of the individual layers. ϵSiO2 is 3.9[85] and ϵhBN is 5.1 [40].
Combining equations 3.7, 3.9 and 3.11, the field effect mobility, estimated as the
slope of the conductance as a function of gate voltage, can now be expressed as:
µ(n) = σ
ne
(3.14)
µ(Vg) = δG4p
δVg
1
C
L
w
(3.15)
where G4p is the conductance measured between the four-terminal voltage probes,
defined as
1
R4p
3.8.0.1
Contact resistance from 4p measurements
In addition to extracting the carrier mobility, a four terminal measurement can in
combination with a two terminal measurement, be used to determine the average
contact resistance of two contacts from the following relation
RC = R2p −R4p
2
.
(3.16)
The calculated average RC in this case also includes a small contribution from the
leads, which is subtracted following the method described above and demonstrated
in appendix B. To validate the contact resistances obtained from the three terminal
measurements, this relation is used as a sanity check.
In this case, the following
should be true:
R2p −R4p = R3p1 + R3p2
(3.17)
where R3p1 and R3p2 refers to the contact resistances of the two contacts measured
in the corresponding R2p measurement.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
This chapter contains methods, sanity checks, technical considerations and calcula-
tions, which have been done to either prepare data or ensure that data is of an
acceptable quality. What is presented here is all closely related to the results, and
have an important influence on the corresponding analysis. However, as none of the
details presented here directly retain to the answering of the hypotheses set out in
Chapter 1, they are presented here in a more technical chapter, separate from the
results, which directly relate to answering the hypotheses.
4.1
Validity of lead contribution subtraction
As described in the characterisation chapter, all measured contact resistances include
a contribution to the resistance stemming from the leads. This contribution is esti-
mated and subtracted from the measured contact resistance of all individual contacts,
to obtain a more precise value for the contact resistance. To test the validity of this
approach, two of the leads were recreated on a distant part of a chip, separate from
any devices. The leads were contacted with four contact pads. A four terminal mea-
surement was conducted to determine the exact resistance Rmeasured of the leads.
This resistance is compared to the calculated resistance, Rcalculated, found from mul-
tiplying the resistivity by the effective L/w ratio. The resistivity is found from a Hall
bar measurement, conducted on a Hall bar made from the same metal combination as
the contact (5 nm Cr/95 nm Au), and fabricated during the same fabrication step as
the leads. This last point is important, as the resistivity has been found to vary ever
so slightly between depositions for otherwise similar metal compositions [39]. The
results are shown in the table below:
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Methods
Lead
ρmeasured [Ω]
Effective L/w
Rcalculated [Ω]
Rmeasured[Ω]
Ratio
1
0.42
451
190.42
164.47
1.16
2
0.42
416
175.64
149.87
1.17
Table 4.1: Comparison of the measured resistance versus the calculated resistance,
for two different leads. The Ratio column indicates Rmeasured/Rcalculated.
The estimation method is found to overestimate the lead resistance by
16-17 % for both leads..
The Ratio column indicates the ratio Rmeasured/Rcalculated. It shows that the
calculated resistance leads to an overestimation of 16±1% for the two leads, compared
to the measured resistance. The overestimation is of comparable magnitude for the
two leads.
A potential explanation behind this overestimation, is that the real width of the
leads is larger than the width designed in L-edit. This could be the case if the e-beam
dose used to cut the PMMA resist, is larger than the optimal dose. In that case a
wider region of resist than desired would be cut, by scattered and secondary electrons,
leading to wider than designed contacts. This would result in an overestimation of the
effective L/w, and could explain the discrepancy between Rmeasured and Rcalculated.
If the opposite was the case, and the dose is too low, the electron beam simply will not
be able to break all the way through the resist. In that case, any leads deposited on
the chip would be removed during lift-off. This was not observed in any circumstances.
Any leads found on a chip, we would therefore expect to be either of a similar or larger
width, than the width designated in the L-edit design.
To test this hypothesis, the actual width of the deposited leads was found using
AFM, and compared to the lead widths given in the L-edit design. The results are
shown in table 4.2.
Intended width [µm]
15
10
5
2
1
Actual width [µm]
15.4
10.4
5.3
2.3
1.2
Table 4.2: Data comparing the actual width of a deposited lead to the intended
width of said lead. Intended width: The width designated to a lead in
the L-edit design file. Actual width: The width measured using AFM.
The widths of the leads, as determined by AFM, were used to calculate a new
effective length to width ratio for the leads. Calculating the resistance from the new
==PAGE:61==
4.2 R2p - R4p = Rc1 + Rc2?
53
effective L/w ratio, yields a result in good agreement with the measured resistance,
Rmeasured. The new results are shown table 4.3.
Lead
ρmeasured [Ω]
New Eff. L/w
Rcalculated [Ω]
Rmeasured[Ω]
Ratio
1
0.42
402
168.85
164.47
1.03
2
0.42
371
155.91
149.87
1.04
Table 4.3: Comparison of the measured resistance versus the calculated resistance,
using an effective L/w ratio where the width is based on AFM measure-
ments. The Ratio column indicates Rmeasured/Rcalculated. The calcu-
lated resistance is now in much better agreement with the actual resis-
tance.
The resistance calculated now only overshoots the actual resistance by 3-4%, or
4-6Ω, supporting the validity of the method.
Accordingly, all contact resistances
presented in the results section, have had a lead contribution subtracted, where the
lead contribution has been found using the above method.
4.2
R2p - R4p = Rc1 + Rc2?
To investigate and support the validity of using three probe measurements for de-
termining contact resistance, and as a general sanity check of the obtained results,
measurements were performed to confirm that the difference between a four point
measurement and a two point measurement was equal to the sum of measuring the
two involved contacts using three point setups. An example of these tests is shown
in figure 4.1. The blue curves respectively represent the difference between the two
probe and four probe measuremetns (Fig. 4.1 top panel) and the sum of the contact
resistances of the two corresponding contacts (fig. 4.1 mid panel). The bottom panel
shows the absolute difference between the blue curves of the top panels. While the
difference is large close to the CNP, the difference tends to zero on both sides away
from the CNP. This supports the validity of the method. The discrepancy around
the CNP is likely influenced by an observed shift in CNP which was observed during
the cause of measurements. This will be elaborated on further in the ’CNP switch
over time’ section of this chapter.
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Methods
Figure 4.1: To check the validity of measurements, the value of R2p minus R4p is
compared to the value of the contact resistances obtained from 3 point
measurements. Top: 2 and 4 point resistance measurements. The blue
curve represents R2p-R4p. Mid: The sum of the two corresponding 3
point contact resistance measurements. Bottom: The absolute differ-
ence between the two blue curves in the plots above. The difference
tends to zero away from the CNP, confirming the validity of the mea-
surement methods.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 SEM
55
4.3
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained, to reveal the effects of
different nanopatterning lengths on the effective edge length. Nanopatterning lengths
from 0 nm to 39 nm were tested in intervals of 1 nm. Based on the SEM images four
different lengths were chosen. The rationale behind choosing a nanopatterning length
is to both maximise the effective edge length, as well as investigate a representative
spectrum of other effective lengths. Nanopatterning lengths of 9 nm, 19 nm, 29 nm
and 33 nm were chosen. SEM images of the four different nanopatterned edges are
shown in figure 4.2.
Image analysis was performed on the SEM images, to determine an effective con-
tact length per device length - a number for how much metal-graphene contact length
is packed into a metal-graphene contact measuring 1 µm from one side to the other.
Analysis was done using ImageJ. The method is described here briefly. A pixels/nm
mapping is found from the scale bar printed on the SEM image. The ’Find edges’
tool in ImageJ is used to find and highlight the device edge in a bright white colour,
making it easier to trace. The shortest distance between two points on the edge is
measured, (figure 4.4 (a)). The edge is then traced out between these two points,
Figure 4.2: SEM images showing the different nanopatterns tested in these studies.
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Methods
using the segmented line tool (figure 4.4 (b)). These two numbers are finally divided
to give an effective edge length per device length ratio. To minimise the effects of
fluctuations in measurement precision, each measurement is conducted thrice. The
ratios are then calculated as the average of these three measurements (figure 4.4 (c)).
The obtained ratios are shown in figure 4.3
4.4
Details of contact resistance
In the results section, each contact is represented by a single contact resistance value.
The consensus for evaluating contact resistance values in literature broadly appears to
Figure 4.3: Plot showing the effective contact length per 1µm edge contact as a
funciton of nanopatterning.
Figure 4.4: Demonstration of how the effective contact lengths were obtained from
SEM images. (A) A straight line is drawn between two peaks of the
pattern. (B) Using the ImageJ segmented line tool, the length of the
edge between the end points of the straight line are traced out. (C)
Lengths are calculated as an average of three measurements.
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Details of contact resistance
57
be to consider the lowest measured value obtained across the entire backgate voltage
sweep (see e.g.
[97][63]).
Based on this, the values presented here are chosen to
be the contact resistance at an electron density of n = 5 × 1012 m−2, corresponding
roughly to a Vbg-VCNP value of 80 V. The contact resistance measurements for device
Exf3 with the relevant region highlighted, is shown in figure 4.5. Presenting contact
resistances obtained at a high density, is chosen to ensure that the obtained value is far
away from the CNP. Additionally, contact resistances tend to stagnate at high carrier
concentrations, meaning that the contact resistance at n = 5 × 1012 m−2 is typically
close to the global minimum contact resistance. The reasoning behind choosing a
positive Vbg-VCNP value over a negative one, is that the use of Cr contacts induces
n-doping in the graphene near the contact region, due to Cr having a lower work
function than graphene. This results in an asymmetric contact resistance, which is
lower for electrons than for holes [97].
4.4.0.1
Theoretical limit to graphene-metal contact resistance
The metal-graphene contact is described by the Landauer approach given above. This
implies that for an ideal metal-graphene contact, where transmission T = 1, the con-
tact resistance is determined only by the available number of conduction modes [100].
By setting the transmission to 1, we can thus find an expression for the theoretically
minimally possible contact resistance.
The values shown in figure 4.6, serve as a
method to qualify whether the value of an observed contact resistance, is realistic or
could perhaps be influenced by other factors such as shorted leads etc. Concretely,
comparisons of data to figure 4.6, resulted in the disqualification of data from two
contacts. Upon further investigation of the disqualified contacts, the contacts did
indeed turn out to be shorted.
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Methods
Figure 4.5: The set of contact resistance measurements for the device Exf3. High-
lighted region indicates the carrier density where values used in the
further analysis are obtained.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Details of contact resistance
59
Figure 4.6: Landauer Büttiker contact resistance as a function of charge carrier
density, plotted for different values of the transmission coefficient T.
==PAGE:68==
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Graphene edge chirality
The following describes the results of contact resistance measurements on hBN encap-
sulated graphene devices, in the attempt to measure a difference in contact resistance
between metal contacted to respectively zigzag and armchair terminated graphene.
The contact resistances of all measured contacts, are shown in figure 5.1. The
results are separated by device and, if relevant, fabrication round. The devices are
given a prefix, either ’CVD’ or ’Exf’, corresponding to graphene type and fabrication
method. ’CVD’ represents devices containing graphene grown by chemical vapour
deposition, assembled using the ’Stampfer method’ [6] described in the fabrication
chapter. ’Exf’ represents devices containing exfoliated graphene, assembled using the
’Hot Pick-up method’ [82].
Each dot in the plot corresponds to the contact resistance of one contact, measured
at a charge carrier density of n = 5 × 1012 m−2. Contacts are colour coded according
to contact angle, with a 0 degree angle corresponding to the contact being aligned
to either an armchair or zigzag graphene edge. The graphene edges are found using
optical microscopy, which cannot determine whether a graphene edge is of zigzag or
armchair chirality. The 0 degree chirality of one device therefore does not necessarily
correspond to the 0 degree chirality of a different device. The colour coding scheme is
sequential, meaning that the distance between colours corresponds to the magnitude
of angular difference between contacts. The contacts of devices ’CVD1’ and ’Exf3’
are of unknown or mixed edge chirality and are represented by a dark red colour.
The device Exf3 was made with contacts etched into the stack, and thus contacts are
a mix of zigzag and armchair edge chirality. The rationale behind etching into the
stack, was to gain more data on the effects of ’ageing’ of exposed contact edges. At
a late point we noticed that exposure of etched device edges to ambient conditions,
appeared to increase contact resistances as well as the spread in contact resistances.
The etched device edges of Exf3 had at that point been exposed to ambient conditions
==PAGE:70==
62
5 Results
for more than a week. It was duly decided to sacrifice the potential data points related
to edge chirality to instead obtain more data points on the effects of ’ageing’. The
results are described in the ’Ageing’ section later in this chapter.
Figure 5.1: Overview of all measured contact resistances for all devices. Each point
represents the contact resistance of one contact, measured at a car-
rier concentration of 5 × 1012 cm−2. Points are coloured according to
graphene edge chirality, measured in degrees difference from a known
zigzag or armchair edge. Boxplots are overlaid to show the average and
standard deviation of contact resistances for each device. The whiskers
extend to include 1.5 × (Q3 −Q1). The three boxes marked by a light
grey colour, indicate devices that were fabricated quickly, meaning that
only a short time interval passed between etching and loading the device
into a vacuum chamber for metal evaporation (seconds/minutes instead
of hours/days).
A quick glance at figure 5.1 reveals that devices fabricated with CVD graphene
exhibit contact resistances which are 1 to 2 orders of magnitude higher than devices
using exfoliated graphene.
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Devices made with CVD graphene
63
5.2
Devices made with CVD graphene
A total number of three different devices containing CVD graphene were fabricated.
The devices were made from two different vdWH stacks, with one of the stacks un-
dergoing two fabrication rounds. A zoom-in of figure 5.1, containing only the contact
resistances obtained for CVD devices is shown in figure 5.2. The contact resistance
is above 1 kΩµm for all contacts except one. In many cases the contact resistance is
above 10 kΩµm. These values are significantly higher than typical contact resistance
values found for good quality edge contacted hBN encapsulated graphene devices,
which are typically in the low hundreds Ωµm (i.e. ref. [97]). The high value of the
observed contact resistances indicate a low quality interface between graphene and
the metal contact, governed by factors having a larger influence on contact resistance
than edge chirality.
Indeed figure 5.2 reveals no indication of angular correlation
with contact resistance for either of the tested devices. An angular correlation would
manifest in the figure as a gradual change of colour with change in contact resistance.
Device ’CVD2 round 1’ has contact resistances of low angle contacts (represented by
blue hues in the figure) both higher and lower than the contact resistances of high
angle contacts (red hues).
The device ’CVD2 round 2’ shows a similar behaviour. Two contact resistances for
10 degree angle contacts are at a value of around 2 kΩµm, but contact with 5 degrees
less twist and 5 degrees more respectively both exhibit contact resistances above 10
kΩµm. The lowest observed value is a contact resistance of 440 Ωµm observed for a
contact on device CVD1. This value, though lower than the other observed values by
a significant amount, is still in the high end compared to literature[97].
5.3
Devices made with exfoliated graphene
A total number of six different devices containing exfoliated graphene were fabricated.
The devices were made from four different vdWH stacks, with two of the stacks
undergoing two fabrication rounds.
A zoom-in of figure 5.1, containing only the
contact resistances obtained for exfoliated graphene devices is shown in figure 5.3. The
contact resistances are significantly lower than the ones observed for CVD graphene
devices, with only a few reaching values around 1 kΩµm. Most contacts resistances
are centered around 100 Ωµm, indicating a generally high contact quality.
As was the case for CVD devices, no trends related to contact edge chirality are
immediately discernible.
Only devices Exf1 round 1 and 2 contain measurements
==PAGE:72==
64
5 Results
Figure 5.2: Overview of all measured contact resistances for devices made with
CVD graphene.
Each point represents the contact resistance of one
contact, measured at a carrier concentration of 5 × 1012 cm−2. Points
are coloured according to graphene edge chirality, measured in degrees
difference from a known zigzag or armchair edge. Contact resistances
show no sign of correlation with contact angle.
from a majority of angles. Both of these have high angle resistances mixed in with
low angle resistances, and show no correlation between edge termination angle and
measured contact resistance 1. If the devices Exf2 rounds 1 and 2, are considered a
single device (justified on the ground that they are made from the same stack), the
low angle contacts do exhibit a higher contact resistance than the high angle contacts.
However, since no data points overlap between the two rounds, it is not possible to
rule out that this simply could be explained by differences in fabrication conditions,
or more generally is caused by spatial inhomogeneity in device quality. Even so, the
few data points that are available do not show any ordering of RC with angle, with
1Note: Half of the contacts on device Exf2 round 2 were etched with a nanopattern, to test the
effects of contact roughness on contact resistance, as shall be described later in this chapter. However,
as will be shown, the nanopatterning has no discernible influence on the contact resistances measured
on this device. Nanopatterned contacts are therefore analysed on equal footing with non-patterned
contacts in the present part of the analysis.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Devices made with exfoliated graphene
65
Figure 5.3: Overview of all measured contact resistances for devices made with ex-
foliated graphene. Each point represents the contact resistance of one
contact, measured at a carrier concentration of 5 × 1012 cm−2. Points
are coloured according to graphene edge chirality, measured in degrees
difference from a known zigzag or armchair edge. Contact resistances
are significantly lower than observed in CVD devices, however, again,
contact resistances show no sign of correlation with contact angle.
==PAGE:74==
66
5 Results
10°angle contacts exhibiting both higher and lower RC than a 5°angle contact on
Exf2 round 1, and similarly so for 25°and 30°contacts on Exf2 round 2.
5.3.1
RC Angle dependence
Figure 5.4 shows the contact resistances of contacts from all exfoliated graphene
devices with known contact edge chirality, plotted as a function of edge chirality. The
data is fitted with a robust linear regression model, using a Huber weight function to
apply weights to the different data points. This is chosen to minimise the influence
from outliers. The light blue shading surrounding regression lines, represents a 95%
confidence interval.
Again I stress the fact, that the 0 degree chirality of one device does not necessarily
correspond to the 0 degree chirality of another device, albeit the 0 degree angle
chirality does remain the same for devices in between fabrication rounds. The slope of
the linear fits reveals further insight into the angular dependence of contact resistance.
Following the theoretical predictions by Kretz et al.[57], contacts are expected to
exhibit roughly a factor 2 difference in resistance between 0 degree contacts and 30
degree contacts. The contact resistances in between are expected to exhibit a sinu-
soidal dependence on angle, assuming a correspondence between contact resistance
and edge energies as a function of number of carbon atoms per unit length, as de-
scribed by Liu et al. [65], and elaborated on in the background chapter. A factor 2
difference in the linear fits to contact resistance is indeed observed for two devices
(Exf2 round 2 and Exf1 round 1), whereas the variation for the rest of the devices
is smaller (< 1.5). The statistical variation of contact resistances for contacts of the
same angle on the same device, in all cases is at least comparable to or larger than
any observed variation with angle.
Given that the majority of useful data points related to edge chirality influence
on contact resistance, were obtained on the stack Exf1, the rest of this part of the
chapter is dedicated to diving deeper into the behaviour of the two devices made from
Exf1.
5.4
Analysis of device Exf1
To explore the influence of spatial inhomogeneity in stack quality on the measured
contact resistances, the data points of device Exf1 which exist for both round 1 and 2
are plotted against each other in figure 5.5. The figure reveals that the data points fall
==PAGE:75==
5.4 Analysis of device Exf1
67
Figure 5.4: Contact resistance as a function of angle. Zero degree angle represents
contact alignment to either a zigzag or armchair graphene edge. The
blue shaded region represents a 95% confidence interval.
==PAGE:76==
68
5 Results
along a line, as shown by the linear fit (blue line). The light blue shading represents a
95% confidence interval. The linearity in the evolution of contact resistances between
fabrication rounds indicate that the measured contact resistances, are influenced by
spatial inhomogeneity in stack quality. The orange dotted line indicates RCrd1 =
RCrd2. Data points falling below this line have lower RC after second fabrication
round. This reveals that RC generally tends to be slightly higher after second round
for this device.
5.4.1
Mobility
The charge carrier Hall mobility is measured for different regions of the device. This
is done to further shine light upon the indications, that differences in device quality
across different regions of the device, are influencing the observed contact resistances.
The mobility measurements are shown in figure 5.6. Two contacts located in opposite
ends of the device, are used as source and drain (indicated by S and D in the figure),
and the mobility is measured across five different regions of the device. The probed
regions are indicated in the figure by colour coded arrows, running between the voltage
probes used for each measurement. The red curve, red electron/hole mobility and
red correction factor, correspond to the measurement indicated by the red arrow, et
cetera.
The correction factors (”CorrF” in figure 5.6) are corrections to the w/L
ratio used when calculating the mobility. Hall mobility calculations demand that the
measured region is an equiangular quadrilateral. As this is not the case for any of the
regions measured here, this is instead compensated for by adjusting the mobilities
by a correction factor [68].
1
CorrF corresponds to the number of squares that are
measured. The correction factors were calculated from finite element simulations in
COMSOL by David M. A. Mackenzie.
The mobility varies greatly between regions, revealing a large spatial inhomogene-
ity in transport quality across the stack. The electron mobility between the red and
the blue region, are 35,000 cm2/V s and 1,750 cm2/V s respectively, meaning that it
varies by a factor 20 across the stack.
5.4.2
Bubbles
Optical microscopy images taken of the stack before and after measurements, reveal
an occurrence of bubbles of unknown origin on the left side of the device. Figure 5.7 (a)
shows the device Exf round 1, before any measurements were conducted. Figure 5.7
(b) shows the same device, taken immediately after the first session of measurements.
==PAGE:77==
5.4 Analysis of device Exf1
69
Figure 5.5: Evolution of contact resistances between first and second fabrication
round of contacts on device Exf1 separated in different colours accord-
ing to contact angle. Numbers indicate contact numbers. The outlier
(contact 5) is excluded from the linear regression. Inset: Optical mi-
croscopy image of device Exf1 after the first fabrication round. Contact
numbers corresponding to the data points in the main plot are super-
imposed on top in white.
==PAGE:78==
70
5 Results
Figure 5.6: Nonuniformity of carrier transport in device ’Exf1 round 1’. The carrier
mobility varies by more than an order of magnitude across the device,
from a hole mobility of 2500 cm2/Vs in the region marked by the blue
arrow, to a hole mobility of 40000 cm2/Vs in the region marked by
the red arrow. S and D refer to the contacts used as source and drain
respectively. CorrF refers to a correction factor to the L/w ratio used
for calculating the mobility.
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Analysis of device Exf1
71
After further measuring sessions over a period of a few weeks, the smaller bubbles
visible to the right of the large bubble in figure 5.7 (b), have merged together to form
a larger bubble, figure 5.7 (c). Contacts located in the region close to where bubbles
occurred (contacts 23-24-25), were observed to stop working as bubble size increased.
Breakdown of contacts occurred in the mentioned order (i.e. first contact 23 broke,
then contact 24 etc.).
5.4.3
CNP switch over time
During measurements it was observed that the charge neutrality point (CNP) of
device ’Exf1’ would be at one value during the first measurement, and then gradually
shift towards a more negative backgate voltage as measurements progressed. The
CNP location was observed to saturate at a gate voltage of approximately -65 V. The
shifting of CNP position indicates that electrons get trapped in the device, where they
remain, resulting in a significant n-doping of the device. To explore this behaviour,
the device was measured at time intervals of respectively 2 hours, 1 week and 3 weeks
since the last measurement. The results are shown in figure 5.8. It is observed that
leaving the device for a significant amount of time, results in a very slow shift in the
charge neutrality point towards a more neutral doping state. After two hours hardly
any shift is observable (figure 5.8, curve). After one week (figure 5.8, green curve),
the CNP has gone from -60 V to -40 V. After leaving the device untouched for three
Figure 5.7: Bubbles of unknown origin occuring in the device during the cause of
measurements. (a): Stack before any measurements. (b): Device after
first measurement session.
(c): After further measurement sessions,
small bubbles have merged together to form a larger bubble.
==PAGE:80==
72
5 Results
weeks, the CNP has now shifted to a value around -20 V. Conducting measurements
on the device is observed to shift the CNP back towards the saturation value of -65
V. This is demonstrated by the red curve in figure 5.8, where CNP has shifted from
a position around -40 V (green curve) to approximately -60 V (red curve), during
the course of around 20 measurements, consisting of a total of 40 gate voltage sweeps
from -80 V to 80 V and back. Figure 5.8 furthermore shows, that the resistance
increases over time. All the resistance increase is included in the 4p measurement,
indicating that the decrease in device quality occurs in this small region.
The mobility of the measured region, is found to decrease significantly between
the first two measurements and the measurements conducted after a week. After
this, the mobility remains largely unchanged, including after reshaping the device, as
shown by the blue curve in figure 5.9.
5.5
Ageing
The devices marked by light grey boxes in figure 5.1, indicate devices where the
time device edges were exposed to ambient conditions, were deliberately kept to a
minimum.
In practice this meant minimising the time between etching and until
PMMA covering the exposed edges was spun on top, as well as minimising the time
between development of the PMMA for metal leads and loading of the device into the
Temescal metal evaporator. The time spent on each step, for all measured devices, is
detailed in table 5.5. The devices Exf 1, 2, 3 and 4 were located on one chip, and thus
fabricated during the same fabrication round. Before the second fabrication round,
the chip was cut in two, explaining why device Exf1 and device Exf2 and 3 have
different fabrication times for round 2. For the purpose of this analysis, the second
round fabrication times of devices Exf1, 2 and 3, are considered ’Fast fabrication’
times.
The total exposure time for devices Exf2 and 3 (round 2) is equal to 24
minutes, whereas the total edge exposure time for device Exf1 is 42 seconds, due to
a re-etching of the contact area before metal deposition.
As is evident from the boxplots in figure 5.1, devices fabricated with a short
exposure to ambient conditions, exhibit a lower average contact resistance as well as
a larger overall uniformity in contact resistance values, as seen by a lower standard
deviation for ’fast fabricated’ devices. Figure 5.10 provides a simpler overview of the
data shown in the boxplots of figure 5.1. In the left (right) hand side plot each dot
represents the mean (standard deviation of) contact resistance for all contacts on one
device. The left hand side reveals that the three lowest average contact resistances,
==PAGE:81==
5.5 Ageing
73
Figure 5.8: CNP shifting over time: The blue curve corresponding to t=0, is taken
at the end of a measurement session. The device is heavily n-doped,
with a CNP around -65 V. After having been left untouched for two
hours, the CNP has shifted by a few V. One week later, the CNP has
shifted by 25 V, however after a short measurement session, the CNP
has shifted back to -60 V (red curve). After being left untouched for a
further three weeks, the CNP is now around -20 V.
Etch ->PMMA spun
Metal dev. ->Load in metal dep. chamber
CVD2
3 h
3 d 7 h
CVD2 (round 2)
3 d
7 h
Exf1,2,3,4 (round 1)
2 d
6 h
Exf1 (round 2)
16 min
8 min
Exf2,3 (round 2)
NA
42 s*
Table 5.1: Time the graphene edges were exposed to ambient conditions during
fabrications, for the devices analysed in this chapter.
* Device Exf2
round 2 was re-etched before entering the metal deposition chamber, and
was thus only exposed to ambient conditions for 42 seconds..
==PAGE:82==
74
5 Results
Figure 5.9: Calculated mobilities of device Exf1 over time. The mobility decreases
between the first measurements and the measurements taken after one
week. After this, the mobility remains largely unchanged, even after
reshaping of the device, as evident by the blue ’Round2’ curve.
were obtained for the three devices where exposure to ambient conditions were kept to
a minimum. Additionally it reveals that the average contact resistance has dropped
between rounds one and two for both Exf1 and Exf2. The right hand side reveals
that the standard deviation for the ’fast fabricated’ devices is likewise generally lower
than devices fabricated over longer time. The low standard deviation of the device
Exf2 round 1, can be explained by the fact that this device only included three data
points.
5.6
Roughness
5.6.1
Devices
The fabrication of nanopatterned contacts was attempted on two separate devices:
”Rough1” and ”Exf1 Round 2”.
The first of these devices turned out to have no
functioning contacts at all, limiting the number of measured contact resistances on
nanopatterned contacts to a total of six contacts. The two devices and corresponding
observations are described in the following.
==PAGE:83==
5.6 Roughness
75
Figure 5.10: Minimising the timespan between etching and metal deposition (”fast
fabrication”) results in a lower average contact resistance (left), as well
as a larger uniformity in contact quality (right). The low observed
standard deviation for device Exf2 round 2 can be ascribed to the low
number (3) of functioning contacts.
5.6.1.1
Device Rough1
Device Rough1 had 36 contacts in total. The distribution of nanopatterning to num-
ber of contacts is described in table 5.2. The sizes of the nanopatterning were chosen
from AFM and SEM images, as described in the methods chapter. The 8 contacts
without nanopatterning were included to allow direct comparision between nanopat-
terning versus non-nanopatterning.
Nanopatterning
None
9 nm
19 nm
29 nm
33 nm
No. of contacts
8
7
7
7
7
Table 5.2: Distribution of nanopatterning for contacts of device Rough1.
The device had only two working contacts, both with contact resistances ranging
in the tens of kΩµm.
None of the devices show a graphene-like response to gate
voltage. Plots of the contact resistance as a function of backgate voltage for the two
working contacts, are shown in figure 5.11. The lack of functioning contacts of an
acceptable quality, rendered the device useless for further analysis.
==PAGE:84==
76
5 Results
Figure 5.11: Contact resistance as a function of backgate voltage sweep for the sole
two working contacts on device Rough1. Contact resistances show no
graphene-like behaviour in form of a charge neutrality point. Contact
resistances are in the kΩµm range, which is too high to observe any
potentially present resistance decrease due to nanopatterning.
5.6.1.2
Device Exf1 round 2
The second device, is the device Exf1, which was given nanopatterned contacts in
the second fabrication round. Every other contact was fabricated with a nanopat-
tern, meaning that each 5 degree segment of the device had one nanopatterned and
one straight contact. In choosing this design, the hope was that it would be made
possible to compare nanopatterned contacts as directly as possible to their straight
counterparts. Both in terms of comparing the behaviour of contacts which were not
patterned after the first fabrication round, and nanopatterned after the second fab-
rication round, as well as comparing the contacts to their direct neighbour of same
edge chirality. The device had 32 contacts in total. Two contacts were visibly not in
contact with any graphene, and were discounted. The distribution of nanopatterning
between contacts is detailed in table 5.3.
Nanopatterning
None
19 nm
33 nm
No. of contacts
16
7
7
Table 5.3: Distribution of nanopatterning for contacts of device Exf1 round 2.
A total of 6 nanopatterned contacts were found to be functioning. 3 contacts with
==PAGE:85==
5.6 Roughness
77
19 nm nanopatterning and 3 contacts with 33 nm nanopatterning. The measured
contact resistances of nanopatterned contacts are plotted in figure 5.12. According
to the theoretical predictions, we would expect nanopatterned contacts to fall lower
along the y-axis than non-nanopatterned contacts. This is observably not the case.
Figure 5.12 also reveals insight into the evolution of contact resistance for a contact
without patterning in the first round and with patterning in the second round.
The figure indicates that nanopatterning of contacts has not lead to a decrease
in contact resistance for the measured contacts, and nanopatterned contacts do not
based on the present data present an improvement over non-patterned contact. The
orange dotted line in the plot indicates contact resistance of round 2 that are equal
to contact resistances of round 1. A contact resistance falling on this line, would
indicate that neither an improvement nor decrease in contact quality is registered
between fabrication rounds.
Four out of the six nanopatterned contacts intersect
with this line, with the remaining two located below and above respectively. Based
on this, the investigated type of nanopatterning of contacts has neither resulted in
an improvement of contacts nor made the contacts worse.
==PAGE:86==
78
5 Results
Figure 5.12: Contact resistances of contacts after 1st and 2nd fabrication rounds
respectively, coloured according to nanopatterning type. The orange
dotted line is plotted for x=y. Contacts below (above) this line have a
lower (higher) contact resistance in the second fabrication round than
in the first fabrication round. 4 out of the 6 nanopatterned contacts
are located on the orange dotted line, with the remaining two located
above and below respectively. This indicates that nanopatterning has
not resulted in an improved contact quality.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
6.1
Low quality CVD stacks
The results section revealed that devices made from CVD grown graphene using the
Aachen assembly method [6], showed significantly higher contact resistances than
devices made from exfoliated graphene, assembled using the hot-pickup technique
[82]. This is unexpected, since devices made from CVD graphene are not expected
to behave worse than devices made from exfoliated graphene. A contact resistance
of 92 Ωµm has previously been reported for CVD graphene, with top contacted Au
leads [37]. While top contacts and edge contacts cannot be compared directly, this
at least gives an idea about the range within which, we should expect good quality
CVD-graphene contact resistances to fall.
It is not likely, that the high contact resistances are caused by contaminated metal-
graphene interfaces, e.g. from polymer residues, as the fabrication process is observed
to work fine during other fabrication rounds. Additionally, comparably high contact
resistances were observed for the stack ’CVD2’, both during 1st and 2nd fabrication
rounds, even though the measured contacts were a completely different set of contacts,
which in addition to being located in different parts of the device, were also fabricated
in different rounds.
The CVD graphene used in devices, is expected to be of a high quality, as it was
obtained directly from the Stampfer group at RTWH Aachen, which used graphene
grown using the exact same growth method, to observe high quality carrier transport
in edge contacted hBN/CVD-graphene/hBN devices [5]. However, as the graphene
samples most likely originate from different growth sessions, it cannot be ruled out
that the graphene utilised in these studies were of a poor quality. To investigate
differences in graphene quality, four different stacks were investigated using Raman
spectroscopy. Raman maps of the FWHM(2D) are shown in figure 6.1.
Two stacks are the CVD1 and CVD2 stacks, which contain the CVD graphene
grown by the Stampfer group and are assembled using the method reported in [6].
==PAGE:88==
80
6 Discussion
Figure 6.1: FWHM(2D) Raman maps of four different stacks fabricated for these
studies. (A) and (B) are the stacks CVD1 and CVD2 respectively, (C) is
a stack fabricated using exfoliated graphene and the hot pickup method,
(D) A stack containing CVD graphene grown on ultrafoil. Stacks (A,B
and D) all show large fluctuations in FWHM(2D) across the stack, as
well as generally higher values of FWHM(2D) compared to the exfo-
laited stack. Stacks (A,D) furthermore contain large holes in central
areas of the stack (red lines indicate areas containing graphene). Stack
(C) on the other hand shows a low FWHM(2D) as well as a large uni-
formity across the stack.
==PAGE:89==
6.1 Low quality CVD stacks
81
The third stack is a stack containing exfoliated graphene, assembled using the hot-
pickup method [82], similarly to the exfoliated stacks presented in the results chapter.
The fourth stack shown in 6.1 is assembled using the Aachen method, but contains
CVD graphene grown locally by Postdoctoral researcher Abhay Shivayogimath on
ultrafoil copper, a copper type with a lower RMS roughness and contamination than
commercially available copper [81]. Including a stack made using the same fabrication
method, but containing graphene from a different growth, is done to help shine a light
on any significant deviations in quality between the two different growths.
Literature reports that low strain samples are expected to have a FWHM(2D)
around 15-20 cm−1 [73], with higher FWHM(2D) values indicating higher strain vari-
ations, and thus lower transport quality [25].
Figure 6.1 reveals that the stack made using exfoliated graphene (figure 6.1 (C))
has a significantly lower FWHM(2D) compared to the CVD stacks, as well as a highly
uniform distribution of FWHM(2D) across the stack area.
All three CVD stacks
reveal a higher average FWHM(2D) value, as well as a larger spread, indicating larger
nanoscale strain variations and thus lower carrier transport quality [25]. Perhaps just
as significantly, the stacks shown in figure 6.1 (B) and (D) are both observed to contain
large holes in the middle of the area where the encapsulated graphene is supposed to
be located (marked by red lines), which are likely the result of graphene not being
picked up properly from the Cu substrate. Observing holes on a macroscopic scale,
cannot help but raise questions about the nanometer scale quality of the graphene
sheet. In the supplementary material, the FWHM(2D) of the shown exfoliated device
is plotted against the FWHM(2D) of 12 stacks containing CVD graphene assembled
using the Stampfer method. This reveals that the FWHM(2D) of the exfoliated device
is both lower and more uniformly distributed than all devices fabricated using CVD
graphene. Figure 6.2, taken from [6], is the Raman data of a stack presented in the
paper that initially presented the fabrication method. This has FWHM(2D) values
between 15 and 25 cm−1, centered around 17 cm−1. These values more resemble those
obtained for the exfoliated stack in figure 6.1, than they do the stacks fabricated for
these studies.
This observation, combined with the observation of large holes in the graphene
shown in figure 6.1 (B) and (D), suggest that the higher observed contact resistance of
CVD stacks, is likely due to the fact that the CVD stacks investigated in these studies
generally are of an inferior quality compared to the exfoliated stacks. This inferior
quality, based on the Raman maps, is likely caused by defects and strain induced
during the stacking process, resulting in detrimental effects on device quality.
==PAGE:90==
82
6 Discussion
Figure 6.2: This Raman map, adapted from the paper that reported the Aachen
assembly method, shows a CVD stack with low and rather uniform
FWHM(2D) values. The stack quality more resembles that of the exfo-
liated stack shown in figure 6.1 (C), than it does the three other CVD
stacks, which however were fabricated using the Aachen method. Figure
adapted from [6].
A very recent paper present a new method for assembling high mobility CVD
graphene stacks [29]. Using a PMMA transfer layer, they wet transfer a single layer
CVD graphene crystal from its copper substrate to a Si/SiO2 substrate, from where
they use a modified version [84] of the hot-pickup technique [82], to obtain hBN/-
graphene/hBN heterostructures with clean interfaces. Using this method they mea-
sure a room temperature mobility of 70,000 cm2/Vs in a CVD-stack. Attempting to
implement this method could be a potential next step, in search of obtaining a higher
stacking success rate. The modified hot pickup method reported by Purdie et al. [84]
however, was attempted during the bachelor’s thesis of Mads Troelsgård, and was not
found to be without problems of its own [93].
6.2
Edge chirality
The results presented in the previous chapter reveal no correlation between graphene
edge chirality and the observed contact resistances. This goes against the theoretical
predictions by Kretz et al. [57], and the hypothesis of this thesis.
For devices made with CVD graphene as well as for the device Exf4, observed
==PAGE:91==
6.2 Edge chirality
83
contact resistances are high, suggesting that the contacts or devices are of suboptimal
quality. However for devices ’Exf1 round 1’, ’Exf1 round 2’ and ’Exf2 round 2’, contact
resistance values are measured in the region around 100 Ωµm.
These resistances
are comparable in magnitude to resistances of high quality contacts, reported in
literature [97][37][26]. This suggests, that the contacts on these three devices are of
a high quality as well. Accordingly, one would expect that these contacts reveal any
correlation between contact resistance and edge chirality, should a such be present.
This is however, as evident, not the case.
A potential explanation, is the observed spatial inhomogeneity in stack quality
across regions of the graphene channel, which was demonstrated for device Exf1. The
contact resistances falling along a line in figure 5.5, demonstrate that the contact
location on the stack, influences the measured contact resistance more than edge
chirality. A closer look at figure 5.5 reveals that all the highest measured contact
resistances appear to be located on the same side of the device.
Calculating the
mean contact resistance for contacts on the top edge of the device, gives an average
resistance per contact of 159.4 Ωµm, whereas the average resistance for contacts
on the bottom edge of the device is 344.1 Ωµm.
This corresponds to a factor 2
difference, caused by location alone. The expected difference in contact resistances
caused by edge chirality, as suggested by Kretz et al. [57], is also roughly a factor 2.
This suggests that any differences in contact resistance due to edge chirality, could
potentially be buried underneath differences caused by spatial inhomogeneity.
A way of cancelling the impact of spatial inhomogeneities, is the method of rotat-
ing the device architecture between fabrication rounds suggested in the fabrication
chapter. If all contacts irrespective of angle show high contact resistance in one end
of the stack and low resistance in the other, it would be a clear indicator of spatial
inhomogeneity governing contact resistance. Concurrently it would also be a clear
indicator of the opposite, should the aforementioned not be true. Checking whether
the contact resistance correlation with edge chirality would be stronglier articulated
for other contact metals, such as Ni, is as simple as changing the recipe in the E-beam
evaporator, and could thus easily be investigated. However, until the suggested ef-
fects of spatial inhomogeneities are ruled out, changing the contact metal should be
of lower priority.
==PAGE:92==
84
6 Discussion
6.3
Reuse of stacks
As discussed above, contacts tend to fall on a line when their contact resistances
between fabrication rounds are plotted against each other, as seen in figure 5.5, in-
dicating that spatial differences in stack quality currently have a larger influence on
contact resistance than any variations occurred during the fabrication process. In ex-
tension to this, a large proportion of the observed contact resistances in figure 5.5 fall
along the orange dotted line, indicating that the contact resistance has not changed
between fabrication rounds.
This is an indication, that the fabrication process is functioning well, and that it,
for the present set of stacks, is more likely that the variance in contact quality comes
from either variations in graphene quality or are caused by the heterostructure assem-
bly process, than from factors relating to the reshaping process. The obtained results
demonstrate that reusing stacks is both possible and a viable method of obtaining
useful results, whilst minimising: a) the variations from stack to stack induced by
the myriads of possible varying conditions a stack could encounter during the assem-
bly and fabrication process, b) time spent on stacking, and c) material waste from
failed stacking attempts. An immediate possible suggestion for an experimental use
of reshaping stacks, is the possibility of rotating the device architecture between fab-
rication rounds, as was just discussed under the edge chirality section of this chapter.
6.4
Switching of CNP
During the course of measurements, a large shift of CNP in the tested device Exf1
was observed.
The CNP shift eventually saturated at a backgate voltage, Vbg ≈
-65 V, corresponding to a charge carrier density, n ≈4.33 × 1012 cm−2. In other
words a heavy n-doping occurs, indicating a buildup of charges in the device. Figure
5.8 revealed a very slow decharging of the device, observing barely any change in
CNP position over the course of two hours. The slow pace of decharging is further
underlined by the fact that a significant amount of decharging is still occur between 1
week and 3 weeks. Conducting measurements on the device, were observed to quickly
shift the CNP back towards the saturation value of -65 V. In other words we observe
a quick recharging followed by a very slow decharging.
Figure 5.9, reveals a large decrease in mobility occurring between the first measure-
ment session, and the measurements obtained after a week. Changes in the mobility of
graphene, have previously been shown to result from doping of graphene by charged
==PAGE:93==
6.4 Switching of CNP
85
impurities [22]. The observed decrease in mobility correlates with the observation
of bubbles forming, and it is therefore deemed likely that the two observations are
somehow correlated.
After the initial decrease in mobility however, the mobility remains largely un-
changed throughout all remaining measurements, including a measurement obtained
after reshaping the device. We still, however, see the doping level of the device shift-
ing, as evident by the CNP position changing progressively with measurements. The
lack of decrease in mobility, indicates that this change in CNP position, is not caused
by Coulomb scattering. This seems plausible given that the graphene sheet is tightly
encapsulated via van der Waals forces in between sheets of hBN, and it therefore
would be unlikely for external charges to enter the stack.
Once the initial shift of CNP has occurred, and the CNP has settled around Vbg ≈
- 65 V; the measurements show no further sign of hysteresis between the up and down-
sweep of the backgate. This suggests that the doping is not caused by dipoles such
as e.g. H2O trapped between the SiO2 substrate and hBN, as dipoles are known to
flip to align with the sign of the backgate, leading to a backgate dependent hysteresis
[66]. Additionally both H2O as well as oxygen are known to cause p-doping when
adsorbed to graphene sheets [98][10], excluding the possibility that the doping is
caused by either of these two common adsorbants.
The heavy n-doping indicates an interaction between electrons in the graphene
sheet and some external source of positive charge. This interaction is diminishing
with time, yet strong enough to sustain itself over a period of several weeks. Kumar
et al. consider an exfoliated graphene device on a SiO2 substrate. They induce a shift
of CNP towards negative values by current annealing the sample. The CNP is then
gradually observed to shift toward a positive value, after the device is left in vacuum
for 86 hours. They ascribe this to charge trapping and subsequent de-trapping in the
oxide layer. In the present case however, the graphene is placed upon hBN which is
expected to be free of charge traps [30], and it is therefore unlikely that the two cases
can be compared directly.
A way to test whether the observed CNP shift is caused by adsorbants from the
surrounding ambient conditions, would be to conduct the measurements in a nitro-
gen atmosphere, baking the device first, to ensure that any adsorbed water would
evaporate. This could for instance be done using the Linkam stage setup available
at the DTU premises. The unconventional behaviour described above, was only ob-
served for this specific stack, and not for the remainder of characterised stacks. Any
observations are therefore not likely to be of universal character, but rather related
==PAGE:94==
86
6 Discussion
to the specifics of this particular stack.
6.5
Ageing
Lowering the fabrication time between etching and placement of the device in the
metal deposition chamber produced lower and more uniform contact resistances. No
studies investigating the ageing of etched graphene interfaces and the effect on contact
quality, have, to the best of my knowledge, been published. The discussion of this
phenomenon, is therefore of a rather speculative character.
The graphene is etched using an O2/Ar plasma, and it is therefore most likely that
these oxygen atoms react with the dangling bonds of the graphene edge, suggesting
that the exposed graphene edges are oxygen terminated.
Wang et al. [97] claim that the presence of oxygen atoms between the graphene
and metal, should result in a better contact, whereas Kretz et al.
[57] find that
that presence of oxygen should result in a worse contact. However they also find,
that the decrease in contact quality due to an interstitial oxygen atom should not
be very significant. Thus the presence of O atoms, resulting in M-O-Gr interfaces
instead of M-Gr interfaces, is not expected to degrade the quality of the contacts to
any significant degree. A freshly etched graphene edge is therefore, expected to form
good quality contact to a deposited metal.
One possible, though rather speculative explanation based on the above goes as
follows: Increasing the time that etched edges are exposed to ambient conditions
increases the probability that larger molecules replace the oxygen atoms adsorbed
to the exposed edges. Adsorbation of larger molecules, result in a longer bonding
length between graphene and metal, which results in an increased resistance across
the interface, due to the smaller orbital overlap.
A way to obtain pure M-Gr interfaces, would be to place the chip and stack in a
vacuum chamber, etch the graphene using ion milling, and then without removing the
device from the vacuum, deposit contacts on to the chip. This is in theory possible
to do in the Temescal E-beam evaporator available at the DTU Nanolab facilities;
however the system at present is not set up to perform such a series of steps, and the
approach was therefore not pursued during these studies. The possibility of doing
this, is mentioned here as a suggestion for work to be performed at a future point in
time.
==PAGE:95==
6.6 Nanopatterning
87
6.6
Nanopatterning
The amount of data points underlying the analysis of the effect of nanopatterning
is heavily limited, by the fact that what was intended to be the primary device for
exploration of nanopatterning turned out not to be functioning. This leaves just six
nanopatterned contacts, from the device ’Exf1 Round 2’, to base the discussion upon
(figure 5.12).
Having a large set of data points to base the analysis on, is essential for drawing
any conclusions about the quality of a certain type of interface. Just as the quality
of transport properties across the graphene channel was observed to vary, the same
may very well also be the case for the graphene edge making up the metal-graphene
interface.
The conditions of the graphene edges are likely to be affected by local
variations such as polymer residue and local defects.
Franklin et al.
[36] report
measurements from 30 different graphene devices contacted with two different contact
types.
Even though the 30 devices are made in the same way, they nonetheless
exhibit a spread in contact resistances of the order of 100 Ωµm for both contact types.
However because of the large number of analysed devices, they are still able to clearly
identify a difference in average contact resistance between the two different contact
types.
The six measured contacts did not improve in contact resistance, when going
from being straight to being nanopatterned.
Neither is any noticeable difference
observable between 19 nm patterned contacts and 33 nm patterned contacts. The
contact resistances of fabrication round 1 plotted against the contact resistances for
the same contacts after fabrication round 2, fall on a line, indicating that variations in
contact resistance are more likely caused by spatial variations in stack quality. Most
of the contacts do however have a contact resistance at a level low enough to consider
the devices to be of a good quality. The lack of observable difference is therefore
somewhat surprising, and goes against the theoretical predictions mentioned in the
background chapter
Ref. [58] report a grain size of 19.9 nm for Cr deposited on SiO2, using sputtering
deposition. E-beam evaporation generally result in larger grain sizes than sputtering
deposition [21], bringing to question whether the etched nanopatterns were large
enough for the Cr to enter into the narrow gaps of the pattern (shown in figure 4.2).
Smith et al. [90] find that for top-deposited contacts, etching lines in the graphene
sheet and thus increasing the amount of edge contact, results in decreased contact
resistances, but only up until a certain etch line density. When the distance between
lines becomes less than 40 nm, the graphene sheet starts to behave like graphene
==PAGE:96==
88
6 Discussion
nanoribbons, meaning that bandgaps occur, resulting in a diminished metal-graphene
carrier transmission. A suggestion for future investigations into nanopatterning of
contacts, would therefore be to space the patterns by at least 40 nm, and make
the negative features of patterns wide enough to ensure that evaporated metal can
actually enter the intended gaps.
A final remark is, that while the etch patterns were realised on test devices prior to
fabrication, it is unsure whether the patterns actually look like intended on the final
devices as well. A way to check whether the contacts look like intended, would be to
measure the etched device edges before metal is deposited, using AFM. However, we
are not interested in running the AFM needle across the sample in the area that is
to be contacted, as we wanna keep the area clean and free of polymer contamination.
This could be circumvented by letting the nanopattern extend further along the device
edge than the contact. The etched pattern could then be measured using an AFM.
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this thesis study, two different hypotheses have been investigated. Both are aimed
at obtaining lower contact resistances in metal-graphene interfaces. The investigated
systems are van der Waals heterostructures, namely hBN/graphene/hBN stacks. Two
different graphene types are tested, with each their corresponding assembly method.
The two types are CVD graphene assembled using a method reported by Banszerus et
al, and exfoliated graphene assembled using the hot-pickup method [82]. The van der
Waals heterostructures are contacted via Cr/Au edge contacts, following the method
pioneered by Wang et al [97].
The first hypothesis proposes a correspondence between contact resistance, and
the chirality of the contacted graphene edge, as predicted theoretically by Kretz et
al [57]. The presented results identify no correlation between chirality and contact
resistance. Results considering edge chirality are presented from a total of 7 different
devices, however only two of these devices contain a large number of data points.
Furthermore both of these devices are made from the same stack.
This stack is
shown to exhibit a large correlation between contact resistance and the geographical
location of contacts on the stack, indicating that the measured contact resistances
are influenced by differences in graphene sheet quality.
The results obtained from CVD graphene devices are of a signicantly poorer qual-
ity than results from exfoliated graphene devices. Raman spectroscopy data is pre-
sented to suggest that this observed inferiority is a product of poor stack quality,
rather than an intrinsic property of CVD graphene.
The second hypothesis suggests a correlation between increasing the effective
length of the graphene-metal 1D interface, and observing lower contact resistances.
Only data points from six contacts are obtained, limiting the analysis significantly.
The obtained contact resistances reveal no correlation introducing nanopatterning
and decrease in contact resistance. Comparisons to literature are drawn, suggesting
that the features of the tested nanopattern may have been too small for the Cr to
enter into the gaps of the nanopattern. Furthermore it is suggested that the features
==PAGE:98==
90
7 Conclusion
are too closely spaced, which risks introducing bandgaps in the contacted graphene.
The thesis introduces the concept of reshaping van der Waals heterostructure de-
vices, allowing the same stack to be reshaped and used in multiple characterisation
rounds. This is obtained via creating devices with a graphene channel that is suffi-
ciently wide, that the contacted edges can be etched away, allowing the device to be
reshaped with a completely new set of contacts. The results demonstrate a low vari-
ation between results obtained on reshaped stacks and results obtained on the same
stack prior to reshaping. This approach paves a way towards obtaining a maximum
number of data points per stack, whilst keeping variations due to differences in stack
quality to a minimum. Furthermore, it cuts down on material waste as well, and
saves valuable time spent stacking, which can instead be spent obtaining data.
Finally, the thesis identifies a correlation between contact resistance magnitude
and uniformity and the amount of time an etched graphene edge is freely exposed to
ambient conditions during fabrication, with shorter time resulting in lower and more
uniform contact resistances. An explanation based on an increased probability of
edge adsorption of large molecules with time, resulting in larger contact resistances,
is suggested.
Based on the above, the edge chirality thesis can neither be confirmed nor re-
jected. To explore the hypothesis further, a larger number of contacts would need
to be measured. Reshaping of devices, combined with a rotation of contact angles in
between fabrication rounds, is suggested as a potential way of confirming the absence
of influence from variations in graphene sheet quality. Likewise the contact roughness
hypothesis can neither be confirmed nor rejected based on the presented results. In
extension to simply obtaining a larger set of data points, it is suggested for future
work, to increase the distance between nanopatterning features, to avoid bandgaps
opening in graphene and ensure that evaporated metal can enter the crevaces of the
etched pattern properly.
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX A
FWHM(2D) of stacks
==PAGE:100==
92
A FWHM(2D) of stacks
Figure A.1: FWHM(2D) of 12 CVD graphene stacks. CVD1 and CVD2 correspond
to stacks that were made into devices of the same names, discussed in
the main text. Letters refer to other CVD stacks which were fabricated,
but not made into devices. ExfA refers to a device assembled with
exfoliated graphene using the hot pickup method [82]. The FWHM(2D)
is both lower and more uniformly distributed for the exfoliated device,
than for the CVD devices.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX B
Lead resistance
The following shows the calculation of the contribution to resistance from each lead
of the device Exf1.
The four point resistance is measured over a backgate sweep from -20 V to 20 V
and back again. The measured resistance over this interval is:
R = Vxx
ISD
= 1.188 ± 0.03Ω.
(B.1)
The thickness, h, of the lead is 100 nm, the width, w, is 20 µm and the length, L,
is 60 µm. From this the resistivity is calculated:
ρ = hW
L R = 1.188Ω· 100nm ∗20µm
60µm
= 0.396Ωµm.
(B.2)
The leads are measured individually. Each lead consists of segments of different
widths. The length of each segment is measured, and divided by the width of the seg-
ment. The segments are then summed up, to give an effective L/w for each individual
contact (figure B.1 column ”effective L/w”). This is then multiplied by the obtained
resistivity, to give the overall contribution to resistance from each lead (figure B.1
column ”R Cr/Au”). In the main text these values are subtracted from the measured
contact resistances, to give more precise values for the contact resistances.
==PAGE:102==
94
B Lead resistance
Figure B.1: Calculation of lead contributions to resistance, for device Exf1.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[1]
Jijo Abraham et al. “Tunable sieving of ions using graphene oxide membranes”.
In: Nature Nanotechnology 12 (Apr. 2017), p. 546. url: https://doi.org/
10.1038/nnano.2017.21http://10.0.4.14/nnano.2017.21https://www.
nature.com/articles/nnano.2017.21#supplementary-information.
[2]
ALLRESIST. Allresist produktinfos ar-p630 deutsch - Übersicht Resiste. 2014.
url: https://www.allresist.de/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/allresist_
produktinfos_ar-p630_deutsch.pdf.
[3]
Alexander AlUs. Figure adopted under a creative commons license.
[4]
Alexander A Balandin. “Thermal properties of graphene and nanostructured
carbon materials”. In: Nature Materials 10 (July 2011), p. 569. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/nmat3064http://10.0.4.14/nmat3064.
[5]
Luca Banszerus et al. “Ballistic Transport Exceeding 28 µm in CVD Grown
Graphene”. In: Nano Letters (2016). issn: 15306992. doi: 10 . 1021 / acs .
nanolett.5b04840.
[6]
Luca Banszerus et al. “Ultrahigh-mobility graphene devices from chemical va-
por deposition on reusable copper”. In: Science Advances (2015). issn: 23752548.
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1500222.
[7]
Wenzhong Bao et al. “Controlled ripple texturing of suspended graphene
and ultrathin graphite membranes”. In: Nature Nanotechnology 4 (July 2009),
p. 562. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2009.191http://10.0.4.
14/nnano.2009.191https://www.nature.com/articles/nnano.2009.191#
supplementary-information.
[8]
Ryan Beams, Luiz Gustavo Cançado, and Lukas Novotny. “Raman character-
ization of defects and dopants in graphene”. In: Journal of Physics Condensed
Matter 27.8 (2015). issn: 1361648X. doi: 10.1088/0953-8984/27/8/083002.
==PAGE:104==
96
Bibliography
[9]
Ashkan Behnam et al. “Transport in nanoribbon interconnects obtained from
graphene grown by chemical vapor deposition”. In: Nano Letters 12.9 (2012),
pp. 4424–4430. issn: 15306984. doi: 10.1021/nl300584r.
[10]
Julia Berashevich and Tapash Chakraborty. “Doping graphene by adsorption
of polar molecules at the oxidized zigzag edges”. In: Phys. Rev. B 81.20 (2010),
p. 205431. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.81.205431. url: https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.81.205431.
[11]
K. I. Bolotin. “Electronic transport in graphene: Towards high mobility”. In:
Graphene: Properties, Preparation, Characterisation and Devices (2014), pp. 199–
227. doi: 10.1533/9780857099334.3.199.
[12]
K I Bolotin et al. “Ultrahigh electron mobility in suspended graphene”. In:
Solid State Communications 146.9 (2008), pp. 351–355. issn: 0038-1098. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssc.2008.02.024. url: http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038109808001178.
[13]
Kirill I Bolotin et al. “Observation of the fractional quantum Hall effect in
graphene”. In: Nature 462 (Nov. 2009), p. 196. url: https://doi.org/10.
1038/nature08582http://10.0.4.14/nature08582https://www.nature.
com/articles/nature08582#supplementary-information.
[14]
F. Bonaccorso et al. “Graphene photonics and optoelectronics”. In: Nature
Photonics 4.9 (2010), pp. 611–622. issn: 17494885. doi: 10.1038/nphoton.
2010.186.
[15]
Mads Brandbyge. “Topic G Electronic properties and applications of Carbon
nano-materials”. In: (2017).
[16]
Kristen M. Burson et al. “Direct imaging of charged impurity density in com-
mon graphene substrates”. In: Nano Letters 13.8 (2013), pp. 3576–3580. issn:
15306984. doi: 10.1021/nl4012529.
[17]
Weiwei Cai et al. “Thermal Transport in Suspended and Supported Monolayer
Graphene Grown by Chemical Vapor Deposition”. In: Nano Letters 10.5 (May
2010), pp. 1645–1651. issn: 1530-6984. doi: 10.1021/nl9041966. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/nl9041966.
[18]
Yuan Cao et al. “Unconventional superconductivity in magic-angle graphene
superlattices”. In: Nature 556.7699 (2018), pp. 43–50. issn: 14764687. doi:
10.1038/nature26160. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature26160.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
97
[19]
Francois Cardarelli. 2800 Maraging Steel. 2008. url: http://www.matweb.
com/search/datasheet_print.aspx?matguid=de22e04486ff4598a26027abc48e6382.
[20]
A. H. Castro Neto et al. “The electronic properties of graphene”. In: Reviews
of Modern Physics 81.1 (2009), pp. 109–162. issn: 00346861. doi: 10.1103/
RevModPhys.81.109.
[21]
E. Chen. II . Thin Film Deposition General Characteristics of Thin Film
Deposition. Tech. rep. 2004.
[22]
J.-H. Chen et al. “Charged-impurity scattering in graphene”. In: Nature Physics
4 (Apr. 2008), p. 377. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys935http:
//10.0.4.14/nphys935https://www.nature.com/articles/nphys935#
supplementary-information.
[23]
Shanshan Chen et al. “Thermal conductivity of isotopically modified graphene”.
In: Nature Materials 11 (Jan. 2012), p. 203. url: https://doi.org/10.
1038/nmat3207http://10.0.4.14/nmat3207https://www.nature.com/
articles/nmat3207#supplementary-information.
[24]
Daniel R. Cooper et al. “Experimental review of graphene”. In: 2012 (2011).
doi: 10.5402/2012/501686. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1110.6557.
[25]
Nuno J.G. Couto et al. “Random strain fluctuations as dominant disorder
source for high-quality on-substrate graphene devices”. In: Physical Review X
4.4 (2014), pp. 1–14. issn: 21603308. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.4.041019.
[26]
Teresa Cusati et al. “Electrical properties of graphene-metal contacts”. In: Sci-
entific Reports 7.1 (2017), pp. 1–11. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-05069-7.
[27]
S Das Sarma et al. “Electronic transport in two-dimensional graphene”. eng. In:
Reviews of Modern Physics 83.2 (2011), pp. 407–470. issn: 15390756, 00346861.
doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.83.407.
[28]
“Conductance from transmission”. In: Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Sys-
tems. Ed. by Supriyo Datta. Cambridge Studies in Semiconductor Physics and
Microelectronic Engineering. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995,
pp. 48–116. isbn: 9780521599436. doi: DOI:10.1017/CBO9780511805776.003.
url: https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/electronic-transport-
in-mesoscopic-systems/conductance-from-transmission/145D7F82230A861B761C59F7
[29]
D. De Fazio et al. “High-mobility, wet-transferred graphene grown by chemical
vapor deposition”. In: 1 (2019), pp. 1–10. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.
01405.
==PAGE:106==
98
Bibliography
[30]
C R Dean et al. Boron nitride substrates for high quality graphene electronics.
Tech. rep.
[31]
C. R. Dean et al. “Boron nitride substrates for high-quality graphene electron-
ics”. In: Nature Nanotechnology (2010). issn: 17483395. doi: 10.1038/nnano.
2010.172.
[32]
Yuchen Du et al. “MoS2 Field-Effect transistors with graphene/metal hetero-
contacts”. eng. In: Ieee Electron Device Letters 35.5 (2014). issn: 15580563,
07413106. doi: 10.1109/LED.2014.2313340.
[33]
A. Fasolino, J. H. Los, and M. I. Katsnelson. “Intrinsic ripples in graphene”.
In: Nature Materials 6.11 (2007), pp. 858–861. issn: 14764660. doi: 10.1038/
nmat2011.
[34]
Andrea C. Ferrari and Denis M. Basko. Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool
for studying the properties of graphene. 2013. doi: 10.1038/nnano.2013.46.
[35]
Andrea C. Ferrari et al. “Science and technology roadmap for graphene, re-
lated two-dimensional crystals, and hybrid systems”. In: Nanoscale 7.11 (2015),
pp. 4598–4810. issn: 20403372. doi: 10.1039/c4nr01600a.
[36]
A D Franklin et al. “Double Contacts for Improved Performance of Graphene
Transistors”. In: IEEE Electron Device Letters 33.1 (2012), pp. 17–19. issn:
0741-3106 VO - 33. doi: 10.1109/LED.2011.2173154.
[37]
Amit Gahoi et al. “Contact resistance study of various metal electrodes with
CVD graphene”. In: Solid-State Electronics 125 (2016), pp. 234–239. issn:
00381101. doi: 10.1016/j.sse.2016.07.008. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.sse.2016.07.008.
[38]
Lene Gammelgaard. “2D Material Device Architectures: Process Optimisation
and Characterisation”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2016,
p. 119.
[39]
Lene Gammelgaard. Private conversation. 2019.
[40]
R. Geick, C. H. Perry, and G. Rupprecht. “Normal Modes in Hexagonal Boron
Nitride”. In: Physical Review 146.2 (1966), pp. 543–547.
[41]
A K Geim and I V Grigorieva. “Van der Waals heterostructures.” In: Nature
499.7459 (2013), pp. 419–25. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature12385.
url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23887427.
[42]
Filippo Giubileo and Antonio Di Bartolomeo. “The role of contact resistance in
graphene field-effect devices Filippo Giubileo”. In: (), pp. 1–70. issn: 13005804.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
99
[43]
Stijn Goossens et al. “graphene – CMOS integration”. In: Nature Photonics
11.6 (2017), pp. 366–371. issn: 1749-4885. doi: 10.1038/nphoton.2017.75.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2017.75.
[44]
Graphene-Info.com. Graphene Investing. url: https://www.graphene-info.
com/graphene-investing.
[45]
Sten Haastrup et al. “The Computational 2D Materials Database: high-throughput
modeling and discovery of atomically thin crystals”. In: 2D Materials 5.4 (Sept.
2018), p. 42002. doi: 10.1088/2053-1583/aacfc1. url: https://doi.org/
10.1088%2F2053-1583%2Faacfc1.
[46]
Wei Han et al. “Graphene spintronics”. In: Nature Nanotechnology 9 (Oct.
2014), p. 794. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2014.214http:
//10.0.4.14/nnano.2014.214.
[47]
Shahin Homaeigohar and Mady Elbahri. “Graphene membranes for water de-
salination”. In: Npg Asia Materials 9 (Aug. 2017), e427. url: https://doi.
org/10.1038/am.2017.135http://10.0.4.14/am.2017.135.
[48]
Yuan Huang et al. “Reliable Exfoliation of Large-Area High-Quality Flakes of
Graphene and Other Two-Dimensional Materials”. In: ACS Nano 9.11 (2015),
pp. 10612–10620. issn: 1936086X. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.5b04258.
[49]
Masa Ishigami et al. “Atomic structure of graphene on SiO 2 ”. eng. In: Nano
Letters 7.6 (2007), pp. 1643–1648. issn: 15306992, 15306984. doi: 10.1021/
nl070613a.
[50]
Nader Jalili and Karthik Laxminarayana. “A review of atomic force microscopy
imaging systems: application to molecular metrology and biological sciences”.
In: Mechatronics 14.8 (2004), pp. 907–945. issn: 0957-4158. doi: https://
doi.org /10. 1016/j.mechatronics.2004.04.005. url: http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957415804000455.
[51]
Bjarke S. Jessen et al. “Lithographic band structure engineering of graphene”.
In: Nature Nanotechnology 14.April (2019). issn: 17483395. doi: 10.1038/
s41565- 019- 0376- 3. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41565- 019-
0376-3.
[52]
M I Katsnelson, K S Novoselov, and A K Geim. “Chiral tunnelling and the
Klein paradox in graphene”. eng. In: Nature Physics 2.9 (2006), pp. 620–625.
issn: 17452481, 17452473. doi: 10.1038/nphys384.
==PAGE:108==
100
Bibliography
[53]
Khoong Hong Khoo et al. “Origin of Contact Resistance at Ferromagnetic
Metal-Graphene Interfaces”. In: ACS Nano 10.12 (2016), pp. 11219–11227.
issn: 1936086X. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.6b06286.
[54]
Geetika Khurana et al. “Temperature tuned defect induced magnetism in re-
duced graphene oxide”. In: Nanoscale 5.8 (2013), pp. 3346–3351. issn: 20403372,
20403364. doi: 10.1039/c3nr34291c.
[55]
Ki Kang Kim, Soo Min Kim, and Young Hee Lee. “A new horizon for hexagonal
boron nitride film”. In: Journal of the Korean Physical Society 64.10 (2014),
pp. 1605–1616. issn: 0374-4884. doi: 10.3938/jkps.64.1605.
[56]
O Klein. “Die Reflexion von Elektronen an einem Potentialsprung nach der
relativistischen Dynamik von Dirac”. In: Zeitschrift für Physik 53.3 (1929),
pp. 157–165. issn: 0044-3328. doi: 10.1007/BF01339716. url: https://doi.
org/10.1007/BF01339716.
[57]
Bernhard Kretz et al. “Atomistic Insight into the Formation of Metal-Graphene
One-Dimensional Contacts”. In: Physical Review Applied 10.2 (2018), p. 1.
issn: 23317019. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.10.024016. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.10.024016.
[58]
A. K. Kulkarni and L. C. Chang. “Electrical and structural characteristics
of chromium thin films deposited on glass and alumina substrates”. In: Thin
Solid Films 301.1-2 (1997), pp. 17–22. issn: 00406090. doi: 10.1016/S0040-
6090(96)09553-3.
[59]
R Landauer. “Spatial variation of currents and fields due to localized scatterers
in metallic conduction”. eng. In: Ibm Journal of Research and Development 32.3
(1988). issn: 21518556, 00188646. doi: 10.1147/rd.323.0306.
[60]
David Larousserie. Graphene - the new wonder material. 2013. url: https:
//www.theguardian.com/science/2013/nov/26/graphene- molecule-
potential-wonder-material.
[61]
Changgu Lee et al. “Measurement of the Elastic Properties and Intrinsic
Strength of Monolayer Graphene”. In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 321.July
(2008), pp. 385–388. issn: 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.1157996.
[62]
Gwan-hyoung Lee et al. “REPORTS High-Strength Chemical-Vapor – De-
posited Graphene and Grain Boundaries”. In: 340.May (2013), pp. 1073–1077.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
101
[63]
Wei Sun Leong, Hao Gong, and John T.L. Thong. “Low-contact-resistance
graphene devices with nickel-etched-graphene contacts”. In: ACS Nano 8.1
(2014), pp. 994–1001. issn: 19360851. doi: 10.1021/nn405834b.
[64]
Jun Liu. “Charging graphene for energy”. In: Nature Nanotechnology 9.10
(2014), pp. 739–741. issn: 1748-3387. doi: 10.1038/nnano.2014.226. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2014.226.
[65]
Yuanyue Liu, Alex Dobrinsky, and Boris I Yakobson. “Graphene Edge from
Armchair to Zigzag : The Origins of Nanotube Chirality ?” In: Physical Review
Letters 235502.December (2010), pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.
235502.
[66]
Timm Lohmann, Klaus Von Klitzing, and Jurgen H Smet. “Four-Terminal
magneto-Transport in graphene p-n junctions created by spatially selective
doping”. eng. In: Nano Letters 9.5 (2009), pp. 1973–1979. issn: 15306992,
15306984. doi: 10.1021/nl900203n.
[67]
Chun Hung Lui et al. “Ultraflat graphene”. In: Nature 462 (Nov. 2009), p. 339.
url: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature08569http : / / 10 . 0 . 4 . 14 /
nature08569https://www.nature.com/articles/nature08569#supplementary-
information.
[68]
David M.A. Mackenzie et al. “Quality assessment of graphene: Continuity,
uniformity, and accuracy of mobility measurements”. In: Nano Research 10.10
(2017), pp. 3596–3605. issn: 19980000. doi: 10.1007/s12274-017-1570-y.
[69]
Yuki Matsuda, Wei-qiao Deng, and William a Goddard Iii. “Quantum Mechan-
ics Predictions for Contact Resistance of “ End- contacted ” Metal – Graphene
and Metal – Nanotube Interfaces”. In: J. Phys Chem. C 114 (2010), pp. 1–6.
doi: 10.0.
[70]
Paul L. McEuen et al. “Impermeable Atomic Membranes from Graphene
Sheets”. In: Nano Letters 8.8 (2008), pp. 2458–2462. issn: 1530-6984. doi:
10.1021/nl801457b.
[71]
N. D. Mermin and H. Wagner. “Absence of ferromagnetism or antiferromag-
netism in one- or two-dimensional isotropic Heisenberg models”. In: Physical
Review Letters (1966). issn: 00319007. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.17.1133.
==PAGE:110==
102
Bibliography
[72]
Jannik C Meyer et al. “The structure of suspended graphene sheets”. In: Nature
446 (Mar. 2007), p. 60. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05545http:
//10.0.4.14/nature05545https://www.nature.com/articles/nature05545#
supplementary-information.
[73]
C. Neumann et al. “Raman spectroscopy as probe of nanometre-scale strain
variations in graphene”. In: Nature Communications (2015). issn: 20411723.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms9429.
[74]
K S Novoselov et al. “Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films”.
In: ().
[75]
K. S. Novoselov et al. “Two-dimensional gas of massless Dirac fermions in
graphene”. In: Nature 438.7065 (2005), pp. 197–200. issn: 00280836. doi: 10.
1038/nature04233.
[76]
Susumu Okada. “Energetics of nanoscale graphene ribbons: Edge geometries
and electronic structures”. In: Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and Ma-
terials Physics 77.4 (2008), pp. 1–4. issn: 10980121. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.
77.041408.
[77]
Rachel Oliver. Atomic force microscopy. doi: 10.1002/0470014229.ch1. url:
https://www.doitpoms.ac.uk/tlplib/afm/index.php.
[78]
PatseerPro. Patent Landscape Report on Graphene. Tech. rep. 2017, p. 30. url:
https://patseer.com/2017/04/patent-landscape-report-on-graphene-
by-patseer-pro/?source=blog_panalysis.
[79]
R S Pease. “An X-ray study of boron nitride”. In: Acta Crystallographica 5.3
(1952), pp. 356–361. doi: 10.1107/S0365110X52001064. url: https://doi.
org/10.1107/S0365110X52001064.
[80]
Vasili Perebeinos and Phaedon Avouris. “Inelastic scattering and current satu-
ration in graphene”. In: Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and Materials
Physics 81.19 (2010), pp. 1–8. issn: 10980121. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.81.
195442.
[81]
Filippo Pizzocchero. “Graphene Electrodes: Universal architecture for 2D elec-
tronics”. PhD thesis. 2014.
[82]
Filippo Pizzocchero et al. “The hot pick-up technique for batch assembly of
van der Waals heterostructures”. In: ().
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
103
[83]
D. G. Purdie et al. “Cleaning Interfaces in Layered Materials Heterostruc-
tures”. In: Nature Communications 2018 (2018), pp. 1–12. issn: 0021-9304.
doi: arXiv:1803.00912v1. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.00912.
[84]
D. G. Purdie et al. “Cleaning Interfaces in Layered Materials Heterostructures”.
In: (2018). doi: arXiv:1803.00912v1.
[85]
J. Robertson. “High dielectric contstant oxides”. In: The European Physi-
cal Journal, Applied Physics 28 (2004), pp. 265–291. doi: 10.1051/epjap:
2004206.
[86]
Marco Romagnoli et al. “Graphene-based integrated photonics for next-generation
datacom and telecom”. eng. In: Nature Reviews Materials 3.10 (2018), pp. 392–
414. issn: 20588437. doi: 10.1038/s41578-018-0040-9.
[87]
Frank Schwierz. “Graphene transistors”. In: Nature Nanotechnology 5 (May
2010), p. 487. url: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nnano . 2010 . 89http :
//10.0.4.14/nnano.2010.89.
[88]
E K Sichel et al. “Heat capacity and thermal conductivity of hexagonal py-
rolytic boron nitride”. eng. In: Physical Review B (solid State) 13.10 (1976).
issn: 05562805. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.13.4607.
[89]
Sigma Aldrich. Thermal transitions of homopolymers. url: https://www.
sigmaaldrich.com/technical-documents/articles/materials-science/
polymer-science/thermal-transitions-of-homopolymers.html.
[90]
Joshua T. Smith et al. “Reducing contact resistance in graphene devices through
contact area patterning”. In: ACS Nano 7.4 (2013), pp. 3661–3667. issn: 19360851.
doi: 10.1021/nn400671z.
[91]
R. Tenne and A.K. Zettl. “Nanotubes from Inorganic Materials.” In: In: Dres-
selhaus M.S., Dresselhaus G., Avouris P. (eds) Carbon Nanotubes. Topics
in Applied Physics, vol 80. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/3-540-39947-X{\_}5.
[92]
Joachim Dahl Thomsen et al. Suppression of Intrinsic Roughness in Suspended
van der Waals Heterostructures. eng. 2017.
[93]
Mads Troelsgård. High temperature cleaning of van der Waals heterostructures.
Tech. rep. Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[94]
F Tuinstra and J L Koenig. “Raman Spectrum of Graphite”. In: The Journal
of Chemical Physics 53.3 (Aug. 1970), pp. 1126–1130. issn: 0021-9606. doi:
10.1063/1.1674108. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1674108.
==PAGE:112==
104
Bibliography
[95]
C Vogt and A Matthiessen. “IV. On the influence of temperature of the electric
conducting powers of metal-alloys.” In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London 154 (1863). url: https://doi.org/10.1098/rstl.1864.
0004.
[96]
P. R. Wallace. “The band theory of Graphite”. In: Physical Review 71.9 (1947),
pp. 622–634. issn: 18806023. doi: 10.2208/jsceja.64.452.
[97]
L. Wang et al. “One-dimensional electrical contact to a two-dimensional ma-
terial”. In: Science (2013). issn: 10959203. doi: 10.1126/science.1244358.
[98]
Xinran Wang et al. “N-Doping of Graphene Through Electrothermal Reactions
with Ammonia”. In: Science 324.5928 (May 2009), 768 LP –771. doi: 10.1126/
science.1170335. url: http://science.sciencemag.org/content/324/
5928/768.abstract.
[99]
Yanqing Wu et al. “State-of-the-Art Graphene High-Frequency Electronics”.
In: Nano Letters 12.6 (June 2012), pp. 3062–3067. issn: 1530-6984. doi: 10.
1021/nl300904k. url: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl300904k.
[100]
Fengnian Xia et al. “The origins and limits of metal-graphene junction resis-
tance”. In: Nature Nanotechnology 6.3 (2011), pp. 179–184. issn: 17483395.
doi: 10.1038/nnano.2011.6.
[101]
Jiamin Xue et al. “Scanning tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy of ultra-
flat graphene on hexagonal boron nitride”. In: Nature Materials 10 (Feb. 2011),
p. 282. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2968http://10.0.4.14/
nmat2968https://www.nature.com/articles/nmat2968#supplementary-
information.
[102]
Megan A. Yamoah et al. “High-Velocity Saturation in Graphene Encapsulated
by Hexagonal Boron Nitride”. In: ACS Nano 11.10 (2017), pp. 9914–9919. issn:
1936086X. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.7b03878.
[103]
Matthew Yankowitz, Jiamin Xue, and B. J. Leroy. “Graphene on hexagonal
boron nitride”. In: Journal of Physics Condensed Matter 26.30 (2014). issn:
1361648X. doi: 10.1088/0953-8984/26/30/303201.
[104]
G. Yu et al. “Graphene, related two-dimensional crystals, and hybrid systems
for energy conversion and storage”. In: Science 347.6217 (2015), pp. 1246501–
1246501. issn: 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.1246501.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
105
[105]
K V Zakharchenko, M I Katsnelson, and Annalisa Fasolino. “Melting tem-
perature of graphene”. In: 045415.January (2015), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevB.91.045415.
[106]
Wenjuan Zhu et al. “Carrier scattering, mobilities, and electrostatic potential
in monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer graphene”. In: Physical Review B - Con-
densed Matter and Materials Physics 80.23 (2009), pp. 1–8. issn: 10980121.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.80.235402.
==PAGE:114==
