==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering
Hydrodynamic Deformability-based
Classification of Fetal and Adult Red Blood
Cells Using Deep Learning
Rasmus Alkestrup Eskesen (s133997)
Theis Friis (s133993)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Fetomaternal haemorrhage is a very dangerous and potentially lethal condition, char-
acterised by loss of blood from a fetus into the maternal circulation during pregnancy
and/or delivery. It is often asymptomatic and therefore rarely detected in time, and
current diagnostic tools used for screening are both time-consuming and expensive.
In this thesis we investigate the possibility of using deep learning as a tool for differ-
entiating between fetal and adult red blood cells. We present a solution that involves
localising, masking and classifying individual cells within a sequence of images con-
taining cells of both origins. The images documents several experiments where the
cells are passed through a narrow channel that forces deformation of the cells, allow-
ing for analysis of said deformation as an addition to more traditional features.
The solution is based on state of the art methods for object detection and classifi-
cation as well as instance segmentation. A deep learning model is trained on over
70000 images containing the two types of red blood cells, and both tested and vali-
dated on separate sets of 13000 and 9000 images respectively. The result of the final
classification yields an accuracy of 70.43% which is a large improvement over results
from previous work on the same problem. Furthermore masks have been predicted
by our model for 100 cell sequences, from which features have been extracted, and
used for training of a Support Vector Machine. This approach yields an accuracy of
72% on the classification task, which is slightly higher than that of the deep learning
classification.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark and submitted in fulfilment of the
requirements for acquiring the degree of Master of Science in Computer Science and
Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 2, 2019
Rasmus Alkestrup Eskesen (s133997) Theis Friis (s133993)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisors Anders Nymark Christensen and Tommy
Sonne Alstrøm for offering this project to us and guiding us through difficult tasks,
and propose papers, that could help us expand our understanding of deep learning
methods.
We would also like to thank our supervisor Kirstine Berg-Sørensen for providing us
with data, provide an understanding of the experiment, and the problem.
A gratitude should also be expressed towards Frederik Wiedenbein Kok and Boris
Sebastian Nordmann with whom we had supervision. By having a collective supervi-
sion with another group of students, we got to see other takes on a similar problem
and could share discussions on how to solve different problems.
A special thanks should go to Juan José Rubio Guillamón and Lukasz Tomasz Bi-
enias, who helped us with explanations and suggestions, when we got stuck in our
implementation.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Symbols and
Abbreviations
In order to improve readability and reduce unnecessary redundancy, frequently used
concepts, notions and terms such as Red Blood Cell and Convolutional Neural Net-
work will henceforth be abbreviated after its first mention (e.g.
RBC and CNN
respectively). Abbreviations used extensively through multiple different sections, is
listed below.
RBC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Red Blood Cell
CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Convolutional Neural Network
R-CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Region-based Convolutional Neural Network
ResNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Residual Network
RPN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Region Proposal Network
FMH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Fetomaternal Haemorrhage
SVM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Support Vector Machine
RoI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Region of Interest
IoU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Intersection over Union
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Symbols and Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Original Experiment and Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Previous Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Theory
13
2.1
Neural Networks for image classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Setup and Data
21
3.1
Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Data Format
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Data Condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Materials and Methods
29
4.1
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Image Manipulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Mask R-CNN Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Experiments and Results
55
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5.1
Backbone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
Mask R-CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6
Discussion
71
6.1
Reflection on Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Further Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Conclusion
83
A Results of Backbone Tests
87
B Results of Box and Mask Predictions
91
C Software libraries and Config.py
95
D Feature Maps
99
E Mask R-CNN Test Results
103
Bibliography
105
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The motivation for this project is the same, as for the thesis by Freja Høier[1], as
well as the thesis by Lise Aagesen[2], upon which the former was based. While their
approach was primarily from a physical and biological point of view, the core problem
is identical to ours, and their experiments has been the source of the data we have
had to work with. Physics, biology and computer science, are all fields of science,
thus their scientific approaches and interpretations of the practical problem as a data
modelling problem is still very relevant, regardless of the subfields in which they were
working and the specific methods they were using to achieve their results.
Biological Perspective
Fetomaternal haemorrhage (also known as fetal-maternal haemorrhage) (FMH) is a
very dangerous - potentially lethal condition, that is often asymptomatic, meaning
that it is rarely detected in time.
It is specifically characterised by loss of blood
from the fetus into the maternal circulation, which is caused by a disruption of the
placental barrier [3, 4]. An insignificant haemorrhage of fetal blood into the mater-
nal circulation during pregnancy and/or delivery, is actually very common, and is
rarely detected as a result [4], but in some cases (0.3-0.4% [3, 5]) this haemorrhage
is significant enough, that it results in a severely anemic infant, a stillbirth or even
demise of the fetus [3, 4]. FMH is said to be severe when the bleeding exceeds 20-30
mL/kg for the fetus [6, 7]. The symptoms of fetal anemia as a result of FMH, include
decreased fetal activity and abnormal heart rate, both of which are relatively common
symptoms, and are therefore unclear indications of a potential FMH [6]. Additionally,
rhesus-negative women are especially at risk of rhesus-immunisation following a FMH
of rhesus-positive blood, which causes a maternal development of antibodies that can
affect the health of subsequent rhesus-positive pregnancies [7].
Currently, the diagnosis of FMH is either time-consuming, expensive and/or inaccu-
rate [8, 9], meaning that most cases are uncaught in time, since it can be especially
difficult to diagnose it at the time of the event, due to the non-specific nature of the
symptoms. Accurate quantification of fetal red blood cells in the maternal circulation
is therefore imperative, when attempting to diagnose the severity of the case. How-
ever using current state of the art diagnostic tools, such as the Kleihauer-Betke test
[10], or even more recent methods using flow cytometry [11], this is practically im-
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
possible to achieve within the desired time-frame, or too expensive and complicated
respectively. Flow cytometry is however, regardless of the complexity and cost, the
current state of the art method for diagnosing and quantifying FMH, as it has proven
to be the most reliable test [9].
Due to the significant downsides to the currently utilised methods, a need for a sim-
pler, quick, inexpensive and reliable method for diagnosing and screening for FMH is
very present.
1.2
Objective
We want to explore the possibility of classifying fetal and adults red blood cells using
deep learning in a hydrodynamic environment, in order to determine the concentration
of fetal red blood cells within a sample from the maternal circulation. Our goal is to
achieve an accuracy of classification that is significantly higher, than that of current
state of the art methods, without exceeding the practical limitations, such as time
and more tangible resources. The higher the accuracy of the classification, the better
the result.
While we do expect the red blood cells to have a small differences in their physical
structure, depending on whether they come from an adult or a fetus, such as in their
size [12, 13], one important part of deep learning is feature abstraction - we should
not care whether one type of cell is bigger than another, but rather focus on teaching
the networks to learn it themselves.
We believe that deep learning is the future, and we want to show its potential within
medical science by using its power on a topical and relevant issue, where it can lit-
erally help save lives. Differentiating between adult and fetal red blood cells, is an
extremely difficult task, and previous attempts at a quick and inexpensive solution
has failed, as we will discuss further in section 1.4.4.
In a broader perspective, this method could potentially be extended to similar prob-
lems, such as classification of other cell groups, which could potentially evolve it into
a tool for diagnosing certain types of cancer.
1.2.1
Primary Hypotheses
To concretize the goal further, we have formulated 2 primary hypotheses that we want
to test, in order to satisfy the overall goal.
1. Using methods within deep learning for classification, the accuracy of the cells
classified inside the tube, will be higher than the accuracy of the cells classified
outside the tube.
2. Using deep learning for classifying red blood cells, the prediction accuracy will
be higher, than for more traditional machine learning techniques, used on the
same sort of data, such as an SVM-classifier.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Objective
3
First of all, we predict that the classification of the blood cells will be difficult to
perform in an environment without any deformation of the cells, due to the limiting
differences between the two classes of red blood cells. Following the conclusions of
prior work done by Høier[1] and Aagesen[2], regarding the impact of the pressure,
flow and spatial constraints on the physical structure of the cells within the tube,
we expect the conditions within the tube to have a positive effect on the results of
the classification. More specifically, we predict that classification using one or several
methods within the field of deep learning will yield a higher accuracy when applied
on deformed red blood cells, compared to that of red blood cells relatively unaffected
by the above-mentioned factors.
Secondly, we expect a higher accuracy of classification than that achieved by prior
work on both exactly the same experiment, such as the results of [1], but also similar
experiments, to an extend that barely includes the results of [2]. Our vision involves
a plan to improve upon previous results achieved by solutions to similar problems. It
is important to note, that the nature of this particular experiment, from which our
data is collected, makes the classification task significantly more difficult than the
average image classification task. This due to the quality of the data and the amount
of variation in characteristics between the classes.
We do not expect to achieve
better results than most of the solutions to image-based classification problems done
previously. Instead we expect to achieve better results than any current solution to
an image-based classification problem, that resembles ours in its complexity and with
the same amount of available information. Both [1] and [2] documents projects done
in 2018, and are done with the state of the art, at that time, in mind. By proving
that an implementation of a deep learning architecture can achieve significantly better
results, than that of those particular solutions using state of the art image analysis
and even machine learning techniques, we can then conclude that our deep learning
solution is an improvement over those techniques, when dealing with this sort of data.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.3
Original Experiment and Setup
While the original experiments for this problem was done by Aagesen [2], the exper-
imental setup and resulting data used for this project stems from the experiments
done by Høier [1].
The physical setup consists of a high-speed camera recording a chip through a micro-
scope. The chip consists of a bunch of channels and an external pump generates a
consistent laminar flow through the channels. The samples being pumped through
the chip, have a high concentration of red blood cells, as the only cells present. The
channels are 150 µm long and 5 µm wide at the narrowest point. In reference, a red
blood cell has a diameter of 7.5-8.7 µm and a thickness of 1.7-2.2 µm [14], meaning
that the surface stress from the channel walls will force deformation of the cells as
they will inevitably be sucked though the channel due to the pressure created by the
pump. Figure 1.1 shows a typical image from the collected data. Here the channel
inlet and outlet, as well as the channel itself can be seen. In this particular image, a
cell is currently on its way through the channel, and is deformed due to the height
restriction of the channel.
Figure 1.1: A typical image from the dataset, showing the channel, including its inlet
and outlet, as well as a cell traversing through the channel. The cell is deformed due
to the height restriction of the channel of which it is being sucked through.
1.4
Previous Work
Previous work in this area has focused on using more traditional image analysis
techniques for feature extraction, creating a feature vector that could be used for
classification via a classifier such as logistic regression or an SVM.
In this section we will describe what different methods has been used for the analysis of
this problem and what features where found to have an influence on the classification
of the cells. This is done for the purpose of creating a better understanding of the
problem, and to present any results, which we can use as a comparison for our own
results.
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Previous Work
5
1.4.1
Classical image processing for localisation of cells
1.4.1.1
Background Subtraction
In the thesis by Aagesen [2] it is described that frames are sorted into two different
types of frames - those that contain a cell and those that does not. This is done to re-
duce the amount of frames that needs to be used for the analysis and the background
frames can be used for background subtraction. By using background subtraction,
Aagesen manages to separate the cell, creating a grey scale image containing only the
cell and a small amount of noise. The new images are then binarised, and here it
becomes clear that they do indeed contain noise, prompting for a Connected Compo-
nent Analysis (CCA) to be carried out discarding all objects in the image that has a
total area of less than 20 pixels.
1.4.1.2
Connected Component Analysis (CCA)
CCA is a traditional image analysis technique for extracting and labelling regions of
pixels that are connected with each other in some way. How it is determined when
they are connected, depends on the definition of connectivity used. An illustration
of CCA can be seen in figure 1.2. In [2], CCA is used on binary images with the
pixels comprising the cells representing the foreground. Aagesen uses CCA to discard
objects that are thought to be noise in the images.
Each object is a connected
component, and each connected component is analysed to check whether it is in fact
a cell or just some noise in the image. Another implementation of CCA can be seen
in [1]. Here the algorithm is also used for cell segmentation to detect the cells as
true objects and remove unwanted noise, only with slightly different results due to
the different images.
Figure 1.2: An illustration showing an example of CCA with two different definitions
of connectivity. Figure 4.3 from [2].
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.4.1.3
Morphological Operations and filling objects
Morphological operation are performed on the images in order to close, disconnecting
parts of cells.
In order to keep the circularity of the cells, a 3 × 3 filter is used
for the morphological operation. The morphological operation used is known as a
morphological closing, which is a dilation followed by an erosion. The dilation with
a 3 × 3 filter looks at every pixel, and if the pixel in the centre of the filter is a
foreground pixel, the 8 surrounding pixels are all turned into foreground pixels, thus
dilating the object. The erosion works in a somewhat opposite manner, as a centre
pixel of the filter is only classified as a foreground pixel if all of the surrounding 8
pixels are also foreground pixels. The idea behind the morphological closing is seen
in figure 1.3
Figure 1.3: Morphological closing consists of a dilation followed by an erosion.
Here shown on a binary image with filter size 3 × 3 [15].
The closing operation closes the disconnected parts of the cells, but the core of some
cells are still classified as background pixels as the core is very close in colour to the
background images. This is actually true for both Aagesens [2] dataset and our own
dataset. Because of this a filling operation is used, in order to classify all background
pixels, that are completely surrounded by foreground pixels, as foreground pixels
themselves.
1.4.2
Feature extraction
Feature extraction is what we want to abstract from when using deep learning. Fea-
tures deemed relevant and descriptive based on the feature selection technique used,
are extracted for each object, which can then be used for classification.
In [2], the focus is on the morphology and deformation of the cells when they are
passing through the channel. Some of the features are simply based on the outline of
the cells at specified positions, all of which are based on the CCA of binary versions
of the images. Other features are based on the pixel intensities of the cells in an
attempt to relate their two-dimensional representation to a three-dimensional shape.
The final features represent the velocity of the cells at specific parts of the channel.
Each cell (object) would therefore have a feature vector associated with it.
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Previous Work
7
All features deemed important for the problem presented in [2], and ultimately anal-
ysed, are circularity, eccentricity, diameter, vertical position, gradient, symmetry
and velocity for all cells. All features are analysed at four different positions, where
a different selection of these metrics are analysed for each position, meaning that not
all features are relevant for all positions. For [1] a similar feature vector was used,
modified for the new boundary conditions. The features of interest for this particular
project, was vertical position, orientation, area, circularity, diameter, symmetry, gra-
dient and eccentricity. The features are recorded at seven different positions, with
none of the features being recorded at all seven (e.g. vertical position is only relevant
at the very beginning and end of the sequence).
1.4.3
Classification
The task of classifying the red blood cells is the final step of the process, as it can
ultimately predict which class a cell belongs to; whether it is from an adult or a fetus.
Each observation comprises one or more input variable (the features from before) of
either continuous or categorical origin. The values of each observation’s features are
what determine the outcome of the classification. The output variable of the clas-
sification is categorical, as it takes only one of a limited number of possible values
representing each class. In order to perform the classification, a classifier needs to be
defined. The classifier is an algorithm that implements the classification. The goal of
the classifier is to identify a set of rules or functions, called decision boundaries that,
based on the features, can categorise the data into each class.
In [2] supervised machine learning is used to map functions between a number of
features and a response variable from a dataset with a known response to every set
of feature observations. This is done by training a prediction model on a training
dataset. These models are then subsequently validated on a previously unseen test
dataset. This is essentially the core of supervised machine learning in general, but
as we are dealing with a classification problem here, this task is concretised to iden-
tifying decision boundaries for the best possible separation of classes. The objective
is to train a prediction model to be able to classify new observations whose class is
unknown. Many of the issues that arise when dealing with the training of supervised
learning models, are also very relevant for the training of deep learning models. One
of the most important of these issues, is that of overfitting, which we will get into
in much greater details when describing our own solution later on. A key take-away
however, is that you want your model to be as general as possible, for as consistent
predictions of previously unseen and unclassified data as possible.
Classifier
The choice of classifier is imperative for a good classification.
When deciding on
a classifier, metrics such as the number of features, the number of classes and the
amount of data are essential.
For this particular problem, [2] uses logistic regression as the classifier, as we are deal-
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
ing with a binomial classification problem. For logistic regression, the classification
is based on modelling the probability of the response variable assuming one over the
other. The classes are denoted ”0” and ”1” and the modelling is based on predicting
the probability of an observation belong to class ”1”. Since the probability has to be
between 0 and 1, it can be modelled using a standard logistic function given by:
f(t) =
1
1 + e−t
(1.1)
where t denotes the linear combinations of features. Given a single feature x and β
as the chosen coefficient of x, 1.1 can be rewritten, as an example of a simple logistic
function modelling the probability P of response variable y belonging to class ”1”.
P(y = 1|x) =
1
1 + e−α+βx
(1.2)
A logit transformation of the logistic probability function would result in a new model
that maps the linear combination of features and the log-odds of the output being of
class ”1”. A logit transformation of 1.2 gives:
ln
P(y = 1|x)
1 −P(y = 1|x) = α + βx
(1.3)
representing the odds of the output variable y belonging to class ”1”. For logistic
regression, the logit function is the algorithm that is trained to fit a training set and
gives the resulting model for classification. The output of the model itself is a log-
odds value, meaning that for classification, the response is transformed back from the
log-odds to a probability value. The probability is then evaluated based on a thresh-
old value after which the actual classification is performed. Typically, the threshold
is 0.5, meaning that P(y = 1) ≥0.5 would classify as the observation being classified
as belonging to class ”1”. Similarly P(y = 1) < 0.5 would classify as belonging to
class ”0”.
Model coefficients
Finally the model coefficients, that determine the effect of each feature on the output,
has to be estimated. This is done using supervised learning on observations where
the class is already known. For logistic regression, estimating these coefficients is
done using the iterative method of maximising the likelihood function, where the set
of parameters for which the probability of the observed data is greatest is identified.
The likelihood function for a two-class logistic regression is given by:
L(⃗β) =
n
∏
i=1
p(xi)yi(1 −p(xi))1−yi
(1.4)
where n is the number of observations and ⃗β is the coefficient vector with a length
corresponding to the number of features. In order to determine the individual roles
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Previous Work
9
of the features, coefficient estimations can be evaluated to analyse the effect of the
features on the output. The exponentiated value of a coefficient expresses the change
of the odds of an observation belonging to class ”1”, if the feature is increased while
all others are held constant. The significance of features are expressed by a p-value
indicating the probability of each feature not having an effect on the response. A low
p-value suggests that a feature is significant in modelling the output. As mentioned
earlier, overfitting can be a big issue when dealing with models like these. In order
to reduce the risk of overfitting, and thus create a more robust and general model,
the model is simplified by removing one or more features.
Usually this involves
eliminating the least significant feature, fir a new model without it, and then evaluate
the remaining features in the new model. Another approach is to apply regularisation
to the model. In [2] Lasso regularisation is applied for feature selection. For this
approach, the ℓ1 norm of the feature coefficients is added to the loss function as the
regularisation term:
λR(f) = λ||⃗β||1 = λ
n
∑
i=1
|βi|
(1.5)
The value of ￿corresponds to the restriction put on the coefficients to obtain a value
lower than a specified limit. A large ￿corresponds to the specified limit being low.
This restriction often leads to one or more coefficients being set to zero for Lasso
regularisation.
1.4.4
Results of previous work
Considering the results of [2], a total of 39422 cells from 101 adult and 59 fetal sam-
ples were registered as part of the experiments. More specifically, 10823 fetal and
28599 adult red blood cells were registered and analysed, however this quantity only
accounted for about 60% of the cells appearing in recordings, as the remaining cells
were not segmented properly. Following the results of the feature selection from above,
the following six features are deemed the most discriminating. The cell diameter at
position 1, eccentricity at position 4, a ratio of the eccentricity at position 4 com-
pared to that of position 3, the velocity at both position 1 and 2, as well as the ratio
between those two.
The first interesting result, is that with a confidence of 99% (using a two-sample
t-test), fetal red blood cells are larger in diameter than adult ones. The means of the
diameters show, that fetal cells are 11.09% larger than adult cells.
The results of an analysis of the eccentricity at position 4, shows that the adult cells
have a higher value than the fetal cells. This might mean, that fetal red blood cells
are more susceptible to deformability, but no final conclusions are drawn, due to a
lack of further experiments.
For the velocity of the cells, it is concluded that fetal cells travel faster than adult
cells at most positions, excluding just before entering the channel. For this particular
experiment, it seems that adult red blood cells are more easily deformed and thus
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Introduction
prepped for entering the channel, but once entered, the fetal cells pick up the pace
and rush through the rest faster than that of adult cells.
From reading [2], the predictive performance of the logistic regression classifier trained
on two different sets, both with and without regularisation, is quantised as accuracies,
for which all four lie between 95.71-96.02%.
However, these results are non-comparable due to an issue with the data collection
that is not mentioned in the thesis, but was later presented in the defence of the
thesis. The data collected from adults and the data collected from fetuses, were not
done in the same way. The details about what happened are not entirely clear, but
the point is, that the recordings of the data for each cell type was setup differently,
to a degree which meant that the image composition and physical metrics are more
discriminating than the actual features of the cells. This ultimately means, that the
final results for the experiment are unusable, as the classifier ends up discriminating
from the image composition rather than cell features.
For the results of [1], a total of 29068 cells from 114 adult and 60 fetal donors. The
total amount is comprised of 18693 cells from adults and 10375 from fetuses. For
this particular case, these numbers are calculated after segmentation, and all these
cells are therefore registered and used for the analysis. However, some samples are
removed later on due to erroneous fluctuations. This leaves 83 adult and 47 fetal sam-
ples comprised of 15972 adult and 8528 fetal cells, summing up to a total of 24500.
The most discriminating features following these results, are diameter, circularity,
area, gradient, eccentricity, and symmetry. For the mean diameter variation, where
[2] found the difference to be 11.09%, which is very close to that of the theoretical
value of 11% [12, 13], [1] finds that this value to be 4.8%. While it is possible to see
some sort of discriminating factor between populations of cells, a concrete accuracy
of the classification is not given, as it is finally concluded, that it is unable to classify
individual cells all together.
==PAGE:23==
1.5 Thesis Outline
11
1.5
Thesis Outline
For the purpose of giving the reader at better idea of what to expect from the further
reading, a brief outline of the remaining chapters will now be given.
Following this introduction to the project, where we have established what we want
to do, what has already been done, and why we want to do it in the first place, we
will initiate the process of describing how we have done it, by elaborating on the
theory behind our solution.
This is done with the intent of giving the reader a
better understanding of how the fundamentals work, and ultimately prepare them for
the technical details of our implementation. This chapter simultaneously outlines the
state of the art regarding the approach we want to take.
As a final step before actually describing our implementation, the setup and data
is described.
This is done in order to give the full context to the solution, and
ultimately to explain why certain decision were made when designing the solution.
This includes a detailed description of both the development environment, the data
format, an outline of our assumptions about the data, and finally a description of the
condition of the data.
At this point, the reader should have a good understanding of the problem we are
trying to solve including the motivation behind this entire project, the scope of the
product, the state of the art, as well as the available data and limitations for a
potential solution. This is necessary for a proper understanding of the materials
and methods used. In this chapter we step through each part of the entire solution,
describing every part in great details. It starts of with data preparation, where the
data described in the previous chapter, is prepared for the later stages. Next up is
the image manipulation, where it is described how the images are augmented, either
to make them better suited for later tasks, such as segmentation and classification, or
to improve training of network in which they are loaded. The key part of this chapter
is a description of the entire Mask R-CNN architecture, and our own implementation
of it. This is followed by sections describing how the networks are both trained and
tested.
Immediately following the materials and methods, we take a look at the experiments
and results of the solution. This chapter outlines any secondary hypotheses about
the performance of the solution and describes which experiments have been performed,
including the rationale behind them and an objective presentation of key results.
Naturally, following the results, comes a discussion where we take a more subjective
approach, and start interpreting the results presented in the previous chapter. This
reflection on the results, is then followed by a section rounding off any additional
thoughts, before going into potential future work, where we outline what the next
steps would have been.
Finally the thesis is rounded off by a conclusion where we reflect on the entire
process, summarise the work that was done, and link the final results to the objective
with respect to previous work.
==PAGE:24==
12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Neural Networks for image classification
In resent years, the use of Neural Networks for all sorts of machine learning tasks
has seen a rise due to the advancements made in hardware and because of the easy
access to big data provided by the internet. This is also the case, when it comes
to classification of images, where neural networks perform significantly better on a
lot of classification tasks.
In 2012 AlexNet won the ImageNet challenge using a
Convolutional Neural Network for classification [16]. After AlexNet won the ImageNet
challenge, image classification using neural nets has become increasingly advanced, as
more people have entered the field of research.
In this section we will dive a little deeper into the structure of a neural network, still
keeping our focus on image classification. The idea behind deep learning is to force
a network to learn important features in a dataset. In traditional machine learning,
an engineer would extract features from data and train a machine learning model
on these features in order to get results. By using Deep neural networks the feature
extraction can be done by the network itself.
2.1.1
Feature map extraction using CNNs
Extracting features in an image using neural networks is done using Convolutional
Neural Networks, also known as CNNs.
A CNN mostly consists of convolutional
layers, pooling layers and often ends out in fully connected layers. The convolutional
layers work much like applying a filter in vanilla image analysis. By sliding a filter
across the entire input image, convolution is performed, returning a smaller image
also known as a feature map. In a convolutional layer multiple filters are applied to
the input image and the amount of feature maps returned by the convolutional layer
is equal to the amount of filters used. These filters consists of a set of weights, that
will be updated during backpropagation, thus the feature maps will change over time.
The filter size is arbitrary and can be selected as wanted, but standards are either
3 × 3 or 5 × 5.
By stacking convolutional layers, feeding the output feature maps as input images to
the next layer of convolutions, we can build up features, as the upper levels will detect
simple local features such as horizontal and vertical lines etc. while the deeper will
detect the more complex features, such as a red blood cell. There are different ways
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theory
of subsampling an input, either by performing strided convolutions or by performing
pooling on the output of a convolutional layer. A visualisation of a typical CNN is
shown in figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: A typical CNN, with convolutional layers, pooling layers and fully con-
nected layers [17].
Strided convolution
When performing strided convolutions, the filter simply skips one or more pixels,
when sliding across the input image.
By skipping pixels, the output will become
smaller than the input image, and has thus become a subsample of this input. When
performing convolutions in Pytorch, we already do some strided convolution as e.g.
a filter of 3 × 3 would start by looking at the pixel with position (1, 1), so for a
picture of 32 × 32 with stride 1, would give an output feature map of 30 × 30 after
the convolutional operation. If we want to avoid this, we can add padding of zeros
around the border of the input image, forcing the convolutional layer to start at the
pixel with position (0, 0), and creating a feature map of the same size as the input
image.
Pooling
Pooling is applied between some of the convolutional layers, in order to downsample
the features, keeping only the most important information. This is done to reduce
the amount of parameters, minimising the risk of overfitting and done so the deeper
layers of the CNN can detect high level features. Max-pooling is one of the most
common ways of pooling and it works much like a filter, by sliding a window across
an image, but unlike the filter, the pooling window pools the highest value within the
sliding window and returns it to an output. This is visualised in figure 2.2.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Neural Networks for image classification
15
Figure 2.2: Figure showing Max-pooling with a 2 × 2 kernel and a stride of 2[18].
There are multiple deep convolutional networks that have been proposed for image
classification over the last few years. Some of the more known ones are the VGG-
network and the Residual Network (ResNet).
We will go into more depth of the
architecture of the ResNet in section 4.3.2, as we have chosen this to be the backbone
of our implementation.
2.1.2
Gradient Descent and Backpropagation
Gradient Descent
A neural network learns through an optimisation technique called Gradient Descent.
By computing the gradients of the weights according to the loss, we can take steps in
order to minimise the loss. When ever we take a step, we compute new gradients and
find the steepest descent from that point in the graph, and then we take a new step
in that direction. By recurrently computing the gradient and updating the weights
accordingly, the network model moves towards a global minimum of the loss function.
This means that the network learns to compute an output for a given input, where
the loss between the output and the ground truth, is at a minimum.
Figure 2.3: Visualisation of Gradient Descent where the loss surface is shown as a set
of contours
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theory
Gradient descent can be visualised as seen in figure 2.3. In the figure, we see the
contours of a graph, and the steps that are taken from the computed gradients. The
centre of the contours is the global minimum in this example.
Stochastic Gradient Descent vs. Batch Gradient Descent
The purest form of Gradient Descent is the Batch Gradient Descent, which uses the
whole dataset to compute gradients at every step it makes. This means that if the
dataset is large, the descent will be very slow and computationally expensive, which
is not optimal when training a neural network. In the other corner of the ring we have
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), which picks a random instance of the dataset
and computes the gradient for that instance only at each step. This is much cheaper
computationally and much faster, but it has another downside, namely that it fluc-
tuates a lot, causing it to only decrease on average and even when it is close to the
minimum, it will still bounce around never stopping with the fluctuation. Another
downside to the SDG is that it is in risk of being stuck in a local minimum, without
being able to get back out, causing the network model to never detect the global
minimum and thus the optimal solution.
Mini-batch Gradient Descent
A variation of Gradient Descent, known as Mini-batch Gradient Descent has been
proposed in order to avoid long computational time caused by the batch gradient
Descent, while still trying to avoid the problem ending up in a local minimum, like
normal SDG can do. Mini-batch Gradient Descent only computes the gradient for the
mini-batch instead of the whole dataset. The step that will be taken during training,
will not be the most efficient step, as it is not the actual gradient of the cost function,
which depend on all examples in the training data, but it is an approximation of
the gradient. By approximating the gradient, we avoid running through all of the
data for each step (so it is computationally faster), and we still get a gradient based
on multiple examples (avoiding too much fluctuation and hopefully avoiding a local
minimum).
The size of the mini-batch is a hyperparameter and a good size of a
mini-batch is a size that finds a compromise between fast computations, while still
trying to avoid getting stuck.[19][20].
Backpropagation
When we train a deep neural network, we forward the input through the different
layers in the network, which from this forward propagation computes an output. Us-
ing this output, the ground truth values for the answer to the input data and a loss
function (cost function), we can compute an error that measures, just how close the
network was to computing the correct output that matches the input data. This error
can be propagated back through the network in order to compute every gradient of the
different weights in the network, which in turn are used to update the weights when
performing Gradient Descent. When doing backpropagation for the output layer L,
we look at how much each neuron in the previous layer L−1 contributed to the error
in the output layer L. It then measures how much of these error contributions came
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Neural Networks for image classification
17
from the neurons in the layer before L −2. This is done in a recursive way until it
reaches the input layer. When the input layer is reached the network has computed
the gradients for each weight in the network and Gradient Descent can then be per-
formed on the network[21]. A mathematical way of looking at backpropagation is to
say that we compute the partial derivatives of the weights with regards to the cost
function:
∂C
∂wl
j
(2.1)
That is how big a change is needed in jth weight (w) in layer l to make a change to
the cost C. For mini-batch Gradient Descent we compute the average of the gradient
across all training examples in the mini-batch, in order to find the desired changes
for the weights.
Since the loss function approximates how well the network performs and is used for
computing gradients, which in turn is used to update the weights, choosing the right
loss function for your problem can be crucial to the training of a network model. In
the section 4.3 we state which loss functions, we have chosen for our problems and
why we have chosen them.
Weight initialisation strategy
There is one big problem with backpropagation, because as we propagate back through
the network, the gradients will often get smaller and smaller, rendering these gradi-
ents almost unchanged when performing Gradient Descent. This problem is known
as the vanishing gradient problem[21]. This problem can be alleviated by using a
proper weight initialisation strategy.
Two common approaches when deciding on how to initialise the weights of the net-
work, is to either set them to 0 or simply use random values. The randomness could
be achieved by using independent Gaussian random variables, normalised to have
mean 0 and standard deviation 1, or one could squeeze the distribution to suit the
particular case better. While being simple to both understand and implement, these
approaches often is a cause of the vanishing gradient problem. Some degree of ran-
domness is necessary however, since it would be practically impossible to initialise the
weights perfectly. But in order to increase performance and avoid vanishing gradients,
more sophisticated approaches, are preferred for deep neural networks, and most of
these stem from one technique - the He Normal initialisation. It is possibly the most
frequently used technique, as it increases performance significantly with only a simple
change to the random initialisation; it simply scales the randomly generated weights
by multiplying them with
√
2/size, where size represents the number of input units
in the weight tensor [20]. Different variations of this technique has later arisen, such
as Xavier and Kaiming, that are optimised for different activation functions; Xavier
being commonly used with tanh, and Kaiming with ReLU.
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theory
2.2
Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks
In the previous section we described how CNNs are trained and used for classifying
entire images, but classifying different objects in an image is a somewhat different
issue to tackle.
CNNs are still used in region based classification, but we need a
more complex architecture to solve the problem of localising instances of objects and
classifying them. In this section we will briefly outline the state of the art architectures
for region-based convolutional neural networks.
2.2.1
R-CNN: A Region-based Convolutional Neural Network
R-CNN is an approach for detecting objects within an image without needing to
select and process a huge number of regions, originally proposed by Ross Girshick et
al [22]. Due to the fact that the length of the output is variable, since the number of
occurrences of the objects of interest can be varying, using a standard convolutional
network followed by a fully connected layer to locate the objects of interest, proves
to be a computational nightmare in many cases. R-CNN bypasses this issue by using
selective search to extract a fixed number of regions from the image (the standard is
2000). These extracted regions are called region proposals, and are then fed into a
CNN for producing a feature map, after being pooled into squares first. Finally the
extracted features are fed into a Support Vector Machine (SVM) that classifies the
presence of an object within the proposed region, while also increasing the precision
of the bounding box of the region in parallel.
2.2.2
Fast R-CNN
Fast R-CNN works very similarly to R-CNN. It was, just like the standard R-CNN
approach, proposed by Ross Girshick [23], and is considered an improvement to R-
CNN. Rather than applying a CNN to the 2000 proposed regions to get 2000 feature
maps, Fast R-CNN instead computes a feature map from the original image upon
which the selective search algorithm is used. From this convolutional feature map
the region proposals are then identified and pooled into a fixed size, before they are
fed into a fully connected layer. this layer is known as a Region of Interest Pooling
(RoIPool) layer. Finally two output vectors are used to predict the observed object
and adapt bounding box localisations with a softmax classifier and a linear regressor
respectively. The reason Fast R-CNN is faster than R-CNN is due to the fact that
you do not have to feed 2000 region proposals to the CNN every time. Instead, the
convolution operation is done only once per image and a feature map is then generated
from it.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks
19
2.2.3
Faster R-CNN
Both R-CNN and Fast R-CNN use selective search to locate the region proposals.
While this can produce some impressive results, it can also be very time-consuming.
Faster R-CNN, as proposed by Shaoqing Ren et al.[24], addresses this caveat by
replacing the algorithm entirely and letting the network learn the region proposals
instead. Similarly to Fast R-CNN, the original image is fed through a CNN in order
to generate a feature map. The difference is how the regions are proposed. In Faster
R-CNN, a separate network, called a Region Proposal Network (RPN), is used to
predict the region proposals. These predicted proposals are then pooled using an
RoIPool layer, which is then used to classify the part of the image inside in the
proposed regions as well as adapting the bounding boxes.
2.2.4
Mask R-CNN
Mask R-CNN, as proposed by Kaiming He et al. [25], extends Faster R-CNN by
adding an object mask prediction branch, that runs in parallel with the existing
bounding box prediction branch. Where Faster R-CNN has two outputs for each
object; a bounding box offset and a class label, Mask R-CNN adds a third one; an
object mask. The object mask is created by sending the region proposals through
a CNN that deconvolves the feature maps and constructs the object mask. Mask
R-CNN is also different, in that it uses Region of Interest Align (RoIAlign) instead
of RoIPool.
RoIAlign is a variation of RoIPool, in that it still extracts a small
feature map from each RoI, but whereas RoIPool applies a harsh quantisation of the
RoI, RoIAlign properly aligns the extracted features with the input. More specifically,
RoIAlign supports floating points when downsampling the feature map, keeping more
of the real information and ultimately making the pooled map more true to the
original one.
==PAGE:32==
20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Setup and Data
3.1
Environment
3.1.1
Hardware
In the interest of limiting variations in results due to hardware differences and similar
external factors, the same overall physical hardware composition has been utilised for
all experiments contributing both directly and indirectly to any conclusions presented
here.
All networks are trained on a single Titan X GPU with 12 GB of dedicated RAM of
the Pascal architecture. The GPU is run from a host machine with a CPU consisting
of two Xeon E5-2620 v4 8c/16t chips - each with a potential clock speed of 2.1
GHz, and 128 GB RAM. The host machine is equipped with an SSD with an overall
capacity of approximately 1 TB, as well as several smaller drives (both HDDs and
SSDs), all interconnected via a gigabit Ethernet connection. Using multiple GPUs
over a Scalable Link Interface (SLI) was technically possible, but proved unnecessary
after a quick cost-benefit analysis of the matter.
The hardware architecture described above, is part of DTU Compute GPU Cluster,
which is, like the name suggests, a cluster of machines equipped with high-end GPUs.
The entire cluster consists of 12 machines, each with anywhere from 2 to 8 GPUs
of varying types. All machines within the cluster are accessible by DTU students,
following approval of a request sent to one of the administrators.
Due to a high
demand for the computational power of these GPUs, machines are often utilised by
several users at a time, potentially occupying one or more GPUs for long periods
at a time.
This means, that experiments have been run on different GPUs and
even machines, depending on the availability at the time of starting the experiments.
However, to ensure that potential variations due to hardware differences were kept
at a minimum, all experiments, from which concluding results has been produced,
has been run on the exact same type of GPU, as well as the exact same machine
architecture as described before.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Setup and Data
3.1.2
Software
The entire solution is developed in Python, using the machine learning library Py-
Torch as the computational framework for GPU programming, as it provides key
high-level features, such as tensor computation with strong GPU acceleration, and
deep neural networks build on a tape-based autodiff system. PyTorch was primarily
chosen over, the perhaps slightly more commonly appraised (at least commercially
and industrially), TensorFlow, as the general framework, due to its sufficient poten-
tial regarding our objective, its relative intuitiveness and the fact that we already had
some experience with it. Most preprocessing was done using ipynb scripts developed
directly within Jupyter Notebook, whereas the rest of the solution consists of py files
(excluding artefacts such as models, graphs, and textfiles) primarily developed in rel-
atively sophisticated texteditors, such as Sublime Text and Atom. All development
was done on three different machines, of which the hardware composition is fairly ir-
relevant due to the test environment outlined above, all running versions of Windows
10. In order to utilise the GPUs for our purpose, we used CUDA, which is an API
developed by Nvidia, that allows for general purpose processing on CUDA-enabled
GPUs. This allowed us to load data into the dedicated memory of the GPUs, which
significantly accelerated most of the computationally intensive parts, as the design of
GPUs generally makes them much better suited for training of neural networks, com-
pared to CPUs. Besides PyTorch, multiple libraries was utilised for the development
of the entire solution. A complete list of these libraries, can be seen in appendix C.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Data Format
23
3.2
Data Format
While credit is due to Aagesen[2], who initially came up with the idea for the experi-
ment and general approach to the problem, the specific dataset used in this project,
or at least the setup of the dataset, was initially the same as the data used by Høier[1].
The entire dataset consists of 8,470,458 images in total, representing about 750 gi-
gabytes of data, where most of the images has a resolution of 800x150 pixels (a few
cases of 800x170) and three channels of 8-bit grayscale, resulting in a bit depth of 24.
These images are partitioned into 196 folders with a maximum of 43,300 images in
each, where most of the folders represents blood from an adult donor, and the rest
blood from a fetus. Furthermore, each of these folders represents an actual recording
session, which ensures that all images within each folder share the same physical setup,
but between folders, properties such as brightness, contrast and camera position are
non-static. Additionally, 131 folders of images are accompanied by a file containing a
table describing several useful annotations for the images within, such as class labels,
bounding box coordinates and sizes, and mask of the objects - all calculated using
blackbox MatLab scripts. However, upon further inspection, these scripts turned out
to be imprecise to a point where several of the annotations proved to be unusable
for our implementation. An example of such an imprecise annotation, was the class
labels, where close to 5% of the labels were outright wrong (concluded due to its
binary form), based on a manual inspection of over 20,000 instances.
It should also be noted that our ”ground truth” annotations are in fact generated
by a script created by a former student, and not by hand, which also gives a bias
to the training as the script is not a 100% correct in its predictions of the cells. Ad-
ditionally the script only gives us information of one cell in an image, even if there
are several other cells in that same image. This could have a negative effect in the
training of the network, because the network could suggest one of the cells without
a data foundation, and even though the network would be right, it would still be
punished, because the ”ground truth” would have no recordings of this. Even though
we know that the data we have been given is not the real ground truth, we will refer
to it as such, during the rest of the thesis for simplicity.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Setup and Data
3.3
Assumptions
From the very beginning of this project, we had some assumptions about the dataset
we were given, stemming from expectations that were based on experience with previ-
ous data modelling tasks and general data collection standards, promises from whom
we got the data, and details from previous work done using the same data. These
following assumptions were collectively necessary, as we needed to fully understand
what we had to work with, before doing any potential data preparation.
Similar image composition
From looking at images from some of the folders, each of which represents a separate
recording session, we quickly got an idea of how the images looked, and though there
was some variations, as mentioned and elaborated upon earlier, some assumptions
about the general structure of the images could easily be made.
First of all, we started with an assumption, that all images had the same resolution.
This turned out to be false later on, but almost all images still had exactly the same
resolution, so just ignoring the rest, was an easy solution due to the already excessive
amount of data we have available. We also expected the images to have been taken
with similar camera positions and angles, focal lengths and brightness, but again,
these metrics did in fact vary a bit from recording session to recording session.
Contrast suited for normalisation
At a first glance of the images, a lot of them looked relatively dark, and with strange
contrasts. Additionally, we would need to normalise all the images, with respect to
what was mentioned above, about the variance in image composition. It was therefore
clear, from an early stage, that some form of normalisation was required. In order to
perform normalisation over all images however, another assumption had to be made.
From looking at a good portion of the dataset, MIN-MAX normalisation seemed like a
promising solution, but in order for this to work, the pixelvalues of each image would
have to vary enough between cells and the background. We expected all images to
normalise nicely using MIN-MAX normalisation, due to the apparent difference in
pixelvalues from cells to background of all images of interest in the dataset.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Data Condition
25
3.4
Data Condition
For the most part the data looks good, with clear tubes, good resolution and visible
cells, but there are some parts of the data from certain experiments, where there
are some irregularities. In this section we will show some of these irregularities and
explain, how these could affect the training of a deep learning model.
3.4.1
Anomalies in the tube
In some of the measurements there are objects different to the blood cells that seems
to be stuck in the tube. This means that these objects are visible in all pictures from
that measurement. In figure 3.1, we see multiple dark spots at the inlet of the tube.
These dark spots does not move for any of the images in the the measurements of
NS126. The spots should not be big enough to be registered as separate important
objects by a model, but when a cell passes through this section of the image, the
spots might seem to be a part of the cell, forcing the model to predict wrong for both
mask, bounding box and classification.
In figure 3.2 we see another type of disturbance in the tube. This seems to be a
bubble of some sort, and the size of it could be a problem. As we will see later in this
section some of the cells are very hard to spot, and bubbles of this sort might cause
confusion during the training of a model.
Figure 3.1: The image shows dark spots stuck at the inlet of the measurements of
experiment NS126.
Figure 3.2: The image shows a bubble stuck in the inlet of the measurements of
NS123.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Setup and Data
3.4.2
Cell visibility
Another problem our network could encounter is the visibility of the cells in the
images. For many of the images the cells have clear borders and are easy to locate,
but for some images the border is not as clear and the cell nuclei blends in with the
background, making the detection of it very difficult. Examples of these issues are
shown in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: The figure above shows sections of images containing cells, where the
border of the cells are somewhat unclear.
In other images only half of the cells are clearly visible, and a deep learning model
might not be able to detect the border of such objects correctly. This is shown in
figure and 3.4. If a model does gets good at detecting cells with low visibility, we
might end up with the problem described in section 3.4.1, where we detect objects,
that are not blood cells, but just anomalies in the measurements.
Figure 3.4: The image shows a section of an image containing a cell, where half of
the cell is clear and visible, but the other half blends in to some extend with the
background of the image.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Data Condition
27
3.4.3
Poor resolution
The resolution of the images are, as mentioned in 3.2, mostly 800x150 pixels, which
might seem decent at first. Considering the small size of the cells however, this turns
out to be way too little information for the task of classification. As mentioned in
section 1.3, the diameter of a red blood cell is 7.5-8.7 µm and the thickness 1.7-2.2
µm [14]. Additionally, as mentioned in section 1.4.4, the difference in size between a
fetal and an adult red blood cell is close to 11% [12, 13]. Since the size of individual
blood cells can vary about 13.8% and the difference in size between the two types
of cells we are attempting to classify is about 11%, we are dealing with very small
variations regarding the size of the cells. Figure 3.5 shows an example of a typical
image, where the size of the cells within the image is illustrated. Even when the cells
are deformed in the channel to be significantly wider than normal, the size of the
cell within the channel rarely exceeds that of 50x30 pixels (due to height restrictions
within the channel). For a typical cell outside the channel however, the size is usually
smaller than 40x40 pixels, and if we assume the largest difference in size (of 11%),
the cell size will often vary by <1 pixel. Additionally the difference between 1.5 and
2 pixels could mean the difference between an adult and a fetal blood cell, but we
would not be able to detect the difference properly, due to the limited amount of
information in the image, which is limited by the resolution.
Figure 3.5: An image showing an example of the size of a typical red blood cell. The
cell on the left has a very typical shape and size, and the cell on the right is deformed
to be slightly wider than normal, but is limited to the width/height of the channel in
its height.
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Materials and
Methods
Up until now, we have analysed the problem, stated our objective, described previous
work and the current state of the art and outlined what we have to work with. We
have now laid out all the information needed to decide on a path to take and to begin
designing and implementing our own solution.
In order to complete our objective and solve the problem, we needed a framework for
object instance segmentation and classification. For this task, Mask R-CNN is the
obvious choice due to its state of the art results on relevant data. The original design
of Mask R-CNN as presented in [25], is optimised for object instance segmentation
of larger objects with obvious feature variations. In order to use Mask R-CNN for
a solution to this particular problem, we need to adapt it to the nature of our data.
Furthermore extensive data preparation and data processing, as well as image ma-
nipulation is needed to make the data suited for the tools and methods we will be
applying.
This section describes exactly how the data is prepared and how the images are ma-
nipulated, before going into the actual design of the Mask R-CNN architecture. All
parts of Mask R-CNN will be described before finally going into how it is both trained
and tested.
4.1
Data Preparation
As per the points laid out when describing the original data format in section 3.3,
some work was necessary before digging into any sort of localisation and classification
of the available data.
Single cell image detection
In order to avoid the problem of wrongfully training the network, due to the fact that
we only have ground truths for one cell in an image, we created a script in python that
should detect all of the images with only one cell in it and then copy those images
into another folder. The images that where copied into the other folder would then
be our training, validation and test data. In order to do this, we used Open-CVs
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Materials and Methods
background subtraction followed by a morphological closing as described in section
1.4.1. After this we applied a threshold on the image going from 50 to 255 pixels and
then found the contours that were left. If the contour area was bigger than 100 pixels
we counted it as a cell, and if that count was equal to 1 in the end, then the image
was approved as a single cell image and copied to our training folder. This was to
some extend a success even though there were still some images with multiple cells,
that were copied to the data folders. This is because some cells were lost during the
cell detection algorithm, probably during the morphological operations. We need to
keep in mind that multiple cells in an image can have a negative affect during training.
Creating target masks from data
For the purpose of training the mask layer of our network, we needed a ground truth
mask for each of the images in the training dataset.
The mask were given to us
from previous work, but existed in the form of a list in a Matlab script, whereas we
needed an image mask for our network. The list we had been given, was a vector
containing pixel indices, as if the image was also one long vector with length = 120000
(height × width).
We created a script that for each image, created a vector of length 120000 containing
only zeros, then pulled out the list for each specific image from the matlab script,
and for each index in the list, we set the corresponding index in our vector to value
255 (white). When we had applied a colour for each index in our vector, we reshaped
the vector to be the size of the original image (height = 150 and width = 800). This
new image created in black and white, was our mask for its corresponding image and
could then be used for training the Mask layer of the Mask R-CNN.
Figure 4.1: Original image and its corresponding Mask.
From the images in figure 4.1 it is clear that the ground truth we have been given
from previous work, only focuses on one cell at a time, as the image of the cells clearly
contains two cells (one in the tube and one on the way out of the tube - at the outlet)
and the mask, given to us as ground truth, clearly only contains the cell inside the
tube.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Data Preparation
31
Annotation files
In order to be able to associate each image with a corresponding annotation, a csv-file
is generated for each dataset used for training, testing and validating. This file con-
tains information such as an ID-reference to the image, bounding box dimensions and
class labels, depending on its purpose (i.e. the purpose of the network that uses it).
These values represents our ground truths and are thus all necessary for the training
of our models, because they are a required addition to the images themselves. The id
references to the images are based on the actual filenames prefaced with an appended
sorting number. The bounding box dimensions are defined using two coordinates
along with its width and height, where the coordinates describe the upper left corner
of the box. The class label is (for the backbone network) a binary parameter that
describes whether the image contains a cell or not; the value 1 meaning there is indeed
a cell in the image.
Shuffling and sorting
For the training and testing of the networks, the data should ideally be shuffled as
randomly as possible beforehand, in order to reduce variance and make the models
more general.
Since the data is stored on a hard drive accessed via a Windows
operating system, the image files will be sorted in relation to their name by default.
After pseudo-randomly shuffling the data, we therefore append the file names with a
new number from 0 to the number of images in the entire dataset utilised at the time,
with the number of decimals fixed.
To ensure that the references to the images in the annotation file remain the same
after shuffling, the same pseudo-randomness, that is applied to the images, is applied
to the lines in the annotation file. This means that after shuffling the dataset, the
annotations will still be intact and the data will be sorted by a new index number,
making it easier to partition later on.
Dataset partitioning
In order to further reduce the risk of overfitting, we want some kind of assurance
that our models are low on bias and variance. What we need is therefore some kind
of validation of our models, that is as unbiased as possible, so we can concretise
the general performance of the models. If we were to evaluate the performance of a
model M trained on dataset Dtrain, by fitting the model to the same exact dataset
Dtrain, the model could very well be overfitting without us knowing it. The only error
we would be analysing would be the training error Etrain
M
, which usually decreases
indefinitely with more complex models and more training, to and beyond the point
of overfitting.
In order to perform a completely unbiased validation of the model, we therefore need
to calculate the generalisation error Egen
M
which is the true performance of the model,
and is defined as the test error Etest
M
evaluated over infinitely many test sets. While
Etrain
M
decreases indefinitely with more complex and trained models M, Etest
M
will
theoretically only decrease to a minimum value before increasing again. Once this
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Materials and Methods
minimum has been reached, the model will start to overfit with more training. While
it is practically impossible to calculate this true performance, we can estimate it by
introducing this test error representing the performance of the model on another part
of the full dataset D.
Cross validation is a great way to partition the dataset into two parts; a training set
Dtrain and a test set Dtest. Regarding cross validation there are multiple methods
for the partitioning, such as leave-one-out, holdout and k-fold cross validation, each
with their own pros and cons.
Generally the more complex methods, like k-fold,
improve the estimation of Egen
M , while increasing computation time. Holdout is the
most simple form of cross validation, in that you simply pre-partition your dataset
into two parts statically. This makes the estimation of Egen
M
slightly less accurate,
but improves performance significantly with larger datasets and models.
Due to our very large dataset and relatively complex models, we have therefore de-
cided to utilise the holdout method of cross validation for data partitioning, where
we select 13000 images of the dataset consisting of more than 92000 images to be test
data, 9000 for validation and the remaining >70000 to be training data.
D = Dtrain ∪Dtest.
(4.1)
For the holdout method, the generalisation error is simply approximated as
Egen
M
≈Etest
M .
(4.2)
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Image Manipulation
33
4.2
Image Manipulation
Normalisation
Normalisation is often used in image processing, and especially for images with poor
contrast, normalisation can help. By normalising the images, we stretch their his-
tograms to a normal distribution, which should help in creating a sharper contrast in
our images. Our images are fairly dark and with little contrast in them, so creating
a bigger contrast could in theory help the network in detecting the cells. We use
OpenCV’s normalisation function, which normalises the images on a scale between 0
and 1. We have used the MIN-MAX normalisation method, that transforms image
values to be between 0 and 1. The formula for calculating a value in the image is
then:
f(value) = value −min
max −min
(4.3)
The biggest downside to the MIN-MAX normalisation is that if the data has signifi-
cant outliers, then the data will still be squashed like before. We chose the MIN-MAX,
because our images does not have significant pixel outliers, such as a very bright spot
in the image.
Figure 4.2: Visualisation of Normalisation.
In figure 4.2 we see that we do indeed get a bigger contrast in our images, and to the
human eye it does get easier to detect the cells in the image. As mentioned, a larger
contrast in the images should help our network in detecting the cells, and making
them more visible in the feature maps that is generated by our backbone network
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Materials and Methods
(more on the feature maps in sections 4.3.2).
Padding
The base of the architecture we will be using downsamples the images, when they
are transformed into feature maps. This downsampling needs to be taken into con-
sideration when sending the feature maps through to a later part of the architecture.
Downsampling the images has to be done in a pixel precise way (meaning that the
pixels can not be cut in half), in order for it to be used correctly later on. Depending
on which layer of feature maps we choose to use, the image will either be downsampled
8 or 16 times. We will elaborate on this in section 4.3.2. The width of the images will
have no problem being downsampled by these two amounts, as the 800 pixels (width
of image) is evenly divisible by both 8 and 16, but because the original image height
is 150 pixels, we have to add some padding to the height. For the experiments, we
chose to add 10 pixels of padding to the bottom of the images. This will just be a
black line at the bottom and will not affect the training of the Mask R-CNN, as long
as we also train our backbone network on the padded images.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Mask R-CNN Implementation
35
4.3
Mask R-CNN Implementation
In this section we will dive into the Mask R-CNN architecture used as a foundation
for locating and classifying the cells in our RBC dataset.
In order to give a full
understanding of the architecture, we will begin by giving a brief overview of the
architecture, followed by a deeper dive into the different components that make up
the Mask R-CNN. All configurations, not explicitly stated in the following sections,
can be found in appendix C.
4.3.1
Mask R-CNN Architecture
Mask R-CNN consists of several different parts including different types of networks,
which are combined in order to predict both bounding boxes, classification of the
object inside the bounding box and a mask for that same object.
The architecture starts of with a backbone network (in our case a Residual Network
also known as a ResNet), which takes the input image and performs convolutions
and max-pooling on that image. From the backbone we pull out the feature maps
from the network layer, which we have deemed the most fitting layer. This means
that it needs to be a, layer where we have not lost important information due to
down-scaling of the image, but a layer where the network have performed some kind
of transformation of the data and recognition of the cell.
After the ResNet has generated feature maps, they are passed on to the Region Pro-
posal Network, also known as the RPN. The RPN uses the feature maps to generate
proposals for interesting regions in the feature maps. These regions are also known
as RoIs (Regions of Interest).
The feature maps generated by the ResNet and the RoIs generated by the RPN is
then passed to an algorithm called RoIAlign, which uses the RoIs to cut the regions
out of the feature map and re-sizes them to a specific size, in order to match with the
size of the input for the last three networks.
Two of the last three networks are fully connected networks, that take the regions as
an input, stretches them to a single vector and runs them through for classification
and bounding box regression. The last of the three end-networks, is a convolutional
network that takes the region as an input and returns a mask for that region as the
output.
The full architecture of Mask R-CNN is illustrated in figure 4.3. In this section we
will take a closer look at the different parts of the Mask R-CNN in order to provide a
full understanding of the mechanisms that make up the network. We will go through
the network in the same order as the data is sent, in order to understand exactly,
what happens to the images we send through the Mask R-CNN.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Materials and Methods
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the Mask R-CNN architecture [26].
4.3.2
Residual Network (ResNet)
The base for the whole Mask R-CNN is a deep CNN, also known as the backbone.
The idea with this backbone, is to feed the network with data (images) and at dif-
ferent levels of the backbone some feature maps are generated, which can be used as
input for the RPN and the RoIAlign. Different types of CNNs have been proposed
as a potential backbone for the Mask R-CNN, but most commonly used is the VGG-
network and ResNet. For our implementation, we chose to go with the ResNet, as it
has been shown to perform better than the VGG-network.
It is generally thought that the deeper a network gets, the better it performs, and in
theory this would also be the case, but in reality, deep neural networks suffers from
what is known as the vanishing gradient problem. This means that as the gradient is
propagated back through the network, it will get infinitely small, causing the updates
of the weights to be so small that it is indifferent to the training of the network.
A better understanding of the ResNet is needed, in order to understand why it is
a good choice for the backbone. The ResNet, as presented in [27], consists of what is
known as residual blocks. A residual block consists of multiple convolutional layers,
and something called shortcut connections. These shortcut connections take the in-
put of the residual block and add it to the output of the residual block, thus creating
a shortcut for the input to travel through the network. By doing this you might keep
some important information, which otherwise might have been lost during the convo-
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Mask R-CNN Implementation
37
lutions done in the residual block [27]. Between each residual block, maxpooling is
performed on the output in order to reduce the parameters as explained in section 2.1.
In our solution, we pull out the feature maps that is returned from the second and
third block of the ResNet. We believe that the ResNet has learned enough features
after the second block and wished to test it against the features learned during the
third block. We also wished to test it because, after the third block in the ResNet the
feature maps returned are only a 16th the size of the original image, meaning that
the feature maps returned after the third block is only 10 × 50 pixels. This would
mean that the cell representation in each feature map is very small, making us fear
for the loss of information, for the mask and bounding box regression. By using the
feature maps returned after the second block, we will get half as many feature maps,
but they will only be an 8th of the original image size, meaning that the feature maps
will be 20 × 100 pixels, keeping a bit more information about the shape of the cells
than the feature maps from the third layer. We test both ResNet50 and ResNet101
during our test, as the depth of the feature maps are twice as big for the ResNet101
as for the ResNet50. In figure 4.4 we see some examples of feature maps pulled after
the second block of the ResNet50.
Figure 4.4: Image of cell and 25 of the 512 feature maps, extracted from the ResNet,
used by the Region Proposal Network.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Materials and Methods
4.3.3
Region Proposal Network
Now that we have generated feature maps from our original image, the next part of
Mask R-CNN is the Region Proposal Network (RPN). An RPN is a fully convolu-
tional network that predicts object bounds as well as a so-called objectness scores for
each position in an image. Here objectness denotes membership to a set of object
classes versus the background of the image. The network takes an image of any size
as input and generates a set of rectangular object region proposals - each with a corre-
sponding objectness score as its output. While it is essentially a standalone network,
it functions as a key part of Mask R-CNN, where it runs in parallel with the rest of
the framework, as seen in figure 4.3, in order to generate better region proposals than
Fast R-CNN.
The region proposals are generated by sliding a small network over the convolutional
feature map output from the shared convolutional layer prior to this one. This net-
work takes a spatial window of the input feature map as its own input, where each
window is mapped to a lower dimensional feature that is then fed into two fully con-
nected layers; a regression layer and a classification layer. Because this small network
slides over the image, the fully connected layers are shared across all spatial loca-
tions. Figure 4.5 illustrates this network at one such location, where 256-d indicates
the particular dimensionality used in [24]. This architecture is implemented with an
n×n convolutional layer followed by two 1×1 convolutional layers for regression and
classification respectively, where n × n also represents the size of the spatial window
used as input, and is set as n = 3 in [24].
Figure 4.5: Illustration of a Region Proposal Network, from [24].
For each location the sliding window moves over, multiple regions are proposed. The
maximum number of proposals for each of these locations are denoted as k on figure
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Mask R-CNN Implementation
39
4.5. The classification layer has 2k outputs since it produces a score that estimate the
probability of both an object and not an object for each proposal. The regression layer
has 4k outputs in that it describes k boxes with 4 values describing each. These 4
values represent the x and y coordinates of the center of the box, as well as the width
and height of it. The reason we do not use the perhaps more intuitive xmin, ymin,
xmax and ymax, is due to the fact that images may have different sizes and aspect
ratios, so having a good model trained to predict raw coordinates can turn out to
be very complicated. Another problem is invalid predictions, since when predicting
xmin and xmax for instance, we would have to somehow ensure that xmin < xmax.
The k proposals can also be seen as reference boxes, more commonly called anchors.
Anchor Generation Layer
The Anchor Generation Layer (AGL) is the layer that generates these anchor boxes
across the entire image. The anchor boxes are of different sizes and aspect ratios,
and will, when generated, enclose the foreground objects, whilst most of them will
only cover background objects. The purpose of the RPN is to learn which proposals
(anchor boxes), are good proposals for a foreground object. A common approach is to
use 3 sizes along with 3 different ratios, yielding k = 3 × 3 = 9 different anchor boxes
that are applied on each location in the image. For a convolutional feature map of
size W × H there will therefore be a total of WHk anchors.
Proposal Layer
The Proposal Layer (PL) takes the anchors generated by the AGL and clips them to
the size of the image. This means that all of the proposals that are overlapping with
the border of the image, is cut to align directly with the image. It does not change
the amount of proposals, but it changes the shape of the proposals, where some of an
anchor boxes lies outside of the image.
After the clipping of the proposals, the Proposal Layer performs Non Maximum Sup-
pression (NMS) on them. NMS will be described in section 4.3.3. This prunes down
the proposals to only return the ones with the highest score. The Proposal Layer
takes the class score and the bounding box prediction of the two convolutional layers
and uses it to generate the final RoI-proposals which are passed through to the RoI-
Align function, along with the feature maps [28].
During training, our PL detect the top 20000 anchors with best score, before do-
ing NMS on those anchors. After NMS we are left with 2000 of the best anchors,
that are all returned to the Proposal Target Layer, which will be described in 4.3.3.
After the network has been trained, during prediction, the PL will only detect the
top 2000 anchors and after performing NMS it will only return 1 proposal. This is
done because we only want to find the very best prediction for a cell in an image.
If the image contains more than 1 cell, we can change the number of proposal that
should be returned by the PL, and we will see an example of this in section 6.3.1.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Materials and Methods
Non-Maximum Suppression
After having generated the proposals, it turns out that many of them often overlap,
due to the nature of the anchors, which usually overlap each other. This means that
there can be multiple proposals for each object, which is not ideal, since we really
only need one per object. Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) is an algorithm that
solves exactly this issue.
It takes a list of proposals that is sorted by their class score (predicted by the RPN),
and discards proposals that have an Intersection over Union (IoU) larger than a cer-
tain threshold in favour of a proposal with a higher score. The IoU is commonly
used as a measure of how close a given bounding box is to another bounding box,
and is independent of pixels or other units used for the dimensions of the bounding
boxes. The threshold is crucial for the performance of the algorithm, as too low of
a value will result in missing objects entirely, and too high might result in too many
proposals for each object. Most commonly the threshold is between 0.6 and 0.7.
Once NMS has been applied to the list, only the best proposals are kept. While in
[24] they keep the top 2000 proposals, it is theoretically possible to lower this number
significantly and still get decent results.
As mentioned in 4.3.3, we keep the top 2000 proposals, returned by NMS during
training, but during predictions we keep the amount that is provided in our Con-
fig.py script (see appendix C, which holds all of our configuration parameters.
Anchor Target Layer
The Anchor Target Layer (ATL) is only used during training of the RPN. The purpose
of this layer is to select promising anchors, chosen from the original bounding boxes.
The ATL gives every anchor, generated by the AGL, a label of either foreground or
background depending on their IoU with the original bounding boxes. The labels
of the foreground and background are distributed from two IoU-thresholds, and for
now foreground labels are given to anchors with an IoU above 0.7 and background
labels are given to anchors with an IoU under 0.3. Every anchor in between these
two thresholds are given a label of a ”don’t care” and has no affect on the training.
There are two types of anchors that will be chosen as good proposals. Those with the
max IoU with a ground truth bounding boxes are chosen, as well as all anchors that
has an IoU with a ground truth bounding box, that exceeds a chosen threshold [28].
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Mask R-CNN Implementation
41
RPN Loss functions
The RPN uses two losses for updating the prediction networks. The first one is a
classification loss, that comes from classifying whether an anchor is a foreground
object or a background object. The other loss function is a bounding box regression
loss, that is used to modify the position and the shape of the proposed anchor. The
RPN loss is the sum of these two losses.
For the classification loss, we use the cross entropy loss in order to penalise the
network for incorrectly classified anchors. Cross Entropy is a log loss function that
is often used for measuring loss on classification problems, where classes are given
a probability value between 0 and 1.
When the difference between the predicted
probability and the target label is big, the loss will also be big, while the loss will go
towards 0 as the predicted probability goes towards the target label as seen in figure
4.6.
Figure 4.6: Cross Entropy loss function. The log loss goes towards 0 as the predicted
probability goes towards the true label[29].
The bounding box regression loss is only done for anchors that are classified as fore-
ground boxes. There are no reason to do regression loss on the background boxes as
they have no ground truth bounding boxes to calculate the loss from. The regression
loss for a given foreground anchor is given by:
Lu =
∑
i∈x,y,w,h
smoothL1(ui(predicted) −ui(target))[28][30],
(4.4)
where ui is the regression coefficients of the prediction and the target. The x, y, w
and h is the top left corner of the box and the width and height of that same box.
The smoothL1-loss function is given by:
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Materials and Methods
smoothL1(x) =
{
σ2x2
2
||x|| <
1
σ2
||x|| −0.5
σ2
otherwise [28][30],
(4.5)
where σ is an arbitrary number. We use smoothL1-loss because, according to the
Faster R-CNN paper [24], it is less sensitive to outliers, compared to L2-loss.
Proposal Target Layer
The Proposal Target Layer (PTL) is technically not a part of the RPN, but is used
in training on the regions proposed by the RPN, in order to generate information
used in the final classification loss. Looking at figure 4.3, the PTL is located imme-
diately after the RPN, but is included within the RPN in the figure for simplicity
as it functions as a natural extension to the RPN. The PTL is important during the
training task, as it is used much in the same way as the ATL. It is used to select
good proposals generated by the Proposal Layer, using the ground truth bounding
boxes, that can be passed through to RoIAlign, in order to train the classification and
bounding box regression properly. If we just used every proposal generated from the
beginning, we would create a hopeless learning task, which means that the network
would try to update using proposal anchors, that are too far from the ground truth.
This would make it difficult, if not impossible, for the network to train correctly.
The PTL uses the RoIs generated by the Proposal Layer to find the RoIs that has
the maximum overlap with a ground truth box. It categorises RoIs into foreground
and background regions, where foreground regions are the ones where the maximum
overlap with a ground truth box exceeds a chosen threshold, and where background
regions are the ones where the maximum overlap falls between two chosen thresholds,
known as bg_thresh_low and bg_thresh_high [28].
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Mask R-CNN Implementation
43
4.3.4
RoIAlign
In order to accurately predict segmentation masks later on, it is crucial that we do
not lose any of the original information at any stages, and must therefore ensure that
inputs and outputs are aligned, pixel to pixel, throughout the architecture. In Faster
R-CNN, RoIPool is used to align the RoIs with the convolutional feature map. The
problem here, is that RoIPool performs a spatial quantisation for the feature extrac-
tion. This is because the algorithm quantises an RoI (represented by floating points)
to the discrete granularity of the feature map, ultimately resulting in a misalignment
between the RoI and the extracted features. Additionally, the RoIPool algorithm
subdivides this quantised RoI into spatial bins which again are quantised. Finally
the feature values covered by each bin are combined using max pooling.
More specifically, the quantisation happens when a continuous coordinate has to be
divided by the feature map stride, or when dividing into bins, as these numbers are
rounding to the nearest integer rather than preserving the continuous information.
The classification has no major issues with this misalignment, as it can usually handle
small translations, but when we are to predict the masks later on, this misalignment
turns out to be a big problem, as the masks have to be accurate down to each pixel.
RoIAlign is fundamentally the same as RoIPool, but with a small difference that
solves the abovementioned issue by simply supporting floating points for its calcula-
tions. This way it preserves exact spatial locations throughout the pooling.
Figure 4.7 shows an illustration of how RoIAlign is performed. It computes the exact
values of the input features at four regularly sampled locations in each bin by bilinear
interpolation, and combines the result using either max or average pooling. Quanti-
sation is performed on neither any coordinates of the RoI, the bins nor the sampling
points.
In [25] they conclude that RoIAlign improves mask accuracy by 10% to 50% com-
pared to RoIPool, showing bigger gains under stricter localisation metrics.
Figure 4.7: Illustration of RoIAlign from [25]. The dashed grid represents a feature
map, the solid lines an RoI with 2×2 bins, and the dots the 4 sampling points in each
bin.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Materials and Methods
4.3.5
Classification Net
For the classification network we actually made two different types of networks. The
reason for this is discussed in section 6.1.2.1. The first classification net is just two
fully connected layers. The output of the RoIAlign is flattened to a vector and that
vector is then passed through a fully connected layer of 1024 output nodes, and then
through another fully connected layer with 3 output notes. We have chosen to use
the ReLU-activation function for this layer as well and also used the Kaiming weight
initialisation due to the use of ReLU. This classification net returns 3 values, that is
a score for each of the different classes, we wish to detect along with the background.
This means that the total number of class types is equal to n-classes + 1.
Each
RoI is given 3 scores and these scores are then transformed to probabilities, using the
Softmax function. The softmax function takes logits and turns them into probabilities
that sum up to 1 [21].
Softmax(yi) =
eyi
∑
j eyi
(4.6)
In the end an RoI is classified as the class, with the highest probability. This classi-
fication network is the original suggested in [25].
The second classification network is a bit different, and might even slow down the
speed of the Mask R-CNN, but since we are more interested in the accuracy, than
the speed we try using it anyway. From the RoIs predicted by the Proposal Layer,
we find the centre of the RoI and then cut out a section of 60 × 60 pixels from the
original image with the same centre as the RoI. This cutout of the original image,
is then sent into a CNN, consisting of 5 convolutional layers all followed by a batch
normalisation and the ReLU-activation function.
The first and the third layer is
followed by max-pooling.
In the end we flatten to a single vector which is sent
through 2 fully connected layers. This is then returned as the classification score and
then we again use the Softmax function for getting a probability, just like we did in
the original classification network. This architecture can be seen in figure 4.8 (b) and
an example of a cutout that is input to the architecture can be seen in figure 4.8 (a).
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Mask R-CNN Implementation
45
(a) A cutout of the original image of 60 × 60
pixels used as input for the second classifica-
tion network.
(b) Architecture of the new classification net-
work.
Figure 4.8: Figure showing architecture of new classification structure and example
of input image for the architecture.
Classification Loss
During training we use the Cross Entropy loss function in order to classify RoIs. We
used Cross Entropy loss in the RPN as well, but where we only detected two classes
in the RPN (foreground and background), we now detect 3 object classes (one for
each cell type and the background)
4.3.6
Bounding Box Net
The bounding box network, much like the first classification net, only consists of two
fully connected layers using the ReLU activation function and the kaiming initiali-
sation for the network weights. The bounding box net has 4 outputs, one for each
regression coefficient, needed to regulate the predicted RoIs.
Bounding Box regression
The output of the RoI-alignment is also passed through another fully connected layer,
known as the box regression layer. The idea behind bounding box regression is to
learn regression coefficients that maps an RoI to match with a ground truth bounding
box. The box regression layer ends in an output layer with 4 outputs that is the 4
regression coefficients of the bounding box (dx, dy, dw, dh). These coefficients are
then applied to the predicted RoIs P in order to get the final bounding box ˆG. The
bounding box regression coefficients are applied to the to the RoI predictions as
follows [22]:
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Materials and Methods
ˆGx = Pwdx + Px
(4.7)
ˆGy = Phdy + Py
(4.8)
ˆGw = Pwexp(dw)
(4.9)
ˆGh = Phexp(dh)
(4.10)
where ˆG is the final prediction for bounding box top left corner, width and height, P
is the predicted RoIs and d is the bounding box coefficients, predicted by our network.
Figure 4.9: The figure shows the mapping between RoI box prediction (black box)
and the final predicted bounding box (red box).
Box Loss
The box loss is defined exactly the same as for the RPN box loss. It is a smoothL1-
loss function, that is used to determine the distance from the predicted box to the
ground truth box. The mathematical description of the smoothL1-loss is described
in equations 4.5 and 4.4.
4.3.7
Mask Net
The mask net consists of 5 convolutional layers, and a deconvolutional layer. First the
input from the RoI-Align is sent through 4 conv-layers each with 256 output layers
and each followed by batch normalisation and a ReLU-activation function. Then it
is sent through the deconvoulutional layer in order to up-sample the mask. Lastly
it is sent through another convolutional layer with input size 256 and output size of
number of classes plus 1 for background. The last layer in the mask net is followed
by a Sigmoid-activation function in order to range each of the output layers between
0 and 1, thus generating 3 output masks pr. RoI (one for each class and one for
background) of size 28 × 28.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Mask R-CNN Implementation
47
Mask regression
Unlike the representation of class labels and bounding box offsets, the masks repre-
sents an input object’s spatial layout. The fully connected layers ultimately produce
short output vectors for the other two outputs, but for masks, we need convolutions
to address the spatial structure of the masks in a pixel-to-pixel manner.
More specifically, a mask is predicted from each RoI using a fully-connected network
(FCN) as proposed in [31]. By using an FCN, we avoid collapsing it into a vector
representation without spatial dimensions, but instead maintain the explicit spatial
layout throughout each layer within the mask branch. This is also where we reap the
result of the RoIAlign algorithm, as we need the RoI features as well aligned feature
maps, in order to preserve the explicit pixel-to-pixel spatial details. For training the
mask, we need to get the ground truth for each of the regions proposed by the RPN.
For doing this we use the RoIAlign-function, but instead of pooling the region out
of the feature map, we pool the region from the corresponding mask and uses that
pooled region as the ground truth for the loss function. The pooling size we use for
the predicted mask is 14 × 14 instead of the 7 × 7 we used for pooling features for the
classification and box regression. This is done to preserve more information, which is
necessary for creating a good mask. The final predicted mask is of size 28 × 28 pixels.
This mask then needs to be re-scaled to match with the RoI that it was pooled from.
In order to do this, we have used the Scikit-Image library for re-sizing the predicted
masks.
Mask Loss
The most commonly used loss functions for mask regression is the binary cross entropy
loss function. This is of course because the classification of pixels in a mask, can
be seen as a binary classification problem.
Either a pixel is an object or else it
is background.
We can even assign a probability to a pixel of it being either a
background pixel or an object pixel, with a certain object pixel getting the probability
of 1 and a certain background getting the probability of 0. The binary cross entropy
loss function is seen in equation 4.11.
Binary Loss = −1
N
N
∑
i=1
yi · log(p(yi)) + (1 −yi) · log(1 −p(yi))
(4.11)
Here, yi is the label of a given pixel, p(yi) is the predicted probability of a pixel being
a part of an object.
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Materials and Methods
4.4
Training
During the training of the network, we write the loss for each 500 mini batch. This
gives us an understanding on how well the network is doing and an indication of when
the network stagnates (when it slows down learning).
4.4.1
Gradient Descent
When optimising a neural network model a loss is computed from a loss function that
measures how well a model fits to the problem, that it tries to solve, as explained in
section 2.1.2.
The optimiser we have chosen for the training of the network is the well known Adam
optimiser, which is a form of efficient stochastic gradient decent, first proposed in [32].
The Adam-optimiser has two hyperparameters (momentum and RMSprop) built in to
it. So for us to avoid choosing these extra hyperparameter values and try to tweak it,
we chose to go with this optimiser. In order to improve performance of the network,
we use some other hyperparameter settings for the Adam optimiser, such as Learning
Rate and Weight Decay, explained later in this section. We do mini batch gradient
decent with a batch size of 16, which should help the network converge faster while
still be fairly precise when descending towards a global minimum.
Learning Rate:
The learning rate is the rate with which a network updates itself with respect to
the loss gradient. The smaller the learning rate, the smaller steps is taken towards
a global minimum, during gradient decent. The picking of the learning rate can be
crucial to the training of a neural network. If the learning rate is too small it will
take a very long time (many iterations), before the network converges, but if the
learning rate is too big, the network might continuously surpass the global minimum,
thus causing the network to never really finding a good solution. A common practice
in deep learning is to dynamically change the learning rate during training, so that
as the network gets closer to the global minimum, the learning rate decays, getting
smaller, thus giving the network a better chance of finding that minimum.
For our learning rate during the training of the Mask RCNN, we chose it to be 0.0001,
as a start and then for every 10th epoch, we dynamically decrease the learning rate by
a factor of 10, meaning that after 10 epochs the learning rate was 0.00001. This gave
us the best of both worlds, with the network training fast in the beginning and as we
moved down closer to the global minimum, we would take smaller steps, making it
to harder to overshoot.
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Training
49
4.4.2
Trying to avoid overfitting
When training a machine learning model, we risk the chance of overfitting the model
to the training data. Overfitting is a machine learning term, that means that the
model has learned the patterns of the training data too well, and will not generalise
nicely to new. An easy way to think about it, is that the model has memorised the
mapping of the training data instead of learning to predict from features. Overfitting
can have different causes. Normally it is due to the dataset not being representative,
meaning that the dataset is not big enough to represent the problem in a sufficient
amount of situations.
This would mean that the model is not trained on certain
representations of the data, which would make it difficult for the model to make the
correct prediction. In deep learning another reason for overfitting is the amount of
nodes in a network. Too many nodes in a network, will make it easier for the model to
memories the mapping of input to output for the training data, causing it to overfit.
We keep an eye on overfitting by evaluating our models on the training data as well
as the validation dataset. We output the training loss and the validation loss in the
same graphs and we also output the validation accuracy in order to see how well the
network performs on the validation set. Additionally we test the overall performance
on a separate test set.
In order for us to avoid overfitting during the training, we took some measures of
caution. There are several ways to avoid overfitting, when training a neural network,
often known as regularisation techniques and in this section we will discuss which
techniques we have used for our models and why.
Dropout:
One of the most commonly used regularisation techniques is known as dropout.
Dropout mutes random neurons in a hidden layer during training, which forces the
network to send the data through other routes in the hidden layers. Every layer that
implements dropout, has a dropout probability, which tells the network how many
neurons in a given layer should be muted. This regularisation technique is helping
the network, preventing overfitting by forcing the network to be accurate, even when
lacking some information [19].
However dropout is not used for convolutional layers, due to the fact that the con-
volutional layers uses parameter sharing. By sharing parameters among all neurons
in a layer, the convolutional layers are good at avoiding overfitting and thus dropout
is not needed. This means that dropout in a CNN is often only used for the fully
connected layers.
After the training of the network, neurons will not get dropped anymore and the
network will again have full access to information and should be able to give a more
generalised guess, not overfitting to the training data.
We chose to use dropout for our fully connected layers, that is used for classification
and bounding box regression. These were obvious choices, as they are the only fully
connected layers in our network. We chose a dropout-rate of 0.5, meaning that 50
percent of the neurons in the hidden layers is turned off during training. This is
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Materials and Methods
Figure 4.10: In the figure below is shown a normal neural network (left) and a neural
network with dropout applied during training [33].
stated to be the most commonly used dropout rate.
Early stopping:
Another technique for avoiding overfitting is early stopping. By stopping the training,
when the validation accuracy starts to drop, we avoid the network overfitting to the
training set, as the drop in validation accuracy indicates that the model has begun
to overfit. A better way is to not stop the training as soon as the validation accuracy
drops, instead you only save the network model, when the validation accuracy of a
network is higher than that of the earlier validation step. This way we do not just
stop training if some irregularities causes the validation accuracy to drop, but run
through all training epochs only saving the models that generalise the best.
We used early stopping in our training script, running evaluation on a model, after a
certain amount of mini batches. For each time we evaluated, we looked at the three
accuracy measures (class, bounding box and mask) and if the validations accuracy
was better for one of the measures, we saved the model. This meant that we saved
4 different models for each experiment we did with the Mask R-CNN (one with the
highest class accuracy, one with the highest bounding box accuracy, one with the
highest mask accuracy and one general one). We evaluated the network after every
500 mini batch, and with a batch size of 16 we evaluated the network 9 times per
epoch.
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Training
51
Weight Decay - L2 regularisation:
Weight decay (or L2 regularisation) is another way of regularising a network model.
When using weight decay you add a scaled factor of the squared sum of all of the
weights in your network to the cost-function. By using weight decay, we try to prevent
a network model from learning weights, that are getting too big.
C = C0 + λ
2n
∑
w
w2
(4.12)
Here, C0 is the original cost function (loss function), λ is a positive number known as
the regularisation parameter, n is the size of the training data and w is the weights in
the network [34]. We can see from this function that big weights would add more to
the original cost, and thus a model will try to aim at smaller weights during training
in order to keep the cost at a low. In Pytorch this is done very easily by adding the
weight decay parameter to the Adam-optimiser function. We chose to use a weight
decay of 10−5 as it is a fairly common factor to use for the Adam-optimiser.
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Materials and Methods
4.5
Testing
4.5.1
Measure of accuracy
In order to validate our solution, we need to measure the accuracy of the predictions,
that is derived by our network. Because of the difference in the classification problem
and the two regression problems, we chose different measures of accuracy.
Classification accuracy: As the measure of the classification accuracy, we use
the Jaccard Similarity Score (also known as the Jaccard Index or the Jaccard Simi-
larity Coefficient). This score (henceforth referred to as accuracy or accuracy score
within the context of classification) is technically identical to that of the Intersection
over Union (IoU) of two sets, but due to semantic differences from the IoU relating
to the RPN, we use the former term here. It is defined as the size of the intersection
divided by the size of the union of two sets:
CA = J(P, T) = |P ∩T|
|P ∪T|
(4.13)
Where T denotes the set of all true labels, and P the set of all predicted labels. This
essentially translates to the sum of all correctly predicted labels divided by the total
number of labels.
CA =
|TP + TN|
|TP + TN + FP + FN|
(4.14)
Where TP denotes all true positive, TN all true negative, FP all false positive, and
FN all false negative labels. This notion is also referred to as the Rand accuracy or
Rand Index.
Following the accuracy, we choose to also calculate the relevance of the results using
the following two classification metrics.
Precision =
|TP|
|TP + FP|
(4.15)
Recall =
|TP|
|TP + FN|
(4.16)
These metrics both tells us how relevant the results are, where precision answers
what proportion of positive identifications was actually correct and recall answers
what proportion of actual positives was identified correctly.
Finally the F1 score (also known as the Dice coefficient) is likewise a measure of
classification accuracy. Unlike the Rand accuracy however, the F1 score considers
both precision and recall to compute the accuracy, meaning that is has more focus
on the relevance of the results, rather than the objective correctness. The F1 score is
a harmonic mean of the two classification metrics described above.
F1 = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
(4.17)
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Testing
53
Bounding box and mask accuracy:
The bounding box accuracy is the measure of how much of the predicted box area
overlaps with the ground truth bounding box area. This is the same as the Intersec-
tion over Union (IoU) described earlier in this chapter and the box accuracy BA is
calculated as follows:
BA = Area of Overlap
Area of Union
(4.18)
The total accuracy of the predicted bounding boxes will be an average of the accuracy
for each image. The mask accuracy is like the bounding box a measure of how much
overlap there is between a ground truth object, and an object that has been predicted
by our network. The reason we do not use pixel-wise accuracy is that the background
of the image takes up such a massive part of the image, and it is fairly easy for the
network to classify background. If we were to do pixel-wise accuracy, we would get
a very high accuracy even if the mask for the object were quite bad, because the
massive amount of correctly classified background pixels would affect the accuracy
towards a positive result. We are only interested in knowing how well our predicted
mask fits the object, and therefore we use IoU between the foreground pixels of the
ground truth and the foreground pixels of the predicted mask. An illustration of IoU
is shown figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Illustration of IoU. The accuracy is the Intersection (blue) divided by
the Union (red + green + blue).
==PAGE:66==
54
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
Experiments and
Results
This chapter provides an overview of the experiments performed, including the mo-
tivation behind each of them, any expectations about the results, as well as relevant
statistics and actual results. Unless explicitly specified, all experiments, for which
the results are directly comparable, have been run with the same exact setup and
settings.
5.1
Backbone
In the interest of optimising the backbone network for as good a classification of
whether an image contains a cell or not, we have carried out the following experiments.
5.1.1
Configurations and Hyperparameters
All experiments within this section were run with the same configurations and hyper-
parameters (other than what is explicitly specified). All variations of the backbone
were trained over 3 epochs, with a batch size of 16, a static learning rate of 1e-4 and
weight decay of 1e-5. Both datasets used, contains 30000 images with a corresponding
annotation file, partitioned into a training set of 24000 and a test set of 6000 images.
General data manipulation and preprocessing, as described in section 4.1 and 4.2, was
applied equally for all experiments. All experiments have been run twice, with the
exact same setup, and the results are then averaged over the two runs, to reduce the
risk of outliers with respect to model performances. For additional configurations,
see appendix C.
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Experiments and Results
5.1.2
Experiments
5.1.2.1
Effect of Annotation Quality
Hypothesis: The poor quality of the original annotations will have a huge negative
effect on the performance of the network.
In order to test this hypothesis, we wanted to compare the results of the same net-
work trained on the same data, only with different ground truths. This meant one
dataset with the original annotations accompanying the images, and one with a re-
viewed annotation file for the exact same images. This way only the ground truths
stemming from the annotations would be the difference. Any difference in results
would therefore indicate a correlation with the quality of the annotations.
The results of this experiment can be seen in table 5.1, where Ex1 represents the data
with the original annotation files for ground truth labels, and Ex2 the data with the
reviewed files. The results will be discussed and reflected upon later on.
5.1.2.2
Effect of Transfer Learning
Hypothesis: Using a pretrained version of the backbone network, will have a small
positive effect on the performance of the network.
In the interest of determining the impact of transfer learning on the backbone net-
work, we experimented with the possibility of using a pretrained ResNet for weight
initialisation when training. While ResNet is trained on an ImageNet dataset with
more than 1000 classes, the weight initialisation as a result of transfer learning, should
still yield better results compared to a default initialisation, such as Xavier or Kaim-
ing. In this particular case, ResNet50 uses Kaiming weight initialisation due to its
ReLU activations, which are both asymmetric and non-linear. The results of this
experiment can be seen in table 5.1, where Ex2 represents the pretrained and Ex3
the non-pretrained network. The results will be discussed and reflected upon later
on.
5.1.2.3
Effect of Network Structure
Hypothesis: The network structure will only have a small effect on the perfor-
mance of the network, due to the relatively simple problem it is attempting to solve.
ResNet101 will perform better than ResNet50, which in turn will perform better than
ResNet34.
After having produced great results from the get go, using different variations of
ResNet, we decided to stick with it from the start. This experiment will therefore
focus on determining the impact of the size of ResNet as a backbone for the rest
of the architecture. After seeing very promising results from training on ResNet50,
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Backbone
57
we decided to test it against its two closest siblings, ResNet34 and ResNet101. The
classification problem of determining whether an image contains a cell or not, is rel-
atively very simple, so we expected ResNet34 to be very capable of achieving top
grade results - close to that of ResNet50, and due to the increased size and com-
plexity of ResNet101 compared to ResNet50, we expected ResNet101 to just barely
outperform ResNet50. The results of this experiment can be seen in table 5.1, where
Ex2 represents ResNet50, Ex4 ResNet34 and Ex5 ResNet101.
5.1.2.4
Classification of Multiple Classes
Hypothesis: Attempting to classify each type of cell as an addition to the problem
of detecting cells, will produce significantly worse results, to the point where they will
be unusable.
The problem of classifying each type of cell, is tremendously more difficult, than
just determining whether an image contains a cell or not - hence why the backbone is
just a small step to the entire solution. In order to rule out the option of simply using
ResNet as the complete solution however, we wanted to test how much worse it would
be, and if we could potentially use its feature maps later on. The annotation file for
Ex2 was altered, to account for cell type, as well as the cell presence. Ex2 is trained
on a manually reviewed dataset, with images taken from only 4 different individuals.
This means that there are about 6000 images from each individual as a unique photo
session. The difference in exposure, focus, brightness, contrast, camera position etc.,
was therefore expected to affect the decisions made by the model greatly. While the
model was still expected to perform well, detecting cells in the first place, actually
determining the type, would likely depend on the image composition, rather than the
cell composition. A confusion matrix showing the results of this model on the test
set can be seen in appendix A.1.
As we will discuss further later on, the result of the model performance is a bit suspi-
cious. More specifically we suspected the model to be using the difference in image
composition to make the guesses, due to the very limited number of individuals. To
test this hypothesis, we decided to check what would happen on a much larger dataset,
with images from many more different individuals.
From the results of Ex1, as seen in table 5.1, it is clear, that using any of the original
annotations would be far from ideal. Instead we decided to generate a new annotation
file using Ex2, which is great at detecting cells. We used a dataset of 150392 images,
taken from 40 different individuals, where we used the predictions of Ex2 to generate
the labels in the annotation file. Once each image had a label, telling whether it
contained a cell or not, we were lucky that the filenames themselves, contained the
additional information needed. From the filenames, we could extract the information
of whether an image with a cell was from an adult or a fetus. This allowed us to
update each label, increasing our total number of classes to 3 from 2. The results of
this particular experiment is shown in appendix A.2.
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Experiments and Results
5.1.3
Summary and Results
The results of the experiments presented above are collected in table 5.1. Here the
measures of accuracy for Ex2 is highlighted due to its superior results over the rest.
Additionally a confusion matrix visualising the distribution of results for Ex2 is shown
in figure 5.1. All these results will be analysed further and reflected upon in section
6.
#
Model
Pretrained
Dataset
Train acc. Test acc. Precision* Recall*
F1*
Ex1 ResNet50
True
Original
52.11%
52.97%
.0000
.0000
.0000
Ex2 ResNet50
True
Reviewed
99.61%
99.38%
.9917
.9936
.9926
Ex3 ResNet50
False
Reviewed
98.97%
98.73%
.9951
.9745
.9847
Ex4 ResNet34
True
Reviewed
99.31%
99.08%
.9823
.9960
.9891
Ex5 ResNet101
True
Reviewed
99.55%
99.30%
.9936
.9897
.9916
Table 5.1: Table showing the accuracy score of each experiment of the backbone
network. * indicates that said metric is calculated from the test set, and is a value
between 0 and 1 (e.g. .9926 represents the true value 0.9926).
Figure 5.1: Confusion matrix visualising the results of the classification done by the
model Ex2 from table 5.1 on the test set containing 6000 manually reviewed images.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Backbone
59
Figure 5.2: Confusion matrix visualising the results of the classification done by the
model Ex1 from table 5.1 on the test set containing 6000 non-reviewed images.
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Experiments and Results
5.2
Mask R-CNN
We used 72000 images for training of the Mask R-CNN, validated on 9000 and tested
on 13000 images. They are a mix of fetal blood cells and donor blood cell, with a
majority being donor. Most of these images contain 1 cell, but in some instances
images may contain multiple cells as stated in 4.1. Unless explicitly specified, the
overarching configuration, choice of hyperparameters and other settings are static for
all the following experiments. An overview of this particular configuration can be
seen in appendix C.
5.2.1
Cell classification
This section will focus on the results from the classification networks we have created,
and will also somewhat focus on the results we got from extracting features from our
masks and training a Support Vector Machine.
5.2.1.1
Old vs. new classification model
Hypothesis: The classification accuracy will be higher for the new model, due to
the better ratio of relevant to irrelevant information.
To begin with, we trained the entire Mask R-CNN model using two fully-connected
layers for the classification part. After getting results that did not quite live up to our
initial expectations, we suspected that the downsampling of the images meant losing
too much information of the cells to properly classify their type. We therefore designed
a different version of the classification net. This new version, was expected to be a bit
slower but had the potential to increase the accuracy of the classification itself. Using
the predicted ROIs as a centre, we cutout a 60×60 pixel area in the original image
around the cell. By sending this cutout through a CNN and subsequently flattening
it to a single vector which we then sent through the two fully-connected layers, we
remove all the irrelevant information in the image, and instead keep all the relevant.
This way we could perform a more sophisticated classification, without requiring many
more resources, and also exclude any irrelevant information from having an impact
on the classification. We therefore expected the new version of the model to perform
better (achieve a higher accuracy) than the old version. The results of can be seen in
table 5.2, where Ex6 represents the new version, and Ex7 the old version. The loss
functions from the training and validation of the models can be seen in figure 5.3.
5.2.1.2
Accuracy of classification inside tube vs. outside tube
Hypothesis: Classification accuracy of cells within the tube, is higher than that of
cells outside the tube, due to the way the cell deform when forced through the tube.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Mask R-CNN
61
In order to test this, we first had to decide on, when a cell has entered the tube and
when it has exited. For the different setups of measurements the tube is placed in
slightly different positions in the image, so choosing these positions from one image,
would mismatch with other images. We therefore took the mean of 10 different setups
and found the average beginning point of the tube and the average exit point, and
used these for sorting the predictions. The starting point of the tube has been decided
to be 60 pixels on the x-axis and the exit of the tube, to be 710 pixels on the x-axis.
If the centre of the predicted bounding box is within these fixed points on the x-axis,
the cell will be sorted as being inside the tube, and otherwise it is sorted to be outside.
The results of this experiment can be seen in table 5.2.
5.2.1.3
Summary and Results
#
Model
Dataset Total test acc. Inside acc. Outside acc.
Ex6 Classification Model 1 Original
70.43%
71.55%
65.5%
Ex7 Classification Model 2 Original
68.15%
69.44%
62.62%
Table 5.2: Table showing accuracy score for all images, images where cell is inside
the tube and images where the cells are outside the tube.
Figure 5.3: Graph of how the loss changes over time for the first classification model
(left) and the second one (right). Note that the secondary (vertical) axes are not
aligned; the loss is predominantly higher for the second model (right). The models
are trained on 72000 images for 15 epochs, and the learning rate is lowered by a factor
of 10 at the 10th epoch.
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Experiments and Results
Figure 5.4: Confusion matrices following test of the new classification model (left)
and the old one (right). The models are trained on 72000 images for 15 epochs, and
the learning rate is lowered by a factor of 10 at the 10th epoch. This is the result of
a test on 13000 images, not included in the training set.
Figure 5.5: Confusion matrices following test of the new classification model, from
inside the tube (left) and outside the tube (right). The models are trained on 72000
images for 15 epochs, and the learning rate is lowered by a factor of 10 at the 10th
epoch. This is the result of a test on 13000 images, not included in the training set.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Mask R-CNN
63
5.2.2
Bounding box regression
The bounding box regression returns 4 regression coefficients as stated in section
4.3.6. These coefficients are then applied to the RoI as shown in equations 4.7,4.8,4.9
and4.10. When applied to RoI, we get the final bounding box of the object, and this
bounding box can then be compared to the ground truth bounding box. Accuracy of
the bounding box is, as stated in section 4.5.1, IoU between the predicted bounding
box and the ground truth. Results of this can be seen in table 5.3. As we only have
one implementation of the bounding box network, we only show the results of the
last model trained, as results for bounding box of the other models is fairly similar.
If interested, results of the other trained models can be seen in appendix E.
#
Model
Dataset Total test acc. Inside acc. Outside acc.
Ex8 Bounding Box Model 1 Original
77.08%
78.37%
71.41%
Table 5.3: Table showing accuracy score for bounding box predictions, total, inside
tube and outside tube.
In figure 5.6 we see the loss of the bounding box. It is easy to see from this that
the network quickly learns to predict bounding box coefficients as the loss does not
change much after a few evaluation steps.
Figure 5.6: Graph of how the loss changes over time for the bounding box regression.
The model is trained on 72000 images for 15 epochs, and the learning rate is lowered
by a factor of 10 at the 10th epoch.
==PAGE:76==
64
5 Experiments and Results
Figure 5.7 shows the box accuracy of the validation set through the evaluations. From
this it is clear to see when the learning rate decreases, as the fluctuation decreases
around the 80th evaluation step.
Figure 5.7: Graph of the accuracy for the bounding box regression during validation.
The model is trained on 72000 images for 15 epochs, and the learning rate is lowered
by a factor of 10 at the 10th epoch. This is the result of a test on 13000 images, not
included in the training set.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Mask R-CNN
65
In figure 5.8 we show some examples of our model prediction vs the ground truth
bounding boxes. Results show that our predictions might overshoot the size a bit,
but all in all, quite good results.
Figure 5.8: Examples of predicted bounding box (red), mapped along side the ground
truth bounding box (blue).
5.2.3
Mask regression
As stated in section 4.3.7, the mask regression returns a mask of 28 × 28 pixels. This
mask is then re-sized to the size of the RoI it belongs to and this RoI containing
the re-sized mask is then put into an empty image (all black pixels) the size of the
original image. This is done for all RoIs that is not predicted to be background. In
this section we look at the loss and the accuracy of the mask regression and shows
an example of a mask predicted by our network.
Table 5.4 shows the results of the mask model. Like with the bounding box, we only
show results for one model as the mask accuracies are very similar for the different
models. Once again the results can be seen in appendix E.
#
Model
Dataset Total test acc. Inside acc. Outside acc.
Ex9 Mask Model 1 Original
76.65%
78.05%
70.45%
Table 5.4: Table showing accuracy score for mask predictions, total, inside tube and
outside tube.
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Experiments and Results
In figure 5.9 we see a graph of the mask loss over evaluation steps. The graph shows
that the loss does not get below 0.3 and as it flattens towards the end, indicating that
it will not decrease much more.
Figure 5.9: Graph of how the loss changes over time for the mask. The model is
trained on 72000 images for 15 epochs, and the learning rate is lowered by a factor
of 10 at the 10th epoch.
Figure 5.10 shows the accuracy of the validation set. Like with the box regression
accuracy, it is clear to see when the learning rate decreases as the fluctuation of the
accuracy decreases.
Figure 5.10: Graph of the accuracy of the mask during validation. The model is
trained on 72000 images for 15 epochs, and the learning rate is lowered by a factor
of 10 at the 10th epoch. This is the result of a test on 13000 images, not included in
the training set.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Mask R-CNN
67
Figure 5.11: Example of mask prediction (right) compared to ground truth mask
(left).
Figure 5.11 shows a ground truth mask and our prediction mask. Our mask is nor-
mally white as well, but to better illustrate it in figure 5.12, it has been turned red.
Figure 5.12: Image of a cell with the mask as overlay in order to show precision of
the mask.
Figure 5.12 shows the mask applied to the image it was predicted for. It might be
hard to tell from the image, but the mask does not fit the cell border 100%, but it
does a fairly decent job. This is the case for most of the predictions made by our
model.
Figure 5.13: Absolute difference between ground truth mask and predicted mask from
example 5.11.
In figure 5.13 we see the absolute difference between our predicted mask and the
ground truth mask. This is the part of the combined union of the two masks that
does not intersect. As seen in the figure this is mostly reserved to the border pixels
of the two objects. More examples can be seen in appendix B.
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Experiments and Results
5.2.4
Traditional Feature Extraction and Classification
Hypothesis: The masks generated by our Mask R-CNN model can be used for ex-
tracting features and these features can be used for other classification methods, in
much the same way as Aagesen[2] and Høier[1] did before us. The results of this
approach will yield a lower accuracy than that of our own classification network.
Since the results of classifying using the Mask R-CNN in itself was not mind blowing,
we wanted to test if the masks we generated, would be more fit for feature extraction
and classification using the extracted features. In order to do this, we looked at 100
sequences (50 adults and 50 fetal) of cells passing all the way through the tube. We
generated masks for each of the frames in every sequence using the our Mask R-CNN
implementation. Then we pulled 5 features from these mask, the Minor Axis, Major
Axis, Area, Circulation and Eccentricity. We then plotted these 5 features across all
frames to see, which features were most discriminating. These plots can be seen in
figure 5.14
Figure 5.14: Plots of features extracted from our predicted masks. Green lines are
Donor blood cells and red lines are Fetal blood cells.
==PAGE:81==
5.2 Mask R-CNN
69
From the plots in figure 5.14, we can see that Eccentricity and Circularity are probably
the most discriminating features. But since Høier[1] found that the area of the cells
are an informative feature, we chose to go forward with these 3 features even though
our Area is not showing much, to differentiate the two types of cells. For the training,
we extracted the 3 features at 5 different positions in the tube, giving us a feature
vector of 15 features pr. cell sequence. We take the average at each position in order
to clarify the difference between donor and fetal cells. This can be seen in figure 5.15.
Figure 5.15: Plots of the mean values of Donor (green) and fetal (red) blood cells, at
the 5 different positions in the tube.
As we can see from figure 5.15, the Circularity and Eccentricity is clearly the most
discriminating features, with the Area of the cells overlapping quite a lot on average.
To see if these features could be used for classification, we used Matlabs Classifica-
tion Learner in order to test multiple classification methods. Out of the different
classification methods, provided by Matlab, the SVM performed the best reaching
a classification accuracy of 72%, using 5 fold cross validation during training. This
result is slightly better than the result we reached using our deep learning method,
and we will elaborate on this in section 6.1.2.5.
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
6.1
Reflection on Results
6.1.1
Backbone
6.1.1.1
Annotation Quality
As mentioned earlier on, the dataset we were given, did not contain the highest qual-
ity of annotation files. Especially the ground truths for images with and without
cells, were outright unusable due to their shockingly low accuracy. First of all, the
annotation files were very inconsistent; some were actually decent, where others might
as well have been filled out randomly. Some careful picking of the better files were
therefore necessary to begin with. These somewhat decent files were then reviewed
manually, in order to fix any mistakes. Even with the use of several smaller scripts to
help out, the process still took a very long time, and was very tedious. We did however
ensure that all reviews files were, to our subjective opinion, coloured by the purpose
of the solution, correctly filled out, allowing for a huge increase in performance of the
networks using it. Even for the files with the highest accuracy, it still misclassified up
to a shocking 20% of the images. Bringing this down close to 0% would undoubtedly
increase to overall performance of the network utilising it. Looking at table 5.1, where
Ex1 represents the data with the original annotation files for ground truth labels, and
Ex2 the data with the reviewed files, it is quite clear how big of a difference it makes,
that the ground truths are truly correct. With a test accuracy score close to 53%, it
is pretty safe to say, that the model is completely unusable, whereas the other one
is close to perfect with an accuracy score of 99.38% for the test set. Granted the
classification problem of the backbone is relatively simple, this experiment still goes
to show how important the quality of the annotations for the data can be.
==PAGE:84==
72
6 Discussion
Another interesting result, is that of Ex1, where we reach an accuracy of 52.97%, but
where the F1 score indicates, that there is no relevance to the results. Additionally
the test accuracy exceeds that of the training accuracy, which is a bit suspicious. A
confusion matrix visualising the distribution of the test data is shown in figure 5.2
(see appendix A.3 for the results on the training data). From the confusion matrix,
it is clear to see, that the low accuracy of the model forces it to go for the prior
distribution, and since there are more images with no cells, the best guess, at any
time, is that there is no cell present in a given image. This means, that is guesses
correct more than half the time, thus reaching an accuracy of >50% on the training
set, and by chance even higher on the test set, but luckily the F1 score tells us, that
something is very wrong, considering how general the model should ideally be.
6.1.1.2
Transfer Learning
From the second experiment of the previous chapter, we can see the results of util-
ising transfer learning for backbone. The weight initialisation for ResNet50 is based
on Kaiming initialisation which is great for the ReLU activations, but while this ini-
tialisation is proven to be very successful, the use of transfer learning from training
ResNet50 on ImageNet still provide a better starting point for the training on our
dataset, even though ImageNet contains 1000 classes, non of which are very close
to that of the cells we are attempting to classify. Looking at table 5.1, where Ex2
represents the pretrained model, and Ex3 the non-pretrained one, we see a slight
improvement of Ex2 over Ex3, proving that the weight initialisation as a result of
transfer learning yields a better result in this particular scenario.
The results of Ex3 is also rather interesting, in that its precision score is the highest
among all the models, but its recall score is considerably lower than all other models.
This means, that when using a model that is not pretrained, it will be very precise,
when guessing what images has cells; when it thinks there is a cell in an image, there
usually is. On the other hand, it is relatively bad at classifying all the images that
actually has cells. This could be because the model has to be trained completely
from the bottom, only on our data. This would mean, that it will take longer for the
model to train the later stages, ultimately meaning, that it will not become as good
at seeing the most detailed and descriptive features, and thus be worse at detecting
all cells. It would only be able to detect those, where the cells are very clear, but this
would also mean, that once it finally decides to have found a cell, it is usually correct
in that decision.
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Reflection on Results
73
6.1.1.3
Network Structure
The hypothesis defined in connection with the third experiment from the previous
chapter, could be rejected based on the results presented in table 5.1, though the
statistical significance is not very high, as the results from the experiment lies very
close to each other, and due to the lack of generality in the tests, which we will
discuss further later on in the chapter. As seen in table 5.1, where Ex2 represents the
ResNet50, Ex4 the ResNet34 and Ex5 the ResNet101 network, ResNet50 produces
slightly better results on the same data and with the exact same configuration as both
competitors. ResNet101 is however extremely close, with a difference in accuracy of
only 0.08% on the test data. Another interesting point, is that ResNet34 achieves a
lower precision but a higher recall than ResNet50, while ResNet101 achieves a higher
precision and a lower recall. The differences are fairly symmetric, which is reflected
in the F1 score, that is somewhat proportional with the accuracies.
6.1.1.4
Multiple Classes
The immediate reaction to the results of experimenting with classification of multiple
classes might be that the model clearly performs well, considering the high accuracy
of 99.18% on the test set (see appendix A.1 for more info), but when taking a closer
look at the classifications, we see that it does in fact perform well on the cell detection,
just as we expected following the original results of Ex2 in table 5.1. However, the
cell type classification is a bit suspicious. The model never makes a mistake when
guessing the cell type. This might sound terrific at first; why bother with the massive
architecture of Mask R-CNN, when ResNet50 trained on only 24000 images from
only 4 difference individuals can determine the cell type with a theoretical accuracy
of 100%? The fact of the matter however, is that it is almost certainly using the
difference in image composition to make the guesses, due to the very limited number
of individuals. To test this hypothesis, we decided to check what would happen on
a much larger dataset, with images from many more different individuals. From the
results of this additional experiment (see appendix A.2 for more info), it was clear
that our initial hypothesis was correct.
==PAGE:86==
74
6 Discussion
6.1.2
Mask R-CNN
6.1.2.1
Classification Network Structure
The standard (old) classification net proved itself slightly worse than our custom
(new) classification net. Looking at the accuracy of Ex7 in table 5.2, and the confusion
matrix in figure 5.4 (right), the old version achieves a slightly lower accuracy compared
to the new one. This is likely due to the fact that a downsampled version of the entire
image is evaluated during classification, and as a results of the downsampling, there
is not quite enough information about the cells to be able to differentiate between
the types very well. Furthermore the training set might contain images with more
than one cell, and since we are only able to classify one cell at a time, the ROI might
find another cell than the one we have a ground truth for. This would mean that
whenever the classifier predicts a cell that is not supposed to be predicted, it is told
that it is just background. This could very well be the reason, it ends up predicting
background slightly more than the new model.
Looking at Ex6 in table 5.2 and the confusion matrix in figure 5.4 (left), we see
a slightly better result. The new classification net manages to reach an admirable
accuracy of 70.43%, whilst actually trying to guess the cell types. Because the network
can focus on what is actually important in the image, considering that it wants to
classify the cell types, it actually produces some decent results. A very important
note here, is that the training set contains a majority of adult donor cells. Looking
at the confusion matrix in figure 5.4 (left), the model primarily predicts that the cells
are donor cells. It is possible that the model has been subject to an unintentional
bias towards donor cells, by being trained on a majority of such. From the confusion
matrix, we see that it guesses most of the donor cells correctly, but when we are
dealing with fetal cells, it often still predicts them as donor cells.
This is likely
because it has a bias towards donor cells following the unfair training. It knows what
a fetal cell looks like, so when a clear instance comes up, it does predict it correctly.
However, when is is in doubt, the best guess would be a donor cell, due to the majority
of cells being donor cells. So the best approach in many cases is to just go for the
prior distribution.
From the graphs of the loss for each model in figure 5.3, the old version (on the right)
quickly reaches a loss close to 0.16 and barely improves from that following further
training.
On the other hand, the new version (on the left) follows a much more
traditional trajectory, and could potentially improve its accuracy even more from
further training. This would however increase the risk of overfitting and could hurt it
generality and thus the accuracy on the test data. 10 epochs in the learning rate gets
lowered by a factor of 10 which might be a bit early considering the declination of
the function just before the change in learning rate. The loss does however decrease
further from that point, albeit at a slower pace.
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Reflection on Results
75
6.1.2.2
Classification Inside and Outside the Tube
One of the main hypotheses for this project, was that classification would be easier
inside the tube than outside, due to the deformation of the cells. Looking at the
results of Ex6 in table 5.2 and in figure 5.5, we can see an improved accuracy inside
the tube compared to that of outside the tube. From the confusion matrix visualising
the distribution outside the tube, we have a few predictions of background. This
could be due to the false positive ground truths. These instances are primarily in the
beginning and end of the image sequences for a cell, and would therefore confuse the
classifier in these particular locations.
6.1.2.3
Bounding Box accuracy
As seen from the images in figure 5.8, the bounding box is quite precise, so why is our
accuracy only around 77%? This can be explained partially by the fact that some
object were incorrectly predicted as cells, meaning that the bounding box was drawn
at a completely different place in the image. This would cause the accuracy to be 0,
reducing the overall accuracy. In other instances it is due to poor ground truth as
seen in figure 6.1. In this example the original bounding box (blue) does not surround
the entire cell, where our method (red) actually does a better job at predicting. Still
because we compare to the ground truth, we will only get an accuracy score of 66%
in an image like this also reducing the overall accuracy score.
Figure 6.1: An explanation for a low accuracy score on bounding boxes, could be
the wrongly annotated ”ground truth”. Our prediction (red) vs. annotated ”Ground
Truth” (blue).
==PAGE:88==
76
6 Discussion
6.1.2.4
Mask accuracy
Just as the bounding box precision was affected by poor ground truth, so to is the
mask precision. In the example in the section above, the bounding box of the ground
truth was smaller, than the actual cell. The ground truth bounding box does not
cover the entire cell and the ground truth mask does not either. The ground truth
mask is encapsulated by the ground truth bounding box, thus the ground truth mask
does not cover the entire cell. In figure 6.2, we have shown the absolute difference
between the ground truth mask and our predicted mask, of the example in section
6.1.2.3. From this it is clear to see that the outmost right part of the cell has not
been annotated when creating the ground truth. The mask accuracy for this example
is only 67% which in turn will help decreasing the overall accuracy.
Figure 6.2: The absolute difference between ground truth mask and predicted mask
from the example in section 6.1.2.3.
6.1.2.5
Mask R-CNN classification vs SVM
The results of the classification using extracted features from predicted masks, in-
dicates that it is somewhat possible to distinguish between the two types of cells.
Reaching an accuracy of 72%, the SVM gets a slightly higher accuracy score, than
using the classification networks we have implemented in the Mask R-CNN. Seeing
this result we should also keep in mind that the SVM has only been trained on 100
sequences (50 adult and 50 fetal), so using more sequences might help get a higher
performance. Due to time constraints though, we have not had the time to test this
theory thoroughly as we only had time to generate masks for 100 sequences. We also
used Matlab’s Classification Learner application due to time constraints as we had
little time testing different classifiers individually. We did test the SVM using sklearn
as well, and reached roughly the same result as the Classification Learner application,
from Matlab.
Indications are, that our predicted masks can indeed be used for feature extraction,
which in turn can be used for classification.
One of our primary hypotheses, was that the neural network would have a higher
accuracy than that of the SVM. This turned out to be wrong, though some opti-
misation to the architecture of the classification network, and a dataset containing
equal amount of adult and fetal red blood cells, might tip it over the edge to a higher
performance, as the bias towards adult red blood cells would be reduced.
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Further Discussions
77
6.2
Further Discussions
6.2.1
Reasoning behind lack of image augmentation
Image augmentation is often used within deep learning to reduce the risk of overfit-
ting, minimise the effect of background variance, and/or improve general performance
by generating more training data. By rotating, shifting, flipping, cropping, scaling
or even adding random noise to images, one can generate new variations of the same
images. One problem of this project this technique could help solving, is the problem
of background noise and general variance interfering with cell localisation. Because
the background is non-static over multiple different samples, the network can have a
hard time excluding it from its considerations. By generating additional images, by
for instance flipping or rotating the images, the network would have an easier time
learning that the background has nothing to due with the cell presence in the images.
When image augmentation is applied to reduce overfitting, it is often because the
original training dataset is relatively small, meaning that additional data is needed
in order to get a more general model. Scaling can be used rather successfully for im-
proved detection of objects of very different sizes - often used in tandem with feature
pyramid networks. This could also be implemented within Mask R-CNN, for better
detection of objects in varying sizes.
The reason this has not been implemented however, is due to the fact, that flipped or
rotated images, also means flipped or rotated cells. This effect ruins the consistency
when it comes to the deformation and orientation of the cells, and since we hypothe-
sised that the deformation of the cells would be an important metric for classification,
and the deformation is reliant on the orientation of the cells, and thus the images,
this type of image augmentation was quickly ruled out. A reason for not applying
other augmentation variations, is the fact that we have plenty of data to work with
already.
6.2.2
Dataset and Ground Truth
The dataset has been a big hurtle for us. We had to ensure that both our backbone
and our Mask R-CNN were trained correctly, meaning that the data we used had
to be a correct representation of the problem. This meant that we had to remove
a lot images with more than one cell in them for the training of the Mask R-CNN,
as we only had ground truths for one cell in each image, even for the images that
contained more than one cell. If we used those images for training, we would punish
our network during training, even if it was in fact correct in its prediction.
==PAGE:90==
78
6 Discussion
Another thing we had to take into consideration, was the fact that our ground truth
for the bounding boxes and the masks, was not annotated by a professional, but was
annotated by a script created by an other student. This would create a bias in the
data, where the script had not created a perfect representation of the data. This have
of course, also had an impact on our results, though it is a small impact as the scripts
created, seemed to be fairly precise.
We tried making our own scripts for annotating images for the backbone, and even
tried using CNNs, trained on smaller datasets with manually reviewed annotations, to
generate annotations for other more comprehensive datasets. Though some of these
attempts proved fairly promising at the time, none of them produces acceptable
results in the end, considering the high requirement of quality. The only apparent
solution to creating acceptable annotations, involved manually doing them. After
doing it for a dataset of 30000 images, we started seeing very promising results from
the backbone network. This approach had one major downside though; it was not
only very tedious, but also extremely time consuming. While the backbone seemed to
do just fine, classifying images with cells in them, from the relatively small dataset of
30000 images, doing annotations for the RPN and other stages of the solution, would
be far more comprehensive, to the point where it seemed very overwhelming. This is
due to the fact that, the dataset would have to be much larger, and the annotations
would require much more information, such as bounding box coordinates for instance.
6.2.3
Resolution of Images
As mentioned in section 3.4.3, the problem of detecting and classifying the RBCs is
made even more difficult by the resolution of the images. The resolution 150 × 800
is not that bad in itself, but taking the cells size in the images into consideration,
it becomes very clear that this is not an easy task. The cells are a maximum of
50 × 40 pixels (due to the deformation and height restriction in the channel). These
are then downsampled by 8 and 16 when creating the feature maps, becoming 5 × 5
and 2.5 × 2.5 (3 × 3 or 2 × 2 since pixels cannot be divided) respectively. All of the
information about the cell has to be found in this small space of information, which
seems to be though for the network. The bounding boxes are actually surprisingly
good, but detecting the difference between fetal blood cells and adult blood cells, just
seems to be to hard of a problem to solve with this resolution. The loss of information
seems too big. In much the same way, it seems to be too hard for the network to get
the correct shape of the blood cells, when creating a mask from these feature maps,
and though it does create a mask for the cells, the accuracy of the mask is not high
enough for us to call it a success.
==PAGE:91==
6.3 Future Work
79
6.3
Future Work
6.3.1
Creating more data
In the end, our network was able to detect more than one cell at a time, provided that
the post_nms_topN in the configuration-file is set to approximately same amount of
cells as we expect to see in an image. This creates an opportunity for augmenting
new ”ground truth” images, that contains more than one cell. We do realise that
for doing this the precision of the mask, probably has to be somewhat higher, than
what our models performed, but for future work, and with some adjustments, this
would be a possibility. Then new models of the network could be trained on a larger
dataset, helping the models to generalise better and possibly improve performance.
An example of our network detecting multiple cells is shown in figure 6.3
Figure 6.3: Multiple cells detected in the same image.
6.3.2
Sequence Analysis for Cell Tracking and Deformability
Analysis using Recurrent Neural Networks
Considering the problem at hand, looking at each image individually and attempting
to classify what type of cells are in that particular image, is not exactly the ideal
approach. Getting decent results this way is definitely not impossible, but by track-
ing each cell and analysing their behaviour over time, we could potentially improve
the accuracy of the classifications significantly - especially as this would allow for a
much more comprehensive analysis of the deformability of each cell, which would add
a whole new perspective to the classification algorithm.
For this, some way of maintaining some sort of memory while reading the input se-
quence would be necessary. The model should be able to modify this memory while
reading and take all the information it observes into account. Feed-Forward networks
are inherently stateless and static in their structure, once they have been trained, so
they would not be able to maintain memory between inputs, nor would they be able
to change how to process an input based on inputs they have seen in the past. For
this task, a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) would be perfect.
The major difference from a RNN to a feed-forward network, is the addition of re-
current connections that propagate information between neurons within the same
layer. This characteristic is what allows for maintaining a form of memory. This
==PAGE:92==
80
6 Discussion
is because, that for each discrete time step, elements of the input is fed forward (as
for feed-forward networks), but also fed back to neurons within the same layer for
recurrent layers. This means that elements of the input from an earlier point in time,
is evaluated concurrently with those of the present time. This essentially means, that
the activations of the neurons in the network, represent the accumulating state of
the network instance. Additionally, each sequence of images, that we would need to
process, would use their own instance of the model. By creating a separate instance
for each sequence of a particular cell traversing through the image, the model could
focus on evaluating the behaviour of only that particular cell, disregarding behaviours
from other cells.
6.3.3
Averaging Multiple Experiments to Increase Generality of
Results
For the experiments relating to the backbone network, we trained and tested each
model twice, to get two results, from which we computed the average, to get a slightly
more general description of each models performance. For most of the experiments,
the results varied very little, and running them twice, or perhaps thrice, would proba-
bly be acceptable. However, in one cases the results varied with a factor of over 1.01.
This variation might not seem significant at first, but when your model reaches an
accuracy score of 98% at one run, and then 97% at another, it seems to be quite de-
pendent on how well it gets started, and in what order the data is (pseudo-randomly)
loaded in.
Running each experiment at least 5 times each, would have been a good approach,
but due to time constraints - especially for training and testing some of the models
on larger datasets, this was unfortunately not a very realistic approach, since we only
had access to two high-end GPUs on average at any given time.
K-fold cross validation
A common approach within the field of machine learning, is to use K-fold cross val-
idation. This approach is resource intensive, compared to just running one or two
different tests, but it is one of the most fair validation techniques relative to the work
required. For this approach, you first decide on how many folds you want to use.
Here, a very common pick is k = 5. You then partition your dataset into a test and
a training set, where the test set contains 1/5 of the data, and the training set the
remaining 4/5. This partition is considered to be 1 fold, and 4 more are therefore
partitioned with the test set shifted 1/5 for every fold. An illustration of this tech-
nique can be seen in figure 6.4.
==PAGE:93==
6.3 Future Work
81
Figure 6.4: K-fold cross validation with k=5. The dataset is split into k parts and
each of them is used for testing once, while the model is trained on the remaining k-1
parts. The predictive performance of the model is estimated as the average of the k
performances.
Ensemble learning
Another way to achieve a higher generality of results, is to use ensemble learning.
Every trained model will likely make slightly different mistakes (compared to a perfect
model). By training the same model multiple times, and having them vote on the
final predictions, we could dilute these individual mistakes, and ultimately produce
a more general prediction.
6.3.4
Image Quality Control
An issue that dawned on us later on in the process, was the how the difference in
quality of the images sometimes vary - even for images from the same recording
session. Sometimes the cells are simply too difficult to detect. An example of such an
image can be seen in figure 6.5. Here the cell is so transparent, that it is practically
invisible. Looking at the original annotation files, it can also be seen, that the script
used to classify whether an image contains a cell or not, struggles to see any cells in
images like this one.
==PAGE:94==
82
6 Discussion
Figure 6.5: Image showing a single NS cell on its way through the channel. The cell
is very transparent in the image, and just like it can be difficult to see it with the
naked eye, it is also difficult to locate it, let alone classify it.
Another example can be seen in figure 6.6. This image is from the same recording
batch as the one in figure 6.5 - in fact only about 150 images apart, but for some
reason, the pixelvalues of the cell is much higher, making it stand out from the
background, and ultimately making it much easier to detect. This makes the tasks
of segmenting it and classifying it much easier, compared to the other image.
Figure 6.6: Image showing a single NS cell on its way through the channel. The
cell is much less transparent to that of figure 6.5. Just like it is easier to detect it
manually, the algorithms will also have a much easier job segmenting it and ultimately
classifying it.
Enforcing some sort of image quality control, where we exclude image like the one
in figure 6.5, could potentially improve performance as the task of segmenting and
classifying the average image would likely become significantly easier. Other examples
of images that could be excluded following an enforcement of image quality control,
are the ones in figure 3.1, 3.2, as well as both (a) and (b) of figure 3.3. These images
either include anomalies or transparent cells that could prevent proper segmentation
and subsequent classification.
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
Part of a dataset of 8,470,458 images stemming from recordings of red blood cells
traversing through a narrow channel, was used to investigate the possibility of dis-
criminating between adult and fetal red blood cells using deep learning. Following an
analysis of the problem from a technical perspective, and a study of the current state
of the art within the field of object instance segmentation and classification within
images, a Mask R-CNN implementation was deemed appropriate.
Using the results of previous work done to solve the same overall problem as a mark to
beat, a Mask R-CNN model was designed and implemented from the bottom. Due to
the dataset having been collected without deep learning as a tool for classification in
mind, large parts of the dataset was practically unusable due to a lack of consistency
between images and annotations. Before implementing the Mask R-CNN architec-
ture, some data preparation and general processing, as well as image manipulation
was needed in order to get the data ready and make it more suitable for eventually
training, testing and validating the model. Overall, the Mask R-CNN architecture
was implemented to the standard of the original method presented by [25], however
smaller design changes was necessary for a better adaptation to the particular prob-
lem of this project.
The model was trained on a dataset consisting of over 72000 images, validated on a
separate set of 9000 images and finally tested on a separate test set of 13000 images,
all of which consisted of images with cells from both adults and fetuses.
Different parts of the architecture were tested independently, so as to isolate potential
issues.
The quality of the annotations for the images turned out to have a huge impact on
the performance of the trained model. By manually reviewing and fixing the origi-
nal annotations, the accuracy of the model performing cell detection increased from
52.97% to 99.38%. By computing theoretical relevance of the former model, it turned
out that the model always went for the prior distribution, assuming there was never
a cell, since most images did not contain one.
Additionally, using transfer learning for our backbone turned out having a slight
positive impact on the model accuracy. By using a pretrained model rather than
initialising the weights using a standard weight initialisation strategy, we reached an
accuracy of 99.38% compared to 98.73%.
==PAGE:96==
84
7 Conclusion
The impact of the network structure for the backbone, was also tested, but while
ResNet50 reached the highest accuracy of three different ResNet variations, the dif-
ference in results was very small, and ultimately statistically insignificant.
Finally the effect of classifying the cells types at this very early stage was tested, with
the intent of excluding this possibility as a full solution to the problem. While the
initial results were surprisingly promising, further testing and investigation proved
that the model was overfitting to an extreme degree and based its predictions on
image composition rather than the features of the cells.
Two different classification network structures were tested for the Mask R-CNN archi-
tecture. After having reached a classification accuracy of 68.65% using the original
classification design from [25], a custom variation focusing on isolating the classifi-
cation problem to the cells, and keeping more relevant information throughout the
process was tested. This variation showed a slight improvement over the old version,
reaching a classification accuracy of 70.43%. In order to test one of our primary hy-
potheses, that classification of cells inside the tube will be easier than outside due to
the deformation of the cells, two boundaries were defined at the inlet and the outlet
of the channel. The classification accuracy was then tested independently inside and
outside these boundaries. The accuracy outside the tube turned out to be 65.50%,
compared to 71.55% inside the tube, proving that our initial expectations were correct.
The accuracy of the predicted bounding boxes reaches 77.08% which is significantly
lower than expected. Especially when looking at the visual results, where the pre-
dicted bounding boxes looked close to perfect in almost all instances. However this
missalignment was likely due to lack of quality control for the annotations, which are
not all perfect, even though they should act as perfect ground truths.
Regarding mask accuracy a value of 76.65% was reached, which is affected by the
same case of ground truths of poor quality. From looking at visual examples, almost
all predicted masks were of a very good representation of the cell considering the
limited information of a 28×28 area.
Finally, we experimented with extracting concrete features for the cells at various po-
sitions in the images, for training a more traditional machine learning classifier. By
extracting three features deemed the most discriminating, at five different locations
in the tube, and using an SVM trained on a smaller dataset with the predicted masks
from our model, we were able to achieve a classification accuracy of 72%. Since this
accuracy technically exceeds that of our Mask R-CNN classification accuracy, we can
not conclude that our second primary hypothesis is true, but the bias towards donor
cells and the inconsistent ground truths in the larger dataset used for training our
Mask R-CNN model, suggests that additional experiments could lead to a different
conclusion.
==PAGE:97==
7 Conclusion
85
In summary, the problem of differentiating between adult and fetal red blood cells
from a sequence of images using deep learning turned out to be very difficult to solve.
The state and quality of the available data turned out to be the biggest issue, and was
a huge limiting factor in the potential performance of the final solution and ultimately
made the problem even more difficult to solve.
Luckily difficult is not synonymous with impossible, and the end result was a model
that was able to classify individual adult and fetal red blood cells with a respectable
accuracy of 70.43%. While this result might not be acceptable for a FMH diagnosis
or screening tool, it goes to show how deep learning has great potential in the area.
If trained on an unbiased dataset with manually created ground truths of an even
larger size, accompanied with a more extensive sequence analysis, there is certainly
potential for a much more reliable model. Therefore the accuracy of 70.43% might
not be a fair representation of the potential of our model. Nonetheless, our final
results are a large improvement over the results of previous work in the field, and the
primary goal of this project has therefore been achieved.
==PAGE:98==
86
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX A
Results of Backbone
Tests
Figure A.1: Confusion matrix visualising the results of the classification done by the
model Ex2 from table 5.1, on 3 classes instead of 2, on the test set containing 6000
images.
==PAGE:100==
88
A Results of Backbone Tests
Figure A.2: Confusion matrix visualising the results of the classification done by the
model Ex2 from table 5.1, on 3 classes instead of 2, on the training set containing over
150000 images, where the labels are generated from the predictions of the standard
Ex2.
==PAGE:101==
A Results of Backbone Tests
89
Figure A.3: Confusion matrix visualising the results of the classification done by the
model Ex1 from table 5.1 on the training set containing 24000 non-reviewed images.
==PAGE:102==
90
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX B
Results of Box and
Mask Predictions
Figure B.1: Example of ground truth bounding box (blue) and predicted bounding
box (red)
Figure B.2: Example of mask prediction (right) compared to ground truth mask (left)
Figure B.3: Image of a cell with the mask as overlay in order to show precision of the
mask
==PAGE:104==
92
B Results of Box and Mask Predictions
Figure B.4: Example of ground truth bounding box (blue) and predicted bounding
box (red)
Figure B.5: Example of mask prediction (right) compared to ground truth mask (left)
Figure B.6: Image of a cell with the mask as overlay in order to show precision of the
mask
==PAGE:105==
B Results of Box and Mask Predictions
93
Figure B.7: Example of ground truth bounding box (blue) and predicted bounding
box (red)
Figure B.8: Example of mask prediction (right) compared to ground truth mask (left)
Figure B.9: Image of a cell with the mask as overlay in order to show precision of the
mask
==PAGE:106==
94
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX C
Software libraries and
Config.py
For the project we have use some different software libraries. We are only going to
state the ones that is not necessarily common to use in python, so we are excluding
libraries like numpy from this list. Also sub-libraries of other libraries will not be
included in this list, so eg. all of the sub-libraries of torch is not stated in the list
• torch
• torchvision
• easydict
• cv2
• PIL
• matplotlib
• chainer
• CuPy
• skimage
• sklearn
In order to use the chainer library (which is used for RoI-align), one also has to
install the CuPy library
==PAGE:108==
96
C Software libraries and Config.py
Figure C.1: First part of our configuration file
==PAGE:109==
C Software libraries and Config.py
97
Figure C.2: Second part of our configuration file
Figure C.3: Third part of our configuration file
==PAGE:110==
98
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX D
Feature Maps
Figure D.1: Image of cell and 25 of the 512 feature maps, extracted from the ResNet,
used by the Region Proposal Network
Figure D.2: Image of cell and 25 of the 512 feature maps, extracted from the ResNet,
used by the Region Proposal Network
==PAGE:112==
100
D Feature Maps
Figure D.3: Image of cell and 25 of the 512 feature maps, extracted from the ResNet,
used by the Region Proposal Network
Figure D.4: Image of cell and 25 of the 512 feature maps, extracted from the ResNet,
used by the Region Proposal Network
==PAGE:113==
D Feature Maps
101
Figure D.5: Image of cell and 25 of the 512 feature maps, extracted from the ResNet,
used by the Region Proposal Network
==PAGE:114==
102
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX E
Mask R-CNN Test
Results
Model Tot cls Tot bbox Tot mask
In cls
In bbox In mask Out cls Out bbox Out mask
Old 1
68.15%
76.49%
76.73%
69.44% 78.08%
78.47% 62.62%
69.70%
69.34%
Old 2
68.65%
76.38%
77.27%
69.63% 77.29%
78.46% 64.28%
72.35%
71.99%
New 1 70.43%
77.08%
76.65%
71.55% 78.37%
78.05% 65.50%
71.41%
70.45%
New 2 69.43%
78.13%
77.71%
70.43% 79.02%
78.78% 64.90%
74.08%
72.82%
Table E.1: Table showing all results of the four models. Tot extends to total, In
extends to inside the tube and Out extends to outside the tube. Furthermore cls
denotes classification and bbox denotes bounding box. All values represent accuracy
scores.
==PAGE:116==
104
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
[1]
Freja Høier et al. Deformation of blood cells in the PolyNano Demonstrator
Chip. Technical report. 2018. url: http : / / production . datastore . cvt .
dk/oafilestore?oid=5b3cab555010df0180324421%7B%5C&%7Dtargetid=
5b3cab555010df0180324424.
[2]
L. Aagesen. “Hydrodynamic Deformability-based Classification of Fetal and
Adult Red Blood Cells Using Image Analysis and Machine Learning”. PhD
thesis. 2018. url: www.fysik.dtu.dk.
[3]
Masood Ahmed and Mohammad Abdullatif. “Fetomaternal Transfusion as a
Cause Of Severe Fetal Anemia Causing Early Neonatal Death: A Case Re-
port”. In: Oman Medical Journal 26.6 (November 2011), pages 444–446. issn:
1999768X. doi: 10.5001/omj.2011.113. url: http://www.omjournal.org/
fultext%7B%5C_%7DPDF.aspx?DetailsID=175%7B%5C&%7Dpdf=images/175%
7B%5C_%7DM%7B%5C_%7DDeatials%7B%5C_%7DPdf%7B%5C_%7D.pdf%7B%5C&
%7Dtype=pdf.
[4]
Josefine Theresia Maier et al. “Fetomaternal hemorrhage (FMH), an update:
review of literature and an illustrative case”. In: Archives of Gynecology and
Obstetrics 292.3 (September 2015), pages 595–602. issn: 0932-0067. doi: 10.
1007/s00404- 015- 3686- 1. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s00404-015-3686-1.
[5]
Blair J. Wylie and Mary E. D￿Alton. “Fetomaternal Hemorrhage”. In: Obstet-
rics & Gynecology 115.5 (May 2010), pages 1039–1051. issn: 0029-7844. doi:
10.1097/AOG.0b013e3181da7929. url: http://content.wkhealth.com/
linkback/openurl?sid=WKPTLP:landingpage%7B%5C&%7Dan=00006250-
201005000-00026.
[6]
Pia Jennes Foli-Andersen. “Neonatal anæmi på grund af føtomaternel blødning
diagnosticeret ved flowcytometri”. In: Ugeskrift for Læger [online] 177.10 (2015).
issn: 16036824. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2435263510.
[7]
ES Sebring and HF Polesky. “Fetomaternal hemorrhage: incidence, risk fac-
tors, time of occurrence, and clinical effects”. In: Transfusion 30.4 (May 1990),
pages 344–357. issn: 0041-1132. doi: 10.1046/j.1537-2995.1990.30490273444.
x. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1046/j.1537-2995.1990.30490273444.
x.
==PAGE:118==
106
Bibliography
[8]
Yeowon A. Kim and Robert S. Makar. “Detection of fetomaternal hemorrhage”.
In: American Journal of Hematology 87.4 (April 2012), pages 417–423. issn:
03618609. doi: 10.1002/ajh.22255. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/
ajh.22255.
[9]
Morten Hanefeld Dziegiel, Leif Kofoed Nielsen, and Adela Berkowicz. “Detect-
ing fetomaternal hemorrhage by flow cytometry”. In: Current Opinion in Hema-
tology 13.6 (November 2006), pages 490–495. issn: 1065-6251. doi: 10.1097/01.
moh.0000245687.09215.c4. url: https://insights.ovid.com/crossref?
an=00062752-200611000-00015.
[10]
E KLEIHAUER. “Demonstration of fetal hemoglobin in erythrocytes of a blood
smear”. In: Klinische Wochenschrift 35.12 (1957). issn: 00232173. url: https:
//findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/100470510.
[11]
BH Davis et al. “Detection of fetal red cells in fetomaternal hemorrhage using
a fetal hemoglobin monoclonal antibody by flow cytometry”. In: Transfusion
38.8 (August 1998), pages 749–756. issn: 00411132. doi: 10.1046/j.1537-
2995.1998.38898375514.x. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1046/j.1537-
2995.1998.38898375514.x.
[12]
Esther Guetta et al. “Analysis of Fetal Blood Cells in the Maternal Circu-
lation: Challenges, Ongoing Efforts, and Potential Solutions”. In: Stem Cells
and Development 13.1 (February 2004), pages 93–99. issn: 1547-3287. doi:
10.1089/154732804773099290. url: https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/
10.1089/154732804773099290.
[13]
O LINDERKAMP. “DEFORMABILITY AND INTRINSIC MATERIAL PROP-
ERTIES OF NEONATAL RED-BLOOD-CELLS”. In: Blood 67.5 (1986). issn:
00064971. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/66495654.
[14]
Monica Diez-Silva et al. “Shape and Biomechanical Characteristics of Human
Red Blood Cells in Health and Disease”. In: MRS Bulletin 35.5 (May 2010),
pages 382–388. issn: 0883-7694. doi: 10 . 1557 / mrs2010 . 571. url: https :
//www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/S0883769400000713/
type/journal%7B%5C_%7Darticle.
[15]
Morphology (Introduction to Video and Image Processing) Part 2. url: http:
//what-when-how.com/introduction-to-video-and-image-processing/
morphology- introduction- to- video- and- image- processing- part- 2/
(visited on May 2, 2019).
[16]
AlexNet. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AlexNet (visited on May 6,
2019).
[17]
Scientific Figure on ResearchGate. url: https://www.researchgate.net/
figure/A-typical-CNN-model-is-composed-of-convolutional-layers-
pooling-layers-and-fully_fig1_331991539 (visited on May 31, 2019).
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
107
[18]
Visualisation of pooling. url: https://pythonmachinelearning.pro/introduction-
to-convolutional-neural-networks-for-vision-tasks/ (visited on May 6,
2019).
[19]
Buduma Nikhil and Nicholas Lacascio. Fundamentals of Deep Learning. Se-
bastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2017. isbn: 978-1-491-92561-4.
[20]
Josh Patterson and Adam Gibson. Deep Learning, A Practitioner’s Approach.
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2017. isbn: 978-1-491-91425-0.
[21]
Aurélien Géron. Hands-on machine learning with Scikit-Learn and TensorFlow
: concepts, tools, and techniques to build intelligent systems. Sebastopol, CA:
O’Reilly Media, 2017. isbn: 978-1-491-96229-9.
[22]
Ross Girshick et al. “Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and
semantic segmentation”. In: (November 2013). arXiv: 1311.2524. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1311.2524.
[23]
Ross Girshick. “Fast R-CNN”. In: (April 2015). arXiv: 1504.08083. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1504.08083.
[24]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with
Region Proposal Networks”. In: (June 2015). arXiv: 1506.01497. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497.
[25]
Kaiming He et al. “Mask R-CNN”. In: (March 2017). arXiv: 1703.06870. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06870.
[26]
Bar Vinograd. Scientific Figure on ResearchGate. url: https://towardsdatascience.
com/instance-embedding-instance-segmentation-without-proposals-
31946a7c53e1 (visited on May 31, 2019).
[27]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: (De-
cember 2015). arXiv: 1512.03385. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[28]
Object Detection and Classification using R-CNNs – Telesens. url: http://
www.telesens.co/2018/03/11/object-detection-and-classification-
using-r-cnns/ (visited on March 27, 2019).
[29]
Loss Functions — ML Cheatsheet documentation. url: https://ml-cheatsheet.
readthedocs.io/en/latest/loss%7B%5C_%7Dfunctions.html (visited on
March 28, 2019).
[30]
About loss functions, regularization and joint losses : multinomial logistic, cross
entropy, square errors, euclidian, hinge, Crammer and Singer, one versus all,
squared hinge, absolute value, infogain, L1 / L2 - Frobenius / L2,1 norms, con-
nectionist temporal classification loss. url: http://christopher5106.github.
io/deep/learning/2016/09/16/about- loss- functions- multinomial-
logistic-logarithm-cross-entropy-square-errors-euclidian-absolute-
frobenius-hinge.html (visited on March 27, 2019).
==PAGE:120==
108
Bibliography
[31]
Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. “Fully Convolutional Net-
works for Semantic Segmentation”. In: (November 2014). arXiv: 1411.4038.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4038.
[32]
DP Kingma, J Ba - arXiv preprint ArXiv:1412.6980, and undefined 2014. “Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization”. In: arxiv.org (). url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1412.6980.
[33]
Visualisation of dropout. url: https://medium.com/@amarbudhiraja/https-
medium-com-amarbudhiraja-learning-less-to-learn-better-dropout-
in-deep-machine-learning-74334da4bfc5 (visited on May 6, 2019).
[34]
Michael Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning
. url: http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap3.html (visited
on May 20, 2019).
