==PAGE:1==
Flexible Scheduling for the
Time-Triggered Traﬃc in
Time-Sensitive Networking
Niklas Reusch
Kongens Lyngby 2019
M.Sc.
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Matematiktorvet, building 303B,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN) is a set of amendments to the well known
IEEE 802.3 Ethernet standard, which adds deterministic services such as guar-
anteed packet transport with bounded latency. This standardization is highly
sought after in industries such as automotive, aerospace and automation, which
rely on distributed safety-critical real-time systems, which need those determin-
istic network services.
Previously there have been several technologies that seek to provide such ser-
vices, however many are not able to meet the high bandwidth requirements
of today’s applications and are not interoperable in a network without losing
real-time guarantees.
TSN diﬀerentiates multiple traﬃc classes such as Time-Triggered (TT), Audio-
Video Bridging (AVB) and Best-Eﬀort (BE). The 802.1Qvb amendment deﬁnes
Gate-Control Lists (GCLs) as a mechanism to control the forwarding of priori-
tized traﬃc, by controlling the opening time of gates attached to priority queues
in network switches.
This thesis aims to provide a base to compare diﬀerent conﬁgurations of TSN
networks and methods to do the traﬃc scheduling. It introduces the notion of
problem compositions to facilitate comparison. It picks out a novel composi-
tion, which removes traﬃc isolation constraints and relies on a worst-case delay
analysis to guarantee bounded latency for time-triggered traﬃc.
Instead of scheduling individual frames on the network nodes, periodic opening
windows representing GCLs are used for ﬂexible traﬃc shaping. A constructive
==PAGE:4==
ii
heuristic for the generation of initial solutions and an iterative optimization
algorithm are proposed, with the goal of fulﬁlling the latency bounds of time-
triggered traﬃc while leaving as much bandwidth as possible available for lower
priority traﬃc.
They are evaluated against a diﬀerent problem composition and scheduling
method based on traﬃc isolation, as the ﬁrst step towards a comprehensive
comparison.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the re-
quirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
The thesis deals with comparison of conﬁgurations and optimization problems
in Time-Sensitive Networks.
It was written under the supervision of Professor Paul Pop.
Lyngby, 10-June-2019
Niklas Reusch
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First I would like to thank my supervisor Paul Pop for his extraordinary en-
gagement with my work and all of his feedback and advice.
I would also like to thank thank Postdoc Luxi Zhao for her help, especially
regarding her worst-case analysis that forms the basis of this theses.
Many
thanks also to Postdoc Bahram Zarrin for helping with various problems.
Then I would like to thank Dr. Silviu Craciunas for sharing his extensive knowl-
edge about TSN and helping me with many questions.
Finally many thanks to Manuel Montoya for his advice on metaheuristics, statis-
tics and general support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Time-Sensitive Networking
5
2.1
Ethernet Packets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
TSN Switches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Streams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Network Synchronization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Worst-Case Delay Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Model
11
3.1
Network Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Network Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Links
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Traﬃc Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.1
Streams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
Egress ports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.3
Queues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.4
Windows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Helper Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.1
Worst-Case Delays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Problem Formulation and Related Work
19
4.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Conﬁgurations and Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Conﬁgurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.2
Scheduling Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.3
Problem Compositions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Solution
27
5.1
Understanding the Worst-Case Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.1
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.2
Technicalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Cost Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Construction of Initial Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.1
Problem Breakdown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.2
Window Length
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.3
Maximum Period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.4
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Iterative Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4.1
Stream Optimization Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4.2
Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.5
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Evaluation
49
6.1
Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.1.1
Test Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.1.2
Heuristic and Iterative Optimization Algorithm . . . . . .
51
6.1.3
Result Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.1.4
Proﬁling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.2
Comparison to Deterministic Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusions and Future Work
61
7.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A Appendix
65
A.1 Problem Example - Network Topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Description
ASAP
as-soon-as-possible
AVB
Audio-Video Bridging
BE
Best-Eﬀort
ES
End system
FIFO
ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out
GCD
Greatest Common Divisor
GCL
Gate-Control List
GRASP
Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure
ILP
Integer Linear Programming
LCM
Least Common Multiple
MTU
Maximum Transmission Unit
OMT
Optimization Modulo Theories
PCP
Priority Code Point
QoS
Quality of Service
SMT
Satisﬁability Modulo Theories
SW
Switch
TSN
Time-Sensitive Networking
TT
Time-Triggered
VID
VLAN identiﬁer
WCD
Worst-Case Delay
==PAGE:12==
x
Abbreviations
==PAGE:13==
Notations
Notation
Description
G(V, L)
Directed graph of physical network topology
L
Set of all edges of a physical network topology graph.
Represents data links.
V
Set of all vertices of a physical network topology graph.
Represent network nodes.
ES
Set of all end systems in the network.
Vertices of a
physical network topology graph.
SW
Set of all switches in the network. Vertices of a physical
network topology graph.
P
Set of all ports in the network. Subset of L
S
Set of all streams in the network.
δ
The maximum deviation from the perfect network clock
[v1, v2]
A network link consisting of two network nodes v1, v2
[v1, v2].d
Propagation delay on the link, in µs
[v1, v2].mt
Macrotick of the link, in µs
[v1, v2].p
Source Port of the link
[v1, v2].s
Speed of the link, in Bit/s
p
An egress port
p.I
The union set of the queue window intervals set of all
queues in the egress port p
p.Q
The set of scheduled queue in an egress port p
p.Thyper
The hyperperiod of an egress port p, in µs
q
A scheduled queue
q.gb
The guard band that has to be contained in window w
of a scheduled queue q
==PAGE:14==
xii
Notations
Notation
Description
q.maxst
The maximum sending time of all streams of a scheduled
queue q, in µs
q.pp
The total period percentage of all streams of a scheduled
queue q
q.p
The priority of a scheduled queue q
q.st
The total sending time of all streams of a scheduled
queue q, in µs
q.w
The window of a scheduled queue q
s
A stream
s.L
The data size of a stream s, in Byte
s.P
The ordered set of egress ports along the route of a
stream s
s.T
The period of a stream s, in µs
s.e2e
The deadline of a stream s, in µs. Maximum end-to-end
delay
s.pp
The period percentage of a stream s
s.p
The priority of a stream, between 0 and 6
s.t
The transmission duration of a stream s, in µs
w
A queue window
w.I
The set of window intervals of a queue window w
w.T
The period of a queue window w, in µs
w.l
The length of a queue window w, in µs
w.φ
The oﬀset of a queue window w, in µs
w.p
The priority of a queue window w
Costσ(P)
A function determining the standard deviation of costs
of a set of ports P
Cost(P)
A function determining the cost of a set of ports P
Cost(p)
A function determining the cost of a port p
Hyperperiod(p.Q)
A function determining the hyperperiod of a set of
queues
WindowSum(p.Q)
A function determining the sum of all window lengths
of a set of queues
WindowsGCD(p.Q)
A function determining the greatest common divisor of
all window parameters of a set of queues
l([a, b]])
A function determining the length of an interval [a,b]
l(I)
A function determining the length of a set of intervals I
AccumWCD(s, p)
A function determining the accumulated worst-case de-
lay for a stream s on its route up to the port p
QueueWCD(s, p)
A function determining the worst-case delay induced by
the port p on stream s
==PAGE:15==
Notations
xiii
Notation
Description
WCD(s)
A function determining the worst-case end-to-end delay
of a stream s
==PAGE:16==
xiv
Notations
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Safety-critical distributed systems are becoming increasingly relevant in our
world as they are getting involved in many areas of life. The automotive or
aerospace areas are examples where many lives rely on their correct function. A
failure in such a system may result in injury, loss of life or serious environmental
damage [1]. Thus adequate quality-control, veriﬁcation and validation measures
have to be adopted.
Such systems usually run real-time applications.
Their correct behavior not
only depends on the logical result but also on the time it took to achieve it.
If the result does not appear before a certain deadline a failure might occur.
We can further subdivide those applications into two groups, hard and soft
real-time systems. In hard real-time systems, the result has no value after the
deadline and severe consequences could occur. In a soft real-time system the
result maintains some utility [2].
In a hard real-time application the miss of a single deadline can have catastrophic
consequences. Imagine a train approaching a crossing. If the barriers do not
close before the train arrives an accident with injury and loss of life can occur.
Or imagine if in a self-driving car the decision of the collision-avoidance system
to break arrives after a crash happened.
Nowadays these distributed safety-critical systems with real-time applications
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
are becoming increasingly relevant in multiple industries, especially in the auto-
motive and industrial automation industries [3]. These systems consist of many
applications running on diﬀerent interconnected nodes, necessitating technolo-
gies that can provide guarantees for communication over the network. Addi-
tionally, the requirements are increasing: High bandwidth and easy availability
of components become more and more important in addition to safety features
[4].
A multitude of bus architectures exists to satisfy the requirements of such sys-
tems. Notable ones include SAFEbus, FlexRay and CAN, each with their ad-
vantages and disadvantages. However, a big problem with these technologies
is bandwidth. The maximum bandwidth of CAN is 2 Mbit/s and of FlexRay
10 Mbit/s. This is nowhere near enough, as, for example, the projected future
need of systems in the automotive domain is 1 Gbit/s, to support features such
as automated driving and infotainment [4, 5].
Industrial Ethernet presents a solution. Ethernet, as deﬁned in the 802.3 stan-
dard [6], is the dominant protocol for physical local-area networks nowadays. It
operates at the bottom two layers of the OSI model, the physical and data link
layer. While it became predominant because of its speed and ease to use it lacked
the real-time capabilities needed. This prompted the development of extensions
such as EtherCAT, PROFINET or TTEthernet for industrial applications [7, 8].
The goal of the TSN task group [9] is to extend the 802 standards with mecha-
nisms to allow deterministic services and consequently support distributed real-
time applications. This would make above-mentioned extensions obsolete and
avoid their interoperability issues [10], instead providing one universally ac-
cepted standard that can be adopted across industries and device manufactur-
ers.
1.1
Thesis Overview
This thesis focuses on a recently proposed conﬁguration of a TSN network.
It relaxes previous assumptions about time-critical traﬃc isolation and thus
requires a worst-case analysis, which was done by Zhao et al. in [11]. Using
this analysis as a base, the occurring scheduling and optimization problems
were explored and solutions are presented. The goal is to be able to compare
this conﬁguration to others to determine its usefulness, which in the future
can be used to help developers choose an appropriate network conﬁguration.
Therefore we evaluate our work by comparing it to another intensively studied
conﬁguration which relies on traﬃc isolation.
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Thesis Overview
3
1. Chapter 2 presents the relevant technical details of the TSN standards.
2. Chapter 3 introduces the formal notation to describe the problem, solu-
tions, and algorithms
3. Chapter 4 deﬁnes the problem and formalizes it. The relevant related
work is presented and the notion of problem compositions is introduced.
4. Chapter 5 tackles the previously deﬁned problem and proposes algo-
rithms to generate solutions. It also gives the necessary background and
implementation details.
5. Chapter 6 evaluates the proposed solutions and compares the outcome
to another conﬁguration
6. Chapter 7 concludes the thesis and mentions opportunities for future
work
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Time-Sensitive Networking
The goal of the TSN task group of the IEEE is:
“to provide deterministic services through IEEE 802 networks, i.e.,
guaranteed packet transport with bounded low latency, low packet de-
lay variation, and low packet loss” [9]
Many diﬀerent amendments to the 802.1 standard have been developed, each
describing diﬀerent mechanisms. The amendments that are relevant for this
work and the technicalities presented in this chapter are listed in Table 2.1.
Standard
Description
802.1AS-Rev [12]
Timing and Synchronization for Time-Sensitive Applications
802.1CB [13]
Frame Replication and Elimination for Reliability
802.1Qav [14]
Forwarding and Queuing Enhancements for Time-Sensitive Streams
802.1Qbv [15]
Enhancements for Scheduled Traﬃc
802.1Qbu [16]
Frame Preemption
802.1Qci [17]
Per-Stream Filtering and Policing
Table 2.1: Relevant TSN Standards
In general, a TSN network consists of three components: Switch (SW), End
==PAGE:22==
6
Time-Sensitive Networking
system (ES) and links connecting them.
Switches and end-systems are also
called network nodes.
End systems are the senders and/or receivers of traﬃc in the network, switches
are the intermediate nodes through which the traﬃc is routed. A switch has a
number of ingress and egress ports. Each network node that is sending traﬃc
through the switch is connected to an ingress port, while each of the receivers of
that traﬃc is connected to an egress port. An exemplary network architecture
is shown in Figure 2.1, in which double black lines symbolize full-duplex links
and the white boxes at the switches ingress and egress ports.
ES1
SW1
ES2
ES7
SW2
ES10
SW3
SW6
SW5
SW4
ES8
ES9
ES3
ES4
ES5
ES6
Figure 2.1: Physical Network Topology Example
2.1
Ethernet Packets
On the low level, traﬃc is packed into Ethernet frames which are wrapped in
an Ethernet packet when sent over the network. The ﬁelds of such a packet are
shown in Figure 2.2.
The most relevant ﬁeld for our conﬁguration of TSN is the Priority Code Point
(PCP) ﬁeld in the 802.1Q Header. It is three bits long and encodes the priority
of the message, which is used inside the switch ports for ﬁltering. [19]
Noteworthy is also the size restriction. The Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU)
==PAGE:23==
2.2 TSN Switches
7
Preamble
7 bytes
6 bytes
6 bytes
4 bytes
2 bytes
42-1500 bytes
4 bytes
12 bytes
1B
Destination
MAC
Source
MAC
802.1Q
Header
Length
Ethernet packet (84-1542 bytes)
Payload
Frame Check
Sequence
Inter Frame
Gap
S
F
D
Ethernet frame (64-1522 bytes)
Figure 2.2: Overview of Ethernet Packet. [18, Figure 2.2]
of an Ethernet frame, i.e.
the maximum payload size, is 1500 Bytes.
That
means if an application needs to send data of x > 1500 Bytes, that data has
to be split into ⌈
x
1500⌉frames and packets. Each frame and packet adds cor-
responding overhead. The total amount of bytes xtotal sent across the link is:
xtotal = x + 42 ∗⌈
x
1500⌉
2.2
TSN Switches
A switch contains ingress and egress ports, as mentioned above.
Figure 2.3
depicts the internals of a switch. The switching fabric receives all the traﬃc
from the ingress ports. Based on the destination and priority deﬁned in the
frame header the packet is forwarded to the corresponding egress port.
Port A
(ingress)
Switching fabric
Port B
(ingress)
Port C
(egress)
Priority 0
Priority 1
Priority 2
Priority 7
.
.
.
GCL
Figure 2.3: Switch Internals (Inspired by [20, Figure 1])
Each of the egress ports has eight attached priority queues, which store the
==PAGE:24==
8
Time-Sensitive Networking
received packets in ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out (FIFO) order. Connected to each priority
queue is a timed gate, which can either be closed or open.
When a gate is
open the queued traﬃc can be forwarded to the next network node connected
to the egress port. When multiple gates are open, the highest priority queue
has preference, blocking others until it is empty.
In 802.1Qbu-compliant devices, a high priority frame can preempt a lower pri-
ority frame currently in transmission on the port. In that case, the transmission
of that low priority frame would be stopped, it would be split in two and the
second part would have to wait.
The gates are controlled by the GCL. The smallest unit of time (granularity)
in the network is called the microtick. The GCL deﬁnes for a number of time
intervals, called ticks, the state for all gates. Once all of these ticks have passed
it repeats itself. We call this time interval the hyperperiod of the corresponding
port.
It could happen that a frame is still being transmitted when the gate is supposed
to be closed. To avoid such an undesirable situation the open cycle of each queue
is extended by a guard band. It should have the length of the transmission dura-
tion of a frame with maximum size, i.e. for an MTU of 1500 Byte it is 12.34 µs
long. In the guard band no new transmission can be begun, guaranteeing that
no transmission is happening when the gate closes.
802.1Qbv-complaint de-
vices will not allow frame transmission that would end too late, thus eﬀectively
implementing a guard band of variable size.
2.3
Streams
In addition to priority levels, TSN also provides mechanisms to decide between
diﬀerent traﬃc classes, e.g. TT, AVB or BE, like stream ﬁltering and policing
deﬁned in 802.1Qci [17].
The class we focus on is called TT, time-triggered or time-sensitive, traﬃc. The
critical communication between applications on the end systems in the network
is modeled by TT streams1. A stream has one sender and one or more receivers.
If the data requirements exceed the MTU, a stream is split into multiple frames,
which are tagged with a VLAN identiﬁer (VID). [21]
Important metrics for a stream are the maximum end-to-end latency and jit-
ter. The end-to-end latency is the time diﬀerence between the departure of the
1Also called ﬂows in other literature
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Network Synchronization
9
ﬁrst frame at the source end-system and the arrival of the last frame at the
destination, so the maximum time it takes for the entire stream to traverse the
network.
Jitter is the deviation between the arrival time of the stream or its frames
between diﬀerent periods. In the optimal case they would always arrive at the
same time relative to the period. Collisions with other traﬃc, however, can
induce undesired variations.
Other traﬃc classes include AVB, which is made for multi-media content and has
a lower priority than TT traﬃc, but still requires bounded end-to-end latency
and low jitter. BE is for the lowest priority traﬃc which does not require timing
guarantees.
2.4
Network Synchronization
The 802.1AS-Rev standard [12] enables synchronization between the devices in
the network by maintaining a global notion of time, including during the removal
of network components or reconﬁguration. The maximum deviation from the
perfect clock is called precision and denoted as δ.
The concept of a synchronized network and time-based GCLs means that it is
possible to deterministically schedule streams, guaranteeing a certain end-to-end
latency and bounded jitter.
2.5
Worst-Case Delay Analysis
Many previous works about TSN scheduling like [18] or [21] have looked at ways
to create a deterministic network schedule. In such a schedule the end-to-end
latency of every stream is deterministic, i.e. a deadline can be guaranteed. This
is achieved by enforcing complete isolation of time-critical streams, through
constraints like Flow Isolation or Frame Isolation. However, it comes at the
cost of a signiﬁcantly reduced solution space [21].
Figure 2.4 (a) illustrates why the non-isolation of frames leads to non-determinism.
Regardless of the synchronization protocol, there will always be some synchro-
nization error [21], making the ordering of the frames in the queue unpredictable.
With a small variation of the arrival time the ﬁrst blue frame might be queued
==PAGE:26==
10
Time-Sensitive Networking
before the ﬁrst green frame, for example, meaning its end-to-end delay can
change depending on the unpredictable synchronization error. A schedule can
thus not be deterministic. Figure 2.4 (b) and (c) show how diﬀerent isolation
methods can avoid that problem. In Section 4.2 we will elaborate on the diﬀerent
isolation mechanisms available.
Figure 2.4: Switch Internals (Taken from [20, Figure 2])
In this work, as opposed to [21], isolation constraints are removed, no timing
information about streams or frames is available. To still be able to guarantee
deadlines for the time-critical traﬃc a worst-case timing analysis has to be
done. We do not know the exact time a network device transmits a stream or
its frames, but we can calculate an upper bound on their end-to-end latency if
we know all the time-sensitive traﬃc that might interfere.
In [11] Zhao et al. created such a worst-case analysis tool using network calculus.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Model
Our system model constitutes of three parts: The network and the traﬃc model
and helper functions. The ﬁrst one describes the top-level architecture of the
network: Its nodes and their connections. The latter models the traﬃc and
its routing and shaping throughout the network. Helper function will be used
for the formulation and solution of the problem. The notation is inspired by
Craciunas et al. [21] and extended where necessary.
3.1
Network Model
3.1.1
Network Graph
The network is modeled as a directed graph G(V, L). The graph’s vertices are
the set of network nodes V. Such a node is either an end-system or a switch:
V = ES ∪SW. End systems are the senders and/or receivers of network traﬃc.
Switches are all the intermediate nodes through which the traﬃc is routed to
its receivers.
The edges of the graph represent the data links between two nodes. L ⊆V × V
These links are directional. A full duplex link between two end systems would
==PAGE:28==
12
Model
thus be represented by two ordered tuples [v1, v2] ∈L and [v2, v1] ∈L for
v1, v2 ∈V.
Figure 3.1 shows an example for such a network graph. End-Systems are shown
in blue, switches in green. The black lines depict links, while the colored arrows
show certain routes in the network.
ES1
SW1
ES2
ES4
SW2
ES3
Figure 3.1: Physical Network Topology Example
3.1.2
Links
A link [v1, v2] ∈L has the following attributes, with their standard values
throughout this thesis shown in the last column:
Attribute
Description
Unit
Value
s ∈N
Link Speed
Bit/s
1 GBit/s
d ∈R
Propagation Delay
µs
0 µs
mt ∈R
Macrotick
µs
1 µs
p ∈P
Source Port
/
/
Table 3.1: Link Attributes
The link speed or link bandwidth deﬁnes the maximum throughput of data
through that link, measured in Bit/s.
The propagation delay is the time it
takes the ﬁrst bit to arrive at the receiver, which is dependant on the physical
medium of the link and its length.
Using these two values the latency t of a packet with size p, i.e. the time it
takes between the ﬁrst bit leaving the sender and the last bit arriving at the
receiver, can be calculated: t = p
s + d
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Traﬃc Model
13
An MTU-sized ethernet packet has 1542 Bytes. For a default link the latency
of the packet would thus be: t = 1542Byte
1 GBit
s
= 12.34 µs
The macrotick is the length of a discrete time unit in the network, deﬁning the
granularity of time measurement [21]. Ports are explained in Section 3.2.
3.2
Traﬃc Model
The traﬃc itself is modeled through streams. As the stream propagates through
the network, it passes though egress ports, where it is shaped by the queues and
the GCL which is modeled by windows.
3.2.1
Streams
A stream s ∈S is a time-sensitive periodic one-way communication between
two end-systems.1
It follows a ﬁxed, i.e. pre-computed, route which is represented by a tuple of all
links along its route: s = [[vstart, v1], [v1, v2], ..., [vn−1, vn], [vn, vend]]
The source node vstart of the ﬁrst link and the destination node vend of the
second link have to be end-systems, while all other nodes are switches.
A stream has several attributes shown in Table 3.2. As a stream is time-sensitive,
the end-to-end latency s.e2e is of critical importance and the GCLs on its route
have to be designed to respect it. The data size s.L and period s.T deﬁne how
much data is sent over the network in which time intervals. In contrast with
previous works [18] [21], the priority s.p is deﬁned as well, meaning it is known
before optimization and will remain constant. Priority 7 is not available as it is
reserved for lower priority traﬃc.
s.P denotes the set of egress ports that the stream passes along its route, from
ﬁrst to last.
Since the link speed is ﬁxed at 1 Gbit/s we can calculate the
transmission duration of a stream, i.e. the time it takes to sent all data over
a link (assuming header overhead is included in s.L), in the following way:
s.t =
s.L
1Gbit/s The period percentage of a stream is the proportion of the streams
1In TSN multicast streams, i.e. with multiple receivers, are also allowed. However the
worst-case analysis tool does not allow for them. An extension to multicast should be trivial
though
==PAGE:30==
14
Model
period the transmission duration takes up: s.pp = s.t
s.T That proportion is going
to be used in the generation of the initial solution to determine the maximum
possible window period for a given window length and thus a window with
minimal cost.
Attribute
Description
Unit
e2e ∈R
Deadline (Maximum end-to-end latency)
µs
L ∈N
Data size
Byte
T ∈N
Period
µs
p ∈[0, 6]
Priority
/
P
Ordered Set of egress ports along route
/
t ∈R
Transmission Duration
µs
pp ∈R
Period Percentage
/
Table 3.2: Stream Attributes
A stream s may be represented by the tuple: (s.L, s.T, s.p, s.e2e)
3.2.2
Egress ports
For our problem formulation, we are interested in the components that shape
the network traﬃc. Thus we only model egress ports, as ingress ports have no
inﬂuence, and use the term port synonymous for egress port. An equivalence
between ports and links can be drawn as each port is explicitly attached to one
link.
An egress port p = [va, vb] contains a set of all the queues p.Q that are scheduled,
i.e. that forward time-sensitive traﬃc. Each queue has a periodic window with
a certain length. The hyperperiod of the port is the least common multiple of
all queue window periods:
p.Thyper = lcm(qi.w.T | qi ∈p.Q)
(3.1)
Each periodic window w of each queue is modeled as a set of intervals w.I within
the hyperperiod. These intervals deﬁne when the associated gate to the queue
of the window should be open. Thus with all of these sets, the GCL for the
port can be constructed. The port itself has the union set of these sets, which
is used to calculate the cost function:
p.I =
[
q.w.I ∀qi ∈p.Q
(3.2)
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Traﬃc Model
15
Attribute
Description
Unit
Q
Set of scheduled queues
/
Thyper ∈N
Hyperperiod
µs
I
Union set of queue window interval sets
/
Table 3.3: Port Attributes
3.2.3
Queues
A queue q is assigned a priority q.p ∈[0, 6], whereby 0 is the highest priority.
Again priority 7 is reserved for other traﬃc classes of lower priority. Each queue
has exactly one window q.w which is described in Section 3.2.4.
The last four parameters are inﬂuenced by the streams going through the queue
and will help determine a good initial window.
• qi.st is the sum of the transmission durations of all streams going through
qi.
• qi.maxst is the highest transmission duration of any stream.
• qi.pp is the sum of the period percentages of all stream going through qi.
• qi.gb is the length of the guard band window w has to contain and is
determined by the highest transmission duration of any stream: qi.gb =
qi.maxst
Attribute
Description
Unit
p ∈[0, 6]
Priority
/
w
Window
/
st ∈N
Total stream sending time
µs
maxst ∈N
Maximum stream sending time
µs
pp ∈R
Total Period percentage of streams
/
gb ∈N
Guard Band
µs
Table 3.4: Queue Attributes
3.2.4
Windows
The window w repeats periodically after w.T µs. Within its period the starting
time is oﬀset by w.φ µs. Once the starting time is reached, the gate, associated
==PAGE:32==
16
Model
to the queue the window is associated with, will be opened for w.l µs. The sum
of oﬀset and length cannot be larger than the period. Each window is associated
to exactly one queue q with priority q.p = w.p. A window w may be represented
by the tuple: (w.φ, w.l, w.T)w.p
The set of window intervals w.I is a mapping of the periodic window to the
hyperperiod of its containing port. For each period of the window within this
larger or equal hyperperiod an interval representing it is added. For example:
Given the window w = (10, 50, 100)0 and a hyperperiod of 300, the resulting
interval set would be w.I = {[10, 60], [110, 160], [210, 260]}.
In general w.I for a window w of a queue q in a port p is deﬁned as:
w.I =
n
[
i=0
[i ∗w.T + w.φ, i ∗w.T + w.φ + w.l] , n = p.Thyper
w.T
−1
(3.3)
Attribute
Description
Unit
φ ∈N
Oﬀset
µs
l ∈N
Length
µs
T ∈N
Period
µs
p ∈[0, 6]
Priority
/
I
Set of window intervals
/
Table 3.5: Window Attributes
3.3
Helper Functions
The following functions operate on the model presented before and will be used
in the generation of the initial solution, during optimization and to calculate
the cost function.
Hyperperiod(p.Q) calculates the hyperperiod of a port using the Least Com-
mon Multiple (LCM) of all window periods.
Similarly WindowsGCD(p.Q)
calculates the Greatest Common Divisor (GCD) of all window parameters.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Helper Functions
17
WindowSum(p.Q) gives the sum of all window lengths.
Hyperperiod(p.Q) = lcm({q.w.T | q ∈p.Q})
WindowsGCD(p.Q) = gcd({q.w.φ | q ∈p.Q} ∪{q.w.l|q ∈p.Q}
∪{q.w.T|q ∈p.Q})
WindowSum(p.Q) =
X
q∈p.Q
q.w.l
(3.4)
The overall cost function Cost(P) computes the sum of all port costs Cost(p).
Those are deﬁned as the proportion of the length of the window intervals to the
length of the hyperperiod. The function l(x) helps determine the length of an
interval or a set of intervals.
As an alternative Costσ(P) computes the standard deviation of all port costs.
Note that Cost(P)
|P|
calculates the mean of all port costs. In Section 5.2 the reasons
behind these speciﬁc cost functions and their implementation are explained in
detail.
l([a, b]) = b −a
l({[a, b]i | i < n, i, n ∈N}) =
n
X
i=1
l([a, b]i)
Cost(p) =
l(p.I)
l([0, p.Thyper])
Cost(P) =
X
pi∈P
Cost(pi)
Costσ(P) =
v
u
u
t 1
|P|
X
pi∈P
(Cost(pi) −Cost(P)
|P|
)2
(3.5)
3.3.1
Worst-Case Delays
With the following functions, the worst-case delays can be calculated. They
are described qualitatively as their calculation is up to the chosen worst-case
analysis. In our case, that analysis is presented in Section 5.1 and done using
network calculus.
==PAGE:34==
18
Model
In addition to the worst-case delay of a stream s, WCD(s), we can also deter-
mine exactly how much of that delay a queue in port p adds to the stream using
QueueWCD(s, p). Additionally, we can determine for a port p on the route of s
how much delay has been accumulated already, by queues in this and previous
ports: AccumWCD(s, p)
WCD(s) = Worst-case end-to-end delay of stream s ∈S
QueueWCD(s, p) = Worst-case delay induced by a queue q in port p ∈P
on stream s ∈S, p ∈s (p is on route of s)
AccumWCD(s, p) = Worst-case delay accumulated for stream s ∈S
by all ports on its route up to p ∈S, p ∈P
(3.6)
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Problem Formulation and
Related Work
This chapter starts by looking at the related work that was done in the area of
TSN analysis and conﬁguration. It becomes clear that many parameters and
constraints play a role when deﬁning optimization problems in this area. To
understand the diﬀerences, we propose to look at TSN problem compositions
which aim to combine the system conﬁguration and constraints proposed in
earlier work. We list multiple of those compositions, including the one used in
this thesis. Then we deﬁne the optimization problem informally and formally
and give an example.
4.1
Related Work
Solving scheduling problems for time-sensitive networks is not a new thing. As
one of the ﬁrst Steiner [22] proposed to solve such problems using Satisﬁability
Modulo Theories (SMT). In [23] he also introduced the concept of schedule
porosity, meaning the degree by which a schedule has blank intervals to allow
lower priority traﬃc to be transmitted in those. High porosity can be achieved
by increasing the length and/or frequency of these intervals and is also the
optimization goal of this thesis. The decomposition approach presented in [24]
==PAGE:36==
20
Problem Formulation and Related Work
improves the SMT approach for large scale problems. In [25] a Tabu Search
metaheuristic is presented as an alternative to SMT solvers.
With the introduction of TSN, work has been done speciﬁcally for these stan-
dards, looking at diﬀerent conﬁgurations and traﬃc classes and using diﬀerent
solvers.
In [21] conﬁgurations and constraints of TSN networks are formally deﬁned by
Craciunas et al. Those deﬁnitions will also be used in Section 4.2. Additionally
TT schedules are created using SMT solvers. In [20] many of the same authors
propose the novel approach to specify the set of constraints for gate operations
using ﬁrst-order theory of arrays. Craciunas and Oliver have also worked on
solving the combined task- and network-scheduling problem [26]. This is inter-
esting as the streams which create the network-scheduling problems originate
from tasks that have to be scheduled within the end-system.
In [10] the scheduling problem is modeled as a no-wait job-shop problem and
solved using Tabu Search. Additionally, guard-bands are identiﬁed as sources
of bandwidth waste and a schedule compression technique to reduce them is
presented.
Pop et al. [27] concentrate on the TT and AVB traﬃc classes. In addition to
the scheduling problem alone, which they solve using Integer Linear Program-
ming (ILP), they also look at the routing problem: Which is the best route
for the streams to take to achieve schedulability and minimize latency? This
work is extended by Raagard in [18], where he focuses on scheduling TT ﬂows
(streams) with minimum end-to-end latency and queue usage in egress ports.
He proposes three optimization strategies: ILP, Greedy Randomized Adaptive
Search Procedure (GRASP) and a constructive heuristic.
In some cases, in TSN a worst-case timing analysis becomes necessary (see
Section 2.5). Zhao et al. [11] do such an analysis for TT traﬃc in a network
without any isolation constraints or timing information.
A similar problem
composition and their worst-case analysis will be used in this thesis.
4.2
Conﬁgurations and Constraints
In [21] Craciunas et al. introduced the notation of system conﬁgurations and
scheduling constraints. They allow to formally specify the conditions and con-
straints made for the network and to compare the optimization algorithms and
results more easily between each other. We introduce the notation of “TSN
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Conﬁgurations and Constraints
21
problem compositions”, which aim to combine all relevant information about a
TSN scheduling problem, including the notations introduced by Craciunas.
4.2.1
Conﬁgurations
A system conﬁguration consists of key parameters that inﬂuence the timing of
TT streams. It is noted as the tuple: {G(E), G(Q)}
G(E) represents the device capabilities of the network. Both end systems and
switches can be scheduled or not. If end systems are not scheduled frames can
arrive at switches in any order at any time within the streams period. If switches
are not scheduled they cannot control the timing of frames.
G(E) =





Ve,
if only end-systems scheduled
Vs,
if only switches scheduled
Ve+s,
if both scheduled
(4.1)
G(Q) represents the conﬁgurations of the queues of the network. Deﬁning these
is important, as, for example, the amount of non-scheduled queues, i.e. queues
that do not send time-triggered traﬃc, has a big inﬂuence on the Quality of
Service (QoS) of non-scheduled lower priority traﬃc. If no queues are available
for lower priority traﬃc it will starve. As one countermeasure some queues can
be reserved for this traﬃc, as is done in this thesis.
G(Q) = ⟨ℵ, ℵtt, ℵprio⟩
(4.2)
ℵis the total number of queues in a port, ℵtt is the number of scheduled queues
and ℵprio the remaining amount (ℵprio = ℵ−ℵtt).
An example conﬁguration could look like this: {Ve+s, ⟨1, 1, 0⟩}.
4.2.2
Scheduling Constraints
The scheduling constraints apply to the timing of streams and frames in a net-
work speciﬁed by a system conﬁguration. In [21] Craciunas et al. diﬀerentiate
between basic Ethernet and 802.1Qbv speciﬁc constraints.
The basic Ethernet constraints for their work are:
==PAGE:38==
22
Problem Formulation and Related Work
1. Frame Constraint: Frame oﬀset is greater than or equal to zero. The
frame transmission window (oﬀset + duration) has to ﬁt in the frame
period.
2. Link Constraint: Two frames cannot be routed through the same link
at the same time. This means that two gates cannot be open at the same
time.
3. Flow Transmission Constraint: A frame must propagate along the
sequential route of the stream. It can only be transmitted on the following
link if it has been received fully on the previous one.
4. End-to-end Constraint: The end-to-end delay of a stream must be
below a speciﬁed maximum.
Some of the constraints mandate that the devices in the network support certain
TSN amendments. The following require 802.1Qvb capable devices:
1. Flow Isolation Constraint: “If a frame of a given ﬂow has entered a
queue, no frame of another ﬂow may arrive at the queue until all frames
of the previous ﬂow have been fully dispatched” [21].
2. Frame Isolation Constraint: If a frame of a given ﬂow has entered
a queue, no frame of another ﬂow may arrive at the queue until that
frame has been fully dispatched. That means frames from diﬀerent ﬂows
interleaving is possible, however it still means only frames of one ﬂow can
be in the queue at the same time.
If devices are also capable of 802.1CB and 802.1Qci the priority of each stream
can be changed by the nodes along the route. Then the following constraint can
be formulated:
1. Queue Separation Constraint: Each stream going through the port is
assigned a unique queue that can only be used by this stream
The Flow/Frame Isolation and Queue Separation constraints are exclusive.
Choosing one makes the others unnecessary, as each can allow deterministic
scheduling. Based on the device capabilities (Qvb, CB, Qci), one of them can
be chosen by the designer. However, it might be even better to let the scheduling
tool decide individually for each port during the optimization which constraint
is most appropriate.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Conﬁgurations and Constraints
23
4.2.3
Problem Compositions
In Table 4.1 the problem compositions of this thesis and related work are com-
pared. In the second column, the composition tackled by Craciunas and Raagard
is deﬁned. Since they schedule individual frames, end-systems have to be sched-
uled to allow deterministic arrival time of frames at the switches. Devices have
to support 802.1CB and 802.1Qci to allow for the possible change of stream pri-
ority between stream instances on diﬀerent links along the route. Preemption is
allowed thus devices also have to support 802.1Qbu. Deterministic end-to-end
latencies are ensured through enforcing Frame Isolation.
The No-GCL composition is one that can be looked at in the future. It does
not require any network devices to be scheduled. Instead, all gates are always
open and frames are forwarded strictly by priority, without being isolated from
each other. No GCL is needed. However, the end-to-end constraint can still be
fulﬁlled if an appropriate worst-case delay analysis is done.
The composition of this thesis is called Windows, as it is based on scheduled
switches controlling traﬃc using GCLs, which are modeled by windows.
It
relaxes several assumptions about the network: Namely that end-systems do
not need to be scheduled, i.e. the arrival time of frames in unknown, and that
network devices do not need CB amd Qci capabilities as the stream priority is
considered ﬁxed. The link constraint is removed since we allow multiple gates
to be open at the same time in one port. No isolation of streams (ﬂows) or
frames is done and preemption is not possible.
Craciunas & Raagard [21][18]
No-GCL
Windows (This thesis)
G(E)
Ve+s
/
Vs
G(Q)
<n, m, n-m>
<n, 0, n>
<8, n, 8-n>, n<8
Device Capabilities
Qvb, CB, Qci, Qbu
Qvb
Qvb
Frame Constraint
Yes
Yes
Yes
Link Constraint
Yes
No
No
Flow Transmission Constraint
Yes
Yes
Yes
End-to-end Constraint
Yes
Yes
Yes
Flow/Frame Isolation
Frame
None
None
Queue Separation
No
No
No
Preemption
Yes
TBD
No
Table 4.1: TSN Problem Compositions
==PAGE:40==
24
Problem Formulation and Related Work
4.3
Problem Formulation
Initially, the idea of the thesis was to optimize worst-case delays in a network
using queue windows. However, the solution to that problem turned out to be
trivial without an additional cost parameter related to the available sending time
for lower priority streams: Just make the queue windows as long as possible.
Thus the problem was changed and that cost parameter added to incentivize
minimizing the length of these windows while keeping the worst-case delays as
a constraint.
The problem can be formulated as follows:
Given a set of streams with ﬁxed route, priority and deadline and the problem
composition in the column Windows of Table 4.1, determine the oﬀset, length and
period for all windows on the routes of all stream, such that the overall still available
bandwidth of all ports in the network is maximized and the worst-case delay for each
stream is below that streams deadline.
More formally, following the notation from Chapter 3:
Given a set of streams S, set of egress ports P generated from S, problem compo-
sition as in Table 4.1, Column Windows.
Find (φ, l, T) ∀qi.w ∈pj.Q, pj ∈P.
Minimize cost(P), while wcd(s, P) ≤
s.e2e ∀s ∈S
4.4
Example
In the following example we have given the nine streams in Table 4.2.1 They
share a common deadline, but their diﬀerent sizes, priorities, and routes make
it harder to fulﬁll for some than for others.
A solution that maximizes the available bandwidth for lower-priority traﬃc is
shown in Figure 4.1. Such a solution could be obtained using the initial solution
algorithm that will be introduced later in Section 5.3. Ports are denoted as
[v1, v2] and their queues are shown below them. The colored boxes represent
the windows, with the dotted line showing their periods. Initially, a lot of free
space is available in every port (low cost) and the periods of all ports are very
uniform.
1The resulting topology can be seen in Figure A.1 in the appendix Section A.1
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Example
25
Size (Byte)
Deadline (µs)
Period (µs)
Priority
Route
tt1
1500
3000
200
1
ES1->SW1->SW4->SW6->ES9
tt2
2500
3000
200
1
ES1->SW1->SW2->ES4
tt3
1500
3000
200
2
ES4->SW2->SW1->ES10
tt4
4200
3000
200
2
ES5->SW4->SW2->SW3->ES3
tt5
3000
3000
200
1
ES5->SW4->SW6->ES9
tt6
1500
3000
200
3
ES5->SW4->SW5->ES6
tt7
1000
3000
200
1
ES7->SW5->SW4->ES8
tt8
1500
3000
200
3
ES8->SW6->SW4->SW2->SW3->ES2
tt9
2763
3000
200
2
ES10->SW1->SW2->SW3->ES2
Table 4.2: Stream Deﬁnition
Figure 4.1: Initial Windows
However, this solution does not fulﬁll the deadline constraint. As can be ob-
served in Figure 4.2a three streams miss their deadlines. An optimization al-
gorithm should reﬁne the solution such that all of these deadlines are fulﬁlled
while not sacriﬁcing too much free bandwidth. A possible solution, generated
with the iterative optimization algorithm from Section 5.4, is presented in Fig-
ure 4.3. In this solution several queue periods have been shorted, for example
in the highly frequented port [SW4, SW2], to reduce the worst-case delay, at
the expense of a higher cost for that port.
That shortening was necessary to ﬁnd a feasible solution where all streams fulﬁll
their deadline. The corresponding worst-case delays to this window conﬁgura-
tion can be seen in Figure 4.2b. Thus Figure 4.3 presents a solution which is
feasible in terms of deadline, i.e fulﬁlls the deadline constraint!
The cost of all ports of the initial solution, as deﬁned in Equation 3.5 was 400.3%
with an average port cost of 25% and three missed deadlines. The ﬁnal solution,
without any deadline misses, has an overall cost of 465.1% with an average port
cost of 29.1%, so on average there is 4.1% less time available in a port to send
lower-priority traﬃc.
==PAGE:42==
26
Problem Formulation and Related Work
(a) Initial Solution (Figure 4.1)
(b) Final Solution (Figure 4.3)
Figure 4.2: Worst-Case Delays and Deadlines for Streams
Figure 4.3: Final Windows
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Solution
This chapter will present two solutions to the problem addressed in this thesis.
To understand the reasoning behind the chosen implementations the worst-case
analysis will be analyzed ﬁrst. Findings and technicalities that have an impact
on the heuristic and implementation are presented.
Then the algorithm for
the generation of the initial solution followed by the optimization algorithm are
explained. In the end noteworthy implementation details are shared.
5.1
Understanding the Worst-Case Analysis
Fundamental for the understanding of the solution is to understand the worst-
case analysis, its behavior, and limitations. We are going to use an analysis
method developed by Zhao et al., presented in [11], to calculate worst-case
delays for our set of stream S.
As an input, we supply our streams S and a global link speed (1 Gbit/s).
Additionally, we give the windows for every egress port except for those of
end-systems. End-system egress ports are assumed not to be scheduled but to
forward traﬃc strictly by priority. Windows are contained in the egress ports
of the set P.
==PAGE:44==
28
Solution
As an output from the worst-case analysis, we receive two batches of information,
as shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1a shows the worst-case end-to-end delays for every stream s ∈S. ES4
is the destination end-system. Figure 5.1b shows the delay induced by every
queue qi ∈p.Q, ∀p ∈P, which applies to every stream passing through that
queue. For example stream tt2, which has priority 1, is going through ports
(ES2 -> SW1) and (SW1 -> ES4) and thus is induced a delay of 326.68 =
24 + 302.68 µs.
tt1 ,ES4 :314.68
tt2 ,ES4 :326.68
tt3 ,ES4 :314.68
(a) End-to-end delays
ES1 -> SW1: 12, priority 1
ES2 -> SW1: 24, priority 1
ES3 -> SW1: 12, priority 1
SW1 -> ES4: 302.68 ,
priority 1
(b) Queue Delays
Figure 5.1: Worst-Case Analysis output
5.1.1
Findings
Following several important ﬁndings about the analysis are presented. They
form the assumptions on which the optimization and the initial solution algo-
rithm are built and have been conﬁrmed with the author of the analysis in [11].
The equations behind these ﬁndings can also be found in [11].
F1
The end-to-end delay of a stream is the sum of all queue delays on its
route
An example of Finding F1 can be seen in Figure 5.1.
F2
Changing windows in a port will only aﬀect queue delays in that port and
the following ports on the route of a stream.
F3
Increasing the window of a priority queue (relative to its period) will al-
ways have a non-negative eﬀect on the queue delay of that priority
and all following queue delays of that priority on the route of a stream.
This suggests a natural order to optimize the ports on a streams route: From
source to destination. This is especially true because the ﬁndings also indicate
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Understanding the Worst-Case Analysis
29
that increasing the earlier windows on a route has more impact on the worst-case
delay since they have more following ports. As Finding F3 states, increasing
a window always has a non-negative eﬀect for that priority, meaning it either
has a positive eﬀect, so reduced worst-case delay, or no eﬀect, if the extended
window part overlaps with a higher priority window.
F4
Window overlap in a port has no beneﬁts and should be avoided.
The reason behind this is that we are looking at a worst-case analysis. It has
to assume that, at the time of the overlap, frames are waiting to be sent in all
queues. Figure 5.2 shows the possible overlap situations. Displayed in red are
parts of the windows that are blocked, do not inﬂuence the worst-case delay,
and can be cut without consequences.
Cases Figure 5.2a and Figure 5.2c are trivial. The analysis always assumes there
are frames in the higher priority queue q0, thus frames in the lower priority queue
q1 will be completely blocked for the entire overlap period.
Case Figure 5.2b is special because of two things. In our problem composition
preemption is not allowed. Additionally, the analysis considers worst-cases for
each queue individually. So for queue q0 it assumes the worst-case scenario of
a maximum size frame in q1 beginning transmission right before the window
in q0 starts, thus blocking q0 from sending anything during the transmission
duration of that frame. Afterward, however, the lower priority window will be
blocked by the higher priority one. For queue q1 it assumes that a frame wants
to be sent the instant after the window in queue q0 started, thus being blocked
by the higher priority queue.
q0
q1
.
.
.
(a) Higher window overlaps
lower
q0
q1
.
.
.
(b) Lower window overlaps
higher
q0
q1
.
.
.
(c) Total Overlap
Figure 5.2: Overlap Situations
In summary, overlapping windows have no positive impact and hence windows
should be placed in a non-overlapping way in the hyperperiod. Visually in Fig-
ure 5.2 just the orange windows could be used instead, with the same overall
result in worst-case delays for all streams going through these queues. While
initially overlapping might seem to have a positive eﬀect on available port band-
width, since more overlap means less occupied space, it does not actually oﬀer
==PAGE:46==
30
Solution
a bandwidth advantage. The overlapping windows would need to be extended
to provide the same worst-case delay guarantees as non-overlapping windows,
and to do that the extended windows need to occupy at least as much space as
non-overlapping ones.
F5
Window placement among diﬀerent priority queues in an egress port does
not matter, i.e. has no inﬂuence on the worst-case delay, as long as there
is no overlap between the windows within the hyperperiod of the port
Figure 5.3 shows two of the many windows placements that are equivalent in
terms of worst-case delay. The reason is again the worst-case assumption: A
frame arriving just at the instant when the remaining time in the window is
not enough anymore to send it, making it wait an entire period for the next
window. Logically the placement of the window does not matter then as the
distance to its next occurrence will always be exactly one window period minus
the window length. The only way that the placement could inﬂuence worst-case
delays is if it would introduce window overlap, which would have a negative
eﬀect as Finding F4 states.
q0
q1
.
.
.
q0.w.T - q0.w.l
q1.w.T - q1.w.l
q2.w.T - q2.w.l
q0.w.T - q0.w.l
q1.w.T - q1.w.l
q2.w.T - q2.w.l
<=>
in terms of
WCD
Figure 5.3: Equivalence of Window Placements
5.1.2
Technicalities
In addition to the general ﬁndings, some technicalities have to be considered in
the implementation.
T1
An input stream is treated as one chunk of data with the given data size,
i.e. it assumes the overhead for Ethernet and frame header are already
included. It will not be split, even if it exceeds the MTU.
T2
A guard band with the length of the transmission duration of the largest
stream in its queue has to be added to the window.
T3
The egress ports of source end-systems are considered to follow a strict
priority policy with all gates always open and no windows have to be
speciﬁed for them.
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Cost Function
31
The reason for Technicality T3 is the assumption of our problem composition
that end-systems are not scheduled.
5.2
Cost Function
One of the crucial components of any optimization problem is the cost function.
It takes a solution and evaluates the cost of it, i.e. “how good” that solution
is. Typically the aim of the optimization is to minimize the value of this cost
function.
In our case, we want to evaluate the porosity of our window schedule. We say
that an egress port has high porosity if there are many and long time intervals
within its hyperperiod where no window is active. In all such time intervals lower
priority traﬃc could be forwarded. To measure the porosity we calculate the
occupation percentage of the hyperperiod: The percentage of the hyperperiod
that at least one window is active. A low occupation percentage means high
porosity. For example the port in Figure 5.4 has a relatively low occupation
percentage of 55% and thus a high porosity. In all green intervals, low priority
traﬃc could be sent.
q0
q1
q2
Hyperperiod: 100 us
20 
10
10
15
25
20
(0, 20, 100)0
(30, 10, 100)1
(55, 25, 100)2
Windows
(offset, length, period)priority
Figure 5.4: Port Porostity
We are going to use this occupation percentage as our measure of cost for an
egress port. The cost of a solution, which consists of the set of all egress ports,
will be the sum of all their occupation percentages. As an alternative we also
implemented a function that takes the standard deviation of all occupation
percentages, to get a sense of their variance, since a high variance is likely to be
bad for lower priority traﬃc.
If all windows in a port have the same period and are not overlapping the
==PAGE:48==
32
Solution
calculation of the cost becomes very easy:
cost(p) =
P
q∈p.Q q.w.l
q.w.T
, q ∈p.Q
(5.1)
Because windows are not overlapping the total space they are occupying equals
the sum of their lengths. And because all windows have the same period we can
take the period of any window as our hyperperiod.
However, if the periods are not the same the calculation becomes much more
diﬃcult. First, the hyperperiod has to be calculated using the least-common
multiple of all periods, which can become very large very fast. Additionally,
even if windows do not overlap initially, they might later on in the hyperperiod,
as their relative positions shift when they have diﬀerent periods. As we have
explained in Finding F4 that can have no positive eﬀect.
Each time interval where overlap occurs means a reduction of occupation per-
centage. Figure 5.5 illustrates that nicely with the overlap marked in red. Sim-
ply taking the sum of all window lengths would lead to a higher occupation than
in reality. For the windows given in the ﬁgure, the hyperperiod would be 3600 µs
long and would only be occupied 2160 µs instead of the 2820 µs that would be
the sum of the window intervals.
q0
q1
Hyperperiod
q2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
(0, 20, 80)0
(20, 30, 90)1
(50, 20, 100)2
Windows
(offset, length, period)priority
Figure 5.5: Hyperperiod of Port for Windows with diﬀerent Periods
As can be seen in Section 3.3 the problem of ﬁnding the occupation of a hy-
perperiod through windows can be solved mathematically by calculating the
sum of a set of intervals. The union operation makes sure overlapping intervals
are merged into one. Calculating the union of intervals is a common problem
that can be solved using Interval Trees [28] or a simple version of a line sweep
algorithm [29].
Our implementation maps out the hyperperiod and contained windows for each
queue as a binary string. A string of ’1’ in the binary string represents a time
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Construction of Initial Solution
33
interval occupied by a window, a string of ’0’ a free interval. Using the bitwise
OR function on all binary strings of a port we can determine all occupied and
un-occupied time intervals for that port. See for example Figure 5.6a where we
determine an occupation percentage of 75% for windows (0, 4, 8)0 and (2, 4, 8)1.
11110000
(0,4,8)_0
| 00111100
(2,4,8)_1
--------
11111100
->Occupied
6/8
(a) Bitwise OR - non reduced
1100
(0,4,8)_0
| 0110
(2,4,8)_1
----
1110
->Occupied
3/4
(b) Bitwise OR - reduced
Figure 5.6: Bitwise OR Examples
For a large hyperperiod, these binary strings can quickly become very long and
thus use a lot of memory.
To save some memory we check if we can repre-
sent longer time periods than 1 µs with one bit.
That is the case when the
GCD of all window parameters of all windows in a port is greater than one:
WindowGCD(p.Q) > 1 It means that all window parameters (oﬀset, length,
period) are multiples of this GCD and thus the bits can represent time periods
of this length instead, without losing information. In Figure 5.6b there is an ex-
ample where the GCD of all the windows is two and thus, in reality, the binary
strings only need to be half as long as originally in Figure 5.6a.
Algorithm 1 presents the pseudocode to determine the cost of a solution, rep-
resented by a set of egress ports P. For each port the individual cost is cal-
culated and added up in the end (alternatively the standard deviation of these
costs could be taken). The ﬁrst step for each port pi is the calculation of the
GCD to determine the coarsest granularity of the hyperperiod. Using these val-
ues a binaryMatrix is created which contains the previously mentioned binary
strings, each in one seperate row. Next, the BitwiseOR operation is applied to
the matrix. resultBinary is a binary string which is as long as the matrix wide,
eﬀectively having one bit representing each column of the matrix. After the
BitwiseOR operation that bit equals ’1’ if the column had at least one ’1’ and
equals ’0’ otherwise. Then the cost can simply be calculated as the proportion
of ’1’s to the total length of the string.
5.3
Construction of Initial Solution
A constructive heuristic has been developed which aims at ﬁnding an initial
solution which minimizes the cost. After studying the problem for a while and
testing out diﬀerent methods to solve it, it became apparent, that because of
==PAGE:50==
34
Solution
Algorithm 1 Calculate cost
1: function Cost(P)
2:
totalCost ←∅
3:
4:
for pi ∈P do
5:
gcd ←WindowsGCD(pi.Q)
6:
pi.Thyper ←Hyperperiod(pi.Q)
7:
8:
binaryMatrix ←CreateBinaryMatrix(pi.Q, gcd, pi.Thyper)
9:
resultBinary ←BitwiseOR(binaryMatrix)
10:
nrOfOnes ←CountOnes(resultBinary)
11:
nrOfBits ←Length(resultBinary)
12:
13:
cost ←nrOfOnes
nrOfBits
14:
totalCost ←totalCost + cost
15:
16:
return totalCost
the big amount of information available as input, namely the set of streams S,
it would be possible to generate a very good initial solution.
It is possible to ﬁnd an initial solution that is near-optimal in terms of cost, but
which may not meet the deadlines. Only if the deadline constraint is not fulﬁlled
further optimization becomes necessary.
5.3.1
Problem Breakdown
First, it is important to observe that the problem, to ﬁnd a solution with near-
optimal cost, can be broken down: We can look at ports individually because
changes in one port do not have any impact on the possible window conﬁgura-
tions of any other port, i.e. cannot impact their cost. Decreasing the cost of
one port will always have a positive impact on the overall cost.
That is not to say that changes in a port have no impact at all on the overall
system.
They do in terms of worst-case delay and some more than others,
however, it is not necessary to consider this yet in the initial solution. Initially,
a solution with near-optimal cost is created. If that solution does not fulﬁll
the deadline constraint the optimization algorithm presented in Section 5.4 will
take over, then also taking the global impact of ports on worst-case delay into
consideration.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Construction of Initial Solution
35
5.3.2
Window Length
Looking at an individual port now the goal is to create cost-optimal windows.
For each queue, the ﬁrst step is to determine the necessary length of the window.
That length can be deducted from the streams passing through the queue. For
each such stream si the transmission duration si.t tells us exactly how long of a
time period that stream needs for transmission. Keeping in mind the necessary
extension of a window by a guard band, which according to Technicality T2
has to have the length of the maximum transmission time of all streams in that
window, we can determine the lower bound on the window length as the longest
sending time of any stream q.maxst plus the guard band q.gb:
q.w.lmin = q.maxst + q.gb
(5.2)
If the window would be smaller than that, the longest stream could not be
transmitted, since a stream is always treated as one indivisible chunk according
to Technicality T1, so the window has to be long enough to transmit it at once.
However, it was found that choosing the lower bound window length is not the
best approach. The reason is that the guard band has a bigger inﬂuence on the
cost for lower window sizes as it is proportionally larger to the size of the rest
of the window.
Instead of just taking the longest sending time of one stream we take the total
stream sending time in that queue plus the guard band:
q.w.l = q.st + q.gb
(5.3)
This way the guard band has less of an inﬂuence on the cost. However the
worst-case delays will increase as well when the window length and thus also
the window period is increased but in our experiments, it showed to be a good
trade-oﬀ.
See Figure 5.7 for an illustration that shows the resulting windows for both
approaches. The amount of additional free space in the queues hyperperiod is
clearly visible in the second ﬁgure.1
5.3.3
Maximum Period
Based on a given window length without guard band, we can then calculate the
period of the window. The goal is to ﬁnd the maximum period of the window
1This also explains why we can only ﬁnd a solution with near-optimal cost. To achieve
an optimal cost the window length and proportionally the period would have to be increased
inﬁnitely
==PAGE:52==
36
Solution
q0
q0.w.T = 48us/0.36 = 133 us
Sending window: 48us
Guard band: 48us
q0
q0.w.T = 60us/0.36 = 166 us
Sending window: 60us
Guard band: 48us
s1 = (1500,100,0,1000)
s2 = (6000,200,0,1000)
Streams
(size, period, priority, deadline)
s1.t = 12us, s1.pp = 12%
s2.t = 48us, s2.pp = 24%
=> q0.maxst = max(s1.t, s2.t) = 48us,
     q0.gb = q0.maxst,
     q0.pp = s1.pp + s2.pp = 36 %
q0.w.lmin
q0.w.l
Minimum Window:
Our Window:
Figure 5.7: Considerations for Window Length
for which no stream has an inﬁnite worst-case delay. This maximum period
can be deducted from the period percentages si.pp of the streams. They tell
us the proportion of the streams sending time si.t to the streams period si.T.
The cumulative period percentage of all streams in the queue then give us the
proportion of the windows length, excluding the guard band, to its maximum
period. That means with a given length we can determine the maximum period
as follows:
q.w.T = q.w.l −q.gb
q.pp
(5.4)
See the periods in Figure 5.7 for an example of how they are calculated in a
concrete case.
5.3.4
Algorithm
Initially, the GenerateInititalSolution algorithm, presented in Algorithm 3,
initializes all the ports P in the network using the streams S and the method
InitializePorts(P, S) shown in Algorithm 2. Speciﬁcally, it initializes q.st, q.maxst, q.pp
and q.gb for all queues q in the network, which are necessary to generate the
initial solution as described in the previous sections.
After initialization, the algorithm proceeds to generate the windows for each
port. Each of those ports goes through two major steps. First windows with
our chosen length as in Equation 5.3 and period as in Equation 5.4 are generated.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Construction of Initial Solution
37
Algorithm 2 Initialize Ports
1: function InitializePorts(P, S)
2:
for si ∈S do
3:
priority ←si.prio
4:
for p ∈si.P do
5:
q ←qpriority ∈p.Q
6:
7:
q.st ←q.st + si.t
8:
if si.t > q.maxst then
9:
q.maxst ←si.t
10:
q.pp ←q.pp + si.pp
11:
q.gb ←q.maxst
12:
return P
After that ﬁrst step, the windows look like the ones in Figure 5.8. Notice the
transparent part which shows the guard band.
q0
q1
q2
(0, 24, 100)0
(0, 48, 100)1
(0, 24, 200)2
(1500 B, 100 us, 0)
(3000 B, 100 us, 0)
(1500 B, 200 us, 0)
q3
(0, 24, 150)3
(1500 B, 150 us, 0)
200 us
Streams
(size, period, priority)
Windows
(offset, length, period)priority
Figure 5.8: Initial Solution: Step 1
Now this solution is not suﬃcient because of one major reason: The periods are
not aligned. Depending on the streams in diﬀerent queues the window periods
calculated in line 8 can be entirely diﬀerent. To avoid the downsides of overlap
we could, of course, calculate oﬀsets such that windows do not overlap initially,
but we can give no guarantee about the whole hyperperiod if the queues have
diﬀerent periods, as has already been discussed in Section 5.2.
To avoid any issues with overlap inﬂuencing worst-case delays and long cost
function calculations due to long hyperperiods, the periods of all windows get
aligned to the same value.
Scaling down the period to the smallest existing one is not a good option. It
will increase the cost slightly, as the guard band becomes more relevant (see
==PAGE:54==
38
Solution
Section 5.3.2), but more importantly, it might be impossible to decrease the
period that far for every queue.
To keep the same cost the window length
would have to be decreased proportionally, which is only possible down to the
boundary deﬁned in Equation 5.2. However, period and length can always be
scaled up without reaching boundaries.
So in line 15 to line 17 the algorithm scales up all window periods, and propor-
tionally the window lengths, to the highest existing period in the port, which
was determined in line 10. Based on those new window lengths it then calcu-
lates oﬀsets in line 19, such that windows start right after a previous window
has ended, with the highest priority window starting at oﬀset 0 and the other
windows following in order of priority. The ﬁnal initial solution then looks like
the one in Figure 5.9.
q0
q1
q2
(0, 36, 200)0
(36, 72, 200)1
(108, 24, 200)2
(1500 B, 100 us, 0)
(3000 B, 100 us, 0)
(1500 B, 200 us, 0)
q3
(132, 28, 200)3
(1500 B, 150 us, 0)
200 us
Streams
(size, period, priority)
Windows
(offset, length, period)priority
Figure 5.9: Initial Solution: Step 2
The whole pseudocode can be seen in Algorithm 3. The functions GetPorts(S)
returns the set of all egress port in the network implicitly deﬁned through the
routes in S. Noteworthy is line 8 where the window period is rounded down
as the division might produce decimal results. After generating periods for all
windows in a port, MaxPeriod(p) is used to determine the maximum of those.
As explained earlier when scaling up the length of the window in line 16 only
the original length qi.st, the orange part in Figure 5.8, is increased. The guard
band stays the same. The method ﬁnishes with returning the set of ports P,
with all windows conﬁgured appropriately, to be used as an initial solution.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Construction of Initial Solution
39
Algorithm 3 Generate initial Solution
1: function GenerateInitialSolution(S)
2:
P ←GetPorts(S)
3:
P ←InitializePorts(S, P)
4:
5:
for p ∈P do
6:
for qi ∈p.Q do
7:
qi.w.L ←qi.st + qi.gb
8:
qi.w.T ←RoundDown( qi.st
qi.pp)
9:
10:
maxPortPeriod ←MaxPeriod(p)
11:
currentOﬀset ←0
12:
13:
for qi ∈p.Q do
14:
qi.w.φ ←currentOﬀset
15:
scaleFactor ←maxP ortP eriod
qi.w.T
16:
q.w.L ←qi.st ∗scaleFactor + qi.gb
17:
qi.w.T ←maxPortPeriod
18:
19:
currentOﬀset ←currentOﬀset + qi.w.L
20:
return P
==PAGE:56==
40
Solution
5.4
Iterative Optimization
The general optimization algorithm, as presented in Algorithm 4, starts from
an initial solution P. Then it checks the feasibility of the solution with the
deadline of all streams in S. We deﬁne a solution to be valid if no stream in S
has an inﬁnite worst-case delay, i.e. the windows are appropriately chosen. If a
solution also fulﬁlls the deadline constraint it is said to be feasible.
Since the initial solution has near optimal cost we do not need to further optimize
it if it is feasible already. See line 4 where P is simply returned.
Algorithm 4 Iterative Optimization - General
1: function Optimize(S)
2:
P ←GenerateInitialSolution(S)
3:
if IsFeasible(P, S) then
4:
return P
5:
else
6:
Sif ←GetInfeasibleStreams(P, S)
7:
for si ∈Sif do
8:
if si ∈Sif then
▷si might have been solved already
9:
P ←OptimizePortsForStream(P, si)
10:
if IsFeasible(P, S) then
11:
break
12:
else
13:
Sif ←GetInfeasibleStreams(P, S)
14:
return P
5.4.1
Stream Optimization Algorithm
If the solution is not feasible however we have to optimize it. For that we ﬁrst
determine the subset of infeasible streams Sif using the function GetInfea-
sibleStreams(P, S). It returns the subset sorted by exceeding percentage in
descending order . The exceeding percentage of a stream is deﬁned as:
ep(s) = wcd(s)
s.e2e −1
(5.5)
This measure is used to determine how much a stream exceeds its deadline. The
rationale is to ﬁx the windows of the worst streams ﬁrst, as while doing that,
other less bad streams might get ﬁxed as well. That is why in line 8 it is checked
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Iterative Optimization
41
if the next stream is still in the infeasible set, and why in line 10 a solution P
might already be feasible.
The method OptimizePortsForStream(P, s) presented in Algorithm 5 does
the ﬁxing for a stream s. In a loop, it either increases or decreases the period of
all ports on the route of s. Increasing/decreasing the period of a port means in-
creasing/decreasing the period of every window in the port by the same amount.
It does that for as long as at least one period of any port still changed, sym-
bolized by didPeriodChange. The goal is to approximate the maximum period
in each port for which the stream is barely feasible. Every turn that feasibil-
ity is checked using IsFeasible(P, s). If it is not reached yet, the periods get
decreased in every port along the streams route. Otherwise, they are increased
until the solution is infeasible again or the period did not change in any port.
Algorithm 5 Iterative Optimization - Optimize Stream
1: function OptimizePortsForStream(P, s)
2:
lower ←true
3:
repeat
4:
didPeriodChange ←false
5:
6:
for pi ∈s.P do
7:
if lower = true then
8:
didPeriodChange ←DecreasePeriod(pi)
9:
else
10:
didPeriodChange ←IncreasePeriod(pi)
11:
12:
if IsFeasible(P, s) = false then
13:
lower ←true
14:
else
15:
lower ←false
16:
until didPeriodChange = false
17:
return P
The methods IncreasePeriod(pi) and DecreasePeriod(pi) implement a
binary search like algorithm [30] to determine the optimal maximum period for
every port pi.
Starting from an interval with the length of the current free
space in the hyperperiod, that interval is continuously halved until it is not
possible anymore. The direction is decided by whether IncreasePeriod(pi)
or DecreasePeriod(pi) is called.
Figure 5.10 visualizes the method, with
the orange box representing the window and the green box the search interval.
Using this algorithm means that the optimal period for a port in the worst case
can be found in O(log (p.Thyper −WindowsSum(p.Q)) steps.
==PAGE:58==
42
Solution
q0
1. Start
q0
2. DecreasePeriod
Period
lb
lb
Period
q0
Period
lb
q0
Period
3. DecreasePeriod
4. IncreasePeriod
5. ....
n. Finish
Period
q0
...
lb = lower bound
 ub = upper bound
lb
lb
ub
ub
ub
ub
ub
Figure 5.10: Binary Search-like Pptimization of Period
5.4.2
Example
To visualize how our proposed optimization algorithm works, we consider the
following example. Given we have the two streams tt1 and tt2 as deﬁned in
Table 5.1 and the network topology in Figure 5.11. The white boxes show the
egress ports that are going to be optimized. Note that the streams have the
same priority and share the egress port in SW3, meaning they will share the
same queue in that port.
Size (Byte)
Deadline (us)
Period (us)
Priority
Route
Transmission
Duration (us)
Period
Percentage (%)
tt1
1500
800
200
0
ES1->SW1->SW2->SW3->ES3
12
6
tt2
1500
400
200
0
ES2->SW3->ES3
12
6
Table 5.1: Input Streams
ES2
ES3
ES1
SW1
SW2
SW3
Figure 5.11: Network Topology
We start by generating the initial solution. The three ports get initial windows
assigned as shown in Table 5.2a. The window in port SW3,ES3 is longer, since
both streams will have to share it. The QueueWCD row denotes the output
of the QueueWCD function, as deﬁned in Section 3.3.1, for that port, i.e. the
Worst-Case Delay (WCD) induced by that port. In Table 5.2b you can then
see the outcome of the worst-case analysis: Both streams largely exceed their
deadline.
Now, according to Algorithm 4, the streams that exceed their deadline, in this
case tt1 and tt2, will be optimized. Because tt1 exceeds its deadline by more
percent, 175% in this case, it will be optimized ﬁrst. The optimization proceeds
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Iterative Optimization
43
ES1,SW1
ES2,SW3
SW1,SW2
SW2,SW3
SW3,ES3
Window
/
/
(0, 24, 200)0
(0, 24, 200)0
(0, 36, 200)0
QueueWCD
12
12
400
800
988
(a) Solution
tt1
tt2
WCD
2200
1000
Deadline
800
400
Feasible?
NO
NO
(b) Worst-case delay
Table 5.2: Initial Solution
as deﬁned in Algorithm 5, i.e with a binary search like method the maximum
period for which tt1 is feasible is determined for each port along its route. After
the ﬁrst step the windows look like in Table 5.3a with the new periods marked in
bold. In Table 5.3b it can be observed that the WCD has decreased signiﬁcantly.
Notably it did also decrease for tt2, even though that stream was not optimized,
since both streams share a queue in SW3. In fact, tt2 is already feasible with
this window conﬁguration.
Stream optimized: tt1 Step: 1
ES1,SW1
ES2,SW3
SW1,SW2
SW2,SW3
SW3,ES3
Window
/
/
(0, 24, 112)0
(0, 24, 112)0
(0, 36, 118)0
QueueWCD
12
12
212.72
325.483
339.732
(a) Solution
tt1
tt2
WCD
889.935
351.732
Deadline
800
400
Feasible?
NO
YES
(b) Worst-case delay
Table 5.3: Solution after Step 1
However tt1 still needs to be optimized, so in the next step the middle value
of the lower half of the period search interval is chosen and the interval halved.
For example for port SW1,SW2 the interval is [24,200] with a middle value of
112 after step one. After step two the new interval is [24,112] with a middle
value of 68.
Now the algorithm has arrived at a solution that is feasible for both streams as
seen in Table 5.4. However, the found periods are not the maximum periods for
which tt1 is feasible so the search continues. Stopping here would be possible,
but result in a signiﬁcantly higher cost. As can be seen in Table 5.4a the queues
are all occupied over 30 percent of the time in this solution.
Stream optimized: tt1 Step: 2
==PAGE:60==
44
Solution
ES1,SW1
ES2,SW3
SW1,SW2
SW2,SW3
SW3,ES3
Window
/
/
(0, 24, 68)0
(0, 24, 68)0
(0, 36, 77)0
QueueWCD
12
12
124.72
132.203
147.462
(a) Solution
tt1
tt2
WCD
416.385
159.462
Deadline
800
400
Feasible?
YES
YES
(b) Worst-case delay
Table 5.4: Solution after Step 2
In the next six steps the maximum periods will be further and further approx-
imated. Table 5.5 shows the progress and the ﬁnal resulting periods in bold.
Note how the same numbers were already found in Step 4, however there they
were not yet conﬁrmed to be the optimal ones, as the search interval was not
yet empty (higher periods still needed to be investigated).
Period of SW1,SW2
Period of SW2,SW3
Period of SW3,ES3
∼wcd(tt1)
∼wcd(tt2)
Initial
200
200
200
2200
1000
Step 1
112
112
118
890
352
Step 2
68
68
77
416
159
Step 3
90
90
97
688
281
Step 4
101
101
107
797
315
Step 5
106
106
112
839
332
Step 6
103
103
109
814
322
Step 7
102
102
108
806
319
Step 8
101
101
107
797
315
Step 9
101
101
107
797
315
Table 5.5: Period Approximation Process fot tt1
The ﬁnal solution with these values can be seen in Table 5.6. The ﬁnal cost is
81% with an average port cost of 27.1%. Figure 5.12 shows the progress of the
optimization visually.
Stream optimized: tt1 Step: 9 (Final)
ES1,SW1
ES2,SW3
SW1,SW2
SW2,SW3
SW3,ES3
Window
/
/
(0, 24, 101)0
(0, 24, 101)0
(0, 36, 107)0
QueueWCD
12
12
190.72
291.163
303.353
(a) Solution
tt1
tt2
WCD
797.236
315.353
Deadline
800
400
Feasible?
YES
YES
(b) Worst-case delay
Table 5.6: Final Solution
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Iterative Optimization
45
q0
q0
q0
(SW1,SW2)
(SW2,SW3)
(SW3,ES3)
wcd(tt1) = 2200
wcd(tt2) = 1000
cost = 42 %
Initial:
q0
q0
q0
(SW1,SW2)
(SW2,SW3)
(SW3,ES3)
wcd(tt1) = 889.935
wcd(tt2) = 351.732
cost = 73.4% 
Step 1:
q0
q0
q0
(SW1,SW2)
(SW2,SW3)
(SW3,ES3)
wcd(tt1) = 416.385
wcd(tt2) = 159.462
cost = 117.3%
Step 2:
q0
q0
q0
(SW1,SW2)
(SW2,SW3)
(SW3,ES3)
wcd(tt1) = 797.236
wcd(tt2) = 315.353
cost = 81%
Final:
Figure 5.12: Optimization Progress
==PAGE:62==
46
Solution
5.5
Implementation
This section describes some details of the implementation that are worth men-
tioning.
The ﬁrst thing the tool has to do is to parse test cases from input ﬁles. Those
consist of ﬁles describing the streams (*.streams) and their routes (*.vls). They
are parsed using the regular expressions2 displayed in Figure 5.13. That has
two advantages: Capture groups, notated as green braces in the ﬁgure, make
it very simple for the developer to extract certain information, for example, all
the diﬀerent stream parameters, from a string. The main advantage though is
that those expressions can be shared with future users of the tool so they can
do a syntax check of their input ﬁles3.
Figure 5.13: Regular Expressions used for Parsing
The data structures that store the parsed information and a generated solution
are built in an object-oriented way to make their relationships easily understand-
able. The whole structure is shown in a UML4 class diagram in Figure 5.14.
Note the composition relationships (black diamond) which imply a lifecycle de-
pendency between objects of two classes, e.g. between a switch and its output
ports.
Node
+ uid : String
+ type : String
Switch
+ name: String
+ output_ports: Map<String, OutputPort>
OutputPort
+ name: String
+ queues = Map<int, Queue>
+ M_Windows = Matrix
Queue
+ window_percentage: ﬂoat
+ total_sending_time: int
+ highest_sending_time: int
+ stream_uids: List<String>
1
1..*
1
1..7
TestCase
+ name: String
+ streams: Map<String, Stream>
+ switches: Map<String, Switch>
Stream
+ uid : String
+ size: int
+ deadline: int
+ route: List<Node>
+ period: int
+ priority: int
+ sending_time: int
1
1..*
1
1..*
2..*
1
1
1..*
EndSystem
Figure 5.14: UML Class Diagram
2https://www.regular-expressions.info/tutorial.html
3For example using a website like https://regex101.com/
4https://www.uml.org/what-is-uml.htm
==PAGE:63==
5.5 Implementation
47
Noteworthy is the member variable M_Windows of an OutputPort. Instead of
modelling windows as their own class, their parameters are aggregated line-by-
line inside a matrix in the OutputPort object. That is to speed up computation
in Python with the use of vectorization5. Using matrix arithmetic, e.g. in this
solution to subtract/add to the period of all windows or calculate the cost is
much faster in Python than using for-loops.
The interface with the worst-case analysis is very simple: The tool just generates
the necessary input ﬁles and calls the executable with the path to these ﬁles.
It was investigated whether it makes sense to change the interface method, e.g
use the same programming language for both tools or communicate through a
socket. However, the investigation showed that the amount of time lost by the
I/O operations to write/read the ﬁles is negligible in comparison to the time
used by the actual worst-case analysis.
Very useful during the development phase were unit-tests for the major compo-
nents of the tool: Generation of data structures, cost function, and optimization.
The complexity and amount of possible test-cases meant that it was really hard
to deduce whether a new implementation was working correctly by manual test-
ing. Additionally, the implementation constantly evolved due to new ﬁndings in
experiments. Thus unit-test came in handy to deﬁne the many possible cases,
including edge-cases, and have them run automatically on every new implemen-
tation to verify it.
5https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/python-for-data/9781449323592/ch04.html
==PAGE:64==
48
Solution
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Evaluation
The proposed heuristic and algorithm are going to be looked at from two sides.
First, they are analyzed by themselves, using the results of multiple test cases
to show how the solution behaves, for example how cost and worst-case delays
develop during computation. Secondly they are going to be compared to other
solutions to a similar problem, namely deterministic scheduling under isolation
constraints.
6.1
Behavior
A good solution is determined by two things: a low cost and a set of worst-case
delays that fulﬁll the deadline constraint.
Since it is possible to generate an initial solution that is near cost-optimal, many
test-cases can be solved outright without optimization.
Those are all whose
initial set of worst-case delays already fulﬁll the deadline constraint. Even for
the biggest test-case, generating the initial solution just takes 0.2 ms.
That means that the heuristic oﬀers an extremely fast way to generate a GCL
for cases in which streams can have relatively high deadlines compared to their
bandwidth use.
==PAGE:66==
50
Evaluation
6.1.1
Test Cases
Since those cases do not tell anything about the optimization algorithm, how-
ever, we are going to focus on ones that do, i.e which have low deadlines and
need to be optimized.
Our test batch consists of 45 cases of varying sizes. While many are synthetically
generated, some to test special scenarios, there are also two realistic test-cases
used.
One belongs to a car of General Motors while the other is from the
Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle. Both were adjusted slightly to work with this
solution. They consisted of streams of two traﬃc classes TT and RC, which
were adjusted to all be TT streams. Additionally, the streams did not have a
ﬁxed period, so one was randomly generated for each of them. The Orion test
case is the biggest one in terms of stream amount. Its topology and streams are
shown in Figure 6.1.
ES_SM2CA
SW52
SW42
SW8
ES_SM2CB
SW32
ES_CM2CA
ES_CM2CB
SW22
SW6
ES_FCM2
ES_LCM2
ES_RCM2
SW13
SW11
SW12
ES_BFCU
SW14
ES_CMRIU2
SW7
ES_STARTR2
SW21
ES_STARTR1
ES_MIMU2
ES_MIMU1
ES_MIMU3
ES_SMRIU1
SW31
ES_SMRIU2
ES_DU3
ES_DU2
ES_DU1
ES_SM1CA
SW51
SW41
ES_SM1CB
ES_CM1CB
ES_CM1CA
ES_CMRIU1
ES_LCM1
ES_FCM1
ES_RCM1
ES_SBAND1
ES_SBAND2
ES_GPS1
ES_GPS2
Figure 6.1: Topology of Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle Test Case
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Behavior
51
6.1.2
Heuristic and Iterative Optimization Algorithm
To explain the behavior of the optimization algorithm and heuristic in detail
we will use the two realistic test cases as examples. The General Motors case
consists of 27 streams varying in size between 100 and 1500 Byte, with periods
between 2500 and 40000µs. The Orion case is much larger, consisting of 137
streams, sizes ranging between 87 and 1527 Bytes and periods between 4000
and 250000µs. More information can be found in the corresponding columns
in Table 6.2.
In general, the Orion case is much more cohesive, all the 137
streams share 15 switches, while in the General Motors case 27 streams share
20 switches. That also explains why the deadlines in the Orion case have to
be so high, despite the relatively small sizes of the streams. In Figure 6.2 and
Figure 6.3 the deadlines and WCDs of each stream for the initial solution can
be compared.
Figure 6.2: Initial Solution - WCDs and Deadlines - General Motors Case
To understand the behavior of the optimization algorithm, we ﬁrst look at the
relationship between cost and worst-case delays. All of the test cases conﬁrm
that the cost generally increases proportionally with a decrease in worst-case
delay. Though there are some exceptions, e.g. if a port that contains many
==PAGE:68==
52
Evaluation
Figure 6.3: Initial Solution - WCDs and Deadlines - ORION Case
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Behavior
53
streams is optimized, leading to a big decrease in worst-case at a relatively
small cost, even in a very cohesive test case like the Orion case the graphs of
cost and worst-case development conﬁrm the proportionality. See Figure 6.4
for the General Motors case and Figure 6.5 for the Orion case, with the red
graph representing the cost development and the blue graph the worst-case
delay development.
Figure 6.4: Cost and WCD development - General Motors Case
Figure 6.5: Cost and WCD development - Orion Case
Another interesting observation is the eﬀect of port/queue sharing between
==PAGE:70==
54
Evaluation
streams. If multiple streams share an output port the optimization of one of
them will also reduce the worst-case delay of the others. In test cases where that
is the case, it will very often lead to a signiﬁcant reduction in optimization steps
needed.
Take for example the Orion test case which consists of 137 streams. Initially
136 streams have to be optimized, so we expect the optimization to go through
136 steps in the worst case. However, since the streams are all routed through
the same few switches, as can be seen in Figure 6.1, the actual number of steps
required is only 45.
In Figure 6.6 the development of the number of solved streams is shown as the
blue graph, while the red line symbolizes the worst-case linear development in
which every stream would be solved separately.
(a) General Motors case
(b) Orion case
Figure 6.6: Amount of solved Streams during Optimization
6.1.3
Result Tables
Table 6.1 and Table 6.2 show the results of various representative test cases
of our test batch with diﬀerent sizes. The row Stream Exceeding Percentage -
Mean(%) gives the mean of all streams exceeding percentages, where the ex-
ceeding percentage is, as deﬁned in Equation 5.5, the percentage by how much
a stream exceeds its deadline after the initial solution. In the second and third
last row, the standard deviation cost function is used in addition to the normal
cost display in the rows above.
From the tables we can observe that the runtime scales more with the number
of streams to be solved and is not really inﬂuenced by the mean exceeding
percentage (see medium1 versus medium2 for example). Streams with a high
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Behavior
55
medium3
small_intersRoutes
small_oneRoute
small1
ES
6
3
2
4
SW
2
3
2
4
Streams
13
2
3
2
Streams to be solved
12
2
2
2
Stream Exceeding Percentage - Mean (%)
322.74
184.0
111.89
102.0
Solution - Steps needed
7
3
2
3
Initial Cost - Mean (%)
9.14
16.0
24.0
12.0
Final Cost - Mean (%)
42.28
35.06
45.71
19.83
Initial Cost - Standard Deviation (%)
6.66
2.83
0.0
0.0
Final Cost - Standard Deviation (%)
39.35
14.87
0.0
0.0
Runtime
17.12 s
3.37 s
1.74 s
3.62 s
Table 6.1: Comparison of small Test Cases
ORION
General Motors
medium1
medium2
ES
31
20
10
6
SW
15
20
6
2
Streams
137
27
9
4
Streams to be solved
136
27
4
3
Stream Exceeding Percentage - Mean (%)
4013.59
2439.43
68.2
242.87
Solution - Steps needed
49
24
3
3
Initial Cost - Mean (%)
0.24
0.15
24.01
3.85
Final Cost - Mean (%)
27.47
7.47
29.72
9.79
Initial Cost - Standard Deviation (%)
0.19
0.11
15.16
1.78
Final Cost - Standard Deviation (%)
36.65
23.23
22.55
9.95
Runtime
32.22 min
2.45 min
5.29 s
3.99 s
Table 6.2: Comparison of Large Test Cases
==PAGE:72==
56
Evaluation
exceeding percentage initially, tend to have a big increase in standard deviation
for the ﬁnal cost. The runtime is reasonable even for the largest test case.
6.1.4
Proﬁling
To get a better understanding of the runtime, test-case runs were proﬁled, i.e.
it was analyzed which parts of the code take what time. Thereby it became
apparent that the worst-case analysis is the big bottleneck of the solutions run-
time. Approximately 93.7% of the runtime is spent on waiting for the worst-case
analysis, 5.7% on the optional creation of output ﬁles and only 0.2% on the op-
timization process. An optimization of the analysis runtime or a reduction of
the analysis step can improve the speed of the overall optimization by a lot.
6.2
Comparison to Deterministic Scheduling
To compare with deterministic scheduling we are going to look at the schedulers
and test-cases proposed by Raagard et al. in [18].
First, the input data needs to be harmonized. The test cases from Raagard miss
two crucial parameters: the stream priority and deadline. He assumes that the
priority of a stream can be changed along the route and thus be decided by the
scheduler. Additionally, the deadline of each stream is simply its period.
To decide these parameters Raagards tool is run ﬁrst. From the resulting sched-
ule, the priority for each stream can be extracted. The deadline is set to equal
10 or 100 times the period for each stream.
The test cases were chosen as a good representation of the test case set available
for Raagards tool. They vary in topology size, stream parameters and stream
amount.
Raagard proposed many diﬀerent optimization methods, including a metaheuris-
tic, GRASP, and ILP. Each can additionally be conﬁgured to focus on either
reducing the number of queues used or the end-to-end delays as much as possible.
The comparison was made with the as-soon-as-possible (ASAP) metaheuristic
in Table 6.3, the ASAP metaheuristic focusing on queue usage in Table 6.5, ILP
focusing on end-to-end delays in Table 6.6 and GRASP focusing on end-to-end
delays in Table 6.7. In all cases, the deadline equaled 10 times the period for
each stream.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Comparison to Deterministic Scheduling
57
Only in Table 6.4 it was set to be 100 times the period. The results for Raagards
algorithm are presented in columns named Raagard while the results for the
algorithm of this thesis is presented in columns named Windows.
Mean e2e Delay (µs)
Mean Cost (%)
Calculation Time (s)
Infeasible Streams
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
G1_6ms_high_9
832.1
4185
59.8
79.8
1.2
12
0
11/18
G1_6ms_high_17
959
3931
53.4
90
0.75
7.9
0
7/12
G1_6ms_low_8
821
4128
47.8
100
0.97
8.2
0
7/13
G2_1ms_high_3
190
1426
46
76.9
0.16
5.4
0
3/15
G2_1ms_low_5
124
1714
39.5
73.1
0.15
4.6
0
1/16
G2_1ms_medium_13
126
1707
32.8
44.8
0.19
3
0
1/14
G3_6ms_medium_6
125
1371
22.3
69
0.27
5
0
0
G3_30ms_high_12
3072
14601
44.3
100
20.7
13.1
0
13/18
G3_30ms_low_4
1277
10472
23.2
61.1
6.21
11.8
0
5/14
G3_30ms_medium_19
338
11825
24.4
58.9
6.18
7.9
0
4/11
Table 6.3: Comparison Table - ASAP Metaheuristic - Deadline = 10*period
Mean e2e delay (µs)
Mean Cost (%)
Calculation Time (s)
Infeasible Streams
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
G1_6ms_high_9
832.1
5040
59.8
54.96
1.2
1.95
0
5/18
G1_6ms_high_17
959
5743
53.4
65.03
0.75
1.71
0
2/12
G1_6ms_low_8
821
5714
47.8
73.61
0.97
0.49
0
0/13
G2_1ms_high_3
190
1830
46
66.88
0.16
0.28
0
1/15
G2_1ms_low_5
124
2087
39.5
63.77
0.15
0.31
0
0/16
G2_1ms_medium_13
126
1776
32.8
44.36
0.19
0.34
0
1/14
G3_6ms_medium_6
125
4148
22.3
36.65
0.27
0.4
0
0/8
G3_30ms_high_12
3072
16798
44.3
84.02
20.7
9.44
0
6/18
G3_30ms_low_4
1277
12104
23.2
52.02
6.21
3.13
0
1/14
G3_30ms_medium_19
338
12520
24.4
53.52
6.18
4.35
0
2/11
Table 6.4: Comparison Table - ASAP Metaheuristic - Deadline = 100*period
The comparison between Table 6.3 and Table 6.4 shows nicely the diﬀerence
the choice of deadline makes. For very high deadlines the mean cost and the
calculation time are much more similar for both solutions. However the mean
end-to-end delay discrepancy is growing even larger, since the high deadline
incentivizes the Windows solution to sacriﬁce latency for lower cost.
Mean e2e Delay (µs)
Mean Cost (%)
Calculation Time (s)
Infeasible Streams
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
G1_6ms_high_9
908
4158
60
79.83
1.1
11.94
0
11/18
G1_6ms_high_17
948
3931
53
90.3
0.92
8.67
0
7/12
G1_6ms_low_8
821
4129
48
100.0
0.95
8.32
0
7/13
G2_1ms_high_3
188
1383
46
76.9
0.16
5.67
0
4/15
G2_1ms_low_5
111
1715
40
73.17
0.16
4.94
0
1/16
G2_1ms_medium_13
122
1708
33
44.84
0.17
3.0
0
1/14
G3_6ms_medium_6
118
1372
22
69.0
0.15
5.23
0
0/8
G3_30ms_high_12
3067
14632
44
100.0
20.0
15.24
0
13/18
G3_30ms_low_4
816
10472
23
61.17
6.51
12.85
0
5/14
G3_30ms_medium_19
403
11826
24
58.87
4.25
7.8
0
4/11
Table 6.5: Comparison Table - ASAPQ Metaheuristic - Deadline = 10*period
==PAGE:74==
58
Evaluation
Mean e2e Delay (µs)
Mean Cost (%)
Calculation Time (s)
Infeasible Streams
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
G1_6ms_high_9
908
4158
60
79.83
1.19
12.39
0
11/18
G1_6ms_high_17
948
3931
53
90.3
0.87
8.87
0
7/12
G1_6ms_low_8
821
4129
48
100.0
1.0
8.27
0
7/13
G2_1ms_high_3
188
1383
46
76.9
0.15
5.53
0
4/15
G2_1ms_low_5
111
1715
40
73.17
0.17
4.55
0
1/16
G2_1ms_medium_13
122
1708
33
44.84
0.17
2.91
0
1/14
G3_6ms_medium_6
118
1372
22
69.0
0.13
5.04
0
0/8
G3_30ms_high_12
3067
14632
44
100.0
20.0
14.19
0
13/18
G3_30ms_low_4
816
10472
23
61.17
6.72
12.99
0
5/14
G3_30ms_medium_19
403
11826
24
58.87
4.29
8.68
0
4/11
Table 6.6: Comparison Table - Integer Linear Programming E2E - Deadline
= 10*period
Mean e2e Delay (µs)
Mean Cost (%)
Calculation Time (s)
Infeasible Streams
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
Raagard
Windows
G1_6ms_high_9
722
2889
60
75.48
71.37
8.52
0
14/18
G1_6ms_high_17
644
4791
53
90.3
66.43
5.12
0
6/12
G1_6ms_low_8
641
4449
48
100.0
70.0
8.15
0
6/13
G2_1ms_high_3
132
1395
46
73.06
60.8
5.23
0
4/15
G2_1ms_low_5
88
1715
40
73.17
66.81
5.28
0
1/16
G2_1ms_medium_13
107
1801
33
46.36
60.59
2.7
0
0/14
G3_6ms_medium_6
115
1372
22
69.0
60.15
6.2
0
0/8
G3_30ms_high_12
3013
16033
44
100.0
101.09
15.87
0
14/18
G3_30ms_low_4
410
10472
23
61.17
70.6
11.74
0
5/14
G3_30ms_medium_19
394
11826
24
58.87
68.91
7.76
0
4/11
Table 6.7: Comparison Table - GRASP E2E - Deadline = 10*period
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Comparison to Deterministic Scheduling
59
All of the results clearly show the superiority of the deterministic solution for
the chosen parameters. That was to be expected, given that it is comparing the
worst-case timings of frames in this thesis versus the close to best case timings
from Raagard. Interesting is the relationship between the numbers. Comparing
all end-to-end delays the Windows solutions delays are 674% higher on average.
The mean cost, i.e. the port occupation, is 91% higher. The calculation time
is 58% lower, but only if the results of the very slow GRASP scheduler are
considered. If not it is actually 218% higher.
The reason is the inherent pessimism of the worst-case analysis, which naturally
increases the end-to-end delays.
Thus the cost also has to increase to keep
those end-to-end delays low enough to be below the deadlines. The calculation
time comparison is not really fair, as Raagards algorithm does not need to
perform a worst-case analysis. As stated previously in Section 6.1.4 the worst-
case analysis consumes most of the runtime. The actual optimization time would
be comparable with the calculation time of Raagards ASAP metaheuristics.
Interesting is that in many of the given test cases many streams were completely
infeasible to solve with the Windows algorithm. That is because in those cases
the streams have high period percentages. Combined with the necessary addi-
tion of very long guard bands it means that a few streams will already occupy the
entire hyperperiod of the port to stay feasible, killing oﬀthe leftover streams
of lower priority. In the future, the existing initial solution algorithm might
be improved to detect such cases and extend the hyperperiod by some degree,
which could make more streams feasible but would also mean an increase in
mean end-to-end delay.
The advantages of the Windows solution lies not in the numbers but in the
composition of the problem. For example, our composition is less constraining
on the designer of a TSN network.
1. There is no need to schedule streams and frames. A designer only has to
set the GCLs of the network switches according to the windows, instead of
imposing a schedule onto each end-system when it has to send which frame.
This can be helpful for combined application and network scheduling.
2. There is no need for the network devices to be 802.1CB, 802.1Qci or
802.1Qbu enabled
3. The solution space of possible stream/frame transmission schedules is
higher. Now situations, where frames overlap in the time domain on arrival
in the same queue, are considered.
==PAGE:76==
60
Evaluation
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 7
Conclusions and Future
Work
7.1
Conclusions
This thesis aimed to provide a base for the comparison of diﬀerent TSN conﬁg-
urations and scheduling methods. It introduced the notion of problem composi-
tions and identiﬁed three.
The ﬁrst composition is one already analyzed in the literature. It is deﬁned
by the use of Frame Isolation, which strictly separates frames of same prior-
ity streams in the time domain to avoid non-deterministic queuing and thus
transmission.
The composition looked at in this thesis relaxes the isolation constraint, which
necessitates a worst-case delay analysis to still be able to guarantee bounded
latency for time-triggered traﬃc. In previous work [11] such a worst-case anal-
ysis was presented. This thesis extended upon the research of this composition
by implementing a constructive heuristic and a window optimization algorithm
with the goal to maximize the bandwidth available to lower priority traﬃc while
guaranteeing all deadlines for time-triggered traﬃc.
An important contribution are the ﬁndings about the worst-case analysis at
==PAGE:78==
62
Conclusions and Future Work
which a good optimization algorithm can orientate.
We identiﬁed that only
certain ports are aﬀected by a change of a window and that a change that has a
positive impact on worst-case delays in the source port will have positive eﬀects
in every aﬀected port, which suggests a natural order in which ports should be
optimized. Additionally, we analyzed all possible cases of window overlap and
concluded that is should be avoided and found that the placement of windows
in queues does not matter in most circumstances.
On the implementation side, we propose a way to calculate the available band-
width of a port by calculating the occupation of its hyperperiod using binary
strings and the bitwise OR function. We conclude that the complexity of the
problem scales with the hyperperiod, so periods with a high LCM should be
avoided in a port.
We found that with out constructive heuristic it is possible to create a near-
optimal initial solution in regards to the available bandwidth, which means
many possible problems can be solved instantaneously. Only if deadlines are
not fulﬁlled initially do we need to optimize windows and sacriﬁce bandwidth
for lower delays.
The optimization algorithm decreases the delays for a stream by decreasing the
window periods along the route of the stream. We found that it works best to
share a common period between all windows in a port since in this way window
overlap and complicated cost function calculations can be avoided. That also
comes with the advantage of potentially solving multiple streams of diﬀerent
periods at the same time. To minimize the cost we implemented an algorithm,
based on the idea of binary search, for ﬁnding those periods. It can ﬁnd the
optimal period in logarithmic time.
We evaluated the behavior of the algorithm by showcasing certain phenomena
such as the inverse proportionality of cost and delays and the positive eﬀect of
cohesive topologies on solving time. For a diverse set of test cases, we present
many solution parameters that describe the test cases diﬃculty, how long it
took to solve and several cost statistics. Through proﬁling, we identiﬁed the
worst-case analysis as the major calculation time bottleneck.
We compared our solution to the ﬁrst composition and determined how much
end-to-end delay and bandwidth-use increase in our case.
We discussed the
reasons and some of the advantages of our solution, one of which is the reduced
demand on a designer of a TSN system.
The third composition that is mentioned in this thesis goes a step further and
proposes to remove scheduling altogether, instead opening all queue gates all
the time, letting the stream priority alone decide who can transmit. This is a
==PAGE:79==
7.2 Future Work
63
promising alternative to the composition of this work that should be investigated
in the future.
7.2
Future Work
As the aim of this thesis was to provide a base for comparison and to analyze
one of the problem compositions, the next steps should be focused on gathering
data about all relevant compositions and do a comprehensive comparison. There
are also some steps that could further improve the results for this composition.
Speciﬁcally, the following things can be done in the future:
• Other problem compositions should be investigated.
A tool to gather
data and the underlying worst-case analysis for the No-GCL case should
be developed. Possibly there are also more compositions that are worth
looking at.
• The presented initial solution algorithm could be extended to better sup-
port high size, high period percentage streams, as mentioned in Section 6.2,
if an analysis conﬁrms that the worst-case delay trade-oﬀis worth it.
• Zhao, the author of the worst-case analysis, mentioned the possibility of
making the analysis less pessimistic, decreasing the calculated worst-case
delays. For example, the interference of higher priority traﬃc could be
analyzed on a level of streams instead of windows, meaning that a higher
priority window could not, or only partially, block a lower priority one, if
itself is not completely ﬁlled with streams. It would need to be checked
if the ﬁndings presented in Section 5.1 still hold. Additionally, a possible
negative eﬀect on the runtime should be taken into consideration.
• Finally, a comprehensive comparison of all problem compositions should
be done. Thought should be put into how to do this fairly, as diﬀerent
compositions require diﬀerent constraints and device capabilities. Also,
test cases have to be constructed carefully as some composition will require
input data that others do not, which can aﬀect the results considerably.1
1For example the decision in this thesis to choose the stream deadline to be ten times the
period when comparing to the deterministic solution
==PAGE:80==
64
Conclusions and Future Work
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Problem Example - Network Topology
ES1
ES2
ES3
ES4
ES5
ES6
ES7
ES8
ES9
ES10
SW1
SW2
SW3
SW4
SW6
SW5
Figure A.1: Topology
The streams are shown as colored arrows. On multiple occasions streams will
==PAGE:82==
66
Appendix
share the same output port which will lead to further delays if they have the
same period.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1] I.
Sommerville.
Critical
systems.
Accessed:
11.06.2019.
[Online].
Available:
http://iansommerville.com/software-engineering-book/web/
critical-systems/
[2] H. Kopetz, Real-Time Systems: Design Principles for Distributed Embedded
Applications, 2nd ed.
Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2011.
[3] IEEE TSN (Time-Sensitive Networking): A Deterministic Ethernet Stan-
dard, TTTech Computertechnik AG, 2015.
[4] J. Specht and S. Samii, “Urgency-Based Scheduler for Time-Sensitive
Switched Ethernet Networks,” in 2016 28th Euromicro Conference on Real-
Time Systems (ECRTS), July 2016, pp. 75–85.
[5] J. Rushby, “A Comparison of Bus Architectures for Safety-Critical Embed-
ded Systems.”
Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 306–323.
[6] “IEEE Standard for Ethernet,” IEEE Std 802.3-2018 (Revision of IEEE
Std 802.3-2015), pp. 1–5600, Aug 2018.
[7] Z. Lin and S. Pearson, “An inside look at industrial Ethernet communica-
tion protocols,” 2013.
[8] Time-Triggered Ethernet,
nov 2016,
Accessed:
11.06.2019. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.4271/AS6802
[9] IEEE. Time-Sensitive Networking Task Group. Accessed:
11.06.2019.
[Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/1/pages/tsn.html
==PAGE:84==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] F. Dürr and N. G. Nayak,
“No-wait Packet Scheduling for IEEE
Time-sensitive Networks (TSN),” in Proceedings of the 24th International
Conference
on
Real-Time
Networks
and
Systems,
ser.
RTNS
’16.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 203–212. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2997465.2997494
[11] L. Zhao, P. Pop, and S. S. Craciunas, “Worst-case Latency Analysis for
IEEE 802.1Qbv Time Sensitive Networks using Network Calculus,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 41 803–41 815, 2018.
[12] IEEE, “802.1AS-Rev - Timing and Synchronization for Time-Sensitive Ap-
plications,” http://www.ieee802.org/1/pages/802.1AS-rev.html, 2016, ac-
cessed: 11.06.2019.
[13] “IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks–Frame Replica-
tion and Elimination for Reliability,” IEEE Std 802.1CB-2017, pp. 1–102,
Oct 2017.
[14] “IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks– Virtual Bridged
Local Area Networks Amendment 12: Forwarding and Queuing Enhance-
ments for Time-Sensitive Streams,” IEEE Std 802.1Qav-2009 (Amendment
to IEEE Std 802.1Q-2005), pp. 1–72, Jan 2010.
[15] “IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks – Bridges and
Bridged Networks - Amendment 25: Enhancements for Scheduled Traﬃc,”
IEEE Std 802.1Qbv-2015 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.1Q— as amended
by IEEE Std 802.1Qca-2015, IEEE Std 802.1Qcd-2015, and IEEE Std
802.1Q—/Cor 1-2015), pp. 1–57, March 2016.
[16] “IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks – Bridges
and Bridged Networks – Amendment 26: Frame Preemption,” IEEE Std
802.1Qbu-2016 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.1Q-2014), pp. 1–52, Aug
2016.
[17] “IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks–Bridges and
Bridged Networks–Amendment 28:
Per-Stream Filtering and Policing,”
IEEE Std 802.1Qci-2017 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.1Q-2014 as
amended by IEEE Std 802.1Qca-2015, IEEE Std 802.1Qcd-2015, IEEE Std
802.1Q-2014/Cor 1-2015, IEEE Std 802.1Qbv-2015, IEEE Std 802.1Qbu-
2016, and IEEE Std 802.1Qbz-2016), pp. 1–65, Sep. 2017.
[18] M. L. Raagaard and P. Pop, “Optimization algorithms for the scheduling of
IEEE 802.1 Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN),” DTU Compute, Technical
University of Denmark, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[19] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Network–Bridges and
Bridged Networks - Redline,” IEEE Std 802.1Q-2018 (Revision of IEEE
Std 802.1Q-2014) - Redline, pp. 1–3654, July 2018.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[20] R. Serna Oliver, S. S. Craciunas, and W. Steiner, “IEEE 802.1Qbv Gate
Control List Synthesis Using Array Theory Encoding,” in 2018 IEEE Real-
Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS),
April 2018, pp. 13–24.
[21] S.
S.
Craciunas,
R.
S.
Oliver,
M.
Chmelík,
and
W.
Steiner,
“Scheduling Real-Time Communication in IEEE 802.1Qbv Time Sensitive
Networks,”
in Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on
Real-Time
Networks
and
Systems,
ser.
RTNS
’16.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2016,
pp.
183–192.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//doi.acm.org.proxy.ﬁndit.dtu.dk/10.1145/2997465.2997470
[22] W. Steiner, “An Evaluation of SMT-Based Schedule Synthesis for Time-
Triggered Multi-hop Networks,” in 2010 31st IEEE Real-Time Systems
Symposium, Nov 2010, pp. 375–384.
[23] ——,
“Synthesis
of
static
communication
schedules
for
mixed-
criticality systems,”
in 2011 14th IEEE International Symposium on
Object/Component/Service-Oriented
Real-Time
Distributed
Computing
Workshops, March 2011, pp. 11–18.
[24] F. Pozo, W. Steiner, G. Rodriguez-Navas, and H. Hansson, “A decompo-
sition approach for SMT-based schedule synthesis for time-triggered net-
works,” in 2015 IEEE 20th Conference on Emerging Technologies Factory
Automation (ETFA), Sep. 2015, pp. 1–8.
[25] D. Tamas-Selicean, P. Pop, and J. Madsen, “Design of Mixed-Criticality
Applications on Distributed Real-Time Systems,” 2015.
[26] S. S. Craciunas and R. S. Oliver,
“Combined task- and network-
level
scheduling
for
distributed
time-triggered
systems,”
Real-Time
Systems, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 161–200, Mar 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11241-015-9244-x
[27] P. Pop, M. L. Raagaard, S. S. Craciunas, and W. Steiner, “Design opti-
misation of cyber-physical distributed systems using IEEE time-sensitive
networks,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory Applications, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 86–94, 2016.
[28] More
Geometric
Data
Structures.
Berlin,
Heidelberg:
Springer
Berlin
Heidelberg,
2008,
pp.
219–241.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-77974-2_10
[29] J.-D. Boissonnat and F. P. Preparata, “Robust Plane Sweep for Intersecting
Segments,” 1997.
==PAGE:86==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[30] T. Seidl and J. Enderle, Binary Search.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 5–11. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-15328-0_1
