==PAGE:1==
Improving Learning Plans with
Peer Goal Revision
Mathias Sixten Pedersen
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This thesis’ main purpose is to serve as a pre-liminary exploratory look into
what beneﬁts might emerge from socially making learning plans.
Based on
previous work, a way of creating plans broken into small actionable step was
designed and tested. From this initial design and testing, a research question of
whether revision of other learners’ plans beneﬁts reviser’s plan itself. To test the
hypothesis a simple workﬂow of create, revise, improve was designed. Extensive
design and several iterations of a prototype made the foundation for testing the
hypothesis on real users. People who planned to engage in either learning a
foreign language or a programming language. With a small sample size of users,
the experience and outcome of this workﬂow was explored and discussed. These
exploratory user studies show good results and indication of the revision task,
can indeed provide beneﬁts for the revisers themselves.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Denne afhandling har til formål at fungere som et udforskende kig ind i hvil-
ke fordele kan fremkomme ved socialt at lave planer. Baseret på nuværende
forsking, bliver der designet en metode til at dele en plan ind små dele. Udfra
dette design kunne man så komme op med et spørgsmål om hvorvidt dette, også
kan hjælpe dem som gennemser planerne til at lave bedre planer til dem selv.
Til at teste dette, en procedure indeholdende planudformning, plangennemgang
samt planforbedring, designet. En lille gruppe deltager testede systemet med
deres planer. Resultater viste at processen kunne hjælpe visse personer i at
forbedre deres planer.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
Lyngby, 10-June-2019
Author:
Mathias Sixten Pedersen
Advised by:
Helle Rootzén, Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Juho Kim, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my two advisors. Namely Helle
Rootzén and Juho Kim. I would like to thank them for their amazing patience,
challenging questions, and support in the immense learning process this was. I
would like to thank all the participants who took the time to participate in my
studies. Furthermore I want to thank all the members of KAIST Interaction
Lab for providing a great working environment and frequent feedback on my
work. I would like to thank my family and friends, no matter close or far, for
their support to me through the whole process.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Personal Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Preliminary Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Building a Plan
7
3.1
Plan framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Pilot testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Research scope
15
4.1
Research purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Design
17
5.1
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Workﬂow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.3
Prototype Iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.4
Last iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
5.5
Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Evaluation
33
6.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7
Discussion
39
7.1
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Outline
The main purpose of this thesis is to take a preliminary and exploratory look
into what beneﬁts might emerge from socially making learning plans. After a lit-
erature survey on current approaches in supporting learning, we narrowed down
our focus to previous research on microtasks and plansourcing as they might be
relevant in making learning plans. Borrowing from these approaches, we pro-
posed a design of microgoal-structured planning that can easily be understood
by others. After running a pilot study with the design, we were able to ask some
concrete research questions that mainly focus on whether helping other learners
to revise their learning plans yield any beneﬁts for the revisers themselves on
their own plans. With further look into related works, we presented a work-
ﬂow, "Create, Revise, Improve", for creating a learning plan with microgoals
and improving learning plans through peer goal revision. Following that, We
described our implementation details and several prototype iterations. Finally,
we described our user study, evaluation method and results and discussed the
limitations and future work of this project.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
1.2
Personal Motivation
My initial interest comes from personal experiences of motivation in productiv-
ity. Where do I usually ﬁnd motivation to be productive. There exists many
scenarios in which motivation can be a signiﬁcant factor in lack of productivity.
One of these is picking up a new thing to learn. Whether that be to play an
instrument, speak a new language or a skill relevant for school or work. Person-
ally, a great motivation factor has always been the peers I can share my ideas,
knowledge, questions, and so on with.
Trying to locate what speciﬁcs gave me a greater learning experience, three
things come to mind: (1.) the knowledge and diverse experience of peers help
overcome confusion and hurdles in understanding something new. (2.) having a
responsibility towards others help complete exercises and (3.)social interaction
provides joy throughout the process of working.
This idea partly came to life through a class project. As it was a group project,
it was quite diﬃcult focus on the exact things I, personally, thought was the
interesting and important questions to tackle. This project involved a question
of how to motivate learners through social means such as encouragement and
gamiﬁcation.
1.3
Context
As we move into the era of online education and digital educational assistance,
there arises an ocean of new questions and variations of old questions with it.
Amongst popular questions, is then how to support the individuals, such as
self-regualted learners[WBD+18]. How these general learning goals get tailored
to the individual[LvdBCA18]. How we draw social beneﬁts back into the in-
dividualised learning experiences[JJ11]. There is an intrinsic contradiction in
trying to reach a worldwide quantity, with an individualised quality. The ﬁrst
thing before learning anything, is to know what and how to learn that. It is to
have a plan. Creating a plan for something you do not know is a diﬃcult task
in itself, so why not get help from others that might know.
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Scope
3
1.4
Scope
Drawing from research in task productivity and social planning, a scenario of
how this is relevant as a part of creating learning plans is discussed. Receiving
plans from others increases motivation[ACMH16] in executing the plan.
So,
anyone receiving a plan beneﬁts from that, but what about one who has to
provide that plan, do they draw any beneﬁt from it?
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Preliminary Research
In this section some of the current related works, that led to narrowing of the
project scope, are summarised. What are the current approaches for learners
to help each other plan, evaluate and execute, each others plans and goals for
learning? Especially skills such as programming and foreign language learning
are studied closesly, as they are popular, diﬃcult, and yet easy to quantify and
measure in many aspects.
In [JJ11] they investigate how socially self-regulated learning is a crucial moti-
vation factor in collaborative learning. Learners showed motivation regulation
through social means in collaborative learning. This includes social reinforce-
ment and task structuring. [PROKGP14]
Mastery grid[GHSB16] provides a tool for feedback on learning introductory pro-
gramming. With each milestone providing information on how much examples,
quizzes etc. are studied. The results are compared and ranked in comparison
to other students. This solution encourages competition instead of collabora-
tion. Utilising competitive nature as motivation. It does not provide detailed
feedback on where or how to improve the approach.
==PAGE:18==
6
Background
In [LvdBCA18] proposes a document recommendation system for English learn-
ing as foreign language. Based on previous readings, the system recommend text
that it ﬁnd suitable for the learner. This motivated the students to read more
and they increased their vocabulary. But this was unfortunately only done as a
supplement to class teaching.
The tool in [TT11] provides translation for English to the foreign language by
changing a selected set of English words with foreign language. This does not
necessarily provide help in understanding diﬀerent aspects of a new language,
such as grammar, cultural context etc., as is use English context and not a
natural context of the foreign language.
In [ACMH16] they show that routines, preferences, constraints and goals are
four useful categories of information that can enable the planners to generate
more personalised and better perceived plans.
Underlying problem: Lack of motivation to plan and execute, new tasks
or skills to learn. Current approaches incorporate both social and individual
support to diﬀerent stages of learning and productivity. All from social solutions
using social reinforcement and sourcing of plans to making task structures which
splits tasks into microtasks. But no one seems to combine such approaches,
especially not within a learning environment.
2.1.1
Scope narrowing
The main idea for how to approach this comes from the microtask concept[ITLT18]
and PlanSourcing[ACMH16]. Both of these results increased motivation in exe-
cuting tasks and plans. In PlanSourcing strangers or friends will provide plans
for the user based on their constraints. As a result the user receives individual
plans without having to go through the initial hurdle of coming up with one by
themselves. Plans were actionable and well received by the users, where both
friends and strangers had each of their own advantages. Friends provide more
personalised plans, while users ﬁnd it easier to share personal information with
strangers. Similarly microtasks makes larger tasks easier to execute and more
ﬂexible in what circumstances they can be executed.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Building a Plan
3.1
Plan framework
As the aim is to let learners create personalised plans the framework has two
main purposes to support:
1. Help learners create and structure a plan that is actionable.
2. Make a plan in which the personal goal is easy to understand for other
learners.
Borrowing from micro tasks[CTIB15], the central type of element in our plan
framework will be the micro goal. A goal small enough to achieve within a single
study session. By this, learners will be encouraged to create small plans that
are actionable, just as micro tasks has proved to be. As these plans are to be
revised by peers the format should be recognisable and the plans easy for others
to understand. Microgoals do not only make the format consistent and help
learners to create actionable plans, but also have a limited size makes the peer
revision easier. Breaking a plan into micro goals also makes the peer revision a
series of micro tasks in itself.
==PAGE:20==
8
Building a Plan
Figure 3.1: Illustration of what a plan consists of.
To help peers revise for the individual and help the learner understand their
own plan better, another important element is the possibility to clarify any
kind of constraints. Constraints provide peers with information that helps them
understand the scope of the learner’s goal. Having such constraints have shown
to help strangers create better personal plans for the individuals.
3.1.1
Constraints
In general constraints are any kind of limitation you have in performing a task
or reaching a goal. Here constraints broadly includes any kind of limitation the
learner might have in time they can allocate for their plan, what resources(e.g.
books, videos, lectures and friends) they have at disposal, or any kind of prior
knowledge that might inﬂuences the learning. Providing a time frame might help
the reviser understand how the goal is broken down into the speciﬁc microgoals
and steps.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Plan framework
9
3.1.2
Description
To provide detailed information on what the goal involves, learners make a
short description of what the goal exactly includes. A one sentence title is often
not enough to convey the full scope of an exact goal. The description in itself
should aim to support the two pillars of the framework. A description made
speciﬁc and concise will both help the plan to be actionable for the learner and
understandable for the reviser.
3.1.3
Steps
Steps are the last and smallest sub element of a good plan. It is not deﬁned of
what exact size these should be, but it is somewhat free to the learner to choose.
Ideally a step should be small and speciﬁc enough such that it is actionable in
itself. The framework should therefor also aim to instruct learners to keep the
steps that way.
3.1.4
Microgoals
The term micro-goal is used to describe any way of breaking down one’s plan-
ning into smaller, more achievable goals.
It is does not necessarily follow a
strictly deﬁned structure, but should support a way of thinking about one’s
goals, planning learning.
It is adopted from previous research on microproductivity[3] (microtasks). Mi-
crotasks are decomposed from larger tasks to accommodate the small moments
people have during their day. In the same way micro-goals are derived from
larger goals. Each goal should collectively (and preferably independent) work
towards a main goal. The point is simply to put an emphasis on having a small
measurable goal instead of a microtask, that might not show results until the
larger task is completed.
An Independent microgoal means that it should be achievable independent from
other micro-goals within the same main goal. It should only be dependent on
the knowledge of the goal setter prior to creating the main goal.
==PAGE:22==
10
Building a Plan
3.1.5
Deﬁning a "good plan"
Outside of the principles supported by previous works we use the simple ap-
proach of SMART action plans as a way to evaluate how actionable a plan
is. SMART1 being an acronym for Speciﬁc, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic,
Time-bound.
3.1.5.1
SMART
SMART is just one of many guidelines for making actionable plans. But it follow
a few simple parameters that a plan has to meet.
1. The plan should be speciﬁc. It should be clear what the exact goal is,
who it involves and why it is important.
2. The goal should be measurable. This highly depends on the exact goal.
There are various ways measure the success/completion of a goal. Whether
it is concrete knowledge of a subject, performance of a skill or simply some
amount of time spent.
3. The goal should be attainable. The learner should have the resources to
actually reach the goal, any limitation or obstacles should be addressed in
the planning phase, to make the plan actionable.
4. The goal should be relevant. More on the why of the goal. It should
be relevant to the learner personally, not too diﬃcult and not too easy to
reach.
5. The goal should be time-bound. Having a deadline increases the seri-
ousness of the goal and make the learner less prone to down prioritise it.
Creating a goal with some sense of urgency increases motivation. E.g what
can be done at the exact moment of plan creation to move towards the
goal.
Other than ensuring a clear and actionable plan for the creator, it also helps
create a plan which purpose is easier understood by others who will have to
revise it.
1https://blog.udemy.com/smart-action-plan/
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Pilot testing
11
3.2
Pilot testing
To test and decide on the best way to instruct people on creating goals, micro
goals and the steps, a pilot study of these three stages in the plan creation
was done. Deciding how to build instructions for each of the stages were done,
over a few iterations by diﬀerent methods. To determine how an overall goal
should be described in a way that makes it understandable for peer learners
and how they could best possibly create microgoals for it, a simple scenario and
instructions were provided. First part was to give feedback on how easy the
provided goal was to understand. What things needed to be elaborated, what
things were unnecessary. From this, the following template of how to make a
goal was derived. Second part was for users to create microgoals based on some
simple instructions. Using feedback from users during multiple iterations, an
appropriate series of instructions could be constructed.
Decomposing a goal
into microgoals is a diﬃcult task for novice planners and therefor needs an
appropriate supportive series of instructions. Last part was for users to create
microgoals that includes steps, to see how they create the speciﬁc steps needed
to reach a microgoal and if detailed instructions were needed.
3.2.1
How to make a goal
Goal Description: Please provide a detailed description of what you want to
achieve, including expectations of when this would be achieved.
Prior Knowledge: Please provide a detailed list of knowledge relevant to your
goal
Constraints (resources, time etc.
the learner is limited by): Please
provide any constraints you have in planning for this goal. This includes: an
estimate of allocated time(per day, per study session etc.), your available re-
sources(devices, books, internet/no-internet, classes etc.)
Preferences: Please provide any non-critical constraints. Personal preference
of media, time of day, place etc. for studying.
3.2.2
How to decompose main goal into microgoals
What is a microgoal? A microgoal is a very small (and independent) sub-
goal decomposed from the main goal. It should preferably be achievable within
==PAGE:24==
12
Building a Plan
a single study session, if learner has not stated otherwise. A microgoal can be
anything that you ﬁnd relevant for achieving the higher level goal. It is a goal,
not a task. So any details on how it is obtained is not to be included. One way
to think of this, is to ﬁnd a sub-task, consider what the outcome is and success
criteria. It is about what to achieve, not how to.
What is an independent microgoal? The microgoals should also be, as far
as possible, independent of each other, and only require what is stated in ‘pior
knowledge’ and ‘constraints’. And if not, please state any further prerequisite.
A microgoal MUST include the following properties:
Description: Short and precise description of what the goal is.
Estimated time: Estimate time of achieving this goal based on what you know
of the learner.
A microgoal CAN include the following property if it requires:
Prerequisite:
Any requirements in achieving this goal not speciﬁed by the
learner. This can include assumptions of further knowledge, resources at learn-
ers disposal and so on.
3.2.3
How to make steps for microgoals
Based on the microgoal and constraints, you should create a series of steps that
sequentially moves the learner towards this goal. Scope of the steps highly de-
pends on the speciﬁc microgoal, but by default should be speciﬁc and action-
able. First step should be easy to pick up and do, where the others then follow
naturally. These steps, combined, should then lead the learner to the speciﬁed
microgoal.
3.2.4
Results
Through the pilot study, feedback on instructions and the plan structures were
pretty consistent across all users. Major concerns/confusions included:
1. Relevance of prior knowledge and preferences.
2. Lack of examples what constraints could include.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Pilot testing
13
User 1
User 2
Microgoal: prototype on paper
- Description:
draw sketchs of the prototype on paper
- Estimated time: 10 minutes
Description: ﬁnd speciﬁc need of target users
Estimated time: 1 hour
- Description: ﬁnd target users to interview
Estimated time: 10 min
- Description: prepare interview questions
Estimated time: 10 min
- Description: conduct interviews
Estimated time: 40 min
Prerequisite: interview skills
Table 3.1: Comparions between two users ﬁrst microgoal in a plan for “creating
a prototype”
3. Size of microgoals is diﬃcult to keep very small and of consistent size.
4. Lack of detail in general instructions.
Though the general feedback on how to make the instructions and what the goals
should included were quite similar, each user made widely diﬀerent microgoals.
Especially varying on the time estimations and detail of explanations.
3.2.5
Discussion
A key take-away from testing microgoal-structured plan is, several of the par-
ticipants reported the experience made them think how this could be used in
their own planning.
==PAGE:26==
14
Building a Plan
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Research scope
4.1
Research purpose
Nowadays, with the vast amount of learning material available, it is very com-
mon to partake in online learning, either as part of oﬀered courses or by oneself.
Both of these requires the learner to have some goals in mind and plan accord-
ingly to other priorities in their life, before digging into the hardship of learning.
Current online oﬀers still struggle to plan according to the individual. Previous
research shows how breaking tasks into smaller pieces can help increase pro-
ductivity and are more robust to interruption[CTIB15, ITLT18]. Furthermore,
research on behavior change shows the eﬀects of how peers can provide plans
for one’s goals in health-related goal setting and planning[ACMH16].
Naturally, a hypothesis would express a bettered learning experience however
that would be measured. But to end at that, there are many stages of research
questions that needs to be clearly answered before trying to answer if plans
are executed, goals are reached, and what the learning outcome even is. So to
tackle the questions before that, concepts of micro-goals and peer planning can
provide a good foundation for ways to collaboratively create goals and do social
“self” reﬂection.
In a scenario where a learner has to provide feedback or revise another’s plan,
==PAGE:28==
16
Research scope
Figure 4.1: Sequential hypothesis of revision leading to better plans.
can that revision support reﬂective behaviour in such way that it will also help
the learner self improve their own plan. Hypothesis:
1. Revising other learner’s plans help learners create better plans
for themselves. With the underlying assumption:
(a) Revising other learner’s plans lets them reﬂect on their own plans
(b) Reﬂection helps them design better plans for themselves
The explicit reﬂection behaviour will not be addressed, but is an assumption
that can lead to a lot of interesting future work.
Pre-workﬂow design questions:
• What is collaborative planning?
• What is social self reﬂection?
• What key elements and interactions are needed?
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 5
Design
5.1
Approach
Based on everything so far, we can start to design an imagined scenario where
this could apply and where the hypothesis would be relevant. Of this, only the
concrete workﬂow that aims to support the hypothesis will be implemented as
a prototype and evaluated. The ﬁrst coming design aims to create a scenario in
which the Research Question is speciﬁcally relevant, that is more relevant in a
longer research agenda.
5.1.1
Collaborative Planning
The term collaborative planning broadly describes ways for learners to collabo-
rate on making goals and plans. In practice, this can widely diﬀer in approaches.
Two interesting approaches are (1.) learners collectively collaborate on planning
for one common learning goal and (2.) within a small group of similar learners,
they revise and reﬂect upon each others goals. Version ONE: A small group
of learners, with a common goal, work together to form a “perfect” plan for
their goal. Here, each learner will contribute with their own ideas to form one
plan, all of the members can follow. Version TWO: A small group of learners,
==PAGE:30==
18
Design
Figure 5.1: Caption
with similar goals, give feedback on each others goals such that each learner
can reﬂect on their own plan and process. This approach makes plans more
individual.
Collaborative Planning will be used to refer to a combination of the two. Mainly
focussed around version 2, with a simpliﬁcation of version 1 to support learners’
goal making.
A “perfect” plan is simply one plan that aims to accomodate all learners needs.
A compromise. So in a broad sense, it should be very general, ﬂexible and easy
to adapt. It will most likely not be the best for any individual, but it should be
an aggregation of the same goals and serve as a reference for making individual
plans.
There are two kinds of similarity between learners to consider (1: similar) they
have the same goal or a big subset of their subgoals intersect, (2: like-minded)
their process, type of learning, type of planning etc. are similar.
5.1.2
Social “self” Reﬂection
Social self reﬂection refers to the idea that social interactions, with especially
like-minded people or people with similar interests, can initiate a certain amount
of self reﬂection. Revising other people’s plans or receiving suggestive inputs
from other learner’s might help one to think diﬀerently, more abstract or with
a new perspective of one’s own plans.
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Workﬂow
19
5.2
Workﬂow
Create, Revise, Improve!
1. Create a plan
(a) Title
(b) Description
(c) Constraints
(d) Microgoals
(e) Steps
2. First step is revision of a plan
(a) Commenting on description, knowledge, constraints
(b) Upvote steps of plan
(c) Edit steps
(d) Delete steps
(e) Add steps
3. Improve
(a) Update one’s own plan (related to revision)
(b) Make new plan
The whole workﬂow consists of three main tasks, in order for the learner to create
an improved plan. The ﬁrst step is mostly just for the learner to create whatever
plan they have in mind. There is no requirements of where this plan comes from,
how diﬃcult the subject is or the level of detail. The learner is provided with (or
partly forced to use) a structure that aims to break the goal into smaller, more
actionable microgoals, and also encourages the user to consider any constraints
they have in achieving the goal and their current knowledge related to the goal.
This structure also applies to the plans a learner needs to revise.
5.2.1
Creating a plan
The ﬁrst stage is to create a plan for the desired goal. Where the goal title is
the self-explanatory part of the plan, the remaining mandatory elements needs
some elaboration on their role in the plan.
==PAGE:32==
20
Design
Learners are guided to create the plan in a top-down approach. Ideally the goal
title leads to the description and constraints which then leads to the microgoals
which then leads to their subsequent steps.
5.2.1.1
Description
The description is here, where the learner gets the opportunity to elaborate in
detail what the exact goal is, and what they actually want to achieve. There are
no requirements in what the description should include, but it is encouraged to
keep it speciﬁc. The description provides a free-form that possibly can be used
to the high level parts that needs to be done to reach the ﬁnal goal or speciﬁc
parts of the goal that can be left out..
5.2.1.2
Constraints
Constraints are used to clarify anything that might limit the learner in achieving
the goal, the amount of time allocated to the learning or what resources they
have to accomplish it. The purpose is not only for the learner themselves to
understand their own goal, and its limitations, better, but also for the peers
to make better revision.
This element of the plan speciﬁcally helps support
the two points of being attainable and time-bound in a SMART action plan as
described in section 3.1.5.1. So the constraints element is an essential part for
constructing an actionable plan from the beginning.
5.2.1.3
Microgoals
As shown in previous work, breaking bigger tasks in to smaller ones, makes
the task more actionable [KKH+13, KWT+18] or result in higher quality work
[ITLT18]. It might be natural to break plans into smaller goals, but by sup-
porting this naturally, learners are enforced to keep a structure and think in
ways that will make their plan actionable. A microgoal does not need to have
a certain size, but it is encouraged that it should be attainable within a single
study session, which is something to be provided in the constraints.
==PAGE:33==
5.3 Prototype Iterations
21
5.2.1.4
Steps
Steps are the concrete tasks the learner needs to execute in order to reach their
goal. Steps are sub-tasks of a microgoal in the sense that a series of steps should
lead the
5.3
Prototype Iterations
To describe the process of designing the prototype, the iterative testing and
design choices have been broken into a few major iterations. Each iteration
implementing and/or updating some important functionalities.
5.3.1
First iteration
First prototype was a simple mock-up of how the UI for the revision phase would
look like and how the workﬂow of that exact phase would be.
Elements of microgoal plans and funtionality of the revision includes:
• Add suggestions to general goal requirements
– Description
– Knowledge
– Constraints
• Revise plan steps
– Edit current steps
– “Upvote” very relevant steps
– Add steps
– Add comments
This version was simple and static to test if users could understand the workﬂow
of revision and recognize the diﬀerence in the goals, microgoals and a plan. First
screen is listing goals made by other learners. Next screen is showing all the
microgoals attached to the chosen microgoal. Last is the plan where users can
do the actually revision.
==PAGE:34==
22
Design
Figure 5.2: The three screens in sequential order from top left. Goals, micro-
goals and plan.
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Prototype Iterations
23
Letting 3 people use the workﬂow for a few minutes and then provide feedback
on whether they could understand the purpose and the relevance of the diﬀerent
functionalities. The most prevelant feedback included:
1. Prior knowledge was irrelevant, as the level of knowledge be inferred from
the plan itself.
2. Find no use of "upvote" button. Confusing and obsolete.
5.3.2
Second iteration
First of all the feedback from ﬁrst design was addressed. The prototype was
then extended to incoorporate all teh phases of the work ﬂow. Meaning goal
creation, and goal improvement was added. Second iteration of the workﬂow
prototype supports the three main functionalities of:
1. Creating the ﬁrst plan
2. Revising another learner’s plan
3. Redoing initial plan
The purpose of testing in this iteration, is to determine any confusion with
instructions or functionalities and usability issues.
Outside of the instructions present on the ﬁrst page of the prototype, users were
partially guided through the process. At each of the three main stages (create,
revise, redo) users were informed of their before and questioned about usability
issues and in what way they thought the current step supported their planning.
Procedure:
Users were selected based on no criteria, and tests were conducted in person
with sessions up to 30 min. Users were instructed through the process.
5.3.3
Results
Through testing several usability issues were addressed.
These issues were
mainly concerned around the revision of other learner’s goal. All included:
==PAGE:36==
24
Design
Figure 5.3: Instructions and "login" screen for creating a goal and starting the
workﬂos
==PAGE:37==
5.3 Prototype Iterations
25
Figure 5.4: Goal creation page, with possibility to add multiple microgoals
and steps.
==PAGE:38==
26
Design
Figure 5.5: Updated plan revision screen. Now with "delete" functionality for
the steps.
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Prototype Iterations
27
Questions
Answers
Did the provided framework help you
create your ﬁrst plan?
User 1:
Yes.
Helped me consider
what small thing I could do ﬁrst.
User 2: Yes. Helped me break it into
smaller parts.
Did revising another learner’s plan
help you improve your own?
User 1: I got ideas for what to add
on to my plan. User 2: No.
After updating your plan do you ﬁnd
it easier to get started?
User 1: No. User 2:
If not asked to, would you have made
a plan?
User 1: Probably yes. User 2: No.
Would simply google.
Table 5.1: Post-testing answers from two of the users.
1. Missing navigation buttons such as back button and "continue" on login
page
2. No deletetion of microgoals on creation page
3. General lack of written instructions through the process
4. Tedious workﬂow while creating the initial plan.
(a) Generally too many mouse clicks
(b) Having to explicitly save every step
5. No indication of who owns the goals listed after creation
6. Uncertain of what suggestions for description and constraints should in-
clude
7. Edit for other learners was thought to do direct edits in their plan.
8. No support for reordering steps
5.3.3.1
User answer examples:
Type of goals: Exactly the same, Similar, Diﬀerent
5.3.4
Third iteration
For the third iteration, several of the most important usability issues were ad-
dressed. These include:
==PAGE:40==
28
Design
Figure 5.6: Visual indication of the suggestive edit made during plan revision
Figure 5.7: Example of instructions added at the goal list page and goal cre-
ator’s username
1. Added Back buttons
2. Expanded instructions to all stages of the workﬂow
3. Save steps on "Enter"
4. Names of goal creator, to indicate it’s someone else’s
5.3.5
Results
Through testing several usability issues were addressed.
These issues were
mainly concerned around the revision and navigation. Most prevalent include:
1. No indication where in the workﬂow you are
2. Navigation between phases were unclera
3. Uncertain if description/constraint suggestion was received
4. No support for reordering steps
5.4
Last iteration
Few new functionalities were added to make navigation and revision easier to
understand:
==PAGE:41==
5.5 Development
29
Figure 5.8: Indicator on the top of the page
Figure 5.9: Example of instructions added at the goal list page and goal cre-
ator’s username
1. Added indicator of where in the workﬂow user currently is
2.
This version was the ﬁnal version used for conducting the user studies described
in the Evaluation chapter.
The prototype can be accessed at http://www.
prototype.sixped.dk/login.
5.5
Development
The prototype is developed as a web application. This gives ﬂexibility in being
available for both desktop and mobile users.
The whole concept is centered
around microgoals, so ubiquitous availability of the study plans makes great
sense in context of accommodating so called micromoments[3]. Development
was done following the same timeline as the design iterations. The core of the
design was the revision part and therefor the ﬁrst to be developed and tested
as well.
5.5.1
Tools and Environment
The prototype is developed as a web application, using the Javascript library
ReactJS1. ReactJS is an Open-Sourced modern Javascript library for building
user interfaces. ReactJS has many advantages for building user interfaces, such
1https://reactjs.org/
==PAGE:42==
30
Design
as UI components, great performance, and easy integration with other services.
To provide a quick and easy database Google’s free solution Firebase2 was used.
Firebase and ReactJS are free(for this project size), has great performance and
integrate well with each other.
5.5.2
Core Design (ﬁrst iteration)
The ﬁrst prototype consisted of three pages, each containing components and
data relevant to each of them.
5.5.2.1
Goal page
The goal page is a simple list of components containing the most basic data
of each user’s goal. The component stores only the title and description, and
provides a link to the page of that exact goal.
5.5.2.2
Microgoal page
Similar to the Goal page the microgoal page is a list of all the microgoal encom-
pased by that exact goal. Each microgoal link to the revision page, referencing
only the ID of the microgoal.
5.5.3
Revision page
The revision page contains two types of components: a Requirement component
and a Step component. The requirement component was used for the description
and constraints. Where as a list of step components was used for listing all the
steps the speciﬁc microgoal has. The Requirement component consists of a
longer text ﬁeld meant for plan parts like description and constraints. The Step
component is a list element and contains buttons for editing and deleting.
2https://ﬁrebase.google.com/
==PAGE:43==
5.5 Development
31
Figure 5.10: This diagram illustrates the three pages and their components,
developed for the core design. Arrows indicate the link between
the pages.
5.5.4
Full Design (last iteration)
Apart from the pages described in the core design, the Final design incorporated
a creation page and an improvement page.
5.5.4.1
Creation page
Creation page uses slightly modiﬁed versions of the Requirement component
and Step component.
5.5.4.2
Improvement page
Figure 5.11: Shown here are the pages and components of the last prototype
iteration. The arrows indicate links and dataﬂow. Circles and
ellipses show
==PAGE:44==
32
Design
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 6
Evaluation
The goal of the study is to investigate whether revising other peer learners’ plans
will help learners themselves to create more actionable plans. After updating,
changing and giving feedback to other learners’ goals, do learners reﬂect on their
own plans and thereby improve them. Quality of feedback and revision, as well
as what phase of workﬂow provides best improvement support, will be assessed
too. Both how the learners perceive their plans and how the exact plans look
like will be taken in to account.
6.1
Participants
A total of ten participants were recruited through group chats on Facebook and
KakaoTalk, mostly consisting of international students at KAIST. 8 were male
and 2 were female, all students (at bachelor or master level) with a background
in engineering. The median age was 24 years old, ranging from 21 to 37.
==PAGE:46==
34
Evaluation
6.2
Setup
The user study was conducted as a combination of participant observation and
interviews. Data was mainly collected through the system on how did partic-
ipants create, revise, and updated goals. Each participant ﬁlled out a ques-
tionnaire of their experience in the end of the study and discussed about tehir
experience using the workﬂow.
• The interviewer ﬁrst explained to the participants the purpose of the study
and how to use the system.
• Users was further instructed in the purpose of the study, how to use the
application, and that their information is anonymous.
• After the study, all participants was asked to ﬁll out an online question-
naire (Post Study Survey).
The procedure for each participant had the general structure of:
1. Introduction:
(a) Receive explanation of the purpose of the experiment
(b) Receive explanation of the procedure of the experiment
(c) Give written consent
2. Create an improved plan:
(a) Create a goal
(b) Revise a goal
(c) Improve a goal
3. Post experiment questions include:
(a) How did the provided framework help create the ﬁrst plan?
(b) How did revising another learner’s plan help improve the learner’s
own plan?
(c) After updating your plan do you ﬁnd it easier to get started?
(d) If not asked to, would you have made a plan?
To see full list of instructions and questions please refer to the appendix.
==PAGE:47==
6.3 Results
35
6.3
Results
The learners’s engagement can generally be categorised into 3 diﬀerent groups:
1. Learners making relatively extensive or detailed plans at the ﬁrst stage,
with no improvemnet at the third stage.
2. Learners making relatively small or not very actionable plans in the ﬁrst
stage. Then extend with ideas from plans they saw or revised.
3. User who engage in all three stages of the workﬂow, adds upon or makes
their microgoals more actionable.
6.3.1
Workﬂow supports goal decomposition
In the post user study questionnaire, all participants either answered "Agree" or
"Strongly Agree" when asked if the workﬂow helped them decompose their goal
into small and actionable steps. Through the revision phase one participant
(P1) came to understand the decomposition through looking at other plans.
The initial plan simply had this:
Microgoal: "Create a class in pyhton"
1. "Learn the syntax of python"
2. "Create variables"
After revising a plan for learning Javascript, P1 almost directly adopted a
microgoal to their own, helping them decompose the plan. Added microgoal
looked as follow:
Microgoal: "Create comments"
1. "Create a line comment"
2. "Create a section comment"
==PAGE:48==
36
Evaluation
6.3.2
Content of revision matters for improvements
In the ﬁrst category of learners all agreed that the structure of having microgoals
helped them make their steps more actionable. These learners also reported that
the goals they revised were not very relevant of their own.
P7:"The plan I saw was for a level that I have already achieved and
was therefore not quite as helpful."
So the level of content of the plans matters for whether a learner will improve
their plan in the last stage. They chose to revise a similar goal, but at a lower
level. As an example, of the available languages, P7 revised a goal of learning
simple introductory Korean. Where as P7’s goal was to be able to follow a long
in everyday conversations, as per the curriculum of their book.
Secondly there was generally two ways for learners to update and improve their
plans; (1.) add new microgoal or (2.) update existing micro goal.
6.3.3
Updating a microgoal makes it more actionable
When learners would just update a microgoal, instead of adding a new, the
steps would generally be more actionable than the ones created in the initial
plan making. This could either be, by adding a new very speciﬁc step that
would help them towards the microgoal, or by updating an existing one to be
more speciﬁc. Examples include:
P3: "Use duolingo" →"Use duolingo 8h per week"
P9: "Practice Vocab" →"Practice Vocab using ﬂashcards"
6.3.4
Revising and improving is not just copying
Several participants stated how revising other’s plans inspired them to update
their own.
In the section above, P9 updates one of their steps to be more
speciﬁc. They even state:
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Results
37
P9: "When revising another learners’ plan, I realised that I could
apply this to my own plan as well."
P9 furthermore explained how similar the goal they chose to revise was, as the
other learner was practising vocabulary from the same book. But nowhere in
the other plans are stated anything using Flashcards, which their exact update
was. Another example, after revising plans for learning french, P8 simply adds:
Microgoal: "Try ordering in a restaurant"
1. "Go to a restaurant."
Though this is not very actionable, there was no reference to food or restaurants
in any of the plans P8 revised. This indicates users do not simply improve by
example. They actively consider improvements that ﬁt their goal.
6.3.5
From a good plan to a better one
One user, namely L5, showed extensive engagement in all three phase, compared
to most others. Though the created microgoals were not that small, the steps
were relatively actionable.
They were quite general, but detailed enough to
make it more speciﬁc. The learner added and updated several steps within their
microgoals. These edtis usually extended the sequence of steps with more tasks,
that were slightly more speciﬁc.
Microgoal: "Go to korean restaurant and only speak korean"
1. "Read and listen to conversations held in restaurants when ordering and
similar"
2. "Make sure I understand the basic vocabulary"
3. "Try to predict and understand replies"
4. "Go to a restaurant and order"
Table 6.1: Example of P5’s added microgoal. Inspired from revision, but made
more actionable.
Table 6.1 shows the additional microgoal of L5. L5 revised 3 diﬀerent plans
within language learning. Only 1 of these plans mentioned "Meet once a week
for drinking Cafe to practice italian"[P2] as a last step of having conversation
==PAGE:50==
38
Evaluation
with friends in Italian.
P5 draws example from this and adds an extended
microgoal using a similar scenario. The microgoal has clear steps to perform in
order reach that exact goal.
In general the workﬂow seemed to provide a lot of
Users following a book tend to have less need for improvement. Either they
have their plan locked down or they will simply adhere to the curriculum.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 7
Discussion
There are still a lot of uncertainties and questions regarding the results, design
choices, testing, and further improvements. The current project still has a lot
of limitations, not only in the intentional design choices, but also parts that has
not been addressed or considered prior to the development and tests. Several of
these points are discussed in the following sections.
7.1
Contribution
A brief insight into how peer revision can facilitate improvements in learning
plans, not only for the revised but for the reviser as well. There were several
parts that made this possible. Designing a plan structure supporting features
from previous work on micro tasks and peer-planning, reﬂect on a scenario in
which peer revision would be relevant, create a workﬂow that could support the
hypothesis. Two main contribution were a microgoal structured plan design,
helping learners create plans with little to no knowledge of a subject, and a
workﬂow to revise similar plans and improve one’s own. The workﬂow indeed
showed interesting results for how revision also can be used as a way to improve
learning plans. Learners could encounter very similar goals to their own, that
helped them make more speciﬁc, possibly than what generic plan examples could
have.
==PAGE:52==
40
Discussion
7.1.1
Structure and workﬂow
The design of a microgoal-based plan has been a core element through out the
design. Though it has not been essential for testing the workﬂow, it supported
people in creating an actionable plan. Enforcing a strict size (i.e. study time and
period) is very diﬃcult, as for some goals even the smallest sensible sub-goals
might not be realistic to achieve within a micromoment as described in [CTIB15].
Especially with language learning that often requires a lot of repetition to fully
reach even the smallest goals. It was not possible to enforce one size for all
microgoal, since everyone has diﬀerent ideas of how small you can break it
down. Therefor, with some guidance, it was left to the individual learner to
decide the size.
Additionally a plan had to include some constraints on time and resources.
Initial the the purpose was to make it easier for peer learners to revise and
give feedback. Learners used these constraints to revise plans. Both changing
steps to consider the constraints, but also evaluate whether the other learner
would actually dedicate enough time or resources to achieve their microgoals.
Adding the constraints to their plan seemed to make them consider the size of
microgoals and amount of them more thoroughly.
Learners were guided (mostly by the system) through the workﬂow of creating,
revising and improving. There was a diﬃcult balance in giving learners freedom
to move around between phases and goals within phases. Learners would either
browse through diﬀerent similar goals before deciding one to revise, or simply
decide on one and stick to that.
No one returned to the revision after the
improvement phase. Learners who went through multiple goals in the revision
phase, used these goals to both improve their own and other’s. Looking through
diﬀerent goals, they could use similar steps across diﬀerent goals to provide
feedback for other learners with similar goals. So moving between revising and
improving might be completely unnecessary at this point. On the other hand
having the freedom to switch between goal in revision phase showed to be an
engaging way to both improve one’s own plan, but also across the other learners’
plans.
==PAGE:53==
7.2 Limitations
41
7.2
Limitations
7.2.1
Revision and engagement
Through the revision there was no strict way or explicit help in choosing, other
than a simple instruction to "choose a plan similar to your own". There was
no personal recommendation of what plan to revise. Not all plans are equally
good at facilitating improvements in the learners own plan.
Results showed
how relevant the plan is, both in topic and level, is important for the later
improvements.
So a more dynamic system, that supports revision choice in
such a way that it is more relevant will possibly improve the revisers’ plans
further. This might aﬀect the revision itself though. As the reviser might not
be able to give proper feedback. Extending with more dynamic features might
also help keeping users engaged. As the example of L5 in the results section
shows, being engaged in all phases creates actionable plans both for reviser and
revised. As instructions in the creation phase were rather generic, users had
diﬃculty coming up with actionable steps. Making the creation phase more
interactive might be a solution. Having personalised prompts when creating
microgoals, asking questions guiding users towards more actionable steps will
possibly create more engagement.
7.2.2
User studies
Do to the low number of participants and design iterations it is diﬃcult to
conclude anything indeﬁnitely. Also, planning is a task that varies a lot between
individuals. To answer whether revision can help the reviser create better plans
for themselves, their own plans were compared. There are much more variations
of a workﬂow in which iterations of their own plans could be compared. Maybe
they could simply see examples before creating ﬁrst plan or instead of revision.
There are many altenative ways to compare to, ways ﬁtted to the individual.
Concluding whether this user study has shown the right results for everyone is
diﬃcult to say. One thing certain is that the workﬂow aﬀect people diﬀerently
and helped some more than others.
7.2.3
User Interface
One of the biggest limitations in testing the concept, was the prototype UI.
Though it went through many iterations, and several with only minor issues,
==PAGE:54==
42
Discussion
there was several design choices that proved itself to be non-intuitive.
7.3
Future work
Other than addressing some of the questions described above, a series of future
work is discussed here.
7.3.1
Workﬂow and structure
7.3.2
Revision and reﬂection
7.3.3
Perspective
Two important directions to consider in where this ﬁts moving forward: (1.)
what is the role within learning and (2.) how is the also relevant outside of
learning. A great example of how peer feedback is used in learning environ-
ments is Peergrade1. Peergrade is primarily a tool to assist regular class teach-
ing methods. Students grade and give feedback on each others work. This not
only frees up time for the teacher to focus on teaching, but also creates opportu-
nities for students to learn from each other. One could imagine a solution that
not only targets class curriculum students or independent learners, but instead
take advantage of the knowledge and work process of each type of student. In-
dependent learners might expose class students to novel approaches and more
challenging ideas than traditional class curriculum. Class students might help
independent learners with in-depth methods and knowledge that might be dif-
ﬁcult for them to obtain on their own. The proposed workﬂow is explicitly for
planning scenarios but might be extend to the learning tasks themselves. Sim-
ilarly a product like Peergrade might be useful in the planning phase as well.
Students will not only have to follow a class curriculum, but can indeed, with
help from the peers, create plans that divert from traditional curriculum a little
but support the individuals better.
The workﬂow does not limit itself to create plans for learners. Novice learners
often have little knowledge to create a plan, but many other tasks and projects
might encounter similar challenges. Many people do not engage in much plan-
ning (or any at all) before starting a new project. Whether that be developing
1https://www.peergrade.io/
==PAGE:55==
7.4 Conclusion
43
an application, writing an article, or engaging in a healthier lifestyle. Having a
social way of creating plans and receive help is not only applicable in learning
environments, but anywhere people need to do tasks they might not be familiar
with.
7.4
Conclusion
In this thesis, we conducted a pre-liminary exploratory look into what beneﬁts
might emerge from socially making learning plans. Based on previous work,
a way of creating microgoal-structured plan was designed and tested.
From
this initial design and testing, a research question of whether revision of other
learners’ plans beneﬁts reviser’s plan itself.
To test the hypothesis a simple
workﬂow of create, revise, improve was designed. Extensive design and several
iterations of a prototype made the foundation for testing the hypothesis on real
users. People who planned to engage in either learning a foreign language or a
programming language. With a small sample size of users, the experience and
outcome of this workﬂow was explored and discussed. These exploratory user
studies show good results and indication of the revision task, can indeed provide
beneﬁts for the revisers themselves.
==PAGE:56==
44
Discussion
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[ACMH16]
Elena Agapie, Lucas Colusso, Sean A. Munson, and Gary
Hsieh.
Plansourcing: Generating behavior change plans with
friends and crowds. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference
on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing,
CSCW ’16, pages 119–133, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
[CTIB15]
Justin Cheng, Jaime Teevan, Shamsi Iqbal, and Michael S. Bern-
stein. Break it down: A comparison of macro- and microtasks.
April 2015.
[GHSB16]
Julio Guerra,
Roya Hosseini,
Sibel Somyurek,
and Peter
Brusilovsky. An intelligent interface for learning content: Com-
bining an open learner model and social comparison to support
self-regulated learning and engagement.
In Proceedings of the
21st International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI
’16, pages 152–163, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
[ITLT18]
Shamsi T. Iqbal, Jaime Teevan, Dan Liebling, and Anne Loomis
Thompson.
Multitasking with play write, a mobile micropro-
ductivity writing tool. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, UIST
’18, pages 411–422, New York, NY, USA, 2018. ACM.
[JJ11]
Sanna Järvelä and Hanna Järvenoja. Socially constructed self-
regulated learning and motivation regulation in collaborative
learning groups. Teachers College Record, 113:350–374, 03 2011.
[KKH+13]
Nicolas Kokkalis, Thomas Köhn, Johannes Huebner, Moontae
Lee, Florian Schulze, and Scott R. Klemmer. Taskgenies: Au-
==PAGE:58==
46
BIBLIOGRAPHY
tomatically providing action plans helps people complete tasks.
ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., 20(5):27:1–27:25, Novem-
ber 2013.
[KWT+18]
Harmanpreet Kaur, Alex C. Williams, Anne Loomis Thompson,
Walter S. Lasecki, Shamsi T. Iqbal, and Jaime Teevan. Creating
better action plans for writing tasks via vocabulary-based plan-
ning. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., 2(CSCW):86:1–86:22,
November 2018.
[LvdBCA18]
Mircea F. Lungu, Luc van den Brand, Dan Chirtoaca, and Martin
Avagyan. As we may study: Towards the web as a personalized
language textbook. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’18, pages 338:1–
338:12, New York, NY, USA, 2018. ACM.
[PROKGP14] Bernd Ploderer, Wolfgang Reitberger, Harri Oinas-Kukkonen,
and Julia Gemert-Pijnen. Social interaction and reﬂection for be-
haviour change. Personal Ubiquitous Comput., 18(7):1667–1676,
October 2014.
[TT11]
Andrew Trusty and Khai N. Truong. Augmenting the web for sec-
ond language vocabulary learning. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’11,
pages 3179–3188, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[WBD+18]
Jacqueline Wong, Martine Baars, Dan Davis, Tim van der Zee,
Geert-Jan Houben, and Fred Paas.
Supporting self-regulated
learning in online learning environments and moocs: A system-
atic review. International Journal of Human-Computer Interac-
tion, 07 2018.
