==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Exploration, Exploitation, Recommendation
and Mobility in High Resolution Behavioral
Data
Thorhildur Jensdottir (s172577)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Decision-making is a ubiquitous part of life, wherein one can exploit a known and
enjoyed option or choose to explore a novel option.
This study examines human
decision-making behaviours with regard to restaurant exploration and recommenda-
tions. It further identifies the important factors for both cases. A high-precision loca-
tion dataset of users’ behaviours was integrated with restaurant data from Foursquare,
resulting in a restaurant visit dataset containing data from 50,450 restaurant visits
to 5,006 restaurants in Copenhagen.
The density of restaurants is the most essential factor when predicting restaurant
exploration. Further, the findings suggest that restaurant exploration patterns follow
coherency maximisation, that people become less likely to explore the more they
exploit.
Moreover, a person’s friends proved to be the most reliable advisers for
restaurant recommendation if chosen from people with similar geospatial behaviours,
personalities, or from one’s friends. The results show that integrating these three
factors results in the most reliable recommendations.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Digital Media Engineering. The project was carried out
from January 2nd to June 16th of 2019 and corresponds to 32.5 ECTS credits.
Sune Lehmann Jørgensen is the supervisor of this project and co-supervisors are
Laura Alessandretti and Pantelis Analytis.
Kongens Lyngby, June 16, 2019
Thorhildur Jensdottir (s172577)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank Sune for his constant and frequent guidance throughout the process
of this thesis and for the answers to my many questions. I also want to thank Laura
and Pantelis for all the advice and assistance.
I want to thank Óli for always being there for me no matter what. I want to thank
my family for their unconditional support and cheering me up when needed. I want
to thank my sister Ingunn for proofreading. I want to thank my friends for providing
moral support during those long hours in the library.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Human mobility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Human exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Recommender systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Datasets
9
3.1
Copenhagen Network Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Restaurant data from Foursquare
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Methods
17
4.1
Restaurant data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Data processing for exploration prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Data processing for restaurant recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Machine learning algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6
Evaluation metrics for recommender system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Restaurant exploration prediction
31
5.1
Target variable and features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Classification methodology and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.3
Summary and comparison of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Recommending restaurants
41
6.1
Choosing data for recommendation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Creating recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Evaluating recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.4
Summary of recommender systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Discussion
55
7.1
Discussion of results for exploration prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2
Discussion of results for recommender system . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8
Conclusion
59
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A An Appendix
61
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
3.1
Data about restaurants was collected within the yellow area . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Restaurants in downtown Copenhagen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
The most common types of restaurants in Copenhagen.
. . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
One stop location could match all restaurants within 20 meters . . . . . .
19
4.2
Distribution of how many restaurants did match each stop location . . . .
19
4.3
The number of restaurant visits in each month. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
The distribution of duration at a restaurant stop, and distribution of dis-
tances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Stops within label match different restaurants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
The distribution of how many restaurants did pair with one label for a user 23
4.7
At what time of the day did users eat out. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.8
The top 10 most popular restaurant categories for users in the CNS study
24
4.9
The number of restaurant visits per month, showing explore and exploit
events. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1
Correlations between features and target variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Performance of the logistic regression model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Random forest feature importance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Performance of the random forest model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.5
XGBoost feature importance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.6
Performance of XGBoost model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.7
Compering the performance of all three models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.1
The geospatial similarity between users illustrated as a heatmap. . . . . .
45
6.2
The number of friends of each user u (N=230). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
The personality distance matrix illustrated as a heatmap. . . . . . . . . .
48
6.4
The distribution of NDCG10 values (N=230) using Jaccard similarity and
grid with cell size 500 × 500 meters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.5
The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values using friendship and per-
sonality approach.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.6
The distribution of NDCG10 values when recommending top 10 most pop-
ular restaurants.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.7
The distribution of NDCG10 values using the weighted combined model.
53
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Figures
7.1
The distributions of calculated NDCG10 values and NDCG50 values (N=230). 57
A.1 Compering different sizes of grids used to find the geospatial similarity
between users. The grids for grid cells of 25 × 25 and 50 × 50 meters were
not plotted as those grids were too fine to see the lines on such small figures.
61
A.2 Illustrating distance matrices using heatmap of all geospatial methods.
.
62
A.3 Box plot illustrating distribution of personality trait values. . . . . . . . .
63
A.4 The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values, here comparing all different
geospatial methods analysed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.5 The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values (N=230), here illustrated
for choosing best friend and 5 friends using similarity.
. . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.6 The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values (N=230), here depicting for
two of the baseline recommender systems.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
3.1
Overview of social behavioural data collected in the CNS study. The data
used in this project were the GPS-locations, Phone calls and Text messages.
9
3.2
Attributes from stop location dataset. The latitude and longitude coordi-
nates are reported in decimal degrees format. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Attributes from test message dataset.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Attributes from phone call dataset.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Attributes in the personality data and description of each personality trait.
All attributes were used in the research [RC03].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.6
The response fields from the Places API from Foursquare
. . . . . . . . .
15
5.1
Features used in modelling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Results from the logistic regression classification. Class 0 represents ex-
ploitation while Class 1 represents exploration. The F1 score is consid-
erably higher for Class 1 compared to Class 0, meaning that the model
is better at predicting exploration but has more difficulty predicting ex-
ploitation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Coefficient and odds ratio of each feature of the logistic regression model.
From the odds ratio we see that the feature restaurantDensity has the
most impact on the model. The higher the restaurant density is, the more
likely the user explores a new restaurant.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Results from the random forest classification. The F1 score is considerably
higher for Class 1 compared to Class 0, meaning that the random forest
model is better at predicting exploration but has more difficulty predicting
exploitation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
Results from the XGBoost classification.
The F1 score is considerably
higher for Class 1 compared to Class 0, meaning that the XGBoost model
is better at predicting exploration but has more difficulty predicting ex-
ploitation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.6
Comparing results from the baseline model and the three classification
models. The XGBoost classifier gives the best results, it has the highest
accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score. The accuracy of the XGBoost
model is considerably better than the accuracy of the baseline model.
. .
40
6.1
An overview of the five different sizes of grids. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:14==
xii
List of Tables
6.2
The average NDCG10 using different geospatial recommendation methods.
49
6.3
The average NDCG10 using different friendship recommendation methods,
reported with standard error of the mean (95% confidence interval).
. . .
50
6.4
The average NDCG10 using different baseline recommendation methods .
51
6.5
The average NDCG10 compared using two different combined recommen-
dation systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.6
The average NDCG10 value for all recommender methods. . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Decision making is an inevitable part of everyday life. The decisions can be small
decisions regarding what to wear, what to have for breakfast, or choosing a movie to
watch, or a larger decision such as buying a house, choosing a career or moving to
another country.
When deciding between options, one can choose an option that one has enjoyed in
the past, receiving a known reward and avoiding disappointment; or one can explore
an unknown option where the risk of uncertainty is higher, hoping to receive even
greater reward. This problem is known as the exploration-exploitation dilemma and
is widely studied across scientific domains.
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems have proven to be a useful framework for
studying how humans tackle this dilemma [SAS15]. MAB tasks are where an agent re-
peatedly chooses between several options and receives reward feedback. Most of what
is known about human exploration comes from MAB tasks [Sch+18] and controlled
laboratory studies.
Our interests for this research is to use real user data to shed light on what does drive
decisions regarding restaurant behaviour in Copenhagen.
This thesis has two main parts, we examined two related but at the same time different
sides of decision behaviour in regard to restaurants; what are the important factors
when people explore restaurants, and what are helpful factors when recommending
restaurants.
We will identify and analyse the factors that affect the choice of exploring a new
restaurant instead of choosing an already enjoyed restaurant. Moreover, we generate
a recommender system that recommends restaurants to users, using data regarding
restaurant visits from other users. We observe and compare three factors the rec-
ommender system is based on; spatial behaviour, friendship network and personality
traits, and measure how well they perform individually.
Ultimately we aggregate
those factors to analyse how they can complement each other, searching for the opti-
mal restaurant recommender system.
In the research we use high-precision location dataset for around 850 students
from the Technical University of Denmark, combined with restaurant data from
Foursquare.
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Research objectives
The research in this thesis is divided into the two following sections; Restaurant
exploration prediction and Restaurant recommender system.
The research questions addressed in this thesis are as follows:
• What are the important factors when predicting restaurant exploration?
• What are helpful factors in restaurant recommendation?
The two questions are related but looked at from two different angles with two
different methods.
1.2
Thesis overview
The structure of this thesis is as follows:
• Chapter 1 Introduction - Introduction to the scope of the research and goals.
• Chapter 2 Literature review - Describes the theory and relevant research
conducted in the field of human behaviour and recommender systems.
• Chapter 3 Datasets - Discusses the datasets used in this research.
• Chapter 4 Methods - Describes the process of creating a restaurant visit
dataset, and discusses the classifier algorithms and evaluation metrics used in
this research.
• Chapter 5 Restaurant exploration prediction - Describes the methods
and results from the exploration prediction analysis.
• Chapter 6: Restaurant recommender system - Describes the methods
and results from the recommender system analysis.
• Chapter 7: Discussion - Discusses the results and presents limitations.
• Chapter 8: Conclusion - Reflects on the work carried out in this research
and provides proposal for future work.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
This section introduces the theory and literature behind the work researched in this
thesis. First we will look into Human mobility and study various human exploration
analyses. Then, we explore Recommendation systems and various studies that have
been carried out within that area.
2.1
Human mobility
The field of Human mobility, how humans move in space and time, has expanded in
popularity the recent years. The availability to geolocated datasets related to human
movement has increased significantly with the help of smart phones, wrist bands and
other devices that track locations. Such datasets enable scientist to study individual
and collective mobility patterns quantitatively [Bar+18].
The research of human mobility has been studied in wide range of areas. In traffic
engineering, [Wan+12] combined Geographic Information System (GIS) data with
large-scale mobile phone data, and proposed a network of road usage based on their
findings. Moreover, their findings allowed them to create a strategy that obtained
significant decrease in travel time across the entire road system.
In studying and modelling of epidemic spread, [BGB11] investigated the spatial
spread of infectious diseases and their model predicted a saturation of the velocity
of the propagating epidemic. [HBG04] introduced a probabilistic model that can be
used to predict global spread of future infectious diseases. Other interesting studies
are [Bal+09; FWF11].
Studying human migration patterns, [Sim+12] introduced a stochastic process,
that captured local mobility decisions and obtained a radiation model that predicts
mobility patterns in good agreement with other observed mobility and transport
patterns.
Further the model can be implemented in areas where there is lack of
precious mobility measurements.
Furthermore, human mobility has been applied in urban planning [Kit+00] and
internal security [Kre02].
==PAGE:18==
4
2 Literature review
2.2
Human exploration
The exploration-exploitation dilemma is a well-known problem, where people choose
between exploring a novel option or exploiting an already known option. Multi-armed
bandit (MAB) problems have been used to study how people tackle this dilemma, but
most of what is known about human exploration comes from MAB tasks. MAB tasks
are where an agent repeatedly chooses between several options and receives reward
feedback [SAS15; Sch+18].
Many studies have examined MAB tasks and exploration problems.
[Wu+18] observed how generalisation guides humans in exploration. To study how
humans search for rewards under limited search horizon they used various bandit
tasks with up to 121 arms.
Their findings show evidence that Gaussian function
learning provides a mechanism for generalisation.
[SAS15] formulated a contextual MAB task where participants chose between
various options that were characterised by two informative features. When comparing
participants’ behaviour with a classic MAB task without feature information, they
found out that participants in the contextual task used the feature information to
direct their exploration. They found that participants engaged in function learning
when there is a large enough choice set.
In the following two sections, two relevant articles to this research will be described.
The first one talks about how people tend to explore when buying products in the
supermarket. The second one analysed the prediction of exploration and which factors
effect the accuracy of next place prediction.
2.2.1
A study of coherency-maximising exploration
A study conducted in 2017 examined exploratory choices of more than 280,000 indi-
viduals in supermarkets over several years. Their goal was find out if the predicted
exploration patterns of supermarket shoppers with subjective rewards would match
either uncertainty-minimising, or coherency-maximising [Rie+17].
In studies with objective reward, people are more likely to explore the longer it has
been since their last explore. This was referred to as uncertainty-minimising. On the
other hand, when people tend to explore less as the interval since the last exploration
increases, is referred to as coherency-maximising. Coherency seeking behaviour is
when people alter their preference to align their previous behaviour.
Their findings tell that the supermarket shoppers matched the coherency-maximising
method; they were less likely to explore the longer they had been exploiting a prod-
uct. This was the reverse from laboratory studies with objective rewards; that people
explore more often when uncertainty is high. Further, their findings tell that when
people had recently started an exploitation streak, they were more willing to explore
other products if they had product coupons [Rie+17].
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Recommender systems
5
2.2.2
A study of exploration in human mobility
A study conducted by Cuttone et al.
[CLG18] investigated predictive models in
human mobility and studied which factors influence the performance of next place
prediction. In their research, they worked with data from the Copenhagen Network
Study and used stop locations data to analyse the prediction of exploration. They
created the next place prediction model using logistic regression, predicting whether
the next stop would be a new, unknown place (exploring) or a place the user had seen
before (return). Their results showed that when only using a single feature in the
model, the current location feature gave the best performance. That gave the idea
that some places can be gateways for exploration, such as public transport hubs.
However, they showed that various properties of the stop location dataset made
it a challenging problem. From their analysis of stop locations, they found out that
for each user on average 70% of the places were visited only once.
Additionally,
the probability of exploration was between 0.2 to 0.25, meaning that users explore
new places every 4 or 5 stops. Then, every week, the average number of new places
explored was 4, so over a year, the number of new explored places kept increasing
[CLG18].
2.3
Recommender systems
When choosing between options and making decisions, people often rely on others’
suggestions for support and assistance. Recommender systems are software tools that
suggest items to a user, where the provided suggestions are intended to assist the user
in his decision-making process. Such decisions could be choosing what movie to watch,
music to listen to, or what food to order [LDS11].
2.3.1
Categories of recommender systems
Recommender systems are often divided into following three categories; content-
based recommendations, collaborative recommendations and hybrid recommendations
[AT05]. The following sections describe these three types of systems, and then the so
called cold-start problem is discussed. Further, different studies using collaborative
filtering recommender are presented.
2.3.1.1
Content-based recommendations
In content-based recommendations, items similar to those a user liked in the past are
recommended to the user. Previously rated documents and/or items rated by the user
are analysed and their features used to build a profile of the user’s interests. If such
profile accurately reflects the user’s preferences or taste, it can be used to advantage to
filter out irrelevant items for the user [LDS11]. Content-based recommendations are
often used to recommend items containing textual information such as web sites and
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Literature review
documents, but the content-based approach has its roots from information filtering
research and information retrieval [AT05].
2.3.1.2
Collaborative recommendations
Collaborative recommendations, or collaborative filtering, try to predict the utility of
items to a particular user by looking at the items that were previously rated by other
users. Collaborative filtering systems are built on the assumption that people with
similar interest like similar items, thus finding other people who are similar to the
user and then recommend items liked by those similar users [BHK98]. The system
can either be memory-based, where users are compared against each other directly
using various measures, or it is model-based, where historical rating data is used to
build a model which is used to make predictions [Bur02].
Above mentioned collaborative filtering methods were traditionally based on us-
ing similarities between users, i.e.
user-based.
Item-based collaborative filtering
technique was proposed by [Sar+01], where the user-item matrix is analysed to
identify similarities between different items and compute the recommendations from
them. [DK04] implemented an item-based top-N recommendations algorithm. Both,
[Sar+01] and [DK04] suggest that item-based algorithms provide comparable or bet-
ter performance than user-based algorithms. Findings of [PP05] also suggest better
performance of item-based algorithm when using explicit ratings.
2.3.1.3
Hybrid recommendations
Hybrid recommendations combine content-based and collaborative filtering methods.
There are four different ways on how the two methods are combined [AT05]:
• combining predictions from separate content-based and collaborative methods
• including some content-based characteristics into a collaborative approach
• including some collaborative characteristics into a content-based approach
• including both methods into a unifying model
Much research has been carried out where content-based and collaborative rec-
ommendations are combined. In [MMN02], content-based predictor is used to en-
hance the user data and then collaborative filtering is used to provide personalised
suggestions. A film recommender developed by [SA06] extends the predictions from
collaborative filtering and uses content-based filtering to include new movies to recom-
mendations. [Cla+99] combined the two methods and applied to an online newspaper.
2.3.1.4
Cold start problem
When new unknown users or items are added to a recommender system, it is known as
the cold-start problem. Both content-based and collaborative filtering have difficulties
providing accurate recommendations for a new user that has no preference for any
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Recommender systems
7
items. The methods need a sufficient number of ratings to understand the user’s
preference. Also, collaborative filtering has a problem recommending new items that
are added to the recommender system. A new item has to be rated by enough number
of users so the recommender system will recommend it, since collaborative systems
rely only on users’ preferences to make a recommendation. These limitations can be
addressed using a hybrid recommender [Lam+08; AT05].
2.3.2
Digging deeper into collaborative filtering recommender
In this research, we used a collaborative filtering recommender to recommend restau-
rants to users. Following sections discuss different studies that have applied collabora-
tive filtering using various approaches, such as location recommender and friendship-
based recommender systems.
2.3.2.1
First collaborative recommender systems
The first recommender systems to use collaborative filtering were GroupLens, Video
Recommender and Ringo [AT05]. Grouplens was a system that helped people to find
articles to their liking from the huge stream of available articles [Res+94]. Video
Recommender suggested videos to users from a large set [Hil+95]. The recommenda-
tion system called Ringo made personalised recommendations for music albums and
artists [SM95].
2.3.2.2
A study exploring friend based collaborative filtering
A study was conducted in 2010 where a location recommendation service was analysed
for large-scale location based social network (LBSN). Using data from Foursquare,
they obtained a dataset of 96,219 locations and 58,659 users, including what users
are friends. They proposed a friend-based collaborative filtering (FCF) approach by ex-
ploring social ties between friends. The proposed FCF is based on ratings of frequently
visited places made by social friends. Moreover, they proposed a Geo-Measured FCF
(GM-FCF) which is based on heuristics attained from observed geospatial character-
istics of locations in the Foursquare dataset. Their results showed that the proposed
FCF techniques hold comparable recommendation effectiveness against the state-of-
the-art recommendation algorithms [YYL10].
2.3.2.3
A study of recommendation using user check-in data
In 2013, a research was conducted that analysed the problem of recommending new
venues by studying the unique properties of a LBSN user check-in data. Recommen-
dations were created on the basis of: past user behaviour (visited places), the location
coordinates of each venue, the social relationships among the users, and the similarity
between users. Their proposed algorithm rely on the idea of personalized PageRank,
which is calculated using bookmark-colouring algorithm [WTM13].
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Literature review
2.3.2.4
A study of location and activity recommendations
A study from 2010 generated an activity recommender system that both recommended
interesting locations and possible activities. In the study, a GPS dataset collected by
162 users for 2.5 years was used. They used user’s location and activity histories as
input, and then gathered additional location features and activity-activity correlations
from geographical databases. A collective matrix factorisation method was then used
to mine interesting locations and activities to recommend to the user. The Discounted
cumulative gain measure was used to evaluate the recommendation system, showing
that it can outperform several state-of-the-art baselines [Zhe+10].
2.3.2.5
A study of kernel density based recommendation
In 2013, a new approach was proposed to the geo-social recommendations [ZC13].
The goal was to include personalised geographical influence on individual users, but
previous studies had modelled the geographical influence on all users’ check-in be-
haviours universally. They proposed a new framework called iGSLR that uses a ker-
nel density estimation approach to personalise the geographical influence, using an
individual distribution, rather than a universal distribution for all users. The iGSLR
gives better location recommendation compared to other state-of-the-art geo-social
recommendation techniques [ZC13].
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Datasets
Data from the Copenhagen Network Study and Foursquare was used in this research.
The data from the Copenhagen Network Study contains multiple datasets where we
analysed location data, personality data, and text messages and call log data. Data
about restaurants in Copenhagen were gathered from the Places API from Foursquare.
Each dataset is described and documented in the following sections.
3.1
Copenhagen Network Study
The Copenhagen Network Study (CNS) experiment was designed to measure human
interactions across variety of communication channels. CNS was a interdisciplinary
research project between University of Copenhagen (UCPH) and Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark (DTU), and aimed at answering a range of questions regarding the
importance and formation of social networks [Las; Sto+14].
The experiment, also called Sensible DTU, was conducted from September 2013
to January 2016 and involved 851 undergraduate students from DTU. The majority
of participants were male (78%), mostly aged between 19 and 21 years old [Ale+18].
All participants received an LG Nexus 4 smartphone with a pre-installed data collec-
tion app that through multiple channels collected social behavioural data. Table 3.1
presents the types of social behavioural data that were collected in the study [Sto+14;
Jen16].
Datatype
Sample period
Used in the study
GPS-location
15 minutes
Yes
WiFi-scans
10 minutes
No
Bluetooth-scans
5 minutes
No
Phone calls
-
Yes
Text messages
-
Yes
Facebook data
-
No
Screen on/off events
-
No
Table 3.1: Overview of social behavioural data collected in the CNS study. The data used
in this project were the GPS-locations, Phone calls and Text messages.
==PAGE:24==
10
3 Datasets
Each participant answered a questionnaire of 310 questions covering socioeconomic
factors and general health and behaviour related questions.
It also included the
Big Five Inventory that measures five broad dimensions of human personality traits
[J+99].
Since the CNS research collected data of very high resolution from a large pop-
ulation, all personal and privacy data were handled appropriately. All participants
had to accept informed consent.
Participants were identified by their pseudonym
identifiers, and sensitive personal data of the participant were kept separate from
their participant data. Data collection was approved by the Danish Data Protection
Agency [Sto+14]. The CNS data is not publicly available and researchers need to
sign a confidentiality agreement to receive access to the data. The data is accessed
through a remote server at https://lestrade.compute.dtu.dk through a virtual
IPython Jupyter Notebook environment [Not]. The data was loaded from the server
using a particular parameter that characterised each data category. In this research
the server was loaded with the parameters: stop_location, calllog and sms.
3.1.1
Location data
When analysing participants locations, we only needed to look at places where the
participant was stationary for a short while, i.e., their stop locations. This is because
when people eat out, it is assumed they stay at the restaurant for a longer time. The
stop locations for each participant were computed from the raw location data, as
described in [CLG18]. When raw location points were within a distance threshold of
50 meters, they were grouped into a stop, and to be considered as a stop location, the
duration at the stop needed to be minimum 15 minutes. This was done to eliminate
shorter stops. Thus, the duration at a stop location is always given in 15 minutes
of precise time intervals. The location coordinates of each stop are the calculated
median of the location points of the stop. Multiple stops were grouped using DBSCAN
clustering (Density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise) with grouping
distance of 50 meters. Thus, each stop was assigned a cluster label that could e.g.
represent participant’s home or work location.
The accuracy of raw location samples does vary, but each location point was
determined by the best available provider, either GPS or WiFi. Approximately 90%
of the location samples have a reported accuracy better than 40 meters, and the
median accuracy is around 20 meters [Sto+14]. To access the stop location, the server
was loaded using the stop_location parameter. The stop locations data contains
the attributes found in Table 3.2.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Copenhagen Network Study
11
Attribute
Description
Used
arrival
Time of arrival in Unix timestamp
Yes
departure
Time of departure in Unix timestamp
Yes
label
Unique id for each stop location for each user
Yes
lat
Latitude coordinate of stop location
Yes
lon
Longitude coordinate of stop location
Yes
timestamp
Time of arrival in Unix timestamp stored in date-format
No
user
Anonymous id for each user, stored as integer number
Yes
Table 3.2: Attributes from stop location dataset. The latitude and longitude coordinates
are reported in decimal degrees format.
3.1.2
Text message and call data
To access the text message data, the server was loaded using the sms parameter.
Description of the text message attributes are listed in Table 3.3.
Likewise, the
parameter calllog was used to load the call log data, see Table 3.4 for an overview
of the attributes.
Attribute
Description
Used
address
Anonymous id for the sender or the receiver of the text message
Yes
status
Takes value -1 if the text message was successfully received
Yes
timestamp
Timing when the text message was recorded in Unix timestamp
Yes
type
The types of text messages. Takes value 1 when an incoming text
message, or value 2 when an outgoing text message
Yes
user
Anonymous id for the user, stored as an integer number
Yes
Table 3.3: Attributes from test message dataset.
==PAGE:26==
12
3 Datasets
Attribute
Description
Used
duration
Duration of the call in seconds
No
number
Anonymous id for the person that received the phone call or was
the caller
Yes
timestamp
Timing when the call was received in Unix timestamp
Yes
type
The types of calls. Takes value 1 when incoming call, value 2 when
outgoing call, and value 3 for a missed call
No
user
Anonymous id for the user, stored as an integer number
Yes
Table 3.4: Attributes from phone call dataset.
3.1.3
Personality traits
The scores from the Big Five Inventory that measures five broad dimensions of human
personality traits [J+99] were accessible from a file containing the data in a JSON
format. The five personality traits are: openness to experience, extraversion, neuroti-
cism, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. Participants answered how much they
agreed to a particular statement on the scale of one to five, where one corresponds to
Disagree strongly, and five corresponds to Agree strongly. Table 3.5 shows an overview
of the attributes and description of what each personality trait measures.
Personality trait
Description of personality trait
Used
Openness
Includes preference for variety, active imagination and attentiveness
to inner feelings.
People scoring low are conservative, prefer the
familiar to the novel and are not reflective. People with a higher
score are curious and willing to consider novel ideas and unusual
values.
Yes
Extraversion
Includes sociability, assertiveness and talkativeness.
User with
higher scores are extroverts, optimistic and energetic; lower scores
suggest that the user is silent, cautious and secretive.
Yes
Neuroticism
Lower scores indicate emotional stability; calm, even-tempered, can
handle stressful situations. Higher scores indicate often a tendency
to experience sadness, fear, guilt and anger.
Yes
Agreeableness
People with higher scores are eager to help, sympathetic to others
and gentle. Lower scores indicate the person is competitive, scepti-
cal of others, jealous and egocentric.
Yes
Conscientiousness
Persons with higher scores are achievement-oriented, organised, de-
termined and purposeful.
Lower scores indicate carelessness and
undependable.
Yes
Table 3.5: Attributes in the personality data and description of each personality trait. All
attributes were used in the research [RC03].
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Restaurant data from Foursquare
13
3.2
Restaurant data from Foursquare
The data about restaurants in Copenhagen were collected from the Places API from
Foursquare. Foursquare is a location technology platform, and the Places API is a
global database of 105 million venues [Foua].
The collection of restaurant data was limited to a part of the Copenhagen metropoli-
tan area (Region Hovedstaden), spanning from Ishøj in the south-west and Amager in
the south-east, up north to Furesø in north-west and Lyngby-Taarbæk in the north-
east, covering DTU campus. The area spans roughly 370 km2, see Figure 3.1. This
area was chosen as participants in the CNS study travelled mostly within this area
[Sto+14].
Figure 3.1: Data about restaurants was collected within the yellow area. Red dots represent
restaurants.
Data received from the Places API is on a JSON format containing a list of venues
limited within a bounding box defined by latitude and longitude coordinates of the
south-west corner and north-east corner. The API has a limitation of returning at
most 50 venues per API call. Therefore, the area was divided into small bounding
boxes of suitable size, and by trial and error, it was decided to use bounding boxes
with side lengths of 200 meters. To avoid overlooking venues placed on the border
of a box, we made the bounding boxes overlap by 20 meters, see Figure 3.2. If a
bounding box returned 50 venues, the box was further divided into smaller bounding
boxes with side lengths of 80 meters and 20 meters overlapping, to make sure no
venue was overlooked. The need to divide into smaller bounding boxes did happen
e.g. when a bounding box covered an area in downtown Copenhagen.
Further, the venues returned are sorted into ten top-level categories that are:
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Datasets
Figure 3.2: The figure illustrates downtown Copenhagen where grey area is land and white
area is ocean. Red dots represent restaurants and the bounding boxes are orange. Notice how
they overlap. A bounding box was not plotted when a it did not contain a restaurant. Here,
some bounding boxes were split into smaller ones to tackle the 50 venues return limitation.
• Arts and Entertainment
• College and University
• Event
• Food
• Nightlife Spot
• Outdoors and Recreation
• Professional and Other Places
• Residence
• Shop and Service
• Travel and Transport
Only venues categorised as Food were taken into account when gathering the
restaurant data. For simplicity, in this report the word restaurant will be used as a
synonym for all dining places. The Food category is divided into 91 categories that can
contain various subcategories and sometimes sub-sub-categories. Example of a few
food categories are Bakery, Café, Italian Restaurant, Pizza Place, Vegetarian Vegan
Restaurant.
In Figure 3.3 the most frequent types of restaurants in Copenhagen
are depicted. The Café category is the most common one, but about 12 % of all
restaurants are categorised as a café. Pizza places are also very common or almost 9
% of all restaurants.
The response from the Places API call contains the attributes described in Table
3.6 [Foub]. Foursquare does not report the accuracy of restaurant’s location coordi-
nates, but we treat them as they are accurate without any errors. The latitude and
longitude coordinates of venues are reported with minimum 5 decimal places, result-
ing in a location accuracy of minimum one meter [GIS]. It is important that the
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Restaurant data from Foursquare
15
Figure 3.3: The 20 most common types of restaurants in Copenhagen. The category Café
is the most common one.
restaurant location points are accurate to be able to say with good certainty whether
a user was visiting a restaurant.
Attribute
Description
id
A unique string identifier for this venue
location
Contains various fields about the location of this venues. Latitude
and longitude coordinates (lat and lng) are the fields that were
collected and used
name
The best known name for this venue
categories
Contains various fields about the category applied to this venue.
The unique category identifier categoryId and the category name
categoryName was collected and used
Table 3.6: The response fields from the Places API from Foursquare
In total, there was collected data about 7,547 restaurants. Still, the restaurant
data needs to be taken with a notice.
Since there is a lack of information from
the API how often a venue was visited, it is not guaranteed that all restaurants are
still in operation. Likewise, it is unknown whether there are many restaurants not
registered to the Places API. In addition, it is notable in Figure 3.1 that up north,
around Lundtofte, is a big cluster of restaurants, where in reality are not so many
restaurants. However, it was decided to use all the restaurants collected from the API,
assuming that all restaurants are operating and that their information is correct.
==PAGE:30==
16
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
This chapter defines the various data processing and the methods carried out in the
research. The first section describes the data pre-processing of how restaurant visits
were computed and what assumptions were taken into account in the process. Further,
the restaurant visits dataset is analysed and the most essential features reported.
The second and the third sections discuss how the restaurant visit dataset was pre-
pared for the machine learning analysis and recommendation analysis, respectively.
Further methods for machine learning analysis and recommendation are discussed in
chapters 5 and 6. The fourth section discusses the various software used to work with
the data. The fifth section describes the various algorithms and statistical methods
used to carry out the research, and the sixth sections describes the evaluation metric
used for recommender systems.
4.1
Restaurant data processing
In this chapter, we first describe how the restaurant dataset was computed by match-
ing stop locations to restaurants. In the second section, the assumptions and the
filtering of unnecessary data is outlined, and in the third section, we analyse the
restaurant data.
4.1.1
Matching stop locations to restaurants
To determine where and when users eat out, we integrate the stop locations of par-
ticipants with the restaurant data from Foursquare. To consider a stop location as
a restaurant visit, it initially needed to match a restaurant located within a certain
radius. For this process of matching location points, we used the Ball tree algorithm.
Ball Trees, also known as Metric Trees, were first presented by Omohundro [Omo89]
and Uhlmann [Uhl91]. It was implemented using the Scikit-learn package in Python
[Ped+11].
Ball tree is a complete hierarchical binary tree, that partitions the current set of
points into two subsets, forming two new hyperspheres or balls. The new hyperspheres
are allowed to intersect, but any point does only belong to either hypersphere, the one
whose centroid is in less distance. The subsets are chosen to have maximum distance
between them, and there is no restriction on the number of points assigned to a subset
==PAGE:32==
18
4 Methods
[KZN08]. The splitting stops when the number of points inside a hypersphere is lower
than a given threshold [KF07].
The ball tree method has shown both to have low runtimes and to give a good
balance between query time and indexing time [Mue17].
The method is suitable
for our task of matching stop location to restaurants, as it supports the haversine
distance formula which finds the distance between two location points [Rob57]. The
formula is important in navigation, and by using latitude and longitude, it calculates
the shortest distance between two points on a spherical body, like the Earth’s surface
[CN13]. The formula is as follows:
d = 2r arcsin
(√
sin2 (ϕ2 −ϕ1
2
)
+ cos (ϕ1) cos (ϕ2) sin2 (λ2 −λ1
2
))
(4.1)
where:
• d: distance between two location points
• r: Radius of the Earth, 6371 km
• ϕ: latitude points
• λ: longitude points
When matching restaurant locations to stop locations, we first constructed a ball
tree from the location points of the set of restaurants. Then, for each stop location,
we queried the tree to find nearby restaurants using the haversine distance within a
distance threshold of 20 meters. It was considered reasonable to search for restaurants
within that distance as the reported median accuracy of stop locations was around
20 meters.
Since the algorithm returns all restaurants within 20 meters radius, many stop
locations did match more than one restaurant. Figure 4.1 illustrates how that could
occur. Around 40% of stop locations matched more than one restaurant. For those
cases, the restaurant located in the shortest distance from the stop location was
selected as the restaurant the user was visiting. Figure 4.2 illustrates the distribution
of how many restaurants did match each stop location.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Restaurant data processing
19
Figure 4.1: One stop location could match all restaurants within 20 meters. Here the stop
location (red dot) matches three restaurants (blue dots). The restaurant nearest to the stop
location was chosen as the restaurant that user was at.
a Distribution of how many restaurants did
match each stop location.
b Cumulative distribution of amount of restau-
rants matching a stop location.
Figure 4.2: Distribution of how many restaurants did match each stop location. Around
40% of stop locations matched 2 or more restaurants. Some stop locations even matched 20
restaurants. The nearest restaurant to the stop location was chosen as the visited restaurant.
4.1.2
Filtering out irrelevant restaurant visits
The data points of matched restaurants and stop locations were processed further.
Making particular assumptions, we filtered out restaurant visits where it was unlikely
that a user was dining out. Following sections describe each assumption. For clarifi-
==PAGE:34==
20
4 Methods
cation, as was described in Chapter 3.1.1, individual stops were clustered into labels
where a label could represent the user’s home or work location.
Most frequent locations.
Studying each user and their location behaviour, we
assumed that a user’s most frequent label is their home or workplace. Therefore,
all stop locations categorised as the most frequent label for each user were excluded
from the data. For some participants, their most frequent label was located outside
of Denmark, but users were allowed to live abroad while participating in the CNS
study. For those users, we identified their most frequent label situated in Denmark,
assuming it is their home in Denmark. All stops belonging to that label were removed
from the data.
Furthermore, we analysed for each user what was the most frequently visited la-
bel in the evening and at night, more particularly, within the period from 20:00 until
08:00. All data points belonging to that label were removed. We believe that this
label is user’s home location, assuming one spends most nights sleeping at their home.
Though, around 15% of users had different places as their most frequent label and
their most frequent label at night, telling us that their most frequent label is likely
their workplace.
Long time spent at a place.
We excluded all individual stops where the duration
spent was more than 6 hours. We assumed that when spending such a long time at
a place, the person is not eating out.
Further, we analysed when a stop location was frequently visited for more than
six hours at a time. If such elongated visits happened more than five times at a label,
all restaurant visits belonging to that label for that user were removed. This was
to tackle places where users spend longer times, e.g. at their student workplace or
parents or friend’s house.
Consecutive stops at the same location.
Analysing the restaurant visits, we
noticed that some users had short consecutive stops at the same location, some only
varying for 15 minutes. This was wrongly identified as many short stops at the same
place, when it was in reality a longer stop at the same place. Thus, if a user had
such behaviour at a place, we only marked the first stop as the restaurant visit and
aggregated the time of each stop to get the total time spent at the place. If those
consequent stops added up to six hours, that restaurant visit was removed from the
data corresponding to the six hours assumption described above.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Restaurant data processing
21
4.1.3
Analysing restaurant stop dataset
After matching stop locations to restaurant location and filtering out irrelevant data
points, we had a new combined dataset, where in total 50,450 stops to 5,006 restau-
rants were categorised as restaurant visits from September 2013 to November 2015.
The total number of restaurant visits in each month is depicted in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3:
The number of restaurant visits in each month, from September 2013 to
November 2015.
The decrease in restaurant visits from spring 2014 can potentially be
explained by the decrease in number of active participants from February 2014.
The restaurant visits dataset contains the following attributes:
• User id
• Stop location label
• Stop location latitude coordinate
• Stop location longitude coordinate
• Arrival in Unix timestamp
• Departure in Unix timestamp
• Restaurant id
• Restaurant name
• Restaurant latitude coordinate
• Restaurant longitude coordinate
• Restaurant category id
• Restaurant category name
• Restaurant exploration
• Time spent at the location
• Distance between the restaurant
and stop location in kilometers
In addition to the attributes described in Chapter 3, three other attributes were
added. The first one was Restaurant exploration, a boolean attribute that was True
for exploration when the user was visiting the restaurant for the first time, or False
for exploitation, if the user had been there before.
The second attribute was the time spent at the location, calculated by taking
the difference between the arrival and departure time. The duration at a restaurant
could vary from 15 minutes and up to six hours, reported in 15 minutes of precise
time interval, i.e. 15 minutes, 30 minutes, etc., as was mentioned in Chapter 3.1.1.
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Methods
Figure 4.4a illustrates the distribution of time spent at restaurants. Most restaurant
visits did vary for less than an hour.
The third attribute added was the calculated distance between the location points
of the matched restaurant and stop. The distance was calculated with the haversine
formula. Figure 4.4b depicts the distribution of the distances.
a Distribution of how long time was spent at a
restaurant
b Distribution of distance between a stop loca-
tion and its matching restaurant
Figure 4.4: The distribution of duration at a restaurant stop, and distribution of distance
between a stop location and its matching restaurant. Notice how most restaurant visits only
last for 15 minutes, implying that majority of restaurant visits could potentially be at a fast
food place, or the user goes to a restaurant to pick up take-away.
As described in Chapter 3.1.1, multiple stops were grouped into labels with a
distance threshold of 50 meters. Therefore, individual stops belonging to the same
label did not always have exactly the same location coordinates. This made it possible
for two stops belonging to the same label to match two different restaurants. Thus,
though initially a label is defined as one particular place, like user’s home or work,
in our research, the label can be classified as one or more restaurants. Figure 4.5
illustrates how three different stops belonging to the same label can match different
restaurants.
It was most common that a label only matched one restaurant, the
distribution of how many restaurants a label does match is illustrated in Figure 4.6.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Restaurant data processing
23
Figure 4.5: Illustrating how different stops (red dots), belonging to the same label, can
match different restaurants (blue dots), making the label pair with three different restau-
rants.
Figure 4.6: Here is illustrated the distribution of how many restaurants paired with each
label. Around 87% of labels only matched one restaurant. Initially, a label is only defined
as one particular place, like user’s home, but in this research, the label can be classified as
one or more restaurants, as different stops belonging to the same label can match different
restaurants.
It is interesting to observe at what time of the day users visited restaurants. Figure
4.7 depicts the distribution of visits within two hours time intervals. Majority of
restaurant visits happened at lunchtime around noon, and then stayed constant from
14:00 until 20:00 when the number of restaurant visits drop. It is also notable, not
to surprise, that restaurant visits are at a minimum during the night.
Observing the restaurant categories for the restaurant visits, the Café category is
the most visited one, see Figure 4.8. Succeeding top categories have all very similar
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Methods
Figure 4.7:
At what time of the day did users eat out.
Majority of restaurant visits
happened at lunch time. After 20:00 the number of restaurant visits drops.
visits count but they have significantly fewer visits than Café. However, we need to
take into account that the Café category was the most common one for all restaurants
in Copenhagen. Roughly 26% of all eating out events were at a café. It is interesting
to see that users went often to Turkish restaurants, but that type of category is not
in the top 20 most common places in Copenhagen, as was illustrated in Figure 3.3.
Figure 4.8: The top 10 most popular restaurant categories for users in the CNS study.
Cafés are the most popular places to go to.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Data processing for exploration prediction
25
4.2
Data processing for exploration prediction
Before carrying out the restaurant exploration prediction, the restaurant visits data
was processed further. The goal was to explore what are the important factors when
predicting restaurant exploration.
Analysing the restaurant visits, we found that users were more exploring new
restaurants than exploiting known ones. Figure 4.9 depicts the number of restaurant
visits in each month, showing how the division is between restaurant exploration and
restaurant exploitation. To account for too many exploration events resulting in very
imbalanced classes, we implemented an observation time window of six months, like
similarly applied in [Mir+13]. This observation time window played as a buffer, where
a part of the data points was kept separate from the classification analysis. The first
time user goes to a restaurant, it is defined as exploration, so within the buffer period
we wanted to gather some of those first visits to account for too many exploration
events. Several buffer periods were considered, but we chose to use the period where
most users were active in all of the 6 months, resulting in the time window from
January 2014 until end of June 2014. Then, the restaurant visits occurring in the
following 17 months from July 2014 to November 2015 were used to train and test
the classification models.
Further, users with not enough data were removed. We only considered users
that had at least 12 months coverage, meaning the user was required to have visited
restaurants in at least 12 months out of the 23 months from January 2014 to November
2015.
It was not necessary that the restaurant activity happened in consecutive
months. Moreover, the users were required to have restaurant activity in all 6 months
within the buffer period, meaning they had to have visited restaurants in all months
from January 2014 to June 2014.
This processing resulted in a total of 24,185 restaurant visits from 335 users. Total
10,466 restaurant visits fell within the buffer period, leading to using 13,739 restaurant
visits in the machine learning modelling for restaurant exploration prediction.
Figure 4.9: The number of restaurant visits per month from January 2014 to November
2015. Each bar shows the number of times when users explored new restaurant, and when
users exploited a known one. Data points from the first six months, January to June, were
within the buffer period.
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Methods
4.3
Data processing for restaurant recommendations
For the restaurant recommendation analysis, we used the restaurant visit dataset,
and data for users’ personality traits, calls and text messages. However, we needed
to remove users that did not have enough data.
Users that had no registered personality data were removed from the recommen-
dation analysis. All incoming or outgoing calls and text messages involving other
operators were ignored, and users that had no phone communication with other users
in the study were removed. Further, only users that had visited a minimum number
of restaurants in the evaluation or train period were taken into consideration, as sim-
ilarity applied in [WTM13]. See Chapter 6.1 for further processing for the analyses
of recommendation systems.
4.4
Software
All data processing and analysis were carried out in Python programming language.
Python, designed in 1990 by Guido van Rossum, is an interactive, object-oriented
programming language that provides high-level data structures and has a simple and
elegant syntax [SF09]. The work was carried out in Jupyter Notebook, which is an
open source application that allows users to work in any language, with implemen-
tations in Python, R and Julia. Jupyter Notebook was derived from the IPython
Notebook, which provides terminal-based tools for interactive computing in Python
[Rag+14; Not].
The libraries Bokeh and D3.js were used to visualise geographical content. The Bokeh
library is an interactive visualisation library [Bok]. D3.js is a Javascript library that
assists to visualise and manipulate documents based on data [D3].
The machine learning models using logistic regression and random forest were built
using Scikit-learn in Python [Ped+11]. The XGBoost algorithm was accessed as a
Python package. The R programming language [R C19] was used to verify the per-
formance of the logistic regression model.
4.5
Machine learning algorithms
This section introduces the three different machine learning algorithms used to create
the exploration prediction models, that is detailed in Chapter 5. Our problem of
predicting restaurant exploration is a classification problem and we used the following
classification algorithms; Logistic regression, Random forest and XGBoost. At the
end of the chapter we discuss the evaluation metrics used to evaluate the performance
of the classification models.
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Machine learning algorithms
27
4.5.1
Logistic regression
Logistic regression is a classification model that is used when the dependent variable Y
is categorical, and models the probability that Y belongs to a particular category. The
underlying concept of logistic regression is the logit function, the natural logarithm
of the odds [PLI02]:
logit(Y ) = log(odds) = log
(
p(X)
1 −p(X)
)
= β0 + β1X
(4.2)
where X represent the independent variables, and β are the coefficients of the model.
The odds is the ratio between the probability of en event happening, to the probability
of the event not happening. Equation 4.2 illustrates that there is a linear relationship
between X and logit(Y ). The direction of the relationship between X and the logit(Y )
can be determined be the values of the coefficients β. When β > 0, the logit(Y ) will
be larger with larger X values. When β < 0 the value of logit(Y ) will be smaller with
larger X values [PLI02].
Applying the anti-logarithm to Equation 4.2 the odds are:
p(X)
1 −p(X) = eβ0+β1X
(4.3)
Equation 4.3 can be rewritten as the logistic function [Jam+13]:
p(X) =
eβ0+β1X
1 + eβ0+β1X
(4.4)
4.5.2
Random Forest
Random forest is a tree-based method that can be used for classification and re-
gression problems [Jam+13]. In this study we applied the random forest classifier.
Random forest is a combination of tree predictors where each tree is generated based
on values of a random vector that is sampled independently. The vector has the same
distribution for all trees [Bre01].
4.5.3
XGBoost
XBGoost is a scalable end-to-end tree boosting system [CG16]. In boosting, a large
number of decision trees are combined and the construction of each tree depends
greatly on already grown trees. Boosting algorithms can be applied to both regression
and classification problems [Jam+13].
XGBoost is widely used in many machine
learning challenges to achieve state of the art results.
==PAGE:42==
28
4 Methods
4.5.4
Evaluating classifier performance
In binary classification, examples are classified either as positive or negative and often
represented in a confusion matrix, which has four categories [DG06]:
• True positive (TP): Example is correctly classified as a positive example
• False positive (FP): Negative example is wrongly classified as a positive example
• True negative (TN): Example is correctly classified asa negative sample
• False negative (FN): Positive example is wrongly classified as a negative example
When evaluating binary classification problems in machine learning the following
metrics are often used:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(4.5)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(4.6)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(4.7)
F1score =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(4.8)
When classes are imbalanced, the accuracy metric has more difficulty capturing the
real performance. Then it is useful to look at the precision and recall, and the F1
score which combines those two.
Moreover, Receiver Operator Characteristics (ROC) and Precision-Recall (PR)
curves are also frequently used to present results for binary classification problems.
The ROC curves are useful when class distribution is close to being uniform, but when
classes are imbalanced, the PR curves are more suitable to evaluate the performance
of the algorithm. For ROC curve, the False Positive Rate (FPR) which measures the
ratio of negative examples wrongly classified as positive, is on the x-axis. On the
y-axis is True Positive Rate (TPR), which measures the ratio of positive examples
that are correctly classified. For FPR and TPR see equations 4.9 and 4.10. For PR
graph, recall is plotted on the x-axis and precision on the y-axis. Note that recall and
TPR are the same [DG06].
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(4.9)
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(4.10)
==PAGE:43==
4.6 Evaluation metrics for recommender system
29
4.6
Evaluation metrics for recommender system
This chapter discusses the evaluation metric, discounted cumulative gain, that is used
to evaluate the performances of recommender systems, which is described in chapter
6.
The discounted cumulative gain (DCG) is an evaluation measure that evaluates
ranking quality. It is developed to evaluate information retrieval (IR) methods for
their ability to retrieve highly relevant documents [JK02]. It is often used to evaluate
search engines performance.
Simpler measure than DCG is its predecessor, the cumulative gain (CG). It sums
the relevance score of each document from ranked position 1 to n. The cumulative
gain vector CG is defined as:
CG[i] =
{
G[1],
if i = 1
CG[i −1] + G[i],
otherwise
(4.11)
where G is the gain vector holding relevance score at ranked position i and CG[i] is
the cumulative gain at ranked position i.
When inspecting a ranked list, highly relevant documents are more valuable than
marginally relevant documents. Also, relevant documents that have higher ranking
position are less valuable for the user, because as the ranking position increases, it
is less likely the user will explore the document. Because of the this, a discounted
function is used to reduce the document’s relevance score as its rank increases. Thus,
the relevance score is divided by the logarithm of its rank, using 2 as the base of the
algorithm. The DC vector with discount is the DCG vector:
DCG[i] =



CG[i],
if i < 2
DCG[i −1] + G[i]
log2 i,
if i ≥2
(4.12)
where DCG[i] is the discounted cumulative gain at ranked position i.
To be able to compare the quality of two different ranking queries, the DCG
vectors are normalised by dividing them by the corresponding ideal DCG vector.
The ideal DCG (IDCG) vector uses the ideal ranking of the query to compute each
cumulative gain, but an ideal ordering is the decreasing sort of all known relevance
scores. E.g. if a ranking had relevance score list G = (2, 1, 3, 0, 1), the ideal ordering
is G = (3, 2, 1, 1, 0). The normalized DCG at ranked position k is:
NDCGk = DCGk
IDCGk
(4.13)
The NDCG value ranges from 0 to 1, where 1 represents ideal performance. A higher
NDCG value means that relevant documents appear earlier in the result list.
For the relevance score list G defined above we would get the NDCG value at ranked
position 5:
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Methods
NDCG5 =
2 +
1
log2 2 +
3
log2 3 +
0
log2 4 +
1
log2 5
3 +
2
log2 2 +
1
log2 3 +
1
log2 4 +
0
log2 5
= 0.868
(4.14)
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Restaurant exploration
prediction
This chapter describes the implementation of machine learning methods to predict the
probability of restaurant exploration. Our goal is to find what factors affect restau-
rant exploration. Three machine learning algorithms were used; Logistic regression,
Random forest and XGBOOST.
The first chapter describes the target variable and the features. Following chapter
describes the methodology and results when applying the three algorithms to address
our problem. The last chapter summarises and compares the results of all algorithms.
We found that XGBOOST algorithm generated the most successful prediction model,
and for all models, the restaurant density factor has the most predictive power.
5.1
Target variable and features
We want to classify whether a visit to a restaurant will be an exploration or an
exploitation. More precise, the task can be phrased as follows: given certain data,
including the restaurant location and user’s previous restaurant behaviour, will user’s
next restaurant visit be the first time the user goes to the restaurant (exploration),
or is the user going to an already enjoyed restaurant (exploitation).
Predicting restaurant exploration is a binary classification problem and the target
variable (Y ) is split into two classes.
We analysed sequences of restaurant visits,
r1, r2, r3, . . . , rn, for each user. As it differed between users how many restaurants
they visited, the length of the restaurant visit sequences varies. Restaurant visit ri
was considered exploration (Y = 1) when user was visiting the restaurant for the
first time.
When user went again to a previously explored restaurant, restaurant
visit ri was considered an exploitation (Y = 1).
We use 13,739 restaurant visits
from the period from July 2014 to November 2015 for the exploration prediction
like previously mentioned in Chapter 4.2. Around 64% of the restaurant visits are
exploration, making the classes slightly imbalanced. The features used are listed in
Table 5.1.
==PAGE:46==
32
5 Restaurant exploration prediction
Feature
Description
Choice horizon
Number of choices a user has made
Local restaurant density
The density of restaurants inside a bounding box of size 400 ×
400 meters
Distance from home
The distance in kilometres to the user’s home location
Exploitation streak length
How many times in a row has the user been exploiting
Exploration streak length
How many times in a row has the user been exploring
Time of the day
Noted in hours of the day (0, 1, 2, ... , 22, 23)
Time of the year
Noted in the number of the month (1, 2, 3, ..., 11, 12)
Time since last exploit
The time in seconds since the user last exploited a restaurant
Time since last explored
The time in seconds since the user last explored a restaurant
Table 5.1: Features used in modelling.
Before training the classification models, we examined if any of the features were
correlated based on Pearson similarity, see Figure 5.1. From the correlation matrix
we found out that no features are highly correlated and therefore there is no presence
of multicollinearity [RPA17].
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Classification methodology and results
33
Figure 5.1: Correlation matrix, showing correlations between features and target variable.
No features are highly correlated.
5.2
Classification methodology and results
The following sections go over the methodology and results when predicting explo-
ration using the different classification models. First, we describe the baseline model,
followed by sections for the methods and results of logistic regression, random forest
and XGBoost models.
When training and testing the classification models, we set aside 10% of the data as
a test dataset that was only used to evaluate the completely trained models. So, 90%
of the data was used when training the models, referenced as the larger training set.
5.2.1
Baseline model
We created a baseline model that predicts for all cases the most frequent class value,
that is exploration for our data. We used the baseline model for comparison to the
results from the classification models. When only predicting exploration, the baseline
model achieves 63.98% accuracy.
==PAGE:48==
34
5 Restaurant exploration prediction
5.2.2
Logistic regression
The logistic regression model was trained using 10-fold cross validation to avoid over-
fitting. Before training the logistic regression model the features were standardised
as they had various scales.
The accuracy score of the logistic regression model was 72.55%. Other measures
of the model can be found in Table 5.2. The coefficients of the model and their odds
ratio can be found in Table 5.3.
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 score
Class 0
Class 1
Class 0
Class 1
Class 0
Class 1
72.55%
0.71
0.73
0.44
0.90
0.54
0.80
Table 5.2: Results from the logistic regression classification. Class 0 represents exploita-
tion while Class 1 represents exploration. The F1 score is considerably higher for Class 1
compared to Class 0, meaning that the model is better at predicting exploration but has
more difficulty predicting exploitation.
Feature
Coefficients
Odds ratio
choiceHorizon
-0.20
0.82
restaurantDensity
0.64
1.90
distanceFromHome
0.10
1.11
exploitationStreakLength
-0.35
0.70
explorationStreakLength
0.20
1.22
hour
0.19
1.21
month
0.05
1.05
timeLastExploit
0.11
1.11
timeLastExplore
0.08
1.09
Table 5.3: Coefficient and odds ratio of each feature of the logistic regression model. From
the odds ratio we see that the feature restaurantDensity has the most impact on the model.
The higher the restaurant density is, the more likely the user explores a new restaurant.
The logistic regression was also implemented in R programming language, to verify
the statistical significance of the coefficients. Feature Month was reported statisti-
cally not significant, with a p-value of 0.07436. All other coefficients were reported
significant.
When examining the value of the coefficients, we can see that the feature
restaurantDensity has the largest impact on the model prediction. For every one
unit increase in the restaurant density, the odds of exploring a restaurant increase
by a factor of 1.90. This tells us that when users are situated where the density of
restaurants is high, it is more likely that they would be exploring a restaurant.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Classification methodology and results
35
The feature exploitStreakLength has a high reverse impact on the model, telling
us that users are less likely to explore when they have been consecutively exploiting
restaurants, which is parallel to the findings of Riefer et al.[Rie+17] about coherency
maximisation. This could partially be expected, as for both cases, shopping in the
supermarket and choosing restaurants, the reward for the user is subject, e.g. valuing
service, food quality and atmosphere.
The feature choiceHorizon also has a reverse impact on the model, which suggests
that when users have made many choices they rather like to exploit already enjoyed
restaurants than exploring new ones. It is interesting to note that the positive value
of the coefficient for the Hour feature indicates that people are more likely to explore
new restaurants later in the day. This suggests that people are more prone to go to
the same place to buy their breakfast or lunch, and then in the evening they fancy
to try something new.
The logistic regression model performs well when predicting exploration (Y = 1)
but has more difficulty predicting exploitation (Y = 0). When users are in reality
exploiting, the model fails to correctly detect exploitation, with the recall of only
0.44 and F1 score of 0.54. This could be because the model is having difficulties when
cases are indistinct and seeks to classify as the majority class.
However, overall, the model attains good performance. The Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) curve graph depicted in Figure 5.2a shows the total area under
the curve (AUC) is 0.74, which is better performance than random guessing. The
precision-recall graph depicted in Figure 5.2b supports that with area of 0.80.
a ROC curve for the logistic regression model.
b Precision-recall graph for the logistic regres-
sion model.
Figure 5.2: Performance of the logistic regression model. The area under the ROC curve
for the logistic regression model is 0.74. Area under the precision-recall curve is 0.80.
==PAGE:50==
36
5 Restaurant exploration prediction
5.2.3
Random forest
When training the random forest model, the larger training set was split into 80%
train set and 20% validation set. We fitted the random forest model using 75 trees,
but the number of trees was derived from hyperparameter optimisation. The accuracy
of the model was 76.96%, see other results in Table 5.4.
The feature importance of the random forest model is illustrated in Figure 5.3.
The restaurant density feature outstandingly gives the most significant contribution
to the model prediction of exploration. The distance from home is the second most
important one, and the other features are lined in decreasing order of importance. The
two features of exploration and exploitation streak length give the least contribution
to the prediction.
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 score
Class 0
Class 1
Class 0
Class 1
Class 0
Class 1
76.96%
0.80
0.76
0.51
0.90
0.62
0.83
Table 5.4:
Results from the random forest classification.
The F1 score is considerably
higher for Class 1 compared to Class 0, meaning that the random forest model is better at
predicting exploration but has more difficulty predicting exploitation.
Figure 5.3: Random forest feature importance. The figure shows us that the restaurant
density feature has the largest impact on the model, which is the same results we got from
the logistic regression model, see Table 5.3.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Classification methodology and results
37
The random forest model predicts exploration with good performance but has more
difficulties interpreting correctly for exploit cases (Y = 0). Figure 5.4a and Figure
5.4b depict the ROC curve and the precision-recall graph, respectively. The ROC
curve and the precision-recall graph show the good performance of the model.
a ROC curve for random forest model.
b Precision-recall
graph
for
random
forest
model.
Figure 5.4: Performance of the random forest model. The area under the ROC curve for
the random forest model is 0.79. Area under the precision-recall curve is 0.83.
==PAGE:52==
38
5 Restaurant exploration prediction
5.2.4
XGBoost
The larger training set was split into 80% train set and 20% validation set when
training the XGBoost model. Table 5.5 shows the results from the XGBoost model.
The accuracy of the model was 76.96%.
The feature importance of the model is depicted in Figure 5.5. The restaurant
density makes the most significant contribution to the prediction, and the exploit
streak length has the second highest importance of the features. The other features
have rather low impact on the prediction. Figure 5.6a and Figure 5.6b depict the
ROC curve and the precision-recall graph, respectively.
The ROC curve and the
precision-recall graph show the good performance of the XGBoost model.
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 score
Class 0
Class 1
Class 0
Class 1
Class 0
Class 1
77.83%
0.82
0.77
0.52
0.93
0.63
0.84
Table 5.5: Results from the XGBoost classification. The F1 score is considerably higher
for Class 1 compared to Class 0, meaning that the XGBoost model is better at predicting
exploration but has more difficulty predicting exploitation.
Figure 5.5: XGBoost feature importance. The figure shows us that the restaurant density
feature has the largest impact on the model, which is the same results we got from the
logistic regression and random forest models, see Table 5.3 and Figure 5.3.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Summary and comparison of results
39
a ROC curve for XGBoost model.
b Precision-recall graph for XGBoost model.
Figure 5.6: Performance of XGBoost model. The area under the ROC curve is 0.81. Area
under the precision-recall curve is 0.85.
5.3
Summary and comparison of results
The performance measures of the three classification models and the baseline model
is depicted in Table 5.6. The performance results are similar, nonetheless, the XG-
Boost model outperforms logistic regression and random forest models and has the
highest score for accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score for both classes. All mod-
els found that feature restaurantDensity is the most crucial factor when predicting
exploration.
The XGBoost model is better at obtaining a blend of recall and precision as it has
the largest area under the curve for both ROC curve and the Precision-recall curve.
The comparison of the ROC curves for all models are depicted in Figure 5.7a and
comparison of the precision-recall curve for all models is depicted in Figure 5.7b. All
three models have more difficulty predicting exploitation (Y = 0). The recall score
for class 0 for all models is rather low, which can be because exploiting is the minority
class, and the features do not capture the characteristics of exploit. Also, perhaps the
models fail to distinguish very similar cases and thus seek to classify as the majority
class exploration.
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Restaurant exploration prediction
Algorithm
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1 score
Class 0
Class 1
Class 0
Class 1
Class 0
Class 1
Baseline model
63.98%
0.00
0.64
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.78
Logistic regression
72.55%
0.71
0.73
0.44
0.90
0.54
0.80
Random Forest
76.96%
0.80
0.76
0.51
0.90
0.62
0.83
XGBoost
77.83%
0.82
0.77
0.52
0.93
0.63
0.84
Table 5.6: Comparing results from the baseline model and the three classification models.
The XGBoost classifier gives the best results, it has the highest accuracy, precision, recall
and F1 score. The accuracy of the XGBoost model is considerably better than the accuracy
of the baseline model.
a ROC curve for all models.
b Comparing precision-recall graphs for all
models.
Figure 5.7: Compering the performance of all three models. The performance of the three
models is very similar, however, the XGBoost classifier outperforms the other two with larger
area under the curve for both the ROC curve and the precision-recall curve.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Recommending
restaurants
We used the restaurant visit dataset to generate restaurant recommendations for users
from the CNS study. Three different recommendation methods were implemented
based on different factors: geospatial behaviour, friendship network and personality
traits. The recommendations were built on user-based collaborative filtering recom-
mender technique. The goal was to observe what method could generate the most
relevant restaurant recommendations.
We created three baseline recommendation
systems to compare with the other recommendation methods. The recommendation
method based on friendship provided the best performance. Further, we aggregated
the three methods into a combined recommender system. The weighted combined
model gave the most relevant recommendation. However, it did not achieve the per-
formance of the baseline model that recommended the most popular restaurants to a
user.
6.1
Choosing data for recommendation
Before creating recommendations, the restaurants visit dataset was split into training
and evaluation datasets based on time. Restaurant visits occurring within the training
period were used to derive the restaurant recommendation.
The training period
spanned 15 months, from September 2013 to November 2014. The evaluation period
spanned from December 2014 to November 2015. Restaurant visits occurring within
the evaluation period were used to evaluate the relevance of the recommendations.
As mentioned briefly in Chapter 4.3, less active users who only visited a few
restaurants were removed from the analyses. By removing those users we want to
prevent incidences of the cold-start problem where the system has not enough infor-
mation about a user. We only considered users that had visited at least 10 different
restaurants during the training period. This resulted in analysing 659 users from the
training period when creating restaurant recommendations.
Next, we filtered out users who were irrelevant to observe when generating recom-
mendations. Restaurant recommendations were only generated for users that visited
at least 10 different restaurants in the evaluation period. With this, we tried to assure
that a user could evaluate the recommendation list suggested for the user. Also, if
==PAGE:56==
42
6 Recommending restaurants
a user had no registered phone communication with other users, or the user had no
friends that fulfilled the requirements of being in the training user set, then it was not
possible to create recommendations based on the user’s social ties. Those users were
removed from the evaluation data. Thus, we generated restaurants recommendations
for total of 230 users.
6.2
Creating recommendations
Essentially, the recommender system generates a list of N restaurants for a given user
u, only recommending restaurants that user u has not yet visited. Recommendations
are successful if user u visited the suggested restaurants in the evaluation period.
The recommendations were created using user-based collaborative filtering. We
find the users who are similar to user u and recommend the restaurants liked by those
similar users. Therefore, restaurants previously explored by other users were used as
the source of possible restaurants to recommend. The users that are most similar to
user u will be called advisers. In this research we use five advisers. The advisers for
user u are identified using different similarity methods based on the three approaches
using geospatial behaviour, friendship network and personality traits.
User u’s preference on a restaurant r can be estimated with Equation 6.1 [WTM13].
The restaurants were ranked by this weighted ranking score, where advisers more
similar to user u had more impact on the restaurant ranking.
score(u, r) =
5
∑
i=1
(
sim(i, u) · rating(r, i)
)
5
∑
i=1
sim(i, u)
,
∀i
(6.1)
where
• score(u, r): ranking score; estimated preference of user u on restaurant r
• i: the i-th advisor
• sim(i, u): the similarity between advisor i and user u
• rating(r, i): the rating score advisor i gives restaurant r
Since we do not hold the actual ratings of restaurants, we assume that the more
often an advisor visited a restaurant, the more he liked it. Thus, the rating score
rating(r, i) adviser i gives a restaurant r is the number of times the user visited the
place. The restaurants with the highest ranking scores were recommended to user u.
With increasing ranking position it is less likely that a user will explore a restaurant.
Therefore, only the 10 highest ranked restaurants are suggested to user u. Whenever
two or more restaurants had the same ranking score, we randomised their position
within their ranking positions.
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Creating recommendations
43
The three following sections describe how restaurant recommendations are built
using different similarity approaches based geospatial behaviour, friendship network
and personality traits. Then, in Chapter 6.2.4 the baseline recommender systems are
described.
6.2.1
Geospatial behaviour method
We observed how similarly users behave in a geographical sense by studying the
location points of the restaurants they have visited. First, we observed and compared
individual location points of visited restaurants.
Then, we developed to analyse
restaurant behaviour within smaller areas or neighbourhoods, and gradually expanded
to observe larger areas.
We began by observing the most specific comparison, looking at each restaurant a
user visited and used the Jaccard similarity coefficient to find how similar restaurant
visits were between users. The Jaccard similarity coefficient is defined as [LRU14] :
Jaccard similarity = J(A, B) = |A ∩B|
|A ∪B|
(6.2)
where A and B are different sets, in our case sets of restaurants. J(A, B) takes value
between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates that the two sets are identical.
Expanding the comparison, we generated five grids covering the analysed Copen-
hagen area prior described in Chapter 3.2. Starting with finer grid with grid cells
of size 25 × 25 meters (area of 625 m2), we gradually expanded to analyse a much
coarser grid with grid cells of size 1, 000×1, 000 meters (area of 1 km2). Analysing the
grids for each user, we counted the number of times a user visited restaurants located
within each grid cell. Then, all grids were kept in a matrix like format (M × N),
where the values in the matrix were the restaurant visit counts. Table 6.1 gives an
overview of the different grids that were analysed. Figure A.1 in Appendix illustrates
how grids with cells of size 100 × 100, 500 × 500 and 1000 × 1000 meters cover the
analysed Copenhagen area.
Transforming each grid of each user to a vector made it possible to measure the
similarity between grids from two users using cosine similarity. Cosine similarity is
found by calculating the cosine of the angle between two vectors [AT05]:
Cosine similarity = cos(A, B) =
A · B
∥A∥2∥B∥2
=
n
∑
i=1
AiBi
v
u
u
t
n
∑
i=1
A2
i
v
u
u
t
n
∑
i=1
B2
i
(6.3)
where A and B are two non zero vectors, in our case the user’s transformed grid
to a vector. This resulted in a similarity matrix containing the geospatial similarity
between all analysed users (N = 659). Thus, for all five grid types, we had a similarity
==PAGE:58==
44
6 Recommending restaurants
Size of each grid cell
Area covered
Grid size [M × N]
25 × 25 meters
625 m2
860 × 708
50 × 50 meters
2,500 m2
430 × 354
100 × 100 meters
10,000 m2
215 × 177
500 × 500 meters
250,000 m2
43 × 36
1, 000 × 1, 000 meters
1,000,000 m2
22 × 18
Table 6.1: An overview of the five different grids analysed. The sizes of grid cells in a grid
varies from 25×25 meters to 1, 000×1, 000 meters. The corresponding area covered by each
cell in the grid is reported. The last column tells the size of the matrix representing the grid
(rows × columns).
matrix containing the geospatial similarity between all analysed users (N = 659).
Transforming a similarity matrix to a distance matrix, using equation
Distance matrix = 1 −Similarity matrix
(6.4)
we plotted a heatmap of the distance matrix for deeper understanding of how similar
users are in geographical sense based on restaurant locations. Figure 6.1 illustrates
the distance matrix of users similarity of geospatial behaviour using a grid with cell
size of 500×500 meters. Figure A.2 in Appendix depicts the distance matrix heatmaps
for the other types of grids and the Jaccard distance matrix.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Creating recommendations
45
Figure 6.1: The geospatial similarity between users illustrated as a heatmap. The dendro-
grams at the top and left show how users are clustered together, using hierarchical clustering,
based on their similar geospatial behaviour in a grid with 500 × 500 meters cells. It is inter-
esting to note that big part of users are very similar, depicted with the lighter box in the
middle. Those users could potentially have in common to live on DTU campus. Following
the horizontal line, there are noticeable smaller clusters of users.
6.2.2
Friendship based method
Identifying social ties between users, we applied friendship-based collaborative fil-
tering [YYL10]. Using the call and text message data from the CNS study, social
ties were recognised based on text messages and phone calls a user made to other
users. Aggregating the text messages and calls, we found out what users contacted
the most, assuming the more contact between two users, the stronger friendship they
had. Choosing the most similar users was based on the friendship strength, so the
top five friends with the strongest friendship with user u were chosen as his advisers.
If user u had fewer than five friends, we used fewer advisers. Figure 6.2 illustrates
the number of friends users had.
Three different implementations were explored when creating friendship based rec-
ommendations. First, we observed how well the recommender method could perform
when only looking at user’s best friend (only one advisor). In [ABH18] found that
when relying only on the individual with the most similar taste does not yield good
==PAGE:60==
46
6 Recommending restaurants
Figure 6.2: The number of friends of each user u (N=230). When user u had fewer than
five friends, he had fewer advisers. E.g. for user u who had two friends, he was assigned two
advisers.
recommendations. We would like to see if our analysis generates similar findings.
The second implementation was to choose the top five friends as advisers. Their
similarity to user u was the value of the aggregated number of text messages and calls.
E.g. if advisor contacted user u 12 times, the similarity value was 12. Using this
implementation, the advisor that contacted user u the most, had the highest impact
on what restaurants were suggested in the restaurant recommendations. This method
could have a disadvantage when one advisor had significantly more contact with user
u then the other advisers and could result in that the majority of recommended
restaurants were only liked and suggested by that advisor.
The third implementation for friendship also used the five top friends as in the
previous implementation, except, now we are not discriminating between friends by
similarity, but instead we combined the restaurant ranks from all advisers where the
suggested restaurants are equally considered.
For this, we used the Borda count
method.
Borda count is a voting method, where each elector ranks all options in order of
preference from highest to lowest. Then, each option is assigned a point between one
and the total number of options, that is, from 1 to n. The highest ranked option gets
n points, the second preferred option gets n −1 points, until the last ranked option
gets 1 point. Then, the scores of each option are added up and the option with the
highest aggregated score wins [Rei02].
Thus, when creating recommendations based on Borda count, we chose the top 10
most visited restaurants of each adviser and gave each restaurant a score from 1 to 10
based on their ranking. Then, aggregating the scores of all restaurants, we obtained
a new rank of restaurants and suggested those top 10 restaurants to user u.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Creating recommendations
47
6.2.3
Personality based method
Using the personality dataset from the CNS study, we built a restaurant recommen-
dation based on how similar personalities the users have. In Figure A.3 in Appendix,
the variability of each personality trait is depicted. We used the distance measure
Manhattan distance, also known as L1 distance or City block distance, to calculate
the distance between personality vectors [LRU14] :
d1(p, q) =
n
∑
i=1
|pi −qi|
(6.5)
where p and q are vectors, p = (p1, p2, . . . pn) and q = (q1, q2, . . . qn), in our case
personality vectors.
Thus, calculating the distance between all personality vectors resulted in a dis-
tance matrix, keeping the personality differences between all analysed users (N =
659). Users that were most similar in personality had short distance between their
personality vectors. Figure 6.3 illustrates the distance matrix as a heatmap, showing
how alike users are based on personality.
To obtain the similarity values between users to use when calculating the ranking
score of a restaurant, the distance matrix was converted into a similarity matrix using
equation:
similarity =
1
1 + d1(p, q)
(6.6)
Where:
• similarity: Similarity in personality between personality vectors p and q.
• d1(p, q): Manhattan distance between personality vectors of two users.
6.2.4
Baseline recommendation systems
Three baseline recommendation systems were created for comparison to the other
models. The first baseline system chose random five advisers that provided the rec-
ommendations of restaurants. All advisers were assigned the same similarity score,
making their suggestions of restaurants equal.
The second baseline system suggested random restaurants to user u. All restau-
rants that were visited in the training period by the 659 users were considered besides
the ones that user u had already tried. The rank of the chosen restaurants was random
on the recommendation list.
The last baseline system recommends the most popular restaurants the user has
not already visited. The most popular restaurant was ranked first on the recommen-
dation list. Because users had visited different restaurants in the training period, the
popular restaurant recommendations did differ between users.
==PAGE:62==
48
6 Recommending restaurants
Figure 6.3: The personality distance matrix illustrated as a heatmap. Dendrograms at
the top and on the left side, show how users with similar personality are clustered together
using hierarchical clustering. It is interesting that it is possible to divide users into three big
clusters based on their personality. The users grouped in the cluster in the top left corner
have a noticeable difference in personality compared to users belonging to the second cluster
(from top left corner to the middle).
6.3
Evaluating recommendations
This section reports the performance results of each recommendation method.
For each method, we generated restaurant recommendations for all users u (N = 230).
To evaluate recommended restaurants to user u, we observed what restaurants user
u visited during the evaluation period. Assuming that people like restaurants they
visit, the relevance for a recommended restaurant was estimated by observing if and
how often user u visited the restaurant in the evaluation period. I.e. a restaurant
received relevance of 0 if user u did not visit it; the relevance was 1 if user u visited
the restaurant once within the evaluation period, and so on.
Then, the performance of each recommendation, holding the 10 suggested restau-
rants, was evaluated by finding the normalised discounted cumulative gain at ranked
position 10 (NDCG10). Observing one recommender method at a time, we calculated
the NDCG10 for each recommendation for users u. Next, we calculated the mean
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Evaluating recommendations
49
NDCG10 to use to compare the performances of all recommender methods. Since the
position of restaurants with the same ranking score was randomised, the performance
of the recommender models could vary between runs.
6.3.1
Results from geospatial recommendations
The performance results from recommender system based on the geospatial meth-
ods are listed in Table 6.2. Figure 6.4 depicts the distribution of NDCG10 values
using Jaccard similarity and grid with cell size of 500 × 500 meters. See Figure A.4
in Appendix for the distribution of NDCG10 values for all geospatial recommender
methods.
Grid cell type
Mean NDCG10
Jaccard
0.242 ± 0.048
25 × 25 meters
0.250 ± 0.049
50 × 50 meters
0.253 ± 0.049
100 × 100 meters
0.243 ± 0.049
500 × 500 meters
0.245 ± 0.048
1, 000 × 1, 000 meters
0.249 ± 0.049
Table 6.2: The performance of the geospatial recommender methods. The average NDCG10
is reported using different methods, reported with standard error of the mean (95% confi-
dence interval).
a Jaccard similarity method
b Grid size 500 × 500 meters
Figure 6.4: The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values (N=230), here comparing geospa-
tial method using Jaccard similarity and grid with cell size 500×500 meters. The bin size is
0.05. Majority of recommendations suggest no relevant restaurants to user u (NDCG10=0).
==PAGE:64==
50
6 Recommending restaurants
The performance is almost the same for all geospatial methods, and the difference
is not statistically significant when using the standard error of the mean with 95%
confidence interval. However, when using the grid with cell sizes of 50 × 50 gives the
highest performance. All methods have in common that roughly 140 users received a
recommendation where no restaurant was relevant to them.
6.3.2
Results from friendship recommendations
Table 6.3 shows the results from different friendship recommendation methods. The
best performance was attained using the Borda count method, which performs much
better than the other two methods. Figure 6.5a illustrates the distribution of NDCG10
values for recommendations based on the friendship method using Borda count. It is
interesting how much better recommendations are achieved when the five top friends
get equal saying what restaurants are recommended.
As was expected, using only users best friend as the advisor gives the lowest
performance, which agrees with the findings of [ABH18]. Figure A.5 in Appendix
depicts the distribution of NDCG10 values for the other two friendship methods. The
two methods using five friends provided recommendations of no relevance to around
140 users, while the method using best friend provided irrelevant recommendations
to around 170 users.
Method
Mean NDCG10
Best friend
0.149 ± 0.036
5 friends using similarity
0.214 ± 0.041
5 friends using Borda count
0.259 ± 0.046
Table 6.3: The average NDCG10 using different friendship recommendation methods, re-
ported with standard error of the mean (95% confidence interval).
6.3.3
Results from personality recommendations
The performance of the personality recommender system acquired mean NDCG10 of
0.193 ± 0.044. The method created irrelevant recommendations for over 160 users.
Figure 6.5b depicts the distribution of NDCG10 values from recommender system
using personality approach.
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Evaluating recommendations
51
a Friendship Borda count method.
b Personality method.
Figure 6.5: The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values (N=230), here depicting for rec-
ommender system using friendship and personality approach. The bin size is 0.05. Majority
of recommendations suggest no relevant restaurants to user u (NDCG10 = 0).
6.3.4
Results from baseline recommender methods
Analysing the performance of the baseline recommender methods, the best perfor-
mance is attained when recommending the 10 most popular places. The method also
attained the highest mean NDCG10 compared to previously analysed recommender
methods. Table 6.4 lists the results of all baseline recommender methods. Figure
6.6 depicts the distribution of the NDCG10 values when recommending most popular
places.
The good performance of the random five advisers system is not surprising. This
is comparable to a study from 2017 that suggested when predicting tastes for music
and film, crowd judgement can be useful when based on randomly chosen individuals
[Mül+17].
On the contrary, choosing random restaurant for recommendation is highly un-
successful. None of the recommended restaurants are relevant for around 96% of the
users. Figure A.6 in Appendix depicts the distribution of NDCG10 values for the
other two baseline methods.
Method
Mean NDCG
Random 5 advisers
0.178 ± 0.043
Random restaurants
0.024 ± 0.018
Top 10 popular restaurants
0.351 ± 0.048
Table 6.4:
The average NDCG10 using different baseline recommendation methods, re-
ported with standard error of the mean (95% confidence interval).
==PAGE:66==
52
6 Recommending restaurants
Figure 6.6: The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values (N=230) when recommending
top 10 most popular restaurants. The bin size is 0.05. Around 100 users receive irrelevant
recommendations (NDCG10=0).
6.3.5
Combined recommender system
Seeking to improve the performance score, we combined the three main methods using
Borda count, creating both weighted and unweighted combined recommender system.
We only used one approach from each method in the combined models. We chose
the Borda count for the friendship method, the geospatial method using the grid with
500 × 500 meters cells, and the personality method. The reason for choosing the grid
with 500 × 500 meters cells was because we were more interested in looking at areas
covering neighbourhoods, rather than smaller areas, as we suspect that when using a
grid with smaller cells the method gets more similar to the friendship model. It has
been observed that friends have more common locations than non-friends [YYL10].
The weighted combined model was generated by adding weight coefficients to each
of the three models. We used grid search to find the combination of the coefficients
that gave the highest performance score. The three coefficients αi needed to sum up
to 1, as follows:
3
∑
i=1
αi = 1
(6.7)
Using grid search is a greedy way of finding the coefficients, and we can not be
sure it is the optimal global solution. First, we analysed coefficients ranging from
0.0 to 1.0 with 0.1 steps between, that yielded coefficients of 0.4, 0.4 and 0.2 for
geospatial, friendship and personality methods, respectively. Further, we searched an
interval around the previously yielded coefficients, which found that the optimised
performance is attained using the following weight coefficients:
• αGeospatial = 0.36
• αF riendship = 0.37
• αP ersonality = 0.27
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Evaluating recommendations
53
Both combined recommender systems generated better results than using individ-
ual methods, but the weighted recommender outperformed the unweighted one, see
results in Table 6.5. Figure 6.7 illustrates the distribution of NDCG10 values when us-
ing the weighted combined recommender system. The combined recommender system
created irrelevant recommendations for around 120 users.
Combined models
Mean NDCG10
Unweighted
0.300 ± 0.050
Weighted
0.328 ± 0.052
Table 6.5: The average NDCG10 compared using two different combined recommendation
systems, reported with standard error of the mean (95% confidence interval).
Figure 6.7: The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values (N=230) using the weighted
combined model. The bin size is 0.05.
==PAGE:68==
54
6 Recommending restaurants
6.4
Summary of recommender systems
The calculated mean NDCG10 value for all recommender methods are listed in Table
6.6. Analysing the individual methods, the recommender system based on friendship
network using the Borda count approach generated the recommendations with the
highest ranking quality. Consulting only user’s top best friend gave the lowest perfor-
mance. The weighted combined recommender system attained the best performance,
with weight coefficients αGeospatial = 0.36, αF riendship = 0.37 and αP ersonality = 0.27.
Recommender method
Mean NDCG10 value
Jaccard
0.242 ± 0.048
25 meters
0.250 ± 0.049
50 meters
0.253 ± 0.049
100 meters
0.243 ± 0.049
500 meters
0.245 ± 0.048
1000 meters
0.249 ± 0.049
Top best friend
0.149 ± 0.036
5 friends using similarity
0.214 ± 0.041
5 friends using Borda count
0.259 ± 0.046
Personality
0.193 ± 0.044
Random 5 advisers
0.178 ± 0.043
Random restaurants
0.024 ± 0.018
Top 10 popular restaurants
0.351 ± 0.048
Combined unweighted
0.300 ± 0.050
Combined weighted
0.328 ± 0.052
Table 6.6: The average NDCG10 value for all recommender methods, reported with stan-
dard error of the mean (95% confidence interval).
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this chapter, we discuss and summarise the results from our research. The first
section discusses the results from restaurant exploration prediction analysis.
The
second section goes over the results from restaurant recommender system analysis.
Lastly, the third section discusses the limitations of the research.
7.1
Discussion of results for exploration prediction
The XGBoost algorithm generated the best model for restaurant exploration predic-
tion, but the performances of the logistic regression and the random forest models
were not far behind. All models had more difficulty making the right predictions when
there was restaurant exploitation, which is likely caused by the imbalanced classes.
Our goal was to find what factors are important when predicting restaurant explo-
ration. The restaurantDensity feature was found the most important for all models,
suggesting that when there are a lot of restaurants in the area, users are very likely
to explore a new restaurant. This is not of a surprise, as with more options to choose
from, the more opportunities to explore.
The feature holding the current exploitation streak length is the second most
important feature for the logistic regression and XGBoost models, yet it has the least
predictive power for the random forest model. The results from the logistic regression
model showed that the exploitationStreakLength feature has a negative impact on
the exploration prediction, suggesting that people explore less the more they exploit
known restaurants. This is in line with the findings of Riefer et al.[Rie+17] and implies
that restaurant exploration patterns are more similar to coherency maximisation.
When choosing restaurants, the reward for the user is subjective as in supermarket
shopping, e.g. valuing service, food quality and atmosphere.
Furthermore, the feature holding exploration streak length suggests that the more
people explore in a row, they are more likely to keep on exploring restaurants. The
distance from home factor also has a valuable impact on the exploration prediction,
but it was the second most important feature for the random forest model.
Our
findings imply that the further users are from home, they are more likely to explore.
Also, the Hour feature indicates that people are more likely to explore new restaurants
in the afternoon or evening, suggesting that people are more prone to go to the same
place to buy their breakfast or lunch, but try some new restaurants for dinner.
==PAGE:70==
56
7 Discussion
The feature choiceHorizon was important for all models, and results from the
logistic regression tell that the feature has reverse impact on the prediction of explo-
ration. This suggests that more choices users make, the more likely they will exploit
already enjoyed restaurants. Potentially indicating that with more choices, people
find what restaurants they like and then stick to those option as they give a known
reward.
Our exploration prediction models showed somewhat comparable performance
results to the findings of Cuttone et al.
[CLG18].
They found that the location
feature provided most prediction power, similarly to our models where the location
based features restaurantDensity and distanceFromHome are very valuable for
exploration prediction.
7.2
Discussion of results for recommender system
Analysing the performance results of each specific recommender method, the friend-
ship collaborative filtering method using Borda count attained the highest ranking
quality with mean NDCG10 of 0.259±0.046, but friendship-based collaborative filter-
ing methods have previously shown to hold comparable results against the state-of-
the-art recommender algorithms [YYL10].
Recommendations based on geospatial behaviour also attained good performances.
Apart from only consulting the top best friend, the personality recommender system
attained the lowest performance score of 0.193 ± 0.044, which is though better than
consulting random five advisers. This suggests that persons with more similar per-
sonality can assist to some extent when recommending relevant restaurants.
Observing the results from the friendship recommender approaches, it is inter-
esting that greater performance is attained when equally choosing restaurants from
user’s five friends using Borda count, compared to the approach where closer friends
have more influence on the suggested restaurants. This suggests that one’s closest
friends do not necessarily suggest the most relevant restaurants, it is wiser to seek
advice from all friends equally.
On the same note, consulting only the user’s best friend resulted in a weak rec-
ommendation which agrees with previous findings that solely relying on the most
similar individual yields poor performance [ABH18]. Also, the best friend approach
attained worse performance than consulting five random advisers. This suggests that
it is better to consult a crowd than your best friend for restaurant recommendations.
A previous study has shown that crowd judgement of randomly chosen others can be
useful when creating a recommendation for music and films [Mül+17].
The recommender system based on geospatial behaviour received very similar
performance for all analysed approaches, and there is no significant difference. This is
quite noteworthy, and it seems like the size of the grids does not affect the performance
of the recommendations, suggesting that regardless of grid size, user u could always
have the same five people most similar to him based on geospatial behaviour, hence
leading to similar performance of the recommender methods. Also, one would then
==PAGE:71==
7.2 Discussion of results for recommender system
57
think that using Jaccard similarity would perform worse as users have very different
geospatial vectors as illustrated in Figure A.2a in Appendix. Using a grid with cells
of 50×50 meters yielded the highest performance among the geospatial recommender
methods.
A weighted combination of the three recommender approaches creates a stronger
recommender system that outperforms the individual methods with mean NDCG10 of
0.328 ± 0.052. The weights are distributed relatively equally between the three meth-
ods, with coefficients for geospatial, friendship and personality as 0.36, 0.37 and 0.27,
respectively. Interestingly, the personality method has a high coefficient although it
yielded the poorest performance, nevertheless, it is essential for the combined model.
Though the weighted combined model outperforms all of the individual recommender
methods, it can not beat the performance when recommending the most popular
restaurants, which attains mean NDCG10 of 0.351 ± 0.048.
In our comparison we need to consider that the difference for some methods is not
statistically significant when using standard error of the mean with 95% confidence
interval.
We decided to recommend 10 restaurants to each user, because, as the ranking po-
sition of an item increases it is more likely the user will not explore it. It is important
to note that when recommending more restaurants, there is an increased likelihood
that some of the suggested restaurants are relevant since there are more options for
user u to choose from. Then, the number of users that found no relevant restaurant
decreases, which can lead to a higher NDCGk score. Figure 7.1 illustrates the differ-
ence of the distribution of NDCGk score when recommending 10 restaurants and 50
restaurants using friendship Borda count method, with mean NDCGk of 0.259±0.046
and 0.282 ± 0.036, respectively. Nevertheless, as mentioned before, it is unlikely that
a user will explore suggestions in high ranking positions. Therefore we believe that
suggesting 10 restaurants was suitable for this analysis.
a Recommending 10 restaurants.
b Recommending 50 restaurants.
Figure 7.1: The distributions of calculated NDCG10 values and NDCG50 values (N=230)
using the friendship approach with Borda count. The bin size is 0.05. More users find some
relevant restaurants in their recommendations when there are suggested 50 restaurants.
==PAGE:72==
58
7 Discussion
7.3
Limitations
We assumed that a stop location was a restaurant visit when the stop matched the
restaurant within a 20-meter radius and aligned with the assumptions described in
chapter 4.1.2. However, it is difficult to say with complete certainty that the user was
in reality dining at that restaurant. Datasets that contain check-in data from users
could be more accurate to resolve such problems. But check-in data has also shown a
disadvantage where users are more eager to check-in at a place when they are trying
it for the first time, but skip to report recurring visits which results in a high number
of explorations [WTM13]. With our collected restaurant visits data, we manage to
capture all possible restaurant visits.
We also need to consider that this research uses data from the CNS study where
participants were university students, mostly 20-year-old males living in Copenhagen.
Younger people usually have fewer earnings, and the participants’ restaurant choices
can be partially affected by that. This is indicated by the most frequently visited
places, which included cafés, pizza places and Turkish restaurants. A more general
data, with participants from different age groups and equal gender distribution, would
be interesting to apply to this research.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this research, we examined decision behaviour in regards to restaurant exploration
and restaurant recommendations, and we managed to identify what factors are im-
portant in both cases. By integrating the dataset of users behaviour with restaurant
data from Foursquare, we created a restaurant visit dataset that contained 50,450
restaurants visits 5,006 restaurants in Copenhagen.
The most essential factor for restaurant exploration prediction was the density of
restaurants, suggesting that when people are situated in an area with many restau-
rants, they will go and try something new. Furthermore, when people are far from
their home and it is later in the day, it is a proper setting for restaurant exploration.
People’s current exploitation streak length has a negative impact on restaurant explo-
ration prediction and suggests that restaurant exploration patterns follow coherency
maximisation.
We explored three different approaches to implement in a recommender system
that were based in geospatial behaviour, friendship network and personality traits.
When analysing the three recommender approaches individually, our findings suggest
that equally considering restaurant suggestions from your five best friends will give
you the most relevant suggestions. On the contrary, consulting only your top best
friend would provide you with the poorest recommendations. Combining the three
approaches gives though the best results but can not outperform the performance of
using the baseline system of suggesting the 10 most popular places.
8.1
Future work
Extending restaurant visits dataset
It could be informative to add external datasets to the restaurants visits data, such
as data about restaurants price range and ratings or reviews. It would be interesting
to see what impact such features could have on the restaurant exploration prediction.
Content-based recommender system
It would be interesting to observe how recommendations based on content-based
recommender would perform when recommending restaurants. Then, we would look
at what restaurants user u previously liked and recommend restaurants similar to
those, not involving data from other users. To find the similarity of two restaurants
could be identified with e.g. the category type, location or name. Further, combining
==PAGE:74==
60
8 Conclusion
content-based and collaborative recommender into a hybrid recommender would also
be interesting to explore and see how far it is possible to go to attain better and more
relevant restaurant recommendations.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
a Grid cells 1, 000 × 1, 000 meters.
b Grid cells 500 × 500 meters.
c Grid cells 100 × 100 meters.
Figure A.1: Compering different sizes of grids used to find the geospatial similarity between
users. The grids for grid cells of 25 × 25 and 50 × 50 meters were not plotted as those grids
were too fine to see the lines on such small figures.
==PAGE:76==
62
A An Appendix
a Jaccard similarity.
b Grid cells 25 × 25 meters.
c Grid cells 50 × 50 meters.
d Grid cells 100 × 100 meters.
e Grid cells 500 × 500 meters.
f Grid cells 1, 000 × 1, 000 meters.
Figure A.2: Illustrating distance matrices using heatmap of all geospatial methods. Darker
cells indicate less similarity between users. Notice as the grid size increases the similarity
increases between users. For all methods, except Jaccard, there is always one group of users
that keep being similar, potentially users that live on DTU campus.
==PAGE:77==
A An Appendix
63
Figure A.3: Box plot illustrating distribution of personality trait values. The median is
the middle line in each box, the sides of the box are lower and upper quartile. Outliers are
represented as diamonds.
==PAGE:78==
64
A An Appendix
a Jaccard similarity.
b Grid cells 25 × 25 meters.
c Grid cells 50 × 50 meters.
d Grid cells 100 × 100 meters.
e Grid cells 500 × 500 meters.
f Grid cells 1, 000 × 1, 000 meters.
Figure A.4: The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values, here comparing all different
geospatial methods analysed. The bin size is 0.05. Notice that the frequent values within
interval 0.0 - 0.05 are only NDCG10 values of 0. Likewise, all values within interval 1.0-1.05
have the value NDCG10 = 1, since NDCG10 can only take value from 0 - 1.0 .
==PAGE:79==
A An Appendix
65
a Top 1 best friend.
b 5 advisers using similarity.
Figure A.5: The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values (N=230), here illustrated for
choosing best friend and 5 friends using similarity. The bin size is 0.05. Majority of recom-
mendations suggest no relevant restaurants to user u (NDCG10 = 0).
a Random 5 advisers.
b Random restaurants.
Figure A.6: The distribution of calculated NDCG10 values (N=230), here depicting for two
of the baseline recommender systems. The bin size is 0.05. Majority of recommendations
suggest no relevant restaurants to user u (NDCG10 = 0), especially when suggesting 10
random restaurants.
==PAGE:80==
66
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[ABH18]
Pantelis P Analytis, Daniel Barkoczi, and Stefan M Herzog. “Social learn-
ing strategies for matters of taste”. In: Nature Human Behaviour 2.6
(2018), page 415.
[Ale+18]
Laura Alessandretti et al. “Evidence for a conserved quantity in human
mobility”. In: Nature Human Behaviour 2.7 (2018), page 485.
[AT05]
Gediminas Adomavicius and Alexander Tuzhilin. “Toward the next gen-
eration of recommender systems: A survey of the state-of-the-art and
possible extensions”. In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge & Data Engi-
neering 6 (2005), pages 734–749.
[Bal+09]
Duygu Balcan et al. “Seasonal transmission potential and activity peaks
of the new influenza A (H1N1): a Monte Carlo likelihood analysis based
on human mobility”. In: BMC medicine 7.1 (2009), page 45.
[Bar+18]
Hugo Barbosa et al. “Human mobility: Models and applications”. In:
Physics Reports 734 (2018), pages 1–74.
[BGB11]
Vitaly Belik, Theo Geisel, and Dirk Brockmann. “Natural human mobil-
ity patterns and spatial spread of infectious diseases”. In: Physical Review
X 1.1 (2011), page 011001.
[BHK98]
John S Breese, David Heckerman, and Carl Kadie. “Empirical analysis
of predictive algorithms for collaborative filtering”. In: Proceedings of the
Fourteenth conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc. 1998, pages 43–52.
[Bok]
Bokeh. Welcome to Bokeh. url: https : / / bokeh . pydata . org / en /
latest/ (visited on April 28, 2019).
[Bre01]
Leo Breiman. “Random forests”. In: Machine learning 45.1 (2001), pages 5–
32.
[Bur02]
Robin Burke. “Hybrid recommender systems: Survey and experiments”.
In: User modeling and user-adapted interaction 12.4 (2002), pages 331–
370.
[CG16]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting
system”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference
on knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM. 2016, pages 785–794.
==PAGE:82==
68
Bibliography
[Cla+99]
Mark Claypool et al. “Combing content-based and collaborative filters in
an online newspaper”. In: (1999).
[CLG18]
Andrea Cuttone, Sune Lehmann, and Marta C González. “Understanding
predictability and exploration in human mobility”. In: EPJ Data Science
7.1 (2018), page 2.
[CN13]
Nitin R Chopde and M Nichat. “Landmark based shortest path detection
by using A* and Haversine formula”. In: International Journal of Innova-
tive Research in Computer and Communication Engineering 1.2 (2013),
pages 298–302.
[D3]
D3. D3 - Data Driven Documents. url: https://d3js.org/ (visited on
April 10, 2019).
[DG06]
Jesse Davis and Mark Goadrich. “The relationship between Precision-
Recall and ROC curves”. In: Proceedings of the 23rd international confer-
ence on Machine learning. ACM. 2006, pages 233–240.
[DK04]
Mukund Deshpande and George Karypis. “Item-based top-n recommen-
dation algorithms”. In: ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS)
22.1 (2004), pages 143–177.
[Foua]
Foursquare. Places API. url: https://developer.foursquare.com/
places-api (visited on February 20, 2019).
[Foub]
Foursquare. Search for venues. url: https://developer.foursquare.
com/docs/api/venues/search (visited on February 20, 2019).
[FWF11]
Enrique Frias-Martinez, Graham Williamson, and Vanessa Frias-Martinez.
“An agent-based model of epidemic spread using human mobility and so-
cial network information”. In: 2011 IEEE Third International Conference
on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust and 2011 IEEE Third International
Conference on Social Computing. IEEE. 2011, pages 57–64.
[GIS]
wiki GIS. Decimal degree. url: http://wiki.gis.com/wiki/index.
php/Decimal_degrees (visited on March 15, 2019).
[HBG04]
Lars Hufnagel, Dirk Brockmann, and Theo Geisel. “Forecast and con-
trol of epidemics in a globalized world”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 101.42 (2004), pages 15124–15129.
[Hil+95]
Will Hill et al. “Recommending and evaluating choices in a virtual com-
munity of use”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing
Co. 1995, pages 194–201.
[J+99]
Oliver P John, Sanjay Srivastava, et al. “The Big Five trait taxonomy:
History, measurement, and theoretical perspectives”. In: Handbook of per-
sonality: Theory and research 2.1999 (1999), pages 102–138.
[Jam+13]
Gareth James et al. An introduction to statistical learning. Volume 112.
Springer, 2013.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
69
[Jen16]
Ulf Aslak Jensen. “Personality archetypes reveal evolutionarily important
behavioral strategies”. Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[JK02]
Kalervo Järvelin and Jaana Kekäläinen. “Cumulated gain-based evalua-
tion of IR techniques”. In: ACM Transactions on Information Systems
(TOIS) 20.4 (2002), pages 422–446.
[KF07]
Ashraf M Kibriya and Eibe Frank. “An empirical comparison of exact
nearest neighbour algorithms”. In: European Conference on Principles of
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. Springer. 2007, pages 140–151.
[Kit+00]
Ryuichi Kitamura et al. “Micro-simulation of daily activity-travel pat-
terns for travel demand forecasting”. In: Transportation 27.1 (2000), pages 25–
51.
[Kre02]
Valdis E Krebs. “Mapping networks of terrorist cells”. In: Connections
24.3 (2002), pages 43–52.
[KZN08]
Neeraj Kumar, Li Zhang, and Shree Nayar. “What is a good nearest
neighbors algorithm for finding similar patches in images?” In: European
conference on computer vision. Springer. 2008, pages 364–378.
[Lam+08]
Xuan Nhat Lam et al. “Addressing cold-start problem in recommenda-
tion systems”. In: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on
Ubiquitous information management and communication. ACM. 2008,
pages 208–211.
[Las]
David Dreyer Lassen. Social Fabric. Copenhagen Center for Social Data
Science. url: https://sodas.ku.dk/projects/social-fabric/ (vis-
ited on April 9, 2019).
[LDS11]
Pasquale Lops, Marco De Gemmis, and Giovanni Semeraro. “Content-
based recommender systems: State of the art and trends”. In: Recom-
mender systems handbook. Springer, 2011, pages 73–105.
[LRU14]
Jure Leskovec, Anand Rajaraman, and Jeffrey David Ullman. Mining of
massive datasets. Cambridge university press, 2014.
[Mir+13]
Giovanna Miritello et al. “Limited communication capacity unveils strate-
gies for human interaction”. In: Scientific reports 3 (2013), page 1950.
[MMN02]
Prem Melville, Raymond J Mooney, and Ramadass Nagarajan. “Content-
boosted collaborative filtering for improved recommendations”. In: Aaai/i-
aai 23 (2002), pages 187–192.
[Mue17]
Alexander Mueller. Experiments with in-memory spatial radius queries in
Python. August 2017. url: https://tech.minodes.com/experiments-
with-in-memory-spatial-radius-queries-in-python-e40c9e66cf63
(visited on March 10, 2019).
[Mül+17]
Johannes Müller-Trede et al. “The wisdom of crowds in matters of taste”.
In: Management Science 64.4 (2017), pages 1779–1803.
==PAGE:84==
70
Bibliography
[Not]
Jupyter Notebook. Jupyter Notebook. url: https://jupyter.org/ (vis-
ited on April 10, 2019).
[Omo89]
Stephen M Omohundro. Five balltree construction algorithms. Interna-
tional Computer Science Institute Berkeley, 1989.
[Ped+11]
Fabian Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python”. In:
Journal of machine learning research 12.Oct (2011), pages 2825–2830.
[PLI02]
Chao-Ying Joanne Peng, Kuk Lida Lee, and Gary M Ingersoll. “An in-
troduction to logistic regression analysis and reporting”. In: The journal
of educational research 96.1 (2002), pages 3–14.
[PP05]
Manos Papagelis and Dimitris Plexousakis. “Qualitative analysis of user-
based and item-based prediction algorithms for recommendation agents”.
In: Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 18.7 (2005), pages 781–
789.
[R C19]
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Comput-
ing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria, 2019. url:
http://www.R-project.org/.
[Rag+14]
Min Ragan-Kelley et al. “The Jupyter/IPython architecture: a unified
view of computational research, from interactive exploration to commu-
nication and publication.” In: AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts. 2014.
[RC03]
Sebastiaan Rothmann and Elize P Coetzer. “The big five personality
dimensions and job performance”. In: SA Journal of Industrial Psychology
29.1 (2003), pages 68–74.
[Rei02]
Benjamin Reilly. “Social choice in the south seas: Electoral innovation
and the borda count in the pacific island countries”. In: International
Political Science Review 23.4 (2002), pages 355–372.
[Res+94]
Paul Resnick et al. “GroupLens: an open architecture for collaborative
filtering of netnews”. In: Proceedings of the 1994 ACM conference on
Computer supported cooperative work. ACM. 1994, pages 175–186.
[Rie+17]
Peter S Riefer et al. “Coherency-maximizing exploration in the supermar-
ket”. In: Nature human behaviour 1.1 (2017), page 0017.
[Rob57]
C Carl Robusto. “The cosine-haversine formula”. In: The American Math-
ematical Monthly 64.1 (1957), pages 38–40.
[RPA17]
Priya Ranganathan, CS Pramesh, and Rakesh Aggarwal. “Common pit-
falls in statistical analysis: Logistic regression”. In: Perspectives in clinical
research 8.3 (2017), page 148.
[SA06]
James Salter and Nick Antonopoulos. “CinemaScreen recommender agent:
combining collaborative and content-based filtering”. In: IEEE Intelligent
Systems 21.1 (2006), pages 35–41.
[Sar+01]
Badrul Munir Sarwar et al. “Item-based collaborative filtering recommen-
dation algorithms.” In: Www 1 (2001), pages 285–295.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
71
[SAS15]
Hrvoje Stojic, Pantelis P Analytis, and Maarten Speekenbrink. “Human
behavior in contextual multi-armed bandit problems.” In: CogSci. 2015.
[Sch+18]
Eric Schulz et al. “Exploration in the wild”. In: bioRxiv (2018). doi: 10.
1101/492058.
[SF09]
Sanner The Scripps and M. F. Sanner. “Python: A Programming Lan-
guage For Software Integration And Development”. eng. In: (2009). doi:
10.1.1.35.6459.
[Sim+12]
Filippo Simini et al. “A universal model for mobility and migration pat-
terns”. In: Nature 484.7392 (2012), page 96.
[SM95]
Upendra Shardanand and Pattie Maes. “Social information filtering: Al-
gorithms for automating” word of mouth””. In: Chi. Volume 95. Citeseer.
1995, pages 210–217.
[Sto+14]
Arkadiusz Stopczynski et al. “Measuring large-scale social networks with
high resolution”. In: PloS one 9.4 (2014), e95978.
[Uhl91]
Jeffrey K Uhlmann. “Satisfying general proximity/similarity queries with
metric trees”. In: Information processing letters 40.4 (1991), pages 175–
179.
[Wan+12]
Pu Wang et al. “Understanding road usage patterns in urban areas”. In:
Scientific reports 2 (2012), page 1001.
[WTM13]
Hao Wang, Manolis Terrovitis, and Nikos Mamoulis. “Location recom-
mendation in location-based social networks using user check-in data”.
In: Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference
on Advances in Geographic Information Systems. ACM. 2013, pages 374–
383.
[Wu+18]
Charley M Wu et al. “Generalization guides human exploration in vast
decision spaces”. In: Nature Human Behaviour 2.12 (2018), page 915.
[YYL10]
Mao Ye, Peifeng Yin, and Wang-Chien Lee. “Location recommendation
for location-based social networks”. In: Proceedings of the 18th SIGSPA-
TIAL international conference on advances in geographic information
systems. ACM. 2010, pages 458–461.
[ZC13]
Jia-Dong Zhang and Chi-Yin Chow. “iGSLR: personalized geo-social lo-
cation recommendation: a kernel density estimation approach”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 21st ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on
Advances in Geographic Information Systems. ACM. 2013, pages 334–
343.
[Zhe+10]
Vincent W Zheng et al. “Collaborative location and activity recommen-
dations with GPS history data”. In: Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on World wide web. ACM. 2010, pages 1029–1038.
==PAGE:86==
