==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Development of an Introductory Finite
Element Tool for Educational Purposes
Lasse Kristensen (S123505)
Supervisor:
Kristoffer Negendahl
Assistant Professor, DTU Civil Engineering
Kongens Lyngby - June 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Title Page
Title:
Development of an Introductory Finite Element Tool for Edu-
cational Purposes
Author:
Lasse Kristensen
Student number:
S123505
M.Sc.Programme: Architectural Engineering
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Institute:
Department of Civil Engineering
Project period:
02/01-2019 to 02/06-2019
ECTS-points:
30 ECTS-points
Supervisor:
Kristoffer Negendahl
Assistant Professor, DTU Civil Engineering
Kongens Lyngby, June 2, 2019
Lasse Kristensen
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The demand for designers to be able to make sustainable performance-based designs,
requires an understanding for structural analysis in the early phases of the design process.
This means structural analysis should not only be for specialists, but for all designing
architects and engineers. The current teachings structural analysis at DTU, Department
of Civil Engineering, excludes many students, who are scared away from the subject,
because the teachings focuses on the mathematics from the beginning, rather than train
the students’ intuitive understanding of structural behavior.
In this thesis an alternative approach to teaching structural analysis is presented.
This approach focuses on the learning by doing method, that trains students’ under-
standing through experimentation.
Instead of building physical models to experiment with, a computational tool is devel-
oped, letting users simulate the physical behavior of their structures. The tool is based
on the Finite Element Method (FEM), which makes it possible to do complex structural
analysis, by discretizing the different parts of the structure.
The tool developed in this thesis, LivestockFEM, lets the user define their structure in
a parametric Computer Aided Design (CAD) environment in Rhino/Grasshopper. This
makes it easier to do structural analysis on complex structures compared to textually
defining the geometry. This also adds an extra level of feedback, as the user get to see
what their inputs looks like graphically. The parametric environment of Grasshopper
also makes it possible for the users to set up optimization algorithms, which is useful in
the early design phases of a performance-based design. The Rhino/Grasshopper plugin
is linked to a FEM program written in CPython as part of the thesis. This link is formed
by sending input- and result data back and forth between Grasshopper and CPython.
In addition to the Rhino/Grasshopper part, the LivestockFEM software also includes
a web application. The web application gives the opportunity to take the input data
from Grasshopper and upload to a web server, the web server then performs the FEM
calculations, without the need for having CPython installled locally, this further extends
the accessibility to FEM calculations. On the web application, the results are listed and
plotted, the users are then given the opportunity to change their structure and see the
effect of their changes instantly in the results. The users are also given the opportunity
to see the underlying calculations, while they are studying their results, this is done to
==PAGE:6==
iv
Abstract
introduce the users to the calculations in an intuitive way.
LivestockFEM has been successfully validated by comparing the results it gives to
the results of other software. An example of usage are also giving in this thesis, that
demonstrates its possibility to use it for optimization.
To evaluate the software, interviews with students and teachers were conducted after
the students had used the software as a part of a course. The students were also asked
to answer a prerequisites and a feedback survey. The results showed that the students
were generally satisfied with LivestockFEM, and the software did make it possible for
students with only little experience in structural analyses, to set up their structures and
experiment with the design from structural perspective.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is a result of the author’s interest in how different tools, mostly compu-
tational, can be used for increasing students engineering-technical competences. This
interest comes from a great discontent with the often very theoretical approach many
universities practices, which in the author’s experience often causes students to opt out
before they get at good understanding of the subject. The author therefore proposes an
approach, that starts practically and then the theory will follow along.
The software developed in this thesis has been developed as a continuation of the
individual special course “Parametric structural tool development for Rhino/Grasshop-
per”, which again is a continuation of the special course “Algorithmic Modelling and
Analysis with Grasshopper 3D” at DTU – Department of Civil Engineering both done
by the author of this thesis. The two individual courses have worked as a preliminary
study for this thesis. The first course investigated the opportunities to link and use
external software from the Rhino/Grasshopper environment, it resulted in a plugin that
linked Grasshopper to a finite element calculation tool written in MatLab. The subse-
quent individual course focused on the further development of the plugin, increasing the
user friendliness, stability and availability by, among other things, rewriting the finite
element code to CPython.
As a result of the continuous work on the subject, parts of the two reports written in
the individual courses [Kristensen, 2017, 2018] will reappear in this thesis.
The MatLab code, that the software developed in this thesis and in the individual
courses, initially was based on, was handed out during the course “Computational Struc-
tural Modelling 1: The Finite Element Method” at DTU, and therefore not developed
during the thesis or individual courses but modified and rewritten to make it able work
with Grasshopper. The original MatLab code can be found at the GitHub link below.
The software developed during this thesis is not verified by any authority, therefore,
use of the plugin and the results it produces is at own risk, the author does not take any
responsibilities for the use.
The source code of the software developed, can be found on GitHub. The plugin files
can be downloaded, and the installation guide can be found at GitHub as well:
https://github.com/Lakris91/LivestockFEM
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the thesis supervisor Kristoffer Negendahl for his guid-
ance throughout the thesis and the individual courses.
The author would also like to thank CN3 for providing computer and office space, and
for showing interest in project.
Finally, the author would like to thank the students who tested and provided feedback
for the software, from the course ”11996 - Project work - Architectural Engineering” and
Egil Borchersen for sharing his knowledge on the history of Finite Element Method and
teaching methods.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Title Page
i
Abstract
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Prerequisites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Method
11
2.1
Literature Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Interviews and Usability Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Case Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Choice of Tools
13
3.1
Rhinoceros3D and Grasshopper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Web Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Livestock3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Finite Element Method
23
4.1
2D Frame Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Supports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
The Beam Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Local to Global Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.6
System Stiffness Matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.7
Load Vector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.8
Displacements and Reaction Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.9
Internal Forces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.10 Hinges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.11 Plotting the Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.12 Other Applications of FEM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Software Development
53
5.1
The MatLab Basis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
Data Exchange
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3
CPython FEM Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.4
Grasshopper Plugin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.5
Web Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6
Use Cases
93
6.1
Validation Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
6.2
Example of Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7
Discussion
101
7.1
Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7.2
Feedback Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
7.3
Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
7.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
8
Conclusion
109
Bibliography
112
A Original MatLab program
117
B CPython local module
123
C CPython main module
125
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The industrial revolution in the latter half of twentieth century, opened up for new
technologies, which gave unprecedented possibilities in the building industry. One of
these technologies was the Finite Element Method (FEM), this method made it possi-
ble to, among other things, to do structural analyses of complex structures, giving the
architects more design freedom, if utilized correctly. However, the building industry are
rarely ahead of the curve when it comes to new inventions, often first using the new
technologies years or even decades after the invention, Computer Aided Design (CAD)
is an example of this, as it first gained ground in the automotive industry [Cadazz, 2019].
FEM is another example, first rooted in aeronautics, and as for so many other inventions,
war is one of the greatest motivators when it comes to innovation.
During World War 2 the need for industrial mass production of military aircraft ex-
ploded. To be to able mass produce aircraft, it must be possible to assemble the aircraft
in smaller sections, instead of assembling the entire aircraft at once. This subdivision of
the aircraft made it possible to have multiple factories each working on their part of the
aircraft. The subdivision also resulted in the aircraft being composed of many smaller
parts, this made structural analysis a lot more complex, using traditional calculation
methods. However, discretizing the parts of the aircraft’s structure, for instance all the
small parts of a wing, into matrix formulations made it possible handle these complex
calculations, see figure 1.1. This led to at the end of the war, multiple research pro-
grammes and facilities, especially in the USA and UK, were initiated in the field, among
these was the Aeroelastic & Structures Research Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT). Some of the earliest work on finite element modelling pioneered
from this laboratory [Kurrer, 2008].
Matrices was not a new phenomenon by the time of World War 2, matrices as we
know them today was invented in 1858 by Arthur Cayley at Cambridge University, but
up until the 1930s had only rarely been used in science and technology. After World
War 1, the development in aircraft technology moved towards monoplanes instead of
biplanes, this meant lower drag and higher speeds, but also more flutter of the wings,
which increased the demands to the strength of the wing. The traditional non-matrix
methods for the complex aeroelastic calculations, were error prone and tedious to carry
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Test model of a wing and discretization of the wing into smaller structural parts, 1947,
by discretizing, the structural calculations became simpler compared the calculation on the entire wing
[Kurrer, 2008]
out by hand [Felippa, 2001].
Therefore, the Aerodynamics Division of the National
Physical Laboratory in the UK, intensified the research in using matrices. The research
lead to the publication of ”Elementary Matrices and some Applications to Dynamics and
Differential Equations.” in 1938 by Frazer, Duncan and Collar [Frazer et al., 1938]. The
book introduced a method for solving aeroelastic problems with matrices, it presented
many of the terms and notations we still use today. Frazer, Duncan and Collar’s book
laid the predominant foundation for the previously mentioned post World War 2 research
programmes [Kurrer, 2008].
Two discoveries are believed to have led to the FEM we know to today [Felippa,
2001], the first being the displacement and matrix-based description of the stiffness of
rectangular panels by John Argyris and triangular panels by Turner, Clough, Martin and
Topp in 1956. The new method, that assumed the displacements as unknown, could,
however, not compete with the traditional force method, in which the forces are assumed
unknown, requiring the structure to be statically determinate, this is when the number
of equilibrium equations equals or exceeds the number of unknowns. This means the
number of elements (see section 4.4) plus the number of reactions (see section 4.3) must
not exceed the number of joints times 2. To make the structure statically determinate, it
often requires simplifications and assumptions, making the theoretical structure deviate
from the actual structure, which can cause an increased margin of error. In figure 1.2 is
an example of a statically determinate and an indeterminate structure [Rohani, 2011].
The reason the new method could not compete with the force method was, that no
computer was able to handle the increased amount of simultaneous equations, that the
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
3
Figure 1.2: The truss to the right is statically indeterminate, as the number reactions plus, the number
elements, 4 + 11 = 15, are larger than two times the number of joints, 7 × 2 = 14 [Rohani, 2011]
new method required, due to the increased number of unknowns.
With the invention of the transistor in 1947 [Brinkman, Haggan, and Troutman,
1998], meant the start of the digital-computer revolution. In 1951 the first electronic
commercial computer, Univac I, was released, two years later IBM released their first
competitor the model 701, however both computers required specialists to program
them, as the language was specific to the computer model. But in 1957, IBM released
their model 704, with it came the first high-level language, a language able to run
different types of computers. FORTRAN I was a simple language, compared to earlier
programming languages, this meant engineers and scientists now had the possibility of
writing their own programs using punched cards, see figure 1.4.
The second discovery that led to the FEM as we know it, was the Direct Stiffness
Method (DSM), presented by M.J. Turner, the head of the Structural Dynamics Unit
at Boeing, in 1959, Turner also contributed to first discovery. DSM uses an element
stiffness matrix that when multiplied with the displacements, gives the internal forces
Figure 1.3: Univac 1, the first commercial electronic computer [Michael, 2019]
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.4: The IBM 704 computer (left), was the first computer offering a high-level programming
language, FORTRAN I, the programming was written on punched cards (right), a deck of cards was
fed in to a punched card reader that send the program to the computer for processing. [NASA, 2019,
Reinold, 2019]
of an element, as described in section 4.1. The method also introduces the system of
adding together expanded versions of the element stiffness matrices to form a stiffness
matrix for the entire system, as described in 4.6. DSM is a simple and elegant method
compared to previously used method, this made it easier to implement and to teach to
students, it still required a certain amount computer power, but already by the early
1960’s this was achievable [Felippa, 2001]. In 1960, the term ”finite element method”
was used for the first time by R. W. Clough, one of originators of the first of the two
discoveries that lead to FEM [Kurrer, 2008]. In the early 1960s the method expanded
into civil engineering, and by 1965 it had expanded into non-structural fields including
thermal and fluid dynamics, as well. In 1967 the first textbook on topic was released.
In the following decades FEM gained ground, however both the aeronautic and the
building industry remained divided between the new methods and the old force method
[Felippa, 2001]. The FEM programming were done on punched cards and there were
only very few computers able to do the calculations, most of those were placed at larger
universities. It was therefore a slow process of doing FEM calculation, when the pro-
gramming was done the punched cards were send to the nearest computer, where it
was queued up for calculations, the results could then be picked up a few days later, if
there were any errors in the code the programmer often had to start over. This is in
great contrast to contemporary programming, where you get your results instantly and
are helped through the debugging, this meant that it was mostly specialists using the
method, and there was only very little teaching in the subject [Borchersen, 2019]. As
the development of the computer in 1960s and 1970s meant smaller processors and the
ability to control the computer from a terminal (screen), the accessibility increased. Uni-
versities started setting up data bars with multiple desktop computers, making it easier
for students and researchers to get instant responds to their FEM programs. Releases of
==PAGE:17==
1 Introduction
5
the first FEM software packages (Abaqus, ANSYS etc.) [de Weck and Kim, 2019] along
with the release of AutoCAD in 1982, further increased the accessibility beacuse the
need for knowing the underlying calculations were no longer crucial, as the structures
could now be defined through user interfaces and digital drawings.
Coding FEM programs were up until the mid-1980s still a job for programming ex-
perts, as the available programming languages were extensive to use. In 1984 the first
version of the programming language MatLab (Matrix Laboratory) was released, it was
developed by professor in mathematics and computer science, Cleve Moler, he wanted
to give his students access to linear algebra, including matrix operations, through pro-
gramming, without them knowing FORTRAN [Moler, 2019]. The release of MatLab
made the teaching in FEM easier and encouraged more students to study and develop
their own FEM programs [Borchersen, 2019]. MatLab are still widely used in teachings
especially at engineering universities, however competing languages like Python are be-
coming more and more popular, especially due to it being open source, unlike MatLab,
and because it can be used for multiple non-mathematical purposes as well.
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The initial motivation that sparked the author’s interest in utilizing computational tools
for improving students engineering competences, was his own discontent with the theo-
retical approach practiced at many universities. This often led to the important technical
courses, becoming courses the author just had to get over with, without getting a good
understanding of the subject, some of these courses were the structural analysis courses.
Other courses relied on the students to be able to do structural analysis, in order to
make quality designs, therefore, other approaches had to be used, here computational
tools were often the solution.
The ability to do structural analyses and investigations is paramount when designing,
especially when focusing on a performance-based design.
With the increased focus,
across industries, on sustainability, optimizing structures with respect to, for instance,
materials savings is crucial. It is not only the environmental sustainability that are
gaining from the ability to optimize structures, the economical sustainability is often of
the, at least, same importance, especially for the building developers. Figure 1.5 is an
example on how investigating the design of a structure affects the forces, and thereby the
size of load carrying elements. It shows three possible arch roofs and the maximum axial
force under uniform vertical load. The curvature change between (a) and (b) halves the
maximum axial force, the maximum axial force is reduced to a third between (a) and
(c).
(a)
Fmax = 1500kN
(b)
Fmax = 750kN
(c)
Fmax = 500kN
Figure 1.5: Relation between roof shape and maximum axial force, under a uniform vertical load, as
it can be seen, even small changes in curvature results in large changes in axial forces, large axial forces
requires a large carrying structure, and thereby a large material consumption, which potentially can be
reduced by minimizing the axial forces [Mueller, 2014]
To get the optimal effect of the optimization, it must be introduced as early as
possible in the design phases. Major decisions regarding the geometry and properties
of the buildings are usually made during the first phases, with very little involvement
of structural engineers, these of are often first introduced in the last half of the design
process, or later, where the overall geometry is already decided, see figure 1.6, making
it difficult for the structural analyses to have any major impact on the design [Mueller,
2014].
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Motivation
7
Figure 1.6: Relationship between design freedom and design knowledge in building design projects,
structural engineers are often introduced in the project at point where the design is so locked, that it
is difficult for a structural analysis to have great impact on the design [Mueller, 2014].
To be able to do structural investigations early in the design process, the tools used for
the investigations must be easy to apply on even complex structures for both architects
and engineers. The historical motivation behind the development of FEM was to make it
easier and less error prone to do structural analysis on complex structures, by rethinking
the way the calculation were done and utilizing the available technology, in contrast to
the old force methods that required several equations to be carried out by hand often
with high risk of errors.
The motivation behind this thesis builds on top of the historical motivation about
increasing the accessibility to complex structural analysis. FEM should not only be
available for structural analysis specialists, designers with even very little experience
in structural analysis should be able to do it as well. There are multiple black box
FEM software packages on the market, but these are often expensive and extensive to
use, because of the many input parameters it requires to be able do the calculations,
in addition to this the programs rarely gives the users any insights of the underlying
calculations, making it difficult for the inexperienced user to know if all inputs are
specified correctly.
The current introductory teachings in structural analysis, at the Department of Civil
Engineering at DTU, focuses on the force method. Using the force method gives the
students some quantitative results, in which they are often struggling to assess the
correctness of. The structures used for the teachings are defined by the teacher, the
students are not taught in defining their own structures with everything that belongs to
that, supports and loads etc. This way of teaching does not train the students intuitive
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
understanding of structures, they get no visual representation of what for instance a
large bending moment or a specific load means for the deformation of the structure. If
the students are taught through physical or virtual models the students will get a better
intuitive understanding of how a structure will act under certain conditions [Emami and
Von Buelow, 2016]. There will still be a need for quantitative results, but with a good
intuitive understanding, it will be easier for students to check and validate their results.
A good example of using simple physical models for understanding structures, is when
investigating the length of a column’s effect on the risk of buckling, it simply requires
small slender sticks in different lengths, the load can be applied by hand as seen in
first picture in figure 1.7. Another example, is a continuous beam with multiple simple
supports, this can be modelled as a thin stick with some wooden blocks for supports,
this illustrates the way bending moments affects the deformation, see bottom picture in
figure 1.7.
Figure 1.7: Simple buckling test of sticks in different lengths (top), as it is seen, the risk of buckling
are strongly influenced by the length of the stick. The deformation of a continuous beam can also be
investigated by a simple physical model, the bending moments in the two middle supports, results in
beam getting a wave shape when load is a applied [Emami and Von Buelow, 2016]
In addition to the simple physical models illustrated in figure 1.7, more wide-ranging
physical structural modelling tools exists, Mola Structural Kit consists of magnetic
springs, beads, plates, corner locks and supports. With Mola Structural Kit it is pos-
sible to construct relatively complex structures, and test how the structure acts under
different load, see figure 1.8, this gives a great intuitive understanding of the structure,
and it does not require a lot of inputs like many FEM programs.
If the models could be build easy virtually, with as few inputs, or fewer, as the
physical model, it will make it possible to combine the intuitive understanding the
visual deformation gives, with the actual results and corresponding plots, in addition to
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Prerequisites
9
Figure 1.8: The Mola Structural Kit gives the opportunity to physically investigate the behavior of
both simple and complex structures [Mola, 2019].
the results it will also be possible to take the users through the underlying calculations
as they experiment with the boundary conditions, loads and supports etc. This could
improve the teachings and ideally give the students a good understanding of structural
behavior.
The teaching in finite element method at the Department of Civil Engineering at DTU,
presents a very mathematical and theoretical approach to the subject instead of a more
practical approach, causing great confusion and frustration among the students without
a great mathematical understanding of linear algebra. For the author the understanding
of FEM did not came through the teaching, but when implementing FEM during the
individual courses. Giving students the opportunity delve into the implementation, could
increase the students’ knowledge of FEM.
1.2
Prerequisites
As mentioned in the preface two preliminary studies, two individual courses, have been
carried out by the author, leading up to this thesis. The two individual courses were
initially not meant as a preliminary study for a thesis, however, the results proved to
have a potential for further work.
The first of the individual courses investigated the opportunity of linking and using ex-
ternal software from within the Rhino/Grasshopper environment (CAD Software and
parametric modelling plugin see more in section 3.1). The course resulted in a plugin
for Grasshopper, developed by the author of the thesis, linking MatLab to Grasshopper,
named LKplugin. The plugin worked for the tested cases, however the calculations in
MatLab were slow and unstable, making it difficult to run automated iterations and
get quick responses. The plugin had some limitations regarding user-friendliness, loads,
hinges and supports were for instance not visualized, making it difficult to know if the
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Introduction
loads were applied correctly etc. The plugin also had some limitation regarding possibil-
ities in structural analysis, for instance it was not possible to combine line loads or make
non-uniform line loads. However, the overall purpose of the course to link Grasshopper
to external software, proved to be simple way to get FEM into the early stages of a
design.
In the second individual course, the focus was on the further development of the plu-
gin, increasing the user friendliness, speed, stability and availability by, among others,
rewriting the finite element code to CPython by using the linear algebra library NumPy.
The plugin was developed to be a part of the Livestock3D software package developed
at DTU and was therefore renamed to LivestockFEM. The course resulted in a plugin
written in open-source code, CPython, rewriting significantly improved the computation
time and many of the instability issues were solved. Grasshopper components were up-
dated and new were added to improve the user-friendliness.
The plugin, LivestockFEM, developed during the individual courses, forms basis for the
software developed in this thesis. Even though plenty of changes will be introduced, the
general method of linking Grasshopper to external software will remain essentially the
same.
1.3
Problem Statement
There is a need for the designers in the early design phases of a project, architects
and engineers alike, to be able to do structural analyses and have a good intuitive
understanding of structures, to be able to make sustainable designs. But introductory
structural teaching, in its current form, focuses on the force method, which makes it
very laborious to do structural analyses on complex geometry. The teaching does not
support the students in getting a good intuitive understanding of structural behaviour,
which is necessary in order to understand and use the results of a structural analysis.
There is therefore a need for a simple tool able to do complex calculations, that can
give the students an intuitive understanding of structural behaviour, give them ability
to get some useful results and letting them delve into the underlying calculations and
implementations behind FEM, as they are experimenting with geometry and boundary
conditions of their structure.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Method
This thesis uses a range of methods in order to acquire the necessary knowledge of finite
element method and software development, and to validate and evaluate the implemen-
tation.
The methods used in this thesis are literature study, interviews, usability testing and
case studies.
2.1
Literature Study
Gathering information from different written sources has been conducted, in order to
gain the necessary knowledge for making a successful implementation of the FEM soft-
ware, this includes FEM theory textbooks and teaching materials [Nielsen, Forbes Olesen,
and Noe Poulsen, 2016, Emami and Von Buelow, 2016], it also includes documentation
for software packages and programming languages, along with forum posts. The litera-
ture study has also been used for studying experiences in teaching methods, in order to
set some appropriate goals for the implementation, to ensure the choices made in the
implementation are substantiated by sources and by that contributes to the validation
and evaluation of the implementation.
2.2
Interviews and Usability Testing
In addition to the literature study, interviews with teachers and students, testing of the
implementation by students and case studies have been conducted in order to validate
and evaluate the software.
Approximately three month into the development of LivestockFEM, it had reached a
state where it could be presented as an operative proof of concept for a group of students,
the students were asked to answer two surveys, one before they used the software to get
their preconditions for structural analysis, and one after to get their feedback and see if
they learned anything. In addition to the surveys, oral suggestions and questions were
noted down, noticeable issues or challenges in how they used the software was noted as
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Method
well. As the students were using LivestockFEM as a part 13-week project period, the
teacher of the course was interviewed about where in his experience the challenges and
issues for the students was.
An interview was also conducted with a professor with more than 50 years of experience
in FEM and teaching structural analysis. He was interviewed about both the develop-
ment in FEM and structural analysis, and how it has been taught in his time as professor,
including where the greatest challenges were, through the years.
2.3
Case Studies
A selection of case studies has been conducted, these have been done in order to demon-
strate and test the possibilities of the software, including an optimization algorithm in
Grasshopper. Case studies was also done in order to validate the results LivestockFEM
provides, this was done by comparing the results, with results from cases previously
done in other FEM software.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Choice of Tools
3.1
Rhinoceros3D and Grasshopper
Rhinoceros3D (Rhino), developed by Robert McNeel & Associates, is a Computer Aided
Design (CAD) software, similar to the well-known AutoCAD, but where AutoCAD has
it forces in 2D drawings, Rhino also offers a strong 3D modelling experience, at a sig-
nificantly lower price, making it popular tool especially among designers and architects.
But 3D modelling and a low price are not the only assets of Rhino, the plugin Grasshop-
per offers the user an environment for doing parametric modelling and analysis through
visual programming, programming with graphical element opposite to traditional tex-
tual programming, see figure 3.1. The visual programming interface for Grasshopper,
gives the opportunities to create complex parametric algorithms without knowing pro-
gramming. The ability to define your subject for an analysis parametrically, gives the
opportunity to quickly try out several design proposals. Even more importantly it is
possible to iterate through possible designs, by either manually running through every
combination or by using one of the many solvers available for Grasshopper, making find-
ing the optimal solution for your design possible. Grasshopper also offers IronPython,
C# (C Sharp) and Visual Basic editors, see figure 3.1, making it possible to code your
own definitions and plugins, this is supported by a well-documented API (Application
Programming Interface), and a very active community.
In the first special course that lead to this thesis, the initial goal was to develop a
method for linking external software with Grasshopper. Initially the software that was
linked with Grasshopper was MatLab in the form of a finite element program for 2D
frame structures, which calculates displacement, reaction forces, normal forces, shear
forces, bending moments and plots the corresponding figures. The frame structure was
defined by seven different matrices, making it difficult for users, with only a little or no
experience in the finite element method, to perform even simple calculations. The idea
behind linking the MatLab program to Grasshopper, was to make it possible to define
your frame structure by simple lines in Rhino or parametrically in Grasshopper, and
then generate the needed matrices by easy-to-use components, doing the latter makes it
possible to optimize the structure as previously described.
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Choice of Tools
Figure 3.1: Comparison of IronPython editor and the Grasshopper visual programming interface,
both generates a sine wave in Rhino, the components in Grasshopper can contain a single function
performing simple operations, but also larger algorithms performing are series of operations [Mode Lab,
2019].
Other FEM plugins with many features already exist for Grasshopper, however none
of these are particularly aimed at students, making them relative extensive to use without
any underlying knowledge of FEM. The most prominent is Karamba3D [Preisinger and
Heimrath, 2014] which is a commercialized FEM plugin, that offers many of the same
features and possibilities as larger commercial FEM software packages (ANSYS, Abaqus
and Autodesk Robot etc.), from inside the Grasshopper environment. Another FEM
plugin for Grasshopper, K2Engineering [Brandt-Olsen, 2016], builds upon another plugin
Kangaroo2, which is a physics simulator, developed as a form-finding tool, that uses
dynamic relaxation, which is a method that works similar to the direct stiffness method in
FEM, however the unknowns are found numerically through iterations until it converges,
instead of matrix systems.
For form-finding purposes Kangaroo2 is often used with
arbitrary stiffnesses, the behaviour of a structure in in Kangaroo2, is determined by
sets of goals (rules), that defines where the particles of the structure want to move to
and how strongly they want to get there. K2Engineering calibrates these goals and sets
the stiffnesses in regards to structural properties, so that Kangaroo2 can be used for
structural analysis as well [Brandt-Olsen, 2016, Piker, 2019].
Salamander is a plugin for Grasshopper, developed by Ramboll, linking Autodesk’s
FEM software, Robot Structural Analysis, to Grasshopper, making it possible to define
geometry and boundary conditions, loads and supports etc., from Grasshopper, and then
run the analysis in Robot Structural Analysis [Jeffries, 2017]. But Autodesk’s products
are very expensive, which limits the accessibility of the plugin. As with the other the
previously mentioned FEM plugins, Salamander is not aimed at students new to FEM
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Rhinoceros3D and Grasshopper
15
or structural analysis in general, meaning there are no simplifications or explanations
on how FEM works. Salamander does not work as a live or a dynamic link between
Grasshopper and Robot Structural Analysis, that lets the user see the instant effects
of the changes committed. Instead the user has to move in and out the two software,
exporting and importing data files manually, which hinders the process of learning an
intuitive understanding of structural behavior, it also eliminates the possibilities to do
optimization algorithms in Grasshopper.
Other designing tools have developed their own Grasshopper-like visual programming
interface, most prominent is Autodesk, with their Dynamo developed for their Building
Information Model (BIM) software Revit. Dynamo offers many of the same features as
Grasshopper, including an IronPython editor. Revit, however, has its clear limitations
when comes to geometry, compared to Rhino, making it difficult to do form-finding and
optimization structures. Revit/Dynamo does have some advantages, as the BIM models
contains a lot of information on materials, cross-sections and other parameters influenc-
ing a structural analysis. These information makes it easy to define material parameters
and dead loads, as they can be extracted directly from the model, instead of defined
explicitly as it is necessary in Rhino/Grasshopper.
Figure 3.2: Dynamo uses a visual programming interface very similar to Grasshopper, here Dynamo is
generating a sine wave [Pierson and Mode Lab, 2018], very similar to the method used in Grasshopper,
see figure 3.1.
The focus in this thesis is to help student improve their knowledge of structural
analysis by training their intuitive understanding, through experimentation, Rhino/-
Grasshopper is therefore considered more suitable for this purpose. The FEM software
developed in this thesis is written in CPython, and therefore works independent of Rhi-
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Choice of Tools
no/Grasshopper. The Grasshopper part, is written in IronPython, it will therefore be
relatively straightforward to expand LivestockFEM to work with Revit/Dynamo.
3.2
Web Application
The method used for linking Grasshopper to external software requires the external soft-
ware to be installed locally on the computer. This limits the accessibility of the software,
as this can be time consuming and extensive, if the software is only occasionally used.
Therefore, it was decided to develop a web application in addition to the Grasshopper
plugin. The web application also gives the possibility of visually and textually explain-
ing the underlying calculations behind FEM, which will be difficult to achieve with
Grasshopper alone. The input-file will still be generated in Grasshopper, but instead of
the calculations being run locally, they are now run on a webserver with the necessary
software installed. The results will be plotted on a web interface, that also gives the
user the opportunity to commit changes to the structure and boundary conditions, and
get the results of the changes instantly, both visually and quantitatively.
3.3
Programming
The software developed in this thesis is composed by three different parts:
• The FEM module reads an input-file, runs the FEM calculations, and writes a
result-file.
• The Rhino/Grasshopper part defines the geometry and boundary conditions, writes
an input-file, runs the FEM module, and reads the result-file and then plots the
results.
• The Web Application runs the FEM module on a webserver and generates interac-
tive plots from the results, it then lets the users perform changes and modifications
to structure, while the plots are continuously updated. Finally, it explains and
visualizes the underlying calculations behind the results.
3.3.1
Grasshopper Plugin
Embedded in Grasshopper are, as previously mentioned, three programming language
editors, that lets you write your own components, the programming languages available
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Programming
17
are C#, Visual Basic (VB) and IronPython. All three languages are based on Microsoft’s
.NET Framework, which can be seen as a layer between applications and the operating
system that handles the allocation of memory, to ease the developing process. Being
based on .NET limits the languages from being able to do matrix calculations, this is
the reason why it is necessary to create the link to CPython in order to do matrix-based
FEM calculations through the library NumPy. CPython is based on C and are able
to do matrix calculations with NumPy package installed. C# and VB both being a
part of the .NET family of languages, offers close to the same possibilities within the
Grasshopper environment.
Grasshopper were initially written in a combination of VB and C#. Which means
they tend to be faster than IronPython as they do not have to be interpreted first. This
also means that C# and VB has historically been the most used by expert developers,
therefore large amount help can be found in the Grasshopper community, however the
developer, McNeel, has the later year developed IronPython into being a more inte-
grated part of Grasshopper, this includes the ability to compile the code to the native
Grasshopper assembly/plug-in format, gha, this has until the release of Rhino 6 in 2018
only been possible in C# and VB [Heumann, 2019].
IronPython is an implementation of the ”classical” Python language, CPython, writ-
ten in C#, to get access to the .NET Framework through the Python syntax. The
Python language (mostly CPython) is the most popular programming language among
software engineers and the one that grows the fastest, due to, among other things, the
constant release of new packages, extending the possibilities of the language [Rayome,
2019]. Some advantages of using IronPython over C# and VB are listed below [Heumann,
2019].
• Python’s loop syntax, list comprehensions and the fact that it is not necessary to
explicitly defining variable types, makes it possible to make very short and concise
codes.
• Python is created with intention of it being easy to read and write, it has very
clear syntax and does not require lots of punctuation, like semicolons after each
line, instead it utilizes significant whitespace, like indents, forcing the programmer
to write easily readable code.
• The RhinoScriptSyntax module is only available in Python, the module contains
a variety of operations, that makes the most useful functions in Rhino available,
through a simple and easy-to-use syntax.
• IronPython and CPython, uses the same syntax, which means the data written into
the input-file and result-file, uses the same format, which have the advantage that
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Choice of Tools
it can be read directly by both languages, which entails an simpler implementation
of the link between Grasshopper and CPython.
The above-mentioned advantages in combination with the author having greater
experience with Python, led to IronPython being used for the plugin. All features of the
plugin are written in IronPython, except from parts of the visualizations which utilizes
native Grasshopper components.
3.3.2
FEM Module
As previously described the original FEM code, LivestockFEM is based upon, was writ-
ten in MatLab. The first version of the Grasshopper plugin linked to the MatLab code
and were able to perform the FEM calculations and return the results, however the link
was unstable and slow, making it tedious and troublesome to perform experiments with
the structure. Other downsides of the code written in MatLab, was that the data from
Grasshopper had to be translated from IronPython syntax to MatLab syntax and that
MatLab is an expensive commercial software that must be run from inside its own editor.
Therefore, it was decided to rewrite the FEM code to another programming language.
CPython was chosen, due to a range of advantages.
• The very readable and concise syntax makes Python a good beginner language,
that is often the first students are taught at universities, this increases the avail-
ability and lets students delve into the implementation.
• It has a large built-in standard library, but also, mainly because it is open source,
an enormous number of external libraries are available, making it one of the fastest
growing programming languages.
• The library NumPy for Python offers a well-documented, comprehensive and easy-
to-use package of matrix operations, among other mathematical functions.
• The link to IronPython can be done directly, as it does not need to be translated,
the link also performs a lot faster, giving instant feedback to the changes the user
does to a structure.
• External library packages making it possible to do interactive plotting and graph-
ics without knowing JavaScript and/or HTML. Packages making it easy setting
up webservers from within Python are also available. This means a FEM web ap-
plication can be setup within the same code, without the need to switch between
programming languages. More on this in section 3.3.3.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Programming
19
Other programming languages like Java, JavaScript and C++, could give many of the
same opportunities, some might even give more. However these are not as readable and
simple as Python , as shown in figure 3.3, where two code blocks, one in Java, the most
popular programming language, and one in Python, the fastest growing programming
language [Hyperion Development, 2019].
The code blocks perform the same action,
adding three strings (text objects) to an empty list and then prints the list. Both code
blocks have the same output, even though they look slightly different, this is because in
Java the list is specified as a list of strings, while in Python the list can contain any type
of data, the strings are therefore still shown with quotation marks. The simplicity and
readability of Python means it supports the goal of this thesis, to make FEM available
for all, to a greater extent than the other languages.
Java
1 // Import ArrayList library
2 import java.util.ArrayList;
3
4 // Initialize main method
5 public class Main {
6 public static void main(String[]
args)
7
{
8
// Initialize list of strings
9
ArrayList <String> a1 = new
ArrayList <String >();
10
11
// Add strings to list
12
a1.add("a");
13
a1.add("b");
14
a1.add("c");
15
16
// Print the list
17
System.out.println(a1);
18
}
19 }
OUT: [a,b,c]
Python
1 # Initialize empty list independent
of object types
2 a1 = []
3
4 # Add strings to list
5 a1.append("a")
6 a1.append("b")
7 a1.append("c")
8
9 # Print the list
10 print(a1)
OUT: ['a','b','c']
Figure 3.3: Comparison of two of the most popular programming languages Java and Python, both
adds three strings, to an empty list and prints the list. As it can be seen Python has a very simple
syntax, free from explicitly defined variable types and punctuation, making Python code very short,
concise and readable compared to other languages [Perception System, 2019].
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Choice of Tools
3.3.3
Web Application
The Web Application have the purpose to run the FEM module on a webserver, visualize
the result textually and graphically with plots, let user do changes to their structure
and explain and visualize the underlying calculations behind the results.
The first task was to select a web framework from within the web application would
be developed. Two frameworks were taken into consideration, Django and Flask, both
working with Python, the latter were chosen because it was considered easier to use
as it is more stripped down and simple, this however means, it by default gives fewer
opportunities. The author had only a very limited experience with web development,
therefore simplicity was chosen over features.
For handling and setting up the web server, the Gunicorn (Green Unicorn) package was
used, as this was the one used in most Flask guides and tutorials. For hosting the web
server, Heroku, was chosen as it offers a very simple semi-automatic deployment method
through GitHub. All other cloud services encountered, required a more manual method
for deploying the server.
The web application consists of three parts, the FEM module previously described,
the plotting module that visualizes the structure, boundary conditions and the results,
and the websites layout module, that sets up the graphical interface of the website and
contains input fields for user inputs and explanations of the underlying FEM calculations.
For the plotting module, different possibilities were considered, the Matplotlib library
offers easy-to-use plotting in Python, but it is limited when it comes to let the user
interact with the plots. Writing the plotting module in JavaScript would offer almost
unlimited graphical possibilities, but even if using one of the many graphing libraries,
it would still be quite extensive to do, as it requires switching between languages and
because the author only have very little experience with JavaScript. The choice fell
on the PlotLy package for Python, this gives easy access to the JavaScript graphing
package of the same name through Python, without knowing JavaScript, PlotLy offers
a long range of graphing opportunities, including letting the user interact with the plots,
for instance zoom, clicking and hover over elements for information.
The developers behind PlotLy has also developed the Dash library, this gives, among
other things, the possibility to do HTML coding from within Python, therefore it was
chosen for the website layout module, this meant that the entire web application could
be kept in Python, which facilitates the development, as it is also in Python the author
has the far most experience and because you do not have to switch between different
languages.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Livestock3D
21
3.4
Livestock3D
The plugin is developed as a part of the Livestock project at DTU which is an open source
package linking Rhino/Grasshopper and Revit/Dynamo to CPython, more information
and guide to install the Livestock environment can be found here:
https://livestock3d.github.io/
The software used for the development of the plugin are:
• Rhinoceros 5 SR14 64-bit
• Grasshopper 0.9.0076 plugin for Rhinoceros
• GHPython 0.6.0.3 plugin for Grasshopper3D
• Python 3.6 with NumPy (v1.14.5)
The plugin for Grasshopper has been tested on Rhino 6 SR13, with Grasshopper
1.0.0007 and GHPython 6.13 without finding any issues.
==PAGE:34==
22
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Finite Element Method
The Finite Element Method or FEM is a computer-based numerical calculation method,
it is widely used for calculation of stresses, forces, deformations and other subjects of
structural analysis, it can also be used in other fields of study such as computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) and heat transfer simulations. The finite element method works by
rationalizing the geometry of the subject of the analysis, for instance a building structure,
this is done by subdividing the geometry into multiple simple isoparametric elements
that are easier to perform calculations on, hence the name, these elements are typical
lines, triangles or squares, but other polygonal shapes can be used for certain types of
FEM simulations as well, including volumetric shapes. Working with these, except from
lines, often requires the subject of the calculations to be in form of a mesh, which is a
way of rationalizing geometry into multiple planar elements, defined by vertices, edges
and faces, see figure 4.1, here it is seen that the geometry is divided into triangular
polygons, this is called a triangulation. The calculations in FEM are initially done on
Figure 4.1: FEM used for displacement analysis in ANSYS Workbench. The geometry is rationalized
by subdividing it into triangular planar panels, this makes it possible to perform calculations on each
triangle, and combining them in large matrices to find displacements in the entire geometry [AutoFEM,
2019].
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Finite Element Method
the simple individual elements in vector and matrix-systems, these matrices and vectors
are then combined into a system vectors and matrices based on the relations between
the elements, this way the forces and deformations can be found for the entire system.
FEM is widely used in many industries, especially in mechanical engineering and civil
engineering, due to its ability in handling large and/or complex structures, for instance,
in mechanical engineering, a strength analysis of complex motor parts etc. There is
several providers of commercial FEM-software on the market, some of the largest de-
velopers are Dassault (Abaqus), ANSYS and Autodesk, all of which offers black box
software, software that does not require any knowledge of the underlying calculations,
for multiple types of FEM analyses, including structural analysis (Autodesk Robot, AN-
SYS CivilFEM etc.) and computational fluid dynamics (Abaqus/CFD, ANSYS Fluent
etc.).
Examples and figures the following sections is taken from or based upon examples and
figures in “Bærende Konstruktioner 4”[Nielsen, Forbes Olesen, and Noe Poulsen, 2016]
unless otherwise stated.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 2D Frame Structures
25
4.1
2D Frame Structures
The software developed in this thesis focuses on 2D frame structures, using linear beam
elements and the direct stiffness method (DSM) for the implementation of FEM.
A frame structure consists of a collection of nodes and elements, the nodes are all the
points of interest in the structure- The beams are linear elements, that are defined by
a start node and an end node. Supports (see section 4.3) and hinges (see section 4.10)
can only be placed in these nodes. The same is the case for point loads, if there is a
point load in the middle of a straight beam a node for this purpose must be placed
there and the element split in to two elements as seen in figure 4.2. The method used in
this thesis uses elements with six degrees of freedom, this is elaborated in section 4.1.2,
this means it includes moment forces in the calculations, making it possible to simulate
the real life behavior of structures. Even though structures in practice are, mostly, in
3D, structural analysis are often done in 2D by making planar sections in the structure
and then project, the structures between the section planes, onto the plane, meaning for
instance a surface load in 3D can be seen as a line load in 2D, more on this in section
4.2.
Figure 4.2: Example of a simple frame structure, consisting of three elements, pinned supports in
node 1 and 4 and a vertical node load in negative y-direction placed in node 2 (left). In the figure to the
right, the node displacements (degrees of freedom) can be seen, each node has a displacement parallel
to the x-axis, one parallel to the y-axis and one describing the counter clockwise rotation around the
node. This frame will be used as a recurring example throughout this section.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Finite Element Method
4.1.1
Direct Stiffness Method
DSM is the most common implementation of FEM, due to its simplicity compared to
other methods. In DSM the system can be seen as a system of springs where Hooke’s
law of springs, (1), can be applied.
F = kx
(1)
Here F is the force needed to extend or compress the string, k is the spring constant,
the stiffness of the spring, and x is the extension or compression, the deformation of the
spring. DSM uses this linear relation between deformation (displacements) and Forces
in its pivotal relation.
r = kv
(2)
Where r is a vector containing the internal forces of an element, k is the stiffness
matrix that defines the stiffness an element or the system, and v is the vector containing
the displacements [De, 2019].
4.1.2
Degrees of Freedom
The degrees of freedom or node displacements, describes every movement a structure
makes, as previously mentioned, the method used in this thesis uses six degrees of
freedom for each element, this means we have, at least, three node displacements for
each node, one that describes the displacement in the x-axis of the coordinate system,
one that describes the displacement in the y-axis and one, or more (see section on hinges
4.10), that describes the counter clockwise rotation around the node, see figure 4.2. The
node displacements of a system can be put up in a system displacement vector, V.
VT =
[
V1
. . .
VN
]
(3)
Where N is the number of node displacements in the system. The example in figure
4.2 has 12 node displacements, this gives us the following system displacement vector.
VT =
[
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10
V11
V12
]
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Loads
27
4.2
Loads
Loads are forces acting on the structure, these forces can come from multiple places, and
can both be static and dynamic. The most commonly used loads are dead loads, live
loads and wind loads. Dead load are the static vertical load from the structure’s own
weight, a structure must always be able to carry it self, it is there for a regular part
of a structural analysis. Live loads are vertical loads, that depends on the use of the
structure, for buildings it is usually the weight of the people and furniture occupying
the building. Wind loads are horizontal loads inflicted by the wind around the structure.
In northern countries or in countries with high risk of earthquakes, loads from snow and
earthquakes must also be taken in to consideration [Rahman, 2019].
In 3D structural analysis loads can be surface loads, usually in N/m2, line loads,
usually in N/m or point loads, usually in N. As mentioned in section 4.1, surface loads
can be projected on to the plane in which the 2D structure lies by multiplying with
length of the surface going out from the plane, the same is case for line loads, if a line
load is perpendicular to the plane, it can seen as a point load by multiplying with length
of line load. This can be seen in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Surface load translated to a line load by multiplying with the width, b. Line load translated
to a point load by multiplying with with length, l. [Schwartz, 2019]
The method used in this thesis, supports two types of loads, element loads and node
loads. Element loads are uniformly distributed line loads, applied to the entire beam
element, the direction of the load is specified by a x- and a y-component in the local
coordinate system of the beam. Node loads are a point loads working on a specific node
in the system, the direction of the node load is specified based on the node displacement,
this means the vertical node load in figure 4.2 is specified at node displacement V5, if
the load was horizontal it would be at V4, for angled loads, the x- and the y-component
of the direction-vector corresponds to a horizontal and a vertical load, respectively.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Finite Element Method
4.3
Supports
The method used in this thesis allows four different types of supports: Fixed-, pinned-,
roller- and guided support. Supports consists of sets of reaction forces, counteracting
the load forces applied to the structure, securing the structure stays in place.
For
the structure to stay in place, it must be in equilibrium, this means the sum of the
horizontal and vertical reactions must be equal to sum of the horizontal and vertical
loads, respectively, but with opposite sign.
4.3.1
Fixed
Figure 4.4:
Fixed support
and related reaction forces.
Fixed supports, also called rigid or cantilevered support,
locks the structure in both the x-direction, y-direction and
against rotation. This means the structure is unable to move
up or down and from side to side in the supported node, it
also stops the structure from rotating around the node. To
prevent the structure from moving and rotating in the node,
the support counteracts on the load forces applied to the structure. The method used
in this thesis, specifies the reaction forces’ directions as shown in figure 4.4. Positive
x-reactions means the structure would move left in the node, if it was not supported.
Positive y-reactions means the structure will move downwards in the node, if it was not
supported. Positive moment-reactions means the structure will rotate clockwise around
the node if it was not supported. Examples of fixed supports in practice can be seen in
figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Three examples of fixed supports [Carigliano, 2016, Anupoju, 2019].
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Supports
29
4.3.2
Pinned
Figure 4.6:
Pinned support
and related reaction forces.
Pinned supports, supports the structure in both the x-
direction and the y-direction, but not against rotation. Mak-
ing the structure unable to move up or down and from side
to side in the supported node, but lets the structure rotate
around the node. Pinned supports uses the same direction
for the reactions as the fixed support. In practice pinned
supports does not necessarily mean it is hinged, this is elaborate in section 4.10. Exam-
ples of pinned supports in practice can be seen in figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Three examples of pinned supports [Boake, 2019, Anupoju, 2019].
4.3.3
Roller
Figure 4.8:
Roller support
and related reaction forces.
Roller supports, supports the structure in only one direction
either the x-direction or the y-direction, it do not support
against rotation. This makes the structure unable to move
either up or down or from side to side in the supported node,
but lets the structure rotate around the node. Roller sup-
ports uses the same direction for the reactions as the fixed
and pinned supports. Even though often illustrated as supports with wheels under it, it
is rarely the case, instead it is mostly used for bridge bearings that lets the bridge deck
move slightly back and forth to accommodate fluctuations and vibrations. Examples of
roller supports in practice can be seen in figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Three examples of roller supports [Mageba, 2019, Jingtong, 2019, Anupoju, 2019].
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Finite Element Method
4.3.4
Guided
Figure 4.10: Guided support
and related reaction forces.
Guided supports, supports the structure in only one direc-
tion either the x-direction or the y-direction and supports
against rotation. Making the structure unable to move ei-
ther up or down or from side to side in the supported node,
and prevents the structure from rotating around the node.
Guided supports uses the same direction for the reactions
as the other three support types. It is rarely used in civil engineering, some examples
from other fields, are unhinged shock-absorbers, hydraulic pumps or elliptic springs like
on a horse carriage, see figure 4.11, these makes the carriage able to only move up and
down.
Figure 4.11: The wheel suspension of a horse carriage is an example of a guided support [Deb, 2010].
4.3.5
Defining the Supports
Like the loads, the reaction forces in the supports, corresponds to the node displacements.
In the example in figure 4.2, we see the system have two pinned supports, one in node 1
and one in node 4. This means the system will be unable to move in the x-direction and
in the y-direction, in these two supported nodes. The node displacements corresponding
to the supports are V1, V2, V10 and V11, these will all be equal to 0 as they will not be
able to move.
VT
s =
[
V1
V2
V10
V11
]
=
[
0
0
0
0
]
==PAGE:43==
4.4 The Beam Element
31
4.4
The Beam Element
A frame structure consists of a system of beam elements, with two nodes and six local
node displacements (or degrees of freedom) three for each node, where the first three
node displacements describes the displacement in the local x-direction, the displacement
in the local y-direction and the rotation around the node, respectively, in the first node.
The last three describes the local displacements in the second node of the element, see
figure 4.12. E is the elastic modulus which is a material constant, A is the cross section
area of the beam and I is the moment of inertia, which is specific to the shape of the
cross section.
The six degrees of freedom is local for the element, this means the local x-direction
is tangential to the element and the local y-direction is the perpendicular normal of the
element. The node displacements for the element can be put up in a vector vℓ. The
local node forces, rℓ, can be organized in a similar way, the relation to the internal forces
can be seen as well.
rℓ=


F ℓ
1x
F ℓ
1y
T1
F ℓ
2x
F ℓ
2y
T2


=


−N(0)
V (0)
−M(0)
N(L)
−V (L)
M(L)


(4)
vℓ=


uℓ
1x
uℓ
1y
θ1
uℓ
2x
uℓ
2y
θ2


(5)
Figure 4.12: The Beam Element’s reaction vector, rℓ, is composed of the horizontal reactions in the
direction of the beams x-axis, xℓ, the vertical reactions in the direction of the beams y-axis, yℓ, and
the counter clockwise moment reactions. These can be translated into the beams internal forces, the
normal forces (axial forces), N, the shear forces, V and the bending moment, M. The six local node
displacements forms the local displacement vector, vℓ, the direction of the displacements are the same
as the direction of the reactions.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Finite Element Method
The stiffness of an element is described by an element stiffness matrix. The element
stiffness matrix in the local coordinate system, kℓ, can be put up row- and column-wise
by setting a node displacement equal to 1 and the rest of node displacements equal to 0,
as shown in figure 4.13, the corresponding rows and columns are highlighted in element
stiffness matrix in (6).
kℓ=
EA
L
0
0
−EA
L
0
0
0
12EI
L3
6EI
L2
0
−12EI
L3
6EI
L2
0
6EI
L2
4EI
L
0
−6EI
L2
2EI
L
−EA
L
0
0
EA
L
0
0
0
−12EI
L3
−6EI
L2
0
12EI
L3
−6EI
L2
0
6EI
L2
2EI
L
0
−6EI
L2
4EI
L




uℓ
1x = 1
uℓ
1y = 1
θ1 = 1
uℓ
2x = 1
uℓ
2y = 1
θ2 = 1
uℓ
1x = 1 uℓ
1y = 1
θ1 = 1
uℓ
2x = 1 uℓ
2y = 1
θ2 = 1
(6)
Figure 4.13: By setting node displacements to 1, one at the time, the rows and columns of the element
stiffness matrix, kℓ, can be found. This figure shows two examples, setting the vertical displacement of
the first node to 1 and the moment around the first node to 1, respectively. The corresponding rows
and column are highlighted in element stiffness matrix in (6)
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Local to Global Transformation
33
4.5
Local to Global Transformation
All the beam elements’ node displacements, reaction forces and stiffness matrices de-
scribed in the previous section, are in the beam element’s local coordinate system, where
the direction of the axes is determined by the direction of the beam element, meaning
the x-axis is the tangent and the y-axis normal of the beam element, see xℓand yℓin
figure 4.14. To be able set up a matrix system for the entire frame structure, the beam
elements must share the same global coordinate system, see x and y in figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: In order to to calculate on the combined system of beams, the beams must share the
same coordinate system, a global coordinate system with axes x and y. The local coordinate system of
a beam, has the axes xℓand yℓ, for each beam a transformation matrix, A, must be found to translate
local displacements, reaction forces and stiffness matrices to the global coordinate system.
In horizontal beam elements, for instance beam element 1 and 2 in figure 4.2, the
local coordinate system is the same as the global i.e.:
v = vℓ
r = rℓ
k = kℓ
(7)
Where v, r and k are the displacements, reactions and the element stiffness matrix
of a beam element respectively, in the global coordinate system.
For non-horizontal beam elements, a transformation is needed, the relation between
the local and the global displacements can be seen in relation (9) where A is the transfor-
mation matrix. The transformation matrix, A, is defined from the normalized (vector
where the length equals 1) direction vector of the element, n, the direction vector is
found by subtracting the first node from the second, and normalized by dividing it by
length of the vector. nx and ny are the x-component and y-component of n, respectively.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Finite Element Method
A horizontal beam therefore has nx = 1 and ny = 0, which when inserted to A forms an
identity matrix, there will therefore be no transformation, as expected, when multiply-
ing with A.
n =

nx
ny


(8)
The relation between the local and the global reactions, rℓand r, are, as seen in (9),
the same as the relation between local and global displacements, vℓand v. Global to
local transformation is done by multiplying by the transformation matrix A, to get from
local to global, the vector is multiplied with the transposed transformation matrix AT.
vℓ= A v
⇔
v = AT vℓ
rℓ= A r
⇔
r = AT rℓ
(9)
The transformation of the element stiffness matrix from local to global is done by first
multiplying with the transposed transformation matrix then the regular transformation
matrix, as seen in (11) where k is the global element stiffness matrix:
A =


nx
ny
0
0
0
0
−ny
xx
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
nx
ny
0
0
0
0
−ny
nx
0
0
0
0
0
0
1


(10)
k = ATkℓA
(11)
Looking at figure 4.2 we can find the global element stiffness matrix, k, for the beam
element by using the method described above. First the local element stiffness matrix,
kℓ, is found for all the elements as described in figure 4.13. As beam element 1 and 2
are both horizontal, have same length and the same material parameters, their stiffness
matrices are identical.
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Local to Global Transformation
35
kℓ
1 = kℓ
2 = 5 · 105 ×


600
0
0
−600
0
0
0
12
12
0
−12
12
0
12
16
0
−12
8
−600
0
0
600
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
12
−12
0
12
8
0
−12
16


kℓ
3 = 5 · 105 ×


300
0
0
−300
0
0
0
1.5
3
0
−1.5
3
0
3
8
0
−3
4
−300
0
0
300
0
0
0
−1.5
−3
0
1.5
−3
0
3
4
0
−3
8


The local element stiffness matrices is then transformed to the global coordinate
system as previously described. kℓ
1 and kℓ
2 are horizontal and are therefore multiplied
by an identity matrix, meaning they are not transformed.
k1 = kℓ
1
k2 = kℓ
2
kℓ
3 needs to be transformed by the transformation matrix A3, defined by the normal-
ized direction vector, nT
3 =
[
nx3
ny3
]
=
[
0
1
]
.
A3 =


0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1


k3 = AT
3 kℓ
3A3 = 5 · 105 ×


1.5
0
3
−1.5
0
3
0
300
0
0
−300
0
3
0
8
−3
0
4
−1.5
0
−3
1.5
0
−3
0
−300
0
0
300
0
3
3
4
−3
0
8


==PAGE:48==
36
4 Finite Element Method
4.6
System Stiffness Matrix
When the global element stiffness matrix has been found for every element in the system,
the matrices can be put together in a system stiffness matrix K. How the matrices are put
together depends on which elements shares nodes and node displacements, the element
stiffness matrices gets expanded to a matrix, Ke, with the size of the system stiffness
matrix, which is a N × N matrix where N is the total number of node displacements in
the system. The element stiffness matrix is expanded by filling in rows and columns of
0s into the rows and columns, that corresponds to the node displacements that are not a
part of the element. The rest of the rows and columns are ordered so each cell position
in the unexpanded matrix match the cell position of the expanded based on the node
displacements. Looking at beam element number 2, in figure 4.2, it has the element
stiffness matrix, k2, with the six node displacements, V4, V5, V6, V7, V8 and V9, this must
be expanded to the a N × N size matrix, N is the total number of node displacements
in the system. The expansion of the element stiffness matrix looks as following.
k2 = 5 · 105 ×
600
0
0 −600
0
0
0
12
12
0
−12
12
0
12
16
0
−12
8
−600
0
0
600
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
12
−12
0
12
8
0
−12
16




V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
K2 = 5 · 105×
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
600
0
0 −600
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
12
0
−12
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
16
0
−12
8
0
0
0
0
0
0 −600
0
0
600
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
12
−12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
8
0
−12
16
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0




V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10
V11
V12
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10
V11
V12
==PAGE:49==
4.6 System Stiffness Matrix
37
The system stiffness matrix, K, is found by combining all the expanded stiffness
matrices, Ke, this is done by simply adding them together.
K =
∑
Ke
(12)
For the example in figure 4.2, when the rest of the expanded element stiffness matrices
is found, K1 and K3, they are added together to find the system stiffness matrix, the
contribution from the first element is marked blue, the second element red and the third
element green. As it can be seen the overlapping areas are added together.
K = K1 + K2 + K3
= 5 · 105×
600
0
0 −600
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
12
0
−12
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
16
0
−12
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
−600
0
0
1200
0
0 −600
0
0
0
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
24
0
0
−12
12
0
0
0
0
12
8
0
0
32
0
−12
8
0
0
0
0
0
0 −600
0
0 601.5
0
3
−1.5
0
3
0
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
312
−12
0 −300
0
0
0
0
0
12
8
3
−12
24
−3
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1.5
0
−3
1.5
0
−3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 −300
0
0
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
4
−3
0
8




V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10
V11
V12
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10
V11
V12
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Finite Element Method
4.7
Load Vector
The system load vector, F, is a vector with the size of N, where N is number of node
displacements in the system, it is composed by the sum of all the loads based on global
node displacements. The contribution from the node loads, Fnl, is simply the size of the
loads in the position in the vector that corresponds to node displacement it is applied
to, see section 4.2.
In the example in figure 4.2, there is no element loads therefore.
FT = Fnl
The node load with size P, that works on node displacement V5 in the opposite di-
rection are the only load, therefore the system load vector is as following.
FT = FT
nl =
0
0
0
0 −P
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
[
]
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9 V10 V11 V12
For element loads, the loads are translated into reactions. An element load consists
of a perpendicular component and a tangential component, corresponding to the y-axis
and x-axis respectively in the beam element’s local coordinate system. The reaction
forces, RV
A, RV
B, and moment reactions, MA, MB, are found by looking at each element
as a simple beam fixed in both ends, with the perpendicular component, qperp, of the
element load acting as a uniformly distributed line load, forces going into node does not
contribute to a moment in that node. The horizontal reactions, RH
A , RH
B, is found the
same way as the vertical, but with the tangential component, qtang, of the element load.
RV
A = RV
B = 1
2qperpL
RH
A = RH
B = 1
2qtangL
MA = −MB = 1
12qperpL2
(13)
Figure 4.15: Beam element fixed in both ends, and the corresponding reactions at the end points, the
direction of the reactions follows the notation presented in section 4.2. The tangential load, qtang, is
not shown in the diagram [Jensen, 2016].
==PAGE:51==
4.7 Load Vector
39
The reactions are put into a local element load vector, f ℓ
e. To be able to use the
local reactions of the beam element in the system load vector, the reactions must first
be transformed to the global coordinate system, by multiplying the local element load
vector, f ℓ
e, with the transposed transformation matrix A, previously described.
f ℓT
e
=
[
RH
A
RV
A
MA
RH
B
RV
B
MB
]
fe = ATf ℓ
e
(14)
In addition to the transformation, it must also be expanded to the size of the system
load vector, F, corresponding to the element’s node displacements, similar to the expan-
sion of the element stiffness matrices. The expanded element load vectors, Fe, are then
added together, to form the vector, Fel, which is all the element load’s contribution to
the system load vector, this is then added to the node load’s contribution, Fnl, to form
the system load vector.
Fel =
∑
Fe
F = Fel + Fnl
(15)
Looking at the example in figure 4.2, if we in addition to the node load, add a line
load on both element 1 and 2, going in a negative y-direction with the size of 3000N/m;
qperp = −3000N/m, qtang = 0N/m.
RH
A,1+2 =
RH
B,1+2
= 1
2qtangL
=
0N
RV
A,1+2 =
RV
B,1+2
= 1
2qperpL
= 1
2(−3000)2
= −3000N
MA,1+2 = −MB,1+2
= 1
12qperpL2
= 1
12(−3000)22
= −1000Nm
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Finite Element Method
Both element 1 and 2 are horizontal therefore, f1 = f ℓ
1 and f2 = f ℓ
2. Element 3 has no
element loads, all reactions are therefore zero. We get the following system load matrix
for the example.
f T
1 = 103 ×
0 −3 −1
0 −3
1
[
]
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
⇒
FT
1 = 103 ×
0 −3 −1
0 −3
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
[
]
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10 V11 V12
f T
2 = 103 ×
0 −3 −1
0 −3
1
[
]
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
⇒
FT
2 = 103 ×
0
0
0
0 −3 −1
0 −3
1
0
0
0
[
]
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10 V11 V12
FT
el = FT
1 + FT
2 + FT
3 = 103 ×
0 −3 −1
0 −6
0
0 −3
1
0
0
0
[
]
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10 V11 V12
FT = FT
el + FT
nl = 103 ×
0 −3 −1
0 −16
0
0 −3
1
0
0
0
[
]
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10 V11 V12
==PAGE:53==
4.8 Displacements and Reaction Forces
41
4.8
Displacements and Reaction Forces
For the frame structure seen in figure 4.2, we will get the system stiffness matrix seen
above. To find the node displacements, V, and the reactions forces, R, we need two
matrices, Kﬀand Ksf , that are extracted from the K-matrix. Kﬀis a 8 × 8 matrix
that are found by removing rows and columns corresponding to the supported node
displacements V1, V2, V10, V11, the red area in figure 4.16. Ksf is a 8×4 matrix, Ksf , it is
found by taking the rows of the supported node displacements, V1, V2, V10, V11, and then
removing the columns corresponding to the same supported node displacement, see the
blue markings in figure 4.16.
K = 5 · 105×
600
0
0 −600
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
12
0
−12
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
16
0
−12
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
−600
0
0
1200
0
0 −600
0
0
0
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
24
0
0
−12
12
0
0
0
0
12
8
0
0
32
0
−12
8
0
0
0
0
0
0 −600
0
0 601.5
0
3
−1.5
0
3
0
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
312
−12
0 −300
0
0
0
0
0
12
8
3
−12
24
−3
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1.5
0
−3
1.5
0
−3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 −300
0
0
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
4
−3
0
8




Kﬀ= 5 · 105 ×
16
0
−12
8
0
0
0
0
0
1200
0
0 −600
0
0
0
−12
0
24
0
0
−12
12
0
8
0
0
32
0
−12
8
0
0 −600
0
0 601.5
0
3
3
0
0
−12
−12
0
312
−12
0
0
0
12
8
3
−12
24
4
0
0
0
0
3
0
4
8




Ksf = 5 · 105 ×
0 −600
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
0
−12
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1.5
0
−3
−3
0
0
0
0
0 −300
0
0




Figure 4.16: The matrices Kﬀand Ksf is found from the system stiffness matrix K. By removing
the rows and columns corresponding to node displacements that are supported, V1, V2, V10 and V11, we
find Kﬀ, the white area in K. Ksf is found by taking the rows corresponding to the supported node
displacements and then remove the columns of the supported node displacement from these rows, the
blue rectangles in K.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Finite Element Method
The system load vector, F, can be split into two vectors in a similar way, one con-
taining the free node displacements, Ff , and one containing the supported node displace-
ments, which is equal to the reaction forces acting directly on the on the supported node
displacements, Rs.
FT =
0
0
0
0
−P
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
[
]
⇒
FT
f =
0
0
−P
0
0
0
0
0
[
]
RT
s =
0
0
0
0
[
]
The free node displacements Vf can be found by taking the inverse matrix of Kﬀ
and multiply it with the load vector containing the free node displacements, Ff , as seen
below.
Vf = K−1
ﬀFf
(16)
Where K−1
ﬀis the inverted Kﬀmatrix. For the example in figure 4.2, where V1, V2, V10, V11
is supported, Vf is therfore:
VT
f =
[
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V12
]
= 10−3m ×
[
−1.888
−0.003
−2.420
0.146
−0.006
−0.040
1.246
−0.621
]
Inserting the supported node displacements for, Vs, we get all the displacements for
the system corresponding to all the degrees of freedom.
VT =
[
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10
V11
V12
]
= 10−3m×
[
0
0
−1.888
−0.003
−2.420
0.146
−0.006
−0.040
1.246
0
0
−0.621
]
==PAGE:55==
4.8 Displacements and Reaction Forces
43
The contribution from the loads in the free node displacements to the reaction forces
in the supported nodes, Rf can be found by multiplying Ksf with the free node displace-
ments, Vf , as shown below.
Rf = Ksf Vf
(17)
The total size of the reaction forces in the supported nodes for the entire system, R,
is found by adding together the the reaction forces in the free node displacements, Rf ,
with the reaction forces from the loads acting directly on the supports, Rs.
R = Rf + Rs
(18)
In the example in figure 4.2, there is no loads acting directly on the supports, this
means R = Rf , we therefore get the following reaction forces.
R = Rf = 5 · 105 ×


0
−600
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
0
−12
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1.5
0
−3
−3
0
0
0
0
0
−300
0
0


10−3m ×


−1.888
−0.003
−2.420
0.146
−0.006
−0.040
1.246
−0.621


=


933N
4067N
−933N
5933N


As it can be seen the two horizontal reactions equalize each other, meaning the
structure will not ’roll away’ in any of the directions, if there was any horizontal loads
in the system these would be included in the equilibrium. As with horizontal reaction it
can also be seen that the sum of the vertical reactions equalizes the sum of the vertical
load, meaning it will not ’fall down’ or ’fly away’.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Finite Element Method
4.9
Internal Forces
The internal forces of the beams are found in the beam element’s local coordinate system,
by using the relation in 2. The internal forces vector, rℓ
e, is found by multiplying the
unexpanded local stiffness matrix, kℓ
e, and the local displacement vector, vℓ
e.
rℓ
e =


−N(0)
V (0)
−M(0)
N(L)
−V (L)
M(L)


= kℓ
evℓ
e
(19)
Where N(0) and N(L) is the normal forces at the start and the end of the beam
element respectively, V (0) and V (L) is the shear forces and M(0) and M(L) the bending
moments.
For elements with element loads, the local element load vector, f ℓ
e, must be subtracted
from the internal forces vector, rℓ
e.
Looking at element two in the example in figure 4.2, we get the following internal forces,
there is no element loads in the example, the local element load vector is therefore a
vector of zeros.
rℓ
2 = kℓ
2vℓ
2 −f ℓ
2
= 5 · 105 ×


600
0
0
−600
0
0
0
12
12
0
−12
12
0
12
16
0
−12
8
−600
0
0
600
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
12
−12
0
12
8
0
−12
16


10−3m ×


−0.003
−2.420
0.146
−0.006
−0.040
1.246


−


0
0
0
0
0
0


=


900N
−5928N
−8128Nm
−900N
5928N
−3728Nm


⇔


N(0)
V (0)
M(0)
N(L)
V (L)
M(L)


=


−900N
−5928N
8128Nm
−900N
−5928N
−3728Nm


==PAGE:57==
4.10 Hinges
45
4.10
Hinges
The connections between the beam elements in structure are, with the method described
in this section, by default fixed, this means the elements will keep the angle between
them, as they are not allowed to rotate individually around the node. This means, when
exposed to loads, the moment will be transferred between the beam elements, along with
shear and axial (normal) forces. To avoid this, hinges can be added to the structure.
A hinge, is a connection that carries shear and axial (normal) forces, like the fixed
connection, but not moment forces between the different beam elements. The elements
that have a hinged connection can have different rotations but the same displacements in
the x- and the y-direction. In practice, hinges can both be actual hinges, but connections
that are designed not to resist the moments, are also modelled as a hinge, even though
there might be a moment in practice.
Examples of hinges in practice can be seen in figure 4.17.
Fixed
Hinged
Figure 4.17: For fixed connections, the joints are strengthened compared to the hinged connections,
see connection a)-c), in order to handle a larger moment at the ends. If comparing the connections, it
can be seen that, for instance, in connection a) stiffeners are added to the column and a larger plate
with more bolts are used in the fixed connection. In the c) pictures it can be seen that a fixed connection
will keep angle between the beam, while a hinged connection, lets the beams rotate independently of
each other around the node [UACEG, 2019].
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Finite Element Method
Adding a hinge moves a moment from the connection (joint) to the beam element,
meaning the beam must able to handle a larger moment, compared to a beam that
has fixed connections, if both are loaded equally. For two beams, with same length, l,
one is hinged in both ends and one is fixed in both ends, they are both loaded with a
uniformly distributed load with size q, the moment in the middle of the beam is three
times bigger for the hinged than the fixed, because the connections does not absorb any
of the moment, see figure 4.18.
Mfixed
( l
2
)
= 1
24ql2
(20)
Mhinged
( l
2
)
= 1
8ql2
(21)
Figure 4.18: The moment in the middle of a beam with fixed ends (left), is one third of the moment in
the middle of a beam with hinged ends (right) [Jensen, 2016]. The fixed beam however, have moments
at the ends one and a half times larger than the moments at the middle, with opposite sign, see figure
4.15, this places higher demands on the strength of the joints. The sum of the moments in a beam is
the same when the load is the same, it is how the structure carries the load that changes.
To add a hinge to the system, an additional rotational node displacement is added to
the node where the hinge is wanted, if two elements share a node each element gets its
own rotational node displacement instead of sharing, meaning the elements can rotate
independently around the node. See figure 4.19 where a hinge is added to the frame
structure seen in figure 4.2, by adding a 13th degree of freedom, V13. The new node
displacement can belong to either the second or the third element with the same effect,
when the hinge is placed in a joint between two elements. If the hinge is placed in
a joint between three or more elements, the extra node displacement is added to the
element that is hinged, meaning the two other two elements will still not be able rotate
independently of each other. If all elements in a joint between three elements shall be
able to rotate independently of each other, two new node displacements are needed.
==PAGE:59==
4.10 Hinges
47
Figure 4.19: As it is seen in the figure to right, an addition rotational node displacement, V13, is
added in node 3, one of the the rotational displacements belongs to element 2 and the other to element
3, they therefore no longer share the node displacement, but got their own, this means the displacement
can be different from each other, which results in the elements can rotate independent from each other
around the node.
Assuming V13 belongs to element 3, VT
3 =
[
V7
V8
V13
V10
V11
V12
]
, gives the
following system stiffness matrix. As it can be seen element 3 no longer contributes to
the ninth node displacement’s, V9, row and column, instead it contributes to the 13th
node displacement, V13. Displacements, reactions and internal forces are found in the
same way as previously described, but with the extra node displacements.
K = 5 · 105×
600
0
0 −600
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
12
0
−12
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
16
0
−12
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−600
0
0 1200
0
0 −600
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
24
0
0
−12
12
0
0
0
0
0
12
8
0
0
32
0
−12
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 −600
0
0 601.5
0
0 −1.5
0
3
3
0
0
0
0
−12
−12
0
312
−12
0 −300
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
8
0
−12
16
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 −1.5
0
0
1.5
0
−3
−3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 −300
0
0
300
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
−3
0
8
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
−3
0
4
8




V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10
V11
V12
V13
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
V9
V10
V11
V12
V13
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Finite Element Method
4.11
Plotting the Results
An effective way of describing how forces runs through a structure, is by visualizing them
in plots. Plots of the deformations of a structure is also paramount for understanding
the structure’s behavior under different boundary conditions.
Figure 4.20 shows how the plots for the example in figure 4.2 looks in the web application
of LivestockFEM.
Figure 4.20: Four different types of plots visualizing the force flow in a structure and the deformations.
Forces and moments are scaled by 0.1 meaning a 10000N force is drawn as 1000mm. The deformation
is scaled by 10.
4.11.1
Normal- and Shear Forces
For normal- and shear forces, the force distribution over an element is a linear interpo-
lation of the values in the end of the element. This means the maximum and minimum
values will always be in the ends of the element as well. The force, F, at a specific length
on the element, x, can therefore be found by the following expression.
F(x) = F0 + x
L(F1 −F0)
(22)
Where L is length of the element, F0 and F1 are the size of the force at the start and
the end of the element, respectively.
==PAGE:61==
4.11 Plotting the Results
49
4.11.2
Bending Moments
The distribution of the bending moment over an element, can be found the same way as
the normal- and shear forces, if the structure is not exposed to any element loads, but
only node loads. If the structure, however, is exposed to element loads, the distribution
of bending moments can be seen as the linear interpolated load size minus the bending
moments of a simply supported beam (see right picture in figure 4.18). The bending
moment, M, at a specific length on the element, x, can therefore be found by the
following expression.
M(x) = M0 + x
L(M1 −M0) −1
2qx(L −x)
(23)
Where L is length of the element, q the size of the element load, M0 and M1 are the
size of the bending moments at the start and the end of the element, respectively.
4.11.3
Deformation
The local deformation of an element is found by the relation below.
uℓ(xℓ) = N(xℓ)vℓ
⇔

uℓ
x
uℓ
y

=

N1
0
0
N4
0
0
0
N2
N3
0
N5
N6




uℓ
1x
uℓ
1y
θ1
uℓ
2x
uℓ
2y
θ2


(24)
Where u(xℓ) is a vector describing the deformation in the local coordinate system,
at a specific point on the element, xℓ. N1 to N6, are form functions describing the de-
formation, N1 and N4 describes the deformation in the local x-axis and are as follow.
N1 = 1 −xℓ
L
and
N4 = xℓ
L
(25)
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Finite Element Method
The rest of form functions can be found in a similar way, to the one used for finding
the local element stiffness matrix. Each form function is found by setting one displace-
ment at a time to 1 while the others are 0, as it seen in figure 4.21.
(26)
Figure 4.21: The form functions N2, N3, N5 and N6 are found by setting node displacements to 1
one at the time.
The deformation of the beam element in the global coordinate system, u(xℓ), are
found by multiplying the local deformation, with a small version of the transformation
matrix, A. The small transformation matrix, Au, consists of the two first rows and two
first columns the large transformation matrix.
Au =

nx
ny
−ny
xx


(27)
u(xℓ) = uℓ(xℓ)Au
(28)
==PAGE:63==
4.12 Other Applications of FEM
51
4.12
Other Applications of FEM
The direct stiffness method described in this section, has, as mentioned in section 4.9, the
fundamental relation between the stiffness k, displacements v and the forces/reactions
r.
r = kv
⇔
v = k−1r
(29)
This relation is universal, as it is the same that are applied in other fields of study
where FEM is used, for instance thermal- and fluid dynamics. k describes the property,
v the behavior and r the action. For instance the property in thermal dynamics is the
conductivity of the material, the behavior is the temperature and the action is the source
of heat, as seen in the table 4.1 [de Weck and Kim, 2019].
Table 4.1: Direct Stiffness Method for other fields of study
Property (k)
Behavior (v)
Action (r)
Structural
Stiffness
Displacement
Force
Thermal
Conductivity
Temperature
Heat Source
Fluid
Viscosity
Velocity
Body Force
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Software Development
As previously mentioned the software developed in this thesis, LivestockFEM, consists
of three parts: The FEM module, that does the structural calculations, the Grasshopper
plugin, that generates the input data for the FEM module and reads the result data,
finally there is the web application that runs the FEM module, reads the result data and
lets the user experiment with the structure, it also explains the underlying calculations
for the user.
In this section, the development of the three parts will be described, the descriptions
of the Grasshopper plugin and the web application will primarily be focusing on the use
of the tools, rather than the underlying programming done. The FEM module will to a
greater extent focus on the implementation, as this might help students and other curi-
ous souls, in getting a good understanding of FEM. As previously mentioned, studying
the implementation of FEM, had high educative value for the author. It is assumed that
the reader is familiar with programming in Python, as most of the functions in Python
will not be explicitly explained.
Source code behind all three parts of LivestockFEM can be found on GitHub, at the
following address:
https://github.com/Lakris91/LivestockFEM/
The Grasshopper plugin can be found on GitHub as well, along with an installation
guide, at the following address:
https://github.com/Lakris91/LivestockFEM/releases/
The web application can be found, at the following address:
https://livestock-fem.herokuapp.com/
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Software Development
5.1
The MatLab Basis
As previously mentioned the program is based on a MatLab program, handed out during
the course “Computational Structural Modelling 1: The Finite Element Method” at DTU
[Nielsen et al., 2016]. The complete original MatLab code can be found in appendix A.
The calculations in the MatLab program are based on seven matrices and vectors
describing: Node coordinates, elements, global node displacements (degrees of freedom),
materials, supports, node loads and element loads. In addition to the matrices a scaling
factor for both the deformation plot and the internal forces plots can be defined. The
different input for the code can be seen in the code-snippets in figure 5.1, the code
snippets defines the example from figure 4.2. This method of defining the input data,
requires the user to have the underlying knowledge of FEM, as node displacements are
needed to define three of the input vectors or matrices. It does not give the user any
graphical feedback before the program is run or provide any error handling, making
it difficult to spot definition errors, this can potentially give run time errors or wrong
results.
5 % Node coordinates: X(node ,:)=[x,y]
6 X(1,:) = [0 4];
7 X(2,:) = [2 4];
8 X(3,:) = [4 4];
9 X(4,:) = [4 0];
10
11 % elements: T(el,:)=[start node end
node]
12 T(1,:) = [1 2];
13 T(2,:) = [2 3];
14 T(3,:) = [3 4];
15
16 % global degrees of freedom (dof): D(el
,:)=[V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6]
17 D(1,:) = [1 2 3 4 5 6];
18 D(2,:) = [4 5 6 7 8 9];
19 D(3,:) = [7 8 9 10 11 12];
20
21 % materials: G(el,:)=[E-modulus , area,
inertia]
22 E = 2.1e11; % [N/m2]
23 A = 1e-3;
% [m2]
24 I = 2e-6;
% [m4]
25 G(1,:) = [E A I];
26 G(2,:) = [E A I];
27 G(3,:) = [E A I];
28
29 % supports: U(i)=global dof
30 U(1) = 1;
31 U(2) = 2;
32 U(3) = 10;
33 U(4) = 11;
34
35 % node loads: bL(i,:)=[global dof, size
]
36 bL(1,:) = [5 -10000];
37
38 % element loads: dL(el,:)=[local
direction , size]
39 dL = zeros(nel,2);
40
41 % plot scaling
42 Vskala = 2e0;
% deformations
43 Sskala = 0.3e-4;
% forces
Figure 5.1: The input for the MatLab program are defined from 7 vectors and matrices, this requires
that the user are familiar with the underlying theory of FEM. The lack of graphical interface means it
is difficult for inexperienced users to define topology and boundary conditions correctly.
==PAGE:67==
5.1 The MatLab Basis
55
When the input data is defined, the code runs through all the calculations described
in section 4, with some changes due to errors in the code (see section 5.1.1. After the
calculations are done, it returns the results in the command window of MatLab along
with five static plots; a plot of the topology, the normal forces, shear forces, the moment
forces and the deformations. See illustrations in figure 5.2. The boundary conditions are
not visualized, this makes it difficult for the user to asses the correctness of the results,
if they are not experienced with FEM, as they cannot see the boundary conditions are
defined correctly.
Figure 5.2: The plots generated from the MatLab program. From top left to bottom right the plots
shows; the topology (beams and nodes), normal forces (scale: 3e-5 [N]), shear forces (scale: 3e-5 [N]),
bending moments (scale: 3e-5 [Nm]) and deformations (scale: 2 [m]).
5.1.1
Errors in MatLab Program
During the development of LivestockFEM, two major errors in the MatLab program
were found, one of the errors, a miscalculation of the reactions, was also found in the
textbook for the course [Nielsen et al., 2016]. The other error was an implementation
error.
The reaction error, was caused by the loads acting directly on a supported node, not
being included in the calculations, as it is described in relation (18) in the FEM theory.
The error meant that node loads acting on a supported node displacement, were not
included. The same was the case for element loads, as element loads are translated in to
local reactions (see section 4.7), these reactions were ignored if they acted on supported
node displacements, meaning that up to half of a load could be ignored, depending on
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Software Development
the support type. Wrongly calculated reactions mean the structure would appear to not
be in equilibrium, as the sum of the reaction would be different from the sum of the
loads. The error did not affect any of the other calculations.
The other error, was an error in the method element loads were defined in the MatLab
code, the error meant it was only possible to add domain loads in one of the local
directions of the element, which again meant it was only possible to make either a
perpendicular or a tangential load on an element, this made it practically impossible to,
for instance, applying horizontal or vertical loads correctly on inclined elements.
The error was caused by the way FEM was implemented in MatLab, the element loads
were defined by a matrix where the rows corresponds to each element in the system,
the first column defines the direction and the second the size of the load, see figure 5.1.
This means it is only possible to apply an element load in one of the local directions per
element. To correct the error, the element load matrix was changed so the first column
contained the load size in the local x-direction and the second column the load size in
the local y-direction, the rows still represented each element. If there is no element load
or only in one direction, the size is set to 0, the local reactions are then calculated for
both direction, if they areas described in section 4.7.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Data Exchange
57
5.2
Data Exchange
The input file and the result file, that exchanges the data between Grasshopper and the
FEM module, were in the first versions of LivestockFEM (LKplugin) custom made, the
data were written into a text-file and separated with a variety of separators, this made
the files difficult to read for the users and required tortuous functions to be interpreted
in Python.
For the latest versions the JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) format has been used
for the data exchange. JSON orders the data by string (text) keys, that can be looked
up by a hash function, making it fast to handle larger amounts of data. The keys in
combination with the JavaScript syntax, makes it relatively easy to read for the users,
and can be interpreted by a single line of code in Python. Python then turns it into a
dictionary object, which is a convenient way of managing the data. The JSON input-
data for the example in figure 4.2 can be seen in figure 5.3.
1 {
2
"PlotDivisions":
3
19,
4
"PlotScalingDeformation":
5
100.0,
6
"PlotScalingForces":
7
0.1,
8
"PyDOFS":
9
[
10
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5],
11
[3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
12
[6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]
13
],
14
"PyElementLoad":
15
[
16
[0.0, 0.0],
17
[0.0, 0.0],
18
[0.0, 0.0]
19
],
20
"PyElements":
21
[
22
[0, 1],
23
[1, 2],
24
[2, 3]
25
],
26
"PyMaterial":
27
[
28
[2e11, 3e-3, 2e-05, "", ""],
29
[2e11, 3e-3, 2e-05, "", ""],
30
[2e11, 3e-3, 2e-05, "", ""]
31
],
32
"PyNodeLoad":
33
[
34
[4, -10000.0]
35
],
36
"PyNodes":
37
[
38
[0.0, 4.0],
39
[2.0, 4.0],
40
[4.0, 4.0],
41
[4.0, 0.0]
42
],
43
"PySupport":
44
[0, 1, 9, 10],
45
"UnitScaling":
46
1000.0
47 }
Figure 5.3: The JSON format uses a clear syntax, making the data easily readable. The string keys
are used when the data is looked up, but it can at the same time be used as a small description of the
data it represents.
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Software Development
5.3
CPython FEM Module
The FEM module is the core of LivestockFEM, both in Grasshopper and in the web
application. The FEM module is an implementation of the FEM theory described in
the previous section, written in CPython.
In order to keep the CPython implementation neat and clear, it is divided in to
three modules, the main module reads and writes the input- and the result-file, it also
performs all the system or global calculations. The local module consists of the local
beam functions, that are called multiple times from inside the main module. Finally, the
visualization module that generates the geometry used for visualizing supports, loads
and hinges used in Grasshopper and in the web application, this module will not be
described any further.
5.3.1
From MatLab to CPython
In order to implement the FEM program in CPython, the NumPy library are the only
library needed besides the build-in math library. NumPy lets the user perform a wide
variety of matrix operations and other linear algebraic operations.
With the array
function in NumPy, a single list or nested lists (lists in lists) are translated into a vector
or a matrix, respectively, making it possible to do the same operations as in MatLab.
NumPy commands can be recognized in the code by the prefix np. , by @ used for
dot products, the suffix .T used for transposing arrays and the suffix .tolist() that
transforms vectors and matrices back to lists and nested lists, to make them readable for
IronPython. One of the major differences between Python and MatLab, that separates
the two implementations of FEM, is the way the two languages indexes lists. The first
element of a list in MatLab is placed at index 1, this is a legacy from FORTRAN and are
common in math languages, while in Python, and most other multipurpose languages,
the lists starts at index 0. In the CPython implementation, index 0 notation manifest
itself in how elements and node displacements are defined compared to MatLab. For
instance looking at figure 5.3, the ”PyDOFS” key represents the degrees of freedom (node
displacements), which here goes from 0 to 11, while in MatLab node displacements goes
from 1 to 12 like it is described in the FEM theory. Element- and node numbering in
also starts from 0, this must be kept in mind when studying the implementation, it
however only affects the definitions and have no influences on the calculations.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 CPython FEM Module
59
5.3.2
Local Module
As previously mentioned the local module contains all the operations that are done lo-
cally for each elements, this includes functions that defines the element stiffness matrix,
sets up the local to global transformation matrix, translates element loads to reactions,
calculates the internal forces and displacements, and finally preparing the data for plot-
ting.
The code of the entire module can be found in appedix B.
5.3.2.1
Transformation Matrix
The transMat function is used for finding the transformation matrix for an element.
The function takes X1 and X2 as input, this is the coordinates of the start-node and the
end-node, respectively. The function slavishly follows the method described in section
4.5. Where n is the normalized direction vector n, L is the length of the element and A
is the transformation matrix, A.
The function outputs the transformation matrix and the length of the element.
5 def transMat(X1,X2):
6
n = X2-X1
7
L = sqrt(n @ n)
8
n = n/L
9
A = np.array([[n[0], n[1], 0,
0,
0,
0],
10
[-n[1], n[0], 0,
0,
0,
0],
11
[0,
0,
1,
0,
0,
0],
12
[0,
0,
0,
n[0],
n[1],
0],
13
[0,
0,
0,
-n[1], n[0],
0],
14
[0,
0,
0,
0,
0,
1]])
15
return A,L
Figure 5.4: The transMat function takes coordinates of the start-node and the end-node of an element
as input, finds the direction vector and generates the transformation matrix A, as described in section
4.5. It returns the transformation matrix along with the length of the element, L.
5.3.2.2
Element Stiffness Matrix
The eleStiff function is used for generating the element stiffness matrix. Like the
transMat function it takes the node coordinates of an element as input, along with a
vector containing the material parameters, elastic modulus, section area and moment
of inertia, for the element. The local element stiffness matrix, kl, is put up using the
method described in section 4.4.
The transMat function is used for generating the
transformation matrix and calculating the length of the element. The local element
stiffness matrix is transformed to the global coordinate system as described in relation
(9). The function, returns both the global, k, and the local unexpanded element stiffness
matrix, kl.
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Software Development
18 def eleStiff(X1,X2,G):
19
A,L = transMat(X1,X2)
20
EA = G[0]*G[1]
21
EI = G[0]*G[2]
22
kl = np.array([[EA/L, 0,
0,
-EA/L, 0,
0
],
23
[ 0,
12*EI/L**3,
6*EI/L**2, 0,
-12*EI/L**3, 6*EI/L**2 ],
24
[ 0,
6*EI/L**2,
4*EI/L,
0,
-6*EI/L**2,
2*EI/L
],
25
[-EA/L, 0,
0,
EA/L, 0,
0
],
26
[ 0,
-12*EI/L**3, -6*EI/L**2, 0,
12*EI/L**3,-6*EI/L**2 ],
27
[ 0,
6*EI/L**2,
2*EI/L,
0,
-6*EI/L**2,
4*EI/L
]])
28
k = A.T @ kl @ A
29
return k, kl
Figure 5.5: The eleStiff function takes coordinates of the start-node and the end-node of an element
as input, along with the beams material parameters, it then generates the unexpanded global element
stiffness matrix, k, as described in section 4.4, and returns it along with the local element stiffness
matrix, kl.
5.3.2.3
Element Load
The eleLoad function is used for translating element loads into reactions that corre-
sponds with the system’s node displacements. Like the previously described functions
it takes the node coordinates of an element as input. In addition to the node coordi-
nates, a vector, dLe, is taken as input, the vector contains the size of the element load
in local x-direction and local y-direction, respectively. The function follows the method
described in section 4.7 and outputs the global element load vector, f, and the local
element load vector, fl.
32 def eleLoad(X1,X2,dLe):
33
A,L = transMat(X1,X2)
34
p1 = dLe[0]*L/2
35
p2 = dLe[1]*L/2
36
m = dLe[1]*L**2/12
37
fl = np.array([[p1,p2,m,p1,p2,-m]]).T
38
f = A.T @ fl
39
return f, fl
Figure 5.6: The eleLoad function, takes start- and end-node coordinates of the element and the load
vector as input. It translates the element load into reactions, by looking at the element as a fixed beam
as described in section 4.7, and finally returns the translated loads.
5.3.2.4
Internal Forces
The forceCalc function calculates the internal forces of an element. It takes the ele-
ment’s node coordinates, X1 and X2, material parameters, Ge, node displacements, Ve
and element load, dLe as inputs. The internal forces is found as described in section
4.9. The resulting vector, rℓ
e, or re in the code, is split into three vectors containing the
normal forces, f1, shear forces, f2, and bending moments, m. The function returns the
three internal forces vectors.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 CPython FEM Module
61
42 def forceCalc(X1,X2,Ge,Ve,dLe):
43
A,L = transMat(X1,X2)
44
k,kl = eleStiff(X1,X2,Ge)
45
vl = A @ Ve
46
re = kl @ vl
47
f,fl = eleLoad(X1,X2,dLe)
48
re = re-fl
49
f1 = np.array([-re[0],re[3]]).T
50
f2 = np.array([re[1],-re[4]]).T
51
m
= np.array([-re[2],re[5]]).T
52
return f1,f2,m
Figure 5.7: The forceCalc function, takes an element’s node coordinates, material parameters, node
displacements and element load as inputs. The function calculates the internal forces of the element,
as described in section 4.9, and returns three vectors containing the normal forces, shear forces and
bending moments, respectively.
5.3.2.5
Forces plots
The forcePlot function generates the points used for making the force plots. It takes
as input an element’s node coordinates, X1 and X2, internal forces, Se, element loads,
dLe, number of interpolation points, nrp, the force scaling, sscale, and which type
of force to plot, s. All forces plots starts and ends at the end points of the elements,
these coordinates are therefore always the first and the last element in the plot point
coordinates lists, Xp and Yp. For normal and shear plots the only other points are the
calculated forces scaled and moved to the element’s coordinates, see F01 and F02. For
bending moment plots the points are interpolated the specified number of times. The
bending moment’s interpolated size through the element are found as described in section
4.11.2. The calculated moments are moved to the element’s coordinates, and added to
the plot coordinates lists, these are returned along with sizes of the bending moment.
55 def forcePlot(X1,X2,Se,dLe,nrp,sscale,s):
56
A,L,n = transMat(X1,X2)
57
F01 = np.array([-n[1],n[0]])*Se[0]*sscale
58
F02 = np.array([-n[1],n[0]])*Se[1]*sscale
59
Xp = np.array([X1[0],X1[0]+F01[0],X2[0]+F02[0],X2[0]])
60
Yp = np.array([X1[1],X1[1]+F01[1],X2[1]+F02[1],X2[1]])
61
if s == 3:
62
M = np.array([Se[0],Se[1]])
63
for i in range(1,nrp+1):
64
x = (i/(nrp+1))*L
65
mx = (1/2)*dLe[1]*x*(L-x)
66
m1 = np.array([-n[1],n[0]])*mx*sscale
67
Xp = np.insert(Xp,i+1,Xp[1]+i*(Xp[-2]-Xp[1])/(nrp+1)-m1[0])
68
Yp = np.insert(Yp,i+1,Yp[1]+i*(Yp[-2]-Yp[1])/(nrp+1)-m1[1])
69
M =
np.insert(M,i,M[0]+i*(M[-1]-M[0])/(nrp+1)+mx)
70
return Xp,Yp,M
71
else:
72
return Xp,Yp
Figure 5.8:
The forcePlot function takes as input an element’s node coordinates, internal forces,
element loads, number of interpolation points, the force scaling and which type of force to plot. It
generates the points used for the plotting, as described in section 4.11.2, and returns it, along with the
sizes of the bending moments.
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Software Development
5.3.2.6
Deformation plot
The final function of the local module, deformationPlot, generates the points used for
making the deformation plot. It takes as input an element’s node coordinates, X1 and X2,
calculated displacements, v, number of interpolation points, div, and the deformation
scaling, vscale. For the calculation of the deformations it uses the method described in
section 4.11.3. When the deformations are calculated they are moved to element’s coor-
dinates. The points for plotting are returned along with the sizes of the displacements
in the x-axis, the y-axis and the resultant distance.
75 def deformationPlot(X1,X2,v,div,vscale):
76
defPlot=[]
77
defVal=[]
78
A,L,n = transMat(X1,X2)
79
Au=A[0:2,0:2]
80
for i in range(div):
81
xL=(i)/(div-1)
82
N2 = 1 - 3*xL**2 + 2*xL**3
83
N3 = L*(xL - 2*xL**2 + xL**3)
84
N5 = 3*xL**2 - 2*xL**3
85
N6 = L*(-xL**2 + xL**3)
86
N=np.array([[1-xL, 0,
0,
xL, 0,
0 ],
87
[0
, N2, N3, 0,
N5, N6]])
88
vl = A @ v
89
ul = N @ vl
90
u = (ul.T @ Au)
91
Xe=X1.T*(1-xL)+X2.T*xL
92
Xu=(Xe+u*vscale)
93
defPlot.append(np.append(Xu,0).tolist())
94
defVal.append(np.append(u,np.linalg.norm(u)).tolist())
95
defVal=(np.array(defVal).T).tolist()
96
return defPlot ,defVal
Figure 5.9: The deformationPlot function takes as input an elements node coordinates, calculated
displacements, number of interpolation points, the deformation scale. It generates the points used for
the plotting, as described in section 4.11.3, and returns it, along with the sizes of the displacements in
the x-axis, the y-axis and the resultant distance.
5.3.3
Main Module
The main module contains all the global functions of FEM, but also reads and writes the
input and result data files and sets up the data dictionaries used for these. It uses most
of the functions in the local module when looping through each element, the results are
then put together in global matrices and vectors by the main module.
5.3.3.1
Run the file
The first thing that happens in the main module is a check whether the module is
run or imported into another module. If the module is run, which is the case when
==PAGE:75==
5.3 CPython FEM Module
63
running calculations from Grasshopper opposite to the web application that imports the
FEM_frame class, the input-file is read and written into a dictionary, the FEM_frame class
is then run and the results it produces is written in to a result-file.
175 if __name__ == "__main__":
176
with open(sys.argv[1]) as jsonfile:
177
jsonDict = json.load(jsonfile)
178
if "input_file.json" in os.path.split(sys.argv[1])[1]:
179
resPath = sys.argv[1].replace("input_file.json","result_file.json")
180
else:
181
resPath = sys.argv[1].replace(".json","result_file.json")
182
FEM=FEM_frame(jsonDict)
183
dictstr=json.dumps(FEM.outDict).replace(', "',',\n "').replace("{","{\n ").
replace("}","\n}")
184
with open(resPath ,"w") as file:
185
file.write(dictstr)
Figure 5.10: This part checks if the file is run, if it is, it reads the input file, runs the FEM_frame
class with the input data and creates the result file with the results from the FEM_frame class. Ready
for Grasshopper to be read.
5.3.3.2
Initiation Function - Part 1
When the FEM_frame class is run the __init__ function runs, this sets up a dictionary
for the outputs, outDict, used in the result-file. It also translates all the lists and nested
lists from the input file in to NumPy arrays (vectors and matrices), these are then saved
as instance variables. self is the prefix of the instance variables, when it is used as
input for functions in the class, all the instance variables are accessible by the functions.
12 class FEM_frame:
13
def __init__(self,inDict):
14
self.outDict={}
15
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessSmall"]=[]
16
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessSmallLocal"]=[]
17
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessExpanded"]=[]
18
self.outDict["DOFPlot"]=[]
19
self.outDict["DefDist"]=[]
20
self.outDict["PlusPos"]=[]
21
self.outDict["ForcePlot1"]=[]
22
self.outDict["ForcePlot2"]=[]
23
self.outDict["ForcePlot3"]=[]
24
self.outDict["MomentForcesPt"]=[]
25
self.X = np.array(inDict["PyNodes"])
26
self.T = np.array(inDict["PyElements"])
27
self.D = np.array(inDict["PyDOFS"])
28
self.G = np.array([mat[:3] for mat in inDict["PyMaterial"]])
29
self.U = np.array(inDict["PySupport"])
30
self.bL = np.array(inDict["PyNodeLoad"])
31
self.dL = np.round(np.array(inDict["PyElementLoad"]),0)
32
self.plotScale = inDict["UnitScaling"]
33
self.Vskala = inDict["PlotScalingDeformation"]
34
self.Sskala = inDict["PlotScalingForces"]/1000
35
self.nrp = inDict["PlotDivisions"]
Figure 5.11:
When the FEM_frame class is run, the lists and nested lists from the input file is
translated into NumPy arrays and saved in instance variables. A dictionary for the outputs, outDict,
used in the result-file is also set up, ready for the results to be stored in.
==PAGE:76==
64
5 Software Development
5.3.3.3
System stiffness matrix
The sysStiff function, is used for generating the system stiffness matrix, it also pro-
duces data for the visualization of the stiffness matrices in the web application. The
data is written into the outDict, all variables used for the visualization of stiffness ma-
trices in the web application has WA as suffix and are not described further and can be
ignored. Inside each loop the eleStiff function is run to generate the local and global
unexpanded element stiffness matrix. The function differs from the method described
in section 4.6, as the element stiffness matrix is not expanded but added to the system
stiffness matrix one cell at the time. The system stiffness matrix is returned from the
function.
63
def sysStiff(self):
64
K = np.zeros((np.max(self.D)+1,np.max(self.D)+1))
65
for el in range(len(self.T)):
66
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
67
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
68
k,kl=eleStiff(X1,X2,self.G[el])
69
kWA=k
70
de=self.D[el]
71
kWA = np.vstack([de, kWA])
72
kWA = np.hstack([np.concatenate(([-1],de))[np.newaxis].T, kWA])
73
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessSmall"].append(np.around(kWA,0).tolist()
)
74
klWA=kl
75
klWA = np.vstack([de, klWA])
76
klWA = np.hstack([np.concatenate(([-1],de))[np.newaxis].T, klWA])
77
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessSmallLocal"].append(np.around(klWA ,0).
tolist())
78
KeWA = np.zeros((np.max(self.D)+1,np.max(self.D)+1))
79
for i,dei in enumerate(de):
80
for j,dej in enumerate(de):
81
K[dei,dej]+=k[i,j]
82
KeWA[dei,dej]+=k[i,j]
83
KeWA = np.vstack([np.arange(np.ma.size(KeWA ,1)), KeWA])
84
KeWA = np.hstack([(np.arange(np.ma.size(KeWA ,0))-1)[np.newaxis].T,
KeWA])
85
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessExpanded"].append(np.around(KeWA ,0).
tolist())
86
KWA = K
87
KWA = np.vstack([np.arange(np.ma.size(KWA,1)), KWA])
88
KWA = np.hstack([(np.arange(np.ma.size(KWA,0))-1)[np.newaxis].T, KWA])
89
self.outDict["SystemStiffness"]=np.around(KWA,0).tolist()
90
return K
Figure 5.12: The sysStiff function sets up the system stiffness matrix, by looping through the elements,
in each loop the element stiffness matrix is then calculated using eleStiff function. The element stiffness
matrices is added together to form the system stiffness matrix. Variable names with ”WA” in it is only
used for the stiffness matrix visualizations in the web application and can be ignored. The function
writes down the data used in the web application for visualizing the stiffness matrices, to the output
dictionary.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 CPython FEM Module
65
5.3.3.4
System load vector
The loadVec function, generates and returns the system load vector. The function first
loops through each element, inside each loop the eleLoad function finds the load vector,
generated from element loads, the reactions in the element load vector is then added to
the system load vector. In the end the function loops through the node loads and adds
them to the system load vector.
93
def loadVec(self):
94
F = np.zeros((np.max(self.D)+1,1))
95
for el in range(len(self.T)):
96
dLe=self.dL[el]
97
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
98
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
99
f,fl=eleLoad(X1,X2,dLe)
100
for i,dei in enumerate(self.D[el]):
101
F[dei]+=f[i]
102
for bLs in self.bL:
103
d=int(bLs[0])
104
F[d]+=bLs[1]
105
return F
Figure 5.13: The loadVec function generates the system load vector, by looping through each element.
Inside each loop the element’s reactions corresponding the applied element load is found and added to
the system load vector. Finally the node loads are added and the system load vector is returned.
5.3.3.5
Displacements and reactions
The calcDispReac function calculates and returns both the displacements for the system
and reactions at the supported node displacements. The function follows the method
described in section 4.8 slavishly.
108
def calcDispReac(self):
109
dof=range(np.max(self.D)+1)
110
ds=self.U
111
Rs=-self.F[ds]
112
df=np.setdiff1d(dof,ds)
113
Kff = self.K[df,:][:,df]
114
Ksf = self.K[ds,:][:,df]
115
V=np.zeros((np.max(self.D)+1,1))
116
Vs=V[ds]
117
Rf=self.F[df]
118
Vf = np.linalg.pinv(Kff) @ Rf
119
Rf = Ksf @ Vf
120
V[df]=Vf
121
V[ds]=Vs
122
Re=Rf+Rs
123
return V,Re
Figure 5.14: The calcDispReac function calculates the displacements for the system and the reactions
at the supports, using the method described in section 4.8. The displacement and the reactions is then
returned from the function.
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Software Development
5.3.3.6
System Internal Forces
The calcForces function, calculates internal forces for the system, by looping through
each element. In each loop the forceCalc function is used to calculate the internal forces
of each element. The results are placed in three different lists, F1, F2 and M, containing
the normal forces, shear forces and bending moments respectively. The three lists are
then returned by the function.
126
def calcForces(self):
127
F1=np.zeros((len(self.T),2))
128
F2=np.zeros((len(self.T),2))
129
M=np.zeros((len(self.T),2))
130
for el in range(len(self.T)):
131
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
132
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
133
de=self.D[el]
134
f1,f2,m=forceCalc(X1,X2,self.G[el],self.V[de],self.dL[el])
135
F1[el]=f1
136
F2[el]=f2
137
M[el]=m
138
return F1,F2,M
Figure 5.15: The calcForces functions calculates the forces in the system, by calculating them for each
element the forces is then placed in three different lists for each force type of force, the three lists is the
output of the function.
5.3.3.7
Export Deformation Plot
The exportDispPlot function generates the points for all elements used for plotting the
deformations. The points are generated by looping through each element and running
the forcePlot function on it. The points are written in to output dictionary, outDict,
used for the result file.
141
def exportDispPlot(self):
142
rou=int(6-math.log10(self.plotScale))
143
div=self.nrp+2
144
for el in range(len(self.T)):
145
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
146
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
147
v=self.V[self.D[el]]
148
DOFPlot ,DefDist = deformationPlot(X1,X2,v,div,self.Vskala)
149
self.outDict["DOFPlot"].append(np.around(np.array(DOFPlot)*self.
plotScale ,rou).tolist())
150
self.outDict["DefDist"].append(np.around(np.array(DefDist)*self.
plotScale ,rou).tolist())
Figure 5.16: The exportDispPlot function generates the points for the entire system used for plot-
ting the deformations, by finding the points for each element, the points are written into the output
dictionary.
==PAGE:79==
5.3 CPython FEM Module
67
5.3.3.8
Export Forces Plot
The exportForcePlot generates the points used for plotting either the normal forces,
the shear forces or the bending moments. It takes in addition to the instance variable
indicator, self, a number between one and three as input. The number, s, decides
whether it plots normal forces (s=1), shear forces (s=2) or bending moments (s=3). It
writes a list of coordinates into the output dictionary. For bending moments it also
writes the sizes of the bending moments into to the output dictionary. The PlusPos key
references the coordinates of the plusses used in the plots in Grasshopper.
154
def exportForcePlot(self,s):
155
if s==1: S=self.F1
156
elif s==2: S=self.F2
157
else: S=self.M
158
rou=int(6-math.log10(self.plotScale))
159
for el in range(len(self.T)):
160
self.outDict["ForcePlot"+str(s)].append([])
161
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
162
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
163
self.outDict["PlusPos"].append((plusPos(X1,X2)*self.plotScale).tolist
())
164
if s == 3:
165
Xp,Yp,M = forcePlot(X1,X2,S[el],self.dL[el],self.nrp,self.Sskala ,s
)
166
self.outDict["MomentForcesPt"].append(np.around(M,0).tolist())
167
else:
168
Xp,Yp = forcePlot(X1,X2,S[el],self.dL[el],self.nrp,self.Sskala ,s)
169
Xp = np.around(Xp*self.plotScale ,rou)
170
Yp = np.around(Yp*self.plotScale ,rou)
171
for i in range(len(Xp)):
172
self.outDict["ForcePlot"+str(s)][el].append([Xp[i],Yp[i],0.0])
Figure 5.17: The exportForcePlot generates the plotting points for a specified force type, by finding
the points for each element, the points are written in to the output dictionary.
5.3.3.9
Initiation Function - Part 2
The last half of __init__ functions runs the functions of the main module, assigns it as
instance variables and writes the results in to the output dictionary. The four preview
functions are from the visualization module that are not described, they generates points
used for visualizing supports as shown in section 4.2, loads are visualized as arrows and
hinges are visualized as a large dots.
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Software Development
37
self.K = self.sysStiff()
38
self.F = self.loadVec()
39
self.V,self.Re = self.calcDispReac()
40
self.F1,self.F2,self.M = self.calcForces()
41
self.outDict["Topology"]=[]
42
for ele in self.T:
43
self.outDict["Topology"].append((self.X[ele]*self.plotScale).tolist())
44
self.outDict["Displacements"]=np.around(self.V,6).T.tolist()[0]
45
self.outDict["Reactions"]=np.around(self.Re,0).T.tolist()[0]
46
self.outDict["NormalForce1"]=np.around(self.F1,0).tolist()
47
self.outDict["ShearForce2"]=np.around(self.F2,0).tolist()
48
self.outDict["Moment3"]=np.around(self.M,0).tolist()
49
self.outDict["UnitScaling"]=self.plotScale
50
self.outDict["Nodes"]=self.X.tolist()
51
self.outDict["PlotDivisions"]=self.nrp
52
self.outDict["DeformTooLarge"]=int(any(self.V>10) or any(self.V<-10))
53
self.exportDispPlot()
54
self.exportForcePlot(1)
55
self.exportForcePlot(2)
56
self.exportForcePlot(3)
57
previewSupports(self)
58
previewHinge(self)
59
previewNodeload(self)
60
previewElementload(self)
Figure 5.18: The second half of the _init_ function runs the described functions of the main module
and writes the results in to the output dictionary. It also runs the preview functions, that has not been
described.
==PAGE:81==
5.4 Grasshopper Plugin
69
5.4
Grasshopper Plugin
The Grasshopper plugin consists of 15 component, these can be divided in to three
groups, definition components, calculation components and helping tools components.
The components are designed, to help the user as much possible, bu using default
values and qualified guessing, this means that each of the components will use default
parameters until the user overwrites them.
The components can give three kinds of information feedback if the input is not as
expected, error messages, warning messages and remarks. These are shown as a small
speech bubble, the error and warnings messages also colors the component red and
orange, respectively. Warnings are mostly used if the component requires an input, but
none is given, errors are used when a wrong input are given and remarks are used when
a component has made a guess or an assumption. The three different information types
can be seen in figure 5.19.
The plugin uses a recurring dictionary, FEMdata, containing the data written in to
the input-file for the FEM program, see figure 5.3, the dictionary is first set up by the
Define Topology component, and is then updated when connected to a new component
in the Grasshopper plugin.
Figure 5.19: The first component gives a warning because there is no input, the second gives an error
as a wrong data type is input and third gives information that it has made guess on how the structure
is supported.
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Software Development
5.4.1
Definition Components
This group contains the seven components related to defining the topology, supports,
loads and materials.
5.4.1.1
Define Topology
Input
InputCurves
The input curves can either be a list of lines or a polyline
SortElement
Sort the elements in Euclidean order, the default is true
SortNodes
Sort the nodes in Euclidean order, the default is true
Decimals
Decimal point of a meter to round the coordinates to, the default 1
meaning the coordinates are round to nearest 10cm
Output
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary containing node coordinates, elements and node
displacement
The Define Topology component is used for setting up the topology, this sets nodes
coordinates and defines the elements from a start- and an end nodes, it also sets up
the node displacements (degrees of freedom) for the system based on the input curves.
It can sort nodes and elements Euclidean (first by the x-coordinate and then by the
y-coordinate), to make the topology numbering logical. It also gives the possibility to
round the coordinates of to the specified decimal point of a meter. The FEM program
can only calculate in meters, therefore, the coordinates for the output are translated to
meter, no matter which unit is used in Rhino. The component’s graphical output for
the example in figure 4.2 can be seen in figure 5.20.
==PAGE:83==
5.4 Grasshopper Plugin
71
Figure 5.20: Graphical output example, elements are drawn and numbered with blue, while nodes
are marked and numbered with red.
5.4.1.2
Define Supports
Input
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary
NodesIndex
Node indices to place supports in, if no input the supports will be
guessed
LockX
Lock movement in the node in the x-axis, the default is true
LockY
Lock movement in the node in the y-axis, the default is true
LockRotation
Lock rotation around the node, the default is true
Output
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary now containing support definitions
The Define Supports component is used for defining the supports of the system. This
can both be done one node at a time or on a list of nodes. It can also come with a guess
of which supports that are used. The guessing algorithm places fixed support in the
structure’s outermost nodes if only a single element is connected to the supported node,
else it will make the structure simply supported, by placing pinned support in the left
most node and roller support in the right most node. The different types of supports
are visualized, this can be seen in figure 5.21.
==PAGE:84==
72
5 Software Development
Figure 5.21: Preview of the different support types, fixed, pinned, roller and guided.
5.4.1.3
Define Materials
Input
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary
ElementIndex
Indices of elements to assign materials to, if no input the material will
be assigned to all elements
E-modulus
Elastic modulus (Young’s modulus) of the material, default is 2.1e11Pa
(steel)
SectionArea
Area of the cross section, the default is for a IPE120 beam
Inertia
Moment of inertia, the default is for the strong axis of a IPE120 beam
ProfileName
Optional name of profile, the default is IPE120
MaterialName
Optional name of material, the default is S235
Output
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary now containing material definitions
The Define Materials component is used for defining the material parameters for one
or more elements, if nothing is input, except from FEMdata, then the default values
assumes it is a IPE120 profile in S235 steel. The parameters for each beam is visualized
as shown in figure 5.22.
Figure 5.22: The material parameters and names are written on the elements, making it easy to see
if the they assigned correctly, the values in this example is for an IPE120 S235 steel beam.
==PAGE:85==
5.4 Grasshopper Plugin
73
5.4.1.4
Define Element Loads
Input
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary
ElementIndex
Indices of elements to assign load to, if no input the load will be as-
signed to all elements
Direction
Direction vector, representing the direction of the load, the default is
negative y-direction
LoadSize
Size of load in Newton/m, the default is 5000
Global
If true, the direction is global, else it is translated to the element’s
local coordinate system, the default is true
PreviewScale
Scale of the preview, the default is 0.1
Output
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary now containing element load definitions
The Define Element Load component is used for applying a uniformly distributed
element load on one or more elements. The FEM program can only handle one element
load for each direction of an element, therefore, if an element load is applied to an
element that already has an element load applied, the two loads are added together.
The element loads is previewed as shown in figure 5.23.
Figure 5.23: The element loads are previewed as shown, a preview scale of 0.1 means a load with the
size 5000N/m is previewed as 500mm long arrows.
==PAGE:86==
74
5 Software Development
5.4.1.5
Define Node Loads
Input
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary
NodesIndex
Index of nodes to apply node loads to, if no input the load will be
applied to all nodes
Direction
Direction vector representing the direction of the load, the default is
negative y-direction
LoadSize
Size of load in Newton, the default is 10000
PreviewScale
Scale of the preview, the default is 0.1
Output
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary now containing node load definitions
The Define Node Loads component, is used for applying node loads, the node load
can be applied one at the time or on multiple at once. Similar to the element loads, the
FEM program can only handle one load per direction (x and y) in each node, therefore,
if multiple loads are applied to the same direction in the node, they are added together.
The node loads is previewed as shown in figure 5.24.
Figure 5.24: The node loads are previewed as shown, a preview scale of 0.1 means a load with the
size 10000N is previewed as 1000mm long arrow.
==PAGE:87==
5.4 Grasshopper Plugin
75
5.4.1.6
Define Dead Load
Input
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary
SectionArea
Area of the cross section, the default is for a IPE120 beam
Density
Density of the material in Newton/m3, default is the density of steel
PreviewScale
Scale of the preview, the default is 0.1
Output
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary now containing element loads corresponding to
the dead load
The Define Dead Load component, is the same the Define Element Loads component,
but this offers to calculate the weight of the elements, and apply it as an element load,
to all the elements in the system.
5.4.1.7
Define Hinge
Input
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary
AddHingeNode
Index of node to place hinge in
AddHingeElement
Optional index of element to place hinge in, if only one of the elements
in the connection is hinges
Output
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary with updated node displacements
The Define Hinge component is used for defining hinges, these can both be added
one at the time or multiple at once.
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Software Development
5.4.2
Calculation Components
This group contains the components relating to the calculations, these writes and reads
the data files, and runs the CPython FEM program.
5.4.2.1
Write Input File
Input
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary
DeformationScale
The scaling of the deformations, the default is 10
ForcesScale
The scaling of the forces, the default is 0.1 meaning 1mm equals 10N
or 10Nm
PlotDivisions
Number of interpolation points used when plotting, the default is 20
ProjectName
Optional project name, used in the input- and result-file’s name
Folder
Optional folder to place input- and result-file in, by default, if the
Rhino file is saved the default folder is the folder of the Rhino file, else
it is placed on the Desktop.
Write
Start the writing of the input-file, the default is false
Output
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary identical to the data in the input-file
InputFile
Path of the input-file
The Write Input File component writes the FEMdata into the input-file for the FEM
program to read. It also fills out the FEMdata if any data is missing, for instance if
no supports are defined, it uses the guessing algorithm previously described, for other
input parameters it uses the same default values as the other components. The added
data is previewed the same way as the other components as well.
==PAGE:89==
5.4 Grasshopper Plugin
77
5.4.2.2
Read Result File
Input
ResultFile
Path of the result-file to read
PlotPreview
Number indicating what to be previewed: 0 = Deformation, 1 = Nor-
mal Forces, 2 = Shear Forces, 3 = Bending Moments
Output
Displacements
Displacement values corresponding to each node displacement
DeformationPlot
The polylines representing the deformation plot
ReactionForces
The reaction forces at the supports of the system
NormalForces
The normal forces at the ends of each element
NormalPlot
The polylines representing the normal plot
ShearForces
The normal forces at the ends of each element
ShearPlot
The polylines representing the shear plot
BendingMoment
The bending moment for each interpolation point of each element
MomentPlot
The polylines representing the moment plot
The Read Result File component, reads a result-file which can be made by using the
Run FEM Calculation component or the web application. It return both quantitative
results and plot figures. The plot figures that are previewed, figure 5.25, are colored.
For the deformation plot the color scale goes from green to red, where green is zero and
red is the largest resultant deformation. For forces and moment plot, the color scale is
centered around zero which is always green, positive forces are red and negative blue,
the darker the red or blue the larger are the forces.
==PAGE:90==
78
5 Software Development
Figure 5.25: In reading order, the deformation plot, normal forces plot, shear forces plot and the
bending moments plot, as visualized by the Read Result File component.
5.4.2.3
Run FEM Calculation
Input
InputFile
Path of the input-file
PythonExe
Optional path of the Python executable file, if no input it will look in
the three of the most common places.
Run
Run the calculation, the default is false
Output
ResultFile
Path of the result-file
The Run FEM Calculation runs the CPython FEM calculations with the input-file
as input. This component requires the user to have CPython installed with the NumPy
library. The component can be skipped and the web application used instead.
==PAGE:91==
5.4 Grasshopper Plugin
79
5.4.3
Helping tools Components
The group helping tools, are components that makes the setting up of the data easier,
by, for instance, looking up material parameters.
5.4.3.1
FEMdata to Geometry
Input
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary
Output
Elements
Lines representing the elements
Nodes
Points representing the nodes
Planes
Local planes for each element
The FEM to Geometry component, translates the input-file dictionary back into
geometry, if the geometry, for instance, is modified for new a analysis.
5.4.3.2
Search Cross Sections
Input
SecName
Name or part of name of the cross section searched for
Region
Optional region filter, lets the user filter the results to only include, for
instance, European standards
Output
Names
Section names matching the name searched for
SectionArea
The corresponding cross section area
InertiaStrong
The corresponding moment of inertia in the strong axis
InertiaWeak
The corresponding moment of inertia in the weak axis
The Search Cross Sections component lets the user look up standard cross sections,
mostly for steel, from a large library. The corresponding cross section parameters is
output, ready for use in the Define Materials component.
==PAGE:92==
80
5 Software Development
5.4.3.3
Search Materials
Input
MatName
Name or part of name of the material searched for
Output
Names
Material names matching the name searched for
Category
The corresponding category, steel, wood, concrete etc.
E-modulus
The corresponding E-modulus of the material
Density
The corresponding density of the material
The Search Material component lets the user look up materials, from a large library,
the corresponding material parameters is output, ready for use in the Define Materials
component.
5.4.3.4
Subdivide Element
Input
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary
ElementIndex
Index of element to subdivide
Divisions
Number of subdivisions, the default is 10
Output
FEMdata
Input-file dictionary updated with extra elements
NewIndices
Indices of the new elements
The Subdivide Element component lets the user, subdivide one or more elements,
this can be used for approximating non-uniformly distributed loads, see figure 5.26.
Figure 5.26: The Subdivide Element can be used for approximating non-uniformly distributed loads.
==PAGE:93==
5.4 Grasshopper Plugin
81
5.4.3.5
Section Creator
Input
Section
Closed curve or surface representing the cross section
ProfileList
Optional list of profiles to compare with
Compare
Comparison parameter: 0 = Average of Section Area, Inertia Strong
and Inertia Weak, 1 = Average of Section Area and Inertia Strong, 2
= Inertia Strong, 3 = Section Area, the default is 0
Output
SectionArea
The cross section area of the input
InertiaStrong
The moment of inertia in the strong axis of the input
InertiaWeak
The moment of inertia in the weak axis of the input
Similar
Standard cross sections ranked with the most similar first
Similarity
The corresponding similarity in percent
The Section Creator can be used for the user to defining a custom cross section, the
component returns the necessary cross section parameters, and compares it with known
standard cross sections.
==PAGE:94==
82
5 Software Development
5.5
Web Application
The web application was developed to extend the accessibility of LivestockFEM, by
letting the users do FEM calculations without CPython installed. The users could now
take their input-file from Grasshopper and upload it to the web application, which then
performs the FEM calculations and plots the results. Making a web application also
gave the opportunity to graphically and textually explain the underlying theory of FEM.
Being able to explain the theory, improves LivestockFEM’s position as educational tool,
as it lets curious students see calculations while they are looking at the results.
The web application, was developed in CPython, using the Dash library to give
access to HTML-coding in Python, and PlotLy to get access to the JavaScript graphics
library of the same name. The Dash and PlotLy libraries was well documented [Dash,
2019] and the associated forums was very extensive, this made it relatively manageable
to make a nice looking and functional web application, without any prior knowledge of
web design. Keeping all the coding in CPython made possible to run the FEM program
directly within the code, without having to transfer data via input- and output-files.
Using Heroku for deploying the web application, only demanded few lines of codes in the
beginning of the main Python script of the web application (not the main FEM module).
The Python files used were then uploaded to a repository on GitHub, along with some
initiation files, that described which version of Python to use, which libraries to include
and what file to run when a user enters the web site. On Heroku’s homepage the link
to the GitHub repository is specified and a domain name chosen, then Heroku does the
rest of the deployment.
This section will focus on the user experience and the possibilities of the web appli-
cation, the development of it, will not be described any further in this thesis, all the
source code can, as previously mentioned, be found on GitHub.
==PAGE:95==
5.5 Web Application
83
5.5.1
Interface
The web application, is a single page website, giving access to all functions without ever
leaving the plot visualization area. The single page interface means the user can see the
results of changes instantly.
The top of the website is dedicated to uploading and downloading, input- and result-
files. After the up- and downloading area, comes the view filters and plot visualization
area. Finally, in the bottom of the website, there is six tabs, Nodes, Elements, Supports,
Loads, Matrix and Result.
In the tabs the user can manipulate the structure and
boundary conditions, get the results or see explanations of underlying calculations. The
web application is optimized to 1080p resolution, but works with other resolutions as
well.
Figure 5.27: The interface can be divided in three, the up- and downloading area, the plot visualization-
and filters area and the tabs area.
==PAGE:96==
84
5 Software Development
5.5.2
Uploading and Downloading Files
The first thing the user sees when entering the website, is the headline and a drag and
drop area, in the drag and drop area the input-file can be dragged onto, to upload it.
The input-file can also be uploaded by clicking on the ”Select Input File” text, this
opens a file browser window that lets the user browse for the file. As soon as the file
is uploaded the FEM calculations starts and the rest of the website appears, as seen in
figure 5.27.
When the input-file is uploaded, the drag and drop area changes, it now writes what file
is uploaded and when it was last changed, this is done to let user know what file they are
working on, to give an overview if it is the right file they have uploaded, but also if the
user have multiple instances of the website open, to for instance comparing the results,
then the user know which file the current results are from. A new input-file can always
be dropped onto the drag and drop area or by clicking on the ”Load another input file?”.
When the FEM calculations are done, which is usually instantly after the input-file is
uploaded, a ”Download Result File” link appears, downloading the result-file lets the
user go back to Rhino/Grasshopper for further analysis of the results. The downloadable
result-file is continuously updated when changes are made in the web application.
Figure 5.28: The drag and drop area before and after the file is uploaded.
==PAGE:97==
5.5 Web Application
85
5.5.3
Plots and Filters
Under the up- and downloading area, the plot visualization and the view filters appears
when the input-file is uploaded. The filters gives the opportunity to turn the different
plots on and off, four examples of plots can be seen in figure 4.20.
Next to the filters the user can change the scale of the deformations and the forces,
including the loads. When changing the scales, the plots are updated when the user
presses enter or leaves the input field.
Next to the scaling fields, a slider lets the user change the size of the plot area, to make
the user able to see more of the structure or to leave more space for content of the tabs.
Inside the plot area, the user has a variety of functions to use, these can be found in
the top right corner of the plot area. The functions lets the user save screenshots, pan
over the structure and zoom in and out, among other things. It is also possible to zoom
by dragging the mouse over the area to zoom to while holding the left mouse button
down. A grid with the corresponding unit notation is always visible along with the
legend explaining the different plots.
If the user hovers over a plot, a small information box is shown, this shows the actual
size of forces and displacement, at the point that are hovered above. Hovering over node
and element points also shows the number of the node or element.
Figure 5.29: The plot area is interactive and lets the user, zoom and pan over the plot, the filter lets
the user turn the different plots on and off.
==PAGE:98==
86
5 Software Development
5.5.4
Nodes Tab
In the ”Nodes” tab, the user can get information on a node. Initially the fields in the
tab are empty, these are filled out when the user click on a node in the plot. When the
fields are filled out, the user can see number of the current node, the node’s coordinates,
the size of the node loads (0 if no loads are applied to the node) and whether the node
is supported in any direction.
The user can overwrite the content of the coordinates and the loads fields, the supports
check boxes can be clicked as well. If the user clicks on the ”Apply Changes” button the
plot will be instantly updated with the user’s input. Being able to apply changes, gives
the user the opportunity to experiment with the geometry, loads and supports, and see
the results right away. This can help the user in getting a good understanding of the
structural behavior under different conditions.
It is currently not possible to change hinges in the web application, hinges modelled in
Grasshopper, however, is visualized with a large dot, and included in the calculations.
Figure 5.30: The ”Nodes” tab gives the user the possibility to see and manipulate the nodes, node
loads and supports.
==PAGE:99==
5.5 Web Application
87
5.5.5
Elements Tab
The ”Elements” tab provides information on the elements in the structure. Like the
”Nodes” tab, the fields in the tab are initially empty, these are filled out when the user
clicks on either the midpoint of the element or any force or deformation plot of the
element. The information given in the tab are, the current element number, the indices
of the start- and end- node, the size of the element loads (0 if no load are applied to the
element) and finally all the material parameters of the element. The size of the loads can
both be given in the local and the global coordinate system, by using the radio button
under the loads fields.
As with the ”Nodes” tab, the user can overwrite the information and apply changes, and
instantly see the changes in the plots. The element loads can also be specified in both
the local and global coordinate system. Overwriting the start- and end node indices,
gives the user the possibility to change the orientation of an element, which can be
useful when, for instance, experimenting with trusses.
Figure 5.31: The ”Elements” tab gives the user the possibility to see and manipulate the elements,
element loads and element material parameters.
==PAGE:100==
88
5 Software Development
5.5.6
Supports Tab
The ”Supports” tab presents the results of the reaction force calculations, the reaction
forces are listed for each of the supported nodes and summed up, this is done to let the
user check the equilibrium by comparing with summed up loads in the ”Loads” tab. The
user cannot change anything in the ”Supports” tab, but results are updated if anything
is changes in the ”Nodes” or ”Elements” tabs.
If the user clicks on one of the ”View Explanation” fields, the user will be given infor-
mation on theory behind supports.
The ”Supports and Reactions forces” explanation explains the different types of supports
and their corresponding reactions, it also presents real life examples of the supports. The
explanation is similar to the one found in section 4.3.
The ”Reactions calculations” explanations, shows the underlying calculations for finding
the reactions, from extracting parts of the element stiffness matrix, to finding the dis-
placements, and using these for finding the reaction forces. The explanation is similar
to the one found in 4.8.
Figure 5.32: The ”Supports” tab views and sums up the reaction forces, it also offers the opportunity
to get the underlying theory behind supports and reaction forces.
==PAGE:101==
5.5 Web Application
89
5.5.7
Loads Tab
The ”Loads” tab lists and sums up all the loads in the system, both node loads and
element loads. This can be used to get an overview of all the loads in the system. The
sum of the loads can be used for checking the equilibrium, by comparing with the sum
of the reaction forces.
If the user clicks on one of the ”View Explanation” fields, the user will be given infor-
mation on theory behind loads.
The ”Load types” explanation presents a description of the different load types, and how
to go from 3D loads to 2D loads. The explanation is similar to the one found in section
4.2.
The ”Load vectors” explains how to put up the load vectors used in the displacement
and forces calculation. The explanation is similar to the one found in section 4.7.
Figure 5.33: The ”Loads” tab views and sums up the loads, both node loads and element loads, it
also offer the opportunity to get the underlying explanation of what a load is and how it is used in the
calculations.
==PAGE:102==
90
5 Software Development
5.5.8
Matrix Tab
The ”Matrix” tab is dedicated to the stiffness matrices, like the ”Nodes” and ”Elements”
tab, the first the user has to do is to click on an element in the plot, the local and
the global unexpanded element stiffness matrix is then viewed. If the user wants to see
the expanded version he must click the ”View Expanded Element Stiffness Matrix”, by
clicking the ”View System Stiffness Matrix” the user can see where the current element
contributes in the system stiffness matrix, as seen in figure 5.34, this is the case for
element 2 in figure 4.2 example.
The ”Matrix” tab also offers explanations of what degrees of freedom (node displace-
ments) are. How to set up the local element stiffness matrix, transforming it to global
coordinates, expanding it and add it to the system stiffness matrix, is also explained.
The stiffness matrices is one of the core elements of the direct stiffness method that
this FEM implementation uses, it is therefore important to understand it if you want
to understand FEM, but it is also one of the most difficult parts to understand and to
keep an overview of when the structures grow large. To give a better overview, this tab
breaks up the different steps needed to do, in order to find the system stiffness matrix.
It tries to show the relationship to the degrees of freedom, by coloring the different parts
of the matrix, the colors are then used throughout the different steps, so the user can
see exactly where each element contributes to stiffness of the system.
The explanations used are similar to the ones used in the FEM theory section.
Figure 5.34: This shows the system stiffness matrix and where element 2 contributes to the stiffness,
these areas are colored red, blue, green and yellow, corresponding to the colors used in the local and
global element stiffness matrix.
==PAGE:103==
5.5 Web Application
91
Figure 5.35: The Matrix tab lets user see the different steps of making the system stiffness matrix.
==PAGE:104==
92
5 Software Development
5.5.9
Results Tab
The ”Results” tab presents the quantitative results of the calculations and explains how
the section (internal) forces are found.
In the tab is a drop down menu letting the user select what results to view, the options
are: Overview, this shows the absolute maximum forces and displacements in the entire
structure, Displacements, Bending Moments, Normal Forces and Shear Forces, the latter
three shows the maximum values for each element and the values in the ends of each
element.
Figure 5.36: The Results tab presents the quantitative results of the FEM calculation.
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 6
Use Cases
This section will present some cases of usage, the first cases will be used for validating
the results LivestockFEM gives, this will be done by comparing the results with the
results from other software. The last of the cases will be used to show some of the
possibilities of the software and give an example on how it can be used.
6.1
Validation Cases
The results of LivestockFEM are compared to the two previously mentioned FEM soft-
ware, K2Engineering and Karamba3D, these two has previously been compared in an-
other thesis [Brandt-Olsen, 2016], the validation of LivestockFEM, builds upon this
comparison.
6.1.1
Truss
The first test case is a simply supported truss with a height of 0.5 meter and a 5 meter
span, with a point load on the middle. In addition to the point load, the dead load of
the structure is also included in the calculation. The rest of the parameters used can be
seen in table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Input parameters for the calculations
Moment of
Cross section
E-modulus
Density
Point load
inertia
area
size
31250 mm4
443 mm2
2.1e11 Pa
76980 N/m3
100000 N
The results of the normal forces (axial forces) in K2Engineering and Karamba3D
can be seen in figure 6.1. The values are in kN. The maximum displacement is in the
middle of the structure, and has a size of 28.8mm and 28.9mm in K2Engineering and
Karamba3D respectively. There are no horizontal reactions in the system, the vertical
reactions are for both supports 50.4kN in both programs.
==PAGE:106==
94
6 Use Cases
Figure 6.1: In K2Engineering the red beams are in compression (negative normal forces) and the blue
beams are in tension (positive normal forces). The colors in Karamba3D indicates the utilization of the
elements.
The results from LivestockFEM can be seen in figure 6.2. The first plot shows the
deformations and the second plot the normal forces, the maximum displacement is found
in the middle of the truss and is 28.5mm. The vertical reaction forces are both 50.4kN,
like the in the two other calculations.
Figure 6.2: The top plot shows the deformations, and the bottom plot the normal forces found by
LivestockFEM.
As it is seen the variations are relatively small, this can be because of rounding
differences. How the calculations are setup in K2Engineering and Karamba3D are not
explicitly shown, the input parameters can therefore be slightly different, there is, for
instance, no specific moment of inertia or cross section specified. The area is specified
as 443mm2, this does not correspond to the cross section specified, 50 x 3mm, it is
therefore assumed the cross section that are specified represents the web of a beam and
are a simplification used for calculating the strong axis moment of inertia of the actual
cross section.
==PAGE:107==
6.1 Validation Cases
95
6.1.2
Frame
Another example, is a frame with a height of 2 meter and a width of 5 meter with pinned
supports and a point load applied in the middle, in addition to the point load, the frame
is subjected to its dead load. The rest of the input parameters can be seen in table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Input parameters for the calculations
Moment of
Cross section
E-modulus
Density
Point load
inertia
area
size
262000 mm4
650 mm2
2.1e11 Pa
76980 N/m3
1500 N
The reaction forces, shear forces and bending moments for K2Engineering and Karamba3D
can be seen in figure 6.3, the maximum displacements are 31.7mm and 32.4mm for
K2Engineering and Karamba3D respectively.
Figure 6.3: The results from K2Engineering and Karamba3D are very similar.
==PAGE:108==
96
6 Use Cases
The results from LivestockFEM are, as seen in figure 6.4, very close to the ones found
in K2Engineering and Karamba3D, the maximum displacement are in fact exactly the
same as K2Engineering, 31.7mm, and the reactions are exactly the same as Karamba3D,
0.41kN (horizontal) and 0.98kN (vertical).
Figure 6.4:
The plots from LivestockFEM, draws the positive values on the opposite site of the
elements compared to K2Engineering and Karamba3D, but the results are almost identical.
==PAGE:109==
6.2 Example of Usage
97
6.2
Example of Usage
A bowstring truss structure, has been set up in Grasshopper, the structure spans 10
meters and it is simply supported. The geometry is set up parametrically in Grasshopper,
with three variables.
The first variable is the height of the arch that the top chords follows, this can vary from
500mm to 5000mm, in 500mm steps, resulting in 10 possible heights.
The second variable is the number of sections in truss, this can vary from 2 to 16, using
even numbers only, this gives 8 different possibilities.
The third variable is the profile types, the algorithm takes all available IPE-beams,
between, and including, IPE80 and IPE400, into consideration, this gives 14 different
profile types.
The variables give in total 10 × 8 × 14 = 1120 combinations to test. The two extreme
cases can be seen in figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: The top truss has the minimum height, 500mm, and consist of the minimum amount of
truss sections, 2. The bottom truss has the maximum height, 5000mm, and the maximum amount of
truss sections, 16.
==PAGE:110==
98
6 Use Cases
The structure is subjected to dead loads, a uniformly distributed line load on the
horizontal bridge deck elements and a point load acting on the middle of the bridge, the
distribution of the loads can be seen in figure 6.6. The input parameters used can be
seen in table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Input parameters for the calculations
E-modulus
Density
Point load size
Line load size
2.1e11 Pa
78500 N/m3
80 kN
50 kN/m
Figure 6.6: The line load is applied to horizontal bridge deck (red arrows). The point load is applied
to middle of the bridge (green arrow). The dead load is not shown.
An optimization algorithm is created in Grasshopper, this finds the variable combina-
tion with the least amount of steel used, based on the total weight of the structure. The
maximum displacement of the structure must not exceed L/400, where L is the length
of the span, this means the structure must not exceed 10000mm/400 = 25mm. The
algorithm does not take connections or buildability into consideration, it does not check
for any other dimensioning factors as well. The optimization is set up using Grasshop-
per’s evolutionary solver, Galapagos, which uses an optimization algorithm inspired by
biological evolution, instead of brute forcing through all combinations. The Grasshopper
file can be found on GitHub.
==PAGE:111==
6.2 Example of Usage
99
Figure 6.7: The top five truss topologies, covers 3 different heights, 3 different amount of truss sections
and 3 different profile types. The parameters for each truss can be seen in table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Top 5 trusses’ variable and results
Rank
Arch Height
Sections
Profile
Max Displacement
Weight
1
3000 mm
8
IPE80
24.2 mm
3278 kg
2
2500 mm
6
IPE100
24.7 mm
3383 kg
3
2500 mm
4
IPE120
23.0 mm
3556 kg
4
3500 mm
8
IPE80
20.0 mm
3650 kg
5
3000 mm
6
IPE100
18.7 mm
3721 kg
As it can be seen, the top 5 trusses, covers 3 different heights, 3 different amount of
truss sections and 3 different profile types. The best two results do not share any variable,
but are still only approximately 100kg apart, this shows the power of being able to run
multi variable optimizations, as it is possible to do more combinations than manual
optimizations, that rarely includes changing more than one variable at the time. For the
optimization case each iteration took approximately 1 second (on an old computer).
==PAGE:112==
100
6 Use Cases
If the ”best” truss’ input-file are uploaded to the web application, were are given the
same results, see figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: The results are the same for the best truss structure, note that the maximum displacement
is rounded up to nearest millimeter.
==PAGE:113==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this section feedback from surveys and oral feedback will be presented and discussed
for the purpose of evaluating the LivestockFEM software developed in the thesis. This
evaluation and discussion will form the basis for a future work discussion.
7.1
Feedback
LivestockFEM was, as previously mentioned, presented to students of the course ”11996 -
Project work - Architectural Engineering” on the 5th of April 2019, approximately three
months into the thesis. The course is taught at the 4. semester of the bachelor degree
in ”Architectural Engineering” at DTU. The students were given an introduction to the
Grasshopper plugin and how to use all of its components, they were also introduced the
web application and its functions. The students were giving two surveys, one to fill out
before they used LivestockFEM and one to fill out after they have used it. The objectives
of the course were interdisciplinary, so structural analysis was only a part of course, not
the primary objective. The course also provided the students with an introduction to
Rhino/Grasshopper prior to the presentation of LivestockFEM.
7.1.1
Surveys
The surveys were designed to both give qualitative and quantitative feedback.
The
survey the students should answer before using LivestockFEM, were only answered by
11 students out of the approximately 40 students in the course, it can therefore be
difficult to assess how good they represent the entire class. Looking at the results, 10
out of the 11 students answered they have had the two introductory structural analysis
courses at DTU Department of Civil Engineering (DTU Byg),the last one had only had
first course. These two courses are the only mandatory courses structural analysis and
should provide the students with a general knowledge on the subject. However, when
asked ”How will you assess your general knowledge of structural analysis?” on a scale
from 1 to 10, where the higher the number the greater the knowledge, all 11 students
==PAGE:114==
102
7 Discussion
placed them self in the lower half, see figure 7.1. This supports the authors assertion that
the teaching in the introductory structural analysis courses at DTU Byg is ineffectual
and there is a need for improvements.
Figure 7.1: All of the 11 students answered that there knowledge of structural analysis lie in the
bottom half.
The first survey also showed, that the students only had very little knowledge of
FEM, average was 2 on the 1 to 10 scale, and that only two of the students have tried
simple 2D structural analysis programs, the rest have only done calculations by hand
before. The students were also asked what they find the most difficult about structural
analysis, there was two recurring answers to this question, the first being, to draw forces
and deformation diagrams (plots) and the second was, to relate it to real life cases.
The survey the students were asked to answer after they have used LivestockFEM,
were only answered by three students, so this cannot be seen a representation of the
entire class. However, the answer were generally positive, the three students all assessed
the user friendliness of the Grasshopper plugin and the web application in the top half
the scale (1 to 10), except from one that had only used the Grasshopper plugin, the
average assessment were 7.33 (three students) and 7.5 (two students). All three found
it likely that they would use LivestockFEM again in future. Only one answered he/she
had used the explanations on the web application, and none have looked at the stiffness
matrices. When asked for improvement suggestions, the answers were; more focus on
the results, and defining the right materials were difficult.
7.1.2
Oral Feedback
In addition to the surveys the students’ use of LivestockFEM was observed and noted,
along with their oral comments and feedback. During the period of the aforementioned
course, the students were given guidance in using LivestockFEM by the author. The first
guidance session was right after the presentation of the software, the second guidance
==PAGE:115==
7.1 Feedback
103
session was in the last week of the course period, when the students have had more time
to get familiar with LivestockFEM. In the weeks between, the teacher, the supervisor of
this thesis, also observed and noted the students’ use of LivestockFEM, theses observa-
tions were reported back to the author.
The first challenge noticed was, the students’ lack of Grasshopper experience, most of
the time spend during the first guidance session, were spent on helping the students set-
ting up their structure in Grasshopper, rather than helping them defining the topology
and boundary conditions in the LivestockFEM. The projects the students were working
on in the course were, at the point of the first guidance session, in a very early state
and many of the students very simply not ready to do structural analysis, as their focus
were on other parameters of the design.
At the second guidance session, the students showed that they to great extent had em-
braced LivestockFEM, the questions were now much more specific on using the software.
One of the recurring questions was how to define the parameters of a reinforced concrete
beam, which are not a part of the standard beams that can be found in the Grasshopper
plugin, the plugin mostly covers standard steel beams. Some of the students had issues
with the CPython installation on their own computer and as a result could not use the
Grasshopper link to CPython, instead they used the web application, the link worked
perfectly on the school’s computers. The students were seen experimenting with their
structure in LivestockFEM, for instance one group were experimenting with, where to
place bracings most efficiently to minimize the deformation of the structure. Some of
the students directly expressed, that they liked the software, and it seemed that there
was general a satisfaction with it.
An interview with Egil Borchersen, associate professor at DTU, were conducted the
23rd of April 2019.
With more than 50 years of experience, Borchersen shared his
knowledge on FEM through the years, but he was also asked about where he, with his
experience in teaching structural analysis and FEM, saw the biggest challenges for the
students lie, to this he mentioned two things; The lack of understanding for the correct-
ness of the results and the definition of boundary conditions, for instance defining loads
correctly. LivestockFEM was also presented to him, and his comments were positive,
especially the graphical feedback the user gets when defining the boundary conditions,
which is not given in the MatLab program previously described in the thesis. He was
also very positive about the explanations the user can get when using the web applica-
tion. Finally, he added that if he was still teaching, he could definitely see himself using
LivestockFEM on the students.
==PAGE:116==
104
7 Discussion
7.2
Feedback Evaluation
One of the things the feedback from the course shows, is that all though the students
seemed happy with LivestockFEM, the software must be tested in other courses as
well, courses where the objective is to learn structural analysis. From the results of
this course, it is difficult to assess the software’s ability to teach the underlying theory
of FEM. Because the course’s objective not was to learn FEM, the student did not
feel the need for understanding the theory behind the software. The students instead
saw it as tool to solve a given task, that otherwise would have been difficult to solve.
That said, LivestockFEM made it is possible for students with only little experience in
structural analysis, to do analyses on complex structures, and modify their structures
on the basis of these analyses to perform better. As previously stated the best way of
learning an intuitive understanding of structural behavior is, learning by doing [Emami
and Von Buelow, 2016], the feedback shows that LivestockFEM supports that.
7.3
Development
Writing the FEM implementation in CPython proved to be a good idea, as it was
possible to make a very readable implementation, which could be linked to Grasshopper
through IronPython. Writing the code in CPython also made it possible to use some
of the many libraries developed for CPython, among them PlotLy and Dash.
Dash
and PlotLy made gave the opportunity to set up a functional web application with a
manageable interface, without any prior knowledge of web development. Even though
the libraries were relatively easy to use, it is the author impression that he only scratched
the surface of the functionalities available in these libraries, and they are still on a
continuous development. Dash and PlotLy can therefore still be used as a basis for
future development of the web application. The use of Heroku for deployment of the
web application, made it easy to deploy it to a server, at the moment the web application
uses the free version of Heroku, this means the calculation speed is limited, it was not
big problem, but the web application could periodically be a bit slow when uploading
files with many elements. Except from the speed issue there was never any problems
with having multiple students using the web application at the same time.
The choice of using the JSON format for data exchange, also made the exchange of data
between the FEM module and Grasshopper much easier and a lot more readable, than
the previous method.
If LivestockFEM was to be developed from scratch again, the same tools would be chosen
for the development.
==PAGE:117==
7.4 Future Work
105
7.4
Future Work
Based on the feedback from students and teachers, and thoughts done by the author
throughout the thesis, there is multiple possibilities for future work. The future work is,
for clarity, divided into the three parts of the LivestockFEM software, the FEM module,
the Grasshopper plugin and the web application.
7.4.1
FEM Module
The FEM module works, efficiently for 2D structures containing beams subjected to
point loads or uniformly distributed loads.
The natural next step will therefore be
to, extend the types of elements available, for instance by making it possible to do
calculation on plate elements and cable elements (elements only working in tension that
gets slack when in compression). For plate elements, the link to Grasshopper could help
transforming the plate in to a mesh, as Grasshopper already are able to handle meshes
well.
Another relevant expansion of the FEM module is, to make it able to handle other
line loads than the uniformly distributed loads currently available. The Grasshopper
plugin offers the opportunity to make an approximation, by subdividing an element into
smaller elements, this, however, results in more elements in the topology, making the
calculations heavier and the input data less clear.
Another possible expansion is to make the FEM module able to handle structures in
3D, however this requires significant changes to the software, as six degrees of freedom
(node displacements) per node are needed, see figure 7.2, as opposed to the current three
degrees of freedom. This will probably require the code to be completely rewritten. An
Figure 7.2: The six degrees of freedom required to make 3D FEM calculations, movement in the x-,
the y- and the z-direction, and rotation around the x-, the y- and the z-axis [Ionescu, 2019].
==PAGE:118==
106
7 Discussion
alternative to 3D could be a 2.5D solution where the calculations are done in 2D, but the
geometry and boundary conditions are defined in 3D and then automatically projected
onto relevant section planes.
7.4.2
Grasshopper Plugin
Based on the observed use of LivestockFEM by the DTU students, some of the com-
ponents could use improvements to user friendliness, for instance when defining hinges,
it became difficult to define many hinges at once. The error handling could also be
improved for some of the components, as it did not catch all types of input errors.
A feature that could be implemented in a component, was heavily requested by the
students, is the ability to define the material parameters of a custom made reinforced
concrete cross section.
Another sought after feature by the students, is the ability to make it easier to apply
real life load combinations, as defined in Eurocodes or other standards.
As mentioned in the future work for the FEM module, implementing a 2.5D feature,
will make it easier to do structural analysis on structures defined in 3D. A 2.5D function
would likely be implemented as a component in Grasshopper, as it is here the geometry
is handled and Grasshopper already have multiple build-in functions that can help with
the projection of geometry and boundary conditions.
Another useful improvement could be to link Grasshopper directly to the web appli-
cation. Making a live link to the FEM calculation engine in the web application, that
sends the input and result data both ways would make LivestockFEM completely inde-
pendent of a local CPython installation, which some of the students struggled with, this
will allow the user to still make, for instance, optimization algorithms, which currently
cannot be done automatically while using the web application.
7.4.3
Web Application
One of the ideas that has been on table since the start of the web application develop-
ment, is the ability to define all parts of the structure and the boundary conditions in
web application. This could be done very intuitively as PlotLy records the coordinates
and the clicks of the mouse, making it possible to draw the geometry directly in the
plot window, like when drawing in Rhino or AutoCAD. This will make LivestockFEM
more accessible for users little or no Grasshopper experience and would not require any
license to Rhino/Grasshopper.
At the moment the explanations in the web application uses the same recurring
==PAGE:119==
7.4 Future Work
107
example as in this thesis. The explanations could follow the user’s input, so the stiffness
matrices are not the only intermediate results shown for the user’s input, as it is at
the moment. This could give the user insight to the underlying calculations, in their
particular structure. Making the explanations follow the user’s input could, however,
make the explanations more confusing, if the user has a structure with many nodes and
elements. Matrices very quickly becomes very large, because every time a node is added
the system matrix gets at least three new rows and columns.
As previously mentioned the web application becomes slow at times, it could therefore
improve the experience of the web application, if it was deployed to a faster server. This
is also a requirement if, as mentioned in future works for the Grasshopper plugin, the
web application is going to be linked dynamically to Grasshopper, the current speed
would not allow automatic optimization algorithms to run.
==PAGE:120==
108
==PAGE:121==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to increase the accessibility of complex structural analysis,
to let designers, both architects and engineers, in the early phases of a project, perform
structural analyses in order to make sustainable performance-based designs. The ac-
cessibility of structural analysis will be increased by improving the current teaching in
structural analysis, this is done by focusing on enhancing the student’s intuitive under-
standing of structural behavior, rather than focusing on the mathematical theory behind
through hand calculations. By starting out with giving the students and intuitive under-
standing, they will become better at understanding and evaluating their results. When
the students have an intuitive understanding and are able to evaluate their results, they
can study the underlying calculations or even the implementation, giving the ability to
understand exactly what is going on, and maybe make their own implementations.
To make a tool that can make complex structural analysis accessible, the Finite El-
ement Method (FEM) was used. FEM makes it possible to perform computer based
structural analyses. FEM utilizes the Direct Stiffness Method which uses the relation be-
tween the structure’s stiffness and the displacements, to calculate internal forces. FEM
originated from the military aeronautic industry, but since spread to many other indus-
tries, including civil engineering.
The software developed in this thesis, LivestockFEM, implements FEM using the
programming language CPython, based on an existing MatLab code. CPython made
it possible to make a readable open source implementation of FEM, that makes the
underlying code accessible for the users of the software, it also expands the compatibility
of the implementation compared to MatLab, this made it possible to link the code to
other software and build a web application on top of it. The original MatLab code
required the user to define matrices with their input parameters directly in the code,
leaving no graphical visualization of the input parameters, causing it to be difficult for
the user to know if the input parameters are specified correctly.
LivestockFEM uses the CAD program Rhinoceros3D and the plugin Grasshopper
for defining the geometry and the boundary conditions. It lets the user define geome-
try graphically through the CAD environment, rather than textually. Grasshopper also
makes it possible to define input parameters parametrically, making it easy to make
==PAGE:122==
110
8 Conclusion
changes and potentially setting up algorithms for optimization, this is ideal when mak-
ing a performance-based design in the early design phases.
LivestockFEM offers a plugin for Grasshopper, that can be used for translating the
geometry from Grasshopper into the input matrices used by the FEM implementation.
The plugin can also be used for defining and visualizing boundary conditions, this makes
it easy for the user to check that they have defined the input parameters correctly. The
Grasshopper plugin is developed in IronPython which is linked to the CPython imple-
mentation of FEM, this link lets the user run the FEM calculations from inside the
Grasshopper environment.
To be able to do FEM calculations in Grasshopper, CPython must be installed locally
on the computer, this limits the accessibility, therefore a web application was devel-
oped. The web application takes the input-file generated in Grasshopper as input, it
then runs the CPython FEM program and plots the results, the result-file can then be
download and taken back into Grasshopper. But the results can also be seen in the web
application both as plots and values, the user can also get explanations of the underlying
calculations, while they are studying the results, resulting in an intuitive way of learning.
LivestockFEM has been tested in two validation cases, in these cases LivestockFEM
is compared to the results of two other FEM tools, K2Engineering and Karamba3D. The
software is tested on a truss structure which shows relatively similar results, the devia-
tions might be caused by rounding differences or uncertainties in the input parameters
of the structures LivestockFEM is compared to, as these were taken from another thesis,
however the deviation are so small they can be considered insignificant.
The second case LivestockFEM is tested up against, is a simple frame structure, here
the deviations are very small, and the results lies in general between the results of the
two other software.
An optimization case is also presented, here Grasshopper and LivestockFEM is used
for setting up an algorithm, which finds the most material saving geometry for a bow-
string truss structure. The requirement of the structure is to span 10 meter and not
deflect more than 25 mm (span divided by 400). Each iteration took on average one
second, which shows the speed of LivestockFEM in Grasshopper makes it possible to
use for optimization, that can be relevant for design investigations in the early design
phases. The optimization algorithm does not take buildability or other factors than the
deformation into account, therefore their might be a more optimal solution than the one
found, but it still gives the designers an idea of which designs perform better than others.
The LivestockFEM software were evaluated based on interviews with students and
teachers, the students were also given surveys to fill out, however, as only few students
==PAGE:123==
8 Conclusion
111
answered these surveys these can not be seen as a general representation of all the
student. The feedback from the interviews and surveys were generally positive, and the
students with only little knowledge on structural analysis, were able to do structural
investigations and experiments on the structures they were working. Using the software
as an educational tool, for learning FEM were difficult to evaluate as the objectives of the
course the software were presented in, not was to learn structural analysis, the students
therefore did not feel the need to study the underlying theory. That said, LivestockFEM
forms a foundation for the method of learning through experimentation.
In addition to the student feedback, professor and teacher in structural analysis for more
than 50 years at DTU, Egil Borchersen, was favourably disposed to LivestockFEM and
commented that he would use it in his teachings, if he was still teaching.
==PAGE:124==
112
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
Lasse Kristensen. FEM Calculation Tool for 2D Frame Structures in Grasshopper3D.
DTU Byg, 2017.
Lasse Kristensen. LivestockFEM - CPython-based FEM Calculation Tool for 2D Frame
and Truss Structures in Rhino/Grasshopper. DTU Byg, 2018.
Cadazz. CAD software - history of CAD , October 2019. URL http://www.cadazz.
com/cad-software-history.html.
Karl-Eugen Kurrer. The History of the Theory of Structures - From Arch Analysis to
Computational Mechanics. Ernst & Sohn, 2008.
Carlos Felippa. A historical outline of matrix structural analysis: A play in three acts.
Computers & Structures, 79:1313–1324, 2001.
Robert Alexander Frazer, William Jolly Duncan, and Arthur Roderick Collar.
Ele-
mentary Matrices and some Applications to Dynamics and Differential Equations.
Cambridge: The University Press., 1938.
Masoud Rais Rohani. Statically Determinate and Indeterminate Trusses, August 2011.
URL http://www.ae.msstate.edu/vlsm/truss/statically_det_indet_trusses/
statically_det_indet_trusses.htm.
George Michael. The Univac 1 Computer, April 2019. URL http://www.computer-
history.info/Page4.dir/pages/Univac.dir/.
NASA. IBM Electronic Data Processing Machine, April 2019. URL https://flic.kr/
p/fqCRYw.
Arnold Reinold. Punch card from a typical Fortran program, April 2019. URL https:
//commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:FortranCardPROJ039.agr.jpg.
William Brinkman, D.E. Haggan, and William Troutman. A history of the invention of
the transistor and where it will lead us. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, SC-32:
1858 – 1865, 1998.
==PAGE:126==
114
Bibliography
Egil Borchersen. External Associate Professor - DTU Civil Engineering. Personal Inter-
view, April 2019.
Olivier de Weck and Il Yong Kim. Finite Element Method (powerpoint slides), May
2019. URL http://web.mit.edu/16.810/www/16.810_L4_CAE.pdf.
Cleve Moler. The Origins of MATLAB, May 2019. URL https://se.mathworks.com/
company/newsletters/articles/the-origins-of-matlab.html.
Caitlin Mueller. Computational Exploration of the Structural Design Space. MIT, 2014.
Niloufar Emami and Peter Von Buelow. Teaching Structures to Architecture Students
through Hands-On Activities. University of Michigan, 2016.
Mola. Mola Structural Models, May 2019. URL https://molamodel.com.
Jens Henrik Nielsen, John Forbes Olesen, and Peter Noe Poulsen. Bærende Konstruk-
tioner 4 - Bærende Konstruktioners Numeriske Modellering - Elementmetoden. DTU
Byg, 2016.
Mode Lab. The Grasshopper Primer - Third Edition V3.3, May 2019. URL https:
//www.modelab.is/grasshopper-primer/.
Clemens Preisinger and Moritz Heimrath. Karamba—a toolkit for parametric structural
design. Structural Engineering International, 24, 05 2014.
Cecilie Søs Brandt-Olsen. Calibrated Modelling of Form-active Structures. DTU Byg,
2016.
Daniel Piker.
Answer to forum post: ”Force density method on Kangaroo?” , May
2019.
URL https://www.grasshopper3d.com/group/kangaroo/forum/topics/
force-density-method-on-kangaroo.
Paul Jeffries. Salamander 3 now in open beta, May 2017. URL https://blog.ramboll.
com/rcd/videos/salamander-3-now-in-open-beta.html#more-910.
John Pierson and Mode Lab. The Dynamo Primer, May 2018. URL https://primer.
dynamobim.org/.
Andrew Heumann.
Which Scripting Language should I learn?
C#, VB.Net, or
Python?, May 2019. URL https://www.grasshopper3d.com/forum/topics/which-
scripting-language-should-i-learn-c-vb-net-or-python.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
115
Alison DeNisco Rayome.
Forget the most popular programming languages, here’s
what developers actually use , May 2019.
URL https://www.techrepublic.
com/article/forget-the-most-popular-programming-languages-heres-what-
developers-actually-use/.
Hyperion Development. Java vs. Python: Which Language Should You Learn in 2018?,
May 2019.
URL https://blog.hyperiondev.com/index.php/2018/06/18/java-
vs-python-which-language-should-you-learn-in-2018/.
Perception System. Java vs. Python, an ongoing debate to select the most productive pro-
gramming language, May 2019. URL http://blogs.perceptionsystem.com/java-
vs-python-the-most-productive-programming-language/.
AutoFEM. AutoFEM and other CAE systems comparison , April 2019. URL https:
//autofem.com/en/about-autofem/comparison.html.
Suvrano De. Introduction to the Stiffness (Displacement) Method: Analysis of a system
of springs (powerpoint slides), May 2019. URL http://homepages.rpi.edu/~des/
Springs.pdf.
Fasi Ur Rahman. Types of Loads on Structures – Buildings and Other Structures, May
2019. URL https://theconstructor.org/structural-engg/types-of-loads-on-
structure/1698/.
Joseph Schwartz.
Structural Design I - Types of Loads,
May 2019.
URL
http://www.block.arch.ethz.ch/eq/files/Figur%204_Belastungsarten_
en_1478791315.pdf.
Sam Carigliano. SkyCiv Cloud Engineering Software, October 2016. URL https://
skyciv.com/education/types-of-supports-in-structural-analysis/.
Sadanandam Anupoju.
Types of Supports and Reactions and Their Applications
in Structures, May 2019. URL https://theconstructor.org/structural-engg/
types-of-supports-reactions-uses-structures/16974/.
Terri Meyer Boake. Innovative Connections - Hinge and Pin Connections, May 2019.
URL https://www.tboake.com/SSEF1/pin.shtml.
Mageba.
Lead Rubber Bearings – LASTO-LRB, May 2019.
URL https:
//www.mageba.ch/en/794/Infrastructure/Structural-bearings/Seismic-
protection/LASTO-LRB/Detail.html.
==PAGE:128==
116
Bibliography
Jingtong. High Damping Rubber Bearing – Fixed and Sliding Types for Large Displace-
ment, May 2019. URL https://www.bearing-pad.com/bearingpad/high-damping-
rubber-bearing.html.
Janeite
Deb.
Travel
in
‘Sense
&
Sensibility’
Part
III
Carriages,
May
2010.
URL https://janeausteninvermont.blog/2010/10/28/travel-in-sense-
sensibility-part-iii-carriages/.
Bjarne Chr. Jensen. Teknisk Ståbi, 24. udgave. PRAXIS - Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 2016.
UACEG.
Chapter 1 - Structural Mechanics, May 2019.
URL https://uacg.bg/
filebank/att_2699.pdf.
Dash. Dash User Guide, May 2019. URL https://dash.plot.ly/.
Horia Ionescu. 6 degrees of freedom, May 2019. URL https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File:6DOF_en.jpg.
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX A
Original MatLab program
1 function BygFEM_ramme
2 %% Program til statisk beregning af 2D rammekonstruktioner
3 clear all; close all
4
5 %% INDDATA
6 a = 3;
% [m]
7 P = 1e4;
% [N]
8 p = 1e4;
% [N/m]
9 E = 2.1e11; % [N/m2]
10 A = 1e-3;
% [m2]
11 I = 2e-6;
% [m4]
12
13 % knudekoordinater: X(knude ,:)=[x,y]
14 X(1,:) = [0 0];
15 X(2,:) = [0 a];
16 X(3,:) = [a a];
17 X(4,:) = [a 0];
18 nno = size(X,1);
% number of nodes, antal knuder i systemet
19
20 % elementer: T(el,:)=[startknude slutknude]
21 T(1,:) = [1 2];
22 T(2,:) = [2 3];
23 T(3,:) = [3 4];
24 nel = size(T,1);
% number of elements, antal elementer i systemet
25
26 % frihedsgrader , globale dof: D(el,:)=[V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6]
27 D(1,:) = [1 2 3 4 5 6];
28 D(2,:) = [4 5 6 7 8 9];
29 D(3,:) = [7 8 13 10 11 12];
30 nd=max(max(D));
% number of dofs, antal frihedsgrader
31
32 % materialer: G(el,:)=[E-modul, tværsnitsareal , inertimoment]
33 G(1,:) = [E A I];
34 G(2,:) = [E A I];
35 G(3,:) = [E A I];
36
37 % understøtninger: U(i)=global dof
38 U(1) = 1;
39 U(2) = 2;
40 U(3) = 3;
41 U(4) = 10;
42 U(5) = 11;
43 U(6) = 12;
44
45 % knudelaste (boundary Load): bL(i,:)=[global_dof , størrelse]
46 % bL = []; hvis ingen knudelast
==PAGE:130==
118
A Original MatLab program
47 bL(1,:) = [4 P];
48
49 % elementlaste (domain Load): dL(el,:)=[lokal_retning , størrelse]
50 dL = zeros(nel,2);
51 dL(2,:) = [2 -p];
52
53 % skalering af plot
54 Vskala = 2e0;
% deformationer
55 Sskala = 0.3e-4;
% snitkræfter
56
57 %% PROGRAM
58
59 % plot geometrien
60 plotTop(X,T,nel,nno)
61
62 % Opstil systemstivhedsmatrix K
63 K = zeros(nd,nd);
% initialisering af K
64 for el = 1:nel
65
no1 = T(el,1);
no2 = T(el,2);
% startknude/slutknude
66
X1 = X(no1,:);
X2 = X(no2,:);
% koordinater til start-/slutknude
67
k = kbeam(X1,X2,G(el,:));
% stivhedsmatrix for element
68
de = D(el,:);
% knudeflytningsnumre , indexarray
69
K(de,de) = K(de,de) + k;
% k lægges til K
70 end
71
72 % Opstil lastvektor R
73 R = zeros(nd,1);
% initialiser R
74 for el = 1:nel
75
dLe = dL(el,:);
76
if dLe(1) > 0
77
no1 = T(el,1);
no2 = T(el,2);
% startknude/slutknude
78
X1 = X(no1,:);
X2 = X(no2,:);
% koordinater til start-/slutknude
79
r = rbeam(X1,X2,dLe);
% elementlastvektor
80
de = D(el,:);
% knudeflytningsnumre , indexarray
81
R(de) = R(de) + r;
% r lægges til R
82
end
83 end
84 nbL = size(bL,1);
% antal knudelaste
85 for i = 1:nbL
86
d = bL(i,1);
% global dof med knudelast
87
R(d) = R(d) + bL(i,2);
% knudelast lægges til R
88 end
89
90 % Løs FEM-ligninger
91 dof = 1:nd;
% indeks til alle knudeflytninger
92 du = U;
% indeks til foreskrevne knudeflytninger
93 df = setdiff(dof,du);
% indeks til frie knudeflytninger
94 Kff = K(df,df);
95 Kuu = K(du,du);
96 Kfu = K(df,du);
97 V = zeros(nd,1);
% nulstil knudeflytningsvektor
98 Vu = V(du);
% foreskrevne knudeflytninger
99 Rf = R(df);
% belastninger
100 Vf = Kff\(Rf-Kfu*Vu);
% frie knudeflytninger
101 Ru = Kfu'*Vf+Kuu*Vu;
% reaktioner
102 V(df) = Vf;
103 V(du) = Vu;
104 disp('Flytninger:'); V = V
% udskriv flytninger
==PAGE:131==
A Original MatLab program
119
105 disp('Reaktioner:'); Ru = Ru
% udskriv rekationer
106 plotDof(X,T,D,V,nel,Vskala)
% plot deformeret gitter
107
108 % Beregn snitkræfter
109 for el = 1:nel
110
no1 = T(el,1);
no2 = T(el,2);
% startknude/slutknude
111
X1 = X(no1,:);
X2 = X(no2,:);
% koordinater til start-/slutknude
112
de = D(el,:);
% indexarray
113
[f1 f2 m] = S(X1,X2,G(el,:),V(de),dL(el,:));
% beregn snitkræfter
114
F1(el,:) = f1;
115
F2(el,:) = f2;
116
M(el,:) = m;
117 end
118
119 disp('Normalkræfter:'); F1 = F1
120 disp('Forskydningskræfter:'); F2 = F2
121 disp('Momenter:'); M = M
122
123 plotS(X,T,nel,F1,1,dL,Sskala)
124 plotS(X,T,nel,F2,2,dL,Sskala)
125 plotS(X,T,nel,M,3,dL,Sskala)
126
127 end % BygFEM_ramme
128
129 %% FUNKTIONER
130
131 function k = kbeam(X1,X2,G)
132 % Opstil elementstivhedsmatrix
133 % dan transformationsmatrix
134 [A L] = Abeam(X1,X2);
135 % dan k efter lokale retninger
136 EA = G(1)*G(2);
137 EI = G(1)*G(3);
138 k = [ EA/L
0
0
-EA/L
0
0
139
0
12*EI/L^3
6*EI/L^2
0
-12*EI/L^3
6*EI/L^2
140
0
6*EI/L^2
4*EI/L
0
-6*EI/L^2
2*EI/L
141
-EA/L
0
0
EA/L
0
0
142
0
-12*EI/L^3 -6*EI/L^2
0
12*EI/L^3 -6*EI/L^2
143
0
6*EI/L^2
2*EI/L
0
-6*EI/L^2
4*EI/L
];
144 % transformer k til glabale retninger
145 k = A'*k*A;
146 end
147
148 function r = rbeam(X1,X2,dLe)
149 % Opstil elementlastvektor
150 % dan transformationsmatrix
151 [A L] = Abeam(X1,X2);
152 % opstil r efter lokale retninger
153 r = zeros(6,1);
154 if dLe(1) == 1
155
p = dLe(2)*L/2;
156
r = [p 0 0 p 0 0]';
157 elseif dLe(1) == 2
158
p = dLe(2)*L/2;
159
m = dLe(2)*L^2/12;
160
r = [0 p m 0 p -m]';
161 else
162
disp('Fejl i specifikation af last!')
==PAGE:132==
120
A Original MatLab program
163 end
164 r = A'*r;
165 end
166
167 function [f1 f2 m] = S(X1,X2,Ge,Ve,dLe)
168 % Beregn snitkræfter i element:
169 % f1: normalkraft
170 % f2: forskydningskraft
171 % m:
moment
172 % dan transformationsmatrix
173 [A L] = Abeam(X1,X2);
174 % dan elementstivhedsmatrix
175 k = kbeam(X1,X2,Ge);
176 % beregn lokal knudekraftvektor
177 re = A*k*Ve;
178 % opstil belastningsvektor efter lokale retninger
179 if dLe(1) == 2
180
p = dLe(2)*L/2;
181
m = dLe(2)*L^2/12;
182
r = [0 p m 0 p -m]';
183 elseif dLe(1) == 1
184
p = dLe(2)*L/2;
185
r = [p 0 0 p 0 0]';
186 else
187
r = [0 0 0 0 0 0]';
188 end
189 re = re-r;
190 f1 = [-re(1)
re(4)];
191 f2 = [ re(2) -re(5)];
192 m
= [-re(3)
re(6)];
193 end
194
195 function [A L] = Abeam(X1,X2)
196 % Beregn A
197 n = X2-X1;
% retningsvektor
198 L = sqrt(dot(n,n));
% elementlængde
199 n = n/L;
% enhedsvektor
200 % dan transformationsmatrix
201 A = [ n(1) n(2)
0
0
0
0
202
-n(2) n(1)
0
0
0
0
203
0
0
1
0
0
0
204
0
0
0
n(1) n(2)
0
205
0
0
0
-n(2) n(1)
0
206
0
0
0
0
0
1];
207 end
208
209 function plotTop(X,T,nel,nno)
210 % plot geometri
211 figure(); title('Elementtopologi'); axis equal; hold on
212 for el = 1:nel
213
plot(X(T(el,:),1),X(T(el,:),2),'b-')
214 end
215 for no = 1:nno
216
text(X(no,1),X(no,2),num2str(no),...
217
'color','blue','BackgroundColor',[0.7 0.7 0.7]);
218 end
219 for el = 1:nel
220
xp=mean(X(T(el,:),:));
==PAGE:133==
A Original MatLab program
121
221
text(xp(1),xp(2),num2str(el),'color','black');
222 end
223 hold off
224 end
225
226 function plotDof(X,T,D,V,nel,skala)
227 % plot deformeret geometri (degrees of freedom)
228 figure(); axis equal; hold on
229 title(['Deformationer , skala: ' num2str(skala, '%10.3e')]);
230 for el = 1:nel
231
plot(X(T(el,:),1),X(T(el,:),2),'b:')
232
% deformeret
233
% dan transformationsmatrix
234
no1 = T(el,1);
no2 = T(el,2);
% startknude/slutknude
235
X1 = X(no1,:);
X2 = X(no2,:);
% koordinater til start-/slutknude
236
[A L] = Abeam(X1,X2);
237
% dan transformationsmatrix for flytninger
238
Au=A(1:2,1:2);
239
% hent lokale flytninger
240
v=V(D(el,:));
241
% koordinater plus flytninger
242
nrp=11;
243
Xs=zeros(2,nrp);
244
for i=1:nrp
245
s=(i-1)/(nrp-1);
246
N=[1-s
0
0 s
0
0;
247
0
1-3*s^2+2*s^3 (s-2*s^2+s^3)*L 0 3*s^2-2*s^3 (-s^2+s^3)*L];
248
Xs(:,i)=X(T(el,1),:)'*(1-s)+X(T(el,2),:)'*s+skala*Au'*N*A*v;
249
end
250
plot(Xs(1,:),Xs(2,:),'b-');
251 end
252 hold off
253 end
254
255 function plotS(X,T,nel,S,s,dL,skala)
256 % plot snitkraft S
257 if s == 1
258
sf = 'Normalkraft';
259 elseif s == 2
260
sf = 'Forskydningskraft';
261 elseif s == 3
262
sf = 'Moment';
263 else
264
sf = ' ';
265 end
266 figure(); axis equal; hold on
267 title([sf ', skala: ' num2str(skala, '%10.3e')]);
268 for el = 1:nel
269
n = X(T(el,2),:)-X(T(el,1),:);
% retningsvektor
270
L = sqrt(dot(n,n));
% elementlængde
271
n = n/L;
% enhedsvektor
272
plot(X(T(el,:),1),X(T(el,:),2),'b-')
273
F1 = [-n(2) n(1)]*S(el,1)*skala;
274
F2 = [-n(2) n(1)]*S(el,2)*skala;
275
x1 = X(T(el,1),1);
276
x2 = X(T(el,2),1);
277
y1 = X(T(el,1),2);
278
y2 = X(T(el,2),2);
==PAGE:134==
122
A Original MatLab program
279
xm = (x1+x2)/2-n(2)*L/15;
280
ym = (y1+y2)/2+n(1)*L/15;
281
plot(xm,ym,'r+')
282
if s == 3
283
p = dL(el,2);
284
m = -p*L^2/2;
285
np = 9;
% antal mellempunkter
286
Xp = zeros(np+4,1);
287
Yp = zeros(np+4,1);
288
Xp(1) =
x1;
Xp(2) =
x1+F1(1);
289
Yp(1) =
y1;
Yp(2) =
y1+F1(2);
290
Xp(np+4) = x2;
Xp(np+3) = x2+F2(1);
291
Yp(np+4) = y2;
Yp(np+3) = y2+F2(2);
292
for i = 1:np
293
x = i/(np+1);
294
mx = m*x*(1-x);
295
m1 = [-n(2) n(1)]*mx*skala;
296
Xp(i+2) = Xp(2)+i*(Xp(np+3)-Xp(2))/(np+1)+m1(1);
297
Yp(i+2) = Yp(2)+i*(Yp(np+3)-Yp(2))/(np+1)+m1(2);
298
end
299
else
300
Xp = [x1; x1+F1(1); x2+F2(1); x2];
301
Yp = [y1; y1+F1(2); y2+F2(2); y2];
302
end
303
plot(Xp,Yp,'r-')
304 end
305 hold off
306 end
307
}
308 }
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX B
CPython local module
1 from math import sqrt
2 import numpy as np
3
4 # Calculate transformation matrix A
5 def transMat(X1,X2):
6
n = X2-X1
7
L = sqrt(n @ n)
8
n = n/L
9
A = np.array([ [n[0],
n[1], 0,
0,
0,
0],
10
[-n[1], n[0], 0,
0,
0,
0],
11
[0,
0,
1,
0,
0,
0],
12
[0,
0,
0,
n[0],
n[1],
0],
13
[0,
0,
0,
-n[1], n[0],
0],
14
[0,
0,
0,
0,
0,
1]])
15
return A,L,n
16
17 # Define element stiffness matrix
18 def eleStiff(X1,X2,G):
19
A,L,n = transMat(X1,X2)
20
EA = G[0]*G[1]
21
EI = G[0]*G[2]
22
kl = np.array([[EA/L, 0,
0,
-EA/L, 0,
0
],
23
[ 0,
12*EI/L**3,
6*EI/L**2, 0,
-12*EI/L**3, 6*EI/L**2 ],
24
[ 0,
6*EI/L**2,
4*EI/L,
0,
-6*EI/L**2,
2*EI/L
],
25
[-EA/L, 0,
0,
EA/L, 0,
0
],
26
[ 0,
-12*EI/L**3, -6*EI/L**2, 0,
12*EI/L**3,-6*EI/L**2 ],
27
[ 0,
6*EI/L**2,
2*EI/L,
0,
-6*EI/L**2,
4*EI/L
]])
28
k = A.T @ kl @ A
29
return k, kl
30
31 # Define element load vector
32 def eleLoad(X1,X2,dLe):
33
A,L,n = transMat(X1,X2)
34
p1 = dLe[0]*L/2
35
p2 = dLe[1]*L/2
36
m = dLe[1]*L**2/12
37
fl = np.array([[p1,p2,m,p1,p2,-m]]).T
38
f = A.T @ fl
39
return f, fl
40
41 # Calculate internal forces in an element
42 def forceCalc(X1,X2,Ge,Ve,dLe):
43
A,L,n = transMat(X1,X2)
44
k,kl = eleStiff(X1,X2,Ge)
45
vl = A @ Ve
46
re = kl @ vl
==PAGE:136==
124
B CPython local module
47
f,fl = eleLoad(X1,X2,dLe)
48
re = re-fl
49
f1 = np.array([-re[0],re[3]]).T
50
f2 = np.array([re[1],-re[4]]).T
51
m
= np.array([-re[2],re[5]]).T
52
return f1,f2,m
53
54 # Generate data for plotting forces in an element
55 def forcePlot(X1,X2,Se,dLe,nrp,sscale,s):
56
A,L,n = transMat(X1,X2)
57
F01 = np.array([-n[1],n[0]])*Se[0]*sscale
58
F02 = np.array([-n[1],n[0]])*Se[1]*sscale
59
Xp = np.array([X1[0],X1[0]+F01[0],X2[0]+F02[0],X2[0]])
60
Yp = np.array([X1[1],X1[1]+F01[1],X2[1]+F02[1],X2[1]])
61
if s == 3:
62
M = np.array([Se[0],Se[1]])
63
for i in range(1,nrp+1):
64
x = (i/(nrp+1))*L
65
mx = (1/2)*dLe[1]*x*(L-x)
66
m1 = np.array([-n[1],n[0]])*mx*sscale
67
Xp = np.insert(Xp,i+1,Xp[1]+i*(Xp[-2]-Xp[1])/(nrp+1)-m1[0])
68
Yp = np.insert(Yp,i+1,Yp[1]+i*(Yp[-2]-Yp[1])/(nrp+1)-m1[1])
69
M =
np.insert(M,i,M[0]+i*(M[-1]-M[0])/(nrp+1)+mx)
70
return Xp,Yp,M
71
else:
72
return Xp,Yp
73
74 # Generate data for plotting deformations in an element
75 def deformationPlot(X1,X2,v,div,vscale):
76
defPlot=[]
77
defVal=[]
78
A,L,n = transMat(X1,X2)
79
Au=A[0:2,0:2]
80
for i in range(div):
81
xL=(i)/(div-1)
82
N2 = 1 - 3*xL**2 + 2*xL**3
83
N3 = L*(xL - 2*xL**2 + xL**3)
84
N5 = 3*xL**2 - 2*xL**3
85
N6 = L*(-xL**2 + xL**3)
86
N=np.array([[1-xL, 0,
0,
xL, 0,
0 ],
87
[0
, N2, N3, 0,
N5, N6]])
88
vl = A @ v
89
ul = N @ vl
90
u = (ul.T @ Au)
91
Xe=X1.T*(1-xL)+X2.T*xL
92
Xu=(Xe+u*vscale)
93
defPlot.append(np.append(Xu,0).tolist())
94
defVal.append(np.append(u,np.linalg.norm(u)).tolist())
95
defVal=(np.array(defVal).T).tolist()
96
return defPlot,defVal
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX C
CPython main module
1 import json
2 import numpy as np
3 from livestockFEM_local import *
4 from livestockFEM_viz import *
5 import sys
6 import os
7 import math
8
9 np.set_printoptions(precision=5)
10 np.set_printoptions(linewidth=200)
11
12 class FEM_frame:
13
def __init__(self,inDict):
14
self.outDict={}
15
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessSmall"]=[]
16
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessSmallLocal"]=[]
17
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessExpanded"]=[]
18
self.outDict["DOFPlot"]=[]
19
self.outDict["DefDist"]=[]
20
self.outDict["PlusPos"]=[]
21
self.outDict["ForcePlot1"]=[]
22
self.outDict["ForcePlot2"]=[]
23
self.outDict["ForcePlot3"]=[]
24
self.outDict["MomentForcesPt"]=[]
25
self.X = np.array(inDict["PyNodes"])
26
self.T = np.array(inDict["PyElements"])
27
self.D = np.array(inDict["PyDOFS"])
28
self.G = np.array([mat[:3] for mat in inDict["PyMaterial"]])
29
self.U = np.array(inDict["PySupport"])
30
self.bL = np.array(inDict["PyNodeLoad"])
31
self.dL = np.round(np.array(inDict["PyElementLoad"]),0)
32
self.plotScale = inDict["UnitScaling"]
33
self.Vskala = inDict["PlotScalingDeformation"]
34
self.Sskala = inDict["PlotScalingForces"]/1000
35
self.nrp = inDict["PlotDivisions"]
36
37
self.K = self.sysStiff()
38
self.F = self.loadVec()
39
self.V,self.Re = self.calcDispReac()
40
self.F1,self.F2,self.M = self.calcForces()
41
self.outDict["Topology"]=[]
42
for ele in self.T:
43
self.outDict["Topology"].append((self.X[ele]*self.plotScale).tolist())
44
self.outDict["Displacements"]=np.around(self.V,6).T.tolist()[0]
45
self.outDict["Reactions"]=np.around(self.Re,0).T.tolist()[0]
46
self.outDict["NormalForce1"]=np.around(self.F1,0).tolist()
==PAGE:138==
126
C CPython main module
47
self.outDict["ShearForce2"]=np.around(self.F2,0).tolist()
48
self.outDict["Moment3"]=np.around(self.M,0).tolist()
49
self.outDict["UnitScaling"]=self.plotScale
50
self.outDict["Nodes"]=self.X.tolist()
51
self.outDict["PlotDivisions"]=self.nrp
52
self.outDict["DeformTooLarge"]=int(any(self.V>10) or any(self.V<-10))
53
self.exportDispPlot()
54
self.exportForcePlot(1)
55
self.exportForcePlot(2)
56
self.exportForcePlot(3)
57
previewSupports(self)
58
previewHinge(self)
59
previewNodeload(self)
60
previewElementload(self)
61
62
#Define System stiffness matrix
63
def sysStiff(self):
64
K = np.zeros((np.max(self.D)+1,np.max(self.D)+1))
65
for el in range(len(self.T)):
66
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
67
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
68
k,kl=eleStiff(X1,X2,self.G[el])
69
kWA=k
70
de=self.D[el]
71
kWA = np.vstack([de, kWA])
72
kWA = np.hstack([np.concatenate(([-1],de))[np.newaxis].T, kWA])
73
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessSmall"].append(np.around(kWA,0).tolist())
74
klWA=kl
75
klWA = np.vstack([de, klWA])
76
klWA = np.hstack([np.concatenate(([-1],de))[np.newaxis].T, klWA])
77
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessSmallLocal"].append(np.around(klWA,0).tolist())
78
KeWA = np.zeros((np.max(self.D)+1,np.max(self.D)+1))
79
for i,dei in enumerate(de):
80
for j,dej in enumerate(de):
81
K[dei,dej]+=k[i,j]
82
KeWA[dei,dej]+=k[i,j]
83
KeWA = np.vstack([np.arange(np.ma.size(KeWA,1)), KeWA])
84
KeWA = np.hstack([(np.arange(np.ma.size(KeWA,0))-1)[np.newaxis].T, KeWA])
85
self.outDict["ElementStiffnessExpanded"].append(np.around(KeWA,0).tolist())
86
KWA = K
87
KWA = np.vstack([np.arange(np.ma.size(KWA,1)), KWA])
88
KWA = np.hstack([(np.arange(np.ma.size(KWA,0))-1)[np.newaxis].T, KWA])
89
self.outDict["SystemStiffness"]=np.around(KWA,0).tolist()
90
return K
91
92
#Define loadvector R
93
def loadVec(self):
94
F = np.zeros((np.max(self.D)+1,1))
95
for el in range(len(self.T)):
96
dLe=self.dL[el]
97
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
98
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
99
f,fl=eleLoad(X1,X2,dLe)
100
for i,dei in enumerate(self.D[el]):
101
F[dei]+=f[i]
102
for bLs in self.bL:
103
d=int(bLs[0])
104
F[d]+=bLs[1]
==PAGE:139==
C CPython main module
127
105
return F
106
107
# Calculate displacements and reactions
108
def calcDispReac(self):
109
dof=range(np.max(self.D)+1)
110
ds=self.U
111
Rs=-self.F[ds]
112
df=np.setdiff1d(dof,ds)
113
Kff = self.K[df,:][:,df]
114
Ksf = self.K[ds,:][:,df]
115
V=np.zeros((np.max(self.D)+1,1))
116
Vs=V[ds]
117
Rf=self.F[df]
118
Vf = np.linalg.pinv(Kff) @ Rf
119
Rf = Ksf @ Vf
120
V[df]=Vf
121
V[ds]=Vs
122
Re=Rf+Rs
123
return V,Re
124
125
# Calculate internal forces
126
def calcForces(self):
127
F1=np.zeros((len(self.T),2))
128
F2=np.zeros((len(self.T),2))
129
M=np.zeros((len(self.T),2))
130
for el in range(len(self.T)):
131
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
132
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
133
de=self.D[el]
134
f1,f2,m=forceCalc(X1,X2,self.G[el],self.V[de],self.dL[el])
135
F1[el]=f1
136
F2[el]=f2
137
M[el]=m
138
return F1,F2,M
139
140
# Generate geometry for deformation plot
141
def exportDispPlot(self):
142
rou=int(6-math.log10(self.plotScale))
143
div=self.nrp+2
144
for el in range(len(self.T)):
145
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
146
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
147
v=self.V[self.D[el]]
148
DOFPlot,DefDist = deformationPlot(X1,X2,v,div,self.Vskala)
149
self.outDict["DOFPlot"].append(np.around(np.array(DOFPlot)*self.plotScale,rou).
tolist())
150
self.outDict["DefDist"].append(np.around(np.array(DefDist)*self.plotScale,rou).
tolist())
151
152
153
# Generate geometry for force plots
154
def exportForcePlot(self,s):
155
if s==1: S=self.F1
156
elif s==2: S=self.F2
157
else: S=self.M
158
rou=int(6-math.log10(self.plotScale))
159
for el in range(len(self.T)):
160
self.outDict["ForcePlot"+str(s)].append([])
==PAGE:140==
128
C CPython main module
161
X1 = self.X[self.T[el][0]]
162
X2 = self.X[self.T[el][1]]
163
self.outDict["PlusPos"].append((plusPos(X1,X2)*self.plotScale).tolist())
164
if s == 3:
165
Xp,Yp,M = forcePlot(X1,X2,S[el],self.dL[el],self.nrp,self.Sskala,s)
166
self.outDict["MomentForcesPt"].append(np.around(M,0).tolist())
167
else:
168
Xp,Yp = forcePlot(X1,X2,S[el],self.dL[el],self.nrp,self.Sskala,s)
169
Xp = np.around(Xp*self.plotScale,rou)
170
Yp = np.around(Yp*self.plotScale,rou)
171
for i in range(len(Xp)):
172
self.outDict["ForcePlot"+str(s)][el].append([Xp[i],Yp[i],0.0])
173
174 # Runs when file is run from Grasshopper
175 if __name__ == "__main__":
176
with open(sys.argv[1]) as jsonfile:
177
jsonDict = json.load(jsonfile)
178
if "input_file.json" in os.path.split(sys.argv[1])[1]:
179
resPath = sys.argv[1].replace("input_file.json","result_file.json")
180
else:
181
resPath = sys.argv[1].replace(".json","result_file.json")
182
FEM=FEM_frame(jsonDict)
183
dictstr=json.dumps(FEM.outDict).replace(', "',',\n "').replace("{","{\n ").replace("}","\
n}")
184
with open(resPath,"w") as file:
185
file.write(dictstr)
==PAGE:141==
==PAGE:142==
