==PAGE:1==
Properties of Deep Weathered Clay
and its Stability Implications in
Tunnelling
Leena Jaakola
10 June, 2019
Under the supervision of:
Bjørn Frengstad
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet
Thomas Guldborg Petersen
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Nordic Five Tech Master of Cold Climate Engineering
Engineering Geology and Rock Mechanics Master Thesis
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Remains of subtropical deep weathered clay found in fracture and weakness zones in the
bedrock in the Trøndelag area yields poor conditions for tunnel construction and have re-
sulted in expensive diﬃculties for such projects. Smectite has a high swelling potential when
hydrated, which can induce swelling pressure and damage the structures it surrounds. This
study was designed as an extension of a previous study performed at NTNU that showed
ambiguity between free swell and swelling pressure measurements. 55 samples exhibiting
swelling behavior were obtained from old SINTEF projects. Swelling minerals were identi-
ﬁed using X-Ray diﬀraction and the ﬁne particle fraction grain size distribution was measured
using laser diﬀraction spectroscopy. Swelling potential was quantiﬁed using constant volume
oedometer testing and free swell tests. The potential of variance (r2) between mineral con-
tent and maximum swelling pressure was 0.8. Free swell was less correlated with smectite
content, yielding an r2 value of 0.4 and several outliers. Free swell was aﬀected by other
physical parameters in addition to smectite content. Additional tests, which could not be
performed due to limited sample material, are desired to better understand the physical
properties behind each measure of swelling potential.
i
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose and Objectives of this Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Swelling Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Outline of Sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theories and State of the Art of Clay Swelling Potential
3
2.1
Formation of Swelling Clay Minerals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Failures Due to Deep Weathered Clay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Macroscopic Measures of Swelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Preliminary Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Microstructural Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5.1
Hydration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.2
Osmosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5.3
Capillarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Soil Properties Which Inﬂuence Clay Swelling Potential
. . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.1
Mineralogy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.2
Particle Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6.3
Particle Arrangement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6.4
Plasticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6.5
Consolidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.6
Compaction and Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.7
Initial Swell Allowance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
ii
==PAGE:4==
CONTENTS
2.7
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Methodology
20
3.1
Material Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Mineral Identiﬁcation Using X-Ray Diﬀraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Swelling Pressure Measurements Using Constant Volume Oedometer Testing .
23
3.4
Volume Change Measurements Using Free Swelling Test . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Grain Size Determination Using Laser Diﬀraction Spectroscopy . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results
28
4.1
Swelling Potential Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Smectite Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Grain Size Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Discussion
35
5.1
Swelling Pressure and Volume Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Smectite Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Grain Size Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Data Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4.1
Inactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4.2
Very Active Free Swell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4.3
Very Active Pressure and Volume Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4.4
Incomplete Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Uncertainties in Laboratory Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5.1
Material Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5.2
Swelling Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
5.5.3
Free Swelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5.4
X-ray Diﬀraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.5.5
Laser Diﬀraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusion
42
Appendix A HSE Certiﬁcate and Risk Assessment
46
Appendix B Raw Data
49
Appendix C X-Ray Diﬀraction Patterns
51
Appendix D Swelling Pressure Curves
81
Appendix E Laser Diﬀraction Curves
117
iv
==PAGE:6==
1. Introduction
1
 Introduction
1.1
Purpose and Objectives of this Study
The interest of this study is to better understand the mechanisms behind swelling clay
minerals, which can cause stability problems in subsurface constructions such as tunnels,
slopes, and foundations. This study is exploratory in nature and will cover a large variety
of physical parameters related to swelling clay material in attempt to ﬁnd relationships.
These relationships could ultimately improve the predictability of the aﬀects of swelling clay
material on the stability of subsurface structures. The main objectives of this study are thus
deﬁned as follows:
• To identify knowledge gaps in the most important mechanisms behind the swelling
potential of clay minerals
• To explore variables aﬀecting the swelling behavior of clay material, including variation
in clay minerals, grain size distribution (especially the fraction less than 20 microm-
eters), compaction, water content and drying procedures, and uncertainties in X-Ray
Diﬀraction at low diﬀraction angles
• To perform a variety of laboratory experiments which measure the physical properties
of clay and swelling potential, and assess the reliability of the methods used
• To investigate relationships between mineralogical content and grain size distribution
of a material and its swelling potential
1.2
Background
Tunnelling stability problems experienced in Norway such as water leakage and rock instabil-
ity are partially attributed to the presence of deep weathered swelling clay minerals, including
smectite, formed by chemical weathering under subtropical conditions in the Jurassic and
Cretaceous Periods. Repeated glacial events have stripped large volumes of surface rock,
leaving behind subtropical saprolite remnants that have been preserved deep in bedrock.
Gouge material found in weakness zones, consists of both clay minerals and rock fragments,
and is a major threat to the stability of subsurface structures. The clay material often ex-
hibits swelling characteristics and the rock mass becomes disturbed, resulting in low quality
construction material.
Swelling minerals that are constricted by a subsurface structure such as a tunnel will exert
external pressure and result in structural damage. Weakness zones containing deep weath-
ered swelling clay are one of the main causes of stability problems associated with hard
rock tunnelling in Norway [28]. Water leakage and cave-ins resulting from swelling clay ar-
eas requiring additional reinforcement are common and costly. In extreme cases, a tunnel
must be diverted or abandoned. The swelling potential of clay minerals should be quantiﬁed
and interpreted such that an accurate prediction of the in-situ behavior of the material can
Page 1 of 42
==PAGE:7==
1. Introduction
be made, and ultimately to design suﬃcient support resistant to the pressure that will be
exerted on the subsurface structure.
1.3
Swelling Potential
The deﬁnition of swelling potential given by ISRM (1983) forms the basis of this study:
Swelling is a physio-chemical reaction involving water and stress relief. When
volume expansion is restricted, the material expresses itself instead with an in-
creased pressure acting on its surroundings [12].
Swelling clay results from a combination of physical and chemical processes. The primary
stage of swelling involves hydration, where water molecules are adsorbed on the clay min-
eral surface. A second stage of swelling, called osmotic swelling, occurs due to a higher
concentration of ions in the water between two backbone layers than in the surrounding
pore water. Water ﬂows towards equilibrium, or towards the highest ion concentration. In
most cases, the swelling potential of a material is described in terms of swelling pressure
and free swell. Swelling pressure develops if a structure is located on or among expanding
material, prohibiting volume expansion. Free swelling describes an increase in volume of the
material without any application of external forces. These parameters can be found using
standardized oedometer and free swell tests, respectively.
1.4
Outline of Sections
The outline of the study is organized as follows:
• Section 2: Theories and State of the Art of Clay Swelling Potential
Background information regarding the formation of swelling clays, swelling clay min-
eralogy, macroscopic classiﬁcation schemes, and internal and external factors aﬀecting
swelling potential
• Section 3: Methods
Laboratory techniques used to measure clay properties and swelling potential
• Section 4: Results
Findings of the laboratory experiments
• Section 5: Discussion
Critical discussion of the laboratory results and the reliability of the methods used
Page 2 of 42
==PAGE:8==
2. Theories and State of the Art of Clay Swelling Potential
2
 Theories and State of the Art of Clay Swelling Potential
Formation of deep weathered swelling clay in Norway is presented in this Section, followed
by case studies of historical failures in tunnelling projects due to the presence of swelling
clay, macroscopic measurements of swelling, and the variables eﬀecting swelling potential.
2.1
Formation of Swelling Clay Minerals
Figure 2.1: Geological
timeline of smectite [1]
Clay minerals are ﬁne-grained sheet silicate minerals which form
as a result of weathering in the presence of water [16]. Soil parti-
cles that contribute most to soil swelling phenomena are the clay-
sized particles (less than 2 micrometers in diameter), and more
speciﬁcally the clay minerals [27]. Clay minerals are often found
in gouges and weakness zones, formed from altered rock masses.
Clay minerals are unique from other minerals found in Earth’s
rock masses because they are formed as the products of chemical
alteration processes where the conditions favor the formation of
hydrous ﬁne-grained minerals. Given their small particle size and
high surface-to-volume ratio, clay minerals are highly chemically
active compared to other soil and sediment constituents.
The chemically weathered bedrock found within Norway, termed
saprolite, is thought to have formed from acidic groundwater per-
colating bedrock in humid subtropical conditions during the Juras-
sic and early Cretaceous Periods [24]. A schematic illustration of
the geological processes describing the formation of saprolites is
provided in Figure 2.1. During the Jurassic Period, the climate
of today’s Norway was warm. Faulting, volcanic activity, and hy-
drothermal activity formed weak zones where acidic water was
able to penetrate deep into the bedrock, attacking silicate minerals
and breaking them down into clay. The saprolite products of this
weathering include smectite and kaolinite (Figure 2.1A). Mechan-
ical weathering processes partially removed the surface saprolites
until the beginning of the Cretaceous Period (Figure 2.1B) [33].
The Cretaceous Period was characterized by sea level rise of 300-
400 meters, which ﬂooded mainland Norway and deposited soft
rocks such as claystone and chalk (Figure 2.1C). The movement
of ice and meltwater during the ice ages of the Quaternary Period
removed these soft rocks and weathered material from the surface,
but the weathered material present in deep fracture zones to depths
of 200-300 meters were preserved and is now being exposed through
tunnelling operations (Figure 2.1D) [33].
Page 3 of 42
==PAGE:9==
2. Theories and State of the Art of Clay Swelling Potential
2.2
Failures Due to Deep Weathered Clay
Figure 2.2: Areas with remains of
subtropical deep weathering in fracture
zones [33]
Primary causes of deep weathered clay related fail-
ures in tunnelling excavations are introduced in this
Section, as well as case studies of major damages and
failures in Norwegian construction projects. Figure
2.2 shows the areas of Norway and Sweden with ex-
tensive clay bearing bedrock remaining and yielding
poor tunnelling conditions.
Jointing of a Rock Mass
Joints and discontinuities present within a rock mass
largely govern its in-situ properties [21].
From a
distance, weakness zones in the bedrock appear as
trenches or gorges on the surface which extend down
into the bedrock. Most faults and crushed zones re-
sult from shear movement. They may develop as pic-
tured in Figure 2.3 from left to right, with increasing
shear stress.
Rock high in clay minerals, talc, graphite, or mica
content have a generally lower shear strength; reduc-
tion of the binding material between mineral grains
due to alterations can also aﬀect rock strength. Water can carry various minerals through
weakness zones, which may also alter the chemical state of minerals. Feldspar, for example,
can be hydrolyzed into clay minerals, causing a strength reduction in the material. In addi-
tion, some clay minerals found in gouge material have the tendency to swell when exposed
to water.
Figure 2.3: Development of shear faults in a brittle rock mass [21]
Tunnels at all depths have reported encounters with weakness zones. Weakness zones con-
taining deep weathered swelling clay are one of the main causes of stability problems asso-
Page 4 of 42
==PAGE:10==
2. Theories and State of the Art of Clay Swelling Potential
ciated with hard rock tunnelling in Norway. Lineaments on the surface can be extrapolated
down to the depth of the tunnel alignment using the measured orientation to prevent inter-
ception.
Problems with Water Inﬂow
Figure 2.4: Variation of tunnel problems with depth [33]
The construction of hydropower
tunnels
are
especially
sensitive
to the presence of swelling clay.
Ventilation air is blown through
the tunnel during its construction,
causing reduced water content in
the clay and greater strength [21].
Stability
problems
may
be
ei-
ther greatly underestimated or ne-
glected completely.
Later, when
the tunnel is ﬁlled with water, the
material expands and may lead
to dangerous rockfalls and slides.
Based on the formation of clay zones in bedrock alone, tunnel stability problems should
decrease with depth. However, water leakage problems tend to increase with depth, com-
plicating the situation. The combined stability and water leakage problems are shown in
Figure 2.4 [33].
The weathering and strength reducing eﬀects of water can reduce the stability of the tunnel.
The stability of the weakness zones are also compromised due to washout and dissolution of
minerals. An example is the dissolution of calcite due to acidic water can cause large water
inﬂows through karst channels. Sulﬁde oxidation producing sulfuric acid is another poten-
tially damaging chemical reaction that can result in rapid corrosion of structural supports
[21].
Figure 2.5: Cases of large water inﬂow problems [21]
Figure 2.5 maps cases of various large
water inﬂows into hydropower tunnels
in the crystalline rocks of southern Nor-
way. Experience in Norway has shown
that large water inﬂows are diﬃcult to
predict.
The cites represent a large
variation of leakage volume and water
head. However, there are a number of
common features reported in the inci-
dents that might help prevent future
large inﬂows of water. In each case, the
rock was strong and had a high Elas-
tic Modulus.
The leakage joints were
parallel tensile feather joints (like the
ones shown in Figure 2.3). The main
leakages were often caused by channels
created by the dissolution of calcite.
Page 5 of 42
==PAGE:11==
2. Theories and State of the Art of Clay Swelling Potential
Case Studies of Damages and Failures due to Deep Weathered Clay
Although the typical hard rock found in Norway provides very stable tunnelling conditions,
the history of tunnel construction in Norway is peppered with several examples of expen-
sive diﬃculties and failures due to the unexpected presence of deep weathered clay. The
Tunnsjødal hydropower tunnel was a 40m2 tailtrace tunnel, located in an area primarily
characterized by Palaeooic granitic gneiss, a supposedly "high quality" material expected to
require little to no additional support. A set of feather joints was found during excavation,
and water started leaking from a brecciated zone between the joints. A slide occurred two
weeks after excavation along a 30 meter section, requiring immediate and complex rock sup-
port, primarily consisting of the installation of a cast-in-place concrete lining. The slide is
pictured in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Slide at Tunnsjødal hydropower tunnel caused by smectite [21]
After the excavation was stabilized, it was observed that the granitic rock had disintegrated
into a clayey mud containing smectite. A slow adsorption rate due to low permeability of
the altered granite allowed the rock to maintain standing for a long period before the slide,
but if smectite had been present as a gouge ﬁlling the stand up time in similar conditions
would have been much shorter [21].
Construction of the Holmenkollbanen subway tunnel met ongoing groundwater drainage is-
sues and rock-falls in clay bearing zones that drove the development company into bankruptcy
[33]. Blasting of the railway tunnel through Lieråsen was halted when swelling clay alter-
ation along linear weakness zones caused water leakage and cave-ins and ultimately forced
the tunnel to be diverted [23]. More recently, construction of the Romeriksporten and Oslo
Fjord tunnels faced costly water leakage and rock falls [23].
The history of damages caused by the presence of swelling clay and the large number of
ongoing tunnelling projects in Norway justify the need for investment in mapping and better
understanding the material present in weakness zones.
Page 6 of 42
==PAGE:12==
2. Theories and State of the Art of Clay Swelling Potential
2.3
Macroscopic Measures of Swelling
Swelling pressure development and volume change are the two main measurements used to
describe the combined eﬀect of all swelling processes occurring within the clay system.
Swelling Pressure
If a subsurface structure is built in an area of expansive soil, an increase in volume of soil
is prohibited by its presence, causing a swelling pressure which can have serious structural
consequences. Norsk Bergmekanikkgruppe classiﬁes the swelling potential of clay according
to the maximum swelling pressure obtained from oedometer testing according to Table 2.1:
Table 2.1: Swelling potential classiﬁed by oedometer swelling pressure [22]
Swell Potential
Not Active
Slightly Active
Active
Very Active
Swelling Pressure [MPa]
< 0.10
0.10 - 0.30
0.30 - 0.75
> 0.75
Volume Change
Norsk Bergmekanikkgruppe classiﬁes the swelling potential of clay according to the free
swelling percentage according to Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Swelling potential classiﬁed by free swelling [22]
Free Swell Potential
Inactive
Slightly Active
Active
Very Active
Free Swelling [%]
< 100
100 - 140
140 - 200
> 200
Swellability Index
Figure 2.7: Swellability index and percent
swelling by unloading from 2 to 0.025
MN/m2[32].
Swellability index (SI) is a measure of how water
content varies with the stress condition of the
material, equal to the diﬀerence in water content
between 0.025 and 2 MN/m2 (Equation (2.1)).
SI = w2 −w0.025
(2.1)
SI is an appropriate description of materials
whose consolidating properties are correlated
with swelling properties. SI is a good assump-
tion in particular for clay with a very low mica
content, as shown by the experimental results in
Figure 2.7, since mica is an elastic mineral and
undergoes mechanical deformation [32]. Samples with high mica content are characterized
by the dashed trendline in Figure 2.7 while samples with little to no mica are characterized
by the solid trendline.
Page 7 of 42
==PAGE:13==
2. Theories and State of the Art of Clay Swelling Potential
2.4
Preliminary Study
This study was designed as an extension of a project performed at Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige
universitet (NTNU) in Autumn, 2019. XRD and free swelling tests were performed on six
samples obtained from two locations in the Trøndelag area. The compiled results, provided
in Table 2.3, include the measured ﬁne fraction of particle size less than 20µm, the smectite-
chlorite mixed-layer content, smectite content, and free swelling results.
Table 2.3: Results from preliminary study [13]
Sample
Fines <20µm (%)
Smectite-Chlorite (%)
Smectite (%)
Free Swell
697
2.4
0.0
0.0
140
698
11.8
0.0
0.0
109
699
17.1
0.0
0.0
128
700
3.7
5.0
6.0
100
701
5.9
7.0
0.0
168
The results of the free swelling tests did not clearly demonstrate the eﬀect of smectite
content in the material. Three samples (697, 698, 699) displayed one-dimensional swelling
behavior even though the XRD did not indicate the presence of swelling minerals. Material
containing a large ﬁne fraction, such as 698 and 699, draws in more water through capillary
action, resulting in a certain degree of expansion even with zero smectite content. In addition,
sample 700 had a swelling mineral of 11 percent and did not display any free swelling activity
in the free swelling test, while sample 701 contained 7 percent swelling minerals and showed
relatively active free swelling at 168 percent.
The diﬀerence in free swelling results was
though to be attributed to 700 having less smectite in the <20µm fraction compared to 701.
2.5
Microstructural Behavior
Figure 2.8: The neutral line (NL) during
crystalline and osmotic swelling [36]
The expansion mechanisms prevalent soil include hy-
dration, capillarity, and osmosis. The neutral line
(NL) plotted in a pressure-suction regime indicates
the boundary of swelling or compression.
Suction
expresses the ability of the material to hold water
by the pressure required to squeeze out water [28].
Surface and cation hydration are predominant in
the 20-550MPa range of suction for water contents
less than 30%; reductions in suction cause step-wise
microstructural expansion related to the hydration
layer states.
Osmotic swelling governs at suction
values less than 20MPa [18], creating a NL in the
swelling pressure-suction regime (Figure 2.8).
Page 8 of 42
==PAGE:14==
2.5.1
Hydration
During particle surface hydration, water molecules are adsorbed to the negatively charged
surface of the clay molecule, to an exposed oxygen or hydroxyl on the tetrahedral layer
surfaces, to balance the charge deﬁciency on the surface. This phase is predominantly in-
tracrystalline swelling due to sorption of the ﬁrst two or three water layers between unit
layers. Strongly hydrating cations Na+, Ca2+, and Mg2+ draw water molecules between
the individual 2:1 layers, forcing the crystalline layers apart. The charge deﬁcit induced by
isomorphous substitution is balanced by exchangeable cations. Cations Na+, K+, Ca2+,
and Mg2+ have relatively high enthalpies of hydration, so are capable of drawing water
molecules into the interlayer and forcing the crystal layers of the molecule apart [4].
Figure 2.9: Water content [mg/g] versus layer spacing d [nm] for Na+- and Ca2+-rich smectite [4]
The degree of interlayer hydration is determined by the hydration potential of the interlayer
cation, the surface density of exchangeable cations between silicate sheets, and the number
of hydration layers that form [9]. Layer spacing increases step-wise with the discrete number
of water molecules present in the interlayer (0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 layers of water molecules dis-
tinguished by the corresponding basal spacings of 10.0, 12.5, 15.0, 17.5, and 20.0 Å). Figure
2.9 shows the relationship between water content and the ideal layer spacing for Na+- and
Ca2+-rich smectite. As seen in Figure 2.9, crystalline clay swelling due to the addition of
one layer of water molecules is equal to the diameter of the water molecule, approximately
2.5Å or 0.25nm. Smectite rich in Ca2+ hydrates more readily at a lower water content, as
it jumps to a three-layer hydrate at a lower water content than Na+ smectite in Figure 2.9.
The U.S. Geological Survey suggests the degree of swelling from hydration is related to the
extent of cation dissociation in water [7]. When a clay mineral is dispersed in water, the
cations in between the structural sheets dissociate, leaving behind negatively charged parti-
cles which repel each other. The charge deﬁcit can be great enough to create a measurable
expansion.
The cation exchange capacity (CEC) and location of cation substitution for
common swelling clay minerals are provided in Table 2.4:
Page 9 of 42
==PAGE:15==
Table 2.4: CEC and location of substitution in swelling minerals [4]
Clay Mineral
Substitution
Location
Cation
Substitution
Substitutions per
O10(OH)2
CEC
[cmol/kg]
Montmorillonite
Octahedral
Mg2+−> Al3+
0.25-0.6
60-140
Beidellite
Tetrahedral
Al3+−> Si4+
0.25-0.6
60-140
Nontronite
Tetrahedral
Al3+−> Si4+
0.25-0.6
60-140
Vermiculite
Tetrahedral
Al3+−> Si4+
0.6-0.7
140-165
As seen in Table 2.4, montmorillonite and beidellite have similar CEC but substitution
occurs in diﬀerent layers. Vermiculite has the highest CEC. CEC is generally equivalent to
the surface charge if all charged cations are available for exchange. This is not the case,
however, with minerals such as mica, who have ﬁxed K+ minerals in the interlayer. The
molecule uptakes water more readily when the negative charge is in the octahedral, such as
in montmorillonite, rather than in the tetrahedral location, as in the rest of the minerals
listed in Table 2.4 as well as in mica.
2.5.2
Osmosis
Figure 2.10: Increasing the weight of Na+
smectite (curve I) increases the free swell
potential, but Ca2+ smectite (remaining
curves) does not [15]
Osmotic swelling, which results from a greater
concentration of ions in the interlayer than
in the pore water outside [10]. The process,
considered intercrystalline swelling, aims to
equalize the ion concentration diﬀerence. Wa-
ter ﬂows in the direction of the highest ion
concentration, towards the interlayers of the
clay minerals. The degree of osmotic swelling
depends on the interlayer spacing, the avail-
ability of pore water, the chemistry of the
pore water, and the concentration and va-
lence of the exchangeable ion (Na+ and Ca2+)
[28].
Among smectites, sodium (Na+) and
calcium (Ca2+) smectite are commonly stud-
ied because they occur most frequently in na-
ture.
Sodium ions promote continuous os-
motic swelling of smectite, but potassium ions
do not have the hydration energy to swell the
interlayer. This is why potassium saturated
smectites resist swelling. Isomorphous substitution for silicon or aluminum results in an
electrical charge deﬁciency which can be satisﬁed with adsorbing exchangeable cations Na+
or Ca2+.
Na+’s ability to totally dissociate in water creates a larger increase in active
surface area (electric double layer), corresponding to a larger increase in free swelling [15].
Osmotic swelling is a slow process and decreases as clay minerals absorb more water [10],
but increases continuously as the salt concentration of the solution increases. Figure 2.11
illustrates that osmotic swelling as inﬂuenced by ionic strength increases in a continuous
Page 10 of 42
==PAGE:16==
swelling regime, as opposed to the step-wise nature of interlayer hydration seen in Figure
2.9.
Figure 2.11: Osmotic swelling of smectite illustrated by the increasing relationship between salt
concentration and sodium ions [4]
Figure 2.12: Attractive and repulsive forces
governing particle bonding [15]
Double layer repulsion forces occur when the
diﬀuse double layers between two particles
with similar electrical charge overlap (Figure
2.12 Curve a). Two particles that have come
so near to each other that they begin to take
up the same space experience Born repulsion
forces (Figure 2.12 Curve c). Van der Walls
forces are an attractive force resulting from
electrical asymmetry of atoms and molecules
of clay particles, inversely proportional to the
square of the distance between the particles
(Figure 2.12 Curve b). The energy of the par-
ticles is ultimately the sum of the repulsive
and attractive potential energies (Figure 2.12
Curve d).
2.5.3
Capillarity
Material without swelling mineral content may also experience swelling, as the material will
still hydrate exchangeable cations on the outer surface and saturate its pores. The presence of
phyllosilicates such as mica, smectite, and chlorite should cause the particles to absorb more
water and have stronger capillary pressures than material rich in quartz or feldspar. The
cation concentration diﬀerence between the particle surface and pore water causes water
Page 11 of 42
==PAGE:17==
to make its way into the diﬀuse layer, creating an increased distance between some clay
particles, and an overall increase in material volume.
There is a relationship between the suction and the eﬀective radius of the pores emptied
at a given suction. Clay soils can remain saturated up to high levels of suction relative to
sandy soils. Water loss is accompanied by a subsequent decrease in volume by increasing the
suction, and the magnitude of suction at a given water content is approximately equal to
the swelling pressure [35]. Capillarity forces depend on the surface tension of the pore ﬂuid,
degree of saturation, and capillary radius. Greater saturation enlarges pore-water menisci,
reducing the suction.
2.6
Soil Properties Which Inﬂuence Clay Swelling Potential
Swelling as a response to water exposure can occur as a function of various physical and
chemical characteristics, including soil structure, mineralogy, pore structure, the concentra-
tion and valence of the ions, water absorption capacity, compaction, stress history, temper-
ature, the availability and chemistry of pore water [25], and other local conditions. The
inﬂuence of various internal variables on the swelling potential of clay is explored in this
Section.
2.6.1
Mineralogy
Clay mineralogy is a fundamental factor controlling expansive behavior, particularly the
smectite content. Clay minerals are ﬁne-grained sheet silicate minerals which form as a result
of weathering in the presence of water [4], or as a byproduct of hydrolysis, a process where
water reacts with the crystalline structure of the rock and causes a chemical breakdown, from
hydrothermal deposition, or as a result of mechanical weathering. Silicates are especially
susceptible to hydrolysis, but the severity of weathering and the products are dependent on
the chemical composition of the rock and water which are interacting, and the permeability
of the rock mass [27]. Clay particles are usually ultra ﬁne-grained, less than 2 micrometers
in diameter.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.13: Ball-and-stick models and polyhedral models for tetrahedra (a) and octahedra (b)
molecular structures [4]
Clay minerals are fundamentally classiﬁed as 1:1 or 2:1, built respectively by one tetrahedral
sheet and one octahedral sheet (T-O) or one octahedral sheet between two tetrahedral sheets
Page 12 of 42
==PAGE:18==
(T-O-T). The tetrahedral sheet is a plane built of tetrahedra with oxygen ions in the tips
and a silicon ion in the center (Figure 2.13a).
The octahedral sheet is a plane of built
of octahedra containing oxygen or hydroxyl ions at the six tips and an aluminum ion at
the center (Figure 2.13b) [17]. 1:1 clay includes kaolinite; 2:1 clay includes smectite, illite,
vermiculite and chlorite.
Clay minerals can also be classiﬁed according to their tendency to expand. Kaolinite and
illite are classiﬁed as non-expansive. Vermiculite is a moderately expansive mineral, and
montmorillonite is highly expansive. Most swelling soils contain minerals in the smectite or
vermiculite family, because these minerals have an expandable interlayer and a large enough
speciﬁc surface area to produce water adsorption forces in their naturally occurring state
[18].
Smectite
Smectite is a group of swelling clay mineral that can greatly increase in volume. The struc-
tural formula of smectite is: Ca0.17(Al, Mg, Fe)2(Si, Al)4O10(OH)2nH2O [2]. Smectite is
formed from the alteration of in-situ rock forming minerals or solution deposits commonly
in relatively ﬂat, alkaline areas such as marine environments in the presence of silicon and
magnesium. Smectite minerals are associated with weakness zones or gouges such as faults,
feather joins, crushed rock, or other discontinuities [21]. Smectite encompasses a large num-
ber of 2:1 clay minerals with cations and water molecules between the layers, with a general
schematic illustrated by Figure 2.14a and simpliﬁed in Figure 2.14b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.14: Schematic diagram for smectite [18] (a) and simpliﬁed (b) [15]
Studies have previously shown that smectite content can dramatically aﬀect swelling pressure
development, but a material containing less than 75% smectite does not dramatically aﬀect
free swelling [15].
Montmorillonite
Smectite in the form of dioctahedral aluminum micas fall in the range of montmorillonite-
Page 13 of 42
==PAGE:19==
beidellite (Figure 2.15a), where the montmorillonite pole of the series has a variable Mg
content, and the beidellite pole contains no Mg.
It has the following chemical formula:
(Na, Ca)0.3(Al, Mg)2Si4O10(OH)2 ∗n(H2O)10 [2]. Montmorillonites are found in weakness
zones, created by surface weathering of rocks in the presence of Na, Ca, Mg, and ferrous
iron. These minerals are characterized by the partial replacement of aluminum by magne-
sium, resulting in a charge deﬁcit balanced by exchangeable cations, usually Na+ or Ca2+.
Montmorillonite has a dramatic shrink-swell capacity and is prone to large volume changes
with water content. Water penetration makes the basal distance between layers variable,
but it is typically between 14 to 15Å [17]. Large spacing implies weak bonds between layers.
Montmorillonite is considered highly active in swelling due to its ability to reversible shrink-
ing and swelling during drying and re-wetting. On the contrary, clays containing kaolinite
or illite show an initial large volume decrease on drying with only limited swelling upon
re-wetting.
Vermiculite
Vermiculites are another type of swelling clay with layers of water molecules between each
T-O-T layer, usually formed by the oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+ in iron rich biotite (Figure
2.15b). It has the following chemical formula: Mg1.8Fe2+
0.9Al4.3SiO10(OH)24(H2O)[2]. The
spacing between the unit layers let the water molecules and cations enter freely and the
unit layers are drawn apart as a result of high repulsive forces. Vermiculites have a basal
spacing of 14Å but are distinguishable from chlorites because their basal spacing collapses
to 10Å after heating, and from montmorillonites because they do not expand beyond 14Å
with glycerol treatment [17]. The spacing between the layers allow free ﬂowing cations and
water molecules to enter, creating repulsive forces which draw the layers further apart.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.15: Schematic structures of montmorillonite (a) and vermiculite (b) [17]
Page 14 of 42
==PAGE:20==
Mixed Layer Clay Minerals
Montmorillonite mixed with other minerals also cause expansion. The majority of layer-
making minerals include illite, montmorillonite, vermiculite, and chlorite [17]. Mixed-layer
clay mineral structures are subdivided into regular (R1) or irregular (R0) ordering. Mixed-
layer minerals with perfect R1 sequences are often assigned a new name, such as corrensite.
Corrensite is a mixed-layer chlorite, subdivided into two categories. Group 1 corrensites
encompass regular interstratiﬁcation of chlorite and swelling chlorite, and are distinguishable
from other chlorites by shifting to 17.7Å after glycerol treatment. Group 2 are well deﬁned
smectite-chlorites with a basal distance of 12Å [11].
2.6.2
Particle Size
Soil has the tendency to expand upon hydration when the particle size making up the
material is very ﬁne, even when it is composed of normally non-expansive minerals.
A
sample that contains a large ﬁne fraction draws in more water than a sample with less ﬁnes
due to capillary action, resulting in volumetric expansion to some degree even with zero
smectite content [32]. Swelling increases with surface area of the soil particles, area upon
which electrical double layers can occur. Table 2.5 lists the average particle thickness of
diﬀerent clay minerals and the degree to which they tend to expand.
Table 2.5: Particle size and swelling potential of some clay minerals [27]
Mineral
Particle
Thickness
Average Speciﬁc
Surface Area
Volume
Change
[nm]
[m2/g]
-
Montmorillonite
2.0
700-800
High
Illite
20
80-120
Moderate
Kaolinite
100
10-15
Low
The table provides minerals with average particle sizes at three diﬀerent orders of magnitude.
Montmorillonite minerals are one order of magnitude smaller than illite and two orders of
magnitude smaller than kaolinite particles, and exhibit the highest volume change due to a
greater average surface area enabling water molecule and cation bonding.
2.6.3
Particle Arrangement
Swelling pressure development is dependent on particle arrangement.
For high swelling
clays, swelling pressure and volume change is greater for material that tends to a parallel
orientation. Leafy minerals such as mica loosely packed in the dry state, can be paralleled
by sedimentation and have a low free swelling compared to others. For low to slightly active
swelling material, higher swelling is observed in random particle arrangement [35].
Page 15 of 42
==PAGE:21==
2.6.4
Plasticity
The plasticity of a material is indicative of the degree of volumetric deformation it will
undergo. Holz and Gibbs demonstrated that the Atterberg Limits of the material largely
determine the degree of expansivity [11]. Their classiﬁcation of swelling potential deﬁned by
the liquid limit and plasticity index is listed in Table 2.6.
Table 2.6: Swelling potential estimated from Atterberg Limits [14]
Liquid Limit (%)
Plasticity Index (%)
Swelling Potential (%)
<50
<25
Low
50-60
25-35
Marginal
>60
>35
High
A study by Patil et al. elaborated on the classiﬁcation proposed by Holz and Gibbs, sug-
gesting that the Atterberg Limits of the material aﬀect the diﬀerent indicators of swelling
potential diﬀerently by demonstrating that lower plasticity soils exhibited a shallower trend
line on the free swell vs. swelling pressure plot [25]. That is, a higher plasticity material
would result in a higher volume change for the swelling same pressure.
Figure 2.16: Swelling pressure over log time
during constant volume oedometer testing with
measured curve (solid) actual (dashed) and the
corrected (dotted) [29]
According to Rokoengen, swelling pressure
increases rapidly at ﬁrst and collapses after
some time due to unstable packing of the
pulverized sample. The collapse is detected
by both a drop in sample height and pres-
sure [29]. The collapse should be compen-
sated with some amount of expansion, but
is instead compensated for at higher pres-
sures with a degree of apparatus deforma-
tion (Figure 2.16).
The plasticity of the material is a major
component of the collapsing behavior; as
water is sucked into clay, particles rearrange
by compacting further to form positive-to-
negative charged points, to overcome the
electrostatic repulsive forces from negatively
charged surfaces. After the repulsive forces are overcome, less force is needed to compact
the sample further.
Percent swell and pressure increase are related to the plasticity index (PI) according to the
experimentally generated Figures 2.17a and 2.17b. For remoulded samples, the increase in
swelling potential with SI is due to a combination of water sorption to mineral surfaces and
mechanical deformation of elastic minerals such as mica. Samples showing greater swelling
than expected based on the PI contained considerable amounts of mica. The high scatter in
Figure 2.17a was attributed to diﬀerences in porosity.
Page 16 of 42
==PAGE:22==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.17: SI vs. swelling pressure (a) and SI vs. free swell (b) where x marks samples with high
mica content [32]
2.6.5
Consolidation
A highly consolidated clay with normally low swelling potential will yield a higher swelling
pressure than clay with low consolidation and high swelling potential [32]. The degree of
consolidation can be estimated by comparing in-situ water content with Atterberg Limits.
The relationship between plastic index (PI) and swellability index, or the diﬀerence in water
content between 0.025 and 2 MN/m2, is pictured in Figure 2.18a. The SI shows an increase
with PI.
2.6.6
Compaction and Density
The initial void ratio and therefore the stress history of a soil is shown to have an inﬂuence
on the measured swelling pressure and volume change associated with water adsorption. The
axial strain as a function of the initial void ratio at 93% relative humidity for Na+ and Ca2+
rich smectite is shown in Figure 2.18b.
Page 17 of 42
==PAGE:23==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.18: SI vs. PI where x marks samples with very high mica content [32](a) and Axial strain
as a function of initial void ratio at 93% relative humidity for Na+ and Ca2+ rich smectite [36] (b)
Constant volume oedometer and free swell tests were conducted by [19] on expansive soils
of diﬀerent dry densities. The study showed, with reproducible results, that for an identical
relative humidity, the amount of swell increases with increasing dry density of the material
(Figure 2.19).
Figure 2.19: Free swelling as a function of time for varying densities [19]
Swelling deformations is highly dependent on the stress paths followed by the sample, and
repercussionally, on the stress history of the sample.
The interaction between two yield
curves in diﬀerent structural states (densely packed and loosely packed clay) are shown in
Figure 2.20. Pressure develops in response to a decrease in suction to maintain a constant
volume. Figure 2.20a shows a maximum normal stress at 1332 kPa and 7860kPa for loose
and dense specimens, respectively.
Page 18 of 42
==PAGE:24==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.20: Stress paths measured during constant volume wetting for loose and densely packed
Na-smectite (a) and Ca-smectite (b) [36]. The LC curves are drawn qualitatively.
2.6.7
Initial Swell Allowance
Figure 2.21: Permitting volume change
prior to volumetric constraint may
reduce the maximum swelling pressure
obtained from oedometer testing [21]
The swelling pressure exerted by a material varies
when the oedometer cell height changes.
That is,
when the material is allowed to swell prior to being
volumetrically constrained, a signiﬁcant reduction in
swelling pressure is obtained. This behavior was il-
lustrated experimentally by plot shown in Figure 2.21
[21].
Figure 2.21 indicates that permitting the material to
swell just a few percent prior to constraining the cell
by volume signiﬁcantly reduces the measured swelling
pressure. This scenario is representative of many in-
situ conditions where the material has the capacity to
swell before meeting a constraining subsurface struc-
ture.
2.7
Hypothesis
Based on the preliminary study and the literature re-
view, the predicted outcome of the results will reveal
that higher smectite content will produce a higher maximum swelling pressure, and a combi-
nation of swelling minerals and capillary action in the ﬁne fraction will govern free swelling.
Page 19 of 42
==PAGE:25==
3. Methodology
3
 Methodology
This study aims to tackle the ambiguities that arose in the preliminary study, by investigat-
ing two measures of swelling potential as a function of swelling mineral content and grain
size distribution. 55 samples stored by SINTEF at NTNU were available for investigation.
Swelling clay minerals are identiﬁed using X-ray diﬀraction analysis; the grain size distri-
bution of is measured using laser diﬀraction; the swelling pressure exerted by the material
is investigated over time using constant volume oedometer tests, and the volume change is
measured using free swelling tests.
3.1
Material Preparation
The 55 samples available for investigation were samples from anonymous previous SINTEF
projects with varying amounts of leftover material and preexisting data available. The gaps
in the available data were then ﬁlled in with additional testing on the samples with suﬃcient
material. All material preparation was previously performed by SINTEF.
Weakness zones are often highly consolidated with a high amount of coarse minerals. It
is therefore diﬃcult to obtain undisturbed samples, and examination of swelling potential
is often performed on remolded samples with the coarse grains removed [28]. The material
used in this study was carefully prepared prior to testing to ensure results are as reproducible
and reliable as possible. The ﬁne fraction of particles sized smaller than 20m was separated,
as most active minerals are present in the ﬁne fractions [3].
Separation was done by a
combination of wet sieving and gravitational settlement (an application of Stoke’s Law).
Powder samples were prepared according to ISRM standard (1979). The sample is dried in
a drying cabinet and the dried sample is crushed in a porcelain mill. The material which is
larger than 20m was also dried and weighed to calculate the fraction of ﬁne particles in the
sample [10].
3.2
Mineral Identiﬁcation Using X-Ray Diﬀraction
X-Ray Diﬀraction (XRD) is used for identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of mineral composition
in this study, as it is a time-eﬃcient and reliable method that is readily available at NTNU.
An XRD pattern is a plot of the X-rays scattered at diﬀerent angles by a sample [37]; each
material has a unique diﬀraction pattern, which is directly related to the crystal structure
and atomic spacing of the mineral composition under observation, given in Angstrom (Å)
(Å = 10−8cm) [37]. The XRD apparatus used at NTNU is shown in Figure 3.1. A ﬁxed
wavelength is used to scan through a range of angles to produce a diﬀraction peak at a
speciﬁc angle θ which is determined by the unique spacing between diﬀracting planes of
atoms. The basal reﬂections yield the spacing of the basal layer, indicating which atoms are
present in the diﬀracting planes [26].
Page 20 of 42
==PAGE:26==
3. Methodology
Figure 3.1: XRD apparatus used at NTNU labs
[31]
Clay mineral separation
The ﬁne-grained fraction is isolated to par-
ticle sizes less than 6m, allowing the pattern
of swelling minerals to be identiﬁed without
being overwhelmed by the diﬀraction peaks
generated by quartz or feldspar. The <6µm
fraction was separated using gravitational
settling in a column of water. The prepa-
ration procedure is described below:
1. Rock fragments were placed in a beaker
with 250ml of deionized water. The beaker
was placed in an ultrasonic cell disruptor
to separate the less than 2µm fraction us-
ing a centrifuge at 1000 rpm for 2 min-
utes.
2.
The clays were distributed into indi-
vidual beakers with 250ml of deionized wa-
ter.
3.
The particle-water solution was sus-
pended in a 250ml graduated cylinder, thor-
oughly shaken to achieve a homogeneous mixture, and left to settle.
The settling time
required to achieve 6µm sized particles in the top 20cm of the graduated cylinder was 1 hour
45 minutes. The top 20cm of water-particle solution was pumped out.
4. The particles were transferred onto two glass slides using the ﬁlter-peel method through
a 0.45µm ﬁlter; one was analyzed as-is and the other was solvated in an ethylene glycol
atmosphere over night at 60 degrees C. The time elapsed between removal from the ethylene
glycol chamber and scanning was minimized to reduce evaporation.
Bragg’s Law
XRD utilizes constructive interference of monochromatic X-rays and a crystalline sample.
The interaction of incident rays with the sample produces a diﬀracted ray when the conditions
for Bragg’s Law are satisﬁed. The reﬂection described by Bragg’s Law is shown in Figure
3.2.
The equation describing Bragg’s law is provided in Equation (3.1).
nλ = 2dsinθ
(3.1)
Bragg’s law relates beams of electromagnetic radiation of wavelength, λ, at certain angles
of incidence, θ, to the diﬀraction angle and lattice spacing d in a crystalline sample. An
integral multiple of the wavelength n, is equal to the extra distance AB+BC travelled by the
Page 21 of 42
==PAGE:27==
3. Methodology
second beam as seen in Figure 3.2 [26].
Figure 3.2: When Bragg’s Law is
satisﬁed, constructive interference
between X-rays and a crystalline
sample produces a diﬀracted ray at
angle θ [4]
Data Collection and Interpretation
A Bruker D8 Advance XRD Powder Diﬀractometer
was used to scan the slides from 3 to 80 degrees
(2θ) using the following parameters: wavelength λ
= 1.54060nm or λ = 1.78886nm, step size = 0.0115
degrees/0.6 seconds, X-ray tube = cobalt. The inten-
sities of diﬀracted X-rays were continuously recorded
as the sample and detector rotated. Extreme angles of
diﬀraction were adjusted by a predetermined weight
factor.The results were plotted as peak positions at
values of 2θ and X-ray counts, or intensities.
The
d-spacing of each peak was then obtained by solving
Bragg’s equation for the corresponding wavelength λ.
DIFFRAC.EVA XRD and Elemental Analysis soft-
ware were used for identiﬁcation.
The software
searches a standard reference ﬁle of inorganic compounds for a matching pattern of d-spacings
exhibited by the specimen. Matching positions and intensities are required to identify a min-
eral.
Quantitative Analysis
The ﬁne-grained XRD analysis does not provide quantitative information. However, since
the fraction of ﬁnes within the bulk sample is known, a quantitative analysis can be made
to understand swelling properties and stability implications of the material as a whole.
Because it is not possible to quantify smectite in the <6m fraction using the standard Ri-
etveld method, the main minerals present in each material were quantiﬁed by hand using
the ratio of peak intensities. 001 peaks identiﬁed using webmineral.com [2] were used for
clay minerals [15]. The intensity of a mineral is equal to the area under the peak, found by
multiplying the height by the width at half the height. The intensities were then multiplied
by a scale factor (Table 3.1) to correct for the variation in intensities due to particle size,
orientation, chemical composition, and crystal structure. The intensities were scaled against
each other to calculate the relative amounts of each mineral constituent. As long as all
samples were prepared in the same way, the minerals can be quantiﬁed as weighted frac-
tions. The samples were prepared randomly and unoriented, making the diﬀraction patterns
comparable for quantiﬁcation.
Page 22 of 42
==PAGE:28==
3. Methodology
Table 3.1: Correction Factors for XRD quantiﬁcation [15]
Mineral
d-value (Å)
Correction Factor
Smectite
14-15
0.5
Mixed-layers
10-14
1.0
Mica/illite
10
1.4
Amphibole
8.40
0.5
Kaolinite
7.17
0.7
Chlorite
4.73
2.10
Quartz
4.26
1.0
K-feldspar
3.24
0.5
Plagioclase
3.19
0.5
Calcite
3.03
0.25
Epidote
2.89
1.0
Figure 3.3: Basal spacings (Å) of various mixed-layer
minerals treated with ethylene glycol, indicated by the
"G" [3].
Expansive soils are identiﬁed by solvat-
ing the ﬁnes in glycol or ethylene gly-
col, which enhances the distance be-
tween layers and may induce an addi-
tional peak in the XRD results [10]. For
instance, the atomic distance for mont-
morillonite is around 14Å (1.4nm), but
after addition of ethylene glycol it will
be increased to 17.7Å.
Mixed-layer constituents can be espe-
cially diﬃcult to identify.
Regular
mixed layers behave as pure minerals
whose basal spacing is equal to the sum
of the two interstratiﬁed layers.
This
means that a corrensite (14Å) - mont-
morillonite (14Å) mixed layer mineral
shows a basal spacing equal to 28Å in
dry conditions [17]. The highest visible
spacings likely to be exhibited by vari-
ous minerals and mixed-layer minerals
after the addition of ethylene glycol are
provided in Figure 3.3.
3.3
Swelling
Pressure
Mea-
surements Using Constant Vol-
ume Oedometer Testing
Clay swelling is expressed by volume change and an induced pressure on its surroundings.
The maximum magnitude of swelling pressure is therefore an essential measurement indica-
tive of the worst case scenario of introducing additional stresses onto a subsurface structure
Page 23 of 42
==PAGE:29==
3. Methodology
or hard rock tunnel that is incapable of accommodating volume change. Swelling potential
of a material can be quantiﬁed by measuring swelling pressure. When volumetric expansion
is prohibited by a subsurface structure, pressure increases. Swelling pressure is often mea-
sured using a one-dimensional consolidation apparatus such as an oedometer test on radially
constrained samples. The apparatus used at NTNU is shown in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Oedometer apparatus used at NTNU labs
Hydrated material attempts to swell, but its volume is kept constant, resulting in a pressure
exerted by the material. The axial pressure is measured over time and the maximum pressure
obtained in 24 hours is recorded. The principal of the procedure used at NTNU is illustrated
in Figures 3.5a and 3.5b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a) Schematic of oedometer test apparatus 1 Balance lever 2 Dial gauge for specimen
height 3 Adjustment screw 4 Container 5 Cylinderical test cell 6 Steel base plate 7 Wheel 8 Frame
9 Base 10 Worm gear 11 Pressure ring 12 Dial gauge for pressure sensitivity [6]. (b) A basic
schematic of the pressure cell (top) and the three stages of pressure measurements over time
(bottom) [20]
Page 24 of 42
==PAGE:30==
3. Methodology
A detailed description of the procedure is provided below. The samples are prepared and
tested according to NTNU standard methods.
1. A rigid metal ring which provides radial restraint is lubricated to reduce side friction
2. 20 grams of pulverized material is distributed into a 20cm2 cylindrical pressure cell
3. Porous ﬁlters allowing water to inﬁltrate are inserted at the top and bottom of the
specimen. Filter papers are inserted between the specimen and the plates
4. Distilled water is added to the cell to above the top porous plate
5. A micrometer dial gauge is mounted to measure the swelling displacement at the center
of the cross section of the specimen
6. The pressure cell is placed in a loading device capable of measuring the force required
to resist swelling
7. The screw is adjusted to balance the lever
8. Compression stage: and steel disc weights are applied to the balance lever to compress
the dry specimen at 2MPa for 24 hours
9. Unloading stage: dry specimen is unloaded and allowed to increase in volume until the
height stabilizes
10. Swelling stage: distilled water is added and sample is maintained at a constant volume
with an automatic motor until the swelling has stabilized, usually about 24 hours
3.4
Volume Change Measurements Using Free Swelling Test
Swelling behavior can be described in the laboratory by their free swell index (FSI), the
one-dimensional volume change of soil after hydration without any external constraints.
The FSI is determined at NTNU using the procedure listed below:
1. Sample particle size less than 20µm was separated, as nearly all the swelling minerals
are contained in this grain fraction. After soaking overnight, the clay was fed through
six sieves sized 4mm, 2mm, 0.5mm, 125µm, 63µm, and 20µm. >20µm and <20µm
portions were placed in the oven separate glass bowls to dry. The dry weights of each
portion were recorded. The dry weights were used to calculate the ﬁne fraction of the
material using equations (3.2) and (3.3).
mdry<20 = Wdry<20+bowl −Wbowl
(3.2)
fines = 100% ∗
mdry<20
mdry<20 + mdry>20
(3.3)
Page 25 of 42
==PAGE:31==
3. Methodology
Where:
mdry<20 is the dry mass of the <20µm fraction material
mdry<20 is the dry mass of the <20µm fraction material
Wdry<20+bowl is the measured mass of the dried sample in the bowl
Wbowl is the measured mass of the empty bowl
2. Deionized water was added up to the 45mL mark in a 50mL graduated cylinder. 10mL
of the <20µm sample was suspended into the graduated cylinder. Entrapped air was
removed by gently shaking. The suspension was left for more than 24 hours (Figure
3.6b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: (a) Free swell test schematic (left to right) 10mL dry powder mixed in 45mL water, and
left to settle for 24 hours before observing the ﬁnal volume of clay [29] (b) eight samples
undergoing free swelling
3. The free swell was reported as the increase in clay volume after settling for 24 hours,
according to Equation (3.4).
FS = 100% ∗Vf
Vi
[6]
(3.4)
Where:
FS = Free Swell
Vf is the ﬁnal volume of material after 24 hours of swelling
Vi is the initial volume of material, 100mL
3.5
Grain Size Determination Using Laser Diﬀraction Spectroscopy
Particle size distribution can be determined using laser diﬀraction. Laser diﬀraction utilizes
the theory of Fraunhofer diﬀraction, which relates particle size to the intensity of light
it scatters [3].
It is suitable for determining a broad range of particle sizes, from 0.01
to 5000mm, at high precision.
Laser diﬀraction at NTNU is performed with a Malvern
Mastersizer 3000 (Figure 3.7). The procedure is as follows:
Page 26 of 42
==PAGE:32==
3. Methodology
1. Launch Malvern Mastersizer 3000 and accessories used for measurements (Figure 3.7)
2. Clean the instrument by running the propeller in a beaker with tap water 4 times. Fill
beaker with 450mL deionized water and place under propeller
3. Select desired settings. This study assumed a refractive index of 1.56, an adsorption
density of 0.01 g/cm3, and a density of 1 g/cm3. Three measurements were taken in
sequence for each sample for a data processing range of 0.005-100µm.
4. Initialize Instrument, turn on ultrasound to reduce air bubbles
5. Measure background
6. Add small amounts of sample until the Obscuration is above 50 %
7. Measure Sample; repeat measurements until reproducible results are obtained (until
the D90 reading has a standard deviation of less than 1% for the same sample)
8. Repeat cleaning procedure before proceeding to next sample
Figure 3.7: Malvern Mastersizer 3000 and propellor used for laser diﬀraction at NTNU
Swelling pressure measurements are plotted with smectite content in the <6µm fraction
obtained from XRD, in attempt to predict how much swelling resulted from the smectite
alone, and eliminating the ambiguities resulting from other mechanisms of swelling, which
cannot be distinguished during free swelling tests.
Page 27 of 42
==PAGE:33==
4. Results
4
 Results
The data includes compiled results from previous laboratory tests performed by SINTEF
at NTNU and additional tests aimed to ﬁll in knowledge gaps on 55 clay samples which
exhibited swelling potential of some kind. The results are presented as follows:
• Raw data, tabulated in Appendix B, including smectite content measured from XRD
patterns on the <6µm fraction of the material (a full quantiﬁcation and all XRD
patterns are provided in Appendix C); ﬁne (<20µm) fraction of the bulk sample; free
swelling volume obtained from free swell tests; maximum swelling pressure obtained
from constant volume oedometer tests
• Swelling pressure curves generated from oedometer tests illustrating pressure develop-
ment as a function of time (Appendix D)
• Grain size distribution curves measured using laser diﬀraction (Appendix E)
4.1
Swelling Potential Parameters
Maximum swelling pressure was plotted against free swell volume in Figure 4.1. The data
points called out in the Figure will be discussed in Section 5.
Figure 4.1: Maximum swelling pressure (MPa) vs. free swell volume (%). Dashed lines are the
lower boundaries of slightly active (green), active (yellow), and very active (red) behavior
Page 28 of 42
==PAGE:34==
4. Results
4.2
Smectite Content
The eﬀect of the smectite content of the <6µm fraction was investigated for each swelling
potential parameter separately. Figures 4.2 and 4.3 illustrate how the maximum swelling
pressure varies with smectite content measured in the <6µm fraction for 28 samples.
Figure 4.2: Maximum swelling pressure as a function of smectite content
Figure 4.3: Smectite content in the <6µm fraction resulting in various levels of swelling pressure
activity
Page 29 of 42
==PAGE:35==
4. Results
Figure 4.4 was created to observe how the predominant cation present in the smectite aﬀects
the swelling behavior.
Figure 4.4: Dominant cation and swelling pressure
Figures 4.5 illustrates how the volume change varies with smectite content measured in the
<6µm fraction for 17 samples. The ﬁgure also calls out samples with high mica content with
an "x".
Figure 4.5: Free swelling volume change as a function of smectite content in the <6µm fraction.
Samples with mica content greater than 20% are marked by "x"
Page 30 of 42
==PAGE:36==
4. Results
A box-and-whisker plot was created to illustrate the range of smectite content for each level
of free swell activity for 17 samples, as classiﬁed by Norsk Bergmekanikkgruppe.
Figure 4.6: Smectite content in the <6µm fraction resulting in various levels of volume change
The swelling pressure development recorded during constant volume oedometer tests display
swelling behavior as a function of time. The curves are compiled in Figure 4.8. The swelling
classiﬁcation according to Norsk Bergmekanikkgruppe are indicated by green, yellow, and
red dashed lines. The average curve from each smectite group is plotted in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Average pressure curves over time plotted according to smectite content
Page 31 of 42
==PAGE:37==
4. Results
Figure 4.8: Swelling pressure over time generated from constant volume oedometer tests. The color
scheme indicates the smectite content measured in the <6 micron fraction using XRD
4.3
Grain Size Distribution
Figures 4.9 and 4.10 illustrate the average grain size distribution curves from 35 individual
samples, divided by the level of swelling pressure and free swell activity, respectively.
Page 32 of 42
==PAGE:38==
4. Results
Figure 4.9: Average grain size distribution curves from 32 samples plotted according to maximum
swelling pressure
Figure 4.10: Average grain size distribution curves from 18 samples plotted according to free swell
The eﬀect of multiple ﬁne fraction values on free swell was investigated in Figure 4.11.
Page 33 of 42
==PAGE:39==
4. Results
Figure 4.11: Free swelling vs. various ﬁne fractions
Finally, the grain size distribution curves for samples which showed outstanding swelling
behavior are provided in Figure 4.12.
Figure 4.12: Grain size distribution curves from samples showing outstanding swelling potential
Page 34 of 42
==PAGE:40==
5. Discussion
5
 Discussion
A discussion of the laboratory ﬁndings will be presented, followed by an assessment of the
reliability of the procedures used.
5.1
Swelling Pressure and Volume Change
The two swelling potential parameters were plotted in Figure 4.1. The classiﬁcation bound-
aries according to Norsk Bergmekanikkgruppen are indicated by the green, yellow, and red
dashed lines. The relationship behaved as expected in general, creating a positive linear
relationship between the maximum swelling pressure and free swell volume. The trendline
ﬁts the data with a potential of variance (r2) of 0.5. While the correlation is not overwhelm-
ingly strong, the trend between the two measures of swelling potential is clearly positive;
there are a number of diﬀerent physical properties governing the two swelling potential pa-
rameters, including mineralogy, particle size, particle arrangement, plasticity, consolidation,
compaction and density, and initial swell, as introduced in 2.6. From Figure 4.1, 16057 and
17144 developed some swelling pressure but had totally inactive free swelling. The trendline,
consequently, did not intersect the free swelling axis at 100%. 17149 experienced an active
level of volume change but still exerted a small swelling pressure. 17148, 18034, and 16095
displayed very large swelling potential values in both tests. The samples called out in Figure
4.1 will be investigated further in attempt to explain divergences from the trend.
5.2
Smectite Content
Generally, swelling pressure was well correlated with smectite content, illustrated by Figures
4.2, 4.3, and 4.8. The exponential relationship found in Figure 4.2 between smectite content
and maximum swelling pressure had a well-correlated r2 value of 0.8. The spread of smectite
percentages in each group in Figure 4.3 is quite compact. There is no overlap between ﬁrst
and third quartiles of the box plots, indicating that the level of swelling pressure produced
is well deﬁned by the amount of smectite present in the ﬁne fraction of the sample. At least
nine data points were present in each subgroup, making the conclusion reliable.
18034 and 16095 reached the most extreme pressures shown in Figure 4.1, and contained
respectively 94% and 99% smectite in their ﬁne fractions, which is a likely explanation to
their very high swelling pressures. Unfortunately, 17148 did not undergo XRD, so its smectite
content is unknown.
The swelling pressure curves divided by smectite content according to the dominant cation
in Figure 4.4 showed a very good correlation in each curve. Ca2+ saturated smectite had the
lowest curve, while Na+ saturated smectite had the highest curve, and samples identiﬁed
with both Ca2+ and Na+ from XRD fell in between.
The swelling curves seen in Figure 4.8, color-coded by smectite content, revealed that the
curves follow the trend very well. Black and dark blue lines are only in the high to very high
Page 35 of 42
==PAGE:41==
5. Discussion
pressure areas, blue lines in the medium to high areas, and light blue lines are condensed in
the low area. Sample 16095 developed a particularly high swelling pressure. Since it didn’t
stabilize within the typical 24 hour period and was allowed to develop for 45 hours until it
reached a maximum of 1.72MPa. To reiterate, this sample contained 99% smectite in the
ﬁne fraction. According to Rokoengen [29], swelling pressure increases rapidly at ﬁrst and
collapses after some time due to unstable packing of the pulverized sample, detected by both
a drop in sample height and pressure. Because the collapse of the curves occur at higher
pressures with higher smectite content, the collapse of the swelling curve at high pressures
is likely related to the elasticity of the material. Higher smectite contents must then provide
higher elasticity in the clay volume. Most of the curves also show distinct stages of pressure
development. The primary stage, which develops the most rapidly, is likely undergoing a
combination of capillary suction and interlayer mineral hydration. The secondary stage is
likely governed by interlayer hydration alone, explaining the variation in peaks governed by
smectite content.
The average curves plotted in Figure 4.7 combine the averaged time-dependent pressure
development for the 30 samples divided into 3 groups. The 80-100% group ultimately de-
veloped the greatest maximum pressure, stabilizing after a major collapse around 1.6 hours.
The 0-29% and 30-79% groups stabilized just after reaching its maximum, also around 1.6
hours.
Free swell volume was correlated less well with smectite content. The linear relationship
found in Figure 4.5 was relatively weak with an r2 value of 0.4.
16100 contained 80%
smectite and remained nearly inactive. 17087 contained 96% smectite and experienced a
very large volume change of 300%. There were numerous instances of each case. The free
swell volume clearly increases with smectite content on average, but the spread of smectite
content for the slightly active and active groups shown in Figure 4.6 is quite large, making
the correlation unconvincing. The large spread may be due to the mineral composition in
the 6-20µm fraction and the grain size distribution, which is related to the elasticity of the
samples. In addition, the very active group only had three data points, so reliable remarks
about this group cannot be concluded. Mechanical deformation of elastic minerals, such as
mica/illite, were also investigated in Figure 4.5 with the expectation that samples with high
concentrations of elastic minerals would exhibit higher swelling [30]. The samples with high
illite/mica content depicted in Figure 4.5 followed the trendline very well, and showed no
exceptional behavior.
5.3
Grain Size Distribution
The grain size distribution curves, averaged over their maximum swelling pressure classiﬁ-
cation in Figure 4.9, showed no pattern. The slightly active samples (85% ﬁner than 20µm)
and low activity samples (78% ﬁner than 20µm) had a ﬁner fraction than the highly active
samples (72% ﬁner than 20µm) and active samples (68% ﬁner than 20µm). The grain size
distribution showed little relation to swelling pressure.
The grain size distribution curves when averaged over their free swell classiﬁcation in Figure
4.10 showed a more organized, but counter intuitive pattern: the inactive and slightly active
Page 36 of 42
==PAGE:42==
samples had the ﬁnest grain sizes (87% ﬁner than 20µm), and the active and highly active
had very similar distributions with the active group slightly ﬁner than the highly active group
(both 70% ﬁner than 20µm). Based on the literature review, ﬁner particle size distributions
were expected to show higher free swell values. Most active clay minerals are said to be found
in the ﬁne fractions [28], so samples with larger <20µm fractions were predicted to contain
relatively more active clay minerals than samples with larger particle sizes. If capillary action
does to some degree contribute to volume change, the samples in this study suggest that the
eﬀects of grain size distribution are negligible compared to the eﬀects of smectite content
present in the ﬁnes. However, the grain size alone does not reveal everything about the size
distribution of the pores and pore throats, or the connectivity of the pore spaces. Additional
information is needed clarifying the true nature of capillarity in the material.
This was investigated further by comparing multiple ﬁne fractions measured by laser diﬀrac-
tion with free swell values in Figure 4.11. Figure 4.11 showed no strong trend between any
ﬁne fraction value and free swell value. All plots actually tend towards a negative relation-
ship, but the correlation is very weak. Despite consistent claims from the literature review
that smaller particles should yield higher free swell values, this was not supported by the
results of this study.
5.4
Data Trends
5.4.1
Inactivity
16057 and 17144 showed both low swelling pressure and inactive free swelling. 16057 had a
relatively ﬁne particle size distribution with 50% of the material ﬁner than 10µm, and 17144
had a very ﬁne grain size with 99% of the material ﬁner than 10µm. Despite having the
largest fraction of ﬁne grained particles, 17144 displayed no free swelling behavior. These
samples indicate that while large fractions of ﬁne grains can contribute to free swelling
behavior, it is not an overwhelmingly dominant parameter. However, the smectite content
was unknown for both samples, yielding inconclusive results.
5.4.2
Very Active Free Swell
17149 had an unknown smectite content and developed a low swelling pressure but a very
high volume change. 17149 had a relatively ﬁne particle size distribution, with 50% of the
sample ﬁner than 8µm and 90% ﬁner than 20µm. The grain size distributions were not
available for other samples that showed similar swelling behavior. As described in Section
2.3, it is possible that Na2+ dominating smectite is behind the high free swell values.
Page 37 of 42
==PAGE:43==
5.4.3
Very Active Pressure and Volume Change
Sample 18111 showed a very large deviation from the average grain size distribution curves,
with only 35% of the sample ﬁner than 20µm, and 50% of the material ﬁner than 35µm.
This sample was likely not prepared in the correct way. Despite the large particle size, both
swelling potential parameters fell in the high classiﬁcation range. 17148 showed grain size
distribution very close to the average of the low series, with 50% of the material ﬁner than
10µm and 85% ﬁner than 20µm. The smectite content was unknown, but very high values
were achieved for both swelling parameters.
17087, 18034, and 16095 had 96%, 94%, and 99% smectite respectively. All showed a grain
size distribution coarser than the average of the active/very active series, and displayed
exceptionally high swelling pressure and free swell values.
5.4.4
Incomplete Data
Because this study was dealing with old samples with varying available data and random
amounts of leftover sample for further studies, it was not possible to perform all tests on the
samples with data gaps. Knowledge of the smectite content from samples 16057, 17144, and
17149, which showed inactivity in one or both swelling parameters, is essential before drawing
conclusions about the physical property dominating these mechanisms. In addition, since
there is no mineral information about the 6-20µm fraction, it is diﬃcult to fully interpret
this behavior.
Elasticity is another factor thought to inﬂuence the swelling pressure, particularly aﬀecting
the magnitude of the collapse of the swelling curve. Obtaining elasticity information could
provide more holistic conclusions to this data set. Porosity, consolidation, compression, and
density information would have also have been useful in gaining a more holistic picture of
the swelling behavior.
5.5
Uncertainties in Laboratory Testing
There are limitations associated with using laboratory test measurements. The uncertainties
presented in the following sections are discussed to ensure test results are interpreted critically
before being used as indicators for predicted in-situ behavior.
5.5.1
Material Preparation
Great uncertainties that arise from the fact that the samples were processed heavily, stored
for up to 3 years, and that it is diﬃcult to reproduce in-situ conditions in the laboratory.
The grain size distributions obtained from laser diﬀraction revealed some critical ﬂaws in the
material preparation techniques used at NTNU. All samples were previously prepared and
Page 38 of 42
==PAGE:44==
stored by SINTEF, and labelled as <20µm. Around 90% of the ﬁnest grained samples were
<20µm, but some of the samples contained up to just 35% <20µm. The separation method
used clearly has poor reproducibility.
There were large diﬀerences in the ﬁne fractions of the total material. Samples containing
a large ﬁne fraction, such as 698 and 699 in the preliminary study, are thought to draw in
more water through capillary action, contributing to a certain degree of expansion even with
zero smectite content. Sample 16107 contained 94% smectite in the <6µm fraction, and
exhibited a very high swelling pressure of 0.95MPa, but the ﬁne fraction only made up 1%
of the total sample, making it diﬃcult to say how indicative the results are of the material
behavior as a whole.
5.5.2
Swelling Pressure
There are limitation associated with oedometer testing which will not necessarily result in a
realistic representation of the in-situ swelling pressure behavior of the material. The results
clearly display that smectite content is a governing factor in swelling pressure development,
greater than inert ﬁnes undergoing capillary suction. However, the reproducability of the
constant volume oedometer test is questionable, particularly from laboratory to labora-
tory. Various oedometer methods have been developed by diﬀerent institutions to interpret
swelling behavior of clay minerals, and there is no deﬁnite international standard detailing
how swelling tests should be interpreted. The standard methods used at two universities,
NTNU and the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KiT), were compared in a study per-
formed by NTNU. The procedure followed at NTNU includes preloading the sample at 2
MPa for 24 hours, followed by an unloading of 2 hours, while KiT does not vertically load
the specimens prior to testing. NTNU utilizes an automatic motor to ensure the volume
remains constant during pressure development, and KiT utilizes manual adjustments in in-
tervals from 1 minute to several hours. The same samples were tested at both universities,
and KiT reached approximately two times higher swelling pressure than the same samples at
NTNU. Preloading could be the cause of the discrepancy, as it might inﬂuence the mineral
structure. As mentioned, compacted material creates a higher swelling pressure. However,
due to the nature of the study, which was designed to ﬁnd relationships among properties
of clay samples, the results are still meaningful because all samples were prepared using the
same procedure in the same lab.
The ﬁt between the ring and specimen at NTNU was remarked to be poor, which could have
allowed the specimen to swell in the ring to a certain degree undetected by the dial gauge [36].
According to Figure 2.21 this would have reduced the maximum recorded swelling pressure.
Inaccuracies in swelling pressure measurements can also arise from incorrectly compensating
for apparatus deformation, illustrated by the dotted line in Figure 2.16 in Section 2.6. A
possible overestimated swelling pressure might also be recorded if the material does not
swell enough after the collapse to compensate for the volume reduction. In this way, swelling
pressure is also a function of the initial degree of packing of the sample, or the dry density,
where swelling pressure will increase with dry density [19].
Page 39 of 42
==PAGE:45==
5.5.3
Free Swelling
The free swell behavior was aﬀected by smectite content, and contrary to [15], was also
eﬀected at smectite contents less than 75%. Discrepancies in free swelling tests can arise
from having a disproportionately small smectite content in the less than 20µm fraction.
In this case, additional XRD analysis should be performed on the less than 20µm fraction
samples to obtain the mineral breakdown of this fraction. That way, it would be possible
to identify the contribution of swelling from smectite content. An additional swelling test
can be used to diﬀerentiate volume change due to swelling clay minerals from that due to
capillary action, by dispersing a second sample into kerosene instead of distilled water. The
resultant diﬀerence in volume change between the water and kerosene samples describes the
fraction attributed to capillary action [34].
The starting volume of the material is not consistently representative of the density of the
material; unrepresentative free swell values can be obtained due to variation in the shape
of the grain, grain size distribution, initial packing, and orientation. An unrepresentatively
paralleled sample will result in a largely greater material weight, making "10mL of loosely
packed material" a poorly deﬁned amount. In addition, ﬁne grained particles with high
salt concentrations prepared in water are especially prone to ﬂocculation, leading to an
uneven sedimentation and in more extreme cases, large air pockets in the material separated
by sedimentation [15]. Another source of uncertainty lies in the skill level of the person
conducting the experiment. Sprinkling too much material at a time into the test cylinder
can cause the particles to clump, air pockets to form, and material to adhere to the sides of
the cylinder.
The material obtained and used for free swell tests would ideally come from undisturbed
samples in their natural in-situ conditions. However, samples in this condition can rarely be
obtained. The material is usually only obtained from a small part of the area of interest.
Properties can vary within the same zone and with depth. Ideally, boreholes would be taken
and studied so soil layer information with depth is known. A series of swell tests should
be performed for each soil layer with diﬀerent soil properties with a known orientation to a
subsurface construction.
Finally, the water used for inundating the specimens should closely match the primary source
of wetting that will take place in the ﬁeld. The applications of this study involves tunnelling
operations aﬀected by groundwater percolation. Groundwater has an average total dissolved
solids content (TDS) of 300-600 [8], a low organic content, and a chemical makeup reﬂective
of the bedrock it permeates. Instead, deionized water was used during testing which under-
goes ion exchange in which all charged ions are exchanged for Hydrogen and Hydroxyl ions,
resulting in pure H2O. The degree of swelling has the potential to increase under favorable
ionic conditions present in the groundwater. Decreasing the salt concentration in a clay sus-
pension when salt concentrations are relatively high causes the layer spacing (d) to increase
as water enters the interlayer.
Page 40 of 42
==PAGE:46==
5.5.4
X-ray Diﬀraction
XRD Analysis is a powerful and relatively quick technique used to identify unknown mineral
composition. In many cases, unambiguous results are obtained with straight-forward data
interpretation. The use of ethylene glycol is essential in identifying the weathering products
vermiculite, montmorillonite, and mixed layers as accurately as possible. However, a number
of factors can alter XRD reﬂections and limit the accuracy of the quantitative analysis.
First, pure and homogeneous material in terms of grain size and composition is most ideal
for identiﬁcation using XRD. Clay minerals are almost always mixed with small amounts of
non-clay material, including quartz, feldspars, and carbonates which might produce sharp
intense peaks against the broader clay peaks [5]. Preparation techniques are often a huge
source of error associated with XRD. Grinding of dried clay can aﬀect the crystallinity of the
material and reduce its diﬀraction intensity [15]. Intensities are also related to the proportion
of minerals in the sample. A grain size of less than 1µm is recommended for a satisfactory
number of grains to participate in diﬀraction. Grains sized greater than 10µm can result in
standard deviations up to 18% [15].
Second, the quantiﬁcation software used at NTNU is not capable of quantifying the <20µm
fraction, and in most cases there was not enough material available to separate the <6µm
fraction for additional XRD tests. Instead, quantiﬁcation was done manually on the qualita-
tive XRD patterns by scaling the intensity of peaks against each other under the supervision
of an experienced geologist. Since the fraction of ﬁnes within the bulk sample is known, a
quantitative analysis can be made to interpret the stability implications of the material as a
whole. There is likely a large amount of human error associated with manual measurements.
Also, the use of the weight factors are uncertain as they are intended for particular min-
erals with a certain chemical composition, crystallinity, grain size, and morphology which
may be diﬀerent than the ones in the sample. All in all, the quantiﬁcation method was
deemed appropriate for the self-comparative nature of this study. If a more reﬁned rela-
tionship between smectite content and swelling pressure is to be established in the future, a
quantiﬁcation software should be used to accurately measure smectite content.
5.5.5
Laser Diﬀraction
The precision of the laser diﬀraction tests performed in this study is unknown due to the input
parameters used in the Malvern Mastersizer 3000. However, as in the case of XRD, because
all samples were prepared and analyzed in the same way, the results should be comparable
for the intended purpose of this study. If absolute relationships are to be deﬁned later, the
input parameters should be reﬁned for each sample (particularly the refractive index and
adsorption densities) and multiple attempts should be made using a range of adsorption
densities.
Page 41 of 42
==PAGE:47==
6. Conclusion
6
 Conclusion
Smectite is a type of saprolite found in the Trøndelag area that expands when hydrated. Its
high cation exchange capacity allows it to heavily inﬂuence the physical properties of the soil
it occupies, and high variability in its composition causes uncertainty in its behavior. This
study attempted to link the microstructure of clay minerals to macroscopic swelling pressure
and volume changes which can cause damage to subsurface structures. Fine grained XRD
analysis was used to reveal the presence of smectite minerals, and its relative amount was
determined using a manual quantiﬁcation technique. Grain size distribution was measured
using laser diﬀraction. Swelling pressure measurements obtained from constant volume oe-
dometer tests were well correlated with swelling mineral content, but free swell was noticeably
inﬂuenced by a combination of mineralogical content and other variables. Capillary suction
showed a weak relationship to both swelling pressure and free swelling values. This study
assumed capillarity is well described by grain size distribution, which is not necessarily the
case. Because the correlation between free swell and swelling pressure was not exceptionally
strong, free swell tests are not recommended to be used alone as an indicator of of the degree
expansivity and pressure development. Mineralogy, speciﬁcally, smectite content in the ﬁne
grained fraction, proved to be a relatively accurate indicator of swelling pressure. However,
a more accurate precise mineral quantiﬁcation is needed to deﬁne a meaningful relationship
between the smectite content of a material and its predicted in-situ swelling pressure.
The results of this study should be reinforced by comparing XRD analyses on the <20µm
fraction with swelling pressure measurements to close the gap between the 6-20µm material
fraction. This way, the contribution of swelling pressure from smectite content alone can be
accurately identiﬁed. In addition, mineral quantiﬁcation should be carried out using software
to more accurately quantify the smectite fraction. Establishing a relationship between smec-
tite content and swelling pressure would allow engineers to predict the pressure exerted by
an expanding clay using relatively simple laboratory procedures, and design reinforcements
in a cost eﬀective way. Grain size distribution did not provide a complete understanding
of capillary action acting in the material. A diﬀerent approach should be used for inter-
preting pore sizes and connectivity in the material. Finally, several parameters that weren’t
included experimentally could have aﬀected the results obtained. The plasticity of the ma-
terial is expected to reveal larger volume change for more plastic materials. Both swelling
potential parameters should increase with the degree of consolidation and compaction. Min-
erals orientated or paralleled during sedimentation, such as loosely packed mica, increase
swelling potential for high swelling clays and decreases swelling potential for low to slightly
active swelling clays.
An initial swell allowance prior to volumetrically constraining can
dramatically reduce the maximum swelling pressure obtained.
There were many parameters involved in this study that complicate the conclusions drawn
from the two swelling potential measurements, and several additional parameters not in-
cluded experimentally that are thought to inﬂuence swelling potential further.
Page 42 of 42
==PAGE:48==
References
[1] Lidmar-Bergström, K. Relief and saprolites through time on the Baltic Shield. Geo-
morphology, Vol. 12, 1995.
[2] Barthelmy, David. Mineralogy Database. http://www.webmineral.com/, 2014.
[3] Bergaya, F.; Lagaly, G. Handbook of Clay Science. Elsevier Ltd., 2006.
[4] Bleam, William. Soil and Environmental Chemistry. Ch3: Mineralogy and Clay Chem-
istry. Academic Press, 2012.
[5] Brindley, G.W; Brown, G. Crystal Structures of Clay Minerals and their X-Ray Identiﬁ-
cation. Mineralogical Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 1980. ISBN 9780903056373.
[6] Catrine Pettersen Skippervik. Study on the Swelling Potential of some Selected Rocks.
2014.
[7] Foster, Margaret. The Relation Between Composition and Swelling in Clays. Clays and
Clay Minerals, DOI 3-1-205, 1954.
[8] Geological
Survey
of
Norway.
Grunnvann
I
Norge.
http://www.ngu.no/
grunnvanninorge/, 2018.
[9] Hofmann, Ulrich; Weiss, Armin; Koch, G.; Mehler, A.; Scholz, A.
Intracrystalline
Swelling, Cation Exchange, and Anion Exchange of Minerals of the Montmorillonite
Group and of Kaolinite. Clays and Clay Minerals, Vol. 4(No. 1), 1955. doi: DOI:10.1346.
[10] A. H. Holter, Martin; Høien. Problems related to measuring of swelling pressure and
determination of swelling pressure in weakness zone. journal =.
[11] Holtz, W. ; Gibbs, H. Engineering Properties of Expansive Soils. Transactions of ASCE,
Vol. 121, 1956.
[12] ISRM Standards. Characterization of Swelling Rock. 1983.
[13] Jaakola, Leena.
Deep Weathered Clay and its Stability Implications in Tunneling:
TGB4500 Specialization Project. 2018.
[14] Kalantari, Behzad.
Engineering Signiﬁcance of Swelling Soils.
Research Journal of
Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology, Vol. 4 no. 17, 2012. ISSN ISSN 2040-
7467.
[15] Kocheise Rainer-Claus. Svelleleire I Undersjøiske Tunneler. Norges Tekniske Høgskole,
1994.
[16] McCave, N. ; Bryant, R. ; Cook, H. ; Coughanowr, C. Evaluation of a Laser-Diﬀraction-
Size Analyzer for use with Natural Sediments. Journal of Sedimentary Research, Vol.
56 no. 4, 1986.
[17] Millot, Georges. Geology of Clays. Springer-Verlag Wien, 1970. ISBN 978-3-662-41611-2.
[18] Mitchell, J.K. Fundamentals of Soil Behavior. John Wiley, 1993.
==PAGE:49==
[19] Nagaraj, Honne; Munnas, Mohammed; Sridharan, A. Swelling Behavior of Expansive
Soils. Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, Vol. 4, 2010. doi: DOI:10.3328.
[20] Nilsen, Bjørn. Reliability of Swelling Pressure Testing for Tunnel Support Evaluation.
2007.
[21] Nilsen, Bjørn; Thidemann, Alf. Rock Engineering Volume No 9. Norwegian Institute of
Technology, 1993. ISBN 82-7598-017-8.
[22] Norsk Bergmekanikkgruppe.
Ingeniørgeologi berg håndbok terminologi, symboler,
tabeller, klassiﬁkasjon, bergartsdannelse, berggrunnskart over Norge. Trondheim, 1985.
[23] Olesen, Odleiv; Dehls, John; Ebbing, Jörg; Henriksen, Helge; Kihle, Ola; Lundin, Erik.
Aeromagnetic mapping of deep-weathered fracture zones in the Oslo Region – a new
tool for improved planning of tunnels. Norwegian Journal of Geology, Vol. 87, 2006.
ISSN ISSN 029-196X.
[24] Olesen, Odleiv; Kierulf, Pascal; Brönne, Marco; Dalsegg, Einar; Fredin, Ola; Solbakk,
Terje. Deep weathering, neotectonics and strandﬂat formation in Nordland, northern
Norway. Norwegian Journal of Geology, Vol. 93, 2013. ISSN ISSN 029-196X.
[25] Patil, A. ; Parkhe, D. ; Shrigriwar, R. ; Panse, R. Establishing Relationship Between
Swelling Pressure and Free Swell Index of Soils - A Case Study. International Journal
of Advances in Science Engineering and Technology, 3, 2016. ISSN ISSN 2321-9009.
[26] Paul Shields. Bragg’s Law and Diﬀraction: How waves reveal the atomic structure of
crystals. http://skuld.bmsc.washington.edu/~merritt/bc530/bragg/, 2004.
[27] Pusch, R. Environmental Soil Properties and Behaviour, Swelling Clays. CRC Press,
Taylor Francis Group, 2012.
[28] Rokoengen, Kåre. Kompendium Utarbeidet av Sivilingeniör Kåre Rokoengen. Geologisk
Institutt, NTH, 1973.
[29] Rokoengen, Kåre.
Måling Av Svelletrykk og Fri Svelling Hos Jordarter.
Geologisk
Institutt, NTH, Rapport nr. 10, 1973.
[30] Rokoengen, Kåre. Klassiﬁsering av Leirsoner I Fjell. Geologisk Institutt, NTH, Rapport
nr. 11, 1973.
[31] Selen, Lena; Panthi, Krishna Kanta; Vergara, Maximiliano. Swelling Pressures of Some
Rocks Using Diﬀerent Test Procedures. 2018 EUROPEAN ROCK MECHANICS SYM-
POSIUM, vol. 1, 2018.
[32] Selmer-Olsen, R. ; Rokoengen, K. . About Swelling Tests and Stability of Clay Zones
in Hard Rock. Third International Congress of Rock Mechanics, Denver, 1974.
[33] Slagstad, Trond; Dahl, Rolv.
Geology for Society for 150 Years - The Legacy after
Kjerulf. Geological Survey of Norway, 2008. ISBN 978-82-7385-121-5.
[34] Y. R. H. Tahasildara, Janardhan; Erzin. Development of relationships between swelling
and suction properties of expansive soils. journal =.
==PAGE:50==
[35] Warkentin, B. Water Retention and Swelling Pressure of Clay Soils. Canadian Journal
of Science, Vol. 42, 1962.
[36] Wayllace, Alexandra. Ph.D. Civil and Environmental Engineering Volume Change and
Swelling Pressure of Expansive Clay in the Crystalline Swelling Regime. 2008.
[37] Xiang, Zhou; Dong, Liu; Hongling, Bu; Liangliang, Deng; Hongmei, Liu; Peng, Yuan;
Peixin, Du; Hongzhe, Song. XRD-based quantitative analysis of clay minerals using
reference intensity ratios, mineral intensity factors, Rietveld, and full pattern summation
methods: A critical review. Science Direct, Vol. 3, 2018. doi: DOI10.1016.
==PAGE:51==
A
 HSE Certiﬁcate and Risk Assessment
The mentionable safety precautions taken during practical work are described below:
– Tour of all lab facilities and an introduction to the eyewash stations, ﬁrst aid kits, ﬁre
blankets and ﬁre extinguishers, and ﬁre exits.
– All tools, devices, vessels, and utensils in contact with samples were washed with
water, dried, disinfected with ethanol, and dried again between every step to avoid
contamination
– Ear and eye protection, safety shoes, and ventilation were used during crushing
– All work was performed under the supervision of the lab manager
==PAGE:52==
 
Certificate
of core competence awarded September 11th 2018 to
Leena Jaakola
for having successfully completed the e-learning course
NTNU - HSE in the laboratories
The training was performed in accordance to ISO 9001
with relevant procedures, regulations and standards from IEC/CENELEC/NEK/DSB/NEMKO
/NBF The course is valid until September 11th 2021
Further details of the course may be found in a separate attachment (Ref. No. db68aa3ea
). Please note that the course certificate can be verified at trainor.no.
 
Steinar Nilsen
Course manager
 
 
 
Terje Gravdal
CEO
db68aa3ea
Trainor Elsikkerhet AS · Prestegaten 3-5 · Postboks 554 Sentrum · NO-3101 Tønsberg · t +47 33 37 89 00 · post@trainor.no · www.trainor.no
==PAGE:53==
B
 Raw Data
Table B.1: Compiled laboratory results including smectite content measured from the <6µm
fraction in XRD, <20µm fraction measured from the bulk sample, free swell percentage measured
from free swell tests, and maximum swelling pressure obtained in the constant volume oedometer
test
Sample
Name
Smectite Content
% in <6µm
Fines
<20µm
Free Swell
[%]
Max Swelling Pressure
[MPa]
16002_1
23
3
130
0.12
16002_2
53
16
175
0.38
16002_3
39
3
179
0.19
16028
x
7
163
0.08
16057
unknown
22
99
0.03
16083_3
x
5
0.84
16083
8
5
0.12
16093
46
8
135
0.13
16095
99
11
220
1.72
16100
79
18
120
0.36
16101
8
12
125
0.08
16104
x
8
1.03
16107
94
1
175
0.94
16111
88
1
0.99
16114
80
2
0.96
17035
x
26
118
0.05
17035
x
13
120
0.06
17040
unknown
3
150
0.49
17051
88
3
180
0.91
17070
x
11
0.19
17074
x
3
0.28
17075
unknown
20
205
0.38
17087
96
6
300
0.75
17088
98
3
1.19
17103
x
2
0.51
17105
52
3
150
0.34
17115
x
3
0.71
17116
57
4
0.32
17117
x
2
0.83
17125
85
3
0.46
17138
x
6
0.23
17139
x
7
0.14
17142
unknown
9
179
0.21
17144
unknown
60
100
0.1
17148
unknown
5
318
1.5
17149
unknown
7
169
0.11
17155
x
11
0.33
17157
78
3
0.36
18009
81
5
0.61
18011
23
20
140
0.29
18012
x
17
0.3
18018
39
3
0.24
18022
43
9
187
0.25
==PAGE:54==
Sample
Name
Smectite Content
% in <6µm
Fines
<20µm
Free Swell
[%]
Max Swelling Pressure
[MPa]
18034
94
6
255
1.18
18037
0
1
167
18055
0
22
0.05
18066
x
10
0.9
18068
x
10
230
0.47
18085
0
6
165
0.33
18090
12
11
0.76
18100
97
2
0.71
18103
62
14
157
0.22
18108
unknown
2
0.59
18111
7
0.4
180
0.33
18128
93
9
172
0.62
==PAGE:55==
C
 X-Ray Diﬀraction Patterns
==PAGE:56==
Table C.1: Mineral quantiﬁcation of XRD patterns
Mineral
Smectite
Quartz
K-Feldspar
Plagioclase
Illite
Calcite
Chlorite
Amphibole
Pyrophyllite
Talc
Chlorite-
Smectite
Pyrite
16002_1
23.4
1.1
3.0
1.5
68.2
0.0
0.6
2.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16002_2
53.1
20.7
0.0
0.0
15.1
0.0
11.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16002_3
39.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
51.9
0.0
8.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16093
45.6
0.9
2.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
44.1
6.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16095
99.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16100
78.8
0.5
0.0
1.5
9.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.3
0.0
0.0
7.6
16101
7.7
0.0
3.4
15.9
0.0
0.0
65.1
5.7
0.0
2.2
0.0
0.0
16107
94.0
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5
2.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.2
0.0
17051
87.6
1.1
0.0
1.4
0.4
0.0
9.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17087
96.5
2.6
0.0
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17088
98.3
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.6
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17105
52.1
1.8
17.8
13.8
6.4
2.8
5.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18009
81.5
0.1
0.0
9.7
8.2
0.0
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18022
43.5
10.1
0.0
11.1
24.6
1.7
1.4
2.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.9
18034
94.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18103
61.9
2.6
8.4
2.4
17.9
0.0
6.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18128
93.1
1.2
0.0
0.0
3.7
0.0
2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16083
7.7
4.0
34.5
16.3
7.6
11.6
18.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16111
88.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.9
10.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16114
80.2
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
18.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17116
57.5
2.8
14.3
5.0
5.1
2.1
13.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17125
84.7
0.0
1.1
2.2
7.2
1.1
3.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17157
78.2
0.1
0.0
7.7
6.1
0.0
7.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18011
23.0
0.8
11.4
15.7
20.6
0.0
28.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18018
38.6
1.2
0.0
0.0
21.2
2.6
36.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18090
81.0
0.0
5.0
0.0
3.0
0.0
11.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18100
96.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.4
0.0
1.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18111
61.7
0.7
12.9
0.0
44.4
0.0
35.6
7.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
==PAGE:57==
 
 
1 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
 
16002_1 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
2 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16002_2 < 6 µm 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
3 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16002_3 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
4 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16083 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
5 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16093 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
6 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16095 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
7 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16100 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
8 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16101 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
9 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16107 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
10 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16111 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
11 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
16114 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
12 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
17051 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
13 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
17087< 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
14 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
17088< 6 µm 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
15 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
17105 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
16 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
17116 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
17 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
17125 < 6 µm 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
18 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
17157 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
19 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18009 < 6 µm 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
20 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18011 < 6 µm 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
21 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18018 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
22 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18022 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
23 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18034 < 6 µm 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
24 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18090 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
25 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18100 < 6 µm  
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
26 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18103 < 6 µm  
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
27 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18111 < 6 µm 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
28 av 28 
Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet 
 
18128 < 6 µm 
 
==PAGE:85==
D
 Swelling Pressure Curves
==PAGE:86==
 
==PAGE:87==
 
==PAGE:88==
 
==PAGE:89==
 
==PAGE:90==
 
==PAGE:91==
 
==PAGE:92==
 
==PAGE:93==
 
==PAGE:94==
 
==PAGE:95==
 
==PAGE:96==
 
==PAGE:97==
 
==PAGE:98==
 
==PAGE:99==
 
==PAGE:100==
 
==PAGE:101==
 
==PAGE:102==
 
==PAGE:103==
 
==PAGE:104==
 
==PAGE:105==
 
==PAGE:106==
 
==PAGE:107==
 
==PAGE:108==
 
==PAGE:109==
 
==PAGE:110==
 
==PAGE:111==
 
==PAGE:112==
 
==PAGE:113==
 
==PAGE:114==
 
==PAGE:115==
 
==PAGE:116==
 
==PAGE:117==
 
==PAGE:118==
 
==PAGE:119==
 
==PAGE:120==
 
==PAGE:121==
E
 Laser Diﬀraction Curves
Table E.1: Grain size distribution measured using laser diﬀraction. D-values indicate the
percentage of mass ﬁner than or equal to a particular diameter (e.g. d10 gives the diameter at
which 10% of the cumulative mass is equal to or ﬁner than).
Sample
d5
d10
d25
d50
d75
d80
d84
d90
d95
d100
16002.1
2.62
3.3
4.95
7.96
12.9
14.5
16.1
19.5
24.3
84.6
16002.2
2.79
3.61
5.66
9.76
17.3
20
23
31
55.3
98.1
16002.3
2.96
3.78
5.83
10.1
19.2
23.3
28.5
47.1
73.2
98.1
16057
2.73
3.67
6.13
11
19.3
22.2
25.4
34
61.4
98.1
16083
3.15
4.15
6.69
11.6
19.9
22.7
25.8
33.5
54.2
98.1
16093
2.37
3.04
4.88
8.68
16.6
19.9
23.9
40.2
72.8
98.1
16095
3.53
4.89
8.95
17.9
35.2
41.8
48.8
63
78.9
98.1
16100
2.28
2.89
4.59
8.09
14.9
17.3
19.8
25.5
35.9
98
16101
2.28
3.02
5.17
9.29
15.9
17.9
19.9
23.9
29.8
97.9
16107
2.49
3.29
5.53
10.1
19.5
23.6
29
50.1
75.8
98.1
16111
2.51
3.23
5.08
8.74
15.8
18.5
21.6
30.8
68.9
98.1
16114
2.6
3.34
5.22
8.89
15.7
18.1
20.7
27.3
51.5
98.1
17040
2.84
3.93
6.93
13.2
24.8
29.6
35.5
53.2
74.7
98.1
17051
2.98
3.84
5.98
10.3
18.8
22.2
26.2
39.1
68.3
98.1
17075
2.55
3.29
5.15
8.67
14.8
16.8
19
23.9
33.2
98
17087
2.98
3.98
6.85
13.8
26.1
30.4
35.2
48.5
70.3
98.1
17088
3.19
4.31
7.1
12.1
19.2
21.4
23.6
28.4
37.2
98.1
17105
2.37
3.18
5.53
10.4
20.1
24.1
29.6
53.7
78.4
98.1
17116
2.31
3
5.02
9.36
18.5
22.4
27.6
51.5
76.7
98.1
17125
2.82
3.8
6.34
11.4
20.1
23.2
26.8
37.3
67.3
98.1
17144
0.084
0.128
0.326
1.2
2.4
2.85
3.32
4.4
6.18
18.6
17148
2.97
3.9
6.14
10.4
17.9
20.6
23.5
31
48.9
98
17149
2.16
2.73
4.34
7.5
13.4
15.5
17.9
23.5
35.1
97.9
17157
2.47
3.24
5.36
9.58
17.2
20
22.9
30.8
60.1
98.1
18009
3.03
4.09
6.8
12.1
21.7
25.3
29.6
42.7
69.7
98.1
18011
1.97
2.64
4.83
10.3
24.8
32.2
41.5
61.5
79.7
98.1
18018
2.23
2.81
4.47
7.68
13
14.7
16.3
19.6
23.9
40.1
18034
2.88
3.81
6.36
12.4
27
34.3
43.5
62.5
79.8
98.1
18055
1.55
2.15
3.96
8.37
19.4
24.5
30.8
47.3
67.5
98.1
18068
2.81
3.72
6.24
12.1
24.3
29.4
35.4
52.3
73.1
98.1
18090
3.09
3.99
6.21
10.6
17.9
20.3
23
29.4
49.9
98.1
18100
3.08
4.16
7.03
12.6
21.5
24.6
28
37.2
60.6
98.1
18103
2.86
3.78
6.17
11.3
22.1
26.8
32.6
49.7
72.9
98.1
18111
3.97
6.24
13.9
34.3
61.8
68
73.2
81.6
89.5
98.1
18128
2.68
3.7
7.16
17.5
46.5
56.3
64.4
76.7
87.2
98.1
==PAGE:122==
 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
 
==PAGE:124==
 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
 
==PAGE:126==
 
 
 
==PAGE:127==
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
 
 
 
==PAGE:130==
 
 
 
==PAGE:131==
 
 
 
==PAGE:132==
 
 
 
==PAGE:133==
 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:135==
==PAGE:136==
 
 
==PAGE:137==
 
 
==PAGE:138==
 
 
