==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Learning Weights for Interactive Dictionary-
Based Segmentation:
Exploiting User Annotations to Enhance an Image
Segmentation Method
Ari Páll Ísberg (s134713)
Supervisors:
Anders Bjorholm Dahl
Vedrana Andersen Dahl
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Interactive segmentation combines image features with user labelled image data to
extract objects of interest in the image. For challenging segmentation problems in mi-
croscopy imaging it is promising to utilize user annotations to guide the segmentation
algorithm. However, there is a need for an accurate interactive segmentation meth-
ods that can be applied to a wide variety of segmentation problems. One promising
method is the interactive dictionary-based method which maps pixels from an image
grid to a dictionary. A small portion of user annotations is propagated from the im-
age grid to the dictionary grid and then back to image grid as pixel-wise probabilities.
In this work, we explore different approaches to how the user labelled data can be
fully exploited in order to make the interactive dictionary-based more general but at
the same time high performing. Three separate modifications to the method are pro-
posed. Firstly, the effect of image features was explored. Secondly, trained weights
were assigned to the dictionary grid. Finally, a sparse autoencoder was trained to
encode the mappings between the image grid and the dictionary grid. A systematic
approach was taken to evaluate the different modifications with automatic user la-
belled data. Six microscopic images were tested with different characteristics. On
average, the unmodified method was superior to modified methods but the proposed
modifications showed mixed results depending on the characteristics of the image.
The modifications illustrated that they were able to learn specific structures in the
image but at the cost of taking more time to compute and being unstable. Despite
not outperforming the unmodified method, the results indicate that further research
and experimentation in this direction is a promising and reasonable option.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, June 2, 2019
Ari Páll Ísberg (s134713)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I like to thank all the educators that have encouraged, inspired and helped me acquire
the knowledge required to accomplish this milestone. That includes my elementary
teachers, secondary school teachers, and my college and university lecturers and pro-
fessors. I especially want to thank Anders Dahl and Vedrana Dahl for their super-
vision during this project. Their suggestions, feedback and guidance throughout the
process has been crucial for this work. I am thankful for their availability as well as
their relaxed and joyful attitude.
I recognize that I am fortunate for my family. Cultivating the skills and traits
needed to get to the place I am in today.
They have always had my back and
supported me. I am thankful for them. I would like to express my gratitude towards
Sebastian Mira and Steven Pilger for proofreading and providing valuable feedback.
Finally, Arna and Aron are my everything. I am truly grateful for having them in
my life. They bring me laughter, joy, and love every day.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
x
List of Symbols
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Interactive segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Interactive Dictionary-Based Segmentation Model
5
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theory
13
3.1
Scale invariant feature transform (SIFT)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
K-means clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Experimental Pipeline
23
4.1
Performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Image test data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Exploration & Modifications
27
5.1
Feature selection, SIFT descriptors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.2
Learning weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Autoencoders with sparse latent representation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Results
37
6.1
Objective evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Subjective evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Discussion
47
7.1
User labels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
SIFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.3
Weight models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.4
Autoencoder methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Conclusion
55
A Partial derivatives
57
A.1 One weight for each dictionary element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 One weight for each class per dictionary element
. . . . . . . . . . . .
59
B Testing images
63
C Segmentation results
67
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Example of an interactive segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Step 1 of the interactive dictionary-based method illustrated
. . . . . . .
8
2.3
Step 2 of the interactive dictionary-based method illustrated
. . . . . . .
9
2.4
Step 3 of the interactive dictionary-based method illustrated
. . . . . . .
10
2.5
Step 4 of the interactive dictionary-based method illustrated
. . . . . . .
11
3.1
Simple illustration of a typical autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Example of a neural network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
KL-divergence penalty function visualized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1
Images that will be used to evaluate the models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Example of an automatic user label utilized in the pipeline
. . . . . . . .
26
5.1
The autoencoder method visually explained . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Comparison of the network structures for the autoencoder methods . . . .
34
6.1
Comparing segmentation results of the original method and the SIFT method 40
6.2
Resulting probability images for the weight models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Segmentation for the class-weight models indicating overfitting . . . . . .
43
6.4
Comparison of segmentation results for the weight models . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Probability map for simple weight model illustrating missing pixels . . . .
44
6.6
Comparing resulting segmentation for the autoencoder methods . . . . . .
45
7.1
The effect of the automatic user labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2
Example of bad segmentation utilizing the SIFT features
. . . . . . . . .
49
B.1
Human HT29 colon cancer cells and ground truth with 3 classes
. . . . .
63
B.2
Zoomed image of nerve cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.3
Image of synthetic clustered nuclei . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.4
Image of nerve cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.5
Synthetic image of onion cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
C.1 Cells image compared for all methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
C.2 Cells2 image compared for all methods.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:12==
C.3 Nerve image compared for all methods.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.4 Nerve zoom image compared for all methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
C.5 Onion image compared for all methods.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
C.6 Onion 20noise image compared for all methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
List of Tables
5.1
Patch size for each image
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Overview of the parameters in the methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1
Summary of the modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Results: mIoU accuracy for each method and image
. . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Results: computation time for each method and image . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:13==
List of Symbols
Symbol
Description
Dimension
M
Patch size
scalar
C
Number of classes in the method
scalar
K
Number of clusters in the method
scalar
X
Number of rows in the image
scalar
Y
Number of columns in the image
scalar
n = XY
Number of image pixels
scalar
m = KM 2
Number of dictionary pixels
scalar
u
Number of user labelled image pixel
scalar
I
Target image
X × Y
L
Label image holding user labels
X × Y × C
P
Probability image
X × Y × C
A
Assignment image
X × Y
B
Biadjacency matrix
n × m
T1
Transformation matrix mapping image to dictionary
m × n
T2
Transformation matrix mapping dictionary to image
n × m
D
The probability dictionary
m × C
W1
Weight matrix (diagonal) for the first weight model
m × m
W2
Weight matrix for the second weight model
m × C
η
Learning rate in optimization
scalar
ϵ
Threshold for stopping criterion
scalar
β
Parameter controlling weight of a sparsity term
scalar
ρ
Target average activation of a hidden node
scalar
λ
Weight decay parameter
scalar
ξ
Threshold for filtering the biadjacency matrix
scalar
σ(·)
The softmax function
-
E(·)
Loss or error function
-
KL(Q||P)
Kullback-Leibler divergence of distributions Q and P
-
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Image segmentation is the process of dividing digital images into regions that have
similar characteristics and often represent certain objects. The main purpose of this
process is to obtain a meaningful representation of the objects that can be further an-
alyzed or measured. A non-exhaustive list of applications includes object recognition,
surgery planning, automated inspection, and even autonomous driving. Another task
which has been receiving increasing attention is identifying cellular or tissue com-
ponents in microscopic images.
This is important for quantitative pathology e.g.
confirmation of diseases and measuring disease progression [1]. For example, in order
to count blood cells, proper segmentation is crucial, since blood cell count may often
indicate various diseases [2]. However, segmenting microscopic images is challenging
due to large variations of objects and features in the image. For instance, overlapping
cells, variability of cells and their structure, low contrast of boundaries, and differ-
ent image microscopy modalities among others. Different studies focus on different
aspects of the image data in accordance with the research question of interest. What
follows is that many image segmentation algorithms have been developed. There are
almost as many cell segmentation methods as there are cell segmentation problems
[3]. To name a few: watershed methods [4–6], level-set methods [7], morphological
methods [8], deep neural networks (supervised learning) [9], and pattern modeling
based methods among others [10]. However, most of these methods have limited ap-
plicability when considering a generalized solution to microscopy segmentation. Thus,
there is still a need for a trainable generic cell segmentation method that can cover a
wide scope of applications and at the same time achieve high performance. [11, 12].
1.1
Interactive segmentation
Researchers have acknowledged that the problem of cell segmentation is so challeng-
ing that even trained expert may disagree on the details of a particular segmentation.
Consequently, some methods address this by incorporating higher-level knowledge
from user interactions. Interactive (semi-automatic) segmentation combines human
and computer qualities where the user performs the recognition task and the com-
puter performs the delineation. In other words, the user locates regions, objects or
structures of interest in the image, and the segmentation algorithm determines the
exact extent of the objects. In most cases, interactive segmentation systems enable
users to control the outcome until a satisfactory result is obtained.
Furthermore,
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
because the user refines the image, it is important that the segmentation process is
quick which sets limits to the processing time.
The objective of an interactive segmentation is to acquire accurate segmentation
results while minimizing user interactions and the time it takes to label an image
[13]. Different interactive segmentation algorithms and systems have been proposed
to reach this objective. The latest advancements in this field, related to microscopy
segmentation, often segment images via pixel classification and include tools such
as a graphical user interface (GUI). An example of such application is the Ilastik
software that utilizes a random forest classifier with preprocessed image features and
user annotations as training samples to train the classifier [14]. The different image
features have to be chosen by the user and require some fundamental understanding of
image analysis. The features are cached in memory which limits the size of the image
set. Similar to Ilastik, the Trainable Weka Segmentation (TWS) trains a classifier
based on different features. TWS has a wider range of image features than Ilastik
[15]. Additionally, TWS supports all the available machine learning algorithms in
the Weka suite that can be exploited if the default classifier underperforms [16]. To
accommodate for the hand-selected features in these two tools, another approach is to
make deep learning algorithms learn the required features for the task at hand. Falk
et. al. [17], introduced a generic deep-learning-based cell segmentation algorithm
through an interface with the ImageJ software [18]. The algorithm is pre-trained
with the U-Net network architecture [9], but can be adapted with user input through
the ImageJ GUI. It is on the verge of being interactive as the computation complexity
limits real-time processing as well as the user annotations require more than a few
brush strokes. However, they claim that because the network is pre-trained, adapting
the network to new image modalities or cell types is in the range of minutes to a few
hours and requires only 1-2 annotated images. All of the above-mentioned methods
have relatively long computation time and may even need to re-train a part of their
model after each user input.
Another recent method is the interactive dictionary-based segmentation method
[19]. Provided with a GUI, this method estimates pixel-wise probabilities by propa-
gating user annotations through learned mappings. These mappings are learned from
the structure and patterns in the image. Essentially, the mappings link image pixels
together that share similar structures and formulate a graph. The features, defin-
ing the structure in the image, are created by clustering raw intensity patches. The
dictionary-based segmentation method is particularly efficient in segmenting images
with repeating patterns, as are often found in microscopic images in biology. The
dictionary-based approach differs from the other interactive segmentation algorithms
mentioned in some areas. The dictionary-based method does not learn the features
that best represent the user-defined structures like the U-net method does, but it is
truly interactive and fast. In addition, the method is not as flexible and general as
TWS and Ilastik but instead requires no manual selection of features. Hence, oppor-
tunities for enhancement are in place for the interactive dictionary-based method.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Objective
3
1.2
Objective
Even though there is ongoing research in this topic there are a limited number of
robust, user-friendly, and interactive applications available for microscopy image seg-
mentation. Many of those available are specialized for certain tasks. The dictionary-
based segmentation method has the potential to generalize for different tasks by tak-
ing advantage of user annotations. Currently, the information in the user-provided
labels is only partly used. Hence, it is worth exploring if they can be further exploited.
By introducing a supervised learning element to the method, the aim is to make it
more robust and generalize better for different segmentation objectives. To accom-
plish this, an experimental approach is taken to test different ideas. First, the method
is investigated, potential modifications to the method identified and the theory be-
hind those modifications explained. Then, an experimental pipeline is implemented
in order to systematically test and compare the impact of the modifications. Finally,
the modifications are assessed with the aim of an interactive method in mind.
To sum up, the overall goal is to improve upon the interactive dictionary-based
segmentation method by fully utilizing the information in the provided user annota-
tions in a more supervised approach.
1.3
Thesis overview
In order to guide the reader through the content and give an overview of the thesis,
the chapters are listed with a short description.
1. Introduction – Introduction to the thesis with motivation and goals.
2. Interactive Dictionary-Based Segmentation Model A description of the
method which the main goal is to improve.
Background on the method is
provided as well as illustrative explanation.
3. Theory – The theory needed to understand the modifications applied and
tested.
4. Experimental Pipeline – The motivation is given for implementing a pipeline.
The image test data is listed along with the relevant performance metrics.
5. Exploration and Modifications – A description of the changes applied to
the Interactive Dictionary-Based method. The development process and imple-
mentation of each modification is explained.
6. Results – The results from the each of the three modifications, split into ob-
jective and subjective evaluations.
7. Discussion – The discussion of the main results in the report. Limitations and
and benefits of each modification is listed. Suggestions for improvement are
given.
8. Conclusion – A short summary of the thesis with the main findings.
==PAGE:18==
4
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Interactive
Dictionary-Based
Segmentation Model
The interactive dictionary-based segmentation algorithm was shortly described in the
Introduction. It is important that the reader is familiar with each step of the algo-
rithm in order to understand the various experiments tested on the method. Hence,
the algorithm is described in this chapter along with some background on the method
and the problems it can solve.
2.1
Background
The interactive dictionary-based method is inspired by sparse dictionary learning.
The task of sparse dictionary learning algorithms is to find a set of basis signals
(dictionary) from a given set of signals. The assumption is that the given set of signals
have common statistical structure which can be represented with the dictionary. The
signal can then be approximated by a sparse linear combination of a only few elements
from the dictionary. By making the dictionary over-complete , where the number of
dictionary elements is greater than the dimensionality of the signal, leads to richer
and more flexible representations and even a better approximation of the statistical
distribution of the signal [20].
Sparse dictionary learning has been utilized for various image analysis tasks [21–
23]. In relation to images, sparse dictionary learning is based on learning an over-
complete set of dictionary patches to represent the input image patches. A linear
combination of the dictionary patches is then used to solve certain tasks. This can
be generative tasks or discriminative tasks. For example, Mairal et al. [24] provide a
general formulation for supervised dictionary learning for tasks such as, image classifi-
cation and digital art identification for data that exhibits sparse representation. Gao
et al. [25] suggested a segmentation scheme based on the sparse representation of
texture information encoded by dictionaries that are created from manual initializa-
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Interactive Dictionary-Based Segmentation Model
tion. More different image analysis methods exist that utilize sparse representations
for solving various problems. The interactive dictionary-based segmentation method
is an interactive discriminative based model, influenced by sparse dictionary learning.
The interactive dictionary-based method has been in constant development. It
roots date back to 2011 [26] where Dahl and Larsen successfully segmented images
with a dictionary of discriminative image patches. Their method was robust to noise
and showed good results on synthetic texture images, cell segmentation and later on
cell tracking problems [27]. Their method was supervised in a way that the dictionary
was trained on labelled training data. Additionally, a single dictionary for all classes
instead of a dictionary for each class made the method faster and able to learn larger
dictionaries. Later, the method was combined with an active contour model called
snakes based on an evolving curve to segment both textured synthetic images as well
as natural images [28]. However, one limitation of that method was that the evolving
curve could only segment into two classes, outside and inside of the curve. Here the
dictionary was not trained with supervised labelled data. Learning the dictionary
was based on K-means clustering of the image itself. Instead of utilizing snakes, A.
Dahl and V. Dahl [29] combined implicit level set representation of the curve with
the method to segment textured images. This allowed for multi-class classification
instead of binary classification.
Additionally, disjoint regions could be segmented
together which was not an option with the snake curve. The same dictionary principal
is maintained through all the papers mentioned above. The latest implementation of
this dictionary segmentation method was introduced in 2018 which is the interactive
dictionary-based segmentation method [19]. In this most recent implementation the
user marks regions in the image that correspond to the classes, which results in a
segmentation. An example of this process is illustrated in Figure 2.1 showing the
user label and the resulting segmentation.
This method has already been shown
to solve some problems such as detecting fibre centers from 2D cross-sectional in
composite material [30] as well as in 3D volumes [31].
a User labels
b Resulting segmentation
Figure 2.1: Segmentation of a microscopic image of an onion. Example of user annotations with 3 classes
(red,green and yellow) as shown to the left and the result of the interactive dictionary-based segmentation
method is shown to the right. Image obtained from [32].
==PAGE:21==
2.2 The algorithm
7
2.2
The algorithm
The segmentation method can be looked at as a pixel classification. It results in a
probabilistic image map where the most probable class is assigned to a given pixel.
The probabilities are obtained by propagating user annotation through two transfor-
mation matrices that make up the so-called dictionary. The dictionary is essentially
a linear mapping, encoding the links between image pixels that share similar struc-
ture around them. The dictionary is constructed by clustering a certain amount of
image patches from the image. An example of an image that has been segmented
with this method is shown in Figure 2.1. In the figure a user has marked 3 classes in
an image and created the user labels that represent what structure belongs to which
class. Propagation of the user labels to the dictionary results in a so called probability
dictionary which is then propagated back to the image grid as probabilities for each
pixel. The method can be considered to be semi-supervised as it learns patterns in
the image in an unsupervised manner but then requires some labelled information
to make the segmentation. An implementation-wise explanation of the method is
presented. It can be divided into the following steps:
1. Obtain main cluster centers: Raw pixel intensity patches are defined as
the features. Features are obtained for a subset of pixel positions and clustered
into a given number of clusters where cluster centers correspond to the main
features of the image.
2. Create assignment image A: The assignment image contains the informa-
tion which pixel in the image belongs to which cluster center based on the
Euclidian distance.
3. Construct biadjacency matrix B: The assignments are used to create a
binary mapping between the image pixels and the dictionary pixels. It is repre-
sented as a sparse bipartite graph in the matrix B. Transformation matrices are
computed using the information in B. Those matrices map pixels from image
grid to the dictionary and vice versa.
4. Propagate user labels: Compute pixel probabilities by propagating a label
image through the two transformation matrices.
Let us define the image that will be processed as I(x, y) with I : Ω∈R2 →R. The
image is of size [X ×Y ] pixels. Each patch, gathered at location (x, y) from the image,
has the dimensions M-by-M with M being referred to as the patch size. The patch
is acquired around a center pixel x, y, thus M must be an odd number. If C is the
total amount of classes that the image will be segmented into, then a layered label
image L of the same spatial dimensions as I is structured such that:
L(x, y, c) =
{
1,
if pixel (x, y) is of class c
0,
otherwise
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Interactive Dictionary-Based Segmentation Model
and is restricted in a way that all pixels must sum up to 1. Hence, all pixels that are
unlabelled, and are not assigned to any class by the user will get equal value in each
layer to satisfy the restriction. E.g. if we assume three classes then all unassigned
pixels will get the value 1/3. The number K will represent the number of clusters
used in the first step of the method, describing the structure in the image. If K is
too small the method will not capture the variety of structures in the image and if K
is too big then computational cost rises. Emerson et al. [33] investigated the effect
of the number of clusters on the performance. They stated that by increasing the
number of clusters better performance was obtained until the performance increase
was not worth the extra computational time.
2.2.1
Obtain main cluster centers
The first step in creating the dictionary is by capturing the specific structures in
the image. This is done by clustering a number of random patches from the image.
The size of the patch should be big enough to capture the target structure in the
image. All the random patches obtained are vectorized into M 2 long vectors and
clustered into K number of clusters. The centers of these clusters define the so called
intensity dictionary. This is visualized in Figure 2.2 showing a dummy image being
clustered into K = 9 clusters with patch size M = 3.
The intensity dictionary
can be structured from [K × M × M] into a matrix of size [K × M 2] where each
row is a cluster center. Current understanding of the method is that the specific
clustering algorithm is not of utmost importance, approximate clustering is sufficient
[19]. The Mini-batch K-means clustering method [34] is fast for large datasets and
simple, making it a reasonable choice. It is later explained in in detail in Section 3.3.
The K number of cluster centers represent the most distinct features in the image
and every single center can be viewed as an image patch (dictionary patch).
1
1
2
2
9
9
Step 1
a patch of size
M x M = 3x3
with center pixel
marked with a dot
image I
intensity dictionary
M
M
X
Y
M
M
K=9
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the first step of the method. Random patches are clustered. The center of those
clusters are the basis for the intensity dictionary. The color code shows which dictionary patch represents
what cluster center. For simplicity the patch size is M = 3 and the number of clusters is K = 9.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 The algorithm
9
2.2.2
Create the assignment image A
In order to obtain the relation from image patches in the image to the dictionary
patches in the intensity dictionary, every image pixel (x, y) with a surrounding patch
in I is uniquely assigned to a cluster center in the intensity dictionary. The Euclidian
distance is used to compute the distances between the patches.
The assignments
can be viewed in the image grid as an assignment image A, where each pixel value
represents what patch in the intensity dictionary it belongs to. This is better shown
in Figure 2.3 where three random pixel assignments are shown color coded as well as
an example of an assignment image.
subset showing each pixel 
assignment to the intensity 
dictionary
all patches in the image 
are matched with intensity 
dictionary and their center 
pixel assigned to a patch in 
the intensity dictionary 
all pixels are 
uniquely assigned
most similar patch 
matched and center 
pixel gets assigned
5
8
9
3
2
9
4
3
8
1
1
9
9
4
1
7
9
7
9
9
A
5
8
9
3
2
9
4
3
8
1
1
9
9
4
1
7
9
7
9
9
Step 2
assignment image
X
Y
Figure 2.3: How the assignment image A is created visualized. For each pixel in the image, a patch around
it is matched to the most similar dictionary patch. That pixel gets the assigned dictionary patch. The assign-
ment image consists of assignments, in our case integer values from 1 to 9, relating to the dictionary intensity
patches.
2.2.3
Construct the biadjacency matrix B
As the association between the patches in the image and the intensity dictionary is
set with the assignment image, it is possible to code the relations between the image
pixels and the dictionary pixels. A dictionary pixel is a single pixel in the dictionary
grid [K × M × M]. This relation between the pixels in the image grid and dictionary
grid is illustrated in Figure 2.4 to the left. The color code shows the association
between the patches and the dots illustrate the pixel relationship, also emphasized
with the pink arrow. Additionally, notice how two pixels in the image grid share
a relation to the dictionary grid. Actually, each non-boundary pixel relates to M 2
dictionary pixels.
The relation between these pixels is represented with a sparse biadjacency matrix
B of size [XY ×KM 2] = [n×m]. So the total number of image pixels in the image is
n = XY , and the total number of dictionary pixels is m = KM 2. As shown in Figure
2.4 (on the right), one can imagine each row in B representing a unique pixel in the
image grid and each column representing a unique pixel in the dictionary. Hence,
bi,j =
{
1,
if pixel i in image relates to pixel j intensity dictionary
0,
otherwise
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Interactive Dictionary-Based Segmentation Model
where i and j are linear indices of the pixels in the image and dictionary respec-
tively. Thus, the biadjacency matrix B defines the mapping between the image and
the dictionary.
T e centered colored 
pixel shows the 
assignment to the 
representing 
dictionary patch. 
T e dots represent the 
patch around the 
assigned pixel and thus 
the relation between a 
particular image pixel 
to a particular 
dictionary pixels as 
shown with the arrow
Two image pixels are shown 
sharing a relation with two 
other dictionary pixel. 
In reality each image pixel 
shares  relation to M2 
dictionary pixels
T e relation between the image 
pixels and the dictionary pixel.
T e relations coded into the biadjacency matrix 
1
2
9
0 0 0 0    1 1 1         0 1   
0 0 0 1    0 0 1         1 0   
1 0 1 0    1 0 0         1 1 
0 0 0 0    1 1 1         0 1 
B
Step 3
K M2
X Y
Figure 2.4: The relationship between image pixels and dictionary pixels visualized. A single relationship is
shown with between an image pixel and a dictionary pixel with the pink arrow to the left. The assignments
from assignment image A are shown with as a center pixel filled with the color of the assigned dictionary
patch. All the relationships can be encoded into a sparse biadjacency matrix (to the right) where 1 repre-
sents a relation between image pixel and dictionary pixel. Every non-boundary image pixel is linked with
M 2 dictionary pixels.
2.2.4
Propagate the user labels
When the relationship between the dictionary and the image is established in the
biadjacency matrix B then the label image L can be mapped to the dictionary and
then back to the image grid. We define these mappings from B such that:
T1 = diag
(
BT1n×1
)−1 BT
(2.1)
T2 = diag (B1m×1)−1 B
(2.2)
where T1 is the mapping from the image grid to the dictionary and T2 is the mapping
from the dictionary back to the image grid. 1 is an all-ones column vector of respected
size. diag stands for a diagonal matrix with the vector in the input placed diagonally.
The probability dictionary which encodes the probabilities of the dictionary elements
is defined as:
D = T1Ln×C
(2.3)
where Ln×C is the label image, L, reshaped into [n × C] matrix for the matrix
multiplication.
Note that this matrix multiplication of T1 with the label image
is essentially equivalent to summing up the linked pixels from the label image to
the dictionary and then normalizing them, resulting in pixelwise probabilities of the
==PAGE:25==
2.2 The algorithm
11
dictionary pixels. To get a better idea of the mapping, Figure 2.5 explains the process
from user labels to a probability image. There we can see that first the user labels
are converted into a label image. Next, we see the mapping of 8 label image pixels
to one dictionary pixel. Subsequently, the mapping from 5 dictionary pixels back to
a pixel in the probability image grid. Hence, the overall propagation of the image
labels to pixel-wise probabilities is done by applying both transformations with the
labels:
Pn×C = T2T1Ln×C
(2.4)
The matrix Pn×C can then be reconstructed into a probability image PX×Y ×C.
Each layer of the probability image contains the pixel probabilities for the relevant
class. P is thresholded such that the class with the highest probability for each pixel
is chosen which results in the final segmentation.
User labels drawn on 
image with 2 classes
Probabilty 
dictionary
Probabilty image
showing only 8 pixels of the
probability image for each layer
probability 
color coding
label image is 
structured from 
the user labels 
1.0
0.0
0.5
8
8
5
5
=
=
=
=
T1L = D
L
T2D = P
Step 4
T1 maps from the image grid to the 
dictionary. T e mapping is equivalent to 
adding up all image pixels related to a 
dictionary pixel and normalizing.
T2 maps from the dictionary grid to the 
image. T e mapping is equivalent to 
adding up all dictionary pixels related to 
a image pixel and normalizing.
a pixel with value 0
a pixel with value 0.5
a pixel with value 1
Figure 2.5: The propagation process from user labels to a probability image. Going from left to right. First, the
user annotations are drawn on the image, here two classes have been shown (red and blue). Secondly the
user annotations are constructed into a label image L where the pixels can be interpreted as probabilities.
Notice how the label image is made of 2 layers, one for each class. Thirdly, the label image is then mapped
from the image grid to the dictionary grid with the transformation matrix T1 making up the probability
dictionary. Finally, mapping the probabilities from the dictionary grid back to the image grid is done via T2,
resulting in the probability image. Here only 8 and 5 relations are illustrated instead of M 2 relations. With
the probability image in place the segmentation can be found by finding the most probable class for each
pixel.
A relatively small amount of labelling is often required in order to obtain a reason-
able segmentation. Better results may be obtained if more diffusion steps are applied,
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Interactive Dictionary-Based Segmentation Model
i.e. using the resulting probability image P as the input label image L and computing
Eq. (2.4) again [19]. More operations can also be applied between diffusion steps in
order to improve the segmentation. However, these diffusion steps are excluded from
the analysis in this thesis.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
As previously mentioned the thesis is structured as an experimental development of
an algorithm. That means that many different methods and algorithms were mixed
and tested. The following chapter introduces the theory needed to cover the methods
developed and described later in Chapter 5. Sift descriptors were used to test how
different features affect the outcome and thus only shortly described here in Section
3.1. Autoencoders were integrated into the algorithm and the underlying theory is
described in Section 3.2.
Some elements of the autoencoder section may also be
applied to learning simple weights, for example, optimizing an objective function
which is described in Sections 3.2.1.2 and 3.2.1.4.
3.1
Scale invariant feature transform (SIFT)
In 1999 David G. Lowe introduced the Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) [35]
in order to match features across images of different scales and rotation. The SIFT
method detects and describes local features in an image. In short, the SIFT method
detects keypoints (points of interest) in an image at multiple scales, determines their
orientation and then describes the keypoints as a high dimensional vector. Finally, the
method matches the keypoints across images making the transformation of the images
possible. Here, the interest is to utilize only the keypoint descriptor as a feature. The
descriptor was designed to be highly distinctive and invariant to changes in viewpoint
and illumination, meaning it can capture the context.
The descriptor is a spatial histogram of the image gradients around a point. The
orientation and magnitude of the gradients in the image are computed for each pixel in
a region and weighted with a Gaussian window. That means that values further away
from the center point are given a lower value. A window of 16 × 16 pixels is obtained
around the point of interest. The window is further divided into sub-regions of size
4×4. The values (orientation and magnitude of the gradients) in each sub-region are
accumulated into an 8 bin orientation histogram. This results in a 4 × 4 × 8 = 128
long feature vector.
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Theory
3.2
Autoencoders
Autoencoders were first studied in order to extract salient features through its latent
representation which would lower the dimensions of the input data [36]. Essentially
an autoencoder is an artificial neural network that learns to copy its input to its
output. It can be split into two parts; an encoder function, h = f(x), which com-
presses the input (x) into a latent feature representation (h), and a decoder function,
ˆx = g(h), which tries to reconstruct of the input with the latent features. The latent
feature representation is sometimes called the code as well. When the latent space
is constrained to be of lower dimension than the input space, i.e. undercomplete, it
forces the autoencoder to learn the most salient features in the data. Otherwise, the
network would copy the inputs without generalizing. By introducing regularizers, the
autoencoder is not restricted to an undercomplete representation and consequently
may also model other properties. Those include sparsity of the representation, small-
ness of the derivative of the representation, and robustness to noise in the input data
among others [37–39]. An illustration of a simple autoencoder is shown in Figure
3.1 where the encoder and decoder represent the functions f and g respectively. All
parts of an autoencoder can be explained in relation to an artificial neural network
(ANN). Therefore, a subsection is dedicated to describing ANN and its components.
Input layer
Code
Output layer
Encoder
Decoder
Figure 3.1: This example shows an undercomplete autoencoder, the latent representation (code) is shown
to be of lower dimension than the input. The encoder and decoder can be thought of as functions which
try to reconstruct the input layer to the output layer.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Autoencoders
15
3.2.1
Artificial Neural Network
Inspired by a biological neural network, an Artificial Neural Network is a mathe-
matical model that has a set of connected neurons (nodes). It is built up by layers,
typically an input layer, output layer and then a number of hidden layers each con-
sisting of a number of nodes. Between all of the nodes are weights that are adjusted
during a learning phase that learns some output. In each layer, an activation func-
tion is applied to the nodes in order to introduce non-linearity to the model making it
more flexible and able to learn more complex functions. We can represent z(l)
j
as the
sum of the inputs to the jth node of the lth layer. The mathematical representation
can then be defined as:
z(l)
j
=
∑
k
w(l)
kj a(l−1)
k
(3.1)
Where w(l)
kj is the weight from node k to node j in layer l. Finally, a(l−1)
k
is the
activation from the kth node in the previous layer, hence (l −1). The activation a
is computed with the activation function a = θ(z). Notice that a(0)
k
is simply the
input data. Figure 3.2 illustrates these concepts and show a general view of a neural
network. The bias is intentionally dismissed in Eq. (3.1) for simplicity, but the basic
idea behind adding a bias in each layer is to decrease or increase the weighted sum
of a layer independent of their values.
layer  l
Hidden layer 
Input layer
Hidden layer 
Output layer
node k
sum of inputs z(l)
weight  w(l)
kj
activation a(l-1)
k
j
Σ  ƒ
Σ  ƒ
Figure 3.2: Simple neural network with two hidden layers and arbitrary number of nodes in each layer. The
figure illustrates variables in Eq. (3.1). Here the symbol f represent the activation function θ(z).
==PAGE:30==
16
3 Theory
3.2.1.1
Activation functions
As aforementioned, the activation functions add non-linearity to the neural network.
These functions have different traits that are necessary for specific learning tasks.
Further, the differentiability of these functions is very important for the optimization
of the networks. Thus, the gradients (derivatives) of the functions play an important
role in how the network learns. The sigmoid function, θ(z) =
1
1+e−z , is one of the
most widely used activation function. It is smooth and acts like an activation meaning
the output value is always in the range (0,1). Another function that is similar to the
sigmoid is the hyperbolic tangent (tanh) defined as: θ(z) = tanh(z) =
2
1+e−2z −1.
It has similar traits as the sigmoid function and is bound in the range (-1,1). The
gradients are usually steeper for the hyperbolic tangent than the sigmoid, i.e.
it
may learn faster. The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) was popularized in the context
of Restricted Boltzmann Machines [40] .
Further, Glorot et al.
[41] showed that
ReLU activation enables better training of deep networks than the sigmoid and tanh
functions. ReLU is defined as θ(z) = max(0, z) but is not differentiable at z = 0.
Another issue with ReLU is that because the output value is 0 for negative input
values the gradient may go towards 0 and will stop adjusting during optimization.
These problems are tackled with different variations of the ReLU but will not be
addressed here. Choosing which activation function to use depends on the problem
at hand at and what traits one is looking for when optimizing the network.
3.2.1.2
Objective functions
The optimal weights in a model or a network are found by minimizing a cost function,
also known as an error function or a loss function. The cost function measures how
well the estimated values from the output of the model correspond with the true val-
ues. If the cost function compares the output of the model with some desired output
from labelled training data then the method is called a supervised method. When
the cost function uses only the input data and does not utilize labelled data, the
method is unsupervised and the model learns the patterns of the data itself. We will
consider two different types of tasks that the model will try to solve called regression
and classification. In classification, the model determines which of k categories some
input belongs to. For regression, the model is predicting a numerical value for some
input. The choice of a cost function depends on the tasks at hand.
Mean Squared Error – With respect to regression, i.e. predicting numerical
values, one way to measure the performance is by computing the mean squared error
(MSE) defined as:
MSE = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(3.2)
for N observations where y is the predicted value and ˆy is the true value.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Autoencoders
17
Cross Entropy Error and Softmax – In the case of classification tasks, the
standard is to use a softmax output layer.
This is because the softmax function,
also called the normalized exponential function, provides a way of predicting discrete
probability distributions over the C classes. It is basically a generalization of the
logistic function for multiple classes [42]. For a single output observation yc of class
c, the function is defined as:
yc = σ(p)c =
exp(pc)
∑C
k=1 exp(pk)
(3.3)
Where C is the total number of classes and p is a single the output of the model,
so p = (p1, . . . , pC) ∈RC. Further, ∑C
k=1 exp(pk) acts as a regularizer in order to
ensure the output class values sum up to 1 and lie in the range (0, 1) so that the
values can be interpreted as probabilities.
As the output prediction from the softmax is a probability the MSE cost function
gives poor learning performance. The Cross Entropy Error (CE) is appropriate for
classification:
CE = −
N
∑
i=1
C
∑
c=1
ti,c ln yi,c
(3.4)
Where we sum over N samples and C classes. Further, ti,c is defined as the true
label provided by the user in a one hot encoded fashion and yi,c is the output of the
softmax function.
Reconstruction Error – In the special case for autoencoders, the reconstruction
error is not an exact cost function but rather a concept referring to that the output is
compared to the input. Hence, making it unsupervised training. With respect to the
previously mentioned encoding and decoding functions f and g, the reconstruction
error is defined as:
E(x, g(f(x)))
(3.5)
where E could for example be some function mentioned here above in this subsection
and x is the input and g(f(x)) the output.
3.2.1.3
Regularizations
The cost functions mentioned above in 3.2.1.2 are often combined with a regularization
term in order put constraints on the complexity of the network and prevent overfitting.
Weight regularization is among the most popular regularization strategies [43]. The
cost increases as the weights become larger. These weight regularizations come mainly
in two flavours:
• L2 regularization — sometimes called weight decay, it is defined as the L2
norm of the weights. It forces the weights to be small but does not make them
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Theory
zero. The cost added is proportional to the square of the value of the weight
coefficients.
• L1 regularization — defined as the L1 norm of the weights, i.e. the absolute
value of the weight coefficients. The regularizer tends to produce sparse weights.
Thus, it is commonly used in models when the difference between zero and
nonzero elements is important.
3.2.1.4
Optimize
For a multidimensional optimization problem with no closed form solution, an iter-
ative optimisation algorithm is a valid choice. The gradient descent method finds
local minima by taking steps in the negative direction of the gradient of an objective
function. Generally, for some cost function E(w) where the objective is to find the
optimal w∗the gradient descent is:
wnew = wold −η ∂E(wold)
∂wold
(3.6)
Where η is the learning rate, which controls the size of the step the algorithm should
take in each iteration. Too large and the model may converge faster but possibly ar-
rive at a sub-optimal solution. Too small and the model converges slower but might
be able to find a more optimal solution. In both cases, the model might not con-
verge. The optimizer continues to run until some stopping criteria are met. This
can, for example, be the maximum iterations if the gradients are very close to zero,
or if the change in the cost function is below some tolerance. These attributes are
all addressed in more advanced variations of the gradient descent algorithm which
are used to train complex neural networks efficiently. The network weights have to
be initialized for the gradient descent algorithm to be able to compute wnew in Eq.
(3.6). The most effective way to initialize w has been highly researched. It depends
on the type of network and the problem at hand. A general approach is to sample
the initial weights from a normal distribution with some mean and standard deviation.
Backpropagation – Backpropagation is an algorithm that commonly uses gradi-
ent descent to adjust the weights in a neural network in order to minimize the error
of the cost functions. The backpropagation algorithm was popularized in 1986 where
it was used to train a neural network [44]. The algorithm utilizes the chain rule to
compute the partial derivatives with one forward pass and one backward pass through
the network. First, a forward pass through the network is computed to evaluate the
error. Second, the current value is used to compute the partial derivatives of the cost
function with respect to the weights of the last layer in the network. What makes the
algorithm efficient is that the derivatives obtained from the last layer can be used to
calculate the derivatives of the previous layer [45]. This can then be continued moving
backwards from the hindmost layer to the initial layer. This is possible because each
layer is an independent function. For example, if the activation function for layer l
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Autoencoders
19
and node j is defined as a(l)
j
= θ(z(l)
j ) where z(l)
j
is the weighted input defined in Eq.
(3.1), then the partial derivative (also called the error) for a cost function C is:
δ(l)
j
= ∂C
∂z(l)
j
= ∂C
∂a(l)
j
∂a(l)
j
∂z(l)
j
(3.7)
The chain rule describes this relationship, because C depends on a which in turn
depends on z. The general equation of the error with respect to any layer l and
weight w is:
∂C
∂w(l)
jk
= a(l−1)
k
δ(l)
j
(3.8)
If a bias is included then the same would apply to it. The partial derivatives and
backpropagation would be computed with respect to the bias.
Advanced gradient descent – Looking back at the basic gradient descent for-
mula in Eq. (3.6) we have explained how the errors (or the partial derivatives) are
computed backwards in the neural network. With regards to the learning rate, taking
the simple approach with a single constant learning rate is inefficient. The main con-
cerns are that it has to be manually chosen, it stays the same throughout the training
process, and the gradient vector is scaled uniformly by this constant. There are al-
gorithms which solve these issues. One example is the Adagrad [46] which adapts
the learning rate to each the parameters in the model. It is based on dividing each
gradient component with the L2 norm of the past gradients for that particular com-
ponent. However, as training time increases this learning rate decreases as the past
gradient components add up. Instead of accumulating all the past squared gradients,
Adadelta [47] which is an extension of Adagrad, solves this by applying a decaying
average of the past squared gradients. Furthermore, the Adadelta algorithm auto-
matically chooses the learning parameter η based on the decaying average of the past
squared parameter (not the squared gradients).
3.2.2
Sparsity
In regards to regularization, regularized autoencoders encourage other properties be-
sides the ability to reconstruct its input. One of these include sparsity of the rep-
resentation [43, p. 504]. In sparse layers, a majority of the input values have zero
weights and very few input values have non zero weights. Sparse autoencoders are
typically used to learn features for another task than the task of reconstruction, e.g.
for classification. In [41], Glorot et al. showed that one way to obtain complete zeros
in the sparse layer was to use rectified linear units in combination with a regularizer
that pushes the representation to zero as well, e.g. the L1 regularizer previously men-
tioned. However, another method which has proven to be more efficient in [48, 49]
was made by encouraging the average activation of the hidden nodes to be low.
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Theory
In that method, a target sparsity parameter ρ is set which defines the intended
average activation. If we define the activation of hidden node j of some layer l in the
network as a(l)
j
we can say that the average activation of a hidden node j is:
ˆρj = 1
m
m
∑
i=1
a(l)
j (zi)
(3.9)
where we average over the inputs ∑m
i=1 zi to a node. The sparsity can now be enforced
to approximate the selected sparsity parameter ρ. For example, if ρ = 0.01 then
we enforce the average activation of each hidden node j to be approximately 0.01.
However, in order to get this approximation we need to penalize if ˆρ deviates from
ρ [50]. One type of penalty to be applied is the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL)
between two Bernoulli random variables with mean ρ and ˆρj.
KL measures the
difference from one probability distribution to another probability distribution. This
penalty function is defined as:
s2
∑
j=1
KL(ρ||ˆρj) =
s2
∑
j=1
ρ log ρ
ˆρj
+ (1 −ρ) log 1 −ρ
1 −ˆρj
(3.10)
where s2 is the number of hidden nodes in the hidden layer. For clarity the penalty
function is illustrated in Figure 3.3 where one can see how the function behaves for
a set ρ = 0.4 in an range of ˆρj = [0, 1]. As ˆρj diverges from ρ the KL-divergence
increases.
Figure 3.3: Example of the KL divergence penalty function as a function of the average activation of a
hidden unit (ˆρj) for a set ρ = 0.4.
3.3
K-means clustering
As touched upon in Section 2.2 obtaining the cluster center is done by Mini-batch K-
means. To fully understand that technique an introduction to K-means is given. The
==PAGE:35==
3.3 K-means clustering
21
clustering algorithm K-means [51] is an iterative algorithm, grouping observations
into K clusters or sets. It can be split into two steps. First, assign observations,
x1, x2, ..., xn, to sets, S = {S1, S2, ..., Sk} also referred to as assigning data points
to a cluster. Second, update the cluster centers in order to minimize the objective
function in (3.11). This is repeated until the cluster centers do not change or by
some other stopping criteria. For given K number of sets S (clusters), formally the
objective is to find:
arg min
S
K
∑
i=1
∑
x∈Si
∥x −µi∥2
(3.11)
Where µi is the mean of points in set Si, and where x is some d-dimensional obser-
vation. Initialization of the algorithm is choosing the initial K cluster centers. In
simple K-means this initialization is selected randomly. It is more efficient, however,
to initialize them heuristically like done in K-means++[52]. There the probability
of choosing a center is high if it is not near any previously chosen centers. One of
the disadvantages of the K-means algorithm is that it is slow for very large datasets.
This is because it has to compute the distance between all the points and the clus-
ter centers in each iteration. Also, storing all these distances in memory might be
infeasible. The Mini-batch K-means algorithm by Sculley[34] addresses this problem.
Fixed size of small batches from the dataset are selected uniformly at random for each
iteration. Next, each observation in the mini batch is assigned to the nearest center.
The cluster centers are then updated as an average of all samples ever assigned to
them. Additionally, a learning rate for each center is assigned that decreases with
every iteration which results in faster convergence. This method saves a significant
amount of computation time but at the expense of small loss in cluster quality.
==PAGE:36==
22
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental Pipeline
With the different prototype algorithms tested in this thesis, an experimental pipeline
was established. This chapter motivates the need for an objective measure along side
a subjective evaluation. The performance metrics of the evaluation are introduced as
well as the testing images. Implementation details are then listed in regards to the
user labels and the pipeline.
Performing an unbiased measure of the performance of a segmentation algorithm
is a challenging task. One way to evaluate segmentation results is to subjectively
evaluate a visual comparison of the segmentation result and the image. However, that
gives the possibility of human error as well as it limits the depth of the evaluation
to a small number of segmentation comparisons.
The alternative is an objective
evaluation where the segmented image is compared to a reference image which has
been manually segmented. Nevertheless, that is also subject to how the expected
results (ground truth) are structured but gives a more unbiased evaluation.
The pipeline is set up in order to compare the results objectively. Additionally,
the reader will be given a qualitative impression of the segmentation result by show-
ing extreme examples. Yet, subjective evaluation cannot be generalized and will only
support an explanation of a particular problem each time. In regards to the objec-
tive evaluation, a reasonable performance metric must be selected. As previously
mentioned, the method is interactive which makes it more demanding to build an
automated testing pipeline. In an interactive segmentation the user is able to choose
which regions to label and then relabel misclassified regions. Despite this fact and for
consistency, random user labels were created and run repeatedly with no relabelling
option. A certain number of images were tested where the ground truth was either
provided with the images or manually marked by the author.
4.1
Performance metrics
The accuracy measure is the most commonly used and known measure for segmen-
tation. Many different ways can be used to express accuracy, the most simple one
is by reporting the total of correctly classified pixels over the total number of pixels.
However, this is a poor measure when there is class imbalance present in the data.
Another technique is to report the mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) which mea-
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Experimental Pipeline
sures the intersection over union for each class and averages the values. In other
words, it measures how well a predicted segmentation matches the corresponding
ground-truth by dividing the intersection of two segments by their union. This is
considered a standard measure for semantic segmentation since it was introduced in
[53]. The benefit of mIoU is that it considers both false positives and false negatives
and does not suffer from class imbalance. However, it does not clearly assess how
accurate the boundaries of the segmentation are.
To explain in relation to the classification rates of a confusion matrix, true positive
(TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN), and false negative (FN) the IoU is simply
TP / (TP + FP + FN), also known as the Jaccard index. The mIoU is then the mean
of all classes. It ranges from 0 (no overlap) to 1 (complete agreement). In more detail,
if we define oij as the number of pixels of class i which are predicted as class j then
the measure can be defined as:
mIoU : 1
C
C
∑
i=1
oii
ti −oii + ∑
j oji
∈[0, 1]
(4.1)
Where ti is the total number of pixels in class i and C is the number of classes.
Each experiment is run multiple times for a single image. In each run, a different
user label is tested. A global measure of the mIoU is thus computed from all the
aggregated classifications rates (TP,FP,FN). Furthermore, a maximum and minimum
mIoU overall runs will be reported to show what the sensitivity is for different user
labels.
In addition to the accuracy metric, another important metric to measure is the
computation time. This measure is often not stated in the literature which could be
explained by the fact that it depends on the hardware used to run the tests. However,
comparing the computation time of the methods tested in this work is possible since
they are run on the same hardware. The computation time is relevant because the
method is interactive. The user will want to get the segmentation results quickly after
labelling is done. The timing of the algorithm can be split into two steps. Firstly, the
preprocessing time, the computation time required before the user can label the image.
This may, for example, involve clustering and constructing the dictionary. Secondly,
the propagation time which is measured from the time the user has finished labelling
until the results are presented.
4.2
Image test data
For the analysis six images are chosen as testing images. The focus is on microscopic
images with repeated patterns. It is challenging to find publicly available image data
that show repeated patterns and include the ground truth segmentations. One dataset
available is The Broad Bioimage Benchmark Collection (BBBC) [54] that has a variety
of microscopy image sets. These datasets come from various papers and contain some
kind of ground truth (expected results). An image of human HT29 colon cancer cells
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Implementation details
25
was extracted from this database and was used as a test image. The ground truth to
this image included a foreground/background labelling. A border was added around
each cell in order to have more classes and investigate if the methods would be able
to separate adjacent cells. The image with its ground truth can be seen in Figure
4.1a and 4.1b. From the same dataset another image with synthetic clustered nuclei
was chosen as a 2 class segmentation problem, shown in Figure 4.1e and 4.1f. An
image of peripheral nerves from [19] was tested. The author manually labelled the
”ground truth” to this image which can be seen in Figure 4.1d and 4.1h. What was
challenging with this image was to differentiate between the inside and outside of the
nerve because of similar brightness values. Finally, a synthetic image was generated
as shown in Figure 4.1i. It was inspired by onion cells as seen in Figure 2.1. First,
a mask was created by thresholding and adjusting a real onion image, then some
circular objects were drawn on top. This was the ground truth, then some textures,
gradients, colors and effects were overlayed on top for each mask. Gaussian blur was
applied to make borders less sharp and as well as Gaussian noise. Two variants of the
image are shown, one with 2% noise and another with 20% noise. All the test images
are shown in Figure 4.1 along with their short identity name used to refer back to
them. All the images are shown larger in Appendix B.
4.3
Implementation details
All implementations in this project were written in the Python programming language
version 3.7 and run on a laptop with the following hardware specs: 2,8 GHz Intel Core
i7, 1 Processor (2 cores) + 2 virtual cores, Total 4 CPU’s, Memory 16 GB, 1TB SSD.
All modifications were tested with the same set of user labels for comparison. Twenty
different random user labels were generated for each image. A user label was defined
as a rectangle drawn at a random location in the image. The rectangle was five times
smaller in height and width than the original image, making it contain 4% of the
image pixels. As seen in Figure 4.1 some testing images had class imbalance present.
To compensate for this, the user labels were drawn again if a class contained less than
10% of the total pixels in the rectangle. An example user label drawn at random is
shown in Figure 4.2. In regards to parameters in the methods, some were shared
from one alteration of the developed algorithm to the next, e.g. patch size. They
remained the same throughout the experiments. On the other hand, there were also
some parameters that were not shared across modifications of the method. For those
parameters, the best ones were chosen in each case by inspection.
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Experimental Pipeline
a cells
b GT cells
c nerve zoom
d GT nerve zoom
e cells2
f GT cells2
g nerve
h GT nerve
i onion
j onion 20noise
k GT onion
Figure 4.1: Testing images used to evaluate the performance of the developed modifications (GT = ground
truth). Beneath each image the shortened form of their name in order to identify them later. (a,b) show
human HT29 colon cancer cells and ground truth with 3 classes. (e,f) is of synthetic clustered nuclei with
ground truth of 2 classes. (c,d) and (g,h) show the same image of nerve cells only (c,d) has been zoomed
in, the ground truth was manually segmented . (i,j,k) show synthetic image inspired by onion cells (i) has 2%
noise while (j) has 20% noise.
Figure 4.2: Example of randomly drawn user labels to be used as input to the methods in the experimental
pipeline, the ground truth image for these labels is shown in Figure 4.1b
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Exploration &
Modifications
This chapter combines the knowledge from Chapter 2 with the theory in Chapter 3 to
describe the experimental work and modifications done to improve the basic method
described in Section 2.2. After extensive exploration and experiments, three modifi-
cations were chosen to be discussed and compared. Firstly, we used SIFT features
instead of purely intensity based features. Secondly, we trained two variants of a
dictionary weight model in a supervised fashion. Lastly, we utilized the latent rep-
resentation of a sparse autoencoder to encode the pixel relationships in the original
method. Training a simple sparse autoencoder in the method was first developed as
a proof of concept and then further improved. The implementation of these methods
will be described in detail here. In regards to the implementation of the autoencoders
a high-level neural network framework called Keras was utilized [55]. A benefit of
using an established framework is that it runs efficiently, decreases computation time,
and makes it fast to prototype different network structures and methods.
5.1
Feature selection, SIFT descriptors
As aforementioned, the raw pixel intensity values in a patch are used for the features,
giving a M 2 feature vector. However, in some cases that is not sufficient, e.g. when
two different classes have the same intensity value but their surroundings are not the
same. The inside and outside of a neural nerve is one such case as seen in Figure
4.1g and 4.1c. One method that captures the local region surroundings is the scale
invariant feature transform method (SIFT) [56]. Although the intent here was not
to compute keypoints at different scales, the SIFT descriptor was utilized to get a
feature vector that captured the spatial surroundings based on the image gradients.
This is considered a good attribute when working with images with repeated patterns
where objects are not clearly defined by their raw intensities. SIFT features have been
combined with the interactive dictionary-based method before [19]. However, it was
not objectively compared with the original method. Additionally, it was interesting to
investigate if SIFT features performed better in combination with other modifications.
Extending the current method with SIFT descriptors was a simple modification in
==PAGE:42==
28
5 Exploration & Modifications
theory. The changes were made in the first step of the basic method (Section 2.2.1).
Instead of gathering random intensity patches from the image and cluster them, the
SIFT features were computed for each pixel position and those features clustered into
K clusters making up the ”intensity” dictionary. The assignments were performed
in the same way as in the original method, matching each feature of a pixel with the
intensity dictionary. This resulted in an assignment image A. With the assignment
image present, the biadjacency matrix could be constructed. Even though patches
were not used to make up the dictionary, a patch size needed to be determined to
construct the biadjacency matrix. The patch size defines how many pixels around
the assigned pixel should be taken into consideration when the relationship between
the image pixels and the dictionary pixels is determined. In other words, how much
overlap of the pixels was present. Still, the patch size should roughly correspond
to the target objects of interest in the image. The OpenCV library [57] includes a
Python implementation of the SIFT method in their opencv_contrib package. This
implementation was utilized in order to obtain the descriptors described earlier. An
input that needed to be determined was the size of the descriptor. That is, the area
around the point of interest that the SIFT descriptor was computed from. Setting
the diameter of the descriptor to be equal to the patch size gave the best results.
5.2
Learning weights
In the original method, obtaining the main structure in the image was done in an
unsupervised manner. The information from the user labels was not utilized when
constructing the dictionary. The motivation behind adding weights to the model was
to exploit the information that the user gives with the user labels in a supervised
manner. It was not obvious what part of the original method should be assigned
weights. After noticing that some cluster centers were very much alike it sparked
the idea that some dictionary pixels might be more important than others. Thus,
the weights were assigned to the dictionary grid. Two different types of models were
tested to investigate the effect of adding weights. In both cases, the weights were
given to the dictionary pixels, defined in Eq. (2.3) and visualized in Figure 2.5 on
page 11. First, the weights were added such that each dictionary pixel, despite what
class it belonged to, was assigned a weight. The argument was that some dictionary
pixels might add more value to the segmentation than others regardless of class. In
the second weight model, each dictionary pixel for each class was assigned a weight.
It was reasoned by the fact that some class dictionary pixels were more important
than others. To make the explanation more comprehensible the original model from
Eq. (2.4) on page 11 is recalled:
Pn×C = T2T1Ln×C
(5.1)
Where Pn×C and Ln×C are the probability image and the label image reshaped into
[n × C] matrix, n being total number of pixels in the image and C total number of
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Learning weights
29
classes to be segmented into. T1 and T2 are the transformation matrices previously
mentioned and defined in Eq. (2.1) and (2.2).
Simple-weight model – All classes got the same weight for a given dictionary pixel.
As a result there was one weight for each dictionary pixel, giving KM 2 = m number
of weights where K is the number of clusters in the method and M is the patch size.
The weights were represented as the vector w. For a matrix convention, w was placed
diagonally into an empty matrix W1. Hence, the model is defined as:
Pn×C = σ [T2W1T1Ln×C]
(5.2)
Where the σ is the Softmax function defined in Eq. (3.3) on page 17. Adding weights
led to the normalization of the pixels to no longer occur and thus the output values
did not range from 0 to 1. In order to get output that could be interpreted as proba-
bilities, the output was passed through the softmax function. The softmax function
is applied to each pixel.
Class-weight model – Each class for all dictionary pixels was assigned a weight.
Consequently, the weight matrix in the model, W2, is of size [m × C]. The model is
similar to the previous one in Eq. (5.2) with a slight change:
Pn×C = σ [T2 (W2 ⊙(T1Ln×C))]
(5.3)
Where ⊙represents the Hadamard product (element-wise multiplication). The soft-
max function was also applied to the second weight model.
5.2.1
Optimize
As the image was only partially labelled not all pixels could be used from the label
image to optimize the weights, only the part that was labelled. Under those circum-
stances, the indices of those image pixels that corresponded to the user input were
found and the biadjacency matrix B was sub-sampled correspondingly. The label im-
age and the probability image were sub-sampled as well. A matrix with a subscript
υ will represent an indexed matrix corresponding to the user input. For instance, the
simple-weight model indexed would be:
Pυ
u×C = σ
[
T2υ
u×m × W1
m×m × T1υ
m×u × Lυ
u×C
]
(5.4)
where the matrix dimensions are shown and u represent the number of pixel in the
user input. Notice that the number of dictionary pixels (m) does not depend on the
number of image pixels.
There was no closed form solution to this optimization problem and it contained a
large number of unknown variables to be optimized. Thus, an iterative optimization
approach was a rational option. A simple gradient descent, defined in Eq. (3.6), with
==PAGE:44==
30
5 Exploration & Modifications
a fixed learning rate for a certain amount of iterations or until the change in loss
was below some threshold. The appropriate loss function was the cross-entropy error,
defined in Section 3.2.1.2, which applied to both models. The true labels in the cross
entropy were actually the input to the model as well, i.e. the indexed label image Lυ.
The partial derivative for the simple-weight model is:
∂E1(W1)
∂W1
= −
[(
(T1υLυ) ⊙
(
T2
T
υ × (Lυ ⊙(1u×C −Pυ))
))
× 1C×1
]
(5.5)
Where E1 is the cross-entropy error for the simple weight model. The matrix Lυ
holds the true labels (user input) in a one-hot encoded fashion and Pυ are the pixel
probabilities.
In addition, 1 is a matrix filled with ones of the given size where
u × C stands for the number of samples in the optimization and the number of
classes respectively. The dependent variables were different between the models so
the partial derivation computed was also different between the models. For the class-
weight model the gradient is given in matrix notation as:
∂E2(W2)
∂W2
=
[
(T1υLυ) ⊙
(
T2
T
υ × (Pυ −Lυ)
)]
(5.6)
Where E2 is the cross-entropy error for the class-weight model. For the full derivation
of both gradients and more detailed explanation of the optimization, see Appendix
A. For the sake of only testing the effects of adding weights to the model, a simple
approach was taken to learn the weights. That is to say, no regularization term was
added to the objective function nor were other more advanced variants of the gradient
descent method tested. The appropriate learning rate was found by trial and error
after running the method on several images.
5.2.2
Implementation details
An approximate solution to the optimization problem is adequate and thus the stop-
ping criteria was based on when the objective function stopped improving. So ei-
ther when the change in cost function between iterations drops below a threshold of
ϵ = 1×10−4 or the algorithm exceeds maximum iterations. The threshold ϵ was chosen
with approximate solution and speed in mind. For the iterative scheme, initial weights
must be set. As the model already predicted the probabilities with the simple model,
the initial weights were drawn from the normal distribution N(µ, σ2) = N(1, 0.25).
Sampling from a normal distribution with mean zero led to unstable results.
The weight models were applied to both the regular method using intensity patches
as features as well as the modified version of using SIFT descriptors as features. For
clarity those will be called the Original method and the SIFT method respectively.
On top of that, the two different types of weight models will be called the simple-
weight model for the weights that have only one weight per dictionary pixel and the
class-weight model where there is one weight for each class per dictionary pixel.
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Autoencoders with sparse latent representation
31
5.3
Autoencoders with sparse latent representation
It is often difficult to work in raw pixel space. One strategy is to embed the raw
pixel representation into some lower dimensional vector space. This space hopefully
contains more meaningful dimensions such as image brightness, edges, etc. Utilizing
this kind of feature learning in image analysis often shows significant improvements
[58, 59]. Initially, it was believed that instead of choosing between computed SIFT
features or raw intensity values the method could learn the features itself. To give an
example of how this would work an autoencoder would learn to reconstruct the input
patches. Next, all patches would be encoded to a latent representation, clustered, and
run on the same original method. This initial thought of compressing the features
did not show significant results and was not included in the results.
On the other hand, autoencoders can be trained such that the latent space ex-
hibits the same properties as a sparse dictionary [60]. In the original method, the
dictionary is initialized with the K-means clustering. If the feature space of the latent
representation of the autoencoder is sparse and large enough it can be interpreted as
a sparse dictionary. This would allow us to eliminate the K-means clustering step.
What follows is that one can simultaneously train the dictionary from the sparse
autoencoder as well as incorporating the information from the user labels. We can
imagine that we use both the image itself and the user labels to build the dictionary
rather than only using the information in the image itself. The first step was to see if
it was possible to train a simple sparse autoencoder and obtain reasonable segmenta-
tion results. The standard way of enforcing a sparse representation is to utilize the L1
regularizer. This regularizer was tested first with the autoencoder but was ineffective.
It was not until adding a penalty term that encouraged a low average activation of
the hidden nodes that some fair results started to unfold.
5.3.1
Simple autoencoder
Considering Section 2.2 which describes the original method, this modification was
based on replacing Step 1, 2 and 3 in the method with a sparse autoencoder that
was trained on the patches. For each patch, around some center pixel (x, y), a sparse
representation could be obtained in the latent space by running the patch through
the encoder. Specifically, this sparse representation could be thought of as the as-
signment to a dictionary element. To illustrate, see Figure 5.1 as an example. For
illustrative purpose, the code dimension (dimension of the latent space) is shown to
be K = 8 dimensional which is equivalent to the original method being clustered into
8 clusters. A filtering step was needed to make the representation even more sparse.
Also, with the explanation figure in mind, we can think of the latent representation
as soft assignments between a single pixel and the dictionary elements, similar to the
assignment matrix A shown in Figure 2.3. In contrast to the hard assignments in the
original method, each image pixel could be softly assigned to multiple dictionary ele-
ments (at most K times). However, as the latent representation was sparse, multiple
assignments should be minimal. In order to get the image pixel to dictionary pixel
==PAGE:46==
32
5 Exploration & Modifications
relationships, the latent space was duplicated M 2 times. This was in order to obtain
the overlapping pixel averaging effect, as explained and illustrated in Figure 2.4 on
page 10. The biadjacency matrix B was filled with the mappings for each pixel re-
sulting in a [XY × KM 2] matrix. Finally, we computed the transformation matrices
and propagated user labels through the matrices as done in the original method.
Code dimension – The number of nodes in the hidden layer represented the
dimensionality of the latent space. This space corresponds to the number of clusters
in the original method. Remember that the dictionary size is the number of clusters
K multiplied by the patch size squared, M 2.
Previously it has been stated that
up to a certain computational limit, a larger dictionary gives better segmentation
results. It was not possible to make the latent space very big because of computational
constraints. Even though a majority of the values in the biadjacency matrix were
filtered out it was not possible to make the latent space larger than 50-100 dimensions.
Filter and Scale – As the latent representation was not totally sparse, i.e. having
exact zeros, some filtering was needed.
If the latent representation was not very
sparse then the biadjacency matrix would also not be sparse and memory issues
could occur. Additionally, the matrix multiplication to obtain the probability map
shown in Eq. (2.4) would take more time. The filtering was done by selecting the
20 largest values in the latent space for each pixel and setting all other values to 0.
Further filtering removed all values below a certain threshold, which in this case was
.12
0
.21
.01
0
0
0
0
.98
.09
.08
.14
0
0
1
0
0
.31
0
0
.01
0
.03
.81
.41
.74
0.1
0.1
.04
.04
.11
.01
code
image
simple 
autoencoder
X
Y
the relations are ﬁ lled into 
the biadjacency matrix
3 patches shown put 
into already trained 
autoencoder. 
T ey are encoded 
into 8 dimensional 
sparse latent space. 
Each center pixel 
obtains a latent  
representiation which 
deﬁ nes the mapping to 
the dictionary.
the relation between image pixels and dictionary 
pixels is not exactly 0 and 1 and each image pixel 
might have less or more than M2 relations.
1 0 1 0    1 0 0         1 1
B
X Y
X Y
K
K M2
ﬁ lter and scale
duplicate M2  times
I
K = 8
Figure 5.1: The method for the simple autoencoder visualized. When the autoencoder has been trained,
patches are preprocessed and encoded to the latent representation (middle). The latent representation
defines the mapping to the dictionary elements such that similar image pixel get softly assigned the same
place in the dictionary. These mappings are filtered and scaled accordingly. Next, duplicating the matrix
M 2 times is done to utilize the averaging effect and obtain the relationships of the pixels around the center
pixel. Finally, the mappings are filled into the biadjacency matrix correspondingly.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Autoencoders with sparse latent representation
33
set to ξ = 1 × 10−3. In addition to the filtering, a scaling step was also introduced
because in some cases the dictionary pixel values became low. Scaling the values up
to 1 increased performance and robustness.
Preprocessing – Before training neural networks on images it is common practice
to apply some simple normalization steps to the images. The patches were normalized
by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the dataset prior to
training. This was mainly done to center the data around 0 which made the training
process more stable and the parameters of the method better generalized between
images.
Structure of the autoencoder – The autoencoder was simple with one hidden
layer between the input and output layers. The input and output layers were of size
M 2 equalling to a single vectorized patch. The number of nodes in the hidden layer
was set to 50, this was the dimensionality of the latent space. ReLU activation in the
hidden layer has been shown to encourage sparsity and was therefore chosen [60, 61].
No activation function was applied to the output layer because it needs to reconstruct
continuous values that can both be negative and positive. That also playerd a role in
why the mean squared error MSE was a good choice of cost function. The objective
function with the sparsity regularisers included is shown in Eq. (5.7):
E = MSE + β
s2
∑
j=1
KL (ρ ∥ˆρj) + λ||w(2)||2
(5.7)
Where KL stands for the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the average activation
( ˆρj) of a node j and the target sparsity parameter which was set to ρ = 0.001. s2 is
the number of nodes in the hidden layer. β = 1, controls the effect of the sparsity
regularization. Further λ = 0.0001 controls the L2 regularization of the weights in
the hidden layer. For more detail, the Kullback-Leibler sparsity term was previously
discussed in Section 3.2.2. The network was optimized with the Adadelta method
because it gave good results and no learning rate coefficient needed to be chosen and
tuned. Finally, all parameters were kept the same for all images.
5.3.2
Fine tune with a classifier
Taking the previous idea one step further was to incorporate the user labels into the
autoencoder. This was done by first training the autoencoder unsupervised as done
in Subsection 5.3.1. Then, only the encoder part was reused and its weights were fine
tuned by replacing the reconstruction output layer with a classification output layer
as shown in Figure 5.2. Thus, a patch with center (x, y) was the input to the network
and the classifier tried to classify the center pixel (x, y) to match the corresponding
pixel in the label image. The appropriate cost function for classification was the cross-
entropy error previously defined in Eq. (3.4). Therefore, the loss function was very
similar to Eq. (5.7) and is shown in Eq. (5.8) where CE stands for the cross-entropy
error. Note that the weights in the encoder were not fixed, i.e. they could be adjusted
and trained further.
==PAGE:48==
34
5 Exploration & Modifications
E = CE + β
s2
∑
j=1
KL (ρ ∥ˆρj) + λ||w(2)||2
(5.8)
There were three reasons why the two tasks, reconstructing the input and classify-
ing the labels, were not trained simultaneously. Firstly, as the user labels often just
covered a limited part of the image, the training data could become scarce. By first
training an autoencoder on the whole image it was ensured that sufficient training
data was present and it captured all the different structures in the image. Secondly,
after testing both alternatives there was no observable difference between training the
tasks simultaneously or separately. Lastly, separating the steps decreased the compu-
tational time for running multiple user labels. As done with the simple autoencoder,
the network was optimized with the Adadelta method. Further, the parameters for
the regularizers in Eq. (5.8) remained the same. The method of utilizing the latent
space to construct the biadjacency matrix remained the same as well.
input layer
input layer
input patch
simple autoencoder
encoder + classiﬁ er
input patch
reconstruction
classiﬁ cation
encoder
encoder
decoder
code
code
(x,y)
(x,y)
Figure 5.2: Two different network structures. (Left), a simple sparse autoencoder trained to reconstruct the
input. (Right), using the trained encoder and replace the reconstruction layer with a classification layer to
tune the encoder further. Number of nodes and patch size is arbitrary in this figure
5.4
Parameters
There were many different parameters in the original method as well as in the added
steps in the modifications. It was important that shared parameters stayed the same
between the methods for comparison. The only parameter that was included in all
methods was the patch size. In Table 5.1 the patch size for different images is pre-
sented.
The size of the patches should roughly capture the size of the objects of
interest. Additionally, the methods that include the weight models and the SIFT
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Parameters
35
Table 5.1: Patch size parameter shown for each image
Image
cells
cells2
nerve
nerve
zoom
onion
onion
20noise
Patch Size [M × M]
[7 × 7]
[5 × 5]
[7 × 7]
[9 × 9]
[9 × 9]
[9 × 9]
Image Size [X × Y ]
[696×520]
[512×512]
[400×400]
[400×300]
[400×300]
[400×300]
features share several parameters with the original model in contrast to the autoen-
coder method. Summary of those parameters is shown in Table 5.2 along with a short
description. As the autoencoder replaces step 1, 2 and 3 in the original method it
does not share any parameters with it. However, the code dimension is related to
the K number of clusters in the original method. The parameters for both weight
models were kept the same.
Likewise, both autoencoder models shared the same
parameters. The choice of some parameters was computationally constrained while
other parameters were guesstimated with respect to what generalized well with the
images and gave good results.
Table 5.2: Overview of the parameters in the methods. The top row shows the parameters shared between
the original, SIFT, and weight models. Middle row present the additional parameters needed in the weight
models. The bottom row lists the parameters for the autoencoder models.
Parameter
Value
Description
Methods: original, SIFT and weight models
Nr. of intital patches
5000
The number of random patches used in the clustering step
K (nr. of clusters)
500
The number of clusters used to make up the dictionary
Methods: weight models
Learning rate, η
0.6
The learning rate of the gradient descent
Threshold ϵ
10−4
The change in loss threshold determining the stopping criterion
Max iterations
300
Determines the maximum iterations in the optimization
Methods: autoencoder models
Code dimension
50
Related to Nr. of clusters parameter. It is the size of the
latent representation and determines the size of the dictionary.
Sparsity weight β
1
Controls the weight of the sparsity penalty term
Target sparsity, ρ
10−3
Determines the target average activation of each hidden neuron
Weight decay, λ
10−4
Weighs the relative contribution of the L2 regularizer towards
the overall loss
Filter threshold, ξ
10−3
Determines the threshold to which values below in the
biadjacency should be set to 0
Filter, B-largest
values
20
Determines how many largest values should be extracted from
the encoded representation
==PAGE:50==
36
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Results
This chapter will demonstrate and explain all the segmentation outcomes for each of
the previously described modifications of the original method. It will be split into two
sections. The objective results, where the performance metrics from Section 4.1 are
listed for each method. Then subjective results are presented, where segmentation
examples are subjectively evaluated for each algorithm. A summary of the compared
methods is found in Table 6.1. Each method has been given a name for reference
along with a short description. Additionally, their corresponding section number is
listed. All the methods were tested with 6 different images shown in Figure 4.1 on
page 26. Each image had different characteristics which were aimed to be captured.
Included in the figure is their reference name.
Table 6.1: All the methods tested along with the short name which they will be referred to in the upcoming
chapters.
Method
Description
Section
Original
The baseline method which all the developed variations
were compared to. Raw intensity patches were used as
features.
2.2
SIFT
Replaced raw intensity patches with SIFT features.
5.1
Simple-weight
Same weights applied to each dictionary pixel regardless of
class.
5.2
Class-weight
Weights trained for each class for each dictionary pixel.
5.2
SIFT+Simple-weight
Combining the SIFT features with simple-weight model.
-
SIFT+Class-weight
Combining the SIFT features with class-weight model.
-
AE
Simple autoencder trained and the latent represnation
used to create linear mappings.
5.3.1
AE + C
Tuning the encoder in the AE method by training a
classifier.
5.3.2
==PAGE:52==
38
6 Results
6.1
Objective evaluation
The mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) was measured over 20 repeated attempts
with random user labels. The results for all methods and images are listed in Table
6.2 along with the average performance for each method. The maximum and mini-
mum mIoU are also reported in the table to demonstrate the variability of different
random user labels, i.e. how sensitive the method was to the user labels. Further,
the computation time was measured as preprocessing time and propagation time for
each case. This is displayed in Table 6.3 as the total computation time with the
propagation time. The overall time for all images is given as well. For readability,
the objective results are specified for each method separately.
SIFT – On average the computational time was approximately twice as long for
the SIFT method compared to the original method. The preprocessing time increased
for larger images. From Table 6.2 we notice that for some images the SIFT method
performed slightly better than the original method but for other images it did not.
The SIFT method performed better on images where the intensity did not distinct
the classes clearly. These images included the nerve image, the nerve zoom image,
and the onion 20noise image. Further, the SIFT method was sensitive to inadequate
user labels as can be seen from the low minimum value of the mIoU for the cells2
image.
Simple-weights and class-weights – Overall, on average, the simple-weight
model performed the best of the modified methods. Though not outperforming the
original method. The class-weight model on average performed similarly or worse than
the simple-weight model. In addition, the class-weight model was more sensitive to
the label image. The weight models outperformed the original method for the same
images that the SIFT method scored well on. In regards to computation time, the
weight models required more computational time to run than the original model.
The high computational time was mainly because of the propagation time being high.
Overall, a small accuracy gain and with increased computation time.
For the cases where the SIFT features were combined with the weight models,
the mIoU accuracy between all the SIFT and SIFT + simple-weight methods were
almost the same. Therefore, combining the weight models with the SIFT features did
not add anything to the regular SIFT method. The SIFT + class-weight model was
the least of the SIFT methods considering the mIoU and the large range between the
maximum and minimum values. In addition, the combination of weights plus SIFT
required much more computation power than the other methods mentioned so far.
AE and AE + C – The autoencoder methods performed the worst in comparison
with the other tested methods. These two methods were the most time consuming
methods as seen in Table 6.3. Along the same line, AE + C exceeded AE in running
time. Tuning the encoder (AE + C) gave clear advantage over the simple AE method.
The only image that did not benefit from the classifier was the cells2 image. Both
methods could fail drastically as is observed from the minimum mIoU of the cells
image for AE + C and the onion 20noise image for the simple AE method.
==PAGE:53==
6.2 Subjective evaluation
39
Table 6.2: Accuracy of each method and image measured as mean IoU. Further the maximum and mini-
mum value of the iterations is given below as (max,min)
Method
cells
cells2
nerve
nerve
zoom
onion
onion
20noise
Average
Original
78
(80,76)
97
(97,96)
59
(64,56)
60
(61,58)
97
(98,95)
78
(79,76)
78
SIFT
72
(74,69)
64
(85,50)
67
(70,64)
65
(69,58)
87
(89,84)
81
(83,77)
73
Simple-weights
79
(80,77)
97
(97,96)
62
(66,56)
54
(61,37)
97
(98,97)
81
(83,78)
78
Class-weights
66
(75,54)
67
(81,57)
65
(67,63)
50
(59,39)
97
(98,96)
82
(83,81)
71
SIFT + simple-weights
73
(75,71)
63
(80,53)
66
(68,63)
67
(71,61)
86
(88,84)
79
(82,76)
72
SIFT + class-weights
71
(74,68)
56
(81,47)
61
(63,59)
50
(53,48)
85
(87,80)
79
(80,76)
67
AE
60
(62,58)
87
(89,82)
36
(45,28)
44
(48,27)
60
(61,59)
10
(24,01)
50
AE + C
64
(76,24)
81
(86,75)
63
(66,61)
48
(58,27)
83
(86,82)
62
(65,57)
67
Table 6.3: Computation time for each method-image pair in seconds. The overall computation time is
shown, i.e. Preprocess time plus propagation time. Then the propagation time is reported as well in the
bracket. Additionally total time is given summarized over all images.
Method
cells
cells2
nerve
nerve
zoom
onion
onion
20noise
Sum
Original
10 (0.8)
4 (0.3)
15 (0.3)
19 (0.3)
7 (0.1)
10 (0.2)
63
SIFT
39 (0.6)
25 (0.3)
19 (0.3)
17 (0.3)
10 (0.1)
17 (0.1)
127
Simple-weights
24 (14.4)
9 (5.2)
27 (12.0)
50 (32.1)
10 (4.3)
14 (4.9)
133
Class-weights
18 (7.6)
7 (3.1)
19 (4.4)
22 (4.3)
8 (2.1)
11 (2.7)
84
SIFT + simple-weights
63 (17.9)
11 (5.6)
38 (13.0)
51 (34.7)
19 (4.6)
22 (5.0)
204
SIFT + class-weights
44 (7.0)
25 (3.3)
23 (3.7)
21 (3.7)
15 (2.2)
18 (2.4)
146
AE
99 (7.6)
48 (2.1)
41 (1.5)
24 (0.5)
34 (1.9)
54 (5.7)
301
AE + C
123 (74.8)
83 (47.0)
63 (30.7)
43 (21.8)
45 (27.0)
44 (25.1)
400
6.2
Subjective evaluation
The mIoU does not provide information on how the methods capture certain struc-
tures or if some classes are predicted better than others. Here a general description of
the resulting segmentation is given for each method. In addition, example segmenta-
tions are shown to support the evaluation. In Appendix C the resulting segmentations
for each method is shown for all images tested.
==PAGE:54==
40
6 Results
6.2.1
SIFT
Applying SIFT features showed improvements for some images but not all.
The
SIFT method showed higher accuracy when the image was texture heavy.
As an
example, in Figure 6.1 the original and the SIFT method are compared for the cells
and nerve image. The main noticeable disadvantage of the SIFT features was that it
misclassified background regions between objects in the image, see Figure 6.1b and
6.1d. However, by comparing Figure 6.1c with 6.1d we see that the SIFT method was
able to distinguish between the inside and outside of the nerves even though those
regions have the same intensity levels. For some places in Figure 6.1b the boundaries
between adjacent cells were captured but the boundary segmentation was irregular
compared to the original method in Figure 6.1a.
a Original – mIoU: 0.78 – Cells
b SIFT – mIoU: 0.69 – Cells
c Original – mIoU: 0.56 – Nerves
d SIFT – mIoU: 0.69 – Nerves
Figure 6.1: Results illustrating the main difference between the original method and the SIFT method. The
SIFT is able to capture the inside of the nerve cells despite it being of the same intensity value as the outside.
However, there are more artifacts inbetween objects for the SIFT method.
==PAGE:55==
6.2 Subjective evaluation
41
6.2.2
Weight models
The probability image can be viewed in Figure 6.2 for the nerve image. There is
more distinction between class probabilities for the class-weight model (bottom row)
compared to the original model (top row). This is especially clear to see by looking
at the images in the middle column. Those images show the probabilities for the
class that represents the inside of the nerve cells. The distinction between the inside
(middle column images) and the outside (leftmost images) for the original method
was vague. In contrast, for both the simple-weight and the class-weight models, there
was a greater distinction. This is also observable on the color range in the color bar to
the right of the images. The inside of the cell was best captured with the class-weight
model.
In Figure 6.3 we observe the segmentation of the cells image for the simple-weight
and the class-weight model. In some cases the class-weight model was overfitting the
weights to the classes. This led to an incorrect classification as can be noted in Figure
6.3b where the white dashed rectangle represents the location of the training samples
from the random user labels. This overfitting did not occur for the simple-weight
model. The overfitting is the reason why the class-weight has low mIoU accuracy and
low minimum values.
The segmentation for the nerve zoom image is shown in Figure 6.4 comparing
all the SIFT weight models with the regular SIFT method. The best segmentation
for each method was chosen to be displayed. The class-weight model in all cases
gave worse results than the regular SIFT method similar to what Figure 6.4c shows.
Further, there was little benefit training the simple-weight as can be seen when com-
paring Figure 6.4a and 6.4b. The weights were not able to adjust the dictionary to
compensate for the artifacts. Rather, the same overfitting as previously discussed is
visible in Figure 6.4d where the probability map for the nerve zoom image is shown
when it was segmented with the SIFT + class-weight model. In the lower right corner
is an area of probabilities values that are very close to 1 or 0. This is where the user
labels were marked. This same area is correctly classified in Figure 6.4c of result-
ing segmentation for the probability map. There is no doubt that the class-weight
method overfitted the model to the user labels.
==PAGE:56==
42
6 Results
a Original – mIoU: 0.56 – Nerves
b Simple-weight – mIoU: 0.64 – Nerves
c Class-weight – mIoU: 0.66 – Nerves
Figure 6.2: Resulting probability images of the nerve cells for the original, simple-weight and class-weight
models. From left to right the classes are: outside of the cells, inside of the cells, and the cells themselves.
Notice that the probability entropy, indicated by the color bar, decreases from top to bottom. Training the
dictionary results in the model becoming more certain and is able to capture the inside of the nerve cell in
some cases.
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Subjective evaluation
43
a Simple-weight – mIoU: 0.79 – Cells
b Class-weight – mIoU: 0.61 – Cells
Figure 6.3: Comparison of the weight models. The white dashed line indicates the location of random user
label of the true segmentation used, i.e. the label image. The class-weight segmentation is inaccurate in
areas where the user label was not marked. This implies overfitting. This is not the case for the simple-weight
model.
a SIFT – mIoU: 0.68 – Nerve
zoom
b SIFT
+
Simple-weight
–
mIoU: 0.70 – Nerve zoom
c SIFT + Class-weight – mIoU:
0.62 – Nerve zoom
d Probability map for the segmentation shown in 6.4c here above to the right.
Figure 6.4: Comparing the weight models when SIFT descriptors are used as features. The best instance
of segmentation was chosen for each method. Overfitting is clearly visible in the lower right corner on the
probability map in the bottom row. Very small difference is between training simple-weight model and using
no weights.
==PAGE:58==
44
6 Results
6.2.3
Autoencoder
In objective evaluation the simple autoencoder had the lowest mIoU accuracy. How-
ever, for some cases, simply using the encoder to encode the patches into the dictio-
nary gave visually fair results. In Figure 6.6 we see the simple AE segmentation for
the cells, nerve, and onion image in the left column. The basic structure was some-
times captured although some regions contained grained texture, see for example the
edges of the cells in Figure 6.6a. For other images, the method was not able to predict
correctly as can be seen for example in Figure 6.6c where the third class is not even
visible. In addition, some probability images showed that not all pixels were assigned
to a dictionary value. Take for an example Figure 6.5 of the probability map of the
nerve zoom image. The same pixels have zero probability for all classes indicating
that these pixels were not connected in any way to a dictionary and thus the values
from label image not propagated to them.
By tuning the autoencoder (AE + C) the results became a little better but still not
to the same level as the other methods mentioned. For this reason, it is interesting
to focus on the improvement from the simple autoencoder and therefore the same
images are chosen to be displayed. The results can be viewed in the right column of
Figure 6.6 where the best results of each iteration are shown. The inside of the nerve
was predicted correctly as seen in Figure 6.6d though the edges were still grainy. In
Figure 6.6b of the cells all graininess is gone and some cells that were missing for the
AE method are now visible. Similarly, missing pixel probabilities in the AE method
were correctly identified with the AE + C when looking at the comparison of the
onion image in Figure 6.6e and 6.6f.
a AE – mIoU: 0.68 – Probability images for Nerve zoom
Figure 6.5: Probability image of the nerve zoom image with the simple AE method. Some probability image
pixels are missing (dark regions in all images) meaning that they have no relation to the dictionary pixels.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Subjective evaluation
45
a AE – mIoU: 0.61 – Cells
b AE + C – mIoU: 0.76 – Cells
c AE – mIoU: 0.40 – Nerve
d AE + C – mIoU: 0.66 – Nerve
e AE – mIoU: 0.61 – Onion
f AE + C – mIoU: 0.85 – Onion
Figure 6.6: Example segmentation result for the simple autoencoder (AE) and when it has been tuned with
a classifier (AE + C). Tuning the autoencoder shows good segmentation results.
==PAGE:60==
46
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
Although the suggested methods did not outperform the original method, there were
interesting discoveries made as well as areas identified that have the potential to
be investigated further. We will discuss the results of the experiments listed in the
previous chapter and reflect on limitations. We will address the benefits and draw-
backs for each modification as well as mentioning problems encountered during this
project. Each method will be addressed separately for readability but before that
an important observation has to be mentioned in regards to the systematic testing
pipeline.
7.1
User labels
The experimental pipeline was designed such that each method could be tested sys-
tematically and be unbiased towards the user labels. Each method ran multiple times
with the same random rectangles drawn from a ground truth image to be used as input.
However, this approach has certain drawbacks because the resulting segmentation is
strongly affected by how and where the user input is drawn. For example, if there
was a large bias field in the image, the user labels might not be propagated correctly
from one end of the bias field to the other end because the labels are drawn locally
in these experiments. Furthermore, a random rectangle can cut off a whole object
in an image or only capture certain shapes. This is evident in Figure 7.1 where the
effects of poor user labels are demonstrated. The class imbalance of the user labels
has a clear effect on the segmentation result. An attempt was made to compensate
for this, by constraining the randomly drawn rectangles to include at least 10% of
each class. However, these automatically drawn user labels do not come close to true
interactive user labelling by a person. It would be interesting investigating this fur-
ther by comparing true user labels and automatic user labels to see what the impact
is. One solution for better automatic user labels is to create a set of true user labels
that capture whole objects and have a balance between the classes. Then, a certain
amount of user labels would be uniformly drawn from this set, located across the
image. This would be a cumbersome process but it would potentially fix the class
imbalance, the local effect, and the object cut off issue.
==PAGE:62==
48
7 Discussion
a The user label, a random rectangle
drawn from the ground truth.
b Resulting segmentation of Nerve Zoom
using the SIFT method
Figure 7.1: An example segmentation illustrating what effect the user label has on the resulting segmentation.
Notice how the same irregular shape and the cutoff in the label image is reappearing in the segmentation
to the right.
7.2
SIFT
Introducing the SIFT descriptors as features instead of raw pixel intensities is some-
thing that had already been tested out with the original method. The segmentation
on the nerve image obtained here with the SIFT features shows similar results as in
Dahl et. al [19]. The SIFT features are of benefit when the objects in the image are
defined by texture and context rather than raw intensity. The effect is clear when
looking at the results of the cells image and the nerve image in Figure 6.1 on page
40. The inside of the nerve cell is predicted correctly even though it has the same
intensity level as the outside. Further, the outline of adjacent cells in the cells image
is better predicted by the sift features but the overall segmentation is clearer for the
original method. The major drawback of using the SIFT features is present for re-
gions where the image gradients are very small. This is believed to be the reason why
we see these misclassifications (artifacts) in the space between objects in the images.
See, for example, Figure 7.2 where the 2 class image, cells2, is segmented with the
SIFT features. This makes the assignment part ambiguous which results in wrong
segmentation when the user labels are not ideal. The fact that the image gradients
are small, in conjunction with the fact that SIFT features are high-dimensional (128
long vector) makes the clustering part challenging. What is evident is that the fea-
tures used in the original method do matter. Other features were not considered in
this experiment but could be a reasonable idea to investigate further.
7.3
Weight models
The weight models were applied to the original method as well as in combination with
the SIFT features. The weight models performed similarly on the SIFT features as
==PAGE:63==
7.3 Weight models
49
a The cells2 image
b Bad segmentation with the SIFT
method
Figure 7.2: The cells2 image along with a bad 2 class segmentation. The invariability in the user labels as well
as challenging clustering of SIFT features is the reason for theses results.
well as the raw intensity pixel and hence the same discussion applies to both features.
The weight models in some cases improved the original method. It required extra
propagation time to learn the weights, i.e. the time it takes to apply the user labels
and get results. This time depended on the optimization of the weight models which
then depended on the number of dictionary elements, i.e. patch size and number
of clusters. This is the reason why the number of clusters was not higher than 500.
Since the method is interactive, it is favourable to keep the propagation time to a
minimum. Considering the maximum and minimum mIoU in Table 6.2 the weights
models are sensitive towards the user labels which indicated overfitting. The class-
weight method was able to show better improvements but was also more unstable
than the simple-weight model.
The initialization of the weights had a big impact on the results. Sampling the
initial weights from a normal distribution around 0 with some standard deviation
did sometimes make the optimization unstable, i.e. the gradients blew up. If all the
weights are set to 1 the weight matrix W1 is identity matrix and the model ends
up as the original model. This fact explains why sampling the initial weights from
a normal distribution, µ = 1 and σ = 0.5, gave good results without the gradients
blowing up.
The most distinctive characteristic of the weight models is that the entropy of
the probability map decreases, i.e. the pixel probabilities become more concentrated
towards 0 and 1.
This is expected since the optimized cost function is the cross-
entropy error.
We can see this in Figure 6.2 in the previous chapter where the
colorbar on the side indicates the probability values in the images. For the case of
the class-weight model in Figure 6.2c we can see in the middle image that the inside
of the nerve cells is distinguishable. This attribute, the concentrated probability map,
is of importance when evaluating which regions in the image the model is uncertain
==PAGE:64==
50
7 Discussion
about and might need more labelling.
In comparison to the original method, the class-weight model improves exactly
those images that the SIFT features showed to be of benefit. That indicates that the
weight model is able to learn structures that the original model cannot. Nevertheless,
by looking at the minimum values in Table 6.2 for the class-weight method we observe
that sometimes the method does not perform very well, thus it is unstable. This can
be explained by the fact that the class-weight model is overfitting to the training labels
as can be noted in Figure 6.3b. Prevention of overfitting has been widely discussed.
Standard solutions include obtaining more training data [62], applying early stopping
[63], and introducing regularizing terms into the objective function [64]. The training
labels here are limited and there is no way to obtain more training data. Subsequently,
for early stopping the labelled data needs to be split into training and test data. This
is not feasible due to the fact that there are so few labelled points and those points
all come from the same local environment in the image. In regards to regularizing
the model, this was attempted with L2 and L1 regularizers but without success. We
believe this is partly due to the fact that this optimization problem is not typical.
The weights are neutral at 1 but not 0 as discussed with respect to the initialization.
A regularizer would need to be designed with those characteristics in mind.
Overall, there is no obvious benefit of training the weights. Even though there
is a small performance increase for some images it is not worth the extra time that
it takes to train the weights. Especially since the training phase happens after the
user has labelled the image. If this method is supposed to stay interactive, the time
from the user drawing the labels until the user obtains the segmentation has to be
kept to a minimum. Still, if the class-weight model can be regularized to become
more stable and not overfit training the weights might be a reasonable option in the
method. To further expand on this idea, the training step might be considered as
an optional choice in the method that can be applied as the last step. For example,
the user would draw the labels, get some segmentation, and then redraw regions that
are classified incorrectly. If adding more user labels does not improve the resulting
segmentation to acceptable standards the user might decide, as a last resort, to train
weights in the model and get an improved result. Under those circumstances, the
training time would not be a drawback because the interactive part would be over.
7.4
Autoencoder methods
Probably the most interesting discovery in regards to this method is that we are
able to create the mapping between the dictionary pixels and the image pixels by
training a sparse autoencoder. Even though this method has the lowest mIoU and
is relatively unstable, the results in Figure 6.6a show that the method is able to
capture the structure and predict all classes.
However, the main setback of this
simple method is twofold. First of all, it is sensitive to any changes in parameters
which have to be tuned precisely. Additionally, as seen in Figure 6.5 some pixels are
not classified. It can be seen that the pixel probabilities do not add up to 1. This can
==PAGE:65==
7.4 Autoencoder methods
51
be explained by the fact that the relations (links) between the image pixels and the
dictionary pixels are missing for these image pixels. Additionally, the averaging effect
of overlapping pixels is not enough to compensate for this. The relation is encoded
with the latent representation meaning that either these missing relations are lost
through the filtering step or the autoencoder is not able to learn the specific patches
around these pixels.
It is remarkable how much the AE method improves when it is combined with
a simple classifier. This is clearly seen in Table 6.2 and in Figure 6.6. The latent
representation captures the relations between the pixels in the image grid and the
dictionary grid better. Even the pixels inside of the nerve cells are correctly classi-
fied to some extent as shown in Figure 6.6d. There is still some graininess in the
segmentation of the AE + C method which is probably due to the assignments being
soft but not hard as in the original method. Despite the fair visual results of this
method it is also worth mentioning that this modification is the slowest one tested.
The computation time could be decreased by adding a relevant stopping criterion but
was not implemented at this time.
Architecture and design choices – Different types of network architectures
and variations were tried out for the autoencoder. For example, stacked autoencoder
[39], and convolutional autoencoder [65]. However, after some experiments, it was
clear that a simple autoencoder was a reasonable choice of architecture. The fact
that the image patches were rather small meant that multilayer networks (deep) or
convolutional networks were too complex. What is more, by having the architecture
simple, computation time decreased drastically. This is a benefit as the method is
supposed to be quick. By simplifying the network there were fewer parameters and
decisions to be made that could influence the method, which in turn made it easier
to generalize the model between images. The drawback of a simple autoencoder is
that for larger patches, e.g. above 13 in size (M > 13), the network did not have
the capacity to make correct assignment in the latent representation. The capacity
could have been increased by adding more nodes to the hidden layer but it was
computationally infeasible. The choice of activation and loss functions were motivated
by recent studies of autoencoders for image reconstruction and classification [43, 58].
However, there is not one golden standard design for an autoencoder, it depends
on the problem and the available data.
Therefore, it was mostly the outcome of
experiments that determined the design choices.
Hyperparameters – It is common to tune the hyperparameters of a neural
network to increase the performance of the network model at a certain task. The
hyperparameters of a network are, for example, the number of hidden nodes, the
sparsity parameters, the learning rate, etc.
For this model, we want to tune the
hyperparameters such that it generalizes well between images while having high accu-
racy. In other words, we do not tune the hyperparameters for a single image. In order
to tune the hyperparameters, a validation set is required. That set, would need to
include substantial amount of training images. Furthermore, the AE+C model splits
into two phases, the reconstruction and the classification phase. A disadvantage of
having two separate training phases is that each phase has its own hyperparameters.
==PAGE:66==
52
7 Discussion
Thus, there is a delay between tuning the hyperparameters in the first phase and
getting feedback from the second phase. A manual search (trial and error) of the
hyperparameters was conducted for the models. Experimenting with the hyperpa-
rameters was a lengthy process and required attention and patience. The main focus
was to determine hyperparameters that worked so it is more than likely that the
hyperparameters chosen were sub-optimal which can factor into the reason why the
autoencoder models under-performed. The same hyperparameters were chosen for all
images (reported in Section 5.3) for a fair comparison between the methods.
Code dimension vs Filtering – As touched upon before, there were computa-
tional constraints when it came to the number of nodes (the code dimension) in the
hidden layer. The reason being that the biadjacency became denser. To solve this
issue a filtering step was added, removing low values and selecting only the N largest
elements in the latent representation. However, this led to some relations between
the image pixels and the dictionary pixel to disappear. Small code dimension and less
filtering gave better results than large code dimension and more filtering. Thus, the
trade-off was made by decreasing the code dimension, therefore lowering the capacity
of the networks, in order to filter less and ensure that most probability pixels got
classified.
Promising steps towards improvement – The downsides of the AE+C method
are instability, occasional noisy segmentations, missing pixel relations, and hyperpa-
rameter tuning. To address noisy segmentation and missing pixel relation, the latent
representation needs to be clear and concrete such that the filtering step will not
affect the results so much. It boils down to a couple of factors like the capacity of the
autoencoder (ability to capture complex patterns), sparsity of the latent space and
how much filtering is done. A feasible solution that has the potential to solve these
factors, is to utilize a K-sparse autoencoder [66]. In a K-sparse autoencoder, only the
k largest elements in the hidden layer are used for the reconstruction of the input data.
In that way, the autoencoder would achieve exact sparsity and a filtering step would
not be necessary. Further, there would be no need to tune the β parameter for the
KL sparsity constraint. Though better results cannot be guaranteed, this suggestion
is promising and worth testing out.
Moreover, the supervised learning process considered when tuning the autoencoder
can be altered to fit better with the actual pixel classification of the original model.
As the setup is now, a network classifier is trained to predict the center pixel given
a patch around it. This network classifier is trained by tuning and adjusting the
weights of the encoder, thereafter the network classifier is discarded and the encoder
is used to create mappings for the transformation matrices. The point is, the encoder
is tuned for the network classification task but not for the actual pixel classification
of the original model. Thus, one suggestion is to tune the encoder and further train it
by backpropagating the error of the resulting predictions that come from propagating
the user labels through the transformation matrices. Even so, this is not as easy as
it sounds, since all the mappings are interlinked in the transformation matrices i.e.
they all depend on each other. What follows is that it is impractical to feed forward a
single patch and backpropagate the error and adjust the weights. Instead, all patches
==PAGE:67==
7.4 Autoencoder methods
53
would need to be propagated at the same time which increases the computation
complexity substantially.
One way to solve this is to update the transformation
matrices recurrently but not in every iteration. For example, after a specific number
of iterations in the optimization, the transformation matrices are updated based on
all the patches. Next, the weights in the encoder will be trained to minimize the
loss between the output probabilities from the transformation matrices and the true
labels for some iterations and then the transformation matrices are updated again
and so forth. This would reduce the amount of times the transformation matrices
would need to be computed and still update the weights in the encoder.
At this
point though, nothing can be stated about the stability or efficiency of this approach.
This idea would need some theoretical confirmation, nevertheless, it is a reasonable
concept to further investigate.
To summarize the AE models, a proof of concept demonstrated the feasibility of
training an autoencoder for the task of creating a dictionary. Most of the performance
obtained in the results is a function of the choice of architecture and parameters of
the autoencoders, suggesting that these are the key areas for further analysis and
improvements.
==PAGE:68==
54
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this work, the main goal has been to incorporate supervised learning elements to an
interactive method in order to improve its performance. The interactive method has
proven useful for segmenting microscopic images that illustrate repeating patterns.
Regardless, the user provided labels are not exploited to the fullest in the method.
That motivated the need to explore the feasibility of leveraging the information in
the user label to get better segmentation results. Three modifications to the method
were proposed. One exploring the effect of SIFT features and the other two exploiting
the user labels in a supervised fashion
First, we focused on the interactive method itself in order to get an understanding
of what aspects of the method could be altered.
Thereafter, relevant theory was
presented such that the reader could comprehend the modifications. A systematic
approach was taken to analyze the performance of each method by measuring the
mean intersection over union and the computation time. Images from industry as
well as synthetically created images were tested. The systematic approach did not
imitate real world user annotations but was successful in showing that some of the
modifications were sensitive towards specific labelling choices.
The explicit features provided to the original method play a big role in the seg-
mentation result. This is evident when the segmentation classes are not clearly repre-
sented by the intensity levels of the image. In those images, the SIFT features proved
to be superior to the raw pixel values of the original method. The first supervised
modification proposed involved assigning weights to the dictionary pixels in two dif-
ferent ways. The weight models were successfully trained and demonstrated that they
captured the information in the training labels. In some cases, they showed better
performance than the original method. However, the weight models also displayed
overfitting which resulted in faulty segmentation and more sensitivity towards the
user labels. We argue that standard ways of solving overfitting cannot be applied
and more specialized regularization has to be formulated and carried out. Though,
with this approach, it will be difficult to fulfil the requirement of real-time process-
ing (interactivity). It is proposed that this technique can be an optional step to be
applied at the end of the user labelling.
The second supervised modification suggested was to utilize a sparse autoencoder
to encode mappings between the image grid and the dictionary. The autoencoder
was trained to reconstruct the patches in the image as well as classify the class labels
from the input. We validated the viability of the technique by showing successful seg-
==PAGE:70==
56
8 Conclusion
mentation results by only training the autoencoder in an unsupervised manner. The
performance of the integrated autoencoder was moderate but showed the potential to
be improved. The results were sensitive to hyperparameters and architecture of the
network which needs to be explored more. In addition, we believe the method can
be enhanced by forming the supervised objective function differently. Specifically,
train the encoder to predict the pixel probabilities from the transformation matrices
constructed from the latent representations.
Overall, we have shown that the thesis objective was partly reached. We success-
fully implemented supervised methods that incorporated the information in given
labels. Unfortunately, the proposed methods did not outperform the original robust
method. We believe that additional experiments would be beneficial to generalize our
findings. With a deeper understanding of the interactive dictionary-based method,
and insight into the limitations and potentials of the modifications, there are oppor-
tunities for further research and continued development of the method.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Partial derivatives
This appendix describes the optimization and partial derivatives for the weight mod-
els detailed in Section 5.2. There are two models that we want to optimize. There
is small difference in how the partial derivatives are computed. This appendix will
be split into two sections, one for each model. First some notation is explained for
clarification.
Only a labelled part of the total pixels in the image are used for learning the
weights. Thus a sub-sample of the pixel is used in the optimization and all matrices
need to be indexed correspondingly. In Section 5.2 the indexed matrices were marked
with υ. For this section we leave this notation out. Furthermore we assume that the
number of labelled pixels are N which previously was defined as u. The number of
dictionary pixels will be defined as M, previously this was number was defined as
m = KM 2 and should not to be confused with patch size M. Finally, C defines the
total number of classes. The objective function that we want to optimize is the cross
entropy error:
E(W) = −
N
∑
n=1
C
∑
i=1
tn,i ln pn,i
(A.1)
where W are the weights that are to be optimized. t is the true label and p is the
probability output of the model.
A.1
One weight for each dictionary element
The model is defined as:
P
N×C = σ
[
T2
N×M × W1
M×M × T1
M×N ×
L
N×C
]
= σ
[
T2
N×M × W1
M×M ×
D
M×C
]
= σ
[
Y
N×C
]
(A.2)
Where T1 and T2 are the transformation matrices, mapping from the image grid to
the dictionary elements and vice versa. The matrix L contains the user labels in one
==PAGE:72==
58
A Partial derivatives
hot encoded format. The term D = T1L is used to decrease lengthy equation. The
matrix, W1 holds the elements of the vector w diagonally (diag(w)). The vector
is M long. Finally Y is shown as the model before putting it through the softmax
function, σ. Writing out the matrix multiplication for Y, a single observation looks
like:
yi =
M
∑
m=1
(
T2mwm
N
∑
n=1
T1m,nLn,i
)
=
M
∑
m=1
T2mwmDm,i
(A.3)
Taking the softmax function into account the the overall model for a single observation
is.
pi =
exp(yi)
∑C
k=1 exp(yk)
This p is the same as defined in the loss function above in Eq. (A.1), for a single
observation the cross entropy is.
En = −
C
∑
i=1
ti ln pi
The gradient with respect to a single weight j will be:
∂En
∂wj
= −
C
∑
i=1
ti
∂ln (pi)
∂wj
= −
C
∑
i=1
ti
1
pi
∂pi
∂wj
= −
C
∑
i=1
ti
1
pi
∂
exp(yi)
∑C
k=1 exp(yk)
∂yi
∂yi
∂wj
= −
C
∑
i=1
ti
1
pi
pi (1 −pi) ∂yi
∂wj
= −
C
∑
i=1
ti (1 −pi) T2jDj,i
(A.4)
In the last step the expression ∂yi
∂wj
is easily derived by looking at Eq. (A.3). The
gradient for all observations is:
∂E
∂wj
= −
N
∑
n=1
( C
∑
i=1
tn,i (1 −pn,i) T2n,jDj,i
)
==PAGE:73==
A.2 One weight for each class per dictionary element
59
which can be written in matrix notation as:
∂E(w)
∂w
= −
[(
D ⊙
(
T2
T × (L ⊙(1N×C −P))
))
× 1C×1
]
= −
[(
(T1L) ⊙
(
T2
T × (L ⊙(1N×C −P))
))
× 1C×1
]
Where P is the output matrix of the softmax function. The true labels tn,i are in
fact the input label image and are represented as L, in a one-hot encoded fashion.
Additionally, ⊙represents the Hadamard product (elementwise multiplication) and 1
is a matrix filled with ones of the given size.
A.2
One weight for each class per dictionary element
The only change from the previous section is that instead of having one weight for
each dictionary element there is one weight for each class per dictionary element,
meaning that the weight matrix W2 will be of size M × C. The partial derivative
also changes. The main model will be:
P
N×C = σ
[
T2
N×M ×
(
W
M×C ⊙
(
T1
M×N ×
L
N×C
))]
= σ
[
T2
N×M ×
(
W
M×C ⊙
(
D
M×C
))]
= σ [Y]
(A.5)
where ⊙represents the Hadamard product (elementwise multiplication). As done
above we write out the matrix multiplication:
yi =
M
∑
m=1
(
T2mwm,i
N
∑
n=1
T1m,nLn,i
)
Taking the softmax function into account the the overall model for a single observation
is.
pi =
exp(yi)
∑C
k=1 exp(yk)
This p is the same as defined in the loss function above in Eq. (A.1), for a single
observation the cross entropy is.
En = −
C
∑
i=1
ti ln pi
To be able to compute
∂E
∂wj,i , the following two partial derivatives must be determined:
∂En
∂yi and
∂yi
∂wj,i . Furthermore, in order to compute the partial derivative of the cross
==PAGE:74==
60
A Partial derivatives
entropy with respect to the softmax input ( ∂En
∂yi ) it is a good idea to first show how
the partial derivative of the softmax function is derived:
∂ph
yi
=









∂pi
∂yi
=
∂eyi
ΣC
∂yi
= eyiΣC −eyieyi
Σ2
C
= eyi
ΣC
ΣC −eyi
ΣC
= eyi
ΣC
(1 −eyi
ΣC
)
if h = i
∂pj
∂yi
=
∂eyj
ΣC
∂yi
= 0 −eyieyj
Σ2
C
= −eyi
ΣC
eyj
ΣC
if h = j
=







∂pi
∂yi
= pi(1 −pi)
if h = i
∂pj
∂yi
= −pipj
if h = j
(A.6)
Where ΣC = ∑C
k=1 exp(yk). Now ∂En
∂yi is computed as:
∂En
∂yi
= −
C
∑
j=1
∂tj log(pj)
∂yi
= −
C
∑
j=1
tj
∂log(pj)
∂yi
= −
C
∑
j=1
tj
1
pj
∂pj
∂yi
= −ti
pi
∂pi
∂yi
−
C
∑
j̸=i
tj
pj
∂pj
∂yi
= −ti
pi
pi(1 −pi) −
C
∑
j̸=i
tj
pj
(−pjpi)
= −ti + tipi +
C
∑
j̸=i
tjpi = −ti +
C
∑
j=1
tjpi = −ti + pi
C
∑
j=1
tj
= pi −ti
(A.7)
where the partial derivatives of the softmax function in Eq. (A.6) are shown in orange.
Furthermore, the partial derivative of
∂yi
∂wj,i give:
∂yi
∂wj,i
=
∂∑M
m=1
(
T2mwm,i
∑N
n=1 T1m,nLn,i
)
∂wj
=
M
∑
m=1
∂
(
T2mwm,i
∑N
n=1 T1m,nLn,i
)
∂wj
=
∂
(
T2jwj
∑N
n=1 T1j,nLn,i
)
∂wj
= T2j
N
∑
n=1
T1j,nLn,i
(A.8)
==PAGE:75==
A.2 One weight for each class per dictionary element
61
Finally for a single observation the partial derivative for the loss function with respect
to weight wj,i will be:
∂En
∂wj,i
= ∂En
∂yi
∂yi
∂wj,i
= (pi −ti) ∗T2j
N
∑
n=1
T1j,nLn,i = (pi −ti) ∗T2j ∗Dj,i
for all observations it is:
∂E
∂wj,i
=
N
∑
n=1
(pn,i −tn,i) ∗T2n,j ∗Dj,i
In matrix notation this is:
∂E(W2)
∂W2
=
[
D ⊙
(
T2
T × (P −L)
)]
=
[
(T1L) ⊙
(
T2
T × (P −L)
)]
(A.9)
Where P is the output matrix of the softmax function. The true labels tn,i are in
fact the input label image and are represented as L, in a one-hot encoded fashion.
==PAGE:76==
62
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Testing images
a cells
b Ground truth
Figure B.1: Human HT29 colon cancer cells and ground truth with 3 classes
a nerve zoom
b Ground truth
Figure B.2: Zoomed image of nerve cells
==PAGE:78==
64
B Testing images
a cells2
b Ground truth
Figure B.3: Image of synthetic clustered nuclei
a nerve
b Ground truth
Figure B.4: Image of nerve cells
==PAGE:79==
B Testing images
65
a onion
b onion 20noise
c Ground truth
Figure B.5: Synthetic image inspired by onion cells. Left image has 2% noise while the right image has 20%
noise. Ground truth shown at the bottom
==PAGE:80==
66
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C
Segmentation results
The resulting segmentation are shown in this appendix. All images are shown for
each method such that the reader can compare the methods. The final segmentation
is shown and the image with the highest mIoU is chosen for each method.
==PAGE:82==
68
C Segmentation results
a Original
b SIFT
c Simple-weights
d Class-weights
e SIFT + Simple-weights
f SIFT + Class-weights
g AE
h AE + C
Figure C.1: Cells image compared for all methods.
==PAGE:83==
C Segmentation results
69
a Original
b SIFT
c Simple-weights
d Class-weights
e SIFT + Simple-weights
f SIFT + Class-weights
g AE
h AE + C
Figure C.2: Cells2 image compared for all methods.
==PAGE:84==
70
C Segmentation results
a Original
b SIFT
c Simple-weights
d Class-weights
e SIFT + Simple-weights
f SIFT + Class-weights
g AE
h AE + C
Figure C.3: Nerve image compared for all methods.
==PAGE:85==
C Segmentation results
71
a Original
b SIFT
c Simple-weights
d Class-weights
e SIFT + Simple-weights
f SIFT + Class-weights
g AE
h AE + C
Figure C.4: Nerve zoom image compared for all methods.
==PAGE:86==
72
C Segmentation results
a Original
b SIFT
c Simple-weights
d Class-weights
e SIFT + Simple-weights
f SIFT + Class-weights
g AE
h AE + C
Figure C.5: Onion image compared for all methods.
==PAGE:87==
C Segmentation results
73
a Original
b SIFT
c Simple-weights
d Class-weights
e SIFT + Simple-weights
f SIFT + Class-weights
g AE
h AE + C
Figure C.6: Onion 20noise image compared for all methods.
==PAGE:88==
74
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
1.
Shirazi, S. H., Naz, S., Razzak, M. I., Umar, A. I. & Zaib, A. in Soft Computing
Based Medical Image Analysis (eds Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Shi, F. & Balas,
V. E.) 13–29 (Academic Press, Jan. 2018).
2.
Adollah, R. et al. Blood Cell Image Segmentation: A Review in 4th Kuala Lumpur
International Conference on Biomedical Engineering 2008 (eds Abu Osman,
N. A., Ibrahim, F., Wan Abas, W. A. B., Abdul Rahman, H. S. & Ting, H.-N.)
(Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008), 141–144.
3.
Bengtsson, E., Wahlby, C. & Lindblad, J. Robust cell image segmentation meth-
ods. Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis c/c of Raspoznavaniye Obrazov I
Analiz Izobrazhenii. 14, 157–167 (2004).
4.
Malpica, N. et al. Applying watershed algorithms to the segmentation of clus-
tered nuclei. Cytometry 28, 289–297 (1997).
5.
Yang, H. & Ahuja, N. Automatic segmentation of granular objects in images:
Combining local density clustering and gradient-barrier watershed. Pattern Recog-
nition 47, 2266–2279 (June 2014).
6.
Bieniek, A. & Moga, A. An efficient watershed algorithm based on connected
components. Pattern Recognition 33, 907–916 (June 2000).
7.
Qi, X., Xing, F., Foran, D. J. & Yang, L. Robust Segmentation of Overlapping
Cells in Histopathology Specimens Using Parallel Seed Detection and Repulsive
Level Set. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 59, 754–765 (Mar.
2012).
8.
Jones, T. R. et al. Scoring diverse cellular morphologies in image-based screens
with iterative feedback and machine learning. en. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 106, 1826–1831 (Feb. 2009).
9.
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P. & Brox, T. U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation in International Conference on Medical image
computing and computer-assisted intervention (Springer, 2015), 234–241.
10.
Dimopoulos, S., Mayer, C. E., Rudolf, F. & Stelling, J. Accurate cell segmenta-
tion in microscopy images using membrane patterns. Bioinformatics 30, 2644–
2651 (2014).
==PAGE:90==
76
Bibliography
11.
Meijering, E. Cell Segmentation: 50 Years Down the Road [Life Sciences]. IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine 29, 140–145 (Sept. 2012).
12.
Thomas, R. M. & John, J. A review on cell detection and segmentation in
microscopic images in 2017 International Conference on Circuit ,Power and
Computing Technologies (ICCPCT) (Apr. 2017), 1–5.
13.
Malmberg, F. Graph-based methods for interactive image segmentation PhD
Thesis (Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis, 2011).
14.
Sommer, C., Straehle, C., Köthe, U. & Hamprecht, F. A. Ilastik: Interactive
learning and segmentation toolkit in 2011 IEEE International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro (Mar. 2011), 230–233.
15.
Arganda-Carreras, I. et al. Trainable Weka Segmentation: a machine learning
tool for microscopy pixel classification. en. Bioinformatics 33, 2424–2426 (Aug.
2017).
16.
Hall, M. et al. The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update. SIGKDD Explor.
Newsl. 11, 10–18 (Nov. 2009).
17.
Falk, T. et al. U-Net: deep learning for cell counting, detection, and morphome-
try. En. Nature Methods 16, 67 (Jan. 2019).
18.
Schneider, C. A., Rasband, W. S. & Eliceiri, K. W. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25
years of image analysis. Nature methods 9, 671 (2012).
19.
Dahl, V. A., Trinderup, C. H., Emerson, M. J. & Dahl, A. B. Content-based
Propagation of User Markings for Interactive Segmentation of Patterned Images.
arXiv:1809.02226 [cs]. arXiv: 1809.02226 (Sept. 2018).
20.
Elad, M. Sparse and redundant representations: from theory to applications in
signal and image processing (Springer Science & Business Media, 2010).
21.
Elad, M. & Aharon, M. Image denoising via sparse and redundant represen-
tations over learned dictionaries. IEEE Transactions on Image processing 15,
3736–3745 (2006).
22.
Mairal, J., Bach, F., Ponce, J., Sapiro, G. & Zisserman, A. Discriminative
learned dictionaries for local image analysis tech. rep. (MINNESOTA UNIV
MINNEAPOLIS INST FOR MATHEMATICS and ITS APPLICATIONS, 2008).
23.
Diego, F., Reichinnek, S., Both, M. & Hamprecht, F. A. Automated identification
of neuronal activity from calcium imaging by sparse dictionary learning in 2013
IEEE 10th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (IEEE, 2013), 1058–
1061.
24.
Mairal, J., Bach, F. & Ponce, J. Task-Driven Dictionary Learning. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 34, 791–804 (Apr. 2012).
25.
Gao, Y., Bouix, S., Shenton, M. & Tannenbaum, A. Sparse texture active con-
tour. eng. IEEE transactions on image processing: a publication of the IEEE
Signal Processing Society 22, 3866–3878 (Oct. 2013).
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
77
26.
Dahl, A. & Larsen, R. Learning Dictionaries of Discriminative Image Patches en.
in Procedings of the British Machine Vision Conference 2011 (British Machine
Vision Association, Dundee, 2011), 77.1–77.11.
27.
Vestergaard, J. S., Dahl, A. L., Holm, P. & Larsen, R. Pipeline for Tracking
Neural Progenitor Cells en. in Medical Computer Vision. Recognition Techniques
and Applications in Medical Imaging (eds Menze, B. H. et al.) (Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2013), 155–164.
28.
Dahl, A. B. & Dahl, V. A. Dictionary Snakes in 2014 22nd International Con-
ference on Pattern Recognition (Aug. 2014), 142–147.
29.
Dahl, A. B. & Dahl, V. A. Dictionary Based Image Segmentation in Image Anal-
ysis (eds Paulsen, R. R. & Pedersen, K. S.) (Springer International Publishing,
2015), 26–37.
30.
Emerson, M. J. et al. Quantifying fibre reorientation during axial compression
of a composite through time-lapse X-ray imaging and individual fibre tracking.
Composites Science and Technology 168, 47–54 (Nov. 2018).
31.
Emerson, M. J., Jespersen, K. M., Dahl, A. B., Conradsen, K. & Mikkelsen, L. P.
Individual fibre segmentation from 3D X-ray computed tomography for charac-
terising the fibre orientation in unidirectional composite materials. Composites
Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing 97, 83–92 (June 2017).
32.
Kim, O. Staining of Onion Cell Nuclei – Microbehunter Microscopy en-US. Blog.
2008.
33.
Emerson, M. J., Jespersen, K. M., Jørgensen, P. S., Larsen, R. & Dahl, A. B.
Dictionary Based Segmentation in Volumes in Image Analysis (eds Paulsen, R. R.
& Pedersen, K. S.) (Springer International Publishing, 2015), 504–515.
34.
Sculley, D. Web-scale K-means Clustering in Proceedings of the 19th Interna-
tional Conference on World Wide Web (ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2010),
1177–1178.
35.
Lowe, D. Object recognition from local scale-invariant features en. in Proceed-
ings of the Seventh IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (IEEE,
Kerkyra, Greece, 1999), 1150–1157 vol.2.
36.
Hinton, G. E. & Salakhutdinov, R. R. Reducing the Dimensionality of Data with
Neural Networks. en. Science 313, 504–507 (July 2006).
37.
Ranzato, M. a., Boureau, Y.-l. & Cun, Y. L. in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 20 (eds Platt, J. C., Koller, D., Singer, Y. & Roweis, S. T.)
1185–1192 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2008).
38.
Rifai, S., Vincent, P., Muller, X., Glorot, X. & Bengio, Y. Contractive auto-
encoders: Explicit invariance during feature extraction in In International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (2011).
==PAGE:92==
78
Bibliography
39.
Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Lajoie, I., Bengio, Y. & Manzagol, P.-A. Stacked
Denoising Autoencoders: Learning Useful Representations in a Deep Network
with a Local Denoising Criterion. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 11, 3371–3408 (Dec.
2010).
40.
Nair, V. & Hinton, G. E. Rectified Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltzmann
Machines in Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on International
Conference on Machine Learning event-place: Haifa, Israel (Omnipress, USA,
2010), 807–814.
41.
Glorot, X., Bordes, A. & Bengio, Y. Deep Sparse Rectifier Neural Networks in
Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics (June 2011), 315–323.
42.
Bishop, C. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Springer-Verlag, New
York, 2006).
43.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y. & Courville, A. Deep Learning (MIT Press, 2016).
44.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E. & Williams, R. J. Learning representations by
back-propagating errors. En. Nature 323, 533 (Oct. 1986).
45.
Nielsen, M. A. Neural Networks and Deep Learning (Determination Press, 2018).
46.
Duchi, J., Hazan, E. & Singer, Y. Adaptive Subgradient Methods for Online
Learning and Stochastic Optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2121–2159
(July 2011).
47.
Zeiler, M. D. ADADELTA: An Adaptive Learning Rate Method. arXiv:1212.5701
[cs]. arXiv: 1212.5701 (Dec. 2012).
48.
Goodfellow, I., Lee, H., Le, Q. V., Saxe, A. & Ng, A. Y. in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 22 (eds Bengio, Y., Schuurmans, D., Lafferty,
J. D., Williams, C. K. I. & Culotta, A.) 646–654 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2009).
49.
Lee, H., Ekanadham, C. & Ng, A. Y. in Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 20 (eds Platt, J. C., Koller, D., Singer, Y. & Roweis, S. T.)
873–880 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2008).
50.
Ng, A. Y. Sparse autoencoder, lecture notes Lecture Notes. 2011.
51.
MacQueen, J. et al. Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate
observations in Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical
statistics and probability 1 (Oakland, CA, USA, 1967), 281–297.
52.
Arthur, D. & Vassilvitskii, S. K-means++: the advantages of careful seeding in In
Proceedings of the 18th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
(2007).
53.
Shelhamer, E., Long, J. & Darrell, T. Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic
Segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
39, 640–651 (Apr. 2017).
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
79
54.
Ljosa, V., Sokolnicki, K. L. & Carpenter, A. E. Annotated high-throughput
microscopy image sets for validation. en. Nature Methods 9, 637 (July 2012).
55.
Chollet, F. et al. Keras 2015.
56.
Lowe, D. G. Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Keypoints. en. In-
ternational Journal of Computer Vision 60, 91–110 (Nov. 2004).
57.
Bradski, G. The OpenCV Library. Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools (2000).
58.
Coates, A., Ng, A. & Lee, H. An Analysis of Single-Layer Networks in Unsuper-
vised Feature Learning in Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (eds Gordon, G., Dunson, D. & Dudík,
M.) 15 (PMLR, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, Apr. 2011), 215–223.
59.
Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Bengio, Y. & Manzagol, P.-A. Extracting and Com-
posing Robust Features with Denoising Autoencoders in Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on Machine Learning event-place: Helsinki, Finland
(ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2008), 1096–1103.
60.
Rangamani, A. et al. Sparse Coding and Autoencoders in 2018 IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) (June 2018), 36–40.
61.
Arpit, D., Zhou, Y., Ngo, H. & Govindaraju, V. Why Regularized Auto-Encoders
learn Sparse Representation? in Proceedings of The 33rd International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning (eds Balcan, M. F. & Weinberger, K. Q.) 48 (PMLR,
New York, New York, USA, June 2016), 136–144.
62.
Cawley, G. C. & Talbot, N. L. C. On Over-fitting in Model Selection and Subse-
quent Selection Bias in Performance Evaluation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 11, 2079–2107 (2010).
63.
Qi, Y. (, Minka, T. P., Picard, R. W. & Ghahramani, Z. Predictive Auto-
matic Relevance Determination by Expectation Propagation in Proceedings of the
Twenty-first International Conference on Machine Learning event-place: Banff,
Alberta, Canada (ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2004), 85–.
64.
Cawley, G. C. & Talbot, N. L. C. Preventing Over-Fitting during Model Selec-
tion via Bayesian Regularisation of the Hyper-Parameters. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 8, 841–861 (2007).
65.
Masci, J., Meier, U., Cireşan, D. & Schmidhuber, J. Stacked Convolutional Auto-
Encoders for Hierarchical Feature Extraction in Artificial Neural Networks and
Machine Learning – ICANN 2011 (eds Honkela, T., Duch, W., Girolami, M. &
Kaski, S.) (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011), 52–59.
66.
Makhzani, A. & Frey, B. k-Sparse Autoencoders. arXiv:1312.5663 [cs]. arXiv:
1312.5663 (Dec. 2013).
