==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Investigating the impact of blade design parameters on 
blade stability using CFD 
 
 
Athanasios Kormas 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0306 
June 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Athanasios Kormas 
Title: Investigating the impact of blade design parameters on blade 
stability using CFD 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0306 
June 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
December 2018 – June 2019 
 
ECTS: 35 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Sergio González Horcas 
Athanasios Barlas 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Alex Loeven 
Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Telephone  46 77 50 85 
 
info@vindenergi.dtu.dk 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
DTU Wind Energy
Department of Wind Energy
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Campus Risø
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK- 4000 Roskilde
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:5==
Preface
Blade vibrations is one the critical areas of blade design as they can gravely affect
blade performance and durability. Modern large scale wind turbine blades experi-
ence different kinds of vibrations in their machine lifetime and therefore need to be
designed so that their structural integrity and performance are not compromised. In
the case of a power or control system failure, the rotor is not oriented to face the
wind, as the yaw tracking system fails to follow the wind direction, resulting in ex-
treme yaw misalignment. This can lead to extreme angles of attack where the flow
is completely separated over the entire blade span leading to the occurrence of vor-
tex induced vibrations in the edge-wise direction. To approach this problem, a CFD
method to predict vortex induced vibrations and investigate the impact of the design
parameters on blade stability using 1-way Fluid Structure Interaction with imposed
blade vibrations is developed.
Unsteady RANS simulations are performed on a stiff non-moving blade for the
determination of the of vortex shedding frequency and imposed vibration simulations
simulations are performed for the investigation of blade stability. The simulated blade
is the offshore 10MW IEA blade. The k - ω SST turbulence model is used for closing
the system of equations. The computational domain is created based on the guide-
lines of Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy who is a collaborator of the project. The
method was able to complete simulations of non-moving blade predicting the genera-
tion of von-Karman vortex street for cases where the flow direction is perpendicular
to the pressure side of the blade (0◦flow inclination angle). The CFD approach was
unable to simulate cases with other inflow angles revealing the limitations of the CFD
setup and the design of the computational domain. Such flow angles are necessary
for the occurrence of vortex induced vibrations. Imposed vibration simulations with
amplitudes up to 0.5 m were completed for inflow velocities with 0◦flow inclination
angle. The impact of design parameters was studied by manually adjusting the cou-
pling between the edge-wise and flap-wise deflection and using the new mode-shape
in imposed vibrations simulations. Aforementioned study revealed a positive impact
on blade stability when the coupling is increased.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
It is with great pleasure and honor that I conclude my masters degree at DTU with
my thesis. I would like to express my gratitude to all the people the supported me
and help reach this point.
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisors at DTU, Senior Researcher Athana-
sios Barlas and Researcher Sergio Gonzalez Horcas for providing me with the material,
the knowledge and guidance needed to complete this project.
Furthermore, I would, also, like to thank my supervisors at Siemens Gamesa Re-
newable Energy Head of Rotor Performance Alex Loeven and Aerodynamic Design
Engineer Sune Jensen for offering me the opportunity to work on such an interesting
and challenging project, while being there to guide me, provide me with valuable
advice and help me overcome every problem I faced.
At this point I would like to thank all my friends here in Denmark for making
this experience an unforgettable one, for being there in good, bad, stressful and more
relaxed moment. Special thanks to my friends Efstathios Georgagakis ans Antonios
Charalampous-Papargeorgiou for assisting with proof reading and for providing me
with the support needed to make it through.
Last but not least, i would like to express my great gratitude to my parents
Konstantinos and Maria and my sisters Effie and Jenny for their constant support,
as without them I would never be where I am now.
Lyngby, Denmark
Athanasios Kormas
June 03, 2019
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
α
Constant used in the k - ω model
¯ui
Mean averaged value of ui[ m
s2 ]
β′
Constant used in the k - ω model
β1
Constant used in the k - ω model
ϵ
Dissipation rate of turbulent kinetic energy [ m2
s3 ]
ˆn
Unit normal vector [-]
µt
Turbulence dynamic viscosity [ Ns
m2 ]
νt
Kinematic viscosity of turbulence [ m2
s ]
ω
Specific dissipation rate of turbulent kinetic energy ( k
ϵ ) [s−1]
ωv
Vibration frequency [Hz]
ψ
Flow inclination angle [deg]
ρ ¯
u′
iu′
j
Reynolds Stresses
ρ
Air density [ kg
m3 ]
σω
Constant used in the k - ω model
σk
Constant used in the k - ω model
AF
Forced oscillation amplitude [m]
CD
Drag coefficient [-]
CL
Lift coefficient [-]
fF
Forced vibration frequency [Hz]
fshnat
Natural frequency of shed vortices [Hz]
==PAGE:10==
vi
Acknowledgements
fv
Vortex shedding frequency [HZ]
t0
Initial time [s]
u′
i
Fluctuating component of ui[ m
s2 ]
ui
Mean velocity component in the ith direction [ m
s2 ]
ux
Normalized edge-wise deflection [-]
uy
Normalized flap-wise deflection [-]
Vinf
Inflow velocity [ m
s ]
Vr
Dimensionless flow speed [-]
Wcycle
Aerodynamic work per vibration cycle [J]
A
Blade surface area [m2]
c
Chord length [m]
D
Cylinder diameter
k
Turbulent kinetic energy [ m2
s2 ]
M
Mach number [-]
p
Pressure [ N
m2 ]
Re
Reynolds number [-]
St
Strouhal number [-]
T
Vibration period [s]
v
Blade velocity
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AOA
Angle of Attack
AOAroot
Angle of Attack at blade root
AOAtip
Angle of Attack at blade tip
BEM
Blade Element Momentum
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
DES
Dettached Eddy Simulations
DOF
Degree Of Freedom
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
vii
DSM
Dynamic Stall Model
FIV
Flow Induced Vibrations
FSI
Fluid Structure Interaction
HAWT
Horizontal Axies Wind Turbine
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commition
LCoE
Levelized Cost of Energy
LE
Leading Edge of blade
LES
Large Eddy Simulations
PS
Pressure Side of blade
RANS
Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes
SIV
Stall Induced Vibrations
SS
Suction Side of blade
SST
Shear Stress Transport
TE
Trailing Edge of blade
TI
Turbulence Intensity
VAWT
Vertical Axis Wind Turbine
VIV
Vortex Induced Vibrations
==PAGE:12==
viii
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
ix
List of Figures
xi
List of Tables
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and goal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Vortex Induced Vibrations
9
2.1
Concept and Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Method
17
3.1
1-way Fluid Structure Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Input Preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Numerical Model and CFD setup
27
4.1
Numerical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
CFD Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Simulation Strategy
39
5.1
The 10MW IEA blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Sensitivity Analysis Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Simulations of Non-moving blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Imposed vibrations simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5
Simulations using adjusted mode shape coupling
. . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Results
51
6.1
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Simulations of Non-moving blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Imposed vibrations simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:14==
x
Contents
7
Conclusions and Future Work
63
7.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A Appendix
65
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:15==
List of Figures
1.1
Cumulative onshore and offshore installations in Europe [source: WindEu-
rope (2018)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Horizontal axis wind turbine rotor size evolution trend [source: Upwind
Consortium (2011)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Sketch of the lock-in region for a forced oscillation cylinder, adapted from
Horcas 2017 [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Snapshots presenting vorticity magnitude of the 3D flow around a section
of the extruded airfoil as results from CFD computations, adapted from
Skrzypinski et al. [19]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Spectrum using uniform inflow of 22m/s, AOAtip = 90◦, AOAroot = 72◦
and Ψ = 25◦, adapted from Heinz et al.[12] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Definition of flow inclination angle Ψ, adapted from Heinz et al. [12] . . .
15
3.1
First edge-wise mode shape of the IEA 10MW blade . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Flow chart of proposed approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Un-deformed (grey) and deformed (red) surface of the IEA 10MW blade .
25
3.4
Visual representation of the adjusted 1st edge-wise mode shape of the IEA
10MW blade
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1
Perspective view of computational domain including blocking . . . . . . .
32
4.2
View of inlet boundary and side view of the computational domain . . . .
32
4.3
Perspective view of preliminary mesh close to the blade. Left: Preliminary
mesh on the blade surface.
Right: Preliminary mesh on the interface
surrounding the blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Block edges for the creation of the hex mesh
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Detail of density regions close to the blade area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Perspective view of the final HYBRID mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.7
Detail of inner domain and blade interface of the HYBRID mesh . . . . .
37
5.1
left: 3D model of the DTU 10 MW IEA rotor. Right: Key parameters of
DTU 10MW IEA wind turbine[27] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Normalized coordinates of airfoil cross sections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:16==
xii
List of Figures
5.3
Radial evolution of blade basic geometrical parameters of DTU 10MW
IEA blade.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Top view (pressure side) and from view (leading edge) of the 10MW IEA
blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.5
Side view and dimensions of computational domain . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.6
left: Generated mesh at blade surface for IEA 10MW blade. Right: Detail
of the mesh at the tip of the IEA 10MW blade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.7
Side view of the computational domain for simulations with flow inclination 48
5.8
Flap-wise deflection distribution for 3 different couplings . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.1
RMS mass residuals for the sensitivity analysis cases . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2
Vorticity contours at R = 75 m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Velocity Streamlines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Force in the chord-wise direction at radial the radial position of 75m . . .
55
6.5
Mass conservation and mass imbalance monitoring points . . . . . . . . .
56
6.6
Evolution of vortices at different time steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.7
Evolution of velocity streamlines at different time steps
. . . . . . . . . .
59
6.8
Aerodynamic Work comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.9
Aerodynamic work of different blade regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.1 Example of ASCII file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 Example of CSV file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 Example of parameters file
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.4 Example of aerodynamic configuration file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
==PAGE:17==
List of Tables
5.1
Sensitivity Analysis Simulation Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Blade surface node distribution for sensitivity analysis cases . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Simulation matrix for simulations of non-moving blade . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Simulation matrix for cases with imposed vibrations . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.1
Fluid characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Fluid characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Successfully simulated cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Aerodynamic damping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.5
Blade Regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
==PAGE:18==
xiv
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Over the past decades, the continuous rise in energy demand has shown significant
increase. The scientific community has proved that the need to turn to sustainable
energy sources is of paramount importance, guiding the industry to invest in further
development and optimization of the already existing energy production methods.
The energy production field is heavily based on fossil fuels, but the percentage of
renewable energy sources in the energy equilibrium has shown substantial growth in
the last decades, as major technological developments have taken place. This increase
is driven by global agreements, like the Paris agreement, which requires that energy-
related carbon dioxide emissions must be reduced by more than 70 % by 2050, having
as comparison the emission levels in 2015. Such a reduction can a only be achieved
by substantially increasing the energy produced by renewable energy sources in the
following years.
Figure 1.1: Cumulative onshore and offshore installations in Europe [source: WindEu-
rope (2018)]
Among the available renewable energy sources, wind energy has become the leading
one, having a total installed capacity of 189 GW in Europe [1] and 600 GW around
the world [2], until the end of 2018. Figure 1.1 illustrates the constant increase of
the installed capacity in the region of Europe over the past 10 years. The fact that
==PAGE:20==
2
1 Introduction
the installed capacity in Europe has increased by approximately 150% highlights the
maturity of the industry and its establishment as a main energy source. There are
several ideas aiming at harvesting the energy available in the wind, the two main
converters being the horizontal axis wind turbine (HAWT) and the vertical axis wind
turbine (VAWT). Out of the two, the prevailing design is the (HAWT), as it is consid-
ered as the most efficient and more suitable for large scale applications. The design
drive of the state of art HAWTs is the maximization of the produced power per single
power unit and the reduction of the levelized cost of energy (LCoE), which points
towards the increase of the rotor diameter as illustrated in Figure 1.2 [3]. Increasing
the rotor diameter, and thus the length of the blades, poses many challenges to the
designers, making their already complex task even harder.
Figure 1.2: Horizontal axis wind turbine rotor size evolution trend [source: Upwind
Consortium (2011)]
Since HAWTs are designed to operate for more than 20 years [4], blades need to be
able to withstand the applied unsteady loads, both in extreme and fatigue conditions,
for such a long period of time. A very important factor in blade design is keeping the
weight as low as possible, as it crucial in keeping manufacturing and transportation
cost as low as possible. To that end, blade designers and manufacturers use compos-
ite fiber materials, as they offer great benefits when it comes mechanical properties
versus weight [4]. The impact of weight on up-scaling the rotor size of wind turbines
is reflected by the fact that the weight of the blade is approximately proportional to
the cube of the blade length [5].
To keep weight to the minimum, while designing blades with increased performance
regarding flap-wise deflections, structural engineers use thick, almost cylindrical, air-
foils close to the root of the blade, sacrificing this way the aerodynamic performance
[6]. The same conflict between aerodynamic and structural design is met also in the
automotive or aviation industry, but it is intensified in the case of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:21==
1 Introduction
3
design, as there are two more factors that need to be taken into consideration. Firstly,
the aerodynamic loads applied on the blade surface are greatly affected by the elastic
deformation of the blade and vice-versa. In modern blades, maximum tip deflections
can reach up to 10 % of the blade’s length [7], meaning that an elastic structure has
to be considered when calculating the aerodynamic loading, the response of which
is influenced gravely by the considered aerodynamic loads. Secondly, modern wind
turbine blades operate at Reynolds (Re) numbers in the order of 107, where the avail-
ability of experimental data is limited, leading designers to base the load prediction
techniques on results of Computational Fluid Dynamics simulations and scaling the
data acquired from experiments at lower Reynolds numbers.
The latest long, flexible and slender blades will experience different kinds of vibrations
in their machine lifetime and therefore need to be designed so that their structural
integrity and performance are not compromised. Wind turbine blades are designed to
have the optimum performance during operation, while being subjected to complex
aerodynamic phenomena. However, the study of the blade vibrations in standstill
position is an area with growing scientific interest, as parked blades experience high
angles of attack and operate in the stall region.
The necessity for the assessment of such vibrations is highlighted in the IEC - 1 Stan-
dard [8], where it is required that the loads on parked wind turbine blades are studied
for all possible wind directions, always with respect to the rotor plane. In the case
of a power or control system failure, the rotor is not oriented to face the wind, as
the yaw tracking system fails to follow the wind direction, resulting in extreme yaw
misalignment. This can lead to extreme angles of attack where the flow is completely
separated over the entire blade span.
Even though no blade failures at standstill have been reported, it is considered that
wind turbine failures may be connected to vibrations occurring during standstill. To
the author’s knowledge, standstill vibrations of wind turbine blades can either be
caused by Vortex Induced Vibrations (VIV) or by Stall Induced Vibrations (SIV),
both of which lie in the area of Flow Induced Vibrations (FIV) The definitions of
vortex and stall induced vibrations are given below, while a more detailed description
is given in the respective chapters.
Flow Induced Vibrations
Structures immersed in or conveying fluid flow can experience structural or mechani-
cal oscillations, induced by the energy of the fluid. Flow induced vibrations describe
the interaction between the fluid’s dynamic forces and the structure’s inertial, damp-
ing and elastic forces. Wind turbine blades experience FIV throughout their lifetime.
In the case of wind turbines in standstill, there are two types of flow-induced vi-
brations occurring as stated earlier: Vortex Induced Vibration and Stall Induced
Vibrations often referred as flutter in literature.
==PAGE:22==
4
1 Introduction
Vortex Induced Vibrations
When bluff bodies are immersed in steady fluid flow, they will shed vortices under
specific flow conditions. For example, in the case of a cylinder, if the Reynolds num-
ber (Re) exceeds 40 million, the shed vortices will form the so called von Karman
vortex street, which is described by a repeating pattern of vortices caused by unsteady
flow separation. The same phenomenon can be observed for aerodynamically shaped
objects such as airfoils, aircraft wings and wind turbine blades exposed to flows at
high angles of attack (AOA), in the vicinity of 90 degrees. Vortex shedding causes a
periodic change in lift and drag creating oscillations of the body. Further details for
the phenomenon of VIV will are presented later.
Stall Induced Vibrations
Stall induced vibrations are often referred to bluff bodies as galloping and to airfoil
structures as flutter. This type of induced vibrations occur at angles of attack higher
than the maximum value of the lift coefficient and more specifically in the case when
the curve of CL has a steep negative slope in the stall region. As aerodynamic damp-
ing is proportional to the inflow wind speed, the higher the wind speed, the higher
the risk of stall induced vibrations, making this type of vibration more likely to occur
during storm conditions.
As the probability of these 2 types of flow induced vibrations during wind turbine
standstill situation is high, it is crucial for researchers to have a better understanding
of the problem and to create reliable models for their prediction.
This project focuses on the prediction of vortex induced vibrations, as it is a phe-
nomenon that may occur during standstill and needs either active control to be
avoided or a completely new design of the blades.
However, the development of
a models for its prediction is rather challenging due to the complexity of the flow and
the difficulty of performing tests and measurement campaigns on real wind turbines.
The majority of the models is based on BEM (Blade Element Momentum) aero-elastic
solvers using Dynamic Stall Models (DSM). Even though these models predict high
amplitude edgewise vibrations under specific conditions, indicating the existence of
flow induced vibrations, their accuracy is still in question due to the extreme and
unrealistic predicted values, which is pointed out in AVATAR project [9]. The high
magnitude of the predicted edgewise vibrations can be attributed to the assumptions
the BEM solvers include and problems of the dynamic stall models.
BEM-based aero-elastic solvers such HAWC2 (Larsen and Hansen) [10] developed by
Risoe and BhawC developed by Siemens Wind Power or currently known as Siemens
Gamesa Renewable Energy, consider the blades as beams, discretized in a number
==PAGE:23==
1 Introduction
5
of elements. The BEM code calculates the unsteady induced velocities at each of
the elements and then the applied loads. Since the flow is unsteady, the loads vary
in time, exciting the elements to vibrations. The loads are calculated using static
curves for CL and CD of the airfoils of each of the cross sectional elements. Having
performed previously an eigen-value analysis of the beam, using appropriate values
for the stiffness and damping matrix, the natural frequencies and the respective mode
shapes are known. In this way, the frequency areas of possible resonance can be es-
timated, and thus, it can be explained that the high amplitude vibration are caused
by the induced vibrations.
As pointed out in a paper from, the way the dynamic stall model is defined, along
with the quality of the airfoil data plays a major role in the prediction of standstill
vibrations using aero-elastic solvers. It is also very important to note that it is very
difficult to acquire airfoil polars of good quality either using wind tunnel testing or
CFD simulations, making the usage of this type of solvers not favourable for the ac-
curate prediction of flow induced vibrations.
Since the accuracy of the results of state-of-the-art aero-elastic solvers is in question,
more advanced approaches have been developed using 2-way Fluid Structure Interac-
tion (FSI) like HAWC2CFD [11] used by Heinz et al. [12]. In more detail, this high
fidelity approach uses a CFD based solver coupled with a BEM based aero-elastic
solver in order to model in a more detailed way the unsteady flow around the blades.
In this approach, the aerodynamic forces and structural deflections are exchanged
once per time step, leading to a detailed prediction of the flow field around the blade,
which leads to a more accurate prediction of the deflections. More information about
the usage of HAWC2CFD is given later on, while a detailed description of the frame-
work can be found in Heinz et al. [11]. An extensive study on CFD methodology for
wind turbines FSI, has been conducted by Horcas [5]. Horcas produced a methodol-
ogy to approach the FSI problem for the case vibrating cylinders.
The major drawback of using such sophisticated models is the grave increase in com-
putational cost, that limits the number of cases they can be applied. More specifically,
even though the coupling of the solvers does not affect very much the computational
resources needed, the fidelity of the flow model is creating the overhead in the demand
of computational power. The aforementioned combined with the fact that their devel-
opment is a highly complicated process requires a lot of for development and testing,
makes these models not favourable for industrial applications. However, since there is
no alternative for detailed modelling yet, these models should be developed, improved
and used, even though they cannot be introduced as a complete replacement of the
engineering models.
As pointed out above, it is very important for blade designers to be able to accurately
predict the occurrence of standstill vibrations and the respective vibration ampli-
tudes caused by them. To achieve that, a more detailed study is required in order to
==PAGE:24==
6
1 Introduction
identify which blade design parameters must be altered for enhanced blade stability.
Increasing blade stability, will help avoiding blade failures due to induced vibrations,
which leads to a longer machine lifetime, lower LCoE and more profitable investments.
It is, therefore, a matter of great importance for blade designers, wind turbine manu-
facturers (OEMs), companies working in the operation and maintenance area, as well
for wind farm developers and utility providers.
1.1
Motivation and goal
Having a good understanding of the the factors affecting the response of wind turbine
blades when it comes to flow induced vibrations and of the approaches that the sci-
entific community has followed, this project will approach the phenomenon of vortex
induced vibrations using CFD.
The goal of this project is to investigate the effect of different design parameters on
the response of a vibrating wind turbine blade using CFD. Said investigation will
be performed using a 1-way FSI model that is developed and proposed. A 1-way
approach can be considered as a step between the usage of aero-elastic codes and
2-way FSI approaches, solving the highly complex flow around the blade in order to
predict the aerodynamic loads, producing more accurate results than the BEM based
models and at the same time, offering an easier way to approach the FSI problem.
Even though both stall induced and vortex induced vibrations are areas of scientific
importance directly connected to design of future blades, the present work focuses
only on vortex induced vibrations.
In more detail, the scope of the thesis includes the points below:
• Give an overview of vortex induced vibration and the conditions under which
they occur
• Present the approaches followed in the past
• Propose an approach regarding the prediction of instabilities caused by vortex
induced vibrations using 1-way FSI
• Investigate the impact of different blade design parameters on the blade stability
1.1.1
Report Structure
The report starts by describing in general the phenomenon of vortex induced vibra-
tions on bluff and aerodynamic shaped bodies and then focuses on the area of wind
turbine blades and the stability issues connected. In continuation, the author goes
through the literature and provides and overview of the approaches used and proposed
==PAGE:25==
1.1 Motivation and goal
7
in the past aiming at providing the reader with adequate information. Afterwards,
the motivation for this project along with goals set are presented.
The next step is the presentation of a CFD approach using 1-way Fluid Structure
Interaction for the prediction of vortex induced vibrations on real wind turbine blades.
At this point, an overview of the CFD setup is provided along with the measures
used for the prediction of critical flow conditions with regard to occurrence of vortex
induced vibrations and a matrix of the simulated cases. Furthermore, a grid study is
presented to illustrate the sensitivity of the approach on the mesh size.
After the CFD setup is presented, a series of validation simulations is presented that
are performed using the improved DTU 10-MW RWT blade as a result of the IEA
project. This blade is chosen as a series of simulations have already been performed
by DTU and the results of the latter can be compared with the results of the devel-
oped approach.
Furthermore, the effect of different design parameters on blade stability is investigated,
by changing some of the design parameters such as small chord distribution variations,
the relative thickness of the several cross section as well as the coupling between
the edge-wise and flap-wise mode shapes. The next chapter focuses on a analytic
presentation of the results and a deep analysis of them. Finally, the last chapter
presents the conclusions of the report and provides suggestions for further research
in the future.
==PAGE:26==
8
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2
Vortex Induced
Vibrations
2.1
Concept and Literature Review
This chapter presents a detailed description of the vortex induced vibrations (VIV) of
wind turbine blades phenomenon. Initially, an overview of the conditions needed for
it to occur is given and later, the reader is provided with a literature review of the
different approaches researchers have followed and proposed over the years in order
to study and investigate said phenomenon.
As mentioned in the introduction section, the study of flow induced vibrations and
especially of vortex induced vibrations of blades has been receiving increasing attention
in recent years, since there is a debate on whether they pose a serious threat to the
structural integrity of modern wind turbine blades or not. In cases when the wind
turbine rotor is not facing the wind because the yawing system has failed, or there
are power or control related problems, the blades are exposed to very high angles
of attack, close to 90 degrees. At such severe angels of attack, the flow is highly
detached and the blade starts to shed vortices, which, due to the periodicity of the
phenomenon, lead to the formation of the von Karman vortex street. The latter is
described as repeating pattern of vortices shed both from the leading and the trailing
edge, with a dimensionless frequency that is denoted by the Strouhal (St) number:
St = fvc
Vinf
(2.1)
where fv is the vortex shedding frequency in Hertz (Hz), c is a characteristic length
and V is the inflow velocity.
Vortex induced vibrations can be observed in flow
around objects of different shapes, thus, there is a variety of factors affecting the St
number with the Reynolds number (Re), the surface roughness, the shape of the cross
sections and the turbulence intensity, being the major ones [13].
The result of the formed von Karman street vortex is a periodic variation of the lift
and drag resulting in oscillations of the blade. The lift oscillates with the vortex
==PAGE:28==
10
2 Vortex Induced Vibrations
shedding frequency, while the drag with twice the vortex shedding frequency. In the
case when the oscillating frequency of either the lift or the drag coincides with the
respective eigen-frequency of one of the blade’s structural modes, the amplitude of
the vibrations will greatly increase due to resonance. Such high amplitude vibrations
can lead to blade failure that can be attributed to the exceedance of the material
stress and strain limits or to fatigue over time. In the case of wind turbine blades,
vortex induced vibrations are detected in the edgewise direction, something that is
further explained later on.
In order to adjust blade design to avoid such phenomena or mitigate their impact, it
is of paramount importance to understand the nature of them and investigate which
parameters have a positive effect on the design. Prior to going into detail regarding
vortex induced vibrations of wind turbine blades, the need to explain the phenomenon
in its most general form comes forth.
2.1.1
Vortex induced vibrations of cylinders
As stated earlier, vortex induced vibrations may occur on bluff bodies of different
size and shape when embedded in a flow field. Extensive research regarding the oc-
currence of vortex induced vibrations on cylinders has been performed in the past
yielding a large amount of the theoretical knowledge and experimental data. More
specifically, Pantazopoulos [13] has presented an extensive review of experimental
data for cylinders with circular cross sections, where the most important parameters
affecting the studied phenomenon are listed. The outcome of said review included the
lift coefficient, the correlation length, the vortex-shedding frequency and the vortex-
shedding frequency bandwidth. In addition, working in the same concept, Dowel et
al. [14], argued that surface roughness should also be included in said list as it limits
the influence of the Reynolds number.
Furthermore, an experimental study conducted by Feng [15] focused on the conditions
required for vortex induced vibrations of cylinders and presented information for the
”lock-in” phenomenon. In more detail, Feng studied the behavior of flexibly mounted
cylinders with circular and D-shaped cross sections exposed to air flow. The move-
ment of each cylinder was constrained so that there is only one degree of freedom (1
DOF) in the direction perpendicular to the air flow. In this experiment, the vortex
shedding frequency, the cylinder vibration frequency and vibration amplitude were
measured for different flow speeds. To better illustrate the results, the researcher
used plots of each of the measured data as a function of a dimensionless flow speed:
Vr = Vinf
Dfn
(2.2)
Where V is the in inflow speed, D is the diameter of the cylinder and fn is the natural
frequency of the cylinder in Hertz [Hz]. The experiment showed that the cylinders
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Concept and Literature Review
11
started vibrating with a small amplitude of the natural frequency when the dimen-
sionless flow speed reached a certain value. At the same time, vortices were being
shed at a frequency corresponding to the Strouhal number of the cylinder. As the
dimensionless flow speed increased further, it reached a value at which the frequency
of the shed vortices was in the vicinity of the natural frequency of the cylinder. At
this point, the vortex shedding frequency was controlled by the vibration of the cylin-
der. As the dimensionless flow speed increased further, the vortex shedding frequency
unlocked and went back to the Strouhal number. This phenomenon is called ”lock-in”
and the width of the lock-in range with respect to the inflow speed increases with the
vibration amplitude.
This phenomenon is also illustrated in [16], where the authors visualized the interac-
tion between vibrating cylinders and their shed vortices, while explaining the ways
vortices are created and move downstream. Moreover, it was observed that the vibra-
tion amplitude is strongly dependent on the vortex shedding frequency, as maximum
amplitude values were observed in the lock in region [5].
On a slightly different
context, a number of researchers, studied this phenomenon by imposing harmonic
oscillations with [17] being the first to observe it. In this context, the cylinders would
oscillate with a forced frequency fF and at a forced oscillation amplitude AF . Figure
2.1 shows a sketch of the lock in region in the case of forced cylinder vibrations, where
fshnat is the natural frequency of shed vortices.
Figure 2.1: Sketch of the lock-in region for a forced oscillation cylinder, adapted from
Horcas 2017 [5]
A review of the research studying the vortex induced vibrations on cylinders using
imposed vibrations can be found in[18].
==PAGE:30==
12
2 Vortex Induced Vibrations
2.1.2
Vortex induced vibrations of airfoils
After understanding the circumstances under which vortex induced vibrations occur
on cylinders, the next step is to investigate and understand the phenomenon on bod-
ies of aerodynamic shape. The most representative example is an airfoil which is a 2D
shape representing the cross sections of aircraft wings and wind turbine blades. Due
to their design, airfoils can experience vortex induced vibrations, when they operate
in high angles of attack. An extensive study explaining the phenomenon on an airfoil
is described by Skrzypinski [19] .
In said study, the author presents the analysis of vortex induced vibrations of the
DU96-W-180 airfoil in deep stall conditions and investigates whether there are simi-
larities between the response of a mounted cylinder such as the one in the experiment
conducted by Feng [15] and the response of the airfoil.
In order to achieve that,
Skrzypinski performed 2D and 3D unsteady CFD simulations studying the cases
of non moving airfoil extruded sections, airfoil extruded sections moving using a pre-
scribed motion and elastically mounted airfoil extruded sections having 1 and 3 DOFs
for the movement. Simulations of a non moving airfoil were performed to study the
way that the vortices are formed and shed, as well as the loading distribution on
the airfoil surface. Prescribed motion simulation were considered as a way to under-
stand the behavior of the forces coming from the fluid and thereby applied on the
structure and vice-versa, in a controlled environment. Finally, the simulations of an
elastically mounted airfoil were performed for the best reflection if real-life vibrations.
The study of the flow around a non moving airfoil showed that at angles of attack
close to 90 degrees, vortices will be shed, the stationary vortex-shedding frequency of
which, differs when performing 2D or 3D computations. Figure 2.2, shows snapshots
presenting the vorticity magnitude of the 3D flow around a section of an extruded
airfoil as a result of the simulations of Skrzypinski showing the formation and shedding
of vortices at the leading and trailing edge, respectively, illustrating the von Karman
vortex street.
Figure 2.2: Snapshots presenting vorticity magnitude of the 3D flow around a section
of the extruded airfoil as results from CFD computations, adapted from Skrzypinski
et al. [19]
Said vortices cause fluctuations on lift and drag indicating the existence of vortex
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Concept and Literature Review
13
induced vibrations. The Strouhal number of the vortices differed from St = 0.13 to
St = 0.16 based on the span-wise length of the extruded airfoil section, with the low-
est Strouhal number corresponding to the shortest span-wise length. Furthermore,
the simulations using prescribed vibrations of the airfoil predicted negative aerody-
namic damping when the excitation frequency was in the vicinity of the stationary
vortex-shedding frequency. Negative aerodynamic damping means that the fluid is
adding energy to the vibrations showing area of possible instability for the airfoil.
Finally, taking into consideration, also, the results of the elastically mounted airfoil,
the possibility of the lock-in phenomenon in the case of vibrating airfoils and also the
possibility of vortex induced vibrations is revealed.
At this point, by studying the response of vibrating cylinders and airfoils in the pres-
ence of wind flow, the main conditions for the occurrence of vortex induced vibrations
have been defined and it can be concluded that it is a phenomenon that can take
place on wind turbine blades.
2.1.3
Vortex induced vibrations of wind turbine blades
The next step is to study and understand the phenomenon, with respect to wind
turbine blades. The main difference in the case of wind turbine blades is the far
more complex design, as the airfoils sections change in the span-wise direction. In
addition, the blade twist from root to tip and the pre-bending of the blades, make the
flow field far more complex than in the case of cylinders or extruded airfoil sections.
In this context, Heinz et al. [12] conducted an extensive study on the blade of the
DTU 10-MW RWT in deep stall conditions and high angles of attack, using the high
fidelity tool HAWC2CFD [11]. In more detail, the research focused on studying the
inflow conditions needed to generate vortex shedding close to the natural frequencies
of the blade and thus vortex induced vibrations.
Initially, using equation 2.1 and a given Strouhal number, a local velocity profile in
span-wise direction was calculated, for a given frequency, as the chord length was
known for all radial positions.
Even though such a profile is not realistic, it was
chosen in order to provoke the generation of vortex shedding. The Strouhal number
was set to St = 0.15 and the frequency was set equal to the 2nd natural frequency of
the blade, which corresponds to first edge-wise mode shape. Simulations of 45 sec-
onds showed edgewise vibrations with increasing amplitude indicating the existence
of VIV. Heinz, also performed simulations with uniform inflow velocity, as the above-
mentioned velocity profile is not realistic. Moreover, different Strouhal numbers were
examined ranging from 0.13 to 0.17 and with two pitch settings corresponding to an
angle of attack AOAtip = 90◦and AOAtip = 100◦. The results of these simulations
showed severe edge-wise vibrations in the case where of St = 0.15 for both pitch set-
tings, where in the case were AOAtip = 100◦, the maximum peak to peak amplitude
after 45 seconds was 8m.
==PAGE:32==
14
2 Vortex Induced Vibrations
To investigate the aerodynamic behavior of the DTU 10-MW RWT blade, Heinz, also
performed simulations, while using an indefinitely stiff blade and the adjusted veloc-
ity profile mentioned earlier. During these simulation, the blade was not vibrating,
giving the opportunity for a better understanding of the force frequency content in
the edge-wise direction, by using a frequency analysis. The outcome of these simula-
tions was a dominating frequency close to the natural frequency of the blade for all
different radial positions. When a more realistic profile was used, it was noticed that
the spectra of the different radial sections showed peaks at different frequencies. This
indicated that the flow is not correlated along the blade and suggested that flow incli-
nation in the span-wise direction could cause correlation of the vortices. Frequency
analysis of simulations using an inflow speed of Vinf = 22 m/s and flow inclination
of Ψ = 25◦, shown in figure 2.3, resulted in a profound peak close to the natural
frequency of the blade at specific blade sections, indicating that flow is correlated at
that region, which was triggered by vortices shed in the outer part of the blade and
then convected towards the inner part.
Figure 2.3: Spectrum using uniform inflow of 22m/s, AOAtip = 90◦, AOAroot = 72◦
and Ψ = 25◦, adapted from Heinz et al.[12]
==PAGE:33==
2.1 Concept and Literature Review
15
Figure 2.4: Definition of flow inclination angle Ψ, adapted from Heinz et al. [12]
Finally, a flexible version of the DTU 10-MW RWT blade was also simulated using
different uniform inflow wind speeds, different flow inclinations and different pitch
settings. The simulations, indicated the critical conditions under which vortex in-
duced vibrations could occur for this specific blade, revealing that wind speeds from
16 ms−1, with an inclination flow in the region 20◦≤Ψ ≤55◦and pitch configuration
yielding angles of attack between 85◦≤AOAtip ≤100◦.
The aforementioned studies provide a clear overview on how the problem of vortex
induced vibrations can be approached. It is evident, that in order to predict this type
of vibrations for wind turbine blades, at least the following characteristics have to be
taken into consideration:
• Blade natural frequencies
• Inflow wind speed
• Flow inclination
• Angle of attack
At this point, it has to be noted that other factors like the effect of turbulence in-
tensity (TI) levels have yet to be investigated. After going through the approaches
followed by the scientific community, it can be concluded that the most appropriate
way to predict vortex induced vibration is by using 2-way FSI for the whole blade.
The possibility of simulating the whole rotor where wind shear and tower effects
could also be included would be the next step, but as it has been proven that the
==PAGE:34==
16
2 Vortex Induced Vibrations
computational capacity of the clusters at the time the respective research was con-
ducted, made such an attempt computationally too expensive and even not possible.
It should also be taken into consideration that as time goes by, new breakthroughs
are revealed and that there more and more powerful clusters are created providing
research group with adequate resources to tackle this issue.
In general, the use of 2-way FSI even for the study of single blades may be the most
effective way for approaching such phenomena, yet it is a very difficult and compli-
cated process that requires the development of sophisticated tools and needs a lot
of resources for its development. This is the reason why this project will approach
the prediction of vortex induced vibrations using 1-way FSI. The proposed method is
presented in detail in the next chapter.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Method
3.1
1-way Fluid Structure Interaction
As mentioned earlier, this project focuses on the investigation of the impact of de-
sign parameters on blade stability using computational fluid dynamics. The proposed
method uses a 1-way FSI to predict the occurrence of vortex induced vibrations and
later investigate which design parameters affect the stability of modern blades under-
going such vibrations. The aim is the creation of a method that uses the advantages
of CFD modeling in order to evaluate the stability of wind turbine blades, while de-
creasing the complexity of 2-way FSI models. This chapter presents in detail the logic
followed for the development of the CFD method. In addition the way the quality
of the results is examined and how the investigation of the impact of the different
design parameters will take place is presented.
3.1.1
Description of the CFD approach
This CFD approach is developed in order to identify possible inflow conditions that
could lead to frequency lock-in and vortex induced vibrations using 1-way FSI, make
this challenging task, easier to solve for industrial purposes. To that end, 3D unsteady
simulations around blades are performed and several flow characteristics are studied.
The next paragraphs describe the approach and provide the reader with details about
the steps followed and the assumptions made.
Chapter 2.1 presented the approaches followed so far by researchers in order to detect
and predict vortex induced vibrations on cylinders, airfoils and wind turbine blades.
This approach uses an analysis of the blade’s response by performing simulations with
imposed blade vibrations. Initially, a computational domain suitable for performing
CFD simulations around wind turbines is created. The computational domain must
fulfill several requirements presented in the respective chapter.
When the size and shape of the domain are set, a series unsteady of simulations over
a stiff non-moving wind turbine blade is performed, using a range of inflow condi-
tions that could possibly lead to VIV. This kind of simulations is performed in order
to define under which conditions the von-Karman vortex street is developed for the
==PAGE:36==
18
3 Method
specific blade. In cases of blades with no pre-bend it would be safe to assume the
von-Karman vortex street will be generated on the whole span of the blade, due to
high angles of attack (as explained in 2.1), as the flow can be considered as two di-
mensional.The important factor is such cases would be the frequency the vortices are
shed at different radial positions. However, when studying long blades designed to
have pre-bend, there is a chance that the flow around the blade would bend due to the
design of the blade, generating velocity components in the radial direction, affecting,
thus, the flow and the way the vortices are generated. A visual analysis of the flow
around the blade and a analysis of the flow characteristics can reveal the existence of
a von-Karman vortex street.
After identifying which inflow conditions lead to the creation of periodic vortices
at leading and trailing edges of the blade, a frequency analysis of the aerodynamic
forces is conducted for these cases. The frequency analysis, will reveal whether the
frequency of the applied aerodynamic forces is close to the 2nd natural frequency of
the blade (1st edge-wise mode shape) as well as if there is a possibility of the lock-in
phenomenon to take place. The frequency analysis is performed for several positions
in the radial direction, in order to identify specific regions of the blade that could be
vulnerable to vortex induced vibrations.
When the frequency of the aerodynamic forces is in the vicinity of the 2nd natural
frequency of the blade, then the blade is in the region of lock-in phenomenon and the
risk of vortex induced vibrations is high. Using this concept, the range of the inflow
conditions leading to lock-in frequencies can be defined. This way, the possibility of
the occurrence of vortex induced vibrations is assessed.
When the blade is vibrating in the lock-in region, the need for assessing its stability
comes forth. In order to assess the stability of the blade, a series of unsteady simula-
tions using imposed vibrations is performed. When the blade vibrates with frequency
close to its 2nd natural frequency, then its deformation is dictated by the 1st edge-wise
mode shape. Taking this into account, the method considers that the blade starts
from an un-deformed position and then vibrates, mainly, in the chord-wise direction
being deformed according to the deflections calculated by the modal analysis.
The frequency of the vibrations is, therefore, set close to the 2nd natural frequency
of the blade. The blade natural frequencies and the corresponding mode shapes are
obtained via a blade modal analysis. The process for performing a modal analysis of
wind turbine blades is described in detailed by Larsen et al. (2002) [20]. The blade
modal analysis can be performed using the majority of the state of the art aero-elastic
solvers.
After performing the blade modal anaysis, the required information regarding the 1st
edge-wise mode shape is acquired and thus the coordinates of the deformed points of
the blade surface can be determined. In order for the latter to be accomplished, a
method is developed using the coordinates of the blade reference line, the coordinates
==PAGE:37==
3.1 1-way Fluid Structure Interaction
19
of the points consisting the shell of the cross sections at several radial stations and
information about the orientation of the said cross sections. The method is described
in the respective section.
A measure indicating the stability of the blade is the aerodynamic damping that can
be either the aerodynamic power or the aerodynamic work per vibration cycle. [19].
In the present study, the simulations are performed using the commercial software
ANSYS CFX 18.2T M and the aerodynamic work per unit cycle is used as a measure
of stability (aerodynamic damping). In this case the aerodynamic damping is defined
as follows:
Wcycle =
∫t0+T
t0
∫
A
p⃗ν · ˆndAdt
(3.1)
where T = 2π/ωv is the period of one vibration cycle, t0 is the time when the cycle
initiates, ω is the vibration frequency, p is the fluid pressure, ν is the velocity of the
blade as a result of the imposed vibrations, A is the blade surface area and ˆn the unit
vector normal to the surface.
By using the above definition for aerodynamic work, the blade is considered damped
when the values are positive, indicating that the fluid is absorbing the energy pro-
duced by the vibrating blade, damping thus, the vibrations. In the case of negative
values, the fluid is adding energy to the vibrating blade, making it un-damped.
The final step is the investigation of the impact of blade design parameters on the
stability of the blade. Said investigation will be performed by adjusting the coupling
between flap-wise and edge-wise modes shapes associated with the 2nd natural fre-
quency of the blade.
At any given mode shape, the distribution of the flap-wise and edge-wise deflections
at each radial position defines the way the edge-wise and flap-wise deformations of
the blade are coupled.
Figure 3.1 shows an example of the normalized edge-wise
and flap-wise deflections distribution as a function of the normalized radial position
for the 1st edge-wise mode shape that corresponds to the 2nd natural frequency of
the IEA 10MW blade. The first edge-wise mode shape presented in figure 3.1 was
obtained by performing an eigen-value analysis using the aeroelastic solver BHawC
developed by Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy.
By keeping the edge-wise (ux) deflections constant and altering the values of the
flap-wise (uy) ones, the author directly alters the coupling between the two directions
of deflection, affecting this way the mode shape and thus, the structural design of
the blade. It has to be noted, that the adjustments performed in this project use
arbitrary values chosen to represent realistic scenarios. It is not in the scope of the
project to define how the actual structural design of the blade should be changed in
==PAGE:38==
20
3 Method
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
r/R
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
ux
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
r/R
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
uy
Figure 3.1: First edge-wise mode shape of the IEA 10MW blade
order for the values to be achieved.
The next step, after adjusting the coupling between the edge-wise and flap-wise de-
flections, is to map the surface of the deformed blade, based on the information of the
newly calculated mode shape. This surface is then used in simulations with imposed
vibrations using the same inflow conditions as before. The aerodynamic work will be
used again as a measure to define how the stability of the blade has been affected.
The description of the approach presented above is summarized in the flow chart in
Figure 3.2.
3.2
Input Preparation
Before following the process illustrated in Figure 3.2, it is important to create and
prepare the files that are going to be used as input. The steps needed for the creation
of specific input and the process followed to create the already mentioned input is
described below:
3.2.1
Blade Surface Mapping
The first step is the creation of the 3D CAD model of the blade used in the simula-
tions. Typically, the model is created by using files directly exported from 3D CAD
software. As mentioned in the introduction, the blade used in the simulations of this
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Input Preparation
21
Figure 3.2: Flow chart of proposed approach
==PAGE:40==
22
3 Method
project is the IEA 10MW blade. However, the 3D model of the 10MW IEA blade
was not available in this project and it was, therefore, important to be created.
In order to create the CAD model of the blade, a series of geometrical and aerody-
namic parameters were provided to the author by DTU. In more detail, the informa-
tion needed is summarized below:
• Coordinates of the reference line (center line in this case)
• Values of chord length and relative thickness for several cross section in the
radial direction
• Information of the airfoils used in the span-wise direction
• Coordinates of the airfoil points
Once the aforementioned information is provided, it is possible to map the surface of
the blade in space. The x, y and z coordinates of the center-line, along with the twist
values of the blade, were obtained by simulations that were performed in HAWC2
[10]. The values for the chord length and relative thickness in the radial direction,
were provided in the form of an ASCII file, an example of which can be found in
the Appendix. Regarding the airfoils and their respective radial positions, the author
was provided with the coordinates of the points forming the airfoil surface and the
respective relative thickness values for 7 different airfoils used from root-to-tip span-
wise locations.
By combining the above said information with the ASCII file, it is possible to consol-
idate all the information in one file and then interpolate the airfoil coordinates for a
number of radial cross sections. Eventually, a generated file with detailed information
about the airfoils was used to create the surface of the blade and their specific radial
positions. The radial position of each airfoil is indicated by the respective relative
thickness value. Said information is formatted in a specific way and stored in an
aerodynamic configuration file. An example of that is given in the Appendix.
Regarding the geometrical characteristics of the blade, these are given using a pa-
rameters file. The parameters file contains information about the coordinates of the
reference line, the twist, cant and toe rotations of the reference line, values of the local
twist, cant and toe, coordinates of the twist center, values of the chord and of the
relative thickness etc. for all radial stations of the blade. An example of a parameters
file is also given in the appendix.
The parameters file is created using the aerodynamic configuration file and structural
information of the blade. The latter was provided by DTU and contained information
about the structure of the blade at several radial positions. More specifically, said
information includes values for mass, coordinates of the center line, coordinates of
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Input Preparation
23
the center of gravity, coordinates of shear center, bending stiffness, torsional stiffness,
twist angle etc.
The combination of the aforementioned files is sufficient for a 3D representation of
a blade and the creation of the 3D CAD model. The way the 3D CAD file is used
in the creation of the computational domain and detailed information about the IEA
10MW blade are given in the respective chapters.
3.2.2
Deformed Blade Surface Mapping
Another step that needs specific preparation of an input file is the simulation with
imposed vibrations. At this step, it is important to calculate the coordinates of the
surface points when the blade is deformed according to the respective mode shape.
In this project, as stated earlier, the studied mode shape is the one corresponding
to the 2nd natural frequency of the blade. For that to be accomplished, the author
developed a method that uses the normalized deflections calculated during the modal
analysis. These were further processed in order to calculate the translations and ro-
tations of the points forming the blade surface.
Similarly to mapping the surface of the un-deformed blade, this case requires several
input files. The aerodynamic design of the blade is defined by using the same aero-
dynamic configuration file described in the previous chapter. The difference in this
case lies in the parameters file as the coordinates of all the points of the blade have
changed due to its deformation. The coordinates have changed according the trans-
lational and torsional deflections, which were calculated during the modal analysis.
The output of the blade modal analysis, is a file including information about the blade
natural frequencies and the deflection of the reference line at specific radial positions
(which is defined by the user), for each specific natural frequency. The modal analysis
in this case was performed using BHAWC which calculates the normalized deflections
in the flap-wise (y-axis), edge-wise (x-axis) and radial (z-axis) directions, as well as
the torsional deflections around the 3 axis for 10 different modes. The deflections are
normalized using the maximum deflection of the dominating mode shape. For exam-
ple, in the case of the 1st edgewise mode, they are normalized by the tip deflection
in the edge-wise direction. This method takes into consideration the translational
deflections (x,y and z directions) and only the torsional deflection around the z-axis
which corresponds to the deflection of the local twist angle.
Usually the number of radial positions used in a blade modal analysis is limited (in
this case 19). In order to get a better representation of the deflected reference line,
the deflections are interpolated at many interval points. The calculated deflections
are then de-normalized and the values are added to the columns containing the in-
formation of the reference line (x, y, z) and the twist angle of the file containing the
==PAGE:42==
24
3 Method
geometrical parameters; by this process the new coordinates of the reference line are
calculated. A new parameters file is created for the deformed blade which is then
combined with aerodynamic configuration file and the coordinates of the points of
the deformed blade surface are generated. The outcome of this process is illustrated
in Figure 3.3. The left and right sides of figure 3.3 show the X-Z and X-Y views of
the un-deformed surface (grey) and deformed surface (red) of the IEA 10MW blade.
The information regarding the surface of the blade in its un-deformed and deformed
states, is used as input in ANSYS CFX PRE 18.2 in order to simulate the move-
ment of the blade during the vibration. CFX Pre provides the option of simulating
such movement via the means of a function that calculates the coordinates of all the
surface points based on coordinates of the initial position of each surface point and
its normalized maximum displacement. This function is used with a transient blade
row model and also uses as input the frequency of the vibration, the total number
of points, the mass of the blade and the maximum displacement. All the above are
inserted in the function in the format of a .CSV (Comma Separated Values) format.
an example of which can be found in the appendix.
This function calculates the new coordinates of each point at each time step based
on the vibration frequency and the maximum displacement contained in the .CSV
file. The benefit of using this function is that CFX calculates the position of each
blade surface point at each time step only for the first period of vibration. After
the completion of the first period, the information about the points of the surface
and mesh nodes that correspond to them, are stored and reused at each time step,
avoiding the recalculation of the mesh deformation and minimizing computational
time. The time-step size is defined by the the period of of vibration divided by the
number of time steps per period.
3.2.3
Adjustment of Deflection Coupling
The last step that requires specific input is the adjustment of the deflection coupling
in the two main directions. After developing the method to calculate the coordinates
of the surface of the deformed blade. the adjustment in the coupling can be achieved
by altering the values of the normalized deflection and using the new values to map
the surface of the blade. Figure 3.4, presents the surface of the deformed blade for 2
different flap-wise/edge-wise couplings. In all 3 cases, only the flap-wise component
of the deflection was adjusted maintaining the same edge-wise component.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Input Preparation
25
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
z [m]
-2
0
2
x [m]
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
y [m]
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
x [m]
Figure 3.3: Un-deformed (grey) and deformed (red) surface of the IEA 10MW blade
==PAGE:44==
26
3 Method
Figure 3.4: Visual representation of the adjusted 1st edge-wise mode shape of the
IEA 10MW blade
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Numerical Model and
CFD setup
This chapter presents a detailed description of the numerical model used and the
CFD setup. More specifically, the main equations of the numerical model are given,
along with information regarding the solution procedure. In addition, an overview
of the computational domain is given, including information about its size, shape,
coordinate system etc.
4.1
Numerical model
A crucial point when performing CFD simulations is the choice of an appropriate tur-
bulence model for modelling the flow. There is a variety of proposals when approach-
ing the vortex induced vibrations problem. A common method is the performance
of simulations using Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes solvers and 2 equation models
like k - ϵ or k - ω for closing the equations, combined with Large Eddy Simulation
(LES) or Detached Eddy Simulation (DES) models Horcas et al. 2018 [21] and Heinz
et al. 2016[12]. RANS models are used for solving the flow in areas close to the blade
and within the boundary layer, while LES or DES simulations are performed in outer
areas further away from the boundary layer, where the turbulent scales become larger
than the grid resolution.
Even though, most of the researchers working on this field use a combination of 2
equations models with LES or DES, the simulations in this work were performed only
using a RANS solver with the k - ω Shear Stress Transport (SST) turbulence model
Menter (1994) [22], for closing the equations for the whole computational domain.
This combination has provided reliable results when performing CFD simulations
around moving airfoils for the study of vortex induced vibrations [19] and [23]. In ad-
dition, this combination has been used by SGRE for several years, providing results
of great quality when it comes to rotor power calculations, development of blade aero-
dynamic add-ons, aero-acoustic simulations etc. This means that the CFD experts
of the company have years of experience using this model, the processes needed are
==PAGE:46==
28
4 Numerical Model and CFD setup
already developed and implemented successfully while the results are reliable. It is
not in the scope of this project to perform simulations using other turbulence models.
4.1.1
Governing equations
In order to provide an overview of the numerical model used in this project, it is
important to present the equations governing the flow and the general state of the
flow. Simulating the flow around wind turbine blades is a purely 3D problem, which
requires the creation of a three dimensional model. In cases where the speed of stud-
ied flow is low, the density is considered to be constant, as no compressibility effects
appear. This is considered to be the case when modelling the flow around wind tur-
bine blades with the flow speed being close to operational conditions. Operational
conditions of modern wind turbine lie in the range from 3[ m
sec] to 25[ m
sec], yielding to
a Mach number M < 0.1, when the maximum tip speeds are close to 90[ m
sec], yielding
a local Mach number M < 0.3, verifying the case of incompressible flow. Therefore,
in the studied cases where the inflow speed is close to 18[ m
sec], the air density is con-
sidered to be constant and equal to 1.225 [ kg
m3 ].
Taking the aforementioned into consideration, the flow can be analytically described
by the Navier-Stokes equations for incompressible flows, which are presented below
in tensor format (i,j=1,2,3):
ρ(∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj
) = −∂p
∂xi
+
∂
∂xj
(µ ∂ui
∂xj
) + ρgi
(4.1)
where ui is the mean velocity component in the direction of the i axis at xi, p is
the mean pressure and ρgi is the gravity force in the i-th direction. In addition, to
describe the flow, the continuity condition must be fulfilled and thus, the continuity
equations is needed:
∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(4.2)
Furthermore, the flow in the studied cases is considered fully turbulent as the Re
number is the range of 108 and thus, each variable ui needs to be decomposed into a
mean or averaged value ui and a fluctuating component u′
i [24]:
ui = ui + u′
i
(4.3)
Finally the Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations are obtained by sub-
stituting equation 4.3 and 4.2 in equations 4.1:
ρ(uj
∂ui
∂xj
) = −∂p
∂xi
+
∂
∂xj
(µ ∂ui
∂xj
−ρu′
iu′
j) + ρgi
(4.4)
where the term ρu′
iu′
j stands for the stresses due to the fluctuations, also know as
Reynolds Stresses. In order to close the set of equations and numerically solve the
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Numerical model
29
problem, it is required to choose an appropriate turbulence model. There are several
turbulence models developed for simulating different flows.
Each one offering en-
hanced results for different types. As mentioned earlier, the chosen turbulence model
is ths k - ω SST model, which is described in detail in the next chapter.
4.1.2
Turbulence model
This section presents a detailed description of the turbulence model used in this
project. As mentioned earlier, the chosen model is the k - ω SST. This model was
proposed by Menter (1994) [22] and it is based on the k - ω model proposed by Wilcox
(1988) [25]. Menter developed two models based on the k - ω model of Wilcox, in
order to remove the dependency of the latter on the free stream conditions.
4.1.2.1
The Baseline (BSL) model
The first model is known as the baseline model (BSL) and it is a combination of the
k - ω model proposed by Wilcox [22] and the standard high-Reynolds-number version
of the k - ϵ. More specifically, the Wilcox k - ω model is used in the sub-layer and
the logarithmic region of the boundary layer, while the k - ϵ, transformed to a k - ω is
used for the free shear flow in the wake. A blending function F1 is used as a ”switch”
between the two models and is designed in a way that has a value of 1 in the sublayer
and logarithmic region of the boundary layer and gradually reduces to zero region of
the wake.
The original k - ω model is described by the following equations:
∂(ρk)
∂t
+
∂
∂xj
(
ρUjk
)
=
∂
∂xj
[(
µ + µt
σk1
) ∂k
∂xj
]
+ Pk −β′ρkω
(4.5)
∂(ρω)
∂t
+
∂
∂xj
(
ρUjω
)
=
∂
∂xj
[(
µ + µt
σω1
) ∂ω
∂xj
]
+ α1
ω
k Pk −β1ρω2
(4.6)
where the buoyancy effects are not included, and the density ρ and the velocity vector
U are treated as known variables form the Navier-Stokes method, in addition to the
independent variables. The production rate Pk of turbulence due to viscous forces,
calculated in the k - ϵ model as follows:
Pk = µt
(∂Ui
∂xj
+ ∂Uj
∂xi
)∂Ui
∂xj
−2
3
∂Uk
∂xk
(
3µt
∂Uk
∂xk
+ ρk
)
(4.7)
while the transformed k - ϵ model is described as follows:
∂(ρk)
∂t
+
∂
∂xj
(
ρUjk
)
=
∂
∂xj
[(
µ + µt
σk2
) ∂k
∂xj
]
+ Pk −β′ρkω
(4.8)
==PAGE:48==
30
4 Numerical Model and CFD setup
∂(ρω)
∂t
+
∂
∂xj
(
ρUjω
)
=
∂
∂xj
[(
µ + µt
σω2
) ∂ω
∂xj
]
+ 2ρ
1
σω2ω
∂k
∂xj
∂ω
∂xj
+ α2
ω
k Pk −β2ρω2
(4.9)
Finally, equations 4.5 and 4.6 are multiplied with the blending function F1, equations
4.8 and 4.9 are multiplied with 1-F1 and the respective equations for k and ω are
added together to give the BSL model:
∂(ρk)
∂t
+
∂
∂xj
(
ρUjk
)
=
∂
∂xj
[(
µ + µt
σk3
) ∂k
∂xj
]
+ Pk −β′ρkω
(4.10)
and
∂(ρω)
∂t
+ ∂
∂xj
(
ρUjω
)
=
∂
∂xj
[(
µ+ µt
σω3
) ∂ω
∂xj
]
+
(
1−F1
)
2ρ
1
σω2ω
∂k
∂xj
∂ω
∂xj
+α3
ω
k Pk−β3ρω2
(4.11)
The values of all constants used in the models are the following:
β′ = 0.09,
α1 = 5/9,
β1 = 0.075,
σk1 = 2,
σω1 = 2
(4.12)
α2 = 0.44,
β2 = 0.0828,
σk2 = 1,
σω2 = 1/0.856
(4.13)
while the coefficients of the BSL model are calculated by using a linear combination
of the coefficients 4.12 and 4.13 using the following formula:
Φ3 = F1Φ1 + (1 −F1)Φ2
(4.14)
4.1.2.2
The k - ω Shear Stress Transport (SST) model
The benefit of the BSL model is that it combines the advantages of the Wilcox and
the k - ϵ models.
However, it does not manage to predict characteristics of flow
separation from smooth surfaces, because these model do not take into consideration
the transport of the turbulent shear stresses, resulting in an over-prediction of the
eddy-viscosity, as highlighted by Menter [22].
To overcome this obstacle, Menter added a limiter in the formulation of the eddy-
viscosity using also a blending function F2, enabling the limiter close to the wall
boundary layer, as the underlying assumptions are not correct for the wake region.
The limiter is the following:
νt =
α1k
max(α1ω, SF2)
(4.15)
where νt = µt
ρ and S is an invariant measure of the strain rate. In addition, the
production of ω is calculated by Pω = (α3/νt)Pk. The final step, is the definition of
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Numerical model
31
the blending functions, as they are very important for the successful implementation
of the method. They are based on the wall distance and the flow variables:
F1 = tanh
(
min
(
max
( √
k
β′ωy′
500ν
y2ω
)
,
4ρk
CDkwσω2y2
))
(4.16)
where y is the distance from the wall, ν is the kinematic viscosity and CDkωis calcu-
lated as shown below:
CDkω = max
(
2ρ
1
σω2ω
∂k
∂xj
∂ω
∂xj
, 1.0x10−10)
(4.17)
and
F2 = tanh
(
max
( 2
√
k
β′ωy′ , 500ν
y2ω
))
(4.18)
4.1.3
Computational domain and boundary conditions
This section presents the logic behind the design of the computational domain in
terms shape, boundary conditions, meshing and sizing.
It is common practice to use a computational domain of cylindrical shape to simulate
the flow around a wind turbine rotor using CFD. In the case of blade simulations,
only one third of the previously mentioned cylinder is used. More specifically, the do-
main is split into 3 equally sized parts, assuming rotational periodicity conditions for
the surfaces in the radial direction. That approach was used in the this case as well.
Figure 4.1 presents a perspective view of the main computational domain, including
domain topology, to give a better of overview of the size and shape.
As seen in Figure 4.1, inlet boundary conditions are used at the surface on the x
- y plane upstream the blade, presented in detail in Figure 4.2. Additionally, inlet
conditions are used in the outer part of the cylindrical surface, as also indicated in
Figure 4.1. Outlet boundary conditions are used in the surface lying on the x - z plane
downstream the blade. An expansion angle in the longitudinal direction is used, to
avoid alignment of the fluid speed with the boundary conditions lying in the outer
surface. This is accomplished by increasing the diameter of the face downstream the
blade.
==PAGE:50==
32
4 Numerical Model and CFD setup
Figure 4.1: Perspective view of computational domain including blocking
Figure 4.2: View of inlet boundary and side view of the computational domain
Inside the main domain, there is a smaller one, following the exact logic in shape
as the main domain, but having slightly different boundary conditions. The main
difference is that the surface lying on the x - y plane downstream the blade, is con-
sidered as opening. This combination of 2 domains is used to create a more dense
mesh close the blade area, which becomes coarser as the flow moves to the area of
the main domain. In this way, the solver focuses on the area around the blade were
more complex flow phenomena take place and uses less nodes at the area away from
the blade. The size of the of both domains is blade dependent. This means, that the
distance of the surface areas from the blade surface are always depended on the size
and more specifically, on the length of the blade.
As also shown in Figure 4.1, the computational domain contains two more blocks, the
blade and hub as well as the interface around the blade. The blade is considered as
a wall boundary using no-slip boundary conditions, while the hub surface is treated
as free-slip wall. The latter is chosen for minimizing the effect of the hub on the flow
==PAGE:51==
4.2 CFD Setup
33
around the blade. The interface around the blade is used to create an even more dense
hexahedral (HEXA) mesh in the area close the blade wall, so that the more complex
flow phenomena are captured. In general, the used mesh is HYBRID consisting of
areas composed by hexahedral elements and areas composed by tetrahedral elements
(TETRA). The TETRA elements are used outside the interface and extend until the
borders of the computational domain.
The process for the creation of the whole computational domain and the CFD setup
used, is presented in the next chapter.
4.2
CFD Setup
This section provides the reader with a detailed description of the process followed to
setup the CFD simulations. This process includes the blocking and meshing process,
mesh optimization process and the setup of the simulations. This process is developed
and followed by the Rotor Performance - Blades Team of Siemens Gamesa Renewable
Energy.
4.2.1
Blocking and Meshing
The creation of the blocks that will be used for the creation of the mesh and the
meshing process, are performed using the commercial software ANSYS ICEM CFD
18.2. Specifically, the procedure below is followed.
In the beginning, a MATLAB script is used to create the blocks consisting the com-
putational domain (main domain, inner domain, interface and blade/hub).
This
MATLAB script is designed for creating domains for aerodynamic power calculations
and not necessarily for the study of vortex induced vibrations. However, the gener-
ated domain complies with the requirements for the study of vortex induced vibrations
and, therefore, was considered acceptable in this case. The script creates the compu-
tational domain based on the following information:
• Inflow speed in [ms−1]
• Rotor rotational speed in [RPM]
• Blade pitch angle in degrees
• Blade cone angle in degrees
• Blade design
• Blade tip design
==PAGE:52==
34
4 Numerical Model and CFD setup
• Nacelle design
For the blade design, the code needs input about aerodynamic parameters of the
blade and information about the general geometrical parameters. Said information
is provided using the files described in section 3.2.1.
By using these 2 files and specifying specific regions in the radial directions and also
around the blade surface, the script uses special tools developed by SGRE to create
3D CAD files for the blade, the interface and the blocks mentioned in section 4.1.3.
All the above-mentioned blocks are assembled together to form a uniform geometry
that is later used in ICEM CFD for the creation of the preliminary HEXA mesh.
The preliminary unstructured HEXA mesh is located in the interface region (Figure
4.3 left and right). The size of the volumes and their distribution are controlled by
specific edges, created during the blocking process, presented in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.3: Perspective view of preliminary mesh close to the blade. Left: Preliminary
mesh on the blade surface. Right: Preliminary mesh on the interface surrounding the
blade
==PAGE:53==
4.2 CFD Setup
35
Figure 4.4: Block edges for the creation of the hex mesh
After creating the initial blocking and generating the initial mesh, it is required that
the user manually inspects the generated blocks and mesh in order to ensure that the
mesh metrics of the created volumes are acceptable. The metrics used in the present
work are the determinant 2x2x2, the orthogonality angle and the aspect ratio of the
created volumes, the criteria of which, are based on engineering judgment and on the
guidelines of ANSYS CFX [26]:
1. The determinant 2x2x2 must be higher 0.4. In general values over 0.3 are usually
acceptable by most solvers
2. The orthogonality angle must be higher than 20 degrees
3. The aspect ratio of the cells on the interface must be higher the 0.3
If the quality of the mesh is not acceptable, then minor adjustments are made to
improve mesh quality and ensure that the convergence criteria will be met. After
completing the fine tuning process of the HEXA mesh, the next step is the creation
of the HYBRID mesh that spans from the interface until the outer boundaries of
the computational domain. This process is completed in two steps. The first step is
the creation of areas of higher density that are located in the vicinity of the blade,
the interface and the nacelle. This is preformed by using a script written in Tcl/Tk
programming language. This script was created by SGRE and it gives the user the
freedom to define the number of density areas needed, the size of them and their
respective density. After running the script using the respective option ICEM CFD,
the code generates a new geometry containing all the regions mentioned in section
4.1.3, plus a cylinder of density regions intersecting said regions.
==PAGE:54==
36
4 Numerical Model and CFD setup
Figure 4.5: Detail of density regions close to the blade area
Figure 4.5 illustrates an example of the area close to blade, where 5 density regions
have been created and indicated by the white lines. In the same figure, the inner
domain and the interface are also visible, giving a better understanding of the way
the HYBRID mesh is developed. The last step in the creation of the HYBRID mesh,
is the merging of the HEXA mesh and the density regions. This is performed again
using a script in Tcl/Tk, developed by SGRE. Figure 4.6, presents a perspective view
of the final mesh, while Figure 4.7 gives a detailed view of the inner domain and the
interface.
Figure 4.6: Perspective view of the final HYBRID mesh
==PAGE:55==
4.2 CFD Setup
37
Figure 4.7: Detail of inner domain and blade interface of the HYBRID mesh
Detailed information about the size of the domain, the number of density regions etc.
are given in the respective simulations section.
==PAGE:56==
38
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Simulation Strategy
Now that the problem and numerical model are described, and the computational
domain is created, the realization of a series of simulations in order to assess the
efficiency of the model and its applicability is required.
This section provides an
overview of the cases that were simulated in this project and reasoning behind their
choice.
One of the goals of this project is to propose an approach to investigate the vortex
induced vibrations of wind turbine blades during standstill phenomenon using 1-way
FSI. As described in chapter 3, the proposed method uses imposed vibrations on the
blade and investigates the stability of the blade by assessing the work of the aerody-
namic forces on the blade per vibration cycle and thus, the aerodynamic damping.
However, before performing simulations to investigate the stability of the blade, an
analysis must be performed to investigate the sensitivity of the results on domain size,
mesh density and time step size. Said analysis, was done by performing simulations on
a non-moving/stiff blade and changing the aforementioned parameters. As mentioned
earlier, the studied blade is the 10MW IEA blade, which described in more detail in
the following section.
5.1
The 10MW IEA blade
The 10MW IEA blade is part of the offshore wind turbine designed in the IEA Wind
Task 37 and is based on the feedback received from many users of the DTU 10MW
RWT. This section provides the reader with basic information regarding the turbine
and details on geometric parameters, aerodynamic and structural design. Detailed
information for the DTU 10MW IEA turbine and for the design process can be found
in [27].
The 10MW IEA wind turbine is a direct drive offshore wind turbine and its rotor is
an optimized version of the old DTU 10MW RWT. The following table summarized
the key parameters of the turbine:
==PAGE:58==
40
5 Simulation Strategy
Figure 5.1: left: 3D model of the DTU 10 MW IEA rotor. Right: Key parameters of
DTU 10MW IEA wind turbine[27]
As mentioned earlier in chapter 4.2.1, in order to create the domain, the blade design
and more specifically, the 3D model of the blade is required. The 3D model was
generated using the process described in chapter 3.2.1.
The IEA 10MW blade is designed using the FFA-WE airfoil family. The coordinates
of the points forming each airfoil were provided along with the respective relative
thickness values in the form of an ASCII file. The coordinates of the airfoil cross
sections normalized by the chord length are presented in Figure 5.2.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 The 10MW IEA blade
41
Figure 5.2: Normalized coordinates of airfoil cross sections
Information regarding the x, y and z coordinates of the center-line, along with values
for the twist of the blade, were provided from simulations that were performed in
HAWC2. By combining said information with the ASCI file, all the information was
consolidated in one file. The airfoil coordinates were interpolated at 98 radial cross
sections, creating this way the aerodynamic configuration file. Finally, following the
process mentioned in 3.2.1, the parameters file was crated.
Finally, the CFG and PARAMS files, where used as input in a script developed by
SGRE and the 3D model of the blade was created using the NX Design CAD software.
==PAGE:60==
42
5 Simulation Strategy
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Radius [m]
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Relative Thickness [%]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Radius [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Chord [m]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Radius [m]
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Twist [deg]
Figure 5.3: Radial evolution of blade basic geometrical parameters of DTU 10MW
IEA blade.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 The 10MW IEA blade
43
Figure 5.3 illustrates the radial evolution of some of the basic geometrical character-
istics of the 10MW IEA blade, as an outcome of the blade surface mapping process.
The results are, almost, in perfect agreement with information provided in [27]. In
addition, figure 5.4 shows the top view (pressure side) and from view (leading edge)
of the final 3D model.
Figure 5.4: Top view (pressure side) and from view (leading edge) of the 10MW IEA
blade
5.1.1
Critical conditions
Researchers at DTU are studying the behavior of the this blade with respect to
vortex induced vibrations. The research is being conducted using the high fidelity tool
HAWC2CFD [11] and some preliminary results have indicated the range of conditions
that could lead to the occurrence of vortex induced vibrations.
The results have
revealed that the below conditions cause high amplitude vibrations and are related
to vortex induced vibrations.
• Inflow speed: Vinf = 18 m
s
• Angle of attack: AOAtip = 100◦
• Inclination angle: ψ = 40◦
where the inclination angle is positive when the inflow speed is going towards the root
of the blade, as defined in Figure 2.4.
==PAGE:62==
44
5 Simulation Strategy
5.2
Sensitivity Analysis Cases
In order to perform a sensitivity analysis, the cases presented in Table 5.1 were
examined.
Case
Type
First Cell Height
Nodes
Time step
1
SS
Steady State
0.003 [mm]
100
not applicable
2
TR_sts
Transient
0.003 [mm]
100
0.001479 [s]
3
TR_lts
Transient
0.003 [mm]
100
0.01479 [s]
4
SS_03fch
Steady State
0.03 [mm]
80
not applicable
5
TR_03fch
Transient
0.03 [mm]
80
0.01479 [s]
Table 5.1: Sensitivity Analysis Simulation Matrix
Table 5.1 provides an overview of the cases simulated in order to perform the sen-
sitivity analysis. In all cases, the inflow speed is Vinf = 18 m
s , the angle of attack
is AOAT IP = 90◦and the inclination angle is ψ = 0◦. The inflow speed of 18 m
s
was chosen based on information provided from DTU, as mentioned in the previous
section. The angle of attack AOAtip = 0 is chosen so that the wind hits the blade on
the pressure side and finally, the inclination angle is chosen to be zero so that there
is no inflow velocity component in the span-wise direction. These inflow conditions
are considered adequate to provoke the generation of the von-Karman vortex street.
The parameter ”Nodes” corresponds to the number of nodes in the direction normal
to the blade surface in the HEX mesh area.
The cases presented in table 5.1 were chosen in order to assess the sensitivity of the
solver on grid size, first cell height and time step.
Steady state simulations were
performed in order to acquire a developed flow field and use the results as input for
the transient (unsteady) cases. This way, problems with the stability of the transient
simulations during the first time steps were avoided and the convergence time was
decreased. The total simulation time was set to 20s. The dimensions of the outer
domain were kept constant in all studied cases and are presented in figure 5.5.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Sensitivity Analysis Cases
45
Figure 5.5: Side view and dimensions of computational domain
Detailed information regarding the cell distribution at the blade surface for all the
cases presented in table 5.1 is given in table 5.2. PS, SS and TE stand for Pressure
Side, Suction Side and Trailing edge respectively:
Case
PS
SS
TE
Normal to blade
1
SS
134
134
47
100
2
TR_sts
134
134
47
100
3
TR_lts
134
134
47
100
4
SS_03fch
124
124
27
80
5
TR_03fch
124
124
27
80
Table 5.2: Blade surface node distribution for sensitivity analysis cases
Figure 5.6 presents the created mesh corresponding to the cases 1 to 3 of table 5.2.
More specifically, the left figure shows a perspective view of the blade mesh, while
the right figure shows a detail at blade tip.
==PAGE:64==
46
5 Simulation Strategy
Figure 5.6: left: Generated mesh at blade surface for IEA 10MW blade. Right: Detail
of the mesh at the tip of the IEA 10MW blade
The different colours seen on the left part of figure 5.6, correspond to different sur-
faces that were generated during the blocking process of mesh generation. The blue
area at the root, corresponds to the surface mesh of the nacelle. The right part of
figure 5.6 shows the cell distribution at the tip of the blade, where the way the cells
are distributed over the circumference of the blade is visible.
5.3
Simulations of Non-moving blade
As mentioned in chapter 3, a series of simulations of a non moving blade were per-
formed in order to assess the existence of the von-Karman vortex street and the shed-
ding frequency of the vortices. Table 5.3 provides an overview of all the simulated
cases.
Case
Vinf [ m
/ s]
Ψ [deg]
AOAtip [deg]
1
IEA_18ms_0_90
18
0
90
2
IEA_18ms_35_90
18
35
90
3
IEA_18ms_35_100
18
35
100
4
IEA_18ms_40_90
18
40
90
5
IEA_18ms_40_100
18
40
100
Table 5.3: Simulation matrix for simulations of non-moving blade
The first 2 cases presented in table 5.3 were chosen in order to assess the flow around
the blade when there is no flow inclination (ψ = 0◦) and the angle of attack is close
to 90 degrees. Based on the information presented in chapter 2.1, such high angles of
attack ensure a fully detached flow that will lead to the generation of the von-Karman
vortex street. The choice of wind speed is based on information provided by DTU
as mentioned earlier. The next four cases were examined in order to study the flow
around the blade at conditions close to the critical ones stated in section 5.1.1.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Simulations of Non-moving blade
47
5.3.1
Limitation of CFD Setup
While following the process of setting up the CFD simulations described above, sev-
eral limitations of the current setup and its applicability were revealed. The compu-
tational domain design process has a proven reliability for power calculations, but it
has not been used to study vortex induced vibrations. In this setup. the inflow profile
is defined by a uniform flow in the direction parallel to the y - axis, as shown in the
ride side of figure 4.2.
The way the computational domain is designed, no flow inclination can be introduced.
In order to overcome this problem, 2 different approaches were followed.
5.3.1.1
Addition of Upwind Cone Angle
The first approach was to add a cone angle to the blade equal to the flow inclination
angle. This way, instead of changing the orientation of the flow, the orientation of
the blade is changed. When the flow inclination angle is positive, the inflow speed
has a velocity component in the radial axis, moving in the direction from tip to root.
To account for such an angle, the blade has to be coned upwind. In order for this to
be achieved, the flow inclination angle is added as a cone angle to the input for the
creations of the computational domain.
The script creating the computational domain, changes the orientation of the blade
and creates a new assembly of the blade and the nacelle. Furthermore, the size of
the inner area has to be increased so that the distance of the blade interface and
boundaries of the inner area is increased. The implementation of the aforementioned
proved to be problematic as the setup could not generate the Hybrid mesh. The
problem lied close to the region of the pressure side of the blade root. Even though
the preliminary HEX mesh was created and its quality metrics were in the acceptable
range of values, due to the added cone angle, the mesh elements of the interface were
very small, creating elements of bad quality when the script attempted to generate
the TETRA mesh. This led to a leakage of elements into different surfaces, causing
the meshing script to fail. Several different mesh distributions were used, making the
mesh as coarse as possible, but with no success.
5.3.1.2
Change in the flow direction
Since the previous attempt to include the flow inclination angle in the simulations
failed, an attempt to change the flow orientation was made. In order to change the
orientation of the inflow, the boundary conditions has to be reconfigured. The side
surfaces that were set as boundaries with rotational periodicity, were changed to
openings. The new computational domain for the cases including flow inclination is
shown in figure 5.7.
==PAGE:66==
48
5 Simulation Strategy
Figure 5.7: Side view of the computational domain for simulations with flow inclina-
tion
This option carried a risk of simulation failure as in the region close to root, the
boundaries were very close the area where vortices would be generated due to the
detached flow. However, since it was in the scope of the project to use the CFD
Setup and the computational domain of SGRE, and there was no available time for
the design and creation of a new computational domain, it was decided to proceed
with this method in order add flow inclination.
5.4
Imposed vibrations simulations
In order to assess the stability of the blade, a series of cases were simulated using
imposed vibrations. During these simulations the frequency was set to be equal to
the 1st (0.676 [Hz]) edge-wise frequency of the blade which was calculated during the
modal analysis using BHawC. Different vibration amplitudes were simulated in order
to study the behavior of the aerodynamic damping. The total simulation time for
these case was equal to 14.79 seconds which equals to 10 vibration periods. The fol-
lowing table summarized the cases using imposed vibrations, including the respective
flow conditions.
==PAGE:67==
5.5 Simulations using adjusted mode shape coupling
49
Case
Vinf [m/s]
Ψ [deg]
AOAtip [deg]
Amplitude [m]
1
IEA_18ms_0_90_02
18
0
90
0.2
2
IEA_18ms_0_90_05
18
0
100
0.5
3
IEA_18ms_35_90_05
18
35
90
0.5
4
IEA_18ms_35_100_05
18
35
100
0.5
5
IEA_18ms_40_90_05
18
40
90
0.5
6
IEA_18ms_40_100_05
18
40
100
0.5
Table 5.4: Simulation matrix for cases with imposed vibrations
At this point, it has to be noted that in the case of imposed vibration, the mesh
density needs to be different than in the cases of non-moving blades. More specifi-
cally, the mesh needs to be rather coarser in order to be able to deform based on the
vibrating blade.
Finally, the setup shown in Figure 5.7 was also used for the simulation of cases in-
cluding flow inclination.
5.5
Simulations using adjusted mode shape coupling
The final step of the proposed approach is the realization of simulations with im-
posed vibrations using adjusted coupling of the edge-wise and flap-wise deflections.
The cases 2, 4 and 4 of table 5.4 were simulated using 2 different deflection couplings.
As mentioned in section 3.2.3, the adjustment in the coupling was done by keeping
the deflection distribution in the edge-wise direction constant and by altering the
deflection distribution in the flap-wise direction.
==PAGE:68==
50
5 Simulation Strategy
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
x/R [-]
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
uy [-]
Normalized flap-wise deflection uy cases
Original
Original x 2
Original x 3
Figure 5.8: Flap-wise deflection distribution for 3 different couplings
Figure 5.8 illustrates the radial distribution of the flap-wise deflections corresponding
to the 2nd natural frequency of the blade. The blue curve corresponds to the original
case. The red curve corresponds to the case where the absolute value of the normalized
flap-wise deflection is doubled, Finally, the yellow curve represents the case where the
absolute value of the normalized flap-wise deflection is tripled. The results of the
above-mentioned adjustments are presented visually in figure 3.4.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Results
In this chapter, the reader is presented with the results of the simulations along
with their analysis. All the simulations were performed using the cluster owned by
Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy. Each simulation run on 280 nodes with a CPU
frequency of 2.6 GHz and memory capacity of 252GB. Furthermore, the characteris-
tics regarding the fluid were kept the same in all the simulations. Said characteristics
are presented in table 6.1.
6.1
Sensitivity Analysis
This section presents the results of the sensitivity analysis. The analysis is performed
by studying the convergence of the solver and the total simulation time. Figure 6.1
shows the RMS residuals for the mass for the 3 simulated cases.
Parameter
Value
1
Dynamic viscosity
1.843E-05 [Pa s]
2
Density
1.225 [kg m−3]
3
Molar Mass
28.96 [kg kmol−1]
4
Thermal Conductivity
2.61E-02 [W m−1 K−1]
Table 6.1: Fluid characteristics
==PAGE:70==
52
6 Results
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
RMS Mass
10-5
TR_sts
TR_lts
TR_03fch
Figure 6.1: RMS mass residuals for the sensitivity analysis cases
Table 6.2 gives and overview of the convergence criteria and total simulation time for
the 3 cases.
The great difference in total computational time of case number 1 of table 6.2 lies on
the fact that the convergence criteria could not be met, forcing the solver to complete
the maximum number of internal iteration before proceeding to the next time step. By
taking into consideration the above-mentioned, the mesh characteristics and chosen
time step of the case TR_lts were considered as the best choice and were used in the
simulations of the non-moving blade.
6.2
Simulations of Non-moving blade
Regarding the simulations of non-moving stiff blade, the results are presented here-
after.
Case
Convergence
Total simulation time
1
TR_sts
1e-05
73 h
2
TR_lts
2e-05
36 h
3
TR_03fch
1e-05
41 h
Table 6.2: Fluid characteristics
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Simulations of Non-moving blade
53
The first simulated case included no flow inclination and an angle of attack of 90 de-
grees. This case was chosen in order to study the flow at the critical inflow speed, but
away from the critical conditions for flow inclination and angle of attack. It was also
chosen as a case to assess the capabilities of the setup in predicting the von-karman
vortex street.
A visual inspection of the vorticity levels at several radial positions revealed that the
von-Karman street vortex is visible at radial positions in the range 72 m≤R ≤79 m.
Figure 6.2 shows the vorticity levels in the form of contours at the radial position R
= 75m.
Figure 6.2: Vorticity contours at R = 75 m
It was expected that the von-Karman vortex street would be visible at the whole span
of the blade due to the high angle of attack which ensures that fully detached flow
would take place. However, the von-Karman vortex street was clearly visible only
in the range stated above. In order to understand this phenomenon, the flow was
visualized using streamlines, figure 6.3.
==PAGE:72==
54
6 Results
Figure 6.3: Velocity Streamlines
As seen in figure 6.3, due to the pre-bend of the blade, the flow is diverted towards
the root of the blade. At the same time, close to the root, the direction of the flow is
also changed, creating vortices that are moving towards the middle part of the blade.
This is probably caused by the presence of the nacelle (not visible in this figure) and
the very thick root of the blade.
The combination of these two phenomena, con-
straints the flow towards the middle part of the blade where the vortices are mixed
and probably break down.
However, since the vortex street is visible in specific regions of the blade, the time
series of the forces in the edge-wise direction was extracted, and presented in figure
6.4.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Simulations of Non-moving blade
55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Time [s]
-53
-52
-51
-50
-49
-48
-47
-46
-45
Fx [N]
Force in the chord direction at R = 75m
Figure 6.4: Force in the chord-wise direction at radial the radial position of 75m
The first 3 seconds of the simulation can be disregarded as the frequency was not
stabilized. Even though the magnitude of the force is not fully converged for those 3
seconds, the period of the oscillating forces is almost constant. A frequency analysis
of the time series yield an oscillation period of approximately TF = 0.7454 s, which
corresponds to an oscillation frequency of ωf = 1.3416 Hz. This frequency is far away
from the 2nd natural frequency of the blade. A study of the force’s frequency for
radial positions in the range 72 m≤R ≤79 m, yielded similar results. This cases
showed that the inflow conditions must differ and flow inclination should be taken
into consideration.
As per table 5.3, the other cases studied included flow inclination. As it was men-
tioned in chapter 5.3.1.2, the only way to introduce an inclination angle to the flow
field was by changing the boundary conditions and by adjusting the inflow velocity
components. Initially, since the domain had changed, steady simulations were per-
formed in order to be used as initialization to the transient ones.
The total simulation time was set to 30s for these cases. Unfortunately, it was not
possible to complete any of the simulations using flow inclination, as all the simula-
tions crashed after a specific time. A study on the residuals and especially the mass
imbalance revealed the cause of the simulations failure.
==PAGE:74==
56
6 Results
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Time [s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
RMS mass residual
10-5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Time [s]
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
RMS mass imbalance
Figure 6.5: Mass conservation and mass imbalance monitoring points
Figure 6.5 illustrates the RMS mass residual and the mass imbalance for the case
IEA_18ms_40_100. By observing the plot of the RMS mass residual, it becomes
evident that the simulation becomes unstable after approximately 13 seconds. By
monitoring the mass imbalance it is becomes clear that simulation failed because the
mass continuity is not fulfilled.
The reason for this result is the distance of the boundaries from the blade, especially
close to the root. In the first seconds of the simulation the flow is being developed
and the vortices have not yet moved downstream. After some time though, the size
of the vortices increase and the vortices travel downstream, hitting eventually the
opening boundary. This leads to numerical errors that build up and eventually lead
to the failure of the simulation. All the simulations have flow inclination ended up
failing for the same reason.
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Imposed vibrations simulations
57
6.3
Imposed vibrations simulations
Regarding the simulations using imposed vibrations, the problem described in the
previous section for the cases including flow inclination was also observed. In the
case of imposed vibrations though, the total simulation time was 14.79 secs and the
simulations ended before the solver crashed.
Figure 6.6 presents the velocity field at 3 different radial sections for 6 different
times step. By observing the way the flow evolves from the time t = 6.3 s at figure
6.6a to the time t = 11.3 s at figure 6.6f, it becomes clear that the problem starts
from the area close to the root. As the vortices travel downstream, they reach the
boundary and gradually ”explode” leading the solver to an unstable solution. For
better understanding, the flow is visualized using velocity streamlines at the exact
same times. The result is depicted in figure 6.7.
Since the case with flow inclination could not be completed, the project focused on
studying the cases with 0 flow inclination. Table 6.3 presents the cases that were
simulated successfully.
Case
Vinf [m/s]
Ψ [deg]
AOAtip [deg]
Amplitude [m]
1
0p_90a_02
18
0
90
0.2
2
0p_90a_05
18
0
90
0.5
3
0p_90a_05_x2
18
0
90
0.5
4
0p_90a_05_x3
18
0
90
0.5
Table 6.3: Successfully simulated cases
Since it was not possible to simulated cases close to critical conditions, due to the
limitations of the setup, the project focused on investigating the impact of design
parameters on blade stability, by studying the cases presented in table 6.3.
Figure 6.8 presents the aerodynamic work for the simulated cases presented in table
6.3. Cases 1 and 2 of said table correspond to the initial design of the blade, while
cases 3 and 4 correspond to the cases with adjusted coupling, described in figure 5.8.
As expected, cases 1 and 2 are stable and the values for the aerodynamic work are
oscillating around 0. However, cases 3 and 4 are not oscillating symmetrically around
zero. In order to assess the impact of the structural coupling on the aerodynamic
damping, the values of work presented in figure 6.8 for cases 2, 3 and 4 are integrated
over one vibration period and the results are presented in table 6.4.
Case
Aerodynamic Damping
1
0p_90a_05
4.5880
2
0p_90a_05_x2
15.4460
3
0p_90a_05_x3
162.245
Table 6.4: Aerodynamic damping
==PAGE:76==
58
6 Results
(a) Velocity contours at t = 6.3 s
(b) Velocity contours at t = 7.3 s
(c) Velocity contours at t = 8.3 s
(d) Velocity contours at t = 9.3 s
(e) Velocity contours at t = 10.3 s
(f) Velocity contours at t = 11.3 s
Figure 6.6: Evolution of vortices at different time steps
By examining the results of table 6.4, it can be noticed that when the coupling be-
tween the edge-wise and flap-wise deflections is increased, the aerodynamic damping
is also increased. This way, the stability of the blade is increased, when it comes to
edge-wise vibrations. This can also be accomplished by making the blade stiffer in
the edge-wise direction. Following this path, blade designers are creating new blades,
which include carbon fiber, making them less susceptible to edge-wise vibrations.
Another area that can provide valuable information when it comes to blade stability,
is the impact of the different regions of the blade. For the study of this aspect, the
blade was split in 6 different regions in the radial direction and the work of each
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Imposed vibrations simulations
59
(a) Velocity streamlines at t = 6.3 s
(b) Velocity streamlines at t = 7.3 s
(c) Velocity streamlines at t = 8.3 s
(d) Velocity streamlines at t = 9.3 s
(e) Velocity streamlines at t = 10.3 s
(f) Velocity streamlines at t = 11.3 s
Figure 6.7: Evolution of velocity streamlines at different time steps
region was calculated. The different blade regions are presented in table 6.5
==PAGE:78==
60
6 Results
0
5
10
15
Time [s]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Aerodynamic Work [J]
0p_90a_02
0p_90a_05
0p_90a_05_x2
0p_90a_05_x3
Figure 6.8: Aerodynamic Work comparison
Region
Blade span [m]
1
Root1
0 ≤R < 15
2
Root2
15 ≤R < 30
3
Mid1
30 ≤R < 60
4
Mid2
60 ≤R < 80
5
Mid3
80 ≤R < 90
6
Tip
90 ≤R ≤96.2
Table 6.5: Blade Regions
By performing this analysis, it is possible to assess the contribution of each blade
region to the total stability of the blade. The plots presented in the 3 sub-figures of
figure 6.9, present aerodynamic work done by each region of the blade for the cases
2, 3 and 4 of table 6.3.
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Imposed vibrations simulations
61
0
5
10
15
Time [s]
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Aerodynamic Work [J]
Root_1
Root_2
Mid_1
Mid_2
Mid_3
Tip
0
5
10
15
Time [s]
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Aerodynamic Work [J]
Root_1
Root_2
Mid_1
Mid_2
Mid_3
Tip
0
5
10
15
Time [s]
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Aerodynamic Work [J]
Root_1
Root_2
Mid_2
Mid_3
Tip
Figure 6.9: Aerodynamic work of different blade regions
==PAGE:80==
62
6 Results
In the first case, the results of which are depicted on the top graph of figure 6.9, it
can be observed that the highest portion of the aerodynamic work is produced by
section Mid1 and Mid2. Such a result could be expected as based on their length,
the chord distribution and the airfoil shape of the cross sections forming this surfaces,
the total surface is big. Another useful conclusion is that the work produced by the
tip region, is at the same magnitude of the Mid3 region and the Root sections. This
is attributed to the shape of the tip region, combined with large movement of the tip
due the highest deflection values. Finally, as expected from the results presented in
6.8, the values of work are oscillating in symmetric way around 0.
By observing the results corresponding to the case 3 of table 6.3, it is very important
to note that the phase of the oscillation of aerodynamic work for the tip is shifted
by 180 degrees. In addition, the aerodynamic work of the tip has now greater abso-
lute values than the region Mid3 and the oscillations are no longer symmetric around
zero, but cover a larger area on the positive side. This shows that by adjusting the
structural coupling of the mode shapes by doubling the flap-wise component, the tip
is damping the vibration.
The positive effect of the increase of the structural damping on the stability of the
blade, is also visible in the result of the case 3 of table 6.3. In this case, the aero-
dynamic work corresponding to both sections Tip and Mid3, oscillates with a phase
difference of 180 degrees compared to the rest of the blade. Furthermore, for both
regions, the aerodynamic work has shifted toward the positive side, revealing that
indeed that the outer part of the blade, damps the vibrations.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions and
Future Work
The final chapter of this report is dedicated to the presentation of the conclusions
reached during this project, to the presentation of the lessons learned, as well as to
recommendations for future work.
7.1
Conclusions
The goal of this project was to investigate the impact of design parameters on wind
blade stability by developing a 1-way FSI CFD approach, based on the setup of
Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy. A big aspect of this method was its ability to
predict and detect the occurrence of vortex induced vibrations at standstill conditions.
The computational domain created by the used CFD setup proved to be inadequate,
when it comes to the prediction of vortex induced vibrations, as there is no possibility
to simulate the critical conditions needed.
More specifically, the way the computational domain, that includes the nacelle of the
turbine, is designed and the process of creating the mesh around the blade were unable
to produce any mesh for the cases when flow inclination was required. The reason for
that is that the computational domain was initially designed for power calculations
making it impossible to be adjusted for a wide range of inflow conditions. In addi-
tion, the shape of the computational domain and the way the boundary conditions
are defined, do not allow for experimenting with various inflow conditions. In order
to study cases that would lead to vortex induced vibrations, a new computational
domain needs to be designed and an analysis on said design needs to be performed.
The approach of using the SST k - ω turbulence model on the whole computational
domain for the prediction of the von-Karman vortex street, was successful as the
model was able to capture the phenomenon when the flow around non-moving stiff
blades was simulated. In addition, the simulations of imposed vibrations were com-
pleted for a small range of vibration amplitudes, up to 0.5m. Simulation of larger
vibration amplitudes were not successful as the generated meshes could not deform
==PAGE:82==
64
7 Conclusions and Future Work
enough, creating negative volumes. A thorough research regarding the mesh size and
the appropriate mesh deformation models is needed but was not performed due to
time limitations.
Moreover, the simulations using adjusted coupling for edge-wise and flap-wise deflec-
tions showed that the behavior of the blade with respect to edge-wise vibrations is
improved when the coupling is increased. More specifically, the study of the contri-
bution of the different sections of the blade to the aerodynamic damping, revealed
that the outer part of the blade actual contributes to the improvement of the blades
damping.
Finally, even though the method could not be used for the prediction of vortex induced
vibrations, it can be used to investigate the impact of design parameters on blade
stability.
7.2
Future Work
The problems encountered during the development of this method provided valuable
information for improvement and future development.
Initially, a new more flexible computational domain should be designed that would
allow for a variety of inflow conditions. A relative study needs to be performed on
the shape and boundary conditions.
A different blocking and meshing approach should be followed that would allow the
user to experiment in an easier way with size of the mesh, the size of the different
regions etc.
A separate study on mesh deformation models and mesh size needs to be performed in
order to simulate larger vibration amplitudes. Furthermore, a study on the different
turbulence models can be conducted in order to further improve the method.
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Example of ASCII file
==PAGE:84==
66
A Appendix
Figure A.2: Example of CSV file
==PAGE:85==
A Appendix
67
Figure A.3: Example of parameters file
==PAGE:86==
68
A Appendix
Figure A.4: Example of aerodynamic configuration file
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
W. Europe, “Wind energy in europe in 2018: Trends and statistics,” The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 2019.
[2]
W. W. E. Association, “Press release: Wind power capacity worldwide reaches
600 gw,” 2018.
[3]
UpWind, “Design limits and solutions for very large wind turbines.,” UpWind
Consortium, Technical report, European Wind Energy Association (EWEA),
2011.
[4]
E. Hau, “Wind turbines - fundamentals, technologies, application, economics,”
number 3, 2013. doi: 10.1007/3-540-29284-5.
[5]
S. G. Horcas, “Cfd methodology for wind turbines fluid-structure interaction,”
2017.
[6]
P. J. Schubel and R. J. Crossley, “Wind turbine blade design,” Energies, 2012,
issn: 1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en5093425.
[7]
B. R. Resor, “Definition of a 5mw/61.5m wind turbine blade reference model,”
Sandia Report, page 022 053, 2013.
[8]
F. Zou, V. A. Riziotis, S. Voutsinas, and J. Wang, “Analysis of vortex-induced
and stall-induced vibrations at standstill conditions using a free wake aerody-
namic code,” Wind Energy, volume 18, pages 2145–2169, 2015, issn: 0997-7546.
doi: 10.1002/we.1811.
[9]
J. Heinz, N. Soerensen, V. Riziotis, M. Schwartz, S. G. Iradi, and M. Stettner,
Aerodynamics of Large Rotors WP4 Delivarble 4.5. 2017.
[10]
T. J. Larsen and H. Anders M, “How 2 hawc2, the user’s manual,” volume 4.6,
2015. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-460X(75)80105-2.
[11]
H. J., S. NN, and Z. F., “Fluid-structure interaction computations for geomet-
rically resolved rotor simulations using cfd,” 2016. doi: 10.1002/we.1976.
[12]
J. C. Heniz, N. N. Soerensen, F. Zahle, and W. Skrzypinski, “Vortex-induced
vibrations on a modern wind turbine blade,” Wind Energy, 2016. doi: 10.1002/
we.1967.
[13]
P. MS., “Vortex-induced vibration parameters: Critical review,” Proceedings of
the International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering,
1994. doi: 10.1002/we.1976.
==PAGE:88==
70
Bibliography
[14]
E. Dowel, R. Clark, D. Cox, H. Curtis, J. Edwards, K. Hall, D. Peters, R.
Scanlan, E. Simiu, F. Sisto, and T. Strganac, “A modern course in aeroelasticity,
fourth revised and enlarged edition,” 2004.
[15]
C. Feng, “The measurement of vortex induced effects in flow past stationary
and oscillating circular ad d-section cylinders,” Proceedings of the International
Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering, 1963.
[16]
C. Williamson and A. Roshko, “Vortex formation in the wake of an oscillating
cylinder,” Journal of fluids and structures, 1988.
[17]
R. Bishop and A. Hassan, “The lift and drag forces on a circular cylinder os-
cillating in a flowing fluid,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 1963.
[18]
W. C. and G. R., “Vortex induced vibrations,” Annual review of fluid mechanics,
2004.
[19]
W. Skrzypinski, M. Gauna, N. Soerensen, F. Zahle, and J. Heinz, “Vortex-
induced vibrations of a du96-w-180 airfoil at 90° angle of attack,” Wind Energy,
2014.
[20]
G. C. Larsen, M. Hansen, B. A., and I. Carlen, “Modal analysis of wind turbine
blades,” 2002.
[21]
S. G. Horcas, M. Madsen, N. N. Soerensen, and F. Zhale, “Suppressing vortex
induced vibrations of wind turbine blades with flaps,” 2018.
[22]
F. Menter and M. Kuntz, “Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for
engineering applications,” AAIA Journal, volume 32, pages 1598–1605, 1994,
issn: 1533385x and 00011452. doi: 10.2514/3.12149.
[23]
F. M. Bessem, J. D. Kamrass, J. P. Thomas, D. Tang, and R. E. Kielb, “Vortex-
induced vibration and frequency lock-in of ab airfoil at high angles of attack,”
Journal of Fluids and Engineering, volume 138, 2016. doi: 10.1115/1.4031134.
[24]
G. K. Bachelor, “An introduction to fluid dynamics,” Journal of the Royal Aero-
nautical Society, volume 71, pages 801–802, 1967, issn: 23984600 and 03683931.
doi: 10.1017/S0001924000054221.
[25]
D. C. Wilcox, “Multiscale model for turbulent flows,” AIAA Journal, volume 26,
pages 1311–1320, 1988, issn: 1533385x and 00011452. doi: 10.2514/3.10042.
[26]
I. ANSYS, “Ansys user documentation, release 18.2,”
[27]
P. Bortolotti, “Wp2.1 - reference wind turbines,” IEA Wind Task 37 on System
Engineering in Wind Energy, pages 34–57, 2018.
