==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Wind Variability and Regionalization in South Africa 
 
 
Daniel Diaz Camacho 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0272 
February 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Daniel Diaz Camacho 
Title: Wind Variability and Regionalization in South Africa 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-02722 
February 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
December 2018 – June 2019 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Andrea N. Hahmann 
Pierre-Elouan Réthoré 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Wind variability and
regionalization in South Africa
Author:
Daniel Díaz Camacho
Supervisors:
Andrea N. Hahmann
Pierre-Elouan Réthoré
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:4==
DTU Wind Energy
Department of Wind Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Risø Campus
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde, Denmark
Phone +45 4677 5085
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis examines the variability of the wind in South Africa. The ob-
jective is to perform a regionalization of the wind variability based on the analysis of
principal components (PCA) and to investigate to what extent this could be used to
improve the planning and development of wind power in South Africa. The thesis was
prepared at the department of Wind Energy at the Technical University of Denmark in
fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree
in Wind Energy.
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors, Andrea Hahmann and Pierre-
Elouan Réthoré for their continuous advice and support during the last five months.
They both have provided great guidance within their personal fields of expertise.
I would also like to thank my family and friends who supported me without hesita-
tion during all my education. I could always count on your encouragement and advice
during stressful, hard and challenging moments despite distance or time.
Kongens Lyngby, June 2, 2019
Daniel Díaz Camacho
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The continuous growth of wind power in the recent years creates an important
interest to better comprehend how the wind behaves with respect to its variability and
how to improve its predictions. This thesis focuses on the study of the wind variability
and its regionalization in South Africa.
A methodology based on the rotation of the main modes selected from a principal
component analysis (PCA) was implemented for the regionalization process. Daily mean
values of measurements from the meteorological masts installed as part of the Wind Atlas
for South Africa (WASA) were used to divide the country in different regions according
to the variability of the observations. The regionalization method was also applied to
Weather Research & Forecast (WRF) model data on the location of the masts in order
to compare the results. Four regions were found in every case, where the wind is also
characterized for each region.
WRF data for the whole domain comprising South Africa was also used to region-
alize the entire surface of the country. Five modes will be used in this case to define the
regions in the area, for which also the wind is characterized in order to observe how it
behaves in every case from a variability point of view.
Finally, an interpretation of the last map of regions developed is performed as an
example of its application to study to what extent this work might be used to improve
the wind power penetration in South Africa.
Some assumptions are considered and
explained in order to simplify the example, but it was observed that an increment in the
share of electricity covered by wind power was obtained when distributing the installed
capacity according to the variability maps. This might set an initial step for subsequent
studies on the field about applying wind variability regionalization techniques to enhance
the planning of new installed wind power capacity.
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Contents
v
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
x
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Study Area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Data
5
2.1
Wind Atlas for South Africa (WASA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Annual cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Results and Discussion
17
4.1
Annual cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Regionalization on the location of WASA meteorological masts . . . . . .
21
4.3
Regionalization on all the WRF domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Applications
37
5.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion
45
A Supplementary figures
47
A.1 Figures for WRF on WASA locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 Figures for WRF on WASA locations with a temporal mask
. . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:10==
vi
Contents
A.3 Figures for WRF whole domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Wind resource for South Africa, from WASA2. Values above 7 m/s repre-
sented in orange color
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Meteorological mast installed for WM05 with the corresponding instrumen-
tation (see WASAData)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Location of the meteorological masts for WASA1 (yellow), WASA2 (red) and
WASA3 (green) (see WASAData) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Representation of the WRF domain d02 used in this project. The black dots
show the location of the meteorological masts installed for WASA. Obtained
from (Hahmann et al. 2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1
Maps of the windiest and least windy month in South Africa. White colors
represent Winter time, whereas red colors represent Summer season. . . . . .
18
4.2
Difference between mean wind speed of the windiest and least windy month
in South Africa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Time series of zonal and meridional component for the observations recorded
by the mast WM03 for WASA. Original and final filtered data, as well as 61-
and 31-day-long moving averages. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Zonal and meridional anomalies wind components of the observations recorded
by the mast WM03 for WASA. In red, the 61-day-long moving average of
the time series. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Cumulative explained variance of the principal component analysis to evalu-
ate the main modes for observations and model output at the location of the
WASA masts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the four modes that explain the most
variance. The color of the arrow indicates the wind speed.
. . . . . . . . . .
23
4.7
First four principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-long
moving average (red).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.8
Time series of PC1 and the zonal wind component (left), and PC3 and the
meridional wind component (right). Plots are shown as 61-day-long average
of the original time series. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.9
Rotational Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the first four modes. The
color of the arrow indicates the wind speed.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.10 First four rotated principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-
long moving average (red) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:12==
viii
List of Figures
4.11 Regionalization maps for each of the three datasets studied in this part of
the project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.12 Variability of the wind anomalies for the zonal (in red color) and meridional
(in blue color) components. Time series are shown as the anomalies obtained
by filtering the original data with the annual cycle. The zonal component
has an offset of +1 m/s, whereas it is of -1 m/s for the meridional component. 28
4.13 Wind distribution for the anomalies for each region found. Zonal (left col-
umn) and meridional (right column) components are shown. The color of
the distribution represents each of the regions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.14 Cumulative explained variance of the principal component analysis for the
whole domain d02 of WRF data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.15 Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the five modes that explain the largest
amount variance. The color of the arrow indicates the wind speed. . . . . . .
31
4.16 Rotated Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the five modes that explain the
most variance. The color of the arrow indicates the wind speed. . . . . . . .
33
4.17 Regionalization map for wind variability in South Africa . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.18 Variability of the wind anomalies for the zonal (in red color) and meridional
(in blue color) components for the four final regions defined for the domain.
The zonal component has an offset of +1 m/s, whereas it is of -1 m/s for the
meridional component. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.19 Wind distribution for the anomalies for each region found. Zonal (left col-
umn) and meridional (right column) components are shown. The color of
the distribution represents each of the regions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1
Power curve of the low- (blue) and high-wind-speed (red) turbines selected
for the example. Own creation with data from (Vestas V112-3.45MW at a
glance) and (Vestas V136-3.45MW at a glance)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Locations chosen for the wind farms in scenarios 1 and 2. The color of the
tags in figure 5.2a shows the wind variability region to which the wind farm
belongs. The scale represents the annual mean wind speed, from 0 m/s (blue)
to 10 m/s (red). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Power production in scenario 1 between 03/03/2016 and 24/03/2016. Color
of each time series matches the color of the corresponding wind variability
region shown in Figure 4.17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Comparison of power production for both scenarios between 01/01/2016 and
14/04/2016
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.5
Zoom in on the comparison between scenarios around 21/01/2016 . . . . . .
41
5.6
Power production in scenario 1 around 21/01/2016
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.7
Histogram of frequencies for wind power penetration in scenarios 1 and 2 . .
43
A.1 Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the four modes that explain the most
variance for WRF on WASA locations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 First four principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-long
moving average (red) for WRF on WASA locations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
ix
A.3 Rotational Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the first four modes for WRF
on WASA locations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.4 First four rotated principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-
long moving average (red) for WRF on WASA locations. . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.5 Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the four modes that explain the most
variance for WRF on WASA locations with a temporal mask.
. . . . . . . .
50
A.6 First four principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-long
moving average (red) for WRF on WASA locations with a temporal mask. .
51
A.7 Rotational Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the first four modes for WRF
on WASA locations with a temporal mask. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.8 First four rotated principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-
long moving average (red) for WRF on WASA locations with a temporal mask. 52
A.9 First five principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-long
moving average (red) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.10 First five rotated principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-
long moving average (red) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
==PAGE:14==
List of Tables
2.1
Meteorological masts installed as part of phases 1 and 2 of WASA . . . . . .
6
2.2
Instrumentation installed in the masts for phases 1 and 2 of WASA . . . . .
6
2.3
Summary of dates and heights for WRF output data. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1
Datasets built to run the regionalization and their different characteristics
.
12
4.1
Correlation between the first four PCs and the mean average zonal and merid-
ional wind components.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Correlation between the rotated PCs (rows) and the non-rotated PCs (columns). 24
4.3
Correlation between the first four RPCs and the mean average zonal and
meridional wind components of each region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Correlation between the rotated PCs (rows) and the non-rotated PCs (columns). 32
5.1
Description of the main characteristics of the wind turbines chosen for the
application example, with data from (Vestas V112-3.45MW at a glance) and
(Vestas V136-3.45MW at a glance). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Power production of each scenario for 2016 and 2017
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Total wind power penetration and frequency of wind power penetration being
above 10% of South African demand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This initial chapter will serve as an introductory section to the project, describing
the actual state of the wind power in the world and specifically in South Africa, men-
tioning the motivation for the study, as well as its scope and structure. Finally, it will
characterized the chosen area for the project.
1.1
Motivation
During 2017, renewable energies accounted for 70 % of all the new power generating
technology installed in the world. This number is clearly lead by solar photovoltaic (PV)
technology in first place with an increment of around 100 GW of installed capacity. Wind
power installed capacity follows solar PV with an 11 % increment (52 GW), to reach 539
GW installed in the whole world as of 2017. Technology scaling, innovation investment,
and the reduction of costs due to an intense industrial competition keep wind power
among the most installed and used clean technologies in the world (REN21 2018).
Throughout the same year, South Africa added 0.6 GW to its wind power installed
capacity, making the total capacity rise up to 2.1 GW, and being the only country
in Africa to install new capacity of this type of technology in 2017.
With a target
to achieve a share of 9 % of electricity generation with renewable technology by 2030
(REN21 2018), the country needs to reach the goal of installing 17.8 GW of renewable
energy technology before that year. The objective includes installing 8.4 GW by the end
of 2030 (DoE 2011).
Despite the fast and important growth of wind power in the last years, an important
obstacle is still wind forecasting and its dependence on the weather variations. Thus,
improving the forecasting techniques, as well as getting to understand to a better extent
the wind variability in the different regions must be one of the objectives of the wind
energy industry in the upcoming years. This will become an important asset to improve
the evaluation of wind resource over an area of study, or to better understand how
the wind behaves in a specific region.
This thesis will address what impact might
have planning the installed wind power capacity of a country from a wind variability
point of view, since looking for the locations with the highest wind resource might not
always be the ideal case. Different locations with relatively high wind resource that may
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
compensate each other in terms of variability might be more interesting and bring more
value to the society in terms of wind power penetration in the electricity mix.
For the purpose of studying the wind variability, regionalization techniques can be
applied to a certain area, in order to differentiate smaller regions inside the area that
present similar behavioral patterns. clustering algorithms or eigenvector techniques are
among the most used methods to identify the wind regions over an area of study. Sim-
ilar studies have been carried out in Navarra, Spain, as seen in (Jiménez et al. 2008)
and (Jiménez et al. 2010), where both techniques are compared, or in (González Sopeña
2018), where the variability of the surface wind in the Northeast of Spain is regionalized.
(Ludwig, Hotel, and Whiteman 2004) also used principal component analysis (eigenvec-
tor technique) in the Great Salt Lake in Utah, USA, whereas (Shi et al. 2015) use a linear
regression method to regionalize wind speed trends and variability over China. With
respect to South Africa, in (Argent 2015) self-organising maps and clustering techniques
are used on station records.
The scope of this project will be to focus on studying the wind variability over the
surface of South Africa, applying a regionalization method based on the rotation of the
preferred principal components after its analysis. Finally, a simple application of how
this could help the planning of wind integration in the power system of South Africa
will also be considered.
The present study includes five more chapters: Chapter 2 shows where the initial
data used during the project is obtained, as well as the main characteristics and dif-
ferences between the options used; Chapter 3 explains the methodology necessary to
achieve the regionalization of the wind variability in South Africa, whereas Chapter 4
shows, discuss and analysis the results obtained after applying the mentioned method-
ology; Chapter 5 represents the simple application considered to improve the planning
of wind power installation in the country; Chapter 6 will finally summarize the main
conclusions of the study. Additional material can be found in the appendices of the
report.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Study Area
3
1.2
Study Area
As mentioned in the previous introductory section, the study area comprises the
whole surface covered by South Africa.
Touching both the Indian and the Atlantic
Oceans, the country counts with slightly less than 3000 kilometres of coastline on its
southern part. With a total surface area of approximately 1.2 million squared kilometres,
it is one of the largest countries in Africa, having its borders in the North next to Namibia,
Botswana, Zimbabwe and Mozambique, and surrounding the country of Lesotho.
Figure 1.1: Wind resource for South Africa, from WASA2. Values above 7 m/s repre-
sented in orange color
With respect to the wind resource in the area, different projects have studied the
availability of wind power in the country, such as the Wind Atlas for South Africa (see
Section 2.1). Figure 1.1 shows the map provided by the Global Wind Atlas, where it
can be seen that the country has areas of considerable size where the mean wind speed
is above 7 m/s. It can also be seen how the areas of higher resource, according to the
Global Wind Atlas, are mostly located in the southern parts of the country.
The study carried out in (Kruger 2002) describes the characteristics of the surface
winds in South Africa. According to the study, the most frequent winds in the coast
of the country usually blow along the same, with the especial characteristic of the west
coast, where the winds have a southern direction during Summer time, whereas the
direction is usually the opposite in Winter. In addition, it is shown that not always
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
the most frequent direction is the direction of the strongest winds. For instance, in the
interior areas of the country the strongest winds are from the Southwest, although are
very rare and usually associated with storms. On the contrary, along the coastline the
most frequent direction is equal to the direction of the strongest winds in most of the
cases.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Data
To study the different regions that may exist in South Africa according to the wind
variability, distinct datasets have been built with data obtained from different sources.
This chapter will describe the main characteristics of the two sources used: observations
from the Wind Atlas for South Africa (WASA) (WASA Data download site), and the
outcome of Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) model simulations in the area, which
are also part of the WASA project.
2.1
Wind Atlas for South Africa (WASA)
DTU Wind Energy department, together with different South African organiza-
tions1 have been developing since 2009 the Wind Atlas for South Africa (WASA) with
the objective of creating a tool that can be used to enhance the planning of large-scale
wind farms integration into the grid of South Africa, as well as to provide information
for smaller off-grid opportunities (see About WASA).
The project is divided in three different phases depending on the year of installation
of the meteorological masts and the area that these masts are covering: phase 1 of the
project (WASA1) started in 2009 and studies the provinces of Western Cape, Eastern
Cape and Northern Cape; WASA2 corresponds to the second phase, which has been
collecting information since 2015 covering KwaZulu-Natal, Free State and also Eastern
Cape province; the third phase of the atlas (WASA3) started in 2017 and includes the
rest of Northern Cape province and the remaining parts of South Africa (see About
WASA).
During this project only the data corresponding to WASA1 and WASA2 will be of
interest, as the availability of data of the third phase is less than two years. Table 2.1
shows an overview of the location of the meteorological masts installed for WASA1 and
WASA2, as well as the start date of data collection in every case.
1South African National Energy Development Institute (SANEDI), the South African Weather
Services (SAWS), the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and the University of Cape
Town (UCT).
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Data
Table 2.1: Meteorological masts installed as part of phases 1 and 2 of WASA
Site
Closest town
Data Start date
WM01
Alexander Bay
June 2010
WM02
Calvinia
June 2010
WM03
Vredendal
June 2010
WM04
Vredenburg
May 2010
WM05
Napier
May 2010
WM06
Sutherland
September 2010
WM07
Beaufort West
May 2010
WM08
Humansdorp
August 2010
WM09
Noupoort
September 2010
WM10
Butterworth
August 2010
WM11
Rhodes
October 2015
WM12
Eston
October 2015
WM13
Jozini
October 2015
WM14
Memel
October 2015
WM15
Winburg
September 2015
The masts collect data with a frequency of 0.5 Hz, and record and compute statis-
tics (average, minimum, maximum and standard deviation) about it with 10-minutes
frequency. A summary of the instrumentation used to measure wind speed and direction
that can be found in the masts is displayed in Table 2.2 (see WASAData). Figure 2.1
shows a picture taken from the meteorological mast WM05 where the different heights
where the instrumentation is located can be seen.
Finally, Figure 2.2 shows how the masts are distributed in South Africa in order to
cover the study areas that are of interest for the wind atlas.
Table 2.2: Instrumentation installed in the masts for phases 1 and 2 of WASA
Variable
Instrumentation
Height [m]
Wind speed
Cup anemometer
10, 20, 40, 60 and 62
Wind direction
Potentiometer wind vanes
20 and 60
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Wind Atlas for South Africa (WASA)
7
Figure 2.1: Meteorological mast installed for WM05 with the corresponding instrumen-
tation (see WASAData)
Figure 2.2: Location of the meteorological masts for WASA1 (yellow), WASA2 (red)
and WASA3 (green) (see WASAData)
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Data
2.2
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) model is a Numerical Weather Prediction
(NWP) system. The simulation of the model is run as part of the WASA project project
and different verification works have been done (Hahmann et al. 2018) in order to see
the deviations and differences between the actual observations obtained from the masts
and the output of the model. This thesis uses the output of a simulation of the model
run for the domain in South Africa, where the data was extracted for the location of the
masts in WASA and for the entire domain of the country. Characteristics of the model
as dates used or grid spacing are described throughout this section.
Firstly, the WRF data obtained for the locations of the meteorological masts in-
stalled for WASA was computed with a 30 minutes time span, starting on the 28/09/2005
(dd/mm/yyyy) and having and end date on the 26/06/2017. Furthermore, the data pro-
duced is available at different heights, which can be observed in the summary in Table
2.3.
In order to work with data of all of the country, the WRF model was simulated for
the whole domain of study. Different domains can be used, depending on the size of the
grid spacing, and thus the accuracy of the data. For the purpose of this project, the
second domain (d02) was used, which runs the model with a 10km x 10km grid spacing,
what represents a value of wind speed and direction for 89.100 points in the area. Figure
2.3 shows the area covered by each of the domains in the WRF model.
Figure 2.3: Representation of the WRF domain d02 used in this project. The black
dots show the location of the meteorological masts installed for WASA. Obtained from
(Hahmann et al. 2018)
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
9
Data available forming the WRF whole domain set starts on the 07-01-2010 and
runs until 31-12-2017. Daily averaged values are used for the objective of the project.
As well as for the WRF output in the WASA locations, the data is available in different
heights, what is also shown in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Summary of dates and heights for WRF output data.
WRF dataset
Dates (dd/mm/yyyy)
Heights [m]
WASA locations
28/09/2005 - 26/06/2017
10, 20, 40, 60, 62, 80, 100 and 120
Whole domain d02
07/01/2010 - 31/12/2017
60, 80 and 100
==PAGE:24==
10
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
Chapter 3 describes the methodology used in this thesis, explaining both the dif-
ferent methods and techniques utilized. In the first part of the chapter, the preparation
of the datasets will be explained as well as the characteristics of each of them and the
decisions taken with respect to heights or data rejection. Later, the process of how to
calculate the annual cycle will be detailed, focusing on how to use it as a filter for the
datasets. Finally, a description of what Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is and
how it will be used as a regionalization method can also be found in this chapter.
3.1
Data preparation
Before starting with the regionalization process, different datasets were prepared
according to certain characteristics that were decided in order to later compare the
results. Firstly, as previously explained in Chapter 2, the data obtained is available
at different heights. It was decided to work with the highest height in the case of the
observations from WASA, what corresponds to 62 meters for wind speed measurements
and 60 meters for wind direction recordings.
The output of WRF model, both for the locations of the WASA masts and the whole
domain of South Africa, is also available at various heights. It was chosen to work with
the closest height to the observations, in order to make the comparison more accurate.
Hence, values at 62 meters were used for WRF in the WASA locations, whereas 60
meters were used as selected height for the whole domain.
In the WASA observation’s dataset, stations WM04 and WM09 were not taken as
part of the dataset due to big gaps of missing data. In the case of Vredenburg’s mast
(WM04), data recording has been suspended due to vandalism causing the destruction
of the mast, whereas Noupoort’s mast (WM09) had problems in the measurements cor-
responding to the direction in the selected height. Since the application of the Principal
Component Analysis requires that the matrix of values has to be complete without any
missing values, these big gaps were considerably reducing the final datasets, and thus
the decision of not using these stations.
==PAGE:26==
12
3 Methodology
A dataset corresponding to the WRF simulation for the whole domain was also built
in order to regionalize a greater extent of the country. All the domain is composed of
89100 points in the area, however a resampling consisting on taking one point every nine
points was carried out. Through this technique 9900 points are taken, which facilitates
the computation process as well as the interpretation of the plots.
Table 3.1: Datasets built to run the regionalization and their different characteristics
Dataset
Points
Time period
Values
WASA
13
10/2015 - 05/2018
893
WRF on WASA
13
09/2005 - 06/2017
4290
WRF on WASA time-masked
13
10/2015 - 05/2018
893
WRF whole domain
9900
01/2010 - 12/2017
2914
Table 3.1 shows the main characteristics of the four dataset that were built for the
purpose of this thesis. It can be seen how one of the datasets represents the observations,
whereas the other three are using the data extracted from the WRF model. Two of those
are using data from the locations of the meteorological masts of WASA, one of them
running for the entire period of time that the simulation is performed, while the second
one (WRF on WASA time-masked) presents a temporal mask that makes it also equal
on time to the WASA dataset. Finally, the last dataset utilizes the data obtained after
running WRF model simulation for the whole domain of South Africa and its entire
period of time.
Wind values from both data sources are given in terms of wind speed and wind
direction. However, these values must be transformed into vector components u (zonal)
and v (meridional), for each pair of speed and direction values in every point of the
space. This will allow the use of principal component analysis, that will be applied to
the complex form of every dataset as:
¯w = u + j · v
(3.1)
where ¯w represents the vector describing the speed and direction of the wind in every
point at every time-step. This methodology has already been followed in the past, as it
can be seen in the work carried out in (Hardy and Walton 1978) for wind measurements,
or a similar study performed for ocean surface currents in (Kaihatu et al. 1998).
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Annual cycle
13
3.2
Annual cycle
With respect to the annual cycle, two calculations have been carried out with two
different purposes.
Initially, and for each of the datasets previously explained, the
monthly average values of the wind speed have been computed. This calculation allows
to observe which regions of the country are the windiest during the different seasons. In
addition, the difference of the mean wind speed between the windiest and least windy
month has also been computed and plotted, in order to evaluate in which areas of the
country the variability throughout the year is greater.
Secondly, an annual cycle is computed for the zonal and meridional components
of the wind, respectively. This second annual cycle is to be used as a filter for each
of the datasets described, before carrying out the principal component analysis, and it
is calculated as a 61-day-long moving average first, and a 31-day-long moving average
afterwards (González Sopeña 2018).
The latter will represent the mentioned annual
cycle, and accounts for the deterministic part of the data, that will be subtracted from
the original datasets in order to only work from this point with the variability of the
wind and the anomalies with respect to the annual cycle.
3.3
Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
Principal component analysis (PCA) is widely used in atmospheric sciences as it
has the ability to reduce datasets with a large number of variables into a smaller dataset
that will have a smaller number of new variables. This multivariate statistical technique
uses patterns of considerable correlation within the linear combination of the original
variables to create the new ones, that will represent the maximum variability contained
in the original dataset (Wilks 2011).
PCA technique can also be called, especially when working in the atmospheric and
climate field, empirical orthogonal functions (EOF) analysis. Equation 3.2 describes
mathematically the definition of the principal component analysis:
X(x, t) =
m
∑
i=1
vi(x) ai(t)
(3.2)
where X(x, t) in the left-hand side of the equation represents the original wind data,
defined at every time-step and for each of the sites in the domain studied. The right-hand
side represents the sum of the m principal modes, as the product of the eigenvectors
vi and the time series of scores ai(t). As mentioned before, the empirical orthogonal
functions (EOFs) are present in the analysis and described here by the eigenvectors vi,
whereas the time series of scores ai represent the principal components (PCs).
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Methodology
The eigenvectors, or EOFs, are ordered according to their eigenvalues, being the
first eigenvector the one corresponding to the largest eigenvalue. In addition, all the
eigenvectors are orthogonal to the previous ones. In the case of the time series of scores,
or PCs, the first one obtained is the linear combination representing the highest variance,
with the following PCs representing the subsequent greatest variance possible, with the
only condition of being uncorrelated to the previous principal components. Thus, all
principal components are mutually uncorrelated. Additionally, they have mean value
of zero and unit standard deviation, making the principal components non dimensional
(Wilks 2011).
Besides converting the datasets into complex numbers and filtering them with the
annual cycle as explained in previous sections of this chapter, a normalization of the
variables has also been carried out, through the division of each value by the standard
deviation of the variable. This will reduce the influence of the areas with larger variability
in the final results, as they would have a greater weight in the PCA (González Sopeña
2018). After applying the technique, the results are again converted to a dimensional
dataset by multiplying by the corresponding standard deviation of each variable.
Interpreting the physical meaning of the PCA can present certain problems due
to the orthogonality characteristic of the eigenvectors obtained after performing the
analysis. Since starting with the second eigenvector obtained, they must be orthogonal
to the previous ones of greater explained variance, this constraint will not consider any
of the physical interpretations that the dataset studied might comprise (Wilks 2011).
To overcome this problem, and when the objective of the project is to study a physical
interpretation of the dataset, a rotation method can be applied to the results obtained
from the PCA. This will create a new matrix of variables defined as rotated principal
components.
A linear transformation of the initial eigenvectors will originate the rotated eigen-
vectors. This process can be an orthogonal or an oblique rotation, and in this thesis,
varimax rotation (orthogonal) is used, as it is the most frequently used technique. This
type of transformation looks for the position in which the sum of the variances of the
squared rotated eigenvectors is maximum. Consequently, this approach will create a
simpler structure, where the elements are moved closer to either their maximum or their
minimum value (Wilks 2011).
Once the rotated EOFs and PCs have been found (now called REOFs and RPCs),
the regionalization of the wind variability in the area can be studied. Ideally, each of
the points in the domain will have a loading value close to 1 in one of the EOF maps
generated, whereas it will be 0 for the rest of the maps. However, achieving the ideal
case is very complicated, and a threshold must be set (González Sopeña 2018). Thus, for
each of the points in each of the REOFs, if the loading is above the selected threshold,
it will be associated to that region of wind variability. As one can think, a point can be
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
15
above the chosen threshold in more than one map, but this will be interpreted as the
transition area between two or more regions.
==PAGE:30==
16
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Results and Discussion
The annual cycle calculated using two methods will be first shown and explained
in the beginning of the chapter.
Next, the outcome of applying the regionalization
method to each of the datasets studied will be presented and described, including a
final map of regionalization with the different regions in every case. Throughout the
description of the results, an analysis and discussion will be carried out, as well as a
comparison between the results obtained for each dataset. The characterization of the
wind variability for each region will also be performed for the WASA observations and
the dataset comprising all the domain in the WRF simulations.
4.1
Annual cycle
Section 3.2 described the process followed to calculate the annual cycle with two
different methods during this project. In the first method, the mean average value of
every month was computed for every site in the domain, allowing to find the maximum
and minimum values and hence the windiest and least windy month for a specific loca-
tion. Therefore, one can study in which season (Summer or Winter) the mean average
wind speed in an area is higher or lower. The results of this method are presented in
Figure 4.1, where the windiest and least windy month for every point in the domain are
represented. South African Summer season, as a country of the Southern Hemisphere,
runs during December, January and February, whereas Winter season includes June,
July and August. According to this, it can be observed that the southern parts of the
country are windier during Winter time, while the wind speed is lower in Summer. The
same phenomena occurs in the Northwest parts, whereas the center and the Northeast
parts have the opposite behaviour: the highest winds take place in Summer and Spring
while the least windy months are in Winter and Fall time.
==PAGE:32==
18
4 Results and Discussion
(a) Windiest month
(b) Least windy month
Figure 4.1: Maps of the windiest and least windy month in South Africa. White colors
represent Winter time, whereas red colors represent Summer season.
An estimation of the areas that present a higher variability can also be computed
using the annual cycle by finding the difference of the mean average value of wind speed
between the windiest and the least windy month.
The result of this calculation for
every point in the WRF domain is presented in Figure 4.2, where it is observed that
areas in the South-central regions present a high variability of wind speed, obtaining
values of difference above 5 m/s in some cases. This area corresponds in its majority to
a geographic feature in South Africa denominated the Great Escarpment, where high
speed winds occur during Winter time and low speed winds take place in Summer time
(see Figure 4.1)
Figure 4.2: Difference between mean wind speed of the windiest and least windy month
in South Africa.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Annual cycle
19
The second method to estimate the annual cycle was also introduced in the method-
ology (Section 3.2) which has the aim of filtering the original data. For this purpose,
wind speed and wind direction values are considered now, decomposing the data into
zonal and meridional components. Figure 4.3 shows an example of this annual cycle for
the zonal and meridional components of the measurements taken by the meteorological
mast WM03 installed for WASA project phase 1. It can be seen how the 61-day-long
moving average in first place, and later the 31-day-long moving average are calculated
over the original data (in blue color). The latter moving average (31-day-long) forms the
annual cycle of each component and will be subtracted from the original measurement.
Therefore, it can be observed (more pronounced in Figure 4.4b) that the green time
series representing the already filter data, oscillates around 0.
(a) Zonal component
(b) Meridional component
Figure 4.3: Time series of zonal and meridional component for the observations recorded
by the mast WM03 for WASA. Original and final filtered data, as well as 61- and 31-
day-long moving averages.
The purpose of using the moving average annual cycle as a filter is to eliminate the
deterministic component of the original data in order to only work with the anomalies
presented in each time series.
As a result, the following regionalization process will
==PAGE:34==
20
4 Results and Discussion
only work with the deviation of the data from the 31-days-long moving average cycle.
Figure 4.4 shows the anomalies for the same mast showed before, plotting as well the
61-day-long moving average.
(a) Zonal component
(b) Meridional component
Figure 4.4:
Zonal and meridional anomalies wind components of the observations
recorded by the mast WM03 for WASA. In red, the 61-day-long moving average of
the time series.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Regionalization on the location of WASA meteorological masts
21
4.2
Regionalization on the location of WASA
meteorological masts
The regionalization methodology consists on applying a principal component anal-
ysis (PCA) to the different datasets created and described in Section 3.1. Afterwords,
the principal modes selected depending on the explained variance in every case, will be
rotated using a varimax rotation process, in order to study the physical interpretation
of the rotated empirical orthogonal functions (REOFs) and to be able to divide the
different domains of study into regions with similar wind variability behaviours. It is
necessary to decide a threshold in order to set a lower limit to classify the loadings of the
REOFs and thus divide South Africa into regions. Approximately 0.3 has been chosen
as starting point to classify a site into a specific region for every case studied. This may
vary depending on the dataset, aiming to avoid overlapping of the regions as much as
possible.
Firstly, all three datasets studying the variability of the wind in the location of the
meteorological masts (WASA observations, WRF data and WRF data with a tempo-
ral mask to match also in time with the observational dataset) will be analyzed and
compared in this section, including a description of the wind characterization for each
region.
Figure 4.5: Cumulative explained variance of the principal component analysis to eval-
uate the main modes for observations and model output at the location of the WASA
masts
In this manner, the principal modes describing the wind variability within these sta-
tions are calculated. Figure 4.5 shows the result of calculating the cumulative explained
variance of the modes obtained after applying the PCA process to all three datasets.
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Results and Discussion
The curves of both datasets made of WRF data are almost identical for every value of
explained variance in every mode, being in addition above the curve corresponding to
the observations measured in the meteorological masts. The first four modes account for
more than 70 % of the variance in the data in all the cases, being the first mode 41.9 %
for the observations, 43.7 % in the case of the WRF data and 43.1 % when the temporal
mask is used. The amount of explained variance in the first four modes is considered
enough to work with a representation of all the data available, and these modes are
displayed for the observed data in Figures 4.6 and 4.7 (see Appendices A.1 and A.2 for
figures describing the EOFs and PCs for the WRF datasets).
The EOFs shown in Figure 4.6 will next be rotated to look for the final wind
pattern that will define the different regions, however some similarities between stations
can already be observed. The first mode can be seen in Figure 4.6a where it shows
a pattern of zonal winds heading to the East in the Southern parts of the country.
The remaining maps do not show a specific trend for many stations, but winds heading
southwest direction can be seen in EOF2 in the Northeast side of the country, and winds
from the inside of the country can be seen in the eastern coast in Figure 4.6c for EOF3.
In the case of the scores of the principal components shown in Figure 4.7 it is
not easy to establish an interpretation of the physical meaning that the mathematical
approach can have due to the uncorrelated characteristic of the PCs and the orthogo-
nality presented in the EOFs (see detailed explanation of the methodology in Section
3.3). However, some correlations between the PCs and the mean average zonal and
meridional wind components can be studied. Table 4.1 shows the correlation (absolute
positive values) coefficients between each of the PCs shown in Figure 4.7 and the mean
zonal and meridional winds of all the stations. It can be seen how the first component
shows a high correlation with the zonal component (0.90), whereas non of the compo-
nents represent a great correlation with the meridional component. This can indeed be
observed in the eigenvector representations in Figure 4.6, where EOF1 shows a stronger
zonal wind representation than the rest of the EOFs.
Table 4.1: Correlation between the first four PCs and the mean average zonal and
meridional wind components.
Wind component
PC1
PC2
PC3
PC4
Zonal
0.90
0.17
0.29
0.26
Meridional
0.42
0.08
0.45
0.17
The mean average zonal and meridional wind components are shown in Figure 4.8
together with the scores of the principal components that show the highest correlation
in each case.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Regionalization on the location of WASA meteorological masts
23
(a) EOF1
(b) EOF2
(c) EOF3
(d) EOF4
Figure 4.6: Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the four modes that explain the most
variance. The color of the arrow indicates the wind speed.
Figure 4.7: First four principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-long
moving average (red).
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.8: Time series of PC1 and the zonal wind component (left), and PC3 and
the meridional wind component (right). Plots are shown as 61-day-long average of the
original time series.
Applying a varimax rotation method to the loadings (eigenvectors previously found
as EOFs and scaled with the square root of the corresponding eigenvalue) produces the
rotated EOFs that are shown in Figures 4.9 and 4.10 (see Appendices A.1 and A.2 for
figures describing the REOFs and RPCs for the WRF datasets). It can be seen how
each of the rotated EOFs represent a higher loading in each of the maps, as the goal of
the varimax rotation is to bring each of the eigenvectors in each mode to its extreme
value (closer to its maximum or minimum value). As previously in the representation
of the non-rotated EOFs, the maps describe the disposition and magnitude of the EOFs
after the normalization initially performed has been reverted by multiplying the results
again by the standard deviation of each site.
The correlation between the rotated principal components and each of the non-
rotated principal components can be seen in Table 4.2. The correlations show how is the
contribution of each of the PCs to the rotated modes. Thus, the first rotated component
shows a high correlation with PC1, whereas RPC2 is generated mainly from PC1 and
PC2. RPC3 shows a more even contribution from the first three modes, and RPC4
exhibits an important correlation with mostly the second mode, but also the fourth one.
Table 4.2:
Correlation between the rotated PCs (rows) and the non-rotated PCs
(columns).
Mode
PC1
PC2
PC3
PC4
RPC1
0.99
0.08
0.29
0.18
RPC2
0.81
0.52
0.39
0.41
RPC3
0.64
0.55
0.61
0.10
RPC4
0.10
0.72
0.32
0.40
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Regionalization on the location of WASA meteorological masts
25
(a) REOF1
(b) REOF2
(c) REOF3
(d) REOF4
Figure 4.9: Rotational Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the first four modes. The
color of the arrow indicates the wind speed.
Figure 4.10: First four rotated principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-
day-long moving average (red)
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Results and Discussion
The spatial distribution outcome of applying the regionalization method is shown
in Figure 4.11. As said in the beginning of the section, it is necessary to set a threshold
in order to distribute the different locations into the desired regions due to the non-ideal
characteristic of the cases. Thus, if the rotated loading of a location is above the chosen
threshold that location will be identified with the color of the region defined by that
REOF map. As Section 3.3 describes, two special cases could arise: if the threshold is
not reached in any of the four modes chosen, the station will not be represented in the
final maps in Figure 4.11, and if on the contrary it is reached in more than one map,
the site will be represented in more than one region and hence it will be considered as
a transition area between two regions.
(a) Observations
(b) WRF without mask
(c) WRF with a temporal mask
Figure 4.11: Regionalization maps for each of the three datasets studied in this part of
the project.
All three datasets are presented in Figure 4.11 in order to compare the final out-
come of the regionalization method. It can be seen that the maps corresponding to the
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Regionalization on the location of WASA meteorological masts
27
WASA observations and the WRF dataset without any mask match each other in several
stations, specially in the Southern part of the country, in stations WM02 to WM11 (see
Figure 2.2). However, once a temporal mask is applied to the WRF dataset in order to
have a dataset equal in space and time to the observation, the regionalization method
does not produce the same results. Only certain stations in the Eastern parts of South
Africa are placed in the same regions for both WRF datasets.
Table 4.3: Correlation between the first four RPCs and the mean average zonal and
meridional wind components of each region.
Region
Wind component
RPC1
RPC2
RPC3
RPC4
Blue
Zonal
0.90
0.72
0.58
0.65
Meridional
0.45
0.37
0.30
0.24
Red
Zonal
0.75
0.84
0.39
0.62
Meridional
0.31
0.35
0.29
0.25
Yellow
Zonal
0.23
0.32
0.29
0.41
Meridional
0.23
0.22
0.41
0.22
Green
Zonal
0.46
0.57
0.16
0.71
Meridional
0.28
0.42
0.18
0.53
For the case of the observations obtained from WASA, a comparison of how each
of the rotated PCs better correlates to the wind components for each of the regions has
been performed and can be seen in Table 4.3. It is shown how the zonal wind component
is usually better correlated than the meridional component. Zone yellow represents less
correlation with any of the RPCs than the rest of the zones, and as it will be commented
later, it shows less variability in the wind anomalies.
4.2.1
Wind Characterization
Figure 4.12 shows the anomalies of the zonal and meridional wind components for
each of the regions found in Figure 4.11a.
Time series are shown as the anomalies
obtained by filtering the original data with the annual cycle and are shifted +1 m/s for
the zonal and -1 m/s for the meridional component to minimize the overlapping in the
plot. It can be seen how the variability of the anomalies is greater for the zonal in the
blue and red regions, being more stable for the meridional component. The green region
shows large variability in both components, whereas the yellow area, as said previously
has a lower wind variability than the other regions.
==PAGE:42==
28
4 Results and Discussion
(a) Blue region
(b) Red region
(c) Yellow region
(d) Green region
Figure 4.12: Variability of the wind anomalies for the zonal (in red color) and meridional
(in blue color) components. Time series are shown as the anomalies obtained by filtering
the original data with the annual cycle. The zonal component has an offset of +1 m/s,
whereas it is of -1 m/s for the meridional component.
Lastly, wind distributions for the anomalies presented in the zonal and meridional
components are shown in Figure 4.13. The first region displays higher standard deviation
in the zonal component than in the meridional component. The same pattern occurs in
the red and green regions, having the remaining yellow region a thinner distribution. In
addition, both components in the green zone show a negative bias, what also occurs for
the meridional component in the red zone.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Regionalization on the location of WASA meteorological masts
29
Figure 4.13: Wind distribution for the anomalies for each region found. Zonal (left
column) and meridional (right column) components are shown. The color of the distri-
bution represents each of the regions.
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Results and Discussion
4.3
Regionalization on all the WRF domain
The same methodology is also applied to the dataset representing the whole domain
of South Africa with data extracted from the WRF model simulation. The cumulative
explained variance obtained in this case is shown in Figure 4.14, where the first 20 modes
are plotted. It is possible to see that with the first five principal components one can
explain almost 70 % of the variance contained in the dataset. This curve is slightly lower
than the curves shown previously in Section 4.2 due to the larger amount of points in
the domain in this dataset if compared to the previous ones.
Figure 4.14: Cumulative explained variance of the principal component analysis for the
whole domain d02 of WRF data
The first five modes are represented in the following Figure 4.15 (see A.9 in Ap-
pendix A.3 to see the scores of the principal components). The eigenvectors here shown
will again be rotated in the next step of the process, but some wind patterns can be
already seen in this first approach. Figure 4.15a shows strong zonal winds from West
to the East, especially in the center of the country. The next EOFs create a division in
the country, with EOF2 representing strong winds in the North and Southwest of the
domain, whereas EOF3 and EOF4 show important winds in the eastern and western
coasts respectively.
Once the varimax rotation methodology is applied to the loadings found after apply-
ing the principal component analysis, both the rotated empirical orthogonal functions
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Regionalization on all the WRF domain
31
(a) EOF1
(b) EOF2
(c) EOF3
(d) EOF4
(e) EOF5
Figure 4.15: Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the five modes that explain the largest
amount variance. The color of the arrow indicates the wind speed.
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Results and Discussion
(see Figure 4.16) and the scores of the rotated principal components (see Figure A.10
in Appendix A.3) can be plotted and studied. This provides a more clear evaluation
of the physical phenomena seen in the PCA through the EOFs, showing how the west-
ern component of the winds in the first mode are narrowed down mostly to the central
part of South Africa. REOF2 in Figure 4.16b represents strong winds to the opposite
direction (from East to West) in the North of the domain, whereas the third rotated
component (REOF3, in Figure 4.16c) shows northerly winds heading South direction in
the Southeast coast. In this case, in the fourth rotated component is difficult to observe
a clear wind pattern, but the fifth REOF shows strong winds in the coast to the West
of the country.
The contribution of each of the principal components to the rotated modes after
the application of the varimax rotation can be seen in Table 4.4. The first rotated mode
is generated mostly from PC1. The second mode exhibits a high correlation with PC1,
and also important contribution from the third and fourth mode. PC1 and PC2 are
the principal components that better correlate with RPC3, whereas the second and the
third component are presenting a larger correlation with RPC4. Lastly, RPC5 is better
represented by PC2 and PC3, although PC1 also shows an important correlation.
Table 4.4:
Correlation between the rotated PCs (rows) and the non-rotated PCs
(columns).
Mode
PC1
PC2
PC3
PC4
PC5
RPC1
0.85
0.17
0.13
0.27
0.12
RPC2
0.80
0.28
0.57
0.50
0.29
RPC3
0.86
0.80
0.44
0.17
0.26
RPC4
0.36
0.69
0.71
0.47
0.43
RPC5
0.55
0.83
0.81
0.37
0.29
The wind patterns described in the rotated EOFs maps are once again used to
define the different regions that represent points with similar behaviour in their wind
variability. The spatial distribution of the mentioned regions are shown in Figure 4.17,
where the rotated EOFs are represented. If compared to Figure 4.16, it can be seen how
the blue region represents REOF1, the red area is showing REOF2, the third rotated
EOF is shown in the yellow region and lastly the black region is formed from the fifth
REOF. There also exists an area to the Northeast of the country that is not included in
any of the regions specified due to the threshold chosen. However, this has been specified
in order to obtain a balance between the reduction of the overlapping among regions
and minimize the absence of sites included in the regionalization.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Regionalization on all the WRF domain
33
(a) REOF1
(b) REOF2
(c) REOF3
(d) REOF4
(e) REOF5
Figure 4.16: Rotated Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the five modes that explain
the most variance. The color of the arrow indicates the wind speed.
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.17: Regionalization map for wind variability in South Africa
4.3.1
Wind Characterization
Wind variability in the different regions is displayed in Figure 4.18. Time series
are shown for both wind components as the difference of the original data with respect
to the annual cycle and are moved +1 m/s for the zonal and -1 m/s for the meridional
component to reduce the overlapping. Figures display a larger wind variability in regions
blue and yellow (Figures 4.18a and 4.18c respectively), while it is slightly lower in region
black (Figure 4.18d). Region red, shown in Figure 4.18b, shows the area with the lowest
wind variability in the anomalies for zonal and meridional components.
Wind anomalies distributions are shown in Figure 4.19 for all the regions presented
in the final regionalization map.
The plots exhibit a higher standard deviation for
the first region, as well as the zonal component in the black region. The remaining
components of the regions show thinner distribution, especially the red region.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Regionalization on all the WRF domain
35
(a) Blue region
(b) Red region
(c) Yellow region
(d) Black region
Figure 4.18: Variability of the wind anomalies for the zonal (in red color) and meridional
(in blue color) components for the four final regions defined for the domain. The zonal
component has an offset of +1 m/s, whereas it is of -1 m/s for the meridional component.
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.19: Wind distribution for the anomalies for each region found. Zonal (left
column) and meridional (right column) components are shown. The color of the distri-
bution represents each of the regions.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Applications
This chapter will apply the results obtained from the regionalization carried out
in previous sections to improve the penetration of wind power in the electricity system
of South Africa. Since it will be a simple application of how regionalizing the wind
variability of an area can help to obtain a better distribution of the installed wind farms,
several assumptions will be considered and explained throughout the different sections.
The chapter will first describe the assumptions and methodology and will finish with a
discussion of the results.
5.1
Methodology
Nowadays, all the installed wind power capacity in South Africa is located in the
Southwest part of the country. However, after the regionalization of the wind variability
performed in Section 4.3 for all the WRF domain, it can be seen in Figure 4.17 that
there exist other areas of interest to the North and the East of country. The goal of
this example is to compensate moments of low wind power production in certain areas
with wind farms located in regions that present a different wind variability, to study
to what extent it might be possible to improve the share of wind energy in the mix of
technologies used to cover the electricity demand.
The regionalization map developed and presented in Figure 4.17 will be the main
tool to decide where to place the wind farms from a variability point of view, but Wind
Atlas maps will also be used to find the best locations inside each area from a wind
resource point of view. Thus, 3000 MW of wind power were decided to be installed in
the country, distributed in 20 wind farms of approximately 150 MW each one (see ENEL
starts construction of 140 MW wind farm in South Africa). In this way, the goal for
wind power capacity in 2019 according to (DoE 2011) would be addressed. Following the
work presented in (Bischof-Niemz 2016), two different wind turbines were used during
this example: Vestas V112 - 3 MW for high-wind-speed sites, and Vestas V136 - 3.45
MW for low-wind-speed locations. The selection of the appropriate type of wind turbine
for each wind farm was done following the map created by (Bischof-Niemz 2016) in the
same work, in which it is described the best turbine type according to the mean wind
speed of the site in order to maxime the capacity factor. Figure 5.1 shows the power
curves of both turbines selected, what will later be used to interpolate the wind speed
==PAGE:52==
38
5 Applications
time series and obtain power production time series for each location.
Figure 5.1: Power curve of the low- (blue) and high-wind-speed (red) turbines selected
for the example. Own creation with data from (Vestas V112-3.45MW at a glance) and
(Vestas V136-3.45MW at a glance)
Table 5.1 shows the main characteristics of the two types of wind turbines selected.
Although the manufacturer offers different hub heights in both cases, these were chosen
to be close to the height options offered in the dataset obtained from the Wind Atlas.
Table 5.1: Description of the main characteristics of the wind turbines chosen for the
application example, with data from (Vestas V112-3.45MW at a glance) and (Vestas
V136-3.45MW at a glance).
Wind turbine
Rated power
Cut-in speed
Cut-out speed
Hub height
Vestas V112
3.00 MW
3 m/s
25 m/s
69 m
Vestas V136
3.45 MW
3 m/s
25 m/s
112 m
As mentioned above, wind speed time series were extracted from the Wind Atlas
for the exact location chosen for the wind farms. These are formed of yearly data with
a frequency of 30 minutes. Data for the years 2016 and 2017 were extracted and used
for the example.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Methodology
39
To make a proper comparison and study if using the regionalization map presents an
advantage when planning the location of the wind farms, two scenarios were simulated.
The first scenario will use wind variability regionalization and will distribute the wind
farms between the different regions. Each area will take a total of five wind farms that
will be placed in the points where the wind resource is higher, according to the map
from the wind atlas. The second scenario was modeled following the current trend of
wind power installations in South Africa. Thus, all 20 wind farms were located in the
South and West parts of South Africa, meaning that mostly only yellow and blue regions
from the regionalization study are used in this scenario. Again, sites with higher wind
resource according to the Wind Atlas were chosen. This distribution also follows the
approach followed by (Sørensen et al. 2017), where an analysis of future scenarios for
the country was performed.
Figure 5.2 shows the locations selected for the 20 wind farms installed in each of
the scenarios studied. It can be observed how scenario 2 accumulates all the wind farms
in the Southwest parts of South Africa, whereas scenario 1 spreads the wind farms
throughout the surface of the country following the variability regions. The location of
the wind farms are shown over the mean wind speed map of the wind atlas.
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Figure 5.2: Locations chosen for the wind farms in scenarios 1 and 2. The color of the
tags in figure 5.2a shows the wind variability region to which the wind farm belongs.
The scale represents the annual mean wind speed, from 0 m/s (blue) to 10 m/s (red).
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Applications
5.2
Results and discussion
The power production of each wind farm, for each scenario, is obtained as an inter-
polation of the wind speed at every moment in the power curves shown in Figure 5.1. A
period of three weeks of the resulting power production time series is shown in Figure
5.3. The plot shows the production for scenario 1, and it can be seen how moments of a
rather low production in certain regions are compensated with much higher production
in the other regions, i.e. see production around 07/03/2016 or 21/03/2016.
Figure 5.3: Power production in scenario 1 between 03/03/2016 and 24/03/2016. Color
of each time series matches the color of the corresponding wind variability region shown
in Figure 4.17
Interpolation for the power production was also run for scenario 2, making it possible
to compare the outcome of both cases. Table 5.2 states a comparison of the total power
production of each scenario for the two years that the simulations were performed. It
can be seen that scenario 1 has a greater production after two years, being the final
outcome around 4 % higher than the production in scenario 2.
Table 5.2: Power production of each scenario for 2016 and 2017
Year
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
2016
25478 GWh
24181 GWh
2017
25493 GWh
24726 GWh
Total
50971 GWh
48907 GWh
It is also possible to plot the power produced in both cases at every moment. Figure
5.4 shows a longer period of time (3 months from the 01/01/2016 to the 14/04/2016)
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Results and discussion
41
in which it can be observed that the power produced in both scenarios is very similar
overall, as both time series tend to match each other. However, there exist periods of
time in which the gap between scenario 1 and scenario 2 represents a bigger difference.
Figure 5.4: Comparison of power production for both scenarios between 01/01/2016 and
14/04/2016
The period around January 21st, 2016 shows an important discrepancy between the
production of both scenarios, being the power generated by the wind farms in scenario
1 higher than the electricity produced with the disposition of the wind farms in scenario
2. In order to obtain a better view and study this case, a zoom in on that date is shown
in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Zoom in on the comparison between scenarios around 21/01/2016
The previous plot shows that for approximately three days, the production in the
==PAGE:56==
42
5 Applications
first scenario simulated is above the generation of the second case-scenario. This can be
better explained in the next Figure 5.6, where it can be seen that this period corresponds
to a moment in which blue and yellow regions (where the majority of wind farms are
located in scenario 2) do not produce energy to its highest point, but this is compensated
with peaks of production in the red and, to a lesser extent, black regions.
Figure 5.6: Power production in scenario 1 around 21/01/2016
Finally, a representative value of the demand in South Africa was taken in order
to make a comparison of the wind power penetration in both scenarios. According to
the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR 2017), the forecast of national
electricity demand in South Africa for 2020, in a moderate case scenario, will be 251179
GWh. Considering this value, and taking the total production of power in each scenario
for 2016, the total wind power penetration is shown in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Total wind power penetration and frequency of wind power penetration being
above 10% of South African demand
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Total penetration
10.14 %
9.62 %
Frequency of penetration above 10 %
50.28 %
46.98 %
In addition, Table 5.3 also shows the frequency of each scenario’s wind power pen-
etration of being above 10 %. This is also presented in Figure 5.7, where it can be seen
that the histogram representing scenario 2 is shifted to the left with respect to scenario
1, meaning that smaller values have a higher frequency. Moreover, the mean values
of power production obtain lower values of frequency in scenario 2 as well, making the
histogram smaller in its peak value of frequency.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Results and discussion
43
Figure 5.7: Histogram of frequencies for wind power penetration in scenarios 1 and 2
Lastly, it is important to state that this example of application has been decided to
be a simple approach to what a real-life case would look like. Thus, many assumptions
have been taken along the process, i.e. considering that the national electricity demand
would be the same during the whole period of study. Improving the model could be
done in future works as a way to obtain more accurate results. Hence, new conditions
must be included as could be losses due to wake effect in the power curve of the wind
farms, in order to not consider all wind turbines with the same power curve, or losses
occurring when transporting the electricity if the location of the wind farms is very
isolated. Consequently, an optimization program should be implemented in order to
find the exact best location of the desired amount of installed capacity, considering as
primary tool wind resource and wind variability maps as done here, but also including
proximity to main power stations and large cities to reduce losses, as well as different
terrain or environmental constraints in the country.
==PAGE:58==
44
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This thesis has examined the wind variability over the surface of South Africa. Daily
mean values have been used to divide the area into different regions according to wind
variability patterns. For that purpose, this study has implemented a methodology in
which the main modes of a principal component analysis (PCA), an eigenvector tech-
nique, are rotated to define the different regions. Observations from the Wind Atlas
for South Africa (WASA) and Weather Research & Forecast (WRF) model data on the
same locations of the WASA meteorological masts have been used in order to compare
the results.
Four regions where found in the first regionalization for the location of the WASA
masts after rotating the first four modes that explained the largest amount of variance in
the dataset. In the comparison between datasets it was seen that the WRF model for all
the period of time available was producing similar results to the regionalization applied
to the observations in many stations. However, once a temporal mask was applied to
the WRF model data in order to obtain a dataset identical in space and time to the
observations, the differences with respect to the measurements were increased and the
regionalization process was not able to classify the locations into the same regions. The
rotation of the principal components (RPCs) showed that the zonal wind component
is usually better described by the RPCs, whereas the correlation with the meridional
component was in general lower.
The same methodology was also applied to a dataset of WRF model data comprising
all the domain of South Africa, in order to try to divide the whole country into different
regions of wind variability. Five modes were rotated in this case, in which more clear
wind patterns could be seen. In this case, four regions were defined, being the red region
covering mostly in the North and the center of the country, the yellow region located in
the South and the blue region placed between these two, in the West side of the country.
The black region covers part of the coast in the East parts of South Africa, whereas in
the Northeast side there was a zone that was not associated to any region due to the
threshold used in order to classify the loadings of the PCA. The wind characterization
showed a lower variability in the red region than in the rest of the areas, followed by the
black and the yellow regions.
After the regionalization, a study of the impact that this study might have in the
==PAGE:60==
46
6 Conclusion
planning and development of wind power in South Africa was carried out. With the
goal of analyzing the penetration of wind power in the country, a simple example was
computed in which the production obtained with 3 GW of wind power is compared
in two different scenarios.
Firstly, the power capacity was distributed following the
current trend of installation of wind farms, mainly located in the South and West of
South Africa. The result of this scenario is compared with the outcome of the same
installed capacity distributed among the four regions defined in regionalization for all
the WRF model domain. A result of 4 % more of energy production when using the
regionalization distribution was found for data of 2016 and 2017. This result can be
explained as a consequence of the compensation in power generation between zones of
different wind variability that takes place when distributing the wind farms following
the regionalization map.
Future works could focus on validating the regionalization method with more mete-
orological stations. Since it is a characteristic of the methodology here implemented that
all the values must be available without the existence of missing data, the composition
of the datasets had to be reduced to only the last years of WASA1 and the masts of
WASA2. Thus, once more measurements from the meteorological masts installed for the
third phase of the project (WASA3) are available, the method could be implemented in
all the surface of the country, making the results more accurate and comparable with
the results of the WRF model in all the country. With respect to the whole domain, a
more in depth study of smaller subregions in the areas found in this study could also be
performed, in order to obtain a more detailed analysis of the variability inside each of
the regions.
Finally, the example of application of the regionalization map can be further im-
proved as already mentioned in the end of Section 5.2, as it is interesting to add more
constraints to the optimization problem here stated. This will lead the results closer to
what a real-life case scenario will look like, as this can be considered as a first estimation
that can be further explored in subsequent works.
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX A
Supplementary figures
A.1
Figures for WRF on WASA locations
(a) EOF1
(b) EOF2
(c) EOF3
(d) EOF4
Figure A.1: Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the four modes that explain the most
variance for WRF on WASA locations.
==PAGE:62==
48
A Supplementary figures
Figure A.2: First four principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-long
moving average (red) for WRF on WASA locations.
(a) REOF1
(b) REOF2
(c) REOF3
(d) REOF4
Figure A.3: Rotational Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the first four modes for WRF
on WASA locations.
==PAGE:63==
A.1 Figures for WRF on WASA locations
49
Figure A.4: First four rotated principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-
day-long moving average (red) for WRF on WASA locations.
==PAGE:64==
50
A Supplementary figures
A.2
Figures for WRF on WASA locations with a
temporal mask
(a) EOF1
(b) EOF2
(c) EOF3
(d) EOF4
Figure A.5: Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the four modes that explain the most
variance for WRF on WASA locations with a temporal mask.
==PAGE:65==
A.2 Figures for WRF on WASA locations with a temporal mask
51
Figure A.6: First four principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-long
moving average (red) for WRF on WASA locations with a temporal mask.
(a) REOF1
(b) REOF2
(c) REOF3
(d) REOF4
Figure A.7: Rotational Empirical Orthogonal Functions for the first four modes for WRF
on WASA locations with a temporal mask.
==PAGE:66==
52
A Supplementary figures
Figure A.8: First four rotated principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-
day-long moving average (red) for WRF on WASA locations with a temporal mask.
A.3
Figures for WRF whole domain
Figure A.9: First five principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-day-long
moving average (red)
==PAGE:67==
A.3 Figures for WRF whole domain
53
Figure A.10: First five rotated principal components at daily resolution (blue) and 61-
day-long moving average (red)
==PAGE:68==
54
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
About WASA. About Wind Atlas for South Africa (WASA) project. url: http://www.
wasaproject.info/about_wind_energy.html. (accessed: 12.05.2019).
Argent, Brendan (2015). An exploration of South Africa’s wind climate using station
records and reanalysis data. University of Cape Town.
Bischof-Niemz, Tobias (2016). “Wind resource in South Africa: On par with solar”. In:
WindAc Africa Conference. CSIR Energy Centre. Cape Town, South Africa.
CSIR (2017). Forecasts for electricity demand in South Africa (2017-2050) using the
CSIR sectoral regression model for the integrated resource plan of South Africa. Tech.
rep. CSIR.
DoE, South Africa Department of Energy (2011). Integrated Resource Plan for Electricity
2010-2030 - Revision 2.
ENEL. ENEL starts construction of 140 MW wind farm in South Africa. url: https:
/ / www . enelgreenpower . com / es / medios / press / d / 2019 / 02 / enel - starts -
construction-of-140-mw-wind-farm-in-south-africa. (accessed: 14.05.2019).
González Sopeña, Juan Manuel (2018). Surface wind regionalization in the NE of the
Iberian Peninsula. Universidad Complutense de Madrid.
Hahmann, Andrea et al. (2018). “Mesoscale Modeling for the Wind Atlas of South Africa
(WASA) project - Phase II”. In:
Hardy, Donald and John Walton (1978). “Principal Components Analysis of Vector
Wind Measurements”. In: Journal of Applied Meteorology 17, pp. 1153–1162.
Jiménez, P.A. et al. (2008). “Surface Wind Regionalization in Complex Terrain”. In:
Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 47, pp. 308–325. doi: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1175/2007JAMC1483.1.
Jiménez, P.A. et al. (2010). “Surface Wind Regionalization over Complex Terrain: Eval-
uation and Analysis of a High-Resolution WRF Simulation”. In: Journal of Applied
Meteorology and Climatology 49, pp. 268–287. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/
2009JAMC2175.1.
Kaihatu, James et al. (1998). “Empirical Orthogonal Function Analysis of Ocean Surface
Currents Using Complex and Real-Vector Methods”. In: Journal of Atmospheric and
Oceanic Technology 15, pp. 927–941.
Kruger, A.C. (2002). Climate of South Africa - Surface Winds. Pretoria, South Africa.
isbn: 0958446318.
==PAGE:70==
56
Bibliography
Ludwig, F.L., John Hotel, and C. David Whiteman (2004). “Using EOF Analysis to Iden-
tify Important Surface Wind Patterns in Mountain Valleys”. In: Journal of Applied
Meteorology 43, pp. 969–983.
REN21 (2018). Renewables 2018 Global Status Report. isbn: 9783981891133.
Shi, Pei-Jun et al. (2015). “Wind speed change regionalization in China (1961-2012)”.
In: Advances in Climate Change Research 6, pp. 151–158.
Sørensen, Poul et al. (2017). “Wind power variability and power system reserves in
South Africa”. In: Journal of Energy in Southern Africa 29.1, pp. 59–71. doi: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.17159/2413-3051/2017/v29i1a2067.
Vestas. Vestas V112-3.45MW at a glance. url: https : / / www . vestas . com / en /
products/4-mw-platform/v112-3_45_mw#!at-a-glance. (accessed: 14.05.2019).
— Vestas V136-3.45MW at a glance. url: https://www.vestas.com/en/products/4-
mw-platform/v136-_3_45_mw#!. (accessed: 14.05.2019).
WASAData. WASA Data download site. url: http://wasadata.csir.co.za/wasa1/
WASAData. (accessed: 12.05.2019).
Wilks, Daniel (2011). Statistical Methods in the Atmospheric Sciencs. Academic Press.
Chap. 12 Principal Component (EOF) Analysis. isbn: 9780123850225.
