==PAGE:1==
Fast Sequences for Magnetic Resonance
Current Density Imaging
Master Thesis
June 2, 2019
Author:
Stine Justsen
s134646
Supervisors:
Associate Professor Axel Thielscher, PhD
&
Associate Professor Lars G. Hanson, PhD
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre
Danish Research Center for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR)
Department 714
Kettegaard Allé 30
2650 Hvidovre
Denmark
Web: www.drcmr.dk
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Health Technology
Center for Magnetic Resonance
Ørsted Plads, Building 349, 1st oor
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Web: www.cmr.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This project will investigate three pulse sequences for magnetic resonance current den-
sity imaging (MRCDI) and compare their performances by analysing their eciencies.
The focus will, in particular, be on one of the fastest magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) pulse sequences, namely echo planar imaging (EPI).
Initially, the basic theory and general concepts are introduced which includes spin,
the main magnetic els (B0), the radio frequency eld (B1), linear gradient elds,
relaxation, phase, the Bloch equations, k-space, pulse sequences, spoiling, MRCDI,
and the three sequences of interest; the fast low-angle shot (FLASH) sequence, the
steady state free precession free induction decay (SSFP-FID), and the EPI sequence.
In order to investigate the theoretical relationship between eciencies an analytical
analysis is performed of the derivation of the steady state transverse magnetization
for the SSFP-FID sequence.
Suitable equations are implemented for each of the three sequences in simulations
which are computed in the R2018b version of the programming platform matlab (The
MathWorks, Inc., Natick, Massachusetts).
Five simulations are performed; one investigating the dependency of phase of the
steady-state transverse magnetization, two investigating the eciency of the sequences
at varies sequence parameters, and two investigating the dependency of eciency on
the ip angle and repetition time (TR).
Data is collected via experiments performed on a 3T MRI scanner along with a 64-
channel head coil at Hvidovre Hospital. Two experiments are performed.
The rst investigates the dependency of the average current-induced magnetic
eld, ∆Bz,c, on the current strength where measurements with four dierent current
strengths are acquired using a spherical agar phantom.
The second experiment consisted of data acquisition where all three sequences are
analysed - both with and without current-injection for seven dierent combinations of
TR and ip angle values.
It was observed that the simulations and the measurements were somewhat in agree-
ment. The simulated eciencies for the sequences FLASH and SSFP-FID were compa-
rable to the resulting eciencies for the experiments. However, the nal experiment of
the project demonstrated a lower noise oor, and higher eciency, of the EPI sequence
than the two other sequences, which is not expected.
Two possible sources of uncertainties were identied; a misrepresented exclusion of
ramp time in the acquisition time for the EPI sequence simulation, and averaging of
1536 measurements to obtain the reconstructed ∆Bz,c image can have averaged out
the hardware instability as well.
The eciencies observed in the nal experiment therefore need to be further investi-
gated and adjusted before rendering in-vivo human MRCDI possible.
II
==PAGE:5==
Resume
Dette projekt vil belyse tre puls sekvenser for Magnetisk Resonans billeddannelse (MRCDI)
og sammenligne deres ydeevne ved at analysere deres eektivitet. Fokus vil især være på
én af de hurtigste MRI puls sekvenser, nemlig ekko-planar billeddannelse (EPI).
Indledningsvis introduceres grundlæggende teori og generelle begreber, der omfatter
spin, hovedmagnetfeltet (B0), radiofrekvensfeltet (B1), lineære gradientfelter, relaksation,
fase, Bloch ligningerne, k-rummet, puls sekvenser, spoiling, magnetic resonance current
density imaging (MRCDI) og de tre undersøgte sekvenser; fast low-angle shot (FLASH)
sekvensen, steady state free precession free induction decay (SSFP-FID) og echo planar
imaging (EPI) sekvensen.
For at undersøge det teoretiske forhold mellem sekvensernes eektivitet udføres først udled-
ningen af den transversale ligevægstmagnetisering for SSFP-FID sekvensen analytisk.
Velegnede ligninger implementeres for hver af de tre sekvenser i simuleringer, som bereg-
nes i R2018b-versionen af programmeringsplatformen matlab (The MathWorks, Inc., Nat-
ick, Massachusetts).
Fem simuleringer udføres; én der undersøger afhængigheden af fase af den transversale
ligevægstmagnetisering, to der undersøger eektiviteten af sekvenserne ved varierende
sekvensparametre og to der undersøger hvorledes eektiviteten afhængigher af ipvinklen
og repetition time (TR).
Data indsamles via eksperimenter udført på en 3T MR scanner sammen med en 64-kanals
hovedspole på Hvidovre Hospital. To eksperimenter udføres.
Det første undersøger hvordan det gennemsnitlige strøminduserede magnetfelt, ∆Bz,c,
afhænger af den påtrykte strømstyrke, hvor målinger med re forskellige strømstyrker er
anvendt med et sfærisk agarfantom.
I det andet eksperiment indsamles data, for alle tre sekvenser - både med og uden ak-
tuelt strøm-injektion. Dette udføres for syv forskellige kombinationer af TR- og ipvinkel-
værdier.
Det blev observeret, at simuleringerne og målingerne stemte overens i nogen grad. De
simulerede eektiviteter for sekvenserne FLASH og SSFP-FID var sammenlignelige med
de resulterende eektiviteter for eksperimenterne. Projektets sidste forsøg viste imidlertid
et lavere støjniveau og en højere eektivitet for EPI-sekvensen end de to andre sekvenser,
hvilket ikke forventes.
To mulige usikkerhedskilder blev identiceret; en fejlagtig udelukkelse af rampetid i
readout-perioden for EPI sekvenssimuleringen, og at gennemsnittet af 1536 målinger var
foretaget for at opnå det rekonstruerede ∆Bz,c billede, hvilket kan have udjævnet hardware
ustabiliteten også.
Eektiviteten observeret i det endelige eksperiment skal derfor undersøges og justeres
yderligere, før in-vivo human MRCDI kan muliggøres.
III
==PAGE:6==
Preface
This project has been a collaboration between the Danish Research Centre for Magnetic
Resonance (DRCMR) at Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre and the Center for
Magnetic Resonance at the Department of Health Technology, Technical University of
Denmark (DTU).
The time frame of the Master's Thesis project was ve months in which some of the third
week was spent on completing an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) safety course in order
to be able to participate in the experimental parts of the project.
The majority of the project time was used on simulations and phantom experiments
which left little time to conduct in-vivo experiments with potential future clinical relevance.
This project is aimed at fellow students or peers with basic knowledge about MRI, a general
interest for medical image processing, and neuroscience.
IV
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
It has been an absolute privilege working with such competent people as my two supervi-
sors: Axel Thielscher and Lars G. Hanson. Therefore, I would like to express my gratitude
to the both of them for their guidance, advice, encouragement, and for making sure I knew
that I could always come to either one of them with questions, doubts or if I was ever stuck.
I would also like to say a huge thanks to Postdoc Cihan Göksu for his invaluable help,
guidance, explanations and incredible patience with my many questions. Also a major
thanks to PhD student Fróði Gregersen for his impeccable coding skills, always having
time to help me out, his appreciation for the snacks I have brought along on long scanning
days and last but not least for teaching me that fermented sheep exists.
I would also like to express my general gratitude towards the entire department both
at DTU and DRCMR for always being open, friendly, and welcoming.
A huge thanks to my fellow "Master's Thesis ladies" at the Technical University of Denmark
in building 349.
Our lunches and coee breaks have been lled with constructive and
thought-provoking discussions, but also comforting chats and lots of laughs.
Thanks to my mum and dad for always loving and supporting me in everything I do. I
am also very grateful to my brother and sister-in-law for giving numerous pep-talks, shelter
and food during stressful times and last but not least for proofreading my project.
My dearest friends, Mary and Kat, thank you for guiding me and giving good advice
concerning the entire process of writing a Master's Thesis project and how to cope with
thoughts about the life before, during, and after.
Finally, I wish to express my enormous gratitude toward my dorm-family, especially
Frida, Frederikke and Daniel, for listening to my ups and downs and keeping me sane
throughout these past ve months.
V
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract
II
Resume
III
Preface
IV
Acknowledgements
V
Abbreviations
IX
Nomenclature
IX
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Spin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Three types of magnetic elds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
The main eld B0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.2
The radiofrequency eld B1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.3
Linear gradient elds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Relaxation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Longitudinal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Transversal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Complex Notation and Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Bloch Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
k-space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Pulse Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7.1
Gradient Echo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.8
Spoiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.9
Magnetic Resonance Current Density Imaging (MRCDI) . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.9.1
Current injection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.10 FLASH sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.11 SSFP-FID sequence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.11.1 Analytic analysis of steady state matrix expression . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.12 EPI sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.12.1 Ramp time and gradient amplitude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.13 Current-induced magnetic eld
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.13.1 Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methods
18
3.1
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
Calculation of steady state transverse magnetization . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.2
Parameter values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Experiment 1a: Dependency of the average ∆Bz,c on the current
strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Experiment 1b: First raw EPI reconstruction - DICOM data
. . . .
21
3.2.3
Experiment 2: Eciency where TR and ip angle varies . . . . . . .
21
VI
==PAGE:9==
4
Results
23
4.1
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Simulation 1: Dependency of phase of the steady-state Mxy . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Simulation 2: Eciency where TR and TE varies . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
Simulation 3: Eciency where TR and ip angle varies . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.4
Simulation 4 & 5: Dependency of eciency on the ip angle and TR
25
4.2
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.1
Experiment 1a: Dependency of the average ∆Bz,c on the current
strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.2
Experiment 1b: First raw EPI reconstruction - DICOM data
. . . .
27
4.2.3
Experiment 2: Eciency where TR and ip angle varies . . . . . . .
28
5
Discussion
31
5.1
Dependency of phase of the steady state magnetization . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Ramp time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Performance of sequences measured in eciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3.1
Alteration of various sequence parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3.2
Dependency on TR and ip angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
36
A Derivation of steady state magnetization
38
B Specic expressions for derivation in Appendix A
39
B.1
Relaxation induced amplitude modulations of magnetization . . . . . . . . .
39
B.2
Rotation matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
C Two solutions for gradient amplitude expression
40
D Experiment 2: ∆Bz,c images without current injection
41
E Experiment 2: Noise distributions of ∆Bz,c without current injection
42
F Experiment 2: ∆Bz,c images with current injection
43
G Experiment 2: mean, standard deviation and eciency
44
VII
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
BW
bandwidth
DRCMR
Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
DWI
diusion-weighted
EPI
echo planar imaging
ES
echo spacing
FCI
full current injection
FLASH
fast low-angle shot
fMRI
functional MRI
FOV
eld of view
MESE
multi-echo spin echo
MR
magnetic resonance
MRCDI
magnetic resonance current density imaging
MREIT
magnetic resonance electrical impedance tomography
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
NMR
nuclear magnetic resonance
PCI
partial current injection
PWI
perfusion-weighted
RF
radiofrequency
ROI
region-of-interest
SNR
signal-to-noise ratio
SR
slew rate
SSFP
steady state free precession
SSFP-FID
steady state free precession free induction decay
TCS
transcranial current stimulation
TE
echo time
TR
repetition time
Nomenclature
B0
main magnetic eld
B1
radio frequency eld
Mxy
transversal magnetization
Mz
longitudinal magnetization
T1
longitudinal relaxation time
T2
transverse relaxation time
T ∗
2
time constant for loss of phase coherence
∆Bz,c
current-induced magnetic eld
∆z
slice thickness
γ
gyromagnetic ratio
ω0
Larmor frequency
IX
==PAGE:12==
Introduction
1
Introduction
Medical imaging modalities is a branch of health technology which has always amazed
and fascinated people and continues to do so. This results in an urge to seek out further
knowledge on how the dierent types of modalities can be used to learn more about the
human anatomy and physiology, to diagnose diseases, locate abnormalities, and perhaps
how they can be used to discover a cure for an illness that has previously been fatal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has only gotten more and more popular ever since
Felix Bloch and Edward Purcell independently discovered nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) in condensed matter in 1946, and since the rst magnetic resonance (MR) im-
age using linear gradient elds was reported by Paul Lauterbur in 1973.
Thorough screening processes and norms for scanners exists in MRI to ensure no po-
tential dangers come into play. Moreover, there is no involvement of ionizing radiation.
MRIs popularity is therefore perhaps mostly due to the fact that it is an imaging modality
considered not to have any known health risk when operated under normal conditions.[1,
pp. 1-2]
Magnetic Resonance Current Density Imaging (MRCDI)
A variety of sub areas exists within the eld of MRI, such as spectroscopy, diusion-
weighted (DWI), perfusion-weighted (PWI), ultra-high eld, and functional MRI (fMRI).
In this project the sub area of interest is magnetic resonance current density imaging
(MRCDI). This is a specic medical imaging modality that reconstructs the current den-
sity distribution inside a material, e.g. human tissue, by combining MRI with electrical
currents that are applied via surface electrodes. This modality can be used to map out
the current density distribution and conductivity variation inside the imaged object which,
among other things, can be utilised to ensure higher accuracy when doing spatial targeting
as part of neurostimulation methods such as transcranial current stimulation (TCS).[2][3]
A study by Scott et al. (1991) drew the conclusion that the sources of phase and recon-
struction artefacts and of resolution loss had to be understood in order to obtain current
density images of good quality. Already back then the authors stated that MRCDI could
be suitable for the study of therapeutic current ow in biological tissue.[4] The following
year the same group of people published yet another article on the topic in which they
analysed the sensitivity of MRCDI to random noise and systematic errors. This was done
by comparing theoretical noise predictions with experimental data obtained from a test
phantom which was designed to create a uniform current density. The results of the study
showed that for large applied currents and/or long application times, systematic errors
limited the sensitivity whereas for small currents and/or short integration times, random
noise dominated.[5]
In a study by Lee et al. (2015) dierent variants of steady state free precession (SSFP)
pulse sequences were investigated in order to develop a current-controlled alternating con-
ductivity imaging method and corresponding MR signal models. This was done with the
interest of estimating the current-induced magnetic ux density and conductivity distri-
bution. A model was analytically derived using the Bloch equations and both numerical
and experimental studies were performed using four SSFP pulse sequences constellations.
The results showed that a steady state free precession free induction decay (SSFP-FID)
sequence with alternating current pulses applied before the read out period shows the
highest signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and conductivity contrast.[6]
Göksu et al. (2017) investigated ∆Bz,c measurements which were improved for two
Page 1 of 44
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
sensitive MRI sequences; multi-echo spin echo (MESE) and SSFP-FID. They were anal-
ysed and optimized specically according to their eciency. This was done via analytical
simulations which were an extension of the study by Lee et al. (2015) mentioned above.
These theoretical simulations were validated with phantom experiments. Under certain
conditions stated in the paper (including physiological noise) the results showed that the
eciency of SSFP-FID was three times higher compared to MESE. It was furthermore con-
cluded that the optimized sequence parameters in the study most likely would make in-vivo
human brain magnetic resonance electrical impedance tomography (MREIT) possible.[3]
In another study by Göksu et el. (2018) human in-vivo measurements were demon-
strated based on the two sensitive sequences from the previous study, i.e.
MESE and
SSFP-FID. Dierent experiments were performed where the focus was on optimizing the
robustness of the sequences while still keeping a high sensitivity to the current-induced
elds. Measurements performed with the more ecient SSFP-FID sequence, as mentioned
in the previous paragraph demonstrated a strong inuence of magnetic stray elds caused
by the paths of the electrode cables. A correction method for this problem was validated.
This method is beyond the scope of this project, however. Furthermore, the results from
both sequences were validated by assessing the linearity of the measured ∆Bz,c with respect
to the current strength. Both simulated and measured results showed signicant linear cor-
relations but only for stray eld-corrected data. Lastly current density distributions from
both measured and simulated data were successfully reconstructed. However, when inves-
tigating the noise levels for both sequences they were similar indicating that physiological
noise is a factor that contributes in limiting the sensitivity of in-vivo measurements.[2]
This project has the overall goal to explore and optimize echo planar imaging (EPI), a fast
MR method with sub-second resolution, for MRCDI. The specic aims are to investigate
dependency of phase of the ∆Bz,c for three gradient echo pulse sequences (one of them
being EPI), to nd optimized EPI sequence settings by theoretical treatment of the Bloch
equations, and lastly to compare performance of the EPI sequence to two other pulse
sequence methods via simulations and phantom experiments.
This is done in hope of nding a sequence that has approximately as high a sensitivity
as SSFP-FID but without having the inuence of the limiting factor of physiological noise
as it is expected EPI can more easily correct for this factor.
Page 2 of 44
==PAGE:14==
Theory
2
Theory
In order to better understand some of the complexities of MRI and how a MR image is
obtained a brief introduction to the basic physics and principles behind MR and MRI will
be given.
2.1
Spin
Atoms that contain an odd number of protons and/or an odd number of neutrons will have
a nuclear spin angular momentum, or more commonly referred to as spins. When the atom
spins around its own axis a small magnetic eld is created, which can be seen as a vector
quantity.[1, p. 23]
A hydrogen atom only contains a single proton (1H) and is the nuclei that gives rise to
the largest signal. As the human body consists mostly of water, which has two hydrogen
atoms per water molecule, the body contains a lot of small magnetic elds due to the spins
of all the hydrogen atoms.[1, p. 23] The hydrogen protons are randomly oriented in the
body such that the overall magnetization, i.e. net magnetization, is zero. However, this
changes when being near a magnetic eld.
MRI is based on how these spins interact with three dierent types of magnetic elds;
the main eld B0, the radiofrequency (RF) eld B1, and linear gradient elds, G[1, p. 24].
In the next section a further elaboration of these will be made.
2.2
Three types of magnetic elds
2.2.1
The main eld B0
When placed in a static magnetic eld, B0, the hydrogen protons will align themselves with
this magnetic eld and start precession around B0 as shown in Figure 1a. The direction
of this static magnetic eld is along the bore of a MR scanner and will be denoted as the
z-direction as is visualized in Figure 1b.
The aligned protons do not precess at a random frequency but at a frequency known
as the ω0 which is described by the strength of the applied B0 and the γ. It is given by
ω0 = γB0.
(1)
The gyromagnetic ratio is the proportionality constant which depends on the particle or
nucleus. For the hydrogen proton γ = 2.675 × 108 rad/s/T or ¯γ = 42.58 MHz/T if divided
by 2π.[7, p. 26]
As a passing remark pertinent to precessing spins; if a group of adjacent spins precess
with the same frequency this is denoted as a spin isochromat[8, p. 243].
2.2.2
The radiofrequency eld B1
In order to obtain an MR signal a RF pulse, B1, is applied in the transverse plane as can
be seen in Figure 1b. This RF pulse is also referred to as the excitation pulse[8, p. 582].
The RF pulse will be matched to have the same resonant frequency as the spins which
will "ip", i.e. rotate, the magnetization away from equilibrium with the ip angle α as
seen in Figure 1a.[1, p. 24]. When the RF pulse is turned o again the static B0 eld will
cause the magnetization to return to its equilibrium along the z-direction.[7, p. 55].
Page 3 of 44
==PAGE:15==
Theory: Three types of magnetic elds
(a) The net magnetization, ⃗
M, has
been ipped away from the static ⃗
B0
with a ip angle of α and precesses
around it with the frequency ω0.
(b) Coordinate system in an MR scanner. ⃗
B0 is
along the bore of the scanner, i.e. in the
z-direction. ⃗
B1 is applied in the transverse plane,
i.e. the xy-plane.
Figure 1
2.2.3
Linear gradient elds
Linear gradient magnetic elds are applied in addition to applying the B0 eld in order to
make spatial localisation of the imaged object possible. The main B0 eld is static, and
can not in itself be changed. However, variations in the magnetic eld along the z-direction
will arise by adding smaller magnetic elds to the B0 .
As the resonant frequency is proportional to the applied eld strength according to
Eq. (1) then the resonant frequencies will also vary linearly when applying dierent linear
eld gradients. The frequency of the spins thereby becomes a function of their location.[1,
pp. 26-27]
These gradient elds are created in the MR scanner by the use of three sets of gradient
coils; one in the x-, y-, and z-direction, respectively. Current is applied through these
coils to generate the desired gradient eld. Hereby the frequency of spins can be spatially
encoded along a particular direction in space[8, p. 215].
In MRI a logical gradient coordinate system for a 2D pulse sequence consist of three axes;
a frequency-encoding, phase-encoding, and a slice-selection axis which corresponds to x, y,
and z, respectively in Figure 1b[8, p. 233]. The gradients in all three directions are utilised
to obtain the specic spatial localization within the imaged object but each in its own way.
They are all visualised in the example of a pulse sequence diagram in Figure 2.
Page 4 of 44
==PAGE:16==
Theory: Three types of magnetic elds
Figure 2: Example of a pulse sequence diagram. An RF excitation pulse with ip angle α
rotates the magnetization towards the transverse plane. Gs initiates with a slice selective
gradient immediately followed by a recovery gradient with opposite polarity and nishes with a
spoiler gradient, Gsp. Gp begins with a phase-encoding lobe (when the magnetization is in the
transverse plane) and ends with a rewinder gradient after readout. The area area under both of
these is varied to introduce dierent linear phase variation. Gr initiates by dephasing the spins
with a prephaser gradient immediately followed by rephasing of the spins by the readout
gradient, during which the signal S(t) is sampled.[8, altered from Fig. 14.1]
Slice selection (seen on the Gs axis) is most often applied via a constant slice-selection
gradient which is played simultaneously with the selective RF pulse. A slice in any ar-
bitrary direction can by obtained by using a linear combination of the three gradients
simultaneously. The thickness of the slice can be altered by changing the amplitude, i.e.
the gradient strength, of the slice-selection gradient for a xed RF bandwidth. The stronger
the gradient (steeper slope) the thinner the slice.[8, p. 266-267]
In frequency encoding (seen on the Gr axis) a gradient lobe is applied during the readout
period which varies the precession frequency within a slice of the imaged object[8, p.256].
This way the MR signal will comprise a range of frequencies that individually corresponds
to a dierent spatial location.[8, p.243]
Phase encoding (seen on the Gp axis) is where a gradient lobe is applied while the net
magnetization is in the transverse plane, but before the readout. The area under the phase
encoding gradient lobe is varied to introduce dierent linear phase variations which is also
illustrated in Figure 2. The rst of the two lobe-sets contains the phase-encoding gradients
whereas the second contains the rewinder gradients.[8, p.256]
When the magnetization returns to equilibrium after excitation it is due to a process called
relaxation. In the following section this process will be explained.
Page 5 of 44
==PAGE:17==
Theory: Relaxation
2.3
Relaxation
When the RF pulse described in section 2.2.2 is turned o the spins magnetic moments
will interact with the B0 eld and with the surrounding spins magnetic moments. This will
cause the created MR signal to decay. The rate at which the magnetizations will return
to their equilibrium can be described in terms of two types of relaxation.[7, p. 8]
2.3.1
Longitudinal
After the longitudinal magnetization has been rotated towards the transverse plane and
the RF pulse has been turned o, the magnetization will grow back along the direction of
the B0 eld, i.e. the z-direction. The rate at which it does so is denoted as the longitudinal
relaxation and is characterized by the T1.[7, p. 8]
The regrowth of the Mz for the situation Mz(0) = 0 will therefore be given as
Mz(t) = M0

1 −e−t/T1
,
(2)
where M0 is the equilibrium magnetization.[7, pp. 8-9]
The value of T1 varies with tissue type and ranges from tens to thousands of milliseconds
for protons in humans.[7, p. 56]
2.3.2
Transversal
As the longitudinal magnetization grows back the magnetization created in the transverse
plane (due to the excitation pulse) will decay away, or rather dephase, exponentially. This
happens due to the interaction between excited spins i.e., spin-spin interactions, which will
give rise to dispersion of their phases.
The expression for this exponential decay of the transverse magnetization is described
by
Mxy(t) = Mxy(0)e−t/T2
(3)
where Mxy(0) is the initial value for the Mxy right after excitation and T2 is the T2.
Like T1 the value of T2 varies with tissue type. It is smaller than T1 and is in the order
of tens of milliseconds.
However, not only the spin-spin interaction causes dephasing of Mxy. Also external
eld inhomogeneities will contribute to the dephasing of transverse magnetization. The
decay time assigned to this process is T ′
2.
The total relaxation rate can therefore be described as a T ∗
2 , which is given by
1
T ∗
2
= 1
T2
+ 1
T ′
2
(4)
The loss of transverse magnetization due to external eld inhomogeneities can be recov-
ered by using dierent techniques, which will be touched upon later in the report in Sec-
tion 2.7.1[7, pp. 9+58-59].
2.4
Complex Notation and Phase
Aside from the notation in Eq. (3), the transverse magnetization can also be written in
terms of a real and imaginary part as
Mxy(t) ≡Mx(t) + iMy(t).
(5)
Page 6 of 44
==PAGE:18==
Theory: Bloch Equation
This utilisation of complex notation makes it possible to express the magnetization in
terms of a magnitude and a phase as Eq. (5) can be written in terms of an exponential
function:
Mxy(t) = M0eiφ(t),
φ(t) = −ω0(t) + φ(0),
(6)
where M0 is the magnitude and eiφ(t) represents phase-contribution. In the phase term ω0
is the Larmor frequency and φ(0) is the initial phase.[7, pp 5-6+61-62]
The phase directly relates to the position of the net magnetic spin vector, which is
perhaps more intuitively understood by introducing Euler's Formula. This formula states
that a complex exponential function relates to the trigonometric functions such that the
phase expression can be written as
e−iω0t = cos(ω0t) + i sin(ω0t)
(7)
which clearly states the horizontal and vertical component of the direction of the net
magnetization vector in the transverse plane. This is also visualised in Figure 3.[7, p. 34]
Figure 3: Visualization of the response of a relaxed magnetization.
M0 is the equilibrium magnetization, α the ip angle, and ⃗M the resulting magnetization vector,
that has been rotated clockwise towards the transverse plane by an RF excitation pulse (omitted
in this gure). Mz and Mxy indicates longitudinal and transverse magnetization, respectively.
It should be mentioned that an optimum angle exists, know as the Ernst angle, θE,
which is given by
cos(θE) = e−TR/T1 ⇔θE = cos−1 
e−TR/T1
.
(8)
This angle maximizes the response of a relaxed magnetization, i.e. ensures optimal trade-
o between the gained Mxy and the loss in Mz.[1, p. 151]
2.5
Bloch Equation
The Bloch equation is a vector equation which describes the change in magnetization
with time in the presence of a magnetic eld by incorporation precession eects and both
relaxations:
dM
dt
= M × γB(t) −Mxi + Myj
T2
−(Mz −M0)k
T1
,
(9)
where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, T1 the longitudinal relaxation time, T2 the transverse
relaxation time, M0 the equilibrium magnetization, and i, j, and k are the unit vectors in
the x, y, and z-direction, respectively.[1, pp. 51+53]
The cross product expresses the precession eect, i.e. M precess about B. The second
and third term is the transverse and longitudinal relaxation, respectively.[1, pp. 48+50]
Page 7 of 44
==PAGE:19==
Theory: k-space
2.6
k-space
The k-space domain is the Fourier space of the standard spatial domain over which the
object magnetization is distributed, i.e. the MR image Mxy(−→r ). In overall terms if enough
data is sampled in k-space then it is possible to reconstruct the MR image by computing
an inverse Fourier transform.[8, p. 378] A k-space diagram is illustrated in Figure 4 where
the trajectory along which sampling occurs is shown with red. The gure also shows that
by Fourier transforming the sampled data a brain image is obtained.
Figure 4: Illustration of the connection between k-space domain and spatial image domain.
Left: k-space diagram with trajectory corresponding to an EPI sequence. Right: MR image in
the spatial domain, here an axial view of the brain, which is obtained by computing a 2D Inverse
Fourier transform (IFT) of the sampled k-space data. Figure altered from Paschal et al.[9].
Covering of k-space is obtained by varying gradient amplitudes, typically by the use of
phase and frequency encoding. Points in k-space can then be collected by sampling data
during the read out time, Ts. The application of the gradients needs to be manipulated
in such a way that k-space can be sampled suciently to reconstruct the MR image.[7,
pp. 166-167]
Two important things to note is that the center of k-space contains low spatial frequency
data which provides low resolution and image contrast. Contrary to this, areas further
from the center of k-space contains high frequency data which provides high resolution
and thereby contains information about details in the image.
2.7
Pulse Sequences
A pulse sequences consists of both RF pulses, gradient waveforms, and data acquisition.
Dierent types of pulse sequences can be used to manipulate the magnetization in order to
produce the desired MR signal. Two fundamental types of pulse sequences exists in MRI,
namely gradient echo and spin echo.[8, p. 575]
The three sequences considered in this project i.e. fast low-angle shot (FLASH), SSFP-
FID, and EPI all measures the gradient echoes and therefore, the spin echo will not be
further elaborated on in the current project.
2.7.1
Gradient Echo
The gradient echo is an imaging technique that is mostly used for fast MR scanning. This
type of pulse sequence is used to refocus transverse dephasing by the use of gradients only.
As the dephased transverse magnetization is refocused this means that the intensity of the
signal will be dependent on the T∗
2 relaxation rate, which was mentioned in Section 2.3.2.[8,
p. 581]
The way an echo is formed when using gradient echo is via gradient reversals on the
frequency-encoded axis.[8, p. 579]The spin isochromats are rstly dephased by a readout
Page 8 of 44
==PAGE:20==
Theory: Spoiling
prephasing gradient, and then they are rephased with a readout gradient that has opposite
polarity as was visualised on the Gr-axis in Figure 2.[8, p. 579]
In gradient echo pulse sequences the longitudinal magnetization Mz will reach a steady
state after a number of excitation pulses. The corresponding response of the transverse
magnetization Mxy determines the classication of the specic sequence. If Mxy = 0 just
before each excitation pulse then the sequence is spoiled (FLASH sequence) but if Mxy ̸= 0
then the sequence will produce SSFP.[8, p. 583] Elaboration on these two classications
follow in Section 2.10 and Section 2.11, respectively.
2.8
Spoiling
Unwanted MR signal could produce artefacts in the image and is therefore often removed.
This can be done via spoiling which is the process of eliminating residual signal after a
readout pulse.[8, p. 349]
Spoiling can be accomplished in dierent ways.
It can be done by having a long
repetition time (TR) so that Mxy has decayed away completely before a subsequent ex-
citation pulse. However, this method can give rise to a slower acquisition speed which is
undesirable.[8, pp. 583-585]
It can also be accomplished by having an end-of-sequence gradient spoiling. Spoiler gra-
dients will always dephase the transverse magnetization along the direction of the gradient
and thereby eliminate Mxy nonselectively.[8, p. 351]. This method has a natural limitation
since the strength of this gradient needs to be increased a bit for each TR interval in order
to achieve perfect spoiling via completely randomized phase dispersion.
The longitudinal magnetization Mz however, is preserved and can give rise to a signal in
subsequent data acquisition. This is for example what happens in the SSFP-FID sequence
which will be elaborated on later.[8, pp. 349-350]
A third way of accomplishing spoiling is by RF spoiling. In this type of spoiling so-
called phase-cycling schedules are used. As the name implies, this involves repetition of a
pulse sequence, but with the phase of the excitation pulses altered slightly each time [10,
p. 57]. It has to be noted that the receiver phase needs to be matched to the phase of the
excitation pulse in order for the correct signal to be acquired [11, p. 115].
One example of a phase-cycling schedule is given by
Φj = Φj−1 + jΦ0,
j = 1, 2, 3, ...
(10)
where Φj is the phase of the B1 eld for the jth RF excitation pulse. The initial value
Φ0 is a parameter which can be varied but Φ0 = 117◦has previously been recommended
to obtain a proper spoiling (see Zur et al. for further information[12]). RF spoiling is
generally known to contribute to more spatially uniform results.[8, pp. 585-586]
2.9
Magnetic Resonance Current Density Imaging (MRCDI)
Magnetic resonance current density imaging (MRCDI) is an imaging modality that recon-
structs the current density distribution inside a material, e.g. a specic tissue, by the use
of MRI and externally applied currents [13].
External electrodes are used to apply bipolar currents, which has to be repetitious
and applied in synchrony with the MRI pulse sequence[5][4].A magnetic eld distribution
is hereby induced in the material from the applied current ow. The component of this
induced magnetic eld (∆Bz,c), which is parallel to B0, creates a phase perturbation in
the resulting MRI signal that can be measured.[3]
Page 9 of 44
==PAGE:21==
Theory: FLASH sequence
This specic imaging modality could be useful in all areas where knowledge of current
distribution would be useful, i.e. enabling characterizing of pathological tissue and better
spatial targeting of neurostimulation methods [3][5].
For example it could be used as a method to directly measure the current ow pattern
generated by weak TCS. Currently only computational models exist to estimate the induced
magnetic eld and MRCDI could therefore be useful in terms of validating the model
estimate or maybe even provide similar information which could be used as an alternative
to the models.[14]
2.9.1
Current injection
In the introduction of this project it was mentioned that Göksu et. al previously have
investigated Lee et al's most sensitive SSFP variant further. This was the partial current
injection (PCI) for the SSFP-FID sequence, and Göksu et. al furthermore proposed a new
variant where the current is injected within the entire TR period, which is denoted as the
full current injection (FCI) SSFP-FID.[3][6]
The two dierent types of current injections are illustrated in Figure 5 along with the
RF excitation pulse prole. In the current project only the FCI is investigated but for
three dierent sequences.
Figure 5: RF excitation pulse sequence with ip angle α visualised along with the bipolar
electrical current injection for partial current injection (PCI) and full current injection (FCI),
respectively. Tc denotes the current injection time and TR the repetition time.
The grey M's (and associated broken lines) indicate location right after an RF excitation pulse,
where n is the RF pulse number, i.e. M +
2n−1 and M +
2n+1 are magnetizations at two odd TRs.
In the three following main sections the three pulse sequences investigated in the current
project will be described.
2.10
FLASH sequence
The rst of the three sequences used in this project is the fast low-angle shot FLASH
sequence which is a spoiled gradient echo pulse sequence[8, p. 583]. As implied by the
name, the FLASH sequence combines small excitation angles (ip angles) with very short
TR times.
The use of short TR times naturally shortens the acquisition time, however a decent
image quality needs to be ensured. By keeping the excitation pulse below 90◦in gradient
echo acquisitions the Mz component will not need to be inverted by a refocusing pulse.
Recovery of T1 therefore does not require a long period of time which is why a short
TR (e.g.
2-50 ms) can be used, while still obtaining high quality MR images.
When
Page 10 of 44
==PAGE:22==
Theory: FLASH sequence
simultaneously using small ip angles, the transverse magnetization created will be much
greater than the loss of longitudinal magnetization, i.e. Mxy ≫(M0 −Mz)[8, pp. 580-581].
This is obvious when investigating Figure 3; for example, if α = 20◦then Mz = 0.94M0
and Mxy = 0.34M0, which means that for a loss of only 6% of Mz, 34% of the maximum
Mxy have been obtained, whereas for α = 80◦then Mz = 0.17M0 and Mxy = 0.98M0, i.e.
the transverse magnetization might have gained 98% but a longitudinal loss of 83% has
also occurred.
In the project the FLASH sequence is assumed to be a perfectly spoiled case. With this
assumption the Mz will return to the steady-state value just before each excitation pulse.
When observing the sketch in Figure 6 this corresponds to the red lines at number 1 and
3, respectively
Figure 6: Visualization of a train of RF excitation pulses with the purpose of analysing gradient
echoes and the steady state assumption. 1⃝indicates a point right before an excitation pulse, 2⃝
a point right after (also stated by M +
2n), and 3⃝the point right before the next excitation pulse.
TR is the repetition time and α the ip angle of the excitation pulse.
If Mz at point 1⃝is Mz1, then at point 2⃝it will be Mz2 = Mz1 cos(α) as the excitation
pulse has rotated the magnetization to the transverse plane. Longitudinal relaxation will
happen in the subsequent TR interval which, as remembered from section 2.3.1, will result
in a longitudinal magnetization at point 3⃝of
Mz3 = Mz2e−TR/T1 +M0

1 −e−TR/T1
= Mz1 cos(α)e−TR/T1 +M0

1 −e−TR/T1
. (11)
Under the assumption that the longitudinal magnetization has reached a steady state,
Mz,ss, then Mz1 = Mz3. The expression from Eq. (11) can thereby be written as
Mz,ss = Mz,ss cos(α)e−TR/T1 + M0

1 −e−TR/T1
Mz,ss

1 −cos(α)e−TR/T1
= M0

1 −e−TR/T1
Mz,ss = M0
 1 −e−TR/T1
1 −cos(α)e−TR/T1 .
(12)
This is the measure for the general steady state longitudinal magnetization, Mz,ss. As
mentioned in section 2.7.1 a gradient echo is obtained by refocusing transverse dephasing.
If this is done at an echo time (TE) then Mz,ss sin(α)e−TE/T ∗
2 .[8, pp.582+586-587]
This means that the obtained signal from a spoiled steady state gradient echo sequence,
i.e. FLASH, at TE will be given by
SFLASH = M0
sin(α)
 1 −e−TR/T1
1 −cos(α) e−TR/T1 e−TE/T ∗
2 .
(13)
However, this expression for the FLASH signal does not take phase (and thereby direc-
tion) of Mxy into consideration. Therefore, the eect of the alternating current from the
Page 11 of 44
==PAGE:23==
Theory: SSFP-FID sequence
current-injection is "added" by multiplying Eq. (13) with e±jφc. Remember the complex
notation from section 2.4.[8, p. 429] With the complex current-induced phase, φc , and the
B0 inhomogeneity-induced phase, φb, which also includes irrelevant contribution from RF
phase. This results in
MxySS1 = SFLASH · ejφc · ejφb
MxySS2 = SFLASH · e−jφc · ejφb
(14)
where MxySS1 is the magnetization for the positive current injection and MxySS2 for the
negative.
2.11
SSFP-FID sequence
Like FLASH the SSFP-FID sequence is a gradient echo pulse sequence. However, it has a
larger signal than the spoiled gradient echo (FLASH) but often at the expense of a lower
contrast.[8, p. 589]
A visualisation of both the FLASH and the SSFP-FID sequence is observed in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Sequence diagram of the gradient echo sequence with (i.e. FLASH) and without (i.e.
SSFP-FID) spoiling. The FLASH sequence has an end-of-sequence spoiler gradient (red) added
in the readout direction but is otherwise identical to the SSFP-FID.
Both sequences are composed of repetitive RF excitation pulses with ip angle α along with
slice-selective, phase encoding, and frequency encoding gradients as described in Figure 2. Both
sequences result in the signals SS1 and SS2 at odd and even TRs, respectively. This is due to the
bipolar electrical current injection Ic(t) which is applied in synchrony with the sequences and
within the entire TR period.
In the current project the SSFP-FID sequence will be implemented in such a way that
a dispersion of the phase will occur before each new excitation pulse. This results in a
Page 12 of 44
==PAGE:24==
Theory: SSFP-FID sequence
somewhat spoiled signal, but not a perfect spoiling such as the FLASH sequence where
the signal is spoiled both via RF spoiling and an end-of-sequence gradient spoiler. As
mentioned earlier if the residual Mxy is not eliminated it can interfere with the signal in
subsequent data acquisition.[8, p. 349] This factor is what will result in a larger signal
as stated in the beginning of this section but it will also result in a lower contrast. It is
therefore expected that the SNR will be lower for the FLASH sequence which will aect
the sensitivity in the reconstructed MR image.
2.11.1
Analytic analysis of steady state matrix expression
In the simulations for the SSFP-FID sequence the mathematical expressions implemented
have been obtained from the paper by Lee et al.[6].
In this paper, the magnetization
was calculated by using by sequential operation of the Bloch equation in a matrix form.
Therefore, to more fully understand these expressions an analytical analysis of the original
matrix expressions in the paper by Lee et al. has been conducted.
The derivation of the steady state magnetization in the SSFP-FID sequence is slightly
dierent from the one presented for the FLASH sequence in Section 2.10 as one needs to
"go a single step further" in the pulse sequence due to the bipolar current injection. This
is furthermore supported by the visualisation which was given in Figure 5 (when looking
at the FCI).
When the bipolar current injection is matched with the sequence, and it is assumed
that steady state is reached (that is, after a sucient amount of RF pulses) then the steady
state magnetization vector is given by
M+
SS1 = M+
2n−1 = M+
2n+1,
(15)
where n is the RF pulse number, the plus sign indicates that it is the magnetization right
after the RF excitation pulse, and M+
2n−1 and M+
2n+1 are magnetization vectors at two odd
TRs. These magnetization vectors are expressed via rotation matrices in Eq. [1] in the
paper by Lee et al.[6]. By substituting the Lee et al. expressions into Eq. (15) the overall
steady state magnetization vector was found. All of the explicit matrix calculations can
be seen in Appendix A.
The resulting overall matrix expression from the above calculations leads to an explicit
formula for the steady state transverse magnetization at odd and even TRs; denoted as
MSS1 and MSS2, respectively, which are given by
MSS1(t = 0+) = M0(1 −E1)sin(α)
D
 
A1e−2j(φc+φg) + A2e−2jφc + A3ej(φg+φb−φc)
+ A4e−j(φg+φb−φc) + A5e−j(φg+φb+φc) + A6
!
MSS2(t = 0+) = M0(1 −E1)sin(α)
D
 
A1e−2j(φc+φg) + A2e2jφc + A3ej(φg+φb+φc)
+ A4e−j(φg+φb+φc) + A5e−j(φg+φb−φc) + A6
! (16)
where
A1 =E2
2(1 + E1) (1 + cos(α)) , A2 = E2
2(1 −E1) (1 −cos(α))
A3 = −E2(1 + E1) (1 + cos(α)) , A4 = E2(1 −E1) (1 −cos(α))
A5 =2E3
2 (E1 + cos(α)) , A6 = −2 (1 + E1cos(α))
D =E2
2(1 −E2
1)[(cos(α) + 1)2cos(2(φg + φb)) + (cos(α) −1)2cos(2φc)]+
2E1E2(1 −E2
2)(cos(2α) −1)(cos(φg + φb)cos(φc)+
2(E1cos(α) + 1)(E1cos(α) −1) + 2E4
2(E1 + cos(α))(Ea −cos(α))
(17)
Page 13 of 44
==PAGE:25==
Theory: EPI sequence
and
E1 = e−TR/T1, E2 = e−TR/T2
(18)
i.e. they correspond to the relaxating of the longitudinal and transverse magnetization,
respectively.
2.12
EPI sequence
EPI is the main focus of this project and an exhaustive exploration of the sequence will
therefore be performed. EPI is one of the fastest MRI pulse sequences and uses a gradient
echo train to accelerate data acquisition. a visualisation of a spoiled EPI pulse sequence
can be seen in Figure 8 where RF is the excitation prole, Gs the slice selection gradient,
Gp the phase encoding gradient, Gr the readout gradient (frequency encoding), S(t) the
obtained signal, and Ic(t) the alternating current injection.
The data acquisition in EPI is accelerated by applying a series of bipolar readout
gradients (seen on the Gr-axis) which results in a series of echoes within each TR-interval
(seen on the S(t)-axis). Between the echoes, phase-encoding blips (seen on the Gp-axis)
are responsible for an increment in k-space line such that sucient sampling through k-
space is ensured to obtain a proper image. The trajectory through k-space thereby has a
traversing manner as was seen in the left image of Figure 4. On the same axis a phase
encoding prewinder gradient and a phase encoding rewinder gradient contributes enabling
of spatial encoding of the gradient echoes. If looking at Figure 4 this correspond to bringing
the sampling to outer "corner" of k-space (yellow arrow) and back to center (green arrow).
This way of phase encoding enables sampling of multiple k-space lines during a single
TR period whereby the transverse magnetization is used maximally without additional RF
excitation.[8, pp. 702-704]
Figure 8: Sequence diagram of an EPI sequence with spoiling. Gp shows phase encoding blips.
Gr shows the bipolar readout gradients and on S(t) the corresponding echoes. In this example six
echoes are obtained within each TR which results in ve phase-encoding blips. Spoiling is
indicated by the red end-of-sequence read gradients.
Page 14 of 44
==PAGE:26==
Theory: EPI sequence
As it can be observed from Figure 8 the characteristic blips occur during the readout gra-
dient. In this project, however, it is assumed that no sampling occurs during the blips,
which will be referred to as ramp time, Tramp. It is assumed to be "wasted time" and is
therefore not a part of the readout time. An actual readout time, Ts, is calculated for EPI
in which the total ramp time is subtracted. This will be further described in Section 3.1.1.
The imaging time of the EPI sequence will be shorter than the corresponding one for
SSFP-FID because of EPIs ability to sample multiple k-space lines during a single TR
period. Therefore it would be expected that the EPI sequence handles physiological noise
better, such as noise due to respiration, heartbeat, blood ow etc.
However, EPI is more sensitive to motion due to the introduced phase roll when initially
moving the trajectory away from the center in k-space with the phase encoding prephaser
gradient. This results in a dephasing of spins which takes some time to be refocused (which
it will be at the center of k-space, i.e. at kx = ky = 0). This relatively time-consuming
refocusing will have a ow-like behaviour which is motion sensitive. Linear algebra can be
used to separate dierent contributions. As an example one contribution could be from
motion of the carotid artery due to the rhythmic expansions and contractions that occur
as the heart beats. Another example of a contribution could be motion of thorax due to
breathing. However, separation of there two examples would require measurements of the
pulse and respiration, respectively.
2.12.1
Ramp time and gradient amplitude
In order to nd the amount of time spent on the blips, i.e. the ramp time (Tramp), one
needs to be aware that this duration depends on how fast the gradients are able to switch.
This speed is know as the slew rate (SR).
To nd Tramp the SR and the amplitude of the blip-gradient lobes needs to be known.
However, how fast the gradients can switch depends on where they need to ramp to and
from. It is known that the maximum amplitude of the MR-scanner used in this project
(MAGNETOM Prisma; Siemens Healthcare) is 80 mT/m at a SR of 200 T/m/s (simulta-
neously on all three axes)[15]). Therefore this maximum SR value can be used to derive
an expression for the gradient amplitude, h.
A sketch of a trapezoidal shaped gradient lobe can be observed in Figure 9 along with
indicated parameters which will be used in the derivation.
Figure 9: Sketch of trapezoidal shaped gradient lope. h = gradient amplitude,
Tramp = ramp time, Tplateau = plateau time, and TES = echo spacing time.
For both the ascending and descending ramps in Figure 9, Tramp = h/SRmax[8, p.220].
It can be seen that in order to have the expression for the ramps on both sides of the
plateau twice of Tramp is needed.
Page 15 of 44
==PAGE:27==
Theory: Current-induced magnetic eld
Therefore when observing the excitation prole along with the phase- and frequency-
encoding lines in the sequence diagram in Figure 8, TR can be written as
TR = N · TES + Trest
= N · (Tramp + Tplateau) + Trest
= N ·

2h
SRmax
+
1
γh∆x

+ Trest,
(19)
where N is the number of phase encoding lines, TES is duration of the echo spacing, Trest
is the summed duration of the RF pulse, the prephaser gradient and the spoiler gradient.
If the entire expression is multiplied with the amplitude, h, then the following quadratic
equation appears
(TR −Trest) h
N
=
2h2
SRmax
+
1
γ∆x ⇔0 =
2
SRmax
h2 −TR −Trest
N
h +
1
γ∆x,
(20)
which has the discriminant
D =

−TR −Trest
N
2
−4 ·
2
SRmax
·
1
γ∆x
(21)
and if D ≥0 then the quadratic equation has solution
h =

TR −Trest
N
±
s
−TR −Trest
N2
2
−
8
SRmaxγ∆x

· SRmax/4.
(22)
A positive discriminant is obtained for the parameter values: N = 64, TR = 80ms,
TRF = 1ms, TPrephaser = 0.5ms, TSpoiler = 0.6ms, SRmax = 200T/m/s, γ = 42.58MHz/T
and ∆x = 3mm. This means that two solutions for the amplitude, h, is found; namely 6.8
mT/m and 114.9 mT/m, respectively. These two solutions are visualized in Figure 23 in
Appendix C.
The smallest option, i.e. h = 6.8 mT/m, is the applicable one for several reasons. As
mentioned in the beginning of this section, the maximum amplitude for the Prisma scanner
is 80 mT/m so the amplitude should not be larger than this. Moreover, it is preferable to
have as long a plateau time as possible, as this is where sampling occurs. If no ramp sam-
pling is assumed then at very high amplitudes (and low SRs) the duration of the gradient
lope will end up being mostly wasted time, i.e. ramp time. This is furthermore supported
by Figure 24 in Appendix C where the sampling in k-space is visualised for the two found
solutions.
The three investigated pulse sequences have now been introduced.
In the following it
will be describe how the obtained magnetization from MRCDI will be implemented in the
project. This will be the topic of the nal section of the theory.
2.13
Current-induced magnetic eld
As mentioned in Section 2.9 MRCDI induces a magnetic eld, ∆Bz,c, via applied current.
As was also mentioned, it is the component parallel to B0 that can be measured.[3]
A linear dependence of ∆Bz,c on the phase of the transverse magnetization is expected
and has been investigated in the current project. It needs to be stated tough that the SSFP-
FID sequence has a non-linear dependence. However, when dealing with weak currents
Page 16 of 44
==PAGE:28==
Theory: Current-induced magnetic eld
(as is done in the current project) this dependence can be approximated by the linear
relationship
∆Bz,c = ∠MSS1 −∠MSS2
mseq
,
(23)
where ∠MSS1 and ∠MSS2 are the phases of the rst and second steady-state complex MR
images (at odd and even TRs) and mseq = ∂(∠MSS1 −∠MSS2) /∂∆Bz,c describes the
eld dependence on the phase change.[3]
2.13.1
Sensitivity
One of the biggest challenges with MRCDI is its low sensitivity of the MR measurement
sequences, which has prevented it from being used clinically so far.[14]
The current project has investigated the sensitivity of MR measurements from dierent
types of sequences to assess their performances compared to each other when used in an
MRCDI setting.
In order to do this the term eciency has been used to characterise the performance,
i.e. the level of sensitivity, of a specic sequence. The eciency of a sequence, ηseq, is
given by
ηseq = SNR∆Bz,c
√Ttot
=
|∆Bz,c|
σ∆Bz,c
√Ttot
,
(24)
where Ttot is the total acquisition time, |∆Bz,c| is the magnitude of the current-induced
magnetic eld, and σ∆Bz,c is the standard deviation of it.
As it can be seen from Eq. (24) the eciency is described by the relationship between
the SNR of the acquired ∆Bz,c image and the acquisition time.[3]
The sensitivity increases with increasing SNR. However, if the SNR increases at a cost
of measurement time then the eciency might not improve. This trade o between SNR
and imaging time should be taken into consideration when optimizing the eciency of a
sequence.
The standard deviation of ∆Bz,c can be calculated as
σ∆Bz,c =
1
mseqSNR.
(25)
In Eq. (25) the SNR is the system SNR and not the one stated for the current-induced
magnetic eld in Eq.(24). The system SNR is given by
SNR = ψs∆x∆y∆z
p
N · TsM(x, y),
(26)
where ψs is the system SNR, ∆x∆y∆z is the voxel volumne, N is the total number of
excitations, and Ts is the readout sampling time.[5]
From the reviewed theory it has been demonstrated that SSFP-FID will have stronger
signal due to the dispersion of phase rather than the perfect spoiling obtained by the
FLASH sequence. The EPI sequence on the other hand will have perfect spoiled but will
also have a smaller Ttot compared to FLASH. Therefore, on the basis of the reviewed(?)
theory and by scrutinising Eq. 24 there is a clear expectation that
ηSSFP−FID > ηFLASH > ηEPI.
(27)
It will be investigated via simulations and experiments whether this expectation proves to
be correct.
Page 17 of 44
==PAGE:29==
Methods
3
Methods
In this section it will be outlined how the simulations and experiments, respectively, have
been performed.
Both the simulations in this project and the data analysis of the experiments have been
conducted in matlab (The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, Massachusetts) version R2018b.
3.1
Simulations
The numerical simulations in the current project compare the output from the three se-
quences: FLASH, SSFP-FID, and EPI where dierent parameters have been altered in ve
dierent simulations:
• Simulation 1: Dependency of phase of the steady-state Mxy
• Simulation 2: Eciency where TR and TE varies
• Simulation 3: Eciency where TR and ipangle varies
• Simulation 4: Dependency of eciency on the ip angle
• Simulation 5: Dependency of eciency on the TR
The calculations of the transversal magnetization was simulated dierently for the three
investigated sequences. The way in which these calculations dier will be elaborated in
the following.
3.1.1
Calculation of steady state transverse magnetization
SSFP-FID:
For the SSFP-FID sequence the steady state transverse magnetization was calculated by
implementing the equations from both the Lee et al. study[6] and the Göksu et al. study[3].
These equations are stated in Eq. 16.
100 isochromates were used when implementing the gradient induced phase, φg, in the
simulations.
This was done to model these 100 spins as a uniform distribution in the
transverse plane to function as an end-of-sequence spoiler gradient[6], i.e. as the phase
dispersion mentioned in Section 2.11. This was done by dening φg as a vector of 100
evenly spaced points between 0 and 2π.
FLASH:
For the FLASH sequence the magnetization was calculated by implementing the equations
stated in Eq. (14).
As the SSFP-FID was simulated by summing the results of 100 isochromates the mag-
netizations for both the FLASH and EPI sequence are multiplied with 100 in order to
enable comparison of the sequences.
EPI
For the EPI sequence the magnetization was also calculated by implementing Eq. (14) as
was done for the FLASH sequence. The dierence in the implementation is that the EPI
consists of a series of gradient echoes within each TR-interval instead of only one. Between
the echoes, phase-encoding blips make sure the k-space trajectory is traversed properly
as described in Section 2.12. However, during these blips it is assumed that no sampling
occurs as mentioned in Section 2.12. Therefore, the "blip-time", here referred to as ramp
Page 18 of 44
==PAGE:30==
Methods: Simulations
time, is not part of the readout time, Ts. The amount of blips is equal to number of phase
encoding steps, N, minus one, which is subtracted from the FLASH readout time. This
can be seen visualised in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Visualization of how readout time, Ts is altered. Time spent on switching gradients
in the EPI sequence is subtracted, i.e ramp time, Tramp. The slice selection gradient has been
omitted in the visualization along with the phase encoding gradient for FLASH and SSFP-FID.
For all three sequences the current-induced magnetic eld, ∆Bz,c, and the eciency,
ηseq, were simulated based on Eq. (23), (25), and (24).
3.1.2
Parameter values
Relaxations times similar to those of brain tissue were used: T1= 1100 ms, T2= 100 ms,
and T ∗
2 = 50 ms.[16]. The RF pulse width, prephaser, and spoiler gradient durations were
TRF = 2 ms, Tpre = 0.5 ms, and Tsp = 0.6 ms[3].
The gyromagnetic ratio for the hydrogen proton was used, i.e.
γ = 267.5 × 106
rad/sec/T It was assumed that background magnetic eld inhomogeneity does not vary
along the pulse train (time-invariant), i.e. ∆B0 = 0.[3].
These above mentioned parameters were kept unchanged in all ve simulations.The
altered parameters can be seen in Table A.
∆Bz,c [nT]
TR [ms]
TE [ms]
Flip angle
Simulation 1
[-72: 72]
80
TR/2∗
30◦
Simulation 2
1
20-260
10-140∗
20◦
Simulation 3
1
20-260
TR/2∗
15◦-80◦
Simulation 4
1
140
70∗
15◦-80◦
Simulation 5
1
20-260
TR/2∗
20◦
Table A: Varying parameters for the ve simulations.
∗applies for SSFP-FID and FLASH. For EPI: TE= (N · TES)/2 + TRF /2 + Tpre,
e.g. equals 39.95 ms for Simulation 1.
Page 19 of 44
==PAGE:31==
Methods: Experiments
Firstly, the dependency of phase of the steady state transverse magnetization was simulated
for all three sequences. The parameters can be seen in rsts row of Table A.
Secondly, simulations were performed for all three sequences where the eciency of
∆Bz,c was simulated to demonstrate the performance of the sequences at various TE, TR,
and ip angle values.The image SNR was adjusted according to a choice of lowest possible
sampling bandwidth (BW)s. The combinations in which TE > TR were ignored, as this
is not a possible combination. The parameters can be seen in second and third row of
Table A.
Thirdly, the dependency of eciency on ip angle and TR, respectively, was simulated...
The parameters can be seen in fourth and fth row of Table A.
3.2
Experiments
A 3T MRI scanner along with a 64-channel head coil was used to perform all experiments
(MAGNETOM Prisma; Siemens Healthcare. Maximum amplitude 80 mT/m at a slewrate
of 200 T/m/s, simultaneously on all three axes[15]).
The current waveforms were created by an arbitrary waveform generator (33500B;
Keysight Technologies) and a home-made voltage-to-current converter, and injected into a
phantom via recessed copper electrodes. The experiments were set-up and carried out in
collaboration with the Postdoc and PhD student.
The phantom used in the experiments was the FBIRN phantom, which can be seen
in Figure 11. It is a 17-cm-diameter spherical phantom lled with agar gel. The agar gel
ensures that the T1, T2, RF conductivity and magnetization transfer characteristics are
similar to those of brain tissue.[17]
Figure 11: The FBIRN phantom. Spherical with a diameter of 17cm, lled with agar.
Two dierent experiments have been performed:
• Experiment 1: Dependency of the average ∆Bz,c on the current strength for two of
the sequences; SSFP-FID and EPI.
• Experiment 2: Eciency of the three sequences where TR and ip angle varies.
sIn both experiments measurements with and without current-injection have been per-
formed. The measurements without current-injection have been used to investigate the
noise in the sequences.
Page 20 of 44
==PAGE:32==
Methods: Experiments
3.2.1
Experiment 1a: Dependency of the average ∆Bz,c on the current strength
In the rst experiment measurements for both the SSFP-FID and EPI sequence, were per-
formed with four dierent current magnitudes; one without current injection and one with
0.33 mA, 0.66 mA, and 1.00 mA current injection, respectively. This was done in order to
perform a linearity check. The particular sequence parameters are given in Table B.
Parameter:
SSFP-FID
EPI
TR
80 ms
80 ms
TE
40 ms
40 ms
Flip angle, α
30◦
30◦
FoV
224×224
224×224
Voxel size in plane
3.5×3.5 mm
3.5×3.5 mm
Slice thickness, ∆z
3 mm
3 mm
No. of measurements
12 (with 5 echoes)
1536 (768 cycles)
Averaging
2
None
Fat saturation
O
O
Echo spacing
80 ms (=TR)
1.22 ms
Table B: Sequence parameters for Experiment 1.
TR for EPI was calculated by isolating TES in Eq. (19), such that TES = (TR −TRF −
Tpre −Tsp)/N which resulted in an echo spacing (ES) of 1.22 ms.
3.2.2
Experiment 1b: First raw EPI reconstruction - DICOM data
After having reconstructed the SSFP-FID data analysis of the EPI obtained in Experiment
1 was rstly performed on DICOM data. A phase subtracted image was created by working
with this data as complex numbers. As DICOM data follow the DICOM standard of 12-
bit pixel storage standard used by MRI vendors adhering to the DICOM standard these
complex numbers were scaled with a factor of π/4096, as 212 = 4096[18].
The scaled data for negative current injections were then divided with the scaled data
for positive current injections to obtain the phase subtracted image.
3.2.3
Experiment 2: Eciency where TR and ip angle varies
In the second experiment all three sequences were investigated where the ip angle and
TR values were altered both with and without current-injection.
TE was set to half of TR and BW was set to the lowest possible to obtain maximal
SNR. eld of view (FOV) was 224 × 224 mm, and ∆z 3 mm. When current was induced,
1Vpp was used. The altered sequence parameters are given in Table C.
The number of cycles was half of the Nmeas for the EPI sequence, since half is used on
sampling during the negative and half on sampling during the positive current-injection.
The length of the period was twice as big as TR since a period needs to contain a full
cycle of the bipolar current-injection, which requires two repetition times as was seen in
Figure 5.
In order to enable comparison of the three sequences single-echo acquisitions were
obtained for SSFP-FID and ash and the scan times for all three sequences were matched
such that each scanning took 2.04 minute.
Page 21 of 44
==PAGE:33==
Methods: Experiments
SSFP-FID & FLASH
EPI
For current injection
Exp
TR [ms]
α [deg]
Nmeas
BW [Hz/Px]
Nmeas
BW [Hz/Px]
Cycles
Period [ms]
a
200
45
4.8 ≈5
5.1
640
752
320
400
b
200
30
4.8 ≈5
5.1
640
752
320
400
c
160
30
6
6.4
768
752
384
320
d
140
30
6.857 ≈7
7.4
896
752
448
280
e
120
30
8
8.6
1024
752
512
240
f
80
30
12
13.2
1536
1014
768
160
g
80
15
12
13.2
1536
1014
768
160
Table C: Sequence parameters for the second experiment. TE = TR/2, FoV was 224 mm, slice thickness ∆z = 3mm,
orientation was transversal, and base resolution 64. For SSFP-FID the RF spoiling was OFF whereas it was ON
for FLASH and EPI. For the measurements with current injection the amplitude was 1Vpp.
The PhD collected the data and analysed it due to limited amount of time towards the
end of the project period.
The data analysis was performed by rstly masking the phantom and calculating the
SNR. Background regions were selected in each corner of the image and were made rather
small to "get away" from signal from the phantom and only have true noise.
The noise distributions were plotted along with a Gaussian distribution, N(µ, σ).
The ∆Bz,c images were plotted and the eciencies of the sequences were calculated in the
following way:
 ∠Mpos −∠Mneg

· SNR,
(28)
where Mpos and Mneg are the averaged phases of the MR images at positive and negative
current-injections, respectively.
Page 22 of 44
==PAGE:34==
Results
4
Results
In this section results from the conducted simulations will be presented as well as the
results from experiments performed at Hvidovre Hospital.
4.1
Simulations
4.1.1
Simulation 1: Dependency of phase of the steady-state Mxy
Figure 12: Simulated dependency of phase of the steady state transverse magnetization, ∆Bz,c
The absence of the FLASH line is due to overlap with EPI. α = 30◦, TR= 80 ms, TE=40 ms (for
SSFP-FID and FLASH) and TE=39.95 ms (for EPI).
The absence of the FLASH line in Figure 12 is due to such a high similarity between
FLASH and EPI that the two graphs overlap. Therefore, it can be observed from the
gure that both the FLASH and EPI sequences show a linear relationship between the
phase and current-induced transverse magnetization.
The SSFP-FID sequence on the
other hand displays a S-shaped curve behaviour, which is due to the contribution from
refocused magnetization from each previous TR interval.
This supports the analytic analysis of the expression for the steady state magnetization
conducted in Section 2.11.1.
4.1.2
Simulation 2: Eciency where TR and TE varies
The eciency of ∆Bz,c measurements were simulated for all three sequences; the SSFP-
FID, the FLASH, and the EPI sequence. This was done for dierent values of TR and TE.
The resulting simulated eciency of ∆Bz,c for these three sequences are seen in Figure 13
where they have been normalized to the peak eciency value of the SSFP-FID sequence.
From Figure 13 it is observed that the maximum eciency, ηmax, for all three sequences
is located in the diagonal where TE is half the size of TR, but at slightly lower TE and
TR for SSFP-FID, i.e. 60 ms and 120 ms, respectively whereas ηmax for the two other
sequences was obtained at 120 ms and 140 ms, respectively.
However, all three plots are very similar so in order to do a more thorough analysis the
percentage dierences between the three sequences are calculated and plotted in Figure
14.
Page 23 of 44
==PAGE:35==
Results: Simulations
(a) SSFP-FID.
(b) FLASH.
(c) EPI.
Figure 13: Eciency of ∆Bz,c for the simulated three sequences. ∆Bz,c= 1 nT and α = 20◦.
All three plots have been normalized to the peak eciency value of the SSFP-FID sequence.
(a) Comparing FLASH to SSFP-FID.
(b) Comparing EPI to FLASH.
(c) Comparing EPI to SSFP-FID.
Figure 14: Percentage loss of eciency of ∆Bz,c between two of the three simulated sequences.
∆Bz,c = 1 nT and α = 20◦.
Page 24 of 44
==PAGE:36==
Results: Simulations
For short TEs it is observed from Figure 14a and Figure 14c that some eciency is lost
when the FLASH or EPI sequence is used instead of SSFP-FID, i.e. when perfect spoiling
has been used. More specically, when looking at the shortest TE and TR simulated there is
approximately a 60% and 80% decrease in eciency for FLASH and EPI, respectively When
increasing TR the dierence in eciency compared to the SSFP-FID sequence decreases.
However, when looking at the values in the middle of the diagonal where TE is half of
TR (which was where the maximum eciency was observed in Figure 13), the dierence
is only in the range 0.9-8.2% for FLASH and 5.2-15.6% for EPI.
From Figure 14b it can be seen that when comparing EPI to FLASH a 160% loss
is observed at TR= 10 ms and 22.4% at TR= 20 ms. In the ηmax diagonal the loss is
4.3-8.0%.
4.1.3
Simulation 3: Eciency where TR and ip angle varies
For all three sequences the eciency of ∆Bz,c measurements were also simulated where
the value of TR and ip angle were altered. The resulting gures are seen in Figure 15
where they have been normalized to the peak eciency value of the SSFP-FID sequence.
(a) SSFP-FID.
(b) FLASH.
(c) EPI.
Figure 15: Eciency of ∆Bz,c between two of the simulated sequences for a variety of dierent
TRs and ip angles. ∆Bz,c = 1 nT, TE=TR/2 for SSFP-FID and FLASH, and
TE= (N · TES)/2 + TRF /2 + Tpre for EPI.
In Figure 15 the maximum eciency for the three sequences is obtained at approxi-
mately the same ip angle but at dierent TR values.
4.1.4
Simulation 4 & 5: Dependency of eciency on the ip angle and TR
In Figure 16 the results from both the fourth and fth simulation are displayed. In these
simulations all three sequences have been normalized with respect to the maximum e-
Page 25 of 44
==PAGE:37==
Results: Experiments
ciency for the SSFP-FID sequence.
(a) Dependency on ip angle. TR= 140 ms.
(b) Dependency on repetition time. α = 20◦
Figure 16: Dependency of eciency on the ip angle and TR. ∆Bz,c = 1 nT.
From Figure 16a it can be seen that the ip angle where the highest/largest eciency
is observed at 31 degrees for the SSFP-FID sequence and 28 degrees for both the FLASH
and EPI sequence.
From Figure 16b the optimal value for the repetition time for the SSFP-FID, FLASH,
and EPI sequence are seen to be 120, 136, and 140ms, respectively.
4.2
Experiments
4.2.1
Experiment 1a: Dependency of the average ∆Bz,c on the current strength
The four dierent current measurements were used to perform a linearity check.
In Figure 17 the current induced magnetic eld, ∆Bz,c, of the FBIRN phantom is
visualized for the four dierent current injections.
From Figure 17 the overall separating "line" caused by the injected current becomes
more apparent when increasing the current. However, some ghosting-like patterns are ob-
served, especially in Figure 17a where no current injection has been applied.
From the region-of-interest (ROI)s indicated on Figure 17 average ∆Bz,c values for each
of the four current strengths were extracted and are stated in Table D along with the
standard error.
Current strength [mA]
∆Bz,c [nT]
Standard error [nT]
0
0.04
0.06
0.33
-0.24
0.04
0.66
-0.45
0.03
1.00
-0.68
0.03
Table D: Average ∆Bz,c values for the four current strengths along with the corresponding
standard error.
The values were plotted against the current strengths to check for linearity which is
observed in Figure 18.
Page 26 of 44
==PAGE:38==
Results: Experiments
(a) 0.00 mA
(b) 0.33 mA
(c) 0.66 mA
(d) 1.00 mA
Figure 17: Combined ∆Bz,c images of the measurements with four dierent current injections
obtained with the SSFP-FID sequence. TR=80 ms, TE=40, α = 30◦, Nmeas = 12 with 5 echoes,
FOV= 224 × 224, ∆z = 3 mm. The specic region-of-interest (ROI) shown in subgure (b) was
chosen for all four measurements. The colorbar is in the unit T.
Figure 18: Dependency of the average ∆Bz,c in the ROI (see Figure 17b for visualisation) on
the current strength for the SSFP-FID sequence. The average of the 12 measurements is shown
and the vertical bars represent the standard error.
From Figure 18 it can be observed that the measurements demonstrate a rather good
linear dependency with small stands errors indicating relatively high accuracy.
4.2.2
Experiment 1b: First raw EPI reconstruction - DICOM data
The resulting phase subtracted image of the rst raw EPI reconstruction of DICOM data
can be observed in Figure 19.
Page 27 of 44
==PAGE:39==
Results: Experiments
Figure 19: ∆Bz,c phase subtracted image with current injection which exhibit a couple of phase
wraps. The image was reconstructed from DICOM-data, had a base resolution of 64 × 64 and
was scaled with a factor of π/4096.
By exploiting the DICOM data it is observed that the embedded reconstruction by
Siemens results in some phase wraps. This can be observed in the phase subtracted image
in Figure 19 where some phase wraps occurs in the upper left side and the lower right side
of the phantom.
This is obviously not optimal and it was therefore decided not to work further with
this type of les, but instead continue in another direction, namely extracting the raw data
(i.e. IMA les) and perform a manual reconstruction in order to obtain the magnitude
and phase images without the inexpedient phase wraps. This will be elaborated on in the
following section.
4.2.3
Experiment 2: Eciency where TR and ip angle varies
In Figure 20 the results from Experiment 2 is plotted for the particular measurements
where TR= 140 ms and α = 30◦.
From the ∆Bz,c images of the phantom for measurements without current-injection
(seen in the left column of Figure 20) the EPI sequence clearly has a much lower noise
oor than the SSFP-FID and FLASH sequences. Furthermore, the ∆Bz,c images of the
phantom for measurements with current-injection are plotted in the middle column of
Figure 20. From these it is observed that the sequence which has a noise distribution that
ts the Gaussian distribution the most is the EPI sequence, followed by the the SSFP-FID
and lastly the FLASH.
When examining the right column of Figure 20 more closely, the horizontal separation of
∆Bz,c due to the bipolar current-injection is clearly visible for all three sequences. However,
the line of separation is more straight for EPI than for the SSFP-FID and FLASH sequences
which has a more sinusoidal shape. The separation is due to the bipolar current-injection
and should ideally be a completely straight, horizontal line.
Page 28 of 44
==PAGE:40==
Results: Experiments
Figure 20: Results from MRCDI experiment with phantom where TR = 140 ms and α = 30◦for all
three sequences; EPI in the top row, SSFP-FID in the middle row, and FLASH in the bottom row.
Left column: ∆Bz,c of phantom for measurements without current-injection, i.e. showing noise
distribution in the phantom. Middle column: Noise distribution of the measured ∆Bz,c (without
current injection) (blue graph), tted along with a Gaussian distribution (red graph), N(µ, σ).
Right column: ∆Bz,c of phantom for measurements with current-injection.
For the remaining measurements in Experiment 2, which had other values of TR and α,
the ∆Bz,c for the measurements of the phantom without current-injection can be seen in
Appendix D, the noise distributions in Appendix E, and nally the ∆Bz,c for measure-
ments with current-injection can be seen in Appendix F.
The mean and standard deviations of the noise distributions are stated in Table E in
Appendix G along with the eciencies calculated from the ∆Bz,c measurements with
current-injection for the three dierent sequences (see Appendix D).
The dependency of eciency on the TR is plotted in Figure 21 where the eciencies
have been normalized to the maximum eciency for the EPI sequence.
Page 29 of 44
==PAGE:41==
Results: Experiments
Figure 21: Eciency vs. TR for the Experiment 2 data obtained at measurements where
α = 30◦. Eciencies have been normalized with respect to the maximum eciency of EPI.
Aside from the sharp decline at TR= 140 ms and then again at 200 ms, it is observed
on Figure 21 that for the experimental measurements the sequence with the overall highest
eciency is the EPI sequence. Up until TR= 120 the three sequences follows the same
patterns however with what appears to be dierent intersections and slightly dierent
slopes. According to this gure, the optimal values for the TR are obtained at 160 ms
for SSFP-FID and at 120 for FLASH and EPI which is not consistent with the results
obtained in Simulation 5 (see Figure 16b).
From Figure 16b the simulations predicted that the optimal values for TR was 120,
136, and 140, respectively for SSFP-FID, FLASH, and EPI.
Page 30 of 44
==PAGE:42==
Discussion
5
Discussion
The discussion will be divided into three main sections. The rst section discusses results
concerning the dependency of phase of the Mxy, the second section discusses how the ramp
time aects acquisition time and hereby the performance of the applied sequence, which
leads to the third section that discusses the performance results of the project's three
investigated sequences.
In these sections the simulations and experiments of the project are compared. For
one thing this comparison is made to assess whether the simulations are corresponding to
the measurement, which would indicate whether or not they are correctly implemented.
Furthermore, if it turns out that simulations have been correctly implemented, they could
be utilized to predict the outcome of future measurements. This could result in both time
and cost savings, as MRI scans are time consuming and expensive.
5.1
Dependency of phase of the steady state magnetization
In the analysis conducted in Section 2.11.1 an expression for the steady state transversal
magnetization for the SSFP-FID sequence was derived. This resulted in an expression
which, compared to the corresponding FLASH sequence, had an additional contribution
from refocused magnetization in previous TR intervals and consequently a stronger signal
due to lack of spoiling of Mxy.
The conducted analysis was supported by the results in Simulation 1 which showed
a linear relationship between the phase and current-induced transverse magnetization for
the FLASH and EPI sequence and a slightly sinusoidal-shaped relationship of SSFP-FID
verifying the added phase contribution for the SSFP-FID sequence.
The resulting images in Section 2.9 showed the current induced magnetic eld, ∆Bzc, with
a clear separation straight through the phantom (due to the bipolar current) which became
more apparent with increasing current strengths. Therefore, it was possible to conclude
that a clear dependency of the measured magnetic eld on current strength exists.
This experiment furthermore supports Eq. [12] from Göksu et al.(2017)[3] which postu-
lated that SSFP-FID (for weak currents) could be approximated by a linearly relationship
expressed by the phase of the MR image and the eld dependence on the phase change
(see Figure 18).
Possible sources of uncertainties in the experiment should be mentioned, which is done in
the following.
For all four images only a single selected ROI was extracted, which was observed in
Figure 17b, and other areas could have been chosen that would also exhibit clear current-
induced phase changes.
Alternative ROIs could potentially result in a dierent linear
dependency. However, from the given ROIs and the calculated uncertainties in Experi-
ment 1 it was observed that the accuracy increases with increasing current strength as
indicated by the decrease in the corresponding relative standard error.
When only looking at the three experiments where current was injected there appears
to be a higher overall linear dependency than when including the reference measurement
where no current was injected. In terms of linear dependency it would have been benecial
to perform a t to a linear regression model for further verication, both for the three
measurements with current-injection but also for the fourth measurement without current-
injection. However, focus was on moving forwards with more simulations and experiments
Page 31 of 44
==PAGE:43==
Discussion: Ramp time
which led to an omission of linear regression ts which would enable precise expressions of
the degree of linear dependency.
A ghosting-like pattern was observed in the ∆Bz,c images of Experiment 1, especially
in the measurement with no current injection (see Figure 17). The ghosting seemed to
decrease with increasing current-injection.
The experiment was a multi gradient echo
acquisition where ve echoes was obtained, however, this pattern might have been removed
had more than ve echoes been used.
The reproducibility of the experiment is lacking as each of the four measurements was
only performed once. As a future prospect, the experiment should be repeated in order to
properly validate the discussed linear, and bring the standard error down.
The measurements for Experiment 1 were only performed for the SSFP-FID sequence
and not the FLASH and EPI. Therefore, it is not possible to experimentally verify the
slightly less linear dependency of SSFP-FID compared to FLASH and EPI from this ex-
periment.
5.2
Ramp time
Generally, for most of the simulations, i.e. Simulation 2 to 5, it has been assumed that
the ramp time, Tramp, does not contribute to the scan time, i.e. that no sampling occurs
during the switching of gradients. However, this is a misrepresentation of the reality as
some ramp sampling will occur.
If including a contribution from ramp sampling, the eective acquisition time (corre-
sponding to Ttot in this project) will increase compared to the one implemented in the
simulations of the current project. If no other parameters are altered, then an increased
acquisition time will result in a lower eciency, i.e.
a worse performing sequence (see
Eq.(24)), when assuming unchanged amount of samples points. Thereby, the current sim-
ulations might have overestimated how high the eciency of the sequences, especially the
EPI, actually is.
5.3
Performance of sequences measured in eciency
Four simulations and one experiment were performed to explore the eciency, i.e. the
performances, of the sequences in various ways. In the following the discussion of the results
will be divided into two sections; one section that discusses with results where various
parameter values have been altered and another section that deals with the eciency's
dependency on one specic parameter.
5.3.1
Alteration of various sequence parameters
In Section 4.1.2 the results from Simulation 2 showed that the maximum eciency, ηmax,
for all three sequences were found when TE=TR/2, however, at a slightly lower TE and
TR value for SSFP-FID than the two other sequences. The latter is furthermore supported
by the results of Simulation 5. However, as mentioned in Section 5.2, this is one of the
simulations which have probably overestimated the eciencies. These results therefore
need further investigation.
It should be noted for Simulation 2, that Figure 13c, Figure 14b, and Figure 14c are
slightly faulty. Figure 13c because a very short TE for EPI would result in no time being
spent on sampling data but instead on switching gradients. Figure 14b and Figure 14c
are faulty because an EPI sequence with a very short TR is not possible - no matter the
value of TE - as not enough time would be available to perform proper traversion through
Page 32 of 44
==PAGE:44==
Discussion: Performance of sequences measured in eciency
k-space. Put in a dierent way; it would require switching of the gradients at an infeasible
speed, i.e. the slew rate would have to be way above the maximum possible for the scanner
in order for proper sampling in k-space to be obtained.
Simulation 3 illustrated in section 4.1.3 shows that the maximum eciency is obtained
at approximately the same ip angle, but at dierent TR values which is furthermore sup-
ported by Simulation 4 and 5. These simulations will be discussed in the next section.
From the above it can be concluded that implementation of the EPI sequence in the
simulations needs to be revised and then adjusted; both in terms of short TEs where the
eciency should go all the way down to zero but also in actually including some ramp time
in the acquisition time.
5.3.2
Dependency on TR and ip angle
The results from Simulation 4 showed that ηmax was obtained at a ip angle of approxi-
mately 30◦ip angle for all three sequences. However, this was when all other parameters
were held constant. The equation for Ernst angle clearly shows that the ip angle obtained
will be the same when TR and T1 are both held constant.
Simulation 5 showed an optimal TR for the SSFP-FID, FLASH, and EPI sequence at 120,
136, and 140 ms, respectively (see Figure 16) whereas it for Experiment 2 was 160, 120,
and 120 ms, respectively (see Figure 21).
This incongruity might be explained by the previously mention ramp sampling, which
will contribute to acquisition time in the measurements as mentioned in Section 5.2 of
the discussion. This obviously needs to be taken into considerations when comparing the
simulations with the measurements, as the simulations lacks this contribution.
For Experiment 2, where all three sequences has been investigated and the scan times
have been matched, the very low BW for FLASH and SSFP-FID, i.e. in the range [5.1 −
13.2] Hz/Px (see Table C), can cause artefacts. Similar experiments should therefore be
performed with higher BWs in order to determine its eect.
A reason that EPI has a noise distribution which ts the Gaussian distribution best
might be due to the fact that the images are obtained by averaging the 1536 collected
measurements which could also average out the hardware instability and thereby lower the
noise.
The reproducibility is also a possible limitation in this experiment as the seven set-ups
within the experiment was only scanned twice for each sequence; once without current-
injection and once with.
A concluding remark for Experiment 2 is therefore that a too high eciency (and too
low SNR) is observed for EPI compared to the two other sequences, which was not ex-
pected (see Eq.(27)). Clearly there is a discrepancy between simulations and measurements
(regarding rst pilot measurements) which needs to be claried.
As a minor remark the eciencies were not calculated by divided with √Ttot, as was
otherwise stated in Eq. (24). This computation was omitted since it was assessed to have
little inuence due to the matching of scan times for the three sequences.
In future studies it could be of interest to simulate the EPI sequence with ramp sampling
in order to obtain more realistic data. Furthermore, an extension of the project could be
to look more into a sequence design where multiply echoes are acquired such as interleaved
EPI.
Page 33 of 44
==PAGE:45==
Discussion: Performance of sequences measured in eciency
The eect of stray elds and correction of these were mentioned in the introduction
but have not been a part of the scope of the project. Investigation of stray elds in a EPI
setting could therefore also be of interest in upcoming studies.
To this day, MRCDI is still not used on humans in a clinical setting due to its low
sensitivity. However, continuous work with optimization of sequence parameters - both in
simulations and experiments - could render in in-vivo experiments possible with similar
sequence settings.
Page 34 of 44
==PAGE:46==
Conclusion
6
Conclusion
This project investigates the eciency of the MRI pulse sequences FLASH, SSFP-FID,
and EPI for the imaging modality MRCDI.
The project has succeeded in presenting a thorough exploration of the EPI sequence
and an assessment of its performance when used in MRCDI was provided.
By conducting an analytic analysis of the expression for the steady state transversal magne-
tization this project has shown that a stronger signal for the SSFP-FID sequence compared
to the corresponding FLASH sequence is obtained due to an additional contribution from
refocused magnetization in previous TR intervals. This was veried in Simulation 1 where
all three sequences were implemented, simulated with the same sequence parameters and
compared. This resulted in a slightly increased phase evolution for the SSFP-FID compared
to the remaining sequences.
Through simulations and experiments this project concludes that the eciencies, i.e.
performance of the three sequences, depend on the chosen TR and the ip angle. Simula-
tion 2 shows a maximum eciency for all three sequences when TE is half as long as TR,
however, a slightly lower TE is obtained for SSFP-FID.
An important nding in this project is the limiting factor of excluding ramp sampling
from the implemented simulated EPI sequence, as ramp sampling will contribute to the
acquisition and therefore the assumption is a misrepresentation of the reality.
As a lot of time was invested in the analysis of the steady state transversal magnetization
for SSFP-FID and the implementation of the three sequences in simulations, it left little
time to investigate EPI in an experimental setting. More experiments and further analysis
needs to be performed in order to clarify exactly which EPI sequence settings are the most
optimal in an MRCDI setting. However, theoretical treatment of Bloch equations in this
project put the research on the right track, seeing that possible limitations were identied.
The nal experiment of this project demonstrates a lower noise oor, and better per-
formance, of the EPI sequence than the two other sequences, which is not expected. A
possible cause of the low noise level is identied in the data analysis where averaging of
1536 measurements has been performed in which the hardware instability also averages
out.
Furthermore, a discrepancy between Simulation 5 and Experiment 2 was identied as
the simulation clearly supported what was expected in the project, namely that:
ηSSFP−FID > ηFLASH > ηEPI.
However, the experiment resulted in EPI being the
sequence with the highest eciency. This comparison in the project shows discrepancies
between the expected eciency and noise level of EPI which is something that needs to be
looked further into in the future.
By performing phantom experiments with and without current-injection for all three
investigated sequences this project has contributed to the existing literature by extending
the research area of MRCDI to encompass use of the EPI pulse sequence.
In future studies it is of interest to include ramp sampling in the simulated EPI sequence
and continue working with optimizing the sequence parameters in the hopes of rendering
in-vivo human experiments possible. This will also make investigation of the physiological
noise aspect feasible.
Page 35 of 44
==PAGE:47==
References
[1] Dwight G. Nishimura.
Principles of Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
Lulu.com, 1.2
edition, 2016.
[2] Cihan Göksu, Lars G. Hanson, Hartwig R. Siebner, Philipp Ehses, Klaus Scheer,
and Axel Thielscher. Human in-vivo brain magnetic resonance current density imaging
(MRCDI). NeuroImage, 171:2639, 2018.
[3] Cihan Göksu, Klaus Scheer, Philipp Ehses, Lars G. Hanson, and Axel Thielscher.
Sensitivity Analysis of Magnetic Field Measurements for Magnetic Resonance Electri-
cal Impedance Tomography (MREIT). Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 79(2):748
760, 2018.
[4] Greig Scott Scott, Michael L. G. Joy, R. L. Armstrong, and R. M. Henkelman. Mea-
surement of nonuniform current density by magnetic resonance. IEEE Transactions
on Medical Imaging, 10(3):362374, 1991.
[5] Greig Scott Scott, Michael L. G. Joy, R. L. Armstrong, and R. M. Henkelman. Sensitiv-
ity of Magnetic-Resonance Current-Density Imaging. Journal of Magnetic Resonance,
97(2):235254, 1992.
[6] Hyunyeol Lee, Woo Chul Jeong, Hyung Joong Kim, Eung Je Woo, and Jaeseok Park.
Alternating Steady State Free Precession for Estimation of Current-Induced Magnetic
Flux Density: A Feasibility Study. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 75(5):20092019,
2016.
[7] Robert W. Brown, Yu-Chung Norman Cheng, E. Mark Haacke, Michael R. Thomp-
son, and Ramesh Venkatesan. Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Physical Principles and
Sequence Design. Wiley-Blackwell, 2nd edition, 2014.
[8] Matt A. Bernstein, Kevin F. King, and Xiaohong J. Zhou. Handbook of MRI Pulse
Sequences. Elsevier Science & Technology, San Diego, 1 edition, 2004.
[9] Cynthia B. Paschal and H. Douglas Morris. K-Space in the Clinic. Journal of Magnetic
Resonance Imaging, 19(2):145159, 2004.
[10] Edwin D Becker. High resolution NMR. Academic Press, San Diego, 3rd edition,
2000.
[11] Brian M Dale, Mark A Brown, and Richard C Semelka. MRI Basic Principles and
Applications. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK, 5th edition, oct 2015.
[12] Y. Zur, M. L. Wood, and L. J. Neuringer. Spoiling of transverse magnetization in
steady-state sequences. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 21(2):251263, 1991.
[13] C. Goksu, M. Sadighi, H. H. Eroglu, and M. Eyuboglu.
Realization of magnetic
resonance current density imaging at 3 Tesla. Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC, pages 11151118, 2014.
[14] DRCMR Neurophysics.
Advanced acquisition methods for mreit and mrcdi.
url-
http://www.drcmr.dk/neurophysics. Accessed: 18/05/2019.
Page 36 of 44
==PAGE:48==
[15] Siemens
Healthcare
A/S.
Magnetom
prisma
-
overview
technical
de-
tails.
https://www.healthcare.siemens.dk/magnetic-resonance-imaging/3t-
mri-scanner/magnetom-prisma/technical-details. Accessed: 03/04/2019.
[16] Janaka P Wansapura, Scott K Holland, R Scott Dunn, and William S Ball. NMR
Relaxation Times In Human Brain at 3 Tesla. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging,
9:531538, 1999.
[17] Lee Friedman and Gary H. Glover. Report on a multicenter fMRI quality assurance
protocol. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 23(6):827839, 2006.
[18] K. E. Sakaie and M. J. Lowe.
The DICOM Standard: Is Twelve Bits Enough?
Proceedings 14th Scientic Meeting, International Society for Magnetic Resonance
in Medicine, 14:2390, 2006.
Page 37 of 44
==PAGE:49==
A
Derivation of steady state magnetization
This appendix goes step-by-step through the derivation of the expression for the steady
state magnetization in Lee et al.s paper ([6]).
Figure 22 visualises localisations of the
calculated magnetizations along the pulse sequence. This gure is included to ease under-
standing of this particular derivation.
Figure 22: A train of RF excitation pulses along with the bipolar full current injection (FCI).
By substituting the expressions in Eq. [1] into the upper expression in Eq. [2] (both in the
Lee et al. paper) this results in
M+
2n+1 = Rx(α)M−
2n+1
= Rx(α)
 ARz(φ−)M+
2n + B

= Rx(α)
 ARz(φ−)Rx(α)M−
2n + B

= Rx(α)

ARz(φ−)Rx(α)
h
ARz(φ+)M+
2n−1 + B
i
+ B

,
(29)
where
• Rx(α) = rotation matrix about the x-axis
• Rz(±φ) = rotation matrices about the x-axis for both positive and negativ current
induced phase
• A = relaxation induced amplitude modulation of magnetization in the transverse plane
• B = relaxation induced amplitude modulation of magnetization along the longitudinal
direction
The specic expression for each of these parameters can be seen in Appendix B
For simplicity the rotation matrices will be denoted as X, Z−, and Z+ instead of Rx(α),
Rz(φ−), and Rz(φ+) for the rest of the derivation.
The steady state assumption results in the expression in Eq. (15) in the current project,
then
M+
ss = X
 AZ− X

AZ+M+
ss + B

+ B

M+
ss = XAZ− X

AZ+M+
ss + B

+ XB
M+
ss = XAZ−XAZ+M+
ss + XAZ−XB + XB
IM+
ss −XAZ−XAZ+M+
ss = XAZ−XB + XB
 I −XAZ−XAZ+
M+
ss = X
 AZ−X + I

B
M+
ss =

I −XAZ−XAZ+−1 X
 AZ−X + I

B
(30)
This concludes the derivation of the nal expression for the steady state magnetization.
Page 38 of 44
==PAGE:50==
B
Specic expressions for derivation in Appendix A
This entire appendix is altered slightly from the Lee et al. paper[6].
B.1
Relaxation induced amplitude modulations of magnetization
- in the transverse plane:
A =


E2
0
0
0
E2
0
0
0
E1

=


e−TR/T2
0
0
0
e−TR/T2
0
0
0
e−TR/T1

,
(31)
where TR is the repetition time, T2 is the transverse relaxation time, and T1 is the longi-
tudinal relaxation time.
- along the longitudinal direction:
B =

0
0
(1 −E1)M0
T =

0
0
(1 −e−TR/T1)M0
T ,
(32)
where B0 is the magnetization in the thermal equilibrium state.
B.2
Rotation matrices
About the x-axis
X = Rx(α) =


1
0
0
0
cos(α)
−sin(α)
0
sin(α)
cos(α)

,
(33)
where α is the ip angle and the entire matrix represents the application of an RF pulse
in the corresponding direction.
About the z-axis
Z+ = Rz(φ+) = Rz(φg + φb+φc) =


cos(φg + φb+φc)
−sin(φg + φb+φc)
0
sin(φg + φb+φc)
cos(φg + φb+φc)
0
0
0
1


(34)
Z−= Rz(φ−) = Rz(φg + φb−φc) =


cos(φg + φb−φc)
−sin(φg + φb−φc)
0
sin(φg + φb−φc)
cos(φg + φb−φc)
0
0
0
1

,
(35)
where φg is the gradient induced phase, φb is the B0 inhomogeneity induced phase, and φc
is the current induced phase. The entire matrix represents the accumulated spin dephasing
in the transverse plane during each TR due to the mentioned three phases.
Page 39 of 44
==PAGE:51==
C
Two solutions for gradient amplitude expression
This appendix contains visual illustrations of the solutions found to the quadratic equation
derived in Section 2.12.1 describing the gradient amplitude.
The area under the plateau for the two gradient lobes (grey areas in Figure 23) is the same.
Figure 23: The two resulting gradient lobes when solving the quadratic equation.
In Figure 24 the corresponding k-space sampling for both solutions are illustrated.
Figure 24: Corresponding k-space sampling
Page 40 of 44
==PAGE:52==
D
Experiment 2: ∆Bz,c images without current injection
Figure 25: ∆Bz,c images of the phantom for measurements without current-injection.
Page 41 of 44
==PAGE:53==
E
Experiment 2: Noise distributions of ∆Bz,c without current
injection
Figure 26: Noise distribution of the measured ∆Bz,c (without current injection) tted along
with a Gaussian distribution, N(µ, σ).
Page 42 of 44
==PAGE:54==
F
Experiment 2: ∆Bz,c images with current injection
Figure 27: ∆Bz,c images of the phantom for measurements with current-injection.
Page 43 of 44
==PAGE:55==
G
Experiment 2: mean, standard deviation and eciency
This appendix displays a table containing the mean, µ, and standard deviation, σ, for
each of the ∆Bz,c images (without current injection) seen in Appendix D along with the
eciency, η, calculated for each of the ∆Bz,c images (with current injection) seen in Ap-
pendix F.
FLASH
SSFP-FID
EPI
Exp
µ
σ
η[×1010]
µ
σ
η[×1010]
µ
σ
η[×1010]
a
0.0358
0.0987
1.0446
0.0042
0.1132
0.8685
-0.0023
0.0486
0.7304
b
-0.0020
0.0762
0.6368
-0.0032
0.0604
0.7795
-0.0037
0.0295
0.5378
c
-0.0217
0.0617
0.6438
0.0079
0.0718
0.9296
-0.0011
0.0371
0.9668
d
0.0162
0.0974
0.5829
0.0197
0.0674
0.7697
-0.0038
0.0198
0.6491
e
0.0117
0.0590
0.6586
-0.0027
0.0677
0.8467
-0.0057
0.0190
1.0663
f
0.0478
0.0495
0.3614
-0.0039
0.1414
0.4064
-0.0045
0.0251
0.4411
g
-0.0017
0.0760
0.7181
-0.0079
0.0571
0.8488
-0.0031
0.0398
0.6270
Table E: Mean, standard deviation, and eciency values for the seven combinations of sequence
parameters (see Table C) for each of the three investigated sequences in Experiment 2.
Page 44 of 44
