==PAGE:1==
l
Technical University of Denmark
M.Sc. thesis
Master of Science in Biomedical engineering
Improved calculation of the point dose kernel for
Cu-64 and radiobiological considerations for
therapeutic and diagnostic applications
Author:
Anne Birgitte Hoegh Dohrmann (s134657)
June 11th 2019
==PAGE:2==
Improved calculation of the point dose kernel for Cu-64 and radiobiological considerations for therapeutic
and diagnostic applications. M.Sc. thesis, June 2019
Author
Anne Birgitte Hoegh Dohrmann
Supervisors
Professor Mikael Jensen
Center for Nuclear Technologies
Technical University of Denmark
Head of Section Claus E. Andersen
Center for Nuclear Technologies
Technical University of Denmark
Professor Jens E. Wilhjelm
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Health Technology
Ørsteds Plads, Building 349,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 58 32
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
Project Period:
January 2th 2019 - June 11th 2019
ECTS Point:
30
Education:
Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering
Copyright:
© Anne Birgitte Hoegh Dohrmann, 2019
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Introduction
The radioactive isotope 64Cu can be used as a PET-agent to diagnose neu-
roendocrine tumors and invasive aspergillosis. However, as 64Cu emits Auger electrons it is
also possible to use it for internal radiotherapy as Auger electrons have a high energy transfer
at small distances. This thesis investigates a new approach to calculate the absorbed dose
from 64Cu along with the S-values for diﬀerent sized cell nuclei and an Aspergillus fumiga-
tus hypha. These results will be compared with other studies and with the oﬃcial cellular
S-values given by the MIRD committee, which contains CSDA limitations.
Method
Firstly, the Monte Carlo program EGSnrc was validated by simple examples, hand
calculations, and comparison with other studies. Hereafter, EGSnrc was used to simulate
the diﬀerent decay branches in the energy spectrum of 64Cu and from these results, a point
energy and dose kernel were calculated. The point dose kernel was spread out in a 3D matrix
and it was convoluted with activity matrices which represented diﬀerent size nuclei in cells
and an Aspergillus fumigatus hypha. This way, the S-values was calculated.
Results
The output from EGSnrc was validated. Furthermore, the point energy and dose
kernel for 64Cu were calculated and it showed that the Auger electrons contributed the most
to the absorbed dose the ﬁrst micrometers.
Moreover, it was found that the calculated
S-values diﬀered from the oﬃcial ones given by the MIRD committee with 9.37-36.77%.
The S-value for an Aspergillus fumigatus hypha with a length of 10 micrometers was also
calculated. Furthermore, S-values which contained CSDA limitations was also calculated
and it showed that they were not very diﬀerent from the S-values, which did not contain the
limitations.
Conclusion
It can be concluded that the new approach for the calculations of point dose
kernels and S-values produced realistic results. This is concluded because the new approach
could reproduce the S-values given by MIRD within a diﬀerence which is also reported by
other studies who have used Monte Carlo calculations. Furthermore, it can be concluded
that the S-value for the Aspergillus fumigatus hypha is the ﬁrst estimate ever made.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Resum´e
Introduktion
Den radioaktive isotop Kobber-64 kan bruges som PET-agent til diagnos-
ticering af hhv. neuroendokrine tumorer og invasiv aspergillose. Da Kobber-64 ogs˚a udsender
Auger elektroner, har det ogs˚a terapeutiske egenskaber, da Auger elektroner har en høj en-
ergioverførsel p˚a korte afstande. Dette projekt undersøger en ny metode til at udregne den
absorberede dosis fra Kobber-64 samt S-værdier for cellekerner og en Aspergillus fumiga-
tus hyfe. Disse værdier vil blive sammenholdt med andre studiers resultater samt med de
oﬃcielle S-værdier opgivet af MIRD-komit´een, der indeholder CSDA-begrænsninger.
Metode
Først blev Monte Carlo-programmet EGSnrc valideret ved hjælp af simple eksem-
pler og h˚andregning samt sammenligning med andre studier. Herefter blev EGSnrc brugt til
at simulere de forskellige henfald og energibidrag i Copper-64’s spektrum, og ud fra disse blev
der udregnet en point energy og dose kernel. Point dose kernel blev herefter omdannet til
en 3D-matrice, og denne blev foldet med en aktivitetsmatrice, der repræsenterede forskellige
størrelse kerner i celler og en Aspergillus fumigatus hyfe. Hermed blev S-værdierne udregnet.
Resultater
Det blev bevist, at data fra EGSnrc var korrekt. Derudover blev der lavet
en point energy og dose kernel for Kobber-64, som viste, at det er Auger-elektronerne, der
bidrager mest til den absorberede dosis i de første mikrometer. Derudover blev der fundet, at
de udregnede S-værdier for Kobber-64 var forskellige fra de oﬃcielle S-værdier, der er givet
af MIRD-komit´een, med mellem 9.37-36.77%. S-værdien for en Aspergillus fumigatus hyfe
med en længde p˚a 10 mikrometer blev ogs˚a fundet. Herudover blev S-værdier, der indeholdt
CSDA-begrænsninger, ogs˚a udregnet, og det viste sig, at de ikke var synderligt forskellige
fra de S-værdier, der ikke indeholdt begrænsningerne.
Konklusion
Ud fra resultaterne konkluderes det, at den nye metode til at udregne S-
værdierne leverede realistiske estimater, da metoden kunne reproducere S-værdierne givet af
MIRD med en forskel svarende til den, som ogs˚a er blevet reporteret i andre studier, der har
brugt Monte Carlo-simuleringer. Derudover konkluderes det, at S-værdien for Aspergillus
fumigatus hyfe-geometrien er det første estimat, der nogensinde er lavet.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis is written to obtain a Master of Science degree in Biomedical Engi-
neering at the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis is written at the Center for
Nuclear Technologies and the Department of Health Technology at the Technical University
of Denmark.
As a biomedical student, it was natural to choose a Master’s thesis which combines technical
engineering and clinical relevance as this thesis focus on mathematical computations, medical
physics, and validation of data used in the clinic.
In this thesis, the decay branches of the isotope 64Cu was simulated and a point dose
kernel was found from these simulations. The point dose kernel was used to calculate S-
values for diﬀerent geometries and the data was compared to the oﬃcial data which is used
in therapeutic and diagnostic applications.
The time frame for this thesis was 20 weeks and presents a workload of 30 ECTS. It is aimed
at fellow students or peers with a similar background and with basic knowledge and interest
in medical physics.
Supervisors:
Mikael Jensen, Professor, Center for Nuclear Technologies, DTU
Claus E. Andersen, Head of Section, Center for Nuclear Technologies, DTU
Jens E. Wilhjem, Professor, Department of Health Technology, DTU
Censor:
Marcus Nowak Lonsdale, Medical Physics Expert, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital
Submission date: June 11th 2019
Examination date: June 24th 2019
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This thesis would not have been possible without the support and encouragement of several
individuals and I would like to extend my gratitude to all of them.
First of all, thank you to my supervisors for their guidance and clariﬁcations throughout
the project. A special thank you to Mikael Jensen who is gratefully acknowledged for his
encouragement, advice and challenging questions. Thank you for your help whenever I ran
into trouble or had questions about my research or writing.
Ph.D. Grichar Valdes Santurio is gratefully acknowledged for his guidance, advice, and en-
couragement with EGSnrc and for always being ready to answer whichever questions I might
have had. Thank you to EGSnrc developer Reid Townson for providing help and clariﬁca-
tions concerning EGSnrc and its possibilities and limitations.
Additionally, I would like to thank my friends and family for their kind assistance and con-
tinuous encouragement throughout my years of study and through the process of this thesis.
Lastly, a special thank you to my ﬁanc´e for his kind encouragement and support through
the process of researching and writing this thesis. This accomplishment would not have been
possible without you.
v
==PAGE:7==
Formalities
Nomenclature
β+
Decay by positron emission
β−
Decay by electron emission
∆E(r)
Point energy kernel
γ
Decay by gamma radiation
ω
Fluorescene yield
ρ
Density
kg/m3
ε
Decay by electron capture
123I
Iodine-123
125I
Iodine-125
18F
Fluorine-18
64Cu
Copper-64
64Ni
Nickel-64
64Zn
Zinc-64
68G
Gallium-68
˜A
Cumulated activity
Bq·s
A
Atomic mass number
D(r)
Point dose kernel
D
Absorbed Dose
Gy = J/kg
eV
Electron volt
E
Deposited energy
J or eV
Gy
Gray
vi
==PAGE:8==
H
Equivalent dose
Sv = J/kg
h
Hours
I
Intensity
J
Joule
keV
Kiloelectron volt
MeV
Megaelectron volt
m
Mass
kg
N/N0
Surviving fraction
nm
Nanometer
1 nm = 1 · 10−9 m
rh
Source region
rk
Target region
RCSDA
CSDA range
cm2/g
RC
Radius of a cell
RN
Radius of a cell nucleus
r
Radius
S
Stopping power
MeV cm2/g
wR
Radiation weighting factor
Z
Atomic number
µm
Micrometer
1 µm = 1 · 10−6 m
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AFH
Aspergillus fumigatus hypha
cf.
Compare
CPU
Central Processing Unit
CSDA
Continuous-slowing-down-approximation
e.g.
exempli gratia, for example
EGSnrc
Electron Gamma Shower by National Research Counsil Canada
ENSDF
Evaluated Nuclear Structure Data Files
ESTAR
Stopping Power and Range Tables for Electrons
vii
==PAGE:9==
et al.
And others
GRF
Geometric reduction factor
GUI
Graphical user interface
i.e.
id est, that is
IA
Invasive aspergillosis
LET
Linear energy transfer
MC
Monte Carlo
MIRD
Medical Internal Radiation Dose
NET
Neuroendocrine tumor
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
NUDAT
National Nuclear Data Center
PET
Positron-emission tomography
RADAR
Radiation Dose Assessment Resource
Keywords
D-value
Dose required to reduce cell population by one log cycle
Isotropic point source Point source which radiates the same intensity of radiation in all
directions
Point dose kernel Radial dose distribution from a point source
S-value
Mean dose per unit cumulated activity
Gy/Bq·s
viii
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Abstract
ii
Resum´e
iii
Preface
iv
Acknowledgements
v
Formalities
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
Use of Cu-64 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Cu-64 and decay modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Energy spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Stopping of electrons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Continuous-slowing-down-approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Dose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Auger radiation biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Point dose kernels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Survival curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
MIRD formalism
14
3.1
Literature review for previous attempts to calculate S-values . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Methods
18
4.1
EGSnrc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Validation of EGSnrc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.1
Simple box example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.2
Validation of 1 MeV electron point source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.3
Validation of Auger electrons in EGSnrc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Failed attempts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Point dose and energy kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.1
Simulation of energy kernel in EGSnrc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4.2
Calculation of point dose kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Validation of S-value calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6
Calculations of S-values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
ix
==PAGE:11==
4.6.1
Cell nucleus geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.6.2
Aspergillus fumigatus hypha geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7
S-value calculations with CSDA limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Results
38
5.1
Validation of EGSnrc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Failed attempts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Point dose and energy kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3.1
Contributions to energy from Auger and β electrons . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.2
Point energy kernel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3.3
Point dose kernel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Calculated S-values for a cell nucleus geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.5
Calculated S-value for Aspergillus Fumigates hypha
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.6
S-value calculations with CSDA limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Discussion
47
6.1
Validation of EGSnrc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Failed attempts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Point energy and dose kernel for Cu-64 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.4
S-values for diﬀerent geometries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.5
S-value calculations with CSDA limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.6
New approach to calculate S-values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.7
Future studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Conclusion
55
8
Bibliography
57
Appendix
60
A Data from NUDAT and RADAR
60
B
CSDA Ranges
62
C
Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
63
D MATLAB functions
72
E
Simulations with CSDA limitations
74
x
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Early and certain diagnosis and eﬀective treatment are of importance in the treatment of can-
cer. At the moment, Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen is using Copper-64 (64Cu) as a positron-
emission tomography (PET) agent to diagnose neuroendocrine tumors (NETs), which are a
rare form of cancer that occurs in the glandular cells of the gastrointestinal tract (75%) or in
the lungs (25%) and more than 400 new cases of NETs are registered each year in Denmark.
The cause of NETs are often unknown, however, certain cases of NETs have proven to be
due to hereditary causes.[1] The NETs overexpress the surface somatostatin receptors, which
are on about 80-90% of all the tumors. DOTATATE is a somatostatin-like substance and
has a high aﬃnity for the somatostatin receptors and will, therefore, bind to the surface
of NETs. DOTATATE will then act as a carrier to bring 64Cu close to the cancer cells.[2]
Due to the electron capture decay of 64Cu, the isotope is also an Auger emitter and Auger
electrons provide a high linear energy transfer (high LET) which will induce great damage
to the surrounding cells and are therefore suitable for internal radiation therapy.
Auger
electrons have a range in matter of nano- to micrometers which prohibits the radiation of
healthy cells and reduces radiotoxicity but are in the range of the cancer cell’s DNA.[3]
Furthermore, 64Cu may also be used to treat invasive aspergillosis (IA). Aspergillus fu-
migatus is a species of fungus which can cause IA in immunocompromised individuals who
lack neutrophils, such as organ and bone marrow transplant recipients, AIDS patients, and
patients who receive chemotherapy. Though IA is most common in patients lacking neu-
trophils, there has been an increase in reported IA patients with underlying lung diseases,
who are not immunocompromised. Exposure typically occurs when airborne spores are in-
haled and pass to the lungs. If the spores are not contained they will swell and germinate
into hyphae which invade the lung tissue and cause destruction with a mortality rate be-
tween 30 and 90 %. The current diagnosis of IA relies on an invasive biopsy which is then
cultured. The procedure is slow and often not possible in critically ill patients. Davies et
al. have found that by combining antibody-guided PET and magnetic resonance imaging,
IA could be diagnosed. In their experiments, the PET agent was 64Cu.[4] As 64Cu might be
used for diagnosis of IA in the future, it is also of interest to investigate the dose delivered
to an Aspergillus fumigatus hypha (AFH) from 64Cu.
1
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1.
Introduction
Internal radiation therapy should deliver predictable and deﬁned radiation doses to the
tumor target. The Medical Internal Radiation Dose (MIRD) committee has calculated the
absorbed fraction at cellular level and S-values using a semi-analytic approach which contains
continuous-slowing-down-approximation (CSDA) limitations. This is a limitation as energy
straggling, angular deﬂections and δ-rays are neglected in this approach. When looking at
dose distributions at the subcellular scale these cannot be neglected.[5]
This thesis presents new approaches to calculate point dose kernels and cellular S-values.
As there is a general agreement that Monte Carlo (MC) codes provide a more detailed and
more realistic estimation of energy deposition, the MC program Electron Gamma Shower by
National Research Counsil Canada (EGSnrc) will be used to simulate the deposited energy
from 64Cu. It should be noted that EGSnrc is not used to calculate the point dose kernel and
S-values directly, as it is important to validate the output of the MC program. The aims of
this thesis are:
• Making a critical review of the existing standard methods (e.g. MIRD) for ﬁnding
S-values of 64Cu at the subcellular scale
• Get an understanding of EGSnrc and its limitations
• Validate output from EGSnrc
• Use a new approach to calculate the point energy and dose kernel of 64Cu
• Use a new approach for the calculation of S-values for a cell nucleus geometry and an
AFH geometry
• Compare the point dose kernel and S-values for 64Cu with a point dose kernel and
S-values containing CSDA limitations
In the project description, it is stated that the particle spectrum from 64Cu decay would
be measured and that the cellular radiation response in cell cultures incubated with 64Cu
would be investigated. However, due to time limitations and an increased interest in S-values
calculations during the project process, these tasks were not obtained.
How to read this report
In Chapter 2, the essential knowledge of 64Cu and its decay modes, stopping of electrons and
dose, radiation biology and point dose kernels will be explained in order to give the necessary
background knowledge to understand the results of this thesis. In Chapter 3, the method
adopted by MIRD will be reviewed and literature comparing MC results with MIRD will also
be reviewed. In Chapter 4, the work process of this thesis will be presented. The chapter will
ﬁrstly give an introduction to the MC program EGSnrc and afterward, the new approach to
calculate the point energy and dose kernel will be presented. Hereafter, the new approach to
calculate S-values for diﬀerent geometries will be presented. Moreover, Chapter 4 will also
present the tasks in this thesis that could not be completed but on which there was spent a
signiﬁcant amount of time. Chapter 5 will show and describe the results obtained through
2
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1.
Introduction
the methods described in Chapter 4. Chapter 6 presents reﬂection of the results and will
furthermore discuss the limitations of this thesis as well as future aspects. Chapter 8 will
present the conclusion of this thesis and summarize what was obtained.
3
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
In the following chapter, background and theory applied in this thesis are presented. Firstly,
an introduction to the use of 64Cu is presented. This is followed by a presentation of 64Cu,
its decay modes and energy spectrum. Further, this chapter introduces the theory about the
interactions between the particles emitted from 64Cu and their surroundings. Furthermore,
the calculation of point dose kernels is presented and survival curves are explained.
2.1
Use of Cu-64
64Cu is a positron emitter with a half-life of 12.7 hours.
This makes it favorable to use
as a PET agent as the PET scans can be acquired up to 48 hours after the injection.
Other advantages of the long half-life are that 64Cu can be utilized by facilities far from the
production site and that 64Cu can image hypoxia in tumors. Furthermore, the maximum
positron energy for 64Cu is 0.6366 MeV, which is similar to 18F, which maximum positron
energy is 0.6335 MeV and the resulting PET images are therefore of high quality.[6]
Furthermore, as 64Cu is a metal, a chelator can be used to create chelation between 64Cu
and a ligand. As mentioned by Pfeifer et al. such a ligand could be somastostatin receptor
ligands, which may be used to visualize NETs as somatostatin receptors are overexpressed
on the tumors. Previously, 68Ga labeled with somatostatin analogs was used to diagnose
NETs but because of the high positron energy (1.899 MeV), the spatial resolution is limited
and the short half-life (68 minutes) is challenging logistically because the production needs
to be aligned with patients and to be repeated several times a day.[7]
Due to all these advantages, the interest in 64Cu is increasing in the area of nuclear
medicine. However, due to the β−and Auger decay of 64Cu, it can also be used for therapeutic
applications, and this possibility will be investigated in this thesis.
2.2
Cu-64 and decay modes
64Cu consists of an atomic nucleus with 29 protons and 35 neutrons as well as 29 electrons
in the shells of the atom. The distribution of the electrons is shown in Figure 2.1 and it is
observed that the K, L, and M shell is completely full, as the subshells contain the maximum
4
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2.
Background
number of electrons, which is 2, 6, and 10 for subshell s, p, and d, respectively. Furthermore,
shell N only has 1 electron in the s subshell. The subshells describe the pathways of which
the electrons move within a shell.
Figure 2.1: Electron structure of 64Cu
Furthermore, 64Cu decays by positron emission, electron emission, electron capture, and γ
radiation. It should be noted that the diﬀerent decays do not happen all at once, but one
at a time. The decay scheme of 64Cu can be observed in Figure 2.2.
As it is observed in Figure 2.2, 64Cu decays 43.53% by electron capture directly to 64Ni
with an energy of 1.675 MeV. It is in this process, that the Auger cascades are started.
Furthermore, 64Cu also decays 0.47% by electron capture, but there will be excessive energy
left and photons with 1.346 MeV will be emitted.
64Cu also decays 38.48% by β−directly
to 64Zn. 64Cu also decays by positron emission and it accounts for 17.52%. Here, 1.022 MeV
is spent on creating the positron and the remaining energy is emitted with the positron.
It should be noted that the positron decay also contributes with the annihilation photons,
which are created when the positron and an electron annihilate. The energies stated next to
the element is the diﬀerence in mass between the elements. The mass of 64Ni is -67.099277
MeV and the mass of 64Cu is -65.424243 MeV, where the diﬀerence between them is 1.675
MeV. Similarly, the mass diﬀerence between 64Cu and 64Zn is 0.579 MeV.
29 Cu 64 (12.701 h)
22 Ni 64 (stable)
30 Zn 64 (stable)
0.579
0.0
β+
0.653 MeV
17.6%
β-
0.579 MeV
38.5%
1.022 MeV
Ɛ
1.675 MeV
43.53%
γ
1.345 MeV
0.475%
Ɛ
0.329 MeV
0.475%
1.675
0.0
1.345
Figure 2.2: Decay scheme of 64Cu. Composed from data by NUDAT[8]
5
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2.
Background
Beta decay
Beta decay is a generic term for both β−and β+ decays.
β−involves electron emission,
where the weak interaction emits an electron and an electron antineutrino and thereby, the
atomic number is increased by one.
A
ZX →
A
Z+1Y + e−+ ¯ve
(2.1)
64
29Cu decays to 64
30Zn by β−decay with end point energy of 579.4 keV.[8] β+ or positron
emission is a process, where the weak interaction emits a positron and an electron neutrino
and thereby decreases the atomic number by one.
A
ZX →
A
Z−1Y + e+ + ¯ve
(2.2)
64
29Cu decays to 64
28Ni by β+ decay with end point energy of 653.03 keV.[8]
Electron capture and atomic relaxations
In electron capture the nucleus decays by absorbing an atomic electron and emitting a
neutrino:
A
ZX + e−→
A
Z−1Y + ¯ve
(2.3)
This creates a vacancy in an inner shell and the atom is left at an excited state. The atom
relaxes by radiative and nonradiative processes. Radiative processes involve characteristic
X-rays, where an electron from an outer shell ”falls” to the vacancy and emits photons with
the energy equal to the energy diﬀerence between the binding energies of the atomic shells
involved. It is called characteristic X-rays as each element has unique binding energies and
the transition from higher to lower shell produces X-rays with unique energies. [9]
Nonradiative processes also involve the rearrangement of atomic electrons, but results
in the emission of an atomic electron, which, depending on the origin of the vacancy-ﬁlling
electron, is either called an Auger, Coster-Kronig, or super-Coster-Kronig process [10] and
they can be observed in Figure 2.3. As in the radiative process, an electron from an outer
subshell/shell makes the transition to the vacancy but the excessive energy is not emitted
as photons. Instead, the energy is transferred to an electron, and if the energy is greater
than the binding energy, this electron is rejected. Thereby, the vacancy in the inner shell is
ﬁlled, but it has created two new vacancies in the outer shells.[9] The diﬀerence between the
Auger, Coster-Kronig, and super-Coster-Kronig eﬀect is:
• The Auger eﬀect: The primary (ﬁrst) vacancy is ﬁlled by an electron from another
shell and the excessive energy is transferred to an orbital electron from the initial shell
or a higher-level shell.
• Coster-Kronig eﬀect: The vacancy is ﬁlled by an electron from the same shell and the
energy is transferred to an electron in another shell.
6
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2.
Background
• Super Coster-Kronig eﬀect: The vacancy is ﬁlled by an electron from the same shell
and the energy is transferred to an electron in the same shell. [11, p. 183]
Figure 2.3: Overview of the diﬀerent nonradiative eﬀects. [11, p. 183]
The rearrangement of electrons in the atomic shells continues until all vacancies are ﬁlled
by radiative and nonradiative processes or until the transitions are no longer energetically
possible, which is when the vacancy has reached the outermost shell of the atom.[9] 64Cu
decays to 64Ni through electron capture, which results in the emission of Auger electrons
from shell L and K with energies 0.84 keV and 6.54 keV, respectively as well as X-rays. [8]
Characteristic X-rays and Auger electrons are competing processes and are described by
the ﬂuorescene yield ω and are given for absorbers and atomic shells of the absorber atom.
The ﬂuorescene yield of a given shell is deﬁned as the number of characteristic photons
emitted per vacancy in the shell and the possibility of the Auger eﬀect can be described as
1 −ω, where w is the ﬂuorescene yield for a given shell. The probability of the Auger eﬀect
depends strongly on the shell level, as the higher the shell level, the higher the probability
of the Auger eﬀect. [11, p. 184]
2.2.1
Energy spectrum
β radiation is emitted with a continuous energy distribution up to a deﬁnite maximum energy.
This is due to the emission of the accompanying neutrinos and antineutrinos in β decays and
the neutrinos have energies that are equal to the diﬀerence between the β particle’s energy
and the maximum energy.[12, p. 91] The energy spectrum for the combined β+ and β−
decay has been composed by the Radiation Dose Assesment Resource (RADAR) and can
be observed in Figure 2.4. The intensity is the probability of the emission of an energy.
The energies in this spectrum are given in intervals, so the ﬁrst energy goes from 0-0.0326
MeV, where the average energy is 0.0163 MeV and this energy interval has the probability
of 3.54%. The sum of all the intensities gives 55.1 %, which is the combined probability of
β+ and β−decays.[8] It is assumed that the energy from the Auger electrons is not included
in this spectrum, as the intensity for the ﬁrst interval then should be higher, given that the
7
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2.
Background
Auger electrons have the energies and intensities of 0.84 keV, 6.54 keV, 57.7%, and 22.51%,
respectively.
Figure 2.4: Combined β+ and β−decay for 64Cu obtained from RADAR[13]
2.3
Stopping of electrons
A charged particle is surrounded by its Coulomb electric ﬁeld and as the particle penetrates
into matter it will interact with the atoms it encounters. During these interactions, the
particle will lose a certain amount of energy depending on the interaction and since the
energy loss generally is small, the particle will go through several interactions before its
kinetic energy is spent. This gradual loss of energy is called stopping power and there are
two classes of stopping power: collision stopping power, which results from interaction with
orbital electrons, and radiation stopping power, which results from interaction with the atom
nuclei.[11, pp.227-230] The types of interaction can be observed in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: The three diﬀerent types of collisions for a charged particle with an atom. The
type of collision depends on the relative size of the impact b and the atomic radius a [11,
p. 229]
Radiation collisions occur when the charged particle interacts mainly with the nucleus of the
absorber atom, i.e. when the impact parameter b is much smaller than the atomic radius a.
8
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2.
Background
When the charged particle interacts with the nucleus, the particle undergoes either elastic or
inelastic scattering and possible a change in direction. When the scattering is elastic, which
it is in most interactions, the kinetic energy of the particle is conserved but the direction is
changed. However, some of the scattering interactions are inelastic and this type is called
bremsstrahlung and result in a signiﬁcant energy loss in forms of emission of photons. [11,
p. 229] The energy loss due to bremsstrahlung production for an electron or positron which
travel through an absorber is expressed as the mass radiation stopping power[11, p.232]:
Srad = NaσradEi
(2.4)
where Na is the number of atoms per unit mass (atomic density), σrad is the total cross sec-
tion for bremsstrahlung production, and Ei is the initial energy of the electrons or positrons.
[11, pp. 232-233] σrad changes according to the energy so the above equation is the simplest
expression. As the bremsstrahlung production for the energies used in this thesis is insignif-
icant, the equation will not be explained further.
Charged particles can interact with the orbital electrons of the absorber atom in two ways:
hard and soft collisions. During a hard collision, when the impact parameter is equal to
the atomic radius, the charged particle will have a direct interaction with a single atomic
orbital electron and transfer a signiﬁcant amount of its kinetic energy (up to 50%) to it.
However, the number of hard collisions are generally small. The orbital electrons will have
enough energy to leave the atom and are now called a δ-ray which has enough energy to
undergo its own interactions in the absorber.[11, pp. 229-230] At a soft collision, the impact
parameter b is much larger than the radius a of the absorber atom. Therefore, the charged
particle interacts with the whole atom (many orbital electrons) and this results in small
losses of kinetic energy. However, the number of these interactions are large and the charged
particles losses approximately 50% of its energy to soft collisions. [11, p. 230] The energy loss
from soft and hard collisions for an electron or positron which travel through an absorber is
expressed as the mass collision stopping power[11, p. 255]:
Scol = 2πr2
e
Z
ANA
mec2
β2
h
lnEK
I
+ ln(1 + 1
τ + F ±(τ) −δ
i
(2.5)
where NA is Avogadro’s number, Z is the atomic number, A is the atomic mass number, re
is the classical electron radius, me is the electron rest mass, v is the speed of the particle,
c is the speed of light, β is the electron velocity normalized to c, EK is the kinetic energy
of the particle, τ is the particle’s kinetic energy normalized to mec2, I is the mean ioniza-
tion/excitation potential of the absorber, and δ is the density correction. F −(τ) applies to
electrons and F +(τ) applies to positrons and is given as:
F −(τ) = (1 −β2)[1 + τ 2/8 −(2τ + 1)ln(2)]
(2.6)
F +(τ) = 2ln(2) −(β2/12)[23 + 14/(τ + 2) + 10/(τ + 2)2 + 4/(τ + 2)3]
(2.7)
9
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2.
Background
The stopping power for water for electron energies used in this thesis (0-1 MeV) is plotted
in Figure 2.6 and it is shown that the Scol becomes almost constant after approximately 0.6
MeV and this is due to the fact that the electron speed is close to the speed of light, so β = 1
in Equation 2.5.
Figure 2.6: Collision, radiation and total stopping power for electron energies plotted for
water. The data is from ESTAR NIST[14]
Furthermore, if the collision stopping power was plotted for diﬀerent materials, it would
show that higher atomic number absorbers have lower collision stopping powers and this is
due to the factor Z/A which makes Scol dependent on the number of electrons per unit mass
of the absorber[11, p.256].
The energy loss of the charged particle depends on the characteristics of the particle as
well as the absorber (medium). The total stopping power Stot for a charged particle with
energy EK penetrating an absorber is the sum of the radiation stopping power Srad and the
collision stopping power Scol. However, as described above, the collision stopping power is
further divided into soft collision stopping power Ssoft
col
and hard collision stopping power
Shard
col . The total stopping power can be expressed as [11, pp. 255-256] :
Stot = Srad + Scol = Srad + Ssoft
col
+ Shard
col
(2.8)
For electrons and positrons, both Srad and Scol contribute to the total stopping power,
however, collision loss is dominant for low energies which are also shown in Figure 2.6, where
the collision and total stopping power are almost equal. The highest electron energy used in
this thesis is 636.6 keV for water and the radiation loss due to bremsstrahlung can, therefore,
be neglected. This can be shown by the ratio of the collision to radiation stopping power,
which can be estimated from [11, p. 257]:
Scol
Srad
= 800MeV
ZEK
(2.9)
The atomic number Z for water can be calculated using:
Zwater =
2.94q
f1 · Z2.94
1
+ ... + fn · Z2.94
n
(2.10)
10
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2.
Background
where f is the fraction of the total number of electrons associated with each element and Z
is the atomic number of each element. The atomic number for water, which is the compound
used in this thesis, is:
Zwater =
2.94p
0.2 · 12.94 + 0.8 · 82.94 = 7.42
(2.11)
The ratio of the collision to radiation stopping power for water for 636.6 keV is:
Scol
Srad
=
800 MeV
7.42 · 0.6366 MeV = 169.36
(2.12)
Due to the high ratio, in further calculations, the bremsstrahlung will be neglected.
2.3.1
Continuous-slowing-down-approximation
It is convenient to think that the electron moving through an absorbing medium is losing its
kinetic energy gradually and continuously in a process called the continuous-slowing-down-
approximation (CSDA). The CSDA range can be calculated by integrating the reciprocal of
the total stopping power with respect to energy.:
RCSDA =
Z (EK)0
0
dE
Stot(E)
(2.13)
where RCSDA is the CSDA range (mean path length) of the electron in the absorber in [ cm2
g ],
(EK)0 is the initial kinetic energy of the electron and Stot(E) is the total mass stopping
power of the electron as a function of the kinetic energy EK. However, the CSDA range
represents the mean path length along the particle’s trajectory, but the trajectory is usually
not a straight path. Therefore, the CSDA range can be up to twice the average range R for
electrons as angular deﬂection, δ-rays and energy straggling is neglected. [11, pp. 259-261]
2.3.2
Dose
Absorbed dose is deﬁned as deposited energy (J) per mass of the medium (kg):
D = △E
△m [Gy]
(2.14)
2.4
Auger radiation biology
Absorbed dose describes the deposit of energy in a volume, however equivalent dose is used
to describe the biological eﬀect of the radiation. Equivalent dose is deﬁned as:
H = wR · D
(2.15)
where D is the absorbed dose and wR is the radiation weighting factor.
The radiation
weighting factor is diﬀerent for diﬀerent kinds of radiation. Alpha particles have a weighting
factor of 20, while β particles have one of 1.[12, p. 331] However, it has been proposed
that Auger electrons should have a weighting factor of 20, given that they are close to the
target as Auger electrons provide a high LET.[10] The Auger electrons from 64Cu have an
11
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2.
Background
average energy of 1.96 keV and have a path length in tissue of approximately 126 nm.[15] The
diameter of the DNA helix is 2 nm and if the Auger electron is close to the DNA, it has more
than a suﬃcient range to cause DNA damage. Therefore, in order for the Auger electron
treatments to be suﬃcient, the Auger emitters should be tightly bound to the DNA, which
then would disrupt the double strands of the DNA and cause double-strand breaks. [10]
The destruction of several nucleotides can make DNA repair rather ineﬃcient and therefore
cause cell death. The relative biological eﬃcacy of Auger radiation emitters is signiﬁcantly
higher than that of beta radiation, however, this is applicable for both tumor and normal
tissue. Therefore, Auger emitters require targeting of the individual tumor cells.
Furthermore, there will also be an indirect eﬀect of the damage caused by the Auger
electrons. This is because 64Cu decays to 64Ni which is then left in an excited state and 64Ni
will interact with the DNA and cause further chemical damage to the DNA.[10]
2.5
Point dose kernels
Point dose kernels describe the radial distribution of absorbed dose from a single isotropic
point source and through the superposition principle, this total radial distribution yields the
total absorbed dose at a point. [16, pp. 363-364] Normally, the point dose kernel is found
by MC simulations and by using a concentric sphere geometry around a point source and
estimating the deposited dose to each shell. A point dose kernel can be calculated by the
deposited energy in a shell divided by the mass of the shell:
D(r) = ∆E(r)
m(r) =
∆E(r)
(4πr3
i+1 −4πr3
i ) · ρ
(2.16)
where ∆E is the sum of deposited energy for each decay branch in a shell at a distance r from
the point source. The numerator in the fraction calculates the mass of the corresponding
shell which is located between r and r+1. This will be described in more detail in Chapter 4.
The mass of the shell is found by calculating the volume of the shell and hereafter multiplying
with the density of the medium ρ. It should be noted that in the following calculations, the
ﬁrst radius will be expressing a sphere and not a shell.
In the literature, when point dose kernels are mentioned, the authors refer to the fraction
of the initial energy deposited in each shell at a distance r from the point source. Further-
more, the radius is also scaled according to the CSDA range. The scaled point dose kernel
F(r/RCSDA) is described by:
F(r/RCSDA) = δE(r)/T0
δr/RCSDA
[17]
(2.17)
where δE(r) is the deposited energy in the shell with the thickness δr and T0 is the initial
kinetic energy.
It should be noted that the energy deposited by the photons in the 64Cu energy spectrum
will be neglected in the following calculations. This is due to the range of photons and as of
that, the photons do not contribute with a signiﬁcant dose in the dimensions which are of
interest in this thesis.
12
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2.
Background
2.6
Survival curves
Both in diagnostic and therapeutic applications, it is important to predict how many cells
or organisms will survive the radiation. The survival of cells and organisms is characterized
by their survival curves and is expressed as:
N/N0 = e−D/D0
(2.18)
where N/N0 is the fraction of the organisms surviving the dose D, where N is the surviving
organisms and N0 is the total population of organisms before radiation.
D0 is the mean
lethal dose or that dose that results in the survival of 37% of the organisms. Another unit
for expressing the survival of organisms is the D10 value (D-value) which is the number of
rads required to reduce the population by one log cycle.[18] In this thesis, it is thought that
the surviving fraction should be 10−4, meaning that of 10000 organisms, 1 will survive. The
D-values for cancer cells and Aspergillus niger are shown in Table 2.1. As NETs occurs in
the gastrointestinal tract and lungs, D-values for the colon and lungs have been used. A
D-value for Aspergillus fumigatus could not be found so instead the D-value for Aspergillus
niger is used.
Table 2.1: Overview of D-values for relevant targets
Organism
D-value
Dose for survival fraction 10−4
Aspergillus niger
0.047 MRad [18] = 470 Gy
1880 Gy
Human lung tumor cell
5 Gy[19]
20 Gy
Human colon tumor cell
3.5 Gy[19]
14 Gy
13
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
MIRD formalism
In nuclear medicine, it is normally the MIRD formalism that is used to calculate the internal
dose.
Traditionally, the formalism express the mean absorbed doses to organs, where it
describes the dose given to one organ from another.
However, the formalism has been
extended to calculate the doses to cells in the organ or tumor. This is of great relevance when
the radionuclides emit particles whose ranges are comparable to cell dimensions. The mean
absorbed dose at cellular level is expressed in terms of S-values, which is the absorbed dose
per unit cumulated activity, and can be used to calculate cellular absorbed dose estimates.
These estimates are a very important tool in the evaluation of diﬀerent radionuclides used
in diagnostic and therapeutic nuclear medicine to improve safety and eﬃcacy. [20, p. 11]
The cell model used by MIRD for estimation of S-values can be observed in Figure 3.1.
The cell is made up of two concentric homogeneous spheres which have a density of 1 g/cm3.
The radius of the cell and the cell nucleus is expressed by RC and RN, respectively.
Figure 3.1: Cell model used by MIRD. Adapted from [20]
In the calculation of S-values, it is assumed that the radioactivity is uniformly distributed
in either the nucleus, the cytoplasm or on the cell surface. Furthermore, the cell model is
only valid for spherical symmetric cell shapes.
The starting point in the MIRD formalism is the deﬁnition of the mean absorbed dose
¯
Dk to the target region rk from the source region rh. The mean absorbed dose to an organ
14
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3.
MIRD formalism
can be expressed as:
¯D(rk ←rh) = ˜
AhS(rk ←rh)
(3.1)
where ˜
Ah is the cumulated activity (Bq·s) in the source region and S(rk ←rh) is the S-value
(Gy/Bq·s). [20, p. 11] This is easily generalized to cellular level where cellular subcompart-
ments are deﬁned as target and source regions [5]. The S-value is deﬁned as:
S(rk ←rh) =
X
i
∆iφi(rk ←rh)
mk
(3.2)
where mk is the mass of the target region, ∆i is the mean energy emitted per nuclear
transition, and φi is the absorbed fraction of the initial energy in the target. The subscript
refers to each radiation component i. The absorbed fraction φi(rk ←rh) for each radiation
component is deﬁned as:
φi(rk ←rh) =
∞
Z
0
Ψrk←rh(x) 1
Ei
dE
dX

X(Ei)−x
dx
(3.3)
where Ei is the initial energy of the ith particle,
dE
dX

X(Ei)−x is the stopping power evaluated
in X(Ei) −x, i.e. the residual range of a particle with initial energy Ei after passing a linear
distance x through the medium. For electrons with energies ranging from 20 eV to 20 MeV,
MIRD uses Cole’s formula with minor changes introduced by Howel et al..[20, pp. 11-12] Cole’s
formula is based on electron transmission experiments which do not account for secondary
electrons (δ-rays). This is a problem as the secondary electrons might travel outside of the
cell and deposit its energy there. [5]
The geometric reduction factor Ψrk←rh(x) (GRF) is the mean probability that a randomly
directed vector of length x that starts from a random point within the source region rh ends
within the target region rk.[20, p. 12] As the calculation of GRFs is diﬃcult, only simple
geometries have been deﬁned, such as spheres.[5]
To sum up, the MIRD cellular S-value formalism for calculating S-values contains limita-
tions in regard to the geometry of the target and source, the neglect of secondary electrons,
and the distribution of the radioactivity.
It should be noted that in the MIRD calculated S-values for 64Cu, the photons in the energy
spectrum are not included in the calculations.[21]
3.1
Literature review for previous attempts to calculate S-
values
Siragusa et al.
designed a software program for dosimetry assessment at the cellular and
subcellular scale in order to overcome the main limitations of the semi-analytic method
adopted by the MIRD committee. This software uses full MC track structure calculations and
cellular geometries that are built in the software and then calculates local energy deposition,
dose, and S-values at the subcellular level.
The authors used the Monte Carlo program
15
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3.
MIRD formalism
PARTRAC to simulate the physical interactions of electrons, which uses an event-by-event
code. Furthermore, the authors used an isotropic point source for monoenergetic electrons
ranging from 5-50 keV with a cut-oﬀenergy of 10 eV. The number of histories was 104
and geometries representing a spherical and an ellipsoid cell were used. Firstly, the authors
calculated the electron range for energies between 5-50 keV and compared the results with
the electron ranges adopted by MIRD. They found that MIRD overestimates the range and
this diﬀerence increase with increasing energies. Furthermore, the authors calculated the
S-values for 3 cases: the source was placed in the nucleus, the source was placed in the entire
cell, and the activity was placed on the cell surface. The target region for all cases was the
nucleus and this was calculated for both cell geometries. For the spherical cell, the authors
found that the biggest disagreement between the program and the results from MIRD would
arise for electrons between 25 to 30 keV, and when the activity was placed on the cell surface.
Here, the disagreement could be up to 100%. The authors explained these diﬀerences by the
neglect of energy straggling, angular deﬂections and δ-rays and the assumption of spherical
cell geometry.
For the ellipsoid geometry, the authors found that there was a diﬀerence
between the S-values calculated between the two geometries as the S-value for the ellipsoid
geometry was generally lower. Furthermore, the authors also positioned the cell nucleus in
diﬀerent positions in the cell and found, that this also had a great inﬂuence of the calculated
S-value. Siragusa et al. could thereby conclude that the geometry of the source and target
has an inﬂuence on the S-value. [5]
Bousis et al. have investigated the absorbed fraction in water for low-energy monoen-
ergetic electrons as well as the Auger-emitting radionuclides 123I and 125I. To do this, the
authors have used MC calculations, a concentric shell geometry with radii ranging from 10-
1000 nm, 106 histories, and a cut-oﬀenergy at 13.6 eV. The monoenergetic electron sources
had the energies from 0.1-10 keV. In order to model the uniform distribution of radioactivity,
the point of origin for each primary electron was distributed randomly and proportional to
the volume mass inside each sphere. The absorbed fraction was found by calculating the ratio
of deposited energy in the corresponding shell, which was then divided by the initial energy
of the primary electron. The absorbed fraction for the monoenergetic sources was calculated
for 0.1-10 keV and for radii equal to 10 nm, 100 nm, and 1000 nm. The absorbed fraction
for 123I and 125I was calculated from radii 10, 50, 100, 500, and 1000 nm. These results were
compared to the semi-analytic method used by MIRD and for the monoenergetic sources,
the diﬀerence between absorbed fractions was up 55%. The authors explained this diﬀerence
by the neglect of δ-rays, which then leads to an overestimation of the absorbed fraction up
to 10-40%. The deviation in absorbed fraction for the Auger-emitting isotopes ranged from
7-36%, where the deviation decreases for larger radii. Therefore, the authors concluded that
the semi-analytic method should be questioned when the target size was smaller than 1 µm.
[22]
Falzone et al.
calculated cellular S-values for 12 Auger electron-emitting isotopes and
compared their results with S-values estimates provided by the MIRD committee.
The
authors used the MC program PENELOPE and build the cell as two homogeneous spheres
of water, which was immersed in an inﬁnite water medium. The cut-oﬀenergy was 50 eV,
16
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3.
MIRD formalism
they used event-by-event simulation, and 2·109 histories. The nucleus was the target and
the activity was uniformly distributed either in the nucleus, cytoplasm or on the cell surface.
The authors found that there was a diﬀerence between their calculated S-values and the one
reported by MIRD when the activity was not placed in the nucleus. The biggest diﬀerence
was when the activity was assumed to be distributed on the cell surface, where their results
showed a diﬀerence in dose estimation of 60% compared to the ones reported by MIRD. The
authors explained this diﬀerence by the calculation approach that is used by MIRD. This
approach is based on point dose kernel calculations assuming straight electron trajectories
and where energy straggling is neglected.
The authors also mentioned the diﬀerence in
energy spectra to be a cause of deviation between the S-values. Furthermore, for S-values
where the source and target region were the nucleus, the calculated S-values were in good
agreement with the ones provided by MIRD. However, Falzone et al. mentioned themselves
that due to the cut-oﬀof 50 eV in the MC program, the energy deposited within the ﬁrst
nanometers might be overestimated. [3]
To sum up, there is a general agreement that MC simulations provide a more detailed
and more realistic estimation of energy deposition and dose from radionuclides as energy
straggling, angular deﬂections and δ-rays are of importance when estimating dose at sub-
cellular scale. Furthermore, from the literature review, it can also be concluded that the
geometry of the source and target aﬀects the estimation of S-values as reported by Siragusa
et al.
17
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Methods
The following chapter presents the process of this thesis as well as the methods used to
calculate the ﬁnal results. The process of the thesis can be observed in Figure 4.1, where the
ﬁrst part of the thesis concentrated around getting to know EGSnrc and validate the output.
The second part of the thesis focused on the calculation of the energy kernel for 64Cu. At
the start of this thesis, it was thought that the MC program could be altered, however, this
could not be obtained, which is indicated by the red box. The failed attempts will therefore
also be presented as a signiﬁcant amount of time was spent on them. The section will also
explain the solutions which were found in EGSnrc so it was possible to work around these
obstacles and continue to the next tasks. Hereafter, the calculation of the point dose kernel
for 64Cu will be explained. Then the method for calculating S-values for a cell geometry
will be explained and evaluated and ﬁnally, the calculation of the S-values for a cell nucleus
geometry and AFH geometry will be explained. Data and MATLAB scripts have been added
as supplementary material on DTU inside.
Learn how to
programme in egs++
Validation of energy
and dose estimation
in EGSnrc
Programme
deposited energy in
every point
Simulation of energy
contributions for Cu-
64
Remove annihilations
Calculation of point
dose kernel for Cu-64
Constructing and
validating of method
to calculate S-values
Calculation of point
energy kernel for Cu-
64
Calculation of S-
values for a cell
nucleus geometry
Calculation of S-
values for AFH
geometry
Make PEGS-ﬁle with
only CSDA transport
1 MeV electron
energy kernel
validation
Auger electrons
validation
Figure 4.1: Overview of the tasks in the thesis. Green boxes indicate that the task was
obtained while the red boxes indicate that the task was not obtained
18
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4.
Methods
4.1
EGSnrc
EGSnrc is an acronym for ”Electron Gamma Shower, National Research Council” and is
a software toolkit used to perform MC simulation of ionizing radiation transport through
matter. EGSnrc simulates the random path of individual particles (photons, electrons, and
positrons) with kinetic energies between 1 keV and 10 GeV in homogeneous materials. This is
done by using machine-generated pseudorandom numbers to sample from probability distri-
butions via the material ﬁles in EGSnrc. The material ﬁles include information about cross
sections, interactions and transport methods of the particles being simulated. The accu-
racy of the predicted distributions increases by increasing the number of simulated particles
(histories), although at the cost of increased computation time.[23] After each simulation,
EGSnrc will provide the statistical uncertainty for the simulation, which is given by 1/
√
N,
where N is the number of histories. The statistical uncertainty reports how well the output
of the simulation follows a given distribution.[24]
It is important to note that the reliability of MC transport calculations depends on the
accuracy of the underlying physics data, i.e. the limitations to MC simulations is how correct
the available cross-section data is and the number of particles simulated. The approximation
will be better when a large number of inputs is chosen as the inputs are randomly generated.
If there were only 10 random inputs, the result would be a bad approximation compared to
10000 random inputs.[24]
When simulating photons in EGSnrc, the software uses analog modeling, meaning that
the particle is followed step by step. When simulating electrons, however, condensed mod-
eling is used, which means that individual elastic interactions are grouped. As electrons
undergo a lot of scattering, this is necessary as the computational time else would dramati-
cally increase. However, information about the electron path is lost.
There are two ways of running simulations in EGSnrc; through the EGSnrc graphical user
interface (GUI) and through egs++ applications. In this thesis, the egs++ application is
used as it gives more ﬂexibility with geometries. In the EGSnrc GUI, only cylinder geometries
can be made. The egs++ application used in this thesis is cavity. By default, the egs++
application just transports the particles in the geometry and it is up to the user to set up
what to score, for which source and in what geometry. There are several blocks in the egs++
applications that need to be ﬁlled out and a short summary can be seen in Table 4.1 and an
example of an input ﬁle can be seen in Appendix C.
Under Run control, the number of histories is required speciﬁed.
Furthermore, the
required uncertainty of the simulation in percent can also be speciﬁed along with how many
times the simulation will report its progress and the maximum Central Processing Unit
(CPU) hours allowed. However, except for the number of histories, the rest is optional. The
number of histories for all simulations made in this thesis is 106.[25]
Under Geometry, the geometry of the cavity should be speciﬁed and is required in order
for the simulation to run. Almost every geometry is possible due to the extensive geometry
package.[25] In this thesis, boxes and concentric spheres are used as geometries.
19
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4.
Methods
Table 4.1: Overview of the diﬀerent blocks in the egs++ application
Block
Requirement
Function
Run control
Required
The number of simulated particles is given in
this block. Further statistical settings are also
available such as accuracy sought and hours
spent on the simulation
Geometry
Required
The geometry is speciﬁed in this block
Media
Optional
All geometries can be ﬁlled with media by in-
cluding a media input property within the the
geometry deﬁnition. If not given, default is vac-
uum
Source
Required
The source to use in the simulation must be
speciﬁed in this block
Scoring options
Required
In this block, methods to extract information
from the simulation are given. Inputs are what
to score (e.g. dose) and in which geometry to
score in
Monte Carlo transport
parameters
Semi-optional
In this block energy cut-oﬀs for photons and
electrons are speciﬁed along with other trans-
port options. The parameters in this block af-
fect the accuracy of the simulation
Ausgab objects
Optional
Additional output options for the simulation
such as dose output by region or medium, and
particle tracks.
Media does not have to be speciﬁed in order for the simulation to run as the default
media is vacuum. However, there are a number of elements and compounds at the user’s
disposal and there are diﬀerent ways to give them as input. One way is ”pegless mode”
where the media is deﬁned in the input ﬁle and the user simply has to indicate which density
correction ﬁle to use. It is also possible to use media deﬁned in the external PEGS data
ﬁles, which include diﬀerent materials. In order to run the simulation this way, the PEGS4
data ﬁle should be included as an argument when running the input ﬁle for the egs++
application.[25] In this thesis, the simulations have been run in pegless mode. However, the
simulations which include CSDA limitations were run with an external PEGS data ﬁle as
input.
The Source input is also a requirement in order for the simulation to run. As with
geometry, there is an extensive amount of options. In this thesis, only the isotropic point
source has been used. For all sources, the user can deﬁne the position, shape, energy, and
spectrum as well as the charge of the source.[25]
The input parameter Scoring options is required in order to extract information from
the simulation and there are diﬀerent options depending on the application used. As the
application cavity is used in this thesis, the calculation type is dose, which is default. It is
also possible to calculate half value layer with this application. Furthermore, the geometry
name, region, and mass of the geometry, in which the dose should be scored, should also be
20
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4.
Methods
given as input.[25]
Monte Carlo transport parameters are not required given in the input ﬁle as they
are default values, which indicate energy cut-oﬀs and which algorithm to use for the MC
calculation among others. It is possible to change these parameters but it aﬀects the accu-
racy of the simulation and is not recommended. The default values have been used in this
thesis.[25]
Ausgab objects are optional but allow for additional output from the simulation such
as dose output by region or medium and particle tracks. This option has been used as the
energy deposited in each shell of a concentric spheres geometry should be found, meaning
that the dose output by region has been used. Furthermore, the particle tracks option has
also been used in order to visualize the simulations.[25]
4.2
Validation of EGSnrc
4.2.1
Simple box example
In order to validate if the output from EGSnrc is correct, ﬁrst, a simple example is calculated.
An isotropic monoenergetic 1 MeV electron point source is placed in a box of liquid water
with the measurements of 1 x 1 x 1 cm. The distribution of particles and the geometry
can be observed in Figure 4.2. The red lines represent the electron trajectories while the
yellow lines represent photon trajectories. The CSDA range for 124.3 keV electrons should
be 0.0206 g/cm2 which is consistent with Figure 4.2a as the electron trajectories do not
travel far in the water geometry. Figure 4.2b shows the same as Figure 4.2a but is zoomed
in so the trajectories of the electrons are visible.
(a) Geometry and distribution of the particles
in the box. The box consists of liquid water
and has the measurements 1 cm x 1 cm x 1
cm.
(b) Trajectories of particles in the liquid water
geometry. The red lines indicates electron tra-
jectories while the yellow lines indicates pho-
ton trajectories.
Figure 4.2: Box geometry with an isotropic point source emitting 124.3 keV monoenergetic
electrons
21
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4.
Methods
The absorbed dose in the box should be:
Dosebox = 0.1243MeV · 10−6 eV
MeV · 1.602 · 10−19 J
eV
(1 · 1 · 1 · 1cm)3 · 106 m3
cm3 · 997 kg
m3
= 1.9913 · 10−14 J
9.9700 · 10−4 kg = 1.9973 · 10−11 Gy
(4.1)
EGSnrc reports that the deposited energy in the water box is 0.12427 MeV and the absorbed
dose is 1.9947·10−11 Gy. This is consistent with the hand calculations as the diﬀerence is
0.13%, which is deemed acceptable. Therefore, the output from EGSnrc is correct.
4.2.2
Validation of 1 MeV electron point source
To further validate if the output from EGSnrc is correct, a simple point dose kernel for a 1
MeV monoenergetic electron isotropic point source is simulated in EGSnrc and this kernel
will be compared with the results from Botta et al.[17]. The isotropic point source is placed
at (0,0,0). The geometry is concentric spheres consisting of liquid water where the radii of
the shells ranges from 0.025·RCSDA to 1.5·RCSDA. The RCSDA for 1 MeV electrons is 0.4367
g/cm3 [14]. The number of histories is set to 106 in order to obtain good statistics.[17] The
result can be observed in Figure 5.1a.
Botta et al.
used the MC program FLUKA, where the energy cut-oﬀwas 1 keV and
the number of particles simulated was 107. The authors also used a isotropic point source
emitting 1 MeV monoenergetic electrons and the source was placed in the center of a sphere
with a radius of 10 cm. The deposited energy was scored in concentric spheres ranging from
0.025·RCSDA to 1.5·RCSDA. [17]
4.2.3
Validation of Auger electrons in EGSnrc
During the ﬁrst phase of this thesis, it was thought that EGSnrc should simulate the point
dose kernel by using the spectrum for 64Cu. The spectrum is given by Evaluated Nuclear
Structure Data Files (ENSDF), which can be an input ﬁle to EGSnrc. It was tested whether
or not EGSnrc included the Auger electrons from the ENSDF in the dose and deposited
energy. According to the documentation of EGSnrc, atomic relaxation should be turned on
when atomic relaxation is set to ’ensdf’ as the software then collects the spectrum from the
ENSDF ﬁle. It was found that this function only worked when EGSnrc is run on a Linux
device and not a Windows device, as the dose would give the same despite if ’ensdf’ was
turned on or oﬀ.
Furthermore, according to the ENSDF ﬁle for 64Cu, the total energy in the 64Cu spectrum
should be 124.22 keV, which is almost consistent with NUDAT. In order to validate if EGSnrc
included the Auger decay in the simulations, the
64Cu spectrum ﬁle was altered, so the
intensities for the Auger electrons were set to 0. The geometry used in these simulations is a
box consisting of liquid water with the measurements of 1 cm x 1 cm x 1 cm. This alteration
in the spectrum should change the deposited energy given to the medium. The deposited
energy for the altered spectrum should be 122.13 keV as the Auger electrons deposit a mean
energy of 2.09 keV. The dose released to the box by the normal and altered 64Cu spectrum
22
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4.
Methods
should be:
Dosebox = 124.22 keV · 103 eV
keV · 1.602 · 10−19 J
eV
(1cm3 · 10−6 m3
cm3 · 997 kg
m3 )
= 1.9960 · 10−11 Gy
(4.2)
Dosebox = 122.13 keV · 103 eV
keV · 1.602 · 10−19 J
eV
(1cm3 · 10−6 m3
cm3 · 997 kg
m3 )
= 1.9624 · 10−11 Gy
(4.3)
The result of the simulations in EGSnrc can be seen in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Deposited energy and absorbed dose for the 64Cu spectrum ENSDF ﬁles, where
the intensities of the Auger electrons is set to 0 in the altered spectrum
Deposited Energy
(keV)
Absorbed dose
(Gy)
Diﬀerence (Energy/dose)
(%)
Normal spectrum
119.97
1.9258·10−11
3.42/3.52
Altered spectrum
117.49
1.8822·10−11
3.80/4.09
It should be noted that when using a spectrum in EGSnrc, it is not possible to make an
isotropic point source. Therefore, in this example, the radius of the sphere emitting the
source is 0.00001 cm = 100 nm.
4.3
Failed attempts
When starting this thesis, it was intended that EGSnrc should sample each time an electron
deposited some of its kinetic energy along with the coordinates for this deposition. This
way, the microdosimetry could be found. This was tried to be obtained by adding the below
lines of code in line 421 in cavity.cpp. The code prints x-, y-, and z-coordinates, the kinetic
energy, the charge and deposited energy of the current particle. This means that each time
the particle moves, it should be sampled. The charge of the particle denotes whether the
particle is an electron (prints -1), a positron (prints +1) or a photon (prints 0). The result
can be observed in Figure 5.2, where only the electrons are plotted. As this idea could not
be obtained, the ausgab function in the egs++ application was used instead to score deposit
energy in diﬀerent regions, which is deﬁned by the user.
Listing 4.1: C++ code used to print information about particles
1
{
2
cout <<
" x = " <<
the stack->x[np]
3
<<
" y = "
<<
the stack->y[np]
4
<<
" z = "
<<
the stack->z[np]
5
<<
" E.kinetic = " <<
the stack->E[np]-the useful->rm
6
<<
"charge = " <<
the stack->iq[np]
7
<<
" deposited energy = " <<
the epcont->edep
<<
endl;
8
}
As mentioned, 64Cu emits electrons, positrons and Auger electrons. However, when simulat-
ing a monoenergenic point source of positrons, the annihilations will make a contribution to
the deposited energy, which can be observed in Figure 4.3. As the idea was to simulate the
23
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4.
Methods
diﬀerent energy contributions from RADAR[13] for both electrons and positrons and then
combine them, it is crucial that the annihilations do not contribute to the dose.
Figure 4.3: The energy kernel of a 1 MeV monoenergetic positron and electron point source.
The photons from the annihilations were sought to be removed, however, this was not ob-
tained despite the help received from EGSnrc developer Reid Townson. Some of the code can
be seen below. The code describes that if the particle has number 13 or 14, an annihilation
has just happened at rest or in ﬂight. Therefore, the two top particles in the stack must
be the two photons created during the annihilation. Therefore, their energy and weight are
set to 0 to discard them. Unfortunately, this did not work as the annihilation tail was still
visible as in Figure 4.3. Therefore, it was decided to simulate positrons as electrons in the
future simulations.
Listing 4.2: C++ code used to remove the photons after annihilation
1
{ if( iarg == 13
| |
iarg == 14 )
2
int np = the stack->np-1;
3
the stack->E[np] = 0;
4
the stack->wt[np] = 0;
5
the stack->E[np-1] = 0;
6
the stack->wt[np-1] = 0;
7
return;
8
}
4.4
Point dose and energy kernel
This section will describe the method for ﬁnding the point energy and dose kernel for 64Cu.
An overview of the process can be seen in Figure 4.4.
24
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4.
Methods
Finding CSDA
ranges
Simulating energy
contributions in
EGSnrc
Calculating energy
kernel
Calculating point
dose kernel
Linear combination of
the energy
contributions
Figure 4.4: Process of calculating the point dose kernel for 64Cu
4.4.1
Simulation of energy kernel in EGSnrc
When simulating a point energy kernel, the deposited energy should be sampled in concentric
spheres. An example of the geometry used to calculate all energy kernels in this thesis can be
observed in Figure 4.5. The geometry consists of a liquid water medium and the deposited
energy is scored in 0.025·RCSDA thick shells. The shells ranged from 0.025·RCSDA to 1.5·RCSDA.
The number of histories was 106 and the energy cut-oﬀfor electrons was 1 keV. The medium
is chosen to be water as soft tissue has the same density as water [26] and as MIRD also uses
water in their calculations.
(a) Geometry in 2D. Each shell is 0.025
·RCSDA thick as indicated by the blue
arrow.
(b) Geometry in 3D using EGSview
Figure 4.5: Example of the geometry used to sample the deposited energy. This geometry
only has 4 spheres, while the ones used in the ﬁnal energy kernel simulation have 60 spheres.
A point isotropic source emitting monoenergetic electrons is placed at (0,0,0). As mentioned,
the decays of 64Cu consist of electrons, positrons, and Auger electrons. It was ﬁrst thought
that each decay branch should be simulated in EGSnrc, however, the annihilations could not
be removed from the positron contributions. Therefore, the combined electron and positron
spectrum are simulated as just electrons.
Furthermore, as mentioned in the Section 2.5, γ and X-ray radiation from
64Cu are
neglected in these simulations. Their energy can be neglected due to the scale in which the
dose is of interest. As the photons have a much longer range than electrons it is unlikely
that they deposit dose in cell dimensions.
The combined β spectrum containing the β−and β+ decays for 64Cu is given by RADAR[13]
and can be seen in Appendix A and Figure 2.4, where the mean energies along with the
corresponding intensities are given. In order to make an energy kernel, each of these en-
25
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4.
Methods
ergies’ radial energy deposition will be simulated with EGSnrc and hereafter, they will be
summed up to create the point energy kernel for the β−and β+ decays. However, it should
be noted that the energy spectrum for 64Cu given by RADAR does not contain the same
amount of energy when comparing the total energy given by National Nuclear Data Center
(NUDAT)[8]. The energy contributions from NUDAT can also be seen in Appendix A. Ac-
cording to RADAR, the total amount of energy in the spectrum for 64Cu is 120.6 keV, while
according to NUDAT, the total amount of energy is 124.3 keV. A summary of the energy
contributions to the spectrum of 64Cu is shown in Table 4.3 and it is observed that the Auger
electrons contribute with the total of 1.96 keV according to NUDAT. It is assumed that the
energy spectrum from RADAR does not include the Auger electrons and these contributions
are also added to the simulations.
Table 4.3: Summary of the energy spectrum contributions for 64Cu. The complete contri-
butions can be seen in Appendix A.
NUDAT
RADAR
Decay
Contribution (keV)
Decay
Contribution (keV)
Total β
122.38
Total β
120.62
Auger
1.96
Total
124.34
Total
120.62
As the geometry contains spheres with radii ranging from 0.025·RCSDA to 1.5·RCSDA, the
CSDA range for the speciﬁc energies should be found ﬁrst. CSDA ranges for multiple energies
can be found through Stopping Power and Range Tables for Electrons from National Institute
of Standards and Technology (ESTAR NIST)[14] and by using interpolation, the CSDA
ranges for the energies in the β spectrum can be found. The result of the interpolation can
be seen in Figure 4.6 and in Appendix B.
Figure 4.6: CSDA ranges for the energies given by RADAR
The radial distribution of deposited energy for each energy contribution can now be simulated
26
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4.
Methods
in EGSnrc. The input ﬁle for the 0.6366 MeV contribution can be seen in Appendix C along
with the corresponding output ﬁle.
As mentioned, the geometry is a concentric spheres
geometry with radii ranging from 0.025·RCSDA to 1.5·RCSDA and the entire geometry consists
of water. The number of histories is 106 and the source is an isotropic point source emitting
monoenergetic electrons. To score the deposited energy in each sphere, the ausgab function
dose scoring is used. As each sphere is assigned a region number, the ausgab function
scores the deposited energy in each region. It is also possible to enter volumes in order to
calculate the dose in each region and if not given, the default is simply 1 cm3 and this does
not aﬀect the deposited energy estimation. It was chosen not to ﬁll out the volume but
instead calculate the dose point kernel in MATLAB. Furthermore, the cavity application also
needs a scoring object input in order for it to run. The calculation type is set to dose and
the calculation geometry is set to the ﬁrst region, meaning the innermost sphere. This does
not aﬀect the estimation of deposited energy but is simply a requirement for the application
to run. The input ﬁles for the diﬀerent energy contributions are almost identical as only the
radii of the spheres and energy emitted from the source are changed.
It should be noted that the radial distribution of energy from the Auger electrons could
not be simulated in EGSnrc. As the energy cut-oﬀis 1 keV, it is obvious why the Auger L
electrons with the energy of 0.84 keV could not be simulated. However, it was thought that
the Auger K electrons with the energy of 6.54 keV could be simulated in EGSnrc but the
entire energy was deposited inside the ﬁrst radius. Therefore, the energy deposited by the
Auger electrons was made by ”hand” and the result can be seen in Figure 5.4. The energy
deposited by the β decay can be observed in Figure 5.3.
The point energy kernel for 64Cu can now be calculated as the diﬀerent energy contribu-
tions have been simulated and the MATLAB script to do has been attached as supplementary
material to the thesis on DTU Inside. In order to calculate the energy kernel, the following
steps are followed:
• Validation of energy contributions: The diﬀerent energy contributions should con-
tain the amount of energy given by RADAR[13]. Therefore, the sum of each energy
contribution is taken. It is found that the contributions contain less energy than given
by RADAR and therefore, the energy contributions are scaled to contain the correct
amount of energy.
• Interpolation: In order to sum up the energy contributions, the energy should be
deposited in the same radii. Therefore, all energy contributions are interpolated so
each kernel starts at the smallest radius (ﬁrst radius for Auger L) and stops at the
largest radius (last radius for 0.6366 MeV). The steps are equal to the steps for the
smallest energy, which is Auger L. When the interpolation has reached 1.5RCSDA, zeros
are simply added instead of interpolating further. An example of three energy kernel
contributions can be observed in Figure 4.7
27
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4.
Methods
Figure 4.7: Energy kernel contribution for 0.6366, 0.3754, and 0.1796 MeV along with the
interpolated energy kernel contributions
• Re-scaling: As the energy contributions now contain more data points, they also
contain more energy than they should. Therefore, the energy kernels are divided by
the step size of the interpolation in order to rescale the total amount of energy in each
contribution.
• Sum of β and Auger contributions: The diﬀerent energy contributions are now multi-
plied with their respective intensities (cf. Appendix A). Hereafter, the β contributions
are summed and the Auger electrons are summed:
∆E(r) =
X
i
Ei(r) · Ii
(4.4)
where Ei(r) is the energy contribution from each energy in the spectrum and Ii is the
belonging intensity. The fractions of which the β and Auger decays contribute to the
ﬁnal point energy kernel for 64Cu can be observed in Figure 5.5.
• Normalizing according to NUDAT: According to NUDAT, the energy contribution
from the β+ and β−decays should be 122.4 keV, cf. Table 4.3. However, this is not
consistent with the data provided by RADAR as mentioned. It was decided to normal-
ize the β contributions according to the data from NUDAT as it deemed more precise.
The Auger contributions are not normalized as it is already taken from NUDAT.
• Calculation of the ﬁnal point energy kernel: The ﬁnal point energy kernel for 64Cu
can now be calculated. This is done by adding the energy kernels for the β energies
and Auger energies. The result can be seen in Figure 5.6
28
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4.
Methods
4.4.2
Calculation of point dose kernel
The point dose kernel for 64Cu can now be calculated. This is done by dividing the sum of
the deposited energy in a given radius with the mass of the corresponding sphere:
D(r) =
∆E(ri)
( 4
3πr3
i+1 −4
3πr3
i ) · ρ
(4.5)
The ﬁnal point dose kernel for 64Cu can be seen in Figure 5.7.
4.5
Validation of S-value calculation
The method for distributing the point dose kernel in a 3D matrix will now be presented and
the new approach to calculate S-values for a cell nucleus geometry will be explained. This
is done with the help of a simple source which contains the total amount of energy from the
spectrum of 64Cu, which is 124.3 keV. This section will also serve as a validation of the new
approach.
As known from NUDAT and Appendix A, the complete energy from 64Cu is 124.3 keV.
This energy is placed from 0.2 to 4 µm in a point energy kernel, which goes from 0.2 µm
to 25 µm with steps of 0.2 µm. Hereby, the entire energy should be deposited inside a cell
nucleus, which has a radius of 5 µm. The energy kernel can be observed in Figure 4.8a. By
taking the sum of the entire energy kernel, the total energy should be 124.8 keV. This is
done in MATLAB and the result is 124.8 keV and the energy kernel is correct.
The point dose kernel is now calculated by dividing the energy deposited in each shell
with the mass of the corresponding shell using Equation 4.5. This is done in MATLAB and
the result can be seen in Figure 4.8b.
(a) Energy kernel for a simple source. The en-
tire energy (124.3 keV) is deposited between
0.2 and 4 µm.
(b) Point dose kernel for a simple source. The
dose is absorbed in the shells from 0.2µm to
4 µm.
Figure 4.8: Construction of the point energy and dose kernel for a simple source
Hereafter, the point dose kernel is spread out in a 3D matrix and the result can be observed
in Figure 4.9. The MATLAB function to do so can be seen in Appendix D and it works by
ﬁrst creating a matrix which has double the length of the point dose kernel in each direction.
This is due to the fact that the point dose kernel is going to be spread out. Then inside this
matrix, the distance from the origin is calculated and hereafter, the matrix is interpolated
29
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4.
Methods
according to the point dose kernel, so the absorbed dose is distributed according to the
distance from the origin of the matrix. Hereby, the absorbed dose in water is made to a 3D
distribution.
(a) Dose distribution showing the dose in each
plan. The plane numbers have been calculated
as distance from the origin of the matrix.
(b) Dose distribution in the center plane. The
voxel number indicates the x- and y- coordinates
in the dose distribution matrix
Figure 4.9: Absorbed dose in the planes of the 3D dose distribution matrix
To validate if the dose is distributed correctly in the 3D matrix, the mean absorbed dose is
calculated. The 3D dose distribution matrix is 251 voxels in each direction and each voxel
has the measurements 0.2 µm x 0.2 µm x 0.2 µm. The mean absorbed dose is:
D = 124.3 keV · 103 eV
keV · 1.602 · 10−19 J
eV
(251 · 0.2µm)3 · 10−15 m3
µm3 · 997 kg
m3
= 1.5788 · 10−7 Gy
(4.6)
The mean absorbed dose inside the 3D distribution can be found by taking the sum of all
the absorbed dose in three dimensions and divide it by the number of elements. This gives
1.3150·10−7 Gy and it is scaled with 1.2, so the absorbed dose is correct.
As the distribution of absorbed dose is validated, the cell nucleus geometry can now be made.
The MATLAB function to do so can be seen in Appendix D and a simple example of a possible
output from the function in 2D can be seen in Figure 4.10. Firstly, the function makes a
3D matrix with a size indicated by the user. Hereafter, the distance from the center of the
matrix is calculated for the entire matrix. The user also indicates the size of the voxels in the
matrix and what the radius of the cell nucleus should be. From this information, a maximum
length from the center is then calculated by dividing the radius by the step size. The matrix
is then ﬁlled with ones and zeros, where the ones are inside the maximum length from the
center and represent the spherical cell nucleus and the zeroes are ”ﬁlling” in the square in
which the sphere is placed.
30
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4.
Methods
Figure 4.10: Example of a cell nucleus geometry in 2D. The blue pixels indicate ones and
the white pixels indicate zeroes. Each pixel is 0.2 µm x 0.2 µm. The red arrow indicates the
radius of the cell nucleus.
This matrix is called the logical matrix as it contains ones and zeroes. In order to validate if
the cell nucleus has the correct volume when the radius is 5 µm, the number of voxels, which
should be inside the nucleus model, is calculated. Each voxel is 0.2 µm x 0.2 µm x 0.2 µm.
Elementsnucleus =
4
3πr3
(0.2µm)3 = 523598 elements
(4.7)
When ﬁnding all the non-zero elements in the logical matrix, it gives 524481 elements. This
is deemed feasible as it is hard to get the correct volume for a round object made of squares.
The geometry, which before consisted of ones to represent the cell nucleus, is now scaled so
the total sum of the matrix gives 1. The model of the cell nucleus is now called the activity
matrix as it contains the activity (1 Bq·s = 1 decay) given to the nucleus geometry.
The new approach to calculate S-values is now demonstrated. The 3D dose distribution and
activity matrix is convoluted in MATLAB as the absorbed dose then will be ”spread out” in
the cell nucleus. An example of 3D convolution can be seen in Figure 4.11. In this case,
one can imagine that the yellow matrix contains the volume of the cell nucleus while the
blue matrix is the dose distribution. The output of the convolution will be the weighted
sum of the two 3D matrices. The mean absorbed dose in the cell should give 1.5788·10−7
Gy and is found by taking the sum of the output of the convolution and dividing it by the
number of elements in the cell nucleus. It is found that the absorbed dose inside the nucleus
is 1.5741·10−7 Gy and it can be concluded that the method works as the entire energy has
been deposited inside the nucleus.
31
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4.
Methods
Figure 4.11: Example of 3D convolution.[27] In this case, the blue matrix is the dose distri-
bution in 3D and the yellow matrix is the matrix containing the cell nucleus geometry. The
green matrix is the output of the convolution
The S-value for the cell nucleus is now calculated. The output of the convolution is multiplied
with the logical matrix so only the dose absorbed inside the geometry of the cell nucleus is
left. Hereafter, the remaining dose is divided by the number of elements in the cell nucleus
to obtain the mean absorbed dose which gives S(N ←N) = 0.0219 Gy
Bq·s
4.6
Calculations of S-values
The point dose kernel for 64Cu, which can be observed in Figure 5.7, goes from 8.38 nm
to 0.3677 cm and contains 438590 data points. When this vector is interpolated to a 3D
dose distribution matrix, the matrix will be enormous and the convolution to calculate the
S-value will take a very long time to compute. As the maximum radius of the cell nucleus
will be 9 µm in this report, it was decided that the point dose kernel should go from 0.1 µm
to 25 µm with steps of 0.1 µm. This way, the point dose kernel will cover the largest cell
nucleus. The calculation of the new point dose kernel is done as follows:
• Finding the new energy inside the energy kernel: It is found that the new kernel
should contain 7 keV when it is ”cut” down to 25 µm. The new energy kernel is made
by interpolating from 0.1 µm to 25 µm with steps of 0.1 µm and can be observed in
Figure 5.9a.
• Calculation of point dose kernel: The new point dose kernel is calculated as given
in Equation 4.5, where the deposited energy in a shell is divided by the corresponding
mass of the shell. The new point dose kernel can be observed in Figure 5.9b.
• 3D dose distribution: The point dose kernel is now spread out in a 3D matrix as
described in the previous section. The matrix contains 501 voxels in each direction
and each voxel is 0.1 µm in each direction. The 3D dose kernel should contain:
32
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4.
Methods
D =
7 keV · 103 eV
keV · 1.602 · 10−19 J
eV
(501voxels · 0.1
µm
voxels)3 · 10−15 cm3
m3 · 997 kg
m3
= 8.9366 · 10−6 Gy
(4.8)
The 3D dose distribution matrix contains 7.7801·10−6 Gy and it is therefore re-scaled,
so it contains the correct amount of absorbed dose.
4.6.1
Cell nucleus geometry
The method for creating a cell nucleus geometry is described in Section 4.5. In order to
calculate the S(N←N), the following is done:
• Making logical matrix: The MATLAB function LogicalSphere.m is used to create the
logical matrix. These matrices are made for a step size of 0.1 µm and for the radii 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 µm. The amount of voxels in the x-, y-, and z-direction is chosen
to be 200 as the largest cell will occupy:
Elements = 9µm
0.1µm · 2 = 180 elements
(4.9)
In order to validate if the cell nuclei have the correct volume, a theoretical volume is
calculated. This is done by calculating the volume of a sphere with the given radius,
and then dividing it by the volume of a voxel, which is (0.1 µm)3.
This gives the
number of voxels, which should be in each geometry the result can be seen in Table 4.4
along with the diﬀerences. As the diﬀerence is less than 0.5 %, the cell nucleus model
is deemed acceptable.
Table 4.4: Overview of the volume of the cells given in number of voxels
Radius (µm)
Voxelstheoretical
Voxelsmodel
Diﬀerence (voxels)
Diﬀerence (%)
1
4189
4169
+20
+0.48
2
33510
33401
+109
+0.33
3
113097
113369
-272
-0.24
4
268082
268433
-350
-0.13
5
523598
524481
-882
-0.17
6
904778
905145
-366
-0.04
7
1436755
1437705
-950
-0.07
8
2144660
2145705
-1044
-0.05
9
3053628
3055249
-1621
-0.05
• Making activity matrix: The logical matrix is now normalized so the total sum of the
matrix will be 1. This represents the 1 decay of 64Cu inside the cell nucleus.
• Convolution: The activity matrix and the distribution of dose in 3D is now convoluted
using the MATLAB function convn. The option 'same' is used as it returns the central
part of the convolution, which is the same size as the activity matrix (cell nucleus
geometry).
33
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4.
Methods
• Finding the absorbed dose in cell nucleus: The output of the convolution is multiplied
with the logical matrix as the absorbed dose outside the cell nucleus will be removed.
• S(N←N): The S-value is calculated by taking the sum of the output from the convo-
lution and divide it by the number of voxels in the cell nucleus geometry. The result
can be seen in Table 5.1.
• Cumulated activity: The cumulated activity needed in order to get a kill rate of 104
can be calculated by dividing the dose needed in order to get the wanted kill factor
(cf. Table 2.1) with the S-value:
˜Alung =
20 Gy
S(N ←N)
(4.10)
˜Acolon =
14 Gy
S(N ←N)
(4.11)
4.6.2
Aspergillus fumigatus hypha geometry
When evaluating the S-value for this geometry, the target and source are no longer the same.
Here, it is the membrane of the AFH that is the source and the nucleus that is the target.
The geometry of the membrane of the AFH is modeled as a hollow cylinder. It is known, that
the diameter of the hypha is 1 µm and the membrane is 0.2 µm thick. In these calculations,
the hypha will be 10 µm long due to computational reasons. The nucleus of the hypha has
a diameter of 0.8 and is placed right beneath the surface of the membrane and ﬁlls out the
entire diameter. Furthermore, it is also known that the nucleus does not occupy the entire
hypha but only about 10%.
The geometry of the hypha is made by constructing a hollow cylinder using the MATLAB
function make cylinder.m which can be seen in Appendix D. The function creates a slice
which contains ones and zeroes as described in section 4.5 and illustrated as in Figure 4.10.
The slice is 0.1 µm thick. These slices are then stacked until the hypha has the required
length of 10 µm. In order to make a hollow cylinder, two cylinders are created and then
subtracted. In this case, the ﬁrst cylinder has a diameter of 1 µm and the other cylinder has
a diameter of 0.8 µm and they both have the length of 10 µm. This way, a hollow cylinder
is created which has the thickness of 0.2 µm and the length of 10 µm. The nucleus is made
as a cylinder with a diameter of 0.8 µm and a height of 0.8 µm. The nucleus is placed in the
center of the hollow cylinder, which represents the hypha. An illustration of the geometry
can be seen in Figure 4.12. Both the membrane and nucleus matrices consist of ones and
zeroes as in the previous example.
34
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4.
Methods
Figure 4.12: Geometry used to model the AFH. The grey cylinder represents the nucleus and
the rest represents the membrane of the hypha, where the activity will be placed. The hypha
is 10 µm long and the thickness of the membrane is 0.2 µm. The nucleus has a diameter
and height of 0.8 µm. Please note that the illustration is not correctly scaled as its purpose
is visualization.
To calculate the S(N←CS) for the AFH geometry, the same dose kernel as before is used
and as described in Section 4.6. The same procedure as in Section 4.6.1 is used with minor
adjustments. Instead of just 1 decay, 10 decays are modeled on the surface of the hypha.
The calculation of S(N←CS) is calculated as follows:
• Making activity matrix: The logical matrix (hypha membrane model) is normalized
so the total sum of the matrix will be 10. This represents the 10 decays of 64Cu on the
surface of the hypha. This is now called the activity matrix.
• Convolution: The activity matrix and the distribution of absorbed dose in 3D is now
convoluted using the MATLAB function convn. The option 'same' is used as it returns
the central part of the convolution, which has the same size as the activity matrix
(hypha geometry).
• Finding the absorbed dose in the nucleus: The output of the convolution is then
multiplied with the logical matrix representing the nucleus as the absorbed dose outside
the nucleus geometry will then be removed.
• S(N←CS): The S-value to the nucleus from the membrane is calculated by taking the
total sum of the dose to the nucleus and divide it by the number of voxels in the nucleus
geometry. The result can be seen in Section 5.5.
• Cumulated activity: The cumulated activity needed in order to get a kill rate of 10−4
can be calculated by dividing the dose needed in order to get the wanted kill factor
(cf. Table 2.1) with the S-value:
˜A =
1880 Gy
S(N ←CS)
(4.12)
35
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4.
Methods
4.7
S-value calculations with CSDA limitations
One of the limitations of the cellular method adopted by MIRD is that it neglects energy
straggling, angular deﬂections and δ-rays. In EGSnrc it is possible to create new materials
where interactions with the ”surroundings” can be speciﬁed.
When creating these new
materials, there is a parameter, IUNRST, which should be given. IUNRST allows various
stopping powers to be calculated and when IUNRST is set to 2, the stopping power produced
is the collision and radiative stopping power, however, secondary electrons are never set into
motion and they will therefore never occur.[23] Using the new parameter for calculations of
stopping power, EGSnrc produces new cross-section data and new probability distributions
are created and sampled from. This makes it possible to estimate the distribution of energy
and absorbed dose with the CSDA limitations which have been critiqued. The other input
parameters can be observed in Table 4.5. The new material ﬁle has the same parameters as
for water with only the calculation of stopper power changed. The input to create the new
material ﬁle can be observed in Appendix E.
Table 4.5: Overview of the input parameters necessary to create a new material
Input
Function
Value for water
ELEM, COMP,
or MIXT
Specify if the new material is an element,
component or mixture
MIXT
NE
Number of elements
2
RHO
Density of the new material in kg/m3
0.998
RHOZ
Proportion by weight of elements in the
mixture
H = 0.111894
O = 0.888106
IUNRST
Calculation of the stopping power of the
particles
2 (no secondary electrons)
AE, UE, AP, UP
Lower and upper cut oﬀenergies for elec-
trons and photons in MeV
AE=0.521,UE=20
AP=0.01,UP=20
In order to validate if the new material ﬁle is created correctly, the ﬂuence spectrum is
found in EGSnrc for a 1 MeV electron point source. As the ﬂuence spectrum is given by
the reciprocal of the stopping power, the ﬂuence spectrum can be calculated by the stopping
powers from ESTAR NIST[14], which does not contain secondary electrons. The geometry
used in the EGSnrc simulation is again a box with the measurements 1 cm x 1 cm x 1 cm
and it is ﬁlled with the new water material, which does not produce secondary electrons.
The result can be seen in Figure 4.13 and it can be concluded that the material ﬁle does not
include secondary electrons.
36
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4.
Methods
Figure 4.13: Fluence spectra calculated by EGSnrc and table values from ESTAR NIST
In order to calculate the point dpse kernel and S-values for this new media, the exact same
procedure as described in Section 4.4 and 4.6 are followed. The results can be observed in
Section 5.6.
37
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Results
The following chapter presents the obtained results. This includes the results obtained while
validating the MC program EGSnrc and the results obtained while testing the method to
calculate the S-values. The ﬁnal results for 64Cu, including the point energy and dose kernel
and the S-values for a cell nucleus and AFH geometry are also presented. The last part
of the results presents the calculation of point energy and dose kernel and S-values for a
cell nucleus geometry for 64Cu, when energy straggling, δ-rays and angular deﬂections are
neglected.
5.1
Validation of EGSnrc
Validation of 1 MeV electron point source
To validate if the output of EGSnrc can be compared with the work of others and to validate
the output of the program, a 1 MeV electron point source was placed in a geometry consisting
of concentric spheres with shell radii ranging from 0.025·RCSDA to 1.5·RCSDA. The geometry
consists of water. The result of the simulation along with results obtained by Botta et al.
can be observed in Figure 5.1a. The diﬀerence between the results obtained by EGSnrc and
Botta et al. can be observed in Figure 5.1b. It can be observed that the simulations made
by Botta et al. and the ones made by the present work are in agreement for 1 MeV electrons
except for a large diﬀerence at 1.1 r/CSDA.
38
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 5.
Results
(a) Scaled point dose kernel for 1 MeV in water
for this work and results obtained by Botta et al.
(b) Diﬀerence in % between point dose kernel
from present work and Botta et al.
Figure 5.1: Comparison between this work and work by Botta et al.
5.2
Failed attempts
During the start of this thesis, it was thought that EGSnrc could output the event-by-event
simulations for electrons and the egs++ application was altered. In Figure 5.2, the result of
the alteration in the egs++ application is shown.
Figure 5.2: Attempt to sample each time an electron deposits some of its kinetic energy
along with the x-,y-, and z-coordinates for a 1 MeV monoenergetic point source
5.3
Point dose and energy kernel
Firstly, the radial distribution for the energy contributions to the 64Cu spectrum are sim-
ulated in EGSnrc and they are seen in Figure 5.3. The diﬀerent energies along with the
corresponding CSDA range can be seen in Appendix B. The energy of the Auger electrons
are too small to simulate in EGSnrc, therefore, they are made by hand. The radial distribu-
tion for the Auger electrons for 64Cu can be observed in Figure 5.4
39
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5.
Results
Figure 5.3: Radial distribution of energies contributing to the energy spectrum for 64Cu
Figure 5.4: Radial distribution of energy for the Auger electrons in the spectrum of 64Cu
5.3.1
Contributions to energy from Auger and β electrons
The average cell has a radius of 3-4 µm, therefore, the fraction of deposited energy from the
Auger electrons and the β electrons is investigated and the results can be observed in Figure
5.5. In Figure 5.5b the energies for the Auger and β electrons are shown. It is evident that
the shape of the Auger electrons energy deposition is visible. Furthermore, the shape of
the 0.0163 MeV contribution is also visible in Figure 5.5b as the peak between 3 and 4 µm.
The fraction of which the Auger and β electrons contribute with is shown in Figure 5.5a.
It is evident that after approximately 1.9 µm, the deposited energy comes only from the β
electrons. Before 1.9 µm the deposited energy comes mainly from the Auger electrons as the
contribute with approximately 90 and 80%. The shape of the Auger electrons is also visible
40
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5.
Results
in Figure 5.5a.
(a) The deposited fractions of energy accord-
ing to Auger and β electrons
(b) The deposited energy from Auger and β
electrons
Figure 5.5: Energy deposition by Auger and β electrons
5.3.2
Point energy kernel
The energy kernel for 64Cu containing the energy contributions shown in Figure 5.3 and 5.4
can be observed in Figure 5.6. Figure 5.6a shows the deposited energy as a function of radius
and Figure 5.6b shows the same on a logscale for the deposited energy. It is evident that
the energy is greatest at small radii while it appears to be zero at approximately 0.15 cm.
It can also be observed that the deposited energy makes four drops at the end of the kernel.
(a) Energy kernel for 64Cu
(b) Energy kernel for 64Cu (logscale)
Figure 5.6: Point energy kernels for 64Cu
41
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5.
Results
5.3.3
Point dose kernel
The point dose kernel for 64Cu can be observed in Figure 5.7 and the calculation of the point
dose kernel was the main goal of this thesis. From Figure 5.7 it can be observed that the
absorbed dose is highest for the smallest radii, while it drops the further away from the
center it gets. A comparison between the point dose kernel calculated in this thesis and by
Tse et al. can be observed in Figure 5.8, where it is evident that the kernels diﬀer at small
and large radii but agree in the radial distance where β particles dominate.
Figure 5.7: Point dose kernel for 64Cu shown on a logscale for the y-axis
Figure 5.8: Point dose kernel for 64Cu calculated by Tse et al. [28] and from the present
work. The kernels are shown on a logscale for the y-axis
42
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5.
Results
5.4
Calculated S-values for a cell nucleus geometry
In order to compare the S-values with the oﬃcial values from MIRD, the cell nucleus should
have the same size and be spherical. The cell nuclei radii will go from 1 µm to 9 µm so
there is no need for the entire point dose kernel, which goes up to 0.35 cm. Therefore, a
new dose kernel was made with steps of 0.1 µm up to 25 µm. This means that there will be
250 data points. The new point energy and dose kernel can be observed in Figure 5.9. It
is again evident that the shape of the energy deposition from the Auger electrons and the
0.0163 MeV β contribution is visible in Figure 5.9a.
(a) Energy kernel for 64Cu going from 0.1 µm
to 25 µm with steps of 0.1 µm
(b) The corresponding point dose kernel for
64Cu
Figure 5.9: Point energy and dose kernel for 64Cu ranging from 0.1 µm to 25 µm
Using the point dose kernel shown in Figure 5.9b, the S-values for diﬀerent sized cell nuclei
were calculated and the result can be observed in Table 5.1 along with the deviation from
the oﬃcial cellular S-values for 64Cu from MIRD. The diﬀerence is also visualized in Figure
5.10b. Furthermore, the activity needed to obtain a kill rate of 10−4 is shown in Table 5.2,
where the cumulated activity is calculated using both the MIRD cellular S-values and the
S-values from this work.
Table 5.1: Calculated S-values for diﬀerent sized cell nuclei along with the oﬃcial cellular
values from MIRD and their diﬀerences
RN
[µm]
S(N←N) from MIRD
[Gy/Bq s]
S(N←N) from this work
[Gy/Bq s]
Diﬀerence
[%]
1
5.21·10−2
3.29·10−2
-36.77
2
9.26·10−3
6.90·10−3
-25.45
3
3.19·10−3
2.59·10−3
-18.90
4
1.48·10−3
1.26·10−3
-14.96
5
8.21·10−4
7.13·10−4
-13.21
6
5.07·10−4
4.47·10−4
-11.77
7
3.38·10−4
3.02·10−4
-10.76
8
2.39·10−4
2.15·10−4
-10.13
9
1.76·10−4
1.60·10−4
-9.37
43
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5.
Results
(a) S-values from this work and oﬃcial cellular
S-values from MIRD
(b) Diﬀerence between the S-values from this
work and MIRD
Figure 5.10: Comparison of S-values from this work and from MIRD
Table 5.2: Overview of the cumulated activity needed to obtain a kill rate of 10−4
RN
[µm]
Cumulated activity
Lung
[Bq·s]
Cumulated activity
Colon
[Bq·s]
Cumulated activity
Lung - MIRD
[Bq·s]
Cumulated activity
Colon - MIRD
[Bq·s]
1
607.13
425.00
383.88
268.71
2
2897.04
2027.93
2159.83
1511.88
3
7730.46
5411.32
6269.59
4388.71
4
15890.56
11123.39
13513.52
9459.46
5
28068.57
19647.00
24360.54
17052.38
6
44708.01
31295.61
39447.73
27613.41
7
66306.62
46414.63
59171.60
41420.12
8
93109.75
65176.82
83682.01
58577.41
9
125390.60
87773.42
113636.36
79545.45
5.5
Calculated S-value for Aspergillus Fumigates hypha
The S-value was calculated to be 0.0432 Gy/(Bq·s per 10 µm), which was an arbitrary choice.
44
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5.
Results
5.6
S-value calculations with CSDA limitations
The cellular method adopted by MIRD is critiqued by the use of the CSDA, which neglects
δ-rays (cf. Chapter 3). These limitations were possible to implement in EGSnrc, which is
described in Section 4.7. The comparison of point energy kernels with and without CSDA
limitations can be observed in Figure 5.11. From Figure 5.11a and 5.11b it is evident that
the energy kernels follow the same progress until 0.15 cm. The diﬀerence in progress after
this point is due to the neglect of secondary electrons, which shortens the range.
(a) Point energy kernel for
64Cu with and
without CSDA limitations
(b) Point energy kernel for 64Cu zoomed in at
the area of interest
Figure 5.11: Comparison of point energy kernels with and without CSDA limitation.
The point dose kernels can be observed in Figure 5.11 and 5.12. It can be seen that the
point dose kernels with and without CSDA limitations do not diﬀer in the part of the point
dose kernel, which is used to calculate the S-values. The diﬀerence between the point dose
kernels is only visible in the bigger radii.
(a) Point dose kernel for 64Cu with and with-
out CSDA limitations
(b) Point dose kernel for 64Cu zoomed in at
the area of interest
Figure 5.12: Comparison of point dose kernels with and without CSDA limitations
The calculated S-values with the CSDA limitations can be observed in Table 5.3. The S-
values without the CSDA limitation and the S-values from MIRD are also shown.
It is
observed that the diﬀerence between the calculated S-values with and without the CSDA
limitation is not very big. A visualization of all the S-values can be seen in Figure 5.13.
45
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5.
Results
Table 5.3: Calculated S-values from this work with and without CSDA limitations and
cellular S-values from MIRD
RN
[µm]
S(N←N) from MIRD
[Gy/Bq s]
S(N←N) calculated
[Gy/Bq s]
S(N←N) CSDA
[Gy/Bq s]
1
5.21·10−2
2.04·10−2
3.33·10−2
2
9.26·10−3
4.94·10−3
7.01·10−3
3
3.19·10−3
1.97·10−3
2.63·10−3
4
1.48·10−3
0.99·10−3
1.28·10−3
5
8.21·10−4
5.74·10−4
7.29·10−4
6
5.07·10−4
3.67·10−4
4.58·10−4
7
3.38·10−4
2.52·10−4
3.09·10−4
8
2.39·10−4
1.82·10−4
2.21·10−4
9
1.76·10−4
1.37·10−4
1.64·10−4
Figure 5.13: S-values calculated with and without CSDA limitations and the oﬃcal cellular
S-values from MIRD
46
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In this Master’s thesis, a new approach for calculating point dose and energy kernels along
with S-values have been presented. In the following, results are considered and discussed in
relation to the cellular method adopted by MIRD, strengths, and limitations.
6.1
Validation of EGSnrc
Firstly, an isotropic point source emitting 124.3 keV electrons in a box consisting of water
was simulated in EGSnrc and according to ”hand calculations” the absorbed dose should be
1.9973·10−11 Gy. EGSnrc reported that the energy deposited in the geometry was 124.27
keV and the absorbed dose was 1.99473·10−11 Gy.
As the diﬀerence between the ”hand
calculations” and EGSnrc was 0.13%, it can be concluded that the output from EGSnrc
could be trusted.
Secondly, a point dose kernel for a monoenergetic source emitting 1 MeV electrons was
simulated in EGSnrc and it was compared to a point dose kernel obtained by Botta et al..
There is generally good agreement between the two set of data as the diﬀerence between the
two point kernels are almost constant at 3%. However, at 1.1 r/CSDA there is a large peak.
This peak is due to the fact that Botta et al use a diﬀerent CSDA range of 0.4220 g/cm3,
however, the CSDA range given by ESTAR NIST is 0.4367 g/cm3 for 1 MeV.[14] The main
reason for the constant diﬀerence of 3% could be due to the simulation algorithm used in the
two diﬀerent programs. However, despite the diﬀerence in CSDA range, the two simulations
are in good agreement and it can be concluded that the results from EGSnrc are similar to
the work of others. Therefore, it can be concluded that the output of EGSnrc can be trusted.
Lastly, as it was thought that the 64Cu spectrum in EGSnrc should be used, the sim-
ulation of Auger electrons in EGSnrc was validated. The mean energy released from the
64Cu spectrum with and without Auger electrons was found and, hereafter, the absorbed
dose in the geometry was calculated. The diﬀerence between the hand calculation and the
simulations for 64Cu spectrum with and without Auger electrons were 3.52 and 4.09% for the
absorbed dose and the diﬀerence in deposited energy was 3.42 and 3.80%. These diﬀerences
might be due to the fact that it is a spectrum, which is sampled from a distribution and not
monoenergetic energies. It can be concluded that Auger electrons are simulated in EGSnrc
47
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6.
Discussion
and their deposited energy are included as there is a decrease in deposited energy when they
are removed from the spectrum.
6.2
Failed attempts
During the start of this thesis, it was thought that EGSnrc could output the event-by-event
simulation for electrons in order to ﬁnd every time an electron deposited some of its energy.
The result can be observed in Figure 5.2 and there are multiple reasons why this result
cannot be correct. Firstly, electrons with a kinetic energy of 1 MeV do not have a range of
multiple centimeters, which some of these electrons have. Secondly, as the stopping power
for electrons increases by decreasing energies, it does not make sense that the electrons
deposit most of their kinetic energy around the center of the source, where they have the
most kinetic energy. The idea was therefore abandoned and the classical way of simulating
a point energy kernel was used instead (concentric spheres geometry and energy deposited
in shells). However, the results have been included as a suﬃcient amount of time was spent
on trying to alter the egs++ application. Other MC programs such as PENELOPE can
simulate event-by-event simulations for electrons and has energy cut-oﬀof 50 eV and are
therefore more suitable if this approach was going to be used.
As each decay branch of the
64Cu spectrum should be simulated, it meant that the
energy deposited by the β decay and positrons should be sampled in EGSnrc. However, as
it is evident in Figure 4.3, the annihilation photons make a contribution to the deposited
dose. This can be seen by the annihilation ”tail” which is evident for the larger radii as the
deposited energy is not zero. The egs++ application was tried altered in order to remove the
annihilations but, unfortunately, this was not obtained. It was decided to model positrons
as electrons in the EGSnrc simulations. This can be substantiated by the stopping power of
electrons and positrons as the expression for soft collisions is almost the same. However, the
expression for the hard collisions is diﬀerent as the cross section for electron and positrons
is diﬀerent due the Coulomb forces near the atomic nucleus. Furthermore, it is evident from
Figure 4.3 that the diﬀerence between the electron and positron source is not great and,
therefore, it is reasonable to simulate positrons as electrons.
6.3
Point energy and dose kernel for Cu-64
Energy spectrum
The energy contributions in the 64Cu spectrum are given by RADAR[13], however, it was
found that the total energy in the spectrum was not consistent with the energy in NUDAT,
cf. Table 4.3. According to RADAR, the data should be in accordance with NUDAT as
of 2003. The reason there is a diﬀerence must be because the data from NUDAT has been
updated in the meantime. Obviously, it is a limitation that RADAR and NUDAT do not
agree on the energy spectrum for 64Cu. In order to get the most precise point dose kernel
and thereby S-values, the energy spectrum needs to be as precise as possible.
Falzone et al. investigated the impact of decay data on point dose kernels and S-values.
48
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 6.
Discussion
The authors compared radiation spectra used by MIRD to calculate cellular S-values with
new decay data provided by BrIccEmis. The spectra used by MIRD are based on the data
from ENSDF, however, when calculating the atomic relaxation spectra after electron capture
and interval conversion, several assumptions were made in the MIRD tabulations due to
computational limits and the lack of experimental data. The authors used the MC software
PENELOPE to simulate event-by-event transport of electrons and X-rays using the decay
data from MIRD tabulation and spectra generated by BrIccEmis. To investigate the point
dose kernel, an isotropic point source was placed in an inﬁnite liquid water medium and
the mean absorbed dose was recorded in 1 nm thick spherical shells around the decay site
and they were tallied up to a radial distance of 50 µm from the point source. Falzone et al.
found that Auger electrons, Coster-Konig, and X-ray yields were generally lower when using
decay data from BrIccEmis than MIRD. The authors found that point dose kernels are highly
sensitive to the diﬀerences in input decay spectra as there was a huge diﬀerence in the ﬁrst
100 nm, where Auger electrons dominate. However, cellular S-values are unaﬀected by this
diﬀerence as the diﬀerence diminish when calculating S-values at a cellular scale, which is in
µm. Furthermore, the larger the dimensions of the cells, the smaller the diﬀerence between
S-values would get. [29]
The diﬀerence between the decay data by NUDAT and RADAR could, therefore, aﬀect
the simulated point dose kernel for 64Cu, however, this diﬀerence would likely not aﬀect the
S-value. However, through the work of Falzone et al. it has been highlighted that a pre-
cise estimate of decay data is missing. It was decided to normalize the point energy kernel
according to the data provided by NUDAT as it was certain that this data included the
Auger electrons. Furthermore, it is deemed that NUDAT can be trusted to provide the most
precise data as they use data about mass diﬀerence and the neutrinos to estimate the energy
spectrum.
As mentioned, the photons from the 64Cu spectrum have not been included in the simulations.
The photons from the 64Cu spectrum have energies ranging from 0.85 keV to 8.265 keV as
well as a γ energy of 1345.77 keV and the annihilation photons with energies of 511 keV.
The attenuation coeﬃcients for these energies can be observed in Table 6.1 and the value
describes how many percent of the photons interact pr. cm of water, meaning for 511 keV,
9.6% of the photons interact the ﬁrst cm. For the annihilation and γ photons, it is clear that
they do not deposit dose near the cell nucleus. For the two X-rays of 7.46 and 8.265 keV,
1.2% and 0.9% of the photons interact the ﬁrst µm and their contribution can therefore also
be neglected as they do not get absorbed inside the cell dimension. However, 57.39 % of the
0.85 keV X-ray photons interact within the ﬁrst µm and this X-ray could contribute with
dose with photoelectrons, but as the intensity of this characteristic X-ray is 0.489%[8], the
deposited energy is neglected in these simulations. In future studies, the photons should also
be simulated and added to the point dose kernel in order to investigate the contribution of
these.
49
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6.
Discussion
Table 6.1: Attenuation coeﬃcients for the photon energies from 64Cu spectrum
Energy
(keV)
Attenuation coeﬃcient
(1/cm)
Attenuation coeﬃcient
(1/µm)
0.85
5739.9
0.5739
7.46
12.4648
0.012
8.265
9.1616
0.009
511
0.0959
0.000009
1345.77
0.0609
0.000006
Point energy kernel
While ﬁnding the point energy kernel a few limitations of EGSnrc arose and some of them
have already been mentioned in Section 6.2. One of the limitations is the simulation of Auger
electrons. As the energy cut-oﬀin EGSnrc is 1 keV it was not possible to simulate the Auger
contributions. These energy contributions were then made ”by hand” in MATLAB, where they
were modeled as a square function containing 6.54 and 0.84 keV, respectively. It was decided
that this was a good approximation as the Auger energy deposition is not known and it was
not possible to simulate it. However, it can not be ruled out that the shape of the energy
deposition for the Auger electrons would change if it could be simulated in EGSnrc. But as
none of the MC programs have a suﬃciently low energy cut-oﬀat the time being, simulation
is not an option.
From Figure 5.6a and 5.6b it can be observed that the deposited energy is highest at the
smaller radii. This is due to the energy deposition from the Auger electrons, which can be
seen in Figure 5.5a. After the radius of the sphere is 1.1 cm, the energy goes to zero. However,
in Figure 5.6b it can be observed that the point energy kernel has some ”jumps” after 0.25
cm. These ”jumps” are due to the zeros added to the individual energy contributions after
interpolation, cf. Section 4.4.1. However, as this thesis is concerned with energy deposition
on µm scale, the error is neglected as it will not aﬀect the S-values. However, if this thesis
dealt with S-values to organs, this would oﬀcourse be an error.
Point dose kernel
The ﬁnal point dose kernel for 64Cu for the β+, β−, and Auger electrons are shown in Figure
5.7. It can be observed that the absorbed dose is highest at the smallest radii and this is
again due to the energy deposition from the Auger electrons as well as the small masses of
the spheres.
After an extensive literature search, the point dose kernel for 64Cu, which includes the
β and Auger decays, has only been calculated by Tse et al. Their decay data comes from
RADAR and NUDAT as well and their point dose kernel also includes the annihilation, γ
and X-rays photons from 64Cu. As the authors included the photons, their step size in radii
was 20 µm and went to approximately 50 cm. A comparison between their point dose kernel
and the one obtained in this thesis can be observed in Figure 5.8. The diﬀerence in kernels
after 0.19 cm is due to the fact that Tse et al. include the photon energy deposition. The
50
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 6.
Discussion
diﬀerence between the kernels for the smaller radii could be due to the fact that Tse et al.
have a step size of 20 µm and the energy deposition from the Auger electrons is hidden in the
bigger mass of the ﬁrst shell. Furthermore, Tse et al. reports that the Auger electrons only
contribute with 16.86% in the ﬁrst volume and this is again due to the large resolution which
the authors have chosen to use. However, in the region of which the β electrons dominate,
it can be observed that the results from this thesis and the result from Tse et al. are in
good agreement despite the fact, that the authors have used another simulation program
with lower cut-oﬀenergies and with positron contributions instead of just electrons as used
in these simulations.[28] Therefore, it can be concluded that the simpliﬁcation of positrons
being simulated as electrons and the high cut-oﬀenergy in EGSnrc do not have a great eﬀect
on the point dose kernel for 64Cu when evaluating the contribution from β particles.
6.4
S-values for diﬀerent geometries
Cell nucleus geometry
The calculated S-values for diﬀerent sized nuclei are shown in Table 5.1 and it can be observed
that with increasing radii of the nuclei, the diﬀerence from the cellular S-values calculated
by MIRD decreases. As previously mentioned, according to Falzone et al. this deviation
might be due to the diﬀerence in energy spectrum as the smaller the nucleus, the bigger
contribution the Auger electrons give to the overall energy deposition.
Furthermore, the diﬀerence between the S-values might also be aﬀected by the volume
of the target. As shown in Table 4.4 there is a slight diﬀerence in what the volumes of the
nuclei should be and what they are. In future studies, a goal should be to create a ﬁner
geometry of the cell nucleus.
Bousis et al. also have an explanation for the diﬀerence between the MIRD cellular S-
values and MC calculated S-values as mentioned in Chapter 3. The authors explain this
diﬀerence by the neglect of δ-rays, which can escape the target and deposit their energy
outside it. As a result, it leads to an overestimation of 10-40% and this is consistent with the
result obtained in this thesis. Furthermore, the authors also state that the neglect of δ-rays
become more prominent the smaller the target size is as the δ-rays easier can escape the
target. This is also consistent with the results obtained. [22] As also mentioned in Chapter
3, Falzone et al. also explain the diﬀerence between cellular S-values calculated by MIRD
and their obtained S-values with the fact that straight trajectories and the neglect of energy
straggling are used in the cellular MIRD method. Furthermore, the authors also mentioned
the diﬀerent energy spectra used as a reason for the diﬀerence between the S-values. [3]
Moreover, Falzone et al.
mentioned the limitations of the cut-oﬀenergies in the MC
program PENELOPE. As the cut-oﬀenergy is 50 eV some of the energy is not transported
and this could lead to an overestimation of energy deposition within the ﬁrst nanometer of
the calculated point dose kernel. [3] This high energy cut-oﬀwas also a problem in EGSnrc
as the entire energy from the Auger electrons was deposited in the ﬁrst shell in the point
dose kernel. However, these problems have been eliminated in this thesis as the Auger energy
deposition has been made by ”hand” and thereby, the Auger electrons deposit their energy
51
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6.
Discussion
all the way out to their CSDA range. However, the shape of the electron energy deposition
has not been investigated and future studies should focus on the energy deposition of Auger
electrons which might have an inﬂuence on the S-value.
Some of the limitations concerning the calculation of S-values in this thesis include the
dose distribution from 64Cu in the cell nucleus. In this thesis, it is assumed that the dose
to the nucleus is homogeneous distributed inside the cell nucleus. However, Di Maria et al.
showed that the dose distribution inside the cell nucleus is not homogeneous and that it
aﬀects the absorbed dose given to the cell nucleus. The authors showed that the smaller
the energy from the source, the bigger the diﬀerence between the absorbed doses for the
homogeneous and nonhomogeneous distributions are, where the biggest diﬀerence was 98%.
[21] Therefore, distribution of dose could be of great importance for the S-value and in future
studies, this should be evaluated.
It is given that colon and lung cancer cells should receive 14 and 20 Gy, respectively, in order
to make the kill factor 10−4 meaning that of 104 cells, only one will survive. The cumulated
activity in order to do so can be seen in Table 5.2 along with the cumulated activity for the
MIRD cellular S-values. It can be observed that when using the MIRD calculated S-values
to calculate the cumulated activity, the activity is overestimated. However, for the largest
radii, the MIRD cumulated activity is underestimated. Both cases are a problem when used
in diagnostic and therapeutic nuclear medicine.
Aspergillus fumigatus hypha geometry
An AFH with the length of 10 µm and which had 1 decay per µm was simulated. It was
found that the S-value to the nucleus from the membrane was 4.32·10−2 Gy/(Bq·s per 10
µm) which is equal to 4.32·10−3 Gy/(Bq·s per µm). It does not make sense to compare the
S-value for the AFH with the cellular S-values from MIRD as the diﬀerence in geometry is
too great. However, it can be concluded that the geometry of the target and source has a
great inﬂuence on the calculated S-values. Furthermore, this also shows that it is possible
to calculate S-values for other geometries than just spheres and without GRF.
Aspergillus fumigatus has a D-value of 470 Gy and in order to get a survival rate of
1
104 ,
the mold should receive 1880 Gy. When 64Cu gives 4.32·10−3 Gy/(Bq·s), then the cumulated
activity should be:
1880 Gy
4.32 · 10−3 Gy/Bq s = 435185.19 Bq · s = 120.88 Bq · h
(6.1)
As 64Cu has a half-life of 12.01 hours, this accumulated activity is not unrealistic to give to
a patient. Furthermore, it is observed that the cumulated activity which should be given to
the AFH is much higher than the activities given to cell nuclei. This is due to the fact that
mold has simpler DNA so it is easier to repair and therefore, the dose given to them should
be higher. At this moment, it is unknown how big the surviving fraction should be in order
to gain a therapeutic eﬀect.
52
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 6.
Discussion
6.5
S-value calculations with CSDA limitations
In Figure 5.11a the point energy kernels with and without CSDA limitations were shown.
There was not much of a diﬀerence in the inner radii and this is due to the fact that the
same energy distributions for Auger electrons are used in both kernels as they could not be
simulated in EGSnrc. This is also visible in Figure 5.12b where it can be observed that the
absorbed doses are almost identical. If it was possible to simulate the deposited energy for
the Auger electron in EGSnrc and thereby force the CSDA approximation on the energy
deposition, then the point dose kernels would not have been identical.
After approximately 0.15 cm, the kernels diﬀer quite a lot and this is because of the
neglect of secondary electrons which shortens the range of the kernel. This does not have a
great eﬀect on the calculation of S-values as only a small part of the kernel is used. However,
this would be a limitation if the S-value for organs should be found.
The oﬃcial cellular S-values from MIRD along with the S-values from this work with and
without CSDA limitations are shown in Table 5.3 and visualized in Figure 5.13. As one of
the greatest critiques of the cellular method adopted by MIRD is based on the use of CSDA
and thereby the neglect of δ-rays and energy straggling, it was thought that the S-values
with CSDA limitations would be closer to the MIRD values than the S-values calculated
without the limitation. However, this was not the case and this might be due to the fact
that the deposited energy from the Auger electrons was the same in both cases. The reason
that there is a slight diﬀerence between the S-values calculated in this thesis is due to the
energy deposited by the β electrons which is slightly higher for the point dose kernel which
contains the CSDA. However, it is diﬃcult to conclude that it is the neglect of δ-rays and
energy-straggling that give the diﬀerence from the cellular MIRD S-values both with and
without CSDA limitations. The diﬀerence might be caused by the diﬀerence in the energy
spectrum as described by Falzone et al..
6.6
New approach to calculate S-values
As of this moment, it has not been possible to ﬁnd other studies which use the same method
for the calculation of S-values as done in this thesis.
Firstly, there is the construction
of the point energy kernel, where each energy contribution to the energy spectrum was
simulated and then weighted by the respective intensity and added. Furthermore, it was
found important that there was normalization after the simulation in EGSnrc so the correct
amount of energy could be deposited in the medium. This new approach to calculate point
dose kernels was validated when comparing the point dose kernel with the result from Tse et
al.
Furthermore, the calculation of S-values using convolution has not been found in other
studies. Typically, other studies use Equation 3.2. However, it has been proven that the
method used to calculate S-values (convolution) in this thesis can reproduce the cellular
S-values given by MIRD inside a given diﬀerence also reported by other studies who have
used MC programs to calculate the point dose kernel. However, whether this method or the
cellular MIRD method is the best for calculating S-values is unknown as it is not possible
53
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6.
Discussion
to validate the S-values and the conclusion must await radiobiological measurements. This
method is superior at one point, as it does not contain limitations regarding geometry and
can be extended to any geometry where the only limitation is the precision by which the
geometry can be described. This was proven by calculating the S-value for the AFH geometry
as the estimated S-value calculated in this thesis is the only existing one.
Furthermore, the reason for calculating S-values for 64Cu is based on the future prospects
of using it for internal radiation therapy both in the treatment and diagnosis of NETs and IA.
As the use of 64Cu is increased and as internal radiation therapy should deliver predictable
and deﬁned radiation doses, it is of great importance that the absorbed dose is as precise
as possible. This thesis has hopefully come one step closer to the optimal treatment as the
S-values for cell nuclei might be lower than the ones reported by MIRD. Furthermore, never
have a cylinder geometry been made, which represents the AFH and a more precise estimate
of dose can now be evaluated. However, the need for a thorough estimation of deposited
energy by the Auger branches is important in order to evaluate a precise absorbed dose and
this should be a goal for the future.
6.7
Future studies
In future studies, the limitations of this thesis should be addressed. Firstly, the choice of
software should be considered because of the high cut-oﬀenergies as well as the simulation
method for electrons and positrons. As the MC program PENELOPE oﬀers a cut-oﬀenergy
of 50 eV, which is much lower than 1 keV in EGSnrc, this might be an improvement.
Furthermore, PENELOPE also oﬀers event-by-event simulation for electrons and positrons,
which might have an inﬂuence on energy deposition.
Moreover, the lack of conclusive data for the spectrum of 64Cu was highlighted in this
thesis. Therefore, one should validate the spectrum of 64Cu and use it in the simulations.
Furthermore, the photons emitted by 64Cu should be included in the point dose kernel as the
X-rays might have an inﬂuence on the point dose kernel in the ﬁrst µm. Another limitation
in this thesis was the simulation of positrons as electrons and in the future, one should ﬁnd
a way to remove the annihilation energies in the point energy kernel which is possible to
do in EGSnrc but due to time restrictions, this was not obtained. The deposition of energy
from the Auger electrons should also be investigated as their energy deposition in this thesis
simply was a square function.
The geometries used in this thesis should also be addressed.
In future studies, the
geometry should be made ﬁner and less boxy as this might inﬂuence the calculated S-values.
Furthermore, as cell geometries typically are not spheres, S-values with diﬀerent geometries,
e.g.
an ellipsoid, should be calculated and investigated to ﬁnd if this has an inﬂuence.
Furthermore, also the distribution of dose inside the cell nucleus should be evaluated and it
should be investigated if this also aﬀects the S-values as reported by Di Maria et al.. Lastly,
the calculation of S-values have been limited to a single cell nucleus model and in the future,
the dose contribution from neighboring cells should be addressed.
54
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In the future, 64Cu might be used in internal radiation therapy which should deliver precise
and predictable radiation doses. In addition to other studies, whose focus has been on MC
calculated point dose kernels, this thesis investigated a potential new method for the calcu-
lation of S-values with MC calculated point energy kernels, which can be extended to any
geometry.
Firstly, during the review of the cellular method adopted by MIRD, it was concluded that
it contains limitations in regards to the geometry of the target and source, the distribution
of radioactivity and the use of the CSDA, which neglects δ-rays, angular deﬂections, and
straggling eﬀects. Furthermore, it was also concluded that the geometry of the cell and the
nuclei had an inﬂuence on the calculated S-values.
Secondly, it could be concluded that EGSnrc provides correct output, however, it contains
limitations in regard to the simulation of electrons, energy cut-oﬀand the possibility to re-
move annihilation photons.
A new way of calculating deposited energy from a spectrum was investigated in this thesis
by simulating each energy in the β spectrum of 64Cu. During this process, it was found that
the energy spectrum from RADAR and NUDAT was not consistent. Furthermore, the point
energy kernel was used to calculate the point dose kernel and it could be concluded that this
new method provides similar point dose kernels as the ones reported by Tse et al. and the
new method was validated.
Furthermore, a new approach to calculate S-values by using convolution between an activity
matrix and an absorbed dose distribution matrix was also presented in this thesis. It could
be concluded that the method could reproduce S-values, which were in agreement with the
ones reported by MIRD, however, with diﬀerences in the same range reported by other stud-
ies, which have used MC simulations.
55
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 7.
Conclusion
In order to investigate the inﬂuence of the CSDA on S-values, a point energy kernel was
constructed, which included this limitation. This was used to calculate the S-values once
more and it showed that there was not a great diﬀerence between the S-values with and
without this limitation. Therefore, it was not possible to conclude if it is the neglect of
δ-rays, angular deﬂections and straggling eﬀects which cause the diﬀerence between MIRD
and MC calculated S-values.
Moreover, this new approach to calculate S-values was extended to include other geometries
than just spheres. The geometry represented an AFH and is the ﬁrst-ever estimate of a
S-value for the mold.
As 64Cu has future prospects in internal radiation therapy, the results of this thesis present
a new approach to the calculation of potentially more precise S-values as it is not limited by
geometry or the CSDA. However, future studies should investigate the energy deposition of
Auger electrons and nonhomogeneous distributions of radioactivity inside the cells.
56
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 8
Bibliography
[1] Danish cancer society.
https://www.cancer.dk/neuroendokrine-tumorer-net/net-
statistik/. Accessed: 2019-03-06.
[2] Andreas Klaus Pfeifer et al. Clinical pet of neuroendocrine tumors using 64cu-dotatate:
First-in-humans study. Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 53(8):1207–1215, 2012.
[3] Nadia Falzone et al.
Monte carlo evaluation of auger electron-emitting theranostic
radionuclides. Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 56(9):1441–1446, 2015.
[4] Genna Davies et al.
Towards translational immunopet/mr imaging of invasive pul-
monary aspergillosis: The humanised monoclonal antibody jf5 detects aspergillus lung
infections in vivo. Theranostics, 7(14):3398–3414, 2017.
[5] Mattia Siragusa et al.
The cooler code:
A novel analytical approach to calculate
subcellular energy deposition by internal electron emitters. Radiation Research Society,
188(2):204–220, 2017.
[6] Laura Evangelista et al. New issues for copper-64: from precursor to innovative pet
tracers in clinical oncology. Current Radiopharmaceuticals, 6(3):117–123, 2013.
[7] Andreas Klaus Pfeifer et al. 64cu-dotatate pet for neuroendocrine tumors: a prospective
head-to-head comparison with 111in-dtpa-octreotide in 112 patients. Journal of Nuclear
Medicine, 56(6):847–854, 2015.
[8] Nudat.
https://www.nndc.bnl.gov/nudat2/decaysearchdirect.jsp?nuc=64CU&unc=nds.
Accessed: 2019-02-05.
[9] B. Q. Lee et al. Atomic radiations in the decay of medical radioisotopes: A physics
perspective. Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine, 2012(651475), 2012.
[10] Franz Buchegger et al.
Auger radiation targeted into dna: A therapy perspective.
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 33(11):1352–1363, 2006.
[11] Erwin B. Podgorsak. Radiation Physics for Medical Physicists. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2010. ISBN: 978-3-642-00874-0.
57
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 8.
Bibliography
[12] Herman Cember. Introduction to Health Physics. The McGraw-Hill Companies, 4. edition,
2009. ISBN: 978-0-07-142308-3.
[13] Data from radar. https://www.doseinfo-radar.com/RADARDecay.html. Accessed: 2019-
02-05.
[14] Data from estar nist. https://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/Star/e_table.pl. Accessed:
2019-05-11.
[15] Dayton D. McMillan et al. Validation of 64cu-atsm damaging dna via high-let auger
electron emission. Journal of radiation research, 56(5):784–791, 2015.
[16] Brian J. McParland. Nuclear medicine radiation dosimetry: advanced theoretical principles.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2010. ISBN: 978-1-84882-125-5.
[17] F. Botta et al. Calculation of electron and isotopes dose point kernels with ﬂuka monte
carlo code for dosimetry in nuclear medicine therapy. Medical Physics, 38(7), 2011.
[18] Seymor S. Block. Disinfection, Sterilization and Preservation. Lea & Febigrt, 2. edition,
1977. ISBN: 0-8121-0544-3.
[19] N. A. P. Franken et al. Cell survival and radiosensitisation: Modulation of the linear
and quadratic parameters of the lq model (review).
International Journal of Oncology,
42(5):1501–1515, 2013.
[20] S.M. Goddu. MIRD Cellular S. Values: Self-absorbed Dose Per Unit Cumulated Activity for
Selected Radionuclides and Monoenergetic Electron and Alpha Particle Emitters Incorporated
Into Diﬀerent Cell Compartments.
A publication of the Society of Nuclear Medicine.
Society of Nuclear Medicine, 1997.
[21] S. Di Maria et al. Monte carlo dose distribution calculation at nuclear level for auger-
emitting radionuclide energies. Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 135:72–77, 2018.
[22] Christos Bousis et al.
Calculations of absorbed fractions in small water spheres for
low-energy monoenergetic electrons and the auger-emitting radionuclides 123I and 125I.
International Journal of Radiation Biology, 88(12):916–921, 2012.
[23] I. Kawrakow, E. Mainegra-Hing, D. W. O. Rogers, F. Tessier, and B. R. B. Walters.
The EGSnrc code system: Monte Carlo simulation of electron and photon transport.
Technical Report PIRS-701, National Research Council Canada, 2017.
[24] Anne Birgitte Hoegh Dohrmann and Stine Justsen. Assessment of tissue doses for skin
cancer treated with low energy x-rays, 2016.
[25] Cavity application in egsnrc. https://nrc-cnrc.github.io/EGSnrc/doc/pirs898/cavity.
html. Accessed: 2019-05-20.
[26] Density of soft tissue.
https://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/Star/compos.pl?261.
Ac-
cessed: 2019-05-27.
58
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 8.
Bibliography
[27] Picture to visualize convolution.
https://towardsdatascience.com/a-comprehensive-
introduction-to-different-types-of-convolutions-in-deep-learning-669281e58215.
Accessed: 2019-05-16.
[28] Jason Tse et al. Calculations of dose point kernels of cu-64 in diﬀerent media with
penelope monte carlo code. Medical Physics, 46(5):2422–2429, 2019.
[29] Nadia Falzone et al. Absorbed dose evaluation of auger electron-emitting radionuclides:
Impact of input decay spectra on dose point kernels and s-values. Physics in Medicine
and Biology, 62(6):2239–2253, 2017.
59
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Data from NUDAT and RADAR
Data from RADAR [13]
RADAR
Mean energy
(MeV)
Intensity
(%)
Energy contribution
(MeV)
0,0163
3,54E-02
5,77E-04
0,0490
3,95E-02
1,94E-03
0,0816
4,36E-02
3,56E-03
0,1143
4,63E-02
5,29E-03
0,1469
4,76E-02
6,99E-03
0,1796
4,75E-02
8,53E-03
0,2122
4,63E-02
9,82E-03
0,2449
4,39E-02
1,08E-02
0,2775
4,06E-02
1,13E-02
0,3101
3,66E-02
1,13E-02
0,3428
3,20E-02
1,10E-02
0,3754
2,70E-02
1,01E-02
0,4081
2,18E-02
8,90E-03
0,4407
1,66E-02
7,32E-03
0,4734
1,18E-02
5,59E-03
0,5060
7,55E-03
3,82E-03
0,5387
4,11E-03
2,21E-03
0,5713
1,96E-03
1,12E-03
0,6040
7,36E-04
4,45E-04
0,6366
1,22E-04
7,77E-05
Total Energy (MeV)
1,21E-01
60
==PAGE:72==
Appendix A. Data from NUDAT and RADAR
Data from NUDAT [8]
NUDAT
Decay
Mean energy
(MeV)
Intensity
(%)
Energy contribution
(MeV)
β+
0.27821
17.60
0.0490
β−
0.19070
38.5
0.0734
Auger K
0.00084
57.7
0.00147
Auger L
0.00654
22.51
0.000485
Total energy (MeV)
0.1243
61
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B
CSDA Ranges
Energy (MeV)
CSDA range (g/cm2)
0.6366
0.2452
0.6040
0.2285
0.5713
0.2120
0.5387
0.1957
0.5060
0.1795
0.4734
0.1636
0.4407
0.1636
0.4081
0.1479
0.3754
0.1326
0.3428
0.1175
0.3101
0.1028
0.2775
0.0885
0.2449
0.0748
0.2122
0.0617
0.1796
0.0493
0.1469
0.0378
0.1143
0.0272
0.0816
0.0179
0.0490
0.0101
0.0163
4.1699e-3
0.00654
0.5963e-3
0.00084
0.1213e-3
62
==PAGE:74==
Appendix C
Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for
0.6366 MeV
Input ﬁle to EGSnrc to calculate point energy kernel for 0.6366 MeV
1
################################
2
#
3
# Simple dose kernel
4
#
5
################################
6
7
################################
8
### RUN CONTROL
9
################################
10
11
:start run control:
12
ncase = 1e6
13
:stop run control:
14
15
16
################################
17
### GEOMETRY
18
################################
19
20
#Make concentric spheres
21
:start geometry definition:
22
:start geometry:
23
name
= my spheres
24
library
= egs spheres
25
midpoint = 0 0 0
26
radii = 0.00612888622546145 0.0122577724509229
0.0183866586763843
27
0.0245155449018458
0.0306444311273072
0.0367733173527687
28
0.0429022035782301
0.0490310898036916
0.0551599760291530
29
0.0612888622546145
0.0674177484800759
0.0735466347055374
30
0.0796755209309988
0.0858044071564603
0.0919332933819217
31
0.0980621796073831
0.104191065832845
0.110319952058306
32
0.116448838283767
0.122577724509229
0.128706610734690
33
0.134835496960152
0.140964383185613
0.147093269411075
34
0.153222155636536
0.159351041861998
0.165479928087459
35
0.171608814312921
0.177737700538382
0.183866586763843
36
0.189995472989305
0.196124359214766
0.202253245440228
37
0.208382131665689
0.214511017891151
0.220639904116612
38
0.226768790342073
0.232897676567535
0.239026562792996
39
0.245155449018458
0.251284335243919
0.257413221469381
40
0.263542107694842
0.269670993920304
0.275799880145765
41
0.281928766371227
0.288057652596688
0.294186538822149
63
==PAGE:75==
Appendix C. Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
42
0.300315425047611
0.306444311273072
0.312573197498534
43
0.318702083723995
0.324830969949457
0.330959856174918
44
0.337088742400380
0.343217628625841
0.349346514851302
45
0.355475401076764
0.361604287302225
0.367733173527687
46
:start media input:
47
media = water
48
:stop media input:
49
:stop geometry:
50
51
simulation geometry = my spheres
52
53
:stop geometry definition:
54
55
56
57
################################
58
### MEDIA
59
################################
60
61
:start media definition: # Only 1 media definition block allowed
62
Defining media in the input file like this is called "pegsless" mode
63
### Cutoff energies, in MeV
64
ae = 0.521 # lowest energy for electrons (kinetic+0.511)
65
ap = 0.01 # lowest energy for photons (kinetic)
66
ue = 50.511 # maximum energy for electrons (kinetic+0.511)
67
up = 50 # maximum energy for photons (kinetic)
68
69
### Water
70
:start water:
71
density correction file = water icru90
72
:stop water:
73
74
75
:stop media definition:
76
77
78
################################
79
### SOURCE
80
################################
81
82
# Isotropic point source of 1 MeV, 0 cm from the origin of the z-axis
83
84
:start source definition:
85
:start source:
86
library
= egs point source
87
name
= my source
88
position
= 0 0 0
89
:start spectrum:
90
type
= monoenergetic
91
energy
= 0.6366
92
:stop spectrum:
93
charge
= -1
94
:stop source:
95
96
97
simulation source = my source
98
99
:stop source definition:
100
101
102
103
################################
104
### AUSGAB OBJECTS
105
################################
106
107
:start ausgab object definition:
108
109
### Particle tracks
110
:start ausgab object:
64
==PAGE:76==
Appendix C. Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
111
library = egs track scoring
112
name = tracker
113
score electrons = yes
114
score positrons = yes
115
score photons = yes
116
:stop ausgab object:
117
118
119
:start ausgab object: # Dose scoring
120
name
= my dose
121
library
= egs dose scoring
122
medium dose
= no
123
region dose
= yes
124
dose regions = 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
125
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
126
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
127
57
58
59# list of individual region numbers
128
:stop ausgab object:
129
130
:stop ausgab object definition:
131
132
133
################################
134
### SCORING OBJECTS
135
################################
136
137
:start scoring options:
138
139
calculation type = Dose
140
141
:start calculation geometry:
142
geometry name
= my spheres
143
cavity regions = 1
144
cavity mass
= 9.5078e-07
145
:stop calculation geometry:
146
147
148
:stop scoring options:
65
==PAGE:77==
Appendix C. Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
Output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
1
2
================================================================================
3
EGSnrc version 4 for linux64
Wed May
1 10:30:40 2019
4
================================================================================
5
6
*************************************************
7
*
*
8
*
cavity
*
9
*
*
10
*************************************************
11
12
This is Cavity Application
based on
13
EGS AdvancedApplication
14
15
In initCrossSections(): spin effects = 1
16
===> Photonuclear flag:
0
17
RAYLEIGH OPTION REQUESTED FOR MEDIUM NUMBER
1
18
19
PEGSLESS INPUT.
CALCULATING ELECTRON CROSS-SECTIONS.
20
21
Medium data:
22
23
AE =
5.21000E-01 MeV,
UE =
5.05110E+01 MeV
24
AP =
1.00000E-02 MeV,
UP =
5.00000E+01 MeV
25
26
No material data file supplied.
Material data obtained from
27
.egsinp file or density correction file.
28
29
Medium: water
30
Sterncid: water
31
rho:
9.98000E-01 g/cmˆ3
32
Elements: H
O
33
rhoz:
1.11894E-01
8.88106E-01
34
pz:
1.11009E-01
5.55087E-02
35
iunrst:
0
36
iaprim:
0
37
gasp:
0.00000E+00 atm.
38
density correction file: /home/s134657/EGSnrc/EGSnrc/HEN HOUSE/pegs4/density corrections/
39
compounds/water icru90.density
40
41
42
(Re)-initializing photon cross sections with files from the series: xcom
43
44
Compton cross sections: default
45
Using Compton cross sections from /home/s134657/EGSnrc/EGSnrc/HEN HOUSE/data/
46
compton sigma.data
47
Working on medium
1 ...
48
->
100 atomic ff values computed!
49
preparing data for Rayleigh sampling ... done
50
51
OK
52
53
Reading screened Rutherford MS data ...............
done
54
55
56
Reading spin data base from /home/s134657/EGSnrc/EGSnrc/HEN HOUSE/data/spinms.data
57
EGSnrc spin data, version 2.0
58
Data generated on a machine with 1234 endianess
59
The endianess of this CPU is 1234
60
Ranges:
1.00
100.00
0.30054
1.00000
61
62
63
medium
1 .....................
done
64
66
==PAGE:78==
Appendix C. Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
65
Medium
1
sige =
6.4180426353620703
6.1988540880358496
monotone =
F F
66
67
Initializing tmxs for estepe =
0.25000000000000000
and ximax =
0.50000000000000000
68
69
70
Bound Compton scattering requested, reading data ......
Done
71
72
Initializing Bound Compton scattering ......
73
Medium
1 has
5 shells:
74
1
1
1
0.19999 0.116E+03
0.014
75
2
17
1
0.20000 0.155E+02
0.543
76
3
18
2
0.20000 0.793E+02
0.024
77
4
19
3
0.20000 0.479E+02
0.014
78
5
20
4
0.20000 0.479E+02
0.014
79
...... Done.
80
81
Output from subroutine EDGSET:
82
==============================
83
Atomic relaxations requested!
84
85
Reading simplified photo-absorption data ..... Done
86
87
Reading simplified relaxation data ..... Done
88
89
Reading parametrized XCOM photo cross section data ..... Done
90
91
Reading EADL relaxation data ......
92
Z =
1 has
1 shells
93
Z =
8 has
4 shells
94
...... Done.
95
96
EGSnrc SUCCESSFULLY 'HATCHED' FOR ONE MEDIUM.
97
98
99
The following media are defined:
100
================================
101
102
0
water
AE= 0.5210 AP= 0.0100 0
103
104
105
Transport parameter and cross section options:
106
==============================================
107
Photon cross sections
xcom
108
Compton cross sections
default
109
Global Pcut
0.01
110
Pair cross sections
BH
111
Pair angular sampling
Simple
112
Triplet production
Off
113
Bound Compton scattering
norej
114
Radiative Compton corrections
Off
115
Rayleigh scattering
On
116
Atomic relaxations
On
117
Photoelectron angular sampling
On
118
Photonuclear attenuation
Off
119
Photonuclear cross sections
default
120
121
Global Ecut
0.521
122
Brems cross sections
BH
123
Brems angular sampling
KM
124
Spin effects
On
125
Electron Impact Ionization
Off
126
Global Smax
1e+10
127
ESTEPE
0.25
128
Ximax
0.5
129
Boundary crossing algorithm
Exact
130
Skin depth for BCA
3
131
Electron-step algorithm
EGSnrc
132
==============================================
67
==PAGE:79==
Appendix C. Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
133
134
135
136
======================== geometry =====================
137
type = EGS cSpheres
138
name = my spheres
139
number of regions = 60
140
midpoint of spheres = (0,0,0)
141
sphere radii = 0.00612889 0.0122578 0.0183867 0.0245155 0.0306444 0.0367733 0.0429022
142
0.0490311 0.05516 0.0612889 0.0674177 0.0735466 0.0796755 0.0858044 0.0919333 0.0980622
143
0.104191 0.11032 0.116449 0.122578 0.128707 0.134835 0.140964 0.147093 0.153222 0.159351
144
0.16548 0.171609 0.177738 0.183867 0.189995 0.196124 0.202253 0.208382 0.214511 0.22064
145
0.226769 0.232898 0.239027 0.245155 0.251284 0.257413 0.263542 0.269671 0.2758 0.281929
146
0.288058 0.294187 0.300315 0.306444 0.312573 0.318702 0.324831 0.33096 0.337089 0.343218
147
0.349347 0.355475 0.361604 0.367733
148
=======================================================
149
150
151
The simulation uses the following source:
152
=========================================
153
Point source with monoenergetic 0.6366 MeV, electrons
154
155
156
Random number generator:
157
============================================
158
type
= ranmar
159
high resolution
= no
160
initial seeds
= 33 97
161
numbers used so far = 0
162
163
164
The following ausgab objects are included in the simulation
165
===========================================================
166
167
168
Particle Track Scoring (tracker)
169
======================================================
170
- Scoring photon tracks
= YES
171
- Scoring electron tracks
= YES
172
- Scoring positron tracks
= YES
173
- First event to score
= 0
174
- Last event to score
= 1024
175
- Track buffer size
= 1024
176
- Output file name
= /home/s134657/EGSnrc/EGSnrc/egs home/cavity/
177
simple dosekernel.ptracks
178
179
180
*******************************************
181
Dose Scoring Object (my dose)
182
*******************************************
183
184
- Regions in dose calculator :60
185
186
187
--------------------------------------
188
medium
rho/[g/cm**3]
189
--------------------------------------
190
water
1.00
191
--------------------------------------
192
193
*******************************************
194
195
196
197
Variance reduction
198
====================================================
199
Photon splitting = off
200
Range rejection = off
201
68
==PAGE:80==
Appendix C. Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
202
=============================================
203
Calculation details
204
=============================================
205
Type = Dose
206
Calculation geometry: my spheres
207
======================== geometry =====================
208
type = EGS cSpheres
209
name = my spheres
210
number of regions = 60
211
midpoint of spheres = (0,0,0)
212
sphere radii = 0.00612889 0.0122578 0.0183867 0.0245155 0.0306444 0.0367733 0.0429022
213
0.0490311 0.05516 0.0612889 0.0674177 0.0735466 0.0796755 0.0858044 0.0919333 0.0980622
214
0.104191 0.11032 0.116449 0.122578 0.128707 0.134835 0.140964 0.147093 0.153222 0.159351
215
0.16548 0.171609 0.177738 0.183867 0.189995 0.196124 0.202253 0.208382 0.214511 0.22064
216
0.226769 0.232898 0.239027 0.245155 0.251284 0.257413 0.263542 0.269671 0.2758 0.281929
217
0.288058 0.294187 0.300315 0.306444 0.312573 0.318702 0.324831 0.33096 0.337089 0.343218
218
0.349347 0.355475 0.361604 0.367733
219
=======================================================
220
cavity region 1, medium = 0
221
=============================================
222
223
224
Starting simulation on Wed May
1 10:30:40 2019
225
226
Fresh simulation of 1000000 histories
227
228
229
230
Running 1000000 histories
231
232
Batch
CPU time
Result
Uncertainty(%)
233
==========================================================
234
1
397.87
1.93312e-06
0.07
235
236
237
*** Reached the requested uncertainty of 1%
238
=> terminating simulation.
239
240
finishBatch() loop termination
241
242
243
Finished simulation
244
245
Total cpu time for this run:
397.87 (sec.) 0.1105(hours)
246
Histories per hour:
9.04818e+06
247
Number of random numbers used:
5210024650
248
Number of electron CH steps:
2.1968e+08
249
Number of all electron steps:
4.67388e+08
250
251
252
last case = 1000000 fluence = 1e+06
253
254
Geometry
Cavity dose
255
-----------------------------------------------
256
my spheres
1.933125e-06 +/- 0.06965
%
257
258
259
260
Particle Track Scoring (tracker)
261
======================================================
262
Total events scored:
1024
263
Total tracks scored:
218733
264
Still being scored:
0
265
Output file name:
/home/s134657/EGSnrc/EGSnrc/egs home/cavity
266
/simple dosekernel.ptracks
267
268
269
======================================================
270
Dose Scoring Object(my dose)
69
==PAGE:81==
Appendix C. Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
271
======================================================
272
=> last case = 1000000 fluence = 1e+06
273
274
275
==> Summary of region dosimetry (per particle)
276
ir medium
rho/[g/cm3]
V/cm3
Edep/[MeV]
D/[Gy]
277
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
278
0 water
0.998
1.0000 1.1024e-02 +/- 0.055
% 1.7696e-12 +/- 0.055
%
279
1 water
0.998
1.0000 1.1637e-02 +/- 0.070
% 1.8679e-12 +/- 0.070
%
280
2 water
0.998
1.0000 1.1973e-02 +/- 0.075
% 1.9219e-12 +/- 0.075
%
281
3 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2274e-02 +/- 0.078
% 1.9702e-12 +/- 0.078
%
282
4 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2572e-02 +/- 0.082
% 2.0181e-12 +/- 0.082
%
283
5 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2893e-02 +/- 0.085
% 2.0696e-12 +/- 0.085
%
284
6 water
0.998
1.0000 1.3235e-02 +/- 0.088
% 2.1245e-12 +/- 0.088
%
285
7 water
0.998
1.0000 1.3605e-02 +/- 0.091
% 2.1838e-12 +/- 0.091
%
286
8 water
0.998
1.0000 1.4012e-02 +/- 0.094
% 2.2492e-12 +/- 0.094
%
287
9 water
0.998
1.0000 1.4452e-02 +/- 0.096
% 2.3199e-12 +/- 0.096
%
288
10 water
0.998
1.0000 1.4948e-02 +/- 0.099
% 2.3995e-12 +/- 0.099
%
289
11 water
0.998
1.0000 1.5492e-02 +/- 0.102
% 2.4868e-12 +/- 0.102
%
290
12 water
0.998
1.0000 1.6089e-02 +/- 0.105
% 2.5826e-12 +/- 0.105
%
291
13 water
0.998
1.0000 1.6754e-02 +/- 0.107
% 2.6894e-12 +/- 0.107
%
292
14 water
0.998
1.0000 1.7501e-02 +/- 0.109
% 2.8092e-12 +/- 0.109
%
293
15 water
0.998
1.0000 1.8269e-02 +/- 0.112
% 2.9326e-12 +/- 0.112
%
294
16 water
0.998
1.0000 1.9107e-02 +/- 0.114
% 3.0671e-12 +/- 0.114
%
295
17 water
0.998
1.0000 1.9965e-02 +/- 0.116
% 3.2047e-12 +/- 0.116
%
296
18 water
0.998
1.0000 2.0801e-02 +/- 0.117
% 3.3391e-12 +/- 0.117
%
297
19 water
0.998
1.0000 2.1641e-02 +/- 0.119
% 3.4739e-12 +/- 0.119
%
298
20 water
0.998
1.0000 2.2412e-02 +/- 0.120
% 3.5976e-12 +/- 0.120
%
299
21 water
0.998
1.0000 2.3109e-02 +/- 0.121
% 3.7095e-12 +/- 0.121
%
300
22 water
0.998
1.0000 2.3640e-02 +/- 0.123
% 3.7946e-12 +/- 0.123
%
301
23 water
0.998
1.0000 2.4015e-02 +/- 0.125
% 3.8550e-12 +/- 0.125
%
302
24 water
0.998
1.0000 2.4231e-02 +/- 0.128
% 3.8896e-12 +/- 0.128
%
303
25 water
0.998
1.0000 2.4175e-02 +/- 0.130
% 3.8807e-12 +/- 0.130
%
304
26 water
0.998
1.0000 2.3812e-02 +/- 0.134
% 3.8223e-12 +/- 0.134
%
305
27 water
0.998
1.0000 2.3103e-02 +/- 0.140
% 3.7085e-12 +/- 0.140
%
306
28 water
0.998
1.0000 2.2130e-02 +/- 0.146
% 3.5523e-12 +/- 0.146
%
307
29 water
0.998
1.0000 2.0814e-02 +/- 0.155
% 3.3410e-12 +/- 0.155
%
308
30 water
0.998
1.0000 1.9093e-02 +/- 0.165
% 3.0648e-12 +/- 0.165
%
309
31 water
0.998
1.0000 1.7120e-02 +/- 0.179
% 2.7481e-12 +/- 0.179
%
310
32 water
0.998
1.0000 1.4908e-02 +/- 0.197
% 2.3931e-12 +/- 0.197
%
311
33 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2513e-02 +/- 0.220
% 2.0085e-12 +/- 0.220
%
312
34 water
0.998
1.0000 1.0072e-02 +/- 0.250
% 1.6167e-12 +/- 0.250
%
313
35 water
0.998
1.0000 7.7802e-03 +/- 0.291
% 1.2489e-12 +/- 0.291
%
314
36 water
0.998
1.0000 5.5866e-03 +/- 0.348
% 8.9677e-13 +/- 0.348
%
315
37 water
0.998
1.0000 3.7328e-03 +/- 0.429
% 5.9920e-13 +/- 0.429
%
316
38 water
0.998
1.0000 2.2768e-03 +/- 0.553
% 3.6548e-13 +/- 0.553
%
317
39 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2275e-03 +/- 0.752
% 1.9703e-13 +/- 0.752
%
318
40 water
0.998
1.0000 5.7127e-04 +/- 1.097
% 9.1701e-14 +/- 1.097
%
319
41 water
0.998
1.0000 2.1724e-04 +/- 1.754
% 3.4871e-14 +/- 1.754
%
320
42 water
0.998
1.0000 5.9959e-05 +/- 3.235
% 9.6246e-15 +/- 3.235
%
321
43 water
0.998
1.0000 1.1335e-05 +/- 6.834
% 1.8195e-15 +/- 6.834
%
322
44 water
0.998
1.0000 2.1183e-06 +/- 12.487 % 3.4003e-16 +/- 12.487 %
323
45 water
0.998
1.0000 1.3298e-06 +/- 11.116 % 2.1345e-16 +/- 11.116 %
324
46 water
0.998
1.0000 1.4232e-06 +/- 12.628 % 2.2845e-16 +/- 12.628 %
325
47 water
0.998
1.0000 1.4793e-06 +/- 11.841 % 2.3745e-16 +/- 11.841 %
326
48 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2593e-06 +/- 11.801 % 2.0215e-16 +/- 11.801 %
327
49 water
0.998
1.0000 1.1269e-06 +/- 14.253 % 1.8090e-16 +/- 14.253 %
328
50 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2125e-06 +/- 16.174 % 1.9463e-16 +/- 16.174 %
329
51 water
0.998
1.0000 1.0057e-06 +/- 13.512 % 1.6143e-16 +/- 13.512 %
330
52 water
0.998
1.0000 1.1957e-06 +/- 12.204 % 1.9194e-16 +/- 12.204 %
331
53 water
0.998
1.0000 1.0355e-06 +/- 13.635 % 1.6622e-16 +/- 13.635 %
332
54 water
0.998
1.0000 1.0757e-06 +/- 12.794 % 1.7267e-16 +/- 12.794 %
333
55 water
0.998
1.0000 1.1431e-06 +/- 13.128 % 1.8348e-16 +/- 13.128 %
334
56 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2043e-06 +/- 12.929 % 1.9332e-16 +/- 12.929 %
335
57 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2956e-06 +/- 12.294 % 2.0797e-16 +/- 12.294 %
336
58 water
0.998
1.0000 1.2667e-06 +/- 14.161 % 2.0333e-16 +/- 14.161 %
337
59 water
0.998
1.0000 1.1197e-06 +/- 13.774 % 1.7974e-16 +/- 13.774 %
338
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
339
70
==PAGE:82==
Appendix C. Input and output ﬁle from EGSnrc for 0.6366 MeV
340
======================================================
341
342
343
================================================================================
344
Finished simulation
345
346
Elapsed time:
398.6 s (
0.111 h)
347
CPU time:
398.1 s (
0.111 h)
348
Ratio:
1.001
349
350
351
End of run
Wed May
1 10:37:18 2019
352
================================================================================
353
finishSimulation(cavity) 0
71
==PAGE:83==
Appendix D
MATLAB functions
Function to distribute point dose kernel in a 3D matrix
1
function [ cube matrix ] = FillSphere(radial vector)
2
%FillSpere fills radial vector values into the 3d cube matrix
3
%
size of the resultmatrix is (2*L+1)ˆ3 where L=length of radial vector
4
% february 2017 mikael jensen
5
6
% Create matrix
7
l=length(radial vector);
8
[X, Y, Z]=meshgrid(-l:1:l,-l:1:l,-l:1:l);
9
r matrix=sqrt(X.*X+Y.*Y+Z.*Z);
10
11
% Distribute point dose kernel in matrix
12
r ext=[radial vector,zeros(1,l)]; % makes PDK the same length as matrix
13
r vector=0:(length(r ext)-1); % create distance from origin vector
14
cube matrix=interp1(r vector,r ext,r matrix); % interpolate
15
end
Function to create a logical sphere representing a cell nucleus
1
function [ cube matrix ] = LogicalSphere(L,dx,radius)
2
%LogicalSphere fills 0 and 1 into the 3d cube matrix
3
%
size of the resultmatrix is (2*L+1)ˆ3
4
% april 2019 mikael jensen
5
6
% Create 3D matrix
7
[X, Y, Z]=meshgrid(-L:1:L,-L:1:L,-L:1:L);
8
r matrix=sqrt(X.*X+Y.*Y+Z.*Z);
9
10
% this r matrix will contain legths up to sqrt(3)*l
11
% calculate max L corresponding to radius
12
13
% Creating sphere with given radius
14
max L=(radius/dx)+0.02;
15
cube matrix=r matrix<max L;
16
end
72
==PAGE:84==
Appendix D. MATLAB functions
Function to create a cylinder representing a hypha
1
function [matrix] = make cylinder(dx,radius,height)
2
% dx, radius and height should be given in micrometer
3
4
% Number of elements in the matrix
5
L = height/dx + 10
6
7
% Creating the matrix
8
[X, Y, Z]=meshgrid(-L:1:L,-L:1:L,-L:1:L);
9
10
% Calculating distances from the origin of the matrix
11
r matrix=sqrt(X.*X+Y.*Y+Z.*Z);
12
13
% Creating a sphere where the plan in the middle of the sphere will be used
14
% to create a tube
15
max L=(radius/dx)+0.02;
16
cube matrix=r matrix<max L;
17
18
% Calculating the height of the tube
19
height elements = height/dx % How many elements the height should be
20
elements = size(cube matrix,3) % How many elements there are in the z axis
21
zero point = (elements/2) % Finds the zeropoint in the matrix
22
23
% Calculates the tube. If the z-plane is inside the given height of the
24
% tube, then the z-plan is filled with a slice containing a cicle. If the
25
% z-plane is outside the height, then the plan will be filled with zeroes.
26
for i = 1:elements
27
if i>zero point-(height elements/2) && i<zero point+(height elements/2)+1
28
matrix(:,:,i) = cube matrix(:,:,L);
29
else
30
matrix(:,:,i)=zeros(elements,elements);
31
end
32
end
33
% This gives a tube with a given radius and height
34
end
Function to sum all elements in a 3D matrix
1
function [ t ] = total( matrix )
2
%total sums all elements of a 3 d matrix
3
t=sum(sum(sum(matrix)));
4
end
73
==PAGE:85==
Appendix E
Simulations with CSDA limitations
Material ﬁle to create a new water media
1
MIXT
2
&INP NE=2,RHO=0.998,RHOZ=0.111894,0.888106, IUNRST = 2 &END
3
WATER
4
H
O
5
ENER
6
&INP AE=0.521,UE=20,AP=0.01,UP=20 &END
7
PWLF
8
&INP
&END
9
DECK
10
&INP
&END
Input ﬁle to EGSnrc to calculate point energy kernel for 0.6366 MeV with
CSDA limitations
1
################################
2
#
3
# Simple dose kernel
4
#
5
################################
6
7
################################
8
### RUN CONTROL
9
################################
10
11
:start run control:
12
ncase = 1e6
13
:stop run control:
14
15
16
################################
17
### GEOMETRY
18
################################
19
20
#Make concentric spheres
21
:start geometry definition:
22
:start geometry:
23
name
= my spheres
24
library
= egs spheres
25
midpoint = 0 0 0
74
==PAGE:86==
Appendix E. Simulations with CSDA limitations
26
radii = 0.00612888622546145 0.0122577724509229
0.0183866586763843
27
0.0245155449018458
0.0306444311273072
0.0367733173527687
28
0.0429022035782301
0.0490310898036916
0.0551599760291530
29
0.0612888622546145
0.0674177484800759
0.0735466347055374
30
0.0796755209309988
0.0858044071564603
0.0919332933819217
31
0.0980621796073831
0.104191065832845
0.110319952058306
32
0.116448838283767
0.122577724509229
0.128706610734690
33
0.134835496960152
0.140964383185613
0.147093269411075
34
0.153222155636536
0.159351041861998
0.165479928087459
35
0.171608814312921
0.177737700538382
0.183866586763843
36
0.189995472989305
0.196124359214766
0.202253245440228
37
0.208382131665689
0.214511017891151
0.220639904116612
38
0.226768790342073
0.232897676567535
0.239026562792996
39
0.245155449018458
0.251284335243919
0.257413221469381
40
0.263542107694842
0.269670993920304
0.275799880145765
41
0.281928766371227
0.288057652596688
0.294186538822149
42
0.300315425047611
0.306444311273072
0.312573197498534
43
0.318702083723995
0.324830969949457
0.330959856174918
44
0.337088742400380
0.343217628625841
0.349346514851302
45
0.355475401076764
0.361604287302225
0.367733173527687
46
:start media input:
47
media = WATER
48
:stop media input:
49
:stop geometry:
50
51
simulation geometry = my spheres
52
53
:stop geometry definition:
54
55
56
57
################################
58
### MEDIA
59
################################
60
61
62
63
################################
64
### SOURCE
65
################################
66
67
# Isotropic point source of 1 MeV, 0 cm from the origin of the z-axis
68
69
:start source definition:
70
:start source:
71
library
= egs point source
72
name
= my source
73
position
= 0 0 0
74
:start spectrum:
75
type
= monoenergetic
76
energy
= 0.6366
77
:stop spectrum:
78
charge
= -1
79
:stop source:
80
81
82
simulation source = my source
83
84
:stop source definition:
85
86
87
88
################################
89
### AUSGAB OBJECTS
90
################################
91
92
:start ausgab object definition:
93
94
### Particle tracks
75
==PAGE:87==
Appendix E. Simulations with CSDA limitations
95
:start ausgab object:
96
library = egs track scoring
97
name = tracker
98
score electrons = yes
99
score positrons = yes
100
score photons = yes
101
:stop ausgab object:
102
103
104
:start ausgab object: # Dose scoring
105
name
= my dose
106
library
= egs dose scoring
107
medium dose
= no
108
region dose
= yes
109
dose regions = 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
110
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
111
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
112
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59# list of individual region numbers
113
:stop ausgab object:
114
115
:stop ausgab object definition:
116
117
118
################################
119
### SCORING OBJECTS
120
################################
121
122
:start scoring options:
123
124
calculation type = Dose
125
126
:start calculation geometry:
127
geometry name
= my spheres
128
cavity regions = 1
129
cavity mass
= 9.5078e-07
130
:stop calculation geometry:
131
132
133
:stop scoring options:
76
