==PAGE:1==
A Review of the As-Built Information
Collection in Scandinavian AEC Projects
Master’s Thesis, June 2019
Louise Mouchard Jonsson
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Title:
A Review of the As-Built Information Collection
in Scandinavian AEC Projects
Project type:
Master’s Thesis
Credits:
32,5 ECTS
Language:
English
Project period:
7. January 2018 - 21. June 2018
Author:
Louise Mouchard Jonsson
Student number:
s172381
Field of study:
Civil Engineering
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Supervisor:
Christian Thuesen
Associate Professor, DTU
Department of Management Engineering
Co-supervisor:
Ergo Pikas
Postdoc, DTU
Department of Management Engineering
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Management Engineering at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark as partial fulﬁllment of the requirement for acquiring a degree of
Master of Science in Civil Engineering. The project was executed between the 7th of January
2019 to the 21st of June 2019 and is credited to 32,5 ECTS in combination with the oral defense.
I would ﬁrst like to thank my supervisors Christian Thuesen and Ergo Pikas for helping and
guiding me throughout the project. Furthermore, I would like to express my appreciation to all
the interviewees for their time and collaboration.
My gratitude also goes to my closest family and friends for great support and patient during
the previous months. Thank you for all the encouraging words and for dealing with me during
deadline periods.
Kgs. Lyngby June 21st, 2019
Louise Mouchard Jonsson
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
ABSTRACT
Facilities managers use an extensive amount of as-built information to effectively operate and
maintain a facility. A great part of these documents are collected and delivered by the contrac-
tor. Until now have the as-built information primarily been collected using manual processes
and thereafter delivered to the owner on a USB-stick. Before the facilities management (FM)
team can use the information for operations, it needs to be manually entered into their FM soft-
ware. This is known to be a time consuming and costly process. Consequently, it forces the
FM team to operate the building without full access to the asset information. Moreover, many
facilities management practitioners are experiencing issues with receiving incomplete or inac-
cessible as-built information. It is therefore important to ﬁnd efﬁcient methods for requiring,
collecting and updating this information. This master’s thesis aimed to investigate how the uti-
lization of BIM-based collection and delivery methods could improve the quality of the as-built
information deliverables.
The current processes of collecting and delivering as-built information, and its challenges were
examined by conducting a literature review followed by stakeholder interviews and a case study.
Thereafter were the theoretical and practical perspectives combined in a comparative analysis.
The study indicated that insufﬁcient delivery requirements from the owner is one reason be-
hind the varying quality of the as-built information. Two main methods for utilizing BIM-based
collection and delivery were identiﬁed. Both methods require the owner to formulate clear han-
dover requirements. In the ﬁrst method, the as-built information is saved as properties on the
BIM model. The second method links externally saved as-built information to the BIM model
objects. Hence, it is easier for the FM team to access and update the information. For owners
capable of formalizing sufﬁcient requirements, BIM-based collection methods are concluded to
have the potential to increase the quality of the as-built information and decrease the effort to
collect it.
iii
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents
PREFACE
i
ABSTRACT
iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vi
LIST OF FIGURES
vii
ABBREVIATIONS
viii
1
INTRODUCTION
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Structure of Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
METHODOLOGY
5
3
LITERATURE REVIEW
9
3.1
Facilities Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Facilities Management Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.2
Information Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Building Information Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.1
BIM Dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
Life-cycle BIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.3
Model Information Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.4
Model Element Identiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.5
BIM Standardization Efforts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
BIM for FM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.1
Implementation Areas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Challenges Identiﬁed in Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
v
==PAGE:10==
3.3.3
BIM-Enabled FM-Software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
As-Built Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.1
Manual Data Collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.2
Automated Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.3
Data Transferring Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.4
Delivery Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.5
Stakeholders Interest in As-Built Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
ANALYSIS
31
4.1
Stakeholder Interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
Interview A: General Contractor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.2
Interview B: Owner Organization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.3
Interview C: Software Developer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.4
Discussion and Main Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Case Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.2
Tønsberg Hospital Project, Norway
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.3
Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.4
Discussion and Main Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Comparative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3.1
The Requiring of As-Built Information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3.2
As-Built BIM Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.3
Manual Collection and Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.4
BIM-based Collection and Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.5
BIM for FM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
DISCUSSION
53
5.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
Further Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
CONCLUSION
57
6.1
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Bibliography
58
A APPENDIX A
69
A.1
Interview Guide for General Contractor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.2
Interview Guide for Developer & FM (Statsbygg Norway)
. . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.3
Interview Guide for FM Actor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.4
Interview Guide for Developer at Tønsberg
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
vi
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Basic Types of Case Study Research Designs (Yin, 2018). . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1
BIM Dimensions (Josseaux, 2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
BIM Applications Throughout a Building’s Life-Cycle (World Economic Fo-
rum, 2016) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Model Maturity Index by Fløisbonn et al. (2018) (translated by the author) . . .
16
3.4
Manual Collection of As-Built Information (Thabet and Lucas (2017b)) . . . .
22
3.5
Suggested Workﬂow for Data Reporting Format (Thabet and Lucas, 2017a) . .
23
4.1
Tønsberg Hospital (Link Arkitektur, 2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Multiparty Agreement at the Tønsberg Project (Aarseth, 2018) . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Digital Collaboration with VDI at Tønsberg Project (Aarseth, 2018) . . . . . .
41
4.4
Information Logistics at the Tønsberg Project (Aarseth, 2018)
. . . . . . . . .
42
vii
==PAGE:12==
ABBREVIATIONS
2D
Two Dimensional Geometric Model
3D
Three Dimensional Geometric Model
AEC
Architecture, Engineering and Construction
API
Application Programming Interface
BAS
Building Automation Systems
BIM
Building Information Modeling
BEP
BIM Execution Plan
bSI
buildingSMART International
bSN
buildingSMART Norway
CMMS
Computerized Maintenance Management Systems
COBie
Construction Operations Building Information Exchange
EDMS
Electronic Document Management Systems
EMIS
Energy Management Information Systems
FM
Facilities Management
GC
General Contractor
HVAC
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
ICT
Information and Communications Technology
IDM
Information Delivery Manual
IFC
Industry Foundation Classes
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
LOD
Level of Development
MMI
Model Maturity Index
MVD
Model View Deﬁnitions
O&M
Operations and Maintenance
PDS
Product Data Sheet
PDT
Product Data Templates
SPR
System and Product Register
SQL
Structured Query Language
TFM
Tverrfaglig Merkesystem (Interdisciplinary ID-system)
VDC
Virtual Design and Construction
VDI
Virtual Desktop Infrastructure
viii
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Background
As an owner of a facility or a portfolio of facilities, one of the main objectives is to manage and
operate the facilities as efﬁcient as possible. It is the facilities managers job to ensure that the
facilities are safe and well-functioning by proactively controlling, maintaining and coordinat-
ing its assets. To do so, the facilities manager uses a wide variety of facility information (Beck
et al., 2011) generated by the engineers, architects, and contractors. Consequently, it is impor-
tant to recognize what information is required, where it exists, and how it should be accessed
and collected for efﬁcient performance of the facility (Teicholz, 2013b, p.2).
Building information modeling (BIM) is a process considered beneﬁcial when planning, de-
signing and constructing facilities to meet the customers’ expectations. BIM models from ev-
ery involved design discipline are created during the design phase. By merging these into one
BIM model, it is possible to identify and solve any issues or collisions before they appear at
the site. The ﬁnal version of the BIM models represents the necessary solutions for meeting
the customers needs and functional requirements. These BIM models are typically a part of the
deliveries from the designer to the contractor who uses it as a tool for building what has been
designed. In a seamless world, the model would be updated with information about what has
been built and installed during construction. At the end of construction, the contractor would
deliver the updated digital representation of the project as a part of the as-built information de-
livery. The as-built BIM model would then be used for facilities management (FM) to support
operation and maintenance decisions. Consequently, the idea of a lifecycle BIM would become
reality.
Previous studies (Kassem et al., 2015; Cavka et al., 2017) describe the utilization of BIM in FM
as much less explored than for design and construction. One deﬁned barrier for the adoption of
BIM in FM is related to the owners’ inability to establish sufﬁcient as-built information require-
ments (Cavka et al., 2017; Becerik-Gerber et al., 2012; Teicholz, 2013b). As a consequence of
incomplete requirements, the contractor will not be fully aware of what as-built information to
1
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. INTRODUCTION
collect nor what collection method that will provide the best ﬂow of information. This could
be one reason for why as-built information and information often is unstructured, incomplete
or not reusable (Cavka et al., 2017). Sacks et al. (2018, p.148) indicates how the as-built infor-
mation, in most projects, is not updated to represent the as-built conditions nor delivered in a
manageable or accessible format. Consequently, will the FM team have to manually organize
and enter the as-built information into their FM systems (Cavka et al., 2017). This process can
take many months during which no FM data will be available for managing the facility (Sacks
et al., 2018, p.148). Borrmann et al. (2018, p.168) claim that an optimization of the collection
and delivery of as-built information can lead to cost and time savings as well as a signiﬁcant
reduction of data errors.
1.2
Problem Statement
Handing over structured and complete as-built information from design and construction to op-
eration is crucial for the efﬁcient performance of a facility. The contractor is responsible for
the collection and delivery of the as-built information while the owner is responsible for re-
quiring what information to collect, and how and when it should be delivered. If this is done
correctly, the facilities manager would immediately after ended construction be able to focus on
managing the facility instead of its building information. However, this does not seem to be the
reality as the facilities managers’ greatest challenge during the start-up phase is related to the
as-built information. According to a Danish questionnaire study executed by Rasmussen and
Due (2019), have 75 percent of the FM practitioners either received incomplete or inaccessible
as-built information or drawing material without any updates from the construction phase.
1.3
Research Objectives
In response to the problem statement, this research proposes to investigate and understand the
current processes and challenges related to the collection and delivery of as-built information.
Subsequently, it aims to examine if the utilization of BIM-based collection and delivery methods
can improve the quality of the delivered as-built information and induce the implementation of
BIM in FM.
1.4
Research Questions
• What is the state-of-the-art, main challenges, and obstacles of collecting and delivering
as-built information in the Scandinavian AEC industry?
2
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Structure of Thesis
• How could the delivery of as-built information be improved by BIM-based delivery meth-
ods?
• How does the current practices of collecting and delivery as-built information encour-
age/enable the use of BIM for FM?
• What set of guidelines in regards to as-built information should the owner take into con-
sideration?
1.5
Structure of Thesis
This thesis is divided into six main chapters: Introduction, Methodology, Literature Review,
Analysis, Discussion, and Conclusion.
The literature review is further divided into four sections. The ﬁrst section presents the gen-
eral information regarding facilities management, its practices and how information systems
are used during the operational phase. The second section aims to describe the basics of BIM
and how BIM can be used throughout the entire life-cycle of a facility. The third section com-
bines BIM and FM and explains how BIM can be implemented in FM. Moreover, it presents
the challenges related to the implementation. The last section describes how the as-built infor-
mation from construction is collected and delivered to the owner. The section also presents the
different stakeholders responsibilities and objective with the as-built information collection.
The analysis chapter is dived into three parts. In the ﬁrst section, stakeholder interviews are
conducted to obtain an understanding of the collection methods used in the Scandinavian AEC
industry. The second section includes a case study of Tønsberg Hospital Project to understand
how they are requiring, collecting and delivering as-built information. The last section is a
comparative analysis of the empirical ﬁndings and literature review on as-built data collection
requirements and delivery.
The ﬁfth chapter discusses the three main topics of this thesis based on the results from the
comparative analysis. Moreover, are the limitations of this thesis presented followed by rec-
ommendations for further research. The answers to the research questions are then highlighted
in the conclusion. The conclusion also presents a set of guidelines directed towards owners in
regards to requiring, collection and delivery of as-built information.
3
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1. INTRODUCTION
4
==PAGE:17==
2
METHODOLOGY
The purpose of this thesis is to obtain a good understanding of the processes and challenges
related to the collection and delivery of as-built information in the Scandinavian AEC industry.
Therefore, a qualitative research method has been used for gathering the information for analyz-
ing this subject. In a qualitative research, an interaction between the subject and the researcher
is necessary (Xuehong, 2002). The researcher obtains an understanding through in-depth con-
tacts with the information gathered from the subject with the objective to shorten the distance
between theory and practice (Xuehong, 2002). According to Macqueen et al. (2005) do quali-
tative research ”seeks to understand a given research problem or topic from the perspectives of
the local population it involves”. The following research methods have been used during the
execution of this project:
Literature Review
The work with this thesis begun with a literature review with the purpose to understand and
introduce the deﬁnitions, main concepts, and state-of-the-art related to BIM, FM and the deliv-
ery of as-built information. Since BIM is considered to be a constantly evolving technology in
the AEC industry, the literature review was conducted with the intention to review the most re-
cent studies, articles, papers, and books ﬁrst. As this thesis is focused on Scandinavian projects,
the intention was to have the greatest focus on literature connected or applicable to the Scan-
dinavian AEC industry. The ﬁndings from this process are stated in the literature review chapter.
Interviews
While performing qualitative research, interviews is one of the most common methods (Mac-
queen et al., 2005). It is considered to be optimal for collecting data based on personal per-
spectives and experiences (Macqueen et al., 2005). Hence, it was chosen as one of the main
methods in this thesis. Interviews with different stakeholders in the Scandinavian AEC industry
were conducted. The objective was to attain a wider understanding of the as-built information
collection, hence representatives from different actors were selected.
5
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. METHODOLOGY
The interviews were semi-structured with several key questions to ensure the main topics of
the interviews were covered. The semi-structure was chosen as it gives the interviewee the
chance to further elaborate on her/his thought (Gill et al., 2008). Consequently, theories and
viewpoints that may not have been previously thought of could be introduced (Gill et al., 2008).
Despite the interview guides, the interviewees were allowed discuss their processes and projects
from their perspectives. With the interviewees’ consent, the interviews were recorded and later
transcribed. To validate the ﬁndings, have the summaries of the interviews found in the analysis
chapter been approved by the interviewees before the publication of this thesis.
Case Study
To provide an in-depth understanding of the subject of this thesis, a case study was conducted.
A case study can be deﬁned as the study of a ”case” where the ”case” represents a speciﬁc situa-
tion, a phenomenon or an organization (Campbell, 2015). When conducting a case study, inter-
views, documents, and observations are the most frequently used sources of evidence (Camp-
bell, 2015). After completing the data collection, the data needs to be analyzed and validated.
There are various types of case study designs, the basic once are visualized in ﬁgure 2.1. For
this thesis, a holistic single-design is chosen. According to Yin (2018) is the holistic approach
advantageous when no logical subunits are identiﬁed, or when none of the subunits are within
(or a part of) the original single-case. A common misunderstanding is that a case study of an
individual case cannot contribute to scientiﬁc development as one cannot use it for generaliza-
tion (Flyvbjerg, 2006). According to Flyvbjerg (2006), ”it is incorrect to conclude that one
cannot generalize from a single case. It depends on the case one is speaking of and how it is
chosen”. Consequently, the selection of case to analyze is considered to be important. Denzin
and Lincoln (2000) state that ”how we learn from the singular case is related to the case is like
or unlike other cases”. Therefore, were the ﬁndings from the single-case study compared with
the ﬁndings from the stakeholder interviews in a comparative analysis.
For the case study, interviews and reviews of secondary documents were selected as data col-
lection methods. After the collection, the data was analyzed by creating verbatim transcripts of
the interviews and compare those with the writer’s ﬁeld notes and previous literature review. To
validate the data, the transcripts were returned to the interviewees for review and approval to
eliminate any misunderstandings.
6
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.1: Basic Types of Case Study Research Designs (Yin, 2018).
7
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. METHODOLOGY
8
==PAGE:21==
3
LITERATURE REVIEW
The objective of this chapter is to understand and describe the state of the art, general concepts,
and deﬁnitions associated with the collection of as-built information and its related concepts.
First, the deﬁnition and practices of facilities management are deﬁned. The second section cov-
ers the concepts and processes of Building Information Modeling. Furthermore describes the
third section the beneﬁts and challenges related to the implementation of BIM in FM. Lastly, the
processes of transferring as-built information from construction to operations are investigated.
3.1
Facilities Management
Facility management can be deﬁnes as ”a profession that encompasses multiple disciplines to
ensure functionality, comfort, safety, and efﬁciency of the built environment by integrating peo-
ple, place, process and technology” (International Facility Management Association, 2019).
The term facility management is mainly used in the USA while the term facilities manage-
ment is more common in Europe. Despite the spelling, the two terms are synonyms and use
FM as an abbreviation. FM can be seen as a support function to an organization that enables
the organization to focus on its core business (Jensen, 2008a). The supporting services vary
depending on the size and type of organization and range from: real estate and ﬁnancial man-
agement, space management, sustainability management, operations and maintenance (O&M),
safety and emergency management, and technology management (Cotts et al., 2010; Jensen,
2008a). Jensen (2008a) divides the FM related tasks into three different levels: strategic, tac-
tical and operational. The author describes the strategical FM tasks as long-term policies and
objectives for the development of a portfolio of properties and their support functions. FM tasks
performed to fulﬁll the objectives can be deﬁned as tactical tasks and involves planning of nec-
essary changes of the property and/or its supporting functions (Jensen, 2008a). The operational
FM tasks are according to the author related to the everyday management and operation of the
property and its supporting functions. These tasks can be outsourced to an external provider
who has access to a more adjustable workforce and higher-quality skilled personnel. By out-
sourcing some of the FM functions, the organization is able to focus on its primary activities
(Cotts et al., 2010).
9
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
The work of the FM personnel is perhaps most commonly associated with the O&M phase,
nonetheless, previous research (Liu and Issa, 2016; Mohammed and A Hassanain, 2010; Meng,
2013) recognizes potential of involving FM specialists already in the programming and design
phase. By integrating FM expertise in the design team, the functionality, sustainability, and
maintainability of the building will signiﬁcantly increase (Mohammed and A Hassanain, 2010).
According to Jensen (2008b) is the transferring of experience from previous projects the most
important FM speciﬁc task in the programming/design phase as their experiences will help to
avoid previous issues and mistakes from being repeated. A commonly used approach for im-
plementing FM expertise in the design team is to directly integrate a facilities manager in the
design process (Jensen, 2008b). For this involvement to be efﬁcient, it is important for the
facilities manager to have an insight into the design process, and posses a theoretical and ab-
stract educational background rather than a practical education (Jensen, 2008b). Jensen (2008b)
recommends involving the project’s future facility manager as he/she can inﬂuence the design
decisions based on his/her knowledge about the owner’s and end users’ needs and requirements.
By involving FM expertise in the design phase, the time, as well as money spent on FM, will
be reduced (Mohammed and A Hassanain, 2010). Cost related to the FM represents more than
85 percent of the life-cycle cost (Teicholz, 2004), thus it could be in owners interest to reduce
these costs.
3.1.1
Facilities Management Practices
Building Operations, Maintenance & Repair Management
Facilities management activities mainly fall into two main categories: facility maintenance and
facility operations (Liu and Issa, 2016). The facility operations activities are related to the rou-
tine, everyday support, use and maintenance of a facility or physical asset. It involves task
such as: custodial services and cleaning, minor repair and maintenance work, ﬁre protection
services, snow removal, landscaping, security services, and trash-removal (National Institute of
Building Sciences, 2017). The maintenance activities performed by the FM personnel can be
preventive (planned), predictive or corrective (repair) (Becerik-Gerber et al., 2012). Preventive
maintenance is mainly scheduled after the manufacturer’s recommended frequency (Cotts et al.,
2010) and performed while the equipment is still operating normally (Accelix, 2018). Conse-
quently, the equipment could be maintained without any need for it (Accelix, 2018). Predictive
maintenance is executed when an abnormal behavior of a physical asset is observed through
digital equipment monitoring or physical inspection, to prevent total failure to occur (Accelix,
2018). Both preventive and predictive maintenance are proactive activities that are performed
to minimize the risk of a breakdown or urgent damage (Accelix, 2018). Corrective maintenance
is a reactive activity performed to repair or replace a failed equipment (Swanson, 2001). Due to
poor planning and/or incomplete repair, is the cost for reactive maintenance typically three to
four times higher than a similar planned repair (Higgings et al., 2008).
10
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Facilities Management
Space Planning & Management
Space is a great cost for an organization (Cotts et al., 2010, p.117). Hence, it is essential to have
a strategy regarding the space that is supporting the strategic plans of the organization. Space
management is closely connected with property strategy (Jensen, 2008a, p.94) and involves
strategic activities such as allocation of space, space inventory, and space forecasting (Cotts
et al., 2010). During the forecasting of space, it is essential to ﬁrst identify any needs for
new/less/more space and then estimate necessary reallocation or disposal of underutilized space
(Cotts et al., 2010, p.117). Space management is also seen as tactical tasks with the objective
to plan and ensure the most efﬁcient use of the current space (Jensen, 2008b). Another central
space management task is to plan and execute internal or external moves/relocation of groups
of employees, departments, single persons, and/or furniture (Jensen, 2008a, p.111). Jensen
(2008a, p.111) encourage the planning of larger moves to be performed by space managers
with a thorough knowledge of the building as well as the organization and its processes.
Sustainability Management
In 2012, almost 40 percent of the overall energy consumption in Europe was being consumed
for the operation of buildings (Dimoudi and Zoras, 2016). The largest energy source in the
operation phase is the heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems (HVAC) which accounts
for 50 percent of a building’s total energy consumption (Costa et al., 2013). By monitoring and
managing the energy performance of a building, around 30 percent of the energy cost can be
saved (Cotts et al., 2010). Another activity performed to ensure and optimize energy efﬁciency
is building commissioning. Commissioning is a quality assurance process that is planned for in
the pre-design and design phase and executed through out the construction, handover and O&M
phase (Mills, 2010). The objectives with performing commissioning are to ensure the facility
is operating as intended and to prepare the FM staff for operating and maintaining the facility
and its systems (Mills, 2010). Sustainability management also involves improving the indoor
climate by controlling the daylight, air quality, and thermal comfort (Cotts et al., 2010).
Information Management
”When one considers the extensive documentation of information needed for effective mainte-
nance and operation of most facilities, it is clear that ﬁnding efﬁcient ways to collect, access
and update this information is very important” (Teicholz, 2013b, p.2). During the construction
phase, facility O&M documentation necessary to support efﬁcient FM is being collected by the
contractor. According to National Institute of Building Sciences (2017) should the documenta-
tion; (1) be required by the owner and (2) be accurate, and (3) be available in a timely fashion.
The documentation could be manuals of the installed systems and equipment with relevant as-
built drawings and should be available for the owner to review during the collection (National
Institute of Building Sciences, 2017). The O&M documentation is from now on referred to as
11
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
as-built information as it appears to be a more frequently used term. The processes related to
the collection and delivery of as-built information is further described in section 3.4.
3.1.2
Information Systems
It is important to select the most appropriate information system for FM, however, it is not suf-
ﬁcient for success (Teicholz, 2013a, p.4). Teicholz (2013a, p.4) points out the importance of
balancing the technology with the objectives of the organization to achieve a successful imple-
mentation of FM automation. Further, the author recommends the facility managers to obtain
an understanding regarding how technology potentially can impact the workplace. Before de-
ciding what to automate, the facility managers also needs to consider factors such as available
resources, type of organization, IT competency, and culture (Teicholz, 2013a).
There are various types of FM information systems for speciﬁc purposes and it is common to
use several different FM-system when operating a facility (coBuilder International, 2017). For
assisting preventive maintenance management, systems as Computerized Maintenance Manage-
ment Systems (CMMS) or/and Computer Aided Facility Management (CAFM) can be used.
CMMS provides the maintenance manager with information for performing condition-based
maintenance and historical information for developing preventive maintenance schedules. It
also enables the operators to report faults faster (Rastegari and Mobin, 2016). Electronic Doc-
ument Management Systems (EDMS) is another type of FM information systems. The main
function of EDMS is to store and maintain electronically created documents and to ensure these
are available upon request (Alshibly et al., 2016). An Energy Management Information Systems
(EMIS) gathers and analyses energy data which can be useful for the facilities manager when
benchmarking energy usage (Kini, 2011). The system should quickly identify any sudden devi-
ations from historical energy usage to achieve cost control (Kini, 2011). While EMIS monitors
the energy consumption, Building Automation Systems (BAS) achieves savings in energy and
reduces cost by automatically controlling the indoor environment’s conditions (Kastner et al.,
2005). BAS is especially efﬁcient for large and complex facilities such as hospitals, ofﬁce build-
ings and warehouses where the potential for optimization is greater (Kastner et al., 2005). When
implementing new information systems for FM, Teicholz (2013a, p.236) points out the neces-
sity for the facility manager to possess a proactive change management approach. Change can
be seen as a threat to the FM personnel, especially if the new technology requires the employees
to obtain a new set of skills (Teicholz, 2013a, p.237). Hence, it is important not to ignore peo-
ple or project processes during the technology-change as it will prevent full implementation.
Teicholz (2013a, p.237) explains how training and education of the personnel are especially
important because it provides knowledge regarding why things should be done in a certain way.
Furthermore, the author believes people are more likely to support an organizational change if
they understand why they are doing something.
12
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Building Information Modeling
3.2
Building Information Modeling
The following sections clarify the main concepts and deﬁnitions related to Building Information
Modeling (BIM). Furthermore, it describes how BIM could be beneﬁcially utilized throughout
the entire life-cycle of a facility.
Building information modeling can be deﬁned as a modeling technology with processes to
develop, communicate, coordinate, and analyze building information models (Eastman et al.,
2011). A BIM model is a virtual environment as a result of the building information mod-
eling processes. It visualizes the building’s geometry and spatial relationships, and contains
all necessary building data such as building element properties and quantities (Azhar, 2011).
BIM is considered to be a technology that potentially can increase productivity and quality, and
decrease project time and cost within the Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC)
industry (Azhar et al., 2008). Sacks et al. (2018, p.12) report about a study performed by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 2002 which indicated how inadequate
interoperability increases the construction cost with $6.12 per square foot and the O&M cost
$0.23 per square foot. This means that the loss of data and the lack of interoperability repre-
sent 12.4 percent of the total annual cost of building operations (Payant and O., 2014, p.29).
Nevertheless, Sacks et al. (2018, p.12) indicate that a comprehensive utilization of BIM and
BIM models throughout a facilities’ lifecycle has the potential to reduce the costs arising from
inefﬁcient interoperability of data.
3.2.1
BIM Dimensions
The initial function of BIM was to visualize the project in a 3D view. Now, BIM has expanded
to also include several subsets of functions often described as BIM dimensions (Kamardeen,
2010). Figure 3.1 visualizes how a BIM model could be utilized for various purposes which are
categorized in different n-D models. The concept of n-D models is ”based on the variety of in-
formation encompassed by a building information model” (Liu and Issa, 2016) and do currently
involve the following dimensions:
4D - BIM can be deﬁned as a 3D model with an added dimension of time. By linking a time
schedule to the BIM model, the planning of the construction is improved because the time and
space relationship of construction activities are visualized (Gledson and Greenwood, 2014).
Hence, 4D planning increases productivity and reduces costly rework (Dawood, 2010).
5D - BIM integrates cost data such as quantities and prices with the information in the 4D
model (Smith, 2014). Smith (2014) describes the cost-integration as valuable as it enables real-
time cost advice when exploring a range of design options and construction scenarios.
13
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
6D - BIM can be utilized by the FM team. The BIM model from the design phase is updated
with as-built information and geometrical changes from the construction phase and used for
FM activities such as energy analysis and control, localization of building resources and space
management (Nica and Wodyski, 2016). The use of BIM in FM further described in section 3.3.
7D - BIM models are developed by integrating sustainability components into the BIM model.
These models can be used by the designers to compare and choose design solutions based on
their carbon footprints (Kamardeen, 2010).
8D - BIM model is related to the planning and analyzing of building safety. Kamardeen (2010)
states that the designers’ ability to inﬂuence construction safety is by their decisions in the
design phase. Hence, he describes how the designers can conduct a risk assessment by imple-
menting a BIM model of their design in an accident Prevention-through-Design (PtD) system.
Figure 3.1: BIM Dimensions (Josseaux, 2018)
3.2.2
Life-cycle BIM
BIM and its associated processes have the potential to be utilized throughout the entire life-
cycle of a facility - from conceptual design through construction and O&M to the renovation
or termination (World Economic Forum, 2016, p.25). Figure 3.2 visualizes how BIM could
be adopted in each stage of a facility’s life-cycle and how it also enables easier collaboration
among all stakeholders (World Economic Forum, 2016, p.25). Normally, the initial step of a
building project is the execution of a conceptual design process, performed or ordered by the
owner. By developing conceptual BIM models with historical cost information and other esti-
mation information, the owner will have access to more reliable and accurate estimates to use
for ﬁnancial decisions and cash ﬂow scheduling (Sacks et al., 2018, p.143). When the concep-
tual design is approved, the ﬁeld data could be integrated into the BIM model which provides
the design team with information about the ground condition or existing facilities.
14
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Building Information Modeling
The current as-built conditions can be captured by laser scanning or photogrammetry technolo-
gies and later compiled into a point cloud ﬁle which can be used as a reference model (Sacks
et al., 2018, p.195). During the design phase, BIM is used for optimizing the design by perform-
ing various types of simulations and performance analysis, discipline coordination, and clash
detection. For project delivery types as integrated project delivery (IPD), the contractor is in-
volved in the design phase. The early involvement in addition to a close collaboration between
the designer and the contractor increases the chance of developing a BIM model suitable for
optimization of the construction process (Sacks et al., 2018, p.228).
Figure 3.2: BIM Applications Throughout a Building’s Life-Cycle (World Economic Forum, 2016)
According to Sacks et al. (2018, p.228), reduces a BIM model the risk of construction errors and
allows better-planned and coordinated building processes. Consequently, it has the potential
to save money and time during construction. More speciﬁcally do the authors describe how
savings can be made due to increased collaboration among the subcontractors as a consequence
of them utilizing BIM when planning their work. Another identiﬁed saving enabled by BIM is
the possibility for off-site prefabrication which reduces the construction time and increases the
accuracy. The utilization of BIM on site, such as providing the crew with hand-held devices
could decrease the risk of any crews working with old plans or drawings (Sacks et al., 2018,
p.229). The BIM model can also be used as a platform for transferring project information from
design and construction to the operational phase. A digital representation of what has been
built can be referred to as a digital twin which contains and visualizes all the necessary as-built
information (ComputerWorld, 2018). The operational phase is the longest phase in a facility’s
lifecycle, nevertheless, it is the latest phase to implement BIM for supporting its tasks (Sacks
et al., 2018, p.154).
15
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
3.2.3
Model Information Levels
Throughout the entire life-cycle of a project, there is a large amount of required information
(Mayo and Issa, 2014). Different information is required for different stakeholders and project
executions models at project milestones (Treldal et al., 2016). Hence, there are several methods
for deﬁning what information is required in a BIM model at different project phases. Level of
Development (LOD), level of detailing, level of deﬁnition and level of information are all com-
monly used concepts to deﬁne the requirements for BIM in the AEC industry (Treldal et al.,
2016). The BIM Handbook refers to the level of modeling as the level of development (Sacks
et al., 2018, p.33) which is an established standard to describe expectations from LOD100
through LOD400 (Mayo and Issa, 2014). When considering the purpose of LOD100-LOD400
for the end user, Mayo and Issa (2014) state that the intention is to satisfy the need of the con-
tractor. The LOD-system also includes LOD500 with the intention to also serve the owners’
purposes (Mayo and Issa, 2014). According to the LOD committee is LOD500 more about the
non-geometrical information than the graphical representations (Mayo and Issa, 2014).
In Denmark, cuneco classiﬁcation system released a concept called Information Levels in 2014.
It consists of seven different levels where level one represents the lowest level of required infor-
mation. The levels are not connected to any project phases as they rather describe the necessary
information and shape of an element (Cuneco, 2014). In Norway, a team with representatives
from three important AEC industry associations released a new concept at the end of 2018
(Fløisbonn et al., 2018). The team states how the Norwegian AEC industry is still using old
terms for working processes and deliveries which do not reﬂect the use of BIM processes.
Moreover, the team claims that the objects used in BIM models mainly are being copied di-
rectly from an object library rather than modeled from scratch. Therefore, their ambition has
been to create a common and more relevant language for the construction industry. Their work
resulted in a new concept called Model Maturity Index (MMI) with levels related to the actual
phases of a construction project as shown in ﬁgure 3.3 (Fløisbonn et al., 2018).
Figure 3.3: Model Maturity Index by Fløisbonn et al. (2018) (translated by the author)
16
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Building Information Modeling
3.2.4
Model Element Identiﬁcation
For the information in the BIM model to be useful throughout all phases of a project, is it rec-
ommended to have a common system for identifying the physical building components and its
related element in the BIM model (BuildingSMART, 2015). In 2017, Statsbygg in Norway
released their interdisciplinary identiﬁcation system ”Tverrfaglig Merkesystem” (TFM) neces-
sary for accomplishing optimized O&M (Statsbygg, 2017). The TFM-number system is an
interdisciplinary identiﬁcation and marking system which identiﬁes a component in regard to
location, system and product type. Each building component receives a unique TFM-number
that will remain the same through all the stages of a building’s lifecycle. By consistently using
these ID-numbers, Statsbygg’s idea is to make referencing between different types of documents
easier. The TFM-number consists of three parts where the ﬁrst part represents the location of
the component, the second part is a system-code based on the table of building elements (NS
3451:2009) (Statsbygg, 2017) and the last part is a serialized GTIN (SGTIN). SGTIN is a com-
bination of a GTIN-number from the global organization GS1 and serial number for the unique
component (BuildingSMART, 2015). The SGTIN-number can also be used individually as a
method for identifying objects and for connecting building products with objects in the BIM
model (BuildingSMART, 2015). In Denmark, cuneco classiﬁcation system has developed their
own identiﬁcation system for identifying individual objects and/or types of objects. By using
the ID for an individual object, one can ﬁnd information connected to the speciﬁc object while
the ID for a type of object can be used for establishing common properties for all the objects
within a type (Molio, 2019).
3.2.5
BIM Standardization Efforts
Until now, there have not been any common European BIM standard. Hence, the previously
mentioned efforts to standardize the information in the BIM models have been independently
and parallelly conducted in the Scandinavian countries. The technical committee CEN/TC 442
consists of several working groups who have been assigned to develop a BIM standardization
across the European countries (Alexandre Beltrao, 2016). The committee is in close collabora-
tion with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and have already adopted a
couple of ISO standards to the European level. The adoption leads to an automatic replacement
of all similar national standards to accomplish similar BIM processes across Europe. One of the
adopted ISO-standards is the Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) standard (Alexandre Beltrao,
2016) which is the most commonly used model format in the AEC industry (Sacks et al., 2018,
p.100). The IFC is an open data representation standard with a ﬁle format that makes it possible
to hold and export data between different software (buildingSMART, 2019a). Consequently, it
supports the idea of openBIM (Alexandre Beltrao, 2016). OpenBIM is according to buildingS-
MART (2019b) ”a universal approach to the collaborative design, realization and operation of
buildings based on open standards and workﬂows”.
17
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
3.3
BIM for FM
The utilization of BIM for FM is not only valuable for the FM discipline. BIM’s ability to sup-
port FM is also considered to be an important value-added feature for the BIM approach (Gu
and London, 2010). An extensive literature review conducted by Edirisinghe et al. (2017) sum-
marizes many beneﬁts and challenges related to the implementation of BIM-enabled FM. Some
of the most essential ﬁndings from the review are further described in the following sections.
For a BIM model to be useful for FM, it should represent the actual as-built information rather
than the as-designed information (Gu and London, 2010). Hence, the BIM model needs to
be updated to represent and recognize the changes done during construction (Gu and London,
2010) and after any renovations (Sveriges Kommuner och Landsting, 2017, p.37). Any changes
in the graphic data or the as-built documents performed during the operational phase must also
be updated to reﬂect the changes (Teicholz, 2013b, p.8). The process of updating the as-built
model during O&M can be referred to as record modeling and could improve the documentation
environment for future use, minimize facility turnover disputes and assist in future permitting
processes (CIC, 2011, p.54).
3.3.1
Implementation Areas
There are several areas of FM where BIM advantageously could be implemented. Becerik-
Gerber et al. (2012) conducted a survey with FM practitioners. They were requested to select
the implementation areas they considered would bring the most value to FM. The result of the
survey indicates that the greatest beneﬁts of the implementation of BIM are related to the cre-
ation and updating of digital assets, facilitating of real-time data access, space management,
visualization and marketing and location of building components. The following sections are
describing how some areas of FM could beneﬁt from the implementation.
O&M
When the FM personnel are performing planned or corrective maintenance work, responding
to trouble calls or conducting performance inspections, they need effective and immediate ac-
cess to a great amount of facility information (Becerik-Gerber et al., 2012). Nonetheless, does
the required information often need to be collected from various FM software such as CMMS,
EDMS, and BAS. Becerik-Gerber et al. (2012) believe BIM has the potential to be utilized as
a uniﬁed data access point for the required data to enable more effective facility data collection
during the operational phase. The BIM model can also be combined with radio-frequency iden-
tiﬁcation (RFID) technologies. The RFID enables the facilities manager to track information
about a building element in the BIM model by scanning the element’s tag (Teicholz, 2013b,
p.39). The RFID tags can also be used by the facilities users to report issues by sending work
orders to the FM team.
18
==PAGE:31==
3.3 BIM for FM
Another BIM-based technology to assist the FM team during O&M is augmented reality (AR).
Teicholz (2013b, p.40) describes AR as the use of virtual reality in combination with the real
world as it presents a view of a real-life scene with data layered on top. AR as a mobile applica-
tion enables the FM personnel to walk around in the physical building and view the installations
above the suspended ceiling from a BIM model on a mobile device (Teicholz, 2013b, p.40).
Space Management
For space management, Becerik-Gerber et al. (2012) identiﬁes various advantages of BIM as it
offers quick access to a precise overview of areas, volumes, and locations of assets both before
and after occupancy. Before the occupancy, the authors describe how the model can be used by
the FM staff to efﬁciently plan the move-in process and future utilization of space. During the
operational phase, it can be used for identifying underutilized space by comparing the actual
and planned utilization of space (Becerik-Gerber et al., 2012). The data from the BIM model
can easily be used to create visualizations and presentations of the facility which could advan-
tageous for marketing and sales (Sveriges Kommuner och Landsting, 2017, p.30).
Energy and Sustainability Management
The BIM model could function as effective support during in-operation simulation to analyze
the effect of renovations or other system changes (Teicholz, 2013b, p.23). BIM also provides a
visual framework for real-time performance data gathered from sensors. Consequently, it could
provide the owner with more intuitive feedback (Teicholz, 2013b, p.24) which can be used
for performing continuous commissioning throughout the facility’s life-cycle (Teicholz, 2013b,
p.42).
Disaster Planning
By having easy access to a BIM model during FM, critical building information could be uti-
lized by the emergency responders in case of an emergency. According to CIC (2011, p.53)
would the critical building information improve the efﬁciency of the response and decrease the
safety risks. By integrating dynamic information from a BAS system with the static information
in the BIM model, the emergency responders would be able to fast identify where in the building
the emergency is located and what route provides the fastest and safest access (CIC, 2011, p.53).
To successfully implement BIM in FM, the owner should provide speciﬁc information deliver-
able requirements (Mayo and Issa, 2015). Moreover, is it important to utilize effective methods
for the collection and delivery of as-built information. Today’s collecting processes are further
described in section 3.4.
19
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
3.3.2
Challenges Identiﬁed in Literature
Various studies are describing BIM as an advantageous and frequently used tool during plan-
ning, designing and construction, whereas the utilization of BIM for FM is much less explored
(Kassem et al., 2015; Cavka et al., 2017). According to Teicholz (2013b, p.20) is the process
of implementing and using BIM for FM more complex and less straightforward compared to
the AEC industry. The author points out a diverse need of information and software among
different FM organizations as a result of their project-speciﬁc objectives. Consequently, there
are no ”best practices” on how BIM should be adopted in FM (Teicholz, 2013b, p.20).
Some barriers for the adoption of BIM in FM are, according to Cavka et al. (2017), related
to the challenges of establishing the information requirements necessary for BIM-based FM.
More speciﬁcally, their study indicates the following three main challenges: ”(1) owners are
not aware of the complete set of information they require to support asset lifecycle information,
(2) they do not have enough experience in BIM to determine how much of this information can
be exchanged and managed through BIM, (3) they are often unsure about how to require infor-
mation in a BIM”. A panelist in a Delphi analysis conducted by Mayo and Issa (2015) noted
that: ” Not atypical, the cultural aversion to change combined with limited resources makes for-
malizing and contractualizing a structured information exchange a challenge...”. The authors of
the analysis argue that one reason behind the owners’ struggle to deﬁne as-built deliverables, is
because they ﬁrst need to consider what information is valuable for the organization instead of
collecting it all just-in-case. Another challenge, discussed by Edirisinghe et al. (2017), is an in-
formation gap between the BIM system and the FM system already in place. Some information
delivered from design and construction is not integrated into the FM system as a consequence
of incompatibility and thus the information will not support the FM activities.
3.3.3
BIM-Enabled FM-Software
There are various approaches for the enabling of BIM for FM and the applications ”varies de-
pending on organizational mission and the requirements of the facilities infrastructure support-
ing it” (Teicholz, 2013b, p.20). However, Teicholz (2013b, p.24) is convinced that is necessary
for the BIM model to integrate with multiple enterprise data systems including existing facili-
ties systems, geographic information systems, and BAS systems. This approach is utilized by
the software Ecodomus FM which is a cloud-based common data environment with real-time
integration between the BIM model and the enterprise data systems (EcoDomus, 2019). A dif-
ferent approach is adopted by the Danish software developer Dalux in their BIM-enabled FM
software DaluxFM. The system is a cloud-based tool with a BIM model in IFC-format as a core
for the various FM applications including; energy monitoring, work orders, asset and space
management, lease management and documentation (Dalux, 2019). Compared to EcoDomus
FM, DaluxFM does not enable the owner to integrate FM systems from other developers.
20
==PAGE:33==
3.4 As-Built Information
3.4
As-Built Information
The hand over of project information from design and construction to the O&M phase can be
referred to as the collection and delivery of as-built information. For an owner to effectively
manage a facility, it is essential to have as-built information about the facility (Beck et al.,
2011). The facilities managers’ need for as-built information is not a new discovery. East
et al. (2012) refers to a study performed by the National Academies of Science in 1983 which
identiﬁed that the greatest saving potentials in an AEC project appear during the operational
phase. Furthermore, the study recognized a possibility to achieve these savings by handing over
a comprehensive database of project information to the facility manager. This database of as-
built information is meant to function as a user manual for all O&M activities during a facility’s
life-cycle (Byggtjeneste, 2011). To support these activities, critical as-built information such
as asset location, asset group, manufacturer, warranty information, quantity, serial number, and
maintenance information should be included in the handover (Thabet and Lucas, 2017a).
In some cases, the owner also requires an as-built BIM model that visualizes what actually have
been built by updating the as-designed model with all the changes done during construction
(Sacks et al., 2018, p.614). According to Sacks et al. (2018, p.614) is this typically a LOD400
or LOD500 model that is being prepared during the construction process. The collection of
necessary project information and development of as-built records from construction enables
intelligent planning of O&M activities and rehabilitation actions, thus it is possible to optimize
the life-cycle costs (World Economic Forum, 2016, p.32). The collected as-built information
can also be used for protecting the project owner as it can identify if an asset has been built or
installed in accordance with the original plans or not (World Economic Forum, 2016, p.32).
3.4.1
Manual Data Collection
Over the last decade, there have been several method of collecting and transferring as-built in-
formation from construction to operation (East et al., 2012). According to East et al. (2012)
is the most frequently used approach to simply store paper manuals and drawings that the FM
personnel later have to manually enter or retype into their FM-software. Another approach
identiﬁed by the authors is to demand the contractor to directly type the information into the
FM-software. Figure 3.4 illustrates a typical manual collection process where the FM person-
nel ﬁrst have to review the delivered as-built material. Thabet and Lucas (2017a) describe the
handover of information as an overwhelming ”Tsunami” of 50 percent valuable and 50 percent
non-valuable information where the FM personnel have to manually extract the valuable infor-
mation into Excel spreadsheets. Subsequently, the quality and the completeness of the extracted
as-built information is veriﬁed by performing building walk-throughs. Any faulty or missing
information is then corrected or added to the spreadsheet. When the collection and veriﬁcation
are completed, the as-built information is manually re-entered to the FM-software.
21
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
Figure 3.4: Manual Collection of As-Built Information (Thabet and Lucas (2017b))
The manual collection and entering the facility data is a time consuming and costly processes
which prevent the FM personnel from utilizing the FM-software for managing the facility
(Sacks et al., 2018, p.148). Research by Liu and Zettersten (2016) reports that some projects
are spending up to two years until all the as-built information for a new facility is imported into
their FM-software. Sacks et al. (2018, p.156) state that the manual entry of data ”cannot be
seriously considered for modern buildings of moderate and large size”.
3.4.2
Automated Data Collection
Parameter-Based Collection
To solve the issues related to the collection of as-built information, Thabet and Lucas (2017a,b,
2018) developed an approach for data reporting format. The approach was divided into two
phases, both with the objective to develop workﬂows that would support an earlier collection
of data during design and construction. Consequently, the as-built information would be gradu-
ally delivery as opposed to having all the information delivered at handover (Thabet and Lucas,
2018). Their initial step was to analyze and deﬁne the information needs of the organization in
the case study (Thabet and Lucas, 2017b). They deﬁned the organization’s data requirements,
future goals with FM, asset properties required by the CMMS system, classiﬁcation standard,
and delivery milestones.
Phase 1:
The objective of this phase was to develop a spreadsheet-based delivery mechanism for the FM
parties without any BIM experience (Thabet and Lucas, 2017b). First, a spreadsheet-based data
reporting format was developed to identify what data formats should be used for delivering in-
formation to the owner. It was developed after conducting interviews and reviews of the case
study organization’s current FM practices. Furthermore, it was decided how the data would
interface with the CMMS system by deﬁning a data transfer mechanism.
22
==PAGE:35==
3.4 As-Built Information
Thabet and Lucas (2017b) chose to use Pentaho (2016) as it would directly transfer asset data
from the spreadsheet to the CMMS system. Compared to manually entering of asset data, this
process will reduce the time before all as-built information is transferred into the CMMS sys-
tem which enables more efﬁcient facilities management shortly after the turnover (Thabet and
Lucas, 2017b).
Phase 2:
During the second phase, practices and workﬂows for collecting and delivering as-built infor-
mation using BIM-tools were addressed (Thabet and Lucas, 2018). As visualized in ﬁgure 3.5,
Thabet and Lucas (2017a) used the data requirements and milestones from phase one as inputs
for developing a BIM-based solution for storing the asset parameters. The ﬁrst step was to cre-
ate a shared parameter ﬁle which deﬁnes the owner’s requirements and speciﬁcations regarding
the shared parameters (element attributes and properties). The research recommends the owners
to prepare this ﬁle and distribute it among the involved stakeholders. Hence, the owners will
be able to communicate what as-built information is required as well as ensure consistent nam-
ing of parameters across all parties (Thabet and Lucas, 2017a). For creating and managing the
case study organization’s ﬁle, Thabet and Lucas (2017a) used the Shared Parameter Manager
plugin from BIM Manager Suit (CTC,2016). They also used the plugin to batch load the pre-
saved set of shared parameters into the project where the parameters were assigned to selected
equipment’s properties.
Figure 3.5: Suggested Workﬂow for Data Reporting Format (Thabet and Lucas, 2017a)
23
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
When the desired parameters had been loaded into the model, the asset parameter values could
be collected and populated into the parameter ﬁeld. To manually enter every asset value in
Revit would have been inefﬁcient. Hence, Thabet and Lucas (2017a) chose to use utilize the
Spreadsheet Link plugin as a part of BIM Manager Suit (CTC,2016). It exported every Revit
elements’ parameter data into a spreadsheet for mass editing. When the contractor and/or the
designer had inserted all parameter values, the spreadsheet was imported back and implemented
into the Revit model. These activities are visualized in ﬁgure 3.5 as step 3-5. Before the as-built
information from the model could be transferred to the CMMS system, the 6th step is to link all
component models into one integrated model.
Product Data Template Collection
A Product Data Template (PDT) is a spreadsheet-based data structure of a product’s properties
developed to function as a common data structure for the exchange of product data between all
parties of an AEC project (coBuilder, 2019c). The objective is for PDT to be a standardized
method for the manufacturers to hand over their products’ properties in a machine-readable for-
mat (Farghaly et al., 2018). The PTDs are divided into several data sets representing different
categories of information such as; speciﬁcation, sustainability, and facility/asset management
(CIBSE, 2019). When the parameters in the PDT’s data sets have been populated with values
by the manufacturer, the PDT becomes a Product Data Sheet (PTS) (coBuilder, 2019c). There
have been several efforts to create a standardized PDT such as coBuilder and B-Link in Norway
and CIBSE in the UK (Farghaly et al., 2018). As this thesis focuses on the Scandinavian AEC
industry, only coBuilder and B-Link’s initiatives in Norway are further explored.
CoBuilder is a Norwegian company with users in Great Britain, Germany, and France. Their
idea is to collect as-built product data and distribute those to BIM and FM systems by their ap-
plications goBIM and ProductXchange (coBuilder, 2019b). In goBIM, over 250.000 products
have been registered by manufacturers, importers, and distributors. By utilizing ProductX-
change, the involved parties can access structured and project speciﬁc product data and imple-
ment it to BIM, COBie and/or FM systems. ProductXchange will later this year be replaced by
coBuilder Collaborate which also will include features where the owner and the GC can estab-
lish information requirements, and gather the required data to an as-built model with validated
and veriﬁed data (coBuilder, 2019a). B-Link as another Norwegian product database which is a
collaboration between the three largest product databases in Norway; NOBB for building mate-
rials, NRF for HVAC and sanitary systems, and EFO for electronic installations (B-Link, 2019).
Together they become a common database with over 1.4 million products from 1500 different
distributors. This web-based BIM-product can just like coBuilder be used for implementing
product information into BIM models. Besides, B-Link can be used for exporting product in-
formation to procurement systems which enables the contractor to place digital orders or price
requests (B-Link, 2019).
24
==PAGE:37==
3.4 As-Built Information
3.4.3
Data Transferring Mechanisms
When the contractor and designers have collected all the required as-built information they
populate the BIM model with values for the shared parameters. Then the BIM model can be
transferred to the owner’s FM system (Thabet and Lucas, 2017a). Sacks et al. (2018) identiﬁes
four common approaches used for information transferring from design and construction to
the operations phase. The ﬁrst approach involves manual entry of data into the FM system as
described in section 3.4.1 while the other methods are semi-or fully automated. The automated
approaches can either have a one-way data integration where the data only can be transferred
from the BIM model to the FM system, or a two-way integration where the data also can be
transferred the opposite way. These approaches are further described below.
One-directional Link: Parameter data export using standard formats
By formatting the data in the BIM model after a standard format such as COBie (Sacks et al.,
2018, p.156), the parameters’ data can be exported by a one-directional link (Thabet and Lucas,
2017a). The data can be exported to a .CSV spreadsheet by using tools such as CTC Tools
Spreadsheet Link plugin or Revit Schedules. This spreadsheet is then linked to the FM system
by a data integration (e.g. Pentaho Kettle). The parameters’ data can also be exported to a
SQL database by using a data integration tool in which the data can be reviewed and modiﬁed
(Teicholz, 2013b, p.267). When the data is ensured to be compatible with the FM system, the
SQL database is linked to the FM system using a data integration tool such as Pentaho Kettle
(Thabet and Lucas, 2017a).
One-directional Link: Middleware
By using a middleware such as Ecodomus PM, data from a BIM model can be exported from
the model and stored in a Structured Query Language (SQL) database (Teicholz, 2013b, p.203).
The contractor and the designer are then able to review, edit or attach information to records
in Ecodomus PM before project turnover (Teicholz, 2013b). The exportation function of the
application creates a one-directional linkage between the BIM model and the organization’s
FM systems (Thabet and Lucas, 2017a). Depending on the capacity of the middleware, the
data exchange between the middleware and the FM system could be two-ways (Thabet and
Lucas, 2017a). One advantage of using a middleware is the possibility of synchronizing data
between various BIM and FM systems (Sacks et al., 2018, p.156). The ﬂexibility enables the
owner to transfer BIM data into their existing FM systems (Sacks et al., 2018, p.157) instead of
integrating a large amount of old data into new a system (Thabet and Lucas, 2017a).
25
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
Bi-Directional Link: Direct Integration
By creating a bi-directional link, the owner will beneﬁt from constantly having, in real time, up-
dated data in both systems (Thabet and Lucas, 2017a). According to Thabet and Lucas (2017a),
there are two methods for creating a bi-directional direct integration between the BIM model
and the FM system. One method is to utilize an FM system that has a developed link to BIM
software. Another method is to develop a customized plugin by programming speciﬁc inter-
actions with the BIM model’s data using the FM system’s Application Programming Interface
(API). Sacks et al. (2018, p.157) are skeptical and points out various difﬁculties with establish-
ing and maintaining this linkage such as; the BIM software’s inability to perform the necessary
preparation and extensive ”cleaning” of data before integrating it to the FM system and the in-
ability to integrate the non-maintainable asset’s data. The authors also describe how the linkage
requires the source of each data set to be determined since an as-built information set only may
be located in one of the two systems.
3.4.4
Delivery Requirements
For the designers and contractors to know what as-built information to collect and when it
should be delivered to whom, the owner develops a set of handover requirements. The require-
ments should be deﬁned at the beginning of the project with the ”end in mind” to guarantee
that the necessary information is delivered with the right structure (Thabet et al., 2016). The
requirements should be forwarded to the designer and the contractor as a part of the contractual
documents (Sacks et al., 2018, p.610). In Denmark, on a public building project with a project
cost over a certain amount, there are information and communications technology (ICT) regu-
lations demanding digital handover including an IFC-model of the project (Bygningsstyrelsen,
2019). Such regulations should also be considered when formulating the delivery requirements
for public projects.
To ensure the usefulness of the delivered as-built information from design and construction, it
is essential for the owner to have clear requirements for the handover (Cavka et al., 2017). De-
tailed information needs provided by the owner is also required for enabling the implementation
of BIM in FM (Mayo and Issa, 2015). According to Cavka et al. (2017) could clearly speciﬁed
information requirements save the project stakeholders a signiﬁcant amount of time during the
facilities lifecycle. Nevertheless, the research states that most owners are lacking clear handover
requirements. Hence, the current handover of as-built information is often unstructured, incom-
plete and non-reusable. To reverse the trend with unstructured deliveries, several standardiza-
tion efforts have been developed. The latest effort, ISO 19650 ”Organization of information
about construction work - Information management using building information modeling”, was
published in December 2018 by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) (ISO,
2018a).
26
==PAGE:39==
3.4 As-Built Information
The standard focuses on information management using BIM with the purpose to ”...enable an
appointing party to establish their requirements for information during the delivery phase of as-
sets...” (ISO, 2018b, p.vi). ISO 19650 is, according to the British Standards Institution (2018),
an internationalization of the UK’s BIM level 2 and includes the same principles and require-
ments but with different setup and terminology. Further, two other initiatives to structure the
as-built deliverables are described.
Information Delivery Manual
In 2010, the BuildingSMART organization developed the Information Delivery Manual (IDM)
standard (ISO 29481-1:2010) (Karlshøj, 2011). It was originally developed to solve the prob-
lems arising from the IFC schema’s inability to ”deﬁne the information exchange requirements
speciﬁc to different project stages and between different project actors and software applica-
tions...” (Aram et al., 2010). Now the IDM standard can assist with creating speciﬁcations that
regulate what information to be delivered by whom, when and to which recipient (Borrmann
et al., 2018, p.128). While 19650-2:2018 mainly focuses on the delivery of as-built informa-
tion to the owner, the IDM standard is intended to promote digital interoperability between all
project phases and actors (National Building Speciﬁcation, 2017). The IDM only involves the
content-related requirements while the Model View Deﬁnitions (MVD) covers the technical im-
plementations (Borrmann et al., 2018). The latest version of the standard was approved by CEN
in 2017 and states that an information delivery manual should include (ISO, 2016):
• Interaction/transaction map and/or process map
• Exchange requirements (ER)
COBie
The US Army Corps of Engineers released the Construction Operations Building Information
Exchange (COBie) speciﬁcation in 2007 as a response to the idea of Computer Aided Facilities
Management (CAFM) (Borrmann et al., 2018, p.168). Therefore, COBie speciﬁcations do not
only identify the project information requirements for handover, it also structures the submittals
accepted by computer-based management systems (Sacks et al., 2018, p.109). The objective
with the development was to optimize the information exchange process by reducing the num-
ber of errors in the handover data and decrease the need for re-entering of data. The COBie
speciﬁcation is partially based on the IDM (Borrmann et al., 2018, p.169) and describes a stan-
dard method for collecting the required as-built information from the design and construction
phase (Sacks et al., 2018, p.108). Based on the business processes identiﬁed by IDM, COBie
speciﬁcation deﬁnes their business processes (Borrmann et al., 2018, p.169) and suggests the
following processes (East, 2012):
27
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
1. identify submittals requirements,
2. deﬁne submittal schedule,
3. transmit submittal,
4. approve submittal,
5. install equipment,
6. commission equipment,
7. provide warranties,
8. provide spare parts sources and
9. transmit handover information
Before any data is exchanged, the use of COBie should be contractually agreed upon (Borrmann
et al., 2018, p.172). By having COBie as a contractually binding speciﬁcation, the increased
effort for the gathering and delivering COBie data can be ﬁnancially rewarded and dates and
responsibilities are more likely to be held (Borrmann et al., 2018, p.172). The master informa-
tion delivery plan (MIDP) can be used as a tool for deﬁning who is delivering what and when
to whom. For the most successful data exchange, the MIDP should separately deﬁne what
deliverables are required in the different phases (Borrmann et al., 2018, p.172).
3.4.5
Stakeholders Interest in As-Built Information
There are various stakeholders involved and/or affected by the collection and delivery of as-
built information from construction to the operational phase. The following sections describe
the different stakeholders’ responsibilities and objectives with the as-built information collec-
tion.
Owner
According to Gallaher et al. (2004) tend the owner sector to make decisions based on the range
of available information, hence inaccurate or poorly deﬁned information impedes their abilities
to make sound decisions. Since the information is crucial for the owner, the owner’s request for
deliverables should be realistic and achievable for internal uses and not include a large amount
of irrelevant information that is rarely, if ever used (Mayo and Issa, 2015). It is also essential
for the owner to establish optimal information requirements for the information to be usable
during the entire life-cycle of the facility (Mayo and Issa, 2014). Hence, the formulation of
delivery requirements is considered to be one of the owner’s most important tasks related to the
collection of as-built information. Nevertheless, Cavka et al. (2017) describes that ”most of the
owners do not have clear requirements for handover that are sufﬁcient to ensure the usefulness
of the delivered information”. The two initiatives mentioned in section 3.4.4, COBie, and IDM,
could be utilized to assist the owner with formulating their requirements.
28
==PAGE:41==
3.4 As-Built Information
However, Love et al. (2014a) points out the initiatives’ inability to help the owner deﬁning
what information to require as they mainly focus on structuring the deliverables. According
to Mayo and Issa (2014), there are consultant services to help the owners to meet their needs.
Nevertheless, the authors also state that an understanding of the taxonomy and standards for the
information would be beneﬁcial in the process of operationalizing the handover deliverables.
When the delivery requirements have been forwarded and the contractor has begun to collect
the as-built information, the owner has the ability to conduct as-built information quality control
and validation through the adoption of BIM for handover (Teicholz, 2013b, p.171). The aim
is to ensure the deliverables are delivered according to the owner’s requirements. Cavka et al.
(2017) points out the importance of understanding the required as-built information to be able
to effectively compare the delivered artifacts with the requirements. Teicholz (2013b, p.292)
recommends both FM and IT staff to be involved in the collection process to ensure the format
is interoperable with the FM system. When the as-built information is approved it needs to
be implemented or transferred to the FM system before it can be utilized by the FM person-
nel. Throughout the facility’s life-cycle, the owner (or the FM personnel) needs to update and
maintain the as-built information (Teicholz, 2013b, p.61). The method for updating the non-
geometrical information depends on how the as-built information is stored. The information
can either be stored as properties on the IFC-format BIM model or linked to the model from
an external database such as coBuilder or DaluxFM. According to Teicholz (2013b, p.61) is the
information easier accessed and updated if stored on an external database.
Contractor
According to the national standards, the contractors in a Scandinavian AEC project are obli-
gated to deliver adequate as-built documentation for the FM personnel to maintain the facility’s
functionality in the operational phase (Byggtjeneste, 2011). The responsible engineers and
architects are also obligated to deliver any of their documentation necessary for O&M. As de-
scribed in section 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 are there both manual and automated methods to be utilized
by the contractor and subcontractors for the gathering and delivery of as-built information.
A case study conducted at the Wisconsin Bureau of Facilities Management Teicholz (2013b,
p.265) reports the following lesson learned; ”the contractors’ primary focus is to build the build-
ing and install the systems, not document management”. Hence, an improvement of the con-
tractors’ management efforts is inevitable to increase the quality of the as-built deliverables (Te-
icholz, 2013b, p.265). The author believes that speciﬁc changes management practices would
increase the contractors’ awareness of the value of collecting and delivering information in a
useful and searchable format. During the case study, they also learned that the subcontractors
generally will not provide the desired as-built information until it is contractually required.
29
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. LITERATURE REVIEW
The contracts should also include clear requirements about how the BIM model should be used
(Teicholz, 2013b, p.288). For the contractor to update the BIM model to reﬂect the as-built
conditions it should be explicitly required in the contract while instructions regarding what in-
formation to include should be deﬁned in the owner’s BIM execution plan (Teicholz, 2013b,
p.88).
Engineers/Architects
In a building, every equipment is a part of a system of building components, connectors and
controllers (Teicholz, 2013b, p.119). Hence, the designers have to ensure that the BIM model
reﬂects which components belong to what system (Teicholz, 2013b, p.120). It is also the de-
signers’ responsibility to ensure each component is given the correct ID/classiﬁcation stated in
the BIM execution plan. Sacks et al. (2018, p.162) points out the importance of following the
BEP as it ensures that the team members know what is expected from them to assure the BIM
deliverables are useful for FM.
BIM Manager/Consultant
A BIM manager normally represents the designer party while a BIM consultant is an external
expert hired by the owner. According to Sacks et al. (2018, p.165) should the BIM consultant
know BIM from all the stakeholders’ perspectives and understand the project contracts, busi-
ness processes, and delivery. With this competence, the author believes the BIM consultant
could provide the owner with a BIM strategy, guidance during the implementation, and out-
sourcing of BIM-related tasks. In a case study conducted by Pishdad-Bozorgi et al. (2018),
the BIM consultant also provided a Revit template ﬁle in which the necessary empty ﬁelds for
COBie parameters were implemented. These ﬁelds were ﬁlled with element properties by the
designers during the design phase. In the same case study, a BIM manager was responsible for
everything BIM related during the design processes including the creation of the BIM model,
identifying model collisions and creating drawings. The authors describe the BIM managers’
responsibilities as too extensive for one person. Hence, they recommend the owners to assign
a BIM implementation champion to ensure that the various stakeholders are collaborating at
a high level throughout the entire project. Such an owner representative would manage the
digital deliverables between the project’s phases and validate the deliverables to ensure format
consistency. In the case study, the owner’s BIM consultant was not responsible for any data
management activities. Pishdad-Bozorgi et al. (2018) concludes that the case study’s failure to
automate the data exchange process during handover was due to the lack of a BIM/data integra-
tor.
30
==PAGE:43==
4
ANALYSIS
In this chapter, the state-of-the-art in the industry is investigated. First, a general analysis
is performed by interviewing various stakeholders to understand their interests and respon-
sibilities in the as-built information collection. Moreover is a speciﬁc project’s processes of
collecting and delivering as-built information examined and analyzed in a case study. Finally,
the ﬁndings from the industry are compared with the ﬁndings from the literature review in a
comparative analysis.
4.1
Stakeholder Interview
Three interviews are conducted before the execution of the case study. The objective is for the
author to develop an understanding of the current collection and delivery methods utilized in the
AEC industry to increase the relevancy of the case study. The main ﬁndings from the interviews
will be used as inputs to the case study. To get a wider picture of the processes, interviewees
with different roles and experiences are selected, these are listed below. Moreover is the aim to
realize the various stakeholders’ interests and responsibilities related to the collection of as-built
information.
The interview guides that are followed are adjusted after the different roles and can be found
in appendix A. Based on the ﬁndings in interview B, interview C is conducted to investigate
a newly developed software for collecting as-built information. The following sections are
summaries of the interviews which have been approved by the interviewees to eliminate any
misunderstandings.
Interviewee A:
General Contractor
Interviewee B:
Owner Organization
Interviewee C:
Software Developer
31
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
4.1.1
Interview A: General Contractor
Interviewee A represents one of the general contractors on the construction of a new National
Museum in Oslo, Norway, where she is responsible for their collection and delivery of as-built
data (Norwegian: FDV-dokumentasjon). The project has a total area of 55.000m2 and is de-
veloped by Statsbygg, the Norwegian Government’s key advisor in construction, who also will
manage and operate the facility. Statsbygg suggested that all the contractors would use the soft-
ware Pims365 (Pims) for their as-built information delivery. The use of Pims was not written in
the contract but the contractors still agreed on using the online-based software. In Pims, every
object requiring as-built information is integrated by Statsbygg with an individual TFM-code.
The interviewee is satisﬁed with how the delivery system is organized by the developer and
compares it with a previous project:
”The developer was ambitious, but they had not decided on the TFM-codes in advance. So
when I found an object without a code I was told to come up with a code and implement it to an
Excel sheet”
On the interviewee’s current project, as-built information collection is one of her areas of re-
sponsibility which involves to require as-built data from their subcontractors, receive the data,
ensure the data is according to Statsbygg’s requirements and thereafter upload the data to the
correct object in Pims. In Pims, Statsbygg reviews the delivered data and marks it as approved
or declined. If the data is declined, the interviewee have to go back and try to ﬁnd the right
data. Some of the as-built data requirements from Statsbygg are stated in the contract, such as
the what data to include, language requirements and how the contractors are obligated to deliver
the as-built data three months prior to the handover of the facility. The project is also utilizing
a document plan where it is stated what the contractors are expected to deliver. The document
plan was developed as a collaboration between Statsbygg and the general contractor. This plan
was then used when Statsbygg created the structure of Pims which enables the interviewee to
see in Pims what speciﬁc documents to include for every system.
Due to this speciﬁc contractor’s role in this project, they are not involved in updating any as-
built drawings. The interviewee mentions a Solibri model of the project that is being updated
every week, but that she is not sure of how or by whom. When discussion the use of such a
BIM-model, the interviewee expresses a concern regarding the low update frequency and how
she believes a higher frequency would be necessary for them to use a model as ”things needs to
happen a bit more rapidly in the construction industry”.
To understand Statsbygg’s processes of receiving the as-built data and what the Solibri model
is used for, questions are sent to the assisting project manager for building completion at Stats-
bygg. The questions are found in appendix A and a summary of his answers is found below.
32
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Stakeholder Interview
As mentioned by interviewee A, Statsbygg are utilizing a module in the FM-tool Pims365 for
gathering the as-built information. In the module, the documents are connected to the correct
building element through the TFM-code. By adding the TFM-codes in the BIM model, the
as-built information will be added to the model objects. Without the TFM marking system,
they would not have been able to integrate any documentation to the BIM model. He points out
the importance of creating a logic TFM-structure for the building objects in order for the FM
personnel to utilize the system.
”Without a deliberated TFM-code structure, the work of the FM personnel in a operational
setting would be impossible - regardless of the quality of the as-built information”
A second factor for a successful as-built data delivery is a clear and complete set of deliv-
ery requirements from the owner including what the contractor is expected to deliver and in
what quality. Each discipline BIM model is being updated each week. The updates are done by
the project’s architects or designers and are based on incoming change orders that have been ap-
proved by Statsbygg. The new discipline models are then merged into a aggregate BIM model
accessible by everyone in the project.
4.1.2
Interview B: Owner Organization
Interviewee B is an ICT specialist working as the section leader of the digital team at DTU
CAS (Technical University of Denmark’s Campus Services). They are a business support unit
and are not executing any actual project themselves but rather assist DTU CAS deﬁning their
project requirements for the digital deliverables and how the projects should collaborate and
coordinate in a digital matter. They are representing the client side and are working with both
consultants and contractors but they are only having a contractual agreement with one of the
parties per project. Independent of contract type, DTU CAS wants the same data deliverables
for all their projects. Their requirements for the ﬁnal delivery of as-built and O&M data are
deﬁned in their ICT speciﬁcations which is to be found on their web page. As the digital team
normally gets involved before the design phase they can ensure that the other stakeholders have
the right framework to work within a DTU project.
The business support unit has a standard set of ﬁnal deliverables that are developed based on
their systems and landscape of systems. The party with the contractual agreement is responsi-
ble to communicate DTU’s requirements with the other stakeholders and their ICT manager is
responsible for coordinating and quality check the deliverables. At the end of the project, this
data is also quality checked by a representative from DTU CAS. At the moment, these processes
are manual but the interviewee states how they are currently developing a handover application
33
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
together with Dalux. The application is called Dalux Handover and is supposed to assist in the
handover of documents from construction to O&M. It will not only be possible to transfer data
to Dalux’s own systems but also to export data to other FM-software by using the open source
format COBie. DTU CAS tries to promote and support such open standard initiatives.
DTU CAS does not only receive 2D-based as-built documents, the interviewee states that they
are obligated to also receive a BIM model. The delivered BIM model is not considered to an
as-built BIM model as the interviewee states:
”The contractor or the consultant only updates the BIM model from their own perspectives
and for their own purposes”
What methods are being used for updating the model depends on the size of the project where
small projects have fewer resources for digital competences which makes it harder for DTU
CAS to communicate their digital requirements to them. Larger projects need the digital tools
for themselves to succeed, therefore it is easier for them to understand the digital requirements.
Even if the model is not updated to be an exact (10 mm tolerance) digital representation of
what has been built, it can still be useful for O&M purposes. The interviewee states how they
mainly need to know what is in the building, in what rooms it is found and roughly where it
is placed. It is more important for them to know how many units there are and how different
systems are connected. To link the as-built information to the BIM model, DTU CAS are using
identiﬁcations and classiﬁcations which is possible by having a strict policy of how to require
deliverables and to communicate with the projects.
”We also make sure to communicate within the projects, how they are using classiﬁcations
and for what purpose and how DTU CAS later will be able to use these when linking the infor-
mation.”
Their biggest challenge related to the receiving of as-built data is that it is never delivered
on time, which for DTU CAS would have been three weeks before the handover of the phys-
ical facility. The interviewee describes this is such a common issue that they usually extract
the necessary as-built data from the common data environment before the data is being deliv-
ered. Some as-built data is business critical and is required for having people moving in on the
handover day. It is critical for space management when setting up a room booking system or
planning how to move inventory inside and how to efﬁciently arrange themselves.
34
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Stakeholder Interview
4.1.3
Interview C: Software Developer
This interview is conducted with the objective to gather an understanding about the new Dalux
handover tool mentioned in interview B. Interviewee C is a senior consultant at the Danish soft-
ware developer Dalux where he is involved in the development of their new handover module.
He has a background as a construction architect with experience from working as an architect,
general contractor, and software developer. Dalux develops cloud-based software for the AEC
industry with BIM as a core of everything they do. Currently, they are offering two groups of
products: Dalux Build and DaluxFM. All of their applications are having their free cloud-based
Dalux BIM viewer as a core function. This viewer was recently tested in Hong Kong where a
man was able to freely walk through a model with 770 uploaded Revit models of 15.5GB ﬁle
size. Dalux have users in over 100 countries, most of them are situated in Denmark where they
have agreements with four of the ﬁve regions and a majority of the municipalities.
Their new handover module, Dalux Handover, will be launched in the second half of 2019
and is going to function as a tool for transferring data from the construction phase to the oper-
ational phase. According to the interviewee, there is a growing demand for this type of module
and one reason behind the timing of the development is a couple of large Danish projects which
still are in their early phase. During the interview, interviewee C described and showed a test
version of the upcoming module. The utilization of the handover module can be divided into
four parts: requiring, collecting, approving, and archiving data.
”The FM actor is normally not chosen when designing the facility and is therefore not usu-
ally involved when setting the delivery requirements - but if possible it would be advantageous
to involve them.”
In Dalux’ handover module, the as-built information requirements are formulated by manu-
ally developing digital ”building part cards” (Danish: bygningsdelskort). A building part card
includes a component’s speciﬁc information requirements such as product information, proper-
ties, warranty, PDF-documents, photos, drawings, and maintenance tasks. These information
requirements can be linked to its model component(s) by deﬁning its element group. An el-
ement group is created by adding model ﬁlters deﬁning what properties and property-values
to include. The ﬁlters will exclude any other model elements other than the desired element
type. On the handover module, the contractor receives a list of building components and their
”building part cards” which have to be ﬁlled with information about the installed products. The
product information has to be manually implemented to the module as there are no product
databases in Denmark. The interviewee is skeptical if it is necessary:
”There is no Danish product database and the question is if that is necessary or if it would
be more efﬁcient with an international database instead”
35
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
In addition to the required product information, the contractor also has to add any required
maintenance tasks and its frequency. These maintenance tasks can either be general recom-
mendations from the contractor, regulated by law or mandatory to keep the contractor’s product
warranty valid. The interviewee points out the importance of having control over all mainte-
nance tasks, as a facilities manager, to prioritize them correctly. When the contractor has ﬁlled
out a building part card, the owner will control the quality and completeness of the delivered
as-built information. Dalux is developing a ﬂow for detecting any faults or shortages. When the
required as-built information is delivered and approved, it can either be transferred straight to
Dalux’s FM tool or extracted to COBie format or a report format.
According to interviewee C, facilities managers pay great attention to task management as it
can reduce the cost related to O&M. By using the Dalux handover module in combination with
DaluxFM, the facilities manager will be able to adjust the contractors suggested maintenance
frequency to better match the FM organization’s ambitions and economy. The FM actor is
forced to perform the mandatory maintenance with the required frequency while any recom-
mended maintenance tasks can be adjusted. Interviewee C describes their method of direct
transferring of data from construction to operations as unique and that no one else is offering
the same integration. He also mentions how some projects are trying to achieve the same direct
transfer by letting the contractor add their information straight into the FM software. However,
such a process could cause loss of the contractor’s information when the FM actor is adjusting
maintenance frequencies.
Before the handover, during the operational phase when building components are removed,
added or replaced, some of the drawings and BIM models will have to be updated. In DaluxFM,
building components information can be updated during the operational phase. Changes in the
BIM models and drawings before handover will have to be made in a BIM software. According
to the interviewee, it is the facility’s data need for the operation that determines what version
of the BIM model to update. A simple version of the BIM model could be enough for some
owners while others decide to update the full version. Regardless of the version, the interviewee
highlights the value of having sufﬁciently updated models and drawings when prioritizing tasks
as a facilities manager.
36
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Stakeholder Interview
4.1.4
Discussion and Main Findings
In neither of the project where the interviewee A and B are involved, are the contractor obli-
gated to update the model to represent a digital duplicate of what has been built. Nevertheless,
interviewee B stated how the Danish government regulations make it mandatory for them to
require BIM as a part of their deliverables. In addition, interviewee B pointed out that it is
more important for them as a facility owner to know how the building systems are connected
and how many units have been installed rather than knowing precisely where they are located.
These statements raised some question regarding the BIM deliverables that could be further in-
vestigated in the case study:
How important is the geometrical aspect of an as-built BIM model?
Is the case study project having an updated BIM model?
How is it updated and for what purpose?
Compared to interview B, the project in interview A seemed to have an approach for collecting
as-built information that enables the information to be connected to the BIM model for oper-
ational usage. This was done by giving the building components a TFM-number. Interview
A also gave the impression of having more and earlier involvement of the owner during the
collection as they performed regular quality checks on the delivered as-built information. Fol-
lowing questions related to the collection of as-built information in the case study project could
be examined:
Do the project utilize any classiﬁcation systems such as TFM-numbering?
How are the owner of the project involved in collecting processes?
How can the owner involvement affect the usefulness of the data in the start-up phase?
In Dalux handover tool, described in interview C, the contractor will have to manually up-
load the as-built information to the software. He also pointed out how it could be advantageous
to have FM expertise involved when deﬁning the as-built data requirements. The presentation
of Dalux’s handover tool raised some questions regarding the software for collecting as-built
information:
Do the case study project have manual processes or are they utilizing any product databases
for collecting as-built information?
How is the project deciding what as-built information requirements to implement in their tool
for data collection?
37
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
4.2
Case Study
The second part of the analysis of the processes for collecting as-built information in the Scan-
dinavian AEC industry includes a case study. The intention is to have the main ﬁndings from
the stakeholder analysis in mind when conducting the case study. The objective of this section
is to develop an understanding of how a speciﬁc project is collecting as-built information from
construction and what challenges they are experiencing.
4.2.1
Introduction
A single-case study is chosen for this thesis, hence the selection of case have been important.
The ambition was to ﬁnd a Scandinavian project which is in the handover phase. Moreover, it
was essential to select a large and complex project such as hospitals or airports. Sacks et al.
(2018) stated that manual collection methods of as-built information should not be considered
for medium to large projects. Consequently, it was crucial to ﬁnd a project that is using BIM-
based collection and delivery methods. Teicholz (2013b) recommends owners to link their
as-built information to the model instead of storing the information as properties in the BIM
model. Considering all these factors, the Tønberg Hospital Project in Norway was selected.
It was also selected based on the project’s collaborative contract form which enables a closer
collaboration among all stakeholders.
Two methods have been utilized when conducting this case study. The ﬁrst part of the case
study is a description of the project and its processes which are based on a review of secondary
documents. Every reviewed document and video was found online and were all written or held
by current or former members of the project team. During the second part, a joint-interview
was held to obtain qualitative results. The interviewees are experienced owner representatives
who are/have been directly involved in the development of the project’s digital processes.
Figure 4.1: Tønsberg Hospital (Link Arkitektur, 2019)
38
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Case Study
4.2.2
Tønsberg Hospital Project, Norway
The Tønsberg Hospital is a buildingSMART International (bSI) award-winning project lo-
cated 130 km south of Oslo, Norway. It was rewarded with the best ”Design Using Open
Technology” in 2017 for their extensive and successful utilization of bSI tools and standards
(Tønsbergprosjektet, 2017). In 2018, the project also won the Norwegian AEC industry award
”Gullhammeren” for their adoption of new technology which utilizes a digital model to im-
prove the as-built information for O&M (VVS Aktuelt, 2018). The project is therefore chosen
for this case study, as it appears to be in front of the Scandinavian AEC industry when it comes
to digital collaboration among all stakeholders and project phases.
Project Owner:
Sykehuset i Vestfold (Vestfold Hospital Trust)
General Contractor:
Skanska AS
Architects/Engineers:
Cura Group (Multiconsult, LINK arkitektur, Bølgeblikk Arkitek-
tur, Hjellnes Consult and Erichsen Horgen)
Project form:
Integrated Project Delivery
Total Area:
45.000m2
Somatic Building:
33.000m2
Psychiatric Building:
12.000m2
Economy:
2,7 Billion NOK
Project Period:
2015-2021
The project is operated by an IPD-contract which is the ﬁrst similar initiative in Norway (Skan-
ska Norge, 2018b). The contract form facilitates early involvement of the GC, designers, and
subcontractors. The core of this multiparty agreement consists of the project owner, the GC
and the Architects/Engineers. To handle the complexity related to hospital projects, experts
from previous hospital projects in Skanska UK are involved as a joint venture (Skanska Norge,
2018b). Figure 4.2 shows the structure of the involved actors and illustrates how the three tech-
nical subcontractors within the outer circle also are aligned with the multiparty agreement while
the subcontractors outside the circle only have a contractual agreement with the GC (Sunesen,
2017). The actors within the multiparty agreement have a shared proﬁt and risk system where
all the actors’ proﬁt is connected to the overall project success and linked to achieving the com-
mon goal to the lowest possible cost (Sunesen, 2017). Two of the project’s common success
criteria are to reduce the project cost with 10% and the construction time (for construction above
ground) with 50% compared to similar projects without decreasing the quality (Link Arkitek-
tur, 2019). Another criterion is to deliver a complete BIM model of the building for as-built
information (Link Arkitektur, 2019).
39
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
Figure 4.2: Multiparty Agreement at the Tønsberg Project (Aarseth, 2018)
The owner has had high digitization requirements from the very beginning (Skanska Norge,
2018b) and is requiring openBIM where IFC is ”the law” for all BIM-based exchanges (Aarseth,
2018). Sunesen (2017) describes how the project is taking advantage of using VDC (virtual de-
sign and construction) principles such as ICE (Integrated Concurrent Engineering) meetings
and co-location ofﬁce. The ICE meetings are held in a big room where interdisciplinary is-
sues can be solved. By having all key players present and prepared during the ICE meetings,
decisions to solve critical issues can be made directly. Therefore, a meeting gets canceled if
one of the actors is not represented. To better integrate the work of the actors, a co-location
is established where the designer, client, and contractor are working. The co-location leads to
quicker clariﬁcations of issues. They are also using virtual reality throughout all project phases
to make it easier to match the owner’s expectations with what actually is being built (Skanska
Norge, 2018b). Virtual reality also promotes inputs from the owner organization regarding the
space and placement of equipment in their future work environment (Skanska Norge, 2018b).
40
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Case Study
Project Status
The psychiatric building was formally delivered on the 9th of May 2019 and the ﬁrst patients
moved in ﬁve days later. During the summer of 2019, two old buildings will be demolished in
order for the somatic building’s terrain work to be done by September (Sykehuset i Vestfold,
2019).
Digital Collaboration
To facilitate a real digital collaboration among all the actors, a Virtual Desktop Infrastructure
(VDI) is implemented (Aarseth, 2018). As visualized in ﬁgure 4.3, the VDI-platform con-
tains every software needed for the project both common and project unique programs. It also
gives access to organization speciﬁc projects such as ISI documents, the collaboration plat-
form/project hotel where Skanska shares documents and information with their external part-
ners (Skanska Norge, 2018a). By having every tool available at the VDI-platform, the users only
need to deal with one desktop to access all project tools compared to other large projects where
it is common to have up to ten different desktops (Sunesen, 2017). It also allows the individual
user to arrange what tools to integrate into her customized VDI-desktop (Sunesen, 2017). Re-
gardless of platform, the VDI-platform is available from everywhere and allows central updates
of the software and automatic exchange of BIM models (Aarseth, 2018).
Figure 4.3: Digital Collaboration with VDI at Tønsberg Project (Aarseth, 2018)
41
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
Information Logistics
A map of the project’s information logistics is visualized in ﬁgure 4.4. The following section is
a description of the logistics map based on a review of published presentation slides (Aarseth,
2018, 2019). The BIM-server/model-server is connected to the VDI-platform and plays a cen-
tral role in the information logistics of the project. On the BIM-sever, there is a geometric
database to which the discipline models are uploaded as IFC-models with TFM-numbered ob-
jects. The BIM-server also contains a System and Product Register (SPR) system/catalog which
is a database of all as-built information such as written documents, properties and pictures con-
nected to buildings, rooms, systems, and objects. The written documents can be cleaning and
maintenance manuals, installation descriptions and warranty clariﬁcations. The SPR database
structure is based on the TFM-numbering system to enable the as-built information to be con-
nected to the correct element in the geometric database. When the contractor has purchased
an item from a distributor or manufacturer, they are required (by Skanska) to implement their
product’s product-id, GTIN, properties and documents to any of the large product registers. The
as-built information will then be imported from coBuilder ProductXchange (or similar) to the
BIM-server where it can be linked to its BIM-object by the TFM-number. The as-built informa-
tion is then transferred to the BIM-server’s SPR database. The project also uses a photo-based
solution for documentation of the execution. These photos are linked to the correct BIM-objects,
rooms, and buildings in the BIM-sever. It is through the SPR database the as-built information
from the construction phase can be further transferred to the operational phase (Sunesen, 2017).
Figure 4.4: Information Logistics at the Tønsberg Project (Aarseth, 2018)
42
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Case Study
4.2.3
Qualitative Results
A joint interview with representatives from the owner organization at the Tønsberg project is
conducted. The interviewees are listed below. The objective of the interview was to obtain qual-
itative data regarding their processes of requiring and collecting as-built data from construction.
A prepared interview guide is found in appendix A, nevertheless, the order in which the ques-
tions were asked was adjusted after the interviewees’ software presentation. The following
sections are summaries of the interview topics that have been approved by the interviewees to
eliminate any misunderstandings.
Interviewee D:
Project Manager Digital Collaboration and Interface Management
Interviewee E:
BIM Technician
As-Built Information Collection
”It is important for us to try and avoid having the properties on the actual model and rather
have those on a corresponding database which we call SPR or Cataloge”
- Interviewee D
The Tønsberg Hospital project’s BIM models are already large and making them even larger
would cause issues. Therefore, they are trying to keep the as-built information separate from
the BIM model. By doing so, a building component’s as-built information only needs to ex-
ist in one place which is advantageous when a component occurs more than once. To enable
this working method, almost all the components in the project have been given a TFM-number
in accordance with the coming NS (Norwegian Standard) which is based on what has been
called Statsbygg’s TFM 2.0 system. The TFM-number is used for linking as-built information
with the model component. When a building components have been delivered on site, it is the
contractors’ responsibility to link the as-built information with the model component from a
linkage-page on the SPR. If an object exists in coBuilder, its as-built information is automati-
cally transferred to the SPR through the contractor’s request of a project tag on receipts when
sub-contractors purchase anything related to the Tnsberg Project. Then the as-built information
ready to be linked to the correct model component. The as-built information for objects not
included in coBuilder has to be manually added to the SPR by the responsible subcontractor.
The project has created a large matrix with what types of as-built documents the contractor is
required to deliver for each system/product. This matrix is implemented in their system which
enables them to easier check if the required documents are delivered. On the linkage-page,
all the different types of model components appear on a list where it is possible to see which
of them have linked information, where they appear in the model and to what system they are
connected to. As-built information can also be linked to the levels on the SPR’s tree structure:
building, ﬂoor, and room.
43
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
During the operational phase, the linkage-page will be used by the FM team when changing a
building component. The link to the old product will have to be removed and a link to the new
product will be added. Interviewee D describes how this would have been much more difﬁcult
if the product information would have been placed on the actual model component rather than
only being linked to it. The FM team member can also use the SPR system for replacing prod-
uct speciﬁc documents with newer versions. The old versions will still be accessible because
of the desktop’s document history which makes it impossible to delete old documents. Though
the Psychiatry building recently was delivered, the owner has postponed the delivery date in
regard to when the contractor has to complete the as-built information delivery. This is partly
due to the fact that all contractors are still on the site working with the next somatic building.
The project board sees this as-built delivery system as a game changer and is more interested in
having a functional system developed rather than receiving the as-built data from the psychiatry
building in a traditional delivery - in time for the start-up. The interviewees are not expecting
the collection to be done until this fall. The owner organization aspires to make this product
database standardized and available for all the health trust organizations (Norwegian: helsefore-
tak) in Norway.
”If the as-built information is already there, then the others will not have to upload the same
data into their projects. And as the time goes and the register gets bigger, it will be less docu-
ments to upload.”
- Interviewee D
BIM-enabled FM
When all the model objects got their as-built information linked, the catalogue-page on the SPR
can be used as a portal by the FM team for ﬁnding product and system information. Interviewee
D describes that there is a common loss of information from construction to operations and
how the reestablishing of the lost data could be time-consuming. He believes their method of
having the contractor and the FM team working on the same SPR database will reduce that loss
of information. The system is still on test-basis but is planned to be internally released soon.
Therefore, the FM personnel are currently being trained in how to use the system for operation
and how to navigate in the BIM model’s 2D and 3D-view. Interviewee D describes how this
FM information consists of three elements. The ﬁrst element is the BIM model which consists
of an updated geometrical as-built model with its associated object information. The second
element is the model objects’ as-built documentation and the third is the delivered product and
systems properties as separate information objects. Interviewee D describes the utilization of
BIM for FM as a shift in the paradigm of the way we look at FM-systems. Earlier, FM-systems
were large systems covering all building functions. At the Tønsberg project, they have decided
to control their main data by utilizing a BIM-server, according to the regional health authoritys
FM strategy regarding digitalization.
44
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Case Study
As-Built BIM Model
”Not everyone is as interested in updating either the BIM model or the physical building. The
model should be updated to be within our tolerance limits”
- Interviewee D
The project plan is to create an as-built BIM model by updating the as-design model within
a certain tolerance limit. Nonetheless, they have experienced some challenges related to the
updating of the BIM model. The interviewees express that this causes them some frustration as
they want the best possible model with as small differences as achievable. The project has eval-
uated the utilization of scanners for updating the BIM models, however, they could not all the
time ﬁnd an economically feasible nor user-friendly solution and decided to use photos instead.
These photos are added to their SPR system and linked to a room or an object in the model.
The contractor scanned the load-bearing system in the Psychiatry building and compared the
results with the as-designed model. As the differences were almost non-existing, they are now
considering not to scan the load-bearing system on the somatic building.
In the early stage of the project, the interviewees’ had a desire to include the wall studs in
the as-designed model but it was not carried through. This decision has led to larger tolerances
further out in the project. By not modeling the studs, they are placed where the carpenters
prefer which causes a ± 30 cm tolerance for the electrical switches and outlets that typically
are installed next to a stud. According to interviewees is 30 cm tolerance way too big from an
owner perspective, especially in small rooms where the placement of electrical installation are
adjusted after the furniture layout. For this speciﬁc case, the owner has special requirements
forcing the contractor to move any installations that hinder the layout. The interviewees agree
that the tolerance for the integrated installations is a greater concern for the FM team than for
the visible installations. Interviewee E points out the importance of having an updated as-built
for the installations above the suspended ceiling where the space is restricted. By having an
as-built BIM model with the actual placement of pipes, the FM team will be able to utilize and
trust the model when planning and installing new pipes in the future without removing a lot of
the ceiling.
”Augmented Reality (AR) is useless if the BIM model do not represent what has been built,
that is why it is important to control if the model is correct”
- Interviewee D
45
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
To solve the issue with models not being updated, the project put together a working group to
discuss how to work with change orders and how the model should be updated. To this day,
the group has not had a single meeting. Interviewee D assumes this is a consequence of the
contractor not updating the model in a systematic way. According to interviewee E, who also
is the owner’s representative in this group, another reason could be their inability to understand
the purpose of having an updated BIM model for FM.
Classiﬁcation System
In Norway, there are several initiatives to digitize the AEC industry, parallel to the Tønsberg
project’s development of a system that enables BIM-based handover. The Federation of Norwe-
gian Construction Industries (BNL) has initiated the development of a digitization plan which
points out the importance of digitization to be done as a collaboration. In addition, BNL wants
to be involved in the development of a common property set structure which would deﬁne which
properties are essential to include. Interviewee D also mentions an initiative that is encourag-
ing the industry to start utilizing GTIN and SGTIN as building component ID. Subsequently,
it would be easier to re-use object and link its information to the BIM model, and to supply
existing objects with new information.
Interviewee D recently performed a test of the current ID-system (NOBB) used by one of the
product databases in B-Link. By implementing one product number in their search-system, he
received twelve different windows as a result. Such inaccuracy in the current ID-system requires
the FM personnel to have more product information than the product ID to be able to order a
new window. The Tønsberg project is trying to establish some key-elements in their system that
can be used for implementing future industry developments such as GTIN and SGTIN. Many
other industries have already managed to implement a unique GTIN on their products. An ex-
ample is the Norwegian supplier market, such as Optimera AS, where over 90% of the items are
having a unique GTIN number. The project wanted to take part in establishing a similar system
for the Norwegian AEC industry. Hence, they initiated the establishment of a Norwegian GTIN
and SGTIN guide together with Statsbygg and GS1 Norway. The English translated guide was
released last year in GS1 international and they have already heard of initiators in China who
are interested in utilizing the system.
Product Data Register System
Today, coBuilder and B-Link have very few product properties included in their databases.
Since the FM personnel at Tønsberg are used to only receiving PDF-documents, the project
does not feel stressed to not have the properties implemented in their as-built deliverables yet.
Nonetheless, interviewee D explains that the more properties coBuilder and B-Link implements
the better as it reduces their need of having any properties in the BIM models.
46
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Case Study
”We do not want our own database of products, we want a commercialized database which
requires a common ID-system”
- Interviewee D
It is also essential to deﬁne what the properties actually stands for as suppliers may use different
methods for measuring the same property. Interviewee D is impressed by coBuilder effort to
link all their data-felts to buildingSMART’s data dictionary (bsDD) and to utilize national and
international standards when deﬁning what properties are required to be included.
4.2.4
Discussion and Main Findings
This case study presented the information logistics for the collection of as-built information at
Tønsberg Hospital Project. The main ﬁnding is that the project has tried to avoid implementing
as-built information to the actual BIM model objects and rather have properties and FM-related
documents linked to the model objects. A majority of the as-built information has been deliv-
ered by the Norwegian product databases coBuilder and B-Link. The project has established
a cloud-based system and product register database on which the TFM-numbering system 2.0
by Statsbygg made the linking achievable. The interviewees would have preferred to have as
many of the properties linked to the model object as possible, however, the as-built information
from the product databases mainly include as-built information in PDF-format and only a few
product properties. The interview revealed some project speciﬁc challenges were the prevailing
one was the contractor’s lack of interest in updating the as-design BIM model to an as-built
model. One of the interviewees recognized the AEC industry’s need for a common building
component classiﬁcation system and implied a further development of GTIN and SGTIN.
47
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
4.3
Comparative Analysis
In this section, the empirical ﬁndings and literature review on as-built data collection require-
ments and delivery are compared. The analysis is divided into ﬁve key areas listed below. The
selection of key areas is based on the most central topics of the empirical and theoretical ﬁnd-
ings. Moreover, are they considered to be the necessary areas to analyze to answer the research
questions of this thesis.
• The Requiring of As-Built Information
• As-Built BIM Models
• Manual Collection and Delivery
• BIM-Based Collection and Delivery
• BIM for FM
4.3.1
The Requiring of As-Built Information
Teicholz (2004) reports that more than 85 percent of the life-cycle costs are FM-related costs.
Payant and O. (2014) reports about a study proving that costs due to loss of data and interop-
erability issues represents 12.4 percent of the total annual cost of building operations. Hence,
the requirement of as-built information is considered to be an important task for the owner.
By having clearly speciﬁed information requirements, the various stakeholders can save a large
amount of time (Cavka et al., 2017). The literature ﬁndings detect that the lack of clear as-
built information requirement is common, hence the as-built information is often unstructured,
incomplete and non-reusable (Cavka et al., 2017). Thabet and Lucas (2017a) describes the
as-built deliverables from construction as a ”Tsunami” of 50 percent valuable and 50 percent
useless information. Consequently, the FM team is forced to ﬁrst sort out the valuable infor-
mation before implementing it to their FM software. The necessity for a clear and complete set
of delivery requirements is also recognized by the owner representative in interview A. He de-
scribes it as a necessary factor for a successful as-built data delivery. Thabet et al. (2016) points
out the importance to have the ”end in mind” when requiring as-built information to guarantee
that the necessary information is delivered with the right structure.
According to literature, the as-built deliverables should be contractually agreed-upon in order to
get the contractor to provide the desired as-built information (Teicholz, 2013b). Consequently,
the collection could be ﬁnancially rewarded which increases the likelihood for dates and respon-
sibilities to be held (Borrmann et al., 2018). This is implemented in the project of interviewee
A where the contract states what information to include, delivery deadlines, language require-
ments and how the information should be collected and delivered.
48
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Comparative Analysis
However, a panelist in the study conducted by Mayo and Issa (2015) expresses difﬁculty in for-
malizing and contractualizing a structured information exchange. The researchers believe it is
due to the owners’ struggle to realize what information is valuable for the organization instead
of collecting it all just-in-case. Initiatives such as COBie and IDM are promoted as tools for
assisting the owners to require as-built information, however, Love et al. (2014b) points out
the initiatives inability to help the owner deﬁning what information to require as they mainly
focus on how to structure the deliverables. Interviewee C points out the possible advantage
of involving the future FM actor when formulating the delivery requirements. Nevertheless,
he also states that it is rarely achievable since the FM actor often is not involved until a later
stage. At the case study project, the owners will also operate the facility which enables them
to use their FM expertise when formulating their as-built information requirements. They have
established a large matrix that described what as-built information is required for every building
component. This matrix is also implemented into their delivery system which makes it easier
for the contractor to understand what information is required for a speciﬁc component.
For owners that are lacking the competence to identify what information to require, there are
consultant services available to help the owners to meet their needs (Mayo and Issa, 2014).
However, Cavka et al. (2017) points out how the owner should understand the required as-
built information to be able to effectively compare the delivered artifacts with the requirements.
According to Teicholz (2013b) should both the FM and IT staff be involved in the collection
process to assure sufﬁcient interoperability of the delivered as-built information. In intervie-
wee A’s project, the owner is frequently controlling the quality while the owner organization
in interview B mainly controls the quality and the end of the projects. Thus it is considered
valuable for the owner to acquire a sufﬁcient understanding regarding their as-built information
requirements.
4.3.2
As-Built BIM Models
Various ﬁndings from the literature review consider the updating of the BIM model during
construction as beneﬁcial for the utilization of BIM for FM (Gu and London, 2010; Teicholz,
2013b; CIC, 2011). The interviewee’s opinions and processes regarding the updating of the
as-designed model to an as-built model are somewhat separated. Interviewee C states that the
extent to which the BIM model is updated varies among different organizations. An update
of a simple version of the BIM model could be enough for some owners while others decide
to update the full version. He highlights the importance of having sufﬁciently updated models
and drawings when prioritizing tasks as a facilities manager. The project in interview A up-
dates their as-built BIM model manually each week by the architects/designers, based on the
approved change orders. The projects of the owner organization in interview B do not require
an update of the as-designed model for their own purposes.
49
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
They are more interested in what is in the building, roughly where it is placed and to what
system the components are connected to. The case study project’s plan is to create an as-built
BIM model by updating the as-design model within certain tolerance limits. However, they
have experienced some challenges related to the updating of the BIM model. The contractor in
the project seems to lack a systematic method for the updating and are not as interested in ac-
complishing the required updating. Interviewee D mentions the uselessness of AR-technology
in FM if the model is not representing what actually has been built. Hence, he points out that
it is essential to control that the as-built model is correct. The project has considered utilizing
laser scanning methods for the updating but was not able to ﬁnd an economically feasible nor
user-friendly solution. Teicholz (2013b) recommends the updating of the BIM model to be ex-
plicitly stated in the contract while the instructions for how it could be updated should the stated
in the BIM execution plan.
If the updating of the BIM model is accomplished, it could improve the documentation en-
vironment for future use, minimize facility turnover disputes and assist in future permitting
processes (CIC, 2011). It is also considered crucial to update the as-built BIM model with any
changes in the graphic data or the as-built documents performed during the operational phase
(Teicholz, 2013b; Sveriges Kommuner och Landsting, 2017). According to Teicholz (2013b)
is the information easier accessed and updated if stored on an external database rather than on
the actual model. This method of externally storing as-built information is utilized by the case
study project as an attempt to constrain the size of the BIM models. The as-built information
is saved on the project’s system and product register places on their BIM-server and is linked
to the model elements by Statbygg’s TFM-codes. When the FM team is replacing a building
component in the future, they simply will have to remove the link and replace it with a link to
the new as-built information.
4.3.3
Manual Collection and Delivery
”When one considers the extensive documentation of information needed for effective mainte-
nance and operation of most facilities, it is clear that ﬁnding efﬁcient ways to collect, access
and update this information is very important” (Teicholz, 2013b). According to the literature
review is the physical storing of manuals and drawings the most frequently used approach (East-
man et al., 2011). The FM staff will then manually import the necessary information into their
FM systems which a time-consuming process (Liu and Zettersten, 2016; Sacks et al., 2018).
Sacks et al. (2018) state how this manual approach ”cannot be seriously considered for modern
buildings of moderate and large size”. Another approach identiﬁed both by interviewee C and
East et al. (2012) is to let the contractor implement the as-built information straight into the
FM-system. Interviewee C dispute the utilization of this method as it could cause loss of the
contractor’s original information when the FM actor is updating or replacing the information.
50
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Comparative Analysis
The approach developed by Thabet and Lucas (2017b) in the ﬁrst phase of their study is con-
sidered to be a semi-automated collection approach for owners without any BIM experience.
First, they developed a spreadsheet with the owner’s as-built information requirements which
the contractor populated with values. The information on the spreadsheet was then directly
transferred into the CMMS system by using a one-way transferring mechanism which enabled
more efﬁcient FM shortly after the turnover.
4.3.4
BIM-based Collection and Delivery
Several BIM-based methods for the collection and delivery of as-built information have been
identiﬁed through the literature review, interviews and case study. The methods do either in-
volve implementing the as-built information as properties in the BIM model or link externally
saved information to the model component. Thabet and Lucas (2017a) developed a process
the owner’s desired parameters were implemented into the designers’ Revit models. It would
have been to time-consuming for the contractor to populate the parameters with values in Revit.
Hence, the parameters were exported to an external spreadsheet for the contractor to ﬁll with
values. When the spreadsheet was completed it was imported back into the Revit models which
then could be linked to the CMMS system. A similar approach was adopted in a case study by
Pishdad-Bozorgi et al. (2018) which failed to automate their data exchange to the FM-system.
The authors argue that it could have been avoided by having a BIM/data integrator in the project
team.
The case study project and the project in interview A are both utilizing the method of link-
ing their as-built information to the BIM model components by using Statsbygg’s TFM-code
system. One major difference between the projects is their methods for collecting the as-built
information. The case study project is mainly collecting the as-built information through a
project register database such as coBuilder or B-Link whereas the other project only uploads
the gathered information manually. The interviewee A’s role is to gather the correct as-built in-
formation from their subcontractors and upload those to the object with the correct TFM-code
on a web-based platform. In the case study project, the contractor is instead linking the al-
ready uploaded as-built information to the correct model component. The as-built information
is uploaded to its speciﬁc TFM-code, hence the information only need to exist once even if a
component exists multiple times. Therefore it is essential to follow a deliberated identiﬁcation
structure such as Statsbygg’s TFM 2.0 manual.
In Norway, the product register databases only offer a limited number of properties. Interviewee
D states how they would like for the product registers to implement as many properties as pos-
sible. Hence, their need for having any properties in the BIM models would decrease. He also
points out that such a commercialized product database would require a common ID-system
51
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4. ANALYSIS
like GTIN. In Denmark, there are no product databases. However, interviewee C believes it
would have been more efﬁcient with an international database instead of a Danish one.
4.3.5
BIM for FM
According to Teicholz (2013b), there are several ways to implement BIM in FM and the meth-
ods ”varies depending on organizational mission and the requirements of the facilities infras-
tructure supporting it”. Two main methods of utilizing BIM for FM have been identiﬁed, one
method involves the use of BIM-enabled FM software such as DaluxFM while the other method
is utilizing a middleware that links the BIM model with the organization’s FM software. The
owner organization in interview B uses DaluxFM and have uploaded the BIM models of their
facilities into the cloud-based software. Interviewee B has also been testing Dalux new han-
dover tool which is described in interview C. Various ﬁndings in the literature review recognize
the advantage of being able to integrate the BIM model with various FM systems required to
operate a facility (Teicholz, 2013b; Sacks et al., 2018). EcodomusFM is a middleware that en-
ables integration with various FM software.
The are several challenges related to the implementation of BIM in FM. Cavka et al. (2017)
points out the owners’ inability to establish the information requirements necessary for BIM-
based FM. Sacks et al. (2018) are critical to the difﬁculties with establishing and maintaining
the bi-directional linkage between the BIM model the FM software. One reason is the BIM soft-
wares’ inability to perform the necessary preparation and extensive ”cleaning” of data before
integrating it to the FM software. Edirisinghe et al. (2017) identiﬁes an information gap between
the BIM software and the owner’s existing FM systems due to incompatibility. Consequently,
some as-built information will not be available to support operational activities. Interviewee
D recognized the same gap and describes the reestablishing of data as time-consuming. He
believes their processes could eliminate that gap as all parties are using the same system. The
case study has experienced issues with the BIM models not being updated to the as-built model
while interviewee B has had issues with contractors not delivering the as-built information in
time for facility turnover. Another challenge identiﬁed that could prevent full implementation
of new technology in FM is the FM team’s willingness to accept the change (Teicholz, 2013a).
Hence, Teicholz (2013a) states it is necessary for the facilities manager to possess a proactive
change management approach. He also points out the importance of educating the FM person-
nel as people are more likely to support an organizational change if they understand why they
are doing something.
52
==PAGE:65==
5
DISCUSSION
In this chapter, the three main topics of this thesis will be discussed based on the results from
the comparative analysis. After that will the limitations and its inﬂuence on the results of this
project be acknowledged. Furthermore, the suggestions for further research will be proposed.
The Requiring of As-Built Information
One reoccurring subject in the literature review of this thesis has been the owners’ difﬁculty
to understand and formulate as-built information delivery requirements. Consequently, the con-
tractors tend to deliver a ”tsunami” of as-built information ”just-in-case”. Hence is the FM
team forced to ﬁrst extract the valuable information before it can be implemented into their FM
system. Further, the deliverables are described as unstructured and non-reusable. One possible
explanation behind this tendency is the different project stakeholders’ varying need for informa-
tion. Without clearly deﬁned requirements, the contractor will presumably delivery what they
assume is necessary as-built information for operating a facility. Consequently, a ”tsunami” of
as-built information is generated.
Several BIM-based collection methods described in this thesis seems to force the owner to
develop clear and structured as-built information requirements in order for the contractor to ex-
ecute the collection. At the Tønsberg project, they have implemented a large requirement matrix
into their delivery-system which visualizes what information the contractor should collect. A
similar approach is adopted in DaluxHandover where the owner has to prepare the module with
what as-built information they are expecting before the contractor can collect the information.
Clear delivery requirements are considered to be an important factor for a successful as-built
collection and delivery. Hence, the BIM-based collection methods could have a positive effect
on the quality of the delivered as-built information.
53
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5. DISCUSSION
Collection and Delivery Methods
The Tønsberg hospital project in the case study is mainly utilizing product register databases
for the collection of as-built information. Hence, a great part of the as-built deliverables is
provided by the product register databases as opposed to have the contractor manually collect
the as-built information. The product register database coBuilder have considered national and
international standards when determining what documents to deliver. Therefore is the utiliza-
tion of the product register database considered to be a process that could reduce the amount of
unnecessary as-built information. In addition, it could reduce the time the contractor spends on
collecting information.
Currently, do the Norwegian product registers mainly provide as-built information in PDF-
format and only a few product properties. Nevertheless would the representatives from Tønsberg
hospital like to see them implement as many properties as possible. The Tønsberg hospital
project is only linking the as-built information from the product register to the BIM model ob-
jects. Hence, an increasing number of properties in the product register would decrease the
need for keeping properties in the actual BIM model. The project would then achieve their am-
bition to keep the as-built information separate from the BIM model. This thesis has recognized
several advantages of externally storing as-built information. One advantage is the constrained
BIM model size which could make it easier to navigate in the model on handheld devices during
the operational phase. Another positive effect by linking the as-built information to the model
is the possibility for the FM team to replace and update old information when a building com-
ponent is replaced or removed. If the component’s properties would have been stored in the
BIM model, the FM team would have been required to access the actual BIM model in order to
update the as-built information.
The method of linking the as-built information to the model requires a systematic method for
identifying the BIM model components and the collected information. In Norway, Statsbygg’s
TFM-number system is used also by projects with other developers than Statsbygg. Each type
of BIM model components are given the same TFM-number, hence an extracted list of model
components can be integrated into a delivery platform and used for collecting the as-built in-
formation. In Denmark, the contractors will soon be able to upload their as-built information
directly to the correct BIM element type by using DaluxHandover. Both collection methods are
enabling the as-built information to be linked to the BIM model. Consequently, both methods
are considered to enable the use of BIM for FM.
54
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Limitations
As-Built BIM Models
When comparing the ﬁndings in the literature review with the empirical ﬁndings from stake-
holder interview, a varying need for updating of the BIM model during construction was recog-
nized. The need varies depending on the size and the objectives of the organization. Hence, it
could be beneﬁcial for the owner to evaluate the future FM teams’ as-built BIM model require-
ments when formulating the contract’s clauses related to the updating of the BIM model during
construction. Despite contractual agreements to update the BIM model, it should be noticed
that the contractor might still not be very interested in performing frequent updates. Hence, it
could be advantageous to ensure the contractor’s effort for updating the model is adequately
ﬁnancially rewarded and penalized. In addition, it could beneﬁcial to increase the contractors’
awareness of how insufﬁcient updates of the as-built BIM model could reduce the usability of
the BIM model for FM activities. If the BIM model is not representing what has been built,
it cannot be effectively used for planning of renovation nor for using augmented reality tools.
Hence, it is considered important for the owner to control the accuracy of the updated as-built
model in addition to the control of the delivered as-built information.
5.1
Limitations
The technologies and software related to BIM in the AEC industry are constantly evolving.
Consequently, there is a need for maintaining the as-built information and the as-built BIM
models to ensure interoperability with the current software. This thesis has mainly focused on
the requiring, collection, and delivery for new facilities, hence the maintaining of information
is beyond the scope of this project. Moreover, have the scope been limited to only examining
methods for new facilities. A subject that is considered to be within the scope is the newly re-
leased standard ISO 19650 ”Organization of information about construction work - Information
management using building information modeling”. However, due to lack of time have not this
standard and its consequences on the topic of this thesis been further evaluated.
The initial intention of this thesis was to focus on literature and empirical information from
the three Scandinavian countries. Due to limited literature from these countries do the ﬁnd-
ings in the theory chapter also include sources from other countries. The empirical ﬁndings are
they only gathered in Norway and Denmark due to a shortage of available and interested inter-
view objects in Sweden. Consequently, there could be other processes related to the delivery of
as-built information which are not covered in this study.
55
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5. DISCUSSION
5.2
Further Studies
During the executing of this project, several relevant and intriguing topics were recognized.
However, due to the restricted time of this master’s thesis are these topics not included in the
scope. Hence, the following topics are suggested for further research:
• A study conducted to realize what changes in processes, and culture are required within
an FM-organization for them to gain beneﬁts from the utilization of BIM.
• The working groups in CEN/TC 442 have various BIM standards related to as-built infor-
mation collection and delivery under approval. When these standards have been released,
a pilot case study project could try to adopt their recommendations and analyze their
effect on the quality of the as-built deliverables.
• The project in the case study is operated by an IPD-contract and is described as the ﬁrst
of its kind in Europe. Hence it would have been interesting to study how the close stake-
holder collaboration in an IPD-contract affects the utilization of BIM for FM.
56
==PAGE:69==
6
CONCLUSION
The intention of this chapter is to answer the research questions by highlighting the most im-
portant ﬁndings of this thesis. Moreover, recommendations directed towards the owner sector
regarding the requiring, collection, and delivery of as-built information is presented based on
the conclusion.
This research aimed to understand how as-built information from construction is being col-
lected and delivered in the Scandinavian AEC industry. A recently performed Danish interview
study indicates that over 75 percent of the FM practitioners have either received incomplete or
inaccessible as-built information or drawing material without any updates from the construc-
tion phase. Hence, the objective was to analyze how the utilization of BIM-based collection
methods could affect the quality of the delivered as-built information and moreover encourage
the use of BIM for FM. To meet the research aim, qualitative research incorporating a literature
review, stakeholder interviews, and a case study was conducted
From the ﬁndings in the literature review, it can be concluded that ﬁnding efﬁcient methods
for collecting, access and update the as-built information is essential. Manual delivery and in-
tegration of as-built information into the organization’s FM system have according to literature
been the most frequently used approach in the past. In combination with the owner’s inabil-
ity to formalize sufﬁcient as-built information requirements, lead the manual delivery often to
a handover including a large amount of non-valuable information. Due to the approach’s in-
efﬁciency, it should not be considered by medium to large facilities. Consequently, several
BIM-based collection and delivery methods were identiﬁed in the literature review. Neverthe-
less, before deciding to automate any of the FM teams’ activities it is crucial for the facilities
managers to consider the organization’s culture and IT competencies.
Based on a qualitative analysis of the current methods for collecting as-built information in
the Scandinavian AEC industry, it can be concluded that BIM-based collection methods have
57
==PAGE:70==
the potential to increase the relevance of delivered the as-built information. The BIM-based
collection methods are partly based on the owners’ established delivery requirements. The re-
quirements are implemented in the collection tool’s desktop and guide the contractor in what
as-built information to deliver for each building component. Subsequently, the delivered as-
built information should be controlled by the owner. Hence, the owner is required to have a
sufﬁcient understanding of their required as-built information in order to effectively compare
the delivered artifacts with the requirements.
A BIM-based collection can either be accomplished by implementing the as-built information
as object properties in the actual BIM model or by externally storing the as-built information
and link it to the BIM model components. Based on ﬁndings from literature and empirical in-
formation, the linking method can be concluded as the most advantageous method. Moreover,
it is considered to be the most beneﬁcial method for the utilization of BIM for FM as it allows
the FM team to instantly access and updates the as-built information.
6.1
Recommendations
The list of recommendations has grown throughout the work with this thesis in order to answer
the last research question: What set of guidelines in regards to as-built information should the
owner take into consideration? The following recommendations are developed by compiling
information from the literature review, empirical analysis, and individual considerations:
• Before making any decisions regarding the implementation of new FM technology, eval-
uate the organization’s available resources, IT competency and culture.
• Consider hiring a consultant for assisting in the formalizing of the as-built delivery re-
quirement it the organization does not have enough IT or FM experience.
• If possible, involve the future facilities manager both in the design process and in the
formalizing of the as-built information requirement. Early involvement of FM in design
could improve the facility’s operability and the relevance of the as-built deliverables.
• The collection of as-built information should be contractually agreed-upon. It could be
advantageous to speciﬁc regarding the owner organizations expectations on the contrac-
tor’s updating of the as-built model.
• Consider the utilization of a collection system where the as-built information is linked to
the BIM model object rather than implemented as properties in the actual BIM model.
• Acquire sufﬁcient knowledge about the as-built information requirements in order to be
able to conduct quality control of the deliverables.
58
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
Aarseth, I. (2018). Digital samhandling i Tønsbergprosjektet.
https://www.difi.no/sites/difino/files/130918_bad_bae_
presentasjon_tonsbergprosjektet_aarseth.pdf.
Aarseth, I. (2019). BIM i Tønsbergprosjektet.
https://d21dbafykfdck9.cloudfront.net/1548339710/
bim-i-prosjekt-toensberg-sykehus-sykehuset-i-vf-helse-soer-oest-rhf-16-
pdf.
Accelix (2018). Predictive Versus Preventive Maintenance.
https://www.accelix.com/community/predictive-maintenance/
predictive-versus-preventive-maintenance/. Last checked on Feb 08,
2019.
Alexandre Beltrao (2016). CEN/TC 442: working for BIM standardization in Europe.
https:
//www.cencenelec.eu/News/Videos/Pages/VIDEO-2016-048.aspx. Last
checked on Jun 11, 2019.
Alshibly, H., Chiong, R., and Bao, Y. (2016). Investigating the Critical Success Factors for
Implementing Electronic Document Management Systems in Governments: Evidence From
Jordan. Information Systems Management, 33, NO.4:287–301.
Aram, S., Eastman, C., Sacks, R., Panushev, I., and Venugopal, M. (2010). Introducing a new
methodology to develop the information delivery manual for aec projects.
Azhar, S. (2011). Building information modeling (bim): Trends, beneﬁts, risks, and challenges
for the aec industry. Leadership and Management in Engineering, 11 (3):241–252.
Azhar, S., Nadeem, A., Mok, J. Y. N., and Leung, B. H. Y. (2008). Building Information
Modeling (BIM): A New Paradigm for Visual Interactive Modeling and Simulation for
Construction Projects.
B-Link (2019). http://www.b-link.no. Last checked on May 10, 2019.
59
==PAGE:72==
Becerik-Gerber, B., Jazizadeh, F., Li, N., and Calis, G. (2012). Application Areas and Data
Requirements for BIM-Enabled Facilities Management. Journal of Construction
Engineering and Management, March:431–442.
Beck, K., Connolly, K. J., Napier, B., and Jordani, D. (2011). Digital Facility Management
Information Handover: Current DSF Practices, Industry-wide Movement, Future Directions
Acknowledgements Project Lead.
Borrmann, A., Knig, M., Koch, C., and Beetz, J. (2018). Building Information Modeling:
Technology Foundations and Industry Practice. Springer International Publishing AG,
Cham, Switzerland.
BuildingSMART (2015). P04 Objektmerking - FDV.
https://buildingsmart.no/sites/buildingsmart.no/files/
p04-objektmerking-fdv_20150309.pdf. Last checked on May 13, 2019.
buildingSMART (2019a). Technical Vision. https://www.buildingsmart.org/
about/what-is-openbim/ifc-introduction/. Last checked on Jun 11, 2019.
buildingSMART (2019b). Technical Vision.
https://www.buildingsmart.org/standards/technical-vision/. Last
checked on Jun 11, 2019.
Byggtjeneste (2011). Om FDV-dokumentasjon. https://byggtjeneste.no/
Artikkelbilder/Produkter/Om%20FDV-dokumentasjon.pdf. Last checked
on Mar 26, 2019.
Bygningsstyrelsen (2019). IKT-bekendtgørelsen.
https://www.bygst.dk/godt-byggeri/
digitalisering-af-byggeriet/ikt-bekendtgoerelsen/. Last checked on
May 19, 2019.
Campbell, S. (2015). Conducting Case Study Research. American Society for Clinical
Laboratory Science, 28(3):201–205.
Cavka, H. B., Staub-French, S., and Poirier, E. A. (2017). Developing owner information
requirements for BIM-enabled project delivery and asset management. Automation in
Construction, 83:169–183.
CIBSE (2019). Product Data Template. https://www.cibse.org/knowledge/
bim-building-information-modelling/product-data-templates. Last
checked on Apr 26, 2019.
60
==PAGE:73==
CIC (2011). Building Information Modeling Project Execution Planning Guide - Version 2.1.
The Computer Integrated Construction Research Group. The Pennsylvania State University,
US.
coBuilder (2019a). 5 frequently asked questions about ProductXchange and Cobuilder
Collaborate. https://cobuilder.com/en/
frequently-asked-questions-about-productxchange-and-cobuilder-collabora
Last checked on Apr 26, 2019.
coBuilder (2019b). ProductXchange Becomes Cobuilder Collaborate.
http://productxchange.no/. Last checked on Apr 26, 2019.
coBuilder (2019c). WHAT IS A PRODUCT DATA TEMPLATE? https:
//cobuilder.com/nb/hva-er-en-product-data-template-pdt/. Last
checked on Apr 26, 2019.
coBuilder International (2017). Part 3: Information requirements (pas).
ComputerWorld (2018). Krever digital tvilling.
http://www.cw.no/artikkel/krever-digital-tvilling. Last checked on
May 19, 2019.
Costa, A., Keane, M. M., Torrens, J. I., and Corry, E. (2013). Building operation and energy
performance: monitoring, analysis and optimization toolkit. Applied Energy, 101:310–216.
Cotts, D. G., Roper, K. O., and Payant, R. P. (2010). The Facility Management Handbook,
Third Edition. AMACOM Book Division of American Management Association, New
York, NY.
Cuneco (2014). Cuneco Classiﬁcation System: Informationsniveauer. https://bips.dk/
files/news_files/informationsniveauer_20141211_r0.pdf. Last
checked on Jan 28, 2019.
Dalux (2019). DaluxFM. https://www.dalux.com/daluxfm/. Last checked on
Jun 06, 2019.
Dawood, N. (2010). Development of 4d-based performance indicators in construction
industry. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 17, issue 2:210–230.
Denzin, N. K. and Lincoln, Y. S. (2000). Handbook of qualitative research. Sage Publications,
Inc.,, 2 edition.
Dimoudi, A. and Zoras, S. (2016). The Role of Buildings in Energy System. Energy
Performance of Buildings, pages 37–62.
61
==PAGE:74==
East, E. W. (2012). ”Construction-Operations Building information exchange (COBie),”
buildingSMART alliance, National Institute of building Sciences, Washington, DC.
http://www.nibs.org/?page=bsa_cobie. cited 03-Apr-2019.
East, E. W., Nisbet, N., and Liebich, T. (2012). Facility Management Handover Model View.
Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering.
Eastman, C., Teicholz, P., Sacks, R., and Liston, K. (2011). BIM Handbook: A Guide to
Building Information Modeling for Owners, Managers, Designers, Engineers and
Contractors. John Wilet & Sons Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
EcoDomus (2019). EcoDomus FM.
http://ecodomus.com/products/masonry-style/. Last checked on Jun 06,
2019.
Edirisinghe, R., London, K. A., Kalutara, P., and Aranda-Mena, G. (2017). Building
information modelling for facility management: Are we there yet? Engineering,
Construction and Architectural Management.
Farghaly, K., Abanda, F. H., Vidalakis, C., and Wood, G. (2018). Taxonomy for BIM and
Asset Management Semantic Interoperability. Journal of Management in Engineering,
34(4):04018012.
Fløisbonn, H. W., Skeie, G., Uppstad, B., Markussen, B., and Sunesen, S. (2018). MMI
Modell Modenhets Indeks. https://www.arkitektbedriftene.no/
arkitektbedriftene-rif-og-eba-med-felles-mmi-veileder. Last
checked on Jan 28, 2019.
Flyvbjerg, B. (2006). Five misunderstandings about case-study research. Qualitative Inquiry,
12(2):219–245.
Gallaher, M. P., O’Connor, A. C., Dettbarn, Jr., J. L., and Gilday, L. T. (2004). Cost Analysis
of Inadequate Interoperability in the U.S. Capital Facilities Industry. Technical report.
Gill, P., Stewart, K., Treasure, E., and Chadwick, B. (2008). Methods of data collection in
qualitative research: Interviews and focus groups. British Dental Journal.
Gledson, B. J. and Greenwood, D. (2014). The implementation and use of 4d bim and virtual
construction.
Gu, N. and London, K. (2010). Understanding and facilitating BIM adoption in the AEC
industry. Automation in Construction, 19(8):988–999.
Higgings, L. R., Mboley, K., and Wolf, D. (2008). Maintenance Engineering Handbook,
Seventh Edition. McGraw-Hill, 7 edition.
62
==PAGE:75==
International Facility Management Association (2019). What is facility management?
https://www.ifma.org/about/what-is-facility-managementr. Last
checked on Feb 04, 2019.
ISO (2016). International Organization for Standardization, ”Building information models -
Information delivery manual - Part 1: Methodology and methods” ISO 29481-1:2017.
Brussels, Belgium.
ISO (2018a). International Organization for Standardization, ”Organization and digitization of
information of buildings and civil engineering works, including building information
modelling (BIM) - Information management using building information modelling - Part 1:
Concepts and principles” ISO 19650-1:2018. Brussels, Belgium.
ISO (2018b). International Organization for Standardization, ”Organization and digitization of
information of buildings and civil engineering works, including building information
modelling (BIM) - Information management using building information modelling - Part 2:
Delivery phase of the assets” ISO 19650-1:2018. Brussels, Belgium.
Jensen, P. (2008a). Facilities Management for Students and Practitioners. Centre for Facilities
Management Realdania Research, 1 edition.
Jensen, P. A. (2008b). Integration of considerations for facilities management in design.
Design Management in the Architectural Engineering and Construction Sector: CIB W096
Architectural Management TG49Architectural Engineering (pp. 191-199). Rotterdam:
CIB., CIB Reports, No.319.
Josseaux, B. (2018). BIM Dimensions. https://blog.drawbotics.com/2018/11/
07/the-bim-revolution-in-building-management/. Last checked on
Jun 10, 2019.
Kamardeen, I. (2010). 8d bim modelling tool for accident prevention through design.
ANNUAL CONFERENCE-ARCOM-, 1:281–290.
Karlshøj, J. (2011). Information Delivery Manuals.
http://iug.buildingsmart.org/idms/. Last checked on Apr 02, 2019.
Kassem, M., Kelly, G., Dawood, N., Serginson, M., and Lockley, S. (2015). BIM in facilities
management applications: A case study of a large university complex. Built Environment
Project and Asset Management, 5, NO.3:261–277.
Kastner, W., Neugschwandtner, G., Soucek, S., and Newman, H. M. (2005). Communication
systems for building automation and control. Proceedings of the IEEE, 93(6):1178–1203.
Kini, G. (2011). Energy Management Systems. IntechOpen.
63
==PAGE:76==
Link Arkitektur (2019). Sykehuset i Vestfold, Tønsbergprosjektet.
https://linkarkitektur.com/Prosjekter/
Sykehuset-i-Vestfold-Toensbergprosjektet. Last checked on May 30,
2019.
Liu, R. and Issa, R. R. A. (2016). Survey: Common knowledge in bim for facility
maintenance. Journal of Performance of Constructed Facilities, 30, issue 3:04015033–1.
Liu, R. and Zettersten, G. (2016). Facility Sustainment Management System Automated
Population from Building Information Models. Construction Research Congress 2016,
pages 2403–2410.
Love, P. E., Matthews, J., Simpson, I., Hill, A., and Olatunji, O. A. (2014a). A beneﬁts
realization management building information modeling framework for asset owners.
Automation in Construction, 37:1–10.
Love, P. E., Matthews, J., Simpson, I., Hill, A., and Olatunji, O. A. (2014b). A beneﬁts
realization management building information modeling framework for asset owners.
Automation in Construction, 37:1–10.
Macqueen, K. M., Guest, G., and Namey, E. (2005). Qualitative Research Methods: A DATA
COLLECTOR’S FIELD GUIDE. Technical report.
Mayo, G. and Issa, R. R. A. (2014). Processes and Standards for BIM Closeout Information
Deliverables for Owners. pages 673–680.
Mayo, G. and Issa, R. R. A. (2015). Nongeometric Building Information Needs Assessment
for Facilities Management. Journal of Management in Engineering, 32(3):04015054.
Meng, X. (2013). Involvement of Facilities Management Specialists in Building Design:
United Kingdom Experience. Journal of Performance of Constructed Facilities, pages
500–507.
Mills, E. (2010). Building Commissioning: A Golden Opportunity for Reducing Energy Costs
and Greenhouse-gas Emissions.
Mohammed, M. and A Hassanain, M. (2010). Towards improvement in facilities operation and
maintenance through feedback to the design team. The Built & Human Environment Review,
3:72–86.
Molio (2019). Strukturen i CCS.
https://molio.dk/vaerktoejer-column-ccs/strukturen-i-ccs. Last
checked on May 7, 2019.
64
==PAGE:77==
National Building Speciﬁcation (2017). What is an information delivery manual?
https://www.thenbs.com/knowledge/what-is-an-information-delivery-manual-idm. Last
checked on Apr 25, 2019.
National Institute of Building Sciences (2017). Facilities Operations Maintenance - An
Overview .
https://www.wbdg.org/facilities-operations-maintenance. Last
checked on Jun 06, 2019.
Nica, A. K. and Wodyski, W. (2016). Enhancing facility management through bim 6d.
Procedia Engineering, 164:299–306.
Payant, R. and O., K. R. (2014). The Facility Management Handbook. AMACOM., 4 edition.
Pishdad-Bozorgi, P., Gao, X., Eastman, C., and Self, A. P. (2018). Planning and developing
facility management-enabled building information model (FM-enabled BIM). Automation
in Construction.
Rasmussen, H. L. and Due, P. H. (2019). The legacy from construction projects to facilities
management in denmark: The good, the bad and the ugly. (Research paper for the European
Facility Management Conference, June 2019).
Rastegari, A. and Mobin, M. (2016). Maintenance Decision Making, Supported By
Computerized Maintenance Management System.
Sacks, R., Eastman, C., Lee, G., and Teicholz, P. (2018). BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building
Information Modeling for Owners, Designers, Engineers, Contractors, and Facility
Managers, Third Edition. John Wilet & Sons Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Skanska Norge (2018a). ISI - samhandlingsverktøy. https://www.skanska.no/
hvem-vi-er/informasjon-til-leverandorer/isi/. Last checked on
May 14, 2019.
Skanska Norge (2018b). Tønsbergprosjektet.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UpBjeDUw6P4.
Smith, P. (2014). Bim & the 5d project cost manager. Procedia - Social and Behavioral
Sciences, 119:475–484.
Statsbygg (2017). PA 0802 Tverrfaglig Merkesystem (TFM). https://www.statsbygg.
no/files/publikasjoner/prosjekteringsanvisninger/0_Generelle/
PA_0802_Tverrfaglig_merkesystem.pdf. Last checked on May 7, 2019.
Sunesen, S. (2017). bS netværksmøde Tønsbergprosjektet.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dajl2L_FuBA.
65
==PAGE:78==
Sveriges Kommuner och Landsting (2017). BIM digitalisering av byggnadsinformation.
ISBN: 978-91-7585-513-4.
Swanson, L. (2001). Linking Programming and Design with Facilities Management. Int. J
Production Economics, 70:237–244.
Sykehuset i Vestfold (2019). Byggingen er i rute.
https://www.siv.no/om-oss/nyheter/-byggingen-er-i-rute. Last
checked on May 30, 2019.
Teicholz, E. (2004). Bridging the AEC/FM technology gap. Journal of Facilities
Management, pt 2.
Teicholz, E. (2013a). Technology for Facility Managers. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken,
New Jersey.
Teicholz, P. (2013b). BIM for Facility Managers. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New
Jersey.
Thabet, W. and Lucas, J. (2017a). ”A 6-Step Systematic Process for Model-Based Facility
Data Delivery. Journal of Information Technology in Construction, pages 104–131.
http://www.itcon.org/2017/6.
Thabet, W. and Lucas, J. (2017b). Asset Data Handover for a Large Educational Institution:
Case-Study Approach”. Journal of Construction and Engineering Management, vol
143(11).
Thabet, W. and Lucas, J. (2018). Using a Case-Study Approach to Explore Methods for
Transferring BIM-Based Asset Data to Facility Management Systems. Construction
Research Congress 2018, pages 439–448.
Thabet, W., Lucas, J., and Johnston, S. (2016). A Case Study for Improving BIM-FM
Handover for a Large Educational Institution. Construction Research Congress 2016, pages
2177–2186.
the British Standards Institution (2018). ISO 19650 Transition Update Question and Answers.
https://bim-level2.org/globalassets/pdfs/
new-iso-19650-uk-transition-update-_questions-and-answers_
14th_june_2018.pdf. Last checked on May 02, 2019.
Tønsbergprosjektet (2017). Vant pris for ˚apen teknologi.
http://tonsbergprosjektet.no/
vant-internasjonal-pris-for-apen-teknologi/. Last checked on May 10,
2019.
66
==PAGE:79==
Treldal, N., Vestergaard, F., and Karlshj, J. (2016). Pragmatic use of lod - a modular approach.
VVS Aktuelt (2018). Tønsbergprosjektet hedret. https://www.vvsaktuelt.no/
tonsbergprosjektet-hedret-127500/nyhet.html. Last checked on May 15,
2019.
World Economic Forum (2016). Shaping the Future of Construction: A Breakthrough in
Mindset and Technology, Prepared in collaboration with The Boston Consulting Group.
Xuehong, Q. (2002). Chinese Education & Society Qualitative Research. Chinese Education
& Society, 35(2):47–54.
Yin, R. K. (2018). Case study research and applications : design and methods / Robert K. Yin.
SAGE Publications, Inc., 6 edition.
67
==PAGE:80==
68
==PAGE:81==
A
APPENDIX A
A.1
Interview Guide for General Contractor
General
The purpose with the following questions is to understand the circumstances of the project you
are currently working on.
1. What project(s) are you currently involved in? What phase is the project in now?
2. Describe your role and work in this project? What phases of the project have you been
involved in?
As-Built Data
The main focus with this research is the as-built data gathering and delivery from construction to
operation in the Scandinavian AEC industry. Following questions are asked to better understand
these processes.
3. How are the project owner’s requirements regarding as-built data and information deliv-
ered to your company?
4. What does these requirements involve? (e.g. what information they ask for, delivery
methods, gathering processes, ﬁle formats)
5. Do you believe these requirements are distinctive or do they leave room for interpretation?
6. Does these requirements tend to be project speciﬁc?
7. What are your as-built data gathering processes like?
8. Who is responsible for these processes at your company?
9. What kind of as-built documents are being delivered? (e.g. changes orders, RFIs, speci-
ﬁcations)
10. What information is required to be delivered as a part of the as-built data for e.g. a door?
(warranty, supplier, maintenance requirements, element speciﬁcation (e.g. position, ma-
terial, color, geometry)
69
==PAGE:82==
Technology
11. Are you using BIM for anything else than extracting drawings? If yes, shortly describe
your main use of BIM.
12. What technology are you using for gathering the as-built data respectively delivering the
data to the project owner?
13. Are you using or have you considered using any automated gathering processes (such as
laser scanning or 3D point cloud)?
14. Are you using any BIM-based handover tools?
15. What are the biggest challenges related to the gathering and delivery of as-build informa-
tion?
70
==PAGE:83==
A.2
Interview Guide for Developer & FM (Statsbygg Nor-
way)
1. What is your role in the construction of the new National Museum and how long have
you been involved in the project?
2. What F-systems are you planning to use for the National Museum? Are some of those
BIM based?
3. You receive the as-built data through PIMS365, what happens to the data after it has
been approved in the quality assurance? Is it ﬁrst integrated into a BIM model and then
implemented to the FM-systems or is it directly integrated into the FM-systems?
4. How is the information implemented to the FM-systems? (eg. through a middleware,
TFM tagging, through direct integration from BIM model or through a data integration
software)
5. What do you think are the biggest challenges in collecting/delivering/receiving as-built
data?
6. Do you have an ”as-built BIM model” that gets updated with what is actually being built?
If so, how is it updated, by whom and how often?
7. What do you think are the biggest challenges with implementing BIM in the operational
phase?
71
==PAGE:84==
A.3
Interview Guide for FM Actor
General
The purpose with the following questions is to understand the circumstances of the project you
are currently working on.
1. What project(s) are you currently involved in? What phase is the project in now?
2. Describe your role and work in this project? What phases of the project have you been
involved in?
As-Built Data
The main focus with this research is the as-built data gathering and delivery from construction to
operation in the Scandinavian AEC industry. Following questions are asked to better understand
these processes.
3. How are the projects owner’s requirements regarding as-built data and information deliv-
ered to your company?
4. Do you believe these requirements are distinctive enough or do they leave some room for
interpretation?
5. Does these requirements tend to be project speciﬁc?
6. What are your as-built data gathering processes like?
7. Who is responsible for these processes at your company?
8. What kind of as-built documents are being delivered? (e.g. changes, RFIs, speciﬁcations)
9. What information is required to be delivered as a part of the as-built data for e.g. a
door? (warranty, supplier, maintenance requirements, element speciﬁcation (e.i. position,
material, color, geometry)
Technology
10. What technology do you use for gathering the as-built data respectively delivering the
data?
11. Are you using or have you considered using any automated gathering processes (such as
laser scanning)?
12. Are you using any BIM-based handover tools?
13. What are the biggest challenges related to the gathering and delivery of as-build informa-
tion?
72
==PAGE:85==
A.4
Interview Guide for Developer at Tønsberg
The focus in this research is the as-built data gathering and delivery from construction to opera-
tion in the Scandinavian AEC industry. The intention of the following questions is to understand
how you are requiring and gathering as-built information and how this data is transferred to FM.
General
The purpose of the following questions is to understand the context of the project you are
currently working on.
1. Describe your role and work in this project? What phases of the project have you been
involved in?
2. Have you been involved in any previous projects utilizing BIM-based delivery methods?
- If yes, how have these differed from the Tnsberg Project?
Digital Delivery Requirements
3. How are you formulating and forwarding you as-built information requirements?
- Are any FM specialists involved in formulating these requirements?
- Does the buildingSMART Norway Guide have any requirements for as-built deliver-
ables?
- If yes, are you using those together with project speciﬁc requirements?
4. Are you following any data exchange formats such as COBie or IDM?
- If yes, what is the reason for the adoption and how does it affect the gathering processes?
Information Delivery
5. What deadlines do you have for the delivery of as-built information?
- Has it been continuous deliveries since the beginning of the construction?
- How long before physical hand over do you require the delivery to be completed?
6. Are the product registers delivering object properties in addition to product documents?
- If yes, how are/will these be linked to the BIM-objects?
- Are you involved in deciding what properties they should deliver?
7. Are you able to gather all as-built information from the product registers?
- If no, how is the missing information being gathered?
8. How do the subcontractors deliver their as-built information?
9. How is the BIM model updated with as-built information during construction?
- What is the purpose of the update?
- How is updating possible when IFC is the mandatory model exchange format?
73
==PAGE:86==
10. Is the system product register an application (database) of the BIM-server or is it a speciﬁc
software placed on the server?
Information Control
11. How do you check the quality of the deliverables?
- Do the Product Register software developers check the quality when receiving informa-
tion from the manufacturers?
BIM for FM
12. How is the as-built data (system product register-database) transferred to FM?
- Is it a one-directional or bi-directional link?
13. How are you planning to utilize BIM in FM?
- Will the BIM model be a part of a Common Data Environment?
General
14. What are the main challenges related to the gathering and delivery of as-built data?
- Due to these challenges, will you change any information delivery processes for the
second building within the project?
15. How can different delivery models inﬂuence the gathering and delivery of information?
74
==PAGE:87==
==PAGE:88==
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
Tel: (+45) 45 25 17 00
E-mail: byg@byg.dtu.dk
