==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK 
 
 
 
MASTER THESIS 
 
 
 
Assessing the climate change vulnerability of commercially important 
species in Europe and identifying countries most dependent on 
vulnerable species 
 
 
 
 
Author: 
 
 
 
 
     Supervisor: 
    Manja Marie Kudahl       
 
 
         Mark R. Payne 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aquatic Science and Technology 
 
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
June 21st, 2019 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Contents 
Abstract ........................................................................................................................................ 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 1 
Previous Climate vulnerability assessments and frameworks ............................................... 2 
Vulnerability components ...................................................................................................... 5 
Methods...................................................................................................................................... 6 
Assessed species .................................................................................................................... 7 
Lost habitat (HL) .................................................................................................................... 8 
Adaptive capacity (AC) ....................................................................................................... 11 
Overall species vulnerability ................................................................................................ 14 
Vulnerability of European countries regarding their fisheries composition ........................ 15 
Results ...................................................................................................................................... 16 
Lost habitat (HL) .................................................................................................................. 16 
Adaptive capacity (AC) ....................................................................................................... 16 
Overall species vulnerability ................................................................................................ 18 
Vulnerability of European countries regarding their fisheries composition ........................ 20 
Discussion ................................................................................................................................ 21 
CVAs and decision making ................................................................................................. 26 
Concluding remarks and future directions ........................................................................... 27 
Acknowledgements .................................................................................................................. 27 
Tables ....................................................................................................................................... 34 
Supplementary Material 1 ........................................................................................................ 56 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Abstract 
 
Climate changes are happening and while many studies have looked into the possible 
biological, chemical and physical impacts thereof, it is more difficult to estimate the combined 
effects for fisheries. In recent last years, climate vulnerability analyses (CVAs) of fisheries 
have been conducted in different parts of the world, though in Europe the vulnerability of 
fisheries is still to be assessed. Europe consists of a combination of countries with large 
proportions of small-scale fisheries but little national economic dependence on fisheries and 
countries with large commercial fisheries, and where fisheries is of great national importance. 
In both cases sustaining fisheries is of high importance. A CVA can increase awareness and 
provide knowledge for policymakers to use in order to mitigate climate change. In this study, 
a vulnerability assessment of key European species to climate change using was performed 
using a methodology adapted from the IPCC fourth assessment report. The potential impacts 
of climate change were estimated as a combination of exposure and species sensitivity based 
on current knowledge regime shifts resulting from climate change. Species are to different 
extent able to cope with climate change and thus adaptive capacity was also included in the 
CVA. The results showed that large commercial species fished by Northern and Western 
European countries were not highly vulnerable. Contrarily, Southern and Eastern European 
countries are highly dependent on species showing higher vulnerability such as European 
anchovy and swordfish. This work differs from other assessment in that it uses an approach 
that is robust to knowledge poor situations. Europe is one of the most knowledge and data rich 
regions in the world, which makes it a good place for evaluating broad based assessment 
methods. This is important, because many assessments are limited by a lack of data either on 
the effects of climate on fisheries, or national statistics (Allison et al., 2009). Moreover, a 
further analysis of the vulnerability of European countries to climate change could be carried 
out based on the present assessment. In order to get a full overview of the vulnerability of 
European countries, a socio-economic aspect is necessary to include.
==PAGE:4==
1 
 
 
Introduction 
Ocean life and its vulnerability towards climate change is important, not only for marine 
organisms, but also because it has a substantial role in supporting human well-being (FAO, 
2018a; Pinsky et al., 2019). If marine fauna are influenced by warming either through 
population extirpations or through shifts in ranges, it will most probably have large 
consequences on humans through e.g. employment, health and economy. On a large scale – 
globally or nationally – such changes can be problematic for policymakers, because most 
management of fisheries depends on the present populations. This means that if a population 
shifts e.g. pole-wards as expected due to warming (Pinsky et al., 2013), some countries might 
lose some of their basis for fisheries. In that regard, climate change will cause a need for 
adaptation of fisheries, both in terms of behaviour and equipment (Colburn et al., 2016). 
Studies have showed, that the most vulnerable countries to climate change impacts on their 
fisheries are also the poorest (Allison et al., 2009; Monnereau et al., 2013). In developing 
countries, the importance of fish/fishing is usually higher than in most European countries. One 
reason for that is, that a larger proportion of the population is employed in the fisheries sector 
and another is that marine species are an important source of protein. 12% of the total animal 
protein consumed in developed countries is from fish, while the share is 26% for the least 
developed countries (LDC) (FAO, 2018). Assessing the vulnerability of marine species to 
climate change is thus an important step towards mitigating and/or increasing the resilience 
towards climate change in areas where needed.  
 
Vulnerability is a measure of the degree to which a species or system is able/unable to cope 
with impacts of climate change (Foden et al., 2018; ICES, 2017b; Johnson et al., 2016). The 
concept of vulnerability is complex and while it today is a key dimension in the development 
debate, its many interpretations and scales has caused confusion among assessors along the 
way (FAO, 2015). Within fisheries, climate vulnerability assessments (CVAs) have been 
carried out in many different scales ranging from local to national and global. CVAs are used 
for many purposes. In Europe and other developed parts of the world one purpose is gaining 
information on risks caused by climate change in order to strengthen large commercial fishing 
operations. Another incentive is protecting small rural fishing communities and fishers, as these 
are expected to be highly affected by climate change (ICES, 2017b). Assessing vulnerability is 
likewise important in order to ensure that fisheries are resilient to increasing impacts from 
climate change and are able to sustain themselves (Le Bris et al., 2018). Compared to land-
based farming, fisheries are subject to many different pressures when climate changes. In 
contrast to agriculture, fisheries can be influenced very rapidly by e.g. changes in available 
biomass and species composition (Rosenberg & Fong, 2013).  
 
Climate change is not the only problem species will experience in the future. Fishing pressure 
is another issue that must be dealt with in order to secure a sustainable production in the oceans 
and overexploitation of marine resources has been a problem for many years (Rosenberg & 
Fong, 2013). Managing aquatic species or fish stocks is impossible, unlike in agriculture, where 
the type and placement of crops can be managed. Thus, managing fisheries is one of few ways 
to support and secure marine life. The Scientific, Technical and Economic Committee for 
==PAGE:5==
2 
 
 
Fisheries (STECF) (2019) has evaluated the stock status in the North East Atlantic and 
Mediterranean and concluded that the proportion of overexploited stocks has decreased over 
the past ten years, but approximately 40% of assessed stocks are still overexploited. In the 
Mediterranean and Blacks Sea, a majority of fish stocks are overexploited (STECF, 2019).  
 
In Europe, the differences between the wealth of countries and between the degree to which 
they depend on fisheries are large. The fisheries in northern Europe and southern Europe differ 
as well in terms of what species they fish on. Small pelagic species such as herring, sardines 
and anchovy constitute the majority of catches in the Mediterranean and Black Sea, while 
catches in the North Sea, primarily consist of Atlantic mackerel, Atlantic cod, Atlantic herring, 
common sole, European plaice and brown shrimp (FAO, 2018). Countries with high GDP and 
with large commercial fisheries have an advantage due to the  high capacity of fleets and fishing 
vessels, including their ability to stay out fishing longer (FAO, 2018). This allows fishing in 
areas e.g. in the Atlantic with temperatures and expected temperature changes lower than in 
coastal areas (see Figure 3). Norway is sometimes expected to benefit from climate change 
instead of being negatively affected (O’Brien et al., 2004). One main reason for this is that 
important fisheries species such as cod are expected to experience a distribution expansion 
towards cooler regions, when water temperatures increase. This will lead to increase of cod in 
e.g. the Barents Sea which is expected to increase Norwegian landings (Lorentzen & 
Hannesson, 2005). Findings by Vinagre et al. (2019), support the hypothesis of temperate 
countries having a low vulnerability to climate change, as tropical species often have a smaller 
thermal safety margin than temperate species.  
 
Previous Climate vulnerability assessments and frameworks 
If a complete overview of a system’s vulnerability is wanted, it is necessary to include both a 
socio-economic (e.g. GDP and employment rate) and an ecological/biological aspect. An 
system can be vulnerable to climate change, but the vulnerability also depends on who/what it 
will have consequences for (socio-economic aspect) (FAO, 2015). Though assessments have 
different aims depending on the assessor and what it is used for (ICES, 2017b). Some CVAs 
use a two-step approach that includes both a socioeconomic and an ecological part (Cinner et 
al., 2013; Pinnegar et al., submitted; Blasiak et al., 2017; Metcalf et al., 2015). Many studies 
though either assess socio-economic vulnerability (Allison et al., 2009; Colburn et al., 2016) 
or ecological vulnerability of a system important to fisheries (Hare et al., 2016; Jones & 
Cheung, 2018; Pecl et al., 2014).  
 
Methodologies used in CVAs likewise vary. One of two frameworks developed by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) have been the basis for several CVAs 
from all parts the world. The two frameworks are from the IPCC’s fourth and fifth assessment 
report from 2007 and 2014 respectively. One main difference between them is that, while the 
first framework from 2007 aims at assessing vulnerability as a result of exposure, sensitivity 
and adaptive capacity, the focus of the newer version from 2014 is “climate risk”. In Figure 4, 
the general differences between the aims and building blocks of the two frameworks are shown.  
In both cases two components focus on intrinsic factors and one component is extrinsic; the 
exposure/hazard. The last one mentioned describes the physical conditions or the forcing agent 
==PAGE:6==
3 
 
 
due to climate change (Foden et al., 2018). Risk is the probability of harmful consequences 
resulting from climate change and is a result of interactions between the hazard related to 
climate and the vulnerability and exposure of the system, whether it being human or natural 
(Foden et al., 2018). The risk framework has been used in some CVAs over the past few years, 
e.g. in the Auckland region in New Zealand, where the risk of marine and freshwater 
ecosystems towards climate chance impacts were assessed (Foley & Carbines, 2019). On a 
global scale,  Cheung et al., (2018) assessed the risk of impact of marine fishes to fishing and 
climate change (including ocean acidification) in order to explore opportunities of risk 
reduction through effective fisheries management and another study estimated the relative 
vulnerability and risk of impacts of climate change in 1074 exploited marine species (Jones & 
Cheung, 2018).  
 
              
 
Figure 1: (a) Reprinted framework from the IPCC fourth assessment, describing vulnerability as a result of exposure, 
sensitivity and adaptive capacity (Foden et al., 2018). (b) Reprinted framework from the IPCC fifth assessment report, 
describing risk as the result of hazard, vulnerability and exposure (Foden et al., 2018). 
 
The “climate risk” framework has yet not been used to the same extent as the former, which is 
one of the reasons why the fourth assessment framework will be used in the present study. The 
framework builds on the conceptual model from IPCC (2001) third assessment report, which 
was one of the first to evaluate vulnerability assessment approaches. The three components; 
exposure (E), sensitivity (S) and adaptive capacity (AC) were described as the contributors to 
vulnerability. Sensitivity describes the degree to which a system is affected by climate related 
stimuli, whether it be a positive or negative effect. Adaptive capacity describes the system’s 
ability to adjust to climate change either to take advantage of the changes or to cope with them. 
These two depend on the exposure that can be any climate variation including changes in range, 
temperature, precipitation and frequency of extreme weather events (IPCC, 2001). Combining  
an exposure and sensitivity results in potential impacts on which adaptive capacity in most 
cases will have an opposite effect as shown in Figure 2. The understanding of each component 
can vary depending on who is carrying out the assessment and on what background the assessor 
has (ICES, 2017c).  
 
(a) 
(b) 
==PAGE:7==
4 
 
 
 
Figure 2: The IPCC basic framework from 2001, with vulnerability being described as a potential impact of climate change 
minus the adaptive capacity (ICES, 2017b). 
 
In studies that assess both the social and ecological aspect of vulnerability to climate change 
the framework is usually modified to result in a two-step approach. These approaches though 
very often differ from each other in terms of how the two steps are formed. One approach is to 
estimate ecological vulnerability using the framework in Figure 2, after which the ecological 
vulnerability represents the exposure to the socio-economic system. The socio-economic 
vulnerability is then estimated based on the sensitivity of socioeconomic systems to ecological 
vulnerability and the adaptive capacity of the society to adapt to such impacts (Cinner et al., 
2013; Marshall et al., 2014). Likewise, Metcalf et al. (2015) used a modified version of that 
approach where species’ exposure was included as a socio-economic component to avoid 
confusion between the sensitivity of species to climate change and the exposure of fished 
species resulting from their management and use. Another slightly different approach was used 
to assess the socio-economic vulnerability of the fisheries in the parishes of Dominica. Here 
the vulnerability of the fisheries sector was based on four components. The first two 
components were species sensitivity (S), which was expanded to include a parish level 
sensitivity and exposure hazard (E), describing the climate change forcing. These two 
represented the ecological part of the assessment. The socio-economic part included the two 
components; fisheries sensitivity (P) adapted from Colburn et al. (2016) and adaptive capacity 
(AC) of the parishes describing poverty, income inequality, and housing quality (Pinnegar et 
al., submitted). 
 
Vulnerability can be calculated in various ways, based on the components included. Some 
studies added unweighted components as follows; V = S+E-AC, while the metrics were 
calculated from weighted metrics scores (Blasiak et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Cinner et al., 
2013). Allison et al., (2009), Pinnegar et al. (submitted) and Hare et al. (2016) calculated the 
total vulnerability as an unweighted mean of components. These are all to some extend based 
on the work done by Allison et al. (2009), in which different ways of calculating vulnerability 
were tested and no significant differences between a vulnerability calculated from unweighted 
and weighted vulnerability components was found. In Table S3 in Supplementary Material 1, 
a comparison of several vulnerability or sensitivity assessments can be found. 
 
Despite the importance and size of the fisheries industry in Europe and the fact that knowledge 
on how fisheries in Europe will be affected by climate change is needed, no assessment 
==PAGE:8==
5 
 
 
focusing on climate vulnerability have been carried out on European level (ICES, 2017b). 
Furthermore, there is no standardized method for assessing vulnerability and some studies from 
especially developing countries, have often experienced lack of readily available data (Allison 
et al., 2009; Monnereau et al., 2013; Pinnegar et al., submitted). 
 
Vulnerability components 
Most CVAs use an exposure component expressing thermal habitat loss/gain (ICES, 2017b). 
Montero-Serra et al. (2015) concluded that SST is the main driver of several species’ 
occurrences. Many species are expected to shift ranges due to climate changes, and the 
environmental parameter that described this with a high correlation was SST. Thus, we argue 
that SST is a suitable exposure component for the present analysis. According to FAO (2018a), 
the SST in the North Atlantic is expected to increase in the future, though models show spatial 
differences in warming trends. As indicated in Figure 3, there are large differences between 
e.g. the North Sea with temperature changes between ~1.6 and 2.6 degrees C and the Baltic 
Sea which is expected to warm more than 3 degrees C. Thus, when assessing vulnerability for 
European fisheries, the exposure component must reflect this difference. 
 
Figure 3: Difference in the mean climate in the future time period (RCP8.5: 2050 to 2099) compared to the historical 
reference period (1956 to 2005) (FAO, 2018). 
 
Studies use different combinations of components in order to assess vulnerability. Hare et al. 
(2016) chose to combine species’ sensitivity with their adaptive capacity. The choice is 
justified as sensitivity of a species very often depend on its ability to cope with or adapt to 
changes by for example migrating to new places (Hare et al., 2016). Other studies assessing 
socio-economic vulnerability (Allison et al., 2009; Blasiak et al., 2017; Pinnegar et al., 
submitted), considered the sensitivity and adaptive capacity as separate components. Here, a 
nation’s or region’s ability to adapt depended on e.g. the governance level and the health of the 
population while the sensitivity described e.g. how much the nation or region depended on 
fisheries (Blasiak et al., 2017).  
 
We use an approach that differs from both approaches, in that it combines sensitivity and 
exposure and has adaptive capacity as a separate component. The rate of warming (exposure) 
==PAGE:9==
6 
 
 
and the time until the Thermal Safety Margin (TSM) is exceeded (sensitivity) are combined to 
express the potential impact of climate change (based on the IPCC (2001) generic model 
(Figure 2)). This combination is defined as the habitat loss. The sensitivity of a species typically 
include specialized habitat, sensitive life history and environmental thresholds that will be 
exceeded by climate change (Foden et al., 2018). In this assessment most of those metrics are 
considered adaptive capacity measures, and the sensitivity instead depend on species’ thermal 
tolerance. From that suitable areas can be determined based on a correlative approach or 
“climate-matching approach” (Foden et al., 2018). If a species is habituated in areas, where the 
water temperature is expected to excess the species’ thermal tolerance, the species will be 
forced to either adapt or move to a suitable habitat. Thus, the sensitivity describes how close a 
species is to have lost a given proportion of its habitat. This can be compared to other 
assessments, using at habitat suitability from prediction models to assess vulnerability 
(AGEDI, 2015; Pacifici et al., 2015; Wabnitz et al., 2018). Other ways of assessing species 
sensitivity includes using fuzzy logic (or rule-based assessment) (Jones & Cheung, 2018), 
archetypes (life-history strategies) (Pecuchet et al., 2017) and a three-step progress based on 
species traits and/or life-history stages (Ortega-Cisneros et al., 2018; Pecl et al., 2014). 
 
The adaptive capacity of species often describes dispersal ability (movement, emigration etc.), 
phenotypic plasticity (changes in the phenotype) and evolvability (potential for rapid genetic 
change) (Foden et al., 2018). Here we include life-history traits as well. In order to make the 
assessment robust to data-limitations, the approach is reduced so that multiple life-history traits 
are reduced to a single trait, based on an archetype analysis carried out by Pecuchet et al. 
(2017).  
 
This work aims at assessing the biological vulnerability of species caught by European 
countries. Such an assessment is an important tool in managing fisheries in Europe and can 
assist policymakers and managers in increasing resilience against climate change impacts. 
Furthermore, an effort will be put into using a method that to best possible extent is robust to 
knowledge- and data-poor situations. The vulnerability of species will depend on habitat loss 
(potential impact) and adaptive capacity, following the framework provided by the IPCC fourth 
assessment report. The final step will be to use countries’ landings to estimate which European 
countries are fishing on the most vulnerable fish species. 
 
Methods 
In this study, a modified version of the IPCC fourth assessment vulnerability framework was 
used. Species vulnerability was calculated from two components, lost habitat and adaptive 
capacity as shown in Figure 4. Lost habitat included both the exposure component in form of 
the rate of warming and sensitivity, the time until the thermal safety margin (TSM) is exceeded. 
The second component, adaptive capacity, included measures that describe the species’ ability 
to overcome or adapt to climate change.  
 
==PAGE:10==
7 
 
 
 
Figure 4: The framework used in this assessment to assess the vulnerability of the European species and countries. 
 
Assessed species 
In order to carry out the assessment, a list of species to assess was needed. The European Union 
has a statistical office called Eurostat, which aims to provide statistics at European level that 
can be used to compare countries and regions (Eurostat, 2019c). From their database, data on 
e.g. fisheries can be obtained, and the species chosen for the present analysis were based on 
fisheries landings of fishery products by European countries (see https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ 
data/database). From here, the species that accounted for 90 % of landings values per year from 
2010-15 were chosen. Not all countries and species had landings data for all years. The average 
value per species per years was thus calculated as the sum of all six years divided by six as 
follows: 
𝐿𝑉[𝑦𝑟−1] =
∑
𝐿𝑉𝑖
2015
𝑖=2010
6
 
 
All species are described by both a 3-alpha code, a taxonomic code and an ISSCAAP code 
assigned by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) as a part of 
the ASFIS (Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information System) list. The 3-alpha code is a 
unique code made of three letters. The ISSCAAP is short for the International Standard 
Statistical Classification of Aquatic Animals and Plants and indicates what type/class the 
species is (FAO, 2019). All species in the species list was assigned a class of either mollusc, 
crustacean or fish (both marine and diadromous species according to the ISSCAAP division 
groups 1, 2 and 3) based on the ISCAAP code (see the species list in Table 4). The taxonomic 
code describes the species, genus, family and/or higher taxonomic level of each species item. 
From this code, it can be derived, whether the species item is a grouping of species or a species 
that is not defined in other items. For groups at genus level, it was possible to find data for the 
==PAGE:11==
8 
 
 
analysis, though for groups at higher taxonomic level, the species differ too much for it to be 
described be a specific characteristic. Thus, and because they only constituted ~7 % of the total 
value of the species list, most species items of higher taxonomic level than genus were 
removed.  
 
For each species on genus level, a species was chosen as its substitute based on general 
characteristics of the genus. An example hereof is Sandeels nei., which was substituted by the 
very common lesser sand-eel due to it being one of the primary targets of the sand-eel fishery 
(HELCOM, 2013). For some species items, species was chosen as one already in the species 
list. In Figure S2 in Supplementary Material 1, a list of all groups and their substitutes can be 
found. Four species were removed because occurrence data was not available at Aquamaps. 
This goes for the freshwater species Pikeperch and European perch and the molluscs Barnacle 
and Solen razor clams nei. The resulting species list used in this study consisted of 157 species 
as shown in Table 4.  
 
In order to carry out the assessment the two vulnerability components lost habitat (HL) and 
adaptive capacity (AC) was compiled from different metrics: 
 
Lost habitat (𝑯𝑳)  
One component describing species’ vulnerability was lost habitat. According to Foden et al. 
(2018), a species’ climate change vulnerability is dependent on its difference in distribution 
from the present to the predicted future. Aquamaps is a joint project of SeaLifeBase and 
Fishbase and aims at generating model-based predictions of species’ occurrences and they are 
updated every 1-2 years. The model uses estimates of environmental preferences including 
water temperature, salinity and depth for all marine species to generate predictions. The 
predictions are displayed as maps using the C-squares Mapper provided by CSIRO Marine and 
Atmospheric Research (Kesner-Reyes et al., 2016). The preferences are called environmental 
envelopes and were used in order to calculate 𝐻𝐿 in this assessment. Data on all 157 species 
was available at the website.  
 
Lost habitat is, as shown in Figure 4, a combination of two components: The warming rate, and 
the time until a species exceeds its preferred thermal range. So far, the understanding of 
sensitivity to climate change has, according to Stuart-Smith et al. (2015), primarily been based 
on life-history traits and comparative studies of the physiological tolerance of species, though 
when looking at sensitivity on a broader geographical scale, such traits can have high 
uncertainty. Instead, the thermal affinity is a good proxy. The thermal affinity of many marine 
species differs from the mean temperature in surroundings. The closer species get to their 
preferred thermal maximum, the higher is the likelihood of the species being lost from its 
community. The loss of species in a local environment is expected to be closer related to how 
close a species is to its maximum of thermal distribution than to the midpoint, also called 
optimum temperature (Stuart-Smith et al., 2015). In studies by Madeira et al. (2017) and 
Vinagre et al. (2019) the thermal safety margin (TSM) was evaluated with respect to warming. 
TSM describes the difference between the maximum temperature the species can endure and 
the present temperature. Species’ TSM depend on where they live, and is known to decrease 
==PAGE:12==
9 
 
 
with latitude meaning species in the tropical regions are more vulnerable than species from 
temperate regions (Vinagre et al., 2019). TSM seems to be a good indicator of tolerance 
towards climate changes, and thus it was chosen as a part of this assessment.  
 
For each species, the warming rate (𝑟𝑤) per area was calculated. Due to using a rate, exposure 
is not time dependent and thus, the assessment focuses on the vulnerability at the current rate 
of change. In order to calculate the warming rate by area, the area was defined for each species 
based on the Aquamaps model. The data used for this was the Half-Degree Cell Authority File 
(HCAF) version 6 from 2016 provided by Aquamaps, which contains freely available data from 
other sources and follows the IPCC scenario A2 for predictions. This dataset contains data on 
the environmental parameters primary production, ice concentration, sea surface temperature 
(SST), sea bottom temperature (SBT) and salinity for each C square (0.5-degree cells extended 
from WMO squares). All parameters are available for several different time periods between 
1950 and 2100 (Kaschner et al., 2016). The depth and elevation are given too. For each species, 
a similar file containing the environmental envelopes and map data for predicted occurrences 
was downloaded (see https://www.aquamaps.org/AboutAquaMaps.htm). These files contain 
an index of species-specific relative likelihood of presence between 0.00 and 1.00 for each grid 
cell, based on the species’ environmental envelope (Kaschner et al., 2007).  
 
All the environmental envelopes are described using the species’ absolute and preferred 
maxima and minima: The preferred min (MinP) and max (MaxP) are 10th and 90th percentile of 
observed variation in an environmental parameter respectively. The absolute min (MinA) and 
max (MaxA) are the values at which the species are not expected to be able to live or survive, 
and in the Aquamaps algorithm, they are calculated as follows (Kesner-Reyes et al., 2016): 
 
MinA = 25th percentile - 1.5 × interquartile or absolute minimum in extracted data 
(whichever is lesser) 
MaxA = 75th percentile + 1.5 × interquartile or absolute maximum in extracted data 
(whichever is greater) 
 
These four values are used to calculate the probabilities of occurrence. All environmental 
conditions has to fall inside the preferred range in order to get a probability score of 1, whereas 
if any condition falls outside the absolute range, the probability is 0, as depicted in Figure 5 
(Kaschner et al., 2016). 
==PAGE:13==
10 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Species-specific environmental envelope used for all environmental parameters used to predict a species' 
occurrence (Kesner-Reyes et al., 2016). 
Several studies on global biodiversity have used only the data from Aquamaps that has a 
relative likelihood > 0.5 (Klein et al., 2015; O’Hara et al., 2017; Venegas-Li et al., 2017). 
Venegas-Li et al. (2017), carried out a sensitivity analysis on different probability threshold 
and showed, that using a threshold of 0.5 to define species presence allowed them to define the 
core area that a species inhabit. O’Hara et al. (2017) showed that the Aquamaps model tends 
to use species ranges that are beyond recorded occurrences if the likelihood threshold was 0.0. 
Furthermore, Aquamaps provides biodiversity maps where the native species in all areas are 
those with a probability of occurrence > 0.5. In this assessment, the aim was to use the lost 
habitat as a measure to define vulnerability, and in order to compare all species in the species 
list, the probability threshold of 0.5 was used.  
 
Warming rate (𝑟𝑤) 
The Aquamaps data contains depth data for all 0.5° grid cells and for the prediction models, 
the depth decides whether the SBT or the SST is used (Kesner-Reyes et al., 2016). For this 
assessment the same approach was thus adapted. If the absolute minimum of a species’ depth 
tolerance, 𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝐴 ≤ 200𝑚, SST temperature was used while the SBT was used if 
𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝐴 >  200𝑚. For each species, the warming rate of the SBT or SST for all grid cells 
with probabilities higher than 0.5 was then calculated, using the following equation: 
 
𝑟𝑤= 𝑇2100 −𝑇1999
101
 
 
Where T2100 and T1999 are the SBT or SST in °𝐶 in year 2100 and 1999, which are modelled 
mean annual sea temperatures during the time period 2090-2099 and 2001-2010 from IPSL 
model IPCC scenario A2, respectively (Kaschner et al., 2016). The temperatures were divided 
by the time in years in which the temperature changes. The warming rate has the unit 
°𝐶
𝑦𝑟𝑠. 
 
Time before exceeding TSM (𝑡𝑇𝑆𝑀) 
The warming rate was used to calculate how close the species was to exceeding its, using the 
following equation: 
==PAGE:14==
11 
 
 
𝑡𝑇𝑆𝑀= 𝑇𝑃90 −𝑇𝑛𝑜𝑤
𝑟𝑤
 
Where 𝑇𝑛𝑜𝑤 is the present temperature annual mean temperature in °𝐶 and the 𝑇𝑃90 is the 
maximum preferred temperature, both in °𝐶. 𝑡𝑇𝑆𝑀 is thus the time it will take before the habitat 
is no longer suitable with respect to temperature and it is given in years. Using this method, the 
rate in some cells were expected to be negative indicating a cooling instead of a warming, 
which was necessary to consider. If the rate was negative, the 𝑡𝑇𝑆𝑀 was calculated as the 
difference between the minimum preferred temperature (𝑇𝑃10) and the present temperature 
(𝑇𝑛𝑜𝑤) divided by 𝑟𝑤 instead. If the temperature in a cell was already exceeding the preferred 
temperature, the cell was excluded.  
 
Scoring habitat loss 
In order to score the habitat loss a 50-year time limit was chosen as reference, and the 
proportion of lost habitat (lost cells) for all species after 50 years was estimated. A large 
proportion of lost habitat means that the species is very vulnerable to climate changes, and thus 
a score of 4 is given to the species with the most lost habitat. Those that barely loses any habitat 
due to climate changes was scored with a low vulnerability (score 1). In Table 1, the scores and 
the exact ranges are given. The ranges of 𝐻𝐿 were chosen based on the 10th, 50th and 90th 
percentiles. 
 
Table 1: The ranges of lost habitat used for scoring the component. 
Score 
Lost habitat 
Low (score 1) 
𝐻𝐿≤0.019 
Medium (score 2) 
0.019 < 𝐻𝐿≤0.078 
High (score 3) 
0.078 < 𝐻𝐿≤0.19 
Very high (score 4) 
0.19 < 𝐻𝐿 
 
Adaptive capacity (AC)  
The AC component was created from two metrics: life span and habitat specificity.  
 
Life span (LS)  
Pecuchet et al. (2017) showed that biological traits can be translated into life-history strategies. 
They analyzed 6 traits in a principal component analysis in order to look at archetypes and 
found that three out of six traits were clustered together (maximum length, life span and trophic 
level) and the other three were negatively correlated (parental care and offspring size against 
fecundity). In this study, it was important to use only a few metrics and thus life span was 
chosen. Since life span is not always measured equally, the goal in this assessment was to 
define the maximum expected life span in wild life. 
 
The majority of the life span data is taken from Fishbase, which provides a “Life-history tool” 
that calculates the life span of species based on multiple life history key facts. The keys facts 
include the Bertalanffy’s growth parameters Linf, K and t0 (Rainer Froese, Palomares, & Pauly, 
2005). Life span is given as the approximate maximum age that the fish of a given population 
==PAGE:15==
12 
 
 
would reach, calculated as the age at 95% of Linf based on the growth parameters as follows 
(Rainer Froese, Palomares, & Pauly, 2005): 
𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥= 𝑡0 + 3
𝐾 
Since default values are used and thus will not be appropriate for all species, the growth 
parameters were compared to those from the Sea Around Us website, and in cases with large 
differences, the life span from Pecuchet et al. (2017) was used instead.  
 
Fishbase only covers fish species, and thus the life spans of molluscs and crustaceans were 
found in other databases and literature. For some of the molluscs, life span data was found in 
a study by Moss et al. (2016). The maximum lifespan here was the observed ages, and thus not 
calculated the same way as the life span data on fish, though the Bertalanffy’s growth 
parameters here were also found. For some species, there were more than one observation, and 
thus the average maximum life span was used.  
 
As for the crustaceans, several studies on lifespan and longevity of both marine and freshwater 
species have been carried out. Life span in the current literature either indicates the oldest 
specimen ever found or the maximum age from growth models. Vogt (2018) summarized these 
studies despite the difficulties in comparing different methods. The majority of crustaceans live 
between 1 and 10 years, while only approximately 22% live either shorter than one year or 
longer than 10 (Vogt, 2018). Lifespan data on the remaining species were found in either 
literature or in other databases, and all references can be found in Supplementary Material S2.    
 
Scoring life span 
Short lived species are expected to be better at adapting to the climate changes, due to a short 
generation time, than species with a long life span. The species were thus scored based on the 
minimum, the maximum and the 1st, 2nd and 3rd quartiles of the life span metric. AC works 
opposite lost habitat, and thus if a species had a high adaptive capacity, the vulnerability was 
scored as low (score 1). Vice versa, if the life span was high, the vulnerability was scored very 
high (score 4). The life span metric was scored according to Table 2: 
 
Table 2: The four scores and their respective life span ranges. 
Score 
Life span 
Low (score 1) 
𝐿𝑆≤7.90 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠 
Medium (score 2) 
7.90 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠< 𝐿𝑆≤12.30 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠 
High (score 3) 
12.30 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠< 𝐿𝑆≤19.10 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠 
Very high (score 4) 
19.10 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠< 𝐿𝑆 
 
Habitat specificity  
The other metric, habitat specificity, described the species ability to migrate and settle in new 
areas, which is another way to adapt to climate changes. Following the framework in Figure 4, 
habitat specificity was made up of 3 indices: horizontal habitat, vertical habitat and mobility.  
 
The horizontal and vertical habitat for most fish species were taken from Engelhard et al. 
(2011).  The vertical habitat had categories such as pelagic and demersal depending on where 
in the water column the species is typically found. Horizontal habitat included categories such 
==PAGE:16==
13 
 
 
as coastal, shelf and slope, depending on distance from land and the typical places in the water 
column at where they can be found (Engelhard et al., 2011). Some fish species were not 
available in this dataset and in those cases Fishbase was used. Fishbase provides habitat 
information based on depth and whether the species live and feed near the bottom or in the 
water column (Froese et al., 2000). For the molluscs and crustaceans, SeaLifeBase provides 
approximately the same information as Fishbase does for the fish species, and thus this 
database was used to retain information on habitat. In order to perform the assessment the same 
terminology was needed for all species, and thus the molluscs and crustaceans, that were 
described as benthic and did not have other habitat information at SeaLifeBase were treated as 
being demersal for the purposes of the analysis. In Supplementary Material S2, the species list 
with references for the habitat can be found.  
 
The mobility index only had three categories: highly migratory, mobile and sedentary, 
following the approach by Pinnegar et al. (submitted). The highly migratory species were 
chosen to be those defined in UNCLOS Annex I (Maguire et al., 2006). For the mobile and 
sedentary species, what differs is the distances to where they migrate/move. All molluscs that 
do not have ISSCAAP code 57 were defined as sedentary, since the code 57 contains octopuses, 
cuttlefishes and squids, which are usually mobile to some extent. The mobile species are 
defined as species that range more than approximately 10 km whereas the sedentary species 
stay inside a short range of only a few km. Mobility data for these species and for crustaceans 
and fish were thus estimated based on habitat and biology information from literature and 
databases such as the SeaLifeBase, Fishbase and FAO species fact sheets. An example is the 
Norway lobster, which is sedentary due to its low range as adult, and the Atlantic cod, which 
is a mobile species. 
 
Scoring habitat specificity 
The three indices were combined and scored following the same approach as Pinnegar et al. 
(submitted), where a low score means low habitat specificity or good adaptive capacity and a 
high habitat specificity score indicates a species with low adaptive capacity. The species habitat 
specificity scores were derived as follows in Table 3:  
 
 
==PAGE:17==
14 
 
 
Table 3: Scoring of habitat specificity from three indices: horizontal habitat, vertical habitat and mobility. 
Score 
Mobility 
Vertical habitat 
Horizontal habitat 
Low (score 1) 
Highly migratory species 
Any 
Any 
Mobile 
Any 
Oceanic 
Mobile 
Bathydemersal 
Mesopelagic 
Slope 
Medium (score 2) 
Mobile 
Unknown 
 
Benthopelagic 
Demersal 
Pelagic  
Epipelagic 
Slope 
Shelf 
Outer shelf 
 
Unknown 
Bathydemersal 
Slope 
Mobile 
Bathydemersal 
Outer shelf 
High (score 3) 
Mobile 
(catadromous/anadromous) 
Pelagic  
Any 
Mobile 
Demersal 
Inner shelf 
Mobile 
Benthopelagic 
Coastal 
Very high (score 4) 
Sedentary 
Any 
Any 
Mobile 
Reef-associated 
Any 
 
Scoring species adaptive capacity 
The two components that constitute adaptive capacity were combined to form species adaptive 
capacity scores. Life span and habitat specificity were weighted equally, since they describe 
two different traits that are not related. With equally weighted scores (50% each), each species 
got an adaptive capacity score between 1 and 4 where 4 indicates the species that have low 
adapting capacity towards climate change and species with a score of 1 have a high adaptive 
capacity. 
 
Overall species vulnerability 
The overall species vulnerability as a measure of the two components habitat loss and adaptive 
capacity was then calculated. A score was given based on an unweighted mean of the two 
components’ scores. This approach has been used in several vulnerability assessments (Allison 
et al., 2009; Ortega-Cisneros et al., 2018; Pecl et al., 2014). Both habitat loss and adaptive 
capacity were multiplied by 0.5, resulting in scores in the range from 1 to 4 as for each 
component. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
15 
 
 
Vulnerability of European countries regarding their fisheries composition 
The last part of the CVA estimating which European countries’ depend on the most vulnerable 
species. For this purpose, the same datafile as used for creating the original species list was 
used. The dataset contained landings values in Euro by species for all EU member countries 
with a significant marine fishery, plus Norway and Iceland  (25 countries shown in Figure 6) 
from 2002 to 2017. The countries are described by the two-letter country code assigned to all 
EU member states, and the species was described with the same 3-alpha-codes as from the 
species list. Besides landings values, landings weight and value per ton were also available 
(Eurostat, 2019a). The dataset also provides information on destination use, nationality of the 
vessel and presentation form (fresh, frozen, dried etc.), though in this assessment the total 
landings were used, not considering the use of the landings. Not all data is based on reportings, 
which means that some values are estimates.  
  
 
 
 
In order to calculate each country’s vulnerability regarding their fisheries composition and 
landings, the average landings values for each species was calculated as the sum of the landings 
from 2010 to 2015 divided by six. The next step was to calculate what proportion of the 
country’s total landings value each species accounted for. The proportion was then multiplied 
by the vulnerability score of the corresponding species. The final country vulnerability score 
was then calculated as the sum of all species and resulting in score inside the range from 1 to 
4, four being the most vulnerable.      
 
 
 
Countries 
Norway 
Germany 
Finland 
Belgium 
Sweden 
France 
Iceland 
Romania 
Estonia 
Italy 
Latvia 
Slovenia 
Lithuania 
Croatia 
Great Britain 
Bulgaria 
Ireland 
Spain 
Denmark 
Portugal 
Poland 
Malta 
Netherlands 
 
Figure 6: The 25 European countries that were assessed. 
==PAGE:19==
16 
 
 
Results 
The first part of this CVA consisted of an ecological analysis of the vulnerability of the fish 
species caught by European countries. The 157 species’ vulnerability scores depend on two 
components, HL and AC.  
 
Lost habitat (HL) 
In 50 years, the 157 assessed species showed predicted habitat losses between 0 and 62.5% of 
their present habitat due to warming. Most species showed losses less than 20% of their habitat, 
but one mollusc, the Japanese carpet shell, showed a loss of 62.5% of its habitat. Another two 
fish species; cunene horse mackerel and greater amberjack lost 45% and 31% respectively. 
This indicates a very high sensitivity and thus species that are vulnerable to a very high extent. 
Among other species that showed losses of more than 20% in 50 years were the 13th most 
valuable species in Europe, northern prawn, which is an important species for the Scandinavian 
countries. Also, the Atlantic chub mackerel, which is caught in the Mediterranean and in the 
Atlantic Ocean showed very high vulnerability. More than 60 species were defined as having 
a high vulnerability to temperature changes, as they show losses anywhere between 7.8 and 
19.4% of their habitat while the same amount showed medium vulnerability due to a share of 
lost habitat in 50 years between 1.9 and 7.7%. Among the least vulnerable species three species 
did not show any habitat loss as a result of temperature changes. These three species were 
yellowfin tuna, which is the 10th most valuable species among the assessed species, the 
common edible cockle and northern shortfin squid. Another 13 species were among the least 
vulnerable when it comes to habitat loss including eight fish species, one mollusc and four 
crustaceans (see Table 5). In general, the three classes; molluscs, crustaceans and fish, were 
evenly distributed since all degrees of vulnerability was assigned to all classes. The mean 
habitat loss for molluscs was 11.4%, 10.8% for crustaceans and 9.7% for the fish species. 
 
Adaptive capacity (AC) 
The habitat specificity was made up of three metrics: mobility, vertical habitat and horizontal 
habitat. 29 species, of which 15 were molluscs, had a very high vulnerability, since their 
adaptive capacity was low regarding habitat specificity. A low adaptive capacity means very 
high habitat specificity, and this is especially related to species being sedentary or dependent 
on specific habitats such as reefs. Few assessed species were reef associated, but many were 
defined as sedentary either due to not being mobile at all or only having small ranges. Even 
though the majority of the sedentary species were molluscs such as clams, mussels and oysters, 
fish and crustaceans were found to be sedentary as well. Such species include parrotfish and 
scorpionfish that both inhabit small ranges of less than ~1 km (R. Froese & Pauly, 2019) and 
the Norway lobster, which is among the most valuable species assessed and is caught by several 
countries across Europe (see Table S1 in Supplementary Material 1).  
 
High habitat specificity species (score 3) included species that are either catadromous or 
anadromous, even though they travel long distances during their lifetime. These species are 
expected to be vulnerable to climate change because they depend on having both freshwater 
and the sea available for living and reproducing. Other species with a high habitat specificity 
were species that live in the coastal area or demersal species from the inner part of the 
==PAGE:20==
17 
 
 
continental shelf. Half the species with high habitat specificity were miscellaneous coastal 
fishes as defined by the ISSCAPP code 33 including redfishes, basses and congers. Only two 
crustaceans had a high habitat specificity while the remaining 28 species with this score were 
fish. 
 
Approximately half of the assessed species showed medium habitat specificity (score 2) (78 to 
be precise). These species were all mobile and included both molluscs, crustaceans and fish 
and their vertical habitat preferences spanned from demersal to pelagic while their horizontal 
preferences included slopes, outer shelf and shelf. Several ISSCAAP groups were represented, 
including squids, cuttlefishes and octopuses (code 57) as the molluscs, shrimps and prawns 
(code 45) as crustaceans and cods, hakes and haddocks (code 34) in the fish category. The three 
most valuable species assessed; the Atlantic cod, Atlantic mackerel and Atlantic herring, all 
showed medium habitat specificity (score 2). 
 
The least vulnerable species when it comes to habitat specificity included species that were 
either highly migratory and travelled long distances such as for example the tunas (bigeye tuna, 
bullet tuna, yellowfin tuna etc.) and/or are mobile and oceanic. Also, species that lived in 
deeper waters at least 200 meters below the surface and were not demersal showed low 
vulnerability and thus had a score of 1. In total, 20 species, which besides the tunas included 
Atlantic bonito and blackbelly rosefish, showed low habitat specificity. There were no 
crustaceans with low habitat specificity primarily because they do not migrate very long 
distances. Two molluscs, the northern shortfin squid and the broadtail shortfin squid had a 
score of 1 (see Table 6). 
 
Life span  
Of the 157 assessed species, 37 showed very high vulnerability, due to having life spans 
between 19.3 and 72 years, which makes them slow to respond to a changing climate. The 
absolute longest living species was the European lobster with its 72 years, while European 
conger with 48.4 years and the European plaice with a life span of 47.8 years, were the second 
and third longest living species, respectively. Only five species were not fish and the ISSCAAP 
group that contains the most species with a very high score was group 38 (sharks, rays and 
chimaeras) with 9 species including the thornback ray and longnose spurdog. Regarding life 
span, the three types of organisms showed some difference, as the average life span of the fish 
species in this assessment was ~17 years against ~9 years for molluscs and ~11 years for 
crustaceans. The last two mentioned had lower average life spans due to having many short-
living species. In Figure 7, the distribution of the species’ life spans is shown, with red marks 
indicating the minimum, the maximum and the 1st, 2nd and 3rd quartiles. The distribution shows 
that almost half of all species had life spans less than 12 years. 
 
==PAGE:21==
18 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Distribution of life spans among the 157 species with red marks indicating the minimum, maximum and the three 
quartiles. 
 
42 species with life spans between 12.4 and 19.1 years showed high vulnerability, including 
one crustacean, six molluscs and 35 fish. Five species with a high vulnerability regarding their 
life spans were among the 10 most valuable species assessed, and these include European hake, 
haddock and Atlantic cod.  
 
A medium vulnerability (score 2) was assigned to 39 species with life spans ranging from 8 to 
12.3 years of which 12 were crustaceans or molluscs. Most groups of marine fish from the 
ISSCAAP were represented here, whereas three were mackerels and seven species were from 
the from the group of redfishes, basses and congers. Species with a high adaptive capacity were 
those with a short life span between 1 and 7.9 years, and close to half of them were molluscs 
or crustaceans. Among these were several squids and octopuses such as Patagonian squid and 
common octopus and prawns and shrimps including caramote prawn and striped red shrimp. 
The fish species included small species such as brill and sandeels and several from ISSCAAP 
group 31 consisting of flounders, halibuts and soles. The full life span table can be found in 
Table 7. 
 
Overall species vulnerability 
The overall vulnerability of the 157 species as a measure of their habitat loss and adaptive 
capacity spanned from 1 to 3.75, indicating that no species scored 4 in all metrics. The species 
that showed the highest vulnerability towards climate changes was the mollusc, Japanese carpet 
shell, with a vulnerability score of 3.75 out of 4. It was followed by two fish species that all 
had a score of 3.5; dusky grouper and European whitefish. Another seven species had 
vulnerability scores of 3.25, but none of the most vulnerable species were among the most 
valuable species. In Figure 7 the 30 most valuable assessed species in Europe and their 
vulnerability scores are shown. The graph shows, that of the most valuable species, the most 
vulnerable crustaceans were northern prawn and deep-water rose shrimp both with a score of 
3.0, and this was the highest overall vulnerability score given to any crustacean in this 
assessment. Of the most valuable species, redfishes nei and monkfishes nei showed the highest 
vulnerability. The top-5 valued species included two species: European hake and Norway 
==PAGE:22==
19 
 
 
lobster, that showed medium-high vulnerability to climate change, while the Atlantic Mackerel, 
Herring and Cod showed low-medium vulnerability. 
 
 
Figure 8: The 30 most valuable species caught by European countries with the most valuable species in the left hand side and 
their overall vulnerability between 1 and 4. 
 
At the other end of the scale are found the least vulnerable species. One species, northern 
shortfin squid had the lowest possible vulnerability (1) and is thus not expected to be influenced 
by climate changes. Other species that had a vulnerability of less than 1.5 include 3 crustaceans 
of which two were shrimp species; scarlet shrimp and striped red shrimp and 4 fish species 
such as yellowfin tuna and red gurnard. Despite the fact that crustaceans had a lower maximum 
vulnerability compared to the other two types, there are no significant differences between the 
crustaceans, fish and molluscs. The boxplot in Figure 9 shows that the means are very much 
alike for the three types, though the range differs since the molluscs are spread out more than 
both fish and crustaceans. The average vulnerability score of each type are thus very close to 
the overall average score, which is shown as the red dotted line in Figure 8 (average 
vulnerability score = 2.49). It must be mentioned, that the two components were equally 
weighted and thus it is possible for species to have a medium/high vulnerability, even though 
one of the components had a score of 4. The ten most vulnerable species all had scores ≥3 for 
both components, though there were species with an overall medium/high vulnerability that 
actually had a very low adaptive capacity (score 4). Such species were megrim and European 
lobster that both had an overall vulnerabilty of 2.5. The overall vulnerability scores of the 157 
species can be found in Table 9. 
==PAGE:23==
20 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Boxplot showing the overall vulnerability differences between the three species types: fish, crustaceans and 
molluscs. 
 
Vulnerability of European countries regarding their fisheries composition 
All countries had vulnerability scores regarding their fisheries composition in the range from 
~1.9 to 2.7, which indicates that no country depends only on highly vulnerable species. Some 
countries though had large proportions of their landings value depending on highly vulnerable 
species. Romania’s fishery industry turned out to be the most dependent on highly vulnerable 
species (see Figure 10). Almost 75% of the value of Romania’s landings was veined rapa whelk 
which had an overall vulnerability score of 3 because it had a medium adaptive capacity and a 
very high habitat loss. Compared to other countries, Romania is not a large fishery nation when 
it comes to values of the fisheries. Romania’s yearly landings values from 2010-2015 were 
among the lowest of all countries in this study: only Slovenia had landings with lower landings 
value. The second most vulnerable country, based on its fisheries composition, was Malta 
whose landings were a bit more diverse than that of Romania. The most important fish species 
in Malta all had vulnerability scores higher than 2.5 which is one of the reasons the country 
scored high. Some of its most valuable landings consisted of swordfish, common dolphinfish 
and Atlantic bluefin tuna, which were all highly migratory and thus had a high adaptive 
capacity but were vulnerable when it comes to habitat loss and life span. The country fishing 
on the least vulnerable species was Estonia, due to landings primarily consisting of herring and 
sprat, which had vulnerability scores of 2 and 1.75, respectively. 
 
==PAGE:24==
21 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Map of Europe with the 25 countries and their vulnerability scores based on their fisheries composition indicated 
as colors, with dark red indicating the countries depending on the most vulnerable species. 
 
The countries that had the highest value of total landings of all aquatic organisms was Spain 
followed by Norway, Iceland and Italy, ranking as the 17th, 22nd, 12th and 4th most vulnerable 
countries, respectively. From the Europe map in Figure 10, it is clear, that the fisheries of 
countries in southern Europe were generally fishing on more vulnerable species than the 
northern countries. Especially countries that are not directly linked to the Atlantic and thus are 
fishing in the Mediterranean and/or Black sea (Romania, Cyprus, Malta), showed higher 
vulnerability when it comes to fisheries composition and climate change than those in Northern 
and Western Europe. The least vulnerable countries (Finland, Estonia and Latvia) are all placed 
at the Baltic Sea in the north east corner of Europe and are all, to different extent, dependent 
on species such as cod, herring, sprat, European smelt and European whitefish (see Table S1). 
Of these species, the only one that had a vulnerability higher than 2.5 was European whitefish 
which is usually not the most valuable species. See all country’s vulnerability scores in Table 
9 and their highest valued species in Table S1 in Supplementary Material 1. 
 
Discussion 
The present analysis looked at vulnerability of 157 species caught by European countries, 
which makes it one of the first in Europe and one of the most extensive ecological vulnerability 
assessments. While other studies (Ortega-Cisneros et al., 2018; Pecl et al., 2014) have assessed 
the sensitivity of species using the rapid sensitivity assessment method combining only climate 
==PAGE:25==
22 
 
 
change exposure and species sensitivity in a two-step progress, this assessment uses a full 
vulnerability framework with three components exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity. In 
several ecological assessments, separating species sensitivity and adaptive capacity was found 
difficult (Hare et al., 2016; Morrison et al., 2015), but in the present analysis it was managed 
to develop metrics for all three components and thus provide a full assessments of the species’ 
vulnerability towards climate change. Furthermore, the combination of exposure and 
sensitivity providing habitat loss has not been used in other studies, even though habitat 
suitability has been used in several other assessments (Pacifici et al., 2015; Wabnitz et al., 
2018). This approach stands out when it comes to assessing biological/ecological systems, and 
it can stand alone and provide results to be used in further analyses. However, combining all 
these parameters in one analysis is very difficult, especially on a scale such as the one in this 
study. The analysis can be used for adaptation purposes by policy makers in Europe wanting 
to mitigate climate change, though here it is recommended to also consider these other 
parameters. Species vulnerability also depends on other parameters than climate change, 
including fishing pressure, pollution, and other anthropogenic stressors (Berry et al., 2013; 
Chen et al., 2018). 
 
Using Aquamaps as the basis for two out of three components makes the approach easy to adapt 
in other parts of the world, where readily available data is often lacking. The large databases 
used to retain information on all metrics and components for the present analysis (Fishbase, 
Aquamaps and Sealifebase) are important and increase the adaptability of our methodology. 
Together they provide information at least 75.000 species, covering on all types of aquatic 
species (Palomares & Pauly, 2019) from all parts of the world. At the same time, it also 
eliminates uncertainties that can be caused by using data from different sources. Using the same 
type of data for all species in the analysis increases the comparability of the results. As for the 
adaptive capacity component, the metrics consists of data from several different sources. The 
life span metric especially has some uncertainty due to data-limitations, since no database 
contained life span calculated the same way for all species. It was found that there is no uniform 
way to measure or calculate life span and even though Fishbase provides a tool in which life 
span for fish species can be calculated, the confidence is not equally high for all species (R. 
Froese & Pauly, 2019). Thus, some life spans are calculated as longevity, some as the average 
expected life span in wild life and others again are the maximum observed life span depending 
on the source. The habitat specificity metric uses less different sources, and especially 
information on fish species was freely available, which again increases the confidence in the 
analysis and makes the comparison of a large amount of species possible. The main part of our 
approach can thus be used in data-poor scenarios, though metrics such as life span might need 
to be modified. 
 
This assessment was based on a broad-brushed methodology, only including two metrics (one 
of which had 3 indices) for the adaptive capacity and a single one for the habitat loss. This is 
contrary to many previous assessments using several life-history traits and several 
environmental parameters (see Table S3) (Hare et al., 2016; Pinnegar et al., submitted). It is 
recommended using several metrics for each component in order to carry out a thorough 
analysis (Foden et al., 2018), though with the amount of species assessed in this study, it would 
==PAGE:26==
23 
 
 
be difficult if not impossible to find data on all of them. Another reason for only using a few 
metrics is that e.g. the SST has been proven to be a key driver for marine ecosystems while 
being a primary indicator of changes in e.g. distribution (FAO, 2018; Pinnegar et al., 2012; 
Taboada & Anadón, 2012). Therefore, it is argued that using several exposure metrics could 
provide extra detail, but not necessarily change the results. With respect to the sensitivity and 
adaptive capacity of species, a study showed that at least three life-history traits (maximum 
length, life span and trophic level) are highly correlated (Pecuchet et al., 2017). Using one of 
these traits for the analysis was thus considered adequate. It is possible that more different 
metrics could have provided a more thorough assessment. However, verifying the results of 
vulnerability assessments difficult, since they are not used for projections, but rather assesses 
the vulnerability at present. ATLANTIS is a ecosystem model that considers all parts of marine 
ecosystems (CSIRO, 2018). It has been used to address fisheries management issues in most 
parts of the world, but with the increased used of ecosystem models, addressing uncertainty is 
needed (Link et al., 2012). Sensitivity analyses quantify the relationship between model inputs 
and responses, though they are rarely performed due to the complexity of models (Hansen et 
al., 2019). Furthermore, ecosystem models often provide contrasting predictions and 
determining which are most appropriate is difficult. It can be argued, that such detailed models 
are better at indicating vulnerability of ecosystems than CVAs, though the uncertainty is 
important to consider. In an analysis evaluating models’ implementation, ATLANTIS was 
showed to not have the capacity to cover individual species (Nielsen et al., 2018). Considering 
that, deciding whether to use ecosystem models or CVAs to address vulnerability again 
depends on the purpose and the assessor. 
 
The present analysis argued that there is no clear trend in what type of species are the most 
vulnerable to climate change, as both fish and molluscs are represented among the top 10 most 
vulnerable species. Highly migratory species and species with a short life span (<7.9 years) 
were found to be less vulnerable than most sedentary species. If looking at species from the 
north east and east central Atlantic on the IUCN red list only one species assessed in this study 
is critically endangered. The roundnose grenadier was estimated to have a relatively low 
vulnerability in this assessment, although the primary threat to the species is fisheries which is 
not a part of the present assessment (Iwamoto, 2015). Likewise, Atlantic bluefin tuna and 
shortfin mako are endangered species threatened by fisheries according to IUCN (2019) while 
they both have a relatively high vulnerability (score of 2.75). Both species have a long life span 
and low habitat specificity and have a high vulnerability regarding their habitat loss. Due to 
being highly migratory they cannot score a very high vulnerability in the present assessment.  
 
The question of how to combine scores along the various dimensions (sensitivity, exposure 
etc.) can have a critical effect on the results. This issue was discussed in a study by Morrison 
et al. (2015), arguing that one disadvantage of averaging scores is that the importance of high 
scoring metrics tends to be minimized. Conversely, we argue that weighting the metrics to a 
higher extent makes sense, if more metrics are used. In that case, a single high scoring metric 
could easily be neglected if the rest scores low. The two metrics of adaptive capacity are equally 
important, since they describe two separate characteristics and averaging the scores was thus 
chosen. A different method could be to base the vulnerability of species on the number of 
==PAGE:27==
24 
 
 
metrics or components that were rated as low, medium, high and very high, so that a high 
overall vulnerability would be given to a species that scored high/very high in both life span, 
habitat specificity and habitat loss. This method is known as the “logic rule”-method and was 
used by e.g. Hare et al. (2016b)(Hare et al., 2016) and Ortega-Cisneros et al. (2018). One thing 
to keep in mind, is that both studies had several metrics, whereas we in this assessment only 
have a few.  
 
Dusky grouper is one of the most vulnerable species assessed and is also a vulnerable species 
due to overexploitation (Pollard et al., 2018), although it is not among the very valuable species 
in Europe. When looking at the most valuable species, five species had a high overall 
vulnerability (score of 3), three of which were crustaceans. One of the species items, redfishes 
nei (based on golden redfish), which had a high vulnerability and high value, is also vulnerable 
according to the IUCN Red list of threatened species (2019) because the population trend is 
decreasing and it can only sustain low rates of exploitation and (Lorance et al., 2015). Among 
the least vulnerable species, yellowfin tuna, the 10th most valuable species in the list is found. 
This species is found worldwide and is highly migratory, which is one of the main reasons why 
it has a low habitat loss and a low vulnerability. IUCN considers it near threatened on a global 
scale, while catches in the Atlantic Ocean has declined since 1990 (Collette et al., 2011).  
 
Fishing accounts for less than one percent of the total GDP of Europe. In many countries, 
fisheries do not have a high economic importance and consumption of seafood per capita is 
low (see Figure 11). Iceland is one of the few together with Greenland that remains reliant on 
fisheries (FAO, 2018), though Greenland was not assessed in this study. It can be argued that 
vulnerability of fisheries should also needs to include details on a sub-national scale. Local or 
coastal communities can be very fishery-dependent, as e.g. adaptive capacity can vary with 
respect to material resources and technology among others (FAO, 2009). O’Brien et al. (2004) 
argued that it is necessary to address climate vulnerabilities at multiple scales. Changes in e.g. 
temperature and precipitation will affect different areas of a country differently and thus even 
though the country might not be very vulnerable on a national scale, there might be regions 
that are affected negatively based on climatic variations. In Norway an example could be winter 
tourism, where some communities are very dependent economically on activities that are based 
on natural resources such as aquatic species (O’Brien et al., 2004).  
 
The spatial scale of a vulnerability assessment is often considered a source of uncertainty 
(IPCC, 2001). On a national scale, many northern countries were estimated to be less 
vulnerable than countries in southern Europe. However, performing the assessment on a finer 
scale might have resulted in a different outcome. With the low importance of fisheries to 
nations’ economies, the local differences are especially worth studying. Some communities 
might have a higher employment rate in the fisheries sector compared to on a national level. In 
countries such as Finland and Norway there might by local changes in the climate that are hard 
to include on a larger scale. Furthermore, this study used species populations when lost habitat 
was estimated. A disadvantage of this approach is that stocks or subpopulations are not 
considered. Different fishing grounds might provide different environmental conditions that 
certain subpopulations are adapted to e.g. the pelagic Atlantic mackerel that is both caught in 
==PAGE:28==
25 
 
 
the Mediterranean, North Sea and the Baltic. Another aspect of habitat loss that is not 
considered is where the habitat is lost. The lost habitat of species could especially effect certain 
countries whereas other could benefit. Atlantic cod, for example, is project to have a habitat 
loss of 2.5 % in the next 50 years. Literature suggests that cod will shift towards north and 
colder waters, and in that case the habitat loss might only affect countries in southern Europe 
whereas the northern countries such as Norway and Denmark might benefit (Drinkwater, 
2005). Species distribution shifts due to climate change are being studied in order to gain 
knowledge of the impacts of climate change. Most studies describe a northward movement due 
to climate change (European Environment Agency, 2019; Pinnegar et al., 2012), while others 
argue that shifts follow climate velocities in magnitude and direction (Pinsky et al., 2013). 
According to European Environment Agency (2019) 72% of the common fish species in the 
NE Atlantic have already experience changes in abundance and/or distribution due to climate 
change. If the species migrate across management boundaries, quotas might have to be 
reallocated in order to satisfy the new conditions (FAO, 2018). Furthermore, if species shift, 
the consequences for fishers might be significant. The revenue from fishing depends on factors 
such as fuel usage and time at sea, and if a target species shifts further away from land, the 
economic benefit might decrease (Pinnegar et al., 2012). 
 
The present analysis found a small difference in vulnerability between the most and least 
vulnerable countries. One of the reasons for the low range of vulnerability scores for countries 
could be the large number of species included in this assessment, as most countries will 
somehow be dependent on both vulnerable and less vulnerable species. The three most 
vulnerable countries regarding their fisheries only represent a small proportion of the overall 
landings value of the 25 countries. These countries are however not some of the major fishing 
nations. Romania was found to be the most vulnerable country due to a large proportion of its 
landings consisting of veined rapa whelk. The fisheries in Romania though primarily consists 
of small-scale fisheries (STECF, 2017) and the contribution of the fisheries sector to the 
national economy is low (European Commission, 2014). In Malta the tendency is the same, 
although here the landings value is higher than in Romania. Italy was found to be the fourth 
most vulnerable country, while they constitute a large proportion of the total landings value 
(approximately 10%). Italy has a larger commercial fisheries sector than the most vulnerable 
countries, as 31% of their vessel fleet are large-scale, even though the small-scale still 
constitutes the largest part of the fleet. Furthermore, not counting Greece, Italy generates 67% 
of the total value landed in the Mediterranean (STECF, 2017). According to FAO (2018), 
small-scale fishers are particularly vulnerable to climate change. As for direct effects, living 
close to the ocean increases the risk of being exposed to extreme weather events. Many small-
scale fishers are likewise vulnerable due to their economic situation e.g. making them unable 
to escape these events (FAO, 2018). 
 
Iceland, which as mentioned previously, is very dependent on its fisheries sector, generates 
approximately 10% of the total value, though it is the 12th most vulnerable country assessed. 
The fisheries sector here employ approximately 5% of the total workforce in Iceland (Popescu 
& Poulsen, 2012), which makes them more vulnerable from a socio-economic point-of-view 
than e.g. Denmark with an employment rate of less than 2% (Eurostat, 2019b). Furthermore, 
==PAGE:29==
26 
 
 
Allison et al. (2009) identified Denmark, Iceland and Norway as being among the most reliant 
on fisheries exports, which is also a matter of vulnerability. This argument is supported by the 
relationship between consumption and production in Figure 11, where the production exceeds 
the consumption per capita. The opposite can be said about countries such as Germany and 
Belgium, which both consume more than they produce (FAO, 2018). Both France and Great 
Britain are among the 10 most vulnerable countries and they both constitute ~8% of the total 
value. Great Britain has experienced a 14% increase in landings values from 2008-2015 
primarily due to an increase in mackerel landings. Both France and Great Britain have a large 
proportion of small-scale vessels, though the majority of their landings value are from the large-
scale vessels (STECF, 2017). Spain generates more than 20% of the total landings value of the 
assessed countries, though they are not very vulnerable regarding their landing’s composition. 
They fish in the eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean and have vessels fishing in distant 
waters as well. Spain’s fleet is dominated by small-scale vessels (70%) (STECF, 2017) and 
~22% of all people employed in fisheries in EU are in Spain (Eurostat, 2019b). Having such 
high employment and a large proportion of small-scale fishing vessels suggests that they are 
more vulnerable than other large fishing nations in Europe.  
 
 
Figure 11: Per capita seafood production and consumption in North Atlantic countries based on FAO data for 2013 (FAO, 
2018). 
CVAs and decision making 
The European Commission is committed to enhance the protection of vulnerable marine 
ecosystems in the North Atlantic. In order to do that, improvements of stock assessments and 
risk-based management strategies are necessary (European Commission, 2015). Assessing the 
vulnerability of species is one important process in planning such protection strategies. The 
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) provides advice to governments 
that considers human pressures and their effects on marine ecosystems (ICES, 2019). Here 
CVAs as the one in this work could be included, so that advice not only focuses on 
==PAGE:30==
27 
 
 
anthropogenic pressures. In 2017 ICES provided an advice describing potential impacts of 
climate change on Atlantic Salmon, but argued that uncertainties and knowledge gaps remained 
a problem (ICES, 2017a). For the purpose of understanding the risks of climate change, 
vulnerability assessments are good tools. In fisheries management, CVAs can also provide 
information to be used for setting quotas and Total Allowable Catches (TACs). Stock 
assessments usually focus on the biomass and recruitment and provide short term predictions, 
but vulnerability assessments could be used for estimating possible changes in e.g. abundance 
and range. Another way to use CVAs to increase resilience in Europe could be to increase the 
diversity in landings for all countries. This is a way to ensure that no country is too dependent 
on a few species, especially if the species are vulnerable to climate change.  
 
Concluding remarks and future directions 
The assessment reported here aimed at assessing the vulnerability of key species to the 
European fisheries towards climate change and has done so by adapting the IPPC fourth 
assessment vulnerability framework, combining species’ sensitivity and adaptivity with the 
predicted SST changes. The analysis showed that the most vulnerable species were Japanese 
carpet shell, European whitefish and Dusky grouper. They all had a habitat loss of more than 
20% in 50 years and a high or very high vulnerability due to having long life spans. The analysis 
likewise showed, that most vulnerable high-value species were deep-water rose shrimp, great 
Atlantic scallop, northern prawn, redfishes nei and monkfishes nei. Of the 5 most valuable 
species, European flounder showed the highest vulnerability. Of the 25 European countries 
assessed, Romania depended on the most vulnerable species. Iceland, a country very dependent 
on fisheries, both economically and socially and with the 3rd highest value of landings of the 
assessed countries was the 12th most vulnerable country regarding their fisheries. Their 
landings were based on a mix of low-medium and medium-high vulnerability species and thus 
parts of their fisheries are likely to be affected by climate change. The two countries generating 
the highest values from landings were Spain and Norway and none of them were found to have 
vulnerable fisheries. When assessing vulnerability of nations, landings are not the only aspect 
to consider. A socio-economic perspective is very important to include in order to assess 
vulnerability. Thus, a further study could be carried out at finer spatial scale, were local social 
and economic vulnerability is also included. Using the risk framework from IPCC fifth 
assessment report would provide an estimate of how likely European countries and/or smaller 
regions are to be affected by climate change. Such an analysis would provide governments with 
important information that can be used for increasing the resilience towards climate change. 
This is an important step towards securing both large-, and especially small-scale fisheries in 
the future. 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was carried out as a part of the EU Horizon 2020 project CERES. I wish to thank a 
few people for their guidance and contribution to this project; My supervisor Mark R. Payne 
for providing support and sharing his experience in during the whole process; John J. Pinnegar 
for providing guidelines for and insights into CVAs in the initial phase and George Engelhard 
for assisting in developing metrics and providing data for the analysis.  
 
==PAGE:31==
28 
 
 
References 
AGEDI. (2015). Executive Summary: Regional Marine Biodiversity and Climate Change. 
Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311145682_Executive_Summary_Marine_Bio
diversity_Vulnerability_to_Climate_Change 
Allison, E. H., Perry, A. L., Badjeck, M.-C., Neil Adger, W., Brown, K., Conway, D., … 
Dulvy, N. K. (2009). Vulnerability of national economies to the impacts of climate 
change on fisheries. Fish and Fisheries, 10(2), 173–196. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
2979.2008.00310.x 
Berry, P., Ogawa-Onishi, Y., & Mcvey, A. (2013). The Vulnerability of Threatened Species: 
Adaptive Capability and Adaptation Opportunity. Biology, 2, 872–893. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/biology2030872 
Blasiak, R., Spijkers, J., Tokunaga, K., Pittman, J., Yagi, N., & Österblom, H. (2017). 
Climate change and marine fisheries: Least developed countries top global index of 
vulnerability. PLoS ONE, 12(6), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179632 
Chen, Q., Shen, W., & Yu, B. (2018). Assessing the Vulnerability of Marine Fisheries in 
China: Towards an Inter-Provincial Perspective. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10114302 
Cheung, W. W. L., Jones, M. C., Reygondeau, G., & Frölicher, T. L. (2018). Opportunities 
for climate-risk reduction through effective fisheries management. Global Change 
Biology, 24(11), 5149–5163. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14390 
Cinner, J. E., Huchery, C., Darling, E. S., Humphries, A. T., & Graham, N. A. J. (2013). 
Evaluating Social and Ecological Vulnerability of Coral Reef Fisheries to Climate 
Change. PLoS ONE, 8(9), 74321. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0074321 
Colburn, L. L., Jepson, M., Weng, C., Seara, T., Weiss, J., & Hare, J. A. (2016). Indicators of 
climate change and social vulnerability in fishing dependent communities along the 
Eastern and Gulf Coasts of the United States. Marine Policy, 74, 323–333. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2016.04.030 
Collette, B., Acer, A., Amorim, A. F., Boustany, A., Canales-Ramirez, C., Cardenas, G., … 
Yanez, E. (2011). Thunnus albacares. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, 
e.T21857A9, 1–14. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2011-
2.RLTS.T21857A9327139.en 
CSIRO. (2018). About ATLANTIS. Retrieved from 
https://research.csiro.au/atlantis/home/about-atlantis/ 
Drinkwater, K. F. (2005). The response of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) to future climate 
change. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 62, 1327–1337. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icesjms.2005.05.015 
Engelhard, G. H., Ellis, J. R., Payne, M. R., ter Hofstede, R., & Pinnegar, J. K. (2011). 
Ecotypes as a concept for exploring responses to climate change in fish assemblages. 
ICES Journal of Marine Science, 68(3), 580–591. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsq183 
European Commission. (2014). Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development - Operational 
Programme for Fisheries - Romania, (August 2009), 2–3. Retrieved from 
https://ec.europa.eu/fisheries/sites/fisheries/files/docs/body/romania_en.pdf 
European Commission. (2015). North Atlantic Fisheries Organisation enhances the protection 
of vulnerable marine ecosystems. Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu/fisheries/north-
atlantic-fisheries-organisation-enhances-protection-vulnerable-marine-ecosystems_en 
European Environment Agency. (2019). Distribution shifts of marine species. Retrieved from 
https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/northward-movement-of-marine-
species-2/assessment 
Eurostat. (2019a). Database - Eurostat. Retrieved May 29, 2019, from 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/database 
==PAGE:32==
29 
 
 
Eurostat. (2019b). Fishery statistics. Retrieved June 19, 2019, from 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Fishery_statistics#Total_fisheries_production_and_employment 
Eurostat. (2019c). Overview. Retrieved May 11, 2019, from 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/about/overview 
FAO. (2009). Climate change implications for fisheries and aquaculture. (K. Cochrane, C. 
De Yong, D. Soto, & T. Bahri, Eds.), FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper. 
https://doi.org/FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical paper No. 530 
FAO. (2015). Assessing climate change vulnerability in fisheries and aquaculture: Available 
methodologies and their relevance for the sector. (C. Brugère & C. De Young, Eds.) 
(FAO Fisher). Rome, Italy: FAO. 
FAO. (2018). Projected changes in global and national potential marine fisheries catch 
under climate change scenarios in the twenty-first century. (M. Barange, T. Bahri, M. 
Beveridge, K. Cochrane, S. Funge-Smith, & F. Poulain, Eds.), FAO Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Technical Paper No 627. Rome. 
FAO. (2019). ASFIS list of species for fishery statistical purposes. Fishery Fact Sheets 
Collections, 43. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/fishery/collection/asfis/en. 
Foden, W. B., Young, B. E., Akçakaya, H. R., Garcia, R. A., Hoffmann, A. A., Stein, B. A., 
… Huntley, B. (2018). Climate change vulnerability assessment of species. WIREs Clim 
Change, 10(1). https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.551 
Foley, M. M., & Carbines, M. (2019). Climate Change Risk Assessment for Auckland’s 
Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems. Retrieved from 
http://www.knowledgeauckland.org.nz/assets/publications/TR2019-015-Climate-
change-risk-marine-freshwater-final.pdf 
Froese, R., & Pauly, D. (2019). FishBase. Retrieved May 31, 2019, from www.fishbase.org 
Froese, R, Capuli, E., Garilao, C., & Pauly, D. (2000). The SPECIES Table. Retrieved May 
29, 2019, from 
https://www.fishbase.org/manual/English/FishBaseThe_Species_Table.htm 
Froese, Rainer, Palomares, M. L. D., & Pauly, D. (2005). Estimation of Life-History Key 
Facts. Retrieved May 21, 2019, from http://www.fishbase.org/manual/key facts.htm 
Hansen, C., Drinkwater, K. F., Jähkel, A., Fulton, E. A., Gorton, R., & Skern-Mauritzen, M. 
(2019). Sensitivity of the Norwegian and Barents Sea Atlantis end-to-end ecosystem 
model to parameter perturbations of key species. PLoS ONE, 14(2), 1–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0210419 
Hare, J. A., Morrison, W. E., Nelson, M. W., Stachura, M. M., Teeters, E. J., Griffis, R. B., 
… Griswold, C. A. (2016). A Vulnerability Assessment of Fish and Invertebrates to 
Climate Change on the Northeast U.S. Continental Shelf. Plos One, 11(2), e0146756. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0146756 
HELCOM. (2013). SPECIES INFORMATION SHEET Ammodytes tobianus Distribution and 
status in the Baltic Sea region. Retrieved from www.helcom.fi 
ICES. (2017a). Advice describes potential climate change impacts on Atlantic salmon. 
Retrieved from https://www.ices.dk/news-and-events/news-archive/news/Pages/Advice-
describes-potential-climate-change-impacts-on-Atlantic-salmon.aspx 
ICES. (2017b). ICES WKSICCME-CVA REPORT 2017 Report of the ICES / PICES 
Workshop on assessment for the large marine ecosystems Regional climate change 
vulnerability of the northern hemisphere ( WKSICCME-CVA ), (July), 19–22. 
ICES. (2017c). Report of the ICES/PICES Workshop on Regional climate change 
vulnerability assessment for the large marine ecosystems of the northern hemisphere 
(WKSICCME-CVA). Copenhagen. Retrieved from www.ices.dk 
ICES. (2019). Ecosystem overviews. Retrieved June 21, 2019, from 
==PAGE:33==
30 
 
 
https://www.ices.dk/community/advisory-process/Pages/Ecosystem-overviews.aspx 
IPCC. (2001). Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. (J. J. 
McCarthy, O. F. Canciani, N. A. Leary, D. J. Dokken, & K. S. White, Eds.), Climate 
change 2001 : Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Cambridge University Press. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.grida.no/publications/other/ipcc_tar/www.grida.no/publications/other/ipcc_t
ar/ 
IUCN. (2019). The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Retrieved from 
https://www.iucnredlist.org 
Iwamoto, T. (2015). Coryphaenoides rupestris (Vol. The IUCN R). Retrieved from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2015-4.RLTS.T15522149A15603540.en 
Johnson, J. E., Welch, D. J., Maynard, J. A., Bell, J. D., Pecl, G., Robins, J., & Saunders, T. 
(2016). Assessing and reducing vulnerability to climate change: Moving from theory to 
practical decision-support. Marine Policy, 74(September), 220–229. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2016.09.024 
Jones, M. C., & Cheung, W. W. L. (2018). Using fuzzy logic to determine the vulnerability 
of marine species to climate change. Global Change Biology, 24(2), e719–e731. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.13869 
Kaschner, K., Ready, J., Agbayani, E., Eastwood, P., Rees, T., Reyes, K., … Froese, R. 
(2007). About AquaMaps. Retrieved May 24, 2019, from 
https://www.aquamaps.org/AboutAquaMaps.htm 
Kaschner, K., Schneider, B., Garilao, C., Kesner-Reyes, K., Rius-Barile, J., & Froese, R. 
(2016). AquaMaps environmental dataset: half-degree cells authority file (HCAF). 
Retrieved from www. aquamaps.org/data/main.php 
Kesner-Reyes, K., Kaschner, K., Kullander, S., Garilao, C., Barile, J., & Froese, R. (2016). 
AquaMaps: Algorithm and Data Sources for Aquatic Organisms AquaMaps for Marine 
Species. Froese, R. and D. Pauly. Editors. 2012. FishBase. World Wide Web electronic 
publication. www.fishbase.org, version (04/2012). Retrieved from 
http://www.marine.csiro.au/csquares/ 
Klein, C. J., Brown, C. J., Halpern, B. S., Segan, D. B., McGowan, J., Beger, M., & Watson, 
J. E. M. (2015). Shortfalls in the global protected area network at representing marine 
biodiversity. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 17539. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep17539 
Le Bris, A., Mills, K. E., Wahle, R. A., Chen, Y., Alexander, M. A., Allyn, A. J., … 
Pershing, A. J. (2018). Climate vulnerability and resilience in the most valuable North 
American fishery. PNAS, 115(8), 1831–1836. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1711122115 
Link, J. S., Ihde, T. F., Harvey, C. J., Gaichas, S. K., Field, J. C., Brodziak, J. K. T., … 
Peterman, R. M. (2012). Dealing with uncertainty in ecosystem models: The paradox of 
use for living marine resource management. Progress in Oceanography, 102(October 
2017), 102–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pocean.2012.03.008 
Lorance, P., Cook, R., Herrera, J., de Sola, L., Costa, M., & Keskin, Ç. (2015). Sebastes 
Norvegicus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, 2015: e.T1. Retrieved from 
https://www.iucnredlist.org/species/18237880/45863343#assessment-information 
Lorentzen, T., & Hannesson, R. (2005). Climate Change and its Effect on the Norwegian Cod 
Fishing Industry. SNF Working Paper No. 07/05, (07), 1–22. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/237513499_Climate_Change_and_Its_Effect_
on_the_Norwegian_Cod_Fishing_Industry 
Madeira, C., Mendonça, V., Leal, M. C., Flores, A. A. V., Cabral, H. N., Diniz, M. S., & 
Vinagre, C. (2017). Thermal stress, thermal safety margins and acclimation capacity in 
tropical shallow waters—An experimental approach testing multiple end-points in two 
common fish. Ecological Indicators, 81(October), 146–158. 
==PAGE:34==
31 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.05.050 
Maguire, J.-J., Sissenwine, M., Csirke, J., Grainger, R., & Garcia, S. (2006). 3. Highly 
migratory species (FAO Fisheries Technical Paper). Rome. Retrieved from 
http://www.fao.org/3/a0653e/a0653e00.htm#Contents 
Marshall, N. A., Stokes, C. J., Webb, N. P., Marshall, P. A., & Lankester, A. J. (2014). Social 
vulnerability to climate change in primary producers: A typology approach. 
“Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment,” 186, 86–93. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2014.01.004 
Metcalf, S. J., van Putten, E. I., Frusher, S., Marshall, N. A., Tull, M., Caputi, N., … Shaw, J. 
(2015). Measuring the vulnerability of marine social-ecological systems: a prerequisite 
for the identification of climate change adaptations. Ecology and Society, 20(2), art35. 
https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-07509-200235 
Monnereau, I., Mahon, R., Mcconney, P., & Nurse, L. (2013). Vulnerability of the fisheries 
sector to climate change impacts in Small Island Developing States and the Wider 
Caribbean: early findings. Retrieved from 
https://www.cavehill.uwi.edu/cermes/docs/technical_reports/monnereau_et_al_2013_vu
lnerability_fisheries_clima.aspx 
Montero-Serra, I., Edwards, M., & Genner, M. J. (2015). Warming shelf seas drive the 
subtropicalization of European pelagic fish communities. Global Change Biology, 21(1), 
144–153. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12747 
Morrison, W. E., Nelson, M. W., Howard, J. F., Eric, J., Hare, J. A., Griffis, R. B., & Scott, J. 
D. (2015). Methodology for Assessing the Vulnerability of Marine Fish and Shellfish 
Species to a Changing Climate, (October). 
Moss, D. K., Ivany, L. C., Judd, E. J., Cummings, P. W., Bearden, C. E., Kim, W. J., … 
Driscoll, J. R. (2016). Lifespan, growth rate, and body size across latitude in marine 
bivalvia, with implications for phanerozoic evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 283(1836). https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2016.1364 
Nielsen, J. R., Thunberg, E., Holland, D. S., Schmidt, J. O., Fulton, E. A., Bastardie, F., … 
Waldo, S. (2018). Integrated ecological–economic fisheries models—Evaluation, review 
and challenges for implementation. Fish and Fisheries, 19(1), 1–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12232 
O’Brien, K., Sygna, L., & Haugen, J. E. (2004). VULNERABLE OR RESILIENT? A 
MULTI-SCALE ASSESSMENT OF CLIMATE IMPACTS AND VULNERABILITY. 
Climatic Change, 64, 193–225. Retrieved from 
http://production.datastore.cvt.dk/filestore?oid=5481a106f36d367c450a2920&targetid=
5481a106f36d367c450a2922 
O’Hara, C. C., Afflerbach, J. C., Scarborough, C., Kaschner, K., & Halpern, B. S. (2017). 
Aligning marine species range data to better serve science and conservation. PLOS 
ONE, 12(5), e0175739. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175739 
Ortega-Cisneros, K., Yokwana, S., Sauer, W., Cochrane, K., Cockcroft, A., James, N. C., … 
Pecl, G. T. (2018). Assessment of the likely sensitivity to climate change for the key 
marine species in the southern Benguela system. African Journal of Marine Science, 
40(3), 279–292. https://doi.org/10.2989/1814232X.2018.1512526 
Pacifici, M., Foden, W. B., Visconti, P., Watson, J. E. M., Butchart, S. H. M., Kovacs, K. M., 
… Rondinini, C. (2015). Assessing species vulnerability to climate change. Nature 
Climate Change, 5(3), 215–225. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2448 
Palomares, M. L. D., & Pauly, D. (2019). SeaLifeBase. Retrieved June 21, 2019, from 
https://www.sealifebase.org/ 
Pecl, G. T., Ward, T. M., Doubleday, Z. a., Clarke, S., Day, J., Dixon, C., … Stoklosa, R. 
(2014). Rapid assessment of fisheries species sensitivity to climate change. Climatic 
==PAGE:35==
32 
 
 
Change, 127(3–4), 505–520. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-014-1284-z 
Pecuchet, L., Lindegren, M., Hidalgo, M., Delgado, M., Esteban, A., Fock, H. O., … Payne, 
M. R. (2017). From traits to life-history strategies: Deconstructing fish community 
composition across European seas. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 26(7), 812–822. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.12587 
Pinnegar, J. K., Cheung, W., Beeching, A., Soma, K., Grilli, F., Margonski, P., … Bernal, M. 
(2012). Climate change and European fisheries: observed changes and future prospects. 
Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281588911_Climate_change_and_European_fi
sheries_observed_changes_and_future_prospects 
Pinnegar, J. K., Engelhard, G. H., Norris, N. J., Theophille, D., & Sebastien, R. D. 
(submitted). Assessing vulnerability and adaptive capacity of the fisheries sector in 
Dominica: Long-term climate change and catastrophic hurricanes. 
Pinsky, M. L., Maria Eikeset, A., Mccauley, D. J., Payne, J. L., & Sunday, J. M. (2019). 
Greater vulnerability to warming of marine versus terrestrial ectotherms. Nature. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1132-4 
Pinsky, M. L., Worm, B., Fogarty, M. J., Sarmiento, J. L., & Levin, S. A. (2013). Marine taxa 
track local climate velocities. Science (New York, N.Y.), 341(6151), 1239–1242. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1239352 
Pollard, D. A., Afonso, P., Bertoncini, A. A., Fennessy, S., Francour, P., & Barreiros, J. 
(2018). Dusky Grouper ( Epinephelus marginatus ). IUCN Red list of Threatened 
Species: e.T7859A100467602. Retrieved from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2018-2.RLTS.T7859A100467602.en 
Popescu, I., & Poulsen, K. (2012). Icelandic Fisheries: A Review. Retrieved from 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/studies 
Rosenberg, A. A., & Fong, L. P. (2013). International Fisheries and Climate Change. In 
Climate Vulnerability: Understanding and Addressing Threats to Essential Resources 
(Vol. 2, pp. 69–72). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-384703-
4.00214-8 
STECF. (2017). The 2017 Annual Economic Report on the EU Fishing Fleet (STECF 17-12). 
(N. Carvalho, M. Keatinge, & J. Guillen Garcia, Eds.). https://doi.org/10.2760/36154 
STECF. (2019). Monitoring the performance of the Common Fisheries Policy (STECF -
Adhoc-19-01). (E. Jardim, F. Scott, I. Mosqueira, C. Osio, P. Vasilakopoulos, A. 
Mannini, & J. Casey, Eds.). Luxembourg. https://doi.org/10.2760/491411 
Stuart-Smith, R. D., Edgar, G. J., Barrett, N. S., Kininmonth, S. J., & Bates, A. E. (2015). 
Thermal biases and vulnerability to warming in the world’s marine fauna. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16144 
Taboada, F. G., & Anadón, R. (2012). Patterns of change in sea surface temperature in the 
North Atlantic during the last three decades: Beyond mean trends. Climatic Change, 
115(2), 419–431. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0485-6 
Venegas-Li, R., Levin, N., Possingham, H., & Kark, S. (2017). 3D spatial conservation 
prioritisation: Accounting for depth in marine environments. Methods Ecol Evol, 1, 1–
12. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12896 
Vinagre, C., Dias, M., Cereja, R., Abreu-Afonso, F., Flores, A. A. V, & Mendonça, V. 
(2019). Upper thermal limits and warming safety margins of coastal marine species – 
Indicator baseline for future reference. Ecological Indicators, 102, 644–649. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2019.03.030 
Vogt, G. (2018). Growing old: Ageing in crustacea. In G. A. Wellborn & M. Thiel (Eds.), 
The Natural History of the Crustacea: Life Histories, Vol. 5 (pp. 179–202). Oxford 
University Press. Retrieved from 
==PAGE:36==
33 
 
 
https://books.google.dk/books?id=NxRbDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA180&lpg=PA180&dq=vo
gt+crustaceans+lifespan&source=bl&ots=DtmuOdMJb_&sig=ACfU3U162U0zIR_ERv
CuRTbU4gYVTRijDw&hl=da&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjckIDG5KziAhUM3KQKHcnQ
D8AQ6AEwA3oECAcQAQ#v=onepage&q=vogt crustaceans l 
Wabnitz, C. C. C., Lam, V. W. Y., Reygondeau, G., Teh, L. C. L., Al-Abdulrazzak, D., 
Khalfallah, M., … Cheung, W. W. L. (2018). Climate change impacts on marine 
biodiversity, fisheries and society in the Arabian Gulf. PLoS ONE. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0194537 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
34 
 
 
Tables 
 
Table 4: Species list containing the 157 species assessed. For each species, the FAO ISSCAAP, 3-
alpha code and taxocode is provided together with the type of species, scientific name and common 
name. 
ISS-
CAAP 
Type 
Scientific Name 
Common Name 
3-alpha 
code 
TAXOCODE 
23 
Fish 
Coregonus lavaretus 
European whitefish 
PLN 
1231200102 
23 
Fish 
Osmerus eperlanus 
European smelt 
SME 
1230400301 
24 
Fish 
Alosa alosa 
Allis shad 
ASD 
1210501104 
31 
Fish 
Dicologlossa cuneata 
Wedge sole 
CET 
1830301701 
31 
Fish 
Glyptocephalus 
cynoglossus 
Witch flounder 
WIT 
1830201102 
31 
Fish 
Lepidorhombus spp 
Megrims nei 
LEZ 
18305003XX 
31 
Fish 
Lepidorhombus 
whiffiagonis 
Megrim 
MEG 
1830500301 
31 
Fish 
Microchirus spp 
Thickback soles nei 
THS 
18303081XX 
31 
Fish 
Microstomus kitt 
Lemon sole 
LEM 
1830204504 
31 
Fish 
Platichthys flesus 
European flounder 
FLE 
1830204802 
31 
Fish 
Pleuronectes platessa 
European plaice 
PLE 
1830200405 
31 
Fish 
Psetta maxima 
Turbot 
TUR 
1830509201 
31 
Fish 
Reinhardtius 
hippoglossoides 
Greenland halibut 
GHL 
1830200501 
31 
Fish 
Scophthalmus 
rhombus 
Brill 
BLL 
1830506401 
31 
Fish 
Solea lascaris 
Sand sole 
SOS 
1830300704 
31 
Fish 
Solea solea 
Common sole 
SOL 
1830300701 
31 
Fish 
Solea spp 
NA 
SOO 
18303007XX 
32 
Fish 
Coryphaenoides 
rupestris 
Roundnose grenadier 
RNG 
1480600401 
32 
Fish 
Gadus morhua 
Atlantic cod 
COD 
1480400202 
32 
Fish 
Gadus spp 
Northern cods nei 
CDZ 
14804002XX 
32 
Fish 
Macruronus 
magellanicus 
Patagonian grenadier 
GRM 
1480501701 
32 
Fish 
Melanogrammus 
aeglefinus 
Haddock 
HAD 
1480401001 
32 
Fish 
Merlangius merlangus 
Whiting 
WHG 
1480403401 
32 
Fish 
Merluccius hubbsi 
Argentine hake 
HKP 
1480500406 
32 
Fish 
Merluccius merluccius 
European hake 
HKE 
1480500401 
32 
Fish 
Merluccius paradoxus 
Deep-water Cape 
hake 
HKO 
1480500410 
32 
Fish 
Merluccius spp 
Hakes nei 
HKX 
14805004XX 
32 
Fish 
Micromesistius 
poutassou 
Blue 
whiting(=Poutassou) 
WHB 
1480403301 
32 
Fish 
Molva molva 
Ling 
LIN 
1480400501 
32 
Fish 
Phycis blennoides 
Greater forkbeard 
GFB 
1480400601 
32 
Fish 
Phycis phycis 
Forkbeard 
FOR 
1480400602 
32 
Fish 
Pollachius pollachius 
Pollack 
POL 
1480401502 
32 
Fish 
Pollachius virens 
Saithe(=Pollock) 
POK 
1480401501 
==PAGE:38==
35 
 
 
32 
Fish 
Trisopterus esmarkii 
Norway pout 
NOP 
1480403201 
32 
Fish 
Trisopterus luscus 
Pouting(=Bib) 
BIB 
1480403203 
33 
Fish 
Ammodytes spp 
Sandeels(=Sandlance
s) nei 
SAN 
17204002XX 
33 
Fish 
Argyrosomus regius 
Meagre 
MGR 
1703710601 
33 
Fish 
Boops boops 
Bogue 
BOG 
1703926101 
33 
Fish 
Dentex dentex 
Common dentex 
DEC 
1703906006 
33 
Fish 
Dentex spp 
Dentex nei 
DEX 
17039060XX 
33 
Fish 
Dicentrarchus labrax 
European seabass 
BSS 
1700634503 
33 
Fish 
Diplodus sargus 
White seabream 
SWA 
1703903303 
33 
Fish 
Diplodus spp 
Sargo breams nei 
SRG 
17039033XX 
33 
Fish 
Epinephelus 
marginatus 
Dusky grouper 
GPD 
1700204201 
33 
Fish 
Epinephelus spp 
Groupers nei 
GPX 
17002042XX 
33 
Fish 
Lithognathus 
mormyrus 
Sand steenbras 
SSB 
1703927702 
33 
Fish 
Liza aurata 
Golden grey mullet 
MGA 
1650101203 
33 
Fish 
Mullus barbatus 
Red mullet 
MUT 
1704100702 
33 
Fish 
Mullus spp 
Surmullets(=Red 
mullets) nei 
MUX 
17041007XX 
33 
Fish 
Mullus surmuletus 
Surmullet 
MUR 
1704100701 
33 
Fish 
Oblada melanura 
Saddled seabream 
SBS 
1703907601 
33 
Fish 
Pagellus acarne 
Axillary seabream 
SBA 
1703900803 
33 
Fish 
Pagellus bogaraveo 
Blackspot(=red) 
seabream 
SBR 
1703900801 
33 
Fish 
Pagellus erythrinus 
Common pandora 
PAC 
1703900802 
33 
Fish 
Pagellus spp 
Pandoras nei 
PAX 
17039008XX 
33 
Fish 
Pagrus pagrus 
Red porgy 
RPG 
1703919103 
33 
Fish 
Serranus cabrilla 
Comber 
CBR 
1700206101 
33 
Fish 
Siganus spp 
Spinefeet(=Rabbitfis
hes) nei 
SPI 
17407001XX 
33 
Fish 
Sparisoma cretense 
Parrotfish 
PRR 
1706505506 
33 
Fish 
Sparus aurata 
Gilthead seabream 
SBG 
1703923508 
33 
Fish 
Spicara maena 
Blotched picarel 
BPI 
1704007501 
33 
Fish 
Spicara smaris 
Picarel 
SPC 
1704007502 
33 
Fish 
Spicara spp 
Picarels nei 
PIC 
17040075XX 
33 
Fish 
Spondyliosoma 
cantharus 
Black seabream 
BRB 
1703906302 
34 
Fish 
Aphanopus carbo 
Black scabbardfish 
BSF 
1750601201 
34 
Fish 
Aspitrigla cuculus 
Red gurnard 
GUR 
1780200403 
34 
Fish 
Caproidae 
Boarfishes nei 
BOR 
16203XXXX
X 
34 
Fish 
Conger conger 
European conger 
COE 
1431300101 
34 
Fish 
Helicolenus 
dactylopterus 
Blackbelly rosefish 
BRF 
1780101703 
34 
Fish 
Lepidopus caudatus 
Silver scabbardfish 
SFS 
1750600601 
34 
Fish 
Lophius piscatorius 
Angler(=Monk) 
MON 
1950100101 
34 
Fish 
Lophius spp 
Monkfishes nei 
MNZ 
19501001XX 
==PAGE:39==
36 
 
 
34 
Fish 
Patagonotothen 
ramsayi 
Longtail Southern 
cod 
PAT 
1709244002 
34 
Fish 
Polyprion americanus 
Wreckfish 
WRF 
1700505801 
34 
Fish 
Scorpaena scrofa 
Red scorpionfish 
RSE 
1780100902 
34 
Fish 
Sebastes mentella 
Beaked redfish 
REB 
1780100112 
34 
Fish 
Sebastes spp 
Atlantic redfishes nei 
RED 
17801001XX 
34 
Fish 
Zeus faber 
John dory 
JOD 
1620100101 
35 
Fish 
Clupea harengus 
Atlantic herring 
HER 
1210500105 
35 
Fish 
Engraulis encrasicolus 
European anchovy 
ANE 
1210600201 
35 
Fish 
Sardina pilchardus 
European 
pilchard(=Sardine) 
PIL 
1210506401 
35 
Fish 
Sardinella aurita 
Round sardinella 
SAA 
1210501210 
35 
Fish 
Sprattus sprattus 
European sprat 
SPR 
1210506601 
36 
Fish 
Auxis rochei 
Bullet tuna 
BLT 
1750102303 
36 
Fish 
Katsuwonus pelamis 
Skipjack tuna 
SKJ 
1750102501 
36 
Fish 
Sarda sarda 
Atlantic bonito 
BON 
1750100101 
36 
Fish 
Thunnus alalunga 
Albacore 
ALB 
1750102605 
36 
Fish 
Thunnus albacares 
Yellowfin tuna 
YFT 
1750102610 
36 
Fish 
Thunnus obesus 
Bigeye tuna 
BET 
1750102612 
36 
Fish 
Thunnus thynnus 
Atlantic bluefin tuna 
BFT 
1750102601 
36 
Fish 
Xiphias gladius 
Swordfish 
SWO 
1750400301 
37 
Fish 
Brama brama 
Atlantic pomfret 
POA 
1702700301 
37 
Fish 
Coryphaena hippurus 
Common dolphinfish 
DOL 
1702807101 
37 
Fish 
Mallotus villosus 
Capelin 
CAP 
1230400201 
37 
Fish 
Pomatomus saltatrix 
Bluefish 
BLU 
1702021301 
37 
Fish 
Scomber colias 
Atlantic chub 
mackerel 
VMA 
1750100209 
37 
Fish 
Scomber scombrus 
Atlantic mackerel 
MAC 
1750100205 
37 
Fish 
Seriola dumerili 
Greater amberjack 
AMB 
1702304801 
37 
Fish 
Trachurus 
mediterraneus 
Mediterranean horse 
mackerel 
HMM 
1702300408 
37 
Fish 
Trachurus picturatus 
Blue jack mackerel 
JAA 
1702300402 
37 
Fish 
Trachurus spp 
Jack and horse 
mackerels nei 
JAX 
17023004XX 
37 
Fish 
Trachurus trachurus 
Atlantic horse 
mackerel 
HOM 
1702300401 
37 
Fish 
Trachurus trecae 
Cunene horse 
mackerel 
HMZ 
1702300414 
38 
Fish 
Isurus oxyrinchus 
Shortfin mako 
SMA 
1060800201 
38 
Fish 
Mustelus spp 
Smooth-hounds nei 
SDV 
10804007XX 
38 
Fish 
Prionace glauca 
Blue shark 
BSH 
1080200401 
38 
Fish 
Raja brachyura 
Blonde ray 
RJH 
1100400105 
38 
Fish 
Raja clavata 
Thornback ray 
RJC 
1100400102 
38 
Fish 
Raja montagui 
Spotted ray 
RJM 
1100400104 
38 
Fish 
Raja naevus 
Cuckoo ray 
RJN 
1100400110 
38 
Fish 
Raja spp 
Raja rays nei 
SKA 
11004001XX 
38 
Fish 
Squalus acanthias 
Picked dogfish 
DGS 
1090100704 
38 
Fish 
Squalus blainville 
Longnose spurdog 
QUB 
1090100701 
==PAGE:40==
37 
 
 
42 
Crustacean 
Cancer pagurus 
Edible crab 
CRE 
2310901006 
42 
Crustacean 
Maja squinado 
Spinous spider crab 
SCR 
2312100501 
43 
Crustacean 
Homarus gammarus 
European lobster 
LBE 
2294200718 
43 
Crustacean 
Nephrops norvegicus 
Norway lobster 
NEP 
2294200602 
43 
Crustacean 
Palinurus elephas 
Common spiny 
lobster 
SLO 
2290100804 
45 
Crustacean 
Aristaeomorpha 
foliacea 
Giant red shrimp 
ARS 
2280203001 
45 
Crustacean 
Aristeus antennatus 
Blue and red shrimp 
ARA 
2280203101 
45 
Crustacean 
Aristeus varidens 
Striped red shrimp 
ARV 
2280203102 
45 
Crustacean 
Crangon crangon 
Common shrimp 
CSH 
2282300303 
45 
Crustacean 
Palaemon serratus 
Common prawn 
CPR 
2281201810 
45 
Crustacean 
Pandalus borealis 
Northern prawn 
PRA 
2280400203 
45 
Crustacean 
Parapenaeus 
longirostris 
Deep-water rose 
shrimp 
DPS 
2280101701 
45 
Crustacean 
Penaeus kerathurus 
Caramote prawn 
TGS 
2280100117 
45 
Crustacean 
Penaeus spp 
Penaeus shrimps nei 
PEN 
22801001XX 
45 
Crustacean 
Plesionika martia 
Golden shrimp 
LKT 
2280403201 
45 
Crustacean 
Plesiopenaeus 
edwardsianus 
Scarlet shrimp 
SSH 
2280202101 
47 
Crustacean 
Squilla mantis 
Spottail mantis 
squillid 
MTS 
2250100102 
52 
Mollusc 
Buccinum undatum 
Whelk 
WHE 
3070800101 
52 
Mollusc 
Rapana spp 
Sea snails 
RPN 
30702018XX 
52 
Mollusc 
Rapana venosa 
Veined rapa whelk 
RPW 
3070201801 
53 
Mollusc 
Ostrea edulis 
European flat oyster 
OYF 
3160700205 
54 
Mollusc 
Mytilus edulis 
Blue mussel 
MUS 
3161000105 
55 
Mollusc 
Aequipecten 
opercularis 
Queen scallop 
QSC 
3160800105 
55 
Mollusc 
Pecten maximus 
Great Atlantic 
scallop 
SCE 
3160800309 
56 
Mollusc 
Callista chione 
Smooth callista 
KLK 
3161100601 
56 
Mollusc 
Cerastoderma edule 
Common edible 
cockle 
COC 
3162300203 
56 
Mollusc 
Chamelea gallina 
Striped venus 
SVE 
3161100105 
56 
Mollusc 
Ruditapes decussatus 
Grooved carpet shell 
CTG 
3161102001 
56 
Mollusc 
Ruditapes 
philippinarum 
Japanese carpet shell 
CLJ 
3161102002 
56 
Mollusc 
Spisula solida 
Solid surf clam 
ULO 
3161202005 
56 
Mollusc 
Venerupis pullastra 
Pullet carpet shell 
CTS 
3161100301 
56 
Mollusc 
Venus verrucosa 
Warty venus 
VEV 
3161102701 
57 
Mollusc 
Eledone moschata 
Musky octopus 
EDT 
3210902402 
57 
Mollusc 
Eledone spp 
Horned and musky 
octopuses 
OCM 
32109024XX 
57 
Mollusc 
Illex argentinus 
Argentine shortfin 
squid 
SQA 
3210501003 
57 
Mollusc 
Illex coindetii 
Broadtail shortfin 
squid 
SQM 
3210501002 
57 
Mollusc 
Illex illecebrosus 
Northern shortfin 
squid 
SQI 
3210501001 
==PAGE:41==
38 
 
 
57 
Mollusc 
Loligo forbesi 
Veined squid 
SQF 
3210400113 
57 
Mollusc 
Loligo gahi 
Patagonian squid 
SQP 
3210400102 
57 
Mollusc 
Loligo spp 
Common squids nei 
SQC 
32104001XX 
57 
Mollusc 
Loligo vulgaris 
European squid 
SQR 
3210400109 
57 
Mollusc 
Octopus spp 
Octopuses nei 
OCZ 
32109005XX 
57 
Mollusc 
Octopus vulgaris 
Common octopus 
OCC 
3210900507 
57 
Mollusc 
Sepia officinalis 
Common cuttlefish 
CTC 
3210200202 
 
 
Table 5: The minimum and maximum preferred temperatures that are the basis for calculating the lost 
habitat, which is here given in %, together with the lost habitat scores for all species from 1 to 4. 
Scientific Name 
Common Name 
TP10 
(°C) 
TP90 
(°C) 
HL 
(%) 
HL 
score 
Ruditapes philippinarum 
Japanese carpet shell 
16.91 
29.07 
62.52 
4 
Trachurus trecae 
Cunene horse mackerel 
21.49 
27.94 
44.98 
4 
Seriola dumerili 
Greater amberjack 
18.95 
28.18 
31.18 
4 
Pandalus borealis 
Northern prawn 
0 
5 
26.95 
4 
Auxis rochei 
Bullet tuna 
13.4 
28.01 
26.93 
4 
Scomber colias 
Atlantic chub mackerel 
16.42 
27.87 
26.58 
4 
Coregonus lavaretus 
European whitefish 
6.22 
10.76 
24.62 
4 
Palaemon serratus 
Common prawn 
9.89 
19.26 
24.57 
4 
Octopus spp 
Octopuses nei 
11.66 
27.99 
22.91 
4 
Octopus vulgaris 
Common octopus 
11.66 
27.99 
22.91 
4 
Parapenaeus longirostris 
Deep-water rose shrimp 
18.57 
27.66 
21.26 
4 
Sardinella aurita 
Round sardinella 
17.96 
27.69 
20.96 
4 
Epinephelus marginatus 
Dusky grouper 
17.98 
27.69 
20.85 
4 
Epinephelus spp 
Groupers nei 
17.98 
27.69 
20.85 
4 
Aristaeomorpha foliacea 
Giant red shrimp 
18.4 
27.4 
20.25 
4 
Coryphaena hippurus 
Common dolphinfish 
20.89 
27.88 
19.90 
4 
Thunnus obesus 
Bigeye tuna 
17 
28.06 
19.50 
4 
Microchirus spp 
Thickback soles nei 
18.7 
27.94 
19.45 
3 
Isurus oxyrinchus 
Shortfin mako 
16.72 
28.09 
18.60 
3 
Phycis blennoides 
Greater forkbeard 
11.27 
19.37 
18.39 
3 
Lophius spp 
Monkfishes nei 
10.41 
19.21 
18.38 
3 
Pagrus pagrus 
Red porgy 
16.57 
27.64 
18.25 
3 
Illex coindetii 
Broadtail shortfin squid 
12.49 
27.68 
18.20 
3 
Xiphias gladius 
Swordfish 
17.26 
27.85 
18.14 
3 
Sarda sarda 
Atlantic bonito 
12.67 
27.64 
17.89 
3 
Eledone moschata 
Musky octopus 
17.4 
21.49 
17.86 
3 
Eledone spp 
Horned and musky octopuses 
17.4 
21.49 
17.86 
3 
Katsuwonus pelamis 
Skipjack tuna 
15 
28.31 
17.41 
3 
Siganus spp 
Spinefeet(=Rabbitfishes) nei 
24.3 
29.22 
17.39 
3 
Merluccius paradoxus 
Deep-water Cape hake 
16.39 
20.86 
15.89 
3 
Mullus surmuletus 
Surmullet 
9.72 
19.65 
15.32 
3 
Helicolenus dactylopterus 
Blackbelly rosefish 
9.83 
27.34 
15.06 
3 
Ostrea edulis 
European flat oyster 
9.53 
19.35 
14.90 
3 
==PAGE:42==
39 
 
 
Penaeus kerathurus 
Caramote prawn 
17.75 
21.49 
14.75 
3 
Penaeus spp 
Penaeus shrimps nei 
17.75 
21.49 
14.75 
3 
Dicologlossa cuneata 
Wedge sole 
16.06 
27.89 
14.47 
3 
Sardina pilchardus 
European pilchard(=Sardine) 
9.75 
19.4 
14.43 
3 
Rapana spp 
Sea snails 
16.36 
26.37 
13.83 
3 
Rapana venosa 
Veined rapa whelk 
16.36 
26.37 
13.83 
3 
Trachurus spp 
Jack and horse mackerels nei 
9.62 
19.25 
13.78 
3 
Trachurus trachurus 
Atlantic horse mackerel 
9.62 
19.25 
13.78 
3 
Mustelus spp 
Smooth-hounds nei 
9.75 
19.66 
13.51 
3 
Phycis phycis 
Forkbeard 
17.31 
21.91 
13.35 
3 
Aristeus antennatus 
Blue and red shrimp 
17,4 
26.37 
13.08 
3 
Raja brachyura 
Blonde ray 
11.55 
20.09 
13.04 
3 
Raja spp 
Raja rays nei 
11.55 
20.09 
13.04 
3 
Merluccius merluccius 
European hake 
9.65 
19.23 
12.68 
3 
Merluccius spp 
Hakes nei 
9.65 
19.23 
12.68 
3 
Pomatomus saltatrix 
Bluefish 
12.67 
27.46 
12.48 
3 
Sparisoma cretense 
Parrotfish 
18.7 
21.88 
12.48 
3 
Dicentrarchus labrax 
European seabass 
9.72 
19.49 
12.42 
3 
Spicara smaris 
Picarel 
15.18 
21.11 
12.32 
3 
Spicara spp 
Picarels nei 
15.18 
21.11 
12.32 
3 
Aequipecten opercularis 
Queen scallop 
9.5 
19.1 
12.31 
3 
Mallotus villosus 
Capelin 
0.91 
8.67 
11.93 
3 
Thunnus alalunga 
Albacore 
13.5 
25.2 
11.52 
3 
Spisula solida 
Solid surf clam 
9.75 
12.54 
11.26 
3 
Callista chione 
Smooth callista 
14.44 
21.49 
11.22 
3 
Plesionika martia 
Golden shrimp 
17.46 
27.92 
11.03 
3 
Platichthys flesus 
European flounder 
8.58 
14.92 
10.46 
3 
Dentex spp 
Dentex nei 
14.92 
21.27 
9.88 
3 
Prionace glauca 
Blue shark 
12 
25 
9.67 
3 
Crangon crangon 
Common shrimp 
9.3 
12.62 
9.56 
3 
Sebastes spp 
Atlantic redfishes nei 
0.55 
9.83 
9.55 
3 
Chamelea gallina 
Striped venus 
9.76 
18.18 
9.54 
3 
Pagellus acarne 
Axillary seabream 
15.49 
21.8 
9.35 
3 
Pagellus spp 
Pandoras nei 
14.62 
21.27 
9.35 
3 
Alosa alosa 
Allis shad 
9.68 
18.51 
8.94 
3 
Pagellus bogaraveo 
Blackspot(=red) seabream 
10.71 
20.2 
8.75 
3 
Thunnus thynnus 
Atlantic bluefin tuna 
9.4 
24.97 
8.61 
3 
Caproidae 
Boarfishes nei 
10.61 
20.15 
8.59 
3 
Mullus barbatus 
Red mullet 
17.63 
20.69 
8.58 
3 
Mullus spp 
Surmullets(=Red mullets) nei 
17.63 
20.69 
8.58 
3 
Micromesistius poutassou 
Blue whiting(=Poutassou) 
9.5 
18.6 
8.16 
3 
Squilla mantis 
Spottail mantis squillid 
18.39 
27.66 
8.11 
3 
Solea lascaris 
Sand sole 
11.45 
27.69 
8.09 
3 
Solea solea 
Common sole 
9.68 
18.72 
7.99 
3 
Solea spp 
NA 
9.68 
18.72 
7.99 
3 
Raja clavata 
Thornback ray 
11.55 
20.09 
7.80 
3 
==PAGE:43==
40 
 
 
Loligo gahi 
Patagonian squid 
6.8 
20.51 
7.79 
3 
Pollachius pollachius 
Pollack 
9.3 
12.52 
7.78 
2 
Raja montagui 
Spotted ray 
9.89 
18.98 
7.68 
2 
Gadus spp 
Northern cods nei 
-1.36 
6.22 
7.65 
2 
Conger conger 
European conger 
10.31 
20.15 
7.55 
2 
.Psetta maxima 
Turbot 
8.91 
12.49 
7.47 
2 
Pecten maximus 
Great Atlantic scallop 
8.85 
12.74 
7.47 
2 
Trachurus mediterraneus 
Mediterranean horse 
mackerel 
14.87 
21.11 
7.46 
2 
Diplodus spp 
Sargo breams nei 
17.01 
21.01 
7.37 
2 
Pagellus erythrinus 
Common pandora 
14.62 
21.27 
7.35 
2 
Dentex dentex 
Common dentex 
14.92 
21.27 
7.22 
2 
Cancer pagurus 
Edible crab 
9.48 
12.5 
7.17 
2 
Ammodytes spp 
Sandeels(=Sandlances) nei 
9.01 
12.49 
7.06 
2 
Brama brama 
Atlantic pomfret 
10.61 
23.39 
7.05 
2 
Sprattus sprattus 
European sprat 
8.95 
12.49 
6.93 
2 
Squalus blainville 
Longnose spurdog 
16.35 
27.66 
6.89 
2 
Boops boops 
Bogue 
14.7 
27.71 
6.77 
2 
Lophius piscatorius 
Angler(=Monk) 
9.65 
18.39 
6.72 
2 
Lithognathus mormyrus 
Sand steenbras 
17.68 
25.61 
6.72 
2 
Reinhardtius 
hippoglossoides 
Greenland halibut 
-0.21 
8.37 
6.72 
2 
Zeus faber 
John dory 
10.02 
25.99 
6.63 
2 
Microstomus kitt 
Lemon sole 
9.58 
12.53 
6.55 
2 
Spicara maena 
Blotched picarel 
16.56 
21.11 
6.53 
2 
Lepidopus caudatus 
Silver scabbardfish 
25.15 
26.41 
6.51 
2 
Loligo forbesi 
Veined squid 
10.59 
26.37 
6.38 
2 
Osmerus eperlanus 
European smelt 
6.74 
12.01 
5.87 
2 
Mytilus edulis 
Blue mussel 
6.92 
13.31 
5.80 
2 
Oblada melanura 
Saddled seabream 
17.31 
26.75 
5.73 
2 
Nephrops norvegicus 
Norway lobster 
9.65 
18.43 
5.61 
2 
Sparus aurata 
Gilthead seabream 
12.74 
20.69 
5.61 
2 
Illex argentinus 
Argentine shortfin squid 
9.04 
14.51 
5.59 
2 
Serranus cabrilla 
Comber 
17.31 
27.69 
5.58 
2 
Raja naevus 
Cuckoo ray 
9.77 
18.39 
5.22 
2 
Merlangius merlangus 
Whiting 
9.26 
12.9 
5.07 
2 
Merluccius hubbsi 
Argentine hake 
8.59 
22.91 
5.03 
2 
Loligo spp 
Common squids nei 
11.55 
20.69 
4.78 
2 
Loligo vulgaris 
European squid 
11.55 
20.69 
4.78 
2 
Sebastes mentella 
Beaked redfish 
1.64 
7.29 
4.57 
2 
Scorpaena scrofa 
Red scorpionfish 
16.5 
27.6 
4.47 
2 
Pleuronectes platessa 
European plaice 
8.93 
12.37 
4.47 
2 
Patagonotothen ramsayi 
Longtail Southern cod 
7.12 
13.07 
4.28 
2 
Venerupis pullastra 
Pullet carpet shell 
17.16 
25.37 
4.12 
2 
Macruronus magellanicus 
Patagonian grenadier 
7.4 
13.64 
3.75 
2 
Melanogrammus aeglefinus 
Haddock 
5.42 
12.79 
3.72 
2 
Squalus acanthias 
Picked dogfish 
7 
15 
3.68 
2 
==PAGE:44==
41 
 
 
Argyrosomus regius 
Meagre 
12.74 
27.58 
3.66 
2 
Glyptocephalus 
cynoglossus 
Witch flounder 
3.61 
12.62 
3.49 
2 
Liza aurata 
Golden grey mullet 
11.66 
20.82 
3.48 
2 
Clupea harengus 
Atlantic herring 
5.02 
12.29 
3.47 
2 
Venus verrucosa 
Warty venus 
12 
21.36 
3.45 
2 
Polyprion americanus 
Wreckfish 
11.89 
25.99 
3.23 
2 
Ruditapes decussatus 
Grooved carpet shell 
12.31 
21.36 
3.23 
2 
Pollachius virens 
Saithe(=Pollock) 
6.22 
12.21 
3.10 
2 
Sepia officinalis 
Common cuttlefish 
10.24 
20.69 
2.81 
2 
Molva molva 
Ling 
9.53 
12.9 
2.78 
2 
Palinurus elephas 
Common spiny lobster 
12 
16 
2.78 
2 
Gadus morhua 
Atlantic cod 
2.54 
12.29 
2.49 
2 
Scomber scombrus 
Atlantic mackerel 
7.47 
18.38 
2.38 
2 
Scophthalmus rhombus 
Brill 
9.48 
22.86 
2.36 
2 
Engraulis encrasicolus 
European anchovy 
9.65 
26.89 
2.22 
2 
Trisopterus esmarkii 
Norway pout 
9.43 
12.21 
2.03 
2 
Diplodus sargus 
White seabream 
17.47 
23.94 
1.89 
2 
Lepidorhombus spp 
Megrims nei 
9.63 
15.6 
1.86 
1 
Lepidorhombus 
whiffiagonis 
Megrim 
9.63 
15.6 
1.86 
1 
Aphanopus carbo 
Black scabbardfish 
8.82 
17.51 
1.82 
1 
Buccinum undatum 
Whelk 
7.14 
12.21 
1.64 
1 
Coryphaenoides rupestris 
Roundnose grenadier 
0.58 
13.49 
1.60 
1 
Plesiopenaeus 
edwardsianus 
Scarlet shrimp 
5 
11.94 
1.57 
1 
Aristeus varidens 
Striped red shrimp 
2.29 
6.23 
1.33 
1 
Trachurus picturatus 
Blue jack mackerel 
2.71 
15.56 
1.19 
1 
Spondyliosoma cantharus 
Black seabream 
10.98 
25.15 
1.19 
1 
Maja squinado 
Spinous spider crab 
13.56 
25.15 
1.17 
1 
Trisopterus luscus 
Pouting(=Bib) 
9.76 
14.92 
1.06 
1 
Homarus gammarus 
European lobster 
9.72 
14.5 
0.14 
1 
Aspitrigla cuculus 
Red gurnard 
10 
25.3 
0.12 
1 
Cerastoderma edule 
Common edible cockle 
10 
27 
0.00 
1 
Illex illecebrosus 
Northern shortfin squid 
4.69 
21.1 
0.00 
1 
Thunnus albacares 
Yellowfin tuna 
18 
31 
0.00 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
42 
 
 
Table 6: Habitat specificity metric including the indices horizontal habitat, vertical habitat and 
mobility with habitat specificity scores for all species. 
Scientific Name 
Common Name 
Horizonta
l habitat 
Vertical 
habitat 
Mobility 
Habitat 
specificity 
Aequipecten 
opercularis 
Queen scallop 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Buccinum undatum 
Whelk 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Callista chione 
Smooth callista 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Cancer pagurus 
Edible crab 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Cerastoderma edule 
Common edible cockle 
Coastal 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Chamelea gallina 
Striped venus 
Coastal 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Conger conger 
European conger 
Shelf 
Reef-
associated 
Mobile 
4 
Dentex dentex 
Common dentex 
Inner shelf 
Reef-
associated 
Mobile 
4 
Homarus gammarus 
European lobster 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Lepidorhombus spp 
Megrims nei 
Outer shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Lepidorhombus 
whiffiagonis 
Megrim 
Outer shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Lithognathus 
mormyrus 
Sand steenbras 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Mytilus edulis 
Blue mussel 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Nephrops norvegicus 
Norway lobster 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Ostrea edulis 
European flat oyster 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Pecten maximus 
Great Atlantic scallop 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Phycis phycis 
Forkbeard 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Rapana spp 
Sea snails 
Coastal 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Rapana venosa 
Veined rapa whelk 
Coastal 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Ruditapes decussatus 
Grooved carpet shell 
Coastal 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Ruditapes 
philippinarum 
Japanese carpet shell 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Scorpaena scrofa 
Red scorpionfish 
Slope 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Serranus cabrilla 
Comber 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Sparisoma cretense 
Parrotfish 
Coastal 
Reef-
associated 
Sedentary 
4 
Sparus aurata 
Gilthead seabream 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Spisula solida 
Solid surf clam 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Squilla mantis 
Spottail mantis squillid 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Venerupis pullastra 
Pullet carpet shell 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Venus verrucosa 
Warty venus 
Coastal 
Demersal 
Sedentary 
4 
Alosa alosa 
Allis shad 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
3 
Ammodytes spp 
Sandeels(=Sandlances) 
nei 
Inner shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
3 
Boops boops 
Bogue 
Coastal 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
3 
Coregonus lavaretus 
European whitefish 
Coastal 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
3 
Crangon crangon 
Common shrimp 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Dentex spp 
Dentex nei 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Diplodus sargus 
White seabream 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Diplodus spp 
Sargo breams nei 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Liza aurata 
Golden grey mullet 
Coastal 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
3 
==PAGE:46==
43 
 
 
Mallotus villosus 
Capelin 
Inner shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
3 
Mullus barbatus 
Red mullet 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Mullus spp 
Surmullets(=Red 
mullets) nei 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Mullus surmuletus 
Surmullet 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Oblada melanura 
Saddled seabream 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Osmerus eperlanus 
European smelt 
Coastal 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
3 
Pagellus acarne 
Axillary seabream 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Pagellus erythrinus 
Common pandora 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Pagellus spp 
Pandoras nei 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Palaemon serratus 
Common prawn 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Platichthys flesus 
European flounder 
Coastal 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Raja brachyura 
Blonde ray 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Raja clavata 
Thornback ray 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Raja montagui 
Spotted ray 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Raja spp 
Raja rays nei 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Siganus spp 
Spinefeet(=Rabbitfishe
s) nei 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Solea lascaris 
Sand sole 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Solea solea 
Common sole 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Solea spp 
NA 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Spondyliosoma 
cantharus 
Black seabream 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Trisopterus luscus 
Pouting(=Bib) 
Inner shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
3 
Aphanopus carbo 
Black scabbardfish 
Slope 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Argyrosomus regius 
Meagre 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Aristaeomorpha 
foliacea 
Giant red shrimp 
Slope 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Aristeus antennatus 
Blue and red shrimp 
Slope 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Aristeus varidens 
Striped red shrimp 
Outer shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Aspitrigla cuculus 
Red gurnard 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Clupea harengus 
Atlantic herring 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Dicentrarchus labrax 
European seabass 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Dicologlossa cuneata 
Wedge sole 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Eledone moschata 
Musky octopus 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Eledone spp 
Horned and musky 
octopuses 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Engraulis encrasicolus 
European anchovy 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Epinephelus 
marginatus 
Dusky grouper 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Epinephelus spp 
Groupers nei 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Gadus morhua 
Atlantic cod 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Gadus spp 
Northern cods nei 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Glyptocephalus 
cynoglossus 
Witch flounder 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Illex argentinus 
Argentine shortfin 
squid 
Unknown 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Lepidopus caudatus 
Silver scabbardfish 
Slope 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Loligo forbesi 
Veined squid 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Loligo gahi 
Patagonian squid 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
==PAGE:47==
44 
 
 
Loligo spp 
Common squids nei 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Loligo vulgaris 
European squid 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Lophius piscatorius 
Angler(=Monk) 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Lophius spp 
Monkfishes nei 
Outer shelf 
Bathydemersal 
Mobile 
2 
Macruronus 
magellanicus 
Patagonian grenadier 
Outer shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Maja squinado 
Spinous spider crab 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Melanogrammus 
aeglefinus 
Haddock 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Merlangius merlangus 
Whiting 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Merluccius hubbsi 
Argentine hake 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Merluccius merluccius 
European hake 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Merluccius paradoxus 
Deep-water Cape hake 
Slope 
Bathydemersal 
Unknown 
2 
Merluccius spp 
Hakes nei 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Microchirus spp 
Thickback soles nei 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Unknown 
2 
Microstomus kitt 
Lemon sole 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Molva molva 
Ling 
Slope 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Mustelus spp 
Smooth-hounds nei 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Octopus spp 
Octopuses nei 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Octopus vulgaris 
Common octopus 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Pagellus bogaraveo 
Blackspot(=red) 
seabream 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Pagrus pagrus 
Red porgy 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Palinurus elephas 
Common spiny lobster 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Pandalus borealis 
Northern prawn 
Outer shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Parapenaeus 
longirostris 
Deep-water rose 
shrimp 
Slope 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Patagonotothen 
ramsayi 
Longtail Southern cod 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Unknown 
2 
Penaeus kerathurus 
Caramote prawn 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Penaeus spp 
Penaeus shrimps nei 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Phycis blennoides 
Greater forkbeard 
Outer shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Plesionika martia 
Golden shrimp 
Slope 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Plesiopenaeus 
edwardsianus 
Scarlet shrimp 
Slope 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Pleuronectes platessa 
European plaice 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Pollachius pollachius 
Pollack 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Pollachius virens 
Saithe(=Pollock) 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Polyprion americanus 
Wreckfish 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Pomatomus saltatrix 
Bluefish 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Psetta maxima 
Turbot 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Raja naevus 
Cuckoo ray 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Reinhardtius 
hippoglossoides 
Greenland halibut 
Slope 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Sardina pilchardus 
European 
pilchard(=Sardine) 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Sardinella aurita 
Round sardinella 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Scomber colias 
Atlantic chub mackerel 
Shelf 
Epipelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Scomber scombrus 
Atlantic mackerel 
Shelf 
Epipelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Scophthalmus rhombus 
Brill 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
==PAGE:48==
45 
 
 
Sebastes spp 
Atlantic redfishes nei 
Slope 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Sepia officinalis 
Common cuttlefish 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Seriola dumerili 
Greater amberjack 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Spicara maena 
Blotched picarel 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Unknown 
2 
Spicara smaris 
Picarel 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Unknown 
2 
Spicara spp 
Picarels nei 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Unknown 
2 
Sprattus sprattus 
European sprat 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Squalus blainville 
Longnose spurdog 
Shelf 
Demersal 
Mobile 
2 
Trachurus 
mediterraneus 
Mediterranean horse 
mackerel 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Trachurus picturatus 
Blue jack mackerel 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Trachurus spp 
Jack and horse 
mackerels nei 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Trachurus trachurus 
Atlantic horse 
mackerel 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Trachurus trecae 
Cunene horse mackerel 
Shelf 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Trisopterus esmarkii 
Norway pout 
Outer shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Zeus faber 
John dory 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Mobile 
2 
Auxis rochei 
Bullet tuna 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Brama brama 
Atlantic pomfret 
Oceanic 
Mesopelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Caproidae 
Boarfishes nei 
Slope 
Bathydemersal 
Mobile 
1 
Coryphaena hippurus 
Common dolphinfish 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Coryphaenoides 
rupestris 
Roundnose grenadier 
Slope 
Bathydemersal 
Mobile 
1 
Helicolenus 
dactylopterus 
Blackbelly rosefish 
Slope 
Bathydemersal 
Mobile 
1 
Illex coindetii 
Broadtail shortfin squid 
Oceanic 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
1 
Illex illecebrosus 
Northern shortfin squid 
Oceanic 
Pelagic 
Mobile 
1 
Isurus oxyrinchus 
Shortfin mako 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Katsuwonus pelamis 
Skipjack tuna 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Micromesistius 
poutassou 
Blue 
whiting(=Poutassou) 
Slope 
Mesopelagic 
Mobile 
1 
Prionace glauca 
Blue shark 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Sarda sarda 
Atlantic bonito 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Mobile 
1 
Sebastes mentella 
Beaked redfish 
Oceanic 
Bathypelagic 
Mobile 
1 
Squalus acanthias 
Picked dogfish 
Shelf 
Benthopelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Thunnus alalunga 
Albacore 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Thunnus albacares 
Yellowfin tuna 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Thunnus obesus 
Bigeye tuna 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Thunnus thynnus 
Atlantic bluefin tuna 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
Xiphias gladius 
Swordfish 
Oceanic 
Epipelagic 
Highly 
migratory 
1 
==PAGE:49==
46 
 
 
Table 7: Life spans of all species given in years and the scores for the life span metric from 1 to 4. 
Scientific Name 
Common Name 
LS (yrs) 
LS score 
Homarus gammarus 
European lobster 
72 
4 
Conger conger 
European conger 
48.4 
4 
Pleuronectes platessa 
European plaice 
47.8 
4 
Sebastes spp 
Atlantic redfishes nei 
47.7 
4 
Thunnus thynnus 
Atlantic bluefin tuna 
41.6 
4 
Isurus oxyrinchus 
Shortfin mako 
36.4 
4 
Polyprion americanus 
Wreckfish 
36 
4 
Lophius spp 
Monkfishes nei 
35.9 
4 
Brama brama 
Atlantic pomfret 
35.8 
4 
Scorpaena scrofa 
Red scorpionfish 
35.7 
4 
Raja clavata 
Thornback ray 
32.1 
4 
Epinephelus marginatus 
Dusky grouper 
32 
4 
Epinephelus spp 
Groupers nei 
32 
4 
Reinhardtius hippoglossoides 
Greenland halibut 
32 
4 
Sebastes mentella 
Beaked redfish 
31.6 
4 
Prionace glauca 
Blue shark 
29.1 
4 
Coryphaenoides rupestris 
Roundnose grenadier 
28.7 
4 
Dentex dentex 
Common dentex 
28.7 
4 
Pagrus pagrus 
Red porgy 
28.7 
4 
Diplodus sargus 
White seabream 
28.6 
4 
Lophius piscatorius 
Angler(=Monk) 
26.5 
4 
Squalus blainville 
Longnose spurdog 
26.2 
4 
Palinurus elephas 
Common spiny lobster 
25 
4 
Xiphias gladius 
Swordfish 
24.2 
4 
Merluccius paradoxus 
Deep-water Cape hake 
24 
4 
Mytilus edulis 
Blue mussel 
24 
4 
Raja brachyura 
Blonde ray 
24 
4 
Raja spp 
Raja rays nei 
24 
4 
Lepidorhombus spp 
Megrims nei 
23.8 
4 
Lepidorhombus whiffiagonis 
Megrim 
23.8 
4 
Pecten maximus 
Great Atlantic scallop 
22 
4 
Molva molva 
Ling 
20.6 
4 
Squalus acanthias 
Picked dogfish 
20.5 
4 
Buccinum undatum 
Whelk 
20 
4 
Mustelus spp 
Smooth-hounds nei 
19.9 
4 
Raja montagui 
Spotted ray 
19.4 
4 
Argyrosomus regius 
Meagre 
19.3 
4 
Merluccius hubbsi 
Argentine hake 
19.1 
3 
Merluccius merluccius 
European hake 
19.1 
3 
Merluccius spp 
Hakes nei 
19.1 
3 
Zeus faber 
John dory 
19.1 
3 
Boops boops 
Bogue 
18.9 
3 
Osmerus eperlanus 
European smelt 
18.9 
3 
Caproidae 
Boarfishes nei 
18.7 
3 
==PAGE:50==
47 
 
 
Callista chione 
Smooth callista 
18 
3 
Liza aurata 
Golden grey mullet 
17.9 
3 
Pagellus bogaraveo 
Blackspot(=red) seabream 
17.9 
3 
Microstomus kitt 
Lemon sole 
17.8 
3 
Helicolenus dactylopterus 
Blackbelly rosefish 
17.7 
3 
Diplodus spp 
Sargo breams nei 
17.6 
3 
Aphanopus carbo 
Black scabbardfish 
17 
3 
Gadus morhua 
Atlantic cod 
16.9 
3 
Spicara maena 
Blotched picarel 
16.6 
3 
Ostrea edulis 
European flat oyster 
16 
3 
Pollachius pollachius 
Pollack 
16 
3 
Ruditapes philippinarum 
Japanese carpet shell 
16 
3 
Venus verrucosa 
Warty venus 
16 
3 
Pomatomus saltatrix 
Bluefish 
15.1 
3 
Nephrops norvegicus 
Norway lobster 
15 
3 
Spicara smaris 
Picarel 
14.9 
3 
Spicara spp 
Picarels nei 
14.9 
3 
Pollachius virens 
Saithe(=Pollock) 
14.4 
3 
Coregonus lavaretus 
European whitefish 
14.3 
3 
Dicentrarchus labrax 
European seabass 
14.3 
3 
Melanogrammus aeglefinus 
Haddock 
14.3 
3 
Glyptocephalus cynoglossus 
Witch flounder 
14.2 
3 
Oblada melanura 
Saddled seabream 
14.2 
3 
Cerastoderma edule 
Common edible cockle 
14 
3 
Trachurus mediterraneus 
Mediterranean horse mackerel 
13.6 
3 
Pagellus acarne 
Axillary seabream 
13.5 
3 
Pagellus spp 
Pandoras nei 
13.5 
3 
Trachurus spp 
Jack and horse mackerels nei 
13.5 
3 
Trachurus trachurus 
Atlantic horse mackerel 
13.5 
3 
Phycis blennoides 
Greater forkbeard 
13 
3 
Spisula solida 
Solid surf clam 
13 
3 
Thunnus alalunga 
Albacore 
12.5 
3 
Platichthys flesus 
European flounder 
12.4 
3 
Scomber colias 
Atlantic chub mackerel 
12.4 
3 
Siganus spp 
Spinefeet(=Rabbitfishes) nei 
12.3 
2 
Raja naevus 
Cuckoo ray 
12 
2 
Aspitrigla cuculus 
Red gurnard 
11.9 
2 
Lithognathus mormyrus 
Sand steenbras 
11.9 
2 
Phycis phycis 
Forkbeard 
11.9 
2 
Mullus spp 
Surmullets(=Red mullets) nei 
11.8 
2 
Pagellus erythrinus 
Common pandora 
11.8 
2 
Seriola dumerili 
Greater amberjack 
11.6 
2 
Thunnus obesus 
Bigeye tuna 
11.6 
2 
Patagonotothen ramsayi 
Longtail Southern cod 
11.4 
2 
Pandalus borealis 
Northern prawn 
11 
2 
Scomber scombrus 
Atlantic mackerel 
11 
2 
==PAGE:51==
48 
 
 
Sparus aurata 
Gilthead seabream 
11 
2 
Trachurus trecae 
Cunene horse mackerel 
11 
2 
Sardinella aurita 
Round sardinella 
10.9 
2 
Gadus spp 
Northern cods nei 
10.7 
2 
Alosa alosa 
Allis shad 
10.6 
2 
Parapenaeus longirostris 
Deep-water rose shrimp 
10 
2 
Venerupis pullastra 
Pullet carpet shell 
10 
2 
Sparisoma cretense 
Parrotfish 
9.8 
2 
Spondyliosoma cantharus 
Black seabream 
9.5 
2 
Serranus cabrilla 
Comber 
9.4 
2 
Sprattus sprattus 
European sprat 
9.4 
2 
Thunnus albacares 
Yellowfin tuna 
9.4 
2 
Lepidopus caudatus 
Silver scabbardfish 
9.3 
2 
Psetta maxima 
Turbot 
9.2 
2 
Aristeus antennatus 
Blue and red shrimp 
9 
2 
Cancer pagurus 
Edible crab 
9 
2 
Chamelea gallina 
Striped venus 
9 
2 
Rapana spp 
Sea snails 
9 
2 
Rapana venosa 
Veined rapa whelk 
9 
2 
Merlangius merlangus 
Whiting 
8.4 
2 
Trachurus picturatus 
Blue jack mackerel 
8.4 
2 
Aequipecten opercularis 
Queen scallop 
8 
2 
Aristaeomorpha foliacea 
Giant red shrimp 
8 
2 
Macruronus magellanicus 
Patagonian grenadier 
8 
2 
Maja squinado 
Spinous spider crab 
8 
2 
Ruditapes decussatus 
Grooved carpet shell 
8 
2 
Solea solea 
Common sole 
7.9 
1 
Solea spp 
NA 
7.9 
1 
Micromesistius poutassou 
Blue whiting(=Poutassou) 
7.7 
1 
Dicologlossa cuneata 
Wedge sole 
7.4 
1 
Dentex spp 
Dentex nei 
7.1 
1 
Engraulis encrasicolus 
European anchovy 
7 
1 
Clupea harengus 
Atlantic herring 
6.9 
1 
Mullus barbatus 
Red mullet 
6.4 
1 
Mullus surmuletus 
Surmullet 
6.4 
1 
Microchirus spp 
Thickback soles nei 
6.2 
1 
Ammodytes spp 
Sandeels(=Sandlances) nei 
6.1 
1 
Solea lascaris 
Sand sole 
6 
1 
Katsuwonus pelamis 
Skipjack tuna 
5.9 
1 
Mallotus villosus 
Capelin 
5.9 
1 
Sardina pilchardus 
European pilchard(=Sardine) 
5.9 
1 
Scophthalmus rhombus 
Brill 
5.8 
1 
Trisopterus esmarkii 
Norway pout 
5.5 
1 
Trisopterus luscus 
Pouting(=Bib) 
4.8 
1 
Auxis rochei 
Bullet tuna 
4.7 
1 
Palaemon serratus 
Common prawn 
4 
1 
==PAGE:52==
49 
 
 
Plesiopenaeus edwardsianus 
Scarlet shrimp 
4 
1 
Sarda sarda 
Atlantic bonito 
4 
1 
Crangon crangon 
Common shrimp 
3.3 
1 
Loligo forbesi 
Veined squid 
3 
1 
Squilla mantis 
Spottail mantis squillid 
3 
1 
Coryphaena hippurus 
Common dolphinfish 
2.8 
1 
Loligo spp 
Common squids nei 
2.5 
1 
Loligo vulgaris 
European squid 
2.5 
1 
Aristeus varidens 
Striped red shrimp 
2 
1 
Eledone moschata 
Musky octopus 
2 
1 
Eledone spp 
Horned and musky octopuses 
2 
1 
Illex argentinus 
Argentine shortfin squid 
2 
1 
Illex coindetii 
Broadtail shortfin squid 
2 
1 
Illex illecebrosus 
Northern shortfin squid 
2 
1 
Octopus spp 
Octopuses nei 
2 
1 
Octopus vulgaris 
Common octopus 
2 
1 
Penaeus kerathurus 
Caramote prawn 
2 
1 
Penaeus spp 
Penaeus shrimps nei 
2 
1 
Sepia officinalis 
Common cuttlefish 
2 
1 
Loligo gahi 
Patagonian squid 
1 
1 
Plesionika martia 
Golden shrimp 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
50 
 
 
Table 8: The overall vulnerability scores of all assessed species. The adaptive capacity is marked with 
green with its two metrics habitat specificity and life span and the habitat loss marked with red. 
Scientific Name 
Common Name 
Habspec 
score 
LS 
score 
AC 
HL 
score 
Total 
vulnerability 
score 
Value 
rank 
Ruditapes 
philippinarum 
Japanese carpet shell 
4 
3 
3.5 
4 
3.75 
129 
Coregonus 
lavaretus 
European whitefish 
3 
3 
3 
4 
3.5 
122 
Epinephelus 
marginatus 
Dusky grouper 
2 
4 
3 
4 
3.5 
148 
Epinephelus spp 
Groupers nei 
2 
4 
3 
4 
3.5 
155 
Raja clavata 
Thornback ray 
3 
4 
3.5 
3 
3.25 
106 
Raja brachyura 
Blonde ray 
3 
4 
3.5 
3 
3.25 
133 
Scomber colias 
Atlantic chub mackerel 
2 
3 
2.5 
4 
3.25 
53 
Ostrea edulis 
European flat oyster 
4 
3 
3.5 
3 
3.25 
139 
Callista chione 
Smooth callista 
4 
3 
3.5 
3 
3.25 
103 
Spisula solida 
Solid surf clam 
4 
3 
3.5 
3 
3.25 
127 
Raja spp 
Raja rays nei 
3 
4 
3.5 
3 
3.25 
81 
Sardinella aurita 
Round sardinella 
2 
2 
2 
4 
3 
64 
Conger conger 
European conger 
4 
4 
4 
2 
3 
60 
Phycis phycis 
Forkbeard 
4 
2 
3 
3 
3 
126 
Merluccius 
paradoxus 
Deep-water Cape hake 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
96 
Trachurus trecae 
Cunene horse mackerel 
2 
2 
2 
4 
3 
147 
Seriola dumerili 
Greater amberjack 
2 
2 
2 
4 
3 
82 
Pagellus acarne 
Axillary seabream 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
120 
Dentex dentex 
Common dentex 
4 
4 
4 
2 
3 
118 
Pagrus pagrus 
Red porgy 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
88 
Sparisoma cretense 
Parrotfish 
4 
2 
3 
3 
3 
140 
Scorpaena scrofa 
Red scorpionfish 
4 
4 
4 
2 
3 
136 
Platichthys flesus 
European flounder 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
112 
Parapenaeus 
longirostris 
Deep-water rose shrimp 
2 
2 
2 
4 
3 
22 
Aristaeomorpha 
foliacea 
Giant red shrimp 
2 
2 
2 
4 
3 
84 
Pandalus borealis 
Northern prawn 
2 
2 
2 
4 
3 
13 
Palaemon serratus 
Common prawn 
3 
1 
2 
4 
3 
110 
Rapana venosa 
Veined rapa whelk 
4 
2 
3 
3 
3 
130 
Aequipecten 
opercularis 
Queen scallop 
4 
2 
3 
3 
3 
89 
Pecten maximus 
Great Atlantic scallop 
4 
4 
4 
2 
3 
14 
Mytilus edulis 
Blue mussel 
4 
4 
4 
2 
3 
59 
Chamelea gallina 
Striped venus 
4 
2 
3 
3 
3 
38 
Mustelus spp 
Smooth-hounds nei 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
116 
Pagellus spp 
Pandoras nei 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
68 
Sebastes spp 
Atlantic redfishes nei 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
15 
Lophius spp 
Monkfishes nei 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
17 
==PAGE:54==
51 
 
 
Rapana spp 
Sea snails 
4 
2 
3 
3 
3 
128 
Isurus oxyrinchus 
Shortfin mako 
1 
4 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
67 
Prionace glauca 
Blue shark 
1 
4 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
41 
Raja montagui 
Spotted ray 
3 
4 
3.5 
2 
2.75 
123 
Alosa alosa 
Allis shad 
3 
2 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
152 
Phycis blennoides 
Greater forkbeard 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
117 
Merluccius 
merluccius 
European hake 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
4 
Dicentrarchus 
labrax 
European seabass 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
29 
Pomatomus 
saltatrix 
Bluefish 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
141 
Trachurus 
trachurus 
Atlantic horse mackerel 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
50 
Pagellus bogaraveo 
Blackspot(=red) 
seabream 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
77 
Diplodus sargus 
White seabream 
3 
4 
3.5 
2 
2.75 
94 
Spicara smaris 
Picarel 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
111 
Thunnus thynnus 
Atlantic bluefin tuna 
1 
4 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
43 
Thunnus obesus 
Bigeye tuna 
1 
2 
1.5 
4 
2.75 
28 
Xiphias gladius 
Swordfish 
1 
4 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
9 
Squilla mantis 
Spottail mantis squillid 
4 
1 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
46 
Nephrops 
norvegicus 
Norway lobster 
4 
3 
3.5 
2 
2.75 
5 
Venus verrucosa 
Warty venus 
4 
3 
3.5 
2 
2.75 
137 
Octopus vulgaris 
Common octopus 
2 
1 
1.5 
4 
2.75 
25 
Merluccius spp 
Hakes nei 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
99 
Trachurus spp 
Jack and horse 
mackerels nei 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
19 
Spicara spp 
Picarels nei 
2 
3 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
109 
Mullus spp 
Surmullets(=Red 
mullets) nei 
3 
2 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
83 
Siganus spp 
Spinefeet(=Rabbitfishes) 
nei 
3 
2 
2.5 
3 
2.75 
138 
Octopus spp 
Octopuses nei 
2 
1 
1.5 
4 
2.75 
153 
Squalus blainville 
Longnose spurdog 
2 
4 
3 
2 
2.5 
154 
Mallotus villosus 
Capelin 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2.5 
18 
Osmerus eperlanus 
European smelt 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2.5 
144 
Molva molva 
Ling 
2 
4 
3 
2 
2.5 
62 
Liza aurata 
Golden grey mullet 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2.5 
157 
Serranus cabrilla 
Comber 
4 
2 
3 
2 
2.5 
145 
Polyprion 
americanus 
Wreckfish 
2 
4 
3 
2 
2.5 
91 
Coryphaena 
hippurus 
Common dolphinfish 
1 
1 
1 
4 
2.5 
104 
Argyrosomus regius 
Meagre 
2 
4 
3 
2 
2.5 
101 
Oblada melanura 
Saddled seabream 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2.5 
151 
Sparus aurata 
Gilthead seabream 
4 
2 
3 
2 
2.5 
52 
Boops boops 
Bogue 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2.5 
78 
==PAGE:55==
52 
 
 
Lithognathus 
mormyrus 
Sand steenbras 
4 
2 
3 
2 
2.5 
107 
Mullus surmuletus 
Surmullet 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2.5 
32 
Mullus barbatus 
Red mullet 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2.5 
36 
Auxis rochei 
Bullet tuna 
1 
1 
1 
4 
2.5 
156 
Thunnus alalunga 
Albacore 
1 
3 
2 
3 
2.5 
27 
Helicolenus 
dactylopterus 
Blackbelly rosefish 
1 
3 
2 
3 
2.5 
85 
Pleuronectes 
platessa 
European plaice 
2 
4 
3 
2 
2.5 
24 
Reinhardtius 
hippoglossoides 
Greenland halibut 
2 
4 
3 
2 
2.5 
20 
Solea solea 
Common sole 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2.5 
8 
Solea lascaris 
Sand sole 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2.5 
135 
Lepidorhombus 
whiffiagonis 
Megrim 
4 
4 
4 
1 
2.5 
61 
Lophius piscatorius 
Angler(=Monk) 
2 
4 
3 
2 
2.5 
65 
Aristeus antennatus 
Blue and red shrimp 
2 
2 
2 
3 
2.5 
48 
Plesionika martia 
Golden shrimp 
2 
0 
1 
3 
2.5 
149 
Crangon crangon 
Common shrimp 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2.5 
21 
Palinurus elephas 
Common spiny lobster 
2 
4 
3 
2 
2.5 
75 
Homarus 
gammarus 
European lobster 
4 
4 
4 
1 
2.5 
34 
Cancer pagurus 
Edible crab 
4 
2 
3 
2 
2.5 
31 
Buccinum undatum 
Whelk 
4 
4 
4 
1 
2.5 
45 
Venerupis pullastra 
Pullet carpet shell 
4 
2 
3 
2 
2.5 
76 
Ruditapes 
decussatus 
Grooved carpet shell 
4 
2 
3 
2 
2.5 
70 
Caproidae 
Boarfishes nei 
1 
3 
2 
3 
2.5 
102 
Diplodus spp 
Sargo breams nei 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2.5 
93 
Dentex spp 
Dentex nei 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2.5 
113 
Solea spp 
NA 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2.5 
115 
Lepidorhombus spp 
Megrims nei 
4 
4 
4 
1 
2.25 
42 
Squalus acanthias 
Picked dogfish 
1 
4 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
146 
Sardina pilchardus 
European 
pilchard(=Sardine) 
2 
1 
1.5 
3 
2.25 
12 
Gadus morhua 
Atlantic cod 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
1 
Melanogrammus 
aeglefinus 
Haddock 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
6 
Pollachius virens 
Saithe(=Pollock) 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
7 
Pollachius 
pollachius 
Pollack 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
73 
Merluccius hubbsi 
Argentine hake 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
37 
Zeus faber 
John dory 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
49 
Trachurus 
mediterraneus 
Mediterranean horse 
mackerel 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
142 
Brama brama 
Atlantic pomfret 
1 
4 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
79 
Pagellus erythrinus 
Common pandora 
3 
2 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
124 
Spicara maena 
Blotched picarel 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
143 
==PAGE:56==
53 
 
 
Sebastes mentella 
Beaked redfish 
1 
4 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
105 
Glyptocephalus 
cynoglossus 
Witch flounder 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
95 
Microstomus kitt 
Lemon sole 
2 
3 
2.5 
2 
2.25 
54 
Dicologlossa 
cuneata 
Wedge sole 
2 
1 
1.5 
3 
2.25 
134 
Penaeus kerathurus 
Caramote prawn 
2 
1 
1.5 
3 
2.25 
58 
Cerastoderma edule Common edible cockle 
4 
3 
3.5 
1 
2.25 
72 
Loligo gahi 
Patagonian squid 
2 
1 
1.5 
3 
2.25 
35 
Eledone moschata 
Musky octopus 
2 
1 
1.5 
3 
2.25 
150 
Microchirus spp 
Thickback soles nei 
2 
1 
1.5 
3 
2.25 
132 
Penaeus spp 
Penaeus shrimps nei 
2 
1 
1.5 
3 
2.25 
74 
Eledone spp 
Horned and musky 
octopuses 
2 
1 
1.5 
3 
2 
55 
Raja naevus 
Cuckoo ray 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
114 
Sprattus sprattus 
European sprat 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
23 
Micromesistius 
poutassou 
Blue 
whiting(=Poutassou) 
1 
1 
1 
3 
2 
26 
Merlangius 
merlangus 
Whiting 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
44 
Macruronus 
magellanicus 
Patagonian grenadier 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
108 
Patagonotothen 
ramsayi 
Longtail Southern cod 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
51 
Sarda sarda 
Atlantic bonito 
1 
1 
1 
3 
2 
69 
Scomber scombrus 
Atlantic mackerel 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Katsuwonus 
pelamis 
Skipjack tuna 
1 
1 
1 
3 
2 
16 
Lepidopus caudatus 
Silver scabbardfish 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
87 
Psetta maxima 
Turbot 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
47 
Illex coindetii 
Broadtail shortfin squid 
1 
1 
1 
3 
2 
63 
Gadus spp 
Northern cods nei 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
39 
Ammodytes spp 
Sandeels(=Sandlances) 
nei 
3 
1 
2 
2 
2 
33 
Clupea harengus 
Atlantic herring 
2 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.75 
3 
Engraulis 
encrasicolus 
European anchovy 
2 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.75 
11 
Trisopterus 
esmarkii 
Norway pout 
2 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.75 
97 
Coryphaenoides 
rupestris 
Roundnose grenadier 
1 
4 
2.5 
1 
1.75 
100 
Spondyliosoma 
cantharus 
Black seabream 
3 
2 
2.5 
1 
1.75 
92 
Aphanopus carbo 
Black scabbardfish 
2 
3 
2.5 
1 
1.75 
71 
Scophthalmus 
rhombus 
Brill 
2 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.75 
66 
Sepia officinalis 
Common cuttlefish 
2 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.75 
30 
Loligo vulgaris 
European squid 
2 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.75 
90 
Loligo forbesi 
Veined squid 
2 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.75 
125 
Illex argentinus 
Argentine shortfin squid 
2 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.75 
57 
==PAGE:57==
54 
 
 
Loligo spp 
Common squids nei 
2 
1 
1.5 
2 
1.75 
40 
Trisopterus luscus 
Pouting(=Bib) 
3 
1 
2 
1 
1.5 
80 
Trachurus 
picturatus 
Blue jack mackerel 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1.5 
121 
Aspitrigla cuculus 
Red gurnard 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1.5 
119 
Maja squinado 
Spinous spider crab 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1.5 
98 
Thunnus albacares 
Yellowfin tuna 
1 
2 
1.5 
1 
1.25 
10 
Plesiopenaeus 
edwardsianus 
Scarlet shrimp 
2 
1 
1.5 
1 
1.25 
131 
Aristeus varidens 
Striped red shrimp 
2 
1 
1.5 
1 
1.25 
56 
Illex illecebrosus 
Northern shortfin squid 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
86 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
55 
 
 
Table 9: The 25 European countries assessed and their vulnerability score ranking from depending on 
the most vulnerable species to least vulnerable. The number of species included in each country’s 
vulnerability assessment (Nspecies), the total landings value of all aquatic organisms (Valuetot), the value 
of assessed species as percentage of the total landings value (Valueassessed) and the share of the total 
landings for each country.  
Rank Country 
Countryvul Nspecies Valuetot (€/yr) 
Valueassess 
(%) 
Share of total  
landings (%) 
1 
Romania 
2.74 
11 
1,798,829 
93.2 
0.02 
2 
Malta 
2.69 
84 
10,147,259 
89.3 
0.10 
3 
Cyprus 
2.63 
65 
8,261,341 
85.4 
0.08 
4 
Italy 
2.56 
86 
954,208,312 
76.3 
9.67 
5 
Bulgaria 
2.52 
19 
4,125,019 
94.1 
0.04 
6 
Portugal 
2.52 
116 
266,041,117 
92.0 
2.70 
7 
Greece 
2.51 
56 
252,734,134 
86.2 
2.56 
8 
France 
2.51 
110 
794,464,688 
90.4 
8.05 
9 
Belgium 
2.44 
44 
66,388,719 
90.2 
0.67 
10 
Great Britain 
2.42 
77 
799,236,587 
90.1 
8.10 
11 
Ireland 
2.39 
79 
343,785,401 
85.8 
3.48 
12 
Iceland 
2.34 
24 
981,629,339 
94.8 
9.94 
13 
Germany 
2.34 
44 
124,744,336 
98.1 
1.26 
14 
Lithuania 
2.33 
21 
3,554,961 
95.1 
0.04 
15 
Croatia 
2.33 
62 
64,268,982 
90.6 
0.65 
16 
Netherlands 
2.32 
83 
512,438,863 
94.5 
5.19 
17 
Spain 
2.30 
150 2,060,780,985 
81.8 
20.88 
18 
Sweden 
2.28 
46 
97,033,390 
96.8 
0.98 
19 
Slovenia 
2.20 
43 
1,549,400 
92.7 
0.02 
20 
Denmark 
2.19 
59 
470,649,649 
97.7 
4.77 
21 
Poland 
2.17 
13 
50,022,073 
88.1 
0.51 
22 
Norway 
2.16 
46 1,942,290,866 
95.5 
19.68 
23 
Finland 
2.01 
6 
27,467,260 
77.2 
0.28 
24 
Latvia 
1.98 
8 
18,307,624 
98.7 
0.19 
25 
Estonia 
1.92 
8 
14,832,139 
82.6 
0.15 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
56 
 
 
Supplementary Material 1 
 
Table S1: Each country and their 4 most valuable species and their respective proportions of the 
country’s landings in percent 
Country 
Species common name 
Species landings 
(%) 
Great Britain Atlantic Mackerel 
17 
Norway lobster 
16 
Great Atlantic scallop 
9 
Haddock 
7 
Malta 
Swordfish 
33 
Common dolphinfish 
16 
Atlantic bluefin tuna 
11 
Giant red shrimp 
6 
Denmark 
Atlantic herring 
14 
European sprat 
13 
Atlantic cod 
12 
Sandeels nei 
11 
Sweden 
Atlantic herring 
29 
Northern prawn 
20 
Atlantic cod 
14 
Norway lobster 
13 
Portugal 
European pilchard 
15 
Common octopus 
12 
Atlantic horse mackerel 
7 
Black scabbardfish 
5 
France 
Common sole 
11 
Monkfishes nei 
9 
Great Atlantic scallop 
9 
European seabass 
7 
Italy 
European hake 
10 
European anchovy 
9 
Deep-water rose shrimp 
8 
Swordfish 
6 
Spain 
Yellowfin tuna 
11 
European hake 
8 
Skipjack tuna 
7 
Swordfish 
7 
Cyprus 
Surmullet  
14 
Bogue 
12 
Albacore 
11 
Red mullet 
7 
Greece 
European hake 
13 
European anchovy 
9 
European pilchard 
7 
Swordfish 
7 
==PAGE:60==
57 
 
 
Ireland 
Atlantic Mackerel 
28 
Norway lobster 
14 
European hake 
10 
Jack and horse mackerels 
nei 
6 
Germany 
Common shrimp 
34 
Atlantic herring 
21 
Atlantic cod 
15 
Blue mussel 
10 
Estonia 
European sprat 
54 
Atlantic herring 
42 
European smelt 
2 
European flounder 
1 
Finland 
Atlantic herring 
79 
European whitefish 
13 
European sprat 
5 
European smelt 
2 
Iceland 
Atlantic cod 
30 
Atlantic redfishes nei 
11 
Atlantic Mackerel 
9 
Capelin 
9 
Lithuania 
Atlantic cod 
76 
European flounder 
4 
Atlantic herring 
4 
European smelt 
4 
Latvia 
European sprat 
53 
Atlantic herring 
31 
Atlantic cod 
12 
European smelt 
2 
Netherlands 
Common sole 
20 
Atlantic Mackerel 
14 
Jack and horse mackerels 
nei 
14 
Atlantic herring 
13 
Norway 
Atlantic cod 
30 
Atlantic herring 
18 
Atlantic Mackerel 
18 
Saithe (Pollock) 
9 
Poland 
Atlantic cod 
47 
European sprat 
21 
Atlantic herring 
20 
European flounder 
10 
Belgium 
Common sole 
51 
European plaice 
11 
Turbot  
6 
Lemon sole 
5 
Slovenia 
European pilchard 
15 
==PAGE:61==
58 
 
 
Common sole 
13 
European squid 
12 
Whiting 
11 
Croatia 
European pilchard 
40 
European anchovy 
16 
Norway lobster 
7 
European hake 
6 
Romania 
Veined rapa whelk 
74 
Turbot 
15 
European anchovy 
4 
European sprat 
4 
Bulgaria 
Sea snails nei 
35 
European sprat 
26 
Bluefish 
10 
Mediterranean horse 
mackerel 
8 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
59 
 
 
Table S2: The 25 species items with their substitute species, including 3-alpha code, taxocode, ISSCAAP code and scientific name. 
Species item 
  
Supplant species 
3-alpha 
code 
ISSCAAP 
TAXOCODE 
Scientific Name 
Common name 
3-
alpha 
code 
TAXOCODE 
Scientific Name 
In 
species 
list 
LEZ 
31 18305003XX 
Lepidorhombus 
spp 
Megrims nei 
MEG 
1830500301 Lepidorhombus 
whiffiagonis 
yes 
SOO 
31 18303007XX 
Solea spp 
NA 
SOL 
1830300701 Solea solea 
yes 
THS 
31 18303081XX 
Microchirus spp 
Thickback soles nei 
MRK 
1830308102 Microchirus 
ocellatus 
CDZ 
32 14804002XX 
Gadus spp 
Northern cods nei 
GRC 
1480400212 Gadus ogac 
HKX 
32 14805004XX 
Merluccius spp 
Hakes nei 
HKE 
1480500401 Merluccius 
merluccius 
yes 
DEX 
33 17039060XX 
Dentex spp 
Dentex nei 
DEL 
1703906002 Dentex 
macrophthalmus 
GPX 
33 17002042XX 
Epinephelus spp 
Groupers nei 
GPD 
1700204201 Epinephelus 
marginatus 
yes 
MUX 
33 17041007XX 
Mullus spp 
Surmullets (=Red 
mullets) nei 
MUT 
1704100702 Mullus barbatus 
yes 
PAX 
33 17039008XX 
Pagellus spp 
Pandoras nei 
SBA 
1703900803 Pagellus acarne 
yes 
PIC 
33 17040075XX 
Spicara spp 
Picarels nei 
SPC 
1704007502 Spicara smaris 
yes 
SAN 
33 17204002XX 
Ammodytes spp 
Sandeels (=Sandlances) 
nei 
ABZ 
1720400205 Ammodytes 
tobianus 
SPI 
33 17407001XX 
Siganus spp 
Spinefeet 
(=Rabbitfishes) nei 
SRI 
1740700106 Siganus rivulatus 
SRG 
33 17039033XX 
Diplodus spp 
Sargo breams nei 
ANN 
1703903302 Diplodus 
annularis 
MNZ 
34 19501001XX 
Lophius spp 
Monkfishes nei 
ANK 
1950100102 Lophius 
budegassa 
BOR 
34 16203XXXXX 
Caproidae 
Boarfishes nei 
BOC 
1620300201 Capros aper 
RED 
34 17801001XX 
Sebastes spp 
Atlantic redfishes nei 
REG 
1780100101 Sebastes marinus 
 
==PAGE:63==
60 
 
 
JAX 
37 17023004XX 
Trachurus spp 
Jack and horse 
mackerels nei 
HOM 
1702300401 Trachurus 
trachurus 
yes 
SDV 
38 10804007XX 
Mustelus spp 
Smooth-hounds nei 
SDS 
1080400715 Mustelus asterias 
SKA 
38 11004001XX 
Raja spp 
Raja rays nei 
RJH 
1100400105 Raja brachyura 
yes 
PEN 
45 22801001XX 
Penaeus spp 
Penaeus shrimps nei 
TGS 
2280100117 Penaeus 
kerathurus 
yes 
RPN 
52 30702018XX 
Rapana spp 
Sea snails 
RPW 
3070201801 Rapana venosa 
yes 
RAZ 
56 31616003XX 
Solen spp 
Solen razor clams nei 
RAE 
3161600302 Solen 
marginatus 
SQC 
57 32104001XX 
Loligo spp 
Common squids nei 
SQR 
3210400109 Loligo vulgaris 
yes 
OCM 
57 32109024XX 
Eledone spp 
Horned and musky 
octopuses 
EDT 
3210902402 Eledone 
moschata 
yes 
OCZ 
57 32109005XX 
Octopus spp 
Octopuses nei 
OCC 
3210900507 Octopus vulgaris 
yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
61 
 
Table S3: Comparison of eight different studies that have assessed vulnerability of either an ecological, socio-economic or socio-ecological system and their 
used metrics. (Next page) 
==PAGE:65==
 
62 
 
Type of CVA 
Socio-economic 
Ecological 
Scale 
Global scale (132 countries) 
Global scale (147 countries) 
Regional scale (11 coastal regions) 
Methodology 
Regional scale (82 species on the US NE coast) 
Study 
Allison et al. (2009) 
Blasiak et al. (2017) 
Chen et al. (2018) 
Morrison et al. (2015) 
Hare et al. (2016) 
Ecological 
sensitivity metric 
 
 
 
 
 
Population growth rate 
Dispersal of early life stages 
Habitat specificity 
Prey specificity 
Sensitivity to ocean acidification 
Sensitivity to temperature 
Stock size/status  
Sensitivity to temperature 
Stock size/status 
Other stressors 
Adult mobility 
Spawning cycle 
Complexity in reproductive strategy 
Early life history survival and settlement 
Population growth rate 
Dispersal of early life stages 
Habitat specificity 
Prey specificity 
Sensitivity to ocean acidification 
Sensitivity to temperature 
Stock size/status  
Sensitivity to temperature 
Stock size/status 
Other stressors 
Adult mobility 
Spawning cycle 
Complexity in reproductive strategy 
Early life history survival and settlement 
Socio-economic 
sensitivity metric 
Number of fishers  
Fisheries export value as 
proportion (%) of total export 
value Proportion (%) of 
economically active population 
involved in the fishery sector  
Total fisheries landings  
Fish protein as proportion of all 
animal protein  
Number of fishers  
Share of marine fisheries exports in total 
exports Percentage of fishers in the 
economically active population  
Weight of total fisheries landings  
Share of marine fish protein in total 
protein consumption 
Food dependency 
Economic dependency Employment 
dependency 
 
 
Exposure metric 
Projected mean surface air 
temperature 1.5 m above sea 
level 
Projected SST anomalies (three different 
scenarios: RCP 2.6, 4.5 and 8.5) 
Sea surface temperature change 
Overfishing 
Marine pollution 
Ocean temperature 
Variance in ocean temperature 
Estuarine temperature 
Salinity 
Ocean acidification 
Precipitation 
Dissolved oxygen 
Circulation 
Sea level rise 
Ocean surface temperature (upper 10 m) 
Ocean surface salinity (upper 10 m) 
Surface air temperature 
Precipitation 
Surface pH (upper10 m)  
Current 
Sea-level rise 
Adaptive 
capacity metric 
Healthy life expectancy  
Literacy rates  
School enrolment ratios  
Governance 
Total GDP 
Fisheries subsidies 
Ratio of industrial to small-scale fisheries 
Healthy life expectancy 
Governance capacity 
Education levels 
Per capita gross domestic product 
 
Assets (financial and natural) 
Flexibility (life expectancy and GINI index) 
Learning (employment and adult literacy) 
Social organization (Government 
Effectiveness Index) 
Included in sensitivity  
Included in sensitivity  
Total 
vulnerability 
V = unweighted mean of 
standardized indices 
V = EN + SN + ACN 
(normalized indices to a scale of 0-1) 
S average of metrics 
AC weighted average of metrics 
VI = E + S – AC 
(All indices normalized to a 0-1 scale) 
Components and metrics were weighted 
differently 
V = E * S 
(Logic model. Both need to be high in 
order to be highly vulnerable) 
V = E * S 
(Logic model. Both need to be high in order to be 
highly vulnerable) 
Exposure factors were equally weighted 
==PAGE:66==
 
63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type of CVA 
Socio-ecological 
Scale 
Community scale (10 coastal communities) 
Regional 
Scale (10 parishes) 
Regional scale (8 EEZs in the Arabian Gulf) 
Study 
Cinner et al. (2013) 
Pinnegar et al. (submitted) 
Wabnitz et al. (2018) 
Ecological 
sensitivity metric 
 
 
Susceptibility of coral community to beaching 
Susceptibility of fish to loss of coral habitat 
 
Tolerance to high temperatures 
Temperature specificity 
Habitat specificity 
Population resilience to fishing 
Price category 
Distribution change (modelled)  
Rate of species invasion 
Rate of species local extinction 
Sum of habitat suitability index 
Socie-economic 
sensitivity metric 
Level of dependence on marine resources 
Data on how susceptible the catch composition of 
fishing gears were to climate change. 
 
Persons vulnerable to food insecurity 
Persons employed in the fisheries sector 
Fisheries landings (tonnes) 
Fisheries landings (value) 
Number of coral reefs 
Shannon diversity of landings 
Simpson’s dominance of landings 
Employment 
Nutritional dependence 
Economic dependence 
Coastal protection 
Exposure metric 
Multivariate model describing temperature, light, 
currents, tidal variation, chlorophyll and water quality. 
Hurricane tracks: 
Wind speeds 
Change in maximum catch potential 
Ecological 
adaptive capacity 
metric 
 
Hard coral cover 
Ratio of coral to macroalgae cover 
Coral size distribution 
Coral richness 
Fish biomass 
Fish species richness 
Substrate complexity  
Fish size distribution 
Herbivore diversity 
Index of herbivore grazing relative to algal production 
 
 
Socie-economic 
adaptive capacity 
Human agency 
Access to credit 
Occupational mobility 
Occupational multiplicity 
Social capital 
Material style of life 
Gear diversity 
Community infrastructure 
Trust 
Capacity to change 
Debt 
Poverty 
Income inequality 
Housing quality 
Health 
Education 
Governance 
Fisheries management 
Size of the economy 
Employment alternatives 
Total 
vulnerability 
Ecological vulnerability: 
VE = EE + SE – ACE 
 
Social vulnerability: 
VS = VE + SS – ACS 
(All indicators in each index were normalized and 
averaged) 
V = (S + E + P – AC)/4 
 
(Unweighted mean of standardized indices - 
Indices were calculated as unweighted 
averages of indicators) 
V = unweighted mean of standardized indices 
 
(Social and ecological sensitivity were combined) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
