==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
A Framework for
Dynamic Epistemic Logic Modeling
Simon Holst Albrechtsen
Supervised by Thomas Bolander
July 2019
==PAGE:2==
2
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 30 31
compute@compute.dtu.dk
compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of this thesis is to present a framework for performing dynamic epistemic
modeling. We start off by introducing an epistemic model based on the S5 modal logic
system, which is what the framework is based upon. Then we introduce the concept of
dynamic epistemic logic and how we can use it to perform knowledge updates. Next, we
introduce the minimization of epistemic models and how this can be solved based on the
relational coarsest partition problem. Furthermore, we propose a data structure along
with a set of algorithms for indexing epistemic models based on bisimilarity, which can
be used to improve the performance of certain planning approaches, such as policy based
planners. Finally, we present a prototype of a data visualization tool implemented as a
web-application, which enables the use of the dynamic epistemic logic framework in an
interactive environment.
3
==PAGE:4==
4
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
7
2
Epistemic Logic
9
2.1
The language of propositional formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Agent knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Possible worlds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Representing knowledge with S5 Kripke models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Common knowledge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Logical omniscience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Dynamic Epistemic Logic
21
3.1
The Three Wise Men: DEL by example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Updating knowledge using event models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Public announcements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Public observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Private observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Model Optimization
29
4.1
Bisimulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Partition Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Bisimilarity Indexing of Epistemic States
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Tree data structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.2
Tree construction algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.3
Tree construction time- and space complexity . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.4
Computing hash value of a tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.5
Hash function time- and space complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.6
Comparison of epistemic models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.7
Comparison time- and space complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.8
Uniformity benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Data Visualization
49
5.1
The vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
System criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
System architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Graph visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.1
Epistemic model creation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
==PAGE:6==
6
CONTENTS
5.4.2
Event model creation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.5
Data structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5.1
Frontend graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5.2
Epistemic- and event models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.5.3
Formulas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.6
Formula evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.6.1
Formula verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.6.2
Evaluator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.7
Product update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.8
Model minimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusion
61
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
References
63
Appendices
65
A Formula Evaluation Interface
67
B Product Update Interface
71
C Model Minimization Interface
73
D ANTLR Grammar for Formula Parsing
77
==PAGE:7==
I: Introduction
Reasoning about knowledge has been discussed since the ancient time. Questions such
as ”what makes justified beliefs justified?”, ”what does it mean to say that we know some-
thing?”, and ”how do we know that we know?” has been discussed thoroughly among
philosophers of epistemology.
With the rise of information technology and the advance in robotics, epistemology
has shown to be useful for analyzing planning problems among autonomous agents within
decentralized- and indeterministic environments that are not fully observable. Reason-
ing about what an agent knows about its world and what it knows about what the other
agents know can be modeled using epistemic logic. Combined with the possibility of
updating knowledge through dynamic epistemic logic (DEL), it is possible to solve plan-
ning tasks, which are not necessarily deterministic and fully observable by every agent
in the environment. DEL provides a useful way to analyze situations that can occur in
planning tasks for the agents such as agreement and coordination.
Having a framework for working with DEL, which can provide a rich set of features,
is easy to extend with new features, and can be represented through a visual and inter-
active interface can be highly valuable for research as well as teaching. We attempt to
provide a framework, which can meet these expectations and provide a new foundation
for a sophisticated tool set for DEL modeling.
Each chapter of this thesis introduces a concept, which is part of the framework.
We begin by introducing epistemic logic using an intuitive approach and provide an
analysis of its definition. Then, we extend this with DEL and show how this is useful
for modeling knowledge change. We then discuss how we can optimize the models and
introduce epistemic model minimization and a way of indexing epistemic models based
on bisimilarity. Finally, we take this knowledge and apply it to a prototype of a web-
application, which attempts to kick-start the vision of having a sophisticated tool for
DEL modeling.
7
==PAGE:8==
8
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:9==
II: Epistemic Logic
Epistemology, the study of knowledge and justified belief, is a branch of philosophy that
has its roots back to the ancient Greek. There are several areas of epistemology such as
knowledge and how it relates to truth, belief and justification [Ste18].
In the recent years there has been a growing interest in epistemology within formal
logic where epistemic modal logic (we will refer to this as epistemic logic), a sub-field of
modal logic focusing on modeling of knowledge, has gained a lot of interest within the-
oretical computer science and artificial intelligence. The Finnish philosopher George H.
von Wright and his seminal paper An Essay in Modal Logic from 1951 [HW53] is widely
regarded as having started the formal study of modern epistemic logic; however, we
should note that there were multiple papers published around this time [RS19]. Jaakko
Hintikka later extended the work with the book Knowledge and Belief: An Introduction
to the Logic of the Two Notions in 1962 [Hin05], which laid most of the groundwork for
epistemic logic.
In this chapter, we will focus on defining the framework for modeling epistemic modal
logic, which is based on the S5 modal logic system and explore some of its properties.
2.1
The language of propositional formulas
Let us first look at the language for expressing descriptive knowledge: The language of
propositional formulas. A typical example would be the sentence: ”If it is raining then
it is cloudy.”, which we can represent with a propositional formula R →C, where R
stands for ”it is raining” and C stands for ”it is cloudy”. Propositional formulas can be
very useful at expressing factual knowledge though it has its limitations for other types
of knowledge where epistemic logic is better suited for the task of representing knowledge.
A reader with a background in computer science should be familiar with the language
of propositional formulas. Nevertheless, since epistemic logic extends this language, we
will briefly recap the definition in a Backus-Naur form (BNF).
Definition 2.1.1 The language LP (V ) of propositional formulas over a vocabulary V is
given as:
ϕ ::= ⊤
p
¬ϕ
ϕ ∧ϕ
(2.1)
where p ∈V .
Aside from this definition we will also use the following abbreviations:
9
==PAGE:10==
10
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
⊥≡¬⊤
ϕ ∨ψ ≡¬ (¬ϕ ∧¬ψ)
ϕ →ψ ≡¬ (ϕ ∧¬ψ)
Now that we have our definition in place, we can explore epistemic logic, which
extends the language of propositional formulas to allow for modeling of more complicated
scenarios.
2.2
Agent knowledge
Defining knowledge purely by propositional formulas can be sufficient in some scenarios;
however, we have some limitations using this approach. As in the real world, requiring
that certainty is guaranteed in the environment we are modeling can be hard to meet.
Furthermore, if we have multiple agents in a decentralized system we cannot ensure that
they have a synchronized view of the environment they are operating in. We need to
extend our representation of knowledge to include uncertainty in a multi-agent environ-
ment.
We can introduce a new operator Kiϕ to our propositional language (definition 2.1.1),
which reads as ”Agent i knows ϕ”. This operator allows us to model knowledge specific
to an agent.
The semantic interpretation of the operator was provided by Hintikka
[Hin05]:
Definition 2.2.1 Kiϕ: in all possible worlds compatible with what i knows, it is the case
that ϕ.
In other words, an agent i has knowledge about ϕ if it has no uncertainty about its
valuation. With this new operator we are able to model knowledge for agents.
Example 2.2.2 Suppose we have two agents, Alice and Bob, doing a coin flip.
The
outcome is either heads (h) or tails (¬h).
Alice knows that the outcome is heads;
however, Bob does not know whether the outcome is heads or tails. We can represent
this situation using our new operator: KAliceh ∧¬KBob¬h ∧¬KBobh.
From our example, there are two possible outcomes for our situation: Either it’s
heads or tails, which we can think of as two possible worlds as mentioned in definition
2.2.1. Each agent has his or her own view of these possible worlds. We will look at the
notion of possible worlds in the next section.
We can express several notions of knowledge using our new operator, which we nor-
mally express using a natural language:
Kiϕ
Agent i knows ϕ is true
Ki¬ϕ
Agent i knows that ϕ is not true
¬Kiϕ
Agent i does not know that ϕ is true
¬Ki¬ϕ
Agent i does not know that ϕ is not true
(i.e. agent i considers it an option that ϕ is true)
¬Kiϕ ∧¬Ki¬ϕ
Agent i does not know whether ϕ is true or not
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
11
2.3
Possible worlds
In definition 2.2.1, possible worlds were mentioned. Possible worlds are used to express
different scenarios in a given model. A possible world represents a specific valuation
for a given set of propositions. Consider example 2.2.2. We had that Alice knew the
outcome was heads and Bob did not know the outcome. We’ll assume that Alice knows
that Bob does not know the outcome. For Bob there are two possible worlds but for
Alice only one possible world. We can present the knowledge from our example visually
as a graph of possible worlds:
Figure 1: Graph illustration of the agent knowledge in example 2.2.2. Only the
propositional variables with a true valuation in a given possible world are shown.
The connection between the two worlds w0, w1 with the label Bob indicates that Bob
is not able to distinguish between w0 and w1. It is not clear from this illustration, which
of the worlds Alice considers possible. Currently, we are observing the situation from
an outside observer’s perspective, from which we illustrate all the possible worlds and
how each agent distinguish between them. We know that h is true from this perspective,
so we can infer that only w0 is considered possible by Alice.
In order to show that
Alice only considers w0 possible, we must shift perspective to Alice and her view of the
situation. In Alice’s perspective, only w0 is considered possible; however, Alice must take
into account about what Bob knows. From this, Alice will have a similar representation
of the knowledge as shown in figure 1. The difference is that from her perspective, Alice
knows that w0 is the only possible world to consider, which we call a designated world.
We indicate designated worlds as a double circle as shown in the graph below:
Figure 2: Graph illustration of agent A’s knowledge in example 2.2.2. The designated
possible world is marked with a double circle.
Designated worlds are a useful way for an agent to keep track of which possible
worlds it considers possible within multi-agent systems. The agent needs to include the
knowledge it has of what other agents knows which may introduce other possible worlds
as seen in figure 2.
==PAGE:12==
12
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
2.4
Representing knowledge with S5 Kripke models
Now that we have introduced the concepts of agent knowledge and possible worlds, we
can begin to formalize the framework we use for modeling epistemic logic. First we define
the language of epistemic logic, which extends the language of propositional formulas
with the agent knows operator:
Definition 2.4.1 The language L (V, A) of epistemic logic over a finite vocabulary V and
a finite set of agents A is given as:
ϕ ::= ⊤
p
¬ϕ
ϕ ∧ϕ
Kiϕ
CGϕ
(2.2)
where p ∈V , i ∈A, and G ⊆A.
An extra operator is introduced in definition 2.4.1, which we haven’t discussed yet.
It is the common knowledge operator CGϕ. We will discuss this concept later on. Next,
we will define a Kripke model for representing our knowledge:
Definition 2.4.2 A Kripke model, M, for a set of agents A and a vocabulary V is given
as M = ⟨W, L, R⟩, where
• W is a finite set of possible worlds with the designated worlds denoted by Wd ⊆W.
• L is a valuation function L(w) ⊆V that assigns a truth valuation to each propo-
sitional variable p ∈V for each possible world w ∈W.
• R is a set of equivalence relations named indistinguishability relations Ri ⊆W ×W
for each agent i ∈A.
Furthermore, we also have pointed Kripke models, which consists of a pair (M, w)
where w ∈W. We can think of a pointed Kripke model as a scenario. We can evaluate
formulas of the language L (V, A) in pointed Kripke models to determine if they are true
in the given scenario.
Definition 2.4.3 For a pointed Kripke model (M, w) and a possible world w, we define
truth as:
(M, w) |= ⊤
is always true.
(M, w) |= p
iff
p ∈L (w)
(M, w) |= ¬ϕ
iff
(M, w) ̸|= ϕ
(M, w) |= ϕ ∧ψ
iff
(M, w) |= ϕ and (M, w) |= ψ
(M, w) |= Kiϕ
iff
for all w′ ∈W, if
 w, w′
∈Ri, then
 M, w′
|= ϕ
(M, w) |= CGϕ
iff
for all w′ ∈W, if
 w, w′
∈RG, then
 M, w′
|= ϕ
Example 2.4.4 Example 2.2.2 can be represented as a Kripke model M, which would
have the following structure:
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
13
A = {Alice, Bob}
V = {h}
W = {w0, w1}
L(w0) = {h} , L(w1) = {}
RAlice =

(w0, w0) , (w1, w1)
	
RBob =

(w0, w0) , (w0, w1) , (w1, w0) , (w1, w1)
	
From example 2.4.4 we could look at the pointed Kripke model (M, w0) and for ex-
ample evaluate if Bob knows that p is true (i.e. KBobp) in the given situation. According
to definition 2.4.3, this is not true as (M, w1) ̸|= p.
We see that we have reflexive- and symmetric relations in our Kripke model (e.g.
(w0, w0) and (w0, w1) , (w1, w0)), which we will not show in our graph illustrations un-
less otherwise stated. This is a property of the equivalence relations that we use in our
Kripke model. When we use equivalence relations in a Kripke model we have an S5
Kripke model. S5 is one of the five systems in modal logic, which were proposed by
Lewis & Langford in 1932 [Lew59]. An equivalence relation is reflexive, symmetric, and
transitive. The S5 system can be characterized by a set of modal axioms, which we
represent in its epistemic counterpart:
K:
|= Ki (ϕ →ψ) →(Kiϕ →Kiψ)
T:
|= Kiϕ →ϕ
B:
|= ϕ →Ki bKiϕ
4:
|= Kiϕ →KiKiϕ
There are several ways to axiomatize the S5 system, which all lead to the same S5
logic; however, for the purpose of justifying the use of equivalence relations in the Kripke
model to support S5 logic, we will use the K, T, B, 4 axioms [RS19].
Axiom K is the distribution axiom. It adds the agent knows operator to the lan-
guage of propositional formulas and provides the foundation for all normal modal logics
systems.
Axiom T is the reflexive axiom. It ensures a strong relation between knowledge and
truth. If an agent knows that ϕ is true in a pointed Kripke model then ϕ must be also
be true in the same pointed Kripke model. The reflexive property of the equivalence
relation ensures that axiom T is valid in every Kripke model. Definition 2.4.3, states
that Kiϕ is true in a pointed Kripke model (M, w) iff for all w′ ∈W, if
 w, w′
∈Ri,
then
 M, w′
|= ϕ. Thus, if Kiϕ is true, then ϕ is true in all possible worlds consid-
ered by agent i in (M, w) and ϕ must therefore be true. The reflexive property ensures
that axiom T is also valid if only w is considered by agent i in (M, w) as we then have
(w, w) ∈Ri and therefore Kiϕ →ϕ would still be valid. If we dropped the reflexive
==PAGE:14==
14
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
property it would be the case that (w, w) /∈Ri. Then any formula ϕ of L (V, A) would
always be true in Kiϕ as Ri would be an empty set; however, it would not necessarily
be true that (M, w) |= ϕ and therefore axiom T would not be valid.
Axiom B states that if ϕ is true, then agent i considers ϕ possible. bKiϕ is read as
”Agent i considers ϕ possible” and therefore the agent knows that ϕ is possible. The
symmetric property of the equivalence relation ensures that axiom B is valid in every
Kripke model. We can show this with an example.
Example 2.4.5 Let us go back to the coin flip situation from example 2.2.2. Alice knows
the outcome. Alice knows that Bob does not know the outcome but considers both
outcomes possible. From Alice’s perspective, if the symmetric property is dropped, the
Kripke model could look like the following:
Figure 3: Graph illustration of Alice’s knowledge in the coin-flip example when
symmetry is dropped.
Alice only considers w0 possible, but Bob considers w0 and w1 possible, therefore
we create a relation between the two possible worlds for Bob. In w0 everything checks
up. The outcome is heads, Alice knows this, and Bob considers both outcomes possible.
However, in w1, Bob only considers tails possible as there is no relation from w1 to w0.
This contradicts axiom B. Bob should not suddenly exclude or ”forget” w0 in w1 when
they are indistinguishable. In w1 it should still be the case that w0 is a possibility for
Bob and therefore we should include the symmetric property to ensure this.
Axiom 4 is the positive introspection axiom. An agent knows what it knows. The
transitive property of the equivalence relation ensures that axiom 4 is valid in every
Kripke model. We can show this with an example:
Example 2.4.6 Consider the following Kripke model, which do not have the transitive
property:
Figure 4: Graph illustration of a Kripke model, which do not have the transitive
property.
In w0, agent i knows that p →q is true i.e. Ki (p →q) because p →q is true in both
w0 and w1. However, it is not the case that KiKi (p →q) is also true as Ki (p →q) is
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
15
not valid in both w0 and w1 due to the relation between w1 and w2 and the fact that
p →q is not true in w2. By introducing the transitive property, our Kripke model will
change to the following:
Figure 5: Graph illustration of the Kripke model from figure 4, which do have the
transitive property.
By introducing the transitive property, we add an extra relation between w0 and w2,
which in turn ensures that axiom 4 is valid. Ki (p →q) is no longer true, as we have
the relation from w0 to w2. However, a formula such as Ki (p ∨q) is true in w0 and so
is KiKi (p ∨q) according to definition 2.4.3.
Axiom 4 can in terms of the Kripke model be thought of as any possible world reach-
able from a pointed Kripke model by agent i are all indistinguishable from each other.
If agent A cannot distinguish between the possible worlds w0 and w1, and the possible
worlds w1 and w2, then agent i should also not be able to distinguish between w0 and
w2, which essentially is represented by the transitive property.
This definition for a S5 Kripke model will provide the foundation for our framework
as we extend it with more features. As mentioned earlier, we also introduced the common
knowledge operator, which we now will analyze and explain why its truth definition is
as it is in definition 2.4.3.
2.5
Common knowledge
Common knowledge is a term that is widely used in our daily life. We all know what it
means for something to be common knowledge, but how do we define common knowledge
more formally?
Common knowledge can be necessary in planning tasks to coordinate the actions of
multiple agents such that progress can be made. Suppose two agents, Alice and Bob,
in a decentralized system each have their own sub-goal to achieve in to solve the overall
goal of a given task as shown in figure 6.
==PAGE:16==
16
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
Figure 6: Example of a simple planning task where coordination is necessary in order
to guarantee the goal of getting the two boxes in each of their respective location.
The two agents can only solve this task by having one agent go to the lower area
with its box to allow the other agent to complete its sub-goal and from there complete
its own sub-goal. Thus, they must reach an agreement on who should go to the lower
area. If there is common knowledge among the two agents that, say, Alice should wait
in the lower area, we can be guaranteed that they both will succeed.
The first definition for common knowledge was introduced by David Kellogg Lewis
in 1969 [Lew02]:
Definition 2.5.1 There is common knowledge of ϕ in a group of agents G when all the
agents in G know ϕ, they all know that they know ϕ, they all know that they all know
that they know ϕ, and so on ad infinitum.
We want to translate definition 2.5.1 into an epistemic logic representation, which
we can analyze further. First, we will introduce another operator, which can help us
abbreviate long formulas of ”agent knows” operators. The ”everyone knows” operator:
Definition 2.5.2 The operator Ek
Gϕ (everyone knows) is defined as
Ek
Gϕ ≡
^
ij∈G,1≤j≤k
Ki1Ki2 . . . Kijϕ
(2.3)
Where G is a group of agents G ⊆A.
We will omit the G subscript when it is clear from the context. From definition 2.5.2
we see that E0ϕ = ϕ, E1ϕ means that everyone knows ϕ (which we write as Eϕ), and
E2ϕ means that everyone knows that everyone knows ϕ and so on.
Example 2.5.3 Given a group of agents G = {Alice, Bob}, we can show how the Ek
Gϕ
operator constructs its conjunction of formulas:
Eϕ =KAliceϕ ∧KBobϕ
E2ϕ =EEϕ = KAlice (KAliceϕ ∧KBobϕ) ∧KBob (KAliceϕ ∧KBobϕ)
=KAliceKAliceϕ ∧KAliceKBobϕ ∧KBobKAliceϕ ∧KBobKBobϕ
(2.4)
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
17
Using the E operator, we can define common knowledge:
Definition 2.5.4 Common knowledge for a group of agents G ⊆A and a formula ϕ is
defined as:
CGϕ ≡
∞
^
j=0
Ej
Gϕ
(2.5)
This definition may seem inadequate for any practical use. Our model cannot deal
with an infinite conjunction of formulas. How can we attain common knowledge when
we must have an infinite conjunction of agreement? Aumann proposed a definition for
common knowledge in 1976 [Aum76], which is based on the notion of possible worlds
and is applicable in our Kripke model. Before we present the definition, we must first
introduce the definition of a possible world w′ being G-reachable from w:
Definition 2.5.5 A possible world w′ is G-reachable from w iff there exists a sequence
w = w0, w1, · · · , wn = w′ such that for each k ∈{0, 1, · · · , n −1} there exists an agent
i ∈G such that
 wk, wk+1

∈Ri.
As it represents a path in the Kripke model, we also call it a G-reachable path. With
definition 2.5.5 in mind, we can present Aumann’s definition for common knowledge:
Definition 2.5.6 ϕ is common knowledge for a group of agents G ⊆A in a possible world
w ∈W if ϕ is true in every world G-reachable from w.
The reasoning behind this definition is that if a world w′ is G-reachable from w, then
there is an agent, which can consider w′ possible. We can show the reasoning behind
this by revisiting our coin example previously used to argue for the use of equivalence
relations in section 2.4:
Example 2.5.7 Consider the case of a coin flip. We have two outcomes, either heads (h)
or tails (¬h). There are two agents, Alice and Bob. Alice knows the outcome, which in
this example is heads. However, Alice does not know if Bob knows the outcome. We can
represent Alice’s knowledge as KAliceh ∧¬KAliceKBobh, which we can represent using
the following graph:
Figure 7: Graph illustration of Alice’s knowledge in example 2.5.7.
If Alice were to determine if there was common knowledge among her and Bob that
h is true in w0, she would conclude that this is not the case. From her perspective, she
considers it possible that Bob might consider ¬h an option as there is a G-reachable1
path from w0 to w2.
1G = {Alice, Bob} in this context.
==PAGE:18==
18
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
As seen from definition 2.5.6 and example 2.5.7, we have a way to define truth for
the common knowledge operator as presented in definition 2.4.3. One may question how
this definition can avoid the infinite conjunction of formulas as described in definition
2.5.4? Aumann’s definition is closely related to the fixed-point definition proposed by
Harman in 1977 [Har77], which thinks of common knowledge as the fixed-point for the
equation:
Cϕ = ϕ ∧ECϕ
(2.6)
The fixed-point definition can be useful for defining common knowledge without
having to use the infinite conjunction of formulas. The fixed-point represents a circularity
that appears in common knowledge from which we can factor out the infinite formulas.
Barwise argues that Aumann’s definition of common knowledge implicitly represents the
fixed-point definition proposed by Harman [Bar88]. To see its resemblance, we must first
think of the basic definition of a fixed point: x is a fixed-point of a function f if f(x) = x.
For our epistemic definition of common knowledge in a pointed Kripke model (M, w),
the fixed-point occurs when Enϕ = En+1ϕ = En+2ϕ = · · · , which appears when Enϕ
evaluates ϕ on all possible worlds G-reachable from w.
Figure 8: Illustration of how we evaluate ϕ in more and more possible worlds as we
increase the degree of the Enϕ operator starting from w0. At some point (n ≥3), ϕ is
evaluated at all G-reachable possible worlds from w0.
According to definition 2.4.3, Enϕ contains all G-reachable paths of length ≤n as
it is the power set of combining n Ki operators. Given that Cϕ is a conjunction of
Enϕ for all n ≥0 and our Kripke model is finite, we will eventually for some n < ∞
have a conjunction containing all G-reachable paths of any length from w and we reach
our fixed-point as no new G-reachable paths is added to the conjunction and therefore
the evaluation does not change. Aumann’s definition therefore implicitly represents a
fixed-point for common knowledge and defines truth for the Cϕ operator.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
19
2.6
Logical omniscience
We have provided a formal definition for our framework, which provides an intuitive
approach to model epistemic logic by modeling the situations using possible worlds and
indistinguishability relations. Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning a limitation of the S5
Kripke model in terms of the agents behavior.
When we model our knowledge we base it on the S5 modal logic system for reasoning
about our knowledge. We require that all our agents are perfect reasoners if we are to
expect consistency in our model. Otherwise, we would not be able to reflect on what
the other agents know as they might not behave accordingly to the set of logical rules
defined in our system. From the distributive axiom (axiom K), which all normal modal
logic system uses, we have that if an agent knows ϕ, and ψ follows from ϕ, then the
agent also knows ψ. In general this means that they should know all consequences of
their knowledge and all the tautologies: They are logical omniscient. This requirement is
reasonable to have in a multi-agent system, where all the agents are designed by us, and
we provide their initial knowledge. However, in certain cases, the assumption of logical
omniscience is not possible to have. The most obvious case is when humans are part of
the multi-agent system. Humans do not excel at logical reasoning and are definitely not
logical omniscient. This is known as The Problem of Logical Omniscience. From this
we argue that the S5 Kripke model is best suited for multi-agent problems with agents
that are perfect reasoners, which should not be seen as negative. The S5 Kripke model
keeps it simple and elegant, which is useful for many use cases where we know that we
have logical omniscient agents. Alternative models have been suggested to overcome this
problem, which are still based on the possible world analogy; however, we will not cover
it here [Fag+03].
==PAGE:20==
20
CHAPTER 2. EPISTEMIC LOGIC
==PAGE:21==
III: Dynamic Epistemic Logic
In the previous chapter we added a formal definition for an epistemic model to our
framework based on the S5 Kripke model, which allows us for representing knowledge
in a given situation.
This epistemic model is useful for analyzing a ”snapshot” of a
situation. However, the lack of a dynamic environment in our epistemic model is not
useful for conducting planning tasks, as we do not have a way of updating knowledge as
time passes and the situation changes.
Dynamic epistemic logic (abbreviated DEL), the study of modal logics of model
change, is combining dynamic logic with epistemic logic and is a rather new concept.
The first approach to DEL was public announcement for epistemic logic, which was in-
troduced in 1989 by Plaza in his paper Logics of public communications [Pla07], which
started the field of DEL modeling.
In this chapter we will explore dynamic epistemic logic and apply it to our framework
such that we can model knowledge change and enable the possibility of solving planning
tasks.
3.1
The Three Wise Men: DEL by example
We will start off with a motivational example of DEL using the well-known Three Wise
Men puzzle by Hans Freudenthal (sometimes modeled as the muddy children puzzle).
The description of the puzzle is the following:
A certain king wishes to test his three wise men. He arranges them in a circle so
that they can see and hear each other and tells them that he will put a white or
black spot on each of their foreheads but that at least one spot will be white. In fact
all three spots are white. He then repeatedly asks them, “Do you know the color of
your spot?” What do they answer?
The solution to this puzzle is that they answer ”no” the first two times and finally
”yes”. At first glance this situation seems bizarre. How can they suddenly know their
color from the dialogue? They do not seem to learn anything new after each repetitive
question. Let us consider the case of only one wise man with a white spot. The wise
man with the white spot will immediately know his color as he knows that at least one
wise man has a white spot, and he only sees black spots on the other wise men. The two
other wise men cannot infer their color as they see at least one with a white spot and
21
==PAGE:22==
22
CHAPTER 3. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
thus consider it possible that they also have a white spot. However, when the wise man
with the white spot announce that he knows his color, the two other wise men can infer
that they must have a black spot by reasoning about the other wise man’s reasoning.
Similarly, if we have two white spots, each wise man can see at least one white spot
and cannot determine their own color. After the first question, everyone answers ”no”.
From this the wise men with the white spot know their color since if they had a black
spot the wise man with the white spot would already know his color. When they both
announce that they know their color, the wise man with the black spot can infer his
color by reasoning about their reasoning. We can generalize the solution to this puzzle:
If k wise men have a white spot then after k −1 questions the white colored wise men
know their color and after k questions every wise man knows their color.
We can model this puzzle using an epistemic model. To keep it simple, we will only
consider two wise men (we’ll call them Allan and Bob), each with a white spot on their
forehead. We will change the puzzle description slightly: Initially, the king does not
say that at least one has a white spot. We will consider the initial situation when no
information is given and all they know is that they have a white or a black spot on
their forehead. Furthermore, we will not include the black spot in our model as it is
redundant information (if they do not have a white spot on their forehead, then they
have a black spot). We use the propositions wAllan and wBob to represent each wise man
having a white spot on their forehead. The wise men can observe each other’s spot but
are uncertain about themselves. We can represent the epistemic model as a graph in the
same style as we did in chapter 2.
Figure 9: Graph representing the epistemic model for the three wise men puzzle;
however, in this instance the puzzle only has two wise men.
Before the king tells them that at least one of them have a spot we have every scenario
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
23
as a possible world, even the one where none of them have a white spot (w3 in figure
9). The world without any white spots is considered possible as one wise man may see
a white spot on the other wise man, but he is unsure about himself, so he considers it
possible that he does not have a white spot and therefore the other wise man would
consider it possible that no one has a white spot. The king then announces at least
one has a white spot on their forehead (wAllan ∨wBob). After the announcement, w3 is
no longer considered possible. Each wise man now only has two possible worlds being
indistinguishable. When they answer the king’s first question they say ”no” at the same
time, which is equivalent to saying that they don’t know whether they have a white spot
or not. We can represent their announcement using the epistemic language L (V, A):
¬KAllanwAllan ∧¬KAllan¬mAllan ∧¬KBobwBob ∧¬KBob¬wBob
(3.1)
This will remove w1 and w2 and thus the wise men only consider w0 possible. In w1 it
is the case that KAllanwAllan is true, which means that ¬KAllanwAllan ∧¬KAllan¬wAllan
is not true and for w2 we have a similar situation, but for the other wise man. In w0
no wise man can infer whether he has a white spot or not and therefore equation 3.1 is
true and the possible world is still considered possible.
From our example we see how it is possible to update knowledge in our epistemic
model when announcements are made. Announcements are not the only type of updates
we can apply in DEL. In the next section we will formalize knowledge updates and show
a few different types of updates that can be made.
3.2
Updating knowledge using event models
As we saw from our example with the three wise men in the previous section, we can
update our epistemic model to represent changes of knowledge. We will denote these
changes (or actions) as event models, which we can represent similarly to our epistemic
model; however, with an additional piece of information [DK08]:
Definition 3.2.1 Given a finite vocabulary V , a finite set of agents A, and the epistemic
language L (V, A), an event model, E, is defined as E = ⟨E, R, pre, post⟩where
• E is a finite set of events with the designated events denoted Ed ⊆E
• R is a set of equivalence relations Ri ⊆E × E for each agent i ∈A
• pre : E →L (V, A) assign to each event e ∈E a precondition.
• post : E →L (V, A): Assigns to each event e ∈E a post-condition for each
propositional variable
As seen from definition 3.2.1, the event model has a similar structure as the epistemic
model (definition 2.4.2) though with a few differences. First of all, we should think of
==PAGE:24==
24
CHAPTER 3. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
an event e ∈E as a possible outcome from the update similarly to how we see a possible
world as a possible scenario.
We have replaced the valuation function with a post-
condition for each event. The post-condition consists of a conjunction of literals, which
also includes the tautology (⊤). The post-condition represents how an outcome changes
the knowledge of each propositional variable. The precondition defines what must be
true for the action to take place and can be any formula of the epistemic language
L (V, A). The relations has the same meaning as for the epistemic model (i.e. they are
indistinguishability relations).
Next, we will formalize how we update an epistemic model using an event model,
which is called a product update [Bol17]:
Definition 3.2.2 Given an epistemic model M = ⟨W, L, RM⟩and an event model E =
⟨E, RE, pre, post⟩over a finite vocabulary V and a finite set of agents A, the product
update of M with E is M ⊗E = ⟨W ′, L′, R′⟩where
• W ′ =

(w, e) ∈W × E | (M, w) |= pre (e)
	
• W ′
d =

(w, e) ∈W ′ | w ∈Wd and e ∈Ed
	
• L′  (w, e)

=

L (w) \

p | post (e) |= ¬p
	
∪

p | post (e) |= p
	
.
• R′
i =

(w, e) ,
 w′, e′
∈W ′ × W ′ |
 w, w′
∈RM
i
and
 e, e′
∈RE
i

for each agent i ∈A
As we see from definition 3.2.2, the product update resembles a Cartesian product
of graphs in terms of how the resulting epistemic model is structured based on the
epistemic model and the event model. The difference lies in the elimination of possible
worlds w ∈W if the precondition is not met and the valuation function L′.
Example 3.2.3 Consider our coin flip from example 2.2.2; however in this situation,
neither Alice nor Bob knows the outcome. We can represent this as a graph:
Figure 10: Graph illustration of the epistemic model for the coin-flip example.
Initially, both Alice and Bob consider any outcome possible. Let’s suppose that Alice
looks at the outcome with Bob observing that Alice is looking, but does not know what
Alice observes. There are two possible outcomes for this observation: It is either heads
(h) or tails (¬h). Alice can distinguish between the two outcomes, but Bob cannot. We
can model this as an event model, which we can illustrate as a graph:
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
25
Figure 11: Graph representing the event model for Alice’s observation. We will use
squared nodes to distinguish between epistemic models and event models. The top
label of the nodes represents the post-condition of an event. The bottom label
represents the precondition, which is the same for all events.
When Alice performs the observation, the knowledge changes (i.e. a product update
is performed), which we can illustrate as the following:
Figure 12: Illustration of the product update caused by Alice’s observation.
As we see from figure 12, we end up with an epistemic model where we have four
possible worlds. There are two pairs of possible worlds representing the same scenario.
Alice cannot distinguish between the possible worlds representing the same scenario and
Bob is not able to distinct between any possible world, which is expected according to
definition 3.2.2.
As we have provided the formal definition for an event model and the product update
we will discuss how we can model some generic event models that are useful for planning
tasks.
3.3
Public announcements
As we saw in our example in section 3.1, public announcement can be very useful for
reducing the size of our epistemic model as it provides the strongest type of knowledge,
that is, common knowledge. The event model for a public announcement is very simple:
Definition 3.3.1 The public announcement of ϕ over a finite vocabulary V and a finite
set of agents G has the event model E = ⟨E, R, pre, post⟩where
==PAGE:26==
26
CHAPTER 3. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
• E = {e0}
• Ed = {e0}
• Ri =

(e0, e0)
	
for each agent i ∈G
• pre (e0) = ϕ
• post (e0) = ⊤
The tautology (⊤) in our definition indicates that the event has no effect on the
valuation at each possible world. We can represent the event model for a public an-
nouncement as the following graph:
Figure 13: Graph representing the event model for a public announcement of ϕ.
Figure 13 clearly illustrates the simplicity of the public announcement. All possi-
ble worlds that contradict the announcement (precondition) of ϕ are removed from the
epistemic model, which is why ϕ trivially becomes common knowledge as there is no
possible world where ϕ is false for any of the agents.
Public announcement can be a powerful action when solving planning tasks; however,
there is an important aspect of its definition that can cause problems if not handled with
care. As seen in definition 3.3.1, we have that the precondition eliminates the possible
worlds where ϕ is not true. However, it is allowed to make a public announcement of any
arbitrary formula from the language L (V, A), which means we can make a public an-
nouncement of something, which might not be true in a given scenario. Consider our ex-
ample with the three wise men from section 3.1. When the king announces wAllan∨wBob,
which we know is true, one of the wise men, say Allan, can make a public announcement
of ¬wBob, which would prevent the wise men (or just Bob, if Allan is trying to fool him)
from reaching the correct conclusion as they no longer consider wAllan ∧wBob a possible
world. Furtermore, it is also possible to make public announcements that do not obtain
common knowledge among the agents. You can publicly announce ϕ ∧¬Kiϕ, which can
be translated as ”ϕ is true and you don’t know it”. This is known as Moore’s paradox
[Moo93].
These issues are normally not considered a problem in a controlled environment as
the agents are perfect reasoners as described in section 2.6, which should prevent such
events from occurring. Nevertheless, if for example one of the agents in an environment
perceives some information incorrectly (i.e. from a malfunctioning sensor), the agent
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
27
might unintentionally give false information, which is hard to recover from as the possible
worlds contradicting the false information are eliminated from every agent’s knowledge.
3.4
Public observation
We already had a glimpse of a public observation in example 3.2.3. An agent performs
a public observation when the agent observes the valuation of a propositional variable ϕ
while the other agents observes that the agent observes ϕ but without knowing the result
from the observation itself. The event model for a public observation can be defined as
the following:
Definition 3.4.1 The public observation by an agent A of ϕ over a finite vocabulary V
and a finite set of agents G has the event model E = ⟨E, R, pre, post⟩where
• E = {e0, e1}
• Ed = {e0, e1}
• RA =

(e0, e0) , (e1, e1)
	
Ri =

(e0, e0) , (e0, e1) , (e1, e0) (e1, e1)
	
for each agent i ∈G \ {A}
• pre (e0) = ⊤
pre (e1) = ⊤
• post (e0) = ϕ
post (e1) = ¬ϕ
We do not specify any precondition for the public observation in our definition;
however, if a precondition is required before the public observation can occur, the ⊤
precondition can be replaced with the needed precondition. We can represent the event
model for a public observation as the following graph:
Figure 14: Graph representing the event model for a public observation of ϕ by agent
A.
Note that both events (e0 and e1) are designated events. Agent A does not know
the outcome of observing ϕ but knows that it will be either of them and therefore
both events are designated. Similarly for the other agents, both events would also be
designated as they are also aware of both outcomes; however, the difference is that they
cannot distinguish between them.
==PAGE:28==
28
CHAPTER 3. DYNAMIC EPISTEMIC LOGIC
3.5
Private observation
An agent performs a private observation when the agent observes the valuation of a
propositional variable ϕ without any of the other agents knowing that the agent did the
observation. The event model for a private observation can be defined as the following:
Definition 3.5.1 The private observation by an agent A of ϕ over a finite vocabulary V
and a finite set of agents G has the event model E = ⟨E, R, pre, post⟩where
• E = {e0, e1, e2}
• Ed = {e0, e1}
• RA =

(e0, e0) , (e1, e1) , (e2, e2)
	
• Ri =

(e0, e0) , (e0, e1) , (e0, e2) (e1, e0) , (e1, e1) , (e1, e2) , (e2, e0) , (e2, e1) , (e2, e2)
	
for each agent i ∈G
• pre (e0) = ⊤
pre (e1) = ⊤
pre (e2) = ⊤
• post (e0) = ϕ
post (e1) = ¬ϕ
post (e2) = ⊤
As with the public observation, we do not specify any precondition for the private
observation in our definition; however, if a precondition is required before the private
observation can occur, the ⊤precondition can be replaced with the needed precondition.
We can represent the event model for a private observation as the following graph:
Figure 15: Graph representing the event model for a private observation of ϕ by agent
A.
The private observation has two designated events (e0 and e1) for agent A as agent
A does not know the outcome of observing ϕ but knows that it will be either of them.
A non-designated event (e2) with the post-condition ⊤models the fact that neither of
the other agents will know about the observation and therefore their knowledge is not
altered.
==PAGE:29==
IV: Model Optimization
We have explored dynamic epistemic logic and shown how it can be used to model
knowledge change, which enables us to use it for performing planning tasks. Due to the
nature of product updates, which resembles a Cartesian graph product, the observing
reader might have noticed a redundancy in the resulting epistemic model from example
3.2.3 shown in figure 12, which clearly illustrates that the resulting epistemic model
from a product update may have a more compact representation, which still preserves
the knowledge of the epistemic model. In this chapter we will introduce the notion of
bisimulation and how we can use it to minimize an epistemic model using the partition
refinement algorithm. Furthermore, we will also provide a data structure with a set of
algorithms for indexing epistemic models based on their simulation property, which can
be useful in some scenarios when computing solutions for a planning task.
4.1
Bisimulation
When we represent agent knowledge using an epistemic model, we may have multiple
ways of constructing the epistemic model, such that it represent the same knowledge. An
example of this can be shown from our product update in example 3.2.3, which presented
an epistemic model of a coin-flip with Alice and Bob not knowing the outcome, which
was followed by a change in the knowledge caused by Alice looking at the outcome with
Bob observing her but not knowing what she observed. The end result was four possible
worlds; however, two possible worlds is sufficient for representing the updated knowledge
as the following illustration shows:
29
==PAGE:30==
30
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
Figure 16: Graph illustrating two epistemic models that represent the same knowledge
occurring from the product update in example 3.2.3.
The intuition behind the simplification shown in figure 16 is the following: w0 and
w1 both represent the same scenario (heads outcome) and share the same relations to
other possible worlds i.e. w2 and w3. Therefore, by merging w0 and w1 together as one
single possible world, w4, we are not altering the knowledge representation. Any formula
of L (V, A) has the same evaluation at w0 as at w1. The same argument goes for w2
and w3 and therefore we are able to minimize the epistemic model to just two possible
worlds, which is the optimal minimization for this example.
When two epistemic models represents the same knowledge we say that they have
a bisimulation or that they are bisimilar. Ditmarsch et al. provides a definition for
bisimulation of two epistemic models [Dit07]:
Definition 4.1.1 Given two models, M = ⟨W, L, R⟩and M′ = ⟨W ′, L′, R′⟩. A non-empty
relation ℜ⊆W × W ′ is a bisimulation iff for all w ∈W and w′ ∈W ′ with (w, w′) ∈ℜ:
Atoms:
p ∈L(w) iff p ∈L′(w′) for all p ∈V
Forth:
for all i ∈A and all v ∈W, if (w, v) ∈Ri, then there is a v′ ∈W ′ such
that (w′, v′) ∈R′
i and (v, v′) ∈ℜ
Back:
for all i ∈A and all v′ ∈W ′, if (w′, v′) ∈R′
i, then there is a v ∈W
such that (w, v) ∈Ri and (v, v′) ∈ℜ
Furthermore, a proof is provided showing that the epistemic language L is not able
to distinguish between two pointed epistemic models that are bisimilar.
Given two
pointed epistemic models (M, w) and
 M′, w′
we write (M, w) ↔
 M′, w′
iff (M, w)
and
 M′, w′
are bisimilar.
Theorem 4.1.2. For all pointed epistemic models (M, w) and
 M′, w′
, if (M, w) ↔
 M′, w′
,
then (M, w) ≡L
 M′, w′
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
31
Proof. We proceed by using induction on ϕ.
Base case: Suppose that (M, w) ↔
 M′, w′
. Then by atoms it must be the case that
(M, w) |= p iff
 M′, w′
|= p for all p ∈V .
Induction hypothesis:
For all pointed epistemic model (M, w) and
 M′, w′
, if
(M, w) ↔
 M′, w′
then it is the case that (M, w) |= ϕ iff
 M′, w′
|= ϕ.
Induction step:
Negation:
Suppose that (M, w) |= ¬ϕ.
By semantics this is only the case iff
(M, w) ̸|= ϕ. By the induction hypothesis this is the equivalent to
 M′, w′
̸|= ϕ,
which is the case iff
 M′, w′
|= ¬ϕ.
Conjunction: Suppose that (M, w) |= ϕ∧ψ, which by using the induction hypothesis
the theorem is proven for ϕ and ψ. By the semantics, ϕ ∧ψ is true iff (M, w) |= ϕ
and (M, w) |= ψ. By the induction hypothesis this is equivalent to
 M′, w′
|= ϕ and
 M′, w′
|= ψ. By the semantics this is the case iff
 M′, w′
|= ϕ ∧ψ.
Individual agent knows operator: Suppose (M, w) |= Kiϕ. Take an arbitrary
v′ such that
 w′, v′
∈Ri. By back there is a v ∈W such that (w, v) ∈Ri and
 v, v′
∈ℜ. Therefore, by the induction hypothesis, (M, v) |= ϕ iff
 M′, v′
|= ϕ.
Since (M, w) |= Kiϕ, by the semantics (M, v) |= ϕ and therefore
 M′, v′
|= ϕ. Given
that v′ was arbitrary,
 M′, v′
|= ϕ for all v′ such that
 w′, v′
∈R′
i. Therefore, by
the semantics
 M′, v′
|= Kiϕ.
For the other way around, the same approach is used; however, forth is used instead
of back.
Given that the C- and E operator are based on the agent knows operator, the proof
covers any formula of L (V, A). Furthermore, given that two bisimilar epistemic models
have an ℜrelation from one model to the other model consisting of all pointed epistemic
models we are not able to distinguish between the two epistemic models in any scenario
and therefore they represent the same knowledge.
Bisimulation stems from labeled state transition systems (LTS). It is common to use
a LTS to represent the possible computation paths a program make. Given two LTSs,
one LTS may simulate the other LTS by containing all its possible computation paths;
however, the reverse may not be true. If the simulation goes in both directions, then
the two LTSs are bisimilar. Bisimulation was introduced to epistemic models due to the
fact that LTSs are structured similarly to epistemic models (an LTS consist of a set of
states and a collection of accessibility relations for each process). With theorem 4.1.2
it was shown that bisimilarity was useful in the context of epistemic models in order to
verify if two epistemic models represent the same knowledge.
It is important to stress that both the back- and forth statement from definition 4.1.1
are important as we otherwise cannot ensure that two epistemic models represent the
same knowledge. Consider the following two epistemic models:
==PAGE:32==
32
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
Figure 17: Graph illustrating two epistemic models M and M′ where forth applies
from M to M′ but not for back as indicated by the arrows.
Though there is a mapping from M to M′, the back property is not met and
therefore are they not indistinguishable from each other (i.e. (M ≡L M′). To show
this, consider the formula KBob (q ∨¬q ∧t). In M there are two possible worlds where
this is true, namely w2 where the scenario is that q is true and w4 where the scenario
is that t is true. However, in M′ there are only one possible world where this is true,
namely w8 where t is true. The formula is not valid in w6 where the scenario is that q is
true due to the relation to w7 and therefore the two epistemic models do not represent
the same knowledge.
4.2
Partition Refinement
By making use of the bisimulation property we can minimize epistemic models such
that they are optimal in terms of the number of possible worlds.
One approach for
minimizing epistemic models is to use a partition refinement algorithm, which is used to
solve another type of problem, which we can utilize to minimize our epistemic model.
The following two definitions will explain the original problem, which we will translate
into the problem of finding a minimal epistemic model of an epistemic model that is
bisimilar.
Definition 4.2.1 Let E be a relation on a set U. The preimage of a set B ⊆U under E
is the subset of U defined as
E−1(B) =

x | ∃y ∈B such that xEy
	
(4.1)
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
33
Definition 4.2.2 The relational coarsest partition problem is, given an initial partition
P of a set U and a relation E on U, find the coarsest stable refinement Q of P such
that for each pair of blocks B1, B2 from Q, we have that either B1 ⊆E−1 (B2) or
B1 ∩E−1 (B2) = ∅.
From definition 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 we see that the relational coarsest partition problem
concerns finding a partition refinement such that any pair of blocks B1, B2 either has no
relations at all from B1 to B2 or that every element in B1 has a relation to an element
in B2 (therefore called a stable refinement).
We can apply definition 4.2.2 to our epistemic model such that we can minimize it
by solving the relational coarsest partitioning problem. We assign the set U to be the
set of possible worlds W in our epistemic model. The relation E will be the equivalence
relations R and our initial partition P will be based on the valuation of each possible
world (i.e. the possible scenarios). The coarsest refinement will partition the possible
worlds based on the following two properties:
• Their valuation as the initial partition is based on the valuation as well.
• Their relation to other blocks of possible worlds as every possible world in a block
B1 either has no connection to another block B2 (i.e. B1 ∩E−1 (B2) = ∅) or they
all have a connection to another block B2 (i.e. B1 ⊆E−1 (B2)).
From these two properties we can identify each block of the refinement as belonging
to a ”class” of possible worlds meaning they share the same relations to other classes
of possible worlds such that any formula of L (V, A) has the same evaluation for any
possible world in a block. Therefore, we can merge the block1 into a single possible
world and preserve the knowledge. The argument for this claim is based on definition
4.1.1 for bisimulation. As we start with an identical epistemic model of the epistemic
model we want to minimze, all properties of definition 4.1.1 are of course met. The initial
partition ensures that atom is preserved as we will at least have one block for each truth
assignment. Forth and back is preserved as each possible world in a block shares the
same relation to other blocks and each block of the other blocks shares the same relation
to other blocks an so forth. As each block only contains one type of truth assignment,
by semantics, any formula of L (V, A) evaluates to the same for each possible world in a
given block. Therefore, by replacing the block with a single possible world having the
same truth assignment and relations as the block being replaced, we are preserving the
knowledge of the epistemic model. Therefore, the pointed epistemic model replacement
is bisimilar to every pointed epistemic model in the block being replaced.
The following figure illustrates an example of solving a relational coarsest partitioning
problem for an epistemic model:
1Given that the block size is larger than one.
==PAGE:34==
34
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
Figure 18: Graph illustrating the relational coarsest partitioning problem for an
epistemic model. The graph on the left shows the initial partitioning based on the
valuation for each possible world. The graph in middle shows the coarsest stable
refinement and the graph on the right shows the minimal epistemic model that is
bisimilar to the original epistemic model.
From looking at figure 18 it may be obvious how to find a refinement; however, to
generalize a solution is less trivial.
Robert Paige and Robert E. Tarjan provides an
elegant algorithm for solving this problem [PT87].
The following describes how the
algorithm works in the domain of epistemic models:
Definition 4.2.3 Given an epistemic model M = ⟨W, L, R⟩, the minimal epistemic model
that is bisimilar to M is found by the following steps:
1. Start with an initial partition P0 where all the possible worlds with the same
valuation are in the same block and a map E0 : W →B from a possible world to
the block B ∈P0 the possible world is in.
2. Given a partition Pi and map Ei.
For each block B ∈Pi, partition B into a
sub-partition of sub-blocks, such that for any two possible worlds w1, w2 ∈B,
w1, w2 are in the same sub-block iff for all agents i ∈A, it is the case that

Ei (w) | (w0, w) ∈Ri
	
=

Ei (w) | (w1, w) ∈Ri
	
that is, they have the same re-
lations to other blocks in Pi.
Update Pi to Pi+1 by replacing each block in Pi with its sub-partition.
Update Ei to Ei+1 by remapping each possible world to the block in Pi+1 they are
in.
3. Repeat step two until Pi = Pi+1.
4. Construct the new minimal epistemic model by replacing each block in Pi with a
single possible world, which has the same valuation and is designated iff at least
one possible world in the block is designated.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
35
Paige and Tarjan argue that any given element2 is in at most log |W| + 1 different
blocks as each of its successive sub-partition is at most half the size of the previous
one. Therefore, they argue that the algorithm can run in O
 |R| · log |W|

time using
O
 |W| + |R|

space if implemented efficient with several data structures [PT87]. This
algorithm has a good time complexity whilst still being relatively simple.
Another
algorithm proposed by Dovier, Piazza and Policriti claims to run in linear time for
several types of input scenarios; however, it is still upper bounded by Paige and Tarjan
algorithm’s time complexity and is more complex in its implementation [DPP01].
With this algorithm for minimizing epistemic models we should be able in practice
to perform a series of product updates faster and with less space, as we can minimize
the epistemic model in a reasonable time before performing the next product update.
4.3
Bisimilarity Indexing of Epistemic States
With our framework we can solve epistemic planning tasks, which we can roughly define
as the following:
Definition 4.3.1 An epistemic planning task is an initial epistemic model M, a set of
event models E and a goal formula ϕ ∈L (V, A). A solution to an epistemic planning
task is a sequence of event models S = {E1, E2, · · · , En ∈E} such that Mg = M ⊗E1 ⊗
E2 ⊗· · · ⊗En and Mg |= ϕ.
The objective is to find a sequence of actions to execute such that the goal formula
is valid in every pointed epistemic model i.e. there are no scenarios where the goal is
not met. When doing so, we have to manage multiple epistemic models as we attempt
to come up with a reasonable solution for the given epistemic planning task. One way
of solving a planning task is to use a policy-based planner [Bol17], which we for example
can construct by exploring all possible epistemic models we can reach given our initial
epistemic model and set of event models, which can be thought of as creating a state
space. Then we can extract a policy from the resulting state space, such that for any
given epistemic model, we have an applicable action to apply such that we can get
towards our goal epistemic model.
2An element being a possible world in our case.
==PAGE:36==
36
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
Figure 19: Illustration showcasing how a state space could look like given an initial
epistemic model and two event models E1 and E2. The structures of each epistemic
model is arbitrary and only serves the purpose to illustrate the concept.
Ideally we would want that the state space only contains a unique set of epistemic
models that we can reach from our initial epistemic state in order to avoid redundant
information. That is for any pair of epistemic model M1, M2 in the state space it is
the case that M1 ̸≡L M2. However, this is not trivial to ensure. For each epistemic
model we want to add to the state space, we must verify whether or not a bisimilar
epistemic model already appears in the state space. If not, we can add it to the state
space and add the event model relation. Otherwise, we route the event model relation
to the existing epistemic model that is bisimilar with the epistemic model we want to
add. A naive approach would be to go through all previously visited epistemic states in
the current state space and check if any of them are bisimilar with the new epistemic
state. This is not very effective as when the state space grow larger we must compare
more and more epistemic models for each new epistemic model we want to add to the
state space. Furthermore, we also need a data-structure that we can use to compare two
epistemic models for bisimilarity.
In this section, we will propose a data structure, which we can use for comparing
bisimilarity between two epistemic models. Furthermore, we will propose a hash func-
tion, HM : M →Z based on the proposed data-structure were we claim that for any
two epistemic states M1, M2, if they are bisimilar i.e. M1 ≡L M2, then they have the
same hash value i.e. HM (M1) = HM (M2).
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
37
4.3.1
Tree data structure
For each pointed epistemic model, we want to represent what relations it has to other
possible worlds, what relations those possible worlds has to other possible worlds and so
on. This is an analogy to the definition for bisimilarity between two pointed epistemic
models as seen in definition 4.1.1. Given that we use equivalence relations and therefore
all relations are symmetric, it is sufficient to represent this using a tree data structure
where a node represents a possible world and the edges represent indistinguishability
relations. The tree structure avoids cycles, which would be a problem when we want to
compute a hash value for a pointed possible world, which we will discuss later.
Figure 20: Illustration showcasing how we construct a tree for a pointed epistemic
model, (M, w4). The red arrows indicate the traversal directions from w4. The tree on
the right is the resulting tree from traversing from the initial possible world.
As seen from figure 20, we construct the tree by traversing outwards from the initial
possible world using a BFS3 approach, which is important in order to match the seman-
tics for the Ki operator (definition 2.4.3) as the evaluation resembles a BFS approach as
well for increasingly larger combinations of Ki operators. This is illustrated in figure 8
for the E operator. The end result is a tree having all possible non-recursive G-reachable
paths from the pointed epistemic model and therefore representing the evaluation prop-
erties for the pointed epistemic model using the epistemic language L (V, A).
4.3.2
Tree construction algorithm
With the defined data structure in mind, we first propose an algorithm for constructing
the set of trees of an epistemic model. The algorithm for constructing the trees is de-
scribed as the following:
3Breadth-first search.
==PAGE:38==
38
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
Algorithm 1: Algorithm for constructing the trees of an epistemic model.
Input: An epistemic model M
Output: A set of trees used for comparing and indexing epistemic models.
1

W ′, L′, R′
= Minimal bisimilar epistemic model of M;
2 trees := empty set;
3 foreach w ∈W ′ do
4
t := Tree;
5
t.w := w;
6
BuildTree(t);
7
add t to trees;
8 end
9 return trees;
10 Function BuildTree(root):
11
visited := empty set;
12
next := [root];
13
while next is not empty do
14
trees := next;
15
next := [ ];
16
treeMap := empty map W →Tree;
17
foreach t ∈trees do
18
relations :=

(i, w) | i ∈A, w ̸∈visited, (t.w, w) ∈R′
i
	
;
19
foreach (i, w) ∈relations do
20
if treeMap (w) = ∅then
21
newTree := Tree;
22
newTree.w := w;
23
treeMap (w) := newTree;
24
add newTree to next;
25
end
26
child := treeMap (w);
27
add (i, child) to t.edges;
28
end
29
end
30
foreach t ∈trees do
31
add t.w to visited
32
end
33
end
As we see from the algorithm it is closely related to the regular BFS algorithm; how-
ever with a slight difference. Instead of using a queue to explore each possible world and
mark them as visited after each visit, we explore the possible worlds in groups for each
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
39
depth level before we mark them as visited. This is to ensure that every relation in the
epistemic model is included in the resulting tree structure such that we do not loose any
knowledge. We can use figure 20 to show this knowledge loss if we chose a regular BFS
approach rather than our modified variant. If we construct the tree for the same pointed
epistemic model (M, w4); however, with the regular BFS algorithm, we will not include
the relations between w0, w1 and w5, w6 as we already visited them before we reach
those relations. Therefore, if we remove those two relations from the epistemic model,
we would end up with the same tree structure when we construct the tree again for the
same pointed epistemic model (M, w4). However, the two pointed epistemic models do
not have the same knowledge. Consider the formula KBobKCarolKBob (s →¬r). In the
original epistemic model if we evaluate the formula in (M, w4) it evaluates to false as the
relation between w5 and w6 contradicts KBob (s →¬r) because in w6 it is not the case
that s →¬r, which Bob considers possible in w5. However, in the modified epistemic
model, where we removed the relations between w0, w1 and w5, w6, the formula evalu-
ates to true as w6 is not considered possible by Bob in w5. Therefore, as we see from
this example, we must ensure that every relation is included in the tree structure for a
pointed epistemic model, which we achieve by visiting the possible worlds in groups for
each depth level rather than sequentially per depth level. The case where relations are
left out using a regular BFS algorithm occurs when we visit a possible world that is part
of a clique of possible worlds with a size greater than two4 as we can visit all possible
worlds in the clique from the initial possible world and therefore the other relations in
the clique are ignored.
The initial minimization of the epistemic model is done to ensure that no redundant
information appears in the tree structures, which will prevent us from computing proper
hash values based on the bisimilarity properties. In theory, we should be able to mini-
mize the epistemic model by identifying pointed epistemic models having the same tree
structure, minimize the epistemic model and then recompute the tree structure. How-
ever, we will not explore this possibility, as it will not improve the time complexity by
replacing the initial minimization with this approach, which the next section will clarify.
4.3.3
Tree construction time- and space complexity
We start of by analyzing time complexity for our algorithm.
• The initial minimization depends on the algorithm used for finding the minimal
epistemic model. We will refer to the partition refinement algorithm by Paige and
Tarjan (section 4.2), which has a time complexity of O
 |R| · log |W|

.
• For each pointed epistemic model, we perform a BFS run. Worst case is when the
graph representation of the epistemic model is connected, and we therefore have
to visit all edges and nodes, which leads to a time complexity of O
 |W| + |R|

.
4A clique of size two corresponds to two possible worlds with a relation. A clique of size one is a possible
world. Therefore, no relation is left out.
==PAGE:40==
40
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
Insert and link operations on our tree data structure runs in O (1) and therefore
the time complexity stays at O
 |W| + |R|

for a pointed epistemic model.
We construct a tree for each pointed epistemic model. Therefore, the total running
time is O

|R| · log |W| + |W| ·
 |W| + |R|

= O

|W|2 + |W| · |R|

. Thus, the initial
minimization of the epistemic model does not impact the asymptotic time complexity
but helps to simplify the algorithm as we do not have to deal with redundant information
in the data structure.
The size of a tree for a pointed epistemic model is proportional to the number of
relations in the epistemic model given the worst case when the graph representation of
the epistemic model is connected. Therefore the space complexity is O
 |W| · |R|

as we
need one tree for each pointed epistemic model.
4.3.4
Computing hash value of a tree
Now that we have a representation of the knowledge for a pointed epistemic model
we want to compute a hash value of the tree based on its structure. We start of by
introducing the concept of our approach for computing the hash value of the tree. For
the sake of the example, we assume that there exists a hash value for representing a
possible world based on its value assignment and designated status as well as a hash
value for representing a relation based on the agent. We will explain how we compute
these values later on. We propose a bottom-up approach, which corresponds to starting
from the outermost reachable possible worlds and working towards the initial possible
world.
Figure 21: Illustration showcasing the concept for computing the hash value (using the
example from figure 20). Starting from the leafs of the tree working upwards the tree
combining the hash values together until the root is reached, and we end up with the
final hash value.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
41
There are several details lacking that we need to discuss to fully explain this approach.
First of all, we will briefly discuss what requirements we should have for the hash values
of these trees:
• Determinism: The computation of the hash values should be deterministic as
we otherwise are not able to compare hash values of different pointed epistemic
models.
• Uniformity: The hash function should aim to distribute the hash values evenly
for different inputs (in our case different knowledge representations) to avoid hash
collisions. The more collisions there are, the higher the computing cost of checking
if a bisimilar epistemic model already exists as we then need to compare between
multiple epistemic models.
• Order independence: The order of the trees should not affect the resulting hash
value as it is not impacting the knowledge representation. In figure 21, it should
not matter if we visited w0, w1 or w3 first and similar for their sub-trees and so
on.
Before we move on, we will introduce a notation for an object O, which is used to
indicate that we are referring to the hash value of O. An object in our case can be a
propositional variable, an agent or a tree, which we will introduce later. The hash value
of an object O has the notation OH.
We need to define a hash function Hlist : Zn →Z, which takes a list of integers and
generates a hash value.
Definition 4.3.2 Given two prime numbers p, q and a list of integers L = (Z1, Z2, . . . , Zn),
the hash value of the list is
Hlist (L) =





p · q + L1,
if |L| = 1.
Hlist

L1...|L|−1

· q + L|L|,
otherwise.
(4.2)
The two prime numbers can be chosen arbitrarily, but they must be prime in order
to reduce hash collisions as the multiplier then only has two divisors, which will result
in fewer hash collisions when we distribute the hash values over a fixed table size5.
We know that two identical lists will always produce the same hash value as we only
depend on basic arithmetic, which is deterministic. In practice, we might experience in-
teger overflow as the limits of the maximum and minimum representable integer value is
dependent on the computer architecture. However, integer overflows are usually handled
by performing an integer wraparound, which is to store the least significant representable
5The range of hash values are often too large to be indexed individually and must be stored in a smaller
table. One approach is to use hash buckets [Kor17].
==PAGE:42==
42
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
digits of the result, which is a deterministic operation [Con09].
To provide an example of our hash function Hlist, we input three values Z1, Z2, Z3,
which results in the following computation:
Hlist (Z1, Z2, Z3) = Hlist (Z1, Z2) · q + Z3
=
 Hlist (Z1) · q + Z2

· q + Z3
=
 (p · q + Z1) · q + Z2

· q + Z3
= Z3 + Z2 · q + Z1 · q2 + p · q3
f
(4.3)
For a given epistemic model, we will have a set of propositional variables and a
set of agents. Each of these will have a hash value assigned based on their identity6,
which can be chosen arbitrarily. Two propositional variables can have the same hash
value; however that can increase the likelihood of hash collisions and slow down the
performance of indexing epistemic models. It is common in practice to assign a string
S = (c0, c1, · · · , cn) as the identity to an object O, where the hash value for example
can be computed as OH = Hlist (c0, c1, · · · , cn), where each character ci in the string S
is represented as an integer7. We now define a hash function for a possible world.
Definition 4.3.3 The hash function of a possible world w of an epistemic model M is
defined as
HW (w) = Hlist

wd, p1H, p2H, · · · , pL(w)
H

(4.4)
where wd = 1 if w ∈Wd and wd = 0 otherwise, and p1, p2, · · · , pL(w)
 ∈L (w), and
p1H ≤p2H ≤· · · ≤pL(w)
H.
As we see from definition 4.3.3, the hash function of a possible world is based on
whether it is designated or not and its valuation, ordered by their hash value.
The
ordering is important to ensure the hash function is deterministic as L (W) is not an or-
dered set and therefore the computation would be indeterministic. Consider for example
two possible worlds w and w′ where wd = 0, w′
d = 0 and L(w) = {s, t}, L(w′) = {t, s}.
It is clear that w and w′ represent the same scenario and therefore should have the same
hash value. However, if we where to compute HW without considering the order of L,
we would end up with the following computations:
HW (w) = Hlist (0, sH, tH) = tH + sH · q + p · q3
HW

w′
= Hlist (0, tH, sH) = sH + tH · q + p · q3
(4.5)
HW (w) and HW
 w′
would only result in the same hash value if p = 1, which is not
guaranteed from definition 4.3.2. Thus, it should be clear that the ordering is important
to ensure a deterministic behavior of HW .
6Commonly the identity is the name of the propositional variable or agent.
7Also known as character encoding.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
43
With these definitions in our hand, we propose an algorithm representing the hash
function HM (M) for computing the hash value of an epistemic model M.
Algorithm 2: Algorithm for computing HM (M) of an epistemic model M.
Input: A set of trees from algorithm 1.
Output: An integer hash value.
1 values := empty list;
2 foreach t ∈trees do
3
add ComputeHash(t) to values;
4 end
5 sort values in ascending order;
6 return Hlist (values);
7 Function ComputeHash(root):
8
values := empty list;
9
foreach (agent, child) ∈root.edges do
10
add Hlist
 agentH, ComputeHash(child)

to values
11
end
12
sort values ascending order;
13
add HW (root.w) to values;
14
return Hlist (values);
The algorithm recursively travels down the tree as each node’s hash value depends on
its children, stops at the leafs, and we traverse upwards again towards the root node as
each recursive call returns. The final step is to collect all values of the pointed epistemic
models, sort them and combine their hash values to the final hash value of the epistemic
model.
4.3.5
Hash function time- and space complexity
As before, we start by analyzing the time complexity of our algorithm.
• The computation of hash values for propositional variables, agents and possible
worlds runs in O (1) time as we work with a fixed size vocabulary and set of
agents.
• The sorting operations done by the algorithm are all based on a list of hash values.
Given that a hash value has a fixed range and therefore a constant number of bits,
we can sort the lists using radix sort, which runs in O (n · m) time, where n is the
number of elements and m is the number of bits and therefore it runs in linear
time as m is constant.
• All other operations runs in O (1) time.
As we only traverse the trees once, the time complexity of the hash function is
==PAGE:44==
44
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
bounded on the size of the trees of the epistemic model. In section 4.3.3 we found that
the space complexity of the trees for an epistemic model was O
 |W| · |R|

and therefore
the time complexity is the same for our hash algorithm.
As we traverse the trees recursively, the worst case space complexity for a tree is
when we have a tree with only one child per node8, which means we have to keep each
function call’s variables in the memory as we reach the leaf and from there work our
way back up, thus the space complexity for a tree is O
 |W|

. We only keep the hash
value of each tree when we iterate all the trees and therefore the final space complexity
is kept at O
 |W|

.
4.3.6
Comparison of epistemic models
So far we have covered how we represent a pointed epistemic model using a tree and
computing the hash value of an epistemic model. In theory there are an infinite amount
of different epistemic models as we can increase the vocabulary and number of agents to
any arbitrary number. This fact in itself is enough to argue that we do not have a perfect
hash function as the range of the hash values is fixed. Therefore, our hash function is
not injective, meaning we do not have a one-to-one relation between an epistemic model
and its hash value.
Figure 22: Illustration showing how multiple epistemic models may share the same
hash value. In this case, the hash value is a signed 32 bit integer.
Thus, when indexing our epistemic models we must handle hash collisions by compar-
ing the epistemic models having the same hash value to check whether they are bisimilar
or not. We can compare their trees to check if they are bisimilar as the trees represent
8Occurs if the epistemic model’s graph representation is one long chain of connected possible worlds.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
45
the knowledge representation for each pointed epistemic model. The following algorithm
shows how we can check if two epistemic models are bisimilar based on their set of trees.
Algorithm 3: Algorithm for checking if two epistemic models are bisimilar
based on their set of trees from algorithm 1.
Input: Two sets of trees, trees1, trees2 from algorithm 1.
Output: True if the two sets of trees are equal, false otherwise.
1 if |trees1| ̸= |trees2| then
2
return false;
3 end
4 foreach t1 ∈trees1 do
5
matches :=

t2 ∈trees2 | t1H = t2H
	
;
6
if for all t2 ∈matches, CompareTree(t1, t2) is false then
7
return false;
8
end
9 end
10 return true;
11 Function CompareTree(t1, t2):
12
if t1.w ̸= t2.w or |t1.edges| ̸= |t2.edges| then
13
return false;
14
end
15
foreach (a1, c1) ∈t1.edges do
16
matches :=

(a2, c2) ∈t2.edges | a1H = a2H, c1H = c2H
	
;
17
if for all (a2, c2) ∈matches, a1 ̸= a2 or CompareTree(c1, c2) is false
then
18
return false;
19
end
20
end
21
return true;
The algorithm checks for each tree in the first set that there exists an equivalent tree
in the second set. Each tree are compared recursively to verify that they have the same
structure. Given that we have the hash values computed for each agent, possible world
and tree9 and two objects of the same type have the same hash value if they are equal to
each other, we can filter out irrelevant objects to compare and therefore reduce number
of comparisons.
4.3.7
Comparison time- and space complexity
For this analysis we will make an initial assumption. The time- and space complexity
depends on how uniform the hash values are for the different objects. We will assume
9This also includes sub-trees as well as it is also a tree.
==PAGE:46==
46
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
that we have a good uniformity, such that we only expect few to no hash collisions.
Furthermore, we assume that all hash values are cached, such that we don’t have to
recompute them. As a hash value only consist of an integer for each object in the trees,
we will not alter the space complexity by doing so.
The worst case is when we compare two epistemic models that are bisimilar as we
then need to compare all the data to conclude that they are bisimilar. The initial loop
requires O
 |W|

time as we can create a lookup table for each tree in O
 |W|

time, and
we expect O (1) matches on average to compare for each iteration given the uniformed
hash values. For each iteration, we compare two trees of the pointed epistemic models.
We can compare the possible world for each tree in O (1) time as they are constant in
size given the fixed vocabulary and set of agents. As with the initial iteration, we can
create a lookup table for each tree’s edges e in O
 |e|

time, and we expect O (1) matches
on average to compare for each edge given the uniformed hash values. As we recursively
have to compare the trees, we must compare all the nodes and edges of the trees. Given
that a tree’s size is O
 |R|

(from section 4.3.3) it can be done in O
 |R|

time. Combin-
ing this with the initial loop, we end up with a time complexity of O
 |W| · |R|

.
The space complexity is similar to the hash function (section 4.3.5) due to the similar
recursion for each tree and that we only store a fixed amount of data for each recursion
and therefore the space complexity is also O
 |W|

.
4.3.8
Uniformity benchmark
In order to test the uniformity of our hash function HM, we have set up a benchmark
for testing the uniformity for a set of random epistemic models. The implementation is
done in a .NET Core environment. There are a few differences in the implementation
compared to the described process. We use a string to identify agents and propositional
variables and use the built in string hash function from .NET Core to compute their
hash values [Mic19b]. The built-in hash function is optimized to perform well on strings
in terms of uniformity, so it makes sense to use it instead of our example described
in section 4.3.4. Our Hlist hash function is replaced with the built-in struct HashCode,
which has a similar functionality for combining multiple hash values again with the same
argument that it is optimized to have a good uniformity [Mic19a].
We generate a set of epistemic models each having their own unique knowledge rep-
resentation, which we verify by comparing the trees (using algorithm 3). Each epistemic
model has the following characteristics:
• Five propositional variables p, q, r, s, t.
• Five agents A, B, C, D, E.
• Between 1 and 25 possible worlds uniformly distributed at random.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
47
• For each possible world, there is a 50 % chance for each propositional variable of
getting a true assignment.
• For all possible relations, there is a 10 % chance of creating the relation.
We compute HM for each epistemic model, check for any hash collisions, and per-
form a binning of the values within the value range (-2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647 in
.NET Core) for bins of size 10, 100, 1000, 10,000 and 100,000 to check the uniformity
of the values. We perform these computations for 1000, 10,000 and 100,000 hash value
sample sizes.
From our results we detected no hash collisions for any sample size, and we computed
the following statistics for each sample size:
Sample size: 1000
Bin size
10
100
1000
10,000
100,000
Mean
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
Max
109
19
5
2
2
Min
79
3
0
0
0
σ
8.56
3.04
1.01
0.32
0.10
σ %
8.56 %
30.36 %
100.60 %
317.80 %
1043.23 %
Table 4.1: Statistics for binning a sample size of 1000.
Sample size: 10,000
Bin size
10
100
1000
10,000
100,000
Mean
1000
100
10
1
0.1
Max
1058
130
22
7
3
Min
948
77
1
0
0
σ
30.34
10.46
3.23
1.00
0.32
σ %
3.03 %
10.46 %
32.32 %
99.62 %
323.53 %
Table 4.2: Statistics for binning a sample size of 10,000.
==PAGE:48==
48
CHAPTER 4. MODEL OPTIMIZATION
Sample size: 100,000
Bin size
10
100
1000
10,000
100,000
Mean
10,000
1000
100
10
1
Max
10,133
1071
139
23
7
Min
9862
932
68
1
0
σ
82.40
30.42
10.24
3.19
1.02
σ %
0.82 %
3.04 %
10.24 %
31.88 %
101.75 %
Table 4.3: Statistics for binning a sample size of 100,000.
From the statistics we see that the uniformity is reasonable well given the small
sample sizes (0.0023 % of the potential range for a sample size of 100,000). We had no
hash collisions for any of the sample sizes. The standard deviation is reasonable and
only deviates significantly when the binning size is large, which is expected given the
small sample size. It is also consistent for each sample size relative to the binning size.
Thus, we find the uniformity of our hash function HM acceptable and given the other
criteria are met (defined in section 4.3.4), the hash function is suitable to use for indexing
of epistemic states with an expected O (1) number of collisions on average if we use a
binning size equal to the number of epistemic states10.
From our analysis, we conclude that our indexing approach allows for indexing11 and
lookup12 of an epistemic state in expected O

|W|2 + |W| · |R|

time and O
 |W| · |R|

space.
10In practice, better approaches are used to keep the collision count minimal, but we will not cover this
topic.
11Constructing the trees and computing HM.
12Same computations required as for indexing.
==PAGE:49==
V: Data Visualization
Data visualization plays a key role in science and engineering. The ability to present
abstract concepts visually is an important tool for getting a deeper understanding of
complex systems. Throughout the chapters we have utilized a graph representation to
present epistemic models in order to explain the different concepts introduced. In this
chapter we present a prototype of a system based on the framework we defined in the
previous chapters, which will provide a visual approach to modeling dynamic epistemic
logic.
5.1
The vision
The vision is to develop a system, which enables the user to create, analyze, and ma-
nipulate epistemic- and event models using an intuitive interactive visual environment.
The system should be useful both for educational- and research related tasks within the
field of dynamic epistemic logic.
As this is the overall vision for the system, we do not require that the prototype fully
satisfies the vision; however, it should be a starting point for achieving it.
5.2
System criteria
We start off by presenting a brief set of criteria for the system as it reflects the design
choices made for the implementation. We will cover different aspects of the system from
a user perspective to a technical perspective.
Simplicity. A great user interface is a user interface that keeps it simple, but not
simpler. It should be clear from the context or with few instructions how the user is
supposed to use the features of the system.
Responsiveness. The user should interact with the system in a dynamic and re-
sponsive way such that it feels swift with a fluent workflow.
Accessibility. The system should be platform independent and work in any desktop
environment; however, we do not require it works with a touch-based platform such as
tablets or phones.
49
==PAGE:50==
50
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
Frameworks. The system should be developed using modern frameworks, which
provides a rich library support and has a well-established community such that devel-
opment time is reduced and troubleshooting is easier.
5.3
System architecture
We will develop the system as a web-application as it will meet the accessibility criterion
as the user can access the service using a web-browser, which removes the platform
dependency for our system. We are then able to choose the environment for our backend
more freely. The system will be based on multitier architecture. We will use a classic
three-tier architecture, which consists of a presentation layer (frontend) the user interacts
with, a business layer (backend) that manages the workflow, and a data layer (also part
of the backend), which provides storage and retrieval of the user data. The three-tier
architecture is chosen as it is modular, well-known among developers and easy to setup
in most frameworks.
Figure 23: Illustration of how the layers of the three-tier architecture interacts with
each other.
We will develop the business layer using ASP.NET Core, which is a modernized
variant of the older ASP.NET framework. It has a great community, a large library
support through the NuGet package manager, uses the popular C# language, and is
open source. Furthermore, it is one of the fastest web frameworks available [Tec19].
The business layer provides a REST API, which the frontend can access through regular
page requests for loading the web-page or performing AJAX calls when we are working
with dynamic content. AJAX is a technique for performing asynchronous request using
Javascript, which is useful when we want to make a web-page dynamic and responsive.
For the frontend we considered Vue.js as it is a very popular frontend framework
with many features and is also great for developing single-page applications that can
give a good responsiveness of the frontend. We also considered applying a model-view-
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
51
controller (ASP.NET MVC) architecture pattern to our business layer and then utilize
a Javascript framework to handle the dynamic content. As time was limited for the
development, we decided to go for the ASP.NET MVC framework and knockout.js, a
lightweight Javascript framework for handling dynamic content. The main reason for the
choice was that we would be faster at setting up the frontend. The design template for
our frontend is based on the free version of the CoreUI Boostrap 4 admin template [Tea].
To reduce development time, we choose to go with the Entity Framework (EF) Core
data access technology for the data layer, as it is part of the standard ASP.NET Core
framework and we will setup EF Core with a SQL database.
5.4
Graph visualization
The most important frontend component of our system is the graph visualization of our
epistemic- and event models. We draw the graphs using the scalable vector graphics
(SVG) format, which is supported by all modern web browsers. The SVG format is
suitable for drawing graphs as it supports the basic shapes (e.g. circle, squares, and
lines) for constructing a graph and is not dependent on the user’s screen resolution and
therefore keeps the drawings detailed at any size.
When working with data visualization in web-development, the most recognized and
specialized framework for the task is the D3.js Javascript library [Bos+].
It allows
for highly customized and well performing data visualizations. The downside is that it
requires a lot of work to create a data visualization; however, multiple tools are available
built based upon the library, which can be used for creating graphs. Unfortunately, we
could not find an available tool that would fit all our needs, so we decided to write our
own tool from scratch based on the D3.js library as it allows for a highly optimized user
interface for creating graphs. We will highlight some key features:
• Construction of graphs using only mouse input once the propositional variables
and agents are defined.
• Formal representation of the graph with LaTeX typeface support.
• Zoom and panning support.
• Full screen mode.
• Customization of labels (for the nodes and edges) and CSS styling.
• Insertion of custom controls with Boostrap 4 layout support.
• JSON model binding with automatic detection of changes for auto-save features.
All the graphs presented throughout the previous chapters have been created using
the graph tool without any modifications except for the extra drawings that are not part
of the graph.
==PAGE:52==
52
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
5.4.1
Epistemic model creation
The approach for creating an epistemic model is to first define the propositions and
agents. It is possible to update this later on; however, the graph will automatically up-
date its content if a proposition or agent is removed to ensure the integrity is maintained.
Figure 24: Screenshots of the three actions involved in creating an epistemic model.
Possible worlds are added by double clicking on an empty spot in the canvas. A pop
up appears, where you can select the properties of the possible world and add it.
Indistinguishability relations are added by double clicking on a possible world, which
will highlight with a red outline, and then clicking on the other possible world you want
to connect the relation with. A pop up appears, where you can select for which agents
the relation applies to.
5.4.2
Event model creation
The approach for creating an event model is similar as with the epistemic model. An
event model is based on an epistemic model, so it is required that an epistemic model is
created first. The event model is linked with the epistemic model such that if propositions
and/or agents are removed from the epistemic model, the event models linked with the
epistemic model are automatically updated to ensure integrity is maintained.
Figure 25: Screenshots of the three actions involved in creating an event model.
A precondition can be defined for the event model. Any valid formula of L (V, A) can
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
53
be used and is typed using LaTeX commands. The default value is ⊤. The frontend will
automatically send the formula to the server for verification. We cover this functionality
in section 5.6.
Creation of events are done similarly as with possible worlds; however, an explicit
negated option is also available as an event can remove propositional variables from a
possible world w’s valuation L (w) (described in definition 3.2.2).
Indistinguishability relations are added as done with epistemic models.
5.5
Data structures
We have several data structures for the different models. In this section we will explain
the different data structures used in the implementation.
5.5.1
Frontend graph
For the graphs in the frontend we store the representation in a JSON structure. It is
not the same as the structure used at the backend as the frontend is only used as the
presentation layer. We represent a graph with two arrays. One for the nodes and one
for the edges. We represent the nodes as the following:
1
{
2
"designated": false,
3
"truthAssignment": {
4
"q": true,
5
"r": true
6
},
7
"x": 20.460344314575195,
8
"y": 247.14952087402344
9
}
Listing 1: JSON example of a node.
The truth assignment can also have false assignments, which we use for the event
model to show explicit negated propositional variables such that we can reuse the data
structure for event models as well. We represent the edges as the following:
==PAGE:54==
54
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
1
{
2
"agents": ["Alice", "Bob"],
3
"source": 1,
4
"target": 4
5
}
Listing 2: JSON example of an edge.
Thus, we only need to store what agents are involved in the edge and the two nodes’
indexes in their corresponding array. Which node is the source and target does not
matter. Those two properties are defined by the D3.js library.
5.5.2
Epistemic- and event models
At the backend, we represent event- and epistemic models with the same data structure.
We have a list of possible worlds with the following properties:
• A unique index such that we can distinguish between possible worlds representing
the same scenario.
• A Boolean indicator for whether the possible world is designated or not.
• A set containing the propositional variables in L (w).
• A set containing the explicit negated propositional variables. This is used by the
event model.
Next, we have a data structure for the indistinguishability relations, which consists
of the following properties:
• A set for each possible world containing the relations to other possible worlds
stored as a tuple (agent, windex).
• A map taking a possible world index and pointing to its set of relations such that
we can get the relations of a possible world in constant time.
For the event model, we also store a precondition.
5.5.3
Formulas
A formula is represented through an interface. We have an interface for propositional
formulas, which is extended by the epistemic formulas such that we can distinguish
between the two as they behave differently. The propositional formula implements a
method, which takes an evaluator interface (explained in section 5.6.2). The evaluator
interface provides the functionality for checking the valuation of propositional variables
(done in a possible world) and also provides functionality for evaluating epistemic for-
mulas (done in a pointed epistemic model).
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
55
Figure 26: Class diagram illustrating the idea of how we represent the formulas.
Each type of formula we want to implement (e.g. implication, conjunction, agent
knows, etc.)
implements the interface.
By doing this, we can handle formulas in a
generic way. When we evaluate a formula, we only care about whether it is an epistemic
formula or a propositional formula and not if it is an implication, conjunction, agent
knows operator etc. We let the formula ensure that the evaluation is done according
to its type. This allows us to introduce new formula types without having to update
the existing formula. It also allows for easy construction of compound formulas, as each
type accepts any type of formula.
5.6
Formula evaluation
One of the main features of the system is the interactive formula evaluation tool. It
is part of the epistemic model graph tool and allows the user to evaluate any formula
of L (V, A) on a pointed epistemic model. Screenshots of the interface is available in
appendix A.
5.6.1
Formula verification
The first step is to ensure that the entered formula is a valid formula of L (V, A). The
user provides a LaTeX input, which we must verify and translate into a formula in order
==PAGE:56==
56
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
to make use of it at the backend. The following figure describes the flow of verifying a
formula:
Figure 27: Flow chart illustrating the different steps of verifying a formula.
At the frontend, we use MathQuill, a Javascript library for presenting and inputting
LaTeX [SS]. We use ANTLR to generate a parser, which can take the LaTeX input
and parse it into a formula as described in section 5.5.3. ANTLR is easy to use, well
documented and supports multiple programming languages, which is the main reasons
for chosing it. We can use ANTLR to both verify the input and parse it into a formula.
ANTLR takes a context-free grammar (available in appendix D) and generates source
code for a lexer and parser. We use the parser to first verify the input and then traverse
the generated parse tree to create the resulting formula.
Figure 28: Simplified parse tree of the input formula KBob (r ⇒¬s).
When we have the parsed formula, we can then verify that all the propositional
variables and agents also exist in the epistemic model we want to evaluate the formula
on.
5.6.2
Evaluator
Once we have the parsed formula, we can evaluate it on a pointed epistemic model.
We evaluate a formula using an evaluator interface as described earlier. The interface
provides evaluation of propositional variables and epistemic formulas.
A formula is
evaluated on a pointed epistemic model (M, w) using the following approach:
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
57
1. Create a new evaluator instance of (M, w).
2. Call Evaluate on the formula with the new evaluator instance and return the result.
(a) If the formula requests the evaluation of a propositional variable p ∈V , return
true if p ∈L (w). False otherwise.
(b) If the formula requests the evaluation of Kiϕ then return true iff for each
(w, w′) ∈Ri, repeating step 1 with
 M, w′
and ϕ returns true. False other-
wise.
(c) If the formula requests the evaluation of CGϕ then return true iff for each w′
G-reachable from w, repeating step 1 with
 M, w′
and ϕ returns true. False
otherwise.
The evaluation of the formula is done recursively through an evaluation tree. In order
to present this evaluation tree as shown in appendix A, we can inject a data structure
into our evaluator, which consist of the following properties:
• A stack Formulastack of (Evaluator, Formula) tuples to represent what formula
is currently being evaluated and for which pointed epistemic model. This stack is
used for the formula evaluation tree.
• A stack Evaluatorstack of evaluators to represent what evaluator is currently eval-
uating. This stack is used for the possible world evaluation tree.
• A list ListTree of (Evaluator, Formula, FormulaDepth, EvaluatorDepth) tuples,
which keeps the information needed to construct the two evaluation trees.
• A map MapResult (Formula, Evaluator) →B to store the result for each evalua-
tion.
Each formula adds information to the data structure when being evaluated in the
following order:
1. Push (Evaluator, Formula) to Formulastack.
2. Push Evaluator to Evaluatorstack iff
Evaluatorstack is empty or Top (Evaluatorstack) ̸= Evaluator.
3. Add
 Evaluator, Formula, |Formulastack| , |Evaluatorstack|

to ListTree.
4. Evaluate formula and get the result R.
5. MapResult (Formula, Evaluator) = R.
6. Pop Formulastack.
7. Pop Evaluatorstack iff
|Formulastack| = 0 or Top (Formulastack) .Evaluator ̸= Evaluator
==PAGE:58==
58
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
This tracks the evaluation process of the formula. Each time a formula must evaluate
a sub-formula in order to evaluate itself, the sub-formula is pushed to the stack. When-
ever a formula has completed its evaluation, it is popped from the stack. Similar for
the evaluator stack. Each time we must evaluate a formula in another possible world,
we push the possible world to the stack, and each time we move back to a previous
possible world, we pop the stack. When we are done evaluating a formula, we can use
ListTree and MapResult to construct the tree as seen in appendix A as they represent
the evaluation process starting from the initial formula.
5.7
Product update
Once an epistemic model and an event model have been defined it is useful to perform a
product update and analyze the resulting epistemic model. Our tool supports product
updates with a screenshot of the interface shown in appendix B. The product update is
computed as defined in section 3.2.2. When determining the indistinguishability relations
in the resulting epistemic model, we can use the map from a possible world index to its
set of links as defined in section 5.5.2 as both the epistemic- and event model uses the
same data structure. It is possible to save the resulting epistemic model, which will also
include the event models of the original epistemic model.
5.8
Model minimization
After creating an epistemic model, either from the graph tool or as a result of a product
update it might be possible to minimize the model.
Our tool supports model mini-
mization in an interactive environment, which can animate the minimization in order to
analyze each merge of possible worlds. Appendix C provides screenshots of the interface.
The approach to minimizing the epistemic model follows the partition refinement
algorithm as described in definition 4.2.3.
One detail missing from the definition is
how we compute the classifications for each possible world in each block of the current
partition. As explained in definition 4.2.3, when we classify possible worlds in a block
of the current partition, we have a map E : W →B, which specifies a possible world’s
current block. Each block B has a unique identifier, which also has an associated hash
code BH (we use a GUID structure in .NET Core). With this, we can classify a possible
world w in a block B by performing the following operations:
1. Get the set of indistinguishability relations of w.
2. Translate each relation
 agent, w′
to a block relation by computing

agent, E
 w′
.
3. Construct a set of the block relations S =

(agent1, B1) , (agent2, B2) , · · · , (agentn, Bn)
	
.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
59
4. Index the possible world by computing Hlist (agentH, BH) for each tuple in S. Or-
der the computed hash values and compute Hlist (tuple1, tuple2, · · · , tuplen). Use
the computed hash value for indexing the possible world based on its classification.
By doing this, we can group the possible worlds by the hash value of their classi-
fication and expect O (1) hash collisions with the assumption of a uniform hash value
distribution. The main reason for using this approach instead of Paige and Tarjan’s
suggested implementation is that we can reuse some of our source code, which is used
for the bisimulation indexing.
The time complexity for classifying a possible world using this approach can be
analyzed as the following:
• The set S can be created in O
 |S|

time as we can make use of the hash code of
each relation to index them, which means we can check if the set already contains
a relation in O (1) time assuming a uniform hash value distribution.
• Assume that a possible world already is indexed with the same classification. The
look-up takes O (1) time. Comparing their sets to ensure they indeed have the
same classification can be done in O
 |S|

time by iterating each element in S, and
again make use of the hash code of each relation to look-up the relation in the
other set in O (1) time assuming a uniform hash value distribution.
Given that we for each refinement of an epistemic model M traverse its indistin-
guishability relations once as we only look at each possible world’s relations once, the
refinement can be done in O
 |R|

time.
As explained at the end of section 4.2, a
possible world is in at most log |W| + 1 different blocks. Thus, the algorithm runs in
O
 |R| · log |W|

time assuming a uniform hash value distribution, which is the same
as the optimal solution by Paige and Tarjan, though with the weakness of requiring a
uniform hash value distribution.
==PAGE:60==
60
CHAPTER 5. DATA VISUALIZATION
==PAGE:61==
VI: Conclusion
We have introduced the concept of epistemic logic starting from an intuitive approach
along with a deeper analysis of its properties. We have introduced the concept of DEL for
enabling the possibility of updating knowledge, which allows for changing a situation over
time. We have introduced the concept of bisimilarity and how it allows us to minimize
epistemic models in order to reduce redundancy in their structures. We have proposed a
data structure and a set of algorithms, which can index epistemic models based on their
bisimilarity, which may have an application is certain areas of epistemic logic and/or
DEL, such as for policy based planning. We have provided a framework for modeling
DEL, which provides many features that are useful for analyzing and visualizing DEL.
The web-application implementation provides an intuitive approach for creating and
manipulating epistemic models, which can be helpful for research as well as a tool for
teaching.
6.1
Future work
Our proposed bisimilarity indexing has not been proved that it works correctly for any
epistemic model, which would be needed if it were to be used in any serious application.
If; however, it turns out to be working correctly, it should be possible to optimize it
in terms of time- and space complexity as there is redundancy in the trees constructed
as we construct a tree for each pointed epistemic model where some sub-trees can be
reused. Furthermore, an in depth analysis of potential use cases for the bisimilarity
indexing would also help determine its potential use within DEL. Finally, it could also
be useful to come up with a solution for bisimilarity indexing of epistemic models where
the symmetric property is not applicable, which is used in for example false belief tasks.
Benchmarking of the framework in terms of time- and memory performance could
be useful for finding any weaknesses in the implementation and suggestions for im-
provements. A feature could be added to the framework, which could make use of the
bismilarity indexing by constructing a state space based upon an epistemic model and
a set of event models. Otherwise, a general development of the framework is suggested.
Making it mature for a production release.
61
==PAGE:62==
62
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
==PAGE:63==
References
[Aum76]
Robert J. Aumann. “Agreeing to Disagree”. In: The Annals of Statistics 4.6
(Nov. 1976), pp. 1236–1239. doi: 10.1214/aos/1176343654. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1214/aos/1176343654.
[Bar88]
Jon Barwise. “Three Views of Common Knowledge”. In: Proceedings of the
2Nd Conference on Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning About Knowledge. TARK
’88. Pacific Grove, California: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1988, pp. 365–
379. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1029718.1029753.
[Bol17]
Thomas Bolander. “A gentle introduction to epistemic planning: The DEL
approach”. English. In: vol. 243. Open Publishing Association, 2017, pp. 1–
22. doi: 10.4204/EPTCS.243.1.
[Bos+]
Mike Bostock et al. D3.js - Data-Driven Documents. (Accessed on 07/15/2019).
url: https://d3js.org/.
[Con09]
The Web Application Security Consortium. Integer Overflows. 2009. url:
http://projects.webappsec.org/w/page/13246946/Integer%20Overflows.
[Dit07]
Hans Ditmarsch. Dynamic epistemic logic. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer,
2007. isbn: 978-1-4020-5839-4.
[DK08]
Hans van Ditmarsch and Barteld Kooi. Semantic Results for Ontic and Epis-
temic Change. 2008.
[DPP01]
Agostino Dovier, Carla Piazza, and Alberto Policriti. “A Fast Bisimulation
Algorithm”. In: Computer Aided Verification. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2001, pp. 79–90. doi: 10.1007/3-540-44585-4_8. url: https://doi.
org/10.1007/3-540-44585-4_8.
[Fag+03]
Ronald Fagin et al. Reasoning about knowledge. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press,
2003. isbn: 9780262256094.
[Har77]
Gilbert Harman. “Linguistic behaviour”. In: Language 53.2 (1977), pp. 417–
424. doi: 10.1353/lan.1977.0036. url: https://doi.org/10.1353/lan.
1977.0036.
[Hin05]
Jaakko Hintikka. Knowledge and belief : an introduction to the logic of
the two notions. London: King’s College London Publications, 2005. isbn:
1904987087.
[HW53]
G. P. Henderson and George H. von Wright. “An Essay in Modal Logic.” In:
The Philosophical Quarterly 3.12 (July 1953), p. 287. doi: 10.2307/2216596.
url: https://doi.org/10.2307/2216596.
63
==PAGE:64==
64
CHAPTER 7. REFERENCES
[Kor17]
Dmitri Korotkevitch. “Hash Indexes”. In: Expert SQL Server In-Memory
OLTP. Apress, 2017, pp. 41–61. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-2772-5_4.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2772-5_4.
[Lew02]
David Lewis. Convention : a philosophical study. Oxford: Blackwell, 2002.
isbn: 9780631232575.
[Lew59]
Clarence Lewis. Symbolic logic. New York: Dover Publications, 1959. isbn:
0486601706.
[Mic19a]
Microsoft. coreclr/HashCode.cs at master · dotnet/coreclr. (Accessed on
07/13/2019). May 2019. url: https://github.com/dotnet/coreclr/blob/
master/src/System.Private.CoreLib/shared/System/HashCode.cs.
[Mic19b]
Microsoft. coreclr/String.Comparison.cs at master · dotnet/coreclr. (Ac-
cessed on 07/13/2019). June 2019. url: https://github.com/dotnet/
coreclr/blob/master/src/System.Private.CoreLib/shared/System/
String.Comparison.cs.
[Moo93]
G. E. Moore. Selected writings. London New York: Routledge, 1993. isbn:
978-0-415-09853-3.
[Pla07]
Jan Plaza. “Logics of public communications”. In: Synthese 158.2 (July 2007),
pp. 165–179. doi: 10.1007/s11229-007-9168-7. url: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11229-007-9168-7.
[PT87]
Robert Paige and Robert E. Tarjan. “Three Partition Refinement Algo-
rithms”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing 16.6 (Dec. 1987), pp. 973–989.
doi: 10.1137/0216062. url: https://doi.org/10.1137/0216062.
[RS19]
Rasmus Rendsvig and John Symons. “Epistemic Logic”. In: The Stanford En-
cyclopedia of Philosophy. Ed. by Edward N. Zalta. Summer 2019. Metaphysics
Research Lab, Stanford University, 2019.
[SS]
Han Seoul-Oh and Mary Stufflebeam. MathQuill: Easily type math into your
webapp. (Accessed on 07/17/2019). url: http://mathquill.com/.
[Ste18]
Matthias Steup. “Epistemology”. In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy. Ed. by Edward N. Zalta. Winter 2018. Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University, 2018.
[Tea]
CoreUI Team. Free Bootstrap Admin Template · CoreUI. (Accessed on
07/15/2019). url: https://coreui.io/.
[Tec19]
TechEmpower. Round 18 results - TechEmpower Framework Benchmarks.
(Accessed on 07/15/2019). 2019. url: https://www.techempower.com/
benchmarks/#section=data-r18&hw=ph&test=plaintext.
==PAGE:65==
Appendices
65
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
A: Formula Evaluation Interface
Figure 29: Screenshot of an epistemic model and the formula evaluation tool.
Figure 30: Screenshot of an epistemic model and the formula evaluation tool with a
valid formula entered (example from section 4.3.2). The start button is only enabled if
the formula has been verified by the backend.
67
==PAGE:68==
68
APPENDIX A. FORMULA EVALUATION INTERFACE
Figure 31: Screenshot of the evaluation results after clicking on w4 with the formula as
shown in figure 30. An evaluation tree is presented, which can be navigated by clicking
on the rows.
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A. FORMULA EVALUATION INTERFACE
69
Figure 32: Screenshot of the epistemic model after clicking on w4 with the formula as
shown in figure 30. The possible world with the thick outline is the pointed epistemic
model, from which formula of the currently selected row (from figure 31) is evaluated.
The color indicates the evaluation result of the root formula for the given possible
world.
==PAGE:70==
70
APPENDIX A. FORMULA EVALUATION INTERFACE
==PAGE:71==
B: Product Update Interface
Figure 33: Screenshot of the product update interface. An event model and its
associated epistemic model is selected. The two models are shown and the product
update can be performed by clicking on the ⟲button. The resulting epistemic model is
randomly arranged in the right canvas and each possible world is labeled by the
product update.
71
==PAGE:72==
72
APPENDIX B. PRODUCT UPDATE INTERFACE
==PAGE:73==
C: Model Minimization Interface
Figure 34: Screenshot of the model minimization interface. An event model is selected
and minmized (if possible) by clicking on the ⟲button. An interactive canvas is
enabled on the right side. It is possible to play/pause the minimization, move one step
forward/backwards or go straight to the end/start.
73
==PAGE:74==
74
APPENDIX C. MODEL MINIMIZATION INTERFACE
Figure 35: Screenshot of the model minimization interface where an animation is
transitioning.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX C. MODEL MINIMIZATION INTERFACE
75
Figure 36: Screenshot of the model minimization interface where the model is shown in
its minimal form, which can be saved for further analysis.
==PAGE:76==
76
APPENDIX C. MODEL MINIMIZATION INTERFACE
==PAGE:77==
D: ANTLR Grammar for Formula Parsing
1
// *************************************************************
2
// ANTLR grammar for epistemic formulas using LaTeX style input.
3
// *************************************************************
4
5
grammar EpistemicFormula;
6
7
// *************************************************************
8
// Parser Rules
9
// *************************************************************
10
11
// NEWLINE is added to ensure ANTLR parses the entire content.
12
start : formula NEWLINE ;
13
14
// Pretty much just as the formal definition of the language of epistemic
15
// formulas.
16
// Ordering is important to ensure operator precedence is correct.
17
formula
:
18
NEGATION formula |
19
(LEFTP formula RIGHTP)* |
20
formula IMPLIES formula |
21
formula IMPLIES (P_SINGLE | P_MULTI) |
22
(P_SINGLE | P_MULTI) IMPLIES formula |
23
(P_SINGLE | P_MULTI) IMPLIES (P_SINGLE | P_MULTI) |
24
formula AND formula |
25
formula OR formula |
26
TOP |
27
agentknows |
28
everyoneknows |
29
commonknowledge |
30
(P_SINGLE | P_MULTI)
31
;
32
33
// Knowledge operators.
34
agentknows
:
35
(K UNDERSCORE P_SINGLE |
36
K UNDERSCORE LEFTBRACKET P_MULTI RIGHTBRACKET)
37
LEFTP formula RIGHTP
38
;
39
40
everyoneknows
:
77
==PAGE:78==
78
APPENDIX D. ANTLR GRAMMAR FOR FORMULA PARSING
41
(E |
42
E SUPERSCRIPT DIGIT |
43
E SUPERSCRIPT LEFTBRACKET DIGIT DIGIT+ RIGHTBRACKET)
44
LEFTP formula RIGHTP
45
;
46
47
commonknowledge : C LEFTP formula RIGHTP ;
48
49
// *************************************************************
50
// Lexer Rules
51
// *************************************************************
52
K
: 'K' ;
53
E
: 'E' ;
54
C
: 'C' ;
55
56
DIGIT
: [0-9] ;
57
58
// Propositional variables of a single letter cannot use the operator
59
// keywords.
60
P_SINGLE : SINGLE_LETTER ;
61
62
// Multi-letter propositional variables must start with a letter, but can
63
// have digit-first subscripts.
64
P_MULTI :
65
WORD |
66
(SINGLE_LETTER | WORD) UNDERSCORE (SINGLE_LETTER | DIGIT) |
67
(SINGLE_LETTER | WORD) UNDERSCORE LEFTBRACKET (WORD | DIGIT DIGIT+)
68
RIGHTBRACKET
69
;
70
71
LETTER
: [a-zA-Z] ;
72
73
// C, E and K are reserved for operators.
74
SINGLE_LETTER
: [a-zA-JL-Z] ;
75
76
// A word must start with a letter.
77
WORD
: LETTER (DIGIT | LETTER)+ ;
78
79
// Basic tokens.
80
WHITESPACE
: ' '+ -> skip ;
81
UNDERSCORE
: '_' ;
82
NEWLINE
: ('\r'? '\n' | '\r') ;
83
LEFTBRACKET
: '{';
84
RIGHTBRACKET
: '}';
85
LEFTP
: '\\left(' ;
86
RIGHTP
: '\\right)' ;
87
NEGATION
: '\\neg' ;
88
AND
: '\\wedge' ;
89
OR
: '\\vee' ;
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX D. ANTLR GRAMMAR FOR FORMULA PARSING
79
90
IMPLIES
: '\\Rightarrow' ;
91
SUPERSCRIPT
: '^' ;
92
TOP
: '\\top' ;
