==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Transport and Logistics
Railway Infrastructure Maintenance
Scheduling
Kornpong Mahitthiburin s1717108
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Maintenance of the infrastructure is expensive, especially in the railway
sector due to the extensive loss of production capacity and the disruption to
society where the infrastructure manager has to compensate. Several mainte-
nance technologies are developed to tackle this concern; however, they require
a substantial investment where numerous railway infrastructure managers are
reluctant to implement. Therefore, planning of maintenance is considered to
be a cost-effective solution for this scenario.
This thesis presents a MILP model to tackle the problem which can be
used by the maintenance planner as a decision support tool for planning of
maintenance activities for railway infrastructure at the operational level. The
main objective is to minimize the number of downtimes as well as tardiness
with operational constraints for a double track rail link. Moreover, planning
of maintenance activities usually involves many stakeholders. In this thesis,
we also consider the perspective of the rail traffic planner.
The findings of the thesis are useful for the infrastructure manager as
not only we can automate the maintenance planning process and get efficient
solutions, but also can reduce the controversy between maintenance and traffic
planners. This thesis recommends further studies to verify the potency of the
technique and making it applicable in a business context.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
During my undergraduate studies, I always have focused on becoming a
decent FOREX trader and establishing a start-up logistics business with my
colleague. However, I zipped them up and flew to Denmark, where Mærsk, the
shipping company was founded, for master studies at the Technical University
of Denmark. However, during my studies, I met Steven Harrod, who is fasci-
nated in the railway industry and passively made me interested in this field.
It was delightful during the early stage of my thesis, where I read all the lit-
erature and developed several marvellous mathematical models to solve many
maintenance issues. However, Steven always told me that the model would
never be great if it fails to address the business issue. Thus, he introduced me
to several railway people, and two months before the thesis deadline; I met
Bernd Schittenhelm, the traffic planner and Kim Gydemand, the maintenance
planner at Banedanmark. Both were interested in my research topic, but due
to the involvement of various departments in Banedanmark, we decided to
scope the problem down. Without Steven, Bernd, and Kim, this thesis would
not be materialized; thus, I would like to express my gratitude to all of them
for being admirable supervisors. Last but not least, I would like to thank all
of my friends who coloured my life during the greyish days in Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
General maintenance principle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Scheduling of maintenance works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Railway system and maintenance norm . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Preventive maintenance in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.5
How to find the optimal maintenance schedule
. . . . . . . . .
26
2
Literature Review
29
2.1
Possession scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.2
Vehicle and maintenance gang routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3
Choice of theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3
Mathematical model
39
3.1
Possession scheduling model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2
Quality of mathematical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4
Case study
45
4.1
Computational results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Sensitivity analysis
51
5.1
In conflict activities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Maintenance under winter time window
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Extended versions
59
6.1
Simplification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Extension: with predetermined bottleneck size
. . . . . . . . .
60
6.3
Extension: with minimizing total bottleneck size
. . . . . . . .
62
7
Conclusion
67
7.1
Implementation and benefit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Further study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A An Appendix
74
A.1 Track section by crossover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.2 Possession schedule in chapter 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.3 Model implementation in Julia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.4 Possession schedule in section 6.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.5 Patterns manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.6 Cost components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.7 Possession schedule considering 5 sections . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.8 TIB1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
Bibliography
121
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Complex engineering systems such as rail tracks, bridges, and pipelines
play an essential role in our society. Rail tracks and bridges enable people
and goods to move point A to B, where pipelines facilitate the flow of oil and
gas from drilling rigs or refinery facilities to buildings. However, all systems
are subject to deterioration, meaning that when the time fly, the condition of
the system declines to the point where the safety and serviceability of the sys-
tem do not guarantee anymore, which may lead to massive loss of production
or negative effect to the society and environment. For example, derailment
of trains, collapsion of bridges, and oil spill cause disastrous consequences to
the society which the instigators have to pay for. Maintenance activities such
as inspection, repair, and replacement are crucial to restrain and restore the
condition of the system to be under the acceptable level. However, mainte-
nance comes at a cost wherein Australian freight train operation, the figure
for maintenance cost accounts for 30 per cent of the total operating expenses
(Higgins et al. 1999). This issue drives to the question of what, when, and
how the maintenance action should be performed. Furthermore, many of the
maintenance actions need the system to be down where in some industries,
for instance, railway, the closure of rail track generally results in the massive
loss of service capacity and revenue.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Nowadays, railway transportation experiences growth in operation time
due to an increase in travelling demand, especially in the urban area. Compare
to other transportation modes; railway service offers a series of advantage
to customers, e.g., safety, reliability, and sustainability. To meet the surge
in demand, railway infrastructure managers generally increase their service
capacity of the current railway network but this results in the reduction of
accessibility for maintenance operation.
Various maintenance technologies,
such as the high-speed grinding train are invented to tackle the issue (Singleton
et al. 2014), but this lead to a massive investment for the firm to adopt the
technologies. Moreover, the labour cost also plays a vital role in maintaining
railway service under good condition. Based on the statistic, the labour cost
in the European Union increased by 30 per cent from 2004 to 2018 (Eurostat
2018) and expected to increase in the future.
These show that there is a
demand to enhance the maintenance management of railway infrastructure
managers where the overall maintenance cost should be kept as low as possible
while the target service level of the system is maximized.
1.0.1
Thesis Objectives
This thesis aims to answer the maintenance planner question of when to
perform maintenance actions in such a way that the total closure of the railway
system is kept at minimum to prevent the loss in production of the service.
The thesis is aiming to develop a useful mathematical model to optimize the
maintenance schedule of a double track rail corridor. The learning objectives
of this thesis are summarized as follow:
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
3
• When to perform the preventive maintenance interventions for a railway
double track system?
• When to shut down the system for maintenance considering both engi-
neering and operating aspects?
• Is there an advantage for the infrastructure manager to apply optimiza-
tion technique to schedule their preventive maintenance activities?
The thesis consists of the introduction, including general maintenance and
scheduling concepts, the maintenance practice in railway infrastructure man-
ager firm, and a brief introduction of the method to be used in this thesis. The
review of the existing literature on railway infrastructure preventive mainte-
nance planning, which divided into two categories, possession scheduling and
vehicle and maintenance gang routing is included in chapter 2. Chapter 3
contains the mathematical optimization model for scheduling the preventive
maintenance interventions, while in chapter 4, the case study is developed to
compare the results from the optimization model and the current scheduling
practice in a specific railway infrastructure manager. Chapter 5 is developed
to perform sensitivity analyses under various conditions, while chapter 6 con-
tains the extended version of the mathematical model considering the traffic
aspects. Lastly, the conclusion and further recommendation are discussed in
chapter 7.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
1.1
General maintenance principle
Maintenance is defined as the combination of all actions to retain or re-
store the system to the serviceable state, which it can perform its required
functions (BSI 1984). As all the users prefer to use the system as long as
possible, the proper maintenance action must be done to retain the function-
ality of the system. Good maintenance is a good business as maintenance
cost contributed to the operating expense of the companies. A comprehen-
sive maintenance program should be established to reduce operating expense
based on the combination of three maintenance types: corrective, preventive,
and predictive. Corrective or reactive maintenance (CM) is the maintenance
task performed to restore the failure or malfunction equipment or asset to its
serviceable condition. As CM is carried out after the detection of failure, the
cost for this maintenance type is relatively high. Due to the stochastic nature
of the unexpected failures which is unable to plan the resource requirement,
all tasks must be done urgently after the detection, incurring higher mainte-
nance cost especially when the task takes place during holidays or weekends.
Furthermore, the penalty associated with dangers after failure and loss of ser-
viceability is essentially huge. In railway industry, this associated cost could
be the cost from derailment as it needs immediate maintenance action to solve
the issue results in an urgent rescheduling of trains path or even shutting down
the services as no alternative train paths found.
Preventive maintenance must be done in order to refrain such a catastro-
phe. Preventive maintenance (PM) is the type of maintenance task that is
conducted regularly based on mean time before failure (MTBF) of components
==PAGE:13==
1.1 General maintenance principle
5
to ensure that there is no sudden failure of the equipment and keep the sys-
tem to operate efficiently. Moreover, PM also includes the activities needed
to be planed such as inspection, overhaul and renewal where some can be con-
ducted during the system service hour while some need the system to be down.
Furthermore, PM can extend the service life of the asset by using the appro-
priate maintenance technique (Patiño-Rodriguez et al. 2019). A significant
advantage of PM is that it can reduce the cost of maintenance by planning
the intervention, for instance, the purchasing time of spare parts can be de-
termined based on the given PM period resulting in lower inventory holding
cost. Furthermore, the railway infrastructure managers having low total main-
tenance cost generally have a high share of preventive maintenance work, as
more economical use of maintenance workers is achieved due to working on a
scheduled basis when the overtime payment is not present rather than a crash
basis to repair an unexpected breakdown of component or system (Stenström
et al. 2016).
To improve the efficiency of preventive maintenance, predictive mainte-
nance, which also known as condition-based maintenance (CBM) is used to
determine when and what maintenance intervention is needed contrasting to
PM where the maintenance interval is fixed. The idea of CBM is to keep track
on the condition using offline (periodic inspection) or online (continuous con-
dition monitoring system) technique during the service life and establish the
threshold limit for all components in the system (Holmberg et al. 2010).
Nowadays, the annual maintenance expenditure per one kilometre of track
in France, Croatia, and the Netherlands hovers around 47,000, 50,000, and
60,000 EUR respectively (Jovanovic et al. 2014; Profillidis 2014). And due to
the advancement of condition monitoring technology, railway infrastructures
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
expect that CBM would be a game changer for them in term of maintenance
cost saving by trading off the repair cost and prevention cost of both CM
and PM strategies respectively as illustrated in figure 1.1.
However, this
would lead to disruptive change in the organization due to the difficulty of
retrofitting the new condition monitoring technologies into the existing legacy
infrastructure. Furthermore, the full implementation of CBM across the entire
infrastructure network comes with considerable investment and complexity as
a large amount of data and monitoring devices are required to build a compe-
tent solution. Therefore, full online CBM may not be practical to implement
in the railway industry, which considered to be an extensive complex system.
Scheduled preventive maintenance, on the other hand, might be a good strat-
egy for railway infrastructure managers by merging the activities to reduce
the number of preliminary work resulting in lower the unit cost of every single
activity and amount of downtime (Budai et al. 2006).
Figure 1.1: Cost comparison between three maintenance schemes.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Scheduling of maintenance works
7
1.2
Scheduling of maintenance works
The focus of this thesis is to schedule the preventive maintenance activi-
ties, including periodic maintenance and non-periodic maintenance to prevent
the breakdown of the system with the minimum number of system downtime.
It is advantageous for all firms to reduce the prevention cost without reducing
the reliability of their system, as illustrated in figure 1.1, that PM activities
are costly when frequently performed since they require the system to be off
leading to the loss of production during the downtime. Generally speaking,
the system composed of several sub-systems and components which subject
to their deterioration functions resulting in different recommended preventive
maintenance intervals which can be obtained from the deterioration function
itself or the recommendation from the manufacturers to guarantee the relia-
bility of the system. Up to a certain point, maintenance action will no longer
increase the condition of the component leading to the need of renewal project
at a much higher cost and duration to return the status of the system to be
”as good as new” (Pargar et al. 2017). Moreover, non-periodic maintenance
activity is the task aiming to solve the bruise of the system after the inspection
process, which happens randomly as the system exposes to the environment.
Scheduling each activity on an individual basis would lead to the vast number
of the system downtime, one principal to reduce the number of downtimes is
to schedule activities simultaneously (Kidd et al. 2019) which try to assign ac-
tivities as much as possible in a single downtime. To illustrate this behaviour,
let us consider a scenario with two components shown in figure 1.2, where
both components have their specific maintenance and renewal period. If we
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Introduction
schedule all activities based on individual component deterioration function,
the system needs to be down for six times. Nonetheless, if we shorten the
length of the first PM cycle of component 2 to be the same as component 1,
we would save one downtime but this lead to the shrinkage of the service life
of component two.
Figure 1.2: Maintenance interval of each system component.
1.3
Railway system and maintenance norm
Viewing the system as the integration of several sub-systems, railway in-
frastructure system consists of two significant sub-systems, track system and
the signalling system, furthermore, if the track is electrified, two more systems
arise, namely, electrification system and power distribution system. Due to
the continuity of data and prominence of the requirements, the thesis will
focus only on the track system. In conventional track design, the system con-
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Railway system and maintenance norm
9
stitutes of rail, sleeper, fastener, ballast rock or concrete and subgrade where
all work synchronously to fulfil the following function:
• Guide the rolling stock throughout the way.
• Provide a smooth level of surface for train movement.
• Endure the shear and normal force during the train movement.
• Deliver a certain level of serviceability of the train operation.
Rail is the longitudinal I-shape steel guiding the rolling stock and transfers
the load to the supporting sleeper and ballast connected by bolts (Indraratna
et al. 2005). Due to the massive demand for rail transportation and environ-
mental regulation, rail track is designed in such a way that noise level and
vibration are kept at a minimum. The following figure illustrates the major
components of the rail track system on ballast support.
Figure 1.3: Main structure of rail ballasted track.
==PAGE:18==
10
1 Introduction
Maintaining the track system under good condition involved many several
parameters. To prevent the defects and the irregularities on the tracks, first,
the condition of the track must be realized, which can be done during the
inspection process by utilizing a track geometry car. Various track geome-
try parameters are recorded along with the sound from the wheels, then the
parameters are transformed into wavelength form if legitimate (Corshammar
2006).
Figure 1.4: (Left) track geometry car (right) track irregularities data.
As characterized by EN13848-5 standard (CEN 2017), when the value
beats the limit, the necessary maintenance activities are triggered. Several
proper maintenance techniques - tamping, grinding, ballast cleaning, surface
welding, for instance, are crucial to return the geometric and other values
into the acceptable range.
Regarding the purpose of the thesis aiming to
schedule the maintenance work, the corrective maintenance activities for the
track system will be discarded from the thesis due to its stochastic nature,
which cannot be planned.
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Railway system and maintenance norm
11
1.3.1
Track Geometry
It is fundamental to mention the track geometry and its measurement param-
eters to have a good picture of maintaining the service functions of the track
system. In general, Track geometry is ruled by four parameters, including
track gauge, longitudinal level, cross-level, and track alignment. Track gauge
is defined as the length between the inner faces of two parallel railheads where
in Denmark and most countries in the European Union, the nominal value is
1435 mm. plus the tolerance up to 20mm on the curve track with the radius
smaller than 400m. The longitudinal level is described as the uniformity along
the track surface of the rail, where the cross-level is the difference in height
between two rail surfaces which generally used to determine the curvature
(radius) of the curved track also the speed limit of the running train. Lastly,
track alignment is defined as the local variation in the curvature of each rail
of the track, on the straight track where the curve is intended to be zero; thus,
the alignment is measured as the deviation from zero. The following figure
illustrates the four parameters of the track geometry. (CEN 2017; Profillidis
2014)
Figure 1.5: Track geometry.
==PAGE:20==
12
1 Introduction
Because rail track is not rigid as the road surface, when it imposed by the
forces from the daily traffic and several additional factors, including weather,
rolling stock, track cross-level and alignment, and subsoil conditions, the four
major parameters will deviate from the original installation position. The ir-
regularities occur when the deviations exceed the permitted level leading to
the need for maintenance interventions to return the value of those parameters
to the acceptable ranges. According to EN13848-5 (CEN 2017), the European
standard for track quality level of track geometry, only three geometric pa-
rameters are respected: longitudinal level, gauge, and alignment. Whereas
the irregularity is organized into three levels, namely, alert limit (AL), in-
tervention limit (IL), and immediate action limit (IAL) where the further
descriptions are included in the following table.
Table 1.1: EN13848-5 track quality levels.
1.3.2
Rail profile
Another set of parameters to be acknowledged for maintaining the service
function of the track system is the rail profile. The rail profile is the cross-
sectional shape of a railway rail. Furthermore, the dimensional values of the
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Railway system and maintenance norm
13
rail profile are varied from country to country where the criteria for selecting
appropriate rail profile is based on country conditions, i.e. axle load, track
traffic, and sleeper spacing. Nowadays, the rail profile which is commonly
used is called flat bottom rail for standard gauge track (Profillidis 2014). Most
infrastructure managers in Europe adopt UIC54 profile for a low traffic load
tracks and UIC 60 profile for medium and heavy traffic load tracks where
the profile generally contain dimension, weight, chemical composition and
mechanical properties (ibid.).
Figure 1.6: Dimension of UIC60 profile with a weight of 60.34kg/m (JFE
2019).
In general, rolling contact fatigue (RCF) is the most common rail failure
mechanism since it promotes crack growth and material damage as a result of
high loads transmitted between wheel and rail surface rolling on each other.
This mechanism generates stress evolving into fatigue in the inner and upper
==PAGE:22==
14
1 Introduction
surfaces of railhead (Santa et al. 2016). The most basic defect caused by RCF
is rail surface squat, which also known as a bruised spot on the rail track. In
addition to the squat, the corrugation is also a well-known defect. It is the
wave-like deformation on the rail surface (ibid.). Without proper treatments,
the track system would not operate properly or even fail when the defects
affected by the mentioned failure are in the maturity stage.
Figure 1.7: Illustration of rail defects. (left) rail squat, (right) rail corruga-
tion..
1.3.3
Periodic preventive tamping
Tamping is one of the most typical types of track maintenance which con-
ducted to restore track geometry irregularities (Esveld 2001). Tamping can
be explained as the compaction of the ballast rocks under the railway track
to increase the supportive effect from the ballast on the sides of and under
the sleepers. In general, the tamping car has a tamping tool consisting of
tamping tines which will insert into the ballast on each side of the sleeper.
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Railway system and maintenance norm
15
The tamping intervention starts when the tamping car stops over the sleeper
to be tamped, then both track and sleeper will be lifted to the predetermined
level and position, after which the tines will enter the ballast and vibrate
creating the small movement of ballast bed which adjust the position of the
individual aggregates to compact the ballast in the void. During the process,
the tamping car is continuously collecting the geometric information by the
lifting unit, ensuring the horizontal and vertical position are restored (ibid.).
In general, the periodic preventive tamping is scheduled based on the traffic
and foundation conditions on the track section resulting in a different tamping
interval.
Figure 1.8: Above: The principle sketch of tamping. Below: The current
position of sleeper and track after and before the tamping action.
==PAGE:24==
16
1 Introduction
1.3.4
Periodic preventive grinding
Rail grinding, in general, is the process to conserve the predetermined
rail profile and to minimize the wheel/rail resistance results in higher fuel
efficiency. To control the defects effectively and prevent their evolution into
squat and corrugation, periodic preventive rail grinding has been proved to
be the best practice to truncate the growth in the defect depth as the process
is to remove the dimension of the railhead up to a certain millimetre when
the defect is in the embryonic stage as shown in figure1.9. Furthermore, pre-
ventive grinding plays an important role to extend the service life of the track
because it prevents the appearance of defects, and indeed, the renewal of rail
is necessary when the height of the railhead is removed up to a certain level
(Sroba 2003).
Figure 1.9: Defect growth rate comparison.
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Railway system and maintenance norm
17
1.3.5
Non-periodic maintenance
Apart from two common periodic maintenance tasks which can be scheduled
based on the maintenance data or from the component’s manufacturer recom-
mendation interval, the non-periodic maintenance tasks must be concerned as
the track system is settled in an open environment. This type of maintenance
task triggered after the railway infrastructure managers send their inspectors;
generally, one to four times a year depends on the traffic measured in the unit
of Million Gross Tons (MGT)(Barkan 2012), to evaluate the track quality and
decide what maintenance tasks and when they shall be done to avoid any
catastrophic situation. This type of maintenance work ranges from lubricat-
ing switches, tightening sleepers, to tracks replacement, which more resources
are required (Banedanmark 2019).
1.3.6
Railway maintenance norm
To realize when both periodic and non-periodic maintenance interven-
tion shall be initiated, railway infrastructure managers developed an indicator
called Track Quality Index (TQI) to trace the health of their asset by defining
the nominal value for each parameter and measure the deviation from those.
TQI is generally obtained from the standard deviation of the geometric and
profile parameters i over a 200-metre section. In theory, all parameters are
equally weighted; thus, TQI for each track section can be described as in the
following equation, which currently employed in the United Kingdom (Zhao
et al. 2006).
==PAGE:26==
18
1 Introduction
TQI =
∑
i
σi
(1.1)
There is no identical set of track parameters and methodology for evalu-
ating track quality across the world as each railway infrastructure managers
develop their own set of indicators according to their working norm and or-
ganization structure, however, most of the included parameters are similar
throughout the industry such as track gauge, cross-level, alignment, and rail
surface (Lasisi 2018). Also, it is worth to note that the higher the TQI is,
the worse the quality of the track section. Furthermore, maintenance limits
are established based on TQI to roughly estimate the necessary preventive
maintenance intervention for each track section as illustrated in table 1.1.
Regarding the recovery value of track quality, Office for Research and
Experiment in International union of Railways indicated that the recovery
level of track geometry (α) is linearly bounded by the quality at the moment
before the intervention (σst−1) which can be formulated as presented in the
following equation (ORE 1988).
αst = a(σst−1 +
( 1
λs
)
) + b
(1.2)
where a and b are real parameters obtained from the observation and 1/λs
represents the deterioration rate of the standard deviation of the track section
geometry parameters (s) estimated from the mean time between failure (λs)
of each section.
==PAGE:27==
1.3 Railway system and maintenance norm
19
1.3.7
Track closure and the consequence
The closure of the track section which hereinafter called possession is nec-
essary to perform maintenance activities on the track system. The possession
is established to guarantee the safety and health condition of maintenance
crews and passengers where within the possession, no train shall be passed
(Van Zante-de Fokkert et al. 2007). In general, maintenance works are prefer-
able to be conducted during the night or weekends to avoid a massive loss
of revenue or service disruption from and to passengers (ibid.). Furthermore,
in a dense railway system, the allocation of possession is limit, for example,
in Denmark, the maintenance time is available for booking at a maximum of
6 hours during the night for regional and suburban corridors (Banedanmark
n.d.). This issue builds a considerable challenge for both planners and main-
tenance teams where most of the works need to be split up into several stages,
causing the delay of maintenance intervention.
Based on the statistic pro-
vided by Incentive, the consultancy company in Denmark, 25 per cent of total
possessions were booked without any maintenance works and only 6 per cent
of total possessions have been used at full booking duration which results in
the loss of opportunity cost (IDA 2019). Nowadays, passengers are informed
beforehand through announcements at train stations, broadcasting, and social
media with the suggestions to use other train routes or transport means, lead-
ing to the loss of customers and their satisfaction on the service. In Denmark,
the announcement for possession must be noticed 16 weeks ahead for train
operators and the public to reschedule their trains and plan their travelling
route respectively, less than that, penalties will be incurred (ibid.). Further-
==PAGE:28==
20
1 Introduction
more, when the possession is declared both public and operating timetables
are modified according to the length of the possession by deleting the affected
train and/or change their arrival and departure times result in the variation
of the route capacity and operational cost from the original timetables for
railway operators (Budai et al. 2006).
When it comes to double track corridor, it is often possible to have only one
of the two tracks on the identical track sections open for the traffic during the
maintenance hours so that the traffic is able to run on single track operation
where the capacity is marked down extensively creating a bottleneck of the
traffic operation (Backman et al. 2019).
This is also another difficulty for
the planners to establish a proper maintenance schedule where the size of the
bottleneck must be as less as possible.
1.3.8
The consequence of delaying maintenance
tasks
Usually, all maintenance tasks are scheduled to be completed before the
IAL limit as described in table 1.1. Nonetheless, when performing any main-
tenance actions, some difficulties arise, provoking postponement of the actual
finish time. Furthermore, some irregularities could not be solved before the
scheduled finish time due to the configuration of the railway corridor. The
result of failing to finish the maintenance task within the due date is that the
defects will continue to develop and cause more severity damages to the prop-
erties. To tackle the issue, various railway infrastructure managers generally
impose speed limit scheme for trains running on the unhealthy track section,
==PAGE:29==
1.3 Railway system and maintenance norm
21
preventing any operating failure (Banedanmark 2019).
By doing this, the
track capacity is reduced, steering to the dissatisfaction of both passengers
and train operators as the travel time is extended, and leading to inconve-
nience of passengers which decrease the farebox revenue for train operators.
The following figure describes the action plan of the infrastructure manager in
Canada, where the remedial action B is the speed limit (Ministry of Transport
2011).
Figure 1.10: Defect types and corresponding actions.
==PAGE:30==
22
1 Introduction
1.4
Preventive maintenance in Denmark
The railway network in Denmark consists of over 3,100 kilometres of rail
track and around 500 stations.
The network can handle over 3,000 trains
running daily consisting of 40,000 arrivals and departures at every station.
Furthermore, every day, about 530,000 passengers and 22,000 tons of freight
were transported in the network (Banedanmark n.d.). The network is mainly
operated by the Danish State Railway (DSB) which wholly owned by Dan-
ish Ministry of Transport, Building, and Housing (DSB n.d.). DSB manages
rollingstock, and train service while Banedanmark, the Danish infrastructure
manager, responsible for the reliability, availability, and safety of the railway
infrastructure network and the construction projects. Moreover, the infras-
tructure preventive maintenance works and renewal projects are outsourced
to several contractors, while Banedanmark authorizes the planning and evalu-
ation of works quality. Generally, the periodic preventive maintenance works
are scheduled to take action once every year to five years, depending on the
traffic condition of the track section measured in the unit of Million Gross Tons
(MGT). Apart from the periodic preventive maintenance works, non-periodic
preventive maintenance also acknowledged, where Banedanmark send their
track inspectors to check the asset condition four times a year and determine
what and when the proper maintenance shall be done based on their mainte-
nance norm which can be classified into five classes (Banedanmark 2019):
• 0: Maximum permissible variation after one year of renewal or new
installation.
• 1: Maximum permissible variation after maintenance action.
==PAGE:31==
1.4 Preventive maintenance in Denmark
23
• 3: Error to be considered when planning the regular maintenance of
track.
• 4: Errors exceeding this threshold must be assessed and corrected before
and within 3 weeks if the design speed is greater than 160 km/h, before
and within 6 weeks if the design speed is less then 160 km/h.
• Max/Min: Errors exceeding this threshold must be solved immediately
to lower the risk of derailment.
This non-periodic preventive maintenance is planned when the irregular-
ities reach class 3 and 4 where the corrective maintenance is triggered by
irregularities class Max/Min, which is definitely cannot be planned. The fol-
lowing figure presents the Banedanmark norms for track geometry irregulari-
ties (ibid.).
Figure 1.11: Norms for track geometry irregularities.
==PAGE:32==
24
1 Introduction
By combining those two types of preventive maintenance works, currently,
Bandanmark utilized the annual portfolio approach called Master plan to
schedule all kinds of maintenance activities. The concept is that each divi-
sion such as rail, switch, and track geometry have to send the maintenance
requests via an in-house ERP system to the maintenance planner with the
rough estimation of the preferable completion date. After which, the mainte-
nance planner will schedule all the tasks based on the economic and technical
aspects by grouping all the necessary and combinable maintenance tasks on a
section to get the most utilization which lower unit cost of possession 22 weeks
before the first possession takes place. Later, the request for the possession
will be sent to the traffic planners to revise the plan and reserve the possession.
This process creates exhaustive negotiations between two departments, as traf-
fic planning and infrastructure maintenance both have different favoured time
for possession (Banedanmark 2019). Next, in 16 weeks before the possession,
the revision of the plan is administered to confirm the status of possession
whether the possession is still feasible or not. The non-feasible possession will
be postponed and rescheduled. The public announcement for possessions is
announced at this stage simultaneously with the recommendation for alterna-
tive train paths during the possession for train operators. Finally, six weeks
before the possession, a revision for the feasibility is conducted again; how-
ever, cancellation for any possession is not possible here results in loss of track
capacity for no reason. Currently, this planning process is conducted regard-
less of any indicators except the unit cost of possession which literally can
be translated into the total number of possession as assigning more works in
one possession results in higher utilization. Ultimately, the current planning
process is done manually where the planners do their best to form and allocate
==PAGE:33==
1.4 Preventive maintenance in Denmark
25
the possession, which we can claim that the implementation of mathematical
optimization models in the organization is considered to be none (ibid.). The
following figure 1.12 and 1.13 illustrates the maintenance planning framework
at Banedanmark and relevant part of the Master plan for the thesis in Excel
format.
Figure 1.12: Maintenance planning framework at Banedanmark.
==PAGE:34==
26
1 Introduction
Figure 1.13: Some part of Master plan.
1.5
How to find the optimal maintenance
schedule
To determine what and when the maintenance activities shall start for
obtaining the optimal solution, the operation research method is used. Oper-
ation research involves the use of mathematics for problem-solving and deci-
sion making context where there are several techniques in this field, including
mathematical modelling, heuristic, and constraint programming. In this the-
==PAGE:35==
1.5 How to find the optimal maintenance schedule
27
sis; however, only the mathematical modelling technique is concerned as it is
the technique which, to some extent, guarantee the optimal solution of the
problem where others cannot.
Mathematical modelling solve the real-life problem by translates the real
world problem into a series of equations and utilizes searching methods to
solve the equations concerning the objective. Several searching methods were
developed since 1946 (Dantzig 1987) to obtain the optimality of the solu-
tion. The method includes simplex method, branch-and-bound, cutting plane,
and branch-and-cut, where the theory behind these searching methods can be
found in (Hillier et al. 2001).
Respecting the difficulty of the mathematical model which represents any
real-life problems, it is often that the model contains various integer variables
where the enormous solving time is required. However, the beauty of mathe-
matical modelling is that when the searching method finds the solution which
is not optimal, an optimality gap can be retrieved. The optimality gap repre-
sents how far the incumbent solution is from the relaxed solution. In practice,
a solution with an adequate optimality gap can be accepted and implemented.
In this thesis, Gurobi, the commercial solver is used to solve the mainte-
nance scheduling problem with the automatic setting of the searching method.
The automatic searching method utilizes branch-and-cut technique where first
the LP relaxation is found by simplex method then the software will imple-
ment several cutting techniques to eliminate non-integer solutions and apply
branching technique to iterate for non-integer solutions (Gurobi 2016).
==PAGE:36==
28
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
In this chapter, literature regarding optimization in railway infrastructure
maintenance scheduling is studied and reviewed. The existing literature can
be grouped into two categories: possession scheduling and vehicle and main-
tenance gang routing.
2.1
Possession scheduling
In order to guarantee the safety and efficiency for both train operators
and maintenance contractors, the scheduling of possession is the vital issue
regarding the railway infrastructure maintenance since it affects the network
capacity and several cost-measured metrics, e.g., maintenance cost and train
rescheduling cost.
Considering a set of maintenance tasks to be performed over the planning
horizon and numerous types of maintenance constraint such as maintenance
time slot and resources must be respected, this problem can be viewed as oper-
ation research problem which aims to schedule track possessions to achieve an
optimal objective. The academic literature regarding the possession scheduling
==PAGE:38==
30
2 Literature Review
first appeared in the late 20th century, (Higgins et al. 1999) used train free in-
terval from freight train timetable to find the job assignment with a minimum
prioritized finish time of each task along with delay for both maintenance tasks
and scheduled trains. The model was applied on 89 km single-track line in Aus-
tralia with the maximum of 30 scheduled trains per day where rescheduling of
less important trains was proven to be a significant reduction of potential de-
lays. However, executing maintenance interventions during train service time
window could lead to potential death or injury of maintenance gangs. Thus,
countries where busy railway systems are exist established specific intervals
for maintenance intervention where no train is scheduled to tackle the issue.
(Budai et al. 2006) formulated a mathematical model for both routine main-
tenance activities and project works. The model aims to create a plan where
both routine and project maintenance activities are assigned to the given pe-
riod with minimum total possession and maintenance cost. The maintenance
time window is implicitly tackled by assigning a specific possession cost in a
particular time slot. Considering the firm’s resource capacities, (Macedo et al.
2017) extended Budai’s model where the objective function is to minimize
possession and maintenance cost plus outsourcing cost when more capacity is
needed in a specific period. (Dao et al. 2018) developed a mathematical model
to tackle the limitation of possession time for maintenance interventions plus
service-life shortening incurred when interventions are assigned before the rec-
ommended period, which intend to maximize the usage of the infrastructure
lifetime. The paper also includes the social-economic cost to tackle the issue of
the duration of possession. Lastly, (Kidd et al. 2019) considered the problem
as project scheduling problem where a project portfolio has already created
together with the estimated project duration, and resource requirements, the
==PAGE:39==
2.1 Possession scheduling
31
mathematical model here aims to minimize the number of possession and pos-
session time while maximize the time between two consecutive projects on the
same section.
Taking into account the degradation function of the railway infrastructure,
(Miwa 2002) developed a bi-objective optimization model to minimize rail
track tamping cost while maximize the quantity of restoration for each track
section measured in the standard deviation of geometric parameters.
The
model was enhanced by (Miwa and Oyama 2006) where the track sections were
clustered into a maintenance unit to reduce the computation time. Seeing the
component’s degradation rate as a linear function, (Vale et al. 2010) developed
a model to minimize the total tamping frequency on each track segment over
a predefined time horizon.
However, the solution space for assigning maintenance tasks to free train
time windows without any violation of train time table is very limited and
quite challenging to be solved by the state of art solvers. Thus, all the models
mentioned above could not be solved to optimality within a reasonable time.
(Albrecht 2009) proposed a model to schedule train traffic and maintenance ac-
tivities at the same time ensuring the optimality of the solution found between
both railway undertaking companies and infrastructure manager. Regarding
the limitation of the infrastructure manager resources and maintenance code
of conduct, (Liden et al. 2018) scheduled both train timetable and mainte-
nance intervention with minimum costs for both parties.
Integrating both
possession and train timetabling problem together makes the model large and
difficult to achieve the optimal solution; however, near-optimal solution can
be found under five minutes for all the tested instances regardless of the use
of heuristic methods.
==PAGE:40==
32
2 Literature Review
2.2
Vehicle and maintenance gang routing
As railway infrastructure maintenance tasks require large and expensive
equipment such as tamping and grinding train, the utilization of these ma-
chines must be kept at maximum by reducing the deadheading travel distance
between tasks. Furthermore, these machinery consume track capacity during
the maintenance intervention and when parked on side tracks.
This oper-
ational problem can be modelled as a vehicle routing problem (VRP) with
several specific side constraints such as maintenance time window and com-
patibility between tasks and maintenance gangs. In classical VRP, the opti-
mal route for each vehicle is constructed with a minimum total travel cost
concerning the capacity of resources. In railway maintenance aspect, not only
the travel cost, which has to be minimized but also the indirect cost associ-
ated with task execution time must be minimized to reduce the probability of
failure. To tackle this issue (Heinicke, Simroth, and Tadei 2013) developed a
model to schedule ballast tamping works for the railway network considering
maintenance time window for the short-term planning horizon. Three greedy
heuristic methods were developed where the most suitable method is depended
on the ratio between travel cost and the indirect cost. (Heinicke, Simroth, and
Scheithauer 2014) extended their model to handle multiple tamping machines
with their start and end depot. He pointed out that the higher the indirect
cost, the more time is required to solve the problem, even the number of jobs
is small.
Considering the large-scale railway network and a long-term planning hori-
zon, (Peng, Kang, et al. 2011) utilized a time-space network (TSN) to solve
==PAGE:41==
2.2 Vehicle and maintenance gang routing
33
the railway track maintenance problem. The problem was formulated as a di-
rect graph G = V, E, where V is the set of jobs, and their locations containing
start and end vertices and E is the set of edges extracted from the examined
railway network. The iterative heuristic framework was developed considering
winter period, mutually exclusive jobs, and job precedence as constraints to
find job sequence for each maintenance gang with minimum travel cost along
with the costs incurred for violating those constraints. To ensure the compe-
tency of the TSN model, (Peng and Ouyang 2012) utilized the model to cope
with more types of side constraint and applied multiple neighbourhood-search
to improve the quality of the solution found. Contrary to Peng’s framework,
(Borraz-Sánchez et al. 2012) established a framework to solve a subproblem
for each maintenance gang. The framework was divided into two phases where
first the shortest path algorithm was used to find each gang’s job path then
all the paths were assembled applying integer programming model taking into
account working regulation of maintenance gang, and job available time win-
dow as constraints. Instead of predetermined job duration, (Xie et al. 2018)
argued that job duration depends on the productivity of each maintenance
gang.
Thus, the parameter regarding job duration was extended with the
maintenance gang index in Peng’s model.
Regarding the deterioration function of components, (Consilvio et al. 2018)
developed a risk-based maintenance scheduling model for a railway network
based on Weibull distribution function. The model was developed based on
component maintenance threshold obtained from the deterioration function
where the risk of failure, which implicitly defined by task completion time and
its tardiness is minimized. Nevertheless, maintenance cost is not explicitly
stated in the objective function but performing such an intervention before
==PAGE:42==
34
2 Literature Review
the maintenance deadline allows the firm to avoid costly service interruption
and failure.
From the literature survey, both possession scheduling and vehicle and
gang routing are classified as NP-hard problems which fail to achieve an opti-
mal solution within a reasonable time. Most of the articles mentioned above
solved the problem by using the heuristic method providing non-optimal so-
lutions. The technique such as Tabu search, Generic metaheuristic, Greedy
heuristic, and other several heuristic frameworks for solving the railway main-
tenance scheduling problem was adopted to solve large scale problems with
various operational constraints. However, none of them considered the char-
acteristic of double track railway corridor and the traffic constraint which are
critical during the planning in operational level.
The following table sum-
marized the articles regarding railway infrastructure preventive maintenance
scheduling problem based on the problem class and their features.
==PAGE:43==
2.2 Vehicle and maintenance gang routing
35
Figure 2.1: State of art summary.
==PAGE:44==
36
2 Literature Review
2.3
Choice of theory
Regarding the existing literature aiming to solve the railway infrastruc-
ture maintenance scheduling problem, the mixed integer program formulation
proposed by (Kidd et al. 2019) which considered the preventive maintenance
scheduling problem as project scheduling problem is a good potential for the
case. The model, however, does not consider the maintenance norms for dou-
ble track railway corridor also the level of his formulation is considered to be
at the strategic level. The formulation is considered to be the time indexed
formulation for project scheduling problem, which relatively gives a strong LP
relaxation and can be extended into several directions as proven by (Klausen
2017). In time indexed formulation, the formulation is based on binary vari-
ables xit such that equals to 1 when activity i starts at time t; thus, most
of the variables are 0. The standard formulation also takes into account the
precedence constraints where in our case, this precedence constraint only ac-
tives when two activities are in conflict which unable to combine them at the
same time, and one has to be scheduled before or after. The standard time
indexed project scheduling problem is presented as follow, with the classical
objective function of minimizing the projects completion time (Pritsker et al.
1969).
==PAGE:45==
2.3 Choice of theory
37
Objective:
min
∑
i∈I
∑
t∈T
txit
(2.1)
Subject to:
∑
t∈T
xit = 1
∀i ∈I
(2.2)
∑
t′∈T:t′≤(t−pi)
xit −
∑
t′∈T
xjt ≥0
∀i, j ∈I, t ∈T
(2.3)
∑
i∈I
rik
∑
t′∈T:t−pi+1≤t′≤t
xit′ ≤Rk
∀t ∈T, k ∈K
(2.4)
xit = 0
∀i ∈I, t ∈T : /ETi, LTi
(2.5)
xit ∈0, 1
∀i ∈I, t ∈T
(2.6)
The first constraint (2.2) states that each activity i have to be initiated only
once in the planning horizon. Constraint (2.3) is the precedence constraint
where the start time of activity j needs to be scheduled after the finish time of
activity i. The third constraint (2.4) is the resource constraint for each type
of resource k. It states that the sum of the resource consumption (rik) of all
activities considered to be active during time t must not exceed the capacity
R. The fourth constraint (2.5) enforces the decision variable to be zero if the
start time is not within the earliest and lateness start time interval. The final
constraint (2.6) is the domain constraint of the decision variable xit which said
to be binary.
==PAGE:46==
38
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3
Mathematical model
In this chapter, the mathematical model for scheduling preventive main-
tenance activities on a double track railway corridor is developed regard-
ing the objectives of the infrastructure maintenance department in the most
favourable case for the traffic planners.
3.1
Possession scheduling model
To schedule the preventive maintenance activities, first, the activities port-
folio including periodic preventive maintenance tasks and class 3 to class 4
failures must be realized, where Banedanmark calls this as their Master plan,
containing a preferable end date, duration, and place of each activity. The
issue for double track system is that both side of the track in the same track
section shall not be occupied on the same night as this will block all the traf-
fics on the corridor. Furthermore, the traffic regulation must be held wherein
some corridor in Denmark; trains are not allowed to pass more than three
left-crossovers as illustrated in the following figure 3.1
==PAGE:48==
40
3 Mathematical model
Figure 3.1: The maximum three left-crossovers rule for some double track
line in Denmark.
From the mentioned requirements, the mathematical model considering
one type of resource can be formulated with the following sets, parameters,
and variables.
Sets and parameters:
T
Set of allowable 6 hours night in a planning period.
A
Set of activities to be completed in a planning period.
K
Set of all track sections in the corridor.
KL
Set of left track sections where KL ⊆K .
KR
Set of right track sections where KR ⊆K .
PEa
Preferable end date of activity a ∈A .
DUa
Days to complete activity a ∈A.
RSk
Maximum resource available (i.e. activity) for section k ∈K.
AKMak
1 if activity a ∈A takes place in section k ∈K. 0 otherwise
CFab
1 if activity a ∈A in conflict with activity b ∈A due to the engineering
aspect. 0 otherwise
==PAGE:49==
3.1 Possession scheduling model
41
Decision variables:
oa ∈R+
Tardiness of activity a.
xat ∈{0, 1}
1 if activity a starts on 6 hours night t. 0 otherwise.
ykt ∈{0, 1}
1 if section k is under possession during 6 hours night t. 0
otherwise.
zab ∈{0, 1}
1 if activity a starts before activity b. 0 otherwise.
Model
Objective function:
min
∑
k∈K
∑
t∈T
ykt +
∑
a∈A
oa
(3.1)
Subject to:
∑
t∈T
t · xat + DUa ≤PEa + oa
∀a ∈A
(3.2)
∑
t∈T
xat = 1
∀a ∈A
(3.3)
∑
p∈T:(t−DUa+1)≤p≤t
xap ≤ykt
∀t ∈T, a ∈A, k ∈K; AKMak = 1
(3.4)
ykt + yjt ≤1
∀t ∈T, k ∈KL, j ∈KR; k = j
(3.5)
∑
k∈KL
ykt ≤3
∀t ∈T
(3.6)
∑
k∈KR
ykt ≤3
∀t ∈T
(3.7)
∑
h∈KL:h=k+1
yht +
∑
u∈KR:u=j+1
yut ≤1
∀t ∈T, k ∈KL, j ∈KR; k = j (3.8)
∑
t∈T
t · xat −
∑
t∈T
t · xbt >= DUb −zab · M
∀a, b ∈A; CFab = 1
(3.9)
==PAGE:50==
42
3 Mathematical model
∑
t∈T
t · xbt −
∑
t∈T
t · xat >= DUa −(1 −zab) · M
∀a, b ∈A; CFab = 1
(3.10)
∑
a∈A
∑
p∈T:(t−DUa+1)≤p≤t
xap ≤RSk
∀t ∈T, k ∈K
(3.11)
The objective function is set to minimize the total number of possession and
tardiness, which generally results in speed reduction during the day.
Con-
straints (3.2) ensures that the scheduled activities must be completed before
the deadline as much as possible, while (3.3) ensures that each activity is
launched only once. Constraint sets (3.4) guarantees that the section k in
day t is occupied when the activity on that section is on proceed. The traffic
constraints for double track corridor are described in the following three equa-
tions. First, the possession prohibition of the parallel track sections is defined
by (3.5). The maximum three left-crossovers rule is handled by constraints set
(3.6)-(3.8) with the principal of no consecutive possession is allowed to main-
tain the flow of traffic as much as possible, which result in three maximum
possession for each trackside as occupying one possession forces the services
to perform one left-crossover. Constraints (3.9) and (3.10) ensure that the in
conflict activities are avoid to proceed on the same day. The resource capacity
constraint is described by (3.11) where here we only consider the maximum
number of activities per 6 hours night per section to avoid working traffic.
The following figure 3.2 graphically describes the constraint 3.8, which forces
the solver to occupied only one out of four track sections in each circle for
each 6-hours night.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Quality of mathematical model
43
Figure 3.2: Illustration of constraint 3.8.
3.2
Quality of mathematical model
It is essential to consider how well the mathematical model reflects the real
maintenance scheduling task. In the model, several presumptions are made
which simplified the maintenance situation. First, the corridor is divided into
two parallel tracks left and right for all sections, where in reality, some track
sections contain more than two tracks. This presumption makes the model
becomes an upper bound of the real-life cases as trains do not have to perform
a crossover to the opposite track sides, lead to more tracks can be closed for
some particular period.
The next presumption is that the duration of an activity is fixed and cannot
be violated which considered being a crucial presumption as the start time of
the following activities depending on the finish time of the one before. The
model utilizes an equation binding the start time with the end time using the
duration time. However, during maintenance works, some tasks are considered
to be critical, which results in an extension of the duration. This presumption
makes the maintenance activities less flexible, but this can be handled by
adding buffer time to all activities.
The third presumption is that activity duration is rounded up to the daily
==PAGE:52==
44
3 Mathematical model
unit. Meaning that if an activity takes 29 hours to complete, the daily duration
will take 5 nights instead of 4.83 nights using 6 hours of the maintenance time
window. However, this presumption corresponds to the planning practice at
Banedanmark as they utilize this calculation method to provide flexibility to
the maintenance contractors.
Next, the formulation of the three maximum left-crossovers constraint (3.6)
to (3.8) is only valid for the case when no consecutive occupying of sections
is allowed, as we aim to maintain the corridor capacity as much as possible.
Let us consider the instance where two track sections are consecutively under
possession. Under this scenario, those two sections are transformed into the
single track operation where the cycle time for the services to run through
those two sections is summed, making a considerable loss of corridor capacity.
The following figure 3.3 illustrates this issue with five minutes cycle time for
all track sections. From the illustration, closing section 4-right and 5-right
results in 10 minutes of the bottleneck.
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the upper bound solution.
The final presumption is that the resources are always available at any
period. However, this may not be the case when the contractor is not available
at that time, or the delivery of the maintenance machine is postponed. This
presumption should be considered to make the model more practical.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Case study
This chapter is established to demonstrate the performance and the ef-
fectiveness of the proposed optimization model from the previous chapter by
using real-life data collected from Banedanmark, the railway infrastructure
manager in Denmark.
The Danish double track railway corridor connecting Copenhagen and
Fredericia (TIB1) with the length of 223.6 km is selected for the case study
as it is considered to be one of the busiest regional railway corridor connect-
ing four major cities in Denmark including Copenhagen, Odense, Arhus, and
Alborg. The TIB1 corridor contains 33 stations in total as presented in table
4 where the station names are displayed in abbreviation together with the
kilometre marks.
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Case study
Figure 4.1: Danish railway infrastructure network.
Table 4.1: Stations and Km. marks on TIB1 .
St.
Kh
Val
Gl
Htå
Hh
Trk
Ro
Vy
Km.
0.0
3.9
11.2
19.5
23.9
28.3
31.3
42.5
St.
Bo
Ky
Rg
Fj
So
Sg
Fo
Kø
Km.
49.7
56.6
63.9
71.5
78.3
92.9
100.0
108.3
St.
Spr
Ng
Uv
Mv
Od
Hp
Tp
Sc
Km.
120.2
131.6
141.5
151.0
160.3
169.1
175.5
178.8
St.
Bd
Ap
Gd
Eb
Na
Ka
Md
Sno
Km.
181.1
184.7
190.2
194.8
200.1
204.3
210.4
216.3
St.
Fa
Km.
223.6
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Computational results
47
For testing the applicability of the model, the first half of 2018 Master
plan is used to compare the results lead to a half year of planning horizon for
the model. Track section here is considered to be between two crossovers as
some stations do not have crossovers before and after results in 34 sections
before the desegregation of left and right tracks (See Appendices A.1 and
A.8). However, the resource limitation constraint is omitted from the model
as currently Banedanmark outsources their maintenance activities and does
not have any limitation on the number of activities per possession.
4.1
Computational results
The first half of 2018 Master plan contains 380 tasks on 68 track sections
over 151 days results in 280,987 variables and 69,207 constraints. The probabil-
ity to return conflict activities in a section is set to 5% and 10% for generating
random pairs of in conflict activities results in 134 and 232 pairs, respectively.
The proposed model was solved by commercial MILP solver, GUROBI in Julia
programming language (see Appendix A.3 for the code) with the termination
time of 7,200 seconds. The following table 4.2 reports the performance of two
scheduling methods, the current spreadsheet-based used by Banedanmark and
the model used in this thesis. Figure 4.2 illustrates the possession of each track
section from the three instances.
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Case study
Table 4.2: Performance comparison.
Manual
Model(5%Conflict)
Model(10%Conflict)
Total possession
720
495
520
Total tardiness
15509
120
99
Late activities
113
5
5
Avg. activities/night
4.74
8.44
5.11
Solution time
N/A
7200
7200
MIP Gap
N/A
5%
20%
Figure 4.2: Possession reduction in percentage by section.
In table 4.1, the total number of possession significantly reduces by 31%
and 28% for the model with 5% and 10% of in conflict activities in a section,
where total tardiness and number of late activities from both instances are
better off. Comparing the possession in each section, most of the sections have
a substantial reduction; however, there is no reduction in some section as all
maintenance tasks in the section are combinable. Thus the total duration of
possession is equal to the maximum duration among all combinable activi-
ties in the track section. Figure 4.3 illustrates the total possessions achieved
from the model with 5% activities on conflict, where the horizontal axis is the
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Computational results
49
section ID, and the vertical axis indicates the date of each 6-hour night, the
orange colour indicates the possession on the left track of the section and blue
is the indicator for the right track possession. The possession from Bandan-
mark spreadsheet technique and the 10% activities in conflict are enclosed in
Appendix A.2
Figure 4.3: Possessions from the model with 5% in conflict activities.
Comparing the schedule from Banedanmark and the model, the model
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Case study
prefers to have possessions around the beginning of the planning period to
avoid the tardiness, where the schedule from Banedanmark, the possessions
spread out throughout the first half of the year. One reason behind this is that
Banedanmark currently uses the possession booking strategy aiming to have
a longer break duration between two possession on the same track section.
This lead to a massive postponement to all activities in the second cluster of
possession if a activity is considered to be critical. Another reason is from
the manipulation of in conflict activities matrix which randomly generated
the in conflict pairs of activities without taking a consideration of the number
of components in track section, where in reality, conflict mostly occur in the
complex track sections such as Kh, Rg, and Fa which at least contain more
than three tracks.
Regarding the number of crossovers used in the instance of 5% of in conflict
activities, there are only a few 6-hours nights where the service from both
directions expose three left-crossovers for both cases for the model. The reason
behinds this is due to the problem does not solve to optimality results in
incurring the total tardiness of 120. Concerning the tardy activities, the results
show that activities on section 5-left and right, and 30-left are considered to
be late due to the failure of reaching optimality. However, this issue can be
solved manually by moving the possession down to the available slot where
the maximum of three left-crossovers rule is respected. In term of the number
of activities on each 6-hours night in table 4.1, we could say that the 5%
and 10% of in conflict activities in a section do not reflect the actual total
number of pair of in conflict activities where Banedanmark used. Therefore,
the percentage should be increased. The effect of the number of in conflict
pairs on the total possession will be investigated in the next chapter.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Sensitivity analysis
The purpose of this chapter is to perform a sensitivity analysis of the
optimization method developed in the thesis. First, the sensitivity analysis
regarding the density of in conflict activities will be analyzed by randomly
generate the in conflict activities based on the Bernoulli probability distribu-
tion function (Montgomery et al. 2018). Then the investigation of the effect
of accessibility of the infrastructure during winter is conducted.
5.1
In conflict activities
First, small instances of 80 activities to be scheduled on six track sections
over 40 periods are created to reduce the solving time, as the MIP problems
belong to the class of NP-hard problems as proven by (Garey et al. 1979) and
(Bertacco 2005). Fifty instances are created to investigate the effect of the
number of in conflict activities on the model performance. To do so, we set the
probability of returning the in conflict activities in a section to 20%, 10%, 5%,
1%, and 0% respectively. By using GUROBI as a solver with the time limit of
300 seconds, the following table presents the average computing performance
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Sensitivity analysis
for each instance.
Table 5.1: Performance comparison.
Probability
Avg. objective
Avg. late tasks
Avg. gap
Avg. time(secs)
0%
98
2
0%
0.48
1%
102.8
2.4
0%
6.82
5%
122.2
5.6
8.1%
289.74
10%
168.6
8
26.38%
300
20%
236.4
16.6
48.2%
300
From table 5.1 we can notice that the relationship between the number of
possession and in conflict percentage follows the exponential pattern. Regard-
ing the 0% probability instances, 2 activities are late due to the setting of some
instances as the sum of two activities duration take place on the parallel track
section is higher than the maximum due date among those two activities. This
analysis could be beneficial for Banedanmark to set the activities due date to
correspond with the traffic conflict to minimize both the number of possession
and tardiness. The following figure 5.1 shows the possession when with 0%
in conflict activities which visualized the issue when the maximum activities
duration on section 1L and 1R are set to 12 days, and the due date of activity
on section 1R is set to 21.
Figure 5.1: Total possession when the probability is 0%.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Maintenance under winter time window
53
5.2
Maintenance under winter time window
In both maintenance scheduling model and the spreadsheet technique, we
consider the situation where the accessibility for maintenance works of the
infrastructure is available all year round. However, in Northern Europe, per-
forming any activities during winter season would be disadvantage for any
firms as the compensation must be covered when staffs get injured within the
firms property. From this reason, Bandanmark is enthusing to schedule all the
activities outside winter season. Therefore, the model needs a modification
in such a way that winter possessions are avoided as much as possible. By
arranging this agreement, the trade-off between winter possession and total
tardiness occurs, as some activities require to be completed during winter.
Moreover, when minimizing the possession during winter, it is evident that
possessions during other seasons are increasing. This lead to a modification
of the objective function to be multiple objectives as the following equation
5.1. To be more generalized, the three-left crossovers rule is neglected in this
analysis and the test instance will cover only the first half of the year as in
the original case study where the conflict matrix remains identical to the 5%
instance used in chapter 4.
min
∑
k∈K
∑
t∈TW inter
ykt + (
∑
k∈K
∑
t∈TOthers
ykt +
∑
a∈A
oa)
(5.1)
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Sensitivity analysis
5.2.1
Weighted sum method
First, the weighted sum method is selected to solve this multi-objective
functions, as the goal is to avoid the winter possession, which effects on both
other seasons possession and total tardiness as much as possible. The method
transforms multiple objective functions into one by assigning the weighting
factors to all objective terms based on user preferences. In this studies the
weighting factors for both objective terms are set to be ∑
i∈I αi = 1 and αi ≥0.
Therefore, the objective becomes:
min α1(
∑
k∈K
∑
t∈TW inter
ykt) + α2(
∑
k∈K
∑
t∈TOthers
ykt +
∑
a∈A
oa)
(5.2)
Figure 5.2 illustrates the Pareto front containing no better off solutions
between two objective terms from 60 enumerations of running the method.
Figure 5.2: Pareto front using weighted sum method.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Maintenance under winter time window
55
From figure 5.2, the decision makers could say that none possession in
winter is possible.
Moreover, the trade-off occurs as there is no solution
found between 600 and 900 winter possession. Thus two option classes are
provided form this method, one with 80-100 winter possessions and another
with 144-398 winter possessions. This due to the failure of the weighted sum
method when solving the non-smooth convex function as proven by (Ehrgott
2005). The following table presents the non dominated solutions found by the
weighted sum method.
Table 5.2: Non-dominated solution found by the weighted sum method.
Solution
First term
Second term
1
0
8703
2
762
14
3
298
159
4
233
256
5
176
383
6
144
530
7
97
906
8
83
1064
5.2.2
ε-constraint method
Beside the weighted sum method, the ε-constraint method introduced
by (Haimes et al. 1971) is also the well-known technique to solve the multi-
objective optimization problem as the method contains no linear scalarization
of the objective function like we did in the weighted sum. The method is
to minimize one objective term while keeping other objectives as constraints.
The setting of the problem is as follow:
==PAGE:64==
56
5 Sensitivity analysis
min(f1(x))
s.t.
f2(x) ≤e2
f3(x) ≤e3
...
fn(x) ≤en
Where en is the upper bound value for objective function fn(x) found by
using the pay-off table between objectives.
In each iteration, the value of
the upper bound is varied to find the optimal solution for finding the Pareto
front. By implementing this method, the minimization of the second term
in our objective function is set, keeping the objective of minimizing winter
possession as a constraint. The following figure illustrates the Pareto front
found by ε-constraint method.
Table 5.3: Pay-off table found by lexicographic optimization.
f1
f2+f3
Min f1
0
4517
Min (f2+f3)
421
14
From the pay-off table, the solutions dominate the extreme points (point 1
and 2) in the weighted sum table; thus, we could say the weighted sum method
provides weaker efficiency solutions. By setting the first term in the objective
function as a constraint with the maximum upper bound of 421 found by
lexicographic optimization and, choosing the step size of the upper bound to
be 20. Table 5.4 reports the non dominated solutions found by ε-constraint
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Maintenance under winter time window
57
method, where solutions 1, 7, and 10 in table 5.4 somehow dominate points 1,
3, and 6 in table 5.2 respectively.
Table 5.4: Non-dominated solution found by ε-constraint method.
Solution
First term
Second term
1
0
4517
2
421
14
3
401
24
4
381
39
5
361
61
6
341
83
7
281
160
8
241
211
9
161
378
10
141
530
11
101
796
==PAGE:66==
58
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Extended versions
In this chapter, the extended versions of the primordial model which have
been developed in chapter 3 are created considering the interest from both
maintenance planner and traffic planner from the investigation of the length
of consecutive possession. To be more generalized, the traffic rule saying a
maximum of three left-crossovers is discarded as it only applies on TIB1 cor-
ridor.
Considering this issue, first, the model regardless of the maximum
left-crossover constraint is developed for finding the lower bound solution, fol-
lowed by the extended versions of the mathematical model considering the
both stakeholders interest, where the in conflict activities pairs remain identi-
cal to the one we used in chapter 4 with 5% for all the models in this chapter.
6.1
Simplification
As the three maximum left-crossovers rule is applied only TIB1 corridor,
this constraint will be neglected when solving other corridors. However, the
maintenance practice for double track corridor saying only one side of a section
can be closed per night still hold. Under this situation, the problem is solved
again regardless of constraint (3.6) to (3.8).
==PAGE:68==
60
6 Extended versions
Table 6.1: Results without crossover constraint.
Total possession
Total tardiness
Solution time
Gap
418
0
1000 sec
5%
6.2
Extension: with predetermined
bottleneck size
As, the bottleneck size of the corridor is determined by the maximum cycle
time of the service running on single track section, in this section, the model is
modified regarding the question of how many possession we will have if we are
allowed to have at most q consecutive track sections under possession per each
6-hours night. Where in the model, the value of q starts from one meaning
consecutive possessions are not allowed. Under this condition, the following
constraint is included:
kl+q
∑
hl=Kl
yhlt +
kr+q
∑
hr=Kr
yhrt ≤q
∀t ∈T, kl ∈(Kl −q), kr ∈(Kr −q); kl = kr (6.1)
This preemptive constraint enforces the solver to select at most q −1
possession from q+1 series of sections, to illustrate this constraint, let consider
the value of q to be 1 which fall into the no allowance of consecutive possession
scenario as we did in chapter 3. The constraint becomes as follow:
yl1 + yl2 + yr1 + yr2 ≤1
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Extension: with predetermined bottleneck size
61
yl2 + yl3 + yr2 + yr3 ≤1
yl3 + yl4 + yr3 + yr4 ≤1
...
ylkl−1 + ylkl + yrkr−1 + yrkr ≤1
By imposing this rule, the model is solved again with the following setting:
Objective : [3.1]
Constraints : [3.2-3.5, 3.9, 3.10, 6.1]
Table 6.2: Results from 1 to 3 permissible consecutive possessions.
q
Total possession
Total tardiness
Solution time
Gap
1
426
68
3600 sec
10%
2
425
0
3600 sec
7%
3
425
0
3600 sec
7%
As we concerned, comparing the scenario regardless of the limitation and
no allowance of consecutive possession, the total tardiness rises from zero to
68 from table 6.1. However, it returns to zero when we are allowed to have
consecutive possessions. Furthermore, the total possessions from the three
instances in the table remain unchanged, as the total number of activities to be
assigned in the first half of Master plan is consider to be sparse compared to the
length of the planning horizon. Thus more than two consecutive possessions
are not necessary for this problem instance.
The drawback of this model is due to the limitation of consecutive posses-
sions meaning that if the number of activities drastically raised, a considerable
amount of total tardiness would be incurred as the available possession on each
==PAGE:70==
62
6 Extended versions
6-hours night is limited by q. Thus, multiple running of the model for finding
the shortest series of possessions where total tardiness is at minimum is nec-
essary. The illustration of total possessions for q = 1 and 2 are enclosed in
Appendix A.4.
6.3
Extension: with minimizing total
bottleneck size
Inspired by the 0-1 Knapsack problem, given a set of items with associated
value and weight. Determine what items we should include in our collection
so that total weight is not above the limit and overall value is as large as pos-
sible (Pisinger 2003). Here an item is called possession pattern containing all
possible possessions for each 6-hours night with its associated cost (bottleneck
size).
The objective here is to minimize the cost of patterns chosen over the
planning period along with the classical minimization of total possession and
tardiness, leading to the multi-objective optimization problem. The drawback
of using this formulation is the memory storage required to save all the possi-
ble patterns where the number of all possible patterns growth with 2n where n
is the number of track sections after the desegregation of left and right. How-
ever, not all the patterns are legal, since closing both left and right tracks in
the same track section is illegal here for double track corridor. Moreover, the
cost (bottleneck size) for each pattern does not grow linearly with the number
of possession but the maximum of the cycle time of each consecutive closed
track sections. Let us consider the situation consists of five track sections, the
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Extension: with minimizing total bottleneck size
63
following figure 6.1 illustrates the possession patterns with associated bottle-
neck cost with the simplification that cycle time for each section is identical
to five minutes.
Figure 6.1: Some legal possession patterns.
Considering this issue, first, the manipulation of all legal patterns is done
using the Julia programming language code enclosed in the Appendix A.5,
where the calculation of pattern costs are done manually based on 80 km/h
of average train speed (see Appendix A.6 for the bottleneck cost of each track
sections).
Then, the following notations and constraints are added to the
model in section 3:
Sets and parameters:
B
Set of all legal patterns.
==PAGE:72==
64
6 Extended versions
PatSecbk
0-1 of b×k matrix containing all legal possession patterns, 1 if
section k is under possession, 0 otherwise.
PatCostb
Cost(bottleneck size) of pattern b.
Decision variables:
rbk ∈{0, 1}
1 if pattern b is selected for 6-hours night t. 0 otherwise.
Objective function
min(
∑
k∈K
∑
t∈T
ykt +
∑
a∈A
oa) +
∑
b∈b
∑
t∈T
PatCostb · rbt
(6.2)
Constraints
∑
b∈B
PatSecbk · rbk = ykt
∀t ∈t, k ∈K
(6.3)
∑
b∈B
rbk <= 1
∀t ∈T
(6.4)
The objective function 6.2 here is set to minimize the possession and tardi-
ness along with the overall bottleneck size. Constraint 6.3 is used to match the
possession with pattern saying if the value of ykt is one then the pattern con-
taining the section k should be summed and equals to one forcing the model
to choose only one pattern if there is a possession. Constraint 6.4 enforces
only one pattern per working night. With these additional sets and equations,
the setting of the model becomes:
Objective : [6.2]
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Extension: with minimizing total bottleneck size
65
Constraints : [3.2-3.4, 3.9, 3.10, 6.3, 6.4]
As we realized that the number of patterns grows with 2n, it is impossible
to manually calculate the cost of all the legal patterns for n = 68; thus the
simplification version of TIB1 corridor containing five track sections is con-
sidered which results in 243 legal patterns. The following table 6.3 presents
the TIB1 corridor with five sections, while table 6.3 benchmarks the results
from the simplified model in section 6.1 and the model in this section under
identical weighting factors for both objective terms. Both models were solved
under stopping criteria of 3600 seconds.
Table 6.3: TIB1 corridor with 5 track sections.
Section #
Description
Length(Km)
Cost(Minutes)
1 and 6
Kh-Vy
43.8
32.85
2 and 7
Vy-Sg
52.6
39.45
3 and 8
Sg-Uv
47.3
35.475
4 and 9
Uv-Ap
42
31.5
5 and 10
Ap-Gfa
41.8
31.35
Table 6.4: Results from the model in section 6.1 to 6.3 under 5 sections.
Model
Total Possession
Total Tardiness
Gap%
Simplified
221
0
5
No consecutive possession
187
102
25.9
Min bottleneck size
123
576
23.9
The results from table 6.3 implied that considering five sections for TIB1
corridor make to model become much difficult to solve as the MIP gap for
the no consecutive rule is doubled from table 6.2. Moreover, the models con-
sidering the traffic aspect perform much better in term of minimization of
==PAGE:74==
66
6 Extended versions
total possession; however, total tardiness is worsened. For the model with the
inclusion of minimization of the bottleneck, patterns with more than three
consecutive possessions are not selected. See Appendix A.7 for the illustra-
tions of total possession from the model in section 6.2 and 6.3 under fives track
sections.
As mentioned that this problem is considered to be a multi-objective prob-
lem, by using the weighted sum method with termination criteria of 30% MIP
gap, the following table records the non dominated solutions for this five sec-
tions instance.
Table 6.5: Non-dominated solutions of the model in section 6.3.
Solution
Total possession & tardiness
Total bottleneck
1
252
7139.33
2
377
2380.27
3
655
1889.02
4
657
1887.52
5
663
1895.4
6
734
1866.67
7
947
1835.32
From table 6.3, it seems that the solutions are clustered into three groups,
solution 1, 2, and 3 to 7, where the solution 1 is likely to be eliminated by the
planner due to its growth in total bottleneck size which considered to be huge
compared to the total possession and tardiness. This argument is also valid for
the elimination of solution 7 by the planners as the overall bottleneck decreases
around 30 minutes, but the total possession and tardiness are substantially
amplified.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, we studied how the mathematical models could be developed
to aid the maintenance planning process for railway infrastructure managers.
In chapter 1, we explored how the maintenance activities are triggered in the
railway industry and the relationship between maintenance and production
where maintenance aims to provide a smooth running of the production pro-
cess. However, to perform any maintenance activities, the production must
be stopped at any track sections, which lower the total production capacity.
Thus, when planning the maintenance activities, this issue must be concerned
in order to reduce the disruptive effects to all stakeholders. Moreover, when
maintenance activities cannot be accomplished before its due date, the loss of
production is incurred until the job is done.
In chapter 2, we continued to study the literature on maintenance planning
in the railway industry.
Although many works of literature regarding the
railway maintenance planning exist, most of them considered this problem to
be in the strategic and tactical levels where the period is considered to be more
than a month, but in reality, maintenance activities happen almost every day.
Therefore, the characteristic of the system must be concerned.
In chapter 3 to 6, we introduce the mathematical models to solve the pre-
ventive maintenance scheduling problem by considering this problem to be the
==PAGE:76==
68
7 Conclusion
project scheduling problem where the maintenance portfolio must be realized
before the planning process, where the need for maintenance is obtained from
inspection or the service life cycle of the component. The objective of the
model is to minimize the total number of downtime and total tardiness from
the above reasons. Since the maintenance scheduling problem is a complex
problem, for a huge instance and the instance having many in conflict activi-
ties, it was impossible to solve the problem to optimality within a reasonable
time. Thus, we accepted the solution with a consistent MIP gap. Consid-
ering the accessibility of the infrastructure due to the weather condition, it
is possible to have no maintenance activities during the winter; however, a
massive amount of total tardiness would be incurred. We tackle this issue
by using two multi-objective optimization techniques. It found out that the
ε-constraint method provided better results than the weighted sum method
in terms of Pareto efficiency and number of iterations run, however, in each
iteration of the ε-constraint method, a tremendous amount of time is required
due to the configuration of the method.
Regarding the traffic aspects in chapter 6 aiming to reduce the controversy
between traffic and maintenance planners, first, the model considering which
the traffic planners aspect comes at priority is developed by limit the size of the
bottleneck of the system. It found out that for our instance, it is not necessary
to have more than two consecutive possession. Secondly, the multi-objective
model, considering the equal power of both stakeholders, was developed using
the pattern matching technique. However, this model is impossible to solve the
real world track system as the growth in the number of total patterns is two
power the total number of track sections; thus, the track sections used in this
model are compressed. It found out that when we consider the traffic planner
==PAGE:77==
7.1 Implementation and benefit
69
aspect, the total number of downtime decreased. However, with the inclusion
of the traffic planner aspects, the degree of difficulty of the mathematical
model to be solved to optimality is substantially increased.
7.1
Implementation and benefit
In term of implementation the mathematical model into the business pro-
cess, two aspects are considered including operational and cost perspectives.
From the operation aspect, the first issue to be considered is the reliability
of the input data must be verified as the mathematical model cannot handle
any uncertainty occur during the maintenance works, but this could be solved
by tracking down the maintenance history. Secondly, the model also needs
verification where necessary maintenance and traffic rules are included. More-
over, the model developed in this thesis is aiming to find the upper bound
solution of the complex railway corridor problem by simplifying the corridor,
which could lead to the challenge of convincing the planners to implement this
solution but the schedule found by the mathematical model can be manually
adjusted afterwards.
Another convincing problem is that the usage of the
mathematical model is not that user-friendly as all the necessary data from
the ERP system need cleaning before entering the model. Also, the output is
difficult to read. One option to overcome this issue is to develop the software
containing the mathematical model which automatically linked with the ERP
system, and can also export the solution which match with the illustration of
infrastructure. Another challenge is that Banedamark currently schedules the
maintenance activities manually using a spreadsheet where no maintenance
==PAGE:78==
70
7 Conclusion
planners have any knowledge of optimization techniques. This issue has to be
seriously considered as it needs a massive change in the organization where
the company has to emphasize on empowering the maintenance planners to be
able to integrate the optimization technique with the current planning process
correctly.
From the cost aspect, although the Julia programming language is a free
software containing a variety of free packages to solve the optimization prob-
lem such as GLPK and Clp, however, the performance of these packages are
much slower for solving the problem; thus, at least one license of CPLEX or
Gurobi is required. Another option is to develop a heuristic approach on any
programming language, meaning that the company must have the employees
mastered in both optimization and programming fields.
In term of the benefit of using the mathematical model to help the schedul-
ing process of the maintenance activities to some degree, one significant ad-
vantage is that it reduces the complexity of the scheduling process where the
planners do not have to start the process from zero. Moreover, this could be
used for scenario analysis when negotiating a contract with any contractors
or even internally with the traffic planners, as shown in section 5.2 and both
6.2 and 6.3, respectively.
7.2
Further study
In addition to the mathematical model developed in this thesis, the further
research areas where the thesis was not able to extensively explore can be
addressed as follow:
==PAGE:79==
7.2 Further study
71
• Column generation on traffic pattern
• Heuristic approach
• Optimization without simplification of the corridor
• Integration with timetable rescheduling problem
Column generation is a technique that used for solving huge linear math-
ematical model which we have seen in section 6.3 that creating all possession
patterns for 68 track sections is a huge challenge where a massive computer
is a necessity. It could be better with column generation to create a pattern
on the fly by generating a pattern which reduces the total bottleneck cost
and iterate the process to find what patterns are used. However, the calcula-
tion of bottleneck must be carefully established as it is not the merely linear
which is a must for pricing problem in column generation technique. Another
research area is to develop a heuristic approach to solve the problem as we
have seen throughout the thesis that the mathematical model requires more
than 10 minutes to solve the instance which is not be practically accept to use
during the negotiation process and heuristic method is considered to be free of
charge for the license. Another potential research area could be the scheduling
of maintenance activities on multiple tracks which precisely solve the real-life
problems with complex corridor layout. Lastly, it could be better to satisfy all
the stakeholders, including train operators with an integration of the railway
infrastructure maintenance scheduling problem and train timetabling problem.
This approach provides a solution for all stakeholders at once; however, this
needs collaboration between two parties, infrastructure manager and train op-
==PAGE:80==
72
7 Conclusion
erators. The potential literature to be integrated with is developed by (Van
Aken et al. 2019) where the problem is solved night by night.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
==PAGE:82==
74
A An Appendix
==PAGE:83==
A.1 Track section by crossover
75
A.1
Track section by crossover
Table A.1: track section by crossover.
Section(Left) #
Description
Section(Right) #
Description
1
Kh-Hif
35
Kh-Hif
2
Hif-Gl
36
Hif-Gl
3
Gl-Hta
37
Gl-Hta
4
Hta
38
Hta
5
Hta-Ro
39
Hta-Ro
6
Ro
40
Ro
7
Ro-Vy
41
Ro-Vy
8
Vy-Bo
42
Vy-Bo
9
Bo-Ky
43
Bo-Ky
10
Ky-Rg
44
Ky-Rg
11
Rg
45
Rg
12
Rg-Fj
46
Rg-Fj
13
Fj-So
47
Fj-So
14
So-Sg
48
So-Sg
15
Sg
49
Sg
16
Sg-Fo
50
Sg-Fo
17
Fo-Ko
51
Fo-Ko
18
Ko
52
Ko
19
Ko-Spr
53
Ko-Spr
20
Spr-Ng
54
Spr-Ng
21
Ng
55
Ng
22
Ng-Uv
56
Ng-Uv
23
Uv-Mv
57
Uv-Mv
24
Mv-Od
58
Mv-Od
25
Od
59
Od
26
Od-Hp
60
Od-Hp
27
Hp-Tp
61
Hp-Tp
28
Tp-Ap
62
Tp-Ap
29
Ap-Eb
63
Ap-Eb
30
Eb-Ka
64
Eb-Ka
31
Ka-Md
65
Ka-Md
32
Md-Sno
66
Md-Sno
33
Sno-Fa
67
Sno-Fa
34
Gfa
68
Gfa
==PAGE:84==
76
A An Appendix
A.2
Possession schedule in chapter 3
Figure A.1: Possessions from Banedanmark up to 31thMay where red indi-
cates the left possession and blue indicates the right possession.
==PAGE:85==
A.2 Possession schedule in chapter 3
77
Figure A.2: Possessions from the model with 10% in conflict activities.
==PAGE:86==
78
A An Appendix
A.3
Model implementation in Julia
1 using
MultiJuMP , JuMP, Gurobi, GLPKMathProgInterface , Distributions
2
3 Conflict=zeros(Float64 ,A,A,K) #Generate in conflict activities by
percentage
4 for x=1:A, y=1:A, k=1:K
5 if AK_match[x,k]==1 && AK_match[y,k]==1 && x>y
6 Conflict[x,y,k] = rand(Bernoulli(0.10)) # 10% of conflict activities
in a section
7 end
8 end
9
10 #use this for single objective optimization
11 Maintenance = Model(solver = GurobiSolver( MIPGap=0.00, TimeLimit =
3600))
12 #use this for multi objective optimzation
13 Maintenance = multi_model(solver = GurobiSolver( MIPGap=0.0), linear
= true)
14
15 ########## Decision Variables ##############
16 @variable(Maintenance , s[1:A]>=0, Int) # start day of activity a
17 @variable(Maintenance , x[1:A,1:T],Bin) # 1 if activity a start at
day t
18 @variable(Maintenance , y[1:K,1:T],Bin) # 1 if section k occupied at
day t
19 @variable(Maintenance , v[1:T],Bin) # 1 if right is down, 0 if left
is down
20 @variable(Maintenance , c[1:A,1:A],Bin) #1 if activity a start b4 b
21 @variable(Maintenance ,o[1:A]>=0, Int) # tardiness of activity a
22 @variable(Maintenance , r[1:B,1:T],Bin) # if pattern b is selected
for day t
==PAGE:87==
A.3 Model implementation in Julia
79
23 ########## End of Decision Variables #######
24
25 ########## Constraints #####################
26
27 # define x
28 @constraint(Maintenance , [a=1:A],
29 sum(t*x[a,t] for t=1:T) +A_DUR[a]-1 <= A_End[a]+o[a])
30
31 # each job must starts only once
32 @constraint(Maintenance , [a=1:A],
33 sum(x[a,t] for t=1:T)==1)
34
35 # if activity a is on section k, then section k must be closed
36 @constraint(Maintenance , [t=1:T, a=1:A, k=1:K; AK_match[a,k]==1],
37 sum(x[a,p] for p=1:T if p >= (t-A_DUR[a]+1) && p<=t) <= y[k,t])
38
39 # activity in conflict constraint
40 @constraint(Maintenance , [a=1:A, b=1:A, k=1:K; Conflict[a,b,k]==true
],
41 sum(t*x[a,t] for t=1:T)-sum(t*x[b,t] for t=1:T) >= A_DUR[b] - 60000*
c[a,b])
42
43 @constraint(Maintenance , [a=1:A, b=1:A, k=1:K; Conflict[a,b,k]==true
],
44 sum(t*x[b,t] for t=1:T)-sum(t*x[a,t] for t=1:T) >= A_DUR[a] -
60000*(1-c[a,b]))
45
46 # left right must not down at the same time at the same section
47 @constraint(Maintenance , [t=1:T, k=1:34, j=k+34],
48 y[k,t]+y[j,t] <= 1)
49
50 # Three left-crossovers rule (left)
==PAGE:88==
80
A An Appendix
51 @constraint(sex, [t=1:T],
52 sum(y[k,t] for k=1:34) <= 3
53 )
54 # Three left-crossovers rule (Right)
55 @constraint(sex, [t=1:T],
56 sum(y[k,t] for k=35:68) <= 3
57 )
58 # No allowance of consecutive section
59 @constraint(sex, zzz[t=1:T, k=1:(34-Q), l=35:(68-Q); l==(k+34)],
60 sum(y[h,t] for h=k:(k+Q)) + sum(y[u,t] for u=l:(l+Q))<=Q
61 )
62
63 # for predetermine bottleneck
64 @constraint(Maintenance , [t=1:T, k=1:(34-Q), l=35:(68-Q); l==(k+34)
],
65 sum(y[h,t] for h=k:(k+Q)) + sum(y[u,t] for u=l:(l+Q))<=Q)
66
67 ## for minimize bottle bottleneck
68 # Pattern cannot be merged
69 @constraint(Maintenance , [t=1:T],
70 sum(r[b,t] for b=1:B)<=1)
71
72 # Assing y to r
73 @constraint(Maintenance , [t=1:T, k=1:K],
74 sum(r[b,t] for b=1:B if PattSec[b,k] ==1) == y[k,t])
75
76 ########## End of Constraints ##############
77
78 ########## Objective Function ##############
79
80 ## Minimize total possession and tardiness (use this for single
objective)
==PAGE:89==
A.3 Model implementation in Julia
81
81 @objective(Maintenance , Min, sum(y[k,t] for k=1:K, t=1:T)+sum(o[a]
for a=1:A))
82
83 ## Miminize winter possession and (other seasons + tardiness)
84 f1 = sum(y[k,t] for k=1:K, t=91:T)+sum(o[a] for a=1:A))
85 f2 = sum(y[k,t] for k=1:K, t=1:90))
86
87 ## Minimize pattern
cost and (total possession and tardiness)
88 f1 = sum(y[k,t] for k=1:K, t=1:T) + sum(o[a] for a=1:A)
89 f2 = sum(PattCost[b]*r[b,t] for b=1:B,
t=1:T)
90
91 # Define which objectives to be considered and direction
92 obj1 = SingleObjective(f1, sense = :Min)
93 obj2 = SingleObjective(f2, sense = :Min)
94
95 ## use these for multi objective problems
96 md = get_multidata(Maintenance)
97 md.objectives = [obj1, obj2]
98 md.pointsperdim = 20 # how many Pareto optimal we want
99 solve(Maintenance , method = WeightedSum()) #MOP method. Use
EpsilonCons()
for e-constraint
100
#(not recommend as the function
doe not have step size)
101
102 using Plots: plot # To plot pareto front
103 plot(md)
104
105 ## use this for single objective problems
106 solve(Maintenance)
107
108 ########## End of Objective Function #######
109
==PAGE:90==
82
A An Appendix
110 ########## Print Results ###################
111 xVal = getvalue(x)
112 for a=1:A, t=1:T
113 if (xVal[a,t] ==1)
114 println("Activity [ $a ] starts [ $t ]",)
115 end
116 end
117 yVal = getvalue(y)
118 for k=1:K, t=1:T
119 if (yVal[k,t] ==1)
120 println("Section [ $k ] closed in night [ $t ]",)
121 end
122 end
123 oVal = getvalue(o)
124 for a=1:A
125 if (oVal[a] >0)
126 println("Activity [ $a ] days late ",getvalue(o[a]))
127 end
128 end
129 rVal = getvalue(r)
130 for t=1:T, b=1:B
131 if (rVal[b,t] >=1)
132 println("Night [ $t ] uses patern [ $b ] ",getvalue(r[b,t]))
133 end
134 end
135 ########## End of Print Results ############
136 ############################################
137 ############################################
138 ########## End of the Model ################
.
==PAGE:91==
A.4 Possession schedule in section 6.2
83
A.4
Possession schedule in section 6.2
A.4.1
q = 1
Figure A.3: Total possession under minimum bottleneck cosntraints.
==PAGE:92==
84
A An Appendix
A.4.2
q = 2
Figure A.4: Total possession under minimum bottleneck constraints.
==PAGE:93==
A.5 Patterns manipulation
85
A.5
Patterns manipulation
1 # for legal pattern with 10 sections
2 iter = (x for x in Iterators.product(0:1, 0:1, 0:1, 0:1, 0:1, 0:1,
0:1, 0:1, 0:1, 0:1)
3 if max(x[1] + x[6],x[2] + x[7], x[3] + x[8], x[4] + x[9], x[5] + x
[10]) != 2 )
4
5 v=vcat(collect(iter)...)
6
7 # for legal 68 track sections and the total possession per day less
than 10
8 iter = (x for x in Iterators.product(0:1, 0:1, 0:1, 0:1, 0:1,
9
0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,
10
0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,
11
0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,
12
0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,0:1,
13
0:1,0:1,0:1)
14 if max(x[1] + x[35],x[2] + x[36], x[3] + x[37], x[4] + x[38]
15 , x[5] + x[39], x[6] + x[40], x[7] + x[41], x[8] + x[42]
16 , x[9] + x[43], x[10] + x[44], x[11] + x[45], x[12] + x[46]
17 , x[13] + x[47], x[14] + x[48], x[15] + x[49], x[16] + x[50]
18 , x[17] + x[51], x[18] + x[52], x[19] + x[53], x[20] + x[54]
19 , x[21] + x[55], x[22] + x[56], x[23] + x[57], x[24] + x[58]
20 , x[25] + x[59], x[26] + x[60], x[27] + x[61], x[28] + x[62]
21 , x[29] + x[63], x[30] + x[64], x[31] + x[65], x[32] + x[66]
22 , x[33] + x[67], x[34] + x[68],) != 2
23
&& max(sum(x[i] for i=1:68)) <= 10)
24
25 v=vcat(collect(iter)...)
.
==PAGE:94==
86
A An Appendix
==PAGE:95==
A.6 Cost components
87
A.6
Cost components
Table A.2: Cost components based on the speed of 80 km/h.
Cost(minutes)
Section(Left & Right)
5.475
Kh-Hif
2.925
Hif-Gl
6.225
Gl-Hta
2.1
Hta
6.825
Hta-Ro
2.1
Ro
7.2
Ro-Vy
5.25
Vy-Bo
5.175
Bo-Ky
3.675
Ky-Rg
2.85
Rg
4.65
Rg-Fj
5.1
Fj-So
10.95
So-Sg
1.8
Sg
4.35
Sg-Fo
5.4
Fo-Ko
2.025
Ko
7.725
Ko-Spr
7.2
Spr-Ng
2.4
Ng
6.375
Ng-Uv
6.225
Uv-Mv
6.45
Mv-Od
1.65
Od
5.475
Od-Hp
4.8
Hp-Tp
6.9
Tp-Ap
7.575
Ap-Eb
7.125
Eb-Ka
4.575
Ka-Md
4.425
Md-Sno
2.175
Sno-Fa
5.475
Gfa
==PAGE:96==
88
A An Appendix
A.7
Possession schedule considering 5
sections
Figure A.5: (Left) Possession schedule from the model in section 6.2 with
q=1. (Right) Possession schedule from the model in section 6.3.
==PAGE:97==
A.8 TIB1
89
A.8
TIB1
==PAGE:98==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
12 - 3
TIB-S
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
7
6
5
8
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
26 40
PU
41
30
2
1
4
3
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
22
SU
40
SU
40
52
51
70
VU
SU
40
40
PU
U
70
50
U
U
Mod Peberholm
strækning 11
km 1,6
Fra Helsingør
strækning 10
80
København H (Kh)
km 0,0
ID: 60000
40
40
60
0,5
60
0,5
70
0,6
70
0,6
80
1,3
80
1,3
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
16
20
U
U
U
M1
mod Gb
Gb 200
gruppen
23
25
16
Mod Peberholm
strækning 11
Mod Vigerslev
strækning 6
60
89
45
90
A An Appendix
==PAGE:99==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
TIB-S
13 - 5
1386
14.01.2019
km 1,6
Fra København H
70
70
AM
2024
km 6,4
AM
2033
Valby (Val) 
km 3,9     T
Valby (Val) 
km 3,9     T
AM
2042
AM
2052
km 6,2
I
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
SI
hast
60
70
km 8,4
I
U
70
70
VU
40
PU
70
PU
2
1
SI
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
SI
hast
40
40
Indkørsel
sp
2
hast
70
Fra Peberholm
strækning 11
80
2,5
100
80
140
2,6
2,6
140
160
4,2
4,2
180
Hvidovre Fjern (Hif)
km 7,3
FC Glostrup
FC Glostrup
linjeblok 
stigning L   
80
Hvidovre Fjern
neutralsektion
km 5,7
km 5,7
A.8 TIB1
91
==PAGE:100==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
14 - 5
TIB-S
km 8,4
AM
2094
Fra København
km 10,6
I
Indkørsel
sp
0
1
2
hast
60
60
70
I
Indkørsel
sp
0
1
hast
60
60
U
70
70
VU
70
PU
2
1
0
km 12,5
“Priorparken”
(postterminal)
60
PU
60
PU
AM
2138
AM
2152
AM
2169
FC Glostrup
linjeblok 
stigning M   
FC Glostrup
linjeblok 
stigning H   
Glostrup (Gl)
km 11,2
FC Glostrup
ID: 60001
120
160
180
70
70
120
120
10,5
10,5
120
160
12,4
12,4
180
km 18,2
92
A An Appendix
==PAGE:101==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
TIB-S
15 - 5
835
I
Fra København H
strækning 810
Fra Taastrup
depot og værksted
VI
3
4
1
0
5
12
11
13
14
15
16
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
2
km 18,2
I
Indkørsel
sp
0
1
2
3
4
5
hast
60
60
60
70
70
60
VI
km 21,0
Fra København
160
180
120
18,5
180
20,7
160
180
160
180
160
180
Kombiterminal
Høje Taastrup (Htå)
km 19,5
overgangsstation
FC Ro Øst
ID: 61001
U
70
U
70
U
70
U
70
120
18,5
160
19,0
100
100
19,1
120
120
20,7
08.05.2017
A.8 TIB1
93
==PAGE:102==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 21,0
AM
3222
Fra København
70
70
70
70
1. hsp
2. hsp
4. hsp
3. hsp
AM
4222
AM
2222
AM
1222
AM
3236
AM
4236
AM
2236
1236
Hedehusene (Hh) 
km 23,9      km 24,2 T  km 24,9
ID: 61041
AM/DS
Hedehusene (Hh) 
km 24,2 T
AM
3254
AM
4254
AM
2254
AM
1254
km 30,1
AM
3268
AM
4268
AM
2268
AM
1268
Trekroner (Trk) 
km 28,3 T
Trekroner (Trk) 
km 28,3 T
AM
3285
AM
4285
AM
2285
AM
1285
160
180
160
180
160
180
160
180
FC Ro Øst
linjeblok / vekselspor 
stigning M   
Hedehusene
neutralsektion
km 22,9
km 22,9
16 - 5
TIB-S
94
A An Appendix
==PAGE:103==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
I
1
7
6
5
3
4
2
1. hsp
2. hsp
3. hsp
4. hsp
Fra
Til
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
70
60
60
70
70
40
70
40
40
70
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
60
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Indkørselshastigheder
1. hsp
2. hsp
4. hsp
3. hsp
km 30,1
I
I
I
Fra København
Roskilde (Ro)
km 31,3
overgangsstation
ID: 61000
40
PU
70
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
V
40
PU
V
70
PU
V
40
PU
V
40
PU
V
40
PU
160
180
160
30,6
120
30,4
31,1
120
160
180
140
140
30,9
100
100
TIB-S
17 - 3
836
08.05.2017
A.8 TIB1
95
==PAGE:104==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1
7
6
40
PU
70
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
V
40
PU
V
70
PU
V
40
PU
V
40
PU
V
40
PU
5
4
3
2
SU
V
70
SU
70
U
U
70
70
VU
U
VU
km 32,9
120
120
32,0
140
140
32,0
160
32,3
180
32,3
Mod Kalundborg
strækning 5
Mod Kalundborg
strækning 5
Mod Næstved
strækning 4
120
100
100
18 - 3
TIB-S
Roskilde (Ro)
km 31,3
overgangsstation
ID: 61000
96
A An Appendix
==PAGE:105==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 32,9
km 43,5
Fra København
70
70
AM
2340
AM
2359
U
70
70
VU
AM
2378
AM
2397
km 41,6
I
Indkørsel
sp
2
hast
70
VI
1
2
70
PU
Viby Sj (Vy)
km 42,5
FC Ro Øst
FC Ro Øst 
linjeblok 
stigning L   
160
180
120
160
41,9
42,2
180
120
40
PU
Roskilde
fordelingsst.
km 33,4
km 33,4
TIB-S
19 - 5
837
08.05.2017
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
A.8 TIB1
97
==PAGE:106==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 43,5
Fra København
70
70
AM
2454
AM
2473
km 55,9
AM
2520
AM
2540
70
PU
km 50,6
U
70
70
VU
60
PU
km 48,8
I
Indkørsel
sp
2
3
hast
60
70
VI
3
2
1
160
180
120
120
Borup (Bo)
km 49,7
FC Ro Øst
FC Ro Øst
linjeblok 
stigning L   
FC Ro Øst
linjeblok 
stigning M   
20 - 5
TIB-S
98
A An Appendix
==PAGE:107==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 55,9
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
2
hast
60
70
VI
Fra København
km 61,5
AM
2592
AM
2603
km 57,8
U
70
70
VU
70
PU
60
PU
1
2
Kværkeby (Ky)
km 56,6
FC Ro Øst
160
180
120
TIB-S
21 - 11
1427
23.04.2019
FC Ro Øst
linjeblok 
stigning L   
A.8 TIB1
99
==PAGE:108==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
22 - 11
TIB-S
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
I
km 61,5
Fra København H
strækning 6
SI
Indkørsel
sp
4
hast
70
SI
SI
Ringsted (Rg)
km 63,9
overgangsstation
FC Ro Øst
ID: 66300
7
2
4
1
5
6
3
40
PU
0
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
I
Indkørsel
sp
6
5
4
SI (T2)
SI (T1)
hast
60
60
40
70
70
Indkørsel
sp
6
5
4
SI (T2)
SI (T1)
hast
60
60
40
70
70
Indkørsel
sp
3
hast
70
PU
T2
T1
T0
I
PU
Fra København H
mod Rødby Færge
I
160
180
100
62,2
120
62,9
100
A An Appendix
==PAGE:109==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
TIB-S
23 - 7
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1428
23.04.2019
U
Ringsted (Rg)
km 63,9
overgangsstation
FC Ro Øst
ID: 66300
VU
U
70
70
VU
7
2
1
5
6
3
N
40
PU
N
40
PU
N
70
PU
N
40
PU
N
40
PU
Mod Fredericia/Taulov
strækning 1
140
64,5
km 66,3
120
120
160
65,8
4
Mod Rødby Færge
strækning 2
A.8 TIB1
101
==PAGE:110==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
24 - 7
TIB-S
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
I
km 61,5
Fra København H
strækning 6
SI
Indkørsel
sp
4
2
hast
70
70
SI
Ringsted (Rg)
km 63,9
overgangsstation
FC Ro Øst
ID: 66300
7
4
5
6
3
40
PU
0
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
I
Indkørsel
sp
6
5
4
SI (T2)
SI (T1)
hast
60
60
40
70
70
Indkørsel
sp
6
5
4
SI (T2)
SI (T1)
SI (T0)
hast
60
60
40
70
70
70
Indkørsel
sp
3
1
hast
70
70
T2
T1
T0
I
Fra København H
mod Fredericia/Taulov
I
160
180
SI
Indkørsel
sp
1
hast
70
2
1
70
PU
60
PU
120
62,5
120
62,5
102
A An Appendix
==PAGE:111==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
TIB-S
25 - 8
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1429
23.04.2019
2
5
4
6
7
3
1
70
PU
S
40
PU
S
40
PU
S
40
PU
S
40
PU
S
40
PU
60
PU
U
70
70
VU
km 65,3
U
VU
120
160
64,9
180
64,9
120
Ringsted (Rg)
km 63,9
overgangsstation
FC Ro Øst
ID: 66300
70
PU
Mod Rødby Færge
strækning 2
Mod Fredericia/Taulov
strækning 1
120
A.8 TIB1
103
==PAGE:112==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 65,3
Fra København
70
70
AM
2669
AM
2686
km 77,6
AM
2739
AM
2758
km 72,8
U
70
70
VU
km 70,6
I
Indkørsel
sp
2
hast
70
VI
70
PU
1
2
40
PU
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning M   
Fjenneslev (Fj)
km 71,5
FC Ro Vest
160
180
77,0
140
140
77,0
120
120
Ringsted
neutralsektion
km 66,5
km 66,5
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning M   
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
26 - 8
TIB-S
104
A An Appendix
==PAGE:113==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 77,6
AM
2851
AM
2867
AM
2812
AM
2831
I
Indkørsel
sp
3
1
hast
60
70
VI
Fra København
2
3
1
70
PU
60
PU
km 79,5
U
70
70
VU
VM
1851
VM
1867
120
140
140
160
77,8
180
77,8
79,1
150
140
79,1
160
79,3
180
79,3
Sorø (So)
km 78,3
FC Ro Vest
88,0
88,0
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning L   
TIB-S
27 - 8
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1430
23.04.2019
A.8 TIB1
105
==PAGE:114==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
88,0
88,0
Fra København
70
70
AM
2885
AM
2903
km 94,2
U
70
70
VU
km 91,8
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
2
3
4
hast
60
60
70
60
VI
70
PU
K
60
PU
K
40
PU
70
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
3
2
1
5
4
120
120
Mod Tølløse
Lokaltog
160
180
90,6
170
140
90,6
120
91,9
120
91,9
93,8
170
140
93,8
Slagelse (Sg)
km 92,9
overgangsstation
FC Ro Vest
ID: 61051
70
PU
*)
*)
*)
km 0,9
Mod Tølløse:
Bogstavviser = H
U
60
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning L   
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
28 - 8
TIB-S
106
A An Appendix
==PAGE:115==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 94,2
Fra København
70
70
AM
2956
AM
2976
km 107,2
AM
2104
AM
2106
km 101,8
U
70
70
VU
km 99,6
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
2
hast
60
70
VI
70
PU
1
2
Forlev (Fo)
km 100,0
FC Ro Vest
120
120
60
PU
Slagelse
fordelingsst.
km 96,6
km 96,6
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning L   
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning M   
TIB-S
29 - 7
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1431
23.04.2019
160
180
94,9
170
140
94,9
A.8 TIB1
107
==PAGE:116==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 107,2
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
2
3
4
hast
60
60
70
60
Indkørsel
sp
1
2
3
4
hast
60
70
60
60
Fra København
I
km 109,9
U
70
U
70
1
2
3
4
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
Udrykningsspor
12
11
160
180
160
180
Korsør (Kø)
km 108,3
FC Ro Vest
ID: 61200
Materielgård
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
30 - 7
TIB-S
108
A An Appendix
==PAGE:117==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 109,9
Fra København
70
70
AM
2112
AM
2114
AM
2116
1. hsp
2. hsp
AM
1112
AM
1114
AM
1116
km 121,6
km 119,4
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
2
hast
70
70
Indkørsel
sp
1
hast
70
I
1
2
U
70
U
70
160
180
160
180
Sprogø (Spr)
km 120,2
FC Ro Vest
FC Ro Vest 
linjeblok / vekselspor 
stigning D   
110,5
140
140
110,5
110,5
140
140
110,5
160
180
118,6
118,6
160
180
118,6
118,6
0
70
70
Sprogø
neutralsektion
km 120,9
km 120,9
TIB-S
31 - 11
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1432
23.04.2019
A.8 TIB1
109
==PAGE:118==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 121,6
Fra København
70
70
AM
2123
1. hsp
2. hsp
AM
1123
AM
2125
AM
1125
AM
2127
AM
1127
U
70
70
VU
km 133,0
km 129,8
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
2
3
4
hast
60
60
70
60
Indkørsel
sp
1
2
3
4
hast
60
70
60
60
I
1
2
3
4
70
PU
60
PU
60
PU
60
PU
160
180
160
180
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok / vekselspor 
stigning F   
Nyborg (Ng)
km 131,6
FC Ro Vest
ID: 61300
120
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
32 - 11
TIB-S
110
A An Appendix
==PAGE:119==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 133,0
Fra København
70
70
AM
2031
km 135,6
Indkørsel
sp
1
hast
70
VI
2
1
U
70
70
VU
km 137,2
km 142,7
U
70
70
VU
km 141,0
I
Indkørsel
sp
3
1
hast
40
70
VI
AM
2078
2
1
3
50
PU
70
PU
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning F   
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning L   
Hjulby (Ju)
km 136,6
FC Ro Vest
120
Ullerslev (Uv)
km 141,5
FC Ro Vest
120
160
180
I
TIB-S
33 - 6
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1433
23.04.2019
A.8 TIB1
111
==PAGE:120==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 142,7
Fra København
70
70
AM
2133
AM
2153
AM
2173
km 150,1
I
Indkørsel
sp
2
3
hast
70
40
VI
AM
2223
AM
2243
AM
2263
km 159,6
km 151,7
U
70
70
VU
1
2
3
40
PU
70
PU
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning K   
120
160
180
Marslev (Mv)
km 151,0
FC Ro Vest
120
FC Ro Vest
linjeblok 
stigning H   
Marslev
fordelingsst.
km 153,1
km 153,1
Langeskov (Lv) 
km 146,6         T
Langeskov (Lv) 
km 146,7         T
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
34 - 6
TIB-S
112
A An Appendix
==PAGE:121==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
7
6
5
8
4
1
2
3
70
PU
T
40
PU
Mod Svendborg
strækning 21
km 159,6
I
Indkørsel
sp
2
3
5
6
7
hast
40
40
70
60
40
VI
Fra København
T
40
PU
T
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
40
PU
U
70
70
VU
PU
U
km 161,8
160
180
100
100
120
159,7
159,7
SU
SU
110
161,0
Odense (Od)
km 160,3
overgangsstation
ID: 66800
TIB-S
35 - 7
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1434
23.04.2019
A.8 TIB1
113
==PAGE:122==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 161,8
Fra København
70
70
AM
2310
AM
2330
AM
2350
km 174,6
AM
2399
AM
2415
km 168,3
I
Indkørsel
sp
2
hast
70
VI
km 169,6
U
70
70
VU
FC Fa
linjeblok 
stigning G   
120
Holmstrup (Hp)
km 169,1
FC Fa
120
FC Fa
linjeblok 
stigning G   
1
2
70
PU
130
150
161,8
161,8
161,8
140
160
162,9
162,9
100
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
36 - 7
TIB-S
114
A An Appendix
==PAGE:123==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 174,6
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
3
hast
60
70
VI
km 176,3
U
70
70
VU
km 183,4
Fra København
AM
2470
AM
2487
AM
2505
1
3
70
PU
60
PU
2
VM
1487
VM
1505
Skalbjerg (Sc) 
km 178,8      T
Skalbjerg (Sc) 
km 178,8      T
Bred (Bd) 
km 181,1  T
Bred (Bd) 
km 181,1  T
Tommerup (Tp)
km 175,5
FC Fa
120
140
160
FC Fa
linjeblok 
stigning M   
170
179,1
TIB-S
37 - 10
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1435
23.04.2019
A.8 TIB1
115
==PAGE:124==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 183,4
I
Indkørsel
sp
3
2
hast
60
70
VI
Fra København
km 185,4
U
70
70
VU
AM
2559
AM
2595
AM
2610
VM
1576
VM
1595
AM
2576
1
2
70
PU
3
40
PU
1a 40
PU
Gelsted (Gd) 
km 190,2    T
Gelsted (Gd) 
km 190,2    T
km 193,6
Årup (Ap)
km 184,7
FC Fa
FC Fa
linjeblok 
stigning G   
120
170
140
160
187,1
170
188,8
160
180
191,6
191,6
Årup
neutralsektion
km 185,8
km 185,8
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
38 - 10
TIB-S
116
A An Appendix
==PAGE:125==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 203,1
AM
2656
AM
2676
70
PU
km 195,4
U
70
70
VU
km 193,6
I
Indkørsel
sp
2
3
hast
60
70
VI
3
2
1
Ejby (Eb)
km 194,8
FC Fa
Fra København
AM
2698
VM
1698
VM
1676
Nørre-Åby (Na) 
km 200,1        T
Nørre-Åby (Na) 
km 200,0        T
km 205,3
U
70
70
VU
I
Indkørsel
sp
3
1
hast
60
70
VI
3
2
1
70
PU
40
PU
Kavslunde (Ka)
km 204,3
FC Fa
FC Fa
linjeblok 
stigning L   
120
160
180
160
195,0
180
195,1
120
40
PU
TIB-S
39 - 7
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1436
23.04.2019
A.8 TIB1
117
==PAGE:126==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 205,3
Fra København
70
70
AM
2752
AM
2770
km 214,5
AM
2815
km 209,5
I
Indkørsel
sp
3
1
hast
70
40
VI
1
40
PU
U
70
70
VU
km 211,2
3
4
70
PU
FC Fa
linjeblok 
stigning G   
FC Fa
linjeblok 
stigning G   
Middelfart (Md)
km 210,4
FC Fa
ID: 67900
120
120
160
180
140
150
206,7
206,7
110
130
209,0
209,0
120
209,3
120
130
210,1
210,1
120
213,3
Indkørsel
sp
3
hast
30
30
209,3
30
209,3
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
40 - 7
TIB-S
118
A An Appendix
==PAGE:127==
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
km 214,5
I
Indkørsel
sp
1
hast
40
Indkørsel
sp
2
hast
70
60
PU
40
PU
1
2
km 219,2
km 216,5
AM
2865
U
70
70
VU
U
U
Mod Taulov
se side 40
Snoghøj (Sno)
km 216,3
FC Fa
FC Fa
linjeblok 
stigning G   
120
130
130
214,5
214,5
140
150
215,3
215,3
Fra København
I
1b
2b
1
2
TIB-S
41 - 6
1. København H - Fredericia / Taulov
1437
23.04.2019
A.8 TIB1
119
==PAGE:128==
120
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Albrecht. “Integrating Railway Track Maintenance and Train timeta-
bles”. In: Ph.D. thesis. University of South Australia. Adelaide (2009).
[2]
M. Backman and E. Solinen. “Timetable Rules and Strategies of Double
Track Maintenance Work”. In: ”Rail Norrkopping”, IAROR cocnference
(2019).
[3]
Banedanmark. About Banedanmark. Accessed: 2019-03-19.
[4]
Banedanmark. Personal interview. 2019.
[5]
C. Barkan. “Introduction to Rail Transportation”. https://web.engr.
uky.edu/~jrose/papers/REES%202012%20Introduction.pdf. 2012.
[6]
L. Bertacco. “Exact and Heuristic Methods for Mixed Integer Linear
Programs”. In: Ph.D. thesis. Universita Degli Studi Di Padova. Padova
(2005).
[7]
C. Borraz-Sánchez and D. Klabjan. “Strategic Gang Scheduling for Rail-
road Maintenance”. In: CCITT, Center for the Commercialization of
Innovative Transportation Technology, Northwestern University (2012).
[8]
BSI. Glossary of Maintenance Management Terms in Terotechnology.
British Standard Institution, 1984.
==PAGE:130==
122
Bibliography
[9]
G. Budai, D. Huisman, and R. Dekker. “Scheduling Preventive Railway
Maintenance Activities”. In: Journal of the Operational Research Society
(2006). doi: 10.1057/palgrave.jors.2602085.
[10]
CEN. EN 13848-5. Railway applications. Track. Track geometry quality.
Geometric quality levels. Plain line, switches and crossings. BSI, 2017.
[11]
A. Consilvio, A. Di-Febbraro, and R. Meo. “Risk-Based Optimal Schedul-
ing of Maintenance Activities in a Railway Network”. In: EURO Journal
on Transportation and Logistics (2018). doi: 10.1007/s13676- 018-
0117-z.
[12]
P. Corshammar. Perfect track. Lund, 2006.
[13]
G. Dantzig. Origins of the simplex method. Stanford, CA: Department
of Operations Research, Stanford University, 1987.
[14]
C. Dao, R. Basten, and A. Hartmann. “Maintenance Scheduling for
Railway Tracks under Limited Possession Time”. In: Journal of trans-
portation engineering:Part A (2018). doi: 10.1061/JTEPBS.0000163.
[15]
DSB. About DSB. Accessed: 2019-03-19.
[16]
M. Ehrgott. Multicriteria Optimization. Second Edition. Springer, 2005.
[17]
C. Esveld. Modern Railway Track. MRT-productions, 2001.
[18]
Eurostat. Labour Costs in the EU. Accessed: 2019-03-19. 2018.
[19]
M. Garey and D. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to
the Theory of NP-Completeness. Bell Telephone Laboratories, 1979.
[20]
Gurobi. Algorithms in Gurobi. Accessed: 2019-06-27. 2016.
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
123
[21]
Y. Haimes, L. Lasdon, and D. Wismer. “On a Bicriterion Formulation of
the Problems of Integrated System Identification and System Optimiza-
tion”. In: IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (1971).
doi: 10.1109/TSMC.1971.4308298.
[22]
F. Heinicke, A. Simroth, and G. Scheithauer. “On a Railway Mainte-
nance Scheduling Problem with Customer Costs and MultiDepots”. In:
Technical Report MATH-NM-01-2014. TU-Dresden. Dresden, Germany
(2014).
[23]
F. Heinicke, A. Simroth, and R. Tadei. “Job Order Assignment at Op-
timal Costs in Railway Maintenance”. In: 2nd International Conference
on Operations Research and Enterprise Systems (ICORES2013) (2013).
[24]
A. Higgins, L. Ferreira, and M. Lake. “Scheduling Rail Track Mainte-
nance to Minimise Overall Delays”. In: The 14th International Sympo-
sium on Transportation and Traffic Theory (1999).
[25]
F. Hillier and G. Lieberman. Introduction to Operations Research. McGraw-
Hill, 2001.
[26]
K. Holmberg, A. Adgar, A. Arnaiz, E. Jantunen, J. Mascolo, and S.
Mekid. E-maintenance. Springer, 2010.
[27]
IDA. “Fyraftensmøde: Planlægning og håndtering af afbrydelser på banenet-
tet”. 2019.
[28]
B. Indraratna and W. Salim. Mechanic of Ballasted Rail Track. A Geotech-
nical Perspective. Taylor Francis, 2005.
[29]
JFE. “Product Catalogue. Rail”. 2019.
==PAGE:132==
124
Bibliography
[30]
S. Jovanovic, D. Bozovic, and M. Tomicic-Torlakovic. “Railway Infras-
tructure Condition-Monitoring and Analysis as a Basis for Maintenance
Management.” In: Journal of the Croatian Association of Civil Engineers
(2014). doi: 10.14256/JCE.959.2013.
[31]
M. Kidd, R. Lusby, and J. Larsen. “Passenger- and Operator-oriented
Scheduling of Large Railway Projects”. In: Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies (2019). doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2019.03.008.
[32]
N. Klausen. “Electrification Project”. In: MSc. thesis. Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark. Lyngby (2017).
[33]
A. Lasisi. “Principal Component Analysis and Track Quality Index:
A Machine Learning Approach”. In: Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies (2018). doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2018.04.001.
[34]
T. Liden, T. Kalinowski, and H. Waterer. “Resource Considerations for
Integrated Planning of Railway Traffic and Maintenance Windows”. In:
Journal of Rail Transport Planning Management (2018). doi: 10.1016/
j.jrtpm.2018.02.001.
[35]
R. Macedo, R. Benmansour, and A. Artiba. “Scheduling Preventive Rail-
way Maintenance Activities with Resource Constraints”. In: Electronic
Notes in Discrete Mathematics (2017). doi: 10.1016/j.endm.2017.03.
028.
[36]
Canada Ministry of Transport. Rules Respecting Track Safety. Govern-
ment of Canada, 2011.
[37]
M. Miwa. “Mathematical Programming Model Analysis for the Opti-
mal Track Maintenance Schedule”. In: Japan Journal of Industrial and
Applied Mathematics (2002).
==PAGE:133==
Bibliography
125
[38]
M. Miwa and T. Oyama. “Mathematical Modeling Analyses for Ob-
taining an Optimal Railway Track Maintenance Schedule”. In: Japan
Journal of Industrial and Applied Mathematics (2006). doi: 10.1007/
BF03167551.
[39]
D. Montgomery and G. Runger. Applied statistics and probability for
engineers. WILEY, 2018.
[40]
ORE. “Dynamic Vehicle/Track Interaction Phenomena, From the Point
of View of Track Maintenance”. In: Union Internationale des Chemins
de Fer (UIC) (1988).
[41]
F. Pargar, O. Kauppila, and J. Kujla. “Integrated Scheduling of Pre-
ventive Maintenance and Renewal Projects for Multi-unit Systems with
Grouping and Balancing.” In: Computers & Industrial Engineering (2017).
doi: 0.1016/j.cie.2017.05.024.
[42]
C. Patiño-Rodriguez and F. Carazas. Maintenance and Asset Life Cycle
for Reliability Systems. 2019.
[43]
F. Peng, S. Kang, and X. Li. “A Heuristic Approach to the Rail Road
Track Maintenance Scheduling Problem”. In: Computer-Aided Civil and
Infrastructure Engineering (2011). doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8667.2010.
00670.x.
[44]
F. Peng and Y. Ouyang. “Track Maintenance Production Team Schedul-
ing in Railroad networks”. In: Transportation Research Part B (2012).
doi: 10.1016/j.trb.2012.07.004.
[45]
D. Pisinger. Where are the hard knapsack problems? Copenhagen, Den-
mark: Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, 2003.
==PAGE:134==
126
Bibliography
[46]
A. Pritsker, L. Watters, and P. Wolfe. “Multi-Project Scheduling with
Limited Resources: A zero-one Programming Approach”. In: Manage-
ment Science (1969).
[47]
V.A. Profillidis. Raiway Management and Engineering. Ashgate Publish-
ing Limited, 2014.
[48]
F. Santa, Toro A., and R. Lewis. “Correlations Between Rail Wear Rates
and Operating Conditions in a Commercial Railroad”. In: Tribology in-
ternational (2016). doi: 10.1016/j.triboint.2015.11.003.
[49]
R. Singleton, M. Marshall, R. Lewis, and G. Evans. “Rail Grinding for
the 21st Century – Taking a Lead From the Aerospace Industry”. In:
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part F: Journal
of Rail and Rapid Transit (2014). doi: 10.1177/0954409714527929.
[50]
P. Sroba. Rail Grinding Best Practice. National Research Council of
Canada, 2003.
[51]
C. Stenström and P. Norrbin. “Preventive and Corrective Maintenance–
Cost Comparison and Cost–Benefit Analysis”. In: Journal of Structure
and Infrastructure Engineering (2016). doi: 10.1080/15732479.2015.
1032983.
[52]
C. Vale, I. Ribeiro, and R. Calcada. “Application of a Maintenance
Model for Optimizing Tamping on Ballasted Tracks: the influence of the
model constraints”. In: 2nd International Conference on Engineering
Optimization (2010).
[53]
S. Van Aken, S. Van Thielen, and P Vansteenwegen. “Optimal Timeta-
bles in case of Temporarily Unavailable Tracks”. In: ”Rail Norrkopping”,
IAROR cocnference (2019).
==PAGE:135==
Bibliography
127
[54]
J. Van Zante-de Fokkert, D. Den Hertog, and F. Van den Berg. “The
Netherlands Schedules Track Maintenance to Improve Track Workers’
Safety”. In: Interfaces (2007). doi: 10.1287/inte.1060.0246.
[55]
S. Xie, C. Lei, and Y. Ouyang. “A Customized Hybrid Approach to In-
frastructure Maintenance Scheduling in Railroad Networks under Vari-
able Productivities”. In: Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engi-
neering (2018). doi: 10.1111/mice.12368.
[56]
J. Zhao, A. Stirling, and K. Madelin. “Optimizing Policies of Railway
Ballast Tamping and R½enewal”. In: Transportation Research Record
Journal of the Transportation Research Board (2006). doi: 10.3141/
1943-07.
==PAGE:136==
