==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Digital Media Engineering
Visually Exploring Temporal Patterns
of Self-Tracking Data
Diana Tofan (s172393)
2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Visualizing temporal data is a challenging task to achieve due to the complex nature
of time. Although a significant amount of research has been done in this regard, each
technique has its own limitations and can only be used with certain data types.
This thesis aims to deliver a web application capable of generating time series visual-
izations rich in information and easy to interact with. By using quantified-self data
collected from real subjects, the goal of the project is to help newcomers discover
meaningful patterns in their datasets, with minimum effort and maximum results.
The data visualization presented in this paper centers around a calendar heatmap that
displays the self-tracked observations over the span of a year. Each day in the calendar
encloses valuable insights and provides an in-depth analysis when clicked, showing the
event occurrences by hour and minute. Furthermore, multiple selection is supported
hence it is possible to compare many elements simultaneously, for identifying general
trends within the data.
To validate the usability of the system, a task-based evaluation was conducted when
the prototype became fully functional. The analysis of the results revealed that the
main objectives were indeed accomplished, however there are still certain areas open
for future research.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Digital Media Engineering.
This report describes the design and implementation of a web application that visual-
izes temporal data and facilitates the discovery of non-trivial patterns using modern
interaction techniques.
Kongens Lyngby, July 2, 2019
Diana Tofan (s172393)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would first like to thank my supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen, for providing invaluable
guidance and feedback through the development process.
Secondly, I would like to thank all the people who agreed to take part in the usability
test.
Without their input, it would have been impossible to detect the system’s
strengths and weaknesses.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge my family and friends for their moral support
and constant encouragement for the past six months.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal of the Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Analysis
5
2.1
Target Users
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Use Case Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Interactivity and Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Related Work
9
3.1
Information Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Personal Informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Visualifzation of Time-Oriented Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Software Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Design
21
4.1
System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Iterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Main Functionalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Implementation
37
5.1
Technology Stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Software Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Usability Evaluation
45
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.1
Description of the Usability Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Analysis of the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Lessons Learned
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Discussion
51
7.1
Major Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.2
Previous Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.3
Usability Testing Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8
Future Work
55
9
Conclusion
59
A Usability Testing
61
B Final Prototype
65
C Project Plan
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Visual exploration of temporal data has always been a matter of interest for mankind.
As time went by and technology evolved, time-series representations became ubiqui-
tous in many application fields like medicine, science, finance or management. The
popularity of time-series visualizations owes to their capacity to reveal hidden pat-
terns in an instant, through the power of graphic communication.
Time is a unique dimension in contrast to other types of quantitative data because
it exposes a hierarchical structure with many levels of granularity. Thus it can be
divided in weeks, days, hours, minutes etc. which significantly increases its complexity.
On top of that, the nature of time can be perceived as both linear, from past to
future, and cyclical, having a set of recurring values (e.g. the seasons of the year).
Considering all these factors, it becomes obvious that temporal data needs to be
treated differently from using conventional methods, for ensuring an accurate analysis
and interpretation [1].
The concept of ”quantified self” first emerged in 2007 to describe how people used
digital technologies for generating personal information about their bodies and ele-
ments of their everyday lives. Consequently, self-tracking data refers to data gathered
from wearable devices (e.g. smart watches, fitness trackers etc.) that measures some-
thing meaningful for an individual. The most extensive use of quantified-self data is
within the health sector [2]. A good example of such an application was presented in
a case study about a patient suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
who recorded his symptoms over a longer period of time using a one-button wrist-
band [3]. The observations provided valuable insights for the therapeutic process and
uncovered important bits of information which would have been neglected otherwise.
Sharing quantified-self data with others to seek treatment or solutions to a problem
leads to an ever growing number of people who must rely on time-dependent visual-
izations to help their customers. Although they may be knowledgeable in their field,
they are not all computer experts. Hence, they need an easy-to-use tool in order to
analyze and extract relevant information from the data under investigation.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Goal of the Thesis
The main goal of this study is to investigate the challenges associated with the graphic
representation of time and try to find a suitable solution for visualizing self-tracking
data. The target group of the system is represented by novice users who want to
extract valuable information from their data with minimum time and effort. Therefore
the tool is intended for specialists who are highly skilled in their fields but lack
computer proficiency, to improve the quality of their work.
Putting everything together, the central objective of the project is to deliver a highly-
interactive visualization easy to learn that maximizes the discovery of patterns in
temporal data. To achieve this goal, multiple aspects are considered, for ensuring
that users are not burdened with unnecessary technical details that would slow them
down.
Firstly, special focus is set on finding the right type of visualization that facilitates
interaction and overcomes usability problems. The thesis experiments with various
approaches of representing time and combines them together on a single display for
showing a comprehensive overview. These components are strongly tied together and
when the user interacts with any of the charts, all the rest are dynamically updated
as well.
As a key functionality, the visualization should allow switching between different
levels of granularity of time. It can start by showing a general overview of the events
distributed over the year, and then it can be expanded further so that individual
days, hours and minutes can be inspected. Besides the hierarchical challenge, the
users should be able to perform multiple comparisons between different units of time
(e.g. days, weeks, months etc.) so they can find correlations in the data. To facilitate
the interaction, keyboard shortcuts should be available, for a quicker and more precise
exploration of the time series.
There are also secondary objectives to accomplish. To begin with, device compati-
bility is an important factor. Since the system is aimed at a non-technical audience,
users should not be required to install additional software or deal with advanced con-
figurations. Besides, the visualization should be responsive and automatically adapt
to the user’s screen size so it can run smoothly on desktop computers, laptops, tablets
or mobile devices.
Performance is another thing to prioritize. Building a scalable web application is es-
sential because the amount of self-tracking data is growing quickly with every passing
moment. Thus the visualization should handle large datasets and provide a seamless
user experience, irregardless of the number of observations registered.
The system is primarily tested with quantified-self datasets measuring healthcare at-
tributes, however it should be generalized and handle any other datasets that contain
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Report Structure
3
similar timestamps. The final prototype should be user-friendly and clear to under-
stand, as it is aimed at a non-technical audience that needs to spend as little time as
possible on deciphering the visualization.
As a final goal, when the prototype becomes fully functional, a task-based evaluation
is conducted, where the participants are put in front of the visualization and are asked
to solve a set of given problems that test their understanding of the system.
1.2
Report Structure
The report opened with an introduction which described the research problem and
main objectives of this project.
Second chapter breaks the research problem into
smaller sub-problems and tries to analyze how they can be solved. The third chapter
moves towards the literature study and reviews the previous work that has been done
in this area, with respect to visualizing the dimension of time.
After gaining some background knowledge on the topic, the design and implementa-
tion of the system are described in Chapter 4 and 5. More specifically, Chapter 4
explains the development steps from a theoretical perspective, while Chapter 5 dives
into technical details and discusses the technologies used, along with the software
architecture of the system.
Chapter 6 shifts the focus to the task-based evaluation that was conducted on a few
subjects, for identifying the usability problems that require further improvements. A
short description of the questionnaire is provided and the users’ behaviour and course
of actions during the test is briefly examined. In the discussion chapter, the results
from the evaluation are evaluated, trying to interpret what they actually mean and
how are they relevant to the visualization. Chapter 7 offers some ideas on how could
the system be improved for an enhanced pattern recognition within the data. The
report ends with a conclusion, which sums up the most important findings of the
research.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
2.1
Target Users
As mentioned in the last chapter, the system designed in this paper is aimed at non-
experts.
To be more specific, what is meant by ”non-experts” is either complete
beginners or users who have basic knowledge of traditional charts (e.g. line chart, bar
chart, scatter plot etc.), but no experience in the field of exploratory data analysis
(EDA). EDA refers to the process of examining a dataset for the first time, to detect
patterns, spot anomalies, test hypotheses and check assumptions, with the help of
statistical graphics [4].
There are two groups of people who usually engage in a self-monitoring process [5].
The first group consists of private self-trackers who collect information about them-
selves voluntarily, for personal reasons (e.g. to lose weight, to improve sleep quality,
to be more productive at work etc.). On the other hand, the second category refers to
individuals who are pushed into self-tracking by others. A good example is the PTSD
case [3], where the patient shared his personal data with his therapist to develop an
effective treatment plan.
Another example could be the self-tracking program of
physical activity in people with diabetes to improve their glycemic control [6]. What
both situations have in common is the fact that regular people are sharing personal
data with a team of medical practitioners to benefit from their insights. This tool
focuses on the second category, hence it involves many different actors (e.g. patient
and health care professional) and aims to improve the communication between them
through visual aids.
The greatest challenge when designing such a system - which is in fact patient-oriented
- is how to encourage both parties to use the visualization to their benefit. The primary
actors, the patients, are fully responsible for the collection of their personal data,
which is why they need to be actively involved and engaged in the self-tracking process
over a long period of time. In order to ensure they are truly committed, it is extremely
important to create a user-friendly visualization they could check regularly to see a
summary of their health statistics, which would help them identify the major problems
in their lives and act on them accordingly. The secondary actors are represented by
medical practitioners, which includes a broad category of professionals like physicians,
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Analysis
therapists, nurses and many more, depending on the event being tracked and the
area of expertise it requires. Unlike patients, these are busy individuals with hectic
schedules who have hundreds of appointments every week and need to fit the people
seeking treatment into the available time slots. This is why they need an ”out-of-the-
box” tool easy to use, from which they can discern crucial details quickly during the
regular check-ups, for providing valuable feedback to their patients.
2.2
Use Case Scenario
This application primarily focuses on solving problems from the healthcare industry
and helps medical entities diagnose and treat their patients. To gain a better under-
standing of the system, imagine the hypothetical situation described in the PTSD
case [3], where a patient suffers from mental disease due to a traumatic event experi-
enced in combat. Even though the recovery process seems to be going pretty well and
the therapist is satisfied with the progress accomplished so far, the patient notices an
unusual behaviour in the past few months. He reports symptoms of hyperarousal at
irregular and unexpected times, deeply affecting his everyday social interactions and
job performance. Having been informed about that, the therapist gives the patient
a one-button device and tells him to press the button whenever he encounters such
outbursts again.
As instructed, the patient keeps track of his psychotic episodes over a longer period
of time and records every occurrence using the one-button device (Figure 2.1). In the
next session, they analyze the collected data and reflect together on possible reasons
that might have triggered these strong emotions. The patient continues tracking his
symptoms during the next few weeks, and with every passing moment, the number
of quantified-self observations increases, providing more and more input for the up-
coming sessions. In each session, the therapist discusses the data with the patient
and identifies why those episodes occurred in the first place and if they are somehow
related to other external factors neglected before (e.g. stress in the workplace, family
issues etc.). Based on the provided data, valuable advice is given for improving the
patient’s wellbeing.
It can be therefore concluded that visualizing time-dependent data can serve as a
powerful means of communication in a therapeutic session, maximizing the discovery
of crucial insights that can reveal - if put together - the root cause of the problem.
2.3
Interactivity and Navigation
The screen size has always posed a threat to the visualization of large datasets, since it
cannot reveal all the information at once. To address this issue, interactive techniques
were designed to deal with limited display space. As a result, graphical representations
can now be manipulated by the user with the help of a few interface widgets (e.g.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Interactivity and Navigation
7
Figure 2.1: Therapeutic process spanning over a longer period of time. A PTSD
patient shares self-tracked symptoms of hyperarousal with his therapist for a better
diagnosis and treatment
menu, slider etc.) or input devices (e.g. mouse, keyboard, pen etc.) [7]. The real
challenge however when designing such a system is how to make these interactions
easy to understand by non-experts, so they can benefit from them to gain meaningful
insights.
Interactivity allows users to extract information that cannot be seen in plain sight,
which might play a key role in studying the tracked phenomenon. There are some
guidelines that should be taken into account when developing a comprehensive visu-
alization [8]:
• Overview - The visualization should provide a general context for understanding
the dataset (i.e. showing the ”bigger picture”)
• Zooming and filtering - The visualization should allow users to remove unnec-
essary information from their visual field and focus on the region of interest
• Details on demand - The visualization should provide extra details about each
item only when the user specifically requests it
• Relations - The visualization should enforce the discovery of relationships be-
tween items
• History - The visualization should offer the ability to switch back and forward
in time, for a better understand of the data
In order to cover most of the recommended guidelines, a calendar view is chosen as
the central component of the visualization, due to its familiarity and simple use. At
first, it would show a general overview with all the distributions spread over a year,
offering the possibility to select particular days, months or weeks and inspect the
hourly intervals when those observations occurred.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Analysis
Navigation is another important factor to consider, especially when moving from
previous to next days in the calendar. Keyboard shortcuts should be supported, for a
much quicker exploration. Same goes for the multiple selection feature, which allows
users to compare specific days between each other for finding correlations. It would
be extremely tedious to select all the days from the dataset manually, thus a faster
approach needs to be available.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Related Work
This chapter will provide a brief literature review on the topic of time-series visual-
ization. First, the concept of ”information visualization” is explained. Then, some
significant visualization techniques heavily used in today’s society are described. The
final section focuses on the most relevant software applications specially developed to
facilitate exploratory analysis.
3.1
Information Visualization
The term ”visualization” is defined in the dictionary as being ”the act or process of
forming mental images”1. Therefore, visualization is a cognitive process that can be
facilitated by the use of computers. Using data visualization tools helps people build
mental representations of the world and gain insights unseen before.
Information visualization (InfoVis) is a special type of visualization and refers to
the use of interactive data visualizations tools in a way that maximizes the users’
understanding of the internal structure of the data and causal relationships in it
[9]. InfoVis is most useful when the users are unaware of the internal structure of
the system and prefer a less cognitive loaded method of exploration. Furthermore,
InfoVis reduces the time spent on searching for information and enhances pattern
recognition within the data [10].
There is a wide repertoire of InfoVis techniques, each destined to different types of
data. Shneiderman’s taxonomy [11] distinguishes seven data types: one-dimensional
(1D), two-dimensional (2D), three-dimensional (3D), temporal, multi-dimensional,
tree and network. 1D data comprises simple lists of items sorted by a single feature
(usually alphabetical order). 2D deals with geospatial analysis. 3D focuses on com-
puter graphics, simulations and digital modeling. In temporal data visualizations,
the items are characterized by a start and finish time and they present the risk of
overlapping. Multi-dimensional representations contain items with n attributes that
become points in a n-dimensional space. They can be displayed using 3D graphs
or parallel coordinates. Tree-based visualizations are connected, unweighted, acyclic
graphs and imply a hierarchical structure. In other words, all the items in a tree
1Source: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/visualization
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Related Work
expose parent-child relationships except for the root. Last but not least, networks
are also graphs, however their structure is unknown.
Irregardless of the data visualization type chosen, the following design guideline must
be followed at all times: ”Overview First, Zoom and Filter, then Details on Demand”
(also known as the Visual Information-Seeking Mantra [11]).
3.2
Personal Informatics
Personal informatics, also known as ”quantified self” or ”self-tracking”, is a collection
of systems that help people collect personal information about themselves to be more
aware of their behaviour. By tracking various aspects of their lives (e.g. sleep, calorie
intake, heart rate, daily steps etc.) people can improve their self-knowledge and gain
self-reflection, which are the two core concepts of personal informatics. Nowadays
there are plenty of self-tracking applications available for use that can collect valuable
insights about an individual and contribute to an increased wellbeing.
What all the personal informatics systems have in common is the stage-based model
[12]. This model details the five steps that a self-tracking user has to go through
when measuring a certain habit:
Figure 3.1: The stage-based model of personal informatics. When a user engages
in a self-tracking process, he/she has to go through five steps and overcome certain
barriers that arise at each level. Source: [12]
• Preparation - Preparation happens before the self-tracking process begins and
is all about the motivation behind. Here is where the user decides what infor-
mation to record and what device to use for achieving that.
• Collection - In this stage, people collect information about themselves and try
to keep themselves motivated in doing so.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Visualifzation of Time-Oriented Data
11
• Integration - The collected information is prepared, combined and transformed
to be ready for self-reflection.
• Reflection - The user reflects on the collected data by looking at the visualization
either on short or long term.
• Action - Having an understanding of the problem, the user takes the necessary
actions to introduce or eliminate particular behaviours from his/her life.
The area of study in this report centers around the reflection stage, thus the time-
series visualization is meant to enhance pattern recognition in self-tracking data
through highly-interactive techniques. The application also tries to overcome some
of the barriers that usually occur when the reflection stage is reached such as the
user’s lack of time or difficulty to interpret the visualization. To address these ob-
stacles, the analytical tool presented in this paper provides a holistic view of the
temporal dataset (from months to days to hours) and tries to facilitate the discovery
of non-trivial patterns in an engaging and user-friendly manner.
3.3
Visualifzation of Time-Oriented Data
Long before computers came into existence, people relied on visualization techniques
to search for patterns or trends in data over time. One of the oldest graphical represen-
tations dates back to the 10th century and consists of a time-series graph illustrating
planetary movements [13].
Prototype versions of today’s line, bar and pie charts
first emerged in 1786, when William Playfair published his book on economic mat-
ters called Commercial and Political Atlas. He is considered the founding father of
modern statistical graphs, completely changing the way people interpreted data and
setting the stage for many more visualizations to come.
The following section starts by summarizing some basic visualization techniques rel-
evant to this project. After that, since the dimension of time cannot be reduced to a
single type of visualization [14], the attention will be shifted towards more sophisti-
cated approaches.
3.3.1
Basic Techniques
One of the oldest forms of data visualization is represented by line graphs, dating
back to the late 1700s when William Playfair illustrated exports and imports be-
tween Denmark and Norway in his book (Figure 3.2a). Due to their simplicity and
precision, line graphs are powerful tools still in use today, as seen in a nearly identical
visualization from 2015 about financial trade [15] (Figure 3.2b).
The primary use of line charts is to display trends over a period of time. They consist
of a horizontal axis, where time units (years, months, hours of the day etc.) are evenly
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Related Work
(a) The first statistical line chart visualizing im-
ports and exports between Denmark and Nor-
way (1786)
(b) Visualization for Financial Times to illus-
trate financial trade (2015)
Figure 3.2: Old and modern uses of the line chart to graphically represent time.
Source: [15]
distributed in chronological order, and a vertical axis, depicting the magnitude of each
element. The continuous line is drawn by connecting individual data points across
the time interval.
By visualizing time as a progression from left to right, one can easily detect small
increases, decreases or fluctuations within the data and compare variables between
each other. However, there are certain limitations. Line charts may lead to the so-
called ”spaghetti plot” when too many lines are displayed together, making the chart
cluttered and unreadable. Besides, the wider the time range, the harder it becomes to
gain new insights about the data, thus it is fairly important to take into consideration
the size of the data before proceeding with this type of chart.
An extension to the line graph is represented by area charts. Similarly, they illustrate
the evolution of numeric variables over a time frame, the only difference being that the
area below the line is filled with colors or textures. This distinguishing feature makes
them a more suitable choice when the magnitude of the trend is more important than
individual data points. Hence, area charts address the bigger picture rather than
focusing on exact values.
Bar charts serve the same purpose as line graphs, showing how data evolved over
time. However, instead of a continuous line they contain rectangular blocks of equal
widths and varying heights. Each height corresponds to the value of the quantity being
represented. One of the greatest advantages bar charts bring is that the horizontal axis
is not limited to time variables. Consequently, data can be split into non-numerical
categories, making them extremely versatile.
Another powerful way of visualizing time-oriented data is based on heatmaps (Figure
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Visualifzation of Time-Oriented Data
13
3.3a).
Heatmaps are two-dimensional (2D) graphical representations that display
data as individually colored cells in a matrix. A darker shade indicates larger values
and vice versa. The main advantage of heatmaps is that they provide a great deal
of information without overwhelming the user. Subsequently, hidden patterns can
be extracted from large datasets in an instant. Same as area charts, heatmaps are
suitable when precision is not the central objective, due to the confusion that might
arise when colors look similar, yet they have different values.
(a) Heatmap example showing how each cell is
colored based on the value it encloses
(b) Digital remake of the first polar area diagram
depicting the cause of death of soldiers during
Crimean war
Figure 3.3:
Heatmap (left, source:
https://python-graph-gallery.com/92-
control-color-in-seaborn-heatmaps) and polar area diagram (right, source:
https://datavizcatalogue.com/methods/nightingale_rose_chart.html)
The concept of cyclical time arose in 1858, when Florence Nightingale took a different
approach and created a polar area diagram to identify the death cause of soldiers
during Crimean War (Figure 3.3b). This type of graph is characterized by circularly
arranged wedges which, unlike in the pie charts, have equal angles. Even though
polar area diagrams are a strong choice for displaying cyclical phenomena, they can
have a distorting effect, due to the larger discs standing out.
3.3.2
Advanced Techniques
Visualizing temporal data has always been a difficult task due to the complex nature of
time. Ordinary visualizations cannot deal with large quantities and would eventually
lead to overcluttered graphs, which poses a real threat on the discovery of meaningful
patterns. Over the years, a lot of interactive applications were developed to tackle
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Related Work
this issue. Aigner et al. [16] stress how important it is to consider the characteristics
of the data to be presented before proceeding with a certain visualization technique.
Three types of time-series are distinguished:
• Linear and cyclic
As the name implies, linear visualizations are characterized by a linear time
domain and are suitable for identifying general trends and outliers in the data.
On the other hand, cyclic visualizations deal with the complex nature of time,
detecting previously unknown periodic behaviours.
Spiral graphs have been first introduced in 2001 [17] and are a suitable choice
when comparing periodic behaviour in the data. The circular structure of spirals
allows for an easy detection of cycles, whereas using a spiral instead of a circle
ensures data continuity. Figure 3.4 shows a case where cyclical representation
of time is the key to discerning meaningful patterns.
Figure 3.4: Two views of the same health-related time series. There is no clear pat-
tern in the linear representation (left), however a weekly trend can be easily spotted
in the spiral visualization (right). Source: [14]
• Time points and intervals
Time points have no duration, in contrast to time intervals that can spread
over days, months or years. The 3D TimeWheel [18] specifically targets data
based on time points. As seen in Figure 3.5a, a time axis is placed in the middle
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Software Applications
15
and the axes encoding time-dependent attributes are circularly arranged around
the central axis.
Regarding time intervals, one approach worth mentioning is called Planning-
Lines [19] (Figure 3.5b). Design wise, the visualization looks similar to a Gantt
chart: tasks and sub-tasks from a larger project laid out on a timeline. However,
the paper solves the issue of uncertainty. Instead of estimating an exact time
for an activity, the duration is expanded with a start and end interval. Estimat-
ing a minimum and maximum duration is more accurate for real-life situations,
where usually not everything goes as planned due to external factors.
(a) 3D TimeWheel with a central axis
and circularly arranged time-dependent
attributes. Source: [18]
(b) PlanningLines employing temporal uncertainties.
Source: [19]
Figure 3.5: 3D TimeWheel for visualizing time points (left) and PlanningLines for
dealing with intervals (right)
• Ordered and unordered
Ordered time domains assume data is sequential and occurs chronologically. Un-
ordered domains are exactly the opposite, thus data is distributed in a chaotic
manner. Most temporal visualizations embrace the idea of ordered time and
not much research has been done on irregular time with multiple perspectives.
3.4
Software Applications
When it comes to discovering relationships of events over time, static visualizations
are insufficient and prone to loss of information.
Users need to interact with the
data in order to discover hidden insights. Various approaches have been taken in
this direction and many software tools were implemented for an effortless time-series
analysis. The following section will outline some of the existing tools that have served
as source of inspiration for this paper.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Related Work
3.4.1
Density Heatmap
Mortiz and Fisher [20] presented in their paper a novel approach for displaying large-
scale data efficiently. Instead of showing hundreds of overlapping lines, the overall
density of the time series is calculated. This allows users to identify major trends in
the data and similarities to other datasets.
To compute the lines’ density, a sequence of steps is followed. First, the algorithm
starts with a simple line graph encapsulating time-oriented data (like the one in Figure
3.6a). Each line from this graph is separately analyzed and - after a few mathematical
operations applied to it - returns a matrix. Adding all the matrices together yields
the final result (e.g. Figure 3.6b is the sum of two matrices).
The line-matrix conversion is a more advanced procedure relying on computer graph-
ics geometry. Simply put, each line is rendered over a 2D matrix, where each cell is
a bin in the time/value space. The bins are set to 1 if the line passes through them,
otherwise 0. The bins are then normalized by the number of items in their column
and the final matrix is obtained.
Density heatmaps are an excellent approach of tackling big data when precision is
not crucial. This type of visualization can convey a lot of information within seconds.
Besides, it’s specifically designed for dealing with millions of individual records there-
fore it scales extremely well. Nevertheless, this technique is not suitable for gaining
insights into self-tracking data, since it only shows an aggregate trend, making it
impossible to trace each individual line.
(a) Model of two time series with constant fre-
quency (blue) and increasing frequency and ampli-
tude (orange)
(b) Density heatmap of the two time series
Figure 3.6: DenseLines algorithm. Source: [20]
3.4.2
Calendar-based
Wijk and Selow [21] developed an analytical tool that identifies patterns in temporal
data by combining clusters with calendar templates. By clustering, data is divided
into groups, each group containing days with similar patterns. Then, for visualiz-
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Software Applications
17
ing the results, a calendar view is used, to maximize the discovery of insights. This
method proved to be highly effective and user-friendly, emphasizing non-trivial pat-
terns clearly.
Figure 2.3 illustrates a screenshot from the application, where the
number of employees in a workplace over the year was visualized. One may notice
how the weekdays and weekends stand out, along with the public holidays and school
vacations. This information is strongly tied to the show-up times at the office, as
seen in the graph on right. With regards to interactivity, each day from the calendar
can be clicked and the other days with similar behaviour will be revealed. Besides,
the number of clusters generated can be manually defined to increase the algorithm’s
accuracy.
Figure 3.7: Cluster calendar view summarizing the number of employees in a work-
place over the year. Source: [21]
Given their ability to display large sequences of time series in a single visualization,
cluster calendars can indisputably provide valuable insights. Besides, this software
tool has a shallow learning curve, therefore it is aimed at all kinds of users, either
experts or novices. Because repetitive data patterns are grouped together, analysis
becomes easier, due to certain behaviours being highlighted.
However, analyzing
multiple variables all at once is not possible at this point, so it is much harder to spot
correlations between items. Lack of correlations may lead to unexposed relationships,
hence data analysis might be incomplete, leaving out important details. This paper
solved the issue of multiple selection, so that multiple variables could be compared
between each other.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Related Work
Moving on, another calendar-based visualization was introduced in 2018 [22] to deal
with time-dependent information. The paper analyzes data about foot traffic in Mel-
bourne (Australia), gathered from 43 street sensors installed across the city. Since
pedestrian congestion rate updates at a fast pace every hour, using heatmap calen-
dars would be insufficient because they cannot use time scales smaller than a day.
This is where line graphs come into place. By replacing color-encoded graphics with
line graphs, users can observe trends in the data when looking at the hours of the
day. Figure 2.4 presents a use case of this application, which revolves around three
city landmarks in Melbourne: State Library (dark purple), the underground station
Flagstaff (light purple) and Birrarung Marr, a centrally located park (orange). It is
immediately noticeable how Flagstaff station is almost empty during the weekends
and public holidays, while libraries are packed with students all year round.
Figure 3.8: Calendar with line graphs illustrating pedestrian traffic in Melbourne,
Australia. Source: [22]
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Discussion
19
As underscored in the paper, this type of visualization is highly beneficial when the
user’s intention is to explore predictable phenomena such as consumer needs or human
behaviour. Calendars incorporating line charts can easily reveal general trends in the
data even if the time series spread over a long period of time. However, not being able
to select particular days and inspect each hour, along with the risk of overplotting,
are some limitations that were specifically addressed in this project.
3.5
Discussion
An enormous amount of research has been done to graphically represent time. Tem-
poral data is extremely complex and presents many characteristics, therefore finding
the right type of visualization requires a prior investigation of the problem. Plenty of
techniques have been developed to deal with various aspects of time, however most of
these techniques present a major drawback - they are not aimed at the novice users.
Even though the software applications are powerful innovative tools, they must be
used by the right persons with an appropriate set of skills in data analysis and ex-
ploration for a proper understanding. This is unviable for health care professionals
or medical practitioners for example, who are busy individuals and cannot afford to
spend too much time in learning how to use the visualization. In conclusion, every-
thing should be as straightforward as possible without causing non-experts cognitive
overload.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Design
This chapter will discuss the development stages of this project from a theoretical
perspective. Since the system design choices were carefully planned and refined over
the semester based on external feedback, they will be thoroughly detailed in the next
sections. First, the project iterations are presented. Then each component is reviewed
individually and the logic behind it is explained. The final section focuses on some key
features of the application, features which played a central role in the visualization
and on which most time was spent to ensure a proper functioning.
4.1
System Overview
Before diving into the system design, it is essential to understand where did the data
come from. Each dataset used for testing purposes belongs to a real person who - at
some point - tracked specific events in his/her life. The data was recorded with the
help of a one-button device that when pressed, stored the corresponding timestamp
in a CSV file (Figure 4.1).
Figure 4.1: High-level view of the system. The system generates data visualizations
based on input CSV files containing observations tracked using a one-button device
A timestamp is a sequence of characters encoding time-oriented information. In this
project, all timestamps have a common structure: YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss, where
YYYY-MM-DD represents the date and HH:mm:ss is the hour when the observation oc-
curred. When a timestamp is saved in the table, additional information are inserted
as well, such as the time zone offset (GMT) and button press duration (in millisec-
onds). Even though all the necessary data is recorded in the CSV file, staring at plain
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Design
text does not bring any value. This is what this application tries to accomplish. By
relying on data visualization techniques, the main goal of the system is to help users
quickly identify patterns, reflect on them and gain useful insights.
4.2
Iterations
This application followed an iterative design approach hence it was built incrementally,
iteration by iteration (Figure 4.2). Each iteration lasted between 2-3 weeks and was
meticulously planned and tested. The feedback collected from a previous iteration
was implemented in the next one until the final version was reached.
As seen in Figure 4.2, most iterations are visually similar, however a lot of work has
been done performance wise. The functionalities and response times were constantly
improved and are operating now at their fastest capacity.
Iteration 1 (Figure 4.2a) was the first step in developing the time-series visualization.
After days of investigating what were the optimal tools suited for this kind of appli-
cation, the technology stack has been chosen and the figure presents a demo example
integrating all these tools. As observed, a calendar heatmap was created to display
temporal observations taken from a small dataset. The dataset contained a list of 9
timestamps which were pre-processed before being shown. The darker the color, the
larger the number of observations recorded that day. Grey means zero observations.
Second iteration (Figure 4.2b) extended the previous visualization. A drag-and-drop
component was added and the application was optimized to handle larger, real-life
datasets. The weekday order has been changed from Sunday - Saturday to Monday -
Sunday, since this format would facilitate the discovery of patterns, due to workdays
and weekends being explicitly separated.
Iteration 3 (Figure 4.2c) reveals more information about the uploaded data by allow-
ing users to select particular days and inspect the intervals when those observations
occurred. Because the time of day spans across 24 hours and day hours exhibit a
different behaviour from night hours, an initial approach was to use a butterfly chart
for isolating them. Even though the yellow-blue color palette was self-explanatory
and did not require further clarification, the real disadvantage was how much time
would the novice user spend on understanding this type of graphics to interpret it
correctly. Besides, having a central axis with left and right values might have led to
confusion since left usually indicates negative values which was not the case here.
In iteration 4 (Figure 4.2d), the butterfly chart was replaced with a bar chart. Addi-
tionally, an area chart was displayed on top of the bar chart, indicating the average
week overview of the other 6 days in contrast to the selected day. Being able to com-
pare one day to the other days in the same week is a useful feature for data analysts
because they can easily detect outliers and reflect upon them (why did they happen,
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Iterations
23
(a) Iteration 1.
Basic version of a calendar
heatmap tested on a small dataset
(b) Iteration 2. Extended calendar heatmap sup-
porting drag-and-drop file upload
(c) Iteration 3.
Butterfly chart providing an
overview of the selected day
(d) Iteration 4. Bar chart for day overview and
area chart for week average
(e) Iteration 5. Clickable months and weekdays
showing the average time-of-day variation
(f) Iteration 6. Vertical line and sequential reds
to pinpoint when most observations occurred
(g) Iteration 7. Clickable bars with updated color
based on the average color of all selected items in
the heatmap
(h) Iteration 8.
Radial chart showing the week
average and multiple selection implemented
Figure 4.2: Iterations summarizing the development stages of the visualization
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Design
under what circumstances, are there any similar days etc.).
In fifth iteration (Figure 4.2e), month labels and weekday labels became clickable.
Just by interacting with the visualization at this stage, one may gain meaningful
insights and get answers to key questions that might uncover hidden patterns within
the data (e.g. which month had peak values, is there a difference between workdays
and weekends, were summers more impactful than winters etc.).
Iteration 6 (Figure 4.2f) introduced a vertical line that could be dragged across the
area chart line to examine all values in each particular point.
Furthermore, each
day could now be compared to the month containing it or the other weekdays, in
addition to the week overview. Another update centered around the day’s, month’s
or weekday’s color when selected. While in the previous iteration all the selected items
were colored red, it has been concluded that using the same shade for everything would
result in loss of information, due to the initial intensity values not being preserved.
Therefore the red color has been replaced with a sequential color scheme to indicate
on which days did most observations occur, even when the user interacts with the
data.
In iteration 7 (Figure 4.2g), the individual bars from the bar chart became clickable.
When pressed, each bar reveals the exact times when the observations were recorded
in HH:MM format. What’s more, every hour in the list differs by size, according to
the number of observations it encloses.
Last iteration (Figure 4.2h) introduced a radial chart providing a general overview of
the data. This way, the users can identify the peak weekdays at first sight, without
the need to interact with the visualization. Moreover, multiple selection has been
implemented, so that one item could be compared against the entire dataset or some
other specific items. For selecting multiple entries at once, keyboard shortcuts are
used (Shift + Click - select some, Shift + A - select all).
4.3
Components
The time-series visualization is the results of many components tied together to create
a larger whole. This subchapter will discuss each one in part, from an incipient stage
to the final version. The challenges that needed to be solved during the implementa-
tion phase will also be highlighted.
4.3.1
Calendar Heatmap
The calendar heatmap is the central component on which this prototype is based. As
illustrated in Figure 4.3, one can see on top of the visualization the year label. If the
observations stretch over multiple years, it is possible to move forwards or backwards
in time by pressing left and right arrows. These arrows are inactive in case the data
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Components
25
spans across the same year (as in the picture). The week numbers are placed just
below the year label and are clickable, providing the average observations for the
selected week. Usually a year has 52 weeks. On leftmost side, the weekday labels
were placed, from Monday to Sunday. They are also clickable. The month names can
be found on the bottom side and - just like the other labels - show the average when
pressed.
Figure 4.3: Calendar heatmap showing the concentration of events over the year
Moving on to the months of the year, each month contains 28-30 days which are
rendered in chunks to speed up the loading times.
Each day is represented by a
small circle in the heatmap and differs by color, based on the number of observations
recorded that day. Because interpreting the meaning of each color is self-explanatory,
the legend was skipped on purpose. A lot of emphasis has been put on calculating
the days’ colors correctly. The process will be detailed in the next section.
4.3.2
Bar Chart
The bar charts appears when one selects a day, month, week or weekday and shows
the hourly intervals when the average observations were recorded. It consists of a
vertical axis representing the number of observations and a horizontal axis containing
the hours of the day. The timestamps use Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) by
default. Using a bar chart is advantageous because any user, irregardless of his/her
background, can understand it instantly. Bar charts can sum up the bigger picture
and provide a general overview of the data only in a matter of seconds. As an example,
Figure 4.4 quickly reveals that most observations occurred in the afternoon, between
17-18.
When a day is selected, there are three checkboxes placed below the bar chart: week
overview, month overview and weekdays. If any of them is checked, a semi-transparent
area graph will be rendered over the bar chart to illustrate how the selected day
compares to the average of the other days in the same week, month or weekday. For
instance, in Figure 4.5a, when 22nd of June is selected and the weekday overview is
required, then the observations from all the other Thursdays will be summed up and
divided by the number of Thursdays in the dataset, yielding the average values. It
can be observed how huge is the difference between the selected Thursday and all the
other Thursdays, which have significantly fewer observations recorded on average.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Design
Figure 4.4: Bar chart showing the time-of-day variation of the self-tracked events.
When any of the three checkboxes on bottom is checked, an area chart appears com-
paring the selected day to the other days in the same week, month or weekday
(a) Area chart comparing the selected day to the
other days from the same week
(b) Modal showing the exact hours and minutes
when all observations between 21-22 were recorded
Figure 4.5: Additional functionalities of the bar chart: area chart for depicting
the week average (left) and modal for showing the exact hours and minutes of the
registered events (right)
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Components
27
The modal is the dialog box that shows up when the user clicks on any bar from the
bar chart. Its purpose is to provide exact information regarding the hour and minute
when a certain observation was recorded (in HH:MM format). Besides, each text
string depicting temporal information varies in size to avoid rendering duplicate data.
For example, if the user pressed the one-button device n times at the exact same
HH:MM, the font size will increase accordingly. Figure 4.5b is a suitable example
illustrating the time string’s size. It becomes obvious how 21:16 is the time when
most observations were tracked, in contrast to the other entries.
4.3.3
Radial Chart
The radial chart acts as a cyclical alternative to the bar chart and depicts the weekday
average.
A quick analysis of the radial chart reveals when did most occurrences
happen. In Figure 4.6a, Saturdays and Sundays stand out, so this might indicate
that certain events happening on work days are accountable for the user’s symptoms.
The radial chart is highly interactive. When one places the mouse over a certain
weekday, the corresponding items in the above heatmap are highlighted in shades of
blue (Figure 4.6b). Besides, pressing a radial bar will update the bar chart with the
average observations recorded on the selected weekday.
(a) Radial chart highlighting that a
lot fewer events occurred on Saturdays
and Sundays
(b) Hover effect on radial bar. Placing the mouse
over a circular bar highlights the weekdays in the
heatmap in blue, while clicking on a circular bar
updates the bar chart on left with the correspond-
ing weekday average
Figure 4.6:
Radial chart showing the most impactful weekdays from the entire
dataset (left) and mouse-over effects triggered when inspecting each circular bar cor-
responding to a particular weekday (right)
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Design
4.4
Main Functionalities
The following paragraphs will discuss the primary functionalities of the system, with
a strong focus on the design challenges faced while developing the visualization. First,
the sequential color scheme from the heatmap is explained, since it has been changed
and improved continuously over the iterations, to maximize the identification of pat-
terns.
Then the multiple selection mechanism is introduced, along with the user
navigation process. Next, the application performance is discussed, explaining how
it handles large datasets. Finally, the subchapter ends with an overview of the visu-
alization in terms of responsiveness.
4.4.1
Color Interpolation
Color interpolation helps creating smooth transitions between two colors by linearly
interpolating the color coordinates. Given two colors A and B, the in-between colors
can be derived algebraically: C(λ) = (1−λ)A+λB, where 0 < λ < 1 [23]. The result
varies on the color space and coordinate system used.
The application presented in this thesis was developed in D3.js, which is one of the
most well-known JavaScript libraries for creating data visualizations that run in the
browser. Being such a large scale library, its API contains a plethora of functions
grouped logically according to their area of interest. There are hundreds of functions
for mathematical operations, array manipulations, geometry, time, color and many
more. For computing the color values of each day, the d3-scale-chromatic module
was used which generated sequential, single-hue color scales.
The purple and orange schemes were generated by using d3.interpolatePurples(t)
and d3.interpolateOranges(t), where t is in the range [0,1]. Given a number t,
these functions return the corresponding color from the palette as an RGB string.
Figure 4.7 illustrates the single-hue color schemes used in this application. It can be
observed how the colors become darker as the value of t increases. In the case of this
application, t was set between [0.25,1] to avoid extremely bright shades.
However, it was later noticed that when the number of observations exceeded 60,
the shades of purple were almost similar in intensity and some totally different days
gave the illusion that they exposed the same patterns. This issue has been solved by
using a new tool called ”Chroma.js Color Palette Helper1”, which helps equalizing
multi-hue colors scales through Bezier interpolation and lightness correction. Bezier
interpolation eases the blending of the colors, while lightness correction ensures a
linear progression throughout the scale. As a result, the new shades looked softer
and revealed a more accurate representation of the values they encoded (Figure 4.8).
1Link: https://gka.github.io/palettes
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Main Functionalities
29
(a) Array of purples
(b) Array of oranges
Figure 4.7: Sequential color schemes used in the heatmap to represent eventful days
(purple) or highlight selected items (orange). Given a number t in the range [0.25,1],
the functions d3.interpolatePurples(t) (top) and d3.interpolateOranges(t) (bottom)
returned the corresponding colors as RGB strings. Source: https://github.com/
d3/d3-scale-chromatic
(a) Initial purple scheme. Colors are darker, giv-
ing the false illusion that the days present a lot
more observations than they actually do
(b) Final purple scheme. Colors are lighter, pro-
viding a more accurate representation of the event
distribution
Figure 4.8: Enhanced algorithm for color interpolation. Initially the colors were
generated using the chromatic functions provided by D3 (left), but the Chroma.js
tool was introduced later for an increased accuracy (right)
4.4.2
Multiple Selection
Multiple selection allows users to compare one item with another simultaneously. This
feature was implemented to act as a shortcut for the data analysts, who instead of
selecting each entry of interest individually can see a quick overview of all combined.
Selecting multiple items at once can extract valuable insights from the data, as the
correlations between days and outliers stand out.
For increasing the user interactivity, the visualization is keyboard-controlled in an
intuitive manner. When one item is selected, pressing Shift + A will show the user
an average of the entire dataset (Figure 4.9a). The average is illustrated through an
overlayed area graph onto the bar chart. Being able to compare one day in contrast to
all the others is a quick yet effective way of identifying whether the person’s behaviour
was abnormal or not. The users are also able to select some specific items from the
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Design
calendar, by using Shift + Click (Figure 4.9b). Consequently, a day can be compared
with the average of some other days, weeks, months or weekdays. Deselection of items
is straightforward and requires clicking the highlighted item for the second time (same
as in a toggle button).
(a) The selected item from the heatmap is com-
pared against the average daily overview of the
entire dataset (Shift + A)
(b) The selected item from the heatmap is com-
pared against the average daily overview of the
days highlighted in orange (Shift + Click)
Figure 4.9: Multiple selection of the entire dataset (left) or particular days (right)
for comparison
4.4.3
Interactivity and Navigation
As one may recall, ensuring a proper interactivity and navigation counts among one
the main objectives set in the beginning of this paper (Section 2.3), therefore the ap-
plication supports the option of switching from one time granularity to another while
relying on navigation buttons or keyboard shortcuts to move forward or backward in
time.
The first graphic element that pops up immediately after a dataset is uploaded is the
calendar heatmap, showing the distribution of the self-monitored events over the year.
This heatmap presents a high level of interactivity and basically all items are clickable
and can reveal further information, as illustrated in Figure 4.10. Each day from the
calendar can be clicked for a further analysis of the observations sorted by the hour
of the day. The week indices, weekdays and months (called ”labels” in the figure) are
also clickable and provide the average time-of-day variation for the days belonging to
the selected unit. When a day with zero observations is chosen, a message informing
the user that no data was recorded back then is shown on behalf of the bar chart.
When any item from the heatmap is selected, navigation techniques are supported.
The users can switch from next to previous element in the dataset in two ways: either
by pressing on the arrow icons found in the header section of both the calendar and
bar chart (Figure 4.11) or using left and right arrows as keyboard shortcuts (purple).
In case an extremity is reached, the arrow icons become inactive. For example, the
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Main Functionalities
31
Figure 4.10: Interactive elements in the calendar heatmap. Clicking on any day or
label generates a bar chart below, illustrating the corresponding time-of-day variation
observations from Figure 4.11 span over a time frame smaller than a year, thus the
arrows are disabled.
Figure 4.11: Navigation headers for moving back or forth in time (purple). Users
can switch from next to previous time unit either by clicking on the arrow buttons
(blue) or using left and right arrows as keyboard shortcuts
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Design
4.4.4
UTC Timestamps
UTC stands for ”Coordinated Universal Time” and has the same value all over the
world, irregardless of the time zone [24]. Standardizing time in UTC format offers
many advantages over using different time zones because there is no need anymore
to check whether a particular location is subject to daylight saving time (DST) (also
known as ”summer time”) or shifted its clock back/forth. As long as the users are
notified that all timestamps in the visualization are UTC, it is much easier for them
to convert the time series to their local clock instead of facing high levels of confusion
that might arise when dealing with different time zones. Switching to UTC is also
a sensible approach for travelers who record their observations all around the globe.
The timestamps should be unambiguous and independent of where the observations
came from, for preserving consistency.
Guessing a place’s local time is a tricky thing to do. Usually time zones are one hour
wide, however there are exceptions to the rule. Time zones can differ not only by one
hour, but also 15, 30 or over 60 minutes. What’s more, some areas change their DST
or time zones frequently and unpredictably, rising uncertainty and leading to errors
when the conversion to local time is performed. For example, if one person records
an observation at 23:45, there is a high risk that this observation could be shown as
belonging to the next day, which heavily alters the information perceived by the user.
Dealing with time zones as a developer is extremely complex because there are too
many corner cases to handle [25]. Even if all the rules are strictly followed, sudden
changes might occur. To give an example, Samoa skipped a day in 2011, jumping
from 29th of December to 31st to align with trade partners from Australia. Then,
in 2013 the Lybian government decided that they were not going to shift the clocks
back and remained on DST instead. In addition, there are two populations living
in the same location who rely on different time zones due to their beliefs (Israel and
Palestine). And the stories do not end here. It is nearly impossible to keep track of
all the time zones changes across the globe. Hence, having continuity in the data is
more important than having accurate time.
Considering all the factors above, using UTC was the safest way for representing time,
since it maximizes the discovery of patterns while avoiding the time zones ambiguity.
4.4.5
Performance Optimization
As previously mentioned, a lot of emphasis has been put on performance optimiza-
tion during the development phase. While the iterations progressed and more features
were added, the application increased in complexity affecting the response times. Ob-
serving performance issues on small datasets (< 500 records) was hardly noticeable.
However, when it came to larger files (> 5,000 records) the system felt much slower
due to longer waiting times before rendering the visualizations.
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Main Functionalities
33
The application was designed so that one could upload a CSV file and then, based
on the provided timestamps, the system would generate data visualizations. Conse-
quently, when the code was running, heavy computations were being performed prior
to showing the calendar and the charts. At this stage the users would stare at a blank
white screen. Only after the program finished executing would they actually see the
visual representations built upon their datasets.
The first and most obvious step in improving the user experience was to find an alter-
native to the blank screen showed while the system was generating the visualizations.
This needed to be fixed because a static white page could have misled people into
thinking the application was malfunctioning. Therefore, to convey a clear message
that the application was loading, a rotating spinner was introduced.
Unfortunately, using a progress indicator in the user interface was not enough since
the loading times were still unacceptably high. Something needed to be done with
respect to the underlying logic. A summary of the loading times in each iteration can
be observed in Figure 4.12, which indicates how long it took the system to generate
visualizations given a large dataset with almost 6,000 records. The application was
developed on a MacBook Pro 2017 with a 2,3 GHz Intel Core i5 processor and 8GB
of RAM.
Figure 4.12: Loading times for a dataset with ≈6,000 records (on a MacBook Pro
2017 with 2,3 GHz Intel Core i5 CPU and 8GB RAM)
The average load time of most webpages nowadays is 8.66 seconds [26]. However,
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Design
Google carried out a research in 2018 and discovered that 53% of people will leave a
page if it takes longer than 3 seconds. Turning back to Figure 4.12, one may observe
how the run time gradually increased until the 4th iteration. This was due to new
functionalities being implemented, causing the application to grow in size. In iteration
5, when progressive rendering was introduced, the loading speed slightly improved,
jumping from 14 to 10 seconds. Progressive rendering is a special technique that
splits large datasets into chunks and renders each chunk iteratively, in a loop. In
this case, progressive rendering was applied on the calendar heatmap, so instead of
showing a rotating spinner until all the days of the year were fully loaded, the users
could observe how the calendar was populated with more and more items second by
second. In the 6th iteration, the maximum peak value was registered (20 seconds),
because the color interpolator’s functionality was extended. The selected items did
not have the same red color anymore (as in Figure 4.2e), but preserved their intensity
values instead (Figure 4.2f). Last iterations fixed this performance issue with lazy
loading.
Before explaining the concept of lazy loading, it is important to understand how the
application behaved when the maximum peak was reached (more exactly in iteration
6 - Figure 4.2f). When a dataset was uploaded into the system, the program checked
in which days of the year did the observations occur. Days with 0 observations were
colored gray and were not stored in memory. However if a day contained at least 1
observation, its date would be saved, along with 2 colors: the purple value, known
as the default shade when the heatmap was rendered, and the orange value, which
showed up only if that day was chosen or belonged to a selected group. Hence, prior
to displaying the visualizations, the system calculated all the color values for all days,
even if they were not needed sometimes. This let to serious slowdowns. Considering
a dataset with 300 days of observations, the system needed to store 600 different
colors in memory before rendering the visualization (2 for each day). Not to mention
that the process of identifying the colors’ intensity in relation to the entire dataset
was mathematically expensive, especially if performed 600 times. This is where lazy
loading came into place.
Lazy loading is a common design pattern in computer programming that defers the
initialization of an object until the point at which is needed.
In other words, it
improves performance and saves system resources by delivering to the users only
content that is specifically requested (Figure 4.13). Lazy loading drastically decreased
the loading times for this application up to the point at which it reached a speed of
2 seconds. Even if 2 seconds is shown on the graph, it has to be mentioned that it
actually takes less than one second for the calendar heatmap to show up and start
rendering the days. 2 seconds is the time by which the data visualization is fully
loaded and ready to interact with.
To review the process, using lazy loading completely changed how colors are stored
in memory. Going back to the example with 300 days of observations, uploading this
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Main Functionalities
35
Figure 4.13: The lazy loading technique where the initialization of objects is delayed
until they are actually needed. Source: https://github.com/codefacebook/lazy-
load-images.js
dataset initially triggered 600 function calls for populating the color array. Hence,
the color array saved for each particular day both its purple and orange values before
rendering the actual calendar heatmap.
Lazy loading optimized the performance
by skipping the color array completely.
Consequently, when uploading a dataset,
the visualization is displayed almost instantly, since it does not need to perform
unnecessary heavy computations.
Instead of calculating the entire color array prior to the visualization, this array is
now calculated gradually, while the user interacts with the data. When a day from the
calendar is selected, the program automatically stores in memory the orange value for
3 days: previous, current and next. Computing colors for both the selected day and
its adjacent days is needed because when someone navigates from one day to another,
the bar chart colors update dynamically based on the data distribution, therefore the
orange value indicating the number of observations must be known in advance.
Another special case that was considered is when the users select an entire month,
week or weekday and the system did not store in memory the color values for those
days before. Since the bar chart colors must update dynamically based on the average
color of the compound days, the color of each day in the selected group is computed,
saved and then used for calculating the average color shown on the bars.
Wrapping it up, lazy loading offered an impressive performance boost and greatly
improved user experience. Not only did the webpage become noticeably faster, but
also the keyboard interaction turned out to be extremely responsive, as switching
from one day to another became smooth and painless.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Design
4.4.6
Responsive Design
Responsive design adapts the layout of a web application based on the user’s device
for delivering a fluid experience [27]. The data visualization developed in this pa-
per is responsive, hence it scales dynamically to fit the available screen space while
preserving the aspect ratio.
Figure 4.14 presents how the visualization would be
rendered on a laptop, monitor, tablet and smartphone. It can be observed how the
calendar heatmap and bar chart ”shrink” but still manage to maintain their appear-
ances when the device width becomes smaller. Additionally, if the screen space is
limited, the three charts are stacked on top of each other (as in the case of the tablet
or smartphone) for an improved readability.
Figure 4.14: The visualization at different device resolutions (on a laptop, desktop
computer, tablet and smartphone)
Since building scalable websites is different from designing scalable visualizations,
two approaches were used to ensure responsiveness. For managing the web elements,
media queries were written to address different screen resolutions (called breakpoints).
In Figure 4.14, when the device width is smaller than 1000 pixels, the three charts
are vertically aligned, otherwise the heatmap stays on top and the bottom region is
occupied by the bar chart on left (70% wide) and radial chart on right (30% wide).
For making the SVG charts responsive, JavaScript window resize events were imple-
mented. These events are functions that are called when the components are first
inserted into the DOM2 or whenever the document view has been resized. The event
handlers are responsible for calculating the new width of the screen in pixels and
update the visualization based on them.
2Read more: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document_Object_Model
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
This chapter will elaborate on the analysis and design of the system, providing an
in-depth technical description regarding the implementation. First, the technology
stack is presented and the motivation behind choosing those specific development
tools is revealed. Second section focuses on the overall structure of the application
and examines the major components of the visualization, along with the relationships
between them. Finally, last section dives into the code base and reviews the most
important features that were implemented.
5.1
Technology Stack
The time-series visualization was built as a web application in JavaScript and three
main libraries were used, namely D3.js, React and Redux. The web-based platform
was chosen due to the advantages it provides: there is no need to download it before
being used, it is compatible with all operating systems and the maintenance is much
easier. The three libraries will be detailed next and then the last subsection will
explain how exactly they were tied together.
5.1.1
D3.js
D3.js stands for ”Data-Driven Documents” and is a JavaScript library built on top
of common web standards like HTML, CSS and SVG, used for generating interactive
visualizations in the browser. D3 transforms raw data into rich animated content tied
to existing web page elements. It allows developers to create sophisticated visualiza-
tions that can be updated dynamically. D3 follows a declarative approach, meaning
that its code describes what should be visualized and not how it should be done [28]
(processes referred to as ”selection” and ”data binding” in D3 nomenclature).
In order to create a visualization, one has to start with a simple dataset which will
be processed accordingly and then, based on the transformed data, choose what kind
of chart would be mostly suited to accomplish the desired goals. D3 is a powerful
library that goes beyond the basic pie and line charts, hence it can also render complex
graphics such as hierarchical layouts, networks or maps. After having the chart drawn,
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Implementation
its functionality can be further extended by adding interaction techniques like mouse
events, brush filtering or zooming.
It is important to mention that D3 it is not only limited to data visualizations and con-
sists of additional key features that contribute to generating these visualizations [29].
Figure 5.1 shows the entire functionality of D3 grouped semantically by categories.
Figure 5.1: A hierarchical diagram of the functions listed in the D3 API page sorted
by category. Source: [29]
Starting with the JQuery Parts (green), they refer to the DOM manipulation and
include special functions for selection, dragging, zooming, dispatching events and
fetching data. The Lodash Parts (blue) contain mathematical functions useful for
manipulating arrays, formatting time, randomizing values, interpolating colors and
many more.
The Animation Parts (pink) make it possible to animate graphical
elements in the visualization with the help of transitions. The Data Analysis Part
(purple) contains helper functions for parsing CSV or files alike. Ultimately, the most
comprehensive category is represented - as expected - by the Data Visualization Parts
(yellow), which also incorporate the geospatial functionalities (brown).
The Data Visualization Parts may be considered the ”core” of D3, since they hold
the entire logic needed for drawing visualizations. They provide functions for drawing
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Technology Stack
39
SVG paths, hierarchical layouts, force-directed graphs and chart elements like axes
or brushes. The graphical functionality can be placed into three broad categories:
generators, components and layouts. Generators consists of functions that take data
and return SVG drawing code used for creating graphical representations of that
data. As an example, generators can transform an array of points into a polygon or
an area. Components create an entire set of graphical elements, unlike generators
which create single objects. The most widely used component is the D3 axis, which
creates <line>, <path>, <g> and <text> elements, and the D3 brush, used for
filtering out unnecessary data from a visualization. The last type is represented by
layouts, which encapsulate a strategy for combining data elements together to create
advanced visualizations (e.g. treemaps, packed circles, force-directed networks etc.).
Counting among the most popular visualization libraries, there is an enormous range
of examples and tutorials to follow so anyone can easily get started with creating
graphical representations in the browser. Even though D3 requires prior knowledge
of JavaScript, HTML, CSS and SVG, once someone masters this library it becomes
an invaluable tool for conveying meaningful information visually.
5.1.2
React
As defined in the official documentation, React is a ”declarative, efficient and flexible
JavaScript library for building user interfaces”1. It is often described as the View in
Model-View-Controller (MVC) architecture, which is a way of thinking when struc-
turing an application. React has gained popularity over the years due to its unique
approach of separating the web elements into self-contained, reusable components.
These components are organized into a hierarchical manner, establishing parent-child
relationships based on how these components relate to one another. For instance,
considering the application developed in this project, the user interface (UI) was di-
vided into three major components, namely the calendar, the bar chart and the radial
chart. However, the division does not end here since each of these components con-
tains other sub-components, such as headers, footers, buttons or individual circles
within the heatmap. Figure 5.2 presents the most important React components from
the time-series visualization. Although the division goes further in the code, only the
major elements were highlighted to preserve the readability. One may notice how the
application was broken down in small pieces and certain components were reused (like
the Card component, which is a bounding box reused three times to enclose every
visualization).
Beside self-contained components, another key advantage that React provides is the
state management. Consequently there can be distinguished two types of components:
stateless and stateful. Components are in fact JavaScript functions which receive in-
puts through ”props” and return React elements based on them. Stateful components
can keep track of changing data and re-render themselves and their children when
1Source: https://reactjs.org/tutorial/tutorial.html
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation
Figure 5.2: The time-series visualization divided into React components. Three pri-
mary components can be distinguished: the calendar heatmap, the bar chart and the
radial chart, which can be further divided into smaller sub-components (e.g. months,
days, axes, bars etc.)
the data updates, whereas stateless components are static and render the same thing
or what is given to them via props.
Combining React with D3.js is beneficial because when the state updates, the whole
data visualization changes, improving the user experience through a higher level of
interactivity.
5.1.3
Redux
Redux is a predictable state container for JavaScript applications. Redux can be used
in conjunction with Redux when the web application becomes too complex and there
are multiple components which rely on the same state objects.
Figure 5.3 presents the data flow when using Redux architecture. As observed, the
whole application state is held by the Redux store. This state can be updated by
dispatching actions from the UI. An action is a JSON object with a type and some
parameters (e.g.
{type: SHOW_SPINNER, value: true}).
The store has a root
reducer which, given the action type and previous state, produces the next state and
refreshes the view by triggering a re-render.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Technology Stack
41
Figure 5.3: Redux architecture. All application state is saved in the same store and
can be updated using reducers. Source: https://www.ag-grid.com/react-redux-
integration-pt1
In this application, a mix between the Redux state and local component state was
used. The non-critical UI state was stored inside React components (e.g. checking if
a checkbox was checked or if the user placed the mouse over a bar from the bar chart),
whereas the global state encompasses variables share by multiple components within
the application (e.g. what dataset was uploaded, which day was selected, what are
the current week insights etc.).
5.1.4
Combining React and D3.js
There are four approaches of combining React and D3.js, as illustrated in Figure 5.4.
The first approach, D3 Within React, gives D3 as much control as possible over the
DOM elements. The next method relies on React’s lifecycle functions to wrap the
creation, update and removal of D3 charts. React Faux DOM creates a fake DOM
for D3 and tricks the library into thinking that it deals with the real thing. The
last strategy uses D3 for Math and React for the DOM, limiting the D3 usage to the
minimum and offering React full control over the DOM elements.
The first prototype of this visualization was built using React Faux DOM, however it
has been replaced with a combination between D3 for Math and React for DOM + D3
within React. This was due to the limitations encountered by React Faux DOM - the
strategy is perfect for drawing static charts, but does not provide support for things
that require mutation of the DOM (like animations, dragging, zooming or brushing).
In addition, introducing a fake DOM to the already existing one leads to performance
issues, making the application less scalable. On the other hand, using D3 for Math
and React for DOM is a cleaner way to structure the code, as it relies on familiar
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Implementation
Figure 5.4: Bringing together React, D3, and their ecosystem. This application uses
”D3 for the Math, React for the DOM” for static components and ”D3 within React”
for animated components. Source: https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2018/02/
react-d3-ecosystem
HTML nodes such as <svg>, <g>, <text>, <path> to build the components. D3
within React was used for implementing animations and transitions, as they were not
reproducible with the React-only approach.
5.1.5
Moment.js
Moment.js is another library worth mentioning since it was the primary tool when
dealing with date and time. Although one can use the default JavaScript Date object,
there are certain cases where complex parsing needs to be done (like in the time-series
presented in this paper). Moment.js extends the JavaScript Date functionality and
provides shortcut functions for developers useful for calculating and displaying dates.
Consequently, the code became shorter and more readable, and the attention could be
fully shifted to the data visualization itself. The Moment.js library not only parses
dates from strings, but also supports internationalization and formats dates in a
human-readable form (e.g. ”Saturday, June 03 2017”).
5.2
Software Architecture
The system was developed using the previously mentioned libraries and is structured
in a hierarchical manner, as shown in Figure 5.5. It can be observed how the architec-
ture has a tree-like structure, with higher level components broken down into multiple
sub-components. The shared state is saved in the Redux store and each component
extracts from there the slices of state it needs. Selecting parts of the data from the
store is done through the function mapStateToProps, which takes as argument the
entire state and returns a plain object containing the required data. In other words,
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Software Architecture
43
if one component needs to access the global state (residing in the Redux store), it
needs to be connected to it through the mapStateToProps function.
Figure 5.5: Diagram summarizing the main components. The application contains
three primary components (Heatmap, BarChart and RadialChart) that create the
entire visualization and a secondary component (Upload) responsible for file upload
Turning towards the diagram depicted in Figure 5.5, it should be noted that it does
not show all architecture of the system, but only the significant parts from it. Hence,
the division goes further in the code and each component presents more properties
and functions than the ones depicted. The root component is called App and it’s
responsible for wrapping all the elements within the web page together. The first
child, Upload, comprises a drag-and-drop area for uploading datasets from the local
machine (Dropzone) and a dropdown with four test datasets that can be selected to
generate visualizations (Dropdown). The central element of the system is represented
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Implementation
by the calendar heatmap (Heatmap), which shows the distribution of the self-tracked
observations throughout the year. The calendar heatmap has a modular design and
is made up from years, months, days and labels.
Moving on to the BarChart, it
provides an overview of the data based on the hour of the day and it is made from
chart sub-components like the XAxis, YAxis or individual Bars. The AreaChart which
shows the observations’ average also resides under the bar chart component and uses
the same axes and scales.
Lastly, the RadialChart presents the weekday average,
highlighting when exactly during the week did the observations occur most often.
Beside the React components mentioned above, some helper functions were also im-
plemented, used for pre-processing the data before rendering the visualizations. The
helper functions are divided in three broad categories: time parsers, navigators and
color interpolators.
The time parsers contain special functions that extract time-
related information from raw CSV files and return the corresponding objects in a
”D3 friendly” format. Navigators deal with the keyboard controls, making it possible
for users to navigate with left and right arrows from next to previous item, while the
visualization updates dynamically. Colors interpolators carry functions for identify-
ing the RGB color of each day (based on the number of observations it encloses) and
of each bar from the bar chart (based on the average color of the selected items).
For further inspection, the source code can be found in the Github repository2.
2Link: https://github.com/diana-tofan/Time-Series-Visualization
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Usability Evaluation
The system was built iteratively in eight incremental steps (Figure 4.2). Each version
was thoroughly reviewed by the thesis supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen, who is a highly
experienced researcher in the field of information visualization. During the semester,
he provided continuous feedback on how could the system be improved to maximize
the discovery of insights. When the last iteration was reached, the prototype became
fully functional (Appendix B), making usability testing possible.
This chapter will present the user study that was conducted in order to assess the
understanding of the system. For identifying the strong and weak points, a task-
based questionnaire was created, which encouraged the subjects to interact with the
visualization for finding the correct answers. The following sections will review how
the questions were designed and then, an analysis will be carried out based on the
received answers. The chapter will end with a short reflection on how could the survey
be improved to guide the users into the right direction.
6.1
Description of the Usability Test
The usability test was carried out on four persons, since it has been pointed out
in previous studies that the ideal number of test users in a usability study should
be no more than five [30]. Researchers proved that testing with fewer people is as
meaningful as testing with many more and - in fact - the first three have the most
influence in identifying the usability problems.
From the four subjects chosen for this test, three have a technical background and the
other one comes from a non-technical environment. A great deal of effort has been
put into selecting these persons, so that they possess different sets of skills and are
knowledgeable in separate domains. All participants study different things, namely
machine learning, UX design, cognitive computing and earth sciences. Gender wise,
two of the subjects are male and the other two female. All users are in their middle
20s and had no prior experience with interactive data visualizations, which made
them perfect candidates for this study.
Two datasets were used for testing purposes. In the first one, 5,743 observations were
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Usability Evaluation
recorded, whereas the second presented 647 timestamps. Both datasets belong to real
persons who - at some point - tracked specific events in their lives using the one-button
device. For confidentiality reasons it has been decided to keep secret what exactly
were those persons tracking, since giving away this kind of information may have
resulted in offering the test users unintentional clues about the patterns they should
perceive. As an example, if they were told that the patient recorded an observation
every time he/she sneezed, they may have assumed that person suffered from pollen
allergy, therefore their attention would have been shifted towards the warmer months
instead of focusing on the whole visualization.
Before proceeding with the questions, the users were introduced to the system and
learnt how to use the keyboard shortcuts.
As they became comfortable with the
visualization and could interact with it without external guidance, they started an-
swering the questions. On average, it took around 20 minutes for each participant to
complete the survey.
The survey consisted of 10 questions which covered most of the functionalities im-
plemented in the visualization. The first half of the questions was based on the first
dataset and the rest on the second. There were plenty of tasks to perform with various
levels of difficulty. For finding out what the subjects were thinking while answering
the questions, they were asked to think out loud and explain their actions.
On the whole, the users enjoyed playing with the visualization and completed the
survey without experiencing major difficulties. The more questions they answered,
the more confident they became with using the visualization. However, the fact that
each question had a correct answer put pressure on some of them, and one participant
even found the experience to be similar to an ”oral exam”. Additionally, there were
times when the subjects asked whether they chose the correct answer, but no hints
were provided and instead they were encouraged to continue the test. There was a
misconception that they would receive a percentage score from 0 to 100 (as a result
of having 10 questions to complete - which was in fact a pure coincidence), but after
they were assured that each input matters, irregardless if it is right or wrong, their
performance improved.
6.2
Analysis of the Results
The next paragraphs describe the reaction of the participants while solving the ques-
tions. Each paragraph deals with one question at a time, in the order in which they
were given. All the survey questions can be found in Appendix A.
Starting with the first dataset, a month clearly stood out from the rest since a lot
more observations were recorded. This was easily spotted by all subjects because of
the color-encoded values in the heatmap (dark means more and light means less). One
participant suggested that it would be nice to include a legend, so that the number of
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Analysis of the Results
47
observations recorded in each day could be guessed directly without mouse inspection.
After having identified the most predominant month, the users were asked to select
it and find the hours between which most events occurred (shown in the bar chart).
Three of them encountered no difficulties and answered correctly, however the fourth
subject performed unnecessarily complicated computations and summed up all the
observations from morning, afternoon and evening before giving an answer.
The next question presented a true/false statement about all Mondays in the dataset.
”Should I select only one Monday?”, said one participant, who after reading the
question more carefully figured it all out. All subjects found the statement to be true
(which was the expected answer) and were right about the time of the day, but half
of them did not pay attention to the fact that the exact hour in HH:MM format was
required, instead of an hourly interval (e.g. between hours A - B).
The third question asked the participants to compare two specific weeks by clicking
on their corresponding week indices and discover which one registered most events.
All test users responded correctly. What was interesting to observe though is that
everyone had different ways of approaching the problem. Even though the expected
behaviour was to click on the first week and then shift click on the second one (for
generating the area graph on top of the bar chart), some people tackled the issue more
creatively. For instance, one participant relied on the average color shown in each of
the two bar charts and concluded that the darker bars revealed more observations,
which was in fact accurate. Another subject carefully analyzed the vertical Y axis
measuring the observations count and observed how the scale updated dynamically
when switching from one week to another.
Fourth question was again answered correctly by all participants. This was due to
the fact that they had to identify an outlier within the data. As anticipated, that
item was relatively easy to perceive by everyone because it was a lot more noticeable
compared to the other items.
Question five stepped up the difficulty and asked users to find the days with more than
60 observations in May. No one had trouble in finding these three days, since they
looked noticeably different (and much darker) than the rest. What proved to be chal-
lenging was the comparison process. All three days were successfully selected using
the shift shortcut, however the area graph was misinterpreted by two people. They
did not feel confident in gaining insights based on the average values and preferred
the traditional way, where each item was individually analyzed.
One participant
suggested that it would have been helpful to have side-by-side comparisons, and for
example if three days were selected, stacked bars (with three segments in this case)
would show up.
For the sixth question, the subjects had to upload a new dataset into the system and
observe the general trends. Except for one person who did not discern any relevant
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Usability Evaluation
pattern, the rest discovered how there were significantly fewer observations tracked
during the weekends. Some users relied on the radial chart providing the week average,
whereas others could tell the answers just with a quick glance at the heatmap.
In the seventh question, another true/false statement was given and three out of
four detected that it was false. Hence, a conclusion that may be drawn from here
is that most participants understood how multiple selection worked and were able
to generate the average distribution of the entire dataset properly. When it came to
identifying the peak hours, the participants demonstrated that they understood what
the depicted values meant and interpreted the values within the area chart correctly.
The eighth question was more of an observation task, where users had to examine
the curved line representing the dataset average and tell whether all self-tracked
events had something to do with the passing of time or they were completely random.
Everyone answered correctly and noticed the fluctuating pattern, with irregular rises
and falls in the number of observations throughout the entire year.
The ninth task was expecting the subjects to compare the last week of observations
with the rest of the dataset and judge based on the daily average whether the patient’s
symptoms improved or worsened with time. Even though the question sounded more
abstract, the participants were told to imagine a real-life situation they would keep
track of (like mental distress, sleep disorder etc.). Having this picture in mind, they
instantly realized that the more often someone pressed the one-button device, the
more intense the event they were tracking got, resulting in a decreased wellbeing of
the patient.
The subjects faced most challenges in the last question, where they had to visualize
the average of four distinct weeks. Only one person provided a correct answer. Instead
of relying on the peak point from the area graph, most subjects misinterpreted the
curved line and read the maximum value from the bar chart instead. The problem
was that the bar chart represented only the average for one week, and not all four as
requested. The fact that the participants experienced difficulties with the overlapping
bar chart delivered extremely useful feedback on how the time-series visualization
could be improved.
6.3
Lessons Learned
Reflecting on the survey results, it can be deduced that even though the time-series
visualization looks simple at first sight, it is actually not so easy to decipher the
meaning of all values being displayed.
One valuable lesson learned is that before
performing the test, the subjects should be reminded that even though there are
indeed right and wrong answers, they are not being graded. In fact, the word ”test”
should be avoided at all costs, since the idea behind the evaluation is to gather honest
feedback from them and observe if they use the prototype as anticipated. Someone
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Lessons Learned
49
will indubitably make mistakes, but this can be seen as a positive thing, since the flaws
of the system are discovered and they will serve as a basis for further improvements.
Overall, the calendar heatmap was intuitive and posed no major problems. It was
self-explanatory for all users why the color of each day varied in intensity.
In a
few questions from the evaluation they were expected to interact with the entire
visualization, however in some cases they could predict the answer straight away with
just a glimpse at the calendar. One subject suggested to add a legend for convenience
purposes, but the others were completely satisfied with how the visualization looked
and preferred the minimalistic way.
In terms of the bar chart, it was easy to interpret the meaning of each bar, and
separating the events based on the hour of the day facilitated the discovery of patterns.
The subjects enjoyed the animation that showed up when switching from one day to
another, with the bars dynamically updating. They were pleased with how quick and
smooth the transitions were.
The most challenges were faced during the interaction with the area graph, plotted
over the bar chart. Although the participants were informed what kind of values
it displayed, they were reluctant to use it during the evaluation and would rather
rely on the heatmap or bar chart to find the correct answers.
At the end of the
test, all participants were asked how they would improve the area graph and they
acknowledged it was difficult to come up with an optimal solution. One subject stated
that it would have been even more confusing if instead of the area graph a second
bar chart was shown, since it would mislead people into thinking it behaves similar
to the first one (which provided a general overview and not an average distribution).
The purpose of the radial chart was to show the week average of the dataset and
update the bar chart with the weekdays overview when a bar was pressed. Both
features were successfully accomplished, however one participant proposed to extend
these functionalities in a future version. At the moment the radial chart is static and
updates only once when the dataset is uploaded, but it would be useful to repopulate
the circular bars with new relevant values every time the end user interacts with the
rest of the visualization.
Not only could the system benefit from further improvements, but also the task-based
evaluation. It has been noticed how some questions were misunderstood during the
test because the introduction from the beginning was too short and took only 2-3
minutes. If the participants would have been instructed about each particular feature
in more depth, they would have gained a better understanding of the visualization and
their scores would have improved. Furthermore, the environment in which the test
is conducted is extremely important and quiet places without background noise can
greatly increase the respondents’ productivity. Taking everything into consideration,
it can be concluded that when novice users are about to test an advanced visualization,
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Usability Evaluation
they should do it undisturbed by external factors and a higher priority should be given
to the introductory tutorial before rushing to the questions.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this project, a new approach to visualizing time-oriented data was presented. The
main purpose of the visualization is to be easy to understand and follow, so that the
novice users can extract meaningful insights with little effort, in an engaging way.
For graphically representing the input files provided at runtime, a highly-interactive
calendar heatmap was used as the central component.
7.1
Major Findings
The task-based evaluation conducted on four subjects resulted in significant findings
with respect to the aforementioned system.
The calendar heatmap provided a positive feedback overall and the participants
counted on it the most during the test, even when the challenges became more de-
manding and could have been solved quicker by taking different approaches. They
managed to extract important bits of information about each particular day either
by reading the tooltip or selecting the required item to reveal the daily overview.
The light-to-dark color scale was also counter-intuitive and the users realized when
most events occurred during the year with only a glimpse at the visualization. These
very aspects proved that combining the convenience of a calendar with a color-based
heatmap for representing time-series distributions was indeed a suitable choice.
Displaying the hour intervals of the self-tracked events on a bar chart also turned
out to be extremely user-friendly and the subjects encountered no difficulties when
they had to interpret the meaning of each bar. They identified correctly the times of
the day and could see directly when most observations occurred (i.e. in the morning,
in the afternoon or at night).
One aspect that was neglected though is that the
bars were clickable and could open dialog boxes showing the exact times in hours
and minutes (as in Figure 4.5b). From an UI perspective, everything was respected,
however the users should have been instructed more in this direction. A possible
explanation why this feature has been overlooked by many could be the either the
increased complexity of the system or the misunderstanding of the question, thus
they assumed a time interval was requested.
The trickiest part for all was using the area graph representing the average observa-
==PAGE:62==
52
7 Discussion
tions count, spread over a whole day. Even though they understood what it meant,
they found it particularly difficult to compare a selected item from the heatmap with
some other mean values. A few participants even performed second checks before giv-
ing the answers, by using more traditional methods (like individual inspection of each
element). What can be concluded from here is that the novice user is reluctant to
use overlapping plots and would prefer two simple charts instead of a more advanced
one.
The last component of the visualization, namely the radial chart, was straightforward
to perceive, but could benefit from further improvements in the future iterations, so
that the data in the circular bars updates every time the user interacts with the
other elements. The users mentioned they would have liked to interact more with
this visualization, however it was limited in functionality and only displayed a static
general overview about the time series.
With respect to the keyboard controls, the participants enjoyed switching from next
to previous item at the press of a button.
Furthermore, they reported that they
found the application very quick and were pleased with the animation effects. The
multiple selection of days in the calendar heatmap was also well received and the
users got accustomed to interacting with the visualization in no time. Analyzing the
entire dataset average in contrast to the selected day uncovered important patterns
for the test users, patterns that would have been impossible to detect by using basic
techniques.
7.2
Previous Research
This project addressed the limitations of the clustered calendar [21] that could not use
time scales smaller than a day. As a result, users interacting with this visualization
could easily see the distribution of observations during the day, separated by hour
intervals. Being able to study the time-of-day variation revealed hidden insights about
the data and allowed participants to detect whether mornings exposed a different
behaviour from evenings for example. In addition, the exact times when the one-
button device was pressed were available (in hours and minutes) and these time strings
varied by size, being directly proportional to the number of observations recorded
at that very moment.
In other words, if one person recorded n events at 12:34,
than ”12:34” would be displayed n times larger compared to the other strings, for
drawing attention to the most critical moment that happened during that day (as in
Figure 4.5b).
Furthermore, the application simplified the calendar incorporating line charts [22]
through the use of colors, by transforming the visualization into a heatmap. The
statistics for each particular day were hidden from sight and showed up only on
demand, when an item from the calendar was selected. This way, the respondents
of the survey could focus better on specific days without being overwhelmed by an
==PAGE:63==
7.3 Usability Testing Improvements
53
overcluttered layout showing too much information at a time.
7.3
Usability Testing Improvements
Not only would the system benefit from improvements, but also the survey itself. It
has been noticed how certain aspects of the evaluation affected the subjects’ perfor-
mance.
To begin with, most users misunderstood the question that required the exact time in
”HH:MM format”. Hence, ”HH:MM” is an ambiguous terms for non-developers and
should have been rephrased in a more clear way, with examples of answers (e.g. valid
- 12:34, invalid - between 12 and 13). This way, they would have remembered that the
bars were clickable and could have revealed the correct solution. In addition to the
word choice, another factor could be related to the limited number of questions (only
10). Maybe if the survey was longer, the jump in difficulty levels from one question
to another would have been less noticeable and the participants would have been able
to learn the system in depth before solving the challenging tasks.
It would be a better idea to create the questions differently in the future, so they cover
all the types of visualization insights discovered by Choe et. al in their case study
[31]. This approach would provide extra feedback, thus a more extensive research
could be carried out given the users’ responses. There are eight data-driven insight
types that could be considered when creating future surveys:
• Detail - Extreme data point (peaks) that should be discerned in the visualization
(e.g. the users could be asked to identify the month with most observations or
measure the event distribution between specified time intervals)
• Self-reflection - Providing external context about the data, which might play a
key role in understanding the phenomenon being tracked. In order to achieve
this, at least one usability test should be conducted with the very person who
registered those events and engage in a conversation with him/her while exam-
ining the visualization, to capture vital information that might explain the root
cause of the occurrences
• Trend - Describes how data changes over time (e.g. the users could be asked to
report if they observe an increasing/decreasing/fluctuating pattern in the time
series)
• Comparison - Even though comparison tasks were already part of the usability
test, they could be extended to handle more cases. Three ways of comparison
could be assessed: by a factor of interest (e.g. focus only on Mondays), by
time segmentation (e.g. weekdays vs. weekends) and against external data (e.g.
compare one dataset with another to determine which patient is in more critical
condition)
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Discussion
• Correlation - Detects associations between two variables (e.g. users could be
asked to examine the effects of job related stress in relation to the number of
observations recorded)
• Data summary - The number of data points and duration of tracking (e.g. users
could be asked to find out how many events were registered in total)
• Distribution - Refers to the variability or categorical distribution of the data
(e.g. users could be asked to observe whether the observations spread over an
entire year or occur within a shorter time frame)
• Outlier - Explicit points that stand out from the rest of the dataset because
they have nothing in common (e.g. ask the users to pinpoint outliers given the
visualization, in case they exist)
7.4
Summary
All in all, the system helped users discover significant patterns in the data and spot
periodic behaviours without major difficulties.
The calendar heatmap was easily
understood by all and the most surprising fact was how much did the participants
rely on this component to find the right answers to the questions. The bar chart
was also clear and the users could make sense of the visualization, comparing how
mornings, afternoons and nights differed from one another. The radial chart showing
the week average was considered aesthetically pleasing, but limited in functionality.
Regarding interaction, using ”Shift” as a keyboard shortcut for multiple selection
came naturally, however the curved line displaying the average distribution posed a
threat for many and they found it rather difficult, thus the application could benefit
from further improvements in that area.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
A lot of work has been done to create an engaging ”out-of-the-box” visualization
that could be used in a real-life setting.
To a certain extent, this goal has been
accomplished, however there are further improvements that might be added in the
future iterations.
First of all, brushing could be integrated for speeding up the multiple selection process.
Brushing is a well-known technique in the field of data visualization that uses an
indicator to select a region along one or two axes of a plot. This technique could be
applied to the calendar heatmap by allowing users draw rectangles with the mouse
cursor to highlight the circles beneath those regions and generate the average time-
of-day variation in a bar chart. Brushing would handle perfectly the case when one
needs to examine small subsets from the data and manual selection is unfeasible. An
initial version of brushing has already been implemented (Figure 8.1), however it was
decided to skip it from the usability test since it did not function entirely and needed
more refinements.
Another important thing to improve is the area graph. As explained in the previous
chapters, the survey participants encountered most difficulties while interacting with
this component, hence appropriate measures should be taken. To begin with, it would
be helpful to have some kind of guidelines in the UI before using this visualization.
They could be either step-by-step instructions or questions mark icons that when
expanded would explain the purpose of each part. Or side-by-side comparisons could
be implemented, so when users select multiple days the bar chart transforms into
a clustered column chart and shows the actual observations registered in each day
instead of their average. For dealing with large selections of items (i.e. more than five
days), the clustered column chart could become extremely wide and allow horizontal
scrolling. This way, no information is hidden and the distributions could be compared
exactly how they were recorded for a more accurate analysis.
More functionalities could be added to the radial chart. At the moment it only up-
dates once, when a dataset is uploaded, and shows the overall week average. However
this could be extended to a higher degree, so that each time the user interacts with
the rest of the visualization, the circular bars would change their values accordingly.
For example, when a month is selected, the radial chart could reveal the week average
==PAGE:66==
56
8 Future Work
Figure 8.1: Initial implementation of brushing which supports the selection of a
subset of days with the mouse and generates their average time-of-day variation
for that specific month for maximizing the discovery of insights. The same applies for
week, weekday or shift selection. It would be more effective to show the entire average
only when requested and display dynamic information during interaction time.
Because the performance has been optimized repeatedly, more experiments could be
carried out on big data. The application was designed to handle large files efficiently,
therefore it should use the speed factor to its advantage. In this regard, additional
usability tests could be conducted on datasets having at least 10,000 records and
various metrics could be collected, such as the success rate, the response time and
subjective satisfaction of each individual.
The visualization supports responsive design, however all the evaluations were per-
formed on laptops or desktop machines. In the future, it would be worth performing
the evaluations on other devices like tablets or phones to cover all screen sizes and
==PAGE:67==
8 Future Work
57
gather constructive feedback.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
This thesis presents a simplistic approach to visualizing self-tracked time series, pri-
marily targeted at a non-technical audience. By using the system implemented, one
can perceive meaningful patterns, without the need to have prior knowledge of ad-
vanced topics like data mining or exploratory analysis.
Firstly, the challenges that arise when it comes to the graphical representation of
time are outlined. Due to its extremely complex nature, enormous research has been
done in this area and a lot of applications are available. This project tries to fill a
gap in literature and investigate how can someone reflect on his/her personal data
acquisition using visual aids.
Calendar heatmaps have been used before as a means of visualizing daily patterns
and anomalies, however they are limited in functionality and do not show the time-
of-day variation, which may lead to potentially vital information being left out. The
current system solves this issue by allowing users to inspect particular days, months,
weeks and weekdays and observe when exactly during the day were most observations
recorded.
The visualization stands out from other similar techniques because it supports mul-
tiple selection of days and side-by-side comparison. The keyboard-guided selection
of multiple items in the calendar heatmap maximizes the discovery of correlations
and outliers within the data and as a result, crucial details are uncovered due to an
in-depth analysis that can be performed.
Linking together multiple visualizations to create a larger whole is an effective way to
address the issue of time granularity and reduces the amount of information displayed
on screen, while still keeping all the additional details available on request.
This
way, the users are not distracted by an overcluttered design and can easily shift
their attention towards smaller parts of the visualization for gaining valuable insights,
impossible to detect using traditional charts.
Regarding performance, the application is memory-efficient and users can navigate
smoothly from one item to another. Besides, it handles large datasets successfully,
thus it can be used to deal with events occurring in a real-life setting. The responsive
==PAGE:70==
60
9 Conclusion
design ensures that the visualization is device independent and users can learn im-
portant facts about their data, irregardless of their screen sizes or operating systems.
The task-based evaluation conducted on four subjects provided indispensable feed-
back. Overall, they enjoyed interacting with the visualization and noticed how quickly
it responded to their commands, but they also faced a few challenges when they had
to interpret the average observations count in relation to other time-oriented elements.
This indicates that there are still further improvements that should be done to im-
prove the user experience and optimize the data interpretation. Not everything is
crystal clear to the end user, hence this issue needs to be specifically addressed in
future iterations, either by providing extra instructions in the UI or rethinking the
logic behind the area chart component.
Wrapping it all up, the research problem has been solved by implementing an extended
version of the calendar heatmap, with additional functionalities. As seen from the
usability test, there is indeed room for improvement, but on a general note, the
visualization fulfills its purpose and contributes to the detection of temporal patterns.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Usability Testing
The survey was created using Google Forms and consisted of 10 questions. Some of
them were multiple choice, while others were open-ended and required written answers.
All questions tried to cover as much functionalities as possible and encouraged users
to interact with the visualization for gaining meaningful insights.
The first five questions referred to the first dataset (with ≈6,000 records), while the
second half focused on the dataset having around 700 observations. The questions
were as follows:
1. [Multiple choice] Identify the month with most observations. When were most
of them recorded?
• Morning (06-12)
• Noon (12-13)
• Afternoon (13-18)
• Evening (18-22)
• Night (22-06)
• Don’t know
2. [Text] The patient tracking these symptoms noticed how a significant majority
happened on Monday evening.
Is it true?
Find the peak hour (in HH:MM
format)
==PAGE:72==
62
A Usability Testing
3. [Text] Compare the odd weeks in November. Can you tell from a quick glance
which week has more observations?
4. [Text] Select the day with most observations in March. How many observations
were recorded during the peak interval?
5. [Text] Compare the dates in May having more than 60 observations/day. What’s
the highest average point and when did it occur?
==PAGE:73==
A Usability Testing
63
6. [Text] Are some specific weekdays distinguishable from others? If yes, which
one(s) and why?
7. [Text] The person tracking these events stated that most of them occurred during
night time. Is it true? Find the peak hour(s).
8. [Multiple choice] Inspect the overall trend in the dataset. Can you discern any
relevant pattern?
• Yes, there’s a gradual increase of the observations throughout the year
• Yes, the number of observations decreases over time
• Yes, the average observations rise and fall in an unpredictable manner
• No, the line is steady hence no meaningful conclusion may be drawn
9. [Multiple choice] Compare last week when an occurrence was recorded with all
the other observations.
Do you notice an improvement or worsening of the
symptoms?
• Improvement
• Worsening
==PAGE:74==
64
A Usability Testing
• Don’t know
10. [Text] Select the even weeks from October and November. When was the highest
point reached during the day?
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX B
Final Prototype
The live prototype can be found at https://diana-tofan.github.io/Time-Series-
Visualization. This version of the time-series visualization has been used when
conducting the task-based evaluation with the participants. There are four datasets
that can be selected to generate visualizations sorted by size, from largest to smallest.
During the usability test, two datasets were used: one containing itching symptoms
(Dataset_1.csv) and another related to PTSD (Dataset_3.csv).
Figure B.1: A screenshot of the final prototype
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX C
Project Plan
The initial project plan established at the beginning of the semester, with milestones
for each iteration. Please note that the distribution of activities slightly changed in
the end and was not exactly as primarily depicted.
Figure C.1: The initial project plan
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
Wolfgang Aigner et al. “Interactively Exploring Time-Oriented Data”. eng. In:
Boston, USA: ACM Press, 2009. url: http://www.ifs.tuwien.ac.at/~rind/
preprint/aigner_chi09_interacting-time.pdf.
[2]
Mesut Çiçek. “Wearable Technologies and Its Future Applications”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Electrical, Electronics and Data Communication 3 (May
2015), pp. 2320–2084.
[3]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen. “Ac-
tive Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One-Button Wearable: A
Case Study in Military PTSD”. In: CoRR abs/1703.03437 (2017). arXiv: 1703.
03437. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03437.
[4]
Chong Ho Yu. “Exploratory data analysis in the context of data mining and
resampling”. In: International Journal of Psychological Research 3 (June 2010).
doi: 10.21500/20112084.819.
[5]
Deborah Lupton. “Self-tracking, health and medicine”. In: Health Sociology Re-
view 26 (Jan. 2017), pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1080/14461242.2016.1228149.
[6]
Thea Kooiman et al. “Self-tracking of physical activity in people with type 2
diabetes: a randomized controlled trial”. English. In: Computers, informatics,
nursing : CIN 36.7 (July 2018), pp. 340–349. issn: 1538-2931. doi: 10.1097/
CIN.0000000000000443.
[7]
Andreas Kerren et al., eds. Information Visualization: Human-Centered Issues
and Perspectives. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2008. isbn: 978-3-540-
70955-8.
[8]
Brock Craft and Paul Cairns. “Beyond Guidelines: What Can We Learn from
the Visual Information Seeking Mantra?” In: Proceedings of the Ninth Inter-
national Conference on Information Visualisation. IV ’05. Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 110–118. isbn: 0-7695-2397-8. doi:
10.1109/IV.2005.28. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IV.2005.28.
[9]
Halimah Badioze Zaman et al. Visual Informatics: Bridging Research and Prac-
tice: First International Visual Informatics Conference, IVIC 2009 Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, November 11-13, 2009 Proceedings. Vol. 5857. Jan. 2009. isbn: 978-
3-642-05035-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-05036-7.
==PAGE:80==
70
Bibliography
[10]
Jean-Daniel Fekete et al. “The Value of Information Visualization”. In: vol. 4950.
July 2008, pp. 1–18. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-70956-5_1.
[11]
Ben Shneiderman. “The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type Taxonomy for
Information Visualizations”. In: The Craft of Information Visualization (2003),
364–371. doi: 10.1016/b978-155860915-0/50046-9.
[12]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “A Stage-based Model of Personal Infor-
matics Systems”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. CHI ’10. Atlanta, Georgia, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 557–
566. isbn: 978-1-60558-929-9. doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753409. url: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409.
[13]
Wolfgang Aigner et al. Visualization of time-oriented data. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2011.
[14]
Gennady Andrienko, Natalia Andrienko, and Urska Demsar. “Space, Time and
Visual Analytics”. In: International Journal of Geographical Information Science
(2010).
[15]
Andy Cotgreave. Visualizing Time: Beyond the Line Chart. url: https://www.
kennisportal.com/KP/tableausoftware/Tableau-Software-visualizing-
time-beyond-the-line-chart.pdf.
[16]
W. Aigner et al. “Visual Methods for Analyzing Time-Oriented Data”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14.1 (2008), 47–60. doi:
10.1109/tvcg.2007.70415.
[17]
M. Weber, M. Alexa, and W. Muller. “Visualizing time-series on spirals”. In:
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2001. INFOVIS 2001. (). doi:
10.1109/infvis.2001.963273.
[18]
Christian Tominski, James Abello, and H. Schumann. Interactive poster: 3D
axes-based visualizations for time series data. IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, 2005.
[19]
W. Aigner et al. “PlanningLines: Novel Glyphs for Representing Temporal Un-
certainties and Their Evaluation”. In: Ninth International Conference on Infor-
mation Visualisation (IV05) (). doi: 10.1109/iv.2005.97.
[20]
Dominik Moritz and Danyel Fisher. “Visualizing a Million Time Series with
the Density Line Chart”. In: arXiv 1808.06019 (2018). url: http://idl.cs.
washington.edu/papers/dense-lines.
[21]
J.j. Van Wijk and E.r. Van Selow. “Cluster and calendar based visualization
of time series data”. In: Proceedings 1999 IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (InfoVis99) (). doi: 10.1109/infvis.1999.801851.
[22]
Earo Wang, Dianne Crook, and Rob J Hyndman. “Calendar-based graphics for
visualizing people’s daily schedules”. In: Journal of Statistical Software (2018).
[23]
Mats Mattsson. Color Interpolation. url: https://howaboutanorange.com/
blog/2011/08/10/color_interpolation/.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
71
[24]
Paul Rapoport. Using Coordinated Universal Time. 2017. url: https : / /
dozenal.ae-web.ca/pdf/using-utc.pdf.
[25]
Tom Scott and Sean Riley. The Problem with Time & Timezones. url: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=-5wpm-gesOY&t=307s.
[26]
Average Page Load Times for 2018 - How does yours compare? 2018. url:
https://www.machmetrics.com/speed-blog/average-page-load-times-
websites-2018/.
[27]
Keith Andrews and Aleš Smrdel. “Responsive Data Visualisation”. In: EuroVis
2017 - Posters. Ed. by Anna Puig Puig and Tobias Isenberg. The Eurographics
Association, 2017. isbn: 978-3-03868-044-4. doi: 10.2312/eurp.20171182.
[28]
Swizec Teller. React d3.js: Build data visualizations with React and d3.js. Lean
Publishing, 2015.
[29]
Elijah Meeks. D3 is not a Data Visualization Library. 2018. url: https://
medium.com/@Elijah_Meeks/d3-is-not-a-data-visualization-library-
67ba549e8520.
[30]
Jakob Nielsen. Why You Only Need to Test with 5 Users. 2000. url: https:
//www.nngroup.com/articles/why- you- only- need- to- test- with- 5-
users/.
[31]
Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, and m. c. schraefel. “Characterizing Visu-
alization Insights from Quantified Selfers’ Personal Data Presentations.” In:
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 35.4 (2015), pp. 28–37. url: http:
//dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/cga/cga35.html#ChoeLs15.
==PAGE:82==
