==PAGE:1==
AI voice-assistance in eldercare 
- designing interactions & ethical considerations
Nanna Lykke Rickers Kristensen, s143989
Design & Innovation, DTU Management Engineering
Supervisor: Jaap Daalhuizen, Assistant Professor DTU 
30 ECTS points 
June 2019
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Page i 
AI voice-assistance in eldercare – designing interactions & ethical considerations
AI stemmestyring indenfor ældrepleje – design af interaktioner & etiske 
overvejelser
English title: 
Danish title: 
Master Thesis in M.Sc. Design & Innovation
Technical University of  Demark
28th January 2019 – 28th June 2019
30 ECTS Points 
Supervisor: 	
	
Collaborative company: 
Project description:
Jaap Daalhuizen
Assistant Professor
DTU Management Engineering 
Helge Kristensen, Hansong Technology Ltd.
8th Kangping Road, Jiangning Development Zone
Nanjing, 211106, China 
In a world relying more and more on technology, ethics must be in­
cluded in the design process to ensure some understanding of how 
new technology and products will impact society. This thesis uses 
Social Implication Design and ethical theory to create an ethically 
sound and innovative AI-voice assistant within the eldercare sector, 
specifically for people suffering of mild cognitive impairment as a 
result of dementia.
Nanna Lykke Rickers Kristensen, s143989
Stud.MSc.Eng. Design & Innovation
DTU Management Engineering
PREFACE
==PAGE:4==
Page ii
Preface
ABSTRACT
As technological development has increased, the use and functionality of Artificial Intelligence has 
expanded, and AI voice-assistance devices have become an integrated part of many homes. This 
development has opened the possibility of presenting AI voice-assistance devices to a wider vari­
ety of people at all ages. There is a growing need for assistive technology within the eldercare sec­
tor, in particular within the field of mild cognitive impairment caused by dementia, as the amount 
of elderly are increasing. The wish to stay independent and in own home presents a market oppor­
tunity; introducing AI voice-assistance devices to people with mild cognitive impairment. 
This thesis aims at developing an ethically sound design concept for the interaction between peo­
ple with mild cognitive impairment and AI voice-assistance devices. To ensure the concept was 
ethically sound, an extensive investigation into ethical theories and considerations were conduct­
ed. This provided a list of ethical considerations to include in the final design, and a method that 
would help ensure that ethics was included; the Social Implication Design method. 
By using the Social Implication Design method this thesis explores the field of AI and mild cogni­
tive impairment and set out to create a solution that not only addresses the individual but society 
as well. The concept was created by gathering factors important to the future context through an 
extensive in-depth explorative process, involving experts and potential users. This led to a clear 
statement of what the concept should aim to accomplish; to improve overall life quality for peo­
ple living with mild cognitive impairment, decrease health risks of being a caretaker and to better 
utilize health resources, the concept should help users make everyday life easier and increase inde­
pendence by the use of assistive technology.
The response to this statement is the DAIVA concept; an interactive AI voice-assistant speaker 
with accompanying app. This concept addresses the people with mild cognitive impairment as well 
as the caretakers, and with focus on ensuring that users are being treated ethically correct. Through 
validation it was found that the concept was well received by potential users and that the concept 
has the potential to increase overall life quality and health of the users. 
==PAGE:5==
Page iii 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction between 
the various components that make up an issue
Can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at interna­
tional level to develop ideas and solve problems
Masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity to take a 
holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader academic and societal 
perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions
Can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for solving 
technological problems
Can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing
Is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her specialist area
Can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and specializa­
tion
Masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the capacity 
to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of timetables, design, 
solution and documentation
Determine ethical guidelines in the creation of new technology based on literature on ethical 
considerations 
Apply ethical guidelines in the creation of a design solution 
Create a design solution for interaction between eldercare and AI voice-interface
Evaluate the design solution through user testing 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
==PAGE:6==
Page iv
Preface
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I would like to thank all who have helped contribute to the creation of this thesis. It has been a 
long but exciting process. In particular thanks to my supervisor Jaap Daalhuizen, Assistant Profes­
sor from DTU Management Engineering, who has been absolutely invaluable by sharing knowl­
edge and advice throughout the process. 
Furthermore, a special thanks to Martin Mose Bentzen, Lector from DTU Management Engi­
neering for his insightful and interesting input on ethics. The discussions have helped increase the 
quality of the work. 
I would also like to thank Helge Kristensen from Hansong Technology Ltd. for embarking on this 
journey with me and providing me with technology, knowledge and feedback. Without his passion 
for developing new and innovative technology the project would have not have been possible. 
Additionally, I would like to express my gratitude to Bruce Crompton (Hansong Technology 
Ltd.), David Chen (Hansong Technology Ltd.), Bryan Chen (Hansong Technology Ltd.), Donny 
Chong (Hansong Technology Ltd.), Homer Zhang (Hansong Technology Ltd.), Jelly Sha (Han-
song Technology Ltd.), Xiaodong Tao (iFlyTek Healthcare), Natthawadee Maneeprom (CT Asia 
Robotics Co. Ltd.), Todd Emerson (Amazon.com Int.), Sarah Skafte (Ældresagen), Else Hansen 
(Demenslinjen) and Laila Øksnebjerg (Videnscenter for Demens) for engaging in stimulating and 
interesting expert interviews. Furthermore, I want to thank Ann Louise Walther, Henriette Fisker, 
Hanne Østenkær and Lone Sørup Larsen for providing me with insight into their struggles with 
dementia and for providing feedback on the final concept. 
Lastly, I would like to thank family and friends for supporting me throughout the last six months. 
Without this support the creation of the thesis would have been significantly more difficult. 
==PAGE:7==
Page v 
NOMENCLATURE
Artificial Intelligence 
The simulation of human intelligence and behavior in computer systems (Nilsson, 1980). 
Assistive Technology 
Technology that helps users conduct different actions, i.e. a smartphone, smoke detector, etc.
Cognitive Neural Network 
Enables decision making by imitating the neural system of the human brain. The system takes an 
amount of inputs and calculate an output based on hidden processes, e.g. based on knowledge of 
tastes, allergies and location it can calculate the nearest and most suitable ice-cream shop. 
Descriptive ethics 
The ethical understanding of the culture, e.g. voluntary euthanasia is ethically acceptable in some 
parts of the Netherlands but not in Denmark. 
Design with Intent toolkit 
Design with Intent toolkit is a tool that can help the designer locate areas the intervention can 
cause behavioral change and how the intervention will encourage interaction. 
Ethics
During the report ethics will be defined as: ethics concerns the moral principles and values that 
guides the behavior, choices and actions of human beings (e.g. Martin & Schinzinger, 2005; Ver­
beek, 2017). 
Mild cognitive impairment 
Dementia causes brain deterioration. The early stages of dementia are often referred to as suf­
fer-ing from mild cognitive impairment, meaning mild deterioration of cognitive abilities. 
Moral 
The specific principles and habits of an individual regarding right and wrong conduct. The 
per-sonal compass deciding whether actions are considered right or wrong. 
Natural Language Processing
Allows the computer system to read, understand and analyze the human language. 
Prima facie duties
Prima facie duties argue that duties will be conflicting at times, and one will have precedence over 
the other, e.g. we should not kill an animal, but we have a responsibility to also not let it suffer 
unnecessarily.
Rights ethics 
The basic human and moral rights, e.g. the right to live, the right to see the world as real, etc. 
Rule-utilitarianism 
The ‘correct’ action is the action that is most beneficial to all based on ethical and societal rules. 
==PAGE:8==
Page vi
Preface
ABBREVIATIONS
AI 	
Artificial Intelligence 
AT 	
Assistive Technology 
SID	
Social Implication Design
NLP 	 Natural Language Processing
DwI 	 Design with Intent 
CNN	 Cognitive Neural Network
Social Implication Design 
Design method that focus on designing interventions for the society and causing improvement 
within the community. The method differs from conventional methods as it is interaction-based 
and focus on society and the individual. 
The Cloud 
Allowing connectivity with the internet and gathering of information on-demand without direct 
management from the user. 
==PAGE:9==
Page vii 
LIST OF FIGURES
Illustration of the thesis approach.  
Illustration of the SID process, inspired by Nynke Tromp and Paul Hekkert 
(2018). 
Illustration of the Cognitive Neural Network (Nielsen, 2015). 
Illustration of the distribution of dementia diseases. Illustration in-spired by 
Lønne-gaard and Hare-Bruun (2017).
Assistive products increasing safety (Socialstyrelsen, 2019). 
Assistive products building functionalities (Socialstyrelsen, 2019). 
Assistive products helping with structure (Socialstyrelsen, 2019). 
An overview of the SID stages and steps (Tromp & Hekkert, 2018). 
(Sallehi, 2018).
(Kovyrina, 2019).
(rawpixel.com, 2018a).
(Zomer, 2019).
(Cordez, 2019).
(Aldarwish, 2018).
(Apichodilok, 2019).
(Fancycrave.com, 2019).
(Pixabay, 2019a).
(Voortman, 2018).
(Rie, 2018).
(Pixabay, 2019b).
(Saylor, 2019).
(rawpixel.com, 2018b).
(Webb, 2018).
(Cunha, 2019).
(La, 2018).
(Pixabay, 2019d).
(Hazelwood, 2019).
5
5
17
35
36
36
36
48
56
56
57
57
57
57
58
58
58
59
59
59
60
60
60
61
61
61
62
Figure 1.1
Figure 1.2 
Figure 2.1
Figure 4.1
Figure 4.2
Figure 4.3
Figure 4.4
Figure 6.1 
Figure 6.2
Figure 6.3 
Figure 6.4
Figure 6.5
Figure 6.6
Figure 6.7
Figure 6.8
Figure 6.9
Figure 6.10
Figure 6.11
Figure 6.12
Figure 6.13
Figure 6.14
Figure 6.15
Figure 6.16
Figure 6.17
Figure 6.18
Figure 6.19
Figure 6.20
==PAGE:10==
Page viii
Preface
(Lopes, 2018).
(Carvalho, 2019).
Illustration of where the clusters are placed on the ethical dimension.
Illustration of where the clusters are placed on the decision-making dimen­
sion.
Four mindsets within the future world.
(Pixabay, 2019c).
Illustration of the speaker and the application, the elements of the DAIVA 
concept.
Lone Sørup Larsen conducting the narrative-based study.
Hanne Østenkær getting ready for the functional test.
62
62
63
64
65
67
71
91
95
Figure 6.21
Figure 6.22
Figure 6.23
Figure 6.24
Figure 6.25
Figure 6.26
Figure 6.27
Figure 7.1
Figure 7.2
==PAGE:11==
Page ix 
LIST OF TABLES
An overview of the distribution of context factors.
Table containing the functionalities of the DAIVA concept and the value 
each functionality brings. 
52
73
Table 6.1
Table 6.2
==PAGE:12==
Page x
Preface
CONTENT
1 INTRODUCTION & METHODOLOGY
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
1.2 PROJECT BACKGROUND
1.3 METHODOLOGY
1.4 THESIS STRUCTURE
2 LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 INTRODUCTION
2.2 ETHICS 
2.3 ENGINEERING, DESIGNING TECHNOLOGY AND THE ROLE OF AI
2.4 ETHICS IN ELDERCARE
2.5 GUIDELINES FOR THIS PROJECT
3 EXPERT INTERVIEW STUDY WITHIN THE INDUSTRY
3.1 INTRODUCTION
3.2 THE DEVELOPMENT OF AI
3.3 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
3.4 TECHNOLOGICAL AND DESIGN BARRIERS
3.5 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
3.6 KEY FINDINGS
4 MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
4.2 DEMENTIA 
4.3 ASSISTIVE PRODUCTS FOR DEMENTIA 
4.4 KEY FINDINGS 
5 FIELD WORK - MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
5.2 PROBLEMS ARISEN - MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT 
5.3 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
5.4 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
1
2
4
4
6
9
10
10
14
20
22
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
33
34
34
36
37
39
40
41
42
42
==PAGE:13==
Page xi 
5.5 THE SOCIAL CULTURE IN DENMARK
5.6 KEY FINDINGS 
6 SOCIAL IMPLICATION DESIGN 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
6.2 PREPARATION: DEBRIEFING
6.3 STAGE 1: ANTICIPATING THE FUTURE
6.4 STAGE 2: GOAL SETTING
6.5 STAGE 3: DEVELOPING THE INTERVENTION
7 VALIDATION
7.1 INTRODUCTION
7.2 VALIDATING THE INTERVENTION
8 REFLECTION 
8.1 INTRODUCTIONN 
8.2 DESIGN PROCESS 
8.3 CONCEPT AND ETHICAL REFLECTIONS 
8.4 GENERAL REFLECTIONS 
9 DISCUSSION, LIMITATIONS AND FURTHER WORK
9.1 INTRODUCTION
9.2 DICUSSION
9.3 LIMITATIONS 
9.4 FURTHER WORK 
10 CONCLUSION 
REFERENCECS 
44
45
47
48
51
51
66
67
87
88
89
99
100
100
101
102
105
106
106
110
111
115
119
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION & 
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:16==
Page 2 of 127
Chapter 1 | Introduction & Methodology
1.1 INTRODUCTION
The technological development has increased tremendously within the last 100 years as technology 
has become an integrated part of everyday life, especially Artificial Intelligence (AI) is impacting 
the world today (Nguyen, 2018). AI is implemented in both industry, e.g. automatization, and in 
homes, e.g. online advertisements generated for the specific user. As a result of the development 
of Natural Language Processing (NPL) and Cognitive Neural Network (CNN) the AI can be used 
not only to communicate with computers but directly with humans as well; AI voice-assistance 
devices can understand and process the spoken word.  AI voice-assistance embedded solutions, 
e.g. Amazon’s Echo, Apple’s Home Pod and Google’s Google Home, have become part of many 
households around the world (Horvitz, 2016; Nguyen, 2018), and these technological devices help 
make daily life easier by allowing quick access to certain functionalities, e.g. to-do list and music., by 
simply speaking to the device. The ease of use allows interaction with people of all ages (Nguyen, 
2018). 
A need for assistance is especially seen within eldercare as the amount of elderly in Denmark 
is increasing rapidly (Sorell & Draper, 2014) – it is expected that the population of elderly will 
have increased two and a half times in 2057 (Danmarks Statistik, 2018). As the aging population 
increases, it becomes more desirable to keep elderly independent for as long as possible (Thoma-
Lürken, Bleijlevens, Lexis, de Witte, & Hamers, 2018), and with AI voice-assistance devices this 
becomes more attainable. As eldercare is an umbrella term for smaller subgroups of elderly, fur-
ther narrowing down of the scope was conducted after the initial research and focus was moved 
to people with mild cognitive impairment caused by dementia. 
However, as technology and AI has become an embedded part of our lives the ethical implications 
of the technology must be considered when developing new design. The ethical implications of 
products has increased as technology has become more intelligent and it is therefore important for 
the designer to include ethics during the design work (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). This thesis will 
set out to create an ethically sound AI voice-assistive concept for the interaction with eldercare.
==PAGE:17==
Page 3 of 127
1.1.1 PROJECT AIM
This thesis will aim at creating a design concept for the interaction between the eldercare sector, 
in particular people with mild cognitive impairment, and AI voice-assistance devices. The main 
focus is on creating an ethically sound concept that encourages behavioral changes and considers 
social implications by using the Social Implication Design method. The concept has been targeted 
for Hansong Technology Ltd. 
To guide the design work, the following research questions have been created. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
What ethical theories are important to address when designing new technologies? 
What ethical considerations are important for eldercare? 
What ethical consideration should be included in the design when developing technol­
ogy specifically for the elderly? 
What are the ethical considerations when introducing Artificial Intelligence to elder­
care?
What are the current and future trends within AI for eldercare as seen from the perspec­
tive of manufacturing companies?
How does the industry see AI evolve in the future?
What ethical elements does the industry consider when developing within eldercare?
What is considered important when creating a device within eldercare?
What are the needs and wants in within mild cognitive impairment? 
What are the most important problems to address resulted by mild cognitive impair­
ment?
How can the experience people with dementia and their relatives have be improved?
What ethical dilemmas are met within mild cognitive impairment? 
How is it possible to create a design solution that addresses the important ethical consid­
erations for mild cognitive impairment found in literature and the field?
How can a designer create a concept that addresses ethics and social context? 
How are ethical dilemmas overcome? 
How can a social design solution be validated? 
a)
b)
a)
b)
c)
a)
b)
c)
a)
b)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
==PAGE:18==
Page 4 of 127
Chapter 1 | Introduction & Methodology
1.2 PROJECT BACKGROUND
This thesis is a result of a collaboration with Hansong Technology Ltd., a manufacturing com­
pany developing commercial audio products, see appendix A1.1 for more information. Hansong 
Technology Ltd. provides a series of AI voice-assistance products for the general consumer but 
harbors a wish of exploring alternate market segments, especially within technology for eldercare, 
healthcare and education. A collaboration was initiated where Hansong Technology Ltd. provid-
ed insight and the technology while I conducted the design process and research of the new mar-
ket; eldercare, in particular people with mild cognitive impairment.
1.2.1 MOTIVATION 
The creation of this thesis has been motivated by an increased interested in consciously includ­
ing ethical consideration into the design process. As designers, we include our own ethical ideas 
and considerations into the design we make but often this is done unconsciously without explicit 
guidelines. As designers we have to vouch for our creations, which is why conscious inclusion of 
ethical considerations is therefore needed. A wish for developing a thesis with a strong explicit 
ethical component emerged. 
As the well-being of others is a very motivating topic for me, I found the idea of improving the 
lives within eldercare, specifically people with dementia, both fascinating and challenging. Further­
more, combining this challenge with new technology, AI voice-assistance, created a possibility of 
creating an innovative and novel concept. A collaboration with Hansong Technology Ltd. provid­
ed me access to the AI voice-assistance technology and experts within the field to consult. 
To further ensure ethics was included in the design, the design method Social Implication Design 
was chosen. As this method is novel to me, it was an interesting challenge and new way of con­
ducting the design process. 
The thesis approach can be explained as an iterative process of defining the context and developing 
the concept by combining literature, research and gathered knowledge through a mix of descrip­
tive and prescriptive studies. The thesis was at first following the Double Diamond methodology 
(Design Council, 2007) but after having conducted the literature review and gathered knowledge 
about design methods that considered ethical aspects, Social Implication Design (Tromp & Hek­
kert, 2018) was chosen. The thesis approach can therefore be described as a combination of these 
two processes. Figure 1.1 illustrates an adapted version of the Double Diamond and how the SID 
method was incorporated.
The combination created a clear understanding of how the thesis should be structured and how 
the process should be conducted. The research process consists of a literature review regarding 
ethics, technology and AI, as well as interviews with experts from the industry. This allowed a 
deeper understanding of the context and enabled limiting of the scope. Thereafter further re-
search was conducted within the limited scope, again experts were interviewed and potential users 
as well. All the research gathered were then used as input when using the SID method. 
1.3 METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:19==
Page 5 of 127
Figure 1.1 – Illustration of the thesis approach.  
The SID method consists of three levels with four stages; Preparation: Debriefing, Stage 1: Antici­
pating the future, Stage 2: Goal setting, and stage 3: Developing the intervention. The SID method 
came with predefined milestones, these can be seen numbered in figure 1.2. 
Figure 1.2 – Illustration of the SID process, inspired by Tromp and Hekkert (2018).
To make the process easier to conduct, milestones were created. The end of each chapter became 
a milestone and only the Social implication Design chapter had internal milestones as well. The 
milestones were reach by using a loose form of sprints to help ensure goals were met and dead­
lines were not pushed too much. Appendix A1.2 illustrates the original project description and 
time plan, and appendix A1.3 illustrates the final. 
1.3.1 METHODS 
Throughout the report different methods have been used. To improve readability the methods 
will be described in the beginning of the respective chapter. An overview of what methods will be 
presented in which chapters can be seen below. 
Chapter 2: Literature search 
Chapter 3: Expert interviews 
Chapter 5: Expert interviews & quantitative user interviews 
Chapter 6: Social Implication Design  
Chapter 7: Narrative-based study & user testing 
==PAGE:20==
Page 6 of 127
Chapter 1 | Introduction & Methodology
1.4 THESIS STRUCTURE
To enhance readability the thesis follows the scientific journal structure; introduction, methods, 
results, discussion, conclusion. The thesis has 10 chapters: 
1 Introduction & Methodology 
This chapter introduces the aim of the thesis, present the research objectives and the methodology.
2 Literature Review 
Here ethics is being investigated in relation to design engineering, design methods, technology and 
eldercare. This chapter creates the basis for the ethical considerations that should be included in 
the final concept. 
3 Expert Interview Study within the Industry
Chapter 3 presents the results of the expert interviews regarding technology, AI and ethics. 
4 Mild Cognitive Impairment 
Chapter 4 presents the limiting of the scope to focus on mild cognitive impairment, and then 
proceed to describe the subject in more detail. 
5 Field Work – Mild Cognitive Impairment
Here the results of expert interviews and potential users are presented in relation to mild cognitive 
impairment.  
6 Social Implication Design 
Chapter 6 presents the results of the SID method and presents the final concept. 
7 Validation 
Here the validation of the concept is described. 
8 Reflection 
Chapter 8 presents the reflection of the design process. 
9 Discussion, Limitations and Further Work 
Chapter 9 discuss the results in relation to literature, presents the implications and limitations of 
the concept and then suggest how the concept could be enhanced through further work. 
10 Conclusion 
Lastly, this chapter presents the conclusion of the report. 
==PAGE:21==
Page 7 of 127
1.4.1 READING GUIDE 
To increase readability the chapters are supposed to be read sequentially, however appendices 
have been provided on the side if the reader wishes to go into more detail and depth with specif-
ic sections of the report. The appendices will be referred to throughout the report and will be 
indicated as AX.X, i.e. A1.1 if it is the first appendix in chapter 1. Each chapter has a short pre­
sentation of the information that will be presented and hereafter some chapters will begin with a 
short method section going into detail with the particular methods used, e.g. chapter 6 will begin 
with a detailed description of the Social Implication Design method. Furthermore, nomenclature 
and abbreviations have been presented in the beginning of the report to ensure understanding 
of terms throughout the report. A list of figures and tables can be seen in the beginning of the 
report as well. 
Although some interviews presented in this thesis were conducted in Danish, quotes have been 
translated to English. Translated quotes will be presented in chapter 5 and 7. 
Concept and intervention will be used interchangeably throughout the report. 
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
LITERATURE REVIEW
==PAGE:24==
Page 10 of 127
Chapter 2 | Literature Review
2.1 INTRODUCTION
This chapter will be addressing the first two research questions, with focus on investigating and 
exploring ethics in engineering within design and technology and defining guidelines for the design 
process in chapter 6. The purpose is to help clarify what ethical considerations should be included 
in the design, as well as create an understanding of how to include them. 
Section 2.2 will present a clear definition of ethics that will be used throughout the report, as well 
as present what constitutes the term ethics, studies of ethics and lastly why ethics is important. 
Section 2.3 will then go on to present ethics in engineering and the process of developing new 
technology. Section 2.3.1 will focus on using ethics in engineering, thereafter section 2.3.2 will 
explore methods with background in ethical considerations. Section 2.3.3 will then identify issues 
within Artificial Intelligence, and present possible future trends therein. 
Next, section 2.4 will delve on ethical considerations specifically to eldercare. Here ethical compo­
nents important for eldercare will be identified.  
Section 2.5 will end the chapter with synthesizing guidelines for this specific project, stressing the 
ethical considerations to include based on the scope. This section combines the key findings from 
section 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4. 
2.1.1 METHOD
Literature presented in this chapter consist of scientific journal articles and specialized books, 
as philosophical literature is often printed in books rather than journals. Literature was found by 
utilizing search engines such as Google Scholar, Scopus and DTU Find It. To ensure the quality 
of the research chosen, the scientific articles were considered in relation to the journal they were 
printed within (impact factor) as well as if they had been cited elsewhere. Furthermore, to ensure 
complete understanding of the ethical literature, expert guidance was received by Martin Mose 
Bentzen, DTU Management Engineering. 
2.2 ETHICS
In this report ethics will be defined as following: ethics concerns the moral principles and values 
that guides the behavior, choices and actions of human beings (e.g. Martin & Schinzinger, 2005; 
Verbeek, 2017). In a more practical sense ethics guide decision making both in professional and 
personal life, e.g. choosing whether the secretary should be fired due to increasing sick days when 
it is known she is fighting cancer or lying about having read a partner’s personal messages to con-
firm infidelity. The job of a design engineer is not only to create new design but also to make the 
most ethically sound decisions when doing so, based on own moral principles and those of the 
surrounding society. As products have been used unintentionally and caused harm to the society 
the importance of including ethical considerations has increased. This is seen with the technology 
used for the atom bomb. Considering ethics is also important, to understand where to place blame. 
This is seen with the self-driving cars – who is to blame if the car crashes? However, it will never 
be possible to create a truly ethically sound decision, as some moral values will be conflicting (Mar­
tin & Schinzinger, 2005). Ethical beliefs differ in different parts of the world, sometimes strong 
==PAGE:25==
Page 11 of 127 
ethical beliefs within a country can cause massive conflicts. The societal understanding of what is 
ethically sound is defined by the people and it therefore becomes increasingly difficult to create a 
universal product. As a result, the engineer must take a stance and find a balance with the design. 
The engineer must decide what ethical beliefs to design based on, e.g.  a design engineer in western 
countries might put more value in privacy, design and brand whereas people from Asia might put 
more value in functionality, brand and price.
The ethical behavior of human beings has been explored extensively in philosophy throughout 
history. Some of the more prominent speakers of ethics are Plato, Nietzsche, Buddha and Con-
fucius (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). During the 20th century ethics expanded from being an 
inherently philosophical aspect of human beings, to become part of technology, as well as the 
process of designing and engineering technology (Latour, 1992). This change in the application 
of ethics has led to four main ethical fields; Descriptive Ethics (Valdez-Martinez, Turnbull, Gar­
duño-Espinosa, & Porter, 2006), Meta-Ethics (e.g. Moore & Baldwin, 1994), Normative Ethics 
(e.g. Martin & Schinzinger, 2005; Reese & Fremouw, 1984), and Applied Ethics (e.g. LaFollette, 
2009; Singer, 1986). While Meta-Ethics concerns the determination of the meaning and origin 
of ethical concepts (Moore & Baldwin, 1994), Normative Ethics concern the determination of a 
morally justified course of action (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005; Reese & Fremouw, 1984). Applied 
Ethics instead concerns the analysis of morally controversial issues, e.g. abortion and gun control 
(LaFollette, 2009; Singer, 1986). Descriptive Ethics focus on defining what the people believe is 
the right course of action based on empirical research (Valdez-Martinez et al., 2006). 
Although all four ethical fields are influential in design of technology, Meta-Ethics is not gener­
ally used by engineers as the concepts in question would often have been discussed by scholars 
beforehand and is therefore not discussed further. Applied Ethics is also not discussed further, as 
the analysis of morally controversial issues will often take place before the design phase begins, or 
after the products have been launched. During the actual design phase, the scope of this project, 
only Normative Ethics and Descriptive Ethics are relevant and will be further explored in this 
literature review in section 2.2.1 and 2.2.2. Section 2.2.3 present the ethical theories utilized for the 
remainder of the project. 
2.2.2 NORMATIVE ETHICS 
The focus of Normative Ethics is to create a morally sound course of action by finding moral 
standards that will help regulate behavior (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005; Reese & Fremouw, 1984). 
A common example of a normative principle is the Golden Rule: “Do to others as you would 
have them do to you” (Stace, 1938). Within Normative Ethics different theories exits, the most in­
fluential are; utilitarianism, duty ethics, virtue ethics, rights ethics, and self-realization ethics (Gert, 
1988; MacIntyre, 2011; Martin & Schinzinger, 2005; Sidgwick, 2011). These will be presented in 
section 2.2.2.1 to 2.2.2.4. 
==PAGE:26==
Page 12 of 127
Chapter 2 | Literature Review
2.2.2.1 UTILITARIANISM 
Utilitarianism is a consequentialist theory with focus on doing the most good for the most people 
while making sure all are giving equal consideration (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005; Sidgwick, 2011). 
Here an action is deemed morally sound if the consequences to all involved are more favorable 
than unfavorable. However, it differs from a cost-benefit analysis as utilitarianism focus on the 
consequences to all, whereas a cost-benefit analysis is focusing on the consequences to the indi­
vidual or company doing the test (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). Defining what is best for the most 
people can be rather difficult which has led to different types of utilitarianism; Act-utilitarianism, 
Rule-utilitarianism, Hedonistic utilitarianism, Ideal utilitarianism, and Preference utilitarianism; 
here act-utilitarianism and rule-utilitarianism concerns the actions, whereas hedon-istic, ideal and 
preference utilitarianism concerns moral conduct (Bentham, 1781; Mill, 1895). Due to the scope 
of this project being action oriented, only act- and rule-utilitarianism are interesting to look fur­
ther into. Jeremy Bentham presented act-utilitarianism as collecting all consequences of different 
actions and then choosing the action that does the most overall good (Bentham, 1781). As this 
definition will at times lead to unethical suggestions, or promotion of injustice, it has been criti­
cized leading to the birth of rule-utilitarianism (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). Rule-utilitarianism 
was created to close some of the holes in act-utilitarianism by saying that the ‘correct’ action is the 
action that is most beneficial to all based on ethical and societal rules (Mill, 1895).  Although both 
theories are widely spread they face a big issue with the definition of ‘good’ (Martin & Schinzing­
er, 2005). ‘Good’ within an area should preferably be clearly defined beforehand and will often 
be discussed within meta-ethics and descriptive ethics, although there will at times be conflicting 
opinions on what ‘good’ is. As a designer it would be necessary to define what ‘good’ is before 
beginning any design task. 
2.2.2.2 VIRTUE ETHICS 
Where utilitarianism focus on actions virtue ethics focus on the virtues of man, meaning that 
virtue ethics focus on good habits of character (MacIntyre, 2011; Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). 
An example is Plato’s four cardinal virtues: wisdom, courage, temperance, and justice (Carr, 1988). 
Another example is the theological virtues: faith, hope, and charity (Cessario, 1991). There are 
perceived to be four different branches of virtue ethics; eudaimonist virtue ethics, agent-based and 
exemplarist virtue ethics, target-centered virtue ethics, and Platonistic virtue ethics (Adams, 1999; 
Annas, 1993; Slote, 2001; Van Zyl, 2014). Eudaimonist virtue ethics states that a ‘good life’ has 
focus on eudaimonia (roughly meaning happiness, flourishing, well-being) (Annas, 1993). Agent-
based and exemplarist virtue ethics instead focus on the motivational and disposi-tional qualities 
of agents (Slote, 2001). This means that a ‘good life’ is filled with good intentions, motives and 
dispositions (Slote, 2001). The target-centered virtue ethics view believes an under-standing of 
virtues already exist (e.g. courage, generosity, compassion, etc.), but that one should strive to im­
prove these (Van Zyl, 2014). Lastly, the Platonistic virtue ethics view is inspired by Plato – here 
focus should be on the ‘good’ around us (Adams, 1999). When considering a design process, virtue 
ethics is what drives the designer. The virtues of the designer guides decision making, and the final 
design will mirror the virtues of the designer. An example could be how a very compassionate and 
generous designer might work for an NGO or how someone growing up with a strong sense of 
justice might choose to become a lawyer. Therefore, an ethically sound design would consist of 
having good intentions and being virtuous. In engineering, virtue ethics does not stand well alone 
and would be better off if complimented by other theories of ethics (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). 
This is the case as virtues are not clearly defined and therefore difficult to use as a guideline for 
==PAGE:27==
Page 13 of 127 
making ethically sound decisions. By combining virtue ethics with other theories of ethics that are 
more clearly defined the engineer will have a clearer path to follow. 
2.2.2.3 Duty Theories 
Duty theories (also called deontological) focus on the duties between humanity and oneself, e.g. 
not hurting others, not committing suicide, being kind, etc. (Gert, 1988). When designing tech­
nology, duties of respect for autonomy and individuality are fundamental (Martin & Schinzinger, 
2005). Four duty theories exist; Pufendorf’s duties, rights ethics, Kant’s duties, and prima facie du­
ties (Kant, Wood, & Schneewind, 2002; Puffendorf, 1735; Ross, 1930). Pufendorf (1735) cre-ated 
three categories of duties: duties to God, duties to oneself, and duties to others. Pufendorf put 
focus on the soul and body, as well as treating others with respect. Rights ethics refer to basic hu­
man rights and to moral rights (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). Human rights are e.g. the right to live, 
the right to happiness, etc. whereas moral rights can be determined if they fulfill four features: they 
must be natural (not created by society), universal (the same all over the world), equal regardless of 
e.g. race etc., and inalienable (they cannot be handed over to others) (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). 
Kant’s duty theory focusses on a principle called “categorical im-perative” (Kant et al., 2002), e.g. 
treat people with respect and dignity, not as a means to an end. The issue with Kant’s theory of 
duty ethics is that it is absolute (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005), meaning the duties have no excep­
tion. Prima facie duties is a response to this issue, allowing that at times duties will conflict and one 
will have precedence over the other (Ross, 1930), e.g. lying or tell the truth and hurt a friend. Here 
it is argued that there is an actual duty and a prima facie duty. 
2.2.2.4 Self-realization ethics
All of the ethical theories above leave room to consider the ethical implications on the self, i.e. 
the pursuit of what is best for each individual (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). This can be realized 
in three different ways: though ethical egoism, through social contract theory, and though com­
munity and relationships (Bradley, 1927; Ciulla, 2000; Hobbes, 1994; Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). 
Ethical egoism is a highly individualistic way of thinking, focusing on promoting self-interest at 
all times, here self-interest is the well-being of oneself (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). Rand (1961) 
argues that doing what is best for oneself will indirectly make the world a better place. Social con­
tract theory is also considered ethical egoism, but with focus on rules (Hobbes, 1994). Hobbes 
argues that agents (e.g. designers) should adopt moral rules for purely selfish reasons as this is the 
only way to allow a civilized community – meaning that social rules will help keep agents safe, if 
they are enforced by all in society (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). A different version of selfreal­
ization is through community and relationships (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). Here it is argued 
that humanity consist of social beings and need community and relationships in order to be truly 
happy (Bradley, 1927), thereby being social for one’s own satisfaction. This is also applicable in 
professional settings, as being in a social environment is often considered a necessity for a suc­
cessful working space (Ciulla, 2000). Lastly, self-interest and self-realization should be mentioned 
as a very powerful motivator (Ciulla, 2000; Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). Although not all would 
pledge themselves to ethical egoism, must of humanity respond well to personal gain and rewards. 
==PAGE:28==
Page 14 of 127
Chapter 2 | Literature Review
2.2.3 CHOOSING THEORIES 
As there are many different theories within the fields of ethics it can at times be difficult to choose 
which is the best (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). In engineering many of these theories are com­
plimentary and the best results might be gained by a combination. However, not all theories are 
equally applicable to designing AI for eldercare as is the scope of the thesis. 
Both descriptive and normative ethics should be addressed. Descriptive ethics should be consid­
ered before the design process truly begins; however, the designer should not set out to define 
the morals. Instead the designer should utilize the knowledge about the culture already gathered. 
By utilizing this knowledge, the designer ensures a more time efficient design process, but is also 
aware that the knowledge gathered by sociologist, etc. would be more extensive than what the 
designer would be able to find. Normative ethics should help guide the design process. Due to the 
scope of the thesis, it would make sense to focus on rule-utilitarianism, rights ethics and prima 
facie duties. Rule-utilitarianism is relevant to include as focus would be on ensuring the best de­
sign for the elderly, however it will be necessary to determine what doing the ‘best’ for the elderly 
constitutes before the actual design process begins – this will be done through research. Rights 
ethics would ensure that the rights of the elderly would be prioritized. Prima facie duties are also 
important to include as the rights of and the best for the elderly might at times be contradictory 
resulting in a dilemma, e.g. privacy and safety. Although virtue ethics is driving the designer, it does 
not make sense going into detail with the psyche of the engineer in this project as the engineer is 
not part of the scope. Instead it is assumed that the designer has virtues relevant for the project, 
i.e. wanting to make a difference to the target group. 
2.3 ENGINEERING, DESIGNING TECHNOLOGY 
AND THE ROLE OF AI
To get a deeper understanding of ethics in a technical field the following section will be exploring 
ethics in engineering (section 2.3.1), using ethics in design of technology (section 2.3.2), and the 
role of Artificial Intelligence (section 2.3.3). This section will also address the possible future of 
Artificial Intelligence as discussed in the ‘One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence’ in 
section 2.3.3.1 (Horvitz, 2016).
2.3.1 ETHICS IN ENGINEERING 
As humanity has evolved so has technology and the number of technological devices in daily life 
is constantly increasing, leading to a change in ethical responsibility (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005; 
Verbeek, 2011). As technology is taking over tasks and making life easier, ethical considerations 
that were once up to the individual performing the task now falls to the designers and engineers 
that creates the technology (Verbeek, 2017). The ethical aspects have to be considered as technol­
ogy mediates human lives and alters the actions of the users (Kudina & Verbeek, 2018). Latour 
argues, that morality is not only found in human beings but also in material items, e.g. consumer 
goods, robots, etc. (Latour, 1992), meaning that ethics should be considered when developing new 
technology. As this has come to be the general opinion, ethics is no longer only considered by the 
==PAGE:29==
Page 15 of 127 
philosophers but the engineers as well and has led to the term ‘ethics in engi-neering’ (Martin & 
Schinzinger, 2005; Van de Poel & Verbeek, 2006). Ethics in engineering is built on the notion that 
technology has an impact on human beings, and this impact should be addressed before launching 
new products (Latour, 1992; Verbeek, 2006). Meaning that ethics, especially “professional and 
ethical responsibility”, has become part of the design process (Van de Poel & Verbeek, 2006). The 
normative ethical theories are used when designing technology, although often the designer is un­
aware of what theory is utilized. The lack of consideration to ethical theory might lead to ethical 
aspects being overlooked or ignored (Martin & Schinzinger, 2005). Keeping the ethical theories 
in mind and covering more than one theory will create a better and more thought through design. 
2.3.2 DESIGNING TECHNOLOGY 
When developing new technology moral values should be included in the design. The moral val-
ues to include are often loosely defined by the society, however the values can differ greatly be-
tween different cultures. As most of the values are loosely defined and some are not defined at 
all, the designers will have to take a stance and clearly define the values (Shilton, 2013). Taking a 
stance can be very difficult as values will at times be contradictory, e.g. safety and autonomy. As a 
result, designers have to gather information about the culture before the actual design process can 
begin (Hämäläinen, 2016). 
There are different methods that already includes ethical values and considerations in the design, 
some popular methods are: Nudging (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008), Persuasive Design (Fogg, 2003), 
Behavioral Design (Datta & Mullainathan, 2014), Value Sensitive Design (Friedman, Kahn, & 
Borning, 2002), Technological Mediation (Verbeek, 2005), Vision in Product Design (Lloyd, Hek­
kert, & Van Dijk, 2006), Design with Intent (Lockton, Harrison, & Stanton, 2010b), and Social 
Implication Design (Tromp & Hekkert, 2018). What all of these methods have in common is the 
understanding that technology can alter behavior and trying to utilize this knowledge in creating 
better design that incorporates ethical considerations and aims at altering the behavior in a desired 
direction. 
Nudging and persuasive design have similar traits, as they both wish people to act in a desirable 
way without taking away freedom of choice (Verbeek, 2017). The purpose of nudging is trying to 
make people make certain choices and push them in a certain direction, but creating a reflective 
state of mind to ensure ‘consent’ in the alteration of behavior (Fogg, 2003). Nudging is often used 
in design for the society. While nudging is pushing people in a desired direction and it allows peo­
ple to make a choice, technology will always affect human behavior even if no choice was made 
(Verbeek, 2017). Persuasive design focus more on persuading alterations in human behavior and 
attitude, and making the process very transparent (Friedman et al., 2002). Here focus is on the 
designer’s motives, the methods of persuasion and the outcome, emphasizing the importance of 
people understanding how they are being affected (Verbeek, 2017). Persuasive design is typically 
used in information-technological applications. However, persuasive design is created with one (or 
few) intended behaviors/attitudes but does not take alternate use contexts into account (Verbeek, 
2017). The technology will not always work or be used as intended, which persuasive design does 
not take into account. 
Behavioral design is a relatively new method that also focusses on influencing behavior in a certain 
direction, but with respect for the freedom to choose, autonomy and dignity (P. J. Cash, Hartlev, & 
==PAGE:30==
Page 16 of 127
Chapter 2 | Literature Review
Durazo, 2017; Datta & Mullainathan, 2014). When using behavioral design, the solution is going 
through an iterative process, and is therefore evaluated continuously during the design process. 
Value Sensitive Design (VSD) instead focus on including human values in the technology through­
out the design process, and it includes many different contexts e.g. workplace, home setting, etc. 
(Friedman et al., 2002). However, it has been criticized for not covering alternate end use contexts 
except the intended one (Verbeek, 2017) and for being unclear in what values should be included 
as well as what constitute good values (Manders-Huits, 2011). 
All the four above mentioned methods have some weaknesses that are quite similar; they do not 
include alternate use contexts during the design phase nor a clear framework for finding the moral 
values to focus on. By looking at the similarities of the methods it becomes apparent that focus 
is on the engineers and companies producing technology to consider the ethical implications the 
technology will have on humanity. The method of Technological Mediation overcomes the weak­
ness of use contexts of nudging, persuasive design and VSD (Ihde, 1990; Latour, 1992; Verbeek, 
2005). Verbeek suggest that technology is rarely used in the intended way and due to this notion, it 
becomes extremely important to consider all possible use context when creating behavior-guiding 
technology (Verbeek, 2017). Technological mediation faces the challenge of considering as many 
use contexts as possible, as it is impossible to consider all, and it is still unclear what values to 
follow. 
Vision in Product Design (ViP) provide a clear framework where the values of an existing prod-
uct can be used or guide the designer in finding new values (Hekkert & van Dijk, 2011)(Lloyd et 
al., 2006). The method focusses on finding possible future scenarios and possibilities, instead of 
dealing with the present. Here focus is on designing for the individual. ViP is interaction-centered, 
meaning the products are seen as a means of accomplishing different actions (Lloyd et al., 2006). 
The future context is very important as well. Social Implication Design (SID) is an altered variant 
of ViP, and again a clear framework is presented where values of the society are incorporated in 
the design (Tromp & Hekkert, 2018). The SID method focusses on the product not just being for 
the individual but also having a social impact. SID also puts focus on under-standing the systems 
that humans interact within as “both people and systems define society”, making it clear that the 
moral values should be found within the group of people and system the designer is working with­
in (Tromp & Hekkert, 2018). Both ViP and SID are methods that addresses moral values in the 
design by focusing on the values of the society, but what values to address is still unclear. During 
the design process these values become clearer by following the frameworks. 
The Design with Intent (DwI) method focusses on influencing behavior, improving performance 
and reducing user errors (Lockton et al., 2010b). DwI is used on the concept generation stage. 
Lockton provides tools that help the designer imagine the problem through different lenses, i.e. 
imagining what position the product might be in, to increase usage or interaction (Lockton, Harri­
son, & Stanton, 2010a). DwI does not provide a clear framework for including values in the design 
nor does it define what values are important, but the method does make it easier to address the 
values once they have been clearly defined by the designer. 
==PAGE:31==
Page 17 of 127 
2.3.2.1 CHOOSING A METHOD
Choosing a design method can be difficult as all methods have positive and negative aspects. 
Therefore, the method should be chosen based on the individual preference from the designer 
and the specific design task. The scope of this thesis focusses on finding a method that allows 
for including ethical considerations and focus on the interaction with the user. As it has become 
apparent that none of the methods clearly define the ethical considerations it is up to the designer 
to define these. The ethical considerations for this project will be defined in section 2.4. Although 
all methods focus on adding moral values in the design process, SID and ViP consider descriptive 
ethics in more depth during the design process. Both these methods are extremely focused on the 
context surrounding the design. Especially SID focus on how both the people and systems are 
important for defining the society, thereby pushing the need for descriptive ethics and utilizing that 
knowledge to create ethically sound concepts with implications for the society. The DwI tools can 
be highly effective when addressing the different ethical considerations and can help explore many 
different contexts. By using SID in combination with DwI it becomes easier to ensure that the 
moral values are included as well as encourage the designer to consider future contexts and what 
the concept should accomplish. 
2.3.3 THE ROLE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Throughout this thesis Artificial Intelligence (AI) will be defined as the simulation of human intel­
ligence and behavior in computer systems (Nilsson, 1980). By the use of machine learning, deep 
learning, Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Cognitive Neural Network (CNN) AI has the 
ability to solve complex problems while also being able to learn faster than human beings, as can 
be seen when the first AI computer beat the leading chess master in 1997. Figure 2.1 illustrates 
how AI utilizes CNN to make decisions – different inputs have been added, the computer then 
calculates and an output comes out. An example of this process can be searching different web­
pages for clothes and the next time Facebook is opened advertisements for similar clothes shops 
will be presented. 
Figure 2.1 – Illustration of the Cognitive Neural Network (Nielsen, 2015). 
The NLP enables AI systems to read and understand human language allowing humans to com­
municate with the AI system through voice or text input (Horvitz, 2016; Nilsson, 1980). The con­
tinued evolution of AI has helped take over mundane tasks, help increase safety and will be part 
of the huge development within technology in the future (Horvitz, 2016).
==PAGE:32==
Page 18 of 127
Chapter 2 | Literature Review
Including ethical values in technology can be difficult in itself but including ethics in AI increase 
the ethical considerations considerably as well as increases possible use contexts from non-users 
(e.g. government, service providers, etc.). AI is used to create intelligent machines that will react, 
work and act as human beings. These machines often include speech recognition (also known 
as voice interaction), learning abilities, planning abilities and problem-solving abilities (Russell & 
Norvig, 2016) – also known as expert systems (LaChat, 1986). As AI has evolved through time 
ethics within AI systems has become a very popular topic of discussion around the world, not 
just in academic circles. This is the case as AI technology is being developed to handle tasks that 
require ethical consideration, e.g. self-driving cars, care robots, etc. (LaChat, 1986; Sorell & Draper, 
2014). The move within large-scale machine learning and deep learning has enabled AI to evolve 
fast and hard, making robots with ‘human’ traits a possibility (Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012).  
2.3.3.1 ISSUES WITH AI
While AI has had a huge impact on the world, some issues arise, the most influential being data 
collection, fairness, transparency, predictability, lack of moral, being held accountable, and not 
harming human beings (Bostrom & Yudkowsky, 2014; Khalil, 1993). These seven issues will be 
further described in the following, although focus will be on data collection and fairness. 
Transparence and predictability are important when dealing with AI as it becomes more difficult 
to notice the errors when the algorithm is running, possibly leading to errors in judgment and con­
sequential unfairness and racial issues – lack of moral (Bostrom & Yudkowsky, 2014). In the same 
sense, being held accountable is important; who is to blame if errors do occur or people get hurt? 
(Bostrom & Yudkowsky, 2014; Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012). These are ethical issues that are often 
not considered when creating technology with AI incorporated, e.g. self-driving cars. The issue 
of fairness originates with the diversity in humans. If the diversity, i.e. race, demography, culture, 
gender, age, etc. is not taken into consideration when AI devices have to calculate probabilities or 
make decisions for humans in any way, true fairness might not be achieved (Bostrom & Yudkows­
ky, 2014). An example on the issue of fairness could be the AI algorithm calculating the time it will 
take to pack 10 containers without taking the gender and size of the workers into consideration 
a 150 cm woman might be asked to provide the same standards as a 190cm man. This would be 
considered unfair. Fairness is therefore an important issue in regard to ethics. The input is there­
fore very important for the output of the algorithm. This issue can be overcome by programming 
ethics into the algorithm and by providing the system with data on demographic, gender, etc., and 
by writing the algorithm to overcome situations that would be considered unfair – programming 
ethics into the AI system (Lin, Abney, & Bekey, 2012). 
The issue currently causing the most debate is collection of Big Data (Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016). 
The main issues with Big Data are informed consent, privacy, ownership, and the “Big Data di­
vide” (Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016; Wu, Zhu, Wu, & Ding, 2013). The “Big Data divide” refers to 
the division between the data givers and the companies that analyze the data (Andrejevic, 2014; 
Crawford, Miltner, & Gray, 2014), while ownership refers to control of data and the right to ben­
efit from that data (Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016). This will not be further explored, as both issues 
are outside the scope of this thesis. More interesting is it to look at in-formed consent and privacy. 
When gathering Big Data, consent is given to a specific purpose, however the issue lies with what 
the Big Data is later used for (Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016; Wu et al., 2013). Often the data will be 
used for different statistics, research areas, etc. and as the inten-tion with Big Data is to detect pat­
==PAGE:33==
Page 19 of 127 
terns between seemingly unrelated data, consent should be given not only to the specific situation 
it is needed but also to any future use of the data unrelated to the original cause (Mittelstadt & 
Floridi, 2016). This also has ties in privacy, and thereby also in anonymization and confidentiality 
(Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016). When gathering Big Data anonymity is often a requirement to in­
crease privacy and confidentiality (Bostrom & Yudkowsky, 2014; Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016). Al­
though privacy is a highly discussed topic it has been difficult to quantify and define, which is why 
there is little literature on the subject as to what precau-tions should be taken during the design 
phase (Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016). Furthermore, no clear understanding or guidelines have been 
created to guide the designer when incorporating privacy into the design. 
2.3.3.2 THE IMPACT OF AI 
Although AI is causing a dispute in opinions among humanity, AI is already a huge part of every­
day life (Bostrom & Yudkowsky, 2014), e.g. the calculations of flight routes, the recommendation 
of mortgage and self-driving cars. The part AI plays in daily lives often go unnoticed, meaning 
that as AI evolves the impact on human life will alter the current societal structure without notice 
(Khalil, 1993). AI can help make everyday life easier and remove mundane task, as is already done 
in many factories where automatization is run by AI algorithms, but it can also affect the indus­
try in a more radical way - AI is already making progress within MedTech (medical technology), 
EdTech (educational technology) and eldercare, making life easier for the doctors, teachers and 
healthcare assistants (Horvitz, 2016). A few of the ways AI is making daily life easi-er undetected 
is the automatization of factory plants, filtering away spam e-mails, showing com-mercials that are 
relevant for each specific person, online recommendations, social media, auto-pilot, safety instal­
lations in factories, etc. It is difficult to define the impact of AI on daily lives as it is so embedded 
in the current way the world is functioning, and the impact will only increase.  
2.3.3.3 FUTURE TREND IN AI 
Although AI is causing a lot of debate literature agree that AI is here to stay, and that AI will only 
evolve from here (Kudina & Verbeek, 2018; Martin & Schinzinger, 2005; Mittelstadt & Floridi, 
2016; Russell & Norvig, 2016). The ‘Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030’ is a study conducted by 
an AI expert study panel, focusing on the future and development of AI (Horvitz, 2016). Based on 
the study, further development can be expected within the areas of; transportation, home/service 
robots, healthcare, education, low-resource communities, public safety and security, employment 
and work place, and entertainment within the next 11 years. However, it is expected that AI can 
be found almost everywhere. In relation to the scope, only healthcare and home/service robots 
will be further explored. The study panel argues that due to the enhance-ment in voice interaction 
and image labeling, robots and AI in general will be able to improve social interaction – this could, 
however, lead to new privacy and ethical issues not yet addressed (Horvitz, 2016). The panel also 
argues that AI could be very beneficial in healthcare, if the trust of doctors, patients, etc. can be 
gained (Horvitz, 2016). Within healthcare AI will be able to better analyze data but also make sur­
geries and treatment safer. As AI evolves, regulations and obstacles will occur, and these should be 
overcome as well. The development of AI technology is moving fast, and countries like Japan and 
China are already far ahead of the western world due to being less restricted by laws and open to 
ethical discussions such as privacy and data collection. 
==PAGE:34==
Page 20 of 127
Chapter 2 | Literature Review
2.4 ETHICS IN ELDERCARE
This section will explore the important ethical considerations when creating assistive technology 
for the eldercare sector. 
As technology has evolved assistive technology (AT) for eldercare has become a widely discussed 
topic (e.g. Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012; Sorell & Draper, 2014; Zwijsen, Niemeijer, & Hertogh, 2011). 
The purpose of AT is to enhance the autonomy of the elderly, improving quality of life (Zwijsen 
et al., 2011), and increase the independence of the elderly (M. Cash, 2003; Cheek, Nikpour, & 
Nowlin, 2005; Melander-Wikman, Jansson, Hallberg, Mörtberg, & Gard, 2007; Robinson, Brit­
tain, Lindsay, Jackson, & Olivier, 2009). Studies with focus on early stage dementia shows that AT 
allow the patients to stay independent in their home for a longer period of time (Zwijsen et al., 
2011). AT often contains AI to help take better care of the user, as well as allow the caretaker to 
keep track of the user. Although most authors agree that AT and home robots could have many 
positive benefits some ethical dilemmas still need to be addressed (Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012; Sorell 
& Draper, 2014; Zwijsen et al., 2011). These ethical dilemmas will be addressed in section 2.4.1. 
2.4.1 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN AT
The main ethical dilemmas found in literature consists of informed consent, confidentiality, pri­
vacy, safety, autonomy, human contact, obtrusiveness and stigma, personal liberty and indepen­
dence, infantilization and control of robots, and enablement (Kuhse, Schüklenk, & Singer, 2015; 
Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012; Sorell & Draper, 2014; Zwijsen et al., 2011). These dilemmas should all 
be included when developing AT for eldercare. To increase the understanding, all dilemmas will 
be further explained. 
•
•
•
Privacy is the most publicly discussed dilemma as it is a basic human right. AT might in-
fringe on the privacy by observing and keeping track of the elderly (Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012; 
Sorell & Draper, 2014). However, literature studies show elderly to accept a loss in privacy if 
it increases safety and the needs for AT is big enough (Zwijsen et al., 2011). Steijn and Vedder 
(2015) also argues that what is perceived as privacy differs in all age groups, and although most 
adults share the same core values in terms of privacy the fun-damental understanding of what 
is deemed most important might differ from adults to elderly. Furthermore, the sense of what 
constitutes as privacy has been challenged with the development of technology, therefore 
the definition of what privacy is could alter in the future. Privacy is considered important to 
include in ethical design, but a sense of security and safety precedes privacy according to the 
literature. 
It is extremely important that informed consent has been collected when handling AT and 
any other AI technology – i.e. consent of gathering data, having microphones or GPS in the 
product, etc. (Kuhse et al., 2015). Giving informed consent is a prerequisite to respect the 
elderly’s rights, and can only be given when the elderly is of sound mind (Kuhse et al., 2015). 
If the elderly cannot give consent, caretakers may help ensure the elderly understand what 
is being asked. The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) demands that consent 
should be given to any data collecting technology (European Union, 2016). 
Confidentiality is a continuous ethical dilemma in modern society. It is extremely important 
that the AT technology does not share information about the owner with family members or 
governments without the elderly giving informed consent (Kuhse et al., 2015). If the elderly 
is not of sound mind to give consent, the legal guardian may have to step in.
==PAGE:35==
Page 21 of 127 
•
•
•
•
•
•
Creating a safe environment around the elderly is important, and AT might just help with that 
(Sorell & Draper, 2014; Zwijsen et al., 2011). Studies have shown that elderly feel safer when 
monitored by AT (Essén, 2008; Melander-Wikman et al., 2007). This notion is very important, 
as this allows designers to find a balance between respecting privacy and gathering enough 
data to increase safety – e.g. by monitoring the house with sen-sors. 
Ensuring autonomy for the elderly can be difficult as the AT might become intruding or 
dehumanizing (Zwijsen et al., 2011). The right to self-determination is part of what AT pro­
motes, however a review of literature illustrates a lot of concern for whether this is truly pos­
sible (Sorell & Draper, 2014; Zwijsen et al., 2011). It is important that the AT helps enable the 
elderly to be self-reliant and ensure a continuous ability to achieve and realize goals by being 
independent (Sorell & Draper, 2014).
As the AT makes the elderly more independent it is important that human contact is not 
lost or decreased to an unhealthy extend (Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012; Sorell & Draper, 2014; 
Zwijsen et al., 2011), the AT should instead promote contact with the outside world. This is 
very important for the designer to consider, as loneliness can affect the mental health of the 
elderly. 
Obtrusion of the house and life creates a negative feeling with the elderly and causes stig­
matization (Zwijsen et al., 2011). This is due to the filming, noises and looks of the AT, 
making the elderly stand out and feel different. As a result, literature argues that shape, size 
and look of the AT matters to the elderly and should be considered during the design process 
(Robinson et al., 2009). 
Personal liberty and independence are the ability to make own decisions and choices, with­
out the approval of the AT (Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012; Sorell & Draper, 2014).This is very 
important to consider during the design phase, as the purpose of AT is to increase the inde­
pendence of the elderly (M. Cash, 2003; Cheek et al., 2005; Melander-Wikman et al., 2007; 
Robinson et al., 2009). The AT should try to promote independence. 
Infantilization of AI has been categorized as an ethical issue, as creating robots and technol­
ogy so authentic that it becomes deceiving is considered unethical (Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012). 
This affects the ethical duty of seeing the world as it. In the same sense, it has been discussed 
whether putting a robot under the control of the elderly is unethical since it is not clear who 
should take responsibility if anything goes wrong (Sharkey & Sharkey, 2012). These elements 
will not be addressed in the design solution presented in chapter 6 as an elderly does not cre­
ate bonds with a small device in the same way as an AT humanoid robot. Also, the control 
over the device is limited. 
==PAGE:36==
Page 22 of 127
Chapter 2 | Literature Review
2.5 GUIDELINES FOR THIS PROJECT  
Although the findings described in this chapter might be usable for similar projects, they create a 
unique set of guidelines for this particular project. It is therefore recommended that the process 
of choosing method and locating ethical considerations must be gone through for each project to 
ensure the final concept will be ethically sound. 
Based on the literature review it has become clear that ethical considerations should always be 
included in the design process. This is especially the case when dealing with AI technology. It was 
found that to best include normative ethical aspects in the design rule-utilitarianism, rights ethics 
and prima facie duties should all be considered during the design process. Rule-utilitarianism will 
ensure that what is considered ‘best’ for the elderly is driving the process, while rights ethics will 
ensure the rights of the elderly are being respected in the design, e.g. basic human rights. Lastly 
prima facie duties will guide the designer when what is ‘best’ for the elderly and their rights are 
conflicting. By utilizing the strengths of these theories, the designer will be better equipped to cre­
ate a solution considering the ethics of designing for the elderly. Thereby ensuring that the elderly 
is treated in the most humane and ethically sound way. Furthermore, descriptive ethics is import­
ant to consider during the design process. When conducting the design process the designer must 
utilize the knowledge already gathered about the culture (eldercare in Denmark) from experts. 
Knowledge can be gathered through published literature and expert interviews to create a more 
complete understanding of the culture that is worked within, as well as give an idea about what is 
‘best’ for the elderly. 
The methodology most suited for this particular design process is Social Implication Design (SID) 
in combination with the Design with Intent toolkit. The combination creates a framework for 
the design process that ensure ethical values to be included in the design, but also allows for the 
subjectivity of the designer. Thereby ensuring that the designer includes societal ethical values but 
also own values. Furthermore, by using SID, the designer is compelled to incorporate the values 
of the people and the systems, making it a social design.
Throughout this chapter different ethical considerations have been presented. When addressing 
the eldercare sector, the ethical considerations relevant to include in the design are fairness, Big 
Data, privacy, informed consent, confidentiality, safety, autonomy, independence, human contact, 
obtrusiveness and stigmatization. These ethical dilemmas should be considered alone, but also 
together – especially the dilemmas between different ethical values are important, in particular 
the dilemmas between autonomy, safety and privacy are relevant to consider. Considering the di­
lemmas is extremely important, as no product or technology can accommodate all values without 
creating friction. Creating a successful design does not necessarily mean that all values have equal 
or full right, but that all values have been considered in different user contexts. 
==PAGE:37==
Page 23 of 127 
==PAGE:38==
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
EXPERT INTERVIEW 
STUDY 
WITIN THE INDUSTRY
==PAGE:40==
Page 26 of 127
Chapter 3 | Expert Interview Study within the Industry
3.1 INTRODUCTION  
This chapter will present the results of expert interviews conducted with four companies all 
producing AI and AT products; Hansong Technology Ltd., CT Asia Robotics Co. Ltd., iFlyTek 
Healthcare and Amazon.com Inc. The interviewees all contribute with practical and professional 
knowledge within the AI and eldercare field. 
The purpose of this chapter is to answer the third research questions and to explore the future 
within AI in section 3.2, to create an understanding of the ethical aspects considered by the in­
dustry when creating products for eldercare in section 3.3, understand the technological and de-
sign barriers that are met within the industry in section 3.4, and lastly section 3.5 will consider the 
functionalities relevant for eldercare. Section 3.6 will highlight the key findings from the chapter.
3.1.1 METHOD
To gather information about technology, AI and working with eldercare within the industry, ex­
plorative expert interviews were conducted (Bogner, Littig, & Menz, 2009). An explorative expert 
interview is a conversation between a quasi-expert and an expert within the field. The interviewer 
has an understanding of the topic beforehand and the interview has the purpose of expanding 
on this understanding with knowledge not found in literature. The expert interview allows the in­
terviewer to gather a vast amount of information in a limited time period, useful when gathering 
knowledge about extensive subjects such as AI (Bogner et al., 2009; DesignKit, 2018). To gather 
the knowledge an interview guide was created with open ended questions, see appendix A3.1 
(Turner, 2010). The purpose of these questions is to guide the interviewer and to let the interview­
ee understand what kind of knowledge it searched for. The interview is semi-structured, as the 
interviewer can lean against the questions when needed, but an open discussion is encouraged as 
hidden knowledge can then emerge. All interviews were conducted with technological companies 
with knowledge within AI. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Bruce Crompton, Product Development, Hansong Technology Ltd. (A3.2)
David Chen, Product Development, Hansong Technology Ltd. (A3.3)
Bryan Chen, Cloud Manager at Hansong Technology Ltd. (A3.4)
Donny Chong, Product Manager at Hansong Technology Ltd. (A3.5)
Homer Zhang, Product Manager at Hansong Technology Ltd. (A3.6)
Jelly Sha, Software Manager at Hansong Technology Ltd. (A3.7)
Xiaodong Tao, Ph.D., CEO of iFlyTek Healthcare (A3.8)
Natthawadee Maneeprom, Project Manager at CT Asia Robotics Co. Ltd. (A3.9)
Todd Emerson, Head of Systems Integrator at Amazon.com Inc. (A3.10)
==PAGE:41==
Page 27 of 127
While conducting the expert interviews it became apparent that AI is constantly evolving and that 
the surface has only been scratched so far as to what is expected of AI technology. The constant 
development of AI is driven by many different factors, but the interviewees agree that efficiency is 
a big factor, homer explains, “[…] right now, the AI is giving people more time to do other things.” 
A general societal wish is being more efficient and utilizing time in the best possible way, this wish 
is driving the development forward aided by advances made within 5G, data collection and data 
usage. Furthermore, the constant competition between companies and industries push the tech­
nology development as well, causing great strides within voice-assistance, smart surveillance, etc. 
All interviewees agree that 5G will be a game changer, as the increased connectivity around the 
world will make AI devices more widespread in everyday use. Having AI products in home will 
become the norm and as a result smart homes are believed to increase as well. The development 
of AI in the industry is also believed to have an impact on the future, especially with an increase 
in automatization the next few years according to Xiaodong Tao and Jelly Sha. Xiaodong Tao 
explains, “In a grand view all companies are pushing technology towards automatization and AI 
is needed for this. AI will not take over all jobs, just the mundane and repetitive ones. AI can also 
help increase the quality and efficiency.” An example is how Amazon.com Inc. has implemented 
200.000 robots in manufacturing, but at the same time created 300.000 jobs. As a result, the future 
will be affected more of AI technology than most will be aware of and will be wider spread within 
all aspects of the future, especially within healthcare, manufacturing and software.  
Although all experts agree that AI will continue evolving, adapting to the technology has been, and 
will continue to be, difficult at times. The biggest barrier met with AI is fear. Homer explained, “I 
hear some say AI is the end of the world, in my opinion this is bullshit. The reason is AI is trained 
by people. It cannot think. The human has a purpose. […] the AI does not.” Fear of what AI is ca­
pable of or how AI might affect the world limits the development of AI, Todd Emmerson further 
discuss, “Fear is the biggest barrier. Fear of losing privacy, of the information shared and the tech­
nological repercussions that might occur., for example seen with self-driving cars. […] Germany 
is very concerned about bugging and recordings whereas China does not have the same problems 
[…] the extreme technology development has been the result.” This extreme fear of what AI will 
do to the world we live in is a result of a knowledge barrier. There is a general understanding of 
what AI is capable of that does not coincide with reality. As a result, many are afraid of situations 
that will either never arrive or is an issue so far in the future it should be possible to avoid. Another 
barrier is the lack of trust in the capabilities of the AI devices. Xiaodong Tao express, “To improve 
the technology, doctors etc. need to test the technology and use it in their everyday life. Unlike oth­
er fields, the potentially serious consequences of A mistakes cause reservation in adaption of new 
technologies in medical practices, and is a barrier affecting the development of AI technologies in 
medicine.” To truly develop freely within AI, industries and individual people will have to be first 
movers and validate technologies thoroughly. Without taking that leap of faith the development 
will be slowed down tremendously. 
In spite of these barriers, the interviewees believe AI will become a bigger part of everyday life 
than it already is. 
3.2 THE DEVELOPMENT OF AI  
==PAGE:42==
Page 28 of 127
Chapter 3 | Expert Interview Study within the Industry
3.3 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
It was found that although most of the companies do not include ethical considerations as a clear 
and explicit step in the design or manufacturing process, ethical considerations are always thought 
into the design. When asked what ethical considerations the companies included, data privacy was 
the most often mentioned. Bryan Chen responded, “People do not want to sell their data to the 
company. But there is a conflict here. They want better features, but they do not want to share, so 
we need to find a balance here between these two things. [..] A balance between privacy and better 
experience.” The dilemma Bryan Chen presents is relevant when introducing the intervention to 
the market since distrust of the intervention can be enough to make it fail. It is therefore very 
important to consider data privacy, and to find a way of making sure the users feel safe. Todd Em­
erson agrees and further explains, “Privacy is very important, and a privacy mode should always 
be included in the product. The data can be managed by users, making sure they feel their privacy 
is being respected and increase their sense of security.” It becomes clear that being transparent 
about how data is handled and protected, and what it is used for, is im-portant to the end users. 
This should therefore be thought into the interaction between user and intervention. However, 
not only privacy is important. Asking for consent when handling data is a hard requirement (must 
be fulfilled) by the end users and now governments as well, as well as data security (Intersoft Con­
sulting, 2019).
In addition, the experts all agree that their companies follow basic ethical principles. Xiaodong 
Tao explained, “[...] should follow commonly accepted ethical principles. Mainly do no harm, do 
more good than harm to the society, and improve welfare.” However, as mentioned in chapter 2 
the basic ethical principles can change from culture to culture and being clear about what ethical 
principles are relevant for the market should therefore be explored before the design process is 
initiated. 
Privacy, consent and do no harm can be seen as the most important ethical considerations includ­
ed in the design and manufacturing by the industry. These ethical considerations can furthermore 
be seen as a confirmation of the considerations found in chapter 2. 
==PAGE:43==
Page 29 of 127
3.4 TECHNOLOGICAL AND DESIGN BARRIERS 
The scope of this thesis focusses on utilizing AI voice-assistance, however creating products with 
voice-assistance has some limitations. The technology is still not quite able to overcome speech 
impairments, although this will alter within the next few years. This is relevant as elderly will at 
times have difficulties expressing themselves clearly. Currently, the technology adapts to the us-
ers over time, and looks for patterns. “Today [Alexa] can be trained to understand some [speech] 
impediments by having the users go into the app and read things to Alexa. Alexa then tries to 
adjust accordingly,” explains Todd Emerson, although he believes the constant improvement of 
NLP will improve the understanding of people with speech impairments greatly. This constant 
development within AI and increased focus on NLP will increase the number of voice-assistant 
products on the market. Although the technology is limited as of yet, it will evolve tremendously 
within the next few years and make it possible to have voice-assistance for people with speech 
impairments as well.
As the success of a technological product is often dependent on user satisfaction focus on user 
experience is very important. Creating a great experience for the elderly should therefore be first 
priority while creating the design, to ensure the interaction is as planned. Therefore, having a sim­
plistic yet interactive design would be optimal for eldercare, and as speaking is a very natural way 
of communicating voice interaction would be an obvious choice for the interface. When using AI 
voice-assistant devices predefined interfaces must be included, these ensure the user experience 
and user interaction is as intended. It must be simplistic and easy to use right away, especially for 
elderly not used to interacting with advanced technology on a daily basis. Bryan Chen explains, 
“[…] If we want to make it simpler, we can use voice interface. By using voice [interface] it will 
only be two steps when choosing a song. The system will recognize the intent. For elder people we 
want to create very simple steps. […] We want to make it easy to use.” In order to create the best 
user interface, it is necessary to look into what the users need and how to create a solution that 
accommodate the needs yet still ensures ease of use. “We are all engineers. We have to constantly, 
this sounds wrong, stupefy the product in order to get the user experience right. We cannot use 
big terminology or expect the users to understand how a WIFI chain works to the cloud, or even 
understand what a cloud is,” Bruce Crompton explains. Creating a product with focus on eldercare 
must therefore be tested on end users early on in the process to ensure the user interface reach the 
intended target group. However, as it differs widely whether elderly use everyday technology the 
interface must incorporate diversity.
==PAGE:44==
Page 30 of 127
Chapter 3 | Expert Interview Study within the Industry
3.5 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS  
To get an understanding of what the experts felt were important functionalities while designing 
assistive technology for eldercare they were asked what they deemed important design consider­
ations in terms of functionality and formfactor. The most important are: 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Ensure privacy and data security is being respected, e.g. ask for consent (A3.2-A3.10)
Uphold laws and regulations (A3.7, A3.8, A3.10)
Find a friend in the technology (A3.2) 
Ensure trust and familiarity while interacting (A3.2, A3.4, A3.8)
Wearable and collecting biometric features with GPS tracking (A3.3, A3.4, A3.5, A3.10)
Make it possible to connect with family and friends (A3.4, A3.10)
Speech to text and text to speech function (A3.3)
Great user interface and ease of use (A3.2, A3.4, A3.5, A3.6, A3.7)
Reminders, e.g. medicine (A3.5)
The ability to play music and audio books (A3.7)
Simplistic design (A3.2, A3.3, A3.4, A3.7, A3.9)
Unobtrusive (A3.4, A3.6)
Not stigmatizing (A3.4, A3.6)
Long life time (A3.5)
The most important design considerations when creating AI commercial products are data securi­
ty, privacy and consent according to the interviewees. As the collected data is used for improving 
the experience for the user and the adaptive abilities of the AI device, it is important to make the 
users understand why data is collected, what it is used for and how it is protected to improve the 
users experience of the device. Laws and regulations often help ensure data protection is being 
upheld as well as ensure consent is given, but companies using Amazon’s Alexa or Google Voice 
Assistant will also have a privacy mode incorporated in the products. Todd Emerson explains how 
in Amazon products the stored data can be deleted by the user as well, to help ensure the sense 
of privacy is upheld. Although it is apparent the companies care a lot about privacy and data pro­
duction, the end users are not always aware of just how much. As a result, rumors might circulate 
that data is not being treated well. To avoid this, informed consent should be implemented instead. 
Thereby ensuring that the users are aware of what they are agreeing to and how their data is being 
treated and protected. 
When discussing product functionalities, the interviewees all agreed that the user interface should 
be given a lot of thought. Donny Chong commented, “User interface is very important. As elderly 
might not be as used to technology it has to be simple enough for them to understand.” Creating 
a user interface that incorporates the abilities of the end users create a better user experience and 
thereby a more successful product. It was also discussed, that a combination between touch and 
voice interface would create a better interaction with the user than just voice-assistance alone. This 
==PAGE:45==
Page 31 of 127
is due to one interface being limiting and at times it would be easier to do specific functions with­
out speaking, e.g. turning the sound up and down or turning the device off. 
While discussing the functionalities, it became apparent that stigmatization should be avoided. Bry­
an Chen elaborated, “The elderly likes fashionable devices. […] They do not want a very explicit 
appearance ‘this is used for elderly only’,” meaning the design should be simplistic, but without 
stigmatizing the users. It is important to create a design that does not make the users feel different 
or stigmatized but instead create a product that is directed towards their needs but presented in a 
universal package, thereby ensuring a great user experience and popularity of the device.
Tracking the elderly, both physical location and biometric health, was also mentioned as a desir­
able functionality. “Creating wearable devices might be a great way of keeping track of elderly 
and conducting biometric monitoring,” explained Todd Emerson. Tracking of health has become 
increasingly popular in recent years, but the tracking by GPS is a result of how safety conscious 
the world has become. Keeping track of the users and measuring biometric health can be done by 
different methods, e.g. video camera, motion sensor, etc. but these sensors might cause a feeling of 
being under surveillance and intrude on privacy. This should therefore be though through and user 
testing would be needed to ensure the product would be well received within different cultures. 
Being able to connect with family, being able to trust the product and having personalized content 
was also mentioned as desirable in products for elderly. 
3.6 KEY FINDINGS
The key findings from the expert interviews were that AI will continue to evolve and become more 
popular. It is generally believed that 5G will be a game changer and help increase the amount of 
AI devices on the market clearing the way for assistive technology. Smart homes will also become 
increasingly popular, as it will make everyday life easier. However, fear of AI and the lack of trust 
might slow down the development and could affect the acceptance of the technology itself. 
The most important ethical aspects to consider when creating AI technology is privacy, ensuring 
consent and doing no harm. These ethical considerations should always be considered when cre-
ating AI technology according to experts. 
Some of the difficulties often met with voice-assistance technology is ensuring the user needs are 
understood and met, as well as ensuring the user interface is adapted to the specific target group. 
The functionalities most important in AI technology for eldercare is data security, privacy mode, 
connecting with family and ensuring personalized content. Having a simplistic design that does 
not stigmatize should also be addressed.
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
MILD COGNITIVE 
IMPAIRMENT
==PAGE:48==
Page 34 of 127
Chapter 4 | Mild Cognitive Impairment
4.1 DELIMITING THE SCOPE
After having conducted interviews with the experts within the industry it became apparent that ‘el­
dercare’ as a target group was very vague. What defines eldercare? What age range is worked with­
in? The vagueness and vastness of the target group initiated a dialog with Hansong Technology 
Ltd. and it was decided that narrowing down was needed. During the research for chapter 2, it was 
found that AT showed a tendency to have a positive impact on victims of dementia, in particular 
in the early stages, also known as suffering from mild cognitive impairment (Zwijsen et al., 2011). 
It was also found that the ethical considerations found in section 2.4.1 covered not only eldercare 
but victims of mild cognitive impairment as well (Robinson et al., 2009; Zwijsen et al., 2011).
As chapter 3 focused mainly on gathering information about AI, the technology and the future 
within the industry, this data is still valid although the target group has been narrowed down. The 
ethical considerations mentioned by the experts were aligned with those found in chapter 2, there­
by allowing the assumption that these are valid as well.  
As a result, the target group has been narrowed down to people diagnosed with mild cog­
nitive impairment (early stages of  dementia).
The target group mild cognitive impairment allows for a narrower focus while still allowing for 
focus on improving their lives. Maybe even more so than by focusing on the wider target group 
eldercare.
Section 4.2 will present dementia in more detail while section 4.3 will focus on the current assistive 
products available. Section 4.4 will highlight the key findings from this chapter. 
4.2 DEMENTIA
In Denmark approximately 89.000 suffers from dementia (National Videnscenter for Demens, 
2018). Dementia is an umbrella term for a number of diseases that causes continuous cognitive 
impairment later in life, i.e. not born with a cognitive impairment. Approximately 200 diseases can 
cause dementia, the most frequent being Alzheimer’s, Frontotemporal, Lewy body and Vascular 
dementia (Løngaard & Hare-Bruun, 2017). Most of these diseases are progressive and all are ir­
reversible. Currently, dementia is the fifth most common cause of death in Denmark (National 
Videnscenter for Demens, 2018).   
Where the diseases attack the brain and the symptoms that follow varies widely. The four most 
common types of dementia will be elaborated to create a better understanding of the symptoms 
that the final design should address. Figure 4.1 illustrates the percentage of incidents with each 
disease.
==PAGE:49==
Page 35 of 127 
Figure 4.1 – Illustration of the distribution of dementia diseases. Illustration inspired by Lønne-gaard and Hare-Bru­
un (2017).
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE 
Alzheimer’s disease is the most common type of dementia and often originates in hippocampus. 
Alzheimer’s disease is caused by microscopic changes in the brain called plagues and tangles. 
Plagues are gatherings of beta-amyloid protein in between brain cells and causes damage to nerve 
cells and tangles are a cluster of tau protein and is a sign of damage of nerve cells. As a result, 
the brain cells begin to degenerate and die. The most common symptoms are memory loss, poor 
judgement, loss of sense of direction, wandering, depression and apathy (Høgh, 2017; Prince et 
al., 2015).
VASCULAR DEMENTIA
Vascular dementia is caused by blood clots or damaged blood vessels in the brain. Not all blood 
clots in the brain causes dementia, it is all dependent on the location and severity (Frederiksen, 
2017). The symptoms for vascular dementia can vary depending on where the brain is affected, 
but most common symptoms are memory loss, apathy, depression, difficulties with sight, lack of 
sensation and the ability to control limbs (O’Brien & Thomas, 2015).
LEWY BODY DEMENTIA
In 1914 German neurologist Frederick Lewy described round shapes within the brain – these have 
later been named Lewy Bodies, originating in the brainstem. Lewy bodies are protein deposits 
that develop within nerve cells inside the brain (Walker, Possin, Boeve, & Aarsland, 2015). Lewy 
body dementia has similarities to Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, and the symptoms are memory 
loss, movement disorders, visual hallucinations, fluctuating attention, among others (Vann Jones 
& O’Brien, 2014). 
==PAGE:50==
Page 36 of 127
Chapter 4 | Mild Cognitive Impairment
FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA
Frontotemporal dementia is an umbrella term for different dementia diseases that primarily affect 
the frontal and temporal lobes within the brain (Bang, Spina, & Miller, 2015). The different dis­
eases within frontotemporal dementia are quite different, but as they are all primarily affecting the 
same area of the brain, the symptoms are similar. Symptoms can be changes in personality, loss of 
language and memory loss (Bang et al., 2015; Johannsen, Gottrup, & Stokholm, 2017).
4.3 ASSISTIVE PRODUCTS FOR DEMENTIA
As dementia causes a lot of different symptoms a vast variety of assistive products has been 
created to help people with dementia. The assistive products can be divided into three categories 
(Socialstyrelsen, 2019);
Increasing safety of  the person with dementia, e.g. alarm systems, tracking devices, etc. 
Figure 4.2 – Assistive products increasing safety (Socialstyrelsen, 2019). 
Build and maintain functions, e.g. memory training, training in behavior, symbols, etc.
Figure 4.3 – Assistive products building functionalities (Socialstyrelsen, 2019). 
Help with structuring, e.g. calendars, timetables, structuring of  personal goals, etc. 
Figure 4.4 – Assistive products helping with structure (Socialstyrelsen, 2019). 
==PAGE:51==
Page 37 of 127 
When looking at current assistive products for dementia a pattern begins to show; most products 
are directed at specific symptoms. This indicates that the person with dementia would probably 
need multiple assistive products to address different symptoms. There seem to be an opening for 
more holistic assistive products that addresses multiple symptoms.
It is also generally seen that all current products have been aimed at helping the person with 
dementia only, not the household as a whole. Caretakers are expressing a need for support and 
help, but they are often not thought into the products themselves (Birk-Olsen, 2008), thereby 
overlooking the opportunity of helping the caretakers with the products as well and spending less 
healthcare resources.
4.4 KEY FINDINGS
While diving into dementia two main points became apparent: there are a lot of different symp-
toms, and the types of assistive products available are solutions that address only one symptom 
and does not include the caretaker as a potential user. 
Variety of  symptoms 
As there are many different types of dementia there is also a vast number of different symptoms. 
It will not be possible to create a product that addresses all symptoms, however, as some symp-
toms are recurring, e.g. memory loss, depression and movement disorder, it should be possible to 
create a more holistic solution. Although, instead of trying to address as many symptoms as pos-
sible, would it not be more interesting to only address the ones the individual possesses? Creating a 
device that could adapt, that could be personalized, could create a more individualized experience. 
Current assistive products 
The assistive products presented to people with dementia are often focused on addressing only 
one symptom. There is an opening for holistic assistive products that address multiple symptoms. 
It also becomes apparent that even though the caretakers might become less worried as a result of 
having assistive products, the products do not consider or aid the caretakers. As there is a general 
request for more support and help for the caretakers, this is a market opportunity. 
==PAGE:52==
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
FIELD WORK
- MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT
==PAGE:54==
Page 40 of 127
Chapter 5 | Field Work - Mild Cognitive Impairment
5.1 INTRODUCTION
This chapter will present the results of interviews with experts within the field of dementia as well 
as with caretakers of people suffering from dementia. The interviewees contribute with profes­
sional and practical knowledge within the social culture of mild cognitive impairment. 
Experts 
•
•
•
Sarah Skafte, Societal Analysis Consultant at Ældresagen (A5.2)
Else Hansen, Dementia Consultant at Alzheimerforeningen (A5.3)
Laila Øksnebjerg, PhD in Neural psychology at Videnscenter for Demens (A5.4)
Relatives
•
•
•
•
Ann Louise Walther, caretaker for mother and farther (A5.6)
Henriette Fisker, caretaker for farther (A5.7)
Hanne Østenkær, caretaker for brother and mother-in-law (A5.8)
Lone Sørup Larsen, caretaker for sister (A5.9)
The purpose of this chapter is to answer research questions four. Section 5.2 will aim at under­
standing what the most important problems arisen by mild cognitive impairment are viewed from 
a practical perspective. Section 5.3 will then explore what ethical considerations that are often met 
in the field, while section 5.4 will look at the functionalities relevant for mild cognitive impairment. 
Lastly section 5.5 will create an understanding of the social culture the intervention should be in­
troduced within. Section 5.6 will highlight the key findings from the chapter.
5.1.1 METHOD 
Knowledge was gathered for this chapter by contacting experts within the field of Mild Cognitive 
Impairment, and expert interviews were conducted as described in section 3.1.1. See appendix 
A5.1 for the interview guide. 
Furthermore, potential users were interviewed as well by conducting qualitative semi-structured 
interviews (Fylan, 2005). The purpose is to gather specific user knowledge within an area. A qual­
itative semi-structured interview is set up by having direct contact to the participants, with open 
ended questions. An interview guide was created to help give an idea about what knowledge was 
needed and to help guide the conversation, see appendix A5.5 (Turner, 2010). As the interviews 
were semi-structured the questions did not have to be gone through in any particular order and the 
participants were at liberty to ask for clarification and come with further insights when possible. 
All interviews were conducted in environments where the participants felt safe and at liberty to 
speak freely. 
==PAGE:55==
Page 41 of 127
5.2 PROBLEMS - MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT 
Memory loss is the main symptom of dementia, but memory loss does not just affect the mem­
ories it also affects the ability to speak, think rationally and function normally in everyday life. 
Laila Øksnebjerg explained how the memory is affected when having dementia: “Memory is a lot 
of things, it is not just remembering what I am doing today [...] it also affects language and we 
need language to communicate.” As a result, it becomes increasingly difficult to function and to 
get through life without feeling scared or frustrated. The increasing memory loss alters the life, 
perception and abilities of the person affected, and it often alters the relationship with family and 
friends as well. 
Often, sense of direction is affected leading to many unable to find their way home. This is an 
issue as wandering is a symptom as well. Not only is this frustrating and frightening for the per-
son with dementia but the caretakers will also worry excessively for their safety and wellbeing. It is 
not uncommon that search parties have been initiated to locate a person with dementia who has 
wandered too far. 
Dementia also causes functional blindness. Functional blindness is when visual and special aware­
ness begins faltering and will cause a shift in reality. Functional blindness makes the person with 
dementia incapable of seeing the world as it truly is, thereby rendering the person unable to trust 
their own brain. The combination of functional blindness and memory loss can have serious con­
sequences, it will at times lead to the inability to eat, forgetting to take showers, forgetting to take 
medicine, etc. causing unease and fear in relatives.  “What creates most unease is that they cannot 
trust their own brain,” Else explains. Another side effect of functional blindness and memory loss 
is the lack of structure in everyday life. The lack of structure creates unease, but also enforces the 
symptoms, such as forgetting to eat or being unaware of the surroundings. 
It is seen that not only the person diagnosed with dementia is feeling insecure and scared – it 
frightens the caretakers that memories of loved ones are being lost and abilities to function and 
stay safe deteriorates. Especially the missing understanding between the person with mild cognitive 
impairment and caretaker causes pain and confusion. As a result, the dynamic between the person 
with dementia and the world alters. The caretakers are often overlooked but as they are helping 
take care of the people with dementia they are directly affected by the constant deteriora-tion of 
the mind. This causes a lot of pain, sorrow and frustration in the caretakers, deteriorating their 
own mental health according to Laila Øksnebjerg.  
Furthermore, there is a lot of stigma around dementia. Dementia is generally considered a death 
sentence and most end up losing connection with friends and distant family members as a result. 
The society is scared of dementia and the lack of information about the subject is staggering. Sar­
ah Skafte explains how the societal image of dementia is damaging, and increases fear in the care­
taker, family and friends: “[...] the western understanding of identity is equal memory and is very 
static. [...] The unease is rising due to the societal image of dementia, for example portrays people 
as living dead, makes them unintelligent, etc.” The lack of general understanding and information 
around dementia is therefore causing the subject to be highly stigmatized. 
==PAGE:56==
Page 42 of 127
Chapter 5 | Field Work - Mild Cognitive Impairment
5.3 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
When working with mild cognitive impairment two main ethical dilemmas arise: autonomy vs. 
safety and privacy vs. safety. Autonomy vs. safety illustrate the change in dynamic between the 
caretakers and the people with dementia. Sarah Skafte explains, “Autonomy and independence 
must be kept on as many parameters as possible, as the people with dementia will lose their ability 
to make rational choice at one point. It is important to keep autonomy as long as possible, also to 
not remove joy of life from the people with dementia.” There will come a point where they can 
no longer make rational decisions and others (caretakers or doctors) will have to make them. From 
a cultural point of view losing one’s autonomy and independence is a huge defeat, and many will 
consider a life without autonomy or ability to take care of oneself as degrading. The same issue 
arises with privacy vs. safety. Else Hansen explains, “It is hard to draw the limit for when you are 
taking care of the person with dementia and when you are crossing their boundaries.” It can be 
difficult to find the balance between taking care of the person with dementia and taking liberties 
with their data and autonomy that would be considered degrading or uncomfortable. An example 
of when this dilemma occurs is GPS tracking of people with dementia who has a tendency to wan­
der off - if they do not wish to wear the tracker, who then decides when the sufferer of dementia 
is no longer capable of making that decision themselves? Ann Louise Walther further elaborated, 
“As a caretaker it is important that the person with dementia is safe, and that you know where they 
are. But as a person with dementia it is also important to have autonomy and dignity.” It is import­
ant to consider both dilemmas when designing for people with mild cognitive impairment. Privacy 
of data should also be kept in mind to preserve the privacy until they can no longer manage the 
task themselves and caretakers will have to take over.
Informed consent is also considered an important issue. Most of the time the consent forms are 
long and difficult to understand, which is why Laila Øksnebjerg argues, “Often there is too much 
information in the small sections, and therefore it is better to make it more concrete and clearer 
for the people with dementia. It is important that they can give consent - both for the future and 
the present.” Consent forms are a part of the law, but often consent is given without the true 
understanding of the users. When dealing with people, and especially people with mild cognitive 
impairment, it is very important they are aware of what they are giving consent to as this could 
affect the user later. 
To get an understanding of what the interviewees felt were needed to improve everyday life they 
were asked about what functionalities and elements they believed would make life easier for peo-
ple with mild cognitive impairment. These are:
5.4 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
==PAGE:57==
Page 43 of 127
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Create structure in everyday life (A5.2, A5.3, A5.4, A5.6, A5.7, A5.8, A5.9)
Make sure the product is individualized (A5.2)
Make the product interactive to activate people with dementia (A5.4)
Be intuitive to use (A5.4, A5.6, A5.7, A5.8, A5.9)
Make sure the intervention is specifically for people with dementia, i.e. avoid stigmatization 
and include diversity (A5.2, A5.4)
Include the caretakers in the design as well (A5.2, A5.3, A5.4, A5.6, A5.7, A5.8, A5.9)
Holistic design – combine functionalities to avoid many products (A5.4, A5.6, A5.9)
Making it easier to communicate with friends and family (A5.3, A5.9)
Memory enhancing functionalities, i.e. music, calendar, to-do lists, etc. (A5.2, A5.7, A5.8)
Safety measures e.g. call in care of emergency (A5.9)
GPS tracking and biometric measurements (A5.3, A5.6, A5.7, A5.8, A5.9)
Incorporate with smart homes (A5.2, A5.8)
Simplistic design (A5.2, A5.6, A5.7)
All interviewees agreed that the best way of making life easier for the person with dementia and 
the caretaker would be to create more structure in everyday life. Henriette Fisker express, “It would 
also help if the person with dementia could be reminded about what they should during the day, 
both in terms of calendar but also daily activities such as taking a shower.” Having a device that 
could build and care for a daily structure would help the person with mild cognitive impairment 
get through everyday tasks e.g. eating, showering, etc., but would also create a calmer environment. 
Having a structured day will create a foundation for each day, making life easier to manage both 
for the people with dementia and the caretakers. Another way of making life a little easier is by 
making sure the person with dementia is activated by having memory enhancing functionalities in 
the intervention, i.e. practice of cognitive abilities, music, etc. 
All interviewees also express a need for the caretakers to be included in the design considerations. 
Henriette Fisker explains, “It would be great to create a product that would address the caretakers 
as well. Thereby helping the entire household. This would increase the life quality of the caretakers 
that generally are stressed, sad and at times depressed.” Creating a device that addresses the entire 
house would improve life quality for all. However, as the caretakers and the people with dementia 
will have extremely different needs the interaction with both user groups should be greatly consid­
ered if both user groups are included in the design. 
As mild cognitive impairment evolves, cognitive and physical abilities start to deteriorate, and this 
affects the ability to interact with technology as well. It is therefore important that design is sim­
plistic and easy to use. Hanne Østenkær explains, “In the beginning it was not so big of an issue, 
but it quickly developed to many buttons causing unease. He did not know what buttons to push 
or call with, or how to answer the phone.” A device that is simplistic could help the users sense of 
self and quality of life by allowing them to interact with the device without help from caretakers. 
==PAGE:58==
Page 44 of 127
Chapter 5 | Field Work - Mild Cognitive Impairment
Autonomy and independence can therefore be kept for a longer period of time than something 
with a more elaborate and complicated user interface. Adding memory supporting functionalities 
would help keep the cognitive abilities activated, slowing degeneration and remove some of the 
frustration that the people with mild cognitive impairment often have. Henriette Fisker further ex­
press, “[...] maybe if you could get some music in [to the product] that they like. I thought it could 
mean something [...] the recognition from wherever they are in their dementia. That is often back 
in time.” By having functionalities that keep the mind alert the users will be able to keep symptoms 
a little more at bay and will also increase quality of life. 
The design itself also seems important to the person with mild cognitive impairment, Laila 
Øk-snebjerg explains, “The most important is that the design is similar to the look of other 
technol-ogy. […] It is important that the person with dementia feel like the product fits into the 
home.” It becomes apparent that the intervention should be easy to place in the home without it 
being stigmatizing or obtrusive to the environment. This is a result of the existing stigmatization 
of dementia, people do not wish to bring any more attention to the disease and they do not wish 
to feel different. Design is therefore important. 
Other functionalities that the interviewees mentioned were making it portable, making sure the 
design is not stigmatizing, adding safety measures as safety calls, and integrating the device with 
home appliances such as light, tv, etc. (smart home). In general, a consensus was that the device 
should be holistic, e.g. gather different functionalities in just one device, and creating an app to 
personalize the functionalities of the device. 
5.5 THE SOCIAL CULTURE IN DENMARK 
Although dementia is a widespread disease, there has not been conducted a lot of research within 
the area and, according to Laila Øksnebjerg, the quality of the research that does exist is quite 
poor: “There really is not a lot of research within the area [of dementia], and there is not really a 
lot of good research. [...] there is basically no one that has done implementation studies of tech­
nology in the area of dementia. At least not with technology used by people with dementia.” This 
gap in knowledge affects the caretakers as well, “As a caretaker you often beat your head against 
the wall due to the lack of knowledge about dementia, also within the healthcare system,” says 
Ann Louise Walther. The social culture is marred by a distrust of the system as a result. This has 
led to many caretakers feeling sad, stressed and depressed, and to the development of many as-sis­
tive technologies that mostly addresses only one symptom. As seen in this chapter, both ex-perts 
and civilians believe the person with dementia and the caretaker should both be addressed by the 
device as to improve life quality for all. However, simply by creating an intervention that will help 
the person with dementia the caretakers will also feel a drop in their responsibility and unease ar­
gues Else Hansen, “The caretakers can also get an easier everyday life if they get relieved. Either 
by removing some of their areas of responsibility and worries, or simply sending the person with 
dementia to a care home for a day.”  
Another problem within the social culture is the belief that if you are sick then you are weak. Many 
do not wish to admit they are sick often leading to a late diagnosis. If people are suggesting that 
==PAGE:59==
Page 45 of 127
something might be wrong, they are often met with anger and frustration. Facing the truth can be 
very difficult for many, especially when it comes to dementia. Being diagnosed with dementia is of­
ten devastating and a lot of stigmatization follows, which can cause many to ignore the symptoms 
out of fear, as was the case with the sister of Lone Sørup Larsen. 
Based on the interviews, the social culture can be interpreted as open for new developments with­
in technology with focus on both the person with mild cognitive impairment and the caretaker. 
There is a general lack of information that has led to caretakers starving for help and support, 
as well as induce fear of the disease leading to anger and frustration. The social culture is under 
development as knowledge of dementia increases, but the slow process still enables fear and mis­
information about the disease, causing frustration and denial in people. 
5.6 KEY FINDINGS 
Based on the interviews it became apparent that memory loss and functional blindness are the 
main problems caused by mild cognitive impairment. As a result, the sufferers might lose function­
ality, speech, sense of direction, and the ability to see the world realistically in the end. This causes 
unease and frustration for the people with mild cognitive impairment, but also the caretakers. 
As the brain deteriorates two ethical dilemmas occur; privacy vs. safety and safety vs. autonomy. 
Both dilemmas vary depending on each individual case but should always be considered when de­
signing for users with dementia. It was also found that informed consent must be gathered when 
introducing technology to the people with mild cognitive impairment. 
When conducting the design process the interviewees believe that all people in the house should 
be included in the design considerations, as both the person with mild cognitive impairment and 
the caretaker could benefit from the device. The technology should be easy to use, simplistic and 
should match the look of current technology to avoid stigmatization. The device should help 
create structure in everyday life as well as help the person with mild cognitive impairment and the 
caretaker feel more at ease. 
Lastly, it became apparent that the social culture around dementia consist of fear and a need 
knowledge and technology that will help increase the quality of life for the people with mild cog­
nitive impairment and caretakers.
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
SOCIAL IMPLICATION 
DESIGN
==PAGE:62==
Page 48 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
This chapter presents the results of using the Social Implication Design method. The purpose 
of this chapter is to answer the fifth learning objective and to create the final concept.  First, 
a debriefing of the concept will be presented in section 6.2, hereafter the future context will 
be constructed in section 6.3. The aim is to create an understanding of the domain that will be 
worked within and to understand both the social and the individual aspects that has claim in this 
future context. By analyzing and determining the future context it becomes more apparent in what 
di-rection to take the intervention. Then, the aim of the intervention will be determined through a 
statement in section 6.4. This statement will be used to create the intervention in the final section 
of this chapter, section 6.5. 
To truly understand the reasoning behind the decisions made in this chapter, section 6.1.1 will 
describe the method of SID in detail. 
6.1.1 METHOD
Social Implication Design (SID) is a method create by Nynke Tromp and Paul Hekkert for de­
signing interventions with focus not only on the individual but the society as a whole (Tromp & 
Hekkert, 2018). As this method is very novel, it will be described in detail to ensure the reader 
understand the fundamental process used to create the concept, as well as understand the mindset 
as it differs from more conventional design methods. 
The SID method aims at creating design that incorporate social implications and try to create long 
term improvements in the community. The method is interaction-driven and action-based, mean­
ing it focus on making a difference through action, and does not focus on the individual alone but 
try to create improvements on a societal level – focus is on designing interventions to improve the 
future. 
Figure 6.1 – An overview of the SID stages and steps (Tromp & Hekkert, 2018). 
As can be seen in figure 6.1, three levels are distinguishable; the world level, the mediation level 
and the artefact level. In the world level the project and the world are defined. The mediation level 
connects the world level with the artefact level by setting a goal that determines what the interven­
tion should accomplish in the world, and the artefact level consist of the intervention itself. Within 
these four levels, four stages are presented, some containing steps to help guide the design process. 
The largest amount of energy and time is used in Stage 1: Anticipating the future and Stage 3: De­
veloping the intervention. The four stages will be gone into further detail in the following sections. 
==PAGE:63==
Page 49 of 127 
PREPARATION: DEBRIEFING 
Before beginning the actual design work, it is important to start with debriefing the request of the 
client. This enables understanding of the political and organizational environment the project will 
be introduced to. This step is important to understand and discuss restrictions of the project as 
well. 
STAGE 1: ANTICIPATING THE FUTURE 
This stage focusses on describing, synthesizing and formulating the world view that the concept 
will be presented within. Three steps will help guide the designer through this stage, and the end 
result will be a clear world view within the domain that the concept will be embedded. 
1 DOMAIN
The first step is to define the domain. The domain is a neutral description of the aspect of soci­
ety that is going to be examined throughout stage 1. Furthermore, the timeframe of the concept 
should be defined in this section. It should be clear whether the concept is designed for the pre-
sent, near or distant future. The domain help guides the designer when exploring the surrounding 
context. 
2 CONTEXT FACTORS 
The second step is the exploration of the future context. The context is explored by gathering 
information about the current world context and information that help describe the future world. 
This information is then synthesized into context factors; “context factors are bits and pieces of 
your future world” (Tromp & Hekkert, 2018, p. 72). Four types of context factors exist; trend, 
development, state and principle. These types help guide the designer to look at the world through 
different lenses; they help explore the world as a whole. Context factors should be interesting 
and relevant, while including both a societal and user perspective. Gathering factors can be done 
through experts, interviews, literature, pictures, reports, etc. This therefore means that context 
factors can be found all around us but should be limited to the confinement of the domain. The 
context factors should be found while maintaining a neutral standpoint, meaning the designer 
should avoid passing judgement. The amount of context factors needed varies from each project, 
but the factors should saturate the future world view. 
3 CONTEXT STRUCTURES 
After having gathered the factors, it is necessary to find structure among them. This is a difficult 
task and will often be a time-consuming iterative process. The process is complex and open-ended 
with the possibility of multiple different outcomes. Context structures are creative and original 
perspectives on the domain, with the goal of helping the designer determine the social impact of 
the design. 
==PAGE:64==
Page 50 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
STAGE 2: GOALSETTING 
Having defined the future context, the designer will have to take a stance and define how the con­
cept should affect the future world. 
4 STATEMENT 
The statement is a clear definition of what behavioral change the concept should induce, as well as 
clearly state the positive contribution to the society. To consider a statement exhaustive, it should 
include three elements; 1) the behavior to change, 2) the social implications, and 3) the meaning 
the behavior will have. 
STAGE 3: DEVELOPING THE INTERVENTION
Having decided the effect, the concept should induce; the design process can begin. 
5 INTERACTION 
Before idea generation can begin the “relationship with the artefact itself” (Tromp & Hekkert, 
2018, p. 76) should be defined. This is done with interaction qualities; these qualities help embody 
the human-artefact interaction. The SID method encourages defining an analogy to help guide the 
interaction that is wanted with the users. Furthermore, analyzing analogies can also help contribute 
to the creation of interaction qualities. 
6 IDEA 
After having created the statement and formulated interaction qualities idea generation is conduct­
ed. The ideas are then translated into the most appropriate concept that addresses the statement 
and the interaction qualities. The final concept can be a physical product, a service or a combina­
tion – this all depends on the debriefing, statement and user context. 
7 VALIDATION
To ensure that the statement is fulfilled validation is needed before implementation. Here it is 
important to validate not only the concept and how it is used, but also whether the concept is 
inducing the wanted change in behavior and the wanted social implications. The validation will be 
presented in chapter 7 in this report. 
==PAGE:65==
Page 51 of 127 
6.2 PREPARATION: DEBRIEFING 
Based on all the knowledge gathered, a debriefing of the problem was conducted. As the project 
is motivated by my understanding of the problem the debriefing was done by me, the designer, in­
cluding Hansong Technology Ltd. in the considerations as the intervention should match their ca­
pabilities and goals as well. The problem addressed has been defined as combining AI voice-assis­
tance technology to help people with mild cognitive impairment. This problem is being addressed 
as dementia is a disease causing much frustration for people with dementia and for care-takers, 
frustration I believe can be relieved. There is a market opportunity for Hansong Technology Ltd. 
to help create a more holistic solution for this target group, as well as an opportunity to combine 
AI voice-assistance with the eldercare and healthcare sector in Denmark, an emerging market.
6.3 STAGE 1: ANTICIPATING THE FUTURE 
The section will begin by defining the domain and the timeframe to work within, making it very 
clear for what part of the social world and when the design is for. Thereafter the future context 
will be defined by context factors. The factors will be clustered and structured into one coherent 
world view as I see it. 
6.3.1 DEFINING THE DOMAIN 
The domain is a neutral description of the area I am exploring during the design process. In es­
sential, it helps scope the world down to the specific area where the design will be introduced. The 
domain chosen is: 
Domain: Living with mild cognitive impairment in own home
I decided to focus the domain on being in own home with mild cognitive impairment, as this is 
where mild cognitive impairment has the biggest impact on everyday life and where people with 
dementia still have the ability to control their lives. Whether living alone or with others the analy-
sis of chapter 4 and 5 illustrated a need for more help and support while still being able to live 
alone and in own home. 
I decided that the design should be introduced to the market in the near future – In 2020, just one 
year from now. The timeframe will help guide the explorative process of the future context. 
Timeframe: I am designing for 2020
As technology is developing at an extreme pace and more focus is put on eldercare and dementia, 
a market opportunity has arisen, and it makes sense for Hansong Technology Ltd. to address this 
early on. Although it makes sense for the partnering company to launch an intervention next year, 
I chose this timeframe as the amount of dementia cases are increasing and this type of interven­
tion is needed now. I hope to reach the market next year to be able to help the end users. 
==PAGE:66==
Page 52 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
6.3.2 CONTEXT FACTORS WITHIN THE DOMAIN 
Defining the future within the domain of living in own home with mild cognitive impairment is 
not simple as both technology and the societal understanding of the domain might change dras­
tically. However, some elements might stay the same, e.g. the emotions that follow the diagnosis. 
To create a qualified prediction of the future within the domain, I sought to determine context 
factors; small pieces of the future that together constitute a whole. The context factors have been 
determined based on the information gathered and analyzed in chapter 2 to 5. 
Based on the information gathered throughout the report I synthesized 68 context factors. These 
factors are not extensive; however, they describe the future context as I see it. Four types of factors 
have been synthesized; Trend, Development, State, and Principle. Table 6.1 illustrates the distri­
bution of each type, within different categories; Technology, Psychological, Cultural, Biological, 
and Economy. To ensure that the domain was extensively explored, different lenses were applied; 
disciplinary lens, stakeholder lens, and anticipatory lens. These lenses helped see the domain from 
different angles allowing both individual and systematic thinking, thereby allowing new context 
factors to emerge. All sources to the factors can be seen in appendix 6.1.  
Table 6.1 – An overview of the distribution of context factors.
CONTEXT FACTORS
==PAGE:67==
Page 53 of 127 
Psychological  
Mild cognitive impairment alters the 
relationship between caretakers and people 
with dementia [P]
We care about our relations and want to help 
them [P]
Being a caretaker is stressful [T]
Taking care of family members can feel like 
an obligation [P]
Limited information about dementia available 
causes further frustration and loneliness [P]
Limited help and support for relations [D]
People with dementia want to stay in own 
home [P]
We do not like relying on others [P]
Reminiscing about happy memories can 
increase happiness [T]
Losing one’s memory and abilities, and being 
diagnosed with dementia, can cause an 
identity crisis [P]
We take pride in taking care of family [P]
We do not like products that are obtrusive to 
the interior of our homes [P]
The ambiance of a space has a psychological 
impact [S]
Physical appearance plays a big role when 
buying products [T]
We are afraid of dementia [S]
We believe that when people start losing 
memory they begin losing their identity [P]
We feel safe in own home [P]
We are ashamed of forgetting [P]
We fear codependence [P]
We fear codependence [P]
One in four diagnosed with dementia and 
their relations feel lonely [S]
People diagnosed with dementia feel 
stigmatized [P]
When spending money quality is important 
[P]
We do not like stigmatizing products [P]
People with dementia prefer simplicity in 
products [S]
Cultural
Approximately 89.000 people in Denmark 
suffers from dementia [S]
17.000 Danish people are absent from work 
due to stress each day [T]
Being a caretaker is time and energy 
consuming [S]
Dementia friendly homes [D]
The amount of dementia cases in Denmark is 
increasing [D]
There is an increased interest in GPS tracking 
[T]
Tighter security for data collection [D]
We are increasingly concerned with data 
security [T]
Safety clashes with privacy and autonomy [S]
Western culture believes privacy is a human 
right [P]
Social culture dictates ethical values around 
dementia [S]
==PAGE:68==
Page 54 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
Technology
Assistive technology allows the people with 
dementia to stay independent in their home 
for a longer period of time [T]
AI makes everyday life easier [D]
Assistive technology for people with 
dementia [D]
Voice assistant technology [D]
There is an increased interest in holistic 
technological solutions [T]
Increased focus on user interaction and user 
experience [T]
Smart homes [D]
Automatization [D]
5G [D]
“AI has come to stay” [T]
Natural Language Processing [D]
Increased focus on speech impairments [D]
The demand for personalized products is 
increasing [T]
Products with AI are increasing in popularity 
[T]
Data collection [D]
Economy
Increased political focus on dementia [D]
The increasing amount of people above 65 
years puts pressure on the municipalities [D]
As dementia progresses more resources are 
needed [T]
The estimated direct cost of dementia in 
Denmark is 24 billion kroner each year [S]
Biological
Taking care of a relation with dementia is a 
health risk [P]
Voice-assistance enables interaction without 
physical contact or abilities [P]
Dementia causes memory loss and functional 
blindness [S]
Memory enhancing technology and exercise 
help suppress symptoms of dementia [S]
The ability to communicate helps us keep 
relations and stay independent [P]
Structure in everyday life improves symptoms 
of dementia [P]
Physical and mental activity keeps the mind 
alert [P]
Approximately 200 different diseases can 
cause mild cognitive impairment (dementia), 
the most frequent being Alzheimer’s, 
Frontotemporal, Lewy body and Vascular 
dementia [S]
Voice communication comes natural to us [P]
Dementia is the fifth most common cause of 
death in Denmark [S]
People still working or living with others 
are diagnosed with dementia earlier in the 
process than people living alone or retired 
[D]
Dementia causes unease, insecurity, 
confusion and frustration [P]
Increasing interest in biometric 
measurements [T]
Between 25% and 50% does not take 
medication as recommended [S]
==PAGE:69==
Page 55 of 127 
6.3.2.1 KEY FINDINGS FROM THE SYNTHETIZATION OF 
CONTEXT FACTORS 
While synthesizing the 68 context factors, a pattern emerged, and three key findings were found. 
These are important for the structure and for further work with the concept. 
Mental health 
I became apparent that mental health is a massive social issue within the domain. Not only is de­
mentia casing apathy, depression, frustration and insecurity, caretakers are also becoming stressed, 
depressed and generally feel poor while taking care of relations. Therefore, healthcare resources 
are not only used on taking care of people with dementia, but also on taking care of the mental 
health of the caretakers. 
The negative environment around dementia 
There is generally a lot of pain connected to dementia – the people with dementia are feeling frus­
trated and depressed, as are the caretakers. The environment and the stigma around the disease 
causes further sadness and loneliness. 
Technological development 
The constant development has made it a lot easier to increase autonomy – it has simply become a 
lot easier to help people and make their lives easier. The current trend is allowing this opportunity 
to grow, making it easier to become independent in own home even with fewer abilities. 
6.3.2 CONTEXT FACTORS WITHIN THE DOMAIN 
To create a deeper understanding of the future context the 68 context factors were structured by 
grouping the context factors into meaningful clusters. All clusters are describing elements within 
the future context and the domain. Through iteration seven clusters were found.
==PAGE:70==
Page 56 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
GRASPING INDEPENDENCE
Assistive technology allows the 
people with dementia to stay 
independent in their home for a 
longer period of time [T]
People with dementia want to stay in 
own home [P]
Dementia friendly homes [D]
Voice-assistance enables interaction 
without physical contact or abilities 
[P]
We do not like relying on others [P]
Dementia causes memory loss and 
functional blindness [S]
The ability to communicate helps us 
keep relations and stay independent 
[P]
Memory enhancing technology and 
exercise help suppress symptoms of 
dementia [S]
Structure in everyday life improves 
symptoms of dementia [P]
Physical and mental activity keeps the 
mind alert [P]
AI makes everyday life easier [D]
Assistive technology for people with 
dementia [D]
Already from the age of two we begin grasping 
for independence. We have a biological predefined 
need for being independent and be able to live life 
without having to rely on others. Independence is 
often linked with feeling strong and being capable, 
whereas asking for help is considered weak. An 
example of this is the many tools for people with 
disabilities, allowing people to be independent and 
living alone that would have needed constant help 
just a century ago. 
This strive to be independent is challenged when 
we are sick or unable to perform certain tasks. As 
a result, many elderly and sick will put themselves 
at risk rather than ask for help or admit defeat. A 
high regard for independence can quickly become 
a security risk. 
Figure 6.3 - (Kovyrina, 2019).
Figure 6.2 - (Sallehi, 2018).
==PAGE:71==
Page 57 of 127 
PUTTING OTHERS FIRST
Mild cognitive impairment alters the 
relationship between caretakers and 
people with dementia [P]
We care about our relations and want 
to help them [P]
Being a caretaker is stressful [T]
Taking care of family members can 
feel like an obligation [P]
Limited information about dementia 
available causes further frustration 
and loneliness [P]
Approximately 89.000 people in 
Denmark suffers from dementia [S]
17.000 Danish people are absent 
from work due to stress each day [T]
Being a caretaker is time and energy 
consuming [S]
Limited help and support for relations 
[D]
Taking care of a relation with 
dementia is a health risk [P]
Most people adhere to altruistic values in our so­
ciety, it has been ingrained in us from our societal 
upbringing. We therefore want to put others first, 
we want to ensure others are good and will go to 
many lengths to ensure others happiness. Humans 
are social animals, and putting others first, taking 
care of our young and our elderly, is a biological 
tendency. Often this can lead to forgetting oneself, 
although we take pride in the selflessness of the 
act. Putting others first becomes a value, howev­
er putting others first can be extremely mentally 
draining and can at times lead to depression and 
stress, becoming a societal health concern.
Figure 6.4 - (rawpixel.com, 2018a).
Figure 6.6 - (Cordez, 2019).
Figure 6.7 - (Aldarwish, 2018).
Figure 6.5 - (Zomer, 2019).
==PAGE:72==
Page 58 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
THE EFFICIENT WORLD 
Voice assistant technology [D]
There is an increased interest in 
holistic technological solutions [T]
Increased focus on user interaction 
and user experience [T]
Smart homes [D]
Automatization [D]
5G [D]
“AI has come to stay” [T]
The estimated direct cost of dementia 
in Denmark is 24 billion kroner each 
year [S]
Voice communication comes natural 
to us [P]
Natural Language Processing [D]
Increased focus on speech 
impairments [D]
The demand for personalized 
products is increasing [T]
Products with AI are increasing in 
popularity [T]
The development of technology is constantly 
evolving producing new and innovative solutions 
to problems of everyday life. This has led to many 
mundane tasks being taken over by technology 
and creating a more efficient life for the world 
population. The dishwasher, washing machine, 
the car and many other technologies are exam­
ples that has made the world more efficient. By 
allowing technology to take over more mundane 
tasks we can focus on more fun and challenging 
tasks at hand and thereby creating more quality of 
life. By having a more efficient world it also allows 
for better use of spare time allowing people to re­
charge after a long day and focus on what truly 
adds value to their lives, whether that being spend­
ing more time with family, go explore or simply 
reading a book. 
Figure 6.9 - (Fancycrave.com, 2019).
Figure 6.10 - (Pixabay, 2019a).
Figure 6.8 - (Apichodilok, 2019).
==PAGE:73==
Page 59 of 127 
FACING REALITY
We are afraid of dementia [S]
Approximately 200 different diseases 
can cause mild cognitive impairment 
(dementia), the most fre-quent being 
Alzheimer’s, Frontotemporal, Lewy 
body and Vascular dementia [S]
Dementia is the fifth most common 
cause of death in Denmark [S]
We believe that when people start 
losing memory they begin losing their 
identity [P]
The increasing amount of people 
above 65 years puts pressure on the 
municipalities [D]
As dementia progresses more 
resources are needed [T]
Increased political focus on dementia 
[D]
The amount of dementia cases in 
Denmark is increasing [D]
People still working or living with 
others are diagnosed with dementia 
earlier in the process than people 
living alone or retired [D]
We live in a society that does not like conflicts. In 
Denmark most shy away from conflict, we stray 
away from dealing with situations that are tough. 
At least until it can be ignored no longer. As a 
result, we are not facing reality before we abso­
lutely have to, and in terms of being sick this can 
do more damage than getting diagnosed quickly. 
Since the problems are pushed away, they often 
become more extensive and will demand more 
time and resources to fix. An example of this is 
how many does not go to the doctor unless they 
absolutely have to, sometimes leading to a situa­
tion becoming more serious than it originated. 
Furthermore, as facing reality can be hard it often 
demands more energy and time if it is postponed 
– e.g. climate change. Not wanting to accept reality 
does not only damage the individual, but it can 
have social repercussions as well. 
Figure 6.13 - (Pixabay, 2019b).
Figure 6.12 - (Rie, 2018).
Figure 6.11 - (Voortman, 2018).
==PAGE:74==
Page 60 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
Data collection [D]
There is an increased interest in GPS 
tracking [T]
Tighter security for data collection [D]
We are increasingly concerned with 
data security [T]
Safety clashes with privacy and 
autonomy [S]
Western culture believes privacy is a 
human right [P]
We feel safe in own home [P]
Dementia causes unease, insecurity, 
confusion and frustration [P]
Increasing interest in biometric 
measurements [T]
Between 25% and 50% does not take 
medication as recommended [S]
Social culture dictates ethical values 
around dementia [S]
SERURITY
Being sick can increase the feeling of being in dan­
ger or feeling of unease causing a lot of fear and 
insecurity. To overcome this feeling, we often stay 
in situations and places we know, and try to avoid 
getting out of our comfort zone. We will grasp at 
things that make us feel secure and safe, especial­
ly privacy is a cause for concern. However, to be 
physically safe we will have to go on compromise 
with privacy and autonomy at times. Examples of 
this is CCTV – it can be found all over in UK and 
it increases people’s sense of security, but it comes 
at the cost of the government being able to lo­
cate the whereabouts of most citizens, removing a 
sense of privacy. 
Feeling secure can also be related to being able 
to trust oneself. When we are sick, this becomes 
more difficult, e.g. cognitive impairment. 
Figure 6.15 - (rawpixel.com, 2018b).
Figure 6.16 - (Webb, 2018).
Figure 6.14 - (Saylor, 2019).
==PAGE:75==
Page 61 of 127 
We are ashamed of forgetting [P]
We fear codependence [P]
One in four diagnosed with dementia 
and their relations feel lonely [S]
People diagnosed with dementia feel 
stigmatized [P]
Losing one’s memory and abilities, 
and being diagnosed with dementia, 
can cause an identity crisis [P]
We take pride in taking care of family 
[P]
SENSE OF SELF
The northern countries have a highly developed 
sense of self. We wish to stand out and stand 
alone. We give ourselves value based on our ac­
tions and our abilities, thereby making our sense 
of self equal to who we are. When our sense of 
self is challenged it can be hard to accept and can 
often lead to an identity crisis, depression, etc. In 
Denmark individuality, memory, and physical abil­
ities are often linked to our perception of who and 
what we are. 
Figure 6.19 - (Pixabay, 2019d).
Figure 6.18 - (La, 2018).
Figure 6.17 - (Cunha, 2019).
==PAGE:76==
Page 62 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
SMALL JOYS
We do not like products that are 
obtrusive to the interior of our homes 
[P]
The ambiance of a space has a 
psychological impact [S]
Physical appearance plays a big role 
when buying products [T]
When spending money quality is 
important [P]
We do not like stigmatizing products 
[P]
People with dementia prefer simplicity 
in products [S]
Reminiscing about happy memories 
can increase happiness [T]
When diagnosed with a disease with deadly out­
come it can be hard to find joy in anything, of­
ten leading to apathy and depression. To improve 
life quality, it is necessary to accept the situation 
and find joy on a smaller scale, i.e. through sur­
roundings, memories, friends and family, etc. Sim­
ply appreciate the smaller things in life has been 
found to add value to the lives of people who are 
chronically ill. We appreciate beauty in our every­
day life and can find happiness being in a pleasing 
physical environment. The ambience of a physical 
environment can increase relaxation and satisfac­
tion, but also has a calming effect. However, find­
ing small elements in our lives that gives us joy 
can be difficult in a society focused on abilities, ac­
complishments and achievements. By introducing 
chronically ill people to these environments will 
increase life quality. Although it is important that 
the environments are not stigmatizing, since this 
will increase negative associa-tions and emotions. 
Figure 6.21 - (Lopes, 2018).
Figure 6.22 - (Carvalho, 2019).
Figure 6.20 - (Hazelwood, 2019).
==PAGE:77==
Page 63 of 127 
6.3.4 OPPOSING FORCES WITHIN THE CONTEXT
All seven clusters describe part of the future social context within the domain living at home with 
mild cognitive impairment. Defining the future context based on the seven clusters is a complex 
task, to make it simpler the clusters were ordered across two dimensions. The two dimensions 
were found by looking at opposing forces within the social context located by creating a Venn 
diagram, see appendix A6.2. The dimensions are: 
ETHICAL PERCEPTION 
How we perceive the world and everything in it has a great impact on our lives and our mental 
health. I believe that two opposing factors in perception is the idea that autonomy should always 
precede any other ethical aspects, and the idea that safety has precedence. 
People who perceived autonomy to be the most important factor of human existence will fight 
for their autonomy and independence to the degree of self-harm. This group of people will not 
compromise their privacy and independence to stay safe (Grasping independence). 
In contrast, others will go to great lengths to stay safe. This group of people will put their own 
and others safety before anything else, often leading to issues with privacy (Security). Fear of new 
technology and misguidance will hold them back, at times causing a false sense of security. The 
driving mindset of these people is laced with fear. 
The illustration below indicates what perception drives the clusters. 
Figure 6.23 - Illustration of where the clusters are placed on the ethical dimension.
==PAGE:78==
Page 64 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
DECISION MAKING 
How we make decisions can affect our lives enormously, especially when it comes to our health. 
Decision making can be split up into active and passive decisions. 
When making active decisions we are taking an active part in our lives. This means we act accord­
ingly to what we want and what we believe is right. This group of people will contact the doctor 
and find treatment fast, and do not shy away from tough decisions. Active decision makers are pro­
gressive and often very strong in will. They will want to improve their situation (Efficient world). 
When making passive decisions we are instead allowing others or situations to guide our lives. 
Passive decision makers will often let others decide or wait for an action to naturally occur. This 
group of people will push tough decisions away as long as possible (Facing reality) to avoid having 
to make a choice. Passive decision makers will also often push going to the doctor, waiting for the 
problem to go away, or allow others to push them to go. 
The illustration below indicates what type of decision making is used within the clusters. 
Figure 6.24 - Illustration of where the clusters are placed on the decision-making dimension.
The two dimensions creates four quadrants all representing mindsets within the social context – 
within the future world. The seven clusters are placed differently within these four mindsets, as can 
be seen in appendix A6.3. The four mindsets will be elaborated in the following.
==PAGE:79==
Page 65 of 127 
Figure 6.25 - Four mindsets within the future world. 
FIGHTERS – AUTONOMY AND ACTIVE DECISION MAKING
People with this mindset care about their independence and ability to control their own life. They 
are open to new elements that will increase or keep their autonomy. They accept being sick but 
will fight the symptoms as long as possible. The fighters will not accept help from others until it 
is extremely necessary. 
ADAPTABILITY – SAFETY AND ACTIVE DECISION MAKING
The adapters accept that they must adapt to the disease. They are open to new elements that will 
help their everyday life and will accept help when needed. These individuals are motivated by feel­
ing safe and doing what is best for themselves and others. 
TURNING THE BLIND EYE: AUTONOMY AND PASSIVE DECISION MAKING
The motivation within this mindset is keeping hold of what once was. The people with this mind­
set is unwilling and unable to accept the disease and the changes that will follow. They will grasp 
at their independence and refuse help from friends and family and ignore the symptoms of the 
disease until it is staring them right in the face. 
FOLLOWING THE FLOW – SAFETY AND PASSIVE DECISION MAKING
Within this mindset people perceive themselves as others perceive them. They will therefore take 
action against the disease when others lead them. They are motivated by safety and comfort and 
will accept help to improve the situation if it is not too big a step outside their comfort zone. 
These individuals do not function well alone and need the support from family and friends. 
==PAGE:80==
Page 66 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
6.4 STAGE 2: GOAL SETTING 
This section will aim at formulating a statement that will clearly define what I wish to accomplish 
with the intervention and what behavior I wish to install in the users.
6.4.1 STATEMENT
Instead of focusing on only one mindset and driving the users towards that, I will be addressing 
all four as one everchanging mindset. I believe that all of these four mindsets will be met by peo-
ple with mild cognitive impairment at different stages of their disease, and therefore all mindsets 
should be considered in the intervention. Mild cognitive impairment affects the composition of 
the brain, and this alters the perception of the world, often leading to different moods on different 
days. Switching from being clear and independent one moment to being scared and not recogniz­
ing anyone the next can happen instantaneously and all mindsets should therefore be considered 
as none are avoidable. 
Based on the behavior I wish to install in the users, the social implications of that behavior and the 
meaning the behavior will have to the users, I formulated the following statement: 
To improve quality of  life for people living with mild cognitive impairment, decrease 
health risks of  being a caretaker and to better utilize healthcare resources, I want to help 
users make everyday life easier and increase their independence by the use of  assistive 
technology. 
The statement was found using a method called underlay and laddering, see appendix A6.4 (Tromp 
& Hekkert, 2018).
6.4.2 SOLUTION SPACE 
Before concept generation should be attempted, the solution space should be considered. Having 
a clear understanding of who is being addressed and where the intervention should be introduced 
will help create an intervention tailor made to fit the domain and the statement. 
The intervention will be introduced to the home, as defined in the domain. By introducing the 
intervention in the home, it becomes possible to address not only the people diagnosed with mild 
cognitive impairment but also the caretakers. Addressing the household as a whole allows a larger 
social impact and will have a larger positive impact for the society – as found in chapter 5. The 
intervention should be included in the household as early as possible, as dementia will affect the 
ability to learn new things as it progresses. The introduction of the intervention should therefore 
be when the diagnosis is given, or, if possible, when symptoms of dementia is showing. 
==PAGE:81==
Page 67 of 127 
6.5 STAGE 3: DEVELOPING THE INTERVENTION  
This section will present and explain the final concept in detail. The concept is a result of the 
accumulated data from the previous sections within this chapter. First interaction qualities and an 
analogy will be presented in section 6.5.1. Then section 6.5.2 will explain the vision of the concept, 
and thereafter the intervention will be gone into detail with in section 6.5.3. Here the functionality 
will be explained together with a run through of how it works. Hereafter section 6.5.4 will elab­
orate on certain functionalities, and why these were chosen will be explained – in particular how 
certain ethical dilemmas were included into the design. 
6.5.1 ANALOGY AND INTERACTION QUALITIES 
As the context statement, the goal, has been defined the next step is designing the interaction that 
occurs between humans and the future intervention. The interaction describes the relationship 
with the intervention and will therefore help guide the users to reach the goal of having an im­
proved everyday life. To better envision the interaction between potential users and the interven­
tion analogies and interaction qualities has been explored (see appendix A6.5). One key analogy 
has been chosen as the most adequate comparison of the interaction. 
6.5.1.1 KEY ANALOGY – LONGTIME PARTNER 
The wanted interaction should be as that in a long and loving relationship. You trust your partner 
to only want what is best for you and will therefore respect the requests presented by the partner, 
even if done so grudgingly. Your partner respect and accept you unconditionally creating an at­
mosphere of being loved and feeling safe. As you have a relationship you still have to take respon­
sibility for yourself and are at complete liberty to ignore the requests, advise and reminders that 
your partner will present you. Although you might fight or disagree at times, you will still respect 
your partner, and you will still feel respected in return. You are free to roam around in your home 
without feeling intruded upon but always know where to find help and support if needed. When 
you are together you feel safe, less worried and completely yourself. Your partner will always be 
there to support and guide no matter what state you are in, there is always ac-ceptance and respect 
between you. 
Figure 6.26 - (Pixabay, 2019c).
==PAGE:82==
Page 68 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
6.5.1.2 INTERACTION QUALITIES UNEARTHED 
The interaction qualities describe qualities that should be applied to the final intervention. The 
found interaction qualities are: 
Friendliness 
The interaction should impose a sense of trust and friendliness. It is important that the interaction 
feels nonjudgmental and creates a bond with the user making the presence of the intervention a 
normality. The interaction should instill a sense of familiarity and safety. 
Authoritative communication
The interaction should be authoritative but create a feeling of being equal, much like the connec­
tion with a longtime partner. It should be clear that the communication is between equal partners 
and impose a sense of trust and respect while still being clear about intentions. Much like sugges­
tions, advise and requests between partners. In this sense the interaction should decrease worry as 
an authoritative figure can help deal with problems. 
Calming 
As the intervention will be introduced in home and under rather somber conditions, the interac­
tion should induce a calm atmosphere that reduces worry. The interaction should create an envi­
ronment where the users will feel relaxed and safe. 
Personal freedom  
We are all different and the interaction should accommodate this fact. It is important that diversity 
will be embraced by the interaction, and it should therefore by adaptive. The interaction should 
promote the individuality of the users and make all feel accepted. 
Guiding 
As the intervention will be addressing people with mild cognitive impairment the interaction should 
be guiding. Guiding the user to do certain chores or remember certain tasks without making the 
user feel stigmatized or attacked is important to create a positive and respectful relationship. 
6.5.1.3 PRODUCT QUALITIES UNEARTHED
During the analysis conducted throughout the thesis different product qualities were unearthed 
as well. These are based on what I have found important insights of the analysis. The qualities 
describe the physical intervention more than the interaction. These have been found to be: 
Unobtrusive 
The intervention should be unobtrusive to the surroundings. This is important for the users as 
they do not appreciate feeling stigmatized. The intervention should therefore be part of the inte­
rior without drawing unnecessary attention to its function. However, the intervention should not 
be bland. The design should by stylish and generally likeable. 
Simplistic 
The intervention will be introduced into an environment where the ability to handle devices will 
slowly deteriorate. The user interface of the intervention should therefore by simplistic. It is im­
portant that the intervention can be used for as long as possible by the users and not cause fear.  
==PAGE:83==
Page 69 of 127 
6.5.2 VISION 
Based on the information gathered from sections 6.2, 6.3, 6.4 and 6.5.1 a vision emerged. 
Being diagnosed with dementia causes a disruption in everyday life that mostly causes pain and 
frustration. Everyday life becomes more difficult as a result. It is not possible for me to change 
what effect dementia has on human beings, but the effect it has on everyday life can be improved. 
I will attempt to improve life quality and make daily life easier for the entire household with the 
intervention presented in the following section. 
Increasing life quality and decreasing health risk of being a caretaker does not happen overnight 
and can be considered high-level goals. These goals can be approached in many different ways, but 
literature and experts inform us that creating a clear structure in daily life will decrease confusion, 
as well as creating surroundings that feel safe and comfortable can help ease state of mind. As a 
result, the concept focusses on making daily life a little easier for the entire household and creating 
a lasting impact through small but thoughtful changes. This will in turn decrease the health risk of 
being a caretaker. 
To address the goals the intervention will be addressing the symptoms of memory loss, functional 
blindness, loss of ability, loneliness and apathy by creating structure, making it easy to interact with 
the intervention, encouraging social interaction and activation of cognition. 
==PAGE:84==
Page 70 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
6.5.3 DAIVA 
DAIVA is a holistic personalized Dementia friendly AI Voice-Assistant (DAIVA) that aims at 
making daily life easier for people with mild cognitive impairment as well as the caretakers, by ad­
dressing multiple symptoms of dementia, with focus on allowing structure throughout the day and 
enable the user to become more independent. The DAIVA system has been designed for home 
use and can be placed in any room making daily life easier for the entire household. The system 
has been designed to create a calm, friendly and authoritative environment that can support and 
encourage the household to feel safe and relaxed. To further encourage a sense of freedom and 
independence the system will guide the user throughout the day by implementing reminders; guid­
ance to conduct daily activities. As DAIVA is placed in home it can be used whenever needed and 
will be accessible at all times of the day unless privacy mode has been enabled. 
The goal, as stated in the statement in section 6.4.1, of the intervention is helping the users to 
make everyday life easier and increase their independence. This change in behavior – going from 
being dependent and finding life frustrating as a result of dementia to being able to take control 
of own life to some degree – can be difficult but by utilizing the DAIVA system it becomes more 
attainable. The DAIVA system makes daily life easier through structure, reminders, taking over 
mundane tasks and creating a positive and safe environment around the user. Not only will the in­
tervention help remind the user of tasks and events, it will encourage social relations and cognitive 
activation of the brain. By introducing an intervention that encourages small positive changes in 
daily life, quality of life will increase.
The DAIVA system consists of two elements; an application for smartphones and a speaker. 
THE SPEAKER 
The speaker is the AI voice-assistant that helps the user structure the daily life by the use of NPL 
and CNN based machine learning algorithms. The speaker is connected to the Cloud through 
WIFI. It is a smart, simplistic speaker with few buttons to ensure a positive and safe interaction 
with people with mild cognitive impairment, designed for home use. The speaker is semi-portable 
and can therefore be place anywhere in the house. Furthermore, the speaker has a battery installed 
making movement between rooms easy but can be powered through (and recharged) a cord. The 
speaker enables the person with mild cognitive impairment to remember and be able to enjoy life. 
To avoid causing fear in the users only six buttons have been added to the concept (see placement 
of the buttons on figure 6.27); 
To increase ease of use two types of light are indicated. The light source on top [7] is shaped as a 
ring around the device and indicates when the device is thinking (blinking) and ready to receive a 
command after having registered the wake word (constant). The light indicator [8] will show green 
if the device is connected to the WIFI. 
•
•
•
•
•
On/off button [1]
Sound up/down [2] [3]
Privacy button [4]
Pair device key [5]
Registering response to reminders [6]
==PAGE:85==
Page 71 of 127 
THE APPLICATION 
The application has been created for smartphones but can be used on tablets as well. The app 
helps setup the speaker by connecting it to WIFI and will then handle user settings and preferenc­
es. The app can be used with cellular data or with WIFI for daily use, as well as enables connectivi­
ty with the Cloud. The purpose of the app is to enable the caretakers to help the person with mild 
cognitive impairment by adding reminders and other elements that will help them through daily 
life. Furthermore, the app will work as a sort of planning device for the caretakers. 
Figure 6.27 - Illustration of the speaker and the application, the elements of the DAIVA concept.
==PAGE:86==
Page 72 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
6.5.3.1 FUNCTIONS OF THE SYSTEM  
Both the speaker and the application are essential to truly benefit from the different functionalities 
the system offers. Although the use of the app is not strictly needed after the initial set-up – the 
speaker will be able to work just fine alone – many of the functionalities that might add structure 
and value throughout the day will not be applicable without the app. The best result is achieved by 
utilizing both elements of the system. 
The DAIVA system has many different functionalities to overcome the boundaries and frustra­
tions of dementia. Table 6.2 will go through all the functionalities and what value they provide. 
Table 6.2 – Table containing the functionalities of the DAIVA concept and the value each functionality brings. 
==PAGE:87==
Page 73 of 127 
==PAGE:88==
Page 74 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
For the person with mild cognitive impairment the main interaction will be with the speaker, while 
the caretaker will be interacting mainly with the application. However, before the speaker and the 
app can be used freely, setup is necessary involving both users. As a result, it becomes possible to 
interact with the system in five different ways. 
Only during set-up is both elements of the intervention needed simultaneously as well as both 
caretaker and the person with mild cognitive impairment. This is the most time-consuming inter­
action, but it creates the foundation for future use of the system. 
In the following the five possible ways of interacting with the DAIVA system will be described in 
more detail together with the functionalities provided. 
6.5.3.1.1 SET-UP OF THE SYSTEM 
As people are highly individual and each case of dementia is different it becomes impossible to 
have one standard setting for the intervention. To accommodate the individuality the DAIVA sys­
tem should be set up to address specific user specifications and requirements before the interven­
tion can be utilized to its full potential. Since DAIVA addresses multiple symptoms the importance 
of individualization of the settings increases, making the system adapt the intervention to the spe­
cific needs of each user. The individuality of the intervention allows the user to decide how many 
reminders they would like, what the caretakers are allowed to see of information and whether or 
not the intervention shall alarm the caretakers in case of sudden noises or long periods of silence. 
The application encourages an open discussion between the caretakers and the people with mild 
cognitive impairment to ensure all points have been considered thoroughly. Furthermore, the ap­
plication asks for informed consent regarding data collection and functionalities to ensure that all 
users are truly aware of what they are agreeing to.  
Setting up the intervention will take between 15 to 30 minutes in total, since the speaker has to 
be set up correctly as well as encourage the users to deeply consider the settings of the interven­
tion. To create the best user experience, the app will be preset to certain functionalities. This is 
to improve the experience of the user by allowing the AI to gather data and thereby adapt to the 
individual, as well as to encourage safety. These settings can be changed during setup if they are 
unwanted. Furthermore, all settings can be altered at all times.  
To create a clear description of how setting up the intervention is done a step by step visualization 
can be seen in the following. 
•
•
•
•
•
Set-up of the system
Use of the application 
User initiated interaction with the speaker 
Speaker initiated interaction 
Physical interaction with the speaker 
==PAGE:89==
Page 75 of 127 
The user receives the package and 
unwraps it. The package contains 
the speaker and a user manual.
1
The user follows the user manual and 
begins by downloading the app to 
begin set-up and plug-in the speak­
er into the power socket. 
2
Having downloaded the app, the 
user creates an account.
3
The user manual describes how to 
connect the speaker to the app 
and to WIFI. 
4
After having connected the speak­
er with the app, the user is asked 
to connect other smart devices in 
home to the system, such as TV and 
light. That way, the user can control 
these devices through the speaker. 
5
The user is now asked to begin set­
ting up the personalized experience.
The user is asked to connect care­
takers to the app. The caretakers will 
receive an email or a SMS with a link 
to download the app.
6
==PAGE:90==
Page 76 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
Next the user is encouraged to have 
an open dialog with the caretaker 
about security measures. Very short 
and concise descriptions are pre­
sented.  
Here informed consent should be 
given by the person with mild cogni­
tive impairment about the following 
topics: 
Data collection – how the data is 
collected 
Data protection – how the data is 
protected 
Privacy – how can the user delete 
the data recorded and how can 
the user put the speaker in priva­
cy more 
Further discussion should be initiated 
about: 
Allowing caretakers to add re­
minders
Allow caretakers to add to calen­
dar and to-do list 
Allow the system to contact care­
takers in case of sudden noises or 
long periods of silence 
Allow caretakers to see statistics 
about the re-sponse to reminders 
How much information is the 
caretaker allowed to see?
All of these points will be preset to 
yes but can be al-tered. 
7
The users are now suggested to set 
up reminders to help create struc­
ture in the daily life. Two reminders 
are preset: taking medicine and 
encouragement of social interaction 
with friends and family. Both points 
are preset to be includ-ed but can 
be removed. 
Further personalized reminders can 
be added to fit the needs of the 
user.
8
Lastly the user manual suggests the 
person with mild cognitive impair­
ment to read or speak out loud to 
allow the AI to adapt to the voice 
and pronunciation of the user. 
9
==PAGE:91==
Page 77 of 127 
6.5.3.1.2 USE OF APPLICATION 
After the initial set-up it is still possible for the people with mild cognitive impairment to use the 
application to add reminders, books, music, etc. and change settings. It is also possible to keep 
an eye on own statistics and data. However, as the abilities of the person with mild cognitive 
im-pairment deteriorates these functions can be accessed through the speaker as well. Although it 
is possible for people with mild cognitive impairment to use the application it is assumed that they 
would use the speaker instead. As the dementia progresses it becomes more difficult to interact 
with smartphones, to read and to understand how to change settings. This issue is overcome with 
the speaker as most can still communicate to some decree and therefore utilize the voice-assistant 
instead.  
Caretakers often have to keep track of what the person with mild cognitive impairment has to do 
throughout the day, what events they have been invited to and whether they are eating, etc. This 
is a lot of responsibility and can often cause stress and frustration in the caretaker as well as the 
person with mild cognitive impairment. The application can help lighten the caretaker by making 
these responsibilities easier to overcome and help create a sense of security. The application will 
allow the caretakers to add reminders, music, books, etc., thereby directly making life easier for 
the person with mild cognitive impairment and themselves. Furthermore, the caretaker can add 
tasks and events to the to-do list and calendar, allowing the intervention to help remind the person 
with mild cognitive impairment what the plans are on a given day and remove the responsibility 
of remembering from own shoulders.  The application also allows the caretakers to keep track of 
whether the person with mild cognitive impairment is responding to the reminders given. This 
is, however, only possible if consent has been given. Lastly, the initial settings can be changed in 
collaboration with the person with mild cognitive impairment as the disease progresses and the 
needs changes. 
The user opens the application and 
signs in. 
1
The user is now at liberty to add 
reminders, add to calendar, add 
favorite music, add audio-books or 
look at the statistics about response 
to reminders. 
2
The caretaker and the person with 
mild cognitive impairment are now 
at liberty to alter the settings. 
3
==PAGE:92==
Page 78 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
6.5.3.1.3 USER INITIATED INTERACTION WITH THE SPEAKER 
Living with mild cognitive impairment can be difficult and frustrating. Therefore, it is important 
that the interactions brought into their lives are friendly, calming and guiding. As the intervention 
has voice-assistance incorporated it is important that the voice fulfills these criteria. The voice can 
therefore be altered to match the needs of the specific user through the application, i.e. choosing 
a soft voice, deciding gender, even allow the device to use the voice of a caretaker. 
Having voice-assistance allow the people with mild cognitive impairment to interact in a natural 
way with the intervention – by voice. This comes naturally for most human beings as it is how 
most communicate daily. Communicating with the speaker should be easy and friendly, making the 
user feel secure and safe: accepted. Thereby, the user should feel the freedom to ask questions of 
the speaker, e.g. what should I be doing today? And the speaker will respond based on what is in 
the calendar or to-do list. The user can add elements such as books and music by simply telling the 
speaker to do so. This allows an easy transaction between the speaker and the user. 
To utilize the device the user will have to say a ‘wake’ word. This word wakes up the device and 
causes the device to listen for a command or request. To initiate interaction with the speaker the 
user will have to say “DAIVA”, if the device is then ready to receive request a sound will appear 
and the LED ring at the top of the speaker will turn on. If no response has been received it will 
turn off after 30 seconds. It is possible to request/ask the speaker of the following functionalities: 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Read book 
Play music or radio 
Tell what is on the calendar or add to it
Tell what is on the to-do list or add to it 
Call friends and family and answer calls 
Write to friends and family (speech to text) and read messages out loud (text to speech)
Can turn on and off TV and other smart devices 
Can turn up and down the volume 
Answer questions, inform about the news, tell jokes, etc. 
A visualization of the communication can be seen in the following. Furthermore, a flowchart de­
scribing behind the scenes actions (connection to the cloud) of interacting with the device can be 
seen in appendix A6.6.
==PAGE:93==
Page 79 of 127 
The user initiates contact by saying 
the wake word.
1
The user request or asks a question, 
e.g. play music, read a book, how is 
the weather today? Etc.
2
The speaker responds by either com­
ing with an answer or acting based 
on the request. 
3
==PAGE:94==
Page 80 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
6.5.3.1.4 SPEAKER INITIATED INTERACTION
When the speaker initiates interaction with the users it is important that the interaction is guiding 
and authoritative. Although the voice should still be friendly and calming, it is important that the 
reminders are presented in a guiding and authoritative manner encouraging the user to listen. This 
is the case as people with mild cognitive impairment are not always able to perform basic tasks 
without being reminded, such as taking a shower. By reminding them in a calm and guiding, yet 
authoritative, manner the likelihood of succeeding in inspiring action will increase significantly. It 
is very important that it is said in a guiding manner to avoid defiance and to avoid harming their 
pride and dignity. 
The speaker will initiate interaction when the user should be reminded of tasks, events, etc. The 
speaker will also be able to initiate contact in cases of loud sudden noises, the cry of ‘help’ or 
simply inactivity for a long period of time. This is to ensure the safety of the user; however, this 
function must be enabled during set-up, and full consent must be given. The user can turn off the 
reminder by pushing the big button on top of the speaker – no. 6 on figure 6.27. 
The speaker initiates contact by say­
ing a reminder into the room. The re­
minder will be repeated three times, 
then take a break for 2 minutes and 
then repeated another three times. 
The speaker will also initiate contact 
if there has been quite for a long 
time, it will then ask how the user is 
and whether to contact a caretak­
er.
1
The user responds by pushing the big 
button on top of the device. 
2
==PAGE:95==
Page 81 of 127 
6.5.3.1.5 PHYSICAL INTERACTION WITH THE SPEAKER
Although the main interaction with the speaker is conducted with voice some functions allow 
physical contact as well. As people with mild cognitive impairment loses their ability to interact 
with complicated products as part of the disease, introducing a very simplistic design with few 
physical functions have been extremely important. As a result, only few buttons have been added 
to the design as seen on figure 6.27. Furthermore, physical interaction is needed when the speaker 
should be charged. Allowing only few buttons on the speaker is crucial to increase a safer physical 
appearance, that is both unobtrusive to the mind and eye. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
The device when needed will inform the user and caretaker when power is running low
Buttons to turn sound up and down can be used at all times, but it is also possible to simply 
tell the speaker to alter the sound level 
If the speaker needs to be turned on or off it is possible with a button on the back 
The big button on the top of the device should be pushed when responding to reminders, 
confirming that the reminder has been heard 
The privacy button turns off the microphone of the device and allows the user to avoid be­
ing recorded – this, however, means the user will have to push the button when needing to 
interact with the speaker 
The pair button is to help the user pair the speaker with the phone 
6.5.4 CHOOSING FUNCTIONALITIES FOR DAIVA
As the design process is very subjective, I have had to make decisions and take a stance on cer-
tain problems encountered during the design. These decisions are vital for how the concept has 
blossomed and evolved. In the following I will be explaining why I have decided to add certain 
functionalities or made certain choices.  
6.5.4.1 AI AND COMMUNICATION
Although AT has been confirmed to be a good tool for elderly and people with mild cognitive 
impairment, this section will shortly elaborate on why AI voice-assistance in assistive technology 
can be game changing.  
The adaptiveness of the algorithm makes it possible to predict the interaction the users will initiate 
based on pattern recognition making it easier to understand what the user wants even if the AI did 
not understand the full request. Furthermore, the learning ability of the AI allows for adaption of 
the users as well – if the user start losing language or become more difficult to understand over 
time, the AI can adapt and begin to create patterns with these new words and sentences. Not only 
does that mean that speech impairment will become a lot smaller problem, it means that it might 
be possible to connect certain words as trigger – e.g. music, song, instrument, guitar, all of these 
words could be triggers for playing music, meaning the person with dementia would only have to 
know one word to communicate their wants. The constant development and adaptability of AI 
makes it possible for people who are having trouble being understood to still have the freedom to 
interact with a product that understands their meaning. At least most of the time. 
==PAGE:96==
Page 82 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
6.5.4.2 PLACEMENT AND WHO TO ADDRESS 
The biggest decision I had to make, was whether to make a portable and wearable device that 
could have GPS and biometric measurements or focus on making a more static device that could 
be placed in the house. By creating a wearable device, the sufferer of mild cognitive impairment 
would be considered safer as the personal assistant would be accessible at all times and could help 
caretakers locate them in case they wandered off. However, this would limit the difference that I 
would be able to make for the caretakers; it would not be possible to create quite as big a change in 
their lives. Furthermore, by having a small personal assistant fewer symptoms could be addressed. 
In the end, I decided to focus on the more static design that considered the person with mild 
cognitive impairment as well as the caretakers. By having a static device to help at home, it could 
make a larger impact in daily life for the entire household. I chose to focus on both users, as this 
would create a larger societal impact and because I believe the environment around the person 
with mild cognitive impairment would be happier and calmer. As it was found in chapter 4 and 5, 
the ambiance of the environment has a psychological impact. 
6.5.4.3 PHYSICAL APPEARANCE 
To help ensure different contexts and behaviors were considered, I used the DwI Toolkit. By using 
this tool and looking at the behaviors through different lenses, I initiated an internal discussion 
about what thoughts, situations and contexts were important to include in the design, as well as a 
discussion about how they should be included. Appendix A6.7 explores the different DwI cards I 
have found helpful during the design process. Especially looking through the perceptual and cog­
nitive lens initiated a long internal discussion. 
It became apparent that how the physical design was presented was important. This has been fur­
ther validated by the product qualities presented in section 6.3.1 and the results from chapter 2, 3 
and 5: the design matters! Through research it was found that the design should be simplistic, un­
obtrusive and not be stigmatizing. However, these elements are describing feelings and sensations 
the design should invite, more than how the actual design should look. As a result, the physical 
design is completely subjective. The design has been created with these elements in mind. 
The design is simplistic and has only few buttons that clearly indicate what they are for.
The physical design is unobtrusive as the design is clean, elegant and smart. 
The design has similarities with current designs and looks, as well as functions, as a normal 
speaker, thereby rendering the design non-stigmatizing. 
6.5.4.4 INCORPORATING ETHICAL DILEMMAS
As mentioned in chapter 2 it is extremely important to include ethical considerations into the de­
sign – in particular, it is important to consider the dilemmas that occur between different ethical 
considerations. Appendix A6.8 describes how all ethical considerations were included. To create 
a concept that accommodate the needs of the users, the dilemmas of safety vs. autonomy, safety 
vs. privacy, and safety vs. informed consent must be considered. In the following how these three 
dilemmas were thought into the design will be explained. 
==PAGE:97==
Page 83 of 127 
SAFETY VS. AUTONOMY 
In literature, and confirmed by experts, it was found that autonomy is valued highly by the west-
ern culture. There is a general wish to stay as autonomous and independent as long as possible. 
However, when dealing with people with mild cognitive impairment it can be difficult to rationally 
determine when full autonomy is no longer possible. This create a dilemma of paternalism; who is 
going to decide when full autonomy is no longer possible? Mild cognitive impairment can alter the 
perception of oneself, making it difficult to see reality as it is, and often doctors or family members 
will need to make the decision. At some point autonomy and safety will be two opposing factors 
and the family will have to decide what is most important, e.g. when the person with dementia 
stops eating, becomes a hazard for others while driving, etc. Finding a balance between doing 
what is safest and what is best for the person with dementia as well as removing their autonomy is 
difficult and highly case based. There is no fixed point in the development of dementia where it is 
known that they become a danger to themselves, and therefore it is difficult as a designer to take a 
definitive stance on when safety trumps autonomy. 
Instead of taking a stance, I found it more giving to embrace the individuality of each case and 
incorporate that into the concept. This was done by opening up for a discussion between the 
person with mild cognitive impairment and the caretaker. The concept should encourage having 
this open and serious discussion during set-up of the device, to ensure both the caretaker and the 
person with mild cognitive impairment are in agreement on who decides when it is necessary to 
begin valuing safety more than autonomy. This setting can still be altered during the process as the 
cognitive abilities deteriorate over time, but the decision should be part of a discussion. 
SAFETY VS. PRIVACY 
Privacy is considered a human right in western culture, however sometimes a compromise be-
tween privacy and safety must be found. For example, some people with dementia will chose not 
to wear a GPS, even though this can result in them getting lost and no one knowing where to look 
for them. Again, how much each user values privacy is individual, and it becomes difficult for 
me as a designer to take a stance. What the users need and how their sickness progresses are also 
individual, making it impossible to have a ‘one solution fit all’ situation. However, the dilemma 
between safety and privacy is very important to address as it is such an important part of what we 
value as a culture.  
In the concept, I addressed this dilemma by asking the users to make a few decisions while setting 
up the device: 1) should the device register loud noises, e.g. a crash or the word “help”?, 2) should 
the device report if it hears any sudden noises to the caretakers?, 3) should a long period of silence 
be reported to caretakers?, and 4) how much information should the caretakers be able to see and 
change? By asking the users to take a stance on these questions, they are deciding what will work 
for their specific case and personalities. Furthermore, the device will have a privacy mode that if 
on will ensure the device does not record anything until the user pushes a specific button. Even 
then, all recordings can be deleted in the app if wanted. 
==PAGE:98==
Page 84 of 127
Chapter 6 | Social Implication Design
SAFETY VS. INFORMED CONSENT 
By law consent should be given when big data is handled. Therefore, the users will have to give 
consent to data collection when setting up the device. However, consent is often given without 
actually knowing what is agreed to, as mentioned by Laila Øksnebjerg (Appendix A5.4). Informed 
consent should be given to other functionalities than Big Data collection as well, i.e. if consent 
is not given, the device cannot act, even if there is a safety related issue. It is therefore important 
that informed consent is given at all times, so the users are aware of what functionalities they are 
choosing to ignore. 
This dilemma was addressed by ensuring that the users are being presented with short and clear 
information about what they are to consent to, to absolutely ensure that the consent is informed. 
The functionalities that the users are giving informed consent to can be altered at all times, ensur­
ing that no decision is binding and to allow change of mind as the disease progress. 
==PAGE:99==
Page 85 of 127 
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 7
VALIDATION
==PAGE:102==
Page 88 of 127
Chapter 7 | Validation
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
This chapter will be presenting the results of the validation of the intervention. Firstly, the vali­
dation of the intervention in relation to the social implications will be presented in section 7.2.1. 
Then the functionalities of the concept will be validated in section 7.2.2. This chapter will aim at 
answering the sixth research question. 
7.1.1 METHOD 
To ensure validation was done of both the concept and the statement, two tests were conducted; 
a narrative-based study and testing of functionalities. 
The narrative-based study focusses on creating a narrative with accompanying images that de-
scribes the intention and actions of the concept, as well as how the behavioral changes and social 
implications will be induced (Tromp & Hekkert, 2018). The purpose is to validate the fulfillment 
of the statement to some degree even though the social implications are long term. The test sub-
jects will be asked to read the narrative and answer questions about how probable the narrative is 
to induce the wanted behavior and social implications. 
The functional user testing has another focus; to test the functionalities of the concept and how 
the test subjects feel about these. Here a functional low-fidelity prototype is presented to the test 
subjects together with a user-case. As the test subjects try to use the concept, they create an un­
derstanding of how well the concept is working in accordance to their expectations based on the 
user-case. The test subjects are then asked questions about the success of the concept, if it can be 
improved, what went well and what is missing. 
As the testing was conducted on potential users that had already taken part of the interviews for 
chapter 5, they might be biased. To try to overcome this bias these tests were created in a struc-
tured and clear way, ensuring all test subjects were presented with the exact same information. 
==PAGE:103==
Page 89 of 127 
7.2 VALIDATING THE INTERVENTION 
Early validation is important when creating new interventions, especially when creating social de­
sign to validate whether the design has the intended effect and to determine how the intervention 
can be improved (Tromp & Hekkert, 2018). 
The overall goal of the intervention presented in chapter 6 is to increase life quality for people 
with mild cognitive impairment, decrease health risk for caretakers and to better utilize healthcare 
resources. These goals are long term and whether the intervention affects these social implications 
can be difficult to answer as of yet. Validating whether the intervention will have the intended 
social implications can therefore be difficult, as it will take months, maybe years, to gather enough 
data to clearly determine the effect of the intervention. Whereas testing the func-tionalities and 
what aspects of the intervention that might need to be improved here and now can be determined 
rather quickly. Therefore, two tests were conducted. 
Both tests are subjective and can therefore give a false positive reaction since few test subjects par­
ticipated in the validation. In particular the narrative-based study is subjective, as the test subjects 
are evaluating whether the social implications can be achieved based on the current understanding 
and experiences, not the future context. 
7.2.1 NARRATIVE-BASED STUDY
Four test subjects were presented with a short yet detailed story with accompanying pictures, see 
appendix A7.1 for the narrative-based study. The test subjects were asked to read through the nar­
rative and look at the accompanying pictures, and then answer some specific questions related to 
the impact of the intervention in relation to the wanted social implications and change in behavior. 
These four test subjects were all potential users, being caretakers for family members. 
The test was conducted by presenting the test subjects with a physical paper with the narrative and 
pictures, here after the questions were asked by myself and recorded to allow more freedom of 
speech compared to having to fill out a questionnaire. Appendix A7.2, A7.3, A7.4 and A7.5 shows 
each individual response from the test subjects, all test subjects were recruited through the study 
in chapter 5. This test creates an understanding of whether the intervention would induce the 
intended social implications and changes in behavior, based on the knowledge of potential users. 
Although the test is subjective and the future development within the domain can be difficult to 
predict, the test gives an idea about the success of the intervention and what should be changed 
or improved to reach the intended social implications. 
The purpose of conducting the test was to explore: 
•
•
Narrative-based study – testing whether the intervention will induce the intended behavior 
change and social implications (four test subjects)
Test of functionalities – testing the most crucial functionalities of the intervention (two test 
suBjects)
•
•
•
How probable the events described in the narrative were?
How realistic it was that the concept would change behavior? 
How realistic it was that the concept would induce the wanted social implications?  
==PAGE:104==
Page 90 of 127
Chapter 7 | Validation
7.2.1.1 INSIGHTS AND KEY FINDINGS 	
Based on the four narrative-based studies it was found that:
•
•
•
•
•
The test subjects considered the events presented in the narrative to be 92.5% accurate
All four participants agreed that the concept would make daily life easier for people with mild 
cognitive impairment and for caretakers 
Receiving help to remind the people with mild cognitive impairment about events, 
tasks, etc. will make the life of the caretakers easier 
It will make the people with mild cognitive impairment feel safer and it will ensure they 
are being treated in a more dignified way 
All four participants agreed that the concept would increase independence for the people with 
mild cognitive impairment 
It will increase independence and sense of dignity that the people with mild cognitive 
impairment does not need human help to remind them eating, showering, taking med­
icine, as well as what is in their calendar etc. 
Allowing the people with mild cognitive impairment to turn on and off TV, music, etc. 
will increase their sense of independence and freedom 
If they include the technology completely into their daily life it will help them and make 
them more independent, but if they do not accept the technology completely help 
might still be needed 
People with mild cognitive impairment are losing some of their dignity and indepen­
dence when social workers arrive to remind them about eating, taking showers, etc. 
All four participants agreed that the concept would decrease the negative mental risks of 
being a caretaker
“If my sister is well, I am well, if she feels safe, I feel safe.” – Lone Sørup Larsen
Removing some of the tasks from the caretaker will give them more freedom and de­
crease the amount of stress accompanied by being a caretaker
The decrease in stress might also help ensure a better relationship between the caretak­
ers and the people with mild cognitive impairment 
By introducing this help to the caretakers in an early stage it might allow the caretakers 
to feel less worn down throughout the entire course of the disease 
Three participants agreed that the concept has the opportunity to improve overall life quality 
for people with mild cognitive impairment, while one said that it had the possibility
By increasing independence, ensuring less stress and maintaining sense of dignity the 
overall life quality could be improved
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
==PAGE:105==
Page 91 of 127 
•
•
•
•
•
All four participants believe the concept will allow for better utilization of healthcare resourc­
es 
By having reminders, it opens up the opportunity of removing need for the social work­
er to arrive only to remind – it opens up the opportunity to utilize this time on people 
with a bigger need for the social worker, for spending the money on other areas within 
the healthcare sector or simply to increase the social aspect of checking up on the peo­
ple with mild cognitive impairment, ensuring social contact 
The sentences must be short and concrete from the speaker to allow the people with mild 
cognitive impairment to understand what is being said 
The concept allows easier communication with friends and family, especially when handling 
a phone becomes an issue 
The open dialogue between the caretakers and the people with mild cognitive impairment is 
very important, as the caretakers can have some insights the person with mild cognitive im­
pairment is not aware of or does not acknowledge
Suggested elements that might add value to the concept: 
Create a link between the medicine box and the app, allowing the caretakers to track 
whether medicine has actually been taken and ensure that the person with mild cogni­
tive impairment has not just turned off the reminder 
Add a phone-list to make it easier to call people and organizations – e.g. doctor, hair­
dresser, etc. 
•
•
•
In general, all test subjects believed the concept had a future and believed this type of helpful de­
vice is needed. All subjects expressed a wish for having this type of assistive technology at some 
point or other. 
Figure 7.1 - Lone Sørup Larsen conducting the narrative-based study.
==PAGE:106==
Page 92 of 127
Chapter 7 | Validation
7.2.2 TEST OF CONCEPT FUNCTIONALITY 
Two test subjects were asked to participate in testing a key functionality prototype, meaning that 
key functionalities of the intervention were tested. Both test subjects were recruited through the 
field study in chapter 5. The testing was conducted in the home of the test subjects, and both were 
potential users having family members with dementia. The test was conducted by allowing the 
users to go through the app, setting up the intervention and then testing the functionalities of the 
speaker. The app was a low-fidelity paper version, while the speaker was a functional prototype, 
as voice-interaction is difficult to imitate in a low-fidelity prototype. The speaker was equipped 
with Amazon-software, meaning the wake word during testing was Alexa, not DAIVA. A user case 
was simulated, although to have received a more correct picture of the use of the intervention, it 
should have been introduced as part of their everyday life throughout a day or more. Due to lack 
of time and the prototype not being developed enough for that kind of testing, it was not possible 
to conduct a day-long test. During the use of the intervention the test subjects were encouraged 
to think out loud, furthermore questions were asked as the end of the test to further elaborate on 
the test and the use of the intervention. The full test setup can be seen in appendix A7.6, and the 
individual responses can be seen in appendix A7.7 and A7.8. 
This test was conducted to help understand how the concept was functioning in a practical set-ting 
and allow the test subjects to come with suggestions of improvements. The test is a necessity to 
improve the experience of using the intervention, as well as to understand how it is used by com­
mon people who might not use a lot of different technology throughout the day. 
The purpose of conducting the test was to explore: 
•
•
•
•
•
Does the setup make sense? 
Do the test subjects deem the intervention valuable? 
Does the intervention create an easier everyday life? 
Is the concept easy to use? 
What can be improved to create a better experience? 
7.2.2.1 TEST 1: HANNE ØSTENKÆR 
The functional test with Hanne was conducted in her home where she could feel free and relaxed, 
in an attempt to create an open and non-judgmental environment allowing her to speak her mind 
freely. Hanne has been caretaker for her mother-in-law before she passed away and is now care­
taker for her brother. 
7.2.2.1.1 FEEDBACK
Overall, Hanne thought the intervention would add a lot of value to the domain. She believes that 
day to day life will be a lot easier with the concept, and that it could help the people with mild 
cognitive impairment feel more independent and dignified, but also help the caretakers feel less 
stressed. Hanne seemed to understand the concept and the functionalities quickly. 
The key feedback was: 
==PAGE:107==
Page 93 of 127 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
The presetting of the app is well received and encourages an open dialogue. Hanne believes 
it encourages trust and sense of security between the caretakers and the people with mild 
cognitive impairment. 
“It is really great to have reminders. The more we can let them act themselves, the more in­
dependent they will be in the course of the disease. That way they can feel dignified as long 
as possible.”
Hanne appreciates that initiation of contact with the device is by saying its name – this makes 
the device more humanoid and easier to interact with. Hanne believes making the device more 
humanoid would help make it easier to bond with the device. She suggested adding a face. 
The intervention is found valuable, as it can help the people with dementia for a long period 
of their disease. Hanne argues that even though the disease is progressive they will still be 
capable of enjoying music and sound books. After the people with dementia can no longer 
interact with the device, the caretakers or retirement homes can still use it to turn play music, 
etc. 
If the communication center of the brain has been affected, using the intervention might be 
difficult for the people with mild cognitive impairment. Here the caretakers of the retirement 
homes can help as well. 
Hanne finds it valuable that the device can connect with other smart devices, e.g. TV. This will 
increase the independence of people with dementia. 
Allow the app to be used by multiple caretakers if needed, not just one, as some caretakers 
might not be able to use the app. 
“If I had had the product from the beginning of the dementia cases I have been part of, then 
it would have decreased our work significantly. Alone the fact that you can talk to it, get an 
answer and add things to the calendar would have been a big help.”
The reminders were considered a great tool to help the people with mild cognitive impairment 
stay independent, but also to remove some of the work load from the caretakers. It was sug­
gested to add more reminders that would include physical activation and maybe even games. 
Hanne envisioned the device being a great communication tool between caretakers, people 
with dementia and social workers. By connecting the healthcare sector to the app, she believes 
it will make the communication more effective and help the people with dementia feel more 
taken care of. 
==PAGE:108==
Page 94 of 127
Chapter 7 | Validation
7.2.2.2 TEST 2: HENRIETTE FISKER
The functional test with Henriette was also conducted in her own home, to create an open and 
non-judgmental environment to allow free speech and create an open dialog during questioning. 
Henriette is currently caretaker for her father. 
7.2.2.2.1 FEEDBACK
Overall, Henriette seemed to find the interaction with the intervention easy. Henriette believes 
the concept would add value to the domain but found the setup a bit more difficult to understand 
than Hanne, believed to be a result of finding it difficult to imagine the intervention in the correct 
setting. She generally believes the concept could help people with mild cognitive impairment, as 
well as the caretakers. 
The key feedback was: 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
As the caretakers might be spouses it is a possibility that neither the caretaker nor the person 
with mild cognitive impairment is capable of downloading and using an app. Therefore, help 
might be needed to use the app, or multiple caretakers should be added. 
Henriette believes the speaker will be the only form of interaction with mild cognitive impair­
ment sufferers: “I do not believe the people with dementia will use the app. It is something 
new for them to learn when they are sick, so it will be difficult to remember.”
Henriette found the ability of connecting the speaker with other smart devices in home (e.g. 
TV, light, radio, etc.) very interesting. She believes it would make the people with mild cogni­
tive impairment feel more relaxed and independent. 
The calling and texting function were deemed extremely valuable, as it allows the people with 
mild cognitive impairment to keep in contact with friends and family when they can no longer 
operate a regular phone. 
“I think it is a great idea that you can add books to the system. It could also be cozy for the 
caretakers.”
The functionality of addressing the person with mild cognitive impairment had there been no 
contact for a while, was deemed very important by Henriette. She argued that in case of such 
a long silence the caretakers should be notified in case the person with dementia had gotten 
hurt or had wandered off. 
The button to push indicating reminders have been registered is not attention seeking enough. 
Henriette suggest adding color and increasing size. 
Henriette found it an issue that the intervention only worked when in the same room as you. 
She suggested adding small speakers to different rooms and having the ‘base-unit’ in the living 
room. Thereby allowing for a wider area to be covered by the concept. 
The names Alexa and DAIVA are not common in Denmark, and as it is a new name to re­
member Henriette believes this could be an issue. She suggests allowing the person with mild 
cognitive impairment to find a name for the device that has meaning or is easy to remember, 
e.g. an old pet. 
==PAGE:109==
Page 95 of 127 
•
Who is going to buy the intervention and the final price will affect the selling prospects. If the 
intervention should be sold or given by the healthcare sector, then they should also provide 
resources for setup of the device argues Henriette. 
7.2.2.3 INSIGHTS AND KEY TAKINGS  
Based on observations and the results of both of the test sessions it was found that: 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
In general, the concept was well received, and the test subjects found it valuable for them as 
caretakers and for people with mild cognitive impairment. They believe the concept will make 
daily life easier. 
The test subjects appreciate that the concept is holistic and address more than one symptom, 
as well as include the more human elements e.g. listening to music and sound books. It makes 
the device more appreciated than many of the more stigmatizing products that already exist.
The intervention can be used in other settings as well, such as retirement homes, but also for 
different target groups, such as children, people who are physically challenged, etc. 
The intervention adds value by increasing independence and help make daily life more man­
ageable. 
The caretakers will have more freedom in the beginning of the disease by allowing them to 
relinquish control. 
It would be easier to remember how to interact with the device if the name was chosen by 
the specific user. 
Not all people with mild cognitive impairment will be able to use the intervention – if they 
cannot communicate at all, they cannot interact with the system. Although the caretakers or 
retirement staff can interact with it, the intervention gives less value to the person with mild 
cognitive impairment if they cannot speak. 
Figure 7.2 - Hanne Østenkær getting ready for the functional test.
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
In the following two chapters the reflection, discussion, limitations and future work will be 
presented. Chapter 8 will be reflecting on the design process and the method used to create 
the concept. Then chapter 9 will discuss the results of the report as a whole in relation to the 
literature. Furthermore, it will present the limitations of concept followed by a description of 
how the concept could be improved with further work. 
After these chapters the conclusion will be presented in chapter 10. The conclusion will sum 
op the results of the report as a whole and answer the research questions presented in section 
1.1.1. 
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 8
REFLECTION
==PAGE:114==
Page 100 of 127
Chapter 8 | Reflection
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
This chapter will reflect on the design process and the SID method. Section 8.2 will present re­
flections of the design process, section 8.3 will then reflect on the concept and ethics, and lastly 
section 8.4 will present general reflections about choice of method and the overall thesis process.
 
8.2 DESIGN PROCESS
Many different considerations were encountered during the design process and had to be dealt 
with, some easy to overcome and some more problematic. In the following I will go through the 
most influential considerations met during the design process. 
The SID method begins with the preparation stage where ‘debriefing’ the problem together with 
the client is done. As the design task was driven by me this step was quickly run through. Alt-
hough it is an extremely important point in general, it did not seem to add a lot of value to the pro­
cess of creating the concept in this thesis. This step would need more thought and time to increase 
the understanding between the client and the designer as well as the boundaries surrounding the 
project if conducted in closer collaboration with a company. 
While trying to anticipate the future, stage 1, data from the expert interviews, regular interviews 
and the literature review were used to synthesize context factors. The data was used to create an 
understanding of the current and the future world view within the domain and based on the in­
formation 68 context factors were created. The future context that the concept has been created 
within, is therefore highly dependent on the knowledge I have received and gathered from the 
experts and caretakers, as well as literature on the subject. However, this knowledge does not nec­
essarily paint a true picture of the situation. As humans’, experiences and opinions are subjective 
to how they perceive the world, gaps can be found: 
If this should have been addressed differently, more time should have been spent on gathering 
data and talking to experts, caretakers and people with mild cognitive impairment. 
As I have been conducting this thesis alone, creating the context factors, the context structures 
•
•
•
Data was gathered from caretakers and experts within the area, but not from people with mild 
cognitive impairment. Lone Sørup Larsen, A5.9, suggested that talking to people with demen­
tia would be difficult and would cause distress. Gathering realistic and useful knowledge from 
people with dementia was therefore decided against, although this would have added value 
and could have helped see the future context from a different and very valid perspective.  
It was not possible to observe either caretakers or people with mild cognitive impairment 
in situ. As a result, all data is based on opinions and memories causing important elements 
of daily life to possibly have been missed. Having been able to observe the current situation 
within the domain could have added value that might have changed the final design. 
Laila Øksnebjerg, A5.4, argues that there is a limited amount of research on dementia avail­
able and that a lot of the research is low in quality. Although this is an issue out of my hands, 
the lack of high-quality research within the area creates a more uncertain fu-ture context that 
might alter more than anticipated in the future. 
==PAGE:115==
Page 101 of 127 
and the concept was difficult as pattern recognition is an iterative process and demanded renewed 
creativity each time. The SID method puts focus on the fact that creating design is a subjective 
process, accepting that all designers include own thoughts and opinions and it is understood that 
when using the SID method, the same domain can present different solutions by changing the 
designer.
 
8.3 CONCEPT AND ETHICAL REFLECTIONS 
The concept was created based on a statement, a vision, about what behavior the concept should 
aim at changing and what social implications the concept should attempt to induce. This state-
ment is what the concept should be held against when validating the design; does the design in-
deed encourage the users to change behavior? Does the design and the social implications match? 
These questions can be difficult to answer. To determine whether the concept fulfilled the state­
ment, I decided to conduct two tests – one with focus on the social impact and one with focus 
on the functionalities. Based on the validation, the concept fulfills the statement and the design is 
considered valuable within the domain. 
Creating the concept based on the vision was very helpful as the vision worked as a very clear 
guideline. If the concept did not fit within the frame of the statement, the concept was not a good 
match. Validating the concept based on the vision was also helpful, as it created a clear picture of 
what I wanted to accomplish and thereby the concept could more clearly be defined as successful 
or not in the eyes of potential users. 
However, the concept was not only guided by the vision but by the ethical considerations found 
in chapter 2,3 and 5 as well. Allowing the ethical considerations to act as a guide the concept 
quickly took form and few variations were found when choosing a final concept. This is positive 
in the sense that the final concept was easy to define, and it was easy to determine whether or not 
it would be considered ethically sound. However, it was also very limiting. By having that many 
ethical guidelines to follow, the design process became more structured, almost as a list of points 
the concept must include. This hindered some of the freedom in the creative process. The final 
concept might have been very different, had the ethical considerations been less or nonexistent. 
Although the process was less free than I have usually tried before, I still, in my opinion, managed 
to create an innovative solution to the statement that fulfilled the requirements I had presented 
before beginning the idea generation. 
To create a more valid perception of the success of the concept, the concept could have been test­
ed on more potential users, in particular people with mild cognitive impairment. As men-tioned 
by Lone Sørup Larsen, A5.9, it is difficult to talk to people with mild cognitive impairment and 
convey what I need from them, which is why validation was only conducted on caretakers. Fur­
thermore, it would have added value to test on experts within the field as well. Due to a limited 
timeframe, this was not possible.
==PAGE:116==
Page 102 of 127
Chapter 8 | Reflection
Throughout the report the SID method has been used to guide the design phase. As this method 
has been a completely novel method to me, it has been more time consuming than using known 
theory. Furthermore, the novelty of the design method, and the fact that the method is relatively 
young, made it difficult for me to confirm thoughts and ideas about the method. This as a result 
led to a time plan constantly changing, as tasks took either longer or shorter time than anticipated. 
Had I had more time or simply been aware of this fact from the beginning, more time would have 
been spent on the design phase and validation, and the design phase would have been initiated 
quite early in the process. 
However, I chose to use the SID method as it included aspects other methods did not; designing 
for society and focus on the behavior and social implications as well as considerations about eth-
ics. Using SID, the focus is on what I wish to accomplish and not until this has been defined does 
the design process begin. This is very different from methods previously used during my design 
education. The more common way of designing is by simply defining a problem, often for the 
individual person, and then creating a solution that addresses that particular problem. SID goes 
above and beyond by trying to define the societal and individual outcome, and then creating a solu­
tion that addresses both aspects. Furthermore, SID presents the designer with a framework that 
guides ethically sound decisions by exploring and anticipating how the design will affect the world. 
The clear framework of the SID method helped guide me towards the most suitable concept for 
my particularly defined problem. Had I used a more conventional method for the design process, I 
might not have considered the social impact of the design nor created a design that would be truly 
novel to the domain. The systematic and action-oriented method is very applicable when designing 
ethically sound interventions for the society.   
 
8.4 GENERAL REFLECTIONS
==PAGE:117==
Page 103 of 127 
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
Chapter 9
DISCUSSION, LIMITATIONS 
& FURTHER WORK
==PAGE:120==
Page 106 of 127
Chapter 9 | Discussion, Limitations & Further Work
This chapter will discuss the results, present limitations and propose further work. Section 9.2.1 
will discuss the results in relation to literature, while section 9.2.2 will present the contributions 
and section 9.2.3 will present the implications of the concept. Section 9.3 will then go into detail 
with the limitations of the concept, while section 9.4 will discuss how to improve the concept 
through further work.  
9.1 INTRODUCTION
9.2 DISCUSSION
9.2.1 DAIVA
This section will focus on discussing concept in relation to theory and interviews, as well as the 
validity of the concept. 
9.2.1.1 LITERATURE AND INTERVIEWS 
While gathering knowledge through literature and research it became apparent that there was 
a want for GPS tracking and in general a wearable device to keep track of the users. The final 
concept does not include these elements in the design, although potential users expressed a wish 
for tracking. I decided not to include this aspect to the design in order to focus on helping the 
caretakers as well as the people with mild cognitive impairment. I believed that the concept would 
bring more value to all if it was placed at home. Although the concept has a more direct influence 
on the caretakers when it is place in home and can be used by them as well, might the indirect 
effect a wearable concept would have had not have helped the caretakers too? By having a wear­
able concept, the caretakers would feel at ease and the concept might be able to keep most of the 
functionalities. 
I stand by my decision, but it is worth considering if two concepts should be introduced – one 
stationary and one wearable. Having a stationary concept does not exclude the possibility of a 
wearable. This way, each case could consider what would give their family most value; a stationary, 
a portable or both. After all, having a mother who wanders off every few hours differs greatly 
from a father that prefers to stay inside all day. 
9.2.1.2 ETHICS 
In chapter 2 ethical guidelines were found for this specific project; the concept was to include ethi­
cal considerations, the method SID was to be used as the design process, and elements of descrip­
tive and normative ethics was to be considered during the design process. Using the SID method 
allowed certain ethical considerations to be included without conscious thought – it encourages 
the use of descriptive ethics by asking the designer to create an understanding of the current and 
future context thereby defining what is ‘best’ for the users. Furthermore, it asks the designer to 
consider what social outcome is wanted and evaluating the design based on that goal. As a result, 
it became easy to include considerations about the culture and the well-being of the users in the 
final design, combining descriptive ethics with right ethics and rule-utilitarianism. However, the 
ethical considerations found in chapter 2 still had to be included as well. This was simply done by 
==PAGE:121==
Page 107 of 127 
addressing each consideration in relation to the goal, to the user and to the domain. While doing 
this, it became apparent that addressing the dilemmas between different con-siderations, e.g. safety 
and autonomy, was impossible for me as a designer as each dementia case is so inherently different. 
Here the ethical theory of prima facie duties came into consideration. I decided that it was not 
ethical to let me, the designer, make the choice of what ethical considera-tion were most import­
ant – what element was the actual duty and what was prima facie – or to treat all cases as similar, 
and I therefore chose to let the users decide. By allowing the users to make the choice, they are 
treated with dignity and respect, and their autonomy is respected. However, the people with mild 
cognitive impairment are often not in any condition to make the choice alone. Therefore, the set-
up of the app encourages an open conversation between the caretakers and the people with mild 
cognitive impairment to truly ensure a complete understanding and a product that accommodate 
the individual needs of the user. 
9.2.1.2.1 CONFLICTS 
Three important possible conflicts became apparent when including the ethical considerations 
into the design – human contact, infantilization and fairness. 
The concept of human contact is supposed to encourage human contact by making it easier to 
connect with friends and family. However, by making the lives easier and more independent might 
I not be removing social contact with the social workers and the caretakers? What if the concept 
ends up reducing the amount of human contact the people with mild cognitive impairment receive 
throughout the day? By ensuring that the users have more freedom and independence, and thereby 
less need of social workers and family members, I might instead increase loneliness. This conflict 
should be addressed with each case before the concept is introduced to their lives – should the 
social workers still drop by to ensure social contact, or can family members and friends ensure that 
the user does not become lonely? These are questions that should be addressed before implemen­
tation by either family members or social workers for each case. 
While defining the ethical consideration in chapter 2, I mentioned that infantilization was con­
sidered unethical as it went against the right to see the world as real, and that it would not be 
con-sidered when creating the concept. However, when talking with experts and caretakers in 
chapter 3,5 and 7 it became apparent that they believed it would create value if the user were to 
sympathize with and befriend the intervention. This conflict is difficult to address as the human­
ization of technology is increasing in daily life yet still it goes against a human right. The concept 
does not address this ethical consideration directly, but as the wanted human-artefact relationship 
has been described as that of a long-term couple, I believe I have indirectly begun humanizing the 
intervention. 
Lastly, the concept of fairness addresses the issue of diversity among people. As the data used for 
the algorithm is not based on data gathered from people with dementia, the concept might not 
be truly fair. To make the concept fair governmental data concerning dementia should be put into 
the algorithm to ensure the concept understands who it is dealing with and does not act based 
on wrong data – acting based on wrong data can cause stigmatization, a problem this concept is 
working hard against.  
==PAGE:122==
Page 108 of 127
Chapter 9 | Discussion, Limitations & Further Work
9.2.1.3 VALIDATION 
To truly evaluate the validity of the concept, it should be evaluated based on the fulfillment of the 
project aim, the statement and the opinion of potential users. During the validation presented in 
chapter 7 it became apparent that the users liked the design and saw great value in it. Furthermore, 
it was found that four out of four test subjects believed the concept would induce the wanted so­
cial implications and changes in behavior stated in the statement with had a success rate of 92.5%. 
Thus, the statement and the opinion of the potential users have been validated enough to warrant 
further development and testing on the concept. 
The project aim was to create an ethically sound concept for the interaction between people with 
mild cognitive impairment and AI voice-assistance devices. The final concept allows people with 
mild cognitive impairment to use an AI assistive device to help make their lives easier and to im­
prove life quality after having been diagnosed with dementia. This concept therefore fulfills the 
project aim to the degree of having created the interaction between eldercare and AI voice-assis­
tive devices. However, verifying whether the concept is ethically sound is more difficult. As the 
concept includes different ethical considerations and it is believed it will induce the wanted behav­
ior it seems the concept is ethically sound. But as ethics is highly dependent on cultural aspects, see 
section 2.2.1, whether the concept is ethically sound in Denmark and in China might vary greatly. 
I will venture to say that the concept is ethically sound in Denmark but should be tested in other 
countries before considering implementing it anywhere else than Denmark. Even though I am 
venturing to call the concept ethically sound in Denmark, the concept should be tested by a greater 
variety of possible users and experts, to confirm this assumption as well. 
Although the concept needs further validation, I speculate that the concept is considered success­
ful enough to begin further high-fidelity testing and consider moving this concept from experi­
mental and concept based to begin treating it as a future product with the possibility of adding 
continued value to people with mild cognitive impairment and to become a game changing tech­
nology on the market. 
9.2.2 CONTRIBUTIONS 
Dementia is a progressive and disruptive disease causing continued cognitive impairment. As a 
result, people often feel bad, forgets simple tasks and rely more on others. By creating a solution 
to people with mild cognitive impairment as a result of dementia different aspects of their lives 
can be improved. I speculated that the DAIVA concept can help make daily life easier by helping to 
create structure, help with reminders and taking over smaller tasks. I have aimed at adding quality 
to the lives of people with mild cognitive impairment, as well as tried to decrease the mental toll 
on caretakers in the beginning of the dementia process. I believe DAIVA can add value and make 
a difference in their lives and increase their sense of independence and dignity as well as increase 
quality of life. 
Furthermore, the concept is believed to contribute to the creation of similar solutions within 
dif-ferent settings, e.g. at retirement homes, for kids, etc. The concept can be expanded to include 
other settings and user cases if more research is conducted. 
==PAGE:123==
Page 109 of 127 
9.2.3 IMPLICATIONS OF THE PROJECT 
Although this thesis does not present a framework or a general way of conducting ethical design, a 
possible implication of the project is the possibility of using this thesis as a case to help create such 
a framework. There is no current framework or methodology that explicitly encourages actively 
finding ethical considerations through research to include in the design. I therefore speculate that 
a framework could be created by becoming inspired by this thesis and other projects like it. Fur­
thermore, I speculate that the way this thesis has been conducted might help guide other designers 
who wish to include ethical consideration in their design. 
Another implication is the possibility of others using the SID method to be inspired or gather 
inspiration from the way I have conducted the design work. As this method is rather new, it might 
help upcoming social designers in doubt about specific steps. 
Furthermore, During the validation of the concept it was expressed that the concept would be 
valuable within different target groups as well, e.g. children and retirement homes, but as the future 
context does not include these target groups a new design process would have to be initiated to 
adapt the concept to ensure the concept is ethically sound and directed towards these very differ­
ent people.  Although the concept is limited to the domain, this insight creates new opportunities 
to expand the market and create an impact in more lives. This concept can act as the starting point 
in improving life quality for many vulnerable social groups and truly impact their daily lives. 
9.2.3.1 IMPLICATIONS FOR HANSONG TECHNOLOGY LTD.
Based on the results of the thesis, I believe Hansong Technology Ltd. has a considerable mar­
ket opportunity and that this concept can help them grasp that opportunity. This thesis present 
Hansong Technology Ltd. with a clear goal, a vision, to follow. The vision is a result of accumu­
lated literature, research and synthesizing of this knowledge, leading to an ethically sound inter­
action-driven AI voice-assistive device. Furthermore, a deeper understanding of the domain and 
future world. Based on the vision Hansong Technology Ltd. has a clear guideline when conducting 
fur-ther improvements to the concept. Not only will the vision allow them to keep their eyes on 
the goal, the interaction and product qualities will help the company to create the wanted interac­
tion. I also believe that Hansong Technology Ltd. has an opportunity in utilizing the SID method 
in the future. This thesis explains how the process was done, and thereby allowing them to utilize 
the method in the future for other designs. 
 
==PAGE:124==
Page 110 of 127
Chapter 9 | Discussion, Limitations & Further Work
The limitations of the project will be gone through in this section. 
9.3.1 CULTURAL DIFFERENCES 
Most of the scientific content presented throughout the report is based on international literature 
and research. Furthermore, expert knowledge about technology and AI is also international. The 
expert knowledge and user data gathered in chapter 5 has been retrieved from Denmark, making 
the research overall culturally mixed. As cultures differ greatly the international insights might be 
less accurate in the cultural eyes of Denmark, e.g. surveillance in China is more accepted than in 
Denmark. In the same line of thought, although the concept was well received during validation 
it is limited to Danish demography and users from other countries might have a very different 
opinion about the usability of the concept. It is therefore possible that the concept would have 
turned out differently has it been based entirely on international research and literature, and fur-
ther testing should be conducted to confirm the validity of the concept in other cultures. 
9.3.2 PLACEMENT AND USE
The concept has been created as a stationary home-based product, meaning it is limited to at 
home use. This means that the concept cannot help keeping track of or guide the users should 
they wander off. It becomes impossible to help the users if they are not in home. When defining 
the domain, I chose to focus on use in own home to create a solution that would benefit the entire 
household, not just the people with mild cognitive impairment, and include multiple symp-toms. 
Creating a portable device would have altered the functionalities of the concept, as well as the do­
main. This limitation is therefore a result of my choices but could be overcome by creating a por­
table device for the people with mild cognitive impairment to carry around with them at all times.
Although the concept has been created for at home use, a limitation is found in choosing the 
placement of the concept. The concept has a limited microphone range, meaning it cannot regis­
ter commands coming from far away, such as another room or the other end of the house. For the 
concept to work without a hitch the user should be in the same room as the speaker when com­
municating. This limits the usability of the concept. To overcome this limitation, the device can be 
moved but moving the speaker could lead to the user forgetting where it is placed, or accidently 
leaving it in places it does not belong, e.g. the garden. 
Making a portable and a wearable solution that is complimentary could overcome both of these 
limitations.  
9.3.3 INTERACTION 
Interaction with the speaker is based on voice-interaction to simplify the interface and to make 
the interaction as easy and comfortable as possible for people with mild cognitive impairment. As 
many different types of dementia exists, see chapter 4, a limitation occurs; if the disease has af­
fected the communication center significantly to the degree where all vocal communication is lost, 
it becomes close to impossible to interact with the concept. The device can still add value to their 
lives by allowing the caretakers to put on music, etc. but it limits the possibility of interaction and 
affects the intended use. The learning adaptability of the algorithm makes it possible to use the 
device with little language, but if no language is had interaction is close to impossible. 
9.3 LIMITATIONS 
==PAGE:125==
Page 111 of 127 
Another limitation is interacting with the app. Not all elderly can use and interacts with apps, and 
this could become an issue if the main caretaker is an elderly partner. Some might need help to use 
the app and thereby utilize the device to the full extend. 
9.3.4 VALIDATION OF THE CONCEPT 
While validating the concept it became apparent that not enough people were asked to help val­
idate the concept, and diversity was lacking with the test subjects. To create a more accurate idea 
about the validity and success of the concept experts and people with mild cognitive impairment 
should be included in the validation process as well. Furthermore, testing the concept was done 
on a low-fidelity stage without user testing in situ. This limits the true understanding of how the 
concept would function in the daily lives of caretakers and people with mild cognitive impairment. 
Addressing this limitation is the obvious next step in improving and enhancing the concept. It 
was also found that since the social implications are long term it is not possible to truly evaluate 
whether they will be reached with a narrative-based study – a pilot study is needed. 
9.4 FURTHER WORK
Although the concept seemed to be well reviewed by the test subjects in chapter 7, I acknowledge 
that the concept is only the preliminary step in developing a product to help people with mild cog­
nitive impairment and improve their quality of life. The concept needs further development to be­
come the best version of itself and to ensure that it continues to improve and makes a difference 
in the lives of people with mild cognitive impairment. In the following I will provide suggestions 
for overcoming the shortcomings and limitations of the concept. The sections have been written 
in the order that each action is suggested – starting with perfecting the concept and ending with 
expanding the possibilities.  
9.4.1 FURTHER RESEARCH 
To overcome the cultural differences, I suggest the first step in enhancing the concept is to fur-ther 
research the context and future world. I suggest asking more experts and caretakers about their 
understanding of living with mild cognitive impairment and even include interviews with people 
just diagnosed with dementia. I further suggest that to gather a deeper understanding about the 
situation, observations should be made in the homes of people with mild cognitive impairment. 
Including this research would help make the concept more relatable and help ensure the cultural 
differences have been overcome. It might also create an understanding of how the concept could 
help people with severe damage to their communication center, without having to exclude them 
as possible users. 
==PAGE:126==
Page 112 of 127
Chapter 9 | Discussion, Limitations & Further Work
9.4.2 MINOR ALTERATIONS 
I suggest that the wake word of the speaker be altered to something the individual can remember. 
Introducing a new name to someone who are losing memory does not make sense and instead it 
would be better to allow them to choose a name from their past, e.g. a pet. Furthermore, I suggest 
adding color to the button on top of the concept, to make it very clear where the user should push 
to turn off the reminders. 
9.4.3 TEST AND VALIDATION 
Further test and validation of the concept is needed. To create a more complete understanding of 
how the concept helps and improves the daily lives of caretakers and people with mild cognitive 
impairment, the concept should be tested in situ and tested on a variety of stakeholders; care­
takers, experts and people with mild cognitive impairment. I therefore suggest that a pilot study 
is conducted with a functional speaker and app, to allow the users to test the intervention over a 
short period of time with a minimum of 24 hours. This will give valuable feedback about the in­
teraction with the concept and help create a better understanding of what changes must be made 
before full implementation. 
9.4.4 COLLABORATIVE DEVICES 
To create a better user experience, it is worth experimenting with collaborative devices. I suggest 
experimenting with small speakers in different rooms of the house to allow wider use of the in­
tervention. This could allow the user to hear reminders even when they are in different rooms. 
Furthermore, the concept opens up for the opportunity to incorporate a smaller, wearable device 
to the overall system that could track location and biometric measurements. The collaboration 
between the at home product and the wearable will help ensure the safety of the person with mild 
cognitive impairment. 
9.4.5 INCREASING THE MARKET
During the validation it was mentioned that the concept was applicable to different target groups 
and domains, but further work is needed before increasing the market. As this concept has been 
particularly created for a specific target group and domain, the design process will have to be 
gone through again for each new market. However, as this intervention might add value to other 
vulnerable target groups it would be worth talking to different experts and potential users within 
the field. I suggest confirming the need within these alternate markets before embarking on full 
concept creation. 
==PAGE:127==
Page 113 of 127 
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
Chapter 10
CONCLUSION
==PAGE:130==
Page 116 of 127
Chapter 10 | Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to create an ethically sound AI voice-assistance concept for eldercare, 
specifically people with mild cognitive impairment caused by dementia. This was done by using 
the Social Implication Design method while including thoughts on ethics, technology, AI and de­
mentia. In the following the results will be presented more in detail. 
As the ethical implications of design has become an increasing responsibility for the designer, this 
thesis has focused on including ethical considerations into the design. It was found that ethics is 
always included through the designers own moral code but is rarely done so consciously. To over­
come this, I set out to define what ethical theories to consider during the design work and how to 
include them. It was found that descriptive ethics, the moral code of the culture, was extremely 
important to include if the design should be considered ethically sound and for the design to be 
successful on the market. Furthermore, it was found that for this specific project rights ethics, 
rule-utilitarianism and prima facie duties should be included into the design. The Social Impli­
cation Design method was chosen to help include these theories, as the method encourages un­
derstanding of the culture where the concept should be implemented.  However, I found that no 
method explained what specific ethical considerations to consider during the design process, and 
therefore embarked on further exploring this for implementation of technology, AI and eldercare. 
Through research I found that the most important ethical considerations to include were fairness, 
big data, privacy, informed consent, confidentiality, safety, autonomy, independence, human con­
tact, obtrusiveness and stigmatization. Furthermore, the ethical dilemmas of privacy vs. safety, 
autonomy vs- safety and informed consent vs. safety must be addressed. 
To gather more practical information about AI and ethical considerations expert interviews were 
conducted with employees within four different manufacturing companies; Hansong Technology 
Ltd., iFlyTek Healthcare, CT Asia Robotics Co. Ltd. and Amazon.com Inc. It was found that AI is 
already embedded in our daily lives, and that in the extend of this will only increase. While creating 
AI technology for eldercare, these experts all agreed that the most important aspects of design 
for eldercare was ensuring privacy, consent and creating a simple and easy to use interven-tion. 
Furthermore, focus was put on making the intervention adaptable to the specific user needs. 
As eldercare covers many different subgroups of people the scope was limited to focus on people 
with mild cognitive impairment. Within this field it was found that the current assistive technology 
rarely addresses more than one symptom and are often targeted only the sufferer of mild cogni­
tive impairment. To gather more detailed information about the problems faced within the field 
of mild cognitive impairment experts and caretakers were interviewed. It was found memory loss 
and functional blindness where the main problems of mild cognitive important, causing a lot of 
frustration, confusion and unease for the entire household, and a need for structure and support 
in daily life was expressed. It became apparent that the social culture around mild cognitive impair­
ment is laced with fear and stigmatization, and a need for helpful technology can be seen. 
Combining these findings created the basis of the future context that the final design solution 
should be presented within. By utilizing the Social Implication Design method, a clear vision was 
defined with the aim of the concept being to increase the life quality of people with mild cogni-tive 
impairment, decreasing the health risk of being a caretaker and better utilization of healthcare re­
sources by helping them making daily life easier by utilization of assistive technology. The concept, 
an AI voice-assistance speaker for at home use with an accompanying app, was created based on 
the vision and the ethical considerations. To ensure the concept fulfilled the vision it was validated 
==PAGE:131==
Page 117 of 127 
based on the social implications and the design itself by conducting a narrative-based study and 
a functional user testing. From the validation with potential users it was found that the not only 
does the concept induce the wanted change in behavior and social implications, but the design was 
also considered to add value to both people with mild cognitive impairment and caretakers. All 
test subjects found the concept to have great potential and all expressed how this concept would 
have made their lives easier had it been available when they be-gan taking care of their relatives. 
Overall, the concept was well received and can be considered ethically sound. It creates the oppor­
tunity for people within eldercare, specifically with mild cognitive impairment, to interact without 
difficulty with an AI voice-assistance device. Furthermore, the concept is a truly novel solution 
to the market and further work should be conducted to decide whether the concept should be 
introduced to the market.  
==PAGE:132==
==PAGE:133==
REFERENCES
==PAGE:134==
Page 120 of 127
References
 Adams, R. M. (1999). Finite and infinite goods: a framework for ethics. Oxford University Press. 
Aldarwish, L. (2018). Man’s Hand in Shallow Focus and Grayscale Photography. Retrieved May 
23, 2019, from https://www.pexels.com/photo/man-s-hand-in-shallow-focus-and-grayscale-
photography-167964/
Andrejevic, M. (2014). The big data divide. International Journal of Communication, 8(1), 
1673–1689.
Annas, J. (1993). The Morality of Happiness. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Apichodilok, P. (2019). Person Playing Brown Ukulele. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://
www.pexels.com/photo/acoustic-adult-close-up-fun-346726/
Bang, J., Spina, S., & Miller, B. L. (2015). Frontotemporal dementia. The Lancet, 386(10004), 
1672–1682. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00461-4
Bentham, J. (1781). An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. Retrieved from 
https://econpapers.repec.org/bookchap/hayhetboo/bentham1781.htm
Birk-Olsen, M. (2008). De pårørendes behov - når demensen flytter ind. (C. for A. S. og Te­
knologivurdering, Ed.). Servicestyrelsen.
Bogner, A., Littig, B., & Menz, W. (2009). Interviewing Experts. Interviewing Experts. London: 
Palgrave MacMilllan.
Bostrom, N., & Yudkowsky, E. (2014). The Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. In K. Frankish & 
W. M. Ramsey (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Artificial Intelligence (pp. 316–334). Cam­
bridge University Press.
Bradley, F. H. (1927). Ethical Studies (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Carr, D. (1988). The Cardinal Virtues and Plato’s Moral Psychology. The Philosophical Quarterly, 
38(151), 186. https://doi.org/10.2307/2219923
Carvalho, E. (2019). Woman Standing Near Yellow-petaled Flower. Retrieved May 23, 2019, 
from https://www.pexels.com/photo/woman-standing-near-yellow-petaled-flower-2050994/
Cash, M. (2003). Assistive technology and people with dementia. Reviews in Clinical Gerontolo­
gy, 13(4), 313–319. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0959259804001169
Cash, P. J., Hartlev, C. G., & Durazo, C. B. (2017). Behavioural design: A process for integrat­
ing behaviour change and design. Design Studies, 48(September 2018), 96–128. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.destud.2016.10.001
Cessario, R. (1991). The Moral Virtues and Theological Ethics. London: University of 
Notre Dame Press. Retrieved from https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.docu­
ments/35898450/Romanus_Cessario-Moral_Virtues_and_Theological_Ethics-Universi­
ty_of_Notre_Dame_Press_1991.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Ex­
pires=1551436785&Signature=TbnOV9MTi0qU5A5Kyn8w9jQL91o%3D&response
==PAGE:135==
Page 121 of 127 
Cheek, P., Nikpour, L., & Nowlin, H. D. (2005). Aging well with smart technology. Nursing Ad­
ministration Quarterly, 29(4), 329–338.
Ciulla, J. B. (2000). The Working Life: The Promise and Betrayal of Modern Work. Three Rivers 
Press. B
Cordez, T. (2019). People Holding Boxes. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://www.pexels.
com/photo/people-holding-boxes-2346558/
Crawford, K., Miltner, K., & Gray, M. L. (2014). Critiquing Big Data politics, ethics, epistemolo­
gy. International Journal of Communication, 8, 1663–1672.
Cunha, W. (2019). Woman Standing by One Foot and Holding Flare Stick Near Trees. Retrieved 
May 23, 2019, from https://www.pexels.com/photo/woman-standing-by-one-foot-and-holding-
flare-stick-near-trees-1886694/
Danmarks Statistik. (2018). Markant flere ældre i fremtiden. Retrieved March 17, 2019, from 
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyt/NytHtml?cid=26827
Datta, S., & Mullainathan, S. (2014). Behavioral design: A new approach to development policy. 
Review of Income and Wealth, 60(1), 7–35. https://doi.org/10.1111/roiw.12093
Design Council. (2007). Eleven Lessons: managing design in eleven global companies. London. 
Retrieved from www.designcouncil.org.uk
DesignKit. (2018). Expert Interview. Retrieved June 16, 2019, from http://www.designkit.org/
methods/43
Essén, A. (2008). The two facets of electronic care surveillance: An exploration of the views 
of older people who live with monitoring devices. Social Science & Medicine, 67(1), 128–136. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SOCSCIMED.2008.03.005
European Union. (2016). REGULATION (EU) 2016/679 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIA­
MENT AND OF THE COUNCIL. Retrieved from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:02016R0679-20160504&from=EN
Fancycrave.com. (2019). Green and Black Computer Motherboard. Retrieved May 23, 2019, 
from https://www.pexels.com/photo/green-and-black-computer-motherboard-825258/
Fogg, B. J. (2003). Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do. 
Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-55860-643-2.X5000-8
Frederiksen, K. S. (2017). Vascular dementia. Ugeskrift for Laeger, 179(12). Retrieved from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28330543
Friedman, B., Kahn, P. H., & Borning, A. (2002). Value Sensitive Design: Theory and Methods. 
Retrieved from www.ischool.washington.edu/vsd
Fylan, F. (2005). Semi-structured interviewing. In A Handbook of Research Methods for 
Clinical and Health Psychology (pp. 65–76). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Retrieved 
from https://books.google.dk/books?hl=en&lr=&id=kmZ3Yt5pY0YC&oi=fnd&p­
g=PR7&dq=Fylan,+F.,+2005.+Semi-structured+interviewing.+In+A+Handbook+of+Re­
==PAGE:136==
Page 122 of 127
References
search+Methods+for+Clinical+and+Health+Psychology.+Oxford+University+­
Press,+pp.+65–76.&ots=US4hXxFDDE&sig=HZ
Gert, B. (1988). Morality: A New Justification of the Moral Rules. Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/293187
Hämäläinen, N. (2016). Descriptive ethics: What does moral philosophy know about morality? 
Palgrave MacMilllan. https://doi.org/10.1057/978-1-137-58617-9
Hazelwood, S. (2019). Man Sitting on Black Chair Grayscale Photo. Retrieved May 23, 2019, 
from https://www.pexels.com/photo/man-sitting-on-black-chair-grayscale-photo-1999352/
Hekkert, P., & van Dijk, M. (2011). Vision in design: a guidebook for innovators. BIS Publishers. 
Retrieved from https://books.google.dk/books/about/Vision_in_Design.html?id=1Mt4PAAA­
CAAJ&redir_esc=y
Hobbes, T. (1994). Leviathan. (E. Curley, Ed.). Hackett Publishing Company. Retrieved from 
https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=7Sc4p5-ghJcC&oi=fnd&pg=PR3&d­
q=Hobbes,+Thomas, Leviathan,+ed.,+E.+Curley,+(Chicago,+IL:+Hackett+Publishing+­
Company,+1994).&ots=9wDlKqNvaC&sig=CAPGB_MHmbCl6Hg6yn4GvzsMd0c#v=onep­
age&q&f=false
Høgh, P. (2017). Alzheimer’s disease. Ugeskrift for Laeger, 179(12). Retrieved from http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28330540
Horvitz, E. (2016). Artificial intelligence and life in 2030. Stanford University. Retrieved from 
https://ai100.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/ai_100_report_0831fnl.pdf
Ihde, D. (1990). Technology and the Lifeworld: From Garden to Earth. Indiana University Press. 
Retrieved from https://philpapers.org/rec/IHDTAT-3
Intersoft Consulting. (2019). General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Retrieved June 17, 
2019, from https://gdpr-info.eu/
Johannsen, P., Gottrup, H., & Stokholm, J. (2017). Frontotemporal dementia. Ugeskrift for Lae­
ger, 179(12). Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28330541
Kant, I., Wood, A. W., & Schneewind, J. B. (Jerome B. . (2002). Groundwork for the metaphysics 
of morals. Yale University Press. 
Khalil, O. E. M. (1993). Artificial decision-making and artificial ethics: A management concern. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 12(4), 313–321. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01666535
Kovyrina, T. (2019). Girl Sitting on Grass Smelling White Petaled Flower. Retrieved May 23, 
2019, from https://www.pexels.com/photo/girl-sitting-on-grass-smelling-white-petaled-flow­
er-1879288/
Kudina, O., & Verbeek, P. P. (2018). Ethics from Within: Google Glass, the Collingridge Dilem­
ma, and the Mediated Value of Privacy. Science Technology and Human Values, 1–24. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0162243918793711
==PAGE:137==
Page 123 of 127 
Kuhse, H., Schüklenk, U., & Singer, P. (2015). Bioethics: an anthology (Third). Wiley-Black­
well. Retrieved from https://www.wiley.com/en-dk/Bioethics:+An+Anthology,+3rd+Edi­
tion-p-9781118941522
La, H. (2018). Man Sitting on Floor. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://www.pexels.com/
photo/man-sitting-on-floor-1205033/
LaChat, M. R. (1986). Artificial Intelligence and Ethics: An Exercise in the Moral Imagination. 
AI Magazine, 7(2), 70–79. https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v7i2.540
LaFollette, H. (Ed.). (2009). The Oxford Handbook of Practical Ethics (Vol. 1). Oxford Univer­
sity Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199284238.001.0001
Latour, B. (1992). Where Are the Missing Masses? The Sociology of a Few Mundane Artifacts. 
In Wiebe E. Bijker & John Law (Eds.), Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Soci­
otechnical Change (pp. 151–180). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Retrieved from http://www.
bruno-latour.fr/sites/default/files/50-MISSING-MASSES-GB.pdf
Lin, P., Abney, K., & Bekey, G. A. (2012). Robot ethics : the ethical and social implications of 
robotics. MIT Press. Retrieved from https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2616404
Lloyd, P., Hekkert, P., & Van Dijk, M. (2006). Vision in Product Design (ViP): The Warm Bath. 
The Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, 2, 2–27.
Lockton, D., Harrison, D., & Stanton, N. A. (2010a). Design with Intent 101 patterns for in­
fluencing behaviour through design v1.0. Windsor: Equifine: Requisite Variety. Retrieved from 
http://designwithintent.co.uk
Lockton, D., Harrison, D., & Stanton, N. A. (2010b). The Design with Intent Method: A de­
sign tool for influencing user behaviour. Applied Ergonomics, 41(3), 382–392. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apergo.2009.09.001
Løngaard, K., & Hare-Bruun, H. (2017). Dansk Klinisk Kvalitetsdatabase for Demens Årsrap­
port 2017. Retrieved from www.sundhed.dk
Lopes, H. (2018). Men’s White Button-up Dress Shirt. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://
www.pexels.com/photo/men-s-white-button-up-dress-shirt-708440/
MacIntyre, A. (2011). After Virtue (4th ed.). Bloomsbury Academic. 
Manders-Huits, N. (2011). What Values in Design? The Challenge of Incorporating Moral 
Values into Design. Science and Engineering Ethics, 17(2), 271–287. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11948-010-9198-2
Martin, M. W., & Schinzinger, R. (2005). Ethics in engineering. McGraw-Hill. Retrieved from 
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2304916612
Melander-Wikman, A., Jansson, M., Hallberg, J., Mörtberg, C., & Gard, G. (2007). The Light­
house Alarm and Locator trial-A pilot study. Technology and Health Care (Vol. 15). IOS Press. 
Retrieved from http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:501698/FULLTEXT01.pdf
==PAGE:138==
Page 124 of 127
References
Mill, J. S. (1895). Utilitarianism (12th ed.). London: Longmans, Green and Co. Retrieved 
from https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=fxERAAAAYAAJ&oi=fnd&p­
g=PA1&dq=+Mill,+John+Stuart,+%22Utilitarianism,%22+&ots=sR8OWdqaaq&sig=5sx­
WxToiljg6-c13wrxGN3jJcQQ#v=onepage&q=Mill%2C John Stuart%2C %22Utilitarian­
ism%2C%22&f=false
Mittelstadt, B. D., & Floridi, L. (2016). The Ethics of Big Data: Current and Foreseeable Is­
sues in Biomedical Contexts. Science and Engineering Ethics, 22(2), 303–341. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11948-015-9652-2
Moore, G. E. (George E., & Baldwin, T. (1994). Principia ethica. (T. Baldwin, Ed.) (2nd ed.). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from https://www.cambridge.org/au/
academic/subjects/philosophy/philosophy-texts/principia-ethica-2nd-edition?format=P­
B&isbn=9780521448482
National Videnscenter for Demens. (2018). Tal og statistik om demens - Nationalt Videnscenter 
for Demens. Retrieved May 26, 2019, from http://www.videnscenterfordemens.dk/statistik/
Nguyen, B. (2018). Voice AI Will Change How We Interact With Technology. Retrieved March 
16, 2019, from https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2018/09/18/voice-ai-will-
change-how-we-interact-with-technology/#86017de21571
Nielsen, M. A. (2015). Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press. Retrieved 
from http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap1.html
Nilsson, N. J. (1980). Principles of artificial intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
O’Brien, J. T., & Thomas, A. (2015). Vascular dementia. The Lancet, 386(10004), 1698–1706. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00463-8
Pixabay. (2019a). Black and White Laptop Computer on Brown Wooden Desk. Retrieved May 
23, 2019, from https://www.pexels.com/photo/apple-coffee-computer-desk-356056/
Pixabay. (2019b). Full Frame Shot of Text on Wood. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://
www.pexels.com/photo/full-frame-shot-of-text-on-wood-326642/
Pixabay. (2019c). Man Standing Beside Woman on Swing. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://
www.pexels.com/photo/couple-elderly-man-old-34761/
Pixabay. (2019d). Portrait of Young Man. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://www.pexels.
com/photo/portrait-of-young-man-326559/
Prince, M., Wimo, A., Guerchet, M., Ali, G.-C., Wu, Y.-T., Prina, M., … Xia, Z. (2015). World 
Alzheimer Report 2015 The Global Impact of Dementia. Retrieved from www.alz.co.uk/
worldreport2015corrections
Puffendorf, S. (1735). The Whole Duty of Man According to the Law of Nature ... Now Made 
English ... - Samuel Freiherr von Pufendorf, E. (J. Barbeyrac & A. Tooke, Eds.) (5th ed.). Lon­
don. Retrieved from https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=WBJgAAAAcAA­
J&oi=fnd&pg=PA147&dq=pufendorf+duties&ots=2flf9cbRxT&sig=UN1zLqmEF7BQm5k­
exP-NrI5OYkQ#v=onepage&q=pufendorf duties&f=false
==PAGE:139==
Page 125 of 127 
Rand, A., & Branden, N. (1961). The Virtue of Selfishness. Signet. Retrieved from https://the-
eye.eu/public/concen.org/Conspirology/Secret societies/Ayn Rand - The Virtue of Selfishness.
pdf
rawpixel.com. (2018a). People Taking Groupie Near Bridge. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from 
https://www.pexels.com/photo/people-taking-groupie-near-bridge-1353351/
rawpixel.com. (2018b). Person Locking Seat-belt. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://www.
pexels.com/photo/person-locking-seat-belt-1266014/
Reese, H. W., & Fremouw, W. J. (1984). Normal and normative ethics in behavioral sciences. 
American Psychologist, 39(8), 863–876. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.39.8.863
Rie, P. (2018). Silhouette of Broken Boardwalk on Body of Water Under Sunset. Retrieved May 
23, 2019, from https://www.pexels.com/photo/silhouette-of-broken-boardwalk-on-body-of-wa­
ter-under-sunset-204968/
Robinson, L., Brittain, K., Lindsay, S., Jackson, D., & Olivier, P. (2009). Keeping In Touch Every­
day (KITE) project: developing assistive technologies with people with dementia and their carers 
to promote independence. International Psychogeriatric Association. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1041610209008448
Ross, W. D. (1930). The Right and the Good. (P. Stratton-Lake, Ed.). Oxford: Claredon Press 
Oxford. Retrieved from https://spot.colorado.edu/~heathwoo/readings/ross.pdf
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2016). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (Third). 
Pearson. Retrieved from http://thuvien.thanglong.edu.vn:8081/dspace/bitstream/
DHTL_123456789/4010/1/CS503-2.pdf
Sallehi, S. (2018). Person Standing on Top of Rock. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://www.
pexels.com/photo/person-standing-on-top-of-rock-1576937/
Saylor, T. (2019). Black and White Private Property Signage. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from 
https://www.pexels.com/photo/black-and-white-private-property-signage-951375/
Sharkey, A., & Sharkey, N. (2012). Granny and the robots: Ethical issues in robot care for the 
elderly. Ethics and Information Technology, 14(1), 27–40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-010-
9234-6
Shilton, K. (2013). Values Levers: Building Ethics into Design. Science Technology and Human 
Values, 38(3), 374–397. https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243912436985
Sidgwick, H. (2011). The Methods of Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https://
doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139136617
Singer, P. (1986). Applied Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Retrieved from https://phil­
papers.org/rec/SINAE
Slote, M. (2001). Morals from Motives. Oxford University Press. 
Socialstyrelsen. (2019). Hjælpemiddelbasen - Demens - hjælpemidler. Retrieved May 26, 2019, 
from https://hmi-basen.dk/r4x.asp?linktype=654
==PAGE:140==
Page 126 of 127
References
Sorell, T., & Draper, H. (2014). Robot carers, ethics, and older people. Ethics and Information 
Technology, 16(3), 183–195. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-014-9344-7
Stace, W. T. (1938). The Concept of Morals. Ethics, 48(3), 452–454. https://doi.
org/10.1086/290012
Steijn, W. M. P., & Vedder, A. (2015). Privacy under Construction: A Developmental Perspective 
on Privacy Perception. Science Technology and Human Values, 40(4), 615–637. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0162243915571167
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and 
Happiness. Yale University Press.
Thoma-Lürken, T., Bleijlevens, M. H. C., Lexis, M. A. S., de Witte, L. P., & Hamers, J. P. H. 
(2018). Facilitating aging in place: A qualitative study of practical problems preventing people 
with dementia from living at home. Geriatric Nursing, 39(1), 29–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gerinurse.2017.05.003
Tromp, N., & Hekkert, P. (2018). Designing for society : products and services for a better world. 
Bloomsbury Visual Arts. Retrieved from https://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/designing-for-soci­
ety-9781472567987/
Turner, D. W. (2010). Qualitative Interview Design: A Practical Guide for Novice Investigators. 
The Qualitative Report, 15(3), 854–760. Retrieved from http://www.nova.edu/ssss/QR/QR15-
3/qid.pdf
Valdez-Martinez, E., Turnbull, B., Garduño-Espinosa, J., & Porter, J. D. H. (2006). Descriptive 
ethics: A qualitative study of local research ethics committees in Mexico. Developing World Bio­
ethics, 6(2), 95–105. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-8847.2006.00144.x
Van de Poel, I., & Verbeek, P.-P. (2006). Ethics and Engineering Design. Science, Technology, & 
Human Values, 31(3), 223–236. https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243905285838
Van Zyl, L. (2014). Right action and the targets of virtue. In S. Van Hooft, N. Athanassou­
lis, J. Kawall, J. Oakley, N. Saunders, & L. Van Zyl (Eds.), The Handbook of Virtue Ethics 
(pp. 118–129). Routledge. Retrieved from https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.docu­
ments/31897033/ACU-HandbookVirtueEthics-10-vanZyl_%281%29.pdf?AWSAccessKey­
Id=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1551437019&Signature=RzWCn87SOeAfc­
J8ZGXagNo4eqwo%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3B filename%3DRig
Vann Jones, S. A., & O’Brien, J. T. (2014). The prevalence and incidence of dementia with Lewy 
bodies: a systematic review of population and clinical studies. Psychological Medicine, 44(4), 
673–683. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291713000494
Verbeek, P.-P. (2005). What Things Do: Philosophical Reflections on Technology, Agency, and 
Design. Pennsylvania State University Press.
Verbeek, P.-P. (2006). Materializing Morality. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 31(3), 
361–380. https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243905285847
==PAGE:141==
Page 127 of 127 
Verbeek, P.-P. (2011). Moralizing technology: understanding and designing the morality of things. 
University of Chicago Press.
Verbeek, P.-P. (2017). Designing the Morality of Things: The Ethics of Behavior-Guiding 
Technology. In J. Van den Hoven, S. Miller, & T. Pogge (Eds.), Designing in Ethics (pp. 78–94). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Voortman, S. (2018). Two White Concrete Statues Covered by Dust. Retrieved May 23, 2019, 
from https://www.pexels.com/photo/abstract-angelic-art-blast-566641/
Walker, Z., Possin, K. L., Boeve, B. F., & Aarsland, D. (2015). Lewy body dementias. The Lancet, 
386(10004), 1683–1697. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00462-6
Webb, S. (2018). Two Gray Bullet Security Cameras. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://www.
pexels.com/photo/equipment-pavement-security-security-camera-430208/
Wu, X., Zhu, X., Wu, G.-Q., & Ding, W. (2013). Data Mining with Big Data. IEEE Transactions 
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 26(1), 97–107. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2013.109
Zomer, M. (2019). Person Holding a Stress Ball. Retrieved May 23, 2019, from https://www.
pexels.com/photo/action-adult-affection-eldery-339620/
Zwijsen, S. A., Niemeijer, A. R., & Hertogh, C. M. P. M. (2011). Ethics of using assistive technol­
ogy in the care for community-dwelling elderly people: An overview of the literature. Aging and 
Mental Health, 15(4), 419–427. https://doi.org/10.1080/13607863.2010.543662
