==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Optimizing Leveraged Asset Allocation
Strategies
Sveinn Heiðar Kristjánsson (s171947)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The negative effects leveraging can have on investments have become very clear in the
past, the most notable example of such effects is probably the infamous 2007-2009
financial crisis. Financial institutions all over the world, especially banks steadily
adopted increased leverage in the years of economic growth prior to the crash. Causing
them to have an over-leveraged position at the time of the crash, contributing to the
extreme events in 2008 that ended in the collapse of some of these companies, that
triggered a global financial crisis. However, leveraging can increase the overall returns
of investments and it was undoubtedly the excessive amount of leverage that pushed
many of these financial institutions over the edge.
This thesis considers the effects leveraging can have on investments. This is at-
tempted by suggesting an investment strategy that allocates assets to a portfolio,
with the possibility of borrowing capital for the asset allocation. The strategy is im-
plemented as a stochastic programming model that considers CVaR constraints on
the portfolio’s risk, it can also reconsider the asset allocation and credit position as
time passes. The stochastic programming model relies on scenarios and the thesis
presents two different scenario generation methods, a time-varying bootstrapping sce-
nario generation method and a stationary Monte Carlo method using a multivariate
normal distribution, which showed a much better out-of-sample performance. The
strategy was backtested over a time period from mid-2007 to February 2019 on equity
indices from Fama/French and euro bond indices from Bloomberg, by considering the
debt adjusted portfolio value for several different amounts of leverage. The analysis
considered the performance of the strategy for various amounts of leverage and com-
pared them to a 1/N benchmark and a non-leveraged strategy. This included various
risk and deviation measures as well as risk-adjusted return measures. The numerical
results showed that leveraging increases the risk in the investment but that conserva-
tive amounts of leveraging can sometimes add value to an investment strategy and
increase the risk-adjusted return.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at The Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computa-
tion. This thesis was conducted from the 1st of February to the 1st of July 2019 and
it corresponds to 30 ECTS points. It has been carried out under the supervision of
Associate Professor Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen.
Kongens Lyngby, June 30, 2019
Sveinn Heiðar Kristjánsson (s171947)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express gratitude to my supervisor Associate Professor Kourosh Mar-
jani Rasmussen for introducing me to the project when I approached him for a Masters
project, after an excellent course he taught on the subject. I also thank him for his
willingness to assist with the implementation of the strategy, constructive criticisms
and his quick response to answer any questions I had throughout the project.
I would like to thank Þórdís Kristjánsdóttir for proofreading my thesis and for
coming with great suggestions for improvements.
Lastly, I would like to thank my parents, Sigríður Hjörleifsdóttir, PhD and Kristján
G. Sveinsson, for all their emotional support throughout my studies, their encourage-
ment to go after what I aspire and to aim high. For being great role models in the
fields of science and engineering. I thank them for all their help and guidance in the
past.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Leveraging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Asset Allocation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Modern Portfolio Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Stochastic Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methods
9
2.1
Models and Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Performance Measures and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Data and Implementation
29
3.1
Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Fixed Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Interest Rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
EUR/USD Exchange Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5
The Inception of the Euro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Analysis
33
4.1
Bootstrapping v Multivariate Normal Monte Carlo . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Comparing Leverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Performance Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Quantiles and Normality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Conclusion
51
5.1
Future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
A Appendix
53
A.1 Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2 Python Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.3 GAMS Scripts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
A.4 R Scripts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Bibliography
125
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
It is common for people to be cautious towards leveraged investments and perhaps
rightfully so as such ventures can be dangerous, as has become evident in previous
years, most notably in the crash of 2008.
Leveraging an investment does usually
increase the risk, however, it can also be an effective tool to diversify a portfolio and
to increase returns, especially at times where markets don’t experience large losses.
The merit of the concept, maybe isn’t so binary and may pose questions such as,
”can leveraging be used in a smart way to add value?” or ”is it possible to get higher
risk-adjusted returns with leveraging?” and even still, ”is it beneficial in the long run
to have leverage in the portfolio?”. These questions motivate the topic of the thesis
but before attempting to answer them it is important to consider the concepts that
characterise the problem and provide some background on the tools used to resolve
them.
1.1
Risk
Financial risks can be defined as the degree of uncertainty of future losses and the
process of identifying, analysing and mitigating these is known as risk management.
There are various types of financial risks and methods of measuring them, but the
three main risk categories are, credit risk, market risk and operational risk. The risk
type focused on and measured in this thesis is market risk, which is the uncertainty
and possibility of losses in positions in assets due to market movements [Zangari 1996].
Some attention will also be devoted to the investor’s risk of defaulting on obligations,
in other words, the risk that the individual won’t be able to make payments on
the loan. This would normally be classified as credit risk but in most cases, that
refers to the risk of an investor’s counterparty defaulting. With regard to market
risk, R. Tyrrell Rockafellar 2007 and Sarykalin et al. 2008 have argued that there
are two schools in viewing this risk, risk measures and deviation risk measures (or
measures of deviation). The former assigns a single value to the possible outcome
of the investment strategy, thus measuring the risk of loss. Such measures usually
quantify the downside risk, that is the risk of returns being under what is expected.
This could, for instance, be in terms of percentiles of the loss distribution like value-at-
risk introduced in section 2.1.2. Deviation measures, as the name suggests, estimate
inconsistency of returns to some central tendency or equivalently, it estimates the
wideness of the strategy’s return distribution.
These measures are perhaps more
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
commonly known with measures such as standard deviation for volatility. This may
be a bit confusing but a very simple example of a risk measure and deviation measure
could respectively be, ”the strategy will not (with some confidence) lose more than
100 euros tomorrow” and ”the daily standard deviation of the strategy is 50 euros”.
Financial institutions and investors have adopted a myriad of different measures to
try to quantify the risk and uncertainty of a strategy, each of these different measures
has their own advantages and limitations as there is no perfect way to measure risk
(yet). This may stem from the fact that different investors have a different appetite
for risk. The concepts risk averse and risk neutral describe polar opposites of two
investors, the former, an investor who always prefers lower risk when faced with two
strategies with equal return and the latter, someone that does not care about risk
and only seeks a higher return. There also exist investors that position themselves
somewhere between those opposites. By that, it can be maintained that risk, much
like beauty is in the eye of the beholder.
1.2
Leveraging
Leveraging investments is simply the act of using borrowed capital to fund an invest-
ment strategy with the hope it will increase the end return. However, this approach
will typically increase the risk associated with the investment. There usually exists a
positive relationship between the amount of leverage and riskiness, meaning the more
leverage one takes on, the higher the associated risk. That increased risk is not only
in terms of market risk but also in terms of the risk of default, which is introduced
when a leveraged position is adopted. A leveraged investment strategy will have a
greater risk in terms of the downside compared to a non-leveraged strategy due to
the increased exposure. However, the deviation risk will also increase when the strat-
egy is adjusted for debt, that is when the outstanding debt is subtracted from the
current market value of the investment. This will usually materialise in high spikes
in adjusted value, either up or down. Extreme examples of the latter may drive the
investor into default, which gives rise to the concept of the probability of default
and is discussed later in the section. Leverage (and increased leverage) might as a
consequence affect the distribution of returns. The amount of leverage taken on by
an investor can be measured by a so-called leverage factor. It compares the total
capital invested, to the investors own capital or in mathematical terms, the ratio of
equity and debt to equity (1.1). This means that a portfolio with a leverage factor of
3 has borrowed 200% of the initial budget to invest.
LF = equity + debt
equity
≡
total invested capital
investor′s own investment
(1.1)
Despite the increased risk, a leveraged investment strategy can be favourable for
an investor, especially in a longer investment period. Such a strategy can thus be
especially desirable for younger investors as Ayres and Nalebuff 2008 argue. This
essentially appears in a young investor’s ability to recover from large losses in the
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Leveraging
3
long run. Clearly, some years give greater returns than others and in some years an
investor might experience huge losses such as in 2008. So, it would have been very
unfavourable to have a relatively large position in 2008 but a relatively small position
in 2005 or other years of a great economic upturn. Thus an increased exposure early
on would help diversify the total exposure over time and as modern portfolio theory
asserts, diversification reduces risk, the old saying of not having all of your eggs in the
same basket. In a sense, a leveraged strategy can diversify risk over time. because
returns across years are less correlated than returns across assets [Ayres and Nalebuff
2008] and therefore exposure should be diversified over time as well. Another way
to look at this strategy is that it basically takes advantage of the market’s ability to
make massive gains in a long time period. But most young investors don’t have much
money to invest and moderate leverage early on could potentially give rise to greater
returns in the long run, as on average markets have beat interest rates [Ayres and
Nalebuff 2008].
Adding leverage essentially gears returns, both positive and negative and should
be adopted with caution. Since excessive leverage can be lethal as was so evident in
the 2007-2009 financial crisis when large and steady banks went bankrupt seemingly
overnight, in part because of excessive leverage [FCIC et al. 2011]. As hinted at before,
increased leverage will increase the investor’s probability of default or equivalently,
increase the likelihood an investor won’t be able to make the scheduled repayments
on the loan in some time horizon, normally one year. This mainly stems from the
geared returns, increased leverage will clearly increase the gearing and as mentioned,
a relatively conservative leverage factor of 3 will have 2-to-1 gearing on returns and
could thus magnify gains or losses by 200%. By that, it is evident that greater gearing
will increase this magnification steadily and hence, increase the probability of default.
This is illustrated in figure 1.1 where the probabilities of default for different leverage
factors have been computed and plotted, using a data set of market returns of equity
and bond indices from 1998-2019 (the data set is further introduced in chapter 3).
This is implemented as follows, the indices are all assigned equal weights in 1998 and
then allowed to accumulate returns over the whole period. Each year’s cumulative
returns are then assessed independently and from those, it is determined at which
leverage factors the strategy defaults in each year, these consequently give rise to the
one-year probability of default over the whole period.
It is evident from figure 1.1 that an increased leveraged position increases the
default rates and by that measure, the probability of default. According to the figure,
defaults start at a leverage factor of 5 with a probability of default of approximately
5%. Although the data shows 0% probability of default for values 1 to 4, these could
have a higher probability than 0 out-of-sample, apart from the factor of one, which by
definition will have zero probability of default, as there is no leverage. The strategy
with factors of 2 to 4 can be assumed to have a conservative annual probability
of default as figure 1.1 shows a cumulative distribution function.
After that, the
probability of default steadily rises and a leverage factor of 26 suggests that an investor
is almost certain to default in one year, with a probability of default of approximately
92% and a leverage factor of 86 has a 100% default probability. It is clear that an
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
012345
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Leverage Factor
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%
60%
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
Probability of Default
Figure 1.1: Probability of default for different leverage factors.
investor can take on too much leverage but there could be some conservative amount
that proves favourable. Prompting the old saying from toxicology, ”it is the dose that
makes the poison”?.
1.3
Asset Allocation
The question then arises, how should the investor allocate the available capital to
achieve as good returns as possible while keeping the risk at bay, and when should
the portfolio be leveraged and by how much. The concept of asset allocation focuses
precisely on this. Asset allocation is an investment strategy that aims to balance
the risk and reward by considering multiple assets and asset classes, it adjusts the
exposure in each asset to achieve a portfolio of the assets that corresponds to the
investor’s appetite for risk and reward. Traditionally this is attempted by combining
equities or equity funds for growth and some kind of fixed income assets such as bonds
or similar funds for risk control [Homescu 2014]. This is because equity markets at a
large have the potential to grow substantially but they are usually rather risky. Bonds
and especially government bonds, usually offer much lower returns. Instead, they
carry much lower risk and by some, they are even treated as risk-free but that has been
a topic of some debate [Viñals 2011]. This brings up the question of which equities
and bonds to buy and in what proportion. That can be a difficult question to answer
since there are virtually endless ways to combine a set of assets but fortunately, this
problem can be modelled mathematically and solved using optimisation. In the most
basic sense, the investor seeks to maximise expected returns while minimising risk or
constraining it to an acceptable value. That, however, requires these two concepts
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Modern Portfolio Theory
5
to defined mathematically. The expected return of a strategy is often defined as its
mean historical return over some time period and its risk as the standard deviation
of the historical returns as already noted. This gives rise to what is commonly known
as modern portfolio theory and mean-variance optimisation.
1.4
Modern Portfolio Theory
According to modern portfolio theory (or mean-variance-analysis) as introduced by
Markowitz 1952, a single investment’s features in terms of risk and return should not
be viewed independently but instead the effect of this single investment on a portfolio’s
risk and return. This introduces the effect asset correlations have on a portfolio and
shows how portfolio diversification gives superior performance in terms of risk and
return. A well-diversified portfolio, where assets have little or no correlation performs
much better than the opposite. Furthermore, Markowitz showed that an investor can
construct multiple portfolio’s (in fact infinite) with different expected returns for the
same amount of risk, as measured by variance. Therefore, there exists some optimal
portfolio as measured by expected return, for any given amount of risk, or vice versa,
there exist some optimal minimum variance portfolio for any given expected return.
These combinations are referred to as an efficient (or efficient frontier) by Markowitz.
A minimum variance portfolio may be modelled by the following quadratic program.
ω∗= min
ω∈Cm
1
2ωT Σω
(1.2a)
Cm := {ω ∈Rn|1T
nω = 1, µT ω = m}
(1.2b)
Where m ∈R is the desired rate of return, 1n ∈{1}n is the n dimensional vector of
ones, ω is the vector of asset weights and µ ∈Rn are their respective expected returns.
This is perhaps the most important concept and framework yet in asset management
and portfolio theory as it presented the effect of diversification and correlation to an
investment’s risk and return. Despite the theoretical importance of mean-variance
analysis, it may be disputed whether it is actually an ideal investment strategy, as its
effort to model financial markets seldom match the real world. In other words, mean-
variance portfolios are created by using the sample mean and dispersion matrix of the
asset returns, which proves to perform poorly out-of-sample [DeMiguel and Nogales
2009]. It’s not possible to identify the second parameter, dispersion matrix, in reality,
it can, however, be estimated, which gives rise to estimation errors. These errors are
the reason behind the method’s inability to model the market correctly according to
DeMiguel and Nogales 2009. Albeit, minimising the risk for a fixed return rather
than maximising return for a fixed risk does perform better out-of-sample, as the
estimation error is much greater in the second moment due to the nature of how it is
estimated. The issue still remains. For these reasons, among others discussed in the
following section, this optimisation method is undesirable for the goal and strategy of
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
this thesis but its concepts are integral for another approach that the author suggests
may be more suitable.
1.5
Stochastic Programming
Many financial models depend on unknown quantities. As is the case of this thesis,
these are often the future prices of an asset or index. Trying to optimally allocate
assets in a portfolio using a regular deterministic optimisation approach as the mean-
variance model commonly used in modern portfolio theory, may not be very successful.
This is because it assumes all parameters are known, with the drawbacks described in
the previous section. In the case of most market traded assets these quantities are only
known within certain bounds, in such cases another optimisation approach is better,
a so-called robust optimisation problem.
That approach instead finds a solution
which is feasible for all instances with these quantities and is optimal in some sense.
The type adopted in this thesis is a stochastic programming model and assumes
that these unknown parameters are random variables with known distributions or
distributions that can be estimated. The model is then solved such that it is feasible
for all the possible instances in the distribution and their likelihood maximised. These
distributions are usually discretised as multiple scenarios, in the case of this thesis
a scenario is some realisation of a market return. These possible future states or
scenarios must be generated by a reliable and robust approach such that the model
performs well.
If that is carried out properly, then the model is able to capture
the variation both within the data and between assets and allows the use of various
risk and deviation measures that is not easy to implement in regular mean-variance
optimisation. To that end, this thesis will make use of CVaR (see section 2.1.2) as a
risk measure in the portfolio.
The goal of this thesis is to try to answer the questions posed at the beginning of
the chapter as well as explore the effect leveraging has on a portfolio and propose a
leveraging strategy (or framework). The goal of the leveraging strategy is to come up
with an approach that establishes a set of rules or behaviours, that guide a stochastic
programming model (or models) to include leverage and allocate assets in an adept
way. A part of the challenge is modelling the strategy mathematically and defining
how the model measures and controls the risk associated with increased leverage and
positions in individual assets. Moreover, the strategy will define how asset positions
and leverage are re-balanced over time and the frequency of the re-balancing. The
underlying theme of these criteria is mainly risk control, and in short, the aim of the
thesis is to provide a risk management framework for a leveraging strategy.
==PAGE:17==
1.6 Literature Review
7
1.6
Literature Review
There is a considerable amount of material on the topic of asset allocation, risk mea-
sures and portfolio optimisation, covering a decent ground of the subjects. There is
significantly less work available on borrowing in a mathematical programming envi-
ronment, though it is by no means an untouched subject.
Portfolio Selection Markowitz 1952 presents a reliable manner to risk-return trade-
off with portfolio optimisation and poses the importance of diversification and other
concepts already mentioned in section 1.4 where their importance to this thesis was
also discussed. Markowitz’s theory does allow borrowing in the portfolio, however,
this is in terms of a fixed risk-free rate through a proxy of short selling a risk-free
asset such a government bond.
Minimising CVaR In their article R Tyrrell Rockafellar, Uryasev, et al. 2000 in-
troduced a new approach to the calculation of VaR and optimisation of CVaR. Im-
portantly, they showed in their paper how CVaR could be minimised using linear
programming and stochastic optimisation. An integral method to optimisation in
finance as it allows for control on the downside risk of a strategy in a mathematical
program.
Piecewice linear borrowing cost function Valladão et al. 2018 acknowledge that
borrowing costs aren’t linear and acknowledge the presence of credit limits from fi-
nancial institutions.
They try to incorporate that in the borrowing function.
In
their article Valladão et al. 2018 propose a convex piecewise linear borrowing cost
function that is supposed to reflect these details and include a minimum borrowing
cost. They incorporate this function in a CVaR based linear stochastic programming
problem for asset allocation as the aim is in this thesis. They run their model for
three equity indices and compare the strategy to one with a linear borrowing cost
such as the intention is to implement in this thesis. Their results showed that their
approach outperformed ones with a linear borrowing function and their strategy also
outperformed market benchmarks.
The author argues that leveraging through shorting a risk-free proxy such as Markowitz’s
model allows for is too simple of a proxy for leverage. There are opportunities in using
CVaR optimisation and stochastic programming to control the risk associated with
leveraging, especially due to the benefits of modelling with scenarios. Although the
approach Valladão et al. 2018 take to borrowing costs is very precise and produces
excellent results there is still room for further analyses of leveraged asset allocation
strategies, especially with regards to the performance for different amounts of leverage
and risk-adjusted returns.
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Methods
2.1
Models and Strategy
In this chapter, the leveraged asset allocation strategy is introduced along with the
mathematical models on which it is based.
The investment strategy itself is out-
lined in section 2.1.3, it is implemented through a series of stochastic programming
optimisation models that rely on the outputs of scenario generation models. Two
different approaches to generating the scenarios will be introduced and implemented,
potentially giving different end results and performances. Although technically, four
stochastic programming models are applied in the method, they are founded on the
same basic model, some of these models serve as inputs or references to the main
model to control performance and set goals. One such goal is the risk in the portfolio.
The idea is that the strategy can be used as time passes, so the investor starts to
invest at some point in time and as time moves forward, the portfolio is reconsidered
approximately every month (four weeks).
2.1.1
Generating the Scenarios
The stochastic programming models for the strategy rely on uncertainty from scenar-
ios of future market returns of the assets. Two methods are proposed to generate
these scenarios, both of which will use historical data to generate future returns. The
former method will generate scenarios through sampling and bootstrapping historical
data. The latter generates scenarios by drawing random samples from a distribution
defined by parameters obtained from historical data.
2.1.1.1
Random Sampling with Bootstrapping
The basic idea of the bootstrapping method is to resample some N samples from a
data set and use these samples to construct a scenario of the future by averaging the
N samples. This would be repeated multiple times to construct multiple scenarios.
By this, the method attempts to mimic the underlying empirical distribution of the
data set in the newly generated scenarios. So bootstrapping then suggests that one
available sample gives rise to many others, being an inspiration to the name, which
is from the saying to pull yourself up by your bootstraps [Diaconis and Efron 1983]
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Methods
More specifically, this strategy splits the investment period into time periods of
four weeks. At the start of the investment period, eight weekly-returns are drawn from
a historical data sample, the data sample looks back three years from the beginning of
the investment period. These eight randomly sampled returns are then compounded
to obtain a new single eight-week return that does not exist in the data sample. These
two steps are repeated 250 times to obtain 250 scenarios. Assume four weeks have
passed, now the algorithm also takes a step four weeks ahead in time and repeats the
same procedure for the next time window (where it now looks back three years from
the current time) and as time passes, it continues to roll forward four weeks at a time
until the end of the investment period. After the algorithm runs it has generated
a set of future scenarios rendered as eight-week returns that rely on relatively close
historical data, for all time periods in the investment horizon. This model is illustrated
in algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 The bootstrapping method
1: Given: The sets of Periods (roll) R, scenarios S, Assets I, Weeks W
2: Given: The Historical Weekly returns WeeklyRet(w, i).
3: Initialize Sim(r, s, i). ▷Array of simulated Ns returns for every period and asset
4: Define the number of samples to be drawn in each period Nsam
5: Ns ←card(S)
▷The number of scenarios
6: Define the set of samples sam
7: for r ∈R do
8:
Define the lower and upper bounds (l and u) in weeks for the time window of
the current period r
9:
for s ∈S do
10:
d ←Nsam Random integers in the interval [l, u] drawn from the uniform
distribution
11:
for i ∈I do
12:
if WeeklyRet(d, i) only has non-missing data in the time window then
13:
tmpSim(sam) ←Nsam samples drawn from WeeklyRet(d, i)
14:
Sim(r, s, i) ←product of tmpSim(sam)
▷The Nsam week return
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
end for
18: end for
19: return Sim(r, s, i)
The idea with this approach is to incorporate the most recent market movements
in each time period along with some long-term smoothing and hope that it gives
the optimisation model a better portrayal of the market’s current future-state. An
advantage of the bootstrapping method is that it does not need any parameters to
generate new scenarios, it uses the data as previously described and by nature includes
its statistics. Importantly, it can be a good method when it is difficult to approximate
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Models and Strategy
11
the underlying distribution of the data. However, by nature, the bootstrapping model
makes the assumption that the course of future returns is similar to that of close
historical data.
2.1.1.2
Drawing from a Stationary Multivariate Normal Process
The most recognised method of generating scenarios is without a doubt the Monte
Carlo method. Generally, it is viewed as the process of generating future states by
sampling from some known probability distribution where the appropriate parame-
ters are known or can be easily calculated or estimated. Plenty of assumptions are
thus made in applying the method. The method does not use resampling as new re-
alisations are readily available, however, like the bootstrapping method, this method
also assumes to some extent that future returns can be generated with information
of the past.
Like the previous procedure, this one splits the investment horizon into four-week
time periods. Unlike the previous procedure, however, this method only splits the
whole data set in two parts, instead of creating a new data (sub)set in each time period.
The former piece can be thought of as a training set, as the scenario generation model
is fitted to that data set and the latter can be thought of as a test set as it is basically
used to evaluate the performance of the models (scenario generation and optimisation
models). The training set will usually be fairly large, i.e. will cover a long period of
time since the idea is to think of it as the assets’ universe of returns. Meaning, it
is used to determine the assets’ potential for return and risk in the future. To that
end, the training set is used to evaluate the statistical parameters required by the
distribution, in the case of this thesis it is the multivariate normal distribution that
is used and so the first two central moments are estimated, namely the mean vector
and the dispersion matrix. A set of 250 (weekly) realisations are drawn for each asset
and each of the four weeks in the time period. The algorithm then compounds the
four observations to create a single four-week return for each asset. Repeating that
step 250 times and then rolling forward to the next time period until the end of the
investment horizon. After the algorithm runs, it has broken the investment horizon
up into four-week time periods, where each period has 250 scenarios of future returns
for the assets, quoted as four-week returns. The structure of this model is outlined
in algorithm 2.
The motivation behind having these two methods is to try two very different ap-
proaches to the scenario generation, one that tries to dynamically model the current
market (bootstrapping) and one that uses a static long-term performance of the mar-
ket to model the future. Additionally, this implements a parametric (Monte Carlo)
and a non-parametric (Bootstrapping) statistics to generate scenarios. By implement-
ing the parametric approach one assumes knowledge of how the data is generated and
that new realisations may be produced from some known probability distribution with
some fixed parameters. Conversely in the non-parametric approach one does not make
such bold assumptions and generates new realisations only from historical data by es-
timating the data’s distribution by its empirical distribution. Parametric approaches
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Methods
Algorithm 2 Multivariate Normal Monte Carlo Method
1: Given: The sets of Periods (roll) R, scenarios S, Assets I, Weeks W
2: Given: The Historical Weekly returns WeeklyRet(w, i).
3: Define the number of samples to be drawn in each period Nsam
4: Ns ←card(S)
▷The number of scenarios
5: Nassets ←card(I)
▷The number of assets
6: Define the set of samples sam
7: Estimate the statistical parameters µ and Σ of the training period using
WeeklyRet(w, i)
8: Initialise Sim(r, s, i)
▷Array of Ns simulated returns for each period and asset
9: for r ∈R do
10:
for s ∈S do
11:
tmpSim(sam, i) ←Nsam × Nassets array of randomly generated samples from
the Multivariate normal distribution with parameters µ and Σ are drawn
12:
Sim(r, s, i) ←product of tmpSim(sam, i) over sam for each i
13:
end for
14: end for
15: return Sim(r, s, i)
such as drawing samples from the normal distribution are widely used in finance but
the non-normality of market returns is well known and documented [Sheikh and Qiao
2009]. Implementing a non-parametric scenario generation method could potentially
prove to be a better way of predicting future returns by including parameters not
represented by the normal distribution.
When the scenarios have been generated they can serve as inputs to the stochastic
models as already mentioned. These stochastic models allocate the available assets
to a portfolio by adjusting their proportion to the whole portfolio. The design and
objective of these models will be introduced in a later section (2.1.3) but as hinted at
earlier, they try to balance risk versus reward in the portfolio. This gives rise to the
question of how to measure and account for the risk.
2.1.2
The Risk Measure of the Strategy
As the future returns of an asset follow a stochastic process it makes sense to look at
its risk by means of the possible future values and their likelihood. A possible measure
of risk is the amount of capital an individual could lose in some time horizon. Clearly,
in the absolutely worst case, an individual may lose all the invested capital, but with
such a pessimistic outlook the investor would probably not make any investments. So
perhaps a better way would be to view the risk by means of percentiles of the assets’
loss distribution. Meaning that one would look at some percentile α% (say 99%) and
assume with some confidence (α%), that losses do not exceed that value. This is what
is referred to as the value-at-risk (VaR). Put simply, the α% VaR of some strategy x is
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Models and Strategy
13
V aRα(x) = A which says that, ”with α% confidence, the future losses will not exceed
A. Using mathematical notation, consider a portfolio of assets X and some market
parameters or stochastic events (for instance scenarios) denoted by y with the density
p(y). Furthermore, let f(x, y) be the loss-function of the portfolio. The cumulative
density function of f(x, y) not exceeding some θ is defined mathematically as
Ψ(x, θ) :=
∫
f(x,y)<θ
p(y)dy
(2.1)
and the α −V aR can be defined as.
V aRα(x) = min{θ ∈R : Ψ(x, θ) ≥α}
(2.2)
This measure will be used in the performance analysis of the strategy in section
4.3.
2.1.2.1
Conditional Value-at-Risk
Although Value-at-Risk has gained some popularity within risk management it is not
without its limitations and many have criticised the measure and pointed out some
of these flaws. A few of these criticisms will be addressed in the list below. The list
will also describe what characteristics the author thinks the strategy’s risk measure
should hold.
• Non-convex VaR isn’t a convex function, moreover, it can also be a discon-
tinuous and thus a non-smooth, non-differentiable function. By that, VaR is
difficult to optimise with traditional linear programming methods as it is likely
to run into local optimisers in the search for the global optimiser. Although it
should be stated that some progress has been made in algorithms that solve VaR
specifically [Sarykalin et al. 2008] [Damodaran 2010] [Cornuejols and Tütüncü
2006]. A risk measure for this strategy should clearly not be difficult to use in
a linear program for optimisation.
• Not a coherent risk measure VaR is not a coherent measure of risk as it doesn’t
fulfil the desirable properties for a coherent measure, defined by the four axioms
set by Artzner et al. 1999. Particularly, VaR lacks subadditivity, meaning that
if one adds two risky assets together, he/she could increase the total risk (as
measured by VaR) compared to just keeping the two risks separate (an example
of this may be found in Artzner et al. 1999). This should of course not be the
case according to modern portfolio theory [Markowitz 1952], where diversifica-
tion is used to decrease risk. A risk measure for this strategy should also fulfil
the other axioms set by Artzner et al. 1999, which basically state that, adding a
constant to a set of losses shouldn’t affect the risk, the exposure and risk should
scale by the same linear function and that increased losses mean increased risk.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Methods
• Ignores losses exceeding the α-percentile VaR does not measure the losses exceed-
ing the α-percentile, which is certainly suboptimal when the loss distribution
has extreme or fat tails as is often the case since the return distribution is usu-
ally left-tail heavy. This can be dangerous as the VaR may cause the model to
underestimate the associated risk and overestimate the rarity of some extreme
events, resulting in VaR not including their effect in the model.
These points motivate the use of another type of a VaR measure for the strategy,
one that tries to address these issues.
This modified VaR measure is defined by
addressing the last point, that VaR doesn’t take into account the losses incurred
beyond the α% threshold, instead, it looks at the conditional expectation of the
losses above the α −V aR. This modification is referred to as the conditional value-
at-risk or CVaR as it is conditioned on the fact that the VaR is exceeded. It was
first introduced by R Tyrrell Rockafellar, Uryasev, et al. 2000 where they also showed
that CVaR is indeed a coherent measure of risk. In general, the α −CV aR for some
portfolio can be defined mathematically as.
CV aRα(x) =
1
1 −α
∫
f(x,y)≥V aRα(x)
f(x, y)p(y)dy
(2.3)
.
CVaR addresses the main issues with VaR and does indeed have superior proper-
ties to VaR but as most risk measures, it isn’t without its own flaws. The main flaw
with CVaR as pointed out by Sarykalin et al. 2008 is that it is more sensitive to esti-
mation errors when there isn’t a good model for the tail of the distribution. In those
cases, the VaR may prove to have a better out-of-sample performance. Nevertheless,
CVaR is chosen as the risk measure for the strategy, because of its overall superior
properties. To that end, the strategy’s loss function is defined.
f(x, y) = −
∑
(i)
xiyi
(2.4)
2.1.2.2
CVaR in a Linear Program
To use CVaR in the optimisation model, the CVaR definition (2.3) is modified to the
following function
Fα(x, θ) := θ +
1
1 −α
∫
(f(x, y) −θ)+p(y)dy
(2.5)
Where (a)+ = a if a > 0 and (a)+ = 0 otherwise. The function in (2.5) has the two
following properties, Fα(x, θ) is a convex and continuously differentiable function of θ
and minimising the α −CV aR of the loss-function for the portfolio x is equivalent to
minimising Fα(x, θ) in (2.5). The former property is important to ensure optimality
conditions and the latter allows one to compute CVaR in a linear program.
Assume that the stochastic events y are obtained by generating a number of scenarios
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Models and Strategy
15
s = 1, . . . , S as described in 2.1.1, each with some probability p(ys). Then (2.5) can
be redefined to fit a linear program as.
Fα(x, θ) := θ +
1
1 −α
∑
s
pszs
(2.6)
Where a new variable zs is defined to try to ensure the properties in (2.5).
zs ≥0, ∀s
(2.7)
zs ≥f(x, ys) −θ, ∀s
(2.8)
The above equations (2.6)-(2.8) can now be directly implemented in the strategy’s
linear stochastic program to compute the CVaR of a portfolio (2.12).
2.1.3
Strategy
With the strategy’s risk measure defined and how the scenarios are generated it is
possible to outline the idea behind the investment strategy. In the beginning of the
investment period (i.e. at time t = 0) there is some available budget and a set of
assets or indices x = (x1, x2, . . . , xm, xm+1, . . . xn) of which m are equities and n −m
are bonds or fixed income instruments. Moreover, available to the investor is credit
with an annual interest of rann
f
.
The idea is to split the investment time horizon into equal time periods of four
weeks and roll forward one period until the end of the time horizon (at time T) as
hinted at previously and in each roll, revise the current portfolio, i.e. reconsidering the
portfolio’s current composition as the market may have changed and consequently the
optimal portfolio composition. The position in each asset can thus, increase, decrease
or stay the same in each roll, i.e. the model can buy, sell or decide to do nothing
for each asset i in every roll. To keep it realistic and to stop the model from buying
and selling unnecessarily, a percentage-wise transaction cost (Transaction) is added
to any amount bought or sold. With regards to the portfolio’s risk, the concept is
to limit the amount of downside risk by setting a cap on the allowed portfolio CVaR.
The cap is determined by the proportional CVaR of a benchmark portfolio that is
solved just previous to the model in each roll forward in time.
Now establishing
the leveraging strategy. At any given period (roll), the model can borrow money
if it deems it profitable (iBorrow) and takes into account the future value of the
loan. Furthermore, the model will also be able to decrease the total credit position
(dBorrow) if it is already leveraged. The model can thus, in other words, deleverage
the portfolio if it deems it favourable. The total credit position (Borrow) at any
given time, therefore depends on its previous position (initBorrow) and the current
increased and decreased leverage.
The model must have some cap on how much
leverage it can take on at any given time, so a constraint is set on the leverage factor,
which allows user-defined limits on the amount of leverage. Furthermore, the model
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Methods
makes sure that positions in risky equity indices do not exceed a 100% position of the
adjusted account value1. By doing so, the borrowed capital is only used to invest in
fixed income or bonds. With this, the idea is to allow all the investor’s own capital
to be invested in high risk, high return equities and use the leveraged capital to
invest in low risk and (usually) lower return fixed income/bonds. This also minimises
the possibility that the portfolio goes in negative equity if the markets turn against
the investor. The strategy does not allow short selling to borrow capital since the
idea is to obtain the borrowed capital through the proposed leveraging strategy itself
and allowing short selling as well would only add noise that is beyond the scope of
this thesis. The model is also given the ability to decrease the total position in the
portfolio and keeping as cash with no assumed (market) risk. This is done to give the
model greater flexibility in controlling the portfolio’s risk. Since at certain periods
the assets could be considered too risky (according to the scenarios) and as the model
is constrained to keep the portfolio’s downside risk under a certain CVaR barrier it
might resort to decreasing the overall position temporarily to keep its downside risk
at bay. The model should rarely take advantage of this feature unless the scenario
distributions have regularly very long left tails and the cost of borrowing is very low
or negative. Lastly, the model is also able to take into account the availability of
the assets, as some assets may enter the market late and therefore new assets can be
introduced while the model rolls forward. As to the objective of the model, it aims
to maximise the potential total return, adjusted for debt.
This process is modelled in the General Algebraic Modeling System (GAMS),
the respective GAMS algorithms are included in appendix A.3. This algorithm is
partitioned into two segments. In the former, the algorithm simply finds the optimal
portfolio(s) for the first time period given the budget and available assets. In the
second segment, the algorithm takes the results from the first time period and uses
them as an input to what is then the ”current” period and constructs the portfolios
for that period, the algorithm is then able to roll forward for the remaining periods
by using the variables from the previous period as input parameters.
2.1.3.1
Benchmark
As discussed in the previous section, the algorithm uses a benchmark portfolio to cap
the allowed downside risk, this will be the 1/N benchmark portfolio. It is simply
a portfolio with equal positions in all N assets. This portfolio is constructed at the
beginning of the investment period and in each remaining period (roll), the value of its
positions can change with the market and so their relative size in the portfolio. This
and the fact that each roll has new scenarios means that the benchmark portfolio’s
CVaR will change with each roll. These values are obtained by solving a separate
linear stochastic program, simply having the constraints (2.13a) - (2.13c) and the
additional constraint
xi = 1
N Budget,
∀i
(2.9)
1Account value introduced in section 2.1.3.2
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Models and Strategy
17
in the first time period. (2.10) is replaced by the following constraint for other
time periods. The objective of the benchmark models is to minimise the CVaR.
xi = InitPorti,
∀i
(2.10)
This 1/N portfolio will also be used as a comparison to the optimised portfolios in
the analysis chapter (4). Such comparison is also known as Naïve Diversification vs
Optimised and can be a good way to check the performance of an optimisation model
as the Naïve diversification is done without any sophistication or intuition. Thus a
good asset allocation optimisation model will perform statistically better in terms of
risk and return. But that can actually be difficult to obtain as the Naïve diversification
approach can prove to perform very well and DeMiguel, Garlappi, et al. 2009 have
argued that optimised portfolios do not outperform the 1/N Naïve diversification.
2.1.3.2
Model Representation
This section will introduce the mathematical representation of the models described
in the strategy discussion. As stated there, the models in the first period differ slightly
from that of the remaining periods, only one model representation will be shown in
this chapter. Namely, the model for time periods higher than 1. Since two of the
models were defined in the previous section (2.1.3.1), it only leaves the model for the
1st time period which is just a submodel of the one introduced in this section. The
representation of all models can be seen in the GAMS code in appendix A.3.
Before the representation is provided, the reader is given some intuition into the
recursion of the strategy and the states of the portfolio right before and after the
models are solved. Imagine that the first four weeks have passed, the budget will
have been used up in the first iteration (first time period) when the model allocated
the capital to some assets. So ”now”, the funds are in the portfolio’s exposure, which
at this point may also include leveraged capital. In the four weeks that already passed,
the portfolio has accumulated returns (be that positive or negative) and its market
value has changed. So before the algorithm starts the next iteration, each asset’s value
in the portfolio is updated accordingly. In that same time, the credit position has
increased by means of the interest on the loan, so the outstanding credit position is
also updated accordingly. Before the start of a new period, the algorithm will record
the updated portfolio value as if it were settled and adjust the value for the updated
outstanding credit or cash position. This can be regarded as a sort of imaginary
account value and thus accordingly the algorithm will record it in the parameter
Account. The imaginary account value can also be thought of as the strategy’s value
over time. This value will be updated as reported by (2.11) in every iteration.
Account∗
t =
∑
i
Portfolio∗
t−1,i −Borrow∗
t−1 + Casht−1
(2.11)
Where ”∗” implies the parameter has been updated accordingly. The main model
for the strategy has the following parameters.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Methods
• Ps,i, the scenario generated return of asset i for scenario s.
• prs, the probability of scenario s.
• EPi, the expected return of asset i over all scenarios s.
• rf, the period’s available (eight- or four-week) interest rate on loans, updated
in each roll.
• Budget, the available funds in the beginning.
• α, the confidence interval for which VaR and CVaR are calculated
• CVaRbarrier, the maximum allowed proportional CVaR rate of the portfolio.
• Transaction, the percentage charge of any transaction made (when buying or
selling).
• LeverageFactor, the maximum allowed leverage factor in the portfolio.
• BondGold, logical variable, 1 if asset i is a fixed income security or bond.
• isAvailable, logical variable, 1 if asset i is currently available in the universe
(some assets are not available from the beginning).
• Account, the account value in the period (not the first period) as defined by
equation 2.11.
• InitPorti, the asset allocation in the previous portfolio, i.e. xi from the previ-
ous period.
• InitBorrow, the previous period’s total credit position.
• InitCash, the previous period’s total position in cash.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Models and Strategy
19
The main model has the following variables.
• Lossess, expected portfolio losses of scenario s.
• VaR, Value-at-Risk.
• VaRDevs, VaR’s deviance.
• CVaR, Conditional Value-at-Risk
• xi, amount invested in asset i.
• Buyi, value of asset i bought in the current period
• Selli, value of asset i sold in the current period..
• Costsi, costs associated with buying xi of asset i.
• Borrow, the total credit position in the period
• iBorrow, amount of capital borrowed in the period.
• dBorrow, amount deleveraged in the period
• Cash, the cash position in the period
• iCash, increased position in cash in period.
• dCash, decreased position in cash in period
The main model is then a linear program expressed as.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Methods
Objective
max
∑
(i)
EPixi + Cash + dBorrow −iBorrow × (1 + rf)
(2.12)
Constraints
Lossess = −
∑
(i)
Ps ixi,
∀s
(2.13a)
V aRDevs ≥Lossess −V aR.
∀s
(2.13b)
CV aR = V aR +
∑
(s) prsV aRDevs
1 −α
(2.13c)
CV aR ≤CV aRbarrier
∑
(i)
xi
(2.13d)
xi = InitPorti + Buyi −Selli,
∀i
(2.13e)
∑
(i)
Buyi + dBorrow + iCash + Costs =
∑
(i)
Selli + iBorrow + dCash
(2.13f)
Costs = Transaction
∑
(i)
(Buyi + Selli)
(2.13g)
Borrow + dBorrow = InitBorrow + iBorrow
(2.13h)
Borrow ≤Account × (LeverageFactor −1) (2.13i)
∑
(i)
xi + Cash ≤Account × LeverageFactor
(2.13j)
Cash = InitCash + iCash −dCash
(2.13k)
iCash ≤
∑
(i)
InitPorti
(2.13l)
∑
({i∈I|BondGoldi̸=1})
xi ≤1.0 × Account
(2.13m)
xi = 0,
∀i| isAvailablei = 0
(2.13n)
(2.13o)
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Performance Measures and Analysis
21
The variables in the model are defined in the following way.
Losses ∈Rs
(2.14a)
V aRDev ∈Rs
≮0
(2.14b)
V aR, CV aR ∈R
(2.14c)
x, Buy, Sell ∈Ri
≮0
(2.14d)
Costs, Borrow, iBorrow,
dBorrow, Cash,
iCash, dCash ∈R≮0
(2.14e)
2.2
Performance Measures and Analysis
This section introduces the various performance measures that are used in chapter
4. The purpose of the section is to give the motivation behind the various choices of
measures and justify how they’re relevant to the analysis and what limitations they
have.
2.2.1
Returns
2.2.1.1
Computing Returns
There are two major techniques in calculating returns given asset prices, logarithmic
return (rt) and ordinary return (Rt). The former is the natural logarithm of the total
reward and assumes continuous compounding, The latter, however, is the simplest
form of returns and does not consider the effect of compounding [“Simple Returns”
2009], It is adequate for short term returns and will be used in this thesis.
The
ordinary returns (Rt) over the time period between time t−1 and t, for an asset with
prices Pt−1 and Pt respectively, is calculated with:
Rt = Pt −Pt−1
Pt−1
(2.15)
2.2.1.2
Average Returns
The analysis of an investment strategy often starts with the average returns, this is
a simple and intuitive measure but can be very useful, it gives an understanding of
the past return tendency of an investment. As in the computation of the returns
there also exist two schools in computing average returns, the arithmetic mean and
the geometric mean. The latter is often suggested to be a better measure of average
returns since the former ignores the effects of compounding and correlation of returns
[Cooper 1996] which the geometric mean however includes. The geometric mean will
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Methods
be used in the analysis in this thesis. For a time series rt of N returns, it is calculated
using the following equation.
µg =
n
v
u
u
t
N
∏
t=1
(1 + rt) −1
(2.16)
2.2.2
Volatility
Another common measure of an investment’s performance is its volatility. While the
measure introduced in the previous section assessed the central tendency of the time
series of returns, the volatility measures the degree of variation in the time series by
considering a single return’s dispersion from the mean. That means it is a measure
of uncertainty, particularly the uncertainty in the change in the returns and is thus
an indicator of deviation risk. The most common way to measure volatility is by the
standard deviation. A high swing in either positive or negative direction results in
higher volatility, meaning the security’s value can be more spread out which in most
cases means a higher risk. This means however that volatility does not measure the
direction of the price changes but investors are typically more concerned about the
negative dispersion from the average.
2.2.3
Downside Deviation
The main issue of the standard deviation is addressed in the so-called downside devia-
tion, which only focuses on the downside deviation risk. The downside deviation was
first introduced by Sortino and Price 1994 and is a type of a semi-deviation measure
as it only looks at returns that fall below a certain threshold, called the minimum
acceptable return, denoted rmin. Before calculating the downside deviation σdown for
a time series of returns rt, the following function must be introduced
Lt = min[0, rt −rmin]
(2.17)
The downside deviation may then be obtained with the following equation.
σDown =
√∑n
t=1(Lt)2
n
(2.18)
The additional advantage of this measure, apart from its tendency to penalise
drawdowns (see section 2.2.5), is that it can very easily be tailored to a specific risk
profile with the selection of the minimum acceptable return, which in this thesis will
be the risk-free rate. Although the downside deviation has some advantages over the
standard volatility, the latter is more of a well-behaved measure and easier to work
with, in many applications such as in models or in statistical testing.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Performance Measures and Analysis
23
2.2.4
CVaR Deviation
The risk measures VaR and CVaR have been introduced in section (2.1.2), these
measures will also be used for the performance analysis conducted in chapter 4.3. As
such (risk measures), they look at the possible loss against zero and depending on the
distribution, can thus either be negative or positive as opposed to a deviation risk
measure such as volatility which is never negative [Sarykalin et al. 2008]. Another
such measure is the so-called CVaR deviation (denoted CV aR∆
α (X)) and is defined
as follows, where E(x) is the expected value of some strategy x.
CV aR∆
α (x) = CV aRα(x −E(x))
(2.19)
The CVaR deviation basically measures the wideness of the loss distribution of a
strategy and according to Sarykalin et al. 2008, should be used in computing various
financial ratios rather than the CVaR risk measure.
2.2.5
Drawdown
Yet another measure of downside risk is the so-called drawdown and most commonly
the maximum drawdown. The drawdown of an investment strategy is the peak to
trough decline during some time period. Put more casually, it is the value drop from
the previous highest value to the lowest realised value before a new highest value
is reached again.
Analysts often look at the maximum of these drawdowns as a
measure of downside risk of the strategy over a given time horizon. Such a measure
can be used as an indicator to determine a strategy’s relative risk to another and is
usually quoted as percentage returns. Put mathematically the maximum drawdown
up to some point T of a strategy, given its process X(t), may be computed using the
following function.
MDD(T) =
max
τ∈(0, T )
[
max
t∈(0,τ) X(t) −X(τ)
]
(2.20)
The output from (2.20) is then scaled by the peak value.
The measure only
assesses the relative size of this drop, but not the frequency of large losses nor the
time it takes the strategy to recover from the loss if it recovers at all. In this regard,
it is also important to look at the proportional increase from the trough, the strategy
has to incur to break even, which is clearly proportionally higher than the drop.
2.2.6
Risk Adjusted Returns
Up to this point, the section has only looked at returns and various risk measures
independently and these can be useful to get an idea of various behaviours of the
investment, however, it’s very important to consider both simultaneously in order
to properly compare different investment strategies. Most of these measures fix the
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Methods
return to a unit of risk, where the idea is to normalise the performance of the invest-
ments so they can be compared on the same basis. In this thesis, two such measures
will be considered, the Sharpe ratio and its close cousin, the Sortino ratio. These are
introduced below.
2.2.6.1
Sharpe Ratio
The Sharpe ratio of an investment measures its excess return adjusted for its volatility,
the excess return refers to the investment’s returns in excess of the available risk-free
rate or its appropriate proxy. By subtracting the risk-free rate from its mean returns
allows one to consider the compensation of taking on the risk and fixing it to the
volatility. The Sharpe ratio SP can be computed using the following equation, where
¯rP is the portfolio’s mean returns, ¯rf is the risk-free rate and σP is the standard
deviation of the portfolio’s returns.
SP = ¯rP −¯rf
σP
(2.21)
The Sharpe ratio is usually quoted per annum and such is the case in this thesis.
Statistically, this measure assumes that returns are normally distributed and i.i.d.
[Ledoit and Wolf 2008], which isn’t the case for most market or portfolio returns as
already acknowledged in a previous chapter. This mainly materialises in the fact that
the Sharpe ratio uses the standard deviation as a measure of risk and thus equates
risk associated with negative deviations to positive deviations, thus penalising positive
volatility while being completely ignorant of the excess skewness and kurtosis (2.2.8)
that often is present in market returns.
This has lead to some variations of the
standard Sharpe ratio, for instance, adjusting the excess return by the CVaR instead
[Bacon 2009] or by the CVaR deviation as argued by Sarykalin et al. 2008 to be a
better risk measure to scale the excess return.
2.2.6.2
Sortino Ratio
The Sortino ratio tries to address this main issue with the Sharpe ratio by replacing
the volatility with the downside deviation. This can be useful as it only penalises
the returns falling below the target (risk-free rate in this case). The theory is that
the investor seeks positive deviation, and furthermore, the way of computing the
downside deviation has been a topic of some debate [Contributors 2018].
2.2.7
Randomness
Results from the models and the measures introduced in this section are presented in
chapter 4 and the outcome of these will be used to draw conclusions about the strategy
and different portfolios it produces. In doing that, the factor of randomness has to
be addressed. As there is always the lurking possibility that the results occurred by
chance and so conclusions about one method (or portfolio) outperforming another
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Performance Measures and Analysis
25
can’t be made in good faith unless first testing the significance of these results. The
tests conducted to that regard in this thesis will address the question of how significant
differences in outcome are, for two or more strategies. The measures tested will be
for the significance of the geometric mean and the Sharpe ratio using two types of
tests.
2.2.7.1
Paired Two-Sample T-test for Equality of Means
The paired two-sample t-test for equality of means adopted here, tests for the equality
of means for two series by simply testing if the mean of the difference of two series
is zero. If portfolios B and P are being tested, then their difference will be defined
as dt = rB
t −rP
t , where the goal is to test if portfolio P can be assumed to have the
same mean as B or alternatively, if portfolio P’s mean can be assumed to be greater
than that of portfolio B. Put mathematically, the hypotheses of this one-tailed test
are.
H0 : ¯dt = 0
(2.22)
HA : ¯dt < 0
(2.23)
For a significance level of α, number of samples N and an estimation of dt’s
standard deviation ˆσ, the t-test statistic and the critical value of the hypothesis are
defined as.
t =
¯dt
ˆσ/
√
N
< t(1 −α, N −1)
(2.24)
2.2.7.2
Test for the Equality of Multiple Sharpe Ratios
There exist methods for testing the significance of the Sharpe ratios of two or more
portfolios, though most methods that have been introduced only apply to the conven-
tional Sharpe Ratio (i.e. the excess returns scaled by standard deviation). A common
method used is one introduced by Wright et al. 2012 and tests the significance of the
Sharpe ratios of k portfolios where the underlying time series are paired samples of
excess returns. Wright et al. 2012 use a matrix notation where the null hypothesis is
defined as.
H0 : QSR = 0
(2.25)
where Q is a matrix of contrasts and SR is a vector of the Sharpe ratios. The null
can then be performed against single-tailed or two-tailed alternatives. This thesis will
have an alternative of the former as
HA : QSR > 0
(2.26)
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Methods
According to Pav 2018 these hypotheses may be tested with the test statistic and
critical value in (2.27), which is somewhat similar to that of the previous subsection.
t = QSR ×
√
1
QˆΩQT < t(1 −α, N −1)
(2.27)
In the case of this thesis, only two Sharpe ratios are compared at a time using
this test. However, Wright et al. 2012 also describe an appropriate test for testing
the equality of multiple Sharpe ratios using a two-tailed chi-squared approximation
for the alternative.
HA : QSR ̸= 0
(2.28)
They propose a statistic testing the hypothesis, which is rejected if.
T 2 = N(QSR)T (QΩQT )−1(QSR) > χ2(α, N −1)
(2.29)
2.2.8
Normality Assumptions
Some of the measures introduced in this chapter assume normality of the returns,
which in practice is often not the case as frequently stated. Accordingly, after the
analysis of the results in section 4.3, the normality of the out-of-sample returns of
the strategies must be addressed. There is a myriad of techniques to check for the
normality of a time series, in this thesis both graphical and hypotheses tests will be
carried out to test for normality.
2.2.8.1
Quantile-Quantile Plot
The quantile-quantile plot (q-q plot) is a graphical technique for establishing if two
data sets come from a population with the same distribution.
The data sets are
compared by plotting the quantiles of one data set against the quantiles of the other.
In the case of normality testing using the q-q plot, one data set would be data from a
population following the theoretical normal distribution and the other would be the
data being tested. The plot is then composed by plotting on the estimated quantiles
of the normal distribution on the x-axis and the estimated quantiles of the time series
on the y-axis. If the time series comes from the normal distribution, then the plotted
points will fall directly on a 45° line across the middle of the plot. So, increasing
deviations from this line will be more indication that the time series does not come
from a normal distribution.
2.2.8.2
Higher Central Moments
One of the characteristics of the normal distribution is constant normalised moments
of the third and fourth order, namely a normal distribution has a skewness of 0
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Performance Measures and Analysis
27
and kurtosis of 3 (or equivalently, excess kurtosis of 0). The fact that the normal
distribution has a skewness of 0 means that it is symmetric, a positive value of the
skewness would mean that it has a longer tail to the right relative to the left and
conversely, a negative skewness means a longer tail to the left. The latter is often
the case for market returns. The sample skewness is most often computed using the
Fisher-Pearson coefficient of skewness defined by.
S =
1
N
∑N
i (xi −¯x)3
ˆσ3
(2.30)
Where ¯x is the sample mean and ˆσ2 is an estimate of the second moment (variance).
The kurtosis, on the other hand, measures the heaviness of the distribution’s tail and
is nonnegative, unlike skewness. A high skewness means that the distribution’s tails
are heavy (”leptokurtic”) as a result of outliers (infrequent but extreme anomalies),
market returns are often leptokurtic [Sheikh and Qiao 2009]. A low value of kurtosis,
on the other hand, means a lighter tailed distribution and thus fewer outliers. The
sample kurtosis is defined as.
C =
1
N
∑N
i (xi −¯x)4
ˆσ4
(2.31)
2.2.8.3
Jarque-Bera Test
The constant values of the normalised third and fourth central moments don’t test
for the normality of data themselves, as the data is usually random and for relatively
small data sets it is unlikely to have exactly the constant values discussed in the
previous subsection. But a statistical hypothesis test can be conceived to test the
normality using these two measures. Such a test is known as the Jarque-Bera test
and is a two-tailed test with the hypothesis that ”the data is normal” and alternative
that ”the data is NOT normal”, equivalently this is the joint hypothesis
H0 : Skewness = 0 and Excess Kurtosis = 0
HA : Skewness ̸= 0 and Excess Kurtosis ̸= 0
The test statistic (JB) and critical value are defined by Jarque and Bera for a
sample size of N and k regressors as the following.
JB = N −k + 1
6
(
S2 + 1
4(C −3)2
)
> χ2(α, 2)
(2.32)
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Data and
Implementation
Eugene Fama’s efficient-market hypothesis states that asset market prices reflect all
available information. This means that, it is not possible to defeat the market con-
sistently on a risk-adjusted return basis given public information (such as historical
returns) and that prices react promptly to new information. By that, if an investor
is able to make greater returns, it is only by chance or by taking on more risk. This
thesis will consider an imaginary investor in the eurozone with access to the equity
and bond market (as measured by market indices), also available to the investor is
credit with some interest rate. The data behind this is the following.
3.1
Equity
25 Portfolios Formed on Size and Profitability for Developed Markets
The data set is a part of the Fama/French research portfolios as established by Fama
and French 2012 and consists of 25 equity market indices that are sorted by five
market capitalisations (size) and five operation profitability groups, measured by the
end of June each year. The whole global market is being considered and the returns
are quoted as total return indices and thus include dividends and capital gains. The
bounds dividing the size groups are the 3rd, 7th, 13th and 25th percentiles of the
market’s total aggregate market capitalisation. Each size group is sorted by the 20th,
40th, 60th and 80th percentile operating profitability breakpoints. The indices are
average value weighted and are quoted as non-continuous daily returns in U.S. dollars
(USD) from July 1990 to (but excluding) February 2019. The data was collected from
Kenneth R. French’s data library [French 2019] but it originates from a February
Bloomberg database.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Data and Implementation
3.2
Fixed Income
Bloomberg Barclays Euro Aggregate Treasury Indices
The indices track different types of investment grade, fixed rate public obligations
from the eurozone countries. These indices serve as an aggregate exposure to the
European government bond market and are used as benchmarks by many investment
funds and exchange-traded funds. The six indices were obtained from a Bloomberg
Terminal data dump as weekly quotes in euros (EUR) from July 1998 to February
2019. They are all total return indices, i.e. all cash distributions are reinvested and
include coupons. The indices are summarised below.
• LET1TREU Index Gives exposure to the short-term Eurozone treasury mar-
ket, maturity from one to (not including) three years. By the 30. April 2019 the
index had 74 constituents, with bonds from Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Finland,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Portugal,
Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain [SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 1-3 Year Euro Gov-
ernment Bond UCITS ETF (Dist) 2019].
• LET3TREU Index Gives exposure to the short-term Eurozone treasury mar-
ket, maturity from three to (not including) five years. By the 30. April 2019
the index had 56 constituents, with bonds from Austria, Belgium, Finland,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Netherlands, Slovakia, Slovenia and
Spain [SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 3-5 Year Euro Government Bond UCITS
ETF (Dist) 2019].
• LET5TREU Index Gives exposure to the intermediate-term Eurozone trea-
sury market, maturity from five to (not including) seven years. By 31. January
2019 the index had 50 constituents [SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 5-7 Year Euro
Government Bond UCITS ETF (Dist) 2019].
• LET7TREU Index Gives exposure to the intermediate-term Eurozone trea-
sury market, maturity from seven to (not including) ten years. By 30. April
2019 the index had 65 constituents [SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 7-10 Year Euro
Government Bond UCITS ETF (Dist) 2019].
• LET0TREU Index Gives exposure to the long-term Eurozone treasury mar-
ket, maturity from ten years and up.
By 30.
April 2019 the index had 92
constituents [SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 10+ Year Euro Government Bond
UCITS ETF (Dist) 2019].
• LEATTREU Index Gives exposure to the total return of the Eurozone govern-
ment bond market. By 30. April 2019 the index had 337 constituents [SPDR®
Bloomberg Barclays Euro Government Bond UCITS ETF (Dist) 2019].
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Interest Rate
31
3.3
Interest Rate
Euro Interbank Offered Rate (Euribor)
Euribor rates are the rates at which the banks in the eurozone offer to lend each other
(inter-bank offered rates), it is also used as a reference for interest rates for various
instruments in the eurozone as well. One-month Euribor rates were obtained from a
specialised Euribor quoting website online [rates 2019] and these are quoted monthly
on an annual basis from 1998 until February 2019. For this thesis these rates will
be used as a reference for the interest on credit offered to the imaginary investor.
The implementation, therefore, uses one-month Euribor rates plus a risk premium
of 45 basis points as the borrowing rate at any given time. Furthermore, inter-bank
offered rates can serve as a good proxy for risk-free interest rates [Janakiramanan
2014] and so these rates will also be used as a proxy for a one-month risk-free rate in
the eurozone at any given month, but clearly with no risk premium.
2007
2010
2013
2015
2018
Year
-2.0%
-1.5%
-1.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
4.0%
4.5%
5.0%
5.5%
6.0%
Annual Rate
1 Month EURIBOR
Figure 3.1: Annualised 1 Month EURIBOR rates over the investment period.
3.4
EUR/USD Exchange Rates
To ensure compatibility of the two index data sets they have to be quoted in the same
currency, this thesis will use the euro as the base currency for transactions. Conse-
quently, the USD equity index returns must be converted to returns in euros via a
USD/EUR currency pair. Daily EUR/USD quotes were obtained from Investing.com
[Investing.com 2019] with quotes from July 1990 to February 2019. These quotes
were then converted to USD/EUR pairs and used in the data manipulation.
3.5
The Inception of the Euro
The euro only formally went in circulation on 1/1/1999, but the data introduced in
the section is all quoted prior to that, these quotes are in European currency units
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Data and Implementation
(ECUs) which later became the euro and thus serve as a good proxy for the euro in
the analysis conducted in the following chapter.
The implementation considers an investment period from 3/9/2007 to 4/2/2019,
meaning that the scenario generation model in section 2.1.1.2 uses the time period
20/07/1998-13/08/2007 as the ”training set” to estimate the 31 indices’ return po-
tential and dispersion. Therefore, the idea is to use the investment period as a ”test
set” for the proposed strategy and thus use it for backtesting. The risk and return
performance measures the model relies on are all in-sample and the various measures
calculated in the following section are all out-of-sample.
The time periods being
considered in this implementation are periods where all the indices are readily avail-
able so the availability function of the model (2.12) will not be used. The investor
has an initial budget of 100,000 EUR and the strategy will be implemented using a
99%-CVaR.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis
This chapter will present results from the models introduced in section 2.1 and the
data introduced in chapter 3. The chapter starts by looking at how the strategy
performs using the two different scenario sets obtained from the two scenario gener-
ation methods. The following section then considers the performances of portfolios
with different amount of leverage. These different portfolios will have different debt
adjusted returns and risk, and the aim is to see what amount of portfolio leverage
gives the best risk-adjusted return. The best performing portfolios are then analysed
further in terms of the performance measures introduced in section 2.2. Lastly, a
series of normality tests are conducted on the return distribution of these strategies
to determine if they exhibit normal tendencies.
4.1
Bootstrapping v Multivariate Normal Monte Carlo
The performance of any model is generally very dependent on the input, in the case of
stochastic programming models such as the ones in introduced in section 2.1.3.2, the
most dominant inputs are the scenarios. The two scenario data sets were obtained by
the bootstrapping method (Algorithm 1) and by the stationary multivariate normal
distribution Monte Carlo method (Algorithm 2). This section will compare these
two methods in terms of the out-of-sample strategy performance for a few leverage
factors. These strategies are the output of the model in (2.12) for different values of
the parameter LeverageFactor in constraint (2.13i). The strategies will be compared
in terms of the average annualised return over the period (measured by the geometric
mean), annual volatility (measured by standard deviation) and risk-adjusted return
(measured by Sharpe ratio), for strategies with leverage factors 1 to 6. Table 4.1
lists these and figure 4.1 compares debt adjusted account value over time for selected
values of the leverage factor. The strategies constructed with models relying on the
bootstrapping method will be referred to as bootstrapping strategies and strategies
constructed with models relying on the Monte Carlo scenario generation will be re-
ferred to as multivariate normal strategies. It should be stated that these names don’t
imply anything about the strategy’s out-of-sample return distribution.
The difference in the out-of-sample performance of the two methods is staggering.
Inspecting the values in table 4.1, it becomes evident that the multivariate normal
scenario generation method is way better for the framework in question.
This is
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Analysis
Table 4.1: Comparison of the two scenario generation methods in terms of the geo-
metric mean for average return, regular standard deviation for volatility
and Sharpe Ratio. For a few different leverage factors (LF) of the strat-
egy.
Average Return
Standard Deviation
Sharpe Ratio
LF
Bootstr.
Mv. Norm.
Bootstr.
Mv. Norm.
Bootstr.
Mv. Norm.
1
2.719%
7.423%
12.198%
13.007%
0.22488
0.56331
2
6.214%
13.877%
15.411%
14.798%
0.42461
0.90758
3
10.276%
18.447%
19.525%
18.334%
0.56484
0.98069
4
13.999%
22.686%
24.833%
23.203%
0.62669
0.97176
5
17.222%
26.638%
30.716%
28.611%
0.65294
0.94979
6
19.877%
30.050%
36.900%
34.250%
0.66426
0.92485
reflected in the fact that the average returns of the multivariate normal scenario
strategies are much higher and in some cases more than twice their bootstrapping
counterparts. Moreover, the strategies constructed using the bootstrapping method
are marginally riskier in all cases except one. As a result, the multivariate normal
strategies have higher Sharpe ratios in all six cases. An important strategy to consider
in order to compare the two methods is the non-leveraged strategy (leverage factor of
1), because it gives an idea of the robustness of the scenario generation method with
regards to the asset allocation scheme alone, i.e. without the leveraging framework.
The results show that the multivariate normal strategy gives nearly triple the return
on an annual basis than the bootstrapping method while being only marginally riskier.
The charts in figure 4.1 tell a similar story. The non-leveraged multivariate normal
strategy is always markedly more valuable over the time horizon apart for a relatively
short period in the crash of 2007-2008.
Where the bootstrapping strategy starts
to recover sooner in the midst of the crisis, while the multivariate normal portfolio
continues to tumble a bit further before picking up speed again and quickly catching
its counterpart. This is because, when presented with the bootstrapping scenarios, the
model starts allocating all the capital in bond indices when it observes the downturn
in 2007-2008, i.e. when the huge losses that are realised get introduced into the rolling
scenario generation, they produce extreme scenarios. This is illustrated in figure 4.3,
which shows the strategy’s portfolio composition, where bond indices are indicated
by different shades of green. This is only favourable for a short time though as it
is rather counter-intuitive. It would actually be more appropriate to devote capital
to underpriced or cheap equities with the potential to recover in the long run. This
over-dependency of the bootstrapping model on the close past is very clear in other
periods as well, for instance in the few months before the crash and in the upturn of
the 2010s. In 2007 and early 2008 the (bootstrapping) model allocates either all or
most of the capital into risky equity indices (figure 4.3). This results from the fact
that, the time window at that time is using data from the years 2004-2007, which were
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Bootstrapping v Multivariate Normal Monte Carlo
35
2007
2010
2013
2015
2018
Year
50,000
75,000
100,000
125,000
150,000
175,000
200,000
225,000
250,000
275,000
EUR
Leverage Factor 1
Stationary MN Disribution
Bootstrapping
2007
2010
2013
2015
2018
Year
50,000
150,000
250,000
350,000
450,000
550,000
650,000
750,000
850,000
EUR
Leverage Factor 3
Stationary MN Disribution
Bootstrapping
2007
2010
2013
2015
2018
Year
50,000
300,000
550,000
800,000
1,050,000
1,300,000
1,550,000
1,800,000
2,050,000
2,300,000
2,550,000
2,800,000
EUR
Leverage Factor 6
Stationary MN Disribution
Bootstrapping
1
3
6
Leverage Factor
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
4-Week Returns
Distribution of returns
Stationary MN Disribution
Bootstrapping
Figure 4.1: Graphical illustration of the different out-of-sample performance for
portfolios constructed using models relying on bootstrapping and Monte
Carlo for scenario generation. The first three panes illustrate the ac-
count value over time for leverage factors, 1, 3 and 6 respectively. The
lower right pane is a box plot of the strategies’ debt adjusted return for
the three leverage factors.
times of extreme economic growth and thus the model sees it beneficial to allocate
most capital to high return equities with seemingly low downside risk, because of
the nature of the rolling time window. Similar behaviour can be seen in the teens
and especially from 2017 onwards. Looking back at the height of such booms, one
would typically consider it beneficial to have an increased position in low-risk bonds
to prepare for the eventual downturn, which of course can hardly be foreseen. That
intuition is clearly contrary to the allocations made by the bootstrapping model. The
multivariate normal portfolio, on the other hand, recovers much faster from the trough
of 2008 (top left pane figure 4.1), as the model allocates equities in the portfolio in
the crisis (figure 4.4), which ends up turning in favour of the investor in the long
run. The multivariate normal model also has larger positions in bonds at prosperous
times. This is likely to stem from the control that is set on the downside risk of the
portfolio by the 1/N benchmark. As the markets start to turn and equities decline
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Analysis
in value, the bond indices grow proportionally in the 1/N portfolio (figure 4.2) and
thus to limit the downside risk, the model responds by increasing the position in
bonds in the strategy’s portfolio. The gearing effect of portfolio leveraging becomes
very clear when the account values for relatively large leverage factors are inspected
(lower left pane of figure 4.1). The box plots in the lower right pane of figure 4.1 are
useful to compare the distributions of the six strategies. Looking at the non-leveraged
strategies it’s not so clear but the returns on the multivariate normal strategy are
a bit more spread out than the returns of the bootstrapping strategy but the latter
has more negative outliers. The multivariate normal strategy with a leverage factor
of 3 is more right tail heavy than the bootstrapping strategy for the same leverage
factor. Demonstrated by the upper whiskers of the boxes, meaning it has a greater
positive return potential. The bootstrapping strategy again has more outliers, most
of which are on the lower part.
Meaning, it is more left tail heavy, indicating a
slightly higher potential loss. In the case of a leverage factor of 6, the multivariate
normal portfolio has a greater potential of return as in the former cases and smaller
downside. In general, for the leverage factors discussed here, the multivariate normal
models produce more superior investment strategies with a greater return, a smaller
downside and more central tendency and predictability. The bootstrapping model is
too dependant on the close future and seems to overfit the training data it is provided
with. With that said, the stationary multivariate normal Monte Carlo method did
a much better job in generalising and the long ”training” period seems to give a
fairly good idea of the indices’ out-of-sample performance. The models using the
stationary multivariate normal method for scenario generation are adopted and used
for the remainder of this chapter.
2007-09-03
2009-01-19
2010-06-07
2011-10-24
2013-03-11
2014-07-28
2015-12-14
2017-05-01
2018-09-17
Date
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Proportion of portfolio
Portfolio Composition - 1/N Benchmark
SMALL_LoBO
ME1_BO2
ME1_BO3
ME1_BO4
SMALL_HiBO
ME2_BO1
ME2_BO2
ME2_BO3
ME2_BO4
ME2_BO5
ME3_BO1
ME3_BO2
ME3_BO3
ME3_BO4
ME3_BO5
ME4_BO1
ME4_BO2
ME4_BO3
ME4_BO4
ME4_BO5
BIG_LoBO
ME5_BO2
ME5_BO3
ME5_BO4
BIG_HiBO
LEATTREU_Index
LET1TREU_Index
LET3TREU_Index
LET5TREU_Index
LET7TREU_Index
LET0TREU_Index
Figure 4.2: Percentage position of the indices in the ”naïve” 1/N benchmark port-
folio over time.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Comparing Leverage
37
2007-09-03
2009-01-19
2010-06-07
2011-10-24
2013-03-11
2014-07-28
2015-12-14
2017-05-01
2018-09-17
Date
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Proportion of portfolio
Portfolio Composition - Leverage Factor 1 [Bootstr.]
SMALL_LoBO
ME1_BO2
ME1_BO3
ME1_BO4
SMALL_HiBO
ME2_BO1
ME2_BO2
ME2_BO3
ME2_BO4
ME2_BO5
ME3_BO1
ME3_BO2
ME3_BO3
ME3_BO4
ME3_BO5
ME4_BO1
ME4_BO2
ME4_BO3
ME4_BO4
ME4_BO5
BIG_LoBO
ME5_BO2
ME5_BO3
ME5_BO4
BIG_HiBO
LEATTREU_Index
LET1TREU_Index
LET3TREU_Index
LET5TREU_Index
LET7TREU_Index
LET0TREU_Index
Figure 4.3: Percentage position of the indices in the non-leveraged bootstrapping
portfolio.
2007-09-03
2009-01-19
2010-06-07
2011-10-24
2013-03-11
2014-07-28
2015-12-14
2017-05-01
2018-09-17
Date
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Proportion of portfolio
Portfolio Composition - Leverage Factor 1 [Mv. Norm.]
SMALL_LoBO
ME1_BO2
ME1_BO3
ME1_BO4
SMALL_HiBO
ME2_BO1
ME2_BO2
ME2_BO3
ME2_BO4
ME2_BO5
ME3_BO1
ME3_BO2
ME3_BO3
ME3_BO4
ME3_BO5
ME4_BO1
ME4_BO2
ME4_BO3
ME4_BO4
ME4_BO5
BIG_LoBO
ME5_BO2
ME5_BO3
ME5_BO4
BIG_HiBO
LEATTREU_Index
LET1TREU_Index
LET3TREU_Index
LET5TREU_Index
LET7TREU_Index
LET0TREU_Index
Figure 4.4: Percentage position of the indices in the non-leveraged multivariate nor-
mal portfolio.
4.2
Comparing Leverage
As the previous section showed, differently leveraged portfolios will have distinct
performances.
This section revisits the risk-adjusted return (measured by Sharpe
ratio) but for a few extra leverage factors. The goal is to compare the Sharpe ratio
of those different strategies to consider the added value of leveraging and to see what
the appropriate amount of leverage seems to be. This is implemented by, first solving
the models for a leverage factor of 1 (portfolio with no leverage) and consider the
results, then for a leverage factor of 2 etc. The iteration stops when the models prove
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Analysis
infeasible, or equivalently in this case, when the account value (value of the strategy)
becomes negative and the investor defaults. This happens at a leverage factor of 19
and thus the Sharpe ratios in table 4.2 run over an interval of leverage factors 1 to 18.
Furthermore, the ratios are illustrated in figure 4.5 for a simple visual interpretation
of the different performances.
Table 4.2: Annualised out-of-sample Sharpe ratios for strategies with different max-
imum allowed leverage factors. Results from models relying on scenarios
from the Monte Carlo method.
Leverage Factor
Sharpe ratio
Leverage Factor
Sharpe ratio
1
0.56330
8
0.88290
2
0.90759
10
0.85418
3
0.98069
12
0.83388
4
0.97175
14
0.81770
5
0.94979
16
0.80277
6
0.92485
18
0.78562
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Leverage Factor
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Portfolio Sharpe Ratio
Highest
Figure 4.5: Annualised out-of-sample Sharpe ratios as a function of maximum al-
lowed leverage factor. Results from models relying on scenarios from
the Monte Carlo method.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Performance Analysis
39
Inspecting the values of table 4.2 suggests a strategy with a leverage factor of
3, although strategies involving a leverage factor of 4 and 5 show a very similar
performance. The greatest improvement in risk-adjusted return is clearly between
a non-leveraged strategy and one with a leverage factor of 2, indicated by the large
positive slope between the two points in figure 4.5. With that, the risk-adjusted return
continues to improve between 2 and 3 but levels off there. At that point, the slope
gradually becomes negative for the remaining leverage factors. This should suggest
that at a leverage factor of 3, there is no additional risk-adjusted reward obtained
by taking on more leverage since the relationship between reward (as measured by
Sharpe ratio) and leverage becomes negative. Suggesting it is possible to get a higher
risk-adjusted return with less leverage. Looking at the right part of the curve in figure
4.5, it’s evident that the ratios seem to show some asymptotic tendency to some value
before the model crashes, as the negative slope of the curve starts decreasing. This
is likely to stem from the total leverage over time and thus the proportion of bond
indices in the portfolios. Displayed in figure 4.6 is the amount of borrowed capital
proportional to the account value over time for a few selected values of the maximum
allowed leverage factor. Two high values of these debt ratios are plotted in the bottom
panes of the figure (strategies with maximum leverage factors 16 and 18). At certain
times these two strategies have the same leverage, even though the latter is allowed
to take on 200% additional leverage. This implies that at certain times, for a high
leverage allowance, it isn’t favourable for the model to fully borrow its limit. This
is also apparent for smaller leverage factors, for instance in 2012 the model doesn’t
deem it profitable to leverage the portfolio over a factor of approximately 4 (300% of
account value) and again in 2014. So at certain times, the risk seems to have the upper
hand in the increased leverage risk-return trade-off. With a higher leverage factor,
the portfolio is less frequently fully leveraged, explaining the asymptotic behaviour
illustrated in figure 4.5). It is also interesting to see that it isn’t until September of
2009 that the model considers it favourable to start being fully leveraged. At that
time, the equity markets had began to recuperate from the crash and the euro interest
rates had dropped considerably (see figure 3.1).
In summary, a strategy with a leverage factor of 3 seems to perform best as mea-
sured by Sharpe ratio but strategies with factors 4 and 5, display similar performance
and so those three strategies will be considered in the analysis and comparison in the
following section. The increased risk associated with increasing leverage seems to
outweigh the potential return at times, demonstrated by the fact that in certain time
periods, strategies with a large maximum allowed leverage factors don’t fully utilise
the allowed leverage.
4.3
Performance Analysis
The aim of this section is to compare the leveraged strategies settled on in the previous
section (leverage factors 3, 4 and 5) to the naïve 1/N benchmark portfolio introduced
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Analysis
Leverage proportional to account value
0%
50%
100%
150%
200%
LF: 3
0%
225%
450%
675%
900%
LF: 10
0%
375%
750%
1125%
1500%
LF: 16
2007
2010
2013
2015
2018
0%
425%
850%
1275%
1700%
LF: 18
Figure 4.6: A strategy’s ratio of debt and account value (leverage factor - 1) in each
time period. For strategies with maximum allowed leverage factors of
3, 10, 16 and 18.
in section 2.1.3.1 and a non-leveraged strategy (leverage factor 1). The section is split
into two main parts, performance and risks, and risk-adjusted return.
4.3.1
Performance and Risks
The performance analysis starts by presenting (table 4.3) a number of deviation risk
measures and measures of downside risk for the strategies. The five strategies are
also compared by their account values over the whole investment period and by the
quartiles of their return distributions in box plots in the left and right pane of figure
4.7 respectively.
It can be seen in the left pane of figure 4.7, that the benchmark and strategies
perform rather similarly in the beginning, although the strategies take a slightly larger
dive in the banking crisis of 2007-2009 due to larger positions in risky equity indices
than the 1/N benchmark. The strategies start to diverge from the benchmark in mid-
2010 and start to perform better throughout the remainder of the time horizon. The
leveraged strategies start to perform much better than the other two in 2011 when
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Performance Analysis
41
2007
2010
2013
2015
2018
Year
100,000
350,000
600,000
850,000
1,100,000
1,350,000
1,600,000
1,850,000
2,100,000
EUR
Adjusted Strategy Value (Account value)
1/N
LF: 1
LF: 3
LF: 4
LF: 5
1/N
LF: 1
LF: 3
LF: 4
LF: 5
Strategies
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
4-Week Returns
Distribution of returns
Figure 4.7: Strategy value over the whole investment period for the 1/N benchmark,
the non-leveraged and leveraged strategies with a leverage factor of 3,
4 and 5 (left). Box plots of the return distributions of the values of the
same strategies (right)..
the portfolios have become more leveraged (see figure 4.6) and reach substantial short
time growths and losses, indicating that they’re more volatile strategies than the two
non-leveraged ones. These properties are also illustrated in the box plots in the right
pane of figure 4.7, namely that higher leveraged strategies have numerically larger
quartiles, suggesting higher return potential and larger deviations.
Inspecting table 4.3 it is clear that the strategies perform better in terms of mean
returns than the 1/N benchmark portfolio. However, they also have more variation
in the returns. reported by the return volatility (standard deviation), implying that
the four strategies (and especially the three leveraged ones) are riskier than the 1/N
benchmark. The standard deviation of the downside portrays similar behaviour, the
increased risk between the strategy with a leverage factor of 3 and the two non-
leveraged ones is proportionally smaller than the risk increase measured by volatility.
Suggesting a smaller deviation increase in the downside. The downside deviation in-
crease, incurred by moving from the strategy with leverage factor 3 to the strategies
with leverage factors 4 and 5 is proportionally very similar to the increase measured
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Analysis
Table 4.3: Out-of-sample performance measures of the strategies over the invest-
ment period (2007-09-03 to 2019-04-02).
Benchmark
Optimised with Leverage factor
Naïve 1/N
1
3
4
5
Average Return
6.515%
7.423%
18.447%
22.686%
26.638%
Volatility
11.851%
13.007%
18.334%
23.203%
28.611%
Downside Deviation
8.480%
9.414%
11.274%
14.073%
17.249%
VaR99%
39.951%
39.687%
46.378%
58.612%
68.368%
CVaR99%
47.049%
50.160%
52.495%
62.932%
78.193%
CVaR Deviation99%
45.222%
48.086%
47.573%
56.979%
71.308%
by the total deviation (volatility). Looking at the value-at-risk shows that the bench-
mark and the non-leveraged strategy are approximately equally risky out-of-sample
but the VaR steadily increases with increased leverage factors. To that regard, it’s
clear that the risk increase, incurred by moving to a 3 times leveraged strategy from
the benchmark (and also the non-leveraged strategy) is proportionally smaller than
moving to either, 4 or 5 times leveraged strategies from the 3 times leveraged strategy.
The riskiness of the strategies measured by CVaR shows a conservative risk increase
between the benchmark and the 3 times leveraged strategy and an even more con-
servative increase from the non-leveraged strategy. There is however a much larger
increase in CVaR between the 3 times leveraged strategy and the 4 and 5 times lever-
aged strategies. The CVaR deviation shows, that when the CVaR is adjusted for
returns, the 3 times leveraged strategy is actually less risky than the non-leveraged
strategy and only slightly more risky than the highly diversified 1/N benchmark. The
4 and 5 times leveraged strategies have a considerably larger CVaR deviation than
the others.
The statistical significance of the mean returns is addressed before continuing on
to the next part of the analysis. That is done by applying the paired two-sample t-test
for equality of means, introduced in section 2.2.7.1. Table 4.4 depicts the results from
individually comparing the five strategies with the hypotheses defined in (2.22) and
(2.23). Using the same notation as the section and the definition of dt = rB
t −rP
t , a
column in table 4.4 represents a strategy with a time series rP
t and a row represents
a strategy with the time series rB
t .
Inspecting the resulting p-values in table 4.4 suggests the mean return of the non-
leveraged strategy is not significant to that of the 1/N benchmark since the t statistic
falls outside the significance level of α = 0.05. The mean difference in returns of the
leveraged strategies and the 1/N benchmark is highly significant in all cases but the
mean difference within leverage factors is significant. So this prompts the author to
reject the null (H0) for all the leveraged strategies and to assume the alternatives
(HA). In other words, the mean returns of the leveraged strategies can be considered
larger than the mean returns of the benchmark and non-leveraged strategy, and the
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Performance Analysis
43
Table 4.4: Results from the paired two sample t-tests for equality of means. The
test is for the equality of the geometric mean of the benchmark and the
non-leveraged and leveraged strategies with leverage factors 3, 4 and 5.
The hypothesis is that, the the mean difference between the time series
of the strategy in a column and the time series of the strategy in a row,
is equal. The alternative is that the mean of the strategy in a column is
greater than the mean of the strategy in a row.
.
LF: 1
LF: 3
LF: 4
LF: 5
t
p-val
t
p-val
t
p-val
t
p-val
1/N
-1.038
0.1506
-3.302
0.0006***
-3.253
0.00071***
-3.296
0.00061***
LF: 1
–
–
-3.067
0.00129**
-3.067
0.00128**
-3.147
0.00100**
LF: 3
–
–
–
–
-2.575
0.0055**
-2.7326
0.00352**
LF: 4
–
–
–
–
–
–
-2.657
0.00437**
mean returns of higher leveraged strategies can be considered larger than the mean
returns of strategies with a lower leverage factor.
One measure of downside risk was introduced in section 2.2 and has yet to be ad-
dressed, the maximum drawdown (MDD). Table 4.5 displays the maximum drawdown
and the date when these troughs occurred for the benchmark and four strategies. All
the strategies have the trough at the same time in the financial crisis of 2007-2009.
The benefit of diversification and large positions in bonds is clear as the benchmark
suffers a considerably smaller drawdown compared to the non-leveraged strategy. Al-
though the strategies were only leveraged by a small amount at that time (see figure
4.6), the effect of leveraging can still be seen. This appears in that, the 3 times lever-
aged strategy suffers a slightly deeper drop than the non-leveraged one. But only by
a margin, since at that point the leveraged strategies were only leveraged to a small
equal amount, explaining their equal MDD.
Table 4.5: The maximum drawdown (MDD) of the benchmark and the four strate-
gies. along with the date when each trough is realised.
Strategy
MDD
Date
1/N
-38.794%
16/02/2009
LF: 1
-45.502%
16/02/2009
LF: 3
-45.889%
16/02/2009
LF: 4
-45.889%
16/02/2009
LF: 5
-45.889%
16/02/2009
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Analysis
In summary, the leveraged strategies do outperform the non-leveraged one and
the benchmark in terms of annualised return but in general, they do carry more risk.
The strategy with a leverage factor of 3 seems to have more conservative downside
risk, according to the various risk and deviation measures in table 4.3, than the other
leveraged strategies. Especially when the increased downside risk the investor takes
on by increasing the leverage is considered.
4.3.2
Risk Adjusted Performance Measures
The risk-adjusted performance analysis starts by revisiting the standard Sharpe ratio
as well as presenting the CVaR deviation Sharpe ratio and the Sortino ratio for the
four strategies and the benchmark (see table 4.6).
Table 4.6: Risk adjusted returns for the benchmark and four strategies.
Benchmark
Optimised with Leverage factor
Naïve 1/N
1
3
4
5
Sharpe Ratio [st. dev.]
0.53374
0.56441
0.98069
0.97176
0.94979
Sharpe Ratio [CVaR dev.]
0.14034
0.15288
0.37921
0.39705
0.38236
Sortino Ratio
0.74838
0.78093
1.60018
1.60758
1.58070
Inspecting the standard Sharpe ratios in table 4.6 reveals similar results as in
the previous section and table 4.3. Namely, that the strategies perform better than
the benchmark and of those, the 3 times leveraged strategy performs best. However,
this has for the most part been demonstrated before (section 4.2) and these ratios
don’t tell a tall tale by themselves and require tests of statistical significance which
are introduced later in this section. The CVaR deviation based Sharpe ratios tell
a different story, however, i.e. that the 4 and 5 times leveraged strategies perform
slightly better than the 3 times leveraged strategy. The benchmark and non-leveraged
strategy display similar characteristics as in the standard Sharpe ratio. The Sortino
ratio suggests 3 and 4 times leveraged portfolios have the best risk-adjusted returns
with a very marginally higher Sortino ratio for the latter, the performance of the
other portfolios is however in line with previous results.
The significance of the standard Sharpe ratios is tested using the test for equality of
multiple Sharpe ratios introduced in section 2.2.7.2. Table 4.7 shows the test results
for the hypotheses defined in (2.25) and (2.26), where the significance of only one
ratio is tested against another. The table is organised in a similar way to table 4.4.
The equality of the Sharpe ratios of the three leveraged strategies is also tested with
hypotheses (2.25) and (2.28), the results of which are shown in table 4.8.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Performance Analysis
45
Table 4.7: Results of the test for equality of two Sharpe ratios. Testing the signif-
icance Of the Sharpe ratios for the benchmark and the non-leveraged
and leveraged strategies with leverage factors 3, 4 and 5. The hypothesis
is, that the difference between the Sharpe ratio of the strategy in the
column and the Sharpe ratio of the strategy in the row is equal. The
alternative is that the Sharpe ratio of the strategy in a column is greater
than that of the strategy in a row.
.
LF: 1
LF: 3
LF: 4
LF: 5
t
p-val
t
p-val
t
p-val
t
p-val
1/N
-0.3801
0.35220
-1.849
0.03323*
-1.464
0.07267
-1.247
0.1071
LF: 1
–
–
-1.722
0.04358*
-1.346
0.09025
-1.138
0.12840
LF: 3
–
–
–
–
0,124
0,54940
0.268
0.60530
LF: 4
–
–
–
–
–
–
0.496
0.68960
Table 4.8: Results of the test for equality of the Sharpe ratios of the strategies with
leverage factors 3, 4 and 5.
.
T 2
p-val
0.045
0.83140
For the same significance level as before (α = 0.05), the first p-value in table 4.7
suggests support for the null, that the Sharpe ratios of the 1/N benchmark and the
non-leveraged strategy are equal. So it cannot be concluded that the non-leveraged
strategy performs better than the benchmark as measured by the Sharpe ratio. Con-
trary, the p-values for the hypotheses of the strategy with a leverage factor of 3 being
statistically significant to the 1/N benchmark and the non-leveraged strategy suggest
rejecting the null and thus assuming the alternative in both cases. On the other hand,
the p-values for the hypothesis comparing the Sharpe ratios of the higher leveraged
strategies (4 and 5) to the benchmark and the non-leveraged strategy, dictate that
the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. Meaning, their Sharpe ratios cannot be as-
sumed to be larger than the benchmark and non-leveraged strategy. There is however
reasonable doubt for these ratios, especially when comparing 4 times leveraged strat-
egy to the benchmark and non-leveraged strategy. From the table, it can also be
concluded that there is not a significant difference in the Sharpe ratios for a strategy
with a leverage factor of 3 and 4, 3 and 5 or 4 and 5, as the p-values suggest the
assumption of the null hypothesis. The same is suggested by the T 2 statistic and
p-value in table 4.8. In short, the Sharpe ratio of the 3 times leveraged strategy is
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Analysis
the only one that can be assumed to be statistically significant to the benchmark and
non-leveraged strategy.
In summary, the highest risk-adjusted returns are obtained by strategies with
leverage factors 3 and 4. In addition, according to the statistical test conducted in
the section, a standard Sharpe ratio of a strategy with a leverage factor of 3 is the
only one that is statistically significant to that of the benchmark and non-leveraged
strategy.
4.4
Quantiles and Normality
This section inspects the distributions of the benchmark and strategies from the
previous section. The main purpose of the section is to inspect the normality of the
return distributions of the strategies and benchmark. But the section starts by taking
a look at some of the measures introduced in the previous section as quantiles on the
loss distribution of the 3 times leveraged strategy (figure 4.8).
CVaR
VaR
Risk Free
Rate
CVaR Deviation
Geometric
Mean
Standard Deviation
Downside Dev
Figure 4.8: Out-of-sample loss distribution of the strategy with a leverage factor of
3. With the various measures discussed in section 4.3 marked on the
distribution’s quantiles..
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Quantiles and Normality
47
−2
−1
0
1
2
Theoretical quantiles
−0.15
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Ordered Values
1/N Nai e Benchmark
−2
−1
0
1
2
Theoretical quantiles
−0.15
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Ordered Values
Le erage Factor 1
−2
−1
0
1
2
Theoretical quantiles
−0.15
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Ordered Values
Le erage Factor 3
−2
−1
0
1
2
Theoretical quantiles
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Ordered Values
Le erage Factor 5
Figure 4.9: The Q-Q plots, comparing the quantiles of return distribution and
the quantiles of the normal distribution for the benchmark, the non-
leveraged strategy and the leveraged strategies with leverage factors of
3 and 5..
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Analysis
Due to the underlying assumption of normality of some of the measures introduced
in the previous section, the normality of the strategies’ return distributions has to
be addressed, this will, as expected be done using the methods introduced in section
2.2.8. The Results of these are illustrated in table 4.9 and figure 4.9.
Table 4.9: The sample skewness and kurtosis as well as the results from a Jarque-
Bera test of normality, for the benchmark and the non-leveraged and
leveraged strategies..
Skewness
Kurtosis
JB
p-value
Benchmark
-1,196
6,636
118,400
<2,20E-16
LF 1
-1,284
6,482
116,960
<2,20E-16
LF 3
-0,504
3,892
11,331
0,01150
LF 4
-0,384
3,684
6,616
0,03750
LF 5
-0,334
3,681
5,694
0,04950*
Inspecting the Q-Q plots in figure 4.9 gives an idea of how the quantiles of the
return distributions (indicated by blue dots) fit the quantiles of the normal distribu-
tion (indicated by the red line). The Q-Q plot for the strategy with a leverage factor
of 4 was omitted as it didn’t add any considerable information over the plot in the
lower right pane. The figures show that the benchmark and non-leveraged strategy
have a larger deviation from the normal quantiles than the two leveraged strategies.
From table 4.9 it can be seen that the return distributions of the benchmark and
non-leveraged strategy have larger negative skewness and greater kurtosis than the
leveraged portfolios. In fact, according to the table, the larger leverage in the strategy,
the more its return distribution resembles the normal distribution. This is demon-
strated by the fact that the skewness appears to slowly near 0. meaning that the
distributions approach symmetry with increased leverage. The kurtosis declines with
the higher leverage factor as well and becomes relatively close to the value of 3 which
indeed characterises the normal distribution. But the strategies in table 4.9 all have
positive excess kurtosis or equivalently the return distributions of the strategies are
all leptokurtic, the non-leveraged are however a great deal more so, suggesting the
return distributions of the non-leveraged strategies are more peaked and with fatter
tails. The effects of this can also to some extent be seen in the box plots in figure 4.7
as leveraged strategies appear more symmetric and with fewer outliers. The results
of the Jarque-Bera normality test show a similar narrative. The p-values for the hy-
potheses on the two non-leveraged strategies are so small, they exceed the minimum
floating point number in the statistical software used to conduct the test. Therefore
it suggests very strong evidence against the hypothesis, meaning there is very strong
evidence that both distributions are not normal. The distributions of the returns
for leverage factors 3 and 4 have a much larger p-value than the non-leveraged ones,
however not significant enough to be assumed normal. Contrary, for a significance
level of α = 0.05, the p-value for the leverage factor of 5 could support the assumption
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Quantiles and Normality
49
that the data comes from a normal distribution, but only barely. These results match
what’s illustrated in figure 4.9.
It was mentioned in a previous section, that the Sharpe ratio assumes normality of
the underlying data but as the tests above have shown, the returns can for the most
part not be assumed normal. That does not render the results from last sections
useless but it instead pushes the recognition of additional risks that may be present
in the portfolios. It’s been attempted to address some of these additional risks in var-
ious ways in section 4.3.1, namely, in terms of downside risk measures and deviation
risk measures. Regarding the comparison of the Sharpe ratios of the leveraged and
non-leveraged strategies, it is maintained that the conclusions that were drawn from
the statistical tests of equality suffice. Where they showed a statistical significance
of the 3 times leveraged Sharpe ratio over the non-leveraged strategies. The author
feels that one risk has yet to be addressed concerning the leveraged strategies, interest
rate risk. Interest rates in the eurozone have undoubtedly been very favourable for
borrowers in the past ten years, as is well documented in figure 3.1. However, there is
always, the ever-lurking possibility of interest rates rising, which would consequently
decrease the investor’s net return and thus increase the likelihood of default.
Al-
though at the time of writing this thesis, with rising inflation forecasts in the EU, the
interest rate policies of the European Central Bank (ECB) will, according to ECB
president Mario Draghi ”remain at their present levels at least through the first half
of 2020” [Meredith 2019]. By that, there will likely continue to be enough supply
of cheap and readily available capital for some time. But at such times where there
is an abundance of cheap capital, it is especially important not to overestimate the
ability of leverage and ignore its limitations. With that said, the strategy that has
shown most favourable throughout this analysis has a relatively conservative gearing
of 2-to-1 and the price of money would need to ”skyrocket” in a short time to have
serious effects on the strategy.
(In appendix A.1 are a few figures, illustrating concepts and approaches that did
not make it into the analysis chapter, the reader is encouraged to take a look at these
if time allows).
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The goal of the thesis was to explore the effects leveraging has on portfolio returns,
to see if leveraging adds any value to a portfolio and see if it is possible to achieve a
higher risk-adjusted return on a leveraged portfolio than a non-leveraged portfolio. A
leveraged asset allocation strategy was proposed along with stochastic programming
optimisation models to try to address these questions.
The analysis started by looking at which of the two scenario generation methods
(bootstrapping and Monte Carlo) resulted in better out-of-sample performance for the
strategy. The analysis showed that the stationary multivariate normal method gave
much better performance for various levels of strategy leverage. It was concluded,
that this came from the bootstrapping model’s over-dependency of the close future
and its tendency to overfit the training data. The Monte Carlo method, however, had
a much greater ability to generalise, which in harmony with strategy’s risk control,
resulted in a good out-of-sample performance in terms of the account value, volatility
and Sharpe ratio.
Using the Monte Carlo scenarios, the next step in the analysis was to examine the
strategy’s risk-adjusted returns for several different amounts of leverage, including
no leverage at all. This was in terms of the standard Sharpe ratio and the analysis
concluded that the 3 times leveraged strategy had the highest risk-adjusted return
but was closely followed by factors 4 and 5. In addition, the analysis showed that
at certain time periods, the risk associated with increasing leverage outweighed the
potential return increase.
These three leverage factors (3, 4 and 5) were then analysed further and com-
pared to a benchmark and a non-leveraged strategy. That showed that the leveraged
strategies did indeed provide statistically greater mean returns but at the cost of
higher risk. These risks were measured by means of the downside and various devi-
ation measures, which showed that in general, the strategy with a leverage factor of
3 showed more conservative risk characteristics than the other leveraged strategies.
The analysis also looked at a few risk-adjusted return measures, which showed that
strategies with leverage factors 3 and 4 generally had the highest risk-adjusted return
and that the standard Sharpe ratio of the 3 times leveraged strategy was statistically
significant to the benchmark and non-leveraged strategy.
The study concluded by looking at the normality of the strategies’ return dis-
tributions. The analysis showed that for the most part the strategies could not be
assumed normal but the leveraged strategies did show more normal tendencies. Fur-
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Conclusion
thermore, for the three leveraged strategies, a higher leverage factor resulted in a
greater resemblance to the normal distribution.
These analyses suggest that leverage can indeed add value to an investment strat-
egy both in terms of total return and when adjusted for risk. It was observed that
adopting a conservative amount of leverage is beneficial in the long-run. To that end,
a conservative leverage factor of 3 in an investment strategy seems to give the best
performance overall in the markets considered in this thesis.
5.1
Future
The multivariate normal Monte Carlo simulation is very simple and by nature doesn’t
incorporate any statistics other than the mean and dispersion, which can cause the
model to underestimate the downside. A possibly better approach would be to try
to incorporate some of these statistics in the scenario distribution. This could, for
instance, be in terms of adding negative skewness or by fitting another distribution
to the left tail through the application of extreme value theory as proposed by Sheikh
and Qiao 2009.
The strategy has a linear borrowing function, which is a simplification of the real
world. For example, as pointed out before, financial institutions have credit limits
and a minimum borrowing costs which could be incorporated in a piecewise linear
borrowing cost function as Valladão et al. 2018 implemented in their strategy. To
that end, this thesis does not incorporate a margin account into the strategy. Such
an account would likely be set up by the financial institution, requiring a certain
percentage of the total exposure being deposited in each period and thus somewhat
limiting the total returns.
A more robust approach in testing the equality of Sharpe ratios given two time
series could be adopted, for instance, Ledoit and Wolf 2008 suggest ”to construct a
studentized time series bootstrap confidence interval for the ratio of the two variances
and to declare the two variances different if the value one is not contained in the
obtained interval”.
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Analysis
Some figures relating to the subject of chapter 4
2007-09-03
2009-01-19
2010-06-07
2011-10-24
2013-03-11
2014-07-28
2015-12-14
2017-05-01
2018-09-17
Date
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Proportion of portfolio
Portfolio Composition - Leverage Factor 3 [Mv. Norm.]
SMALL_LoBO
ME1_BO2
ME1_BO3
ME1_BO4
SMALL_HiBO
ME2_BO1
ME2_BO2
ME2_BO3
ME2_BO4
ME2_BO5
ME3_BO1
ME3_BO2
ME3_BO3
ME3_BO4
ME3_BO5
ME4_BO1
ME4_BO2
ME4_BO3
ME4_BO4
ME4_BO5
BIG_LoBO
ME5_BO2
ME5_BO3
ME5_BO4
BIG_HiBO
LEATTREU_Index
LET1TREU_Index
LET3TREU_Index
LET5TREU_Index
LET7TREU_Index
LET0TREU_Index
Figure A.1: Percentage position of the indices in the 3 times leveraged portfolio
constructed using with stationary multivariate normal Monte Carlo
scenarios.
==PAGE:64==
54
A Appendix
2007-09-03 2009-01-19 2010-06-07 2011-10-24 2013-03-11 2014-07-28 2015-12-14 2017-05-01 2018-09-17
Date
100,000
300,000
500,000
700,000
900,000
1,100,000
1,300,000
1,500,000
1,700,000
1,900,000
2,100,000
2,300,000
2,500,000
EUR
Model Attributes - Leverage Factor 3
Total exposure in Portfolio
Account balance
Increased Leverage
Decreased Leverage
Figure A.2: Some attributes from the model (multivariate normal Monte Carlo sce-
narios) for the 3 times leveraged strategy. The figure illustrates the
portfolio’s total exposure over time, the strategy value (Account value)
and the amount of increased and decreased leverage in each time pe-
riod.
==PAGE:65==
A.1 Analysis
55
2007-09-03
2009-01-19
2010-06-07
2011-10-24
2013-03-11
2014-07-28
2015-12-14
2017-05-01
2018-09-17
Date
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
140,000
160,000
180,000
EUR
Portfolio Value - Leverage Factor 1 [Bootstr.]
99.0-confidence interval
Returns
Figure A.3: Total exposure of the non-leveraged bootstrapping portfolio and 99%
prediction intervals of the respective scenarios.
The author recom-
mends considering figure 4.3 alongside this plot.
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
0.0
0.2
Density
ME1_BO3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
ME2_BO2
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
ME3_BO2
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
ME4_BO2
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Return
ME5_BO2
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.025
0.000
0.025
Return
LEATTREU_Index
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
0.0
0.2
Density
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.025
0.000
0.025
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
0.0
0.2
Density
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.025
0.000
0.025
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
0.0
0.2
Density
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Return
−0.025
0.000
0.025
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Return
0.0
0.2
Density
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Return
−0.025
0.000
0.025
Return
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Return
−0.2
0.0
Return
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Return
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Return
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Return
0.0
0.2
Density
Distribution of Market Returns
Figure A.4: Scatter plots to view the correlation between 5 equity indices (one of
each size group) and 1 bond index over the whole investment period.
On the diagonal is plotted each index’s return distribution .
==PAGE:66==
56
A Appendix
A.2
Python Scripts
Class.py
Script defining various functions used in the python codes
1
import datetime
2
import numpy as np
3
from matplotlib.pyplot import boxplot, grid, show, ioff, gcf, xticks,
title, ylabel, subplot, subplots, suptitle, hist, xlabel, ylabel,
plot, figure, close, clf, yticks, ylim, legend, bar
,→
,→
4
import math
5
import matplotlib.animation as animation
6
import matplotlib.ticker as ticker
7
8
9
10
def Date_Excel2Python(ExcelDate):
11
start_date = datetime.datetime(1900, 1, 1) #Excel start date
12
13
N = len(ExcelDate)
14
PythonDate = np.empty((N), dtype='datetime64[D]')
15
for date in range(len(ExcelDate)):
16
tmp_date = start_date +
datetime.timedelta(days=ExcelDate[date] - 2)
,→
17
PythonDate[date] = tmp_date.date()
18
return PythonDate
19
20
21
22
def Date_str2datetime(dateString):
23
date = datetime.datetime.strptime(dateString, '%Y-%m-%d')
24
return date
25
26
def Date_str2datetimeList(dateStringList):
27
N = len(dateStringList)
28
dateList = np.empty((N), dtype='datetime64[D]')
29
for date in range(N):
30
tmp_date =
datetime.datetime.strptime(dateStringList[date],
'%Y-%m-%d')
,→
,→
31
dateList[date] = tmp_date.date()
32
return dateList
33
34
==PAGE:67==
A.2 Python Scripts
57
35
def Plot_ReturnsWithConfidence(Returns, Sims, Dates, alpha):
36
#Plot an assets returns with confidence interval
37
#Returns - two dimensional returns matrix
38
#Sims - three dimensional matrix of simulations
39
#Assets - one dimensinal array of Asset names
40
#Dates - one dimensional array of Dates
41
#Asset_No - Int, index of asset to be plotted
42
#alpha - confidence interval ex. 0.99 or 0.95
43
44
#Convert Returns to appropriate format
45
Returns = np.array(Returns)
46
47
#Attributes
48
N_rolls = len(Returns)
49
NO = range(1, N_rolls + 1)
50
51
#Compute two sided confidence interval
52
lower = np.percentile(Sims, (1-alpha)/2*100, axis=1)
53
upper = np.percentile(Sims, (alpha + (1-alpha)/2)*100,
axis=1)
,→
54
55
56
#Lets count how when portfolio goes outside its respective
confidence interval
,→
57
58
FalseLower = (Returns < lower).astype(int)
59
FalseUpper = (Returns > upper).astype(int)
60
61
N_FalseLower = sum(FalseLower)
62
N_FalseUpper = sum(FalseUpper)
63
64
LowerError = N_FalseLower/N_rolls
65
UpperError = N_FalseUpper/N_rolls
66
Error = LowerError + UpperError
67
68
69
#We only want to plot nonzero values (i.e. where we cash out
of the portfolio)
,→
70
lower[lower == 0] = np.nan
71
upper[upper == 0] = np.nan
72
Returns[Returns == 0.0 ] = np.nan
73
74
#Plot
==PAGE:68==
58
A Appendix
75
fig = figure()
76
ax = subplot(111)
77
ax.plot(NO, lower, color='#E3434F')
78
ax.plot(NO, Returns, color='#2F3AF9')
79
ax.plot(NO, upper, color = '#E3434F')
80
title('Portfolio Value - Leverage Factor 1 [Bootstr.]',
fontsize=16)
,→
81
legend(['{}-confidence
interval'.format(alpha*100),'Returns'], fontsize=14)
,→
82
xlabel('Date', fontsize=14)
83
ylabel('EUR', fontsize=14)
84
idx = list(range(0, 9))
85
window = math.floor(N_rolls/(len(idx) - 1))
86
idx = [i * window
for i in idx]
87
xticks(idx, Dates[idx])
88
grid(b=True, axis='both')
89
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda
x, p: format(int(x), ',')))
,→
90
show()
91
92
print('Number of realizations below lower {}% confidence
interval: {} or {}%\nNumber of realizations below above
{}% confidence interval: {} or {}%\nTotal Error
{}%'.format(alpha*100, N_FalseLower, round(LowerError*100,
2), alpha*100, N_FalseUpper, round(UpperError*100, 2),
round(Error*100, 2)))
,→
,→
,→
,→
,→
93
94
return(N_FalseLower, N_FalseUpper, LowerError, UpperError,
Error)
,→
95
96
97
98
def readBySheet(file, SheetName):
99
sheet = file.sheet_by_name(SheetName)
100
rows = sheet.nrows
101
cols = sheet.ncols
102
103
Data = np.empty((cols, rows), dtype=float)
104
105
for row in range(cols):
106
Data[row, :] = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(row, 0,
rows))
,→
107
==PAGE:69==
A.2 Python Scripts
59
108
return(Data)
FamaFrenchReadBondDump.py
Code for reading in all the data and performing appropriate data manipulations.
1
#© Sveinn Heiðar Kristjánsson - DTU 2019
2
3
#Import data..
4
from Class import *
5
#from Scenario2 import *
6
#..Includes following packages
7
#import datetime
8
#import numpy as np
9
10
#Import following packages
11
import xlrd
12
import math
13
import xlwt
14
import pandas as pd
15
from matplotlib.pyplot import suptitle, axvline, text, subplots,
boxplot, xlim, show, xticks, title, ylabel, subplot, hist,
xlabel, ylabel, plot, figure, yticks, ylim, legend, bar, grid
,→
,→
16
import matplotlib.ticker as ticker
17
import scipy.stats as stats
18
import pylab
19
20
loc_string = 'C:\\Users\\s171947\\OneDrive\\Documents\\Verkfræði Vor
2019\\Optimizing Leveraged Asset Allocation
Strategies\\Models\\FamaFrench\\RollingAttributes\\Variables\\'
,→
,→
21
22
#CVaR
23
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'Combined.xlsx')
24
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('CVaR')
25
rows = sheet.nrows
26
cols = sheet.ncols
27
28
N_ports = cols
29
N_rolls = rows
30
31
CVaR = readBySheet(fil, 'CVaR')
32
Sharpe = readBySheet(fil, 'Sharpe')
33
Account = readBySheet(fil, 'Account')
==PAGE:70==
60
A Appendix
34
AccountReturn = readBySheet(fil, 'AccountReturns')
35
AccopuntMonthlyReturn = readBySheet(fil, 'AccopuntMonthlyReturn')
36
Colors = [(70/256, 69/256, 109/256), (89/256, 101/256, 239/256),
(236/256, 101/256, 108/256)]
,→
37
38
Colors = ['#2F3AF9', '#742298', '#E3434F', '#F87528', '#F6CE43',
'#349F5B', '#85EABE', '#349F5B']
,→
39
40
NO = np.linspace(0, N_rolls - 1, N_rolls)
41
42
43
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'DatesIdx.xlsx')
44
Date_label = readBySheet(fil, 'DatesIdx')
45
46
47
#Read in sharpe ratios as function of leverage factor
48
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'SR_Leverage.xlsx')
49
SRLeverage = readBySheet(fil, 'Sheet1')
50
N_SR = len(SRLeverage[0, :])
51
52
#Read in leverage ratios for some portfolios
53
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'LeverageRatios.xlsx')
54
rows = sheet.nrows
55
cols = sheet.ncols
56
57
LeverageRatios = readBySheet(fil, 'Leverage Ratios')
58
medians = np.median(LeverageRatios[2:14, :], axis=1)
59
60
61
#compare a few portfolios of bootsrapping and norm
62
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'NormvBoot.xlsx')
63
NvBAccount = readBySheet(fil, 'Account Values')
64
NvBReturn = readBySheet(fil, 'Account Returns')
65
NvBAnnual = readBySheet(fil, 'Account Returns Annual')
66
67
ones_array = np.ones(len(NvBReturn[0,:]), dtype=float)
68
69
geomean = stats.mstats.gmean(ones_array + NvBReturn[3, :]) - 1
70
amean = np.mean(NvBReturn[3, :])
71
stdev = np.std(NvBReturn[3, :])
72
upper_std = amean + stdev/2
73
lower_std = amean - stdev/2
74
VaRmonth = -0.13388
==PAGE:71==
A.2 Python Scripts
61
75
CVaRmonth = -0.15154
76
rf = 0.0584609/100
77
downside_dev = rf - 0.03254
78
79
80
81
#Benchmark returns
82
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'Bench.xlsx')
83
Bench = readBySheet(fil, 'Sheet1')
84
85
86
#Probability of default
87
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'PDs.xlsx')
88
pDefault = readBySheet(fil, 'Sheet1')
89
90
91
#Euribor
92
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'Euribor.xlsx')
93
Euribor = readBySheet(fil, 'Sheet1')
94
95
DTUred = (155/256,0,0)
96
#PD plot
97
fig = figure()
98
ax = fig.add_subplot(111)
99
ax.plot(pDefault[0, :], pDefault[1, :], color=DTUred, linewidth=3)
100
arr1 = np.asarray([0,1,2,3,4])
101
arr2 = np.arange(5, 95, 5)
102
xticks(np.concatenate((arr1,arr2)))
103
xlabel('Leverage Factor')
104
yticks(np.arange(0, 1.05, .05))
105
ylabel('Probability of Default')
106
grid(b=True, axis='y')
107
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
108
show()
109
110
111
#plot sharpe ratios as function of leverage
112
figure(1)
113
plot(SRLeverage[0, :], SRLeverage[2, :], 'o', color=Colors[0],
markersize=10, label='_nolegend_')
,→
114
plot(SRLeverage[0, 2], SRLeverage[2, 2], 'o', color=Colors[2],
markersize=10)
,→
115
title('Portfolio Sharpe Ratio', fontsize=16)
==PAGE:72==
62
A Appendix
116
ylim([0.1, 1.1])
117
yticks(np.arange(0.2, 1.1, 0.1))
118
xlim([-1, 21])
119
xlabel('Leverage Factor',fontsize=14)
120
xaxis = np.asarray([1,2,3,4,5,6,8,10,12,14,16,18])
121
xticks(xaxis)
122
grid(b=True, axis='both')
123
legend(['Highest'], numpoints=1)
124
show()
125
126
127
#Plot sharpe ratios as a function of time
128
figure(2)
129
subplot(2, 1, 1)
130
title('Rolling Monthly Period Sharpe Ratio')
131
plot(NO, Sharpe[0, :], color='black')
132
plot(NO, Sharpe[1, :], color=Colors[0])
133
grid(b=True, axis='both')
134
xticks(Date_label[0, :], Date_Excel2Python(Date_label[2, :]))
135
xlabel('Date')
136
yticks(np.arange(min([min(Sharpe[0, :]), min(Sharpe[1, :])]),
max([max(Sharpe[0, :]), max(Sharpe[1, :])]), 2))
,→
137
ylabel('Sharpe Ratio')
138
legend(['1/N-Benchmark Portfolio', 'Optimised Portfolio - No
Leverage'])
,→
139
140
subplot(2, 1, 2)
141
plot(NO, Sharpe[0, :], color='black')
142
plot(NO, Sharpe[2, :], color=Colors[2])
143
grid(b=True, axis='y')
144
xticks(Date_label[0, :], Date_Excel2Python(Date_label[2, :]))
145
xlabel('Date')
146
yticks(np.arange(min([min(Sharpe[0, :]), min(Sharpe[2, :])]),
max([max(Sharpe[0, :]), max(Sharpe[2, :])]), 2))
,→
147
ylabel('Sharpe Ratio')
148
legend(['1/N-Benchmark Portfolio', 'Optimised Portfolio - Leverage
Factor 3'])
,→
149
show()
150
151
152
#Plot Account value as a function of time
153
datesidx5 = np.asarray([0, 2, 4, 6, 8])
154
dates5 = Date_Excel2Python(Date_label[2, datesidx5])
==PAGE:73==
A.2 Python Scripts
63
155
dates5 = pd.DatetimeIndex(dates5)
156
dates5 = dates5.year
157
158
159
fig = figure(3)
160
ax = fig.add_subplot(1, 2, 1)
161
title('Adjusted Strategy Value (Account value)', fontsize=14)
162
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[0, :], color='black')
163
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[1, :], color=Colors[0])
164
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[2, :], color=Colors[2])
165
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[3, :], color=Colors[3])
166
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[4, :], color=Colors[4])
167
grid(b=True, axis='both')
168
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
169
xlabel('Year')
170
#yticks(np.arange(min([min(Sharpe[0, :]), min(Sharpe[1, :])]),
max([max(Sharpe[0, :]), max(Sharpe[1, :])]), 2))
,→
171
ylabel('EUR')
172
yticks(np.arange(100000, 2250000, 250000))
173
legend(['1/N', 'LF: 1', 'LF: 3', 'LF: 4', 'LF: 5'])
174
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda x, p:
format(int(x), ',')))
,→
175
176
177
ax = fig.add_subplot(1, 2, 2)
178
bplot = boxplot([AccopuntMonthlyReturn[0, :],
AccopuntMonthlyReturn[1, :], AccopuntMonthlyReturn[2, :],
AccopuntMonthlyReturn[3, :], AccopuntMonthlyReturn[4, :]],
,→
,→
179
notch=True,
180
vert=True,
181
patch_artist=True)
182
title('Distribution of returns', fontsize=14)
183
xticks([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], ['1/N','LF: 1','LF: 3','LF: 4','LF: 5'],
fontsize=12)
,→
184
xlabel('Strategies')
185
ylabel('4-Week Returns')
186
fillcolors = ['black', Colors[0], Colors[2], Colors[3], Colors[4]]
187
for patch, color in zip(bplot['boxes'], fillcolors):
188
patch.set_facecolor(color)
189
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
190
#legend([bplot["boxes"][0], bplot["boxes"][1], bplot["boxes"][2],
bplot["boxes"][3], bplot["boxes"][4]], ['1/N', 'LF: 1', 'LF: 3',
'LF: 4', 'LF: 5'])
,→
,→
==PAGE:74==
64
A Appendix
191
grid(b=True, axis='y')
192
show()
193
194
195
# figure(4)
196
# boxplot([AccountReturn[0, :], AccountReturn[1, :], AccountReturn[2,
:]])
,→
197
# grid(b=True, axis='y')
198
# xticks([1, 2, 3], ['Benchmark', 'No Leverage', 'Leverage Factor
3'])
,→
199
# show()
200
201
202
203
204
figure(5)
205
ax = subplot(2, 2, 1)
206
#suptitle('Account', fontsize=18)
207
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[1, :], color = Colors[2])
208
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[7, :], color = Colors[0])
209
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
210
xlabel('Year')
211
yticks(np.arange(50000, 300000, 25000))
212
ylabel('EUR')
213
legend(['Stationary MN Disribution', 'Bootstrapping'])
214
grid(b=True, axis='both')
215
title('Leverage Factor 1', fontsize=14)
216
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda x, p:
format(int(x), ',')))
,→
217
218
219
ax = subplot(2, 2, 2)
220
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[3, :], color = Colors[2])
221
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[9, :], color = Colors[0])
222
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
223
xlabel('Year')
224
yticks(np.arange(50000, 900000, 100000))
225
ylabel('EUR')
226
legend(['Stationary MN Disribution', 'Bootstrapping'])
227
grid(b=True, axis='both')
228
title('Leverage Factor 3', fontsize=14)
229
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda x, p:
format(int(x), ',')))
,→
==PAGE:75==
A.2 Python Scripts
65
230
231
232
ax = subplot(2, 2, 3)
233
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[6, :], color = Colors[2])
234
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[12, :], color = Colors[0])
235
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
236
xlabel('Year')
237
grid(b=True, axis='both')
238
title('Leverage Factor 6', fontsize=14)
239
yticks(np.arange(50000, 3000000, 250000))
240
ylabel('EUR')
241
legend(['Stationary MN Disribution', 'Bootstrapping'])
242
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda x, p:
format(int(x), ',')))
,→
243
244
#subplot(2, 2, 4)
245
ax = subplot(2, 2, 4)
246
bplot = ax.boxplot([NvBReturn[1, :], NvBReturn[7, :],
NvBReturn[3
, :], NvBReturn[9, :], NvBReturn[6, :],
NvBReturn[12, :]],
,→
,→
247
notch=True,
248
vert=True,
249
patch_artist=True)
250
title('Distribution of returns', fontsize=14)
251
xticks([1.5, 3.5, 5.5], ['1','3','6'], fontsize=12)
252
xlabel('Leverage Factor')
253
ylabel('4-Week Returns')
254
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
255
grid(b=True, axis='y')
256
fillcolors = ['#EC7E81', '#9A9CFE', '#EC7E81', '#9A9CFE','#EC7E81',
'#9A9CFE' ]
,→
257
for patch, color in zip(bplot['boxes'], fillcolors):
258
patch.set_facecolor(color)
259
legend([bplot["boxes"][0],bplot["boxes"][1] ], ['Stationary MN
Disribution', 'Bootstrapping'], loc='upper left')
,→
260
show()
261
262
263
emptystr = np.empty(len(dates5), dtype=str)
264
265
thefig = figure(6)
266
subaxis = thefig.add_subplot(111)
267
#subplot(5, 1, 1)
==PAGE:76==
66
A Appendix
268
ax = thefig.add_subplot(4, 1, 1)
269
ax.bar(LeverageRatios[0, :], LeverageRatios[3, :], color=Colors[7])
270
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], emptystr)
271
#ylabel('Leverage in portfolio')
272
yticks(np.arange(0, 2.5, 0.5))
273
grid(b=True, axis='y')
274
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
275
text(345, 1, 'LF: 3', fontsize=14)
276
ax = thefig.add_subplot(4, 1, 2)
277
ax.bar(LeverageRatios[0, :], LeverageRatios[8, :], color=Colors[7])
278
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], emptystr)
279
#ylabel('Leverage in portfolio')
280
yticks(np.arange(0, 9.25, 2.25))
281
grid(b=True, axis='y')
282
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
283
text(345, 5, 'LF: 10', fontsize=14)
284
ax = thefig.add_subplot(4, 1, 3)
285
ax.bar(LeverageRatios[0, :], LeverageRatios[11, :], color=Colors[7])
286
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], emptystr)
287
#ylabel('Leverage in portfolio')
288
yticks(np.arange(0, 15.75, 3.75))
289
grid(b=True, axis='y')
290
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
291
text(345, 8, 'LF: 16', fontsize=14)
292
ax = thefig.add_subplot(4, 1, 4)
293
ax.bar(LeverageRatios[0, :], LeverageRatios[12, :], color=Colors[7])
294
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], emptystr)
295
#ylabel('Leverage in portfolio')
296
yticks(np.arange(0, 17.25, 4.25))
297
grid(b=True, axis='y')
298
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
299
text(345, 9, 'LF: 18', fontsize=14)
300
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
301
subaxis.yaxis.set_label_coords(-0.1,0.5)
302
subaxis.set_ylabel('Leverage proportional to account value',
fontsize=14)
,→
303
subaxis.set_yticks([])
304
subaxis.set_xticks([])
305
show()
306
307
308
#Loss distribution
309
print(geomean)
==PAGE:77==
A.2 Python Scripts
67
310
311
figure()
312
title('Loss Distribution - Leverage Factor 3',fontsize=16)
313
hist(-NvBReturn[3, :], bins=11, color=Colors[2])
314
xlim([-.175, .22])
315
xticks(fontsize=14)
316
yticks(fontsize=14)
317
axvline(-geomean, linestyle='dashed',color='black', linewidth=2.7)
318
axvline(-VaRmonth, linestyle='dashed', color='black', linewidth=2.7)
319
axvline(-CVaRmonth, linestyle='dashed', color='black', linewidth=2.7)
320
plot(-amean, 0.2, 'o', color='black')
321
axvline(-upper_std, linestyle='dashed', color='blue', linewidth=2.7)
322
axvline(-lower_std, linestyle='dashed', color='blue', linewidth=2.7)
323
plot(-rf, 0.2, 'o', color='black')
324
axvline(-downside_dev, linestyle='dashed', color='mediumseagreen',
linewidth=2.7)
,→
325
xlabel('Loss', fontsize=14)
326
ylabel('Frequency',fontsize=14)
327
show()
328
329
330
#qq plots
331
332
fig = figure()
333
ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,1)
334
stats.probplot(Bench[0], dist='norm', plot=pylab)
335
title('1/N Naive Benchmark')
336
ax.get_lines()[0].set_markersize(4)
337
ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,2)
338
stats.probplot(NvBReturn[1, :], dist='norm', plot=pylab)
339
title('Leverage Factor 1')
340
ax.get_lines()[0].set_markersize(4)
341
ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,3)
342
stats.probplot(NvBReturn[3, :], dist='norm', plot=pylab)
343
title('Leverage Factor 3')
344
ax.get_lines()[0].set_markersize(4)
345
ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,4)
346
stats.probplot(NvBReturn[5, :], dist='norm', plot=pylab)
347
title('Leverage Factor 5')
348
ax.get_lines()[0].set_markersize(4)
349
350
show()
351
==PAGE:78==
68
A Appendix
352
353
#Euribor rates over the investment
354
fig = figure()
355
ax = fig.add_subplot(111)
356
ax.plot(Euribor[0, :], Euribor[1, :], color=DTUred, linewidth=3)
357
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
358
xlabel('Year')
359
ylabel('Annual Rate')
360
yticks(np.arange(-.02, .065, .005))
361
grid(b=True, axis='both')
362
title('1 Month EURIBOR')
363
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
364
show()
FamaFrenchScenario2.py
Code for generating scenarios using the bootstrapping method and exporting various
data used by the GAMS code.
1
from FamaFrenchReadBondDump import *
2
#Previously imports ..
3
#..import xlrd
4
#..import math
5
#..from Class import *
6
7
import xlwt
8
import pandas as pd
9
10
print('-------Scenario Generation-------')
11
#Scenario Generation
12
N_iter = 4 #Go 4 weeks ahead in each iteration
13
N_scen = 8 #Number of returns to generate each scenario
14
N_sim = 250 #Number of simulations
15
Window = 52*3 #Window in weeks for historical data
16
N_rolls = math.floor((N_weeks - (Window - 1) - 8)/N_iter)
17
18
#Allocate memory
19
draw = np.empty(N_scen, dtype=int)
20
tmp_sim = np.empty(N_scen, dtype=float)
21
sim = np.zeros((N_rolls, N_sim, N_indices), dtype=float) #Match GAMS
format
,→
22
dat_sim = np.zeros((N_rolls), dtype='U11')
23
==PAGE:79==
A.2 Python Scripts
69
24
ret = np.zeros((N_rolls, N_indices), float)
25
dat_ret = np.zeros((N_rolls), dtype='U11')
26
27
available = np.zeros((N_rolls, N_indices), dtype=float)
28
29
names = np.empty((N_indices), dtype='U11')
30
for roll in range(N_rolls):
31
roll_mult = roll*N_iter
32
for s in range(N_sim):
33
#Draw N_scen random numbers spanning 1 year of
indices
,→
34
draw = np.random.randint(low=0, high=Window - 1,
size=N_scen)
,→
35
for asset in range(N_indices):
36
if all(weekly_ret_total[roll_mult:(roll_mult
+ (Window - 1)), asset] != Missing):
,→
37
#Return the N_scen returns
38
tmp_sim = (1 +
weekly_ret_total[roll_mult +
draw[:], asset])
,→
,→
39
#Compute 2 month returns and save to
data structure
,→
40
sim[roll, s, asset] =
np.prod(tmp_sim)**(1) - 1
,→
41
#Availability
42
available[roll, asset] = 1
43
dat_sim[roll] = weekly_dates[roll_mult + (Window - 1) + 8]
44
45
46
print('-------Generating Returns-------')
47
48
for roll in range(1, N_rolls + 1):
49
50
for asset in range(N_indices):
51
roll_mult = roll*N_iter
52
if all(weekly_ret_total[(roll_mult + (Window - 1) +
4):( roll_mult + (Window - 1) + 2*4 ), asset] !=
Missing):
,→
,→
53
tmp_ret = (1 + weekly_ret_total[( roll_mult +
(Window - 1) + 4 ):( roll_mult + (Window
- 1) + 2*4 ), asset])
,→
,→
54
ret[roll - 1, asset] = np.prod(tmp_ret)**(1)
- 1
,→
==PAGE:80==
70
A Appendix
55
dat_ret[roll - 1] = weekly_dates[roll_mult +
(Window - 1) + 4]
,→
56
57
58
print('-------EURIBOR Risk-free Data-------')
59
#EURIBOR 1Month rates
60
fil = xlrd.open_workbook('1mEuribor.xlsx')
61
sheet = fil.sheet_by_index(0)
62
rows = sheet.nrows
63
cols = sheet.ncols
64
65
N_rf = rows
66
67
rf_close = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(1, 0))
68
rf_date = Date_Excel2Python(np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 0)))
69
70
MonthlyDates = pd.DatetimeIndex(dat_ret)
71
72
roll = 0
73
while MonthlyDates[roll] < rf_date[roll]:
74
rf_close = np.insert(rf_close, roll, Missing)
75
rf_date = np.insert(rf_date, roll, dat_ret[roll])
76
roll += 1
77
78
start_roll = roll
79
for roll in range(start_roll - 1, N_rolls):
80
if MonthlyDates[roll].month == MonthlyDates[roll - 1].month:
81
rf_close = np.insert(rf_close, roll, rf_close[roll -
1])
,→
82
rf_date = np.insert(rf_date, roll, dat_ret[roll])
83
84
85
print('-------Writing to files-------')
86
#Write to excel file for GAMS
87
fil = xlwt.Workbook()
88
89
for sheet_no in range(N_indices): #Assets
90
name_str = Indices[sheet_no]
91
sheet = fil.add_sheet(name_str)
92
for col in range(N_sim + 1): #Simulation
93
if col > 0:
94
sheet.write(0, col, col)
95
for row in range(1, N_rolls + 1): #Roll
==PAGE:81==
A.2 Python Scripts
71
96
if col == 0:
97
sheet.write(row, col, row)
98
else:
99
#print(row, col, sheet_no)
100
sheet.write(row, col, sim[row - 1,
col - 1, sheet_no])
,→
101
102
fil.save('FamaFrench_Sims.xls')
103
104
105
#Write to excel file for GAMS
106
#New file
107
fil = xlwt.Workbook()
108
sheet = fil.add_sheet('Sheet1')
109
for col in range(N_indices + 1): #Simulation
110
if col > 0:
111
sheet.write(0, col, Indices[col - 1])
112
for row in range(1, N_rolls + 1): #Roll
113
if col == 0:
114
sheet.write(row, col, row)
115
else:
116
sheet.write(row, col, ret[row - 1, col - 1])
117
fil.save('Monthly_Returns.xls')
118
119
#Availability
120
#Write to excel file for GAMS
121
#New file
122
fil = xlwt.Workbook()
123
sheet = fil.add_sheet('Sheet1')
124
for col in range(N_indices + 1): #Simulation
125
if col > 0:
126
sheet.write(0, col, Indices[col - 1])
127
for row in range(1, N_rolls + 1): #Roll
128
if col == 0:
129
sheet.write(row, col, row)
130
else:
131
sheet.write(row, col, available[row - 1, col
- 1])
,→
132
fil.save('Availability.xls')
133
134
135
#Riskfree rates
136
#Write to excel file for GAMS
==PAGE:82==
72
A Appendix
137
#New file
138
fil = xlwt.Workbook()
139
sheet = fil.add_sheet('Sheet1')
140
sheet.write(0, 1, 'RiskFree')
141
for row in range(1, len(rf_date) + 1): #Roll
142
sheet.write(row, 0, row)
143
sheet.write(row, 1, rf_close[row - 1])
144
145
fil.save('RiskFree.xls')
146
147
148
np.savetxt('Sim_Dates.csv', dat_sim, delimiter=';', fmt='%s')
149
np.savetxt('Monthly_Dates.csv', dat_ret, delimiter=';', fmt='%s')
150
np.savetxt('RiskFree_Dates.csv', rf_date, delimiter=';', fmt='%s')
151
152
print('--Ran: FamaFrenchScenario.py--')
FamaFrenchDist.py
Code for generating scenarios using the multivariate normal distribution Monte Carlo
method and exporting for the GAMS code.
1
from FamaFrenchReadBondDump import *
2
#Previously imports ..
3
#..import xlrd
4
#..import math
5
#..from Class import *
6
7
import xlwt
8
import pandas as pd
9
import scipy.stats as stats
10
11
ret_train = weekly_ret_total[419:892, :]
12
ret_test = weekly_ret_total[892:, :]
13
ret_test_cum = np.cumprod(ret_test + np.ones((ret_test.shape),
dtype=float), axis=0)
,→
14
15
figure()
16
subplot(1, 2, 1)
17
hist(ret_train[:, 26], bins=15)
18
subplot(1, 2, 2)
19
hist(ret_train[:, 7], bins=15)
20
show()
==PAGE:83==
A.2 Python Scripts
73
21
22
N_train = len(ret_train[:, 0])
23
N_test = len(ret_test[:, 0])
24
25
N_iter = 4
26
N_sim = 250
27
N_indices = len(ret_train[0, :])
28
29
SIGMA = np.cov(ret_train, rowvar=False) #The covariance matrix
30
RHO = np.corrcoef(ret_train, rowvar=False) #The correlation matrix
31
MU = np.mean(ret_train, axis=0) #The mean array
32
sd = np.sqrt( np.diagonal(SIGMA) )
33
N_rolls = math.floor((N_test)/N_iter)
34
35
36
sim = np.zeros((N_test, N_sim, N_indices), dtype=float) #Match GAMS
format
,→
37
38
print('-------Simulating Weekly Returns-------')
39
for week in range(N_test):
40
# performance = ret_test_cum[week, :] - (1 + MU*(1 + week))
41
# new_sd = sd*(1 + performance/np.sqrt(1 + week) )
42
# if any(x < 0 for x in new_sd):
43
#
print('Error!!! ', week)
44
#
break
45
# new_sd = np.diag(new_sd)
46
# SIGMA = new_sd.dot(RHO).dot(new_sd)
47
sim[week, :, :] = np.random.multivariate_normal(mean=MU,
cov=SIGMA, size=N_sim)
,→
48
49
monthly_sim = np.zeros((N_rolls, N_sim, N_indices))
50
51
52
print('-------Computing Monthly Returns-------')
53
for roll in range(N_rolls):
54
roll_mult = roll*N_iter
55
for s in range(N_sim):
56
for index in range(N_indices):
57
tmp_rets = 1 + sim[roll_mult:(roll_mult + 4),
s, index]
,→
58
monthly_sim[roll, s, index] =
np.prod(tmp_rets) - 1
,→
59
w
==PAGE:84==
74
A Appendix
60
61
fil = xlwt.Workbook()
62
63
print('-------Write to file-------')
64
65
for sheet_no in range(N_indices): #Assets
66
name_str = Indices[sheet_no]
67
sheet = fil.add_sheet(name_str)
68
for col in range(N_sim + 1): #Simulation
69
if col > 0:
70
sheet.write(0, col, col)
71
for row in range(1, N_rolls + 183 + 1): #Roll
72
if col == 0:
73
sheet.write(row, col, row)
74
else:
75
if row > 183:
76
#print(row, col, sheet_no)
77
sheet.write(row, col, sim[row
- 1, col - 1, sheet_no])
,→
78
79
fil.save('FamaFrench_SimsNorm.xls')
80
81
print('--Ran FamaFrenchDist.py--')
FamaFrenchCombinedPlots.py
Code for making the various plots 1.1, 3.1 and most of the plots in chapter 4.
1
#© Sveinn Heiðar Kristjánsson - DTU 2019
2
3
#Import data..
4
from Class import *
5
#from Scenario2 import *
6
#..Includes following packages
7
#import datetime
8
#import numpy as np
9
10
#Import following packages
11
import xlrd
12
import math
13
import xlwt
14
import pandas as pd
15
from matplotlib.pyplot import suptitle, axvline, text, subplots,
boxplot, xlim, show, xticks, title, ylabel, subplot, hist,
xlabel, ylabel, plot, figure, yticks, ylim, legend, bar, grid
,→
,→
==PAGE:85==
A.2 Python Scripts
75
16
import matplotlib.ticker as ticker
17
import scipy.stats as stats
18
import pylab
19
20
loc_string = 'C:\\Users\\s171947\\OneDrive\\Documents\\Verkfræði Vor
2019\\Optimizing Leveraged Asset Allocation
Strategies\\Models\\FamaFrench\\RollingAttributes\\Variables\\'
,→
,→
21
22
#CVaR
23
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'Combined.xlsx')
24
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('CVaR')
25
rows = sheet.nrows
26
cols = sheet.ncols
27
28
N_ports = cols
29
N_rolls = rows
30
31
CVaR = readBySheet(fil, 'CVaR')
32
Sharpe = readBySheet(fil, 'Sharpe')
33
Account = readBySheet(fil, 'Account')
34
AccountReturn = readBySheet(fil, 'AccountReturns')
35
AccopuntMonthlyReturn = readBySheet(fil, 'AccopuntMonthlyReturn')
36
Colors = [(70/256, 69/256, 109/256), (89/256, 101/256, 239/256),
(236/256, 101/256, 108/256)]
,→
37
38
Colors = ['#2F3AF9', '#742298', '#E3434F', '#F87528', '#F6CE43',
'#349F5B', '#85EABE', '#349F5B']
,→
39
40
NO = np.linspace(0, N_rolls - 1, N_rolls)
41
42
43
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'DatesIdx.xlsx')
44
Date_label = readBySheet(fil, 'DatesIdx')
45
46
47
#Read in sharpe ratios as function of leverage factor
48
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'SR_Leverage.xlsx')
49
SRLeverage = readBySheet(fil, 'Sheet1')
50
N_SR = len(SRLeverage[0, :])
51
52
#Read in leverage ratios for some portfolios
53
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'LeverageRatios.xlsx')
54
rows = sheet.nrows
==PAGE:86==
76
A Appendix
55
cols = sheet.ncols
56
57
LeverageRatios = readBySheet(fil, 'Leverage Ratios')
58
medians = np.median(LeverageRatios[2:14, :], axis=1)
59
60
61
#compare a few portfolios of bootsrapping and norm
62
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'NormvBoot.xlsx')
63
NvBAccount = readBySheet(fil, 'Account Values')
64
NvBReturn = readBySheet(fil, 'Account Returns')
65
NvBAnnual = readBySheet(fil, 'Account Returns Annual')
66
67
ones_array = np.ones(len(NvBReturn[0,:]), dtype=float)
68
69
geomean = stats.mstats.gmean(ones_array + NvBReturn[3, :]) - 1
70
amean = np.mean(NvBReturn[3, :])
71
stdev = np.std(NvBReturn[3, :])
72
upper_std = amean + stdev/2
73
lower_std = amean - stdev/2
74
VaRmonth = -0.13388
75
CVaRmonth = -0.15154
76
rf = 0.0584609/100
77
downside_dev = rf - 0.03254
78
79
80
81
#Benchmark returns
82
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'Bench.xlsx')
83
Bench = readBySheet(fil, 'Sheet1')
84
85
86
#Probability of default
87
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'PDs.xlsx')
88
pDefault = readBySheet(fil, 'Sheet1')
89
90
91
#Euribor
92
fil = xlrd.open_workbook(loc_string + 'Euribor.xlsx')
93
Euribor = readBySheet(fil, 'Sheet1')
94
95
DTUred = (155/256,0,0)
96
#PD plot
97
fig = figure()
==PAGE:87==
A.2 Python Scripts
77
98
ax = fig.add_subplot(111)
99
ax.plot(pDefault[0, :], pDefault[1, :], color=DTUred, linewidth=3)
100
arr1 = np.asarray([0,1,2,3,4])
101
arr2 = np.arange(5, 95, 5)
102
xticks(np.concatenate((arr1,arr2)))
103
xlabel('Leverage Factor')
104
yticks(np.arange(0, 1.05, .05))
105
ylabel('Probability of Default')
106
grid(b=True, axis='y')
107
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
108
show()
109
110
111
#plot sharpe ratios as function of leverage
112
figure(1)
113
plot(SRLeverage[0, :], SRLeverage[2, :], 'o', color=Colors[0],
markersize=10, label='_nolegend_')
,→
114
plot(SRLeverage[0, 2], SRLeverage[2, 2], 'o', color=Colors[2],
markersize=10)
,→
115
title('Portfolio Sharpe Ratio', fontsize=16)
116
ylim([0.1, 1.1])
117
yticks(np.arange(0.2, 1.1, 0.1))
118
xlim([-1, 21])
119
xlabel('Leverage Factor',fontsize=14)
120
xaxis = np.asarray([1,2,3,4,5,6,8,10,12,14,16,18])
121
xticks(xaxis)
122
grid(b=True, axis='both')
123
legend(['Highest'], numpoints=1)
124
show()
125
126
127
#Plot sharpe ratios as a function of time
128
figure(2)
129
subplot(2, 1, 1)
130
title('Rolling Monthly Period Sharpe Ratio')
131
plot(NO, Sharpe[0, :], color='black')
132
plot(NO, Sharpe[1, :], color=Colors[0])
133
grid(b=True, axis='both')
134
xticks(Date_label[0, :], Date_Excel2Python(Date_label[2, :]))
135
xlabel('Date')
136
yticks(np.arange(min([min(Sharpe[0, :]), min(Sharpe[1, :])]),
max([max(Sharpe[0, :]), max(Sharpe[1, :])]), 2))
,→
137
ylabel('Sharpe Ratio')
==PAGE:88==
78
A Appendix
138
legend(['1/N-Benchmark Portfolio', 'Optimised Portfolio - No
Leverage'])
,→
139
140
subplot(2, 1, 2)
141
plot(NO, Sharpe[0, :], color='black')
142
plot(NO, Sharpe[2, :], color=Colors[2])
143
grid(b=True, axis='y')
144
xticks(Date_label[0, :], Date_Excel2Python(Date_label[2, :]))
145
xlabel('Date')
146
yticks(np.arange(min([min(Sharpe[0, :]), min(Sharpe[2, :])]),
max([max(Sharpe[0, :]), max(Sharpe[2, :])]), 2))
,→
147
ylabel('Sharpe Ratio')
148
legend(['1/N-Benchmark Portfolio', 'Optimised Portfolio - Leverage
Factor 3'])
,→
149
show()
150
151
152
#Plot Account value as a function of time
153
datesidx5 = np.asarray([0, 2, 4, 6, 8])
154
dates5 = Date_Excel2Python(Date_label[2, datesidx5])
155
dates5 = pd.DatetimeIndex(dates5)
156
dates5 = dates5.year
157
158
159
fig = figure(3)
160
ax = fig.add_subplot(1, 2, 1)
161
title('Adjusted Strategy Value (Account value)', fontsize=14)
162
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[0, :], color='black')
163
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[1, :], color=Colors[0])
164
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[2, :], color=Colors[2])
165
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[3, :], color=Colors[3])
166
plot(NvBAccount[0, 1:], Account[4, :], color=Colors[4])
167
grid(b=True, axis='both')
168
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
169
xlabel('Year')
170
#yticks(np.arange(min([min(Sharpe[0, :]), min(Sharpe[1, :])]),
max([max(Sharpe[0, :]), max(Sharpe[1, :])]), 2))
,→
171
ylabel('EUR')
172
yticks(np.arange(100000, 2250000, 250000))
173
legend(['1/N', 'LF: 1', 'LF: 3', 'LF: 4', 'LF: 5'])
174
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda x, p:
format(int(x), ',')))
,→
175
==PAGE:89==
A.2 Python Scripts
79
176
177
ax = fig.add_subplot(1, 2, 2)
178
bplot = boxplot([AccopuntMonthlyReturn[0, :],
AccopuntMonthlyReturn[1, :], AccopuntMonthlyReturn[2, :],
AccopuntMonthlyReturn[3, :], AccopuntMonthlyReturn[4, :]],
,→
,→
179
notch=True,
180
vert=True,
181
patch_artist=True)
182
title('Distribution of returns', fontsize=14)
183
xticks([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], ['1/N','LF: 1','LF: 3','LF: 4','LF: 5'],
fontsize=12)
,→
184
xlabel('Strategies')
185
ylabel('4-Week Returns')
186
fillcolors = ['black', Colors[0], Colors[2], Colors[3], Colors[4]]
187
for patch, color in zip(bplot['boxes'], fillcolors):
188
patch.set_facecolor(color)
189
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
190
#legend([bplot["boxes"][0], bplot["boxes"][1], bplot["boxes"][2],
bplot["boxes"][3], bplot["boxes"][4]], ['1/N', 'LF: 1', 'LF: 3',
'LF: 4', 'LF: 5'])
,→
,→
191
grid(b=True, axis='y')
192
show()
193
194
195
# figure(4)
196
# boxplot([AccountReturn[0, :], AccountReturn[1, :], AccountReturn[2,
:]])
,→
197
# grid(b=True, axis='y')
198
# xticks([1, 2, 3], ['Benchmark', 'No Leverage', 'Leverage Factor
3'])
,→
199
# show()
200
201
202
203
204
figure(5)
205
ax = subplot(2, 2, 1)
206
#suptitle('Account', fontsize=18)
207
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[1, :], color = Colors[2])
208
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[7, :], color = Colors[0])
209
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
210
xlabel('Year')
211
yticks(np.arange(50000, 300000, 25000))
==PAGE:90==
80
A Appendix
212
ylabel('EUR')
213
legend(['Stationary MN Disribution', 'Bootstrapping'])
214
grid(b=True, axis='both')
215
title('Leverage Factor 1', fontsize=14)
216
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda x, p:
format(int(x), ',')))
,→
217
218
219
ax = subplot(2, 2, 2)
220
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[3, :], color = Colors[2])
221
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[9, :], color = Colors[0])
222
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
223
xlabel('Year')
224
yticks(np.arange(50000, 900000, 100000))
225
ylabel('EUR')
226
legend(['Stationary MN Disribution', 'Bootstrapping'])
227
grid(b=True, axis='both')
228
title('Leverage Factor 3', fontsize=14)
229
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda x, p:
format(int(x), ',')))
,→
230
231
232
ax = subplot(2, 2, 3)
233
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[6, :], color = Colors[2])
234
ax.plot(NvBAccount[0, :], NvBAccount[12, :], color = Colors[0])
235
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
236
xlabel('Year')
237
grid(b=True, axis='both')
238
title('Leverage Factor 6', fontsize=14)
239
yticks(np.arange(50000, 3000000, 250000))
240
ylabel('EUR')
241
legend(['Stationary MN Disribution', 'Bootstrapping'])
242
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda x, p:
format(int(x), ',')))
,→
243
244
#subplot(2, 2, 4)
245
ax = subplot(2, 2, 4)
246
bplot = ax.boxplot([NvBReturn[1, :], NvBReturn[7, :],
NvBReturn[3
, :], NvBReturn[9, :], NvBReturn[6, :],
NvBReturn[12, :]],
,→
,→
247
notch=True,
248
vert=True,
249
patch_artist=True)
==PAGE:91==
A.2 Python Scripts
81
250
title('Distribution of returns', fontsize=14)
251
xticks([1.5, 3.5, 5.5], ['1','3','6'], fontsize=12)
252
xlabel('Leverage Factor')
253
ylabel('4-Week Returns')
254
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
255
grid(b=True, axis='y')
256
fillcolors = ['#EC7E81', '#9A9CFE', '#EC7E81', '#9A9CFE','#EC7E81',
'#9A9CFE' ]
,→
257
for patch, color in zip(bplot['boxes'], fillcolors):
258
patch.set_facecolor(color)
259
legend([bplot["boxes"][0],bplot["boxes"][1] ], ['Stationary MN
Disribution', 'Bootstrapping'], loc='upper left')
,→
260
show()
261
262
263
emptystr = np.empty(len(dates5), dtype=str)
264
265
thefig = figure(6)
266
subaxis = thefig.add_subplot(111)
267
#subplot(5, 1, 1)
268
ax = thefig.add_subplot(4, 1, 1)
269
ax.bar(LeverageRatios[0, :], LeverageRatios[3, :], color=Colors[7])
270
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], emptystr)
271
#ylabel('Leverage in portfolio')
272
yticks(np.arange(0, 2.5, 0.5))
273
grid(b=True, axis='y')
274
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
275
text(345, 1, 'LF: 3', fontsize=14)
276
ax = thefig.add_subplot(4, 1, 2)
277
ax.bar(LeverageRatios[0, :], LeverageRatios[8, :], color=Colors[7])
278
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], emptystr)
279
#ylabel('Leverage in portfolio')
280
yticks(np.arange(0, 9.25, 2.25))
281
grid(b=True, axis='y')
282
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
283
text(345, 5, 'LF: 10', fontsize=14)
284
ax = thefig.add_subplot(4, 1, 3)
285
ax.bar(LeverageRatios[0, :], LeverageRatios[11, :], color=Colors[7])
286
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], emptystr)
287
#ylabel('Leverage in portfolio')
288
yticks(np.arange(0, 15.75, 3.75))
289
grid(b=True, axis='y')
290
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
==PAGE:92==
82
A Appendix
291
text(345, 8, 'LF: 16', fontsize=14)
292
ax = thefig.add_subplot(4, 1, 4)
293
ax.bar(LeverageRatios[0, :], LeverageRatios[12, :], color=Colors[7])
294
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], emptystr)
295
#ylabel('Leverage in portfolio')
296
yticks(np.arange(0, 17.25, 4.25))
297
grid(b=True, axis='y')
298
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
299
text(345, 9, 'LF: 18', fontsize=14)
300
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
301
subaxis.yaxis.set_label_coords(-0.1,0.5)
302
subaxis.set_ylabel('Leverage proportional to account value',
fontsize=14)
,→
303
subaxis.set_yticks([])
304
subaxis.set_xticks([])
305
show()
306
307
308
#Loss distribution
309
print(geomean)
310
311
figure()
312
title('Loss Distribution - Leverage Factor 3',fontsize=16)
313
hist(-NvBReturn[3, :], bins=11, color=Colors[2])
314
xlim([-.175, .22])
315
xticks(fontsize=14)
316
yticks(fontsize=14)
317
axvline(-geomean, linestyle='dashed',color='black', linewidth=2.7)
318
axvline(-VaRmonth, linestyle='dashed', color='black', linewidth=2.7)
319
axvline(-CVaRmonth, linestyle='dashed', color='black', linewidth=2.7)
320
plot(-amean, 0.2, 'o', color='black')
321
axvline(-upper_std, linestyle='dashed', color='blue', linewidth=2.7)
322
axvline(-lower_std, linestyle='dashed', color='blue', linewidth=2.7)
323
plot(-rf, 0.2, 'o', color='black')
324
axvline(-downside_dev, linestyle='dashed', color='mediumseagreen',
linewidth=2.7)
,→
325
xlabel('Loss', fontsize=14)
326
ylabel('Frequency',fontsize=14)
327
show()
328
329
330
#qq plots
331
==PAGE:93==
A.2 Python Scripts
83
332
fig = figure()
333
ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,1)
334
stats.probplot(Bench[0], dist='norm', plot=pylab)
335
title('1/N Naive Benchmark')
336
ax.get_lines()[0].set_markersize(4)
337
ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,2)
338
stats.probplot(NvBReturn[1, :], dist='norm', plot=pylab)
339
title('Leverage Factor 1')
340
ax.get_lines()[0].set_markersize(4)
341
ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,3)
342
stats.probplot(NvBReturn[3, :], dist='norm', plot=pylab)
343
title('Leverage Factor 3')
344
ax.get_lines()[0].set_markersize(4)
345
ax = fig.add_subplot(2,2,4)
346
stats.probplot(NvBReturn[5, :], dist='norm', plot=pylab)
347
title('Leverage Factor 5')
348
ax.get_lines()[0].set_markersize(4)
349
350
show()
351
352
353
#Euribor rates over the investment
354
fig = figure()
355
ax = fig.add_subplot(111)
356
ax.plot(Euribor[0, :], Euribor[1, :], color=DTUred, linewidth=3)
357
xticks(Date_label[1, datesidx5], dates5)
358
xlabel('Year')
359
ylabel('Annual Rate')
360
yticks(np.arange(-.02, .065, .005))
361
grid(b=True, axis='both')
362
title('1 Month EURIBOR')
363
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
364
show()
FamaFrenchPortfolio.py
Code for the remainin plots in chapter 4 and some of the plots in appendix A.1.
Mainly Portfolio allocation figures and A.2.
1
#© Sveinn Heiðar Kristjánsson - DTU 2019
2
3
#Import data..
4
from Class import *
==PAGE:94==
84
A Appendix
5
#from Scenario2 import *
6
#..Includes following packages
7
#import datetime
8
#import numpy as np
9
10
#Import following packages
11
import xlrd
12
import math
13
import xlwt
14
from matplotlib.pyplot import rcParams, grid, boxplot, show, xticks,
title, ylabel, subplot, hist, xlabel, ylabel, plot, figure,
yticks, ylim, legend, bar
,→
,→
15
import matplotlib.ticker as ticker
16
17
18
#Read data
19
##Returns & date
20
#Open file with the weekly returns
21
fil = xlrd.open_workbook('Monthly_Returns.xls').sheet_by_index(0)
22
assets = [str(cell.value) for cell in fil.row(0)]
23
assets.pop(0)
24
25
#Number of rows and assets
26
N_ret = fil.nrows - 1
27
N_assets = fil.ncols - 1
28
29
#allocate memory
30
ret = np.empty((N_ret, N_assets), dtype=float)
31
#read into datastructure
32
for col in range(N_assets):
33
ret[:, col] = np.asarray(fil.col_values(col + 1, 1, N_ret +
1))
,→
34
35
36
37
38
##Rolling Portfolio attributes
39
#Dates
40
fil = xlrd.open_workbook('Monthly_Dates.xlsx')
41
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('Monthly_Dates')
42
rows = sheet.nrows
43
44
#Get cell values from file
==PAGE:95==
A.2 Python Scripts
85
45
Dates = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 0, rows))
46
#Convert to appropriate format
47
Dates = Date_Excel2Python(Dates) #Fromm Class.py
48
49
50
#Portfolio composision
51
fil = xlrd.open_workbook('RollingAttributes3.xlsx')
52
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('xHistory')
53
rows_x = sheet.nrows
54
cols_x = sheet.ncols
55
56
#Get cell values from file
57
x1 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 3, rows_x))
58
x2 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(1, 3, rows_x))
59
x3 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(2, 3, rows_x))
60
61
#make a dataframe
62
x = np.rec.fromarrays([x1,x2,x3], names='NO,ISIN,EXPOSURE')
63
#Make an array of all portfolio decomposision with an index for each
"roll" keeping each roll's portfolio decomposition in a
dictionary
,→
,→
64
# ..indexed by all assets
65
66
#define the empty array
67
Portfolio = []
68
PortfolioPCT = []
69
#iterate over all rolls
70
for roll in range(int(x.NO[0]), int(x.NO[-1]) + 1):
71
#Pick out where in the data each roll is
72
idx = np.where(x.NO == str(roll))[0]
73
#Temporary arrays
74
tmp_ISIN = x.ISIN[idx]
75
tmp_EXPOSURE = x.EXPOSURE[idx]
76
#define the dictionary
77
tmp_dict = {key: 0 for key in assets}
78
tmp_dict_pct = {key: 0 for key in assets}
79
#enter values
80
for i in range(0, len(tmp_ISIN)):
81
tmp_dict[tmp_ISIN[i]] = tmp_EXPOSURE[i]
82
tmp_dict_pct[tmp_ISIN[i]] =
tmp_EXPOSURE[i]/sum(tmp_EXPOSURE)
,→
83
#append to array
84
Portfolio.append(tmp_dict)
==PAGE:96==
86
A Appendix
85
PortfolioPCT.append(tmp_dict_pct)
86
87
#Portfolio returns over time periods (rolls)
88
##Zero leverage
89
Budget = 100000
90
#Allocate memory for Account value in each period (roll)
91
TotalExposure = np.zeros((len(Portfolio)))
92
TotalExposureFV = np.zeros((len(Portfolio)))
93
#Let's also keep track of how each asset grows over each roll
94
PortfolioFV = []
95
96
#For all remaining periods
97
for roll in range(0, len(Portfolio)):
98
#Initialise for account
99
tmp_ret = 0
100
101
#define the dictionary
102
tmp_dict = {key: 0 for key in assets}
103
104
#Compute portfolio growth in each period in terms of each
asset i
,→
105
for i in range(N_assets):
106
tmp_ret = tmp_ret + Portfolio[roll][assets[i]]
107
tmp_dict[assets[i]] = Portfolio[roll][assets[i]]*(1 +
ret[roll][i])
,→
108
#Update account
109
TotalExposure[roll] = tmp_ret
110
PortfolioFV.append(tmp_dict)
111
TotalExposureFV[roll] = sum(PortfolioFV[roll].values())
112
113
114
#AccountValue
115
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('AccountHistory')
116
rows = sheet.nrows
117
cols = sheet.ncols
118
119
#Get cell values from file
120
Account1 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 3, rows))
121
Account2 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(1, 3, rows))
122
123
#Account1 = np.insert(Account1, 0, 1)
124
#Account2 = np.insert(Account2, 0, Budget)
125
==PAGE:97==
A.2 Python Scripts
87
126
N = len(Account1)
127
#make a dataframe
128
Account = np.rec.fromarrays([Account1,Account2], names='NO,BALANCE')
129
130
#Expected returns on portfolio
131
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('returnsHistory')
132
rows = sheet.nrows
133
cols = sheet.ncols
134
135
#Get cell values from file
136
ExpectedReturns1 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 3, rows))
137
ExpectedReturns2 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(1, 3, rows))
138
ExpectedReturns3 = np.empty((N))
139
140
for roll in range(N):
141
ExpectedReturns3[roll] =
ExpectedReturns2[roll]/TotalExposure[roll] - 1
,→
142
143
144
ExpectedReturns = np.rec.fromarrays([ExpectedReturns1,
ExpectedReturns2, ExpectedReturns3], names='NO,EXPOSURE,PCT')
,→
145
146
#CVaR
147
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('CVaRHistory')
148
rows = sheet.nrows
149
cols = sheet.ncols
150
151
#Get cell values from file
152
CVaR1 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 3, rows))
153
CVaR2 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(1, 3, rows))
154
155
fristNo = int(CVaR1[0])
156
lastNO = int(CVaR1[-1])
157
158
for roll in range((lastNO - fristNo)):
159
if Account.NO[roll] < CVaR1[roll]:
160
CVaR1 = np.insert(CVaR1, roll, Account.NO[roll + 1])
161
CVaR2 = np.insert(CVaR2, roll, 0)
162
163
if lastNO < int(Account.NO[-1]):
164
for roll in range(lastNO, int(Account.NO[-1])):
165
CVaR1 = np.insert(CVaR1, roll - 1, Account.NO[roll])
166
CVaR2 = np.insert(CVaR2, roll - 1, 0)
==PAGE:98==
88
A Appendix
167
168
CVaR3 = np.empty((len(CVaR2)))
169
CVaR4 = np.empty((len(CVaR2)))
170
171
for roll in range(lastNO - fristNo + 1):
172
CVaR3[roll] = (CVaR2[roll] +
TotalExposure[roll])/TotalExposure[roll]
,→
173
CVaR4[roll] = CVaR3[roll] -
(ExpectedReturns.EXPOSURE[roll]/TotalExposure[roll] - 1)
,→
174
175
#make a dataframe
176
CVaR = np.rec.fromarrays([CVaR1,CVaR2,CVaR3,CVaR4],
names='NO,EXPOSURE,TRUE,DEVIATION')
,→
177
178
179
180
#Borrow
181
182
#increaseBorrow
183
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('increaseBorrowHistory')
184
rows = sheet.nrows
185
cols = sheet.ncols
186
187
increaseBorrow1 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 3, rows))
188
increaseBorrow2 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(1, 3, rows))
189
190
fristNo = int(increaseBorrow1[0])
191
lastNO = int(increaseBorrow1[-1])
192
193
for roll in range(0, (lastNO - fristNo)):
194
if Account.NO[roll + 1] < increaseBorrow1[roll]:
195
increaseBorrow1 = np.insert(increaseBorrow1, roll,
Account.NO[roll + 1])
,→
196
increaseBorrow2 = np.insert(increaseBorrow2, roll, 0)
197
198
if fristNo > int(Account.NO[0]):
199
increaseBorrow1 = np.insert(increaseBorrow1, 0,
Account.NO[0])
,→
200
increaseBorrow2 = np.insert(increaseBorrow2, 0, 0)
201
202
203
if lastNO < int(Account.NO[-1]):
204
for roll in range(lastNO, int(Account.NO[-1]) -
int(Account.NO[0])):
,→
==PAGE:99==
A.2 Python Scripts
89
205
increaseBorrow1 = np.insert(increaseBorrow1, roll -
1, Account.NO[roll])
,→
206
increaseBorrow2 = np.insert(increaseBorrow2, roll -
1, 0)
,→
207
208
#make a dataframe
209
increaseBorrow = np.rec.fromarrays([increaseBorrow1,increaseBorrow2],
names='NO,EXPOSURE')
,→
210
211
212
#decreaseBorrow
213
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('decreaseBorrowHistory')
214
rows = sheet.nrows
215
cols = sheet.ncols
216
217
decreaseBorrow1 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 3, rows))
218
decreaseBorrow2 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(1, 3, rows))
219
220
fristNo = int(decreaseBorrow1[0])
221
lastNO = int(decreaseBorrow1[-1])
222
223
for roll in range(0, (lastNO - fristNo)):
224
if Account.NO[roll + 1] < decreaseBorrow1[roll]:
225
decreaseBorrow1 = np.insert(decreaseBorrow1, roll,
Account.NO[roll + 1])
,→
226
decreaseBorrow2 = np.insert(decreaseBorrow2, roll, 0)
227
228
if fristNo > int(Account.NO[0]):
229
decreaseBorrow1 = np.insert(decreaseBorrow1, 0,
Account.NO[0])
,→
230
decreaseBorrow2 = np.insert(decreaseBorrow2, 0, 0)
231
232
233
if lastNO < int(Account.NO[-1]):
234
for roll in range(lastNO, int(Account.NO[-1]) -
int(Account.NO[0])):
,→
235
decreaseBorrow1 = np.insert(decreaseBorrow1, roll -
1, Account.NO[roll])
,→
236
decreaseBorrow2 = np.insert(decreaseBorrow2, roll -
1, 0)
,→
237
238
#make a dataframe
239
decreaseBorrow = np.rec.fromarrays([decreaseBorrow1,decreaseBorrow2],
names='NO,EXPOSURE')
,→
==PAGE:100==
90
A Appendix
240
241
#Total borrow
242
sheet = fil.sheet_by_name('BorrowHistory')
243
rows = sheet.nrows
244
cols = sheet.ncols
245
246
247
Borrow1 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 3, rows))
248
Borrow2 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(1, 3, rows))
249
250
fristNo = int(Borrow1[0])
251
lastNO = int(Borrow1[-1])
252
253
254
for roll in range(0, (lastNO - fristNo)):
255
if Account.NO[roll + 1] < Borrow1[roll]:
256
Borrow1 = np.insert(Borrow1, roll, Account.NO[roll +
1])
,→
257
Borrow2 = np.insert(Borrow2, roll, 0)
258
259
if fristNo > int(Account.NO[0]):
260
Borrow1 = np.insert(Borrow1, 0, Account.NO[0])
261
Borrow2 = np.insert(Borrow2, 0, 0)
262
263
if lastNO < int(Account.NO[-1]):
264
for roll in range(lastNO, int(Account.NO[-1]) -
int(Account.NO[0])):
,→
265
Borrow1 = np.insert(Borrow1, roll - 1,
Account.NO[roll])
,→
266
Borrow2 = np.insert(Borrow2, roll - 1, 0)
267
268
269
#make a dataframe
270
Borrow = np.rec.fromarrays([Borrow1,Borrow2], names='NO,EXPOSURE')
271
272
273
#Sharpe ratio
274
fil = xlrd.open_workbook('RiskFree.xls')
275
sheet = fil.sheet_by_index(0)
276
rows = sheet.nrows
277
cols = sheet.ncols
278
279
N_rf = rows - 1
==PAGE:101==
A.2 Python Scripts
91
280
281
RiskFree1 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 1, rows))
282
RiskFree2 = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(1, 1, rows))
283
284
first = Account.NO[0]
285
first_ind = np.where(RiskFree1 == int(first))[0][0]
286
RiskFree = np.rec.fromarrays([RiskFree1[first_ind:(N_rf - 1)],
RiskFree2[first_ind:(N_rf- 1)]], names='NO,RATE')
,→
287
288
289
tmpAccount = np.insert(Account.BALANCE, 0, Budget)
290
Sharpe = np.empty((len(Account.NO)))
291
port_ret = np.empty((len(Account.NO)))
292
account_ret = np.empty((len(Account.NO)))
293
294
for roll in range(len(Account.NO)):
295
port_ret[roll] = (TotalExposureFV[roll] -
TotalExposure[roll])/TotalExposure[roll]
,→
296
account_ret[roll] = (tmpAccount[roll + 1] -
tmpAccount[roll])/tmpAccount[roll]
,→
297
Sharpe[roll] = (account_ret[roll] - ( (1 +
RiskFree.RATE[roll])**(1/12) - 1) )/CVaR.TRUE[roll]
,→
298
299
300
figure(6)
301
plot(Account.NO, TotalExposure)
302
title('Total Exposure')
303
legend(['Leveraging factor: 3'], loc='upper left')
304
show()
305
306
307
figure(1)
308
plot(Account.NO, Account.BALANCE)
309
idx = list(range(0, 9))
310
window = math.floor(N/(len(idx) - 1))
311
idx = [i * (window)
for i in idx]
312
Date_idx = [(int(Account.NO[0]) - 1) + i for i in idx]
313
xticks(idx, Dates[Date_idx])
314
title('Account Balance')
315
legend(['Leveraging factor: 3'], loc='upper left')
316
show()
317
318
==PAGE:102==
92
A Appendix
319
figure(2)
320
plot(CVaR.NO, CVaR.TRUE)
321
ylim([0, max(CVaR.TRUE ) + 0.05])
322
xticks(idx, Dates[Date_idx])
323
title('CVaR')
324
show()
325
326
327
figure(3)
328
plot(CVaR.NO, Sharpe)
329
ylim([min(Sharpe ) - 0.5, max(Sharpe ) + 0.5])
330
xticks(idx, Dates[Date_idx])
331
title('Sharpe Ratio')
332
show()
333
334
fig = figure(4)
335
ax = subplot(111)
336
ax.plot(Account.NO, TotalExposure, color='gray')
337
ax.plot(Account.NO, Account.BALANCE, color='#2F3AF9')
338
ax.bar(increaseBorrow.NO, increaseBorrow.EXPOSURE, color='green')
339
ax.bar(decreaseBorrow.NO, decreaseBorrow.EXPOSURE, color='red')
340
legend(['Total exposure in Portfolio', 'Account balance','Increased
Leverage', 'Decreased Leverage'], fontsize=14)
,→
341
xticks(idx, Dates[Date_idx], fontsize=14)
342
yticks(np.arange(100000, 2700000, 200000), fontsize=14)
343
grid(b=True, axis='both')
344
xlabel('Date', fontsize=14)
345
ylabel('EUR', fontsize=14)
346
title('Model Attributes - Leverage Factor 3', fontsize=16)
347
ax.get_yaxis().set_major_formatter(ticker.FuncFormatter(lambda x, p:
format(int(x), ',')))
,→
348
show()
349
350
#Portfolio weights as stacked column chart
351
#Need to convert to a doubly list for pyplot.bar()
352
bars = [[]]
353
for etf in range(N_assets):
354
tmp = []
355
for i in range(len(PortfolioPCT)):
356
tmp.append(PortfolioPCT[i][assets[etf]])
357
bars.append(tmp)
358
bars.pop(0)
359
==PAGE:103==
A.2 Python Scripts
93
360
#Some random colours
361
colors = []
362
for asset in range(N_assets):
363
r = lambda: np.random.randint(low=0, high=255)
364
hex_str = '#%02X%02X%02X' % (r(),r(),r()) #Inspired by code
from Dmitry Dubovitsky stackexchange
,→
365
colors.append(hex_str)
366
367
colors = ['#2F3AF9', '#5A67E4','#6E75F8','#6E75F8', '#9A9CFE',
368
'#742298', '#9C4DA0', '#9967B0', '#AF78B4',
'#BB8FCE',
,→
369
'#E3434F', '#ED646D', '#EC7E81', '#F1767C',
'#F1A5A9',
,→
370
'#F87528', '#FF8E50', '#FE9D66', '#FCAB80',
'#F4BB9E',
,→
371
'#F6CE43', '#F1D968', '#F8DD7B', '#F9E288',
'#F5EAA3',
,→
372
'#349F5B', '#10D180', '#3EDB98', '#56E1A9',
'#67E7B2', '#85EABE', ]
,→
373
#Starting point of stacks
374
bottoms = np.zeros((len(bars[0])))
375
#Retrieve the appropriate tickers from the ISIN dictionary
376
legends = assets
377
n_cols = math.ceil((N_assets/2))
378
#number of bars
379
r = range(len(bars[0]))
380
#plot for all assets
381
382
fig = figure(5)
383
ax = subplot(111)
384
ax.bar(r, bars[0], color=colors[0], edgecolor='white')
385
for etf in range(1, N_assets):
386
bottoms = bottoms + bars[etf - 1]
387
ax.bar(r, bars[etf], bottom=bottoms, color=colors[etf],
edgecolor='white')
,→
388
title('Portfolio Composition - Leverage Factor 3 [Mv. Norm.]',
fontsize=16)
,→
389
ylabel('Proportion of portfolio', fontsize=14)
390
ylim([-0.01,1.01])
391
yticks(fontsize=14)
392
legend(legends, loc='center right', bbox_to_anchor=(1.12, .5),
ncol=1)
,→
393
xlabel('Date', fontsize=14)
==PAGE:104==
94
A Appendix
394
xticks(idx, Dates[Date_idx], fontsize=14)
395
ax.yaxis.set_major_formatter(ticker.PercentFormatter(xmax=1))
396
show()
397
398
399
400
#Save portfolio to file
401
new_file = xlwt.Workbook()
402
write_sheet = new_file.add_sheet('sheet1')
403
404
headers = list(Portfolio[0].keys()) # list() is not need in Python
2.x
,→
405
406
for i, row in enumerate(Portfolio):
407
for j, col in enumerate(headers):
408
write_sheet.write(i, j, row[col])
409
410
new_file.save('x.xls')
411
412
np.savetxt('TotalExposure.csv', TotalExposure, delimiter=';')
413
414
np.savetxt('Account.csv', Account.BALANCE, delimiter=';')
415
416
np.savetxt('AccountRet.csv', account_ret, delimiter=';')
417
418
np.savetxt('ExpectedRet.csv', ExpectedReturns.PCT, delimiter=';')
419
420
np.savetxt('CVaR.csv', CVaR.TRUE, delimiter=';')
421
422
np.savetxt('CVaRDev.csv', CVaR.DEVIATION, delimiter=';')
423
424
np.savetxt('Sharpe.csv', Sharpe, delimiter=';')
425
426
np.savetxt('DatesIdx.csv', np.transpose([idx, Date_idx,
Dates[Date_idx]]), delimiter=';', fmt='%s')
,→
427
428
print('--Ran: FamaFrenchPortfolio.py--')
FamaFrenchPlotting.py
Code to make plots A.3 and A.4 in appendix A.1.
==PAGE:105==
A.2 Python Scripts
95
1
from Class import *
2
#Includes..
3
#..import datetime
4
#..import numpy as np
5
#..from matplotlib.pyplot import boxplot, show, xticks, title,
ylabel, subplot, suptitle, hist, xlabel, ylabel, plot, figure,
yticks, ylim, legend, bar
,→
,→
6
#..import math
7
import xlrd
8
import math
9
import time
10
11
12
InvestmentPeriod = 150
13
14
#Import returns
15
fil = xlrd.open_workbook('Monthly_Returns.xls')
16
17
sheet = fil.sheet_by_index(0)
18
#Collect the asset names and replace spaces with '_'
19
Assets = [str(cell.value) for cell in sheet.row(0)]
20
Assets.pop(0)
21
22
rows = sheet.nrows
23
cols = sheet.ncols
24
25
N_rolls = rows - 1
26
N_assets = len(Assets)
27
28
#allocate memory
29
R = np.empty((N_rolls, N_assets), dtype=float)
30
ret = np.empty((InvestmentPeriod, N_assets), dtype=float)
31
NO = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 1))
32
33
for col in range(1, cols):
34
R[:, col - 1] = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(col, 1))
35
ret[:, col - 1] = R[183:, col - 1]
36
37
38
39
#Import simulations
40
#Open file stream
41
fil = xlrd.open_workbook('FamaFrench_Sims.xls')
==PAGE:106==
96
A Appendix
42
43
sheet = fil.sheet_by_index(0)
44
rows = sheet.nrows
45
cols = sheet.ncols
46
47
N_sim = cols - 1
48
49
#allocate memory
50
X = np.empty((N_rolls, N_sim, N_assets), dtype=float)
51
52
for asset in range(N_assets):
53
sheet = fil.sheet_by_index(asset)
54
#read into datastructure
55
for col in range(1, cols):
56
X[:, col - 1, asset] =
np.asarray(sheet.col_values(col, 1))
,→
57
58
#Import portfolio composition
59
fil = xlrd.open_workbook('x.xls')
60
sheet = fil.sheet_by_index(0)
61
rows = sheet.nrows
62
cols = sheet.ncols
63
64
Portfolio = np.empty((150, N_assets), dtype = float)
65
for col in range(cols):
66
Portfolio[:, col] = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(col, 0))
67
68
69
70
71
#Import dates
72
fil = xlrd.open_workbook('Monthly_Dates.xlsx')
73
sheet = fil.sheet_by_index(0)
74
Dates = np.asarray(sheet.col_values(0, 0))
75
Dates = Date_Excel2Python(Dates)
76
77
78
79
#Confidence interval of portfolio expected value
80
81
alpha = 0.99
82
#Allocate memory
83
PortfolioExposure = np.multiply((np.ones((InvestmentPeriod,
N_assets), dtype=float) + ret), Portfolio)
,→
==PAGE:107==
A.2 Python Scripts
97
84
PortfolioRet = [sum(PortfolioExposure[roll, :]) for roll in
range(InvestmentPeriod)]
,→
85
PortfolioSims = np.empty((InvestmentPeriod, N_sim))
86
PortfolioSimsRet = np.empty((InvestmentPeriod, N_sim))
87
tmp_X = [X[:, s, :] for s in range(N_sim)]
88
89
#Assign portfolio exposure to the simulations
90
for s in range(N_sim):
91
tmp_ret = np.ones((InvestmentPeriod, N_assets), dtype=float)
+ np.array(tmp_X[s][183:][:])
,→
92
tmp_mult = np.multiply(tmp_ret, Portfolio)
93
for roll in range(InvestmentPeriod):
94
PortfolioSims[roll, s] = sum(tmp_mult[roll, :])
95
theDates = Dates[183:]
96
Plot_ReturnsWithConfidence(PortfolioRet, PortfolioSims, theDates,
alpha)
,→
97
show()
98
99
#Lets look at each asset's distribution
100
figure()
101
for asset in range(N_assets):
102
subplot(6, 6, asset + 1)
103
hist(ret[:, asset].flatten(),
weights=np.ones(InvestmentPeriod)/(InvestmentPeriod),bins=50)
,→
104
xlabel('Monthly return')
105
ylabel('Density')
106
legend([Assets[asset]], loc='upper left', frameon=False)
107
show()
108
109
#Lets make an animation of the distribution of simulated returns
110
#Define the update function
111
def update_hist(roll):
112
clf() #Clear everyting
113
hist(PortfolioSims[roll, :], weights=np.ones(N_sim)/N_sim)
114
xlabel('Portfolio Value')
115
ylabel('Density')
116
title('Distribution of simulations - Roll {}'.format(roll +
1))
,→
117
118
fig = figure()
119
#Make animation
120
animate = animation.FuncAnimation(fig, update_hist, interval=50,
frames=InvestmentPeriod)
,→
==PAGE:108==
98
A Appendix
121
show()
122
123
124
N_assets = 6
125
some_range = [2, 6, 11, 16, 21, 25]
126
127
figure()
128
suptitle('Distribution of Market Returns')
129
idx_i = 0
130
for ii, i in enumerate(some_range):
131
for jj, j in enumerate(some_range):
132
subplot(N_assets, N_assets, ii*N_assets + jj + 1)
133
if i == j:
134
hist(ret[:, i],
weights=np.ones(InvestmentPeriod)/InvestmentPeriod,
color='#2F3AF9')
,→
,→
135
xlabel('Return')
136
ylabel('Density')
137
else:
138
plot(ret[:, i], ret[:, j], '.',
color='#E3434F')
,→
139
xlabel('Return')
140
ylabel('Return')
141
if ii == 0:
142
title(Assets[j])
143
show()
A.3
GAMS Scripts
Read_Data.gms
Script that reads in the data and converts to GAMS format and saves as data structure
1
∗Sveinn ￿Heiar ￿Kristjnsson −DTU 2019;
2
∗Define the
sets
3
set
r o l l
/1∗333/
4
scen /1∗250/
5
;
7
∗Regular
8
$INCLUDE ”Assets . inc ”
9
∗display Asset ,
Tickers ;
10
a l i a s ( Asset , i ,
j ) ;
==PAGE:109==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
99
13
∗Parameters
14
parameters IDX1( roll ,
scen )
15
IDX2( roll ,
scen )
16
IDX3( roll ,
scen )
17
IDX4( roll ,
scen )
18
IDX5( roll ,
scen )
19
IDX6( roll ,
scen )
20
IDX7( roll ,
scen )
21
IDX8( roll ,
scen )
22
IDX9( roll ,
scen )
23
IDX10( roll ,
scen )
24
IDX11( roll ,
scen )
25
IDX12( roll ,
scen )
26
IDX13( roll ,
scen )
27
IDX14( roll ,
scen )
28
IDX15( roll ,
scen )
29
IDX16( roll ,
scen )
30
IDX17( roll ,
scen )
31
IDX18( roll ,
scen )
32
IDX19( roll ,
scen )
33
IDX20( roll ,
scen )
34
IDX21( roll ,
scen )
35
IDX22( roll ,
scen )
36
IDX23( roll ,
scen )
37
IDX24( roll ,
scen )
38
IDX25( roll ,
scen )
39
IDX26( roll ,
scen )
40
IDX27( roll ,
scen )
41
IDX28( roll ,
scen )
42
IDX29( roll ,
scen )
43
IDX30( roll ,
scen )
44
IDX31( roll ,
scen )
47
$ c a l l GDXXRW FamaFrench_SimsNorm . xls
trace=3 par=IDX1 rng=SMALL_LoBO! a1 :
iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX2 rng=ME1_BO2! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX3
rng=ME1_BO3! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX4 rng=ME1_BO4! a1 : iq360 rdim=1
cdim=1 par=IDX5 rng=SMALL_HiBO! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX6 rng=ME2_
BO1! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX7 rng=ME2_BO2! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1
par=IDX8 rng=ME2_BO3! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX9 rng=ME2_BO4! a1 :
iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX10 rng=ME2_BO5! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=
IDX11 rng=ME3_BO1! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX12 rng=ME3_BO2! a1 : iq360
rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX13 rng=ME3_BO3! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX14 rng
=ME3_BO4! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX15 rng=ME3_BO5! a1 : iq360 rdim=1
cdim=1 par=IDX16 rng=ME4_BO1! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX17 rng=ME4_
BO2! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX18 rng=ME4_BO3! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1
par=IDX19 rng=ME4_BO4! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX20 rng=ME4_BO5! a1 :
iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX21 rng=BIG_LoBO! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=
IDX22 rng=ME5_BO2! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX23 rng=ME5_BO3! a1 : iq360
rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX24 rng=ME5_BO4! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX25 rng
=BIG_HiBO! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX26 rng=LEATTREU_Index ! a1 : iq360
rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX27 rng=LET1TREU_Index ! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=
IDX28 rng=LET3TREU_Index ! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX29 rng=LET5TREU_
Index ! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1 par=IDX30 rng=LET7TREU_Index ! a1 : iq360 rdim
==PAGE:110==
100
A Appendix
=1 cdim=1 par=IDX31 rng=LET0TREU_Index ! a1 : iq360 rdim=1 cdim=1
49
∗Get data from excel
f i l e
into gdx
f i l e
W
52
$GDXIN FamaFrench_SimsNorm . gdx
53
$LOAD IDX1
54
$LOAD IDX2
55
$LOAD IDX3
56
$LOAD IDX4
57
$LOAD IDX5
58
$LOAD IDX6
59
$LOAD IDX7
60
$LOAD IDX8
61
$LOAD IDX9
62
$LOAD IDX10
63
$LOAD IDX11
64
$LOAD IDX12
65
$LOAD IDX13
66
$LOAD IDX14
67
$LOAD IDX15
68
$LOAD IDX16
69
$LOAD IDX17
70
$LOAD IDX18
71
$LOAD IDX19
72
$LOAD IDX20
73
$LOAD IDX21
74
$LOAD IDX22
75
$LOAD IDX23
76
$LOAD IDX24
77
$LOAD IDX25
78
$LOAD IDX26
79
$LOAD IDX27
80
$LOAD IDX28
81
$LOAD IDX29
82
$LOAD IDX30
83
$LOAD IDX31
84
$GDXIN
86
∗The parameter that keeps track
of
scenarios
for each
etf
87
parameter RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
i ) ;
89
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'SMALL_LoBO' ) = IDX1( roll ,
scen ) ;
90
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME1_BO2' ) = IDX2( roll ,
scen ) ;
91
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME1_BO3' ) = IDX3( roll ,
scen ) ;
92
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME1_BO4' ) = IDX4( roll ,
scen ) ;
93
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'SMALL_HiBO' ) = IDX5( roll ,
scen ) ;
94
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME2_BO1' ) = IDX6( roll ,
scen ) ;
95
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME2_BO2' ) = IDX7( roll ,
scen ) ;
96
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME2_BO3' ) = IDX8( roll ,
scen ) ;
97
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME2_BO4' ) = IDX9( roll ,
scen ) ;
98
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME2_BO5' ) = IDX10( roll ,
scen ) ;
99
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME3_BO1' ) = IDX11( roll ,
scen ) ;
==PAGE:111==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
101
100
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME3_BO2' ) = IDX12( roll ,
scen ) ;
101
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME3_BO3' ) = IDX13( roll ,
scen ) ;
102
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME3_BO4' ) = IDX14( roll ,
scen ) ;
103
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME3_BO5' ) = IDX15( roll ,
scen ) ;
104
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME4_BO1' ) = IDX16( roll ,
scen ) ;
105
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME4_BO2' ) = IDX17( roll ,
scen ) ;
106
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME4_BO3' ) = IDX18( roll ,
scen ) ;
107
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME4_BO4' ) = IDX19( roll ,
scen ) ;
108
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME4_BO5' ) = IDX20( roll ,
scen ) ;
109
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'BIG_LoBO' ) = IDX21( roll ,
scen ) ;
110
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME5_BO2' ) = IDX22( roll ,
scen ) ;
111
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME5_BO3' ) = IDX23( roll ,
scen ) ;
112
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'ME5_BO4' ) = IDX24( roll ,
scen ) ;
113
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'BIG_HiBO' ) = IDX25( roll ,
scen ) ;
114
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'LEATTREU_Index ' ) = IDX26( roll ,
scen ) ;
115
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'LET1TREU_Index ' ) = IDX27( roll ,
scen ) ;
116
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'LET3TREU_Index ' ) = IDX28( roll ,
scen ) ;
117
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'LET5TREU_Index ' ) = IDX29( roll ,
scen ) ;
118
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'LET7TREU_Index ' ) = IDX30( roll ,
scen ) ;
119
RetScen( roll ,
scen ,
'LET0TREU_Index ' ) = IDX31( roll ,
scen ) ;
121
Execute_unload
' RetScen250ScenRolling . gdx ' ,
RetScen ;
124
parameter
125
MonthlyReturns( roll ,
i )
126
;
129
$ c a l l GDXXRW Monthly_Returns . xls
trace=3 par=MonthlyReturns rdim=1 cdim=1
131
parameter
132
BondGold( i )
133
;
134
BondGold( i ) = 0;
136
BondGold( 'LEATTREU_Index ' ) = 1;
137
BondGold( 'LET1TREU_Index ' ) = 1;
138
BondGold( 'LET3TREU_Index ' ) = 1;
139
BondGold( 'LET5TREU_Index ' ) = 1;
140
BondGold( 'LET7TREU_Index ' ) = 1;
141
BondGold( 'LET0TREU_Index ' ) = 1;
143
Execute_unload
'ETFtype. gdx ' , BondGold ;
147
parameter
148
Available ( roll ,
i )
149
;
152
$ c a l l GDXXRW Availability . xls
trace=3 par=Available rdim=1 cdim=1
==PAGE:112==
102
A Appendix
156
set someset /RiskFree/
157
parameter
158
RiskFreeRate ( roll ,
someset )
159
RiskFree
160
;
161
$ c a l l GDXXRW RiskFree . xls
trace=3 par=RiskFreeRate rdim=1 cdim=1
163
$GDXIN RiskFree . gdx
164
$LOAD RiskFreeRate
165
$GDXIN
167
ParaMeter RiskFree ( r o l l ) ;
169
RiskFree ( r o l l ) = RiskFreeRate ( roll ,
' RiskFree ' ) ;
171
Execute_unload
' RiskFree . gdx ' ,
RiskFree ;
codes/Read_Data.gms.
Leveraging.gms
The algorithm that solves the models for the first time period
1
∗© 2019 −Sveinn Heidar Kristjansson −DTU Compute
2
$TITLE Final
project −Asset Allocation
using ETFs
3
$eolcom //
4
option optcr =0.005, reslim =120;
6
∗set
7
∗
Asset
Set of
assets
tickers
8
∗
Dates
Set of
dates
9
∗;
11
set
12
r o l l
Set of
r o l l i n g
forward index
/105∗333/
13
scen
Set of
scenarios
/1∗250/
14
;
17
$INCLUDE ”Assets . inc ”
18
a l i a s
( Asset ,
j ,
i )
19
∗$INCLUDE ”Dates . inc ”
20
∗a l i a s
(Dates ,
t ) ;
22
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
23
∗−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Read in the necessary data
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
24
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
27
∗Import return data
==PAGE:113==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
103
28
parameter
29
∗
All
scenarios
30
RetScen
31
∗
Single
period
scenarios
32
RetScenOnce( scen ,
i )
34
∗
Need to know the type of each asset Bond or gold rated
35
BondGold( i )
37
∗
Need to know which asset
i s
available
at each time
38
Available ( roll ,
j )
39
isAvailable ( j )
41
∗
Need to have the
risk−free
rates
at each
r o l l
42
RiskFree ( r o l l )
43
RiskFreeOnce
44
;
46
∗−−−Read data from respective
f i l e s
and define parameters−−−−
47
∗Scenarios
previously
generated
48
$GDXIN RetScen250ScenRolling . gdx
49
$LOAD RetScen
50
$GDXIN
51
∗Asset type
52
$GDXIN ETFtype. gdx
53
$LOAD BondGold
54
$GDXIN
55
∗Availability
of the data
56
$GDXIN Availability . gdx
57
$LOAD Available
58
$GDXIN
59
∗Risk
free
returns
60
$GDXIN RiskFree . gdx
61
$LOAD RiskFree
62
$GDXIN
66
∗−−−Define Parameters for
current period−−−
67
RetScenOnce( scen ,
i ) = RetScen ( '184 ' , scen ,
i ) ;
68
isAvailable ( j ) = Available ( '184 ' ,
j ) ;
69
RiskFreeOnce = RiskFree ( '183 ') ; //183 Because
last we don ' t know the
r f
rate
in month 184 yet
72
//display RetScenOnce , BondGold , RetScenOnce ,
RiskFreeOnce ;
78
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
79
∗−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Define Model
==PAGE:114==
104
A Appendix
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
80
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
82
scalars
83
lambda
' Risk appetite '
84
alpha
' Confidence
interval '
85
Budget
'Nominal investment budget '
86
MIN_MU
'Minimum return
in
universe '
87
MAX_MU
'Maximum return
in
universe '
88
MU_TARGET
' Target return '
89
CVaR_Target
'The value
of the target CVaR for
the equal
increment model '
90
ETFcount
'The current count of
available ETFs'
91
EQweights
' Equal weights given
available ETFs'
92
CVaRbarrier
'The maximum allowed CVaR for
the bakctesting model
'
93
PrevReturns
'The returns from the previous model '
94
TRANSACTION
'The transaction
cost
( percentage )
of buying or
selling '
95
LEVERAGE_FACTOR 'The maximum allowed
leverage
factor
( multiplier '
96
Rf
'The risk−free
borrowing rate '
97
;
99
∗Various Scalars
100
∗lambda = 0.999;
101
lambda = 0.001;
102
alpha = 0.99;
103
Budget = 100000;
104
ETFcount = card (RetScenOnce)/card ( scen ) ;
105
EQweights = 1/ETFcount ;
108
∗Define model attributes
109
TRANSACTION = 0.001;
110
LEVERAGE_FACTOR = 19;
111
Rf = 0.02;
114
parameters
115
pr ( scen )
' Scenario
probability '
116
P( scen ,
i )
' Final values '
117
EP( i )
' Expected
f i n a l
values ( over
a l l
scenarios '
119
;
121
∗−−−−Stochastic Modelling−−−−
122
pr ( scen ) = 1.0/card ( scen ) ;
123
P( scen ,
i ) = 1 + RetScenOnce( scen ,
i ) ;
124
EP( i ) = sum( scen ,
pr ( scen )∗P( scen ,
i ) ) ;
126
∗−−−Contrioling
scalars−−−−
127
MIN_MU = smin( i , EP( i ) ) ;
128
MAX_MU = smax( i , EP( i ) ) ;
==PAGE:115==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
105
129
MU_Target = 1;
134
∗−−−Model Variables−−−
136
positive
variables
137
x( i )
' Holdings of
assets
in monetary units
( not proportions ) '
138
VarDev( scen )
' Measures of the deviation from the VaR'
139
Buy( i )
'Amount of
asset
i bought '
140
Sell ( i )
'Amount of
asset
i
sold '
141
BuyCost( i )
' Cost associated with buying asset
i '
142
SellCost ( i )
' Cost associated with
s e l l i n g
asset
i '
143
Borrow
'The amount of
risk−free
capital borrowed '
144
Costs
' '
145
Cash
' '
147
;
149
variables
150
losses ( scen )
'Measure of the
losses '
151
VaR
'Value−at−Risk '
152
CVaR
' Conditional−Value−at−Risk −−−Objective '
153
RETURN_RISK
' objective
value
for
the return and risk model '
154
RET_Cash
' Objective value
for
the equal increment model '
155
SellPort ( i )
'Amount sold
of
asset
i
in
portfolio '
156
BuyPort( i )
'Amount bought of
asset
i
in
portfolio '
157
SHARPE_RATIO
'The sharpe
ratio '
158
;
161
equations
162
BudgetCon
' Equation defining
the bodget constraint '
163
ReturnCon1
' Equation defining
the
portfolio
return
constraint
for
the
i n i t i a l
portfolio '
164
ReturnCon2
' Equation defining
the
portfolio
return
constraint
for
the
revised
portfolio '
165
LossDef ( scen )
' Equations defining
the
losses '
166
VarDevCon( scen )
' Equation defining
the VaR deviation
constraints '
167
ObjDefCVaR
' Objective
function
definition
for CVaR
minimization '
168
Ret_Risk
' Objective
function
definition
for
the Retrun and
Risk (max return min risk ) '
169
CVaRTarget
'The target
value
for CVaR in the equal increment
model '
171
ObjVaR_Step
' Objective
function
definition
for
the equal
increment model '
172
EqualWeights( i )
' Equation ensuring equal weights
of the
portfolio '
173
MaximumCVaR
'The maximum allowed CVaR ( that
of
equal weights
portfolio )
for
the backtesting model '
174
PortfolioStorage ( i )
' Storage
constraint
to
associate
previous
portfolio and current buying and selling '
175
BuySell
' Constraint that ensures what i s
sold
i s
equal to
==PAGE:116==
106
A Appendix
what i s
bought '
176
SellVal ( i )
' Define the amount sold
in
asset
i
after
transaction
costs '
177
BuyVal( i )
' Define the amount bought in
asset
i
after
transaction
costs '
178
SellCostDef ( i )
' Defining the cost
associated with
s e l l i n g
asset
i '
179
BuyCostDef( i )
' Defining the cost
associated with buying asset
i '
180
Borrowing
' Defining the borrowed capital '
181
GoldFixed
' '
182
CostsDef
' Costs associated with buying asset '
183
TotalExposure
' '
184
NoCash
'When we dont want to include a cash variable '
186
AvailableETFs ( i )
' Constraint that ensures that
assats
currently not
available cannot be bought '
187
Equality ( i )
' Constraint that ensures equal weights
for
available
assets '
188
ObjSharpe
' Objective
function
definition
for
the sharpe
ratio
model '
189
;
192
∗−−Objective−−−−−
193
ObjVaR_Step
. .
RET_Cash =e= SUM( i , EP( i ) ∗x( i ) ) −Borrow∗(1 + Rf)∗∗(1
/12) + Cash ;
195
ObjSharpe
. .
SHARPE_RATIO =e= ( sum( i , EP( i )∗x( i ) ) −
sum( i , x( i ) )∗
(1 + RiskFreeOnce )∗∗(1/12) )/(sum( i , x( i ) ) + CVaR) ;
196
∗−−s . t.−−−−−−−−−−
198
BudgetCon
. .
SUM( i , x( i ) ) + Cash =E= Budget + Borrow −Costs ;
200
ReturnCon1
. .
SUM( i , EP( i ) ∗x( i ) ) =G= MU_TARGET∗(Budget + Borrow) ;
202
LossDef ( scen ) . .
Losses ( scen ) =E= −1∗SUM( i , P( scen ,
i ) ∗x( i ) ) ;
204
VaRDevCon( scen )
. .
VaRDev( scen ) =G= Losses ( scen ) −VaR;
206
ObjDefCVaR . .
CVaR =E= VaR + SUM( scen ,
pr ( scen ) ∗VaRDev( scen ) ) / (1
−alpha ) ;
208
MaximumCVaR . .
CVaR =l= CVaRbarrier∗(sum( i , x( i ) ) ) ;
210
∗−−−Buying constraints
211
CostsDef
. .
Costs =e= sum( i , Buy( i ) )∗TRANSACTION;
213
∗−−−Borrowing
definition
constraints
214
PortfolioStorage ( i )
. .
x( i ) =e= Buy( i ) ;
216
BuySell
. .
sum( i , Buy( i ) ) + Cash =e= Borrow + Budget −Costs ;
218
Borrowing
. .
Borrow =l=
(LEVERAGE_FACTOR −1)∗Budget ;
220
TotalExposure
. .
sum( i , x( i ) ) + Cash =l= LEVERAGE_FACTOR∗Budget ;
==PAGE:117==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
107
222
GoldFixed
. .
sum( i $(BondGold( i ) < 1) , x( i ) ) =l= 1.0∗Budget ;
224
∗−−−Availability
constraints
225
AvailableETFs ( i )$( isAvailable ( i ) <> 1)
. .
x( i ) =e= 0;
227
∗−−−Special
constraints
for
equal weights model
228
Equality ( i )$( isAvailable ( i ) <> 0)
. .
x( i ) =e= Budget∗EQweights −Costs∗
EQweights ;
230
∗−−−Not include the cash
variable
231
NoCash . .
Cash =e= 0;
233
∗−−−−−−−−−−−−Model−−−−−−−−−−
234
model EqWeightsModel
'The Equal Weights model ' /LossDef , VaRDevCon,
ObjDefCVaR,
CostsDef ,
PortfolioStorage ,
BuySell ,
Borrowing ,
TotalExposure ,
AvailableETFs ,
Equality/ ;
235
model LeveregingBeginning
'The leverageing
portfolio
step 1 ' /ObjVar_Step ,
LossDef , VaRDevCon, ObjDefCVaR, MaximumCVaR,
CostsDef ,
PortfolioStorage ,
BuySell ,
Borrowing ,
TotalExposure ,
GoldFixed ,
AvailableETFs/ ;
236
model LeveregingSharpe
'The sharpe
ratio
leverageing
portfolio
step 1 ' /
ObjSharpe ,
LossDef , VaRDevCon, ObjDefCVaR,
CostsDef ,
PortfolioStorage ,
BuySell ,
Borrowing ,
TotalExposure ,
GoldFixed ,
AvailableETFs/ ;
238
∗−−−−−−−−−−−Solve Models−−−−−−−−−−
240
∗Update Current risk−free
rate
241
Rf = RiskFreeOnce + 0.0045;
243
∗Start computing the equal weights
portfolio
as a target
244
solve EqWeightsModel minimizing CVaR using
lp ;
245
scalar
theReturn ;
246
theReturn = sum( i , EP( i ) ∗x . l ( i ) ) ;
247
display CVaR. l ,
theReturn , x . l , Buy. l ,
Costs . l , Borrow . l ;
249
EXECUTE_UNLOAD ' EQWeightsPortfolio . gdx ' , x , CVaR, Borrow ,
theReturn ;
251
∗Define the maximum CVaR
253
CVaRbarrier = CVaR. l /sum( i , x . l (
i ) ) ;
254
//CVaRbarrier = −0.96;
256
∗S t i l l
missing minimum of 50DKK
257
solve
LeveregingBeginning maximizing RET_Cash using
lp ;
258
display
isAvailable , CVaR. l , RET_Cash . l , Cash . l , x . l , Buy. l ,
Costs . l , Borrow
. l ;
259
RET_Cash . l = sum( i , EP( i )∗x . l ( i ) ) ;
261
EXECUTE_UNLOAD ' Portfolio . gdx ' , x , Buy, CVaR, RET_Cash , Borrow ,
Costs , Cash ;
263
∗Solve the nonlinear sharpe
ratio problem using
regular
nlp
264
$ontext
265
solve
LeveregingSharpe maximizing SHARPE_RATIO using nlp ;
266
display CVaR. l , SHARPE_RATIO. l , Cash . l , x . l , Buy. l ,
Costs . l , Borrow . l ;
267
EXECUTE_UNLOAD ' PortfolioSharpe . gdx ' , x , Buy, CVaR, SHARPE_RATIO, Borrow ,
Costs , Cash ;
==PAGE:118==
108
A Appendix
268
$ offtext
codes/Leveraging.gms.
Leveraging RevisedEQ.gms
The algorithm that solves the models for the remaining time periods by rolling forward
in time
1
∗© 2019 −Sveinn Heidar Kristjansson −DTU Compute
2
$TITLE Final
project −Asset Allocation
using ETFs
3
$eolcom //
4
option optcr =0.005, reslim =120;
6
∗set
7
∗
Asset
Set of
assets
tickers
8
∗
Dates
Set of
dates
9
∗;
11
set
12
r o l l
Set of
r o l l i n g
forward index
/106∗333/
13
scen
Set of
scenarios
/1∗250/
14
;
17
$INCLUDE ”Assets . inc ”
18
a l i a s
( Asset ,
j ,
i , k)
19
∗$INCLUDE ”Dates . inc ”
20
∗a l i a s
(Dates ,
t ) ;
22
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
23
∗−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Read in the necessary data
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
24
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
26
∗Import return data
27
parameter
28
∗
All
scenarios
29
RetScen
30
∗
Single
period
scenarios
31
RetScenOnce( scen ,
i )
33
∗
Previous model ' s
portfolio
34
InitPort ( i )
35
InitincreaseBorrow
36
InitdecreaseBorrow
37
InitCVaR
38
InitRet
39
InitCosts
40
Account
41
InitBorrow
==PAGE:119==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
109
42
InitCash
44
∗
Temporary variables
45
ModelPort
46
ModelBorrow
47
ModelAccount
49
∗
The 1/N benchmark portfolio
50
BenchmarkPort( i )
51
BenchmarkBorrow
52
BenchmarkCVaR
53
BenchmarkAccount
54
BenchmarkRet
56
∗
Keep track
of the
variables and parameters
for each period
58
∗
For the optimised
portfolio
aswell
59
increaseBorrowHistory ( r o l l )
60
AccountHistory ( r o l l )
61
decreaseBorrowHistory ( r o l l )
62
BorrowHistory ( r o l l )
63
returnsHistory ( r o l l )
64
CVaRHistory( r o l l )
65
BuyHistory ( roll ,
i )
66
SellHistory ( roll ,
i )
67
CostsHistory ( r o l l )
68
xHistory ( roll ,
i )
69
InitPortHistory ( r o l l )
70
CashHistory ( r o l l )
72
∗
Same for
the 1/N portfolio
73
BenchBorrow( r o l l )
74
BenchAccount( r o l l )
75
BenchCVaR( r o l l )
76
Benchx( roll ,
i )
77
BenchRet( r o l l )
80
∗
The true
returns
81
MonthlyReturns( roll ,
j )
83
∗
Need to know the type of each asset Bond or gold rated
84
BondGold( i )
85
nonBondGold( i )
87
∗
Need to know which asset
i s
available
at each time
88
Available ( roll ,
j )
89
isAvailable ( j )
91
∗
Need to have the
risk−free
rates
at each
r o l l
92
RiskFree ( r o l l )
93
RiskFreeOnce
95
;
96
∗−−−Read data from respective
f i l e s
and define parameters−−−−
==PAGE:120==
110
A Appendix
97
∗Scenarios
98
$GDXIN RetScen250ScenRolling . gdx
99
$LOAD RetScen
100
$GDXIN
102
∗Equal weights
portfolio
103
$GDXIN EQWeightsPortfolio . gdx
104
$LOAD BenchmarkPort = x . l
105
$LOAD BenchmarkBorrow = Borrow . l
106
$LOAD BenchmarkCVaR = CVaR. l
107
$LOAD BenchmarkRet = theReturn . l
108
$GDXIN
109
∗Previous
portfolio
110
$GDXIN Portfolio . gdx
111
$LOAD InitPort = x . l
112
$LOAD InitincreaseBorrow = Borrow . l
113
$LOAD InitCVaR = CVaR. l
114
$LOAD InitRet = RET_Cash . l
115
$LOAD InitCosts = Costs . l
116
$LOAD InitCash = Cash . l
117
$GDXIN
118
∗True returns
119
$GDXIN Monthly_Returns . gdx
120
$LOAD MonthlyReturns
121
$GDXIN
122
∗Asset type
123
$GDXIN ETFtype. gdx
124
$LOAD BondGold
125
$GDXIN
126
∗Availability
127
$GDXIN Availability . gdx
128
$LOAD Available
129
$GDXIN
130
∗RiskFree returns
131
$GDXIN RiskFree . gdx
132
$LOAD RiskFree
133
$GDXIN
136
∗Define bool parameter defining
equity
assets / indices
137
nonBondGold( i ) = 1 −BondGold( i ) ;
140
∗−−−−−−−First
Rolling forward Period−−−−−−−−−
141
∗−−−Define Parameters for
current period−−−
142
RetScenOnce( scen ,
i ) = RetScen ( '185 ' , scen ,
i ) ;
143
isAvailable ( j ) = Available ( '185 ' ,
j ) ;
144
RiskFreeOnce = RiskFree ( '184 ') ; //Always one
r o l l
behind as we use the today
month as
r f
rates
147
∗−−−Record the
f i r s t
period ' s EQ weights
attributes−−−
149
BenchBorrow( '184 ') = BenchmarkBorrow ;
150
BenchCVaR( '184 ') = BenchmarkCVaR;
==PAGE:121==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
111
151
Benchx( '184 ' ,
i ) = BenchmarkPort( i ) ;
152
BenchRet( '184 ') = BenchmarkRet ;
154
∗−−−Record the
f i r s t
period ' s
attribute ' s−−−
155
increaseBorrowHistory ( '184 ') = InitincreaseBorrow ;
156
decreaseBorrowHistory ( '184 ') = 0;
157
BorrowHistory ( '184 ') = InitincreaseBorrow ;
158
CVaRHistory( '184 ') = InitCVaR ;
159
returnsHistory ( '184 ') = InitRet ;
160
BuyHistory ( '184 ' ,
i ) = InitPort ( i ) ;
161
SellHistory ( '184 ' ,
i ) = 0;
162
CostsHistory ( '184 ') = InitCosts ;
163
xHistory ( '184 ' ,
i ) = InitPort ( i ) ;
164
CashHistory ( '184 ') = InitCash ;
168
scalar
169
InitPortVal
170
;
171
InitPortVal = sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) ;
173
//display RetScenOnce ;
174
//display
InitPort ,
InitPortVal ,
InitincreaseBorrow , InitCVaR ,
InitRet ,
InitCosts ;
175
//display BondGold ,
MonthlyReturns ;
179
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
180
∗−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Define Model
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
181
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
183
scalars
184
lambda
' Risk appetite '
185
alpha
' Confidence
interval '
186
Budget
'Nominal investment budget '
187
MIN_MU
'Minimum return
in
universe '
188
MAX_MU
'Maximum return
in
universe '
189
MU_TARGET
' Target return '
190
CVaR_Target
'The value
of the target CVaR for
the equal
increment model '
191
ETFcount
'The current count of
available ETFs'
192
EQweights
' Equal weights given
available ETFs'
193
CVaRbarrier
'The maximum allowed CVaR for
the bakctesting model
'
194
PrevReturns
'The returns from the previous model '
195
TRANSACTION
'The transaction
cost
( percentage )
of buying or
selling '
196
LEVERAGE_FACTOR 'The maximum allowed
leverage
factor
( multiplier '
==PAGE:122==
112
A Appendix
197
Rf
'The risk−free
borrowing rate '
198
BIG
' Large scalar number '
199
SMALL
' Small
scalar number '
200
;
201
∗Various
scalars
202
alpha = 0.99;
203
Budget = 100000;
204
ETFcount = card ( isAvailable ) ;
205
EQweights = 1/ETFcount ;
208
∗Define model attributes
209
TRANSACTION = 0.001;
210
LEVERAGE_FACTOR = 19;
211
Rf = 0.02;
214
parameters
215
pr ( scen )
' Scenario
probability '
216
P( scen ,
i )
' Final values '
217
EP( i )
' Expected
f i n a l
values ( over
a l l
scenarios '
218
;
220
∗−−−−Stochastic Modelling−−−−
221
pr ( scen ) = 1.0/card ( scen ) ;
222
P( scen ,
i ) = 1 + RetScenOnce( scen ,
i ) ;
223
EP( i ) = sum( scen ,
pr ( scen )∗P( scen ,
i ) ) ;
226
∗−−−Contrioling
scalars−−−−
227
MIN_MU = smin( i , EP( i ) ) ;
228
MAX_MU = smax( i , EP( i ) ) ;
229
MU_Target = 1;
231
∗−−−Model Variables−−−
233
positive
variables
234
x( i )
' Holdings of
assets
in monetary units
( not proportions ) '
235
VarDev( scen )
' Measures of the deviation from the VaR'
236
Buy( i )
'Amount of
asset
i bought '
237
Sell ( i )
'Amount of
asset
i
sold '
238
Costs
' Total
costs
associated with buying and s e l l i n g
assets '
239
increaseBorrow
'The amount of
risk−free
capital borrowed '
240
decreaseBorrow
' Total deleveraged
portfolio
exposure '
241
Borrow
' '
242
Cash
' '
243
increaseCash
' '
244
decreaseCash
' '
246
;
248
variables
249
loss es ( scen )
'Measure of the
losses '
250
VaR
'Value−at−Risk '
==PAGE:123==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
113
251
CVaR
' Conditional−Value−at−Risk −−−Objective '
252
RET_Cash
' Objective value
for
the equal increment model '
253
SHARPE_RATIO
'The sharpe
ratio '
254
;
256
equations
257
BudgetCon
' Equation defining
the bodget constraint '
258
ReturnCon2
' Equation defining
the
portfolio
return
constraint
for
the
revised
portfolio '
259
LossDef ( scen )
' Equations defining
the
losses '
260
VarDevCon( scen )
' Equation defining
the VaR deviation
constraints '
261
ObjDefCVaR
' Objective
function
definition
for CVaR
minimization '
262
CVaRTarget
'The target
value
for CVaR in the equal increment
model '
264
ObjVaR_Step
' Objective
function
definition
for
the equal
increment model '
265
EqualWeights( i )
' Equation ensuring equal weights
of the
portfolio '
266
MaximumCVaR
'The maximum allowed CVaR ( that
of
equal weights
portfolio )
for
the backtesting model '
267
PortfolioStorage ( i )
' Storage
constraint
to
associate
previous
portfolio and current buying and selling '
268
BuySell
' Constraint that ensures what i s
sold
i s
equal to
what i s
bought '
269
Borrowing
' Defining the borrowed capital '
270
GoldFixed
' Defining the
r e s t r i c t i o n on non gold rated
assets
or bonds '
271
SellLimit ( i )
' Constraint on the amount of
asset
i
that can be
sold , no shorting allowed '
272
CostsDef
' Defining the transaction
costs
associated with
buying and s e l l i n g
assets '
273
AvailableETFs ( i ) ' Constraint that ensures that
assats
currently not
available cannot be bought '
274
Deleveraging
' '
275
BorrowingStorage
' '
276
TotalExposure
' '
277
CashStorage
' '
278
CashLimit
' '
279
ObjSharpe
' Objective
function
definition
for
the sharpe
ratio
model '
280
Equality ( i )
'The equal weights
constraint '
281
NoCash
'When we dont want to include a cash variable '
283
;
286
∗−−Objective−−−−−
287
ObjVaR_Step
. .
RET_Cash =e= SUM( i , EP( i ) ∗x( i ) ) + decreaseBorrow
−increaseBorrow∗(1 + Rf)∗∗(1/12) + Cash ;
289
ObjSharpe
. .
SHARPE_RATIO =e= ( sum( i , EP( i )∗x( i ) ) −
sum( i , x( i ) )∗
((1 + RiskFreeOnce )∗∗(1/12) −1) )/(sum( i , x( i ) ) + CVaR) ;
290
∗−−s . t.−−−−−−−−−−
==PAGE:124==
114
A Appendix
292
∗The basic
constraints
293
//BudgetCon
. .
SUM( i , x( i ) ) =E= Account + increaseBorrow −
decreaseBorrow −Costs ;
295
//ReturnCon2
. .
SUM( i , EP( i ) ∗x( i ) ) =G= MU_TARGET∗(Account +
increaseBorrow ) ;
297
LossDef ( scen ) . .
Losses ( scen ) =E= −1∗SUM( i , P( scen ,
i ) ∗x( i ) ) ;
299
VaRDevCon( scen )
. .
VaRDev( scen ) =G= Losses ( scen ) −VaR;
301
ObjDefCVaR . .
CVaR =E= VaR + SUM( scen ,
pr ( scen ) ∗VaRDev( scen ) ) /
(1 −alpha ) ;
303
MaximumCVaR . .
CVaR =l= CVaRbarrier∗(sum( i , x( i ) ) ) ;
306
∗−−−Buying and s e l l i n g
constraints
307
PortfolioStorage ( i )
. .
x( i ) =e= InitPort ( i ) + Buy( i ) −Se ll ( i ) ;
309
BuySell
. .
sum( i , Buy( i ) ) + decreaseBorrow + increaseCash +
Costs=e= sum( i ,
Sell ( i ) ) + increaseBorrow + decreaseCash ;
311
CostsDef
. .
Costs =e= sum( i , Buy( i ) + Sell ( i ) )∗TRANSACTION;
313
// SellLimit ( i )
. .
Se ll ( i ) =l= InitPort ( i ) ;
315
∗−−−Borrowing
definition
constraints
316
BorrowingStorage
. .
Borrow =e= InitBorrow + increaseBorrow −
decreaseBorrow ;
318
Borrowing
. .
Borrow =l= (LEVERAGE_FACTOR −1)∗Account ;
320
TotalExposure
. .
sum( i , x( i ) ) + Cash =l= LEVERAGE_FACTOR∗Account ;
322
GoldFixed
. .
sum( i $nonBondGold( i ) , x( i ) ) =l= 1.0∗Account ;
324
//Deleveraging
. .
decreaseBorrow =l= InitBorrow ;
326
CashStorage
. .
Cash =e= InitCash + increaseCash −decreaseCash ;
328
CashLimit
. .
increaseCash =l= sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) ;
331
∗−−−Availability
constraints
332
AvailableETFs ( i )$( isAvailable ( i ) <> 1)
. .
x( i ) =e= 0;
334
∗−−−Equality
constraints
335
Equality ( i )$( isAvailable ( i ) <> 0)
. .
x( i ) =e= InitPort ( i ) ;
337
∗−−−Not include the cash
variable
338
NoCash . .
Cash =e= 0;
==PAGE:125==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
115
342
∗−−−−−−−−−−−−−Model−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
343
model RevisedEqWeightsModel
'The Equal Weights model revised ' /LossDef ,
VaRDevCon, ObjDefCVaR,
Equality/ ;
344
model RevisedLeveraging
'The leverageing
portfolio
Revised ' /ObjVar_Step ,
LossDef , VaRDevCon, ObjDefCVaR, MaximumCVaR,
PortfolioStorage ,
BuySell ,
CostsDef ,
BorrowingStorage ,
Borrowing ,
TotalExposure ,
CashStorage ,
CashLimit ,
GoldFixed ,
AvailableETFs/ ;
345
model RevisedLeveragingSharpe
'The Sharpe ratio
leverageing
portfolio
Revised ' /ObjSharpe ,
LossDef , VaRDevCon, ObjDefCVaR,
PortfolioStorage ,
BuySell ,
CostsDef ,
BorrowingStorage ,
Borrowing ,
TotalExposure ,
CashStorage ,
CashLimit ,
GoldFixed ,
AvailableETFs/ ;
347
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
348
∗−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−Solve Models
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
349
∗
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
351
∗Dummy parameter to stop
i n f e a s i b i l i t y when we set
leveraging
factor
to some
insane amount ,
because then account becomes negative and which forces
the non−negative
variables
to be negative . Not used in
regular running
of the method
352
parameter tmpAccount ;
356
∗Let ' s
define
the borrow balance in the current
period (growth since
last )
357
InitBorrow = InitincreaseBorrow∗(1 + Rf)∗∗(1/12) ;
359
∗Update the borrowing rate we are
offered
360
Rf = RiskFreeOnce + 0.0045;
362
∗Redefine
InitPort
to reprecent the value
of the
portfolio
at the current
time ( update ) ( First
the 1/n benchmark and then the actual
portfolio we'
re working with ) . Then record the values
into data frame
363
BenchmarkPort( i ) = BenchmarkPort( i )∗(1 + MonthlyReturns ( '184 ' ,
i ) ) ;
364
InitPort ( i ) = InitPort ( i )∗(1 + MonthlyReturns ( '184 ' ,
i ) ) ;
365
InitPortVal = sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) ;
366
InitPortHistory ( '184 ') = InitPortVal ;
369
∗Adjust
I n i t i a l
Portfolio
for
return
in the four weeks and define maximum
CVaR
370
BenchmarkAccount = sum( i , BenchmarkPort( i ) ) −BenchmarkBorrow∗(1 + Rf)∗∗(1/
12) ;
371
Account = sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) −InitBorrow + InitCash ;
372
∗Record the account value at the end of
period 2
373
BenchAccount ( '184 ') = BenchmarkAccount ;
374
AccountHistory ( '184 ') = Account ;
375
InitPortVal = sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) ;
376
//display
' Before model ' ,
InitPortVal , Account , InitCVaR ,
CVaRbarrier ;
==PAGE:126==
116
A Appendix
379
∗Temporary keep optimized model paramaeters , we need to do this
since
the
benchmark model uses the same equations and thus the same input
parameters ,
so we make sure the benchmark model takes
in the parameters
from last
periods benchmark model . . . .
380
ModelPort( i ) = InitPort ( i ) ;
381
ModelBorrow = InitBorrow ;
382
ModelAccount = Account ;
384
∗Update model parameters
for EQ weights model
385
InitPort ( i ) = BenchmarkPort( i ) ;
386
InitBorrow = BenchmarkBorrow ;
387
Account = BenchmarkAccount ;
389
∗Solve the equal weights model and calculate
the CVaR ratio
for
the next
model
390
solve RevisedEqWeightsModel minimizing CVaR using
lp ;
391
display x . l ;
392
BenchmarkPort( i ) = x . l ( i ) ;
393
BenchmarkRet = sum( i , EP( i )∗x . l ( i ) ) ;
395
BenchBorrow( '185 ') = BenchmarkBorrow ;
396
BenchCVaR( '185 ') = CVaR. l ;
397
Benchx( '185 ' ,
i ) = BenchmarkPort( i ) ;
398
BenchRet( '185 ') = BenchmarkRet ;
400
∗Use benchmark CVaR as input
for
optimized model
401
CVaRbarrier = CVaR. l /sum( i , x . l ( i ) ) ;
403
∗Bring back optimized model parameters
404
InitPort ( i ) = ModelPort( i ) ;
405
InitBorrow = ModelBorrow ;
406
Account = ModelAccount ;
409
∗This
i s
only
for when we' re
testing when the leverage
i s
too high
410
//tmpAccount = Account ;
411
// i f (Account < 0 ,
412
//
Account = 0;
413
//) ;
416
∗Solve
leveraging model
417
solve
RevisedLeveraging maximizing RET_Cash using
lp ;
418
//display CVaR. l , RET_Cash . l , x . l ,
increaseBorrow . l ,
decreaseBorrow . l , Cash .
l ,
increaseCash . l ,
decreaseCash . l ,
InitCash , buy . l ,
s e l l . l ,
Costs . l ;
419
//display
' Previous
portfolio ' ;
420
//display Account , InitCVaR ,
InitRet ,
InitPort ,
InitincreaseBorrow , EP,
isAvailable , RetScenOnce ;
421
//Account = tmpAccount ;
424
∗−−−Record the second period ' s
attribute ' s−−−
425
increaseBorrowHistory ( '185 ') = increaseBorrow . l ;
426
decreaseBorrowHistory ( '185 ') = decreaseBorrow . l ;
==PAGE:127==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
117
427
BorrowHistory ( '185 ') = Borrow . l ;
428
CVaRHistory( '185 ') = CVaR. l ;
429
returnsHistory ( '185 ') = sum( i , EP( i )∗x . l ( i ) ) ;
430
BuyHistory ( '185 ' ,
i ) = Buy. l ( i ) ;
431
SellHistory ( '185 ' ,
i ) = Sell . l ( i ) ;
432
CostsHistory ( '185 ') = Costs . l ;
433
xHistory ( '185 ' ,
i ) = x . l ( i ) ;
434
CashHistory ( '185 ') = Cash . l ;
437
∗−−−Now we can
iterate
over the remaining steps−−−
438
set
439
i t e r ( r o l l ) /186∗333/
440
;
441
scalar
442
∗
Keep track
of which iteration
we¨re currently
in
443
counter
444
;
446
counter = 186;
449
∗First update The i n i t i a l
portfolio and other
results
before
entering the
repeated loop ,
as the
450
∗the
portfolio
returns
are updated after
the model
i s
solved .
Returns are
computed at current time
451
InitPort ( i ) = x . l ( i ) ;
452
InitincreaseBorrow = increaseBorrow . l ;
453
InitdecreaseBorrow = decreaseBorrow . l ;
454
InitCVaR = CVaR. l ;
455
InitRet = sum( i , EP( i )∗x . l ( i ) ) ;
456
InitBorrow = Borrow . l ;
457
InitCash = Cash . l ;
460
∗Update Account and Borrow balances
461
BenchmarkBorrow = BenchmarkBorrow∗(1 + Rf)∗∗(1/12) ;
462
InitBorrow = InitBorrow∗(1 + Rf)∗∗(1/12) ;
463
//CVaRbarrier = InitCVaR/(sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) ) ;
464
//CVaRbarrier = −0.98;
466
BenchmarkPort( i ) = BenchmarkPort( i )∗(1 + MonthlyReturns ( '185 ' ,
i ) ) ;
467
InitPort ( i ) = InitPort ( i )∗(1 + MonthlyReturns ( '185 ' ,
i ) ) ;
468
InitPortVal = sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) ;
469
InitPortHistory ( '185 ') = InitPortVal ;
471
∗Update the account value ,
with
last
period ' s
credit
adjusted to monthly
rate
472
BenchmarkAccount = sum( i , BenchmarkPort( i ) ) −BenchmarkBorrow ;
473
Account = sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) −InitBorrow + InitCash ;
475
BenchAccount ( '185 ') = BenchmarkAccount ;
476
AccountHistory ( '185 ') = Account ;
478
RiskFreeOnce = RiskFree ( '185 ') ;
==PAGE:128==
118
A Appendix
479
Rf = RiskFreeOnce + 0.0045;
481
∗We now enter next time period . . .
482
loop (( i t e r ) ,
484
∗
. . . And thus update the expected returns and available
assets
485
RetScenOnce( scen ,
i ) = RetScen( iter ,
scen ,
i ) ;
486
isAvailable ( i ) = Available ( iter ,
i ) ;
487
EQweights = 1/card ( isAvailable ) ;
489
//
display
isAvailable ;
491
∗
Compute the
f i n a l
value expected returns
492
P( scen ,
i ) = 1 + RetScenOnce( scen ,
i ) ;
493
EP( i ) = sum( scen ,
pr ( scen )∗P( scen ,
i ) ) ;
494
//
display
' Before model ' ,
InitPort , Account , EP, P,
pr ,
isAvailable
;
497
∗
Temporary keep optimized model paramaeters
498
ModelPort( i ) = InitPort ( i ) ;
499
ModelBorrow = InitBorrow ;
500
ModelAccount = Account ;
502
∗
Update model parameters
for EQ weights model
503
InitPort ( i ) = BenchmarkPort( i ) ;
504
InitBorrow = BenchmarkBorrow ;
505
Account = BenchmarkAccount ;
509
∗
−−−Solve−−−
511
∗
Solve the equal weights model to obtain the CVaR ratio
for
the
leveraging mdoel
512
solve RevisedEqWeightsModel minimizing CVaR using
lp ;
513
i f
(RevisedEQWeightsModel . modelstat = 4 ,
514
abort ” error
solving model RevisedEQweights ” , counter
;
515
) ;
516
BenchmarkPort( i ) = x . l ( i ) ;
517
BenchmarkRet = sum( i , EP( i )∗x . l ( i ) ) ;
519
BenchBorrow( i t e r ) = BenchmarkBorrow ;
520
BenchCVaR( i t e r ) = CVaR. l ;
521
Benchx( iter ,
i ) = BenchmarkPort( i ) ;
522
BenchRet( i t e r ) = BenchmarkRet ;
524
∗
Use benchmark CVaR as input
for
optimized model
525
CVaRbarrier = CVaR. l /sum( i , x . l ( i ) ) ;
527
∗
Bring back optimized model parameters
528
InitPort ( i ) = ModelPort( i ) ;
529
InitBorrow = ModelBorrow ;
530
Account = ModelAccount ;
==PAGE:129==
A.3 GAMS Scripts
119
533
//tmpAccount = Account ;
534
// i f (Account < 0 ,
535
//
Account = 0;
536
//) ;
538
∗
Solve the
leveraging model
539
solve
RevisedLeveraging maximizing RET_Cash using
lp ;
540
∗
Check
i f
model
i s
feasible ,
i f
not end the loop
541
i f
( RevisedLeveraging . modelstat = 4 ,
542
abort ” error
solving model RevisedLeveraging ” , counter
;
543
) ;
544
//
display counter , CVaR. l , RET_Cash . l , Account , x . l ,
increaseBorrow
. l ,
decreaseBorrow . l , Borrow . l , Cash . l ,
increaseCash . l ,
decreaseCash . l ,
InitCash , buy . l ,
s e l l . l ,
Costs . l ;
545
//Account = tmpAccount ;
547
increaseBorrowHistory ( i t e r ) = increaseBorrow . l ;
548
decreaseBorrowHistory ( i t e r ) = decreaseBorrow . l ;
549
BorrowHistory ( i t e r ) = Borrow . l ;
550
CVaRHistory( i t e r ) = CVaR. l ;
551
returnsHistory ( i t e r ) = sum( i , EP( i )∗x . l ( i ) ) ;
552
BuyHistory ( iter ,
i ) = Buy. l ( i ) ;
553
SellHistory ( iter ,
i ) = Sell . l ( i ) ;
554
CostsHistory ( i t e r ) = Costs . l ;
555
xHistory ( iter ,
i ) = x . l ( i ) ;
556
CashHistory ( i t e r ) = Cash . l ;
558
∗
Update porfolio
for
next period
559
InitPort ( i ) = x . l ( i ) ;
560
InitincreaseBorrow = increaseBorrow . l ;
561
InitdecreaseBorrow = decreaseBorrow . l ;
562
InitCVaR = CVaR. l ;
563
InitRet = sum( i , EP( i )∗x . l ( i ) ) ;
564
InitBorrow = Borrow . l ;
565
InitCash = Cash . l ;
567
∗
Update accounts and balances
568
BenchmarkBorrow = BenchmarkBorrow∗(1 + Rf)∗∗(1/12) ;
569
InitBorrow = InitBorrow∗(1 + Rf)∗∗(1/12) ;
570
∗
Update the borrowing rate we' re
offerd
at
this
time .
571
Rf = RiskFreeOnce + 0.0045;
574
∗
Adjust
575
BenchmarkPort( i ) = BenchmarkPort( i )∗(1 + MonthlyReturns( iter ,
i ) ) ;
576
InitPort ( i ) = InitPort ( i )∗(1 + MonthlyReturns( iter ,
i ) ) ;
577
InitPortVal = sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) ;
578
InitPortHistory ( i t e r ) = InitPortVal ;
580
BenchmarkAccount = sum( i , BenchmarkPort( i ) ) −BenchmarkBorrow ;
581
Account = sum( i ,
InitPort ( i ) ) −InitBorrow + InitCash ;
583
BenchAccount( i t e r ) = BenchmarkAccount ;
584
AccountHistory ( i t e r ) = Account ;
==PAGE:130==
120
A Appendix
586
∗
Update RiskFreeRate
587
RiskFreeOnce = RiskFree ( i t e r ) ;
588
Rf = RiskFreeOnce + 0.0045;
590
counter = counter + 1;
591
) ;
594
∗Save dataframes to
f i l e s
595
EXECUTE_UNLOAD ' BenchmarkAttributes . gdx ' , BenchBorrow , BenchAccount ,
BenchCVaR, Benchx , BenchRet
596
EXECUTE_UNLOAD ' Borrowings . gdx ' ,
increaseBorrowHistory ,
AccountHistory ,
decreaseBorrowHistory ,
returnsHistory , CVaRHistory ,
BuyHistory ,
SellHistory ,
CostsHistory ,
xHistory ,
BorrowHistory ,
InitPortHistory ,
CashHistory
codes/Leveraging_RevisedEQ.gms.
A.4
R Scripts
SharpeStatistic.R
Script to compute the Sharpe ratios in chapter 4 and conduct the test for equality of
Sharpe ratios
1
rm(list =ls())
2
cat("\014")
3
4
library(SharpeR)
5
6
setwd('/zhome/88/c/124286/Documents/Project/')
7
8
Returns <- read.delim('AccountRet.csv', header = FALSE, sep = ',')
9
10
rf = 0.007037904
11
rf_m = (1 + rf)^(1/12) - 1
12
13
SharpeRatios <- as.sr(Returns, c0 = rf_m)
14
SharpeRatios$sr*sqrt(12)
15
16
#Convert Returns df to Matrix of excess returns
17
RETURNS <- matrix(unlist(Returns) - rf_m, ncol = 5)
18
# contrast <- matrix(c(0, 0, 0), ncol = 3)
19
20
==PAGE:131==
A.4 R Scripts
121
21
#Test for equality of all
22
test_all <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 'chi', alternative =
'two.sided', contrasts = matrix(c(0, 0, 2, -1, -1), ncol = 5))
,→
23
24
#Test for benchmark < optimised with LF 1
25
test_bv1 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(1, -1, 0, 0, 0), ncol = 5))
,→
26
27
#Test for benchmark < optimised with LF 3
28
test_bv3 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(1, 0, -1, 0, 0), ncol = 5))
,→
29
30
#Test for benchmark < optimised with LF 4
31
test_bv4 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(1, 0, 0, -1, 0), ncol = 5))
,→
32
33
#Test for benchmark < optimised with LF 5
34
test_bv5 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(1, 0, 0, 0, -1), ncol = 5))
,→
35
36
#Test for optimised with lf 1 < optimised with LF 3
37
test_1v3 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(0, 1, -1, 0, 0), ncol = 5))
,→
38
39
#Test foroptimised with lf 1 < optimised with LF 4
40
test_1v4 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(0, 1, 0, -1, 0), ncol = 5))
,→
41
42
#Test for optimised with lf 1 < optimised with LF 5
43
test_1v5 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(0, 1, 0, 0, -1), ncol = 5))
,→
44
45
#Test for optimised with lf 3 < optimised with LF 4
46
test_3v4 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(0, 0, 1, -1, 0), ncol = 5))
,→
47
48
#Test for optimised with lf 1 < optimised with LF 5
49
test_3v5 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(0, 0, 1, 0, -1), ncol = 5))
,→
50
51
#Test for optimised with lf 4 < optimised with LF 5
52
test_4v5 <- sr_equality_test(RETURNS, type = 't', alternative =
'less', contrasts = matrix(c(0, 0, 0, 1, -1), ncol = 5))
,→
==PAGE:132==
122
A Appendix
53
54
55
56
57
58
#Test geometric means
59
#Values from excel file Tables.xlsx
60
#Benchmark vs Optimised lf 1
61
pt(-1.03749,149)
62
#Benchmark vs Optimised lf 3
63
pt(-3.30238,149)
64
#Optimised lf 1 vs lf 3
65
pt(-3.0665,149)
66
67
#----------------------------------------------------------
68
#----------------------------------------------------------
69
#Compute sharpe ratios as a function of leverageing factor
70
LeveragedReturns <- read.delim('LeveragedRet.csv', header = FALSE,
sep = ',')
,→
71
LeveragedSharpeRatios <- as.sr(LeveragedReturns, c0 = rf_m)
72
LeveragedSharpeRatios$sr*sqrt(12)
73
74
75
76
77
#Compute sharpe ratios of mv normal vs bootstrapping
78
NormvBootReturns <- read.delim("NormvBootReturns.csv", header =
FALSE, sep = ',')
,→
79
NormvBootSharpeRatios <- as.sr(NormvBootReturns, c0 = rf_m)
80
NormvBootSharpeRatios$sr*sqrt(12)
Normality test.R
Script that test the time series for normality using Jarque-Bera
1
rm(list =ls())
2
cat("\014")
3
4
library(normtest)
5
library(moments)
6
7
#Read data
8
setwd('/zhome/88/c/124286/Documents/Project/')
==PAGE:133==
A.4 R Scripts
123
9
Returns <- read.delim('AccountRet.csv', header = FALSE, sep = ',')
10
11
12
#Compute the moments of the distributions
13
#Benchmark Portfolio
14
skewb <- skewness(Returns[,1])
15
kurtb <- kurtosis(Returns[,1])
16
#Leverage Factor 1
17
skew1 <- skewness(Returns[,2])
18
kurt1 <- kurtosis(Returns[,2])
19
#Leverage Factor 3
20
skew3 <- skewness(Returns[,3])
21
kurt3 <- kurtosis(Returns[,3])
22
#Leverage Factor 4
23
skew4 <- skewness(Returns[,4])
24
kurt4 <- kurtosis(Returns[,4])
25
#Leverage Factor 5
26
skew5 <- skewness(Returns[,5])
27
kurt5 <- kurtosis(Returns[,5])
28
29
30
31
32
#Test normality
33
#Benchmark Portfolio
34
jb.norm.test(Returns[,1], nrepl=2000)
35
#Leverage Factor 1
36
jb.norm.test(Returns[,2], nrepl=2000)
37
#Leverage Factor 3
38
jb.norm.test(Returns[,3], nrepl=2000)
39
#Leverage Factor 4
40
jb.norm.test(Returns[,4], nrepl=2000)
41
#Leverage Factor 5
42
jb.norm.test(Returns[,5], nrepl=2000)
==PAGE:134==
124
==PAGE:135==
Bibliography
Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J., & Heath, D. (1999). Coherent measures of risk.
Mathematical finance, 9(3), 203–228.
Ayres, I. & Nalebuff, B. J. (2008). Life-cycle investing and leverage: Buying stock on
margin can reduce retirement risk (Working Paper Number 14094). National
Bureau of Economic Research. doi:10.3386/w14094
Bacon, C. (2009). How sharp is the sharpe-ratio?-risk-adjusted performance measures.
Stat Pro publications.
Contributors. (2018). Sortino ratio — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. [Online; ac-
cessed 14-June-2019]. retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sortino_
ratio
Cooper, I. A. (1996). Arithmetic versus geometric mean estimators: Setting discount
rates for capital budgeting. European Financial Management, 2(2), 157–167.
Cornuejols, G. & Tütüncü, R. (2006). Optimization methods in finance. Cambridge
University Press.
Damodaran, A. (2010). Strategic risk taking: A framework for risk management. Pear-
son Education.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., & Uppal, R. (2009). Optimal versus naive diversification:
How inefficient is the 1/n portfolio strategy? Review of Financial Studies, 22(5),
1915–1953.
DeMiguel, V. & Nogales, F. J. (2009). Portfolio selection with robust estimation.
Operations Research, 57(3), 560–577.
Diaconis, P. & Efron, B. (1983). Computer intensive methods in statistics.
Fama, E. F. & French, K. R. (2012). Size, value, and momentum in international
stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 105, 457–472.
FCIC, F. C. I. C. et al. (2011). The financial crisis inquiry report: The final report of
the national commission on the causes of the financial and economic crisis in
the united states including dissenting views. Cosimo, Inc.
French, K. R. (2019). 25 global portfolios formed on size and operating profitability
(5 x 5) [daily]. data retrieved from Dartmouth College, https://mba.tuck.
dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.
Homescu, C. (2014). Many risks, one (optimal) portfolio. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2473776.
Investing.com. (2019). Eur/usd - euro us dollar. data retrieved from Investing.com,
https://www.investing.com/currencies/eur-usd.
==PAGE:136==
126
Bibliography
Janakiramanan, S. (2014). Derivatives and risk management. PEARSON EDUCA-
TION INDIA. retrieved from https://books.google.dk/books?id=yUOpU4l6bPUC
Ledoit, O. & Wolf, M. (2008). Robust performance hypothesis testing with the sharpe
ratio. Journal of Empirical Finance, 15(5), 850–859.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection*. The Journal of Finance, 7(1), 77–91.
Meredith, S. (June 6, 2019). Euro rises as ecb pushes back rate hike deadline; raises
inflation forecast. CNBC. retrieved June 26, 2019from https://www.cnbc.
com/2019/06/06/ecb-european-central-bank-holds-interest-rates-steady.html
Pav, S. E. (2018). SharpeR: Statistical significance of the Sharpe ratio. R package
version 1.2.0. retrieved from https://github.com/shabbychef/SharpeR
rates, E. (2019). Euribor 1 month. data retrieved from Euribor-rates.eu, https://
www.euribor-rates.eu/euribor-rate-1-month.asp.
Rockafellar, R. T. [R. Tyrrell]. (2007). Coherent approaches to risk in optimization
under uncertainty. In In tutorials in operations research informs (pages 38–61).
Rockafellar, R. T. [R Tyrrell], Uryasev, S. et al. (2000). Optimization of conditional
value-at-risk. Journal of risk, 2, 21–42.
Sarykalin, S., Serraino, G., & Uryasev, S. (2008). Value-at-risk vs. conditional value-
at-risk in risk management and optimization. Tutorials in Operations Research::
State-of-the-Art Decision-Making Tools in the Information-Intensive Age, 270–
294. doi:10.1287/educ.1080.0052
Sheikh, A. Z. & Qiao, H. (2009). Non-normality of market returns: A framework for
asset allocation decision making. The Journal of Alternative Investments, 12(3),
8–35. doi:10.3905/JAI.2010.12.3.008
Simple Returns. (2009), In Farlex financial dictionary. retrieved from https://
financial-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Simple+Returns
Sortino, F. A. & Price, L. N. (1994). Performance measurement in a downside risk
framework. The Journal of Investing, 3(3), 59–64. doi:10.3905/joi.3.3.59. eprint:
https://joi.iijournals.com/content/3/3/59.full.pdf
SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 10+ Year Euro Government Bond UCITS ETF (Dist).
(2019). retrieved from https://lu.spdrs.com/library-content/public/SYBV%
20GY_factsheet_en.pdf
SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 1-3 Year Euro Government Bond UCITS ETF (Dist).
(2019). retrieved from https://www.ssga.com/doc/factsheets/FS1285_
English.pdf
SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 3-5 Year Euro Government Bond UCITS ETF (Dist).
(2019). retrieved from https://lu.spdrs.com/library-content/public/SYB4%
20GY_factsheet_en.pdf
SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 5-7 Year Euro Government Bond UCITS ETF (Dist).
(2019). retrieved from https://ie.spdrs.com/library-content/public/SYB6%
20GY_factsheet_en.pdf
SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays 7-10 Year Euro Government Bond UCITS ETF (Dist).
(2019). retrieved from https://lu.spdrs.com/library-content/public/SYB7%
20GY_factsheet_en.pdf
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
127
SPDR® Bloomberg Barclays Euro Government Bond UCITS ETF (Dist). (2019).
retrieved from https://www.ssga.com/doc/factsheets/FS1205_English.pdf
Valladão, D. M., Veiga, Á., & Street, A. (2018). A linear stochastic programming
model for optimal leveraged portfolio selection. Computational Economics, 51(4),
1021–1032.
Viñals, J. (2011). Government bonds: No longer a world without risk. retrieved
from https://blogs.imf.org/2011/03/24/government-bonds-no-longer-a-world-
without-risk/
Wright, J. A., Yam, S. C. P., & Yung, S. P. (2012). A test for the equality of multiple
sharpe ratios. Journal of risk, 16(4), 3–21.
Zangari, P. (1996). Riskmetrics technical document. JP Morgan and Reuters. https://www.msci.com
4206-4ba0-aee2-3449d5c7e95a.
==PAGE:138==
