==PAGE:1==
Physics and Nanotechnology
Master of Science in Engineering
Efficiency Enhancement of Near Ultraviolet
Light-Emitting Diodes by Surface Plasmonic Effect
MSc thesis
Evangelos Dimopoulos
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Evangelos Dimopoulos
Efficiency Enhancement of Near Ultraviolet
Light-Emitting Diodes by Surface Plasmonic Effect
MSc thesis, July 4, 2019
Supervisors:
Haiyan Ou
Yiyu Ou
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
DTU Fotonik
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Growing interest in ultraviolet (UV) light applications drives the development of novel
and efficient light sources. Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are in the midst of this de-
velopment boom revolutionalizing applications in lighting, display and healthcare
settings due to their high energy efficiency, compactness, and wavelength tunability.
However, UV-LEDs have yet to reach high performance due to poor material proper-
ties that deteriorate the internal and external quantum efficiency. One of the most
prominent methods to address this problem is the use of surface plasmons (SPs). By
placing metallic nanoparticles (NPs) in the near-field of quantum-well (QW) light-
emitters, it is possible to improve the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) through the
enhanced Purcell effect.
This thesis is an experimental investigation of surface plasmonics for efficiency
enhancement of a near-ultraviolet (NUV) LED and aims at building up a fabrica-
tion process for metallic nanoparticles (NPs) based on the self-assembly method via
thermal annealing of a thin metallic film.
Initially, a brief introduction on LEDs and their physics is given. Furthermore,
we introduce the theory behind surface plasmons and their utilization for efficiency
enhancement in LEDs. A brief review of the state of the art is also given. Experimen-
tally, we start by characterizing the NUV-LEDs wafers and subsequently we examine
the fabrication of metallic nanoparticles using Ag and Au. Then a systematic inves-
tigation for fabricating Al nanoparticles via the self-assembly method is presented.
This is also the core result of this work since it opens up new possibilities for high-
efficiency LEDs in the UV region. Finally, a series of optical experiments to observe
efficiency enhancement for the NUV-LED wafer were conducted.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Den stigende interesse for anvendelse af ultraviolet (UV) lys driver udviklingen af nye
og effektive lyskilder. Lysdioder (LED) er i midten af dette udviklingseksplosion, som
revolutionerer anvendelserne indenfor lys, display og sundhedspleje på grund af deres
høje energieffektivitet, kompakthed og nem justering af bølgelængde. UV-LED’er har
dog endnu ikke opnået den højest ydeevne på grund af dårlige materiale egenskaber,
som forringer den interne -og eksterne kvanteeffektivitet. En af de mest fremtrædende
metoder til at løse dette problem er brugen af overfladeplasmoner (SP). Ved at placere
metalliske nanopartikler (NP) i området nær kvantebrønd (QW) lysudsendere, er
det muligt at forbedre deres interne kvanteeffektivitet (IQE) gennem den forstærket
Purcell-effekt.
Dette speciale er en eksperimentel undersøgelse af overfladeplasmoner for effektiv
forstærkning af en nær-ultraviolet (NUV) LED og sigter mod at opbygge en fabrika-
tionsproces for metalliske nanopartikler (NP) baseret på selvsamlingsmetoden via
termisk udglødning af en tynd metallisk film.
Til at starte med gives en kort introduktion af lysdioder og fysikken bag. Desuden
introducerer vi teorien bag overfladeplasmoner og deres benyttelse af effektivitets-
forøgelse i lysdioder. Der gives også en kort gennemgang af ’state of the art’. Der
startes en eksperimentelt karakterisering af NUV-LED’ets halvlederskiver og efterføl-
gende undersøges fremstillingen af metalliske nanopartikler ved hjælp af Ag og Au.
Derefter præsenteres en systematisk undersøgelse af fremstillingen af Al nanopartikler
via selvsamlingsmetoden. Dette er også det centrale resultat af dette arbejde, da det
åbner nye muligheder for effektive lysdioder i UV-regionen. Derudover er der udført
en række optiske eksperimenter for at observere effektivitetsforøgelsen af NUV-LED
halvlederskiver.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Photonics Engineering, Technical
University of Denmark (DTU Fotonik) in partial fulfillment of the requirements for
the degree of Master of Science in Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology. The
work presented here was carried out in the period from 4th February, 2019 to 4th
July, 2019, at the research facilities of DTU Fotonik and DTU Nanolab - National
Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization, and supervised by:
• Haiyan Ou (main supervisor)
Associate Professor, DTU Fotonik
• Yiyu Ou (co-supervisor)
Assistant Professor, DTU Fotonik
Kongens Lyngby, July 4, 2019
Evangelos Dimopoulos
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
An MSc thesis is an individual project, however, there are a lot of people who helped
to make this work possible and I would like to express my deep gratitude.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my main supervisor Haiyan Ou, who be-
lieved in me from the very beginning and gave me the freedom to pursue a project that
fulfilled my academic interests. Her guidance and support throughout this project
were invaluable, always inspiring me to find creative solutions.
I would also like to express my deep gratitude to Yiyu Ou, my co-supervisor,
whose door was always open for me, his guidance throughout the project and his help
with the different experimental apparatus.
I am grateful for all the knowledge, inspiration, patience and friendly atmosphere
that Haiyan and Yiyu provided. Their deep physical understanding and their many
virtues made me a better researcher and a better human being.
This thesis would not have been possible without the help of DTU Nanolab per-
sonnel, who provided me training and always found the time for some insightful
discussions.
I would also like to thank personally, the process specialists Patama
Pholprasit for her instructions and crucial advice in thin film deposition and Evgeniy
Shkondin for his help in the ellipsometry of metallic films. I also want to thank many
professors and researchers from DTU Fotonik for some really helpful conversations.
Furthermore, I would like to thank all of my friends at DTU Fotonik and DTU
Fysik for making the work on my thesis so memorable. Their positiveness and happy
feelings really transformed the long hours and made DTU feel like home.
Finally, I am very grateful to my family for their constant support throughout my
studies and for teaching me the value of hard work. I would also like to thank my
lovely partner for her continuous encouragement and for all her troubles for visiting
me throughout the MSc program.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
History of Light-Emitting Diodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Semiconductor Optics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Nitride-based LEDs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Challenges of UV-LEDs and state of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Surface Plasmonics
11
2.1
Surface plasmon polaritons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Localized surface plasmons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Efficiency enhancement using surface plasmonics
. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
Recent developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Wafer characterization
23
3.1
Detailed description of the epi-wafers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Photoluminescence mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Surface roughness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Etch rate calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Self-assembly of metallic nanoparticles
37
4.1
Double metallic Al:Ag nanoparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.1
Optical characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Ag and double metallic Ag:Au nanoparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.1
Optical characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5
Aluminum nanoparticles
49
5.1
Aluminum nanoparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.1
Sputter deposition of Al and calibration of the sputtering rate
49
5.1.2
Al thin films
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.1.3
Self-assembly of Al NPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.1.4
Optical characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2
SP-exciton coupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2.1
NUV-LED chips
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2.2
Formation of aluminum nanoparticles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2.3
Time-resolved photoluminescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Conclusions and Outlook
71
6.1
Summary and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A LED Efficiency: definitions
73
B PhC surface patterned NUV-LED
75
C Optical experiments
79
C.1 Scatter transmission measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.2 Light sources and NUV spectral limit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.3 Time-resolved photoluminescence measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . .
81
D Nanofabrication and characterization
83
D.1 E-beam evaporation physical vapor deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
D.2 Magnetron Sputtering of Al . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
D.3 Ellipsometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Acronyms
89
Bibliography
91
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Light-Emitting Diodes (LEDs) can be found in hundreds of everyday life objects, and
they are used for applications on signs, sensing, mobiles and many more. LEDs are
compact, tunable, have long lifetime expectancy and can cover the whole visible and
most of the UV spectrum. LEDs emitting in the visible range have started to take
over the lighting industry introducing the solid-state lighting (SSL) which is amongst
the most energy-efficient and sustainable lighting technologies. However, LEDs emit-
ting in the UV range are considered even more prosperous and have experienced
unprecedented development during the last two decades.
Today, UV-LEDs are gradually becoming available and can be found in numerous
UV applications ranging from water and air purification1, to UV curing and medical
applications like skin cure, bacteria disinfection2, and vitamin D treatment3. UV-
LED applications can also promote sustainability since they can be used in agriculture
for plant disease prevention and reduce food waste through post-harvest preservation4.
As UV-LEDs are getting more efficient, they are expected to substitute the blue LEDs
in SSL technology, since white light produced by blue LEDs have relatively low color
rendering5. A general mapping of the application of UV-LEDs can be seen in figure
1.1.
UV-LEDs can revolutionalize UV light applications that usually require bulky and
inefficient gas discharge lamps. Compared to the traditional UV light sources, UV-
LEDs have higher energy efficiency and tunable narrow-band emission. Furthermore,
they are much more compact and robust, they have fast modulation, less standby
time and low heat generation. Their lifetime is also longer, and they have excellent
optical and electrical performance. Moreover, they are considered eco-friendly since
they are mercury free and are not made from toxic materials.
Some of the disadvantages of UV-LEDs are the relatively high price and the tem-
perature dependent performance.
The major drawback, however, is the efficiency
gap that is related to poor material properties that deteriorate the internal and exter-
nal quantum efficiency, making UV-LEDs the lowest performance LEDs. Recently,
several notable groups are tackling this problem from different angles. Namely, op-
timization of the growth can enhance the internal quantum efficiency (IQE), while
nanopatterning techniques are being employed to increase the light extraction effi-
ciency (LEE). Finally, using surface plasmonics, both IQE and LEE can be enhanced.
This thesis focuses on surface plasmonics for efficiency enhancement.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: A mapping of UV-LEDs applications, grouping them in terms of spectral
range and power. Adapted from [6].
1.1
History of Light-Emitting Diodes
Electroluminescence (EL) is a physical phenomenon in which a material emits light
due to the passage of an electric current or due to interaction with a strong electric
field. This phenomenon was first discovered in 1907 from H. J. Round of Marconi
Laboratories when a potential of 10 volts was applied to a silicon carbide (SiC) Schot-
tky diode producing a yellowish light7. O. Losev created the first LED device, which
was based on SiC and zinc oxide7. In the 1950s, R. Braunstein of the Radio Corpo-
ration of America demonstrated EL in infrared using gallium arsenide (GaAs)8, and
seven years later N. Holonyak Jr. of General Electric Company developed the first
commercial red LED using gallium arsenide phosphide (GaAsP)9. In 1972, G. Craw-
ford, a graduate student of Holonyak, invented the first yellow LED and improved
the brightness of red and red-orange LEDs by a factor of ten10.
Finally, the modern era in LED industry came after the development of the bright
blue LED using gallium nitride (GaN) from S. Nakamura of Nichia Chemical Indus-
tries11. This achievement could not have been done without the work of Akasaki et al.,
who realized the p- and n-doped conductivity of GaN12 and Amano et al. who first
implemented the GaN buffer layer on the sapphire substrate significantly improving
the crystal quality13. For their contribution, Nakamura, Akasaki, and Amano were
rewarded with the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physics14. In 2000, soon after Nakamura’s
efficient LED, Nitride Semiconductors Co., in collaboration with the University of
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Semiconductor Optics
3
Tokushima, developed the first commercial UV-LED15. In figure 1.2(a), the histori-
cal evolution of LEDs and their performance can be seen.
(b)
(a)
Figure 1.2: (a) Chronological evolution of the efficiency in LEDs. Adapted from
[16]. (b) Typical external quantum efficiency of UV-LEDs. Adapted
from [17].
InGaN-based LEDs have the potential to spectrally cover the whole visible spec-
trum, partially the near-infrared (NIR), and NUV (down to 365 nm). AlGaN-based
LEDs can cover the rest of the NUV and deep UV (DUV) spectrum. Currently, the
shortest wavelength achieved is 210nm for pure AlN active region18, yet the efficiency
of UV-LEDs is still considerably low. In figure 1.1(b), the efficiency in respect to the
emission wavelength is shown for some state of the art UV-LEDs.
1.2
Semiconductor Optics
Semiconductors are materials in between conductors and insulators, having minimal
bandgap energy (fig.
1.3).
For a conductor, the conduction band overlaps with
the valence band creating free electrons, while for insulators the bandgap energy is
very high, making the electrons bound to their atoms. For a semiconductor, a small
number of electrons are excited to the conduction band at room temperature, leaving
behind a vacancy in the valence band. These vacancies are called ”electron holes”,
or simply holes, and are usually treated as positively charged quasiparticles with
properties similar to electrons. The holes can also move freely through the crystal
lattice, while their effective mass is higher than the one of the electrons.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.3: Electron energy band comparisons between conductors, semiconductors
and insulators.
If an electron absorbs enough energy to be excited in the conduction band, then an
electron-hole (e-h) pair is generated. One of the mechanisms for e-h pair generation
is the absorption of a photon with energy higher than the bandgap energy (Eph>Eg).
The electrons excited to the conduction band have a finite lifetime and eventually
decay back to the valence band. There are several competing recombination mecha-
nisms, which can be grouped into radiative and non-radiative recombinations. The
radiative recombination is when the bound e-h pair - also called exciton - decays gen-
erating a photon. This recombination is more probable when the e-h energy is just
above the bandgap. The non-radiative recombination is a decay channel that does
not produce light, and the energy is usually transformed into heat. Some of those are
the trap-assisted recombination (Shockley–Read–Hall), surface recombinations and
Auger recombinations19.
For a light-emitting semiconductor device, it is crucial to enhance the radiative
recombinations, while suppressing the non-radiative ones. As a result, the internal
quantum efficiency (IQE) is defined as:
ηint =
krad
krad + knrad
(1.1)
where krad and knrad is the radiative and non-radiative recombination rate respec-
tively.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Nitride-based LEDs
5
E
k
Direct bandgap
VB
e
h
CV
photon
E
k
Indirect bandgap
VB
e
h
CV
photon
phonon
Figure 1.4: Electronic band diagram of a direct- and indirect-bandgap semiconduc-
tor. For the indirect-bandgap semiconductor, the radiative recombina-
tion requires the mediation of a phonon. The conduction and valence
bands are denoted by CV and VB respectively.
The bandgap of a semiconductor is defined as the minimum energy difference
between the conduction and the valence band. If these points have the same crys-
tal momentum (k-vector) in the Brillouin zone, then the semiconductor has a direct
bandgap, and if the k-vector is different, then it has an indirect bandgap. Compared
to the k-vector of the electrons, the k-vectors of the photons are neglectable; thus only
direct transitions can be mediated by a photon. For an indirect bandgap, radiative
recombination requires the interaction with a phonon in order to conserve momen-
tum. Therefore, the indirect-bandgap semiconductors are very poor light-emitters
due to their slow radiative recombination process. The band diagrams for direct- and
indirect-bandgap semiconductors are shown in figure 1.4. GaN, InN, and GaAs are
examples of direct-bandgap semiconductors, while Si and Ge are indirect.
1.3
Nitride-based LEDs
The active region of an LED typically consists of narrow Quantum Wells (QW) sep-
arated by barrier layers. For nitride-based LEDs, these structures are made from
ternary or quaternary AlN/GaN/InN alloys. The wavelength of a photon emitted
from the recombination of an electron-hole (e-h) pair is given by the bandgap energy
which is calculated using the Bloch theorem and band parameters such as the elec-
tron and hole effective masses. The bandgap energies of these alloys for the bulk
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
semiconductors in the stable wurtzite phase is given by20:
GaxIn1−xN:
Eg(eV ) = 0.77 + 2.65x −2.4x(1 −x)
AlxGa1−xN:
Eg(eV ) = 3.42 + 2.86x −x(1 −x)
(1.2)
AlxIn1−xN:
Eg(eV ) = 0.77 + 5.51x −3.0x(1 −x)
The wavelength of the energy transition can be calculated from the bandgap
energy using the relation:
λ = hc
Eg
(1.3)
where h and c is Planck’s constant and the speed of light respectively. The bandgap
energy and its corresponding wavelength are plotted in respect to the lattice constant
in figure 1.5.
Figure 1.5: Bandgap energy and its corresponding wavelength as a function of the
lattice constant for AlN, GaN, InN, and their alloys. Adapted from [21].
In a more detailed analysis, using a sapphire substrate will give a stress-induced
red-shift. In contrast with the bulk material, in the QWs the energy levels are blue-
shifted due to the quantum confinement effect, while the built-in polarization field is
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Challenges of UV-LEDs and state of the art
7
responsible for a small red-shift and a spatial separation between the e-h wavefunc-
tions, which is called quantum-confined Stark effect (QCSE)17.
1.4
Challenges of UV-LEDs and state of the art
The AlN/GaN/InN solid state solutions are typically grown using metallorganic chem-
ical vapour deposition (MOCVD) or molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on various sub-
strates. The most common substrate is the c-plane sapphire, however, Si, SiC, AlN,
and others are also used22. The main problems related to this material system are: the
high dislocation density (106 −109 cm−2) caused by the significant lattice mismatch,
the different thermal expansion coefficients of the substrate and the epilayers, the
strong piezoelectric fields, and the low crystalline quality due to solubility problems
of In-rich and Al-rich solutions (In, Al molar fraction > 30%).
For NUV-LED wafers with low Al molar fraction, the IQE is quite high - close
to blue LEDs - however, LEE drops dramatically due to the increasing portion of
transverse magnetic (TM) versus the transverse electric (TE) field. The TM-polarized
light propagates mainly in the horizontal direction of the chip, resulting in high
total internal reflection (TIR) and lower LEE23.
For flip-chip design where light
travels from the QW through the n-AlGaN layer, the superlattice buffer layer and
the sapphire substrate, the fraction of the transmitted light would be in the order
of 15%17. However, for the DUV-LEDs the problems are even worse since on top of
the increasing TIR, the crystal quality deteriorates due to the excessive tensile stress
and high dislocation density (5-50×109 cm−2)17. The IQE is further decreased due
to deep traps (oxygen DX-center24, Ga and N vacancies25, etc) and high activation
energy of Mg acceptors26,27. Finally, UV light is absorbed by most materials, and
thus, only specific substrates can be used. The wall-plug efficiency (WPE) for the
DUV-LEDs is still below 10% making them the most inefficient LEDs16, which is also
demonstrated in figure 1.2(b).
IQE usually depends on the growth, which is the major focus on UV-LEDs. MBE
grow films of higher quality than MOCVD due to the lower substrate temperature
during growth; however, MBE fails when it comes to films with high Al content. On
the other hand, due to higher temperatures, MOCVD is less adequate for AlGaInN
solutions. As a result, novel growth techniques like pulsed atomic layer epitaxy28
are being explored. Furthermore, low-temperature SiN or GaNP buffer layer29,30 has
shown a drastic decrease in dislocation density. Finally, QCSE can be reduced by
growing non-polar GaN on a-plane sapphire or γ-LiAl02 substrates.
For improving the LEE, patterning or roughening the sapphire substrate or the top
p-GaN layer is usually a successful strategy. Photo-electrochemical etch been used to
etch along the crystallographic planes of GaN creating a rough surface31. Moreover,
natural lithography using polymer or SiO2 nanospheres and e-beam lithography have
been employed to create nanorods32 or photonic crystal structures33,34.
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
Finally, IQE can be increased using surface plasmonics. By creating a new channel
of excitonic relaxation via surface plasmons, the non-radiative recombination channel
can be effectively bypassed.
Since this is the main topic of this work, the physi-
cal mechanism and several representative results are given in sections 2.3 and 2.3.1
respectively.
1.5
Thesis Structure
This work aims to contribute to the combined field of efficiency enhanced LEDs using
surface plasmonics with the ambition to provide a deeper understanding of this effect
and a fabrication method that has not yet fully explored. In particular, the goal is
to develop a fabrication method for metallic nanoparticles (NPs) that can tune the
plasmonic resonance in the UV spectral region. In particular, the technique examined
is the self-assembly method of metallic NPs via thermal annealing of a metallic thin
film (TF). Although the end-goal of this project was partially achieved, many failed
attempts are also presented. As a result, this work presents the systematic endeavor
involved in a research project.
The theoretical framework and the key results of this work are organized and
presented in the following manner:
Chapter 2
introduces the theoretical framework of surface plasmonics. In partic-
ular, the basic theory of the two major branches of surface plasmons - the surface
plasmon polaritons and the localized surface plasmon resonances - are presented. Sub-
sequently, their application on the efficiency enhancement in LEDs is explained, and
a brief review of the current activity in the field is given.
Chapter 3
is dedicated to the characterization of the NUV-LED epiwafers that
were used in these experiments. In particular, we discuss in detail the epitaxial struc-
ture, while photoluminescence mapping and surface characterization are conducted.
Finally, the dry etching process was calibrated for this specific epistructure.
Chapter 4
presents a fabrication method of different metallic nanoparticles on a
GaN template based on their self-assembly via annealing of a thin film and their sub-
sequent characterization. Initially, the fabrication of double metallic Al:Ag nanopar-
ticles is attempted aiming to tune the plasmonic resonance in the UV spectral range.
Then, two replication experiments are conducted, where different sized Ag nanopar-
ticles and double metallic Au:Ag nanoparticles are examined.
Chapter 5
is dedicated to the development of a fabrication method for self-assembled
Al nanoparticles. Subsequently, Al nanoparticles are fabricated on NUV-LED sam-
==PAGE:21==
1.5 Thesis Structure
9
ples and the SP-exciton coupling is verified by time-resolved photoluminescence mea-
surements.
Chapter 6
summarizes the results of this work while proposing the new exper-
iments needed for further investigation.
Finally, further possibilities are put into
perspective.
==PAGE:22==
10
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Surface Plasmonics
Surface plasmons (SPs) are the collective oscillations of the free electrons of a con-
ductor generated at an interface between a metal and a dielectric.
For a wide frequency range, the optical response of metallic materials can be
explained using the plasma model, where the electron gas is oscillating due to an
external electric field.
The equation of motion of the electrons can be described
by a driven oscillation damped by collisions of a characteristic collision frequency
γ = 1/τ, where τ is the plasma relaxation time. Considering a field with harmonic
time dependence, the plasma frequency of a metal is derived as ω2
p =
Ne2
meϵ0 where N
electron concentration in the metal, e the electronic charge, me the effective mass of
the electron and ϵ0 the prermittivity in vacuum. The complex dielectric function of
the metallic material is calculated as:
ϵ(ω) = 1 −
ω2
p
ω2 + iγω
(2.1)
This is also referred as the Drude model35 and it is successful for various metals in
the NIR. For frequencies below ωp, the metal retain its metallic character, while for
higher frequencies the metal behaves as dielectric.
In a more detailed analysis, the model is extended to include the polarization
effects due to the static ion cores36. These effects are especially important for noble
metals where the d band is filled, and free s electrons dominate the response. As
a result, the constant term in equation 2.1 is substituted by a dielectric constant
ϵ∞at ω →∞37. Finally, the last correction to the plasma model should come by
adding the effect of the interband electronic transitions. This can be done by adding
different Lorentzian oscillators of resonant frequency Ωj and linewidth Γj - each one
with a different weighting factor Aj. Finally, the complex dielectric function in the
Drude-Lorentz model is written as38,39:
ϵDL(ω) = ϵ∞−
ω2
p
ω2 + iγω −
∑
j
Aj ·
Ω2
j
(ω −Ωj)2 + iΓjΩj
(2.2)
The interaction of light with the free electrons of a metallic interface can produce
plasmonic effects, which are divided to two major categories: the surface plasmon
polaritons (SPPs) and the localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs).
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Surface Plasmonics
2.1
Surface plasmon polaritons
Surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) are electromagnetic surface waves propagating at
the interface between a conductor and a dielectric. These waves are electromagnetic
fields coupled to the oscillations of the free electron gas of the metal.
By solving Maxwell’s equations, one can derive the dispersion relation of the SPP
mode36:
β = λ0
2π
√ϵdϵm
ϵd + ϵm
> k0
√ϵd
(2.3)
where β is the propagation constant, λ0 the free-space wavelength and ϵm,d the com-
plex dielectric function of the metal and dielectric respectively. In figure 2.1, the
dispersion relation of propagating SPP at the interface of GaN and the three most
popular metals for SP applications - Al, Ag and Au - is shown.
Figure 2.1: Dispersion diagrams for the SPP modes propagating at Al/GaN, Ag/-
GaN, and Au/GaN interfaces. The shaded area represents the cone of
light in GaN, the dashed lines the surface-plasmonic frequency of each
metal, the solid lines the theoretical dispersion and the different points
results of FDTD simulations. Adapted from[40].
This is a central result in the SPP theory and has two major consequences. Firstly,
it shows that there cannot be a direct excitation of SPP modes using light propagating
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Localized surface plasmons
13
in the dielectric and thus special phase-matching techniques such as grating or prism
couplers are required. In reality, however, the surface roughness and the defects on
the structure can act as scattering centres and couple light to the SP modes.
Secondly, when the relation ϵd(ω) + ϵm(ω) = 0 holds, the propagation constant
diverges. This happens when the frequency of the SPPs approaches the characteristic
surface plasmon polariton frequency ωsp given by:
ωsp =
ωp
√1 + ϵd
(2.4)
At the surface plasmon frequency the propagation constant goes to infinity, while
the group velocity goes to zero and, as a result, the mode acquires its electrostatic
character.
The amplitude of an SPP mode decays exponentially with distance from the metal-
dielectric interface. The penetration depth of the surface mode to the dielectric is
calculated as41:
dz = λ0
2π
√
ϵ′
d + ϵ′m
ϵ2
d
(2.5)
where ϵ′
d,m are the real part of the dielectric constant for the dielectric and metallic
material respectively. The penetration depth is also considered as the near-field of
the SP, which is also the distance where an exciton can be directly coupled to an
SP mode. This effect is explained in more detail in section 2.3. In table 2.1, the SP
frequency, wavelength and penetration depth for the Al/GaN, Ag/GaN and Au/GaN
interfaces is shown.
Table 2.1: The surface plasmon frequency, wavelength and penetration depth for
SPPs propagating at an interface of GaN and different metals. Values
are taken from ref. [42–44].
Metal
ℏωsp [eV]
λsp [nm]
dz [nm]
Al
5.7
243
64-77
Ag
2.9
442
39-47
Au
2.3
539
27
2.2
Localized surface plasmons
When the metallic material is structured as a nanoparticle (NP) whose size is smaller
than the wavelength of the electromagnetic field, the subsystem of the free-electrons
inside the particle forms oscillating surface charges that change the polarization along
the field. As a result, the field in the vicinity of a NP is greatly enhanced, and the
scattering and absorption properties are altered. These localized collective oscillations
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Surface Plasmonics
of the electrons are spatially bound by the particle geometry resulting in specific
resonances which are dependent of the size, shape and area density (particles/cm2)
of the NPs.
These resonances are commonly known as localized surface plasmon
resonances (LSPRs) or simply as localized surface plasmons (LSPs). A drawing of an
LSP response can be seen in figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: A localized surface plasmon resonance. The electric field drives the free
surface charges of a metallic sphere into collective oscillations.
In the quasi-static approximation, the field inside a spherical NP is spatially con-
stant, and it is given by45:
Eint = E0
3ϵd
ϵm + 2ϵd
(2.6)
where ϵm,d is the complex dielectric constant for the metallic NP and the host dielec-
tric medium respectively. The polarizability α and the dipole moment p for the NP
is given by:
α = ϵm −ϵd
ϵm + 2ϵd
(2.7)
p = ϵ0ϵdαE0
(2.8)
If Im[ϵm] ≪1 or its frequency dependence is weak ( ∂ω(Im[ϵm]) ≪∂ω(Re[ϵm])), then
the resonance condition occurs when ϵm(ω) = −2ϵd(ω), which is known as the Fröhlich
condition36. This resonance condition for the localized surface plasmon (LSP) can
also be written as:
ωsp =
ωp
√1 + 2ϵd
(2.9)
The LSP resonance originates from the dipole moment response of the NP, and as a
result, a series of higher-order resonances are theoretically predicted46. The higher-
order dipole moments have been observed experimentally; however, they are usually
weaker and are not commonly used in applications. Comparing (2.4) and (2.9), it can
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Localized surface plasmons
15
be seen that the SP frequencies of the SPP and LSP modes differ. In literature and
in this work, the symbol ωsp is used interchangeably for LSP and SPP resonances,
and as a result, attention should be given in the context. For NPs the SP resonance
is a result of the LSP modes, while for TFs the SP resonance is due to the SPP
modes. Furthermore, the absorption and scattering cross-sections for incident light
of a particular k-vector is dependent on the polarizability given in equation 2.7 and
can be expressed as47:
Cscat = k4
6π |α|2 = 8π
3 k4R6

ϵm −ϵd
ϵm + 2ϵd

2
∝
(R
λ
)4
(2.10)
Cabs = kIm[α] = 4πkR3Im
[ ϵm −ϵd
ϵm + 2ϵd
]
∝R
λ
(2.11)
From these equations it is shown that for big NPs the scattering cross section is
dominant, while for smaller particles scattering becomes negligible and absorption
dominates. In plasmonic applications, tailoring the NP size is extremely important
since it greatly affects the SP resonance. In general, for as the NP size increases the SP
resonance red-shifts. Furthermore, the above equations shows that the surrounding
medium also plays a role in the scattering and absorption cross sections. This has
been also demonstrated experimentally in 2014 by A. Fadil et al.
where the SP
resonance and the scattering/absorption coefficient blueshifted when the NPs where
fabricated on a SiN dielectric layer48.
All of the above results were dealing with a single metallic sphere. However, the
NP shape plays also a role when determining the resonant condition. The change
in the resonance can be calculated using the same electrostatic arguments; however,
this is usually done by simulations due to the difficulty in using analytical methods.
A systematic experimental study on this effect was conducted by J. J. Mock et al.49
and some of their results are shown in figure 2.3(a). Finally, the density of the NPs
also affects the SP resonance. Many theoretical studies and experimental results have
shown that as the surface density of the metallic NPs increases, the SP resonance red-
shifts and broadens50,51. This can be also seen from figure 2.3(b). For closely spaced
NPs, the optical properties of the NP-ensemble are determined by the strong near
field coupling of the different LSP dipole moments and probably due to higher-order
mode contributions50.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Surface Plasmonics
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: (a) Shape effects on the SP resonance using individual colloidal Ag
NPs. From Ref. [49]. (b) The inter-particle spacing effect on the SP
resonance. Adapted from[50].
2.3
Efficiency enhancement using surface plasmonics
One of the most promising potential application of surface plasmonics is the efficiency
enhancement of LEDs. The first theoretical work suggesting that plasmonics can be
utilized to enhance the emission efficiency was done by the group of Yablonovitch42,52
and was experimentally demonstrated in 2004 by Okamoto et al.43. Nowadays, the ef-
fectiveness of surface plasmonics is well known, and various groups have demonstrated
similar results using metallic films and metallic nanoparticles.
The excitons generated in a QW can recombine radiatively or non-radiatively
producing photons or phonons respectively. Metals deposited in the LED structure
can increase the light extraction efficiency (LEE) by altering the scattering properties
of the structure. Under specific conditions, though, surface plasmons can enhance the
internal quantum efficiency (IQE). In particular, the metallic interface close to the
QWs can effectively create a new relaxation process for the charge carriers, where the
excitonic energy is transferred to an SP mode. This process is usually much faster
than the original recombination channels. Finally, the energy stored in the SP mode
can generate a photon or be thermally dissipated. This simple but intuitive picture
is shown in figure 2.4.
Initially, a fraction of the current run through the device
excites e-h pairs inside the QWs, while the rest is lost. Consequently, the excitons
can recombine radiatively, non-radiatively or couple their energy to the SP modes.
The excited SPs can also relax, emitting a photon or lose their energy non-radiatively.
Finally, the produced photons can be extracted from the device as useful light or be
absorbed. Each process described can be evaluated using a corresponding efficiency.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Efficiency enhancement using surface plasmonics
17
These quantities are used extensively in the LED industry and research, and they are
defined in Appendix A.
surface
plasmon
exciton
photon
current
(i)
(i)
(iii)
(ii)
(iv)
(v)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(i)  Current injection
(ii) Radiative recombination
(iii) Exciton-SP coupling
(iv) SP-photon coupling
(v) Extracted light
(i)  Current lost
(ii) Nonradiative recombination
(iii) Damping of SP
(iv) Photons absorbed
metal
semiconductor
QW
Figure 2.4: Energy conversion schemes in an SP-enhanced LED.
In a more detailed description, the mechanism behind this process can be explained
in the following manner:
If the QW is located in the near-field of an SP mode and the emission wavelength
of the QW matches the SP resonance, the excitons of the QW can couple their energy
to the SP mode. For an exciton located at ⃗re, the exciton-SP coupling rate is given
by Fermi’s Golden rule40,52:
kex−sp = 2π
ℏ
⟨f|⃗d · ⃗E(⃗re, ω)|i⟩

2
ρ(ω)
(2.12)
where ρ(ω) is the SP density of states (DOS) and ⟨f|⃗d · ⃗E(⃗re, ω)|i⟩is the dipole
emission matrix element with ⃗d the dipole moment of the exciton and ⃗E the SP
electric field at the emitter. For an SPP-mode the DOS is very large near the SP
resonance, since (dk/dω) at ωsp approaches infinity.
The increase in the emission rate can be observed by time-resolved photolumi-
nescence (TRPL) measurements44.
The photoluminescence (PL) decay rate kP L
that originally depends solely on the radiative and non-radiative recombination rate
(krad,non), is enhanced by the exciton-SP coupling rate as:
k∗
P L = krad + knon
|
{z
}
kP L
+kex−sp
(2.13)
where k∗
P L is the enhanced PL decay rate. This enhanced spontaneous emission rate
can be regarded as a Purcell enhancement effect53. The Purcell enhancement factor
(Fp) in the case of the exciton-SP coupling can be expressed as43,44:
Fp(ω) = kex−sp(ω) + krad(ω) + knon(ω)
krad(ω) + knon(ω)
= k∗
P L
kP L
(2.14)
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Surface Plasmonics
The Purcell enhancement factor is shown to follow the DOS of the SP-modes40. This
is also shown in figure 2.5(a).
However, even if the majority of excitons are coupled to the SP modes, it is still
difficult to extract useful photons.
The energy stored in the SP modes can relax
either by radiative or non-radiative processes, and as a result, the LEE for the SPs
is defined as:
ηsp−ph(ω) =
ksp−rad(ω)
ksp−rad(ω) + ksp−non(ω)
(2.15)
Coupling light with the SP modes can happen only if the phase matching condition
is respected. This is not possible for a perfectly flat semiconductor-metal surface and
the SP energy will be thermally dissipated. However, the surface can be roughened
or nanostructured in order for the SPs with high momentum to scatter and radiate
light. Finally, the SP-enhanced IQE (η∗
int) can be written as54:
η∗
int = krad + ηsp−ph · kex−sp
krad + knon + kex−sp
≈ηsp−ph · ηex−sp
(2.16)
where ηex−sp is the exciton-SP coupling efficiency given by:
ηex−sp =
kex−sp
krad + knon + kex−sp
(2.17)
When the exciton-SP coupling rate is much faster than the original recombination
rate ( kex−sp ≫krad,non) the equation 2.16 is determined by the efficiency of exciton-
SP coupling and SP-photon coupling. In equations (2.16) and (2.17), every quantity
is frequency dependent.
In figure 2.5(b), the SP-enhanced IQE over the Purcell
enhancement factor is plotted for different initial IQE. From this plot, it is clear that
the theoretical limit of the enhanced IQE is the SP-photon coupling efficiency. This
is one of the main advantages of surface plasmonics, especially for LEDs with very
low IQE.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Efficiency enhancement using surface plasmonics
19
100
101
102
Purcell Enhancement Factor
0
20
40
60
80
100
SP Enhanced IQE [%]
sp-ph
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: (a) Purcell enhancement factors obtained by TRPL measurements. The
solid red solid line represents the DOS (dk/dω) from the SPP modes
at an Ag/GaN interface. Adapted from[40]. (b) The enhanced IQE for
different initial IQE as a function of the purcell enhancement factor. In
this case the IQE is limited by the ηsp−ph.
The usual strategy for SP enhancement is to match the SP resonance with the
emission wavelength of the emitter. As hinted in section 2.2, appropriate tuning the
SP resonance will lead to SP-exciton coupling; however, this does not necessarily
lead to efficiency enhancement. On the contrary, there are cases where this coupling
degrades the device performance55,56.
For the SPP modes, the transferred energy can dissipate as heat without being
extracted as photons. Actually, this is the usual case since coupling light in and out of
the SPP mode specific phase-matching conditions are required (see chapter 2.1). This
problem can be overcome via nanostructuring or roughened surface that can create
scattering centres.
For the LSPRs, the coupled energy can also be dissipated as
ohmic losses, however, the efficiency enhancement is dependent on the scattering and
absorption cross-section of the NPs. In particular, scattering is related to the radiative
efficiency of the LSP modes, while absorption is related to the LSP dampening. These
are two competing processes, and in order to take into account both effects, the
scattering-to-extinction ration (SER) is considered as a figure of merit57. The SER
is defined as:
SER = σscat
σext
(2.18)
where σscat,ext is the scattering and extinction cross section respectively. The ex-
tinction cross section is defined as σext = σscat + σabs, where the last term is the
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Surface Plasmonics
absorption cross section. SER can qualitetively explain if a specific NP design can
lead to enhancement or degradation of the efficiency.
2.3.1
Recent developments
Nowadays, there are several notable groups around the globe working on surface
plasmonics for the enhancement of LED devices. Some of the possible LED structures
that can accommodate SP and be electrically pumped are shown in figure 2.6. For PL
measurements, the enhancement factor achieved is between 2-3; however, for complete
devices measured by EL, the typical enhancement factor is between 1.5-2. The lower
enhancement factor for EL can be traced back to the reduced injection efficiency (IE)
that the metal layers/particles introduce. In this section, some typical experimental
results from the field are mentioned.
Figure 2.6: Different LED structures that can incorporate surface plasmonics and
electrical pumping. (a) A metallic film is deposited on a thin p-GaN
layer that also functions as a p-contact. (b) Nanostructured p-GaN layer
with metal deposited near the QWs. (c) Metallic NPs are embedded at
the near field of the QWs. (d) Metallic NPs are employed to increase
the light extraction characteristics of the device.
Starting with plasmonic enhancement in UV-LEDs, Gao et al.58 achieved a 2.85
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Efficiency enhancement using surface plasmonics
21
enhancement factor for an AlGaN-based LED emitting at 280 nm by adding an Al
film on a 90 nm thick p-GaN layer. This structure was close to the design of figure
2.6(a), however, the p-GaN was much thicker, and thus only LEE was enhanced.
Hong et al.59 fabricated Pt NPs via annealing and embedded them 20 nm away from
QWs emitting at 400 nm. The LED structure used is similar to the one portrayed in
2.6(c). This led to a 57.9% enhancement of EL at 20 mA.
For blue LEDs, Cho et al.60 used a similar strategy, embedding Ag NPs in the
p-GaN layer that resulted in 72% enhancement in efficiency. SiO2 nanodisks were
also grown above the NPs in order to reduce the defects and IE degradation. Sung et
al.61 enhanced the efficiency of an LED emitting at 465 nm by 80% after fabricating
Au NPs on the ITO current spreading layer enhancing the LEE.
The research on SP enhancement of LEDs is extended to green LEDs as well.
Using an Ag nanograting like the one shown in figure 2.6(b) Shen et al.62 doubled
the efficiency of an LED emitting at 510 nm. Furthermore, Ag and double metallic
Ag:Au NPs were explored by Fadil et al.48 and Mano et al.63, respectively. In their
work, the NPs were grown on a thin p-GaN layer, and they achieved a PL efficiency
enhancement of 240% and 220% for LEDs emitting at 530 nm. The last representative
example was published by Yeh et al.64, who achieved a 1.5 EL enhancement using Ag
NPs on a green LED emitting at 550 nm. The NPs were fabricated on top of the 80
nm thick p-GaN layer, and the design was similar to figure 2.6(d). All of the above
findings are summarized in table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Representative experimental results for the efficiency enhancement of
LEDs using surface plasmonics.
Structure
Wavelength
Enhancement
Authors
Al film on 90 nm p-Gan layer
280 nm
236 % (PL)
Gao et al. [58]
Pt NPs embedded 20 nm from QWs
400 nm
158 %
Hong et al. [59]
Ag with SiO2 nanodisks embedded in p-GaN
450 nm
172 %
Cho et al. [60]
Au NPs on the current spreading layer
480 nm
180 %
Sung et al.[61]
Ag nanograting
510 nm
200 %
Shen et al. [62]
Au:Ag NPs on 100 nm p-GaN layer
528 nm
220 % (PL)
Mano et al. [63]
Ag NPs on 30 nm p-GaN layer
530 nm
240 % (PL)
Fadil et al. [48]
Ag NPs on 80 nm p-GaN layer
550 nm
150 %
Yeh et al. [64]
==PAGE:34==
22
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Wafer characterization
The NUV-LED epi-wafers used throughout these experiments consist of an InGaN-
based epitaxial structure grown on a 2” sapphire substrate.
The epi-wafers were
grown by professor Xiaoyan Yi of the Institute of Semiconductors of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences for our group.
The epitaxial structure is composed of an undoped GaN buffer layer, n-doped GaN
layers, InGaN MQWs emitting at 400nm, and the top p-GaN layers. A drawing of
the epitaxial structure is shown in figure 3.1(b). The above description is a simplified
picture of the actual epitaxial structure, which gives a basic understanding of the
wafer.
In reality, the epitaxial structure consists of numerous thin layers and its
detailed description is given in the next section.
A1
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
A6
A5
A4
A3
A2
C1
C3
C2
C4
C5
C6
D4
D2
D1
D3
D6
D5
50.8mm
0.400mm
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: (a) A drawing of the top and side view of the 2” sapphire substrate. (b)
A simplified drawing of the epitaxial structure grown on the sapphire
substrate.
The whole epitaxial structure was grown on a commercial 2” c-sapphire substrate.
During this work, two different groups of substrates were considered. In particular,
a single side polished (SSP) and double side polished (DSP) c-sapphire of 400 µm
and 300 µm respectively. All the experiments presented in this chapter were done
using the SSP wafers. In particular, we optically characterized three SSP NUV-LED
wafers and processed them in order to calibrate the dry etching process. A drawing
of the substrate is shown in figure 3.1(a). The wafer was cleaved into smaller pieces
for processing and the individual chips with the naming convention is also shown.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Wafer characterization
3.1
Detailed description of the epi-wafers
The epitaxial structure consists of numerous thin layers of different material com-
position and thickness. The specifications of the epitaxial wafer are shown in table
3.1.
Table 3.1: Epitaxial structure of the NUV-LED wafer emitting at 390nm.
Layer
Thickness
Composition
Doping
Comments
p+-GaN
15 nm
2,00E+20
p-AlGaN
50 nm
1-2%Al
2,00E+19
EBL sl
32 nm (8 pairs)
0%-20% Al
GaN/Al20Ga80N
AlGaN
3 nm
15% Al
GaN
12nm
Last quantum barrier
MQW2
(2 nm + 8 nm)×9
3% In
1,00E+17
MQW1
(2 nm + 8 nm)×3
3% In
5,00E+17
Pre-well
(2 nm + 50 nm)×3
1% In
5,00E+17
n-GaN
150 nm
1,00E+17
n-AlGaN
5 nm
15%Al
5,00E+18
n-GaN
2 um
1,50E+19
u-GaN
3.5 um
Buffer layer
α-Al2O3
400 um
Sapphire substrate
Initially, a thick undoped GaN buffer layer was epitaxially grown on the sapphire
substrate.
Due to the significant lattice mismatch between the sapphire and the
AlInGaN quarternary, a buffer layer is usually required for a high-quality crystal of
nitride-based LED devices. Nakamura made the first demonstration of a high-quality
thin film of GaN on a sapphire substrate using a thick GaN buffer layer in 199130.
Subsequently, a thick n-GaN layer was grown that is typically exposed after etching
to conclude the mesa pattern and to deposit the n-contact.
The active region consists of two groups of In0.03Ga0.97N/GaN MQWs that are 2
nm wide and are separated by GaN quantum barrier layers of 8 nm. The MQWs is
a structure that is used to confine the electrons in the lower bandgap material that
greatly enhance the IQE.
After the MQWs, a group of superlattice (SL) structured Electron Barrier Lay-
ers (EBL) is grown in order to enhance the electrical characteristics of the device.
Adding a single p-AlGaN layer in the p-type region limits the electron leakage into
the p-type side, increasing the performance of the LED device65–67. Moreover, it
has been demonstrated that further enhancement can be achieved using the SL-EBL
structure68. SL-EBL increases the effective barrier of the electrons while decreasing
the effective barrier for the holes, resulting in reduced electron leakage to the p-type
region and higher hole injection to the MQW. Finally, a p-AlGaN and a highly doped
p+-GaN layer conclude the epi-structure. The top p+-GaN layer acts as the p-contact
layer, where the current spreading layer and the top metal contact will be deposited.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Photoluminescence mapping
25
More information about transparent current spreading layers that are currently used
in LED technology and their governing physics can be found in a review paper pub-
lished by Porch et al. in 200469.
3.2
Photoluminescence mapping
Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were conducted in order to characterize the
individual chips and map the wafers in general. PL is the light emission after the
absorption of photons. In semiconductors, the photoexcitation is done by a source
that generates photons of higher energy than the bandgap of the semiconductor.
The absorbed photons excite electrons (holes) to the conduction band (valence band),
which relax through various mechanisms. The radiative recombination of the electron-
hole pairs gives the PL spectrum and reveals information about the band structure
and the material composition.
(b)
(a)
Figure 3.2: The experimental setup used in the PL measurements. A drawing of the
setup is shown in figure (a). In figure (b), a picture of the excitation laser
(bottom left), the spectrometer (top left), and the microscope/stage
(right) is shown.
Experimental setup.
All of the PL measurements were conducted in the optical
labs of DTU Fotonik, and a drawing and pictures of the experimental setup can be
seen in figure 3.2(a-b). The sample is placed on a 3D movable stage and was examined
by a state of the art microscope. The excitation source was a fiber-coupled NUV-laser
diode emitting at 375nm and was connected to the microscope. The excitation light
was focused on the wafer by the objective lens at a 20x magnification that also gathers
the PL signal and the reflected excitation light. The light gathered from the objective
is then coupled to a multimode fiber and is sent to the spectrometer. Finally, the
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Wafer characterization
spectrometer is connected to a PC for data acquisition. A list of the optical equipment
can be found in Appendix C.
PL measurements.
In figure 3.3(a), typical PL spectra of six different positions
of wafer #2 are shown. The smaller peak at 375 nm corresponds to the reflected
excitation light. During all the measurements, the output power of the laser was kept
at 5 mW.
390
395
400
405
410
415
Wavelength [nm]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized Intensity
A3
B3
C2
C5
D2
D5
350
400
450
Wavelength [nm]
0
0.5
1
Intensity [A.U.]
A3
B3
C2
C5
D2
D5
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: (a) Typical PL-spectra from six different positions of wafer #2. (b) PL
spectra normalized to peak PL intensity.
Due to limitations of the MOCVD growth process, a variance in the peak wave-
length and PL intensity was observed. The variation of the peak wavelength can
be seen in figure 3.3(b), where the intensity is normalized at the peak wavelength.
These variations are typical during the MOCVD process and are dependent on the
material composition. It is typical to observe a wavelength gradient on the wafer that
is dependent on its position at the chamber during the growth.
Furthermore, the uncertainty in the compounds’ composition manifests also lo-
cally through the spectral width of each peak, which is also called alloy broadening.
Theoretically, the full width half maximum (FWHM) of a bulk semiconductor emit-
ting at peak wavelength λp in the weak pumping regime - where the quasi-Fermi
levels are located within the bandgap and at least kT from the edge of the bands - is
given by70:
FWHM ≃1.45 · 10−3λ2
pkT
(3.1)
where the FWHM and peak wavelength are expressed in nm while the kT in eV. For
the chips belonging to the second wafer, the theoretical FWHM is 6 nm, while the
measured one was 11.8 nm - almost two times higher. This broadening effect is mostly
due to the alloy broadening, but there is also some contribution from the thickness
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Photoluminescence mapping
27
variation of the QWs - different quantum confinement and the built-in polarization
field.
On the other hand, the variation in PL intensity is determined by the crystal
defects, which augment the non-radiative recombination leading to lower performance.
Initial PL measurements are also necessary in order to evaluate and choose the wafer
and chips for the following experiments. In general, we would like to compare chips
that are spatially and spectrally close, while demonstrating similar performance -
within 10% of PL intensity.
Finally, while illuminating the wafers with the laser light, certain regions of lim-
ited PL intensity were observed. Typically, a violet spot from photoluminescence is
observed where the laser beam illuminates the wafer. However, these spots exhibited
a brown colour and an area in the order of the laser spot size. In these few cases -
four spots in all three wafers - the PL intensity was lower than the reflected excitation
light. This weird phenomenon is attributed to some extended defects during growth.
These spots are also visible with an optical microscope and are shown in figure 3.4.
The position of each spot was recorded, and the corresponding samples will be used
as test samples for calibration.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Microscope image of a site of an extended defect found in wafer #1.
The magnification of the objective is (a) 2.5x and (b) 20x.
PL mapping.
During the PL measurements, each wafer was measured in twenty-
four different positions, one for each chip - see figure 3.1(a). PL-mapping of each wafer
gives a nice overview and can help in selecting the samples for further processing.
The PL-mapping for each wafer is shown in figure 3.5. Unfortunately, since the wafer
positioning was done by eye, these positions cannot be precisely in the middle of each
chip. Furthermore, this limited amount of points cannot accurately depict the spatial
gradient of the growth process, however, a trend can be observed in the wavelength
of wafers #1 −2.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Wafer characterization
(c)
(b)
(a)
Figure 3.5: PL mapping of the three wafers: the spatial distribution of the peak
wavelength (left) and the peak PL intensity (right). The vertical group-
ing (a)-(c) corresponds to the wafer ID number #1-3 respectively.
Evaluation of the epi-wafers’ quality.
A way to evaluate the quality of the epi-
wafers is to examine the distribution of the wavelength and PL intensity. A scatter
plot for the different chips on each wafer in the Wavelength-Intensity space is shown in
figure 3.6. Furthermore, a fit with a 2D Gaussian distribution has also been made in
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Photoluminescence mapping
29
order to evaluate the performance of each wafer. The mean wavelength/intensity and
their spread are shown on top of each figure. This plot can also be useful in grouping
the individual chips in terms of similar performance. This is especially useful for
wafers like #3 where the spatial PL-mapping is not enough. In these plots, the chips
enclosing the irregular brown spots of low PL intensity were omitted.
(b)
Mean lambda: 400 nm, Spread: 0.8 nm
Mean intensity: 0.720, Spread: 0.067
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
C1
C2
C3
C4
C6
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
398
399
400
401
402
distribution [nm]
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Intensity distribution [A.U.]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Mean lambda: 401.2 nm, Spread: 1.3 nm
Mean intensity: 1.044, Spread: 0.082
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
B1
B3
B4
B5
B6
C1
C3
C4
C5
C6
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
398
399
400
401
402
403
404
405
distribution [nm]
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
Intensity distribution [A.U.]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Mean lambda: 403.9 nm, Spread: 1.6 nm
Mean intensity: 0.71, Spread: 0.11
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
B1
B2B3
B4
B5
B6
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
400
401
402
403
404
405
406
407
distribution [nm]
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Intensity distribution [A.U.]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(c)
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: A scatter plot of the individual chips of each wafer on the Intensity-
Wavelength space. The color map shows the fitted 2-D Gaussian dis-
tribution. The (a)-(c) grouping corresponds to the wafer ID number
#1-3.
Although the epi-wafers were designed to emit at around 390 nm, the PL measure-
ments showed an average of 401.65 nm. The main reason for this can be attributed
to limited composition control during the MOCVD process. Typically, a variance of
at least ±2% in the composition is to be expected, and as a result, the MOCVD pro-
cess is followed by a PL-mapping, in order to characterize the wafer. In figure 3.7(a)
the bandgap energy and wavelength are plotted against the gallium molar fraction
of an In1−xGaxN bulk semiconductor using equations 1.2-1.3. For a high fraction of
gallium, the wavelength follows an approximately linear relation. This is shown in
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Wafer characterization
figure 3.7(b). From the linear fit, it is shown that a 1% change in indium molar frac-
tion changes the wavelength by almost 6 nm. This shows how sensitive the emitting
wavelength to the material composition is.
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1-x Indium fraction
360
380
400
420
(nm)
Linear fit:
(nm) = a * (1-x) (%) + b
a = -5.9293 nm
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
Gallium molar fraction
360
380
400
420
[nm]
Linear fit:
(nm) = a * (1-x) (%) + b
a = -5.9293 nm
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Gallium molar fraction
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Eg [eV]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
[nm]
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7: (a)The bandgap energy and wavelength as a function of the gallium
molar fraction for a In1−xGaxN bulk semiconductor. (b) A linear fit
(red dashed line) on the wavelength in the high gallium molar fraction
regime.
3.3
Surface roughness
During the following experiments, thin metallic films will be deposited and subse-
quently annealed. Since the thickness of the films is in the order of nanometers, it is
crucial to verify that the roughness of the unprocessed wafers is within the specifica-
tions given by the growers.
The roughness was determined using atomic force microscopy (AFM) for the NUV-
LED, a GaN on DSP sapphire template, and a test wafer piece of the GaN template
on which TFs of aluminum and silver (2nm:8nm) were deposited. The AFM images
are shown in figure 3.8. The last chip was measured in order to evaluate the deposition
using the e-beam evaporation method.
The NUV-LED wafer had a surface roughness of 0.85 nm, while the surface of
the commercial GaN template was 0.82 nm. Locally, the GaN template was much
smoother (appx. 0.3 nm surface roughness), however, the average surface roughness
is much higher due to some relatively large objects, that are clearly shown in the 3D
representation. These objects can be identified as micelles that have been adsorbed
to the surface after growth71. The GaN template also shows some height variation on
the crystallographic planes, usually referred as atomic steps72–74. This is evident from
the shape of the lines and their 5 Å height steps, however in the 3D image, the atomic
steps are obscured due to these growth residues. Finally, the surface roughness of an
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Surface roughness
31
Al:Ag double metallic layer was measured. The metals had been deposited by e-beam
evaporation physical vapour deposition (PVD) and exhibited roughness of 1.31 nm
the TF surface was fairly smooth, and as a result, the metal deposition using e-beam
evaporation is considered successful.
GaN template 
NUV-LED wafer
12.0 nm
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0 nm
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
TF of Al:Ag (2:8nm) 
on the GaN template
12.0 nm
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
Rq = 1.31nm
Rq = 0.85nm
Rq = 0.82nm
Figure 3.8: AFM image (upper) and their 3D representation (lower) for the NUV-
LED wafer, the GaN template and a TF of Al:Ag (2:8nm) deposited on
the GaN template. The AFM images are 1.0µm × 1.0µm in dimensions
and use the same color gradient.
The label shows the RMS surface
rougness calculated in the whole area.
The data of the AFM measurements were analyzed using the data analysis free-
ware Gwyddion75. In particular, the AFM data were levelled by mean plane subtrac-
tion, while the 3rd order polynomial background was removed, and the horizontal
artifacts of the scan were corrected. The surface roughness was calculated using the
root mean square (RMS) height - usually denoted by Rq - using the formula:
Rq =


1
MN
M
∑
i=1
N
∑
j=1
(z(xi, yj) −z)2


1/2
(3.2)
where M and N is the total number of measured points during the scan in the x- and
y-direction respectively.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Wafer characterization
3.4
Etch rate calibration
Looking at table 3.1, the last quantum barrier and top QW are located 100nm and
112nm from the surface of the top p+-GaN layer respectively. In order to realize
plasmon-exciton coupling, the distance between the metallic NPs and the MQWs
should be below 50nm, which is approximately the near-field range of the surface
plasmons. Etching in this range requires precise calibration of the etching rate. The
etching rate strongly depends on the epitaxial structure, and thus, four of the test
wafer pieces were used for this purpose.
Wafer preparation.
Before entering the cleanroom, the wafers were cleaned using
ultrasonic soap cleaning. This was done by immersing the wafers in an ultrasound
tank with a solution deionized (DI) water with diluted Triton X-100 for 10min.
The wafer #2 was chosen for further processing, and thus it was diced into smaller
chips using a diamond pen and a ruler. The wafer was scored on the unpolished side
using the geometry of figure 3.1(a); however, the cleaving was not precise, and most
of the chips had irregular shapes. This was due to the inexperience of the user and
the thick sapphire substrate. The chips that retained their central part were kept for
further processing, while the smaller irregular chips were kept as test samples.
Finally, all of the chips were cleaned by emersion in acetone, isopropanol (IPA) and
DI water for 5, 2 and 1 minutes respectively. Acetone is a polar solvent used to remove
the organic remnants/contaminants from the wafers. Because of its high evaporation
rate, the particles can redeposit on the chips. As a result, the chips are immediately
immersed in IPA, which is suitable for dissolving non-polar contaminants that are
still on the chip. Furthermore, it removes the contaminants related to acetone, and
it has a high evaporation rate as well. Finally, the wafers are further cleaned using
DI water to wash out the residues and dried using nitrogen.
Photoresist patterning.
Initially, the wafer pieces are patterned using a drop of
the AZ5214e photoresist. Since the photoresist drop was at least 5 µm thick, the
chips were soft baked for 5 min at 100◦C76. Microscope pictures of a sample after the
photoresist patterning are shown in figure 3.9(a). During the microscope inspection,
a yellow filter was used to protect the photoresist.
Dry etching.
After the resist patterning, the wafers were dry etched using an
inductively coupled plasma (ICP) process unit. During etching, we used 40W and
20W of platen and coil power, respectively, a pressure of 2 mTorr and Cl2 and Ar
gas flow of 30 and 10 sccm respectively. The coil and platen power used is relatively
low in order to achieve a slow etch rate that is necessary to control the etch depth
in the order of tens of nanometers. A 10 min etching on a dummy wafer was used
for chamber preconditioning. Each sample was etched using different etching time, in
particular, 30 sec, 1:00 min, 1:30 min and 2:00 min.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Etch rate calibration
33
Photoresist removal.
The resist was removed using an Acetone:IPA:DI water
clean and the resist residues were removed using oxygen plasma. The plasma asher
used was the Diener Pico Plasma Asher.
The actual parameters of this machine
are unknown, however, there are standard recipes for resist removal and descuming
calibrated by other users of DTU Nanolab. A figure of the etch profile of a sample
after the photoresist removal is shown in figure 3.9(b). Although photoresist residues
are observed even after the plasma ashing, they are not critical for the calibration
process.
Figure 3.9: Microscope images at 2.5X magnification of two wafer pieces (a) with
the photoresist drop pattern and (b) after etching and the photoresist
removal. The inlet of figure (b) shows the etch profile at 50x magnifica-
tion.
Etch profile.
The etch depth was subsequently characterized. Initially, a stylus
profilometer was used, however, the results were inconsistent even after optimization
of the scan speed and scan length. In figure 3.10, the profile of a sample etched for
2 min at four different positions is shown. From this figure, it is apparent that the
method is not precise. There are several reasons for these imprecise results, however,
the main one was due to the limited accuracy of the profilometer.
Although the
theoretical vertical resolution is 5 nm, practically the noise due to vibrations can
reach 30 nm. On top of that, the step profile of a single area of interest (AOI) was
impossible to give reproducible results due to the data levelling. Data levelling is
usually done by levelling two points on different surfaces of the same height. Since
the noise was almost at the order of the etch depth, the levelling was irreproducible,
and thus even a statistical analysis was complicated. Finally, many scanning artifacts
were observed, making this method inappropriate.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Wafer characterization
0
200
400
600
800
x [ m]
-200
-100
0
100
Height [nm]
Res3 - high
Etching depth:
d=95 nm
0
200
400
600
800
1000
x [ m]
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
Height [nm]
Res3 - low
Etching depth:
d=62 nm
0
200
400
600
800
1000
x [ m]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Height [nm]
Res3 - mid low
Etching depth:
d=88 nm
0
200
400
600
800
x [ m]
-100
0
100
200
300
Height [nm]
Res3 - bottom
Etching depth:
d=78 nm
Figure 3.10: The etch profiles of a sample after a 2 min etch for four different
positions along the etched step. These profiles were measured using
stylus profilometry.
The etch profile was finally measured by AFM. The AFM images taken are
5.0µm×5.0µm in dimensions. The data were levelled by fitting a plane through 3
points in the etched part of the sample, and for each image, the profile of 5 arbitrary
lines was extracted. The AFM images, the line profiles and the 3D reconstruction
of the AFM data are shown in figures 3.11(a-d). The calculated etch rate for the
4 different etching times is shown in figure 3.11(e). The error bars were calculated
using the maximum and minimum etch rate observed. For the chip etched for 2 min,
two more AFM images were taken from different positions in order to have higher
accuracy in the etching rate.
From figure 3.11(e), it is clear that the plasma is not stable in the beginning of
the process. The etching rate is much lower for the first 30s, and it saturates at 46
nm/min after 2 min. If the desired etched depth were below 50nm, the recipe would
have been adjusted in order to stabilize the etching rate. However, since the etching
depth of interest lies between 70 to 110 nm, the recipe is stable enough. Finally, the
etched regions demonstrated the same surface roughness as the unprocessed ones.
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Etch rate calibration
35
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3.11: AFM images of the etched samples and their etch profile. Vertically:
figures (a), (b), (c) and (d) correspond to samples etched for 0:30,
1:00 and 1:30 and 2:00 min respectively.
Horizontally: To the left,
5.0µm×5.0µm AFM images and five abritrary lines are drawn. In the
middle, the profile of each of the drawn lines is shown. To the right,
a 3D representation of the AFM data is shown. Figure (e) shows the
calculated etch rate as a function of time.
==PAGE:48==
36
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Self-assembly of metallic
nanoparticles
Several metals were used to fabricate NPs that can support LSPRs. The fabrication
method examined is the self-assembly method via thermal annealing of a metallic
TF. This method has several advantages, especially for the industry, since it is cost-
effective and easy to up-scale. The physical mechanism behind the formation of NPs is
led by the surface diffusion, agglomeration and surface/interface energy minimization
of the metallic TFs, which depends on the TF thickness, the annealing temperature,
and the annealing time.
The major drawback, however, is that the size and the
inter-particle spacing cannot be controlled individually.
Self-assembly of silver and gold NPs on GaN surface has been demonstrated re-
peatedly in the literature48,61,63,64. Although Ag and Au can be used for tuning the
resonance in the whole visible spectrum, they cannot reach the UV region.
On the other hand, Al is the most popular plasmonic material for applications
in the UV range, and thus it should be examined. Fabrication of Al NPs has been
demonstrated in various papers, in which their shape ranges from spherical particles
and nanorods77, to nanodisks78 and triangular particles79. Unfortunately, most of
the nanostructuring of Al is typically done by patterning techniques, while the self-
assembly method has been proven less successful. The reason behind this is the rapid
oxidation of Al that is limiting the mobility of the metal. After the deposition of Al,
a self-limiting alumina layer of 2.5 nm is quickly formed upon air exposure80. This
oxide layer is transparent in the optical range81,82, and it is usually advantageous
since it protects the NPs, stabilize their performance78.
4.1
Double metallic Al:Ag nanoparticles
In order to tune the SP-resonance down to the UV region, a double metallic Al:Ag
NP scheme was examined. The fabrication was based on the self-assembly method
by thermally annealing of Ag on Al TFs of a total thickness of 10 nm. In this scheme,
Ag was deposited last in order to shield the Al layer from oxidation. The metals were
deposited on a GaN template grown on a 2” double side polished (DSP) sapphire
substrate.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Self-assembly of metallic nanoparticles
Preparation of the wafer pieces.
Initially, the GaN template was spin-coated
with 1.5 µm of AZ5214E photoresist (30 sec, 4500 rpm, 4000 acc) for protection of the
top side, and then cleaved into wafer pieces following the geometry shown in figure
3.1(a). The cleaved chips were marked at the sapphire side using a diamond pen, and
the resist was removed using an Acetone:IPA:DI water cleaning (5 min:2 min:1 min).
Metal film deposition using e-beam evaporation.
Double metallic Al:Ag thin
films were deposited using e-beam evaporation.
The desired deposition rate was
set to minimum, namely 0.5 Å/s and 1 Å/s for aluminum and silver, respectively.
Unfortunately, the actual deposition rate was much higher right after opening the
shutter, and thus, the recipe had to be adjusted. The most crucial parameter was
the intensity of the e-beam, which was optimized. Finally, the initial deposition rate
was close to the desired rate, which was achieved after depositing approximately 1
nm of the metals. The deposition method was evaluated using AFM. The surface
roughness was 1.31 nm after a deposition run of 2nm Al and 8nm Ag. The AFM
image is shown in figure 3.8. More information about the machine and the process is
given in Appendix D.1.
Rapid thermal annealing.
The samples were subsequently subjected to rapid
thermal annealing (RTA). In particular, the samples were annealed at 300◦C for
30 min in N2 atmosphere. The ambient nitrogen gas is vital since it prevents the
oxidation of the metal film.
Characterization using electron microscopy.
The characterization of the NPs
was done primarily by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The SEM figures for the
six different samples are shown in figure 4.1. The naming of each sample follows the
’x : y nm’ convention where x and y is the TF thickness of Al and Ag, respectively.
The goal of this experiment was to create separated double metallic NPs of alu-
minum and silver, following a profile similar to the silver NPs shown in the first image
of figure 4.1. Unfortunately, the aluminum deposited on GaN adheres much better
to the surface than silver and could not form NPs. The rest of the samples can be
categorized in two different cases: the 2:8 nm case, where big and small nanoparti-
cles formed, while the GaN surface was not entirely covered by the metals and the
samples with higher aluminum content. For the former case, we believed that the
big and small NPs were made out of Ag, while Al was stuck in the surface. However,
since SEM gives only topological information, further characterization was conducted.
For the latter category, the surface was covered by a metallic TF, and no NPs were
present.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Double metallic Al:Ag nanoparticles
39
200 nm
0:10 nm
2:8 nm
4:6 nm
10:0 nm
8:2 nm
6:4 nm
200 nm
200 nm
200 nm
200 nm
200 nm
Figure 4.1: SEM pictures of the six samples taken at the same length scale. The
titles above the figures show the thickness of the Al:Ag layers.
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was used to conduct elemental anal-
ysis to the NPs and the metallic clusters of the 2:8 sample. EDX analysis was subse-
quently performed to the rest of the samples to use as a reference. EDX is a technique
where a high-energy beam of electrons stimulates the emission of characteristic X-rays
from the specimen. A detector is used to gather the photons produced by the inner
shell electronic transitions. EDX analysis for the samples with the double metallic
layer is shown in figure 4.2.
In this figure, both the SEM images and the X-ray
spectra of a specific area of interest (AOI) are shown. For each sample, a particle
and the surface were analyzed, which correspond to the first and second spectrum,
respectively. The main characteristic emission lines observed are listed in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Characteristic electronic transitions found in EDX elemental analysis.
From ref. [83].
Element
Energy [keV]
Electronic transition
C
0.277
Ka1
N
0.3924
Ka1
O
0.5249
Ka1
Ga
1.0979
La1
Al
1.48
Ka1
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Self-assembly of metallic nanoparticles
2:8 nm
4:6 nm
6:4 nm
8:2 nm
Figure 4.2: EDX analysis of the double metallic samples. The samples are named
using the same convention of Al:Ag thickness. The first spectrum cor-
responds to a particle while the second spectrum to a ”clean” surface.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Double metallic Al:Ag nanoparticles
41
For the 2:8 sample, it is clear that the NPs are mostly made out of Ag, while
on the TF surface, both Ag and Al were found. This is also in accordance with the
backscattered SEM image. The big particles found in the rest of the samples are
mostly made out of Al, while Ag was relatively the same both on the surface and in
the particles. Furthermore, the oxygen peak shows that these particles are heavily
oxidized. This is something we expected since the samples had been fabricated three
weeks before this measurement.
Although EDX is a powerful characterization technique, it was difficult to spatially
resolve the fine structures around the NPs for the 2:8 sample. The main problem
was the low X-ray counts. To achieve high resolution, a small aperture and high
acceleration voltage are needed. However, in order to have sufficient X-ray signal,
more electrons are needed; thus, a smaller aperture is not an option. Although a high
acceleration voltage increases the resolution, it also increases the interaction volume
within the specimen. As a result, the major portion of the X-ray signal would come
from the substrate and not from the TF deposited on the surface84. The lower limit
for the acceleration voltage required in such an experiment is approximately double
the energy of the desired electronic transition. In our case, the limit to observe the
Lα line of Ag would be 6 keV. As a compromise, 8 keV of acceleration voltage was
used.
200 nm
200 nm
Topology
Z-contrast
Figure 4.3: SEM pictures using the backscattered electrons for the same AOI of the
2:8 nm Al:Ag sample. The atomic number contrast and the topology is
shown in the left and right images respectively.
Since the EDX characterization proved partially unsuccessful, we characterized the
2:8 nm sample using the SEM backscattered electrons’ detector. The most common
technique for SEM imaging is the detection of the secondary electrons that give
information about the surface topography of the sample. Another technique that SEM
features is the detection of the backscattered electrons. These electrons are elastically
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Self-assembly of metallic nanoparticles
scattered by the specimen atoms giving a contrast based on the atomic number and
using different bias schemes of the detector the image can give both topological and
compositional information. In figure 4.3, the same AOI was imaged using the detector
in the atomic number contrast and the topology mode. The two figures look identical,
and thus we can conclude that the smooth dark regions correspond to the GaN surface,
while the light regions correspond to the metals. Since the atomic number difference
between Ag (Z=47) and Al (Z=13) is quite high, it seems that Ag has covered Al
completely.
4.1.1
Optical characterization
The existence of an SP resonance can be verified by a dip in the transmittance or
reflectance spectrum40,63,85,86. Although the existence of separated metallic islands
is needed to observe LSPRs, there is a small chance to observe an SP resonance due
to SPPs or due to random nanostructures made by the augmented surface roughness
due to the RTA. As a result, a transmission experiment was conducted.
Since the NPs scatter the transmitted light in steep angles, the use of an integrated
sphere was needed. In these scatter transmission measurements, a Xenon white light
source, a 6-inch integrating sphere, and a spectrometer were used. All optical elements
were connected via fiber bundles. The setup is shown in figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: The experimental apparatus for scatter transmission and diffuse re-
flectance measurements. The integrating sphere, the xenon lamp and
the spectrometer are highlighted with the green, blue and red square
respectively.
The spectral range of this apparatus is 385 nm to 780 nm. The upper limit was
imposed by the spectrometer, while the lower limit was due to a combination of the
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Double metallic Al:Ag nanoparticles
43
power density of the xenon lamp and the absorption of the integrating sphere and
the fibers. For more detailed information, the reader is referred to Appendix C.2.
The scatter transmission spectra of the processed are shown in figure 4.5 and were
calculated using a series of different measurements, which are explained in Appendix
C.1. The normalization of the transmission was done by dividing the transmission
spectrum of each sample by the unprocessed sample. This relative transmission is
calculated using the relation:
Trel =
Ti
Tref
(4.1)
where Ti,ref is the transmission of the i-the sample and the reference respectively. In
this way, if an SP resonance exists, it will be easy to be observed. Finally, in figure
4.5, the thick, smooth curves corresponds to a Fourier curve fit on the data, while
the thin oscillating curves correspond to the actual measurement. These oscillations
are the result of the interference of light by reflecting on different interfaces.
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
Wavelength [nm]
20
40
60
80
100
Ti / Tref [%]
Al:Ag Nanoparticles
0:10
2:8
4:6
6:4
8:2
10:0
Figure 4.5: The normalized transmission spectra of the six different samples and
an unprocessed reference sample. The sample naming follows the same
convention of Al:Ag in nanometers.
The 0:10 sample demonstrated an absorption dip at 615 nm. This result is in
accordance with many articles found in literature and the work that has been already
done in our group (see section 2.3.1). Unfortunately, the rest of the samples did not
exhibit any resonant behavior, which is attributed to the lack of separated islands.
Furthermore, due to the to higher absorption of Al, the transmission of the TFs
diminished as the Al content increased. This trend is observed for all samples.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Self-assembly of metallic nanoparticles
4.2
Ag and double metallic Ag:Au nanoparticles
Going out of the immediate research interest of this work, two experiments were
conducted, in order to reproduce the methods and the results of articles dealing with
Ag and Au NPs for enhancing green LEDs. The primary goal of these experiments is
to test our current setup and deposition methods after the failure of the Al:Ag NPs
of section 4.1. The secondary goal was the reproduction of experiments conducted
by other groups. Reproducibility is one of the founding principles of the scientific
method, and while contemporary research is focused on producing novel and original
work, verifying previous results is also crucial.
Initially, Ag NPs were self-assembled using the same recipe. In particular, a thin
film of Ag with a thickness of 4, 6, 8 and 10 nm was deposited and annealed ex vacuo
for 30 min at 300◦C in N2 atmosphere. SEM pictures of the Ag NPs are shown in
figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: SEM pictures of self-assembled Ag NPs.
Furthermore, trying to replicate the recent work of Mano et al.63, a double metallic
Au:Ag TF of 0:4, 2:2 and 4:0 nm thickness was subjected to RTA using the same recipe.
The SEM pictures of the double metallic Ag:Au NPs are shown in figure 4.7.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Ag and double metallic Ag:Au nanoparticles
45
200nm
200nm
200nm
200nm
Ag 4nm
Au:Ag 2:2nm
Au 4nm
Figure 4.7: SEM images of Ag, Au:Ag and Au nanoparticles.
For the silver NPs, the size increased in respect to the TF thickness as expected;
however, the particles deviated from sphericity for the sample with 10 nm TF. For
the Au:Ag samples, although the total thickness remained the same, Au had a pro-
found effect on the NP shape and density. In particular, for the Au:Ag 2:2nm case,
the particles partially retained their spherical shape; however, the NPs area density
greatly increased. For the extreme 4nm Au case, the particles’ shape became highly
irregular. This information is depicted in figure 4.8, where a histogram of the NPs
diameter for each sample is shown. The values were extracted from the SEM figures
by utilizing the contrast of the NPs and by creating an ellipse around them. The
effective diameter is then calculated as d = 2
√
Ap/π, where Ap is the area of each
particle. Although this analysis becomes less accurate for irregular objects like the
ones found on the Au 4nm sample, it can give an overview of the mean NP diameter
and spread.
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Self-assembly of metallic nanoparticles
Mean: 90.6 nm, Spread: 40 nm
0
100
200
300
Particle size [nm]
0
5
10
15
Size distribution
Mean: 35.6 nm, Spread: 13 nm
0
50
100
150
Particle size [nm]
0
50
100
Size distribution
Mean: 41 nm, Spread: 14 nm
0
50
100
150
Particle size [nm]
0
50
100
Size distribution
Mean: 61.7 nm, Spread: 20 nm
0
50
100
150
Particle size [nm]
0
10
20
30
40
Size distribution
Mean: 37 nm, Spread: 12 nm
0
50
100
150
Particle size [nm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Size distribution
Mean: 32.9 nm, Spread: 18 nm
0
50
100
150
Particle size [nm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Size distribution
Ag 4nm
Au:Ag 2:2
Au 4nm
Ag 6nm
Ag 8nm
Ag 10nm
Figure 4.8: Histogram of the NPs diameters for each sample and its Gaussian fit.
4.2.1
Optical characterization
Consequently, the optical characterization of the samples was conducted. The scatter
transmission spectra, and the SP wavelength as a function of the initial TF thickness
of the samples can be seen in figure 4.9. For the silver NPs, the SP resonance red-
shifts as the particle size increases, while a broading of the SP resonance is strongly
correlated with the variance of the size and shape of the particles. For the 10nm case,
the resonance only slightly red-shifts and becomes weaker due to the spread of the
size of the NPs. This is a direct result of the spread of the NPs diameter. For the
samples of Ag 10nm and Au 4nm, the shape and size of the NPs are highly irregular
and a second group of tiny particles can be observed. As a result, the resonance
is much broader. The above results are consistent to the ones reported in various
articles dealing with self-assembly of Ag and Au NPs48,63.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Ag and double metallic Ag:Au nanoparticles
47
2
4
6
8
10
12
Ag thickness [nm]
500
550
600
650
[nm]
Ag SP wavelength
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
Wavelength [nm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ti / Tref [%]
Ag Nanoparticles
4nm
6nm
8nm
10nm
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Au thickness fraction
500
550
600
650
[nm]
Au:Ag SP wavelength
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
Wavelength [nm]
20
40
60
80
100
Ti / Tref [%]
Au:Ag Nanoparticles
0:4
2:2
4:0
Figure 4.9: Transmission spectra and their respective SP resonant wavelength for
Ag and double metallic Au:Ag nanoparticles.
==PAGE:60==
48
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Aluminum nanoparticles
5.1
Aluminum nanoparticles
Self-assembly of Al NPs via thermal annealing is something that is not usually tried
because of the difficulties associated with oxidation. One of the scarce articles on the
matter was on the field of plasmonic enhancement of Si solar cells87, where aluminum
NPs were successfully self-assembled on a Si substrate by annealing of an Al TF right
after deposition and without breaking the vacuum. In the cleanroom of DTU Nanolab,
an e-beam evaporator that can simultaneously control the substrate temperature
does not exist; however, there is a sputtering system that can heat the substrate.
As a result, an experiment was designed where both Si and GaN substrates would
be simultaneously used.
In this way, we can test if the failure of the Al:Ag NPs
fabrication method described in section 4.1 was due to oxidation problems (ex-vacuo
annealing) or due to the adhesion of Al on the GaN surface.
Before proceeding to the actual experiment, a calibration of the deposition rate
should be conducted since an in-situ monitor or definitive deposition rates of the
sputtering system do not exist.
5.1.1
Sputter deposition of Al and calibration of the sputtering rate
Deposition of Al thin films.
The Al TFs were deposited via ion-assisted sputter
deposition using a magnetron sputtering system. During this process, 100 W of DC
power was used to accelerate the Ar ions. The pressure of the Ar plasma was kept
at 5 mTorr, while the pressure of the process chamber before the plasma ignition
was below 5 × 10−7 Torr. For the calibration of the deposition rate, nine samples
were prepared using different sputtering time ranging from 150 to 600 sec, aiming to
deposit 5 to 15 nm thick films.
Ellipsometry.
One of the best methods to determine the thickness and the optical
properties of a TF is ellipsometry. Ellipsometry is an optical characterization tech-
nique, where elliptically polarized light interacts with the sample. The difference in
amplitude and phase of the s- and p- polarization components of the incident and
reflected light is measured. A simple sketch of the method is given in figure 5.1.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
Figure 5.1: Ellipsometry measurement showing the s- and p- polarization compo-
nents for the incident and reflected light. Adapted from [88].
The fundamental equation of ellipsometry is given by89 :
tan(Ψ)ei∆= Rp
Rs
(5.1)
where Ψ and ∆are related to the amplitude and phase difference of the polarization
components, while the Rs,p are related to the Fresnel reflection coefficients for the s-
and p-waves respectively. For a complete definition of these quantities, the reader is
referred to the book of Tompkins and McGahan on Spectroscopic Ellipsometry88.
Although (Ψ, ∆) are the measured quantities, they do not have any physical mean-
ing by themselves. However, using regression analysis, we can build a mathematical
model to deduce the thickness and the optical constants of the film. The model is
then evaluated by the mean square error (MSE), which is used to quantify its devia-
tion from the experimental data (MSE ∝
√∑(Model −Experiment)2). As a rule
of thumb, the MSE should be less than 10 for simple structures and less than 20 for
more complicated ones. Considering that the beam size used for the experiment is
relatively large, there can be significant errors due to thickness variations and surface
roughness. Furthermore, depending on the crystalline structure or composition, each
TF can exhibit a graded refractive index or anisotropic permittivity. The problem
gets even worse for absorbing TFs, where more complicated models should be used.
In order to deduce the thickness of a metallic film via ellipsometry, the film needs to
be transparent.
Characterization of the substrate.
The Al TF was deposited on a Si wafer that
had a silicon oxide grown on top. In order to get high accuracy, the silicon oxide
should be around 250nm. In our experiment, we used a SiO2 film of 200nm grown by
dry oxidation for higher oxide quality [90].
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Aluminum nanoparticles
51
An initial 9-point characterization for the SiO2 on a 4” Si wafer was conducted.
The model built includes the Si substrate, a thin native oxide and the Sellmeier model
for the 200nm grown oxide. The thickness profile and the model used is shown in
figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: The thickness profile and the model of the SiO2 on Si 4” wafer.
The wafer was consequently cleaved into smaller chips that were used as substrates
for multiple Al TF depositions.
Characterization of Al thin films.
The thickness of the Al films was calculated
by building on the model that was used in the oxide thickness calculation of the
previous ellipsometric measurement. The model for the Al TFs was initially built
using a Gen-Osc layer with a Drude metal and three different Lorentzian oscillators.
The resulting MSE was around 10 for all the samples except for the sample with the
highest deposition time. For that particular sample, the lowest MSE achieved was
18.4 which is attributed to the increased absorption of the film. Although one could
argue that each point should be (statistically) weighted in the final deposition rate
calculation according to its MSE, this approach was considered highly arbitrary and
was avoided. In figure 5.3, the primary optical model and the experimental/model
generated data for one sample are shown. A brief guide for ellipsometry of metallic
films and the rest of the ellipsometric reports are given in Appendix D.2, in order to
be shared with the personnel of DTU Nanolab and other cleanroom users.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
Figure 5.3: At the top, a table with the layers and the optical model parameters is
shown. At the bottom, a graph for the experimental (solid lines) and
model generated data fits (dashed lines) for the (Ψ, ∆) is given.
The film thickness over the deposition time and its linear fit (Y = a·X) is shown in
figure 5.4. As expected, the film thickness is fairly linear in respect to the deposition
time, with a deposition rate of 0.30 Å/s; however, the point marked with red was
excluded from the fit.
The argument behind such a choice was the unreasonable
reduction of the sputtering rate. Namely, by including this point, the sputtering rate
was reduced by 15% as opposed to 0.1% when excluding it. During the ellipsometric
data analysis, this was also the sample exhibiting the highest MSE and was already
considered less reliable. As a result, the deposition rate calculation also functions as
an independent test of the ellipsometric data.
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Aluminum nanoparticles
53
Another effect that can be observed in figure 5.4 is the relatively high MSE of the
linear fit. This is the result of imposing the fitted line to pass from the origin point
(0,0), following the physical argument that there should be no film before the start
of the deposition. In reality, however, the optimum linear fit followed the relation
Y = a · X + b with deposition rate (a) of 0.27 Å/s and an initial thickness (b) of
1.2 nm. This puzzling result is examined in more detail in section 5.1.2; however,
it does not affect the main body of this work, where the desired Al thickness range
is precisely calibrated. For significantly higher accuracy of the sputtering rate, one
should go to great lengths in order to minimize the errors of ellipsometry. Namely,
the same number of depositions should be done using three different substrates of 200,
250 and 300 nm of oxide thickness. Unfortunately, this was not attempted during
this work due to time limitations.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Deposition time [s]
0
5
10
15
20
Film thickness [nm]
Linear fit:  
Y = a  X
a = 0.30 
 0.01 Å  s-1
MSE = 0.46
Figure 5.4: Sputter deposition rate of aluminum. The equation Y = a · X is fitted
to the data to model the film thickness in respect to the deposition time.
The red point is not included in the fit.
In order to test the validity of ellipsometry, an independent measurement using
AFM was conducted. A pure Si chip was used as a substrate, and an Al film was
deposited for 250 s. A thin scratch was made in the middle of the chip in order
to remove the Al film. In figure 5.5(a), a 30µm × 30µm AFM image of the scratch
is shown. The profile of five arbitrary lines across the scratch was extracted and is
depicted in figure 5.5(b). From this single measurement, a rough estimate of the Al
film thickness was calculated as 6.5 nm, which is 1 nm less than we would expect
using the deposition rate of figure 5.4. As a result, both ellipsometry and the AFM
give fairly similar results; however, if we are interested in accuracy of less than 1 nm,
we should invest more time in the future to precisely calibrate the sputtering rate.
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Length [ m]
0
5
10
15
Height [nm]
profile 1
profile 2
profile 3
profile 4
profile 5
(b)
(a)
Figure 5.5: (a) AFM image of a scratch on the Al TF and (b) profiles of five ar-
bitrary lines across the scratch. The AFM image is 30µm × 30µm in
dimensions.
5.1.2
Al thin films
In this section we further characterized the Al TFs in order to explain the ”initial
film thickness” that was calculated from the linear fit of section 5.1.1.
Several reasons can explain this discrepancy and they can be traced back to the
nucleation and growth of the Al TF. In particular, the TF deposition can be split
into three stages: the nucleation stage, where the Al atoms adsorb to the surface
creating nuclei that are growing in all three dimensions, the coalescence stage where
more nuclei combine to form islands and the channel stage, where the decreasing
exposed substrate channels are filled by secondary nucleation, which will become
grain boundaries on the TF91. As a result, the deposition rate at the beginning of
the process much depends on the substrate and the probability of adsorption of the
atoms, the surface energy of the material and the deposition rate.
In figure 5.6 the AFM images of the Al TF as deposited on the SiO2 substrate is
shown. The stages of TF deposition described above are visible. In particular, the
roughness increased in respect to the TF thickness, which shows a preferential growth
on the metallic islands. To reduce surface roughness during sputtering, one should
use the RF sputtering mode in contrast to the DC mode that we used during these
series of experiments. A higher sputtering rate is also known to produce smoother
surfaces since the grain boundaries are reduced.
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Aluminum nanoparticles
55
5.5 nm 
8 nm 
11 nm
13 nm
17 nm
5
10
15
Film thickness [nm]
1
2
3
Roughness [nm]
Figure 5.6: AFM images with dimensions of Al TFs of different thickness deposited
on the SiO2 substrate. The images are 500nm×500nm in dimensions
and use the same colormap. The bottom right graph shows the surface
roughness over the film thickness.
Measuring the TF roughness for both Si and SiO2 substrates, we found that it
was very similar, which means that the adsorption was also comparable. Moreover,
the AFM images showed a patterning almost identical to those taken for samples
with NPs that will be explained in detail in section 5.1.3.Therfore, an Al TF on Si
substrate before and after annealing was visualized via SEM.
Going a step further, a comparison of the two different physical vapor deposition
(PVD) processes - the e-beam evaporation and the sputtering - using SEM is shown
in figure 5.7.
The Al film deposited via e-beam evaporation before, and after ex
vacuo annealing is depicted in the top row, while the one deposited by magnetron
sputtering is shown on the bottom row. Before annealing we can easily see the islands
and grains on the film; however, it is much more pronounced for the film deposited
via sputtering. Furthermore, only in vacuo annealing can create truly separated Al
islands.
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
After in vacuo 
annealing
After ex vacuo 
annealing
200nm
200nm
E-beam
evaporation
Magnetron
sputtering
200nm
200nm
200nm
Figure 5.7: SEM images before and after annealing. In the top row 10 nm of Al
were deposited by e-beam evaporation and annealed ex vacuo, while in
the bottom row 8 nm of Al were sputtered and annealed in vacuo. The
annealing lasted for 1 hour and the temperature was kept at 300◦C for
both samples.
5.1.3
Self-assembly of Al NPs
Aluminum NPs were successfully fabricated via the self-assembly method. The depo-
sition and annealing were performed in the sputtering system, where the substrate
was heated up to 300◦C and coated with aluminum. After deposition, the samples
were kept at the same temperature for an additional 60 min in order to further anneal
the Al layer. Since the substrate heater cannot cool down the substrate, the samples
were left in the process chamber for at least 7 hours and removed after the temper-
ature was below 70◦C in order to reduce oxidation. This point is crucial because a
thick alumina layer can degrade the plasmonic behavior of the NPs.
A rough estimation of the temperature profile of the samples during the annealing
process can be seen in figure 5.8. The actual parameters of the sputtering process
are greatly dependent on the machine and thus are given in Appendix D.2. Initially,
only one process run was attempted, in which an 8 nm thick Al layer was deposited
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Aluminum nanoparticles
57
on both Si and GaN substrates.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Annealing time (min)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Substrate Temperature (°C)
Figure 5.8: Estimation of the annealing temperature for in vacuo thermal annealing
using the substrate heater of the sputtering system.
The horizontal
dashed lines represents two different critical temperatures, namely the
200◦C where annealing still can change the NPs profile and the 70◦C
that Al will not be disproportionately oxidized on air exposure.
First run.
In figure 5.9, SEM images and a histogram on the particle sizes on
both Si and GaN substrates are shown. From these figures, it is clear that separated
metallic islands were successfully fabricated on both substrates. On the upper SEM
pictures, the top view of the samples is shown, while the side view of the samples is
shown on the middle ones. The side view pictures show the edge of the sample and
were taken by tilting it by 30 degrees. Looking at the top view image, the particles
are smaller in size and much more dense in comparison to the Ag and Au NPs that
were fabricated in the previous sections. The side view image reveals that the NPs’
shape is fairly semi-spherical as we would expect.
Furthermore, the statistics on the diameters of the particles show that the size
does not depend on the substrate. The NPs had very similar sizes, and while a small
reduction of the size for the Si substrate can be observed, it is mostly attributed to the
limitation of our image analysis technique. Namely, the image analysis is done based
on contrast, however above 300k magnification the sensitive InLens detector had to
be used. This, however, introduces an extended charging effect which changes the
brightness locally. As a result, tiny areas are artificially measured, which contributed
to bad statistics for NPs on the Si substrate.
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
200nm
100nm
200nm
100nm
Mean: 14.4 nm, Spread: 8.3 nm
0
20
40
60
Particle size [nm]
0
50
100
150
Size distribution
8nm of Al on Si substrate
8nm of Al on GaN substrate
Mean: 15.5 nm, Spread: 7.3 nm
0
20
40
60
Particle size [nm]
0
20
40
60
Size distribution
Figure 5.9: SEM images of the top view (top row), side view (middle row) and the
size distribution (bottom row) of the self-assembled Al NPs on the Si
and GaN substrates.
Intermediate run.
After the 8 nm sample success, fabrication of two more samples
with 5.5 and 9.5 nm Al film was attempted. Unfortunately, no NPs were formed. This
posed a significant problem of reproducibility, however another run was made in order
to examine the problem further.
Second run.
Finally, a second successful run was attempted, where a scan over
the Al TF thickness was performed in order to control the particle size. In particular,
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Aluminum nanoparticles
59
three more samples were fabricated depositing 12, 16, and 24 nm of Al on three differ-
ent substrates - a GaN template, a Si substrate, and a DSP sapphire substrate. The
SEM pictures for the GaN and sapphire substrate are shown in figure 5.10. Looking
closely at the SEM images, there are a few surprising features that we should point
out. Firstly, the choice of the substrate does not affect the NPs profile in a profound
manner. This is evident since all of the three substrates demonstrated the same pro-
files. Secondly, it looks like the 12 nm and 16 nm samples have very similar NPs
profiles. This is one of the most counter-intuitive results since this 4 nm difference
was expected to increase the particle size and decrease the particle density. For the 24
nm samples, big (80-150 nm) NPs with tiny particles filling the gaps can be observed.
200nm
GaN - Al 12nm
GaN - Al 16nm
GaN - Al 24nm
Sapp - Al 24nm
Sapp - Al 16nm
200nm
Sapp - Al 16nm
200nm
200nm
200nm
200nm
Figure 5.10: SEM images of the Al NPs on GaN (top row) and sapphire (bottom
row) substrate.
Furthermore, the NPs profile for this second deposition run seems much worsened.
Although NPs are visible, it is not so easy to distinguish if they are completely
separated. The difference between the two runs was the source gun, which relates to
the geometry of the process, and the recent process history. In regards to geometry,
we should trust the calibration of the sputtering system, and as a result, we should
not take it into account.
On the other hand, cleanliness can, in principle, pose
problems.
Sputtering is a process that can introduce contamination since a wide
variety of different targets can be used. This is especially relevant in DTU Nanolab
that it is a research facility where many different processes are taking place. This
”contamination” may have worked in our favor during the first run, for the previous
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
process was a long and high energy sputtering of NbTi. Nb and Ti are known to be
highly reactive with oxygen, and as a result, they may have been strongly bonded
with the oxygen of the chamber walls, effectively preconditioning the chamber.
To further strengthen this argument, we should mention that there have been
reports from other cleanroom users in DTU Nanolab of Al oxidization during deposi-
tion using the e-beam evaporator. This can happen when the deposition rate is very
low (appx. 5 Å/s) even at high vacuum (5·10−7 Torr). For the sputtering deposition,
we use similar vacuum conditions while the deposition rate is one order of magnitude
lower, making the oxidation problem more profound. As a result, the preconditioning
of the chamber is deemed essential and should be done in future deposition runs.
Another major issue was the deviation from the results of Villesen et al.87, which
was used as a reference for our process. Assuming that their methods are reliable, it
seems that our Al layer thickness is 5-10 nm lower than we expected. This deviation
can either be due to the different PVD method or due to oxidation problems on the
second run.
All in all, this experiment can be considered successful; however, further opti-
mization is needed. The main result is that the self-assembly method via thermal
annealing is possible - even for aluminum - as long as the annealing is done in vacuo.
Further optimization can be done by varying the annealing temperature. Moreover,
the sputtering rate should be increased as much as possible in order to reduce oxida-
tion inside the film.
5.1.4
Optical characterization
Transmission measurements were conducted to optically characterize the samples with
sapphire and GaN substrates. Although we went to great lengths in order to measure
in the DUV spectral range - where we believe that the Al resonance is located - our
endeavor was unsuccessful. In particular, the integrating sphere was not used because
of the high absorption in the UV range, and fibers with high transmission in UV were
chosen. Furthermore, an attempt to use a deuterium lamp was made, however, the
signal proved too weak. More information on the matter is given in Appendix C.2.
Finally, we settled in the range between 385 and 485 nm by coupling our xenon lamp
to the microscope. A simplified drawing of the experimental apparatus is shown in
figure 5.11. In this drawing, the samples are magnified in order to highlight their top
and bottom side.
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Aluminum nanoparticles
61
Figure 5.11: A sketch of the optical setup for the transmission measurements.
In figure 5.12, the relative transmission spectra (see eq. 4.1) for the GaN and
sapphire samples are shown. As expected, the SP resonance is not located in this
385-485 nm wavelength range.
During the span of this project, an optical setup
that can be extended in the UV was not realizable and as a result, only indirect
measurements like PL-enhancement or reduction of the PL lifetime of the NUV-LED
can verify the existence of SP-exciton coupling.
400
420
440
460
480
Wavelength [nm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ti / Tref [%]
8 nm
12 nm
16nm
24 nm
(a)
380
400
420
440
460
480
Wavelength [nm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ti / Tref [%]
12nm
16nm
24 nm
(b)
Figure 5.12: Relative transmission for Al NPs on (a) GaN and (b) sapphire susbr-
tate.
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
5.2
SP-exciton coupling
The successful fabrication of aluminum NPs enabled us to work towards the efficiency
enhancement of NUV-LEDs. Unfortunately, the current optical setup cannot support
reflection and transmission measurements in the UV spectral range and thus the
SP resonance cannot be located spectrally.
However, if a resonance exists and is
located sufficiently near the emission wavelength, then SP-exciton coupling and PL-
enhancement will be observed. In this section we characterize four NUV-LED samples
with a 20 nm thin p-GaN layer.
5.2.1
NUV-LED chips
The experiment presented in this chapter was initially planned to follow these steps:
the initial characterization of the individual NUV-LED chips, dry-etching of the p-
GaN layer, a second optical characterization, the deposition and in vacuo annealing
of aluminum NPs and the final optical characterization. A drawing of the nanofabri-
cation process flow can be seen in figure 5.13.
n-GaN
p-GaN
sapphire
substrate
MQWs
n-GaN
p-GaN
sapphire
substrate
MQWs
Dry Etching
Metallic Film
Thin ﬁlm
deposition
n-GaN
p-GaN
sapphire
substrate
MQWs
Metallic
Nanoparticles
Thermal
Annealing
n-GaN
MQWs
p-GaN
sapphire
substrate
Figure 5.13: Process flow for self-assembled nanoparticles via thermal annealing.
Our goal is to observe SP-exciton coupling and maybe an enhancement in PL
intensity. However, since the Al NPs are so dense they will hinder the exciation light.
Therefore, excitation from the top p-GaN - like the one shown in figure 3.2(a) - will
not be consistent. Therefore, the excitation light should pass through the backside
of the wafer and thus DSP wafers are required.
Unfortunately, the substrates of
the NUV-LED epitaxial wafers that were PL-mapped in chapter 3 are SSP and as a
result, we had to use another wafer. Although the PL-mapping should be repeated,
fortunately, the etch rate calibration should not, for our group had another NUV-LED
==PAGE:75==
5.2 SP-exciton coupling
63
wafer with the same epitaxial structure grown on a 300 µm thick, 2” DSP sapphire
substrate. Eight chips were cleaved from this wafer and characterized.
Unlike the SSP NUV-LEDs or the GaN template, the sapphire side was not dis-
tinguishable by eye. Using a microscope, however, one can see the clamping marks
done during the growth on the sapphire substrate. The top and back side of the wafer
can be seen in figure 5.14(a) and 5.14(b) respectively.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.14: Microscope image at 2.5x and 20x (inlet) magnification of the top (a)
and bottom (b) side of the 2” NUV-LED.
PL characterization.
The individual NUV-LED samples were characterized via
PL measurements using an excitation laser at 375 nm. The laser light was attenuated
by a longpass (LP) filter with a cutoff at 380 nm. A typical spectrum is shown in
figure 5.15(a), however not until the final (after processing) PL measurement did we
realize that this was just the spectrum of the excitation laser.
Initially, we thought that the strange shape of the spectrum was due to a variation
of the composition of some QWs, resulting in secondary peaks. However, since the
cutoff of the filter was smoother than a step function and was located around 385
nm, we thought that this was the PL-signal from the LED. Finally, we understood
that the side peaks were due to the laser, however, any attempts of substracting the
excitation signal were unsuccessful. The spectrum of the excitation laseris shown in
figure 5.15(b). In the inlet of figure 5.15(b), the spectrum is zoomed in the region
that the LED should emit. Although the LED was too weak for PL-measurements, it
was still strong enough for TRPL measurements that are described in section 5.2.3.
==PAGE:76==
64
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
360
380
400
420
440
Wavelength [nm]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Intensity [A.U.]
"NUV-LED" spectrum
Main peak
Secondary peaks
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
Wavelength [nm]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Intensity [A.U.]
NUV laser spectrum
390
400
410
420
430
440
Wavelength [nm]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Intensity [A.U.]
Figure 5.15: (a) Spectrum of the supposed NUV-LED. The highlighted main and
secondary peaks were initially thought to be emitted light from dif-
ferent QWs. (b) The NUV excitation laser. In the inlet figure, the
spectrum is zoomed without changing the scale of the arbitrary units..
Etching.
The top p-GaN layer of the NUV-LEDs was thinned down to 20 nm from
the first QW using ICP dry etching. The recipe used was the one calibrated in section
3.4. In figure 5.16, the ideal band structure and the SP interaction strength for the
NUV-LED and Al NPs are plotted against the depth. The penetration depth of Al
used is 70 nm, which is the median of the values reported in literature, presented in
table 2.1.
Etching GaN and its ternaries AlGaN and InGaN can generate crystal defects in
tens of nanometers depth of the etching surface, degrading the device performance92.
Both the electrical93 and optical94 characteristics can be worsened. Since the first
QW is located 20 nm away from the surface, PL measurments should be conducted
in order to use them as reference. Unfortunately, during this experiment it became
apparent that the PL of the NUV-LED samples was too weak.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 SP-exciton coupling
65
0
20
40
60
80
100
Depth / nm
1
0
1
0
0.5
Bangap energy / Ebar
Relative interaction strength
0.5
Figure 5.16: A drawing of the ideal band structure (black line) and the SP penetra-
tion depth for Al NPs (blue line). The bandgap energy is normalized
in respect to the energy of the quantum barrier (GaN). The QWs are
highlighted with purple color. The first QW is located 20 nm from the
surface.
5.2.2
Formation of aluminum nanoparticles
After dry etching and the subsequent optical characterization, the samples were re-
turned in the cleanroom for further processing. After the typical ultrasonic cleaning
for entering the cleanroom (see section 3.4), the samples were subjected to Al sput-
tering deposition and in vacuo annealing, following the method introduced in section
5.1.3.
For these deposition runs all the parameters were unchanged, however, we
introduced an additional preconditioning step using Ti. Before each deposition, Ti
was sputtered in the chamber for 5 min using Ar gas at 220 W of DC power and
3.5 mTorr of pressure, which corresponds to a 15 nm layer. During the precondition-
ing step the substrate shutter was kept closed. Along with the NUV-LED samples,
Si and sapphire samples were also included in the deposition chamber and will be
characterized in the future.
For this experiment, five samples were processed, scanning over the Al TF thick-
ness. The sputtering system was booked for three straight days and the five samples
were sputtered with 8, 12, 16, 10 and 8 nm of Al. Mentioning the depositions in
chronological order is important, for the first sample did not exhibit any NPs, failing
to reproduce the results of section 5.1.3. Nonetheless, after the first process, Al NPs
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
were successfully fabricated for each sample. The SEM pictures of the NPs can be
seen in figure 5.17.
Comparing figure 5.17 with figure 5.10 we can clearly see that our hypothesis
of oxidation was confirmed. Furthermore, the NPs’ profiles seen in figure 4.1 are
comparable with those made by Villesen et al.87 on the Si substrate, which acts as
an indirect verification for the calibration of the sputtering rate of section 5.1.1.
200nm
200nm
200nm
200nm
Al 8nm
Al 10nm
Al 16nm
Al 12nm
Figure 5.17: SEM pictures of self-assembled Al NPs on NUV-LED wafers.
The
pictures are taken at 300kx magnification and the thickness of the Al
layer deposited is shown on the upper left corner of each picture.
Finally, the profile of the NPs are what we would expect. For higher Al thickness
the particles’ size increase, since particles coalesce to form bigger, irregular particles.
In contrast to the noble metals Ag and Au, the intraparticle spacing for Al NPs
remains low independently of the film thickness. This can be favorable for plasmonic
applications since large and closely spaced NPs exhibit higher enhancement. For the
16 nm sample though, small NPs can be observed in the spacing between the larger
particles. As a sidenote, we should mention that the particles for the 12 nm sample
==PAGE:79==
5.2 SP-exciton coupling
67
look more dense than expected, which could also relate to the limited preconditioning
of the chamber - this was the second sample that was processed during this run.
5.2.3
Time-resolved photoluminescence
The existence of SP-exciton coupling can be verified by time-resolved photolumi-
nescence (TRPL) measurements, for this recombination channel is faster than the
channels of radiative and non-radiative recombination (see section 2.3). Therefore, a
decrease in the PL lifetime can be a direct evidence of SP-exciton coupling.
Figure 5.18: Experimental setup for photoluminescence decay measurements with
TCSPC.
The TRPL measurements have been performed using a time-correlated single
photon counting (TCSPC) system from PicoQuant. In particular, a picosecond pulsed
laser source emitting at 375 nm is used to excite the samples. The pulses have 90
ps FWHM and the repetition time was chosen as 2 µs (500 kHz). The pulses were
attenuated using a ND filter and were coupled to the microscope using a fiber. For
maximum PL signal, the 50x magnification objective was used and the laser signal
was filtered out using an LP filter. The light was then coupled to a photomultiplier
tube (PMT) of 25 ps resolution. The PMT and the laser driver were synchronized
and analyzed via ultra-fast electronics. All the measurements were taken in room
temperature and the integration time was 300 s. A drawing of the setup can be seen
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Aluminum nanoparticles
in figure 5.18. For more information regarding the TCSPC measurements, the reader
is referred to Appendix C.3.
Reference
τ=6.6±0.2 ns
Al NPs : 8 nm
τ=3.5±0.1 ns
Al NPs : 10 nm
τ=3.4±0.1 ns
Al NPs : 12 nm
τ=3.4±0.1 ns
Al NPs : 16 nm
τ=3.6±0.1 ns
Al TF : 10 nm
τ=7.0±0.3 ns
Figure 5.19: Normalized spectrally-integrated TRPL decay signals at room temper-
ature for six different samples. The fitted bi-exponential decay curves
are shown in black color and the lifetime of the fast decay component
is denoted as τ.
The normalized time-resolved PL profiles of six different samples are shown in
figure 5.19. Namely, the four samples of figure 5.17 that features NPs, an unprocessed
reference sample and an etched sample with 10 nm of sputtered Al TF were measured.
In order to study the excitonic dynamics, the PL transient is usually fitted by a bi-
exponential decay function with a fast and a slow decay component95. The model
function can be written as: I(t) = A1 · exp(−t/τ1)+A2 · exp(−t/τ2). The fast decay
component corresponds to the PL lifetime that was defined in eq. 2.13, while the slow
component corresponds to the QCSE96–98. In figure 5.19, the fitted bi-exponential
==PAGE:81==
5.2 SP-exciton coupling
69
curves are superimposed on the experimental data and the lifetime of the fast decay
component is denoted as τ.
For the reference sample, the carrier lifetime was calculated as 6.6 ns, which is
within the typical 4-20 ns range of planar c-plane LEDs99. The samples with the Al
NPs demonstrated a clear SP-exciton coupling, since the decrease in the lifetime is be-
tween 45 to 48 %. The corresponding Purcell enhancement factor, defined in eq. 2.14,
is almost 2, however there is no particular trend for the different samples. The results
are summarized in table 5.1. A Purcell enhancement in the order of two is something
common when the emission wavelength is away from the SP resonance98,100; however,
when the SP resonance closely matches the emission wavelength, the Purcell factor
can reach up to 3044. All in all, we can safely conclude that a resonance exists, how-
ever, it is spectrally located deep in the UV range. Finally, the sample with the Al
TF did not demonstrate any reduction of the carrier lifetime, which is to be expected
since the TF cannot support any LSPR modes, while coupling to SPP modes without
any nanopatterning is highly improbable.
Table 5.1: The carrier lifetime and its corresponding Purcell enhancement factor for
each sample.
NUV-LED Sample
Carrier lifetime
Purcell Factor
Reference
6.6 ± 0.2 ns
1
Al NPs - 8 nm
3.5 ± 0.1 ns
1.9
Al NPs - 10 nm
3.4 ± 0.1 ns
1.9
Al NPs - 12 nm
3.4 ± 0.1 ns
1.9
Al NPs - 16 nm
3.6 ± 0.1 ns
1.8
Al TF - 10 nm
7.0 ± 0.3 ns
<1
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions and Outlook
This chapter summarizes the results and achievements of this work. Future possibili-
ties are also discussed.
6.1
Summary and conclusions
UV-LEDs are considered game-changers in applications of UV-light, and thus, they
are in the midst of unprecedented growth and development. The efficiency of UV-
LEDs, however, is very low due to poor material properties, and there is still huge
room for improvement. Using surface plasmonics is considered as one of the most
prominent methods for enhancing the LED performance, mainly from an IQE and
secondly from a LEE perspective. The main plasmonic material that can cover the
UV spectral range is Al; however, due to its sensitivity to oxidation, Al NPs are
typically fabricated via costly lithographic techniques. In this work, we successfully
fabricated Al NPs using the self-assembly method via thermal annealing of a thin
metallic film. Furthermore, we showed that the NPs exhibit a plasmonic character
by coupling the SP to the excitons of a NUV-LED.
Initially, a characterization of three SSP NUV-LED wafer was conducted. Fur-
thermore, a dry etching recipe was calibrated in order to thin down the top p-GaN
layer accurately. Consequently, a failed attempt to fabricate double metallic Al:Ag
NPs was made. This was the initial goal of the project since - in principle - it can
continuously tune the SP resonance between the Ag and Al SP resonances. In or-
der to test our fabrication methods, fabrication and characterization of Ag a double
metallic Au:Ag NPs was attempted. This experiment successfully replicated previous
results, and an SP resonance was observed for all the samples.
Realizing that the main problem for the Al:Ag NPs is the behavior of aluminum,
an effort has been made to fabricate Al NPs. Using a magnetron sputtering system,
we calibrated the sputtering rate via ellipsometry, and finally, by sputtering a TF of
Al on a heated substrate and further anneal it in vacuo, Al NPs were successfully self-
assembled. Soon it became apparent that the success of the process greatly depends
on the chamber preconditioning and expertise was built via failed and successful trials.
The SP resonance for Al NPs is expected to be in the UV-B region. Unfortunately,
direct observation of the SP resonance was not possible, for our experimental setup
was not optimized for measurements in UV.
==PAGE:84==
72
6 Conclusions and Outlook
The existence of an SP resonance can be verified by its effect on the efficiency
and the carrier dynamics of an LED. As a result, Al NPs was fabricated on NUV-
LED samples.
Unfortunately, the initial samples were too weak to observe a PL
signal; however, the signal was enough for TRPL measurements. These measurements
revealed a strong coupling with the excitons of the QW, although the resonance is
probably located away from the emission wavelength.
6.2
Outlook
The fabrication process for self-assembled Al nanoparticles that was developed in this
work has the potential for demonstrating enhancement in the quantum efficiency of
UV-LEDs in the future. Numerous things should be optimized and further examined.
From a fabrication process perspective, a scan over the annealing temperature and
annealing time should be attempted. This can change the profile and the resonant
behavior of the Al NPs. From a characterization perspective, an experimental appa-
ratus that can support transmission and reflection measurements in UV is needed,
for it is required to observe the SP resonance directly. From a wafer perspective,
DUV-LED samples would be needed in order to match the emission wavelength with
the expected plasmonic resonance.
If the aforementioned conditions are realized, it can lead to the first-ever demon-
stration of efficiency enhancement of UV-LEDs using self-assembled Al nanoparticles.
This can have a significant impact on both academic and industrial applications since
this particular fabrication method is cost-effective. Demonstrating just the fabrication
process can also have an impact in the general field of plasmonics, initializing a series
of applications in UV plasmonics. Finally, the sputtering system used throughout
this work can accommodate the subsequent or simultaneous sputtering of multiple
targets. This opens up several groundbreaking possibilities like fabricating double
metallic Al:Ag nanoparticles, combining the metals as an alloy or even in a core-shell
configuration.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX A
LED Efficiency: definitions
The radiated power of an LED can be calculated by the electron-hole radiative re-
combination rate and the Light Extraction Efficiency (LEE) as:
Prad = LEE ·
∫
d⃗rℏωkrad(⃗r)
(A.1)
where krad is the radiative recombination rate, ℏω is the photon energy and LEE is
the fraction of the radiated power that escapes from the device.
The Internal Quantum Efficiency (IQE) is defined as the fraction of the radiative
recombination rate over the total recombination rate and is given by:
IQE =
∫
d⃗rkrad(⃗r)
∫
d⃗r [krad(⃗r) + knon(⃗r)]
(A.2)
where knon is the non-radiative recombination rate.
The Injection Efficiency (IE) is defined as the current injected in the active region
which will result in e-h pair generation, over the total current through the device.
IE = Iinj
I
(A.3)
Finally, the two most important parameters that sum up the overall efficiency
of the LED is the Wall-Plug Efficiency (WPE) that shows the conversion of the
electrical power into radiative power and the External Quantum Efficiency (EQE)
that encapsulates the LEE, IE and IQE:
WPE = Prad
Pelec
= LEE · IQE · IE
|
{z
} · ℏω
qV = EQE · ℏω
qV
(A.4)
where the last term ℏω/qV is also termed as Feeding Efficiency (FE) or Electrical
Efficiency (EE) and it is the ratio of the average photon energy and the energy
provided to an e-h pair from the power source. All the above definitions of efficiencies
follow the standard LED conventions101.
==PAGE:86==
74
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX B
PhC surface patterned
NUV-LED
Since the thinned p-GaN NUV-LEDs of section 5.2.1 proved too weak for PL mea-
surements, a PhC surface patterned NUV-LED with the same epitaxial structure was
examined. Furthermore, PL and TRPL measurements have been already conducted,
which could be used reference.
PhCs are structures with a wavelength-scale periodicity of the refractive index102.
This periodicity results in a forbidden band in the (ω, k) space of propagating light
- the photonic bandgap - that resembles an electronic bandgap of a crystal.
This
property can be used for spatial confinement of light creating waveguides and cavities.
In LED technology, PhCs are usually fabricated on the top p-GaN layer in order to
diffract out trapped light, decreasing the TIR. Furthermore, they can be used to
tailor the angular distribution of the emitted light34. The PhC of our structures were
designed to increase the reflection from the top p-GaN layer and extract the light
from the sapphire substrate.
Detailed description.
The sample has a PhC structure patterned on the top p-
GaN layer that consists of nine groups of PhCs that have a triangular arrangement
of holes. The pitch Λ of all the PhC was kept at 375 nm while the radius of the holes
r for the nine groups were 35, 40, 45, 85, 90, 95, 135, 140 and 145 nm respectively.
The pattern has been made via e-beam lithography, and the holes were dry etched
40 nm deep. Therefore, the first QW is located 72 nm from the bottom of the etched
holes, which is close to the penetration depth for Al NPs.
Formation of aluminum nanoparticles.
From all our prior knowledge on self-
assembly of Al NPs, it is apparent that preconditioning of the chamber is of utmost
importance. Since the previous user had used Ar and (10%) O2 gases, we had to go
to great lengths to remove the oxygen from the chamber. As a result, an extended
30 min Ti and 30 min Al sputtering was used to precondition the chamber. Before
depositing on the actual PhC LED sample, we fabricated three more samples using a
Si substrate. Before each deposition, a preconditioning step of 10 min Ti sputtering
was used for binding the oxygen coming from the load lock. The SEM pictures of
the four runs are shown in figure B.1. The profile of the NPs looks similar for all
==PAGE:88==
76
B PhC surface patterned NUV-LED
samples, except for the second sample that the NPs look larger and less uniform. For
this reason, the preconditioning step was reduced to 6 min for the last two samples.
In general, the process looks stabilized from the start; however, the NPs profile looks
a bit denser compared to their counterpart of figure 5.17.
200 nm
200 nm
200 nm
2. Al 10nm on Si
4. Al 10nm on PhC NUV-LED
3. Al 10nm on Si
200 nm
1. Al 10nm on Si
Figure B.1: SEM pictures of self-assembled Al NPs on Si and the PhC NUV-LED.
The 1-4 numbering corresponds to the chronological order of the depo-
sitions. The pictures are taken at 200kx magnification.
Considering the PhC, we found that the NPs had covered the bottom of the holes
of all the nine groups. In figure B.2, SEM pictures of the extreme 145 nm and 35 nm
hole radius at 300kx and 500kx magnification are shown. The Al NPs are visible in
the bottom of the PhCs.
==PAGE:89==
B PhC surface patterned NUV-LED
77
50nm
PhC 35nm
PhC 145nm
100nm
Figure B.2: SEM pictures of self-assembled Al NPs on the PhC NUV-LED with
hole radius of 145 nm and 35 nm.
10-1
100
TCSPC signal [a.u.]
0
20
40
60
80
100
time [ns]
10-1
100
TCSPC signal [a.u.]
PhC - 145 nm
=2.80±0.03 ns
Reference
=2.77±0.03 ns
Figure B.3: Normalized spectrally-integrated TRPL decay signals at room temper-
ature for the reference and the PhC structure of 145 nm hole radius.
The fitted bi-exponential decay curves are shown in black color.
==PAGE:90==
78
B PhC surface patterned NUV-LED
TRPL measurements.
Finally, a TRPL measurement was conducted in order to
see if there is any SP-exciton coupling.
In figure B.3, the TCSPC signal for the
reference (an unpatterned surface of the sample) and the 145 nm PhC coated with Al
NPs is shown. Since the decay time of both samples are similar, we can conclude that
the carrier dynamics were not affected by the Al NPs and an SP-exciton coupling was
not successful.
This is because the first QW is located at a distance in the order of the SP
penetration depth. Considering that the PL signal is the sum of twelve QWs that
are separated by an 8 nm quantum barrier layer, the SP coupling will be very weak.
By geometrical arguments, we can calculate the area coverage of the etched holes
in regards to the total surface area. In figure B.4, the area coverage and the final
SP-coupling strength of all the QWs is plotted against the hole radius of the 9 PhC
groups.
0
2
4
6
8
10
Normalized SP-coupling strength [%]
40
60
80
100
120
140
Hole radius [nm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Area coverage [%]
Figure B.4: The total area coverage for the holes for the nine different PhC groups
and their corresponding SP-coupling strength. The lattice constant is
375 nm for all groups. The SP coupling strength was averaged for all
QWs, and the SP penetration depth of Al was chosen as 70 nm.
Although we knew that the probability of coupling the excitons to the QWs is min-
imal (less than 10% for the PhC of 145 nm hole radius), we proceeded to fabricate
Al NPs. This experiment was not planned from the start and was conducted in order
to get further insight into the process of self-assembly of Al NPs. From this experi-
ment, we learned that sputtering 90 and 50 nm of Ti and Al respectively is enough
to precondition the chamber, bypassing the history of the machine. Furthermore, we
found out that Al particles can be formed even in PhC holes of 35 nm radius.
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX C
Optical experiments
All of the optical experiments were conducted in our lab at DTU Fotonik.
The
equipment used is listed in table C.1.
Table C.1: Representative equipment used during the optical experiments.
Optical Component
Key characteristics
Model
Company
Integrating sphere
250 – 2500 nm
OL 700-71
Optronic Laboratories
Xenon lamp
185 – 2000 nm
HPX-2000
Ocean optics
Laser diode
375 nm
LBX series
Oxxius
Pulsed Laser
375 nm
LDH-D-C-375
PicoQuant
Diode Laser Driver
Pulsed (< 80 MHz)
PDL-828
PicoQuant
Photomultiplier Tube
res. 25 ps
PMA series
PicoQuant
TCSPC module
res. 25 ps
TimeHarp 260
PicoQuant
Spectrometer
180 - 790 nm
CAS 140 B
Instrument Systems
Multimode Fiber
300 - 2200 nm
OFG-311
Instrument Systems
Fiber bundle
380 - 1600 nm
OFG-415
Instrument Systems
Multimode Fiber
250 - 1200 nm
M92L02
Thorlabs
C.1
Scatter transmission measurements
The function of an integration sphere is to measure the scatter transmission and dif-
fuse reflectance. This is particularly important for samples that generate hotspots
- like samples with nanostructured surfaces - since the typical transmission and re-
flectance apparatus is insufficient for collecting light scattered in steep angles. In
an integrating sphere, the scattered light is reflected multiple times from the inner
surface of the sphere resulting in a uniform irradiance. A fraction of the light is then
collected via a small port on top of the sphere, where a collimating lens couples the
light to a fiber. The size of the sphere and the ports’ dimensions and positions affect
the device performance. A comprehensive qualitative study on the effect of the sphere
characteristics can be found in a technical note from PerkinElmer Inc.103
The main error introduced in the measurements is due to the sample altering the
average reflectance of the integrating sphere inner surface. As a result, the calibration
of the transmittance scale is needed, and the incident flux is measured before placing
==PAGE:92==
80
C Optical experiments
the sample. This error is even more critical to the diffused reflection measurements,
and some spheres feature a double-beam design to compensate for the reflectance and
the self-absorption of the sphere104. For the model used throughout these measure-
ments, the double-beam is achieved using an optical beam switch that enables the
more accurate ”comparison method”105.
In the ”comparison method”, quantities for calibrating the sphere are measured
before and after the experiment. Finally, the transmittance is calculated by:
T(λ) = SB(λ)
SA(λ)
| {z }
GT C(λ)
·
ST
SCL(λ)
(C.1)
where T is the spectral transmittance of the sample, GTC is the spectral calibration
factor for the transmission, the SB(A) is the signal with the Reflection (Transmission)
source with no sample, and SCL, ST is the signal from the sample using the Re-
flectance and Transmittance source respectively. For these quantities, the switch is
in the comparison position.
C.2
Light sources and NUV spectral limit
Since the SP resonance of Al NPs is located probably in the UV-B range, much effort
has been made in order to reach these wavelengths and observe a resonance directly.
Initially, we tried to perform scatter transmission measurements using the inte-
grating sphere; however, this resulted in a reduction of the signal by almost six orders,
for most of the light in the NUV was absorbed due to the fibers and the powder coat-
ing of the integrating sphere. In figure C.1(a), the scaled spectra of the xenon lamp
after directly coupling it to the spectrometer and after passing through the integrat-
ing sphere are shown. In figure C.1(b), the reflection of the powder coated on the
integrating sphere walls is shown.
The scatter transmission measurements were abandoned due to the low signal
in the UV region, and we settled for regular transmission measurements using the
microscope. Unfortunately, the components of the microscope were not optimized for
UV, and thus, a deuterium lamp was borrowed from another lamp to increase the
power density of the source. Although the deuterium lamp could reach down to 300
nm, the power density was even lower than the one from the xenon lamp, making it
impossible to work with. The scaled spectra of the deuterium and the xenon lamp
are shown in figure C.1(c).
Finally, the NUV laser spectrum that was used as the excitation source during
the PL measurements is showed in figure C.1(d). In the inset figure, the spectrum
is zoomed to show the part that was mistakenly considered an LED after adding the
LP filter. This is described in detail in section 5
==PAGE:93==
C.3 Time-resolved photoluminescence measurements
81
400
500
600
700
Wavelength [nm]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Intensity [A.U.]
After integrating sphere
After integrating sphere
Xenon Lamp
Before integrating sphere
200
300
400
500
600
700
Wavelength [nm]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Intensity [A.U.]
200-320nm
300-380nm
360-750nm
Xenon Lamp
300
400
500
600
700
Wavelength [nm]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Intensity [A.U.]
Deuterium Lamp
Xenon Lamp
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
Wavelength [nm]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Intensity [A.U.]
390
400
410
420
430
440
Wavelength [nm]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Intensity [A.U.]
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
Figure C.1: (a) Scaled xenon lamp spectrum before and after the integrating sphere.
The power after the integrating sphere is weakened by 6 orders of mag-
nitude. (b) The reflectance spectrum of the powder coated on the inte-
grated sphere given in Ref. [105]. (c) The scaled spectra of the xenon
and a deuterium lamp. The power of the deuterium lamp is 2 orders
of magnitude lower. (d) The NUV excitation laser source spectrum.
C.3
Time-resolved photoluminescence measurements
The TRPL measurements were conducted using a TCSPC system from PicoQuant.
The main components - the pulsed laser head, the diode laser driver, the PMT detec-
tor, and the TCSPC module - are listed in table C.1. The TRLP measurements were
conducted in room temperature.
The TCSPC signal, R(t), is the convolution of the actual PL signal with the
system response function, IRF, and can be written as:
R(t) = IRF(t) ⊛PL(t)
(C.2)
==PAGE:94==
82
C Optical experiments
The system response is commonly referred to as instrument response function
(IRF). IRF corresponds to the overall timing precision of the system, and it is the
convolution of the response function of all the individual subsystems. The detector
usually is the main source of timing errors. Furthermore, the width of the excitation
pulse and its reflected components also contribute to the errors. Finally, the elec-
tronics - synchronized laser driver and TCSPC electronics - introduces further time
spread. The statistical error propagation law can give an estimate of the IRF width:
eIRF ∝
√∑
e2
component
(C.3)
The above equation not only shows that the IRF is a ”sum” of the response of the
different components, but also that the highest time spread error will dominate. For
more information about the TCSPC measurements, the reader is referred to the
technical note of PicoQuant106.
For our system, the PMT detector has 25 ps timing, and our laser pulse is 90 ps
wide. Our IRF spread, however, is more than 200 ps. In figure C.2, the TRPL of
the reference NUV-LED sample and the IRF are shown. To estimate the IRF, we
measured the laser signal after being reflected on a Si chip. From this figure, it is
evident that the sharp increase of the TCSPC at the first 200-300 ps can be attributed
to the IRF. Ideally, one would want to deconvolute the PL signal from the IRF and
TCSPC signal, however since the time scales of the LEDs are in the order of ns, we
disregarded the first 500 ps from the bi-exponential decay model.
0
20
40
60
80
100
time [ns]
100
101
102
103
TCSPC signal [a.u.]
NUV-LED reference
Instrument response function
Figure C.2: Time-resolved PL measurement for the NUV-LED sample and the in-
strument response function. For this measurement 500 kHz pulses were
used and an integration time of 5 min.
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX D
Nanofabrication and
characterization
All of the nanofabrication and characterization of nanostructures was held in DTU
Nanolab - National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization. The list of
the equipment used is given in table D.1. This appendix also contains specific param-
eters and details on the e-beam evaporation and sputtering PVD. Thus, most of the
information presented here can be considered as feedback directed to the personnel
of DTU Nanolab.
Table D.1: Cleanroom equipment used during the fabrication and characterization.
Function
Model
Company
III-V ICP etching
ICP process module
SPTS Technologies (Orbotech)
III-V plasma asher
Pico plasma system
Diener
E-beam Evaporator
Temescal FC-2000
Ferrotec
Magnetron sputtering
Sputtering system
Kurt J. Lesker
Rapid thermal annealer
Jipelec Jetfirst
ECM-USA Technologies
Ellipsometer
Ellipsometer VASE
J.A. Woollam
Scanning electron microscope
Supra VP 40 & Supra VP 60
Carl Zeiss AG
Atomic force microscopy
Dimension Icon-PT
Bruker AXS
Stylus profilometer
Dektak
Bruker
D.1
E-beam evaporation physical vapor deposition
This section is a technical note directed to DTU Nanolab personnel that provides
feedback about the Al and Ag deposition using Temescal e-beam evaporator. The
goal of the process was to deposit a 10 nm Al:Ag double layer with the minimum
deposition rate for both materials (5 and 10Å/s respectively). As a result, the recipe
was optimized by reducing the power of the e-beam (soak power 2) as a way to reduce
the initial overshoot of the deposition rate. In table D.2 the process parameters and
actual deposition rates are listed.
==PAGE:96==
84
D Nanofabrication and characterization
Table D.2: Parameters and actual deposition values during six deposition runs. The
chamber pressure before the start of the deposition and the final e-beam
(relative) power for both materials is shown. The initial and stapilized
deposition rate is denoted with ri and rf respectively, while the critical
film thickness for stabilization of the deposition rate and the final film
thickness is denoted by tstab and tf respectively. The rates and film
thickness was measured by a quartz crystal deposition rate monitor.
Deposition Run
Pressure
Al:Ag Power
Al:Ag ri
Al:Ag rf
Al:Ag tstab
Al:Ag tf
Al:Ag - 0:10 nm
8·10−7 Torr
0 : 25 %
0 : 60 Å/s
0 : 10 Å/s
0 : 3 nm
0 : 10.2 nm
Al:Ag - 2:8 nm
7·10−7 Torr
24 : 22 %
14 : 23 Å/s
10 : 10 Å/s
- : 2 nm
2.1 : 8.2 nm
Al:Ag - 4:6 nm
8·10−7 Torr
24 : 22 %
14 : 32 Å/s
6 : 10 Å/s
- : 1 nm
4.2 : 6.2 nm
Al:Ag - 6:4 nm
8·10−7 Torr
24 : 22 %
14 : 33 Å/s
6 : 10 Å/s
3 : 2 nm
6.2 : 4.2 nm
Al:Ag - 8:2 nm
4·10−7 Torr
24 : 22 %
14 : 23 Å/s
5 : 10 Å/s
3 : 2 nm
8.1 : 2.2 nm
Al:Ag - 10:0 nm
3·10−7 Torr
24 : 0 %
10 : 0 Å/s
5 : 0 Å/s
2 : 0 nm
10.1 : 0 nm
In addition, a single attempt to maximize the deposition rate of Al to 15 Å/s was
made. In particular, the Soak Power 2 in the standard Al deposition process gives an
initial undershoot in the deposition rate, and was increased by 4%. This, however,
resulted in a much higher rate (at least 10 nm/s) and the desired film thickness (10
nm) was reached immediately. No further optimization was attempted since this was
outside of the scope of this project.
D.2
Magnetron Sputtering of Al
In this section, we provide information about the deposition rate of Al using Lesker
sputtering system. Since this machine cannot incorporate a quartz crystal deposition
rate monitor to monitor the film thickness and deposition rate in situ, the deposition
rates can only be calibrated for each specific sets of parameters.
Therefore, the
database for each deposition can only be built up using the feedback given by the
users.
For Al deposition, a low sputtering rate recipe using Ar gas at 5 mTorr and DC
power at 100 W was used. The film thickness was estimated by ellipsometry using
substrates of 200 nm SiO2 on Si.
The basic parameters and the calculated film
thickness is given in table D.3.
==PAGE:97==
D.3 Ellipsometry
85
Table D.3: Sputtering parameters and thickness of Al TF. The thickness was calcu-
lated via ellispometry using the Gen-Osc optical model. The goodness
of the fit is given in terms of the mean square error (MSE).
Gas
Pressure (mTorr)
Target
DC power (W)
Time (s)
Thickness (nm)
MSE
Ar
5
Al
100
150
5.36
9.957
Ar
5
Al
100
200
6.47
10.346
Ar
5
Al
100
250
7.88
7.410
Ar
5
Al
100
300
9.09
6.501
Ar
5
Al
100
350
10.9
9.443
Ar
5
Al
100
400
12.01
9.196
Ar
5
Al
100
450
13.24
9.162
Ar
5
Al
100
500
14.61
8.811
Ar
5
Al
100
600
16.87
18.444
D.3
Ellipsometry
The sputtering rate was calculated as 0.3 Å/s. The sputtering rate was determined via
ellipsometry. In contrast to a single layer of dielectric, building a model for metallic
films is not trivial, and even creating a model of low MSE does not necessarily lead
to physically correct results.
In particular, for metallic films, a physically meaningful model requires that data
are analyzed using the following iterations: Initially, the measured (Ψ, ∆) data should
be modelled in the transparent region (long wavelengths) using the Cauchy model.
This model should be used as a reference in order to build a B-spline model that
will match the experimental data in the UV region.
The B-spline model should
also force the Kramers–Kronig relations35 for the optical constants (n, k) or (ϵ1, ϵ2).
Consequently, the optical constants should be modelled using the general oscillation
model (Gen-osc), adding a Drude and additional Lorentz layers in order to determine
the electronic interband transitions (see equation 2.2). For more technical information
and practical advice on the data analysis, the reader is referred to the manual of the
software CompleteEASET M 107.
For further information on the calculation of the sputtering rate and the film
roughness see section 5.1. The reports of all ellipsometric data is given in figures D.1
to D.3.
==PAGE:98==
86
D Nanofabrication and characterization
Sample: Si_150s_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 9.957
Thickness # 3 = 5.36 ± 0.037 nm
Einf = 0.00 ± 0.7954
UV Pole Amp. = 211.8390 ± 100.15296
UV Pole En. = 9.642 ± 0.8604
IR Pole Amp. = -8.6561 ± 2.61973
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 0.00012538 ± 5.9674E-05
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.0711 ± 0.0404
Amp2 = 110.454786 ± 370.3525026
Br2 = 3.8555 ± 1.06248
En2 = 2.384 ± 0.2514
Amp3 = -100.000000 ± 370.7053338
Br3 = 3.3306 ± 0.83115
En3 = 2.260 ± 0.1972
Amp4 = -40.308859 ± 19.6756398
Br4 = 14.0980 ± 7.01062
En4 = 1.761 ± 0.4228
Thickness # 2 = 205.50 ± 0.063 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Sample: Si_200s_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 10.346
Thickness # 3 = 6.47 ± 0.030 nm
Einf = 0.00 ± 0.3910
UV Pole Amp. = 112.4715 ± 39.26959
UV Pole En. = 8.657 ± 0.4904
IR Pole Amp. = -8.8762 ± 3.53889
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 0.00011772 ± 8.3964E-05
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.0414 ± 0.0183
Amp2= 112.970559 ± 216.6134542
Br2 = 3.0873 ± 0.47950
En2 = 1.960 ± 0.1032
Amp3= -99.728096 ± 216.6516412
Br3 = 2.6370 ± 0.44538
En3 = 1.867 ± 0.0885
Amp4= -39.017004 ± 33.1986657
Br4 = 17.0754 ± 7.01186
En4 = 1.802 ± 0.5553
Thickness # 2 = 206.48 ± 0.052 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Sample: Si_250s_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 7.410
Thickness # 3 = 7.88 ± 0.020 nm
Einf =0.00 ± 0.3482
UV Pole Amp. =6.2869 ± 3.77240
UV Pole En. = 7.009 ± 0.3671
IR Pole Amp. = -11.4186 ± 1.15270
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 0.00012095 ± 1.4010E-05
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.0208 ± 0.007515
Amp2 = 124.125365 ± 159.5276012
Br2 = 2.9310 ± 0.53636
En2 = 1.784 ± 0.0805
Amp3 = -96.048514 ± 162.5521267
Br3 = 2.3388 ± 0.39129
En3 = 1.695 ± 0.0569
Amp4 = -38.355286 ± 3.6027700
Br4 = 11.6046 ± 1.70096
En4 = 2.294 ± 0.0833
Thickness # 2 = 204.26 ± 0.033 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Sample: Si_300s_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 6.501
Thickness # 3 = 9.09 ± 0.015 nm
Einf =0.00 ± 0.1908
UV Pole Amp. =0.0229 ± 0.00144
UV Pole En. = 5.865 ± 0.001862
IR Pole Amp. = -5.0098 ± 1.30027
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 9.9133E-05 ± 1.0100E-05
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.0194 ± 0.003453
Amp2 = 121.265428 ± 266.8787514
Br2 = 2.5187 ± 0.51513
En2 = 1.678 ± 0.1037
Amp3 = -98.430620 ± 267.3084415
Br3 = 2.1189 ± 0.46560
En3 = 1.610 ± 0.0650
Amp4 = -33.710416 ± 3.5302638
Br4 = 13.9090 ± 1.18648
En4 = 2.589 ± 0.0794
Thickness # 2 = 203.68 ± 0.025 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Figure D.1: The elipsometric analysis of Al TF after sputtering for 150, 200, 250
and 300 sec.
==PAGE:99==
D.3 Ellipsometry
87
Sample: Si_350_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 9.443
Thickness # 3 = 10.90 ± 0.024 nm
Einf = 1.536 ± 0.0321
UV Pole Amp. = -0.0881 ± 0.00260
UV Pole En. = 5.819 ± 0.00092899
IR Pole Amp. = 5.1355 ± 0.22913
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 0.00019101 ± 2.6929E-06
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.137 ± 0.0152
Amp2= 168.106519 ± 6662.2333002
Br2 = 3.1054 ± 3.10379
En2 = 2.479 ± 1.0723
Amp3= -82.515638 ± 4520.8057936
Br3 = 2.9636 ± 5.42370
En3 = 2.319 ± 3.5917
Amp4= -81.039013 ± 2196.6547323
Br4 = 3.4844 ± 2.49718
En4 = 2.675 ± 2.1381
Thickness # 2 = 204.90 ± 0.034 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Sample: Si_400s_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 9.196
Thickness # 3 = 12.01 ± 0.023 nm
Einf = 1.169 ± 0.0300
UV Pole Amp. = 0.009761 ± 0.00611
UV Pole En. = 5.751 ± 0.002674
IR Pole Amp. = 1.7579 ± 1.78274
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 9.6487E-05 ± 1.1557E-05
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.126 ± 0.005676
Amp2= 145.429656 ± 292.2975289
Br2 = 2.1908 ± 1.95525
En2 = 1.567 ± 0.1248
Amp3= -73.822684 ± 487.4349716
Br3 = 1.7099 ± 1.00772
En3 = 1.521 ± 0.1252
Amp4= -100.000000 ± 215.3131340
Br4 = 3.3197 ± 1.42275
En4 = 1.566 ± 0.0679
Thickness # 2 = 204.30 ± 0.034 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Sample: Si_450s_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 9.162
Thickness # 3 = 13.24 ± 0.027 nm
Einf = 0.990 ± 9.7522
UV Pole Amp. = 42.0056 ± 3905.65698
UV Pole En. = 15.000 ± 311.7721
IR Pole Amp. = 14.0844 ± 6.53796
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 6.1250E-05 ± 2.1571E-05
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.0885 ± 0.0127
Amp2 = 79.209448 ± 15.4757639
Br2 = 2.5018 ± 0.39194
En2 = 1.533 ± 0.0759
Amp3 = -33.922213 ± 19.0632791
Br3 = 1.3102 ± 0.17748
En3 = 1.362 ± 0.0160
Amp4 = -96.867646 ± 28.6290019
Br4 = 6.0017 ± 1.27654
En4 = 1.592 ± 0.1369
Thickness # 2 = 204.11 ± 0.034 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Sample: Si_500s_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 8.811
Thickness # 3 = 14.61 ± 0.024 nm
Einf = 0.719 ± 7.2528
UV Pole Amp. = 82.3803 ± 2916.85629
UV Pole En. = 15.000 ± 118.8034
IR Pole Amp. = 1.9741 ± 4.76673
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 5.8879E-05 ± 1.3816E-05
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.129 ± 0.0111
Amp2 = 68.902661 ± 332.6715930
Br2 = 1.9479 ± 1.35557
En2 = 1.513 ± 0.2839
Amp3 = -44.939864 ± 346.8437414
Br3 = 1.5613 ± 1.19987
En3 = 1.436 ± 0.2179
Amp4 = -91.574997 ± 19.2997936
Br4 = 4.2822 ± 0.88181
En4 = 1.430 ± 0.1098
Thickness # 2 = 206.25 ± 0.031 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Figure D.2: The ellipsometric analysis of Al TF after sputtering for 350, 400, 450
and 500 sec.
==PAGE:100==
88
D Nanofabrication and characterization
Sample: Si_600s_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 18.444
Thickness # 3 = 16.87 ± 0.061 nm
Einf = 0.00 ± 9.5187
UV Pole Amp. = 243.6503 ± 2725.98651
UV Pole En. = 13.028 ± 30.7679
IR Pole Amp. = 30.7724 ± 9.62022
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 6.1155E-05 ± 2.1537E-05
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.386 ± 0.0241
Amp2 = 62.916964 ± 324.2666469
Br2 = 0.8045 ± 0.50300
En2 = 1.392 ± 0.1457
Amp3 = -51.894754 ± 321.7097022
Br3 = 0.6250 ± 0.48064
En3 = 1.360 ± 0.0546
Amp4 = -81.638291 ± 37.1784806
Br4 = 1.4983 ± 0.22700
En4 = 0.947 ± 0.1281
Thickness # 2 = 202.36 ± 0.069 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Sample: Si_350_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 9.443
Thickness # 3 = 10.90 ± 0.024 nm
Einf = 1.536 ± 0.0321
UV Pole Amp. = -0.0881 ± 0.00260
UV Pole En. = 5.819 ± 0.00092899
IR Pole Amp. = 5.1355 ± 0.22913
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 0.00019101 ± 2.6929E-06
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.137 ± 0.0152
Amp2 = 168.106519 ± 6662.2333002
Br2 = 3.1054 ± 3.10379
En2 = 2.479 ± 1.0723
Amp3 = -82.515638 ± 4520.8057936
Br3 = 2.9636 ± 5.42370
En3 = 2.319 ± 3.5917
Amp4 = -81.039013 ± 2196.6547323
Br4 = 3.4844 ± 2.49718
En4 = 2.675 ± 2.1381
Thickness # 2 = 204.90 ± 0.034 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Sample: Si_400s_Al TF
Fit Results
MSE = 9.196
Thickness # 3 = 12.01 ± 0.023 nm
Einf = 1.169 ± 0.0300
UV Pole Amp. = 0.009761 ± 0.00611
UV Pole En. = 5.751 ± 0.002674
IR Pole Amp. = 1.7579 ± 1.78274
Resistivity (Ohm·cm)1 = 9.6487E-05 ± 1.1557E-05
Scat. Time (fs)1 = 0.126 ± 0.005676
Amp2 = 145.429656 ± 292.2975289
Br2 = 2.1908 ± 1.95525
En2 = 1.567 ± 0.1248
Amp3 = -73.822684 ± 487.4349716
Br3 = 1.7099 ± 1.00772
En3 = 1.521 ± 0.1252
Amp4 = -100.000000 ± 215.3131340
Br4 = 3.3197 ± 1.42275
En4 = 1.566 ± 0.0679
Thickness # 2 = 204.30 ± 0.034 nm
Optical Model
Experimental and Model Generated Data Fits
Figure D.3: The ellipsometric analysis of Al TF after sputtering for 600 sec.
==PAGE:101==
Acronyms
AFM
AlGaN
AlInGaN
AOI
DI
DOS
DSP
DUV
EBL
EDX
e-h
EL
FDTD
FWHM
GaN
ICP
IE
InGaN
IPA
IRF
ITO
LED
LP
LSP
LSPR
MBE
Atomic force microscopy
Aluminum gallium nitride
Aluminum indium gallium nitride
Area of Interest
Deionized
Density of states
Double side polished
Deep Ultraviolet
Electron blocking layer
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
Electron-hole
Electroluminescence
Finite-difference time-domain method
Full width at half maximum
Gallium nitride
Inductively coupled plasma
Injection efficiency
Indium gallium nitride
Isopropyl alcohol
Instrument response function
Indium tin oxide
Light-emitting Diode
Longpass
Localized surface plasmon
Localized surface plasmon resonance
Molecular beam epitaxy
==PAGE:102==
90
Acronyms
MOCVD
MQW
MSE
ND
NIR
NP
NUV
PhC
PL
PMT
PVD
QCSE
QW
RIE
RMS
RTA
SEM
SER
SiC
SL
SPP
SSL
SSP
TCSPC
TE
TF
TIR
TM
TRPL
UV
Metalorganic chemical vapor deposition
Multiple Quantum Well
Mean square error
Neutral density
Near-infrared
Nanoparticle
Near-ultraviolet
Photonic Crystal
Photoluminescence
Photomultiplier tube
Physical vapor deposition
Quantum-confined Stark effect
Quantum well
Reactive ion etching
Root mean square
Rapid thermal annealing
Scanning electron microscope
Scattering-to-extinction ratio
Silicon carbide
Superlattice
Surface plasmon polariton
Solid-state lighting
Single side polished
Time-correlated single photon counting
Transverse electric
Thin film
Total internal reflection
Transverse magnetic
Time-resolved photoluminescence
Ultraviolet
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
1.
Song, K., Mohseni, M. & Taghipour, F. Application of ultraviolet light-emitting
diodes (UV-LEDs) for water disinfection: A review. Water Research 94, 341
–349. issn: 0043-1354 (2016).
2.
Argyraki, A. et al. UV light assisted antibiotics for eradication of in vitro
biofilms. Scientific Reports 8, 16360 (2018).
3.
Kalajian, T. A., Aldoukhi, A., Veronikis, A. J., Persons, K. & Holick, M. F.
Ultraviolet B Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) Are More Efficient and Effective
in Producing Vitamin D3 in Human Skin Compared to Natural Sunlight. Sci-
entific Reports 7, 11489. issn: 2045-2322 (2017).
4.
Britz, S. et al. Deep ultraviolet (DUV) light-emitting diodes (LEDs) to main-
tain freshness and phytochemical composition during postharvest storage. Pro-
ceedings, CLEO: 2013, 1–2. issn: 2160-8989 (2013).
5.
Muramoto, Y., Kimura, M., Dempo, A., Nouda, S. & Fukawa, Y. 66.1: Appli-
cation of UV-LED to the LCD Backlight. SID Symposium Digest of Technical
Papers 41, 982–984 (2010).
6.
Hirayama, H. Recent Progress in AlGaN Deep-UV LEDs, Light-Emitting Diode
- An Outlook On the Empirical Features and Its Recent Technological Advance-
ments. Jagannathan Thirumalai, IntechOpen. doi:10.5772/intechopen.79936
(Sept. 2018).
7.
Zheludev, N. The life and times of the LED – a 100-year history. Nature Pho-
tonics 1, 189 EP (2007).
8.
Braunstein, R. Radiative Transitions in Semiconductors. Phys. Rev. 99, 1892–
1893 (6 1955).
9.
Holonyak Jr., N. Lemelson-MIT Prize Winner. Lemenson-MIT Program (1994).
10.
Perry, T. S. M. George Craford biography. IEEE Spectrum 32, 52–55. issn:
0018-9235 (1995).
11.
Nakamura, S. & Krames, M. R. History of Gallium–Nitride-Based Light-Emitting
Diodes for Illumination. Proceedings of the IEEE 101, 2211–2220. issn: 0018-
9219 (2013).
12.
Courtland, R. The Blue LED Has Many Parents. IEEE Spectrum. (2004).
==PAGE:104==
92
Bibliography
13.
Amano, H., Sawaki, N., Akasaki, I. & Toyoda, Y. Metalorganic vapor phase
epitaxial growth of a high quality GaN film using an AlN buffer layer. Applied
Physics Letters 48, 353–355 (1986).
14.
Foundation, N. 2014 Nobel Prize in Physics: Invention of efficient blue light-
emitting diodes https : / / www . nobelprize . org / prizes / physics / 2014 /
press-release/.
15.
Muramoto, Y., Kimura, M. & Nouda, S. Development and future of ultravi-
olet light-emitting diodes: UV-LED will replace the UV lamp. Semiconductor
Science and Technology 29, 084004 (2014).
16.
Kneissl, M et al. Advances in group III-nitride-based deep UV light-emitting
diode technology. Semiconductor Science and Technology 26, 014036 (2010).
17.
Pearton, S. GaN and ZnO-based Materials and Devices (Springer 2012).
18.
Taniyasu, Y., Kasu, M. & Makimoto, T. An aluminium nitride light-emitting
diode with a wavelength of 210 nanometres. Nature 441, 325 EP – (2006).
19.
Li, S. S. Semiconductor Physical Electronics 2nd ed. (Springer 2005).
20.
Strite, S. & Morkoç, H. GaN, AlN, and InN: A review. Journal of Vacuum Sci-
ence & Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures Processing,
Measurement, and Phenomena 10, 1237–1266 (1992).
21.
Schubert, E. F. Light-Emitting Diodes 2nd ed. (Cambridge, 2006).
22.
Denis, A., Goglio, G. & Demazeau, G. Gallium nitride bulk crystal growth
processes: A review. Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports 50, 167
–194 (2006).
23.
Ryu, H.-Y., Choi, I.-G., Choi, H.-S. & Shim, J.-I. Investigation of Light Ex-
traction Efficiency in AlGaN Deep-Ultraviolet Light-Emitting Diodes. Applied
Physics Express 6, 062101 (2013).
24.
Son, N. T., Bickermann, M. & Janzén, E. Shallow donor and DX states of Si
in AlN. Applied Physics Letters 98, 092104 (2011).
25.
Gaddy, B. E. et al. Vacancy compensation and related donor-acceptor pair
recombination in bulk AlN. Applied Physics Letters 103, 161901 (2013).
26.
Nakarmi, M. L., Nepal, N., Lin, J. Y. & Jiang, H. X. Photoluminescence studies
of impurity transitions in Mg-doped AlGaN alloys. Applied Physics Letters 94,
091903 (2009).
27.
Nakarmi, M. L. et al. Correlation between optical and electrical properties of
Mg-doped AlN epilayers. Applied Physics Letters 89, 152120 (2006).
28.
Zhang, J. et al. Pulsed atomic layer epitaxy of quaternary AlInGaN layers.
Applied Physics Letters 79, 925–927 (2001).
29.
Wang, T, Morishima, Y, Naoi, N & Sakai, S. A new method for a great re-
duction of dislocation density in a GaN layer grown on a sapphire substrate.
Journal of Crystal Growth 213, 188 –192. issn: 0022-0248 (2000).
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
93
30.
Nakamura, S. GaN growth using GaN Buffer layer. Japanese Journal of Applied
Physics 30, L1705–L1707 (1991).
31.
Jung, Y., Baik, K. H., Ren, F., Pearton, S. J. & Kim, J. Effects of Photo-
electrochemical Etching of N-Polar and Ga-Polar Gallium Nitride on Sapphire
Substrates. Journal of The Electrochemical Society 157, H676–H678 (2010).
32.
Li, Q. et al. Optical performance of top-down fabricated InGaN/GaN nanorod
light emitting diode arrays. Opt. Express 19, 25528–25534 (2011).
33.
Wiesmann, C., Bergenek, K., Linder, N. & Schwarz, U. Photonic crystal LEDs
– designing light extraction. Laser & Photonics Reviews 3, 262–286 (2009).
34.
Matioli, E. & Weisbuch, C. Impact of photonic crystals on LED light extrac-
tion efficiency: Approaches and limits to vertical structure designs. Journal of
Physics D: Applied Physics 43, 354005 (Sept. 2010).
35.
Fox, M. Optical Properties of Solids 2nd ed. isbn: 978-0199573370 (Oxford
University Press, 2010).
36.
Maier, S. Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications (Springer 2007).
37.
Ordal, M. A. et al. Optical properties of the metals Al, Co, Cu, Au, Fe, Pb,
Ni, Pd, Pt, Ag, Ti, and W in the infrared and far infrared. Appl. Opt. 22,
1099–1119 (1983).
38.
Vial, A., Grimault, A.-S., Macías, D., Barchiesi, D. & de la Chapelle, M. L.
Improved analytical fit of gold dispersion: Application to the modeling of ex-
tinction spectra with a finite-difference time-domain method. Phys. Rev. B 71,
085416 (8 2005).
39.
Adachi, S. The Handbook on Optical Constants of Metals doi:10.1142/8479
(WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 2012).
40.
Okamoto, K., Funato, M., Kawakami, Y. & Tamada, K. High-efficiency light
emission by means of exciton–surface-plasmon coupling. Journal of Photochem-
istry and Photobiology C: Photochemistry Reviews 32, 58 –77. issn: 1389-5567
(2017).
41.
L Barnes, W. Surface plasmon-polariton length scales: A route to sub-wavelength
optics. Journal of Optics A: Pure and Applied Optics 8, S87 (2006).
42.
Gontijo, I. et al. Coupling of InGaN quantum-well photoluminescence to silver
surface plasmons. Phys. Rev. B 60, 11564–11567 (16 1999).
43.
Okamoto, K. et al. Surface-plasmon-enhanced light emitters based on InGaN
quantum wells. Nature Materials 3, 601 EP – (2004).
44.
Okamoto, K. et al. Surface plasmon enhanced spontaneous emission rate of
InGaN/GaN quantum wells probed by time-resolved photoluminescence spec-
troscopy. Applied Physics Letters 87. doi:10.1063/1.2010602 (2005).
45.
Jackson, J. D. Classical electrodynamics 3rd ed. isbn: 978-0-471-30932-1 (Wiley,
1999).
==PAGE:106==
94
Bibliography
46.
Klimov, V. & Guzatov, D. Plasmonic atoms and plasmonic molecules. Applied
Physics A 89, 305–314 (2007).
47.
Kreibig, U. & Vollmer, M. Optical Properties of Metal Clusters isbn: 978-3-540-
57836-9 (Springer, 1995).
48.
Fadil, A. et al. Surface plasmon coupling dynamics in InGaN/GaN quantum-
well structures and radiative efficiency improvement. Scientific Reports 4, 6392
(2014).
49.
Mock, J. J., Barbic, M., Smith, D. R., Schultz, D. A. & Schultz, S. Shape effects
in plasmon resonance of individual colloidal silver nanoparticles. The Journal
of Chemical Physics 116, 6755–6759 (2002).
50.
Gong, Y. et al. Systemically tuning the surface plasmon resonance of high-
density silver nanoparticle films. The European Physical Journal D 67, 87.
issn: 1434-6079 (2013).
51.
Mayer, K. M. & Hafner, J. H. Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Sensors.
Chemical Reviews 111, 3828–3857 (2011).
52.
Neogi, A. et al. Enhancement of spontaneous recombination rate in a quantum
well by resonant surface plasmon coupling. Phys. Rev. B 66, 153305 (15 2002).
53.
Purcell, E. M. Spontaneous Emission Probabilities at Radio Frequencies. Phys.
Rev 69, 681 (1946).
54.
Okamoto, K. & Kawakami, Y. Enhancements of emission rates and efficiencies
by surface plasmon coupling. physica status solidi c 7, 2582–2585 (2010).
55.
Jiang, S. et al. Resonant absorption and scattering suppression of localized
surface plasmons in Ag particles on green LED. Opt. Express 21, 12100–12110
(2013).
56.
Henson, J. et al. Enhanced near-green light emission from InGaN quantum wells
by use of tunable plasmonic resonances in silver nanoparticle arrays. Optics
express 18, 21322–9 (Sept. 2010).
57.
Fadil, A. Application of Surface Plasmonics for Semiconductor Light-Emitting
Diodes PhD thesis (2015).
58.
Gao, N. et al. Surface-plasmon-enhanced deep-UV light emitting diodes based
on AlGaN multi-quantum wells. Scientific Reports 2. Article, 816 EP – (2012).
59.
Hong, S.-H. et al. Localized surface plasmon-enhanced near-ultraviolet emission
from InGaN/GaN light-emitting diodes using silver and platinum nanoparticles.
Opt. Express 21, 3138–3144 (2013).
60.
Cho, C.-Y. et al. Surface plasmon-enhanced light-emitting diodes with silver
nanoparticles and SiO2 nano-disks embedded in p-GaN. Applied Physics Letters
99, 041107 (2011).
61.
Sung, J.-H. et al. Enhanced luminescence of GaN-based light-emitting diode
with a localized surface plasmon resonance. Microelectronic Engineering - MI-
CROELECTRON ENG 86, 1120–1123 (Apr. 2009).
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
95
62.
Shen, K.-C. et al. Enhanced and partially polarized output of a light-emitting
diode with its InGaN/GaN quantum well coupled with surface plasmons on a
metal grating. Applied Physics Letters 93, 231111 (2008).
63.
Mano, R. et al. Tuning the Resonant Frequency of a Surface Plasmon by Double-
Metallic Ag/Au Nanoparticles for High-Efficiency Green Light-Emitting Diodes.
Applied Sciences 9, 305 (Jan. 2019).
64.
Yeh, D.-M., Huang, C.-F., Chen, C.-Y., Lu, Y.-C. & Yang, C. C. Localized
surface plasmon-induced emission enhancement of a green light-emitting diode.
Nanotechnology 19, 345201 (2008).
65.
Lee, J. et al. On carrier spillover in c- and m-plane InGaN light emitting diodes.
Applied Physics Letters 95, 201113 (2009).
66.
Xia, C. S., Simon Li, Z. M. & Sheng, Y. On the importance of AlGaN elec-
tron blocking layer design for GaN-based light-emitting diodes. Applied Physics
Letters 103, 233505 (2013).
67.
Lin, H.-W., Lu, Y.-J. ￿., Chen, H.-Y. ￿., Lee, H.-M. ￿. & Gwo, S. ￿. InGaN/GaN
nanorod array white light-emitting diode. Applied Physics Letters 97, 073101
(2010).
68.
Ju, Z. G. et al. Advantages of the Blue InGaN/GaN Light-Emitting Diodes with
an AlGaN/GaN/AlGaN Quantum Well Structured Electron Blocking Layer.
ACS Photonics 1, 377–381 (2014).
69.
Porch, A., Morgan, D. V., Perks, R. M., Jones, M. O. & Edwards, P. P. Trans-
parent current spreading layers for optoelectronic devices. Journal of Applied
Physics 96, 4211–4218 (2004).
70.
Saleh, B. E. A. & Teich, M. C. Fundamentals of photonics; 2nd ed. (Wiley, New
York, NY, 2007).
71.
Liakos, I. L., McAlpine, E., Chen, X., Newman, R. & Alexander, M. R. Assem-
bly of octadecyl phosphonic acid on the ￿-Al2O3 (0001) surface of air annealed
alumina: Evidence for termination dependent adsorption. Applied Surface Sci-
ence 255, 3276 –3282. issn: 0169-4332 (2008).
72.
Gil, B. III-nitride semiconductors and their modern devices isbn: 978-0-19-
968172-3 (Oxford University Press, 2013).
73.
Shen, X.-Q. et al. Quality improvement of III-nitride epilayers and their het-
erostructures grown on vicinal substrates by rf-MBE. Journal of Crystal Growth
301, 404–409 (Apr. 2007).
74.
Cuccureddu, F. et al. Surface morphology of c-plane sapphire (￿-alumina) pro-
duced by high temperature anneal. Surface Science 604, 1294 –1299. issn:
0039-6028 (2010).
75.
Gwyddion - free SPM data analysis software http://gwyddion.net.
76.
MicroChemicals technical notes: Softbake, https : / / www . microchemicals .
com/technical_information/softbake_photoresist.pdf.
==PAGE:108==
96
Bibliography
77.
Ekinci, Y., Solak, H. H. & Löffler, J. F. Plasmon resonances of aluminum
nanoparticles and nanorods. Journal of Applied Physics 104, 083107 (2008).
78.
Langhammer, C., Schwind, M., Kasemo, B. & Zorić, I. Localized Surface Plas-
mon Resonances in Aluminum Nanodisks. Nano Letters 8. PMID: 18393471,
1461–1471 (2008).
79.
Chan, G. H., Zhao, J., Schatz, G. C. & Van Duyne, R. P. Localized Surface
Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopy of Triangular Aluminum Nanoparticles. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C 112, 13958–13963. issn: 1932-7447 (2008).
80.
Chan, G. H., Zhao, J., Schatz, G. C. & Van Duyne, R. P. Localized Surface
Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopy of Triangular Aluminum Nanoparticles. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C 112, 13958–13963 (2008).
81.
Peelen, J. Alumina : sintering and optical properties PhD thesis (Department
of Chemical Engineering and Chemistry, 1977). doi:10.6100/IR4212.
82.
Akimov, Y. A. & Koh, W. S. Resonant and nonresonant plasmonic nanoparticle
enhancement for thin-film silicon solar cells. Nanotechnology 21. doi:10.1088/
0957-4484/21/23/235201 (2010).
83.
X-Ray emission lines, http://www.med.harvard.edu/JPNM/physics/refs/
xrayemis.html.
84.
Hüfner, S. Photoelectron Spectroscopy, Principles and Applications 3rd ed. isbn:
978-3-662-09280-4 (Springer, 2003).
85.
Huang, C.-W. et al. Fabrication of surface metal nanoparticles and their in-
duced surface plasmon coupling with subsurface InGaN/GaN quantum wells.
Nanotechnology 22, 475201 (Nov. 2011).
86.
Lee, I.-H., Jang, L.-W. & Polyakov, A. Y. Performance enhancement of GaN-
based light emitting diodes by the interaction with localized surface plasmons.
Nano Energy 13, 140 –173. issn: 2211-2855 (2015).
87.
Villesen, T. F., Uhrenfeldt, C, Johansen, B & Larsen, A. N. Self-assembled
Al nanoparticles on Si and fused silica, and their application for Si solar cells.
Nanotechnology 24, 275606 (2013).
88.
Tompkins, H. G. & Hilfiker, J. N. Spectroscopic Ellipsometry - Practical Ap-
plication to Thin Film Characterization isbn: 978-1-60650-728-5 (Momentum
press, NY, 2016).
89.
Azzam, R. & Bashara, N. Ellipsometry and Polarized Light isbn: 0-7204-0694-3
(Elsevier, 1977).
90.
Plummer, J. D. & Deal, M. D. Silicon VLSI Technology : Fundamentals, prac-
tice and modeling (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2000).
91.
Loo, J. Nucleation and growth of PVD aluminum. Nat.Lab. Unclassified Report
807/98. doi:10.1088/0957-4484/24/27/275606 (1998).
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
97
92.
Pearton, S., Shul, R. J. & Ren, F. A Review of Dry Etching of GaN and
Related Materials. MRS Internet Journal of Nitride Semiconductor Research
5, e11 (2000).
93.
Lee, J.-M., Huh, C., Kim, D.-J. & Park, S.-J. Dry-etch damage and its recov-
ery in InGaN/GaN multi-quantum-well light-emitting diodes. Semiconductor
Science and Technology 18, 530–534 (2003).
94.
Yu, Z.-G. et al. Influence of Dry Etching Damage on the Internal Quantum
Efficiency of Nanorod InGaN/GaN Multiple Quantum Wells. Chinese Physics
Letters 29, 078501 (2012).
95.
Chichibu, S. F. et al. Time-resolved photoluminescence, positron annihilation,
and Al0.23Ga0.77N/GaN heterostructure growth studies on low defect density
polar and nonpolar freestanding GaN substrates grown by hydride vapor phase
epitaxy. Journal of Applied Physics 111, 103518 (2012).
96.
Monemar, B. et al. Recombination of free and bound excitons in GaN. physica
status solidi (b) 245, 1723–1740 (2008).
97.
Nami, M. et al. Carrier Dynamics and Electro-Optical Characterization of High-
Performance GaN/InGaN Core-Shell Nanowire Light-Emitting Diodes. Scien-
tific Reports 8, 501. issn: 2045-2322 (2018).
98.
Kwon, M.-K. et al. Surface-Plasmon-Enhanced Light-Emitting Diodes. Ad-
vanced Materials 20, 1253–1257 (2008).
99.
Ji, Y. et al. Comparative study of field-dependent carrier dynamics and emis-
sion kinetics of InGaN/GaN light-emitting diodes grown on (112¯2) semipolar
versus (0001) polar planes. Applied Physics Letters 104, 143506 (2014).
100.
Yao, Y.-F. et al. Coupling of a light-emitting diode with surface plasmon polari-
ton or localized surface plasmon induced on surface silver gratings of different
geometries. Opt. Express 26, 9205–9219 (2018).
101.
LEDs Magazine, http://www.ledsmagazine.com/features/1/1/10. 2005.
102.
Joannopoulos, J. D., Johnson, S. G., Winn, J. N. & Meade, R. D. Photonic
Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light 2nd. isbn: 0691124566, 9780691124568
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 2008).
103.
Taylor, J. L. Technical notes: Integrating Sphere Functionality: The Scatter
Transmission Measurement, PerkinElmer, Inc, http://www.perkinelmer.
com.
104.
Technical guide: Integrating Sphere Theory and Applications, Labsphere Inc,
www.labsphere.com.
105.
Manual for the integrating sphere OL 700-71 from Optronic Laboratories, Man-
ual No: M000300 2010.
106.
M., W. Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting, Technical Note, PicoQuant
GmbH. doi:https://www.picoquant.com/images/uploads/page/files/
7253/technote_tcspc.pdf.
==PAGE:110==
98
Bibliography
107.
CompleteEASE software manual from J.A. Woollam Co., https://www.jawoollam.
com.
==PAGE:111==
==PAGE:112==
