==PAGE:1==
J. Henneke, T. L. Mouritzen 
June 2019  
Integrated multi-projection visualization 
and interactive user control  
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Integrated multi-projection visualization and interactive
user control
Master thesis
J. Henneke, T. Mouritzen
Abstract
Visual effects and interactivity is a necessity of any modern showroom. Impressive vi-
sual displays can be achieved through combining multiple projectors into one seamless
projection. This is usually done through expensive hardware and software and requires
technical expertise for installation. Interactivity with such displays is usually achieved
using expensive LIDAR sensors for touch detection.
This thesis presents a novel integrated approach for such multi-projector displays with
interactivity through touch detection. The solution is based on cheap ﬁsheye cameras and
Raspberry Pi single board computers. It is implemented using free open source software.
The solution is therefore available at a very low price tag making it available for low bud-
get installations. The calibration of the system is automated using camera input, enabling
setup and conﬁguration without prior technical knowledge.
Unlike common approaches in multi-projector display solutions, the solution proposed in
this thesis works well on uneven continuous surfaces due to a piece-wise afﬁne transfor-
mation applied to the displayed images. The performance of the seamless multi-projection
is thoroughly evaluated and despite the use of cheap hardware a sub projector pixel pre-
cision is achieved.
The touch detection was achieved using a foreground detection algorithm based on a linear
threshold as a function of the running average pixel values. This foreground detection
shows better performance under the given circumstances than other popular foreground
detectors such as gaussian models and gaussian mixture models and due to its simplicity
it is a lot faster.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Projective geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Camera model and calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Scene Analysis
15
3.1
Geometric conﬁguration of hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Touch detection modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Camera Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Image processing
33
4.1
Image transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Principal axis from moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Foreground detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Development and Implementation
43
5.1
Software and hardware tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Projector registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.1
Registration image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.2
Making binary images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.3
Finding the ROI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.4
Localizing points of interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2.5
Tessellation and piece-wise afﬁne transformation . . . . . . . . .
56
==PAGE:6==
5.3
Seamless multi-projection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3.1
Warping of images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3.2
Blending
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.4
Touch detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.4.1
Undistortion of ﬁsheye images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.4.2
Foreground detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.4.3
Describing the foreground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.4.4
Binary classiﬁcation of foreground
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6
Results and validation
89
6.1
Edge blending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.1.1
Warping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.1.2
Gamma correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.2
Touch detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
6.2.1
Foreground Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
6.2.2
Description of foreground
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6.2.3
Binary Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
7
Discussion
105
7.1
Limitations in foreground descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
7.2
Disparity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
8
Future work
109
8.1
Edge blending with ﬁsheye cameras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
8.2
Foreground detection on varying background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
9
Conclusion
112
9.1
Seamless multi-projection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
9.2
Touch detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
9
Bibliography
116
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor David Arge Klevang Pedersen for his great support
and encouragements. David is a busy man, but he has never hesitated taking his time for
a meeting when we asked for one. David has always had a positive attitude and we have
left many frustrations in the meetings with him.
Next we would like to thank ENERGY & WATER for their collaboration. Without them
there would be no thesis. They have provided hardware and useful feedback throughout
the project.
Last we would like to give a special thanks to Linde Fr¨olke who has been a great sup-
port through this thesis. She has been very helpful through discussions and has been very
encouraging.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction to the problem
This master thesis is made in collaboration with ENERGY & WATER – Greater Copen-
hagen Living Lab (E&V). E&V is a collaboration between the municipality of Copen-
hagen and HOFOR - Greater Copenhagen Utility. A new showroom, The Sustainable City
is being build at the facilities at E&V and will open to visitors in 2020. The showroom
will communicate the initiatives in the municipality of Copenhagen making Copenhagen
a sustainable city. The visitors of the showroom will be both danish and international
politicians, experts and students.
The exhibitions in the showroom will be a mix of visual, auditory and physical. The
common factor is, that they will all be interactive in one way or another. One of the
planned exhibitions consist of 13 interactive projections on walls with 6 of the projectors
being able to project one coherent, seamless projection of a movie. By interactive is
meant, that the projections are like touch screens, where pressing a projection of a button
will start a video or show an image.
An example of the result from seamless multi-projection on our system is showed on
Figure 1.1.
1
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
SECTION 1.4
(a) An image split in two and projected on
two overlapping projections without seam-
less multi-projection.
(b) The seamless multi-projection of same
image
Figure 1.1: Illustration of the result of seamless multi-projection
1.2
Problem statement
Based on the problem stated above the aims of this master thesis is to:
develop, implement, and test a camera based, low cost, and auto-calibrating solution for
an interactive, seamless, multi-projection display.
The problem is divided into two parts. The ﬁrst part is regarding the seamless projection
and the second part is regarding the touch detection on the projection surface.
1.3
Previous work
Both of the problems addressed in the problem statement have been solved previously
with different approaches. The seamless multi-projection is already an available com-
mercial product and several algorithms have been suggested in litterature[15, 18, 17, 23].
The common approach is to map the projections of each projector using camera based
registration and simple perspective transformations. Solutions for touch detection is also
available as a commercial product [10] using LIDAR sensors and multiple camera based
solution have been proposed [3, 7].
We have not found evidence of an integrated solution that solves both problems.
2
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
SECTION 1.5
1.4
Methods
In this report the seamless projection is only tested with two projectors, but the implemen-
tation is made for as many projectors as needed. In the showroom the seamless projection
will split on 2×3 projectors, so the full movie is split into two movies and then seamlessly
projected on 3 projectors each. To enable seamless multi-projection a warping and a color
correction for each projector is needed. To determine the warping and color corrections
a registration of the projectors is carried out. This registration process is designed to be
semi-automatic and camera based, so that non-technical staff can carry out the procedure.
The touch detection is based on foreground detection of the touching object. This means,
that our solution can only be used in systems where the touch detection will happen within
a static scene. This is not in general the natural behaviour of a video wall, but in the
showroom at (E&V) this is not a problem since touch only needs to be detected within
predeﬁned projections of buttons. An advantage of the camera based solution over the
LIDAR based solution is, that LIDAR solution only work on ﬂat walls, where the camera
based solution also works on curved (continuous) surfaces.
There exist several algorithms for foreground detection[1]. But models like the Gaussian
Mixture Model[22], which are widely used, are designed for robustness in highly unpre-
dictable scenes. In this project the scene is relatively simple, so we have developed our
own simple foreground detection model based on a Gaussian model. With a single cam-
era it would be difﬁcult to tell the difference between an object touching the surface and
a shadow being cast on the surface. Therefore 2 synchronized cameras are used to detect
the touch.
1.5
Thesis structure
The background theory in this thesis is valid for both of the touch detection and the seam-
less multi-projection. The remaining sections are divided into a part with the seamless
multi-projection and a part with the touch detection. The integrated solution to the two
problems is to be implemented with so-called ﬁsheye cameras. At the time of the devel-
opment of the seamless multi-projection, these cameras were not available so this part is
developed and explained using the camera of a Motorolla Moto G5 smart phone. In the
discussion Section 8.1 it is explained how the developed tools can be adapted to be used
with the ﬁsheye cameras.
This report will demonstrate the results of a fully functional system for each of the two
problems. But to be able to install an integrated solution in the showroom at E&V a lot
3
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
SECTION 1.5
of work still has to go into the design of installation equipment, graphical user interfaces
and manuals.
4
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Theory
This section describes some of the concepts in projective geometry and the camera models
used in this thesis. The focus in the description of projective geometry is on the concept
of projective transformations. The camera models are the standard pinhole camera model
and a version of a ﬁsheye camera model
2.1
Projective geometry
A point
Pe = (x,y,z)
in euclidean geometry, is described in projective geometry as[9]
Pp = (xp,yp,zp,k)
The translation between euclidean geometry and projective geometry is[9]
Pe = (xp/k,yp/k,zp/k)
Coordinates described in projective geometry are also called homogeneous coordinates.
In the Euclidean plane IR2 two parallel lines will not meet at any point. In the projective
plane IP2 two parallel lines will meet at a point at inﬁnity. This means, any two lines will
5
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SECTION 2.1
in IP2 space meet in some point. Any point in the IP2 can be described by a homogeneous
vector.[9]
The idea of projective geometry can be understood as euclidean geometry with perspec-
tive. Any set of n points X = {P1,P2,...,Pn} in euclidean space will look different by an
observers from different perspectives. As an example say, we have two points P1 and P2,
then if an observer is located along the line going through both P1 and P2, the two points
will look like one point.
Any mapping between a set of n points X = {P1,P2,...,Pn} seen from one perspective
and the corresponding points X′{P′
1,P′
2,...,P′
n} seen from another perspective can be de-
scribed by a projective transformation. This enables transformations from a sometimes
impractical coordinate system to a more beneﬁcial one making some feature extractions
and further mappings much easier. The rest of this section describes two such projective
transformation. First the most general perspective transformation is described and next
the afﬁne transformation is described.
Perspective transformation
A perspective transformation, also called a homography, from one projective plane to
another is a linear transformation. The homogeneous vectors X representing points in a
plane transformed into the homogeneous vectors X′ in another plane is described by
X′ = HX
where H, is a 3x3 non-singular matrix. H is a homogeneous matrix meaning the ratios
are the relevant features, and the scale is irrelevant. In Figure 2.1 an illustration of a
perspective transformation of two points in one perspective plane into another can be
seen.
6
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SECTION 2.1
Figure 2.1: Transforming two points from one projective plane into another using a central
projection, where points are mapped from one plane to another through straight lines that
meet in one point.
The H matrix has 8 unrelated ratios and thus 8 degrees of freedom for the projective
transformation. With 8 degrees of freedom at least 4 points are necessary to calculate H.
The equations for a point X = (x,y) in inhomogeneous coordinates in the original plane
to the point X′ = (x′,y′) in the transformed plane is
x′ = x′
k′ = h11x+h12y+h13
h31x+h32y+h33
(2.1)
y′ = y′
k′ = h21x1 +h22y+h23
h31x+h32y+h33
(2.2)
where
H =


h11
h12
h13
h21
h22
h23
h31
h32
h33


7
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SECTION 2.1
An example of the use of a homography, can be seen in Figure 2.2, where four points in
the original image have been identiﬁed and used to make a mapping, so the checkerboard
is viewed from the front in stead of from the side.
(a) Image of checkerboard seen in perspec-
tive.
(b) Transformed version of the perspective
image of chessboard.
Figure 2.2: Perspective transformation of a checkerboard from one perspective to another
using four points to calculate a homography.
Performing a perspective transformation preserves straight lines, but parallel lines, ratios
of areas and ratios of length of parallel lines are not preserved.
Afﬁne Transformation
The afﬁne transformation from one plane to another is also linear transformation in ho-
mogeneous coordinates
X’ = HAX
but with some restrictions on the HA matrix
HA =

A
t
0
1

=


a11
a12
tx
a21
a22
ty
0
0
1


(2.3)
The A-matrixs determinant is non-zero. The afﬁne transformation has 6 degrees of free-
dom. So three points are needed in order to calculate the afﬁne transformation matrix
HA. The geometric effect of an afﬁne transformation consist of non-isotropic scaling and
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SECTION 2.2
a rotation described by the A matrix and a translation described by t. The non-isotropic
scaling and rotation can be quantiﬁed by decomposition of A[9]
A = R(θ)R(φ)DR(−φ)
where
D =

λ1
0
0
λ2


The R-matrixes are rotation matrices and D is diagonal scaling matrix. Without φ, the
scaling matrix D would scale with λ1 in the x direction and λ2 in the y direction. φ rotates
these scaling axis, so that they are still orthogonal. θ-rotation is a ﬁnal rotation of the
image. With an afﬁne transformation parallel lines are preserved, ratios of parallel line
segments are preserved and ratios of areas are preserved.
2.2
Camera model and calibration
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the pinhole camera model. The red quadrilateral in world
coordinates is projected unto the image sensor plane (a,b) through the principal point
O. (X,Y) is the principal plane and Z is the principal axis. The distance between the
image plane and the principal plane f is the focal length. This model is often augmented
with a virtual image plane parallel to the image at the distance f from O in the positive Z
direction. This is to avoid the ﬂipping of coordinates.
9
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SECTION 2.2
In this project cameras are used as sensors to describe positions of objects. To enable this
a camera model is needed. One of the simplest such camera models is the pinhole camera
model illustrated in Figure 2.3. This model is especially useful in this project because
it enables the use of projective geometry. The actual cameras used in this project are so
called ﬁsheye cameras. Therefore a ﬁsheye camera model is used to warp images from
the ﬁsheye camera to pinhole camera equivalents. In the following the pinhole camera
model is described followed by a description of the ﬁsheye camera model used in this
project.
Pinhole camera model
The pinhole camera model assumes, that an image is formed by straight rays of light
travelling from the object to be imaged to the image sensor through a point O called the
principal point. The distance f between the principal point and the image sensor is called
the focal length of the camera. The plane in which the image sensor lies is called the
image plane with axis (a,b). The plane parallel to the image plane containing O is called
the principal plane with axis (X,Y). The axis Z going from the center of the image plane
through O is called the principal axis. Often a virtual image plane is introduced as the
plane parallel to the image plane with the distance f to O is the positive direction of Z.
This is to avoid the ﬂipping of coordinates through O. The coordinate system deﬁned by
(X,Y,Z) is called the camera coordinate system.[9]
To project a point ⃗Xw in world coordinates (Xw,Yw,Zw) unto the image sensor, the point is
ﬁrst transformed into camera coordinates by a translation ⃗C and a rotation ⃗R as
⃗X = R

⃗Xw −⃗C

where ⃗X denotes the point in camera coordinates. Or formulated in homogeneous coordi-
nates
⃗X =

R
−R⃗C
0
1

⃗Xw
This can be rewritten into
10
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SECTION 2.2
⃗X = R⃗Xw +⃗t
(2.4)
where⃗t = −⃗CR. R and t are called the extrinsic camera parameters. Projecting the point
from camera coordinates unto the image sensor is done by ﬁrst projecting unto the image
plane as


X
Y
Z

7→


fX/Z
fY/Z
f


and then adding an offset to each coordinate due to the fact, that the image sensor is not
necessarily with origin in the origin of the image plane


X
Y
Z

7→


fX/Z + px
fY/Z + py
f


or in homogeneous coordinates
⃗Xi =


f
0
px
0
0
f
py
0
0
0
1
0


⃗X
(2.5)
The ﬁrst three columns K of this transformation matrix is called the calibration matrix
and describe the intrinsic parameters of a camera.
K =


f
0
px
0
f
py
0
0
1


Combining equation 2.5 and 2.4 gives the full pinhole camera model as described by
11
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SECTION 2.2
⃗Xi = K

R|⃗t
⃗Xw
The matrix K

R|⃗t

is called the camera matrix P, so in short form
⃗Xi = P⃗Xw
where ⃗Xi and ⃗Xw are in homogeneous coordinates.
Fisheye camera model
This simple pinhole camera model can be extended with a lens model. In the standard
pinhole model, the lens projection can be described as
r(θ) = tan(θ)· f
where r =
√
a2 +b2 is the distance from origin in the image plane to the position (a,b) of
the projection of the point in the image plane . θ is the angle between the incoming ray
of light from the point to be projected and the principal axis.
In this project the so-called ﬁsheye lens is used to extend the FOV of the camera. The
name ﬁsheye refers to the fact, that light is bend when going from air to water, and that
the ﬁrst ﬁsheye lens cameras made images similar to, how an underwater observer would
see scenes over the water [27]. The concept of the ﬁsheye lens projection is shown in
Figure 2.4. The ﬁsheye lens has several popular projection equations including: [12]
r(θ) = 2f tan(θ/2)
Stereographic projection
(2.6)
r(θ) = fθ
Equidistance projection
(2.7)
r(θ) = 2f sin(θ/2)
Equisolid angle projection
(2.8)
r(θ) = f sin(θ)
Orthogonal projection
(2.9)
The ﬁsheye camera model used in this project is the one available in the OpenCV 4.0
toolbox which is based on the paper by Juho Kannala and Sami S. Brandt[12]. This
ﬁsheye camera model is a Taylor approximation of the general projection equation. The
12
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SECTION 2.2
model describes projections of points by
r(θ) = k1θ +k2θ 3 +k3θ 5 +k4θ 7 +...
(2.10)
The ks are constants. In the OpenCV implementation k1 = 1 and only k2, k3, k4 and k5 are
included.
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the ﬁsheye camera model. The red line is the ray of light from
a point travelling through the principal point O with an angle θ to the principal axis Z.
The ray is bend according to equation 2.10, so that the distance r from the origin of the
camera coordinate system and the projection of the ray unto this plane is a function of θ.
A fully calibrated camera is a camera where both the extrinsic and intrinsic parameters
are known. The calibration described in this section is solving for the intrinsic parameters
only, since this is, what is needed to transform images taken with the ﬁsheye cameras
into images equivalent of images taken with a perspective camera. That is images, where
straight lines in world coordinates are also straight lines in the images.
The algorithm used for the calibration is the one implemented in the OpenCV 4.0 Python
module. This algorithm is a modiﬁed version of the one presented in [12]. The ﬁrst step
is to take multiple images of a planar calibration pattern from different views. OpenCV
provides such a calibration pattern in the form of a chessboard pattern as shown in Figure
2.5.
Points of interest are identiﬁed in the images of the calibration pattern as shown in Figure
2.5. This is done with the algorithm described in [6].
13
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SECTION 2.2
Figure 2.5: Example of images of the calibration pattern from different views where the
points of interest are identiﬁed as the internal chessboard corners.
Next an initial guess is made on the intrinsic parameters of the camera. The guess on
px and py is set to the center of the image and the guess on f is set to around 1/3 of the
largest of the image dimensions. The ks are initialized by ﬁtting equation 2.10 with the
equidistance projection model.
Then the extrinsic parameters R and t are estimated for each of the views of the calibration
pattern using [28] where the calibration pattern is assumed to be in Z = 0.
This initial guess on parameters is used in the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm to itera-
tively reﬁne the intrinsic parameters. In each iteration the extrinsic are also re-estimated.
The effect of undistorting an image using the calibrated camera model is shown in Figure
2.6.
(a) Image captured with the ﬁsheye
lens. The radial distortion makes the
straight lines look bended.
(b) The undistorted version of the im-
age using the calibration camera model
Figure 2.6: The result of using the calibration camera model to undistort a ﬁsheye camera
image.
14
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Scene Analysis
3.1
Geometric conﬁguration of hardware
This section describes geometric conﬁguration of the projectors and cameras relative to
the surface unto which the projection is made.
The cameras are modelled as ﬁsheye cameras and the projectors are described as inverse
pinhole cameras as described in section 2.2. The inverse pinhole model is where the rays
of light are travelling from the image plane through the principal point unto the projection
surface. The image sensor is then no longer a sensor but a generator. This image generator
is not centered around the principal axis but is shifted to enable the ultra short throw ratio
of the projectors. The principal is illustrated in Figure 3.1
Figure 3.1: The inverse pinhole model used to model the projectors. The projection
surface unto which the projector is projecting is located in Zw = 0. ph is the height of
the image projected by the projector, hv is the vertical offset between the bottom of the
projected image and the principal point O of the projector. G is the image generator in the
projector model.
15
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.1
The orientation of the projectors have to be such, that the principal axis is perpendicular
to the projection surface, for the image to appear as a rectangle. The dimensions of the
surface unto which the full projection is to be made are deﬁned by E&V as 6 m×1.5 m.
Looking in the data-sheet[25] it is seen, if the height of the projection is to be 1.5 m, the
distance z0 between then projection surface and the projector has to be 0.5 m. At this
distance, the width pw of the projection on the projection surface is 2.66 m. Therefore
three projectors are needed to cover the full projection surface. The vertical offset hv
between the projector and the lower edge of the projected image is 0.125 m.
The projection surface can be described as a rectangle deﬁned by two diagonal corner
points. A world coordinate system is introduced with origin located at one of the cor-
ners of the projection rectangle. The other corner describing the rectangle is located in
(sw,sh,0) where sw = 6m and sh = 1.5m is the width and height of the projection surface
respectively. The position pos of the three projectors p1, p2 and p3 is then
pos{p1} = (pw/2,−hv,z0)
pos{p2} = (sw/2,−hv,z0)
pos{p3} = (sw −pw/2,−hv,z0)
This conﬁguration of projectors is shown in Figure 3.2
Figure 3.2: The conﬁguration of the projectors to cover the projection surface deﬁned by
E&V.
The ﬁsheye cameras used in this project have to:
• Enable auto-calibration for the edge blending
• Enable the touch interface
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.1
For the auto-calibration of the edge blending the cameras need to be placed, so the reso-
lution on the projection surface is as high as possible. Positioning the cameras too close
to the wall would make the resolution at the edges of the projection surface too low due
to the ﬁsheye distortion, while positioning the cameras too far from the wall will lower
the resolution of the projection surface in general. So a compromise has to be chosen.
Regarding the vertical position of the cameras, this is restricted to being above the pro-
jection surface to not be in the way for people looking at the display. To enable the touch
feature of the projection surface, two cameras per projector will be used.
Another concern regarding the position of the cameras is, that they have to be installed
in something. That means, that some camera mount has to be designed. To ease the
installation and to accommodate the requirements for the cameras, they will be positioned
on the sides of the projectors, one camera on each side. So the position of the cameras c1
and c2 for projector p1 will be
pos{c1} = (pw/2−a,−hv,z0)
pos{c2} = (sw/2−a,−hv,z0)
where a is half the width of the projector plus some space to account for the size of the
camera. The only thing left is to decide on the orientation of the ﬁsheye cameras. Since
the cameras are also to be used for the edge blending calibration, it makes sense, that
principal axis of the cameras should be parallel to the (Zw,Xw) plane. This makes image
stitching easier later on. Then only the tilt θc around the Xw axis is left to determine.
This tilt should be such, that the camera resolution ρc on the part of the projection surface
illuminated by the projector is as high as possible. The resolution of the projection surface
in camera pixels is described as
ρc =
Ac
∆Xw ·∆Yw
where ∆Xw · ∆Yw is the area of a rectangular patch Ps on the projection surface and Ac is
area of the projection of this patch unto the image sensor of the camera. So the unit of the
pixel density is px2 m−2.
Assuming for a moment that the cameras are pinhole cameras, then the transformation of
a point on the projection surface in world coordinates into camera pixels coordinates is
17
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.1
Xc = Xw
Yc = cosθc ·Yw −sinθc ·z0
Zc = sinθc ·Yw +cosθc ·z0
a = Xc
Zc
· f
b = Yc
Zc
· f
The offset (px, py) is omitted since this will not affect the area of the transformed patch.
With this, the four corner points of the rectangular patch Ps can be transformed into cam-
era pixel coordinates. In pixel coordinates the area of the patch can be calculated by
dividing the quadrilateral into two triangles and calculating the area of each of these tri-
angles. To determine the optimal tilt angle θc a measure of quality Q is needed. This
measure of quality Q is decided to be the lowest resolution on the illuminated part of the
projection surface. The aim is, to ﬁnd the angle that will maximize the lowest resolution.
The expression of the area of the transformed patch does not simplify to a simple expres-
sion. The resolution will therefore be estimated numerically by dividing the illuminated
part of the projection surface into small rectangles, transform each rectangle and calculate
the area of each transformed rectangle. This area is then used to calculate the resolution
for the given rectangle. The resulting Q for angles going from −π/8rad to π/4rad, where
positive angles are turning the camera towards the illuminated projection surface is shown
in Figure 3.3. Here it is seen how the quality measure Q gets better when the camera is
turned away from the illuminated projection surface. This result is a bit misleading, since
it assumes an inﬁnite image sensor and since the pinhole camera model does not account
for dispersive lens effects which would be present at these extreme angles.
18
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.1
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Angles [radians]
0
2
4
6
8
Q [px/m²]
1e5
Figure 3.3: The quality measure Q as a function of the tilt angle of the camera using the
pinhole camera model.
When the pinhole camera model is extended to the ﬁsheye camera model, the result is
different. This is because the ﬁsheye lens distortion gives the highest resolution in the
center of the image as illustrated in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Heatmap showing the resolution of the illumated part of the projection surface
with a ﬁsheye camera located at the distance z0 from the projection surface, with the
principal axis perpendicular to the projection surface and with Xw and Yw, so that the
center of the image is in the center of the illuminated area.
The quality measure Q as a function of θc with the ﬁsheye camera model is shown in
Figure 3.5. The optimal angles is thus found to be
19
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.1
θc = 0.27rad
(3.1)
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Angles [radians]
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
7.0
7.2
7.4
7.6
Q [px/m²]
1e3
Figure 3.5: The quality measure Q as a function of the tilt angle of the camera using the
ﬁsheye camera model.
The resolution distribution with this camera tilt angle is shown in Figure 3.6
Figure 3.6: Heatmap showing the resolution of the illumated part of the projection surface
with the optimal til angle.
To achieve this camera tilt angle a camera mount was designed and laser cut. The result
is illustrated in Figure 3.7
20
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.2
Figure 3.7: Picture of the camera mount designed to give the camera a tilt of 0.27 rad.
3.2
Touch detection modelling
The aim of this section is to develop a model for touch detection on the projection surface
illustrated in Figure 3.2. The model needs to determine whether or not a touch is present
within a given area of the projection surface. The model will assume, that the ﬁnger is
identiﬁed in the image. To determine whether an object is touching the projection surface,
the point of the object closest to the projection surface will be identiﬁed in each camera.
Knowing the position of the object in both cameras enables estimation of the distance of
this object to the projection surface. Further, the model needs to not classify a shadow
on the projection surface as a touch. The modelling will focus on geometric relations
between the touching object, the projectors and the cameras. In this section the touch
angle θt refers to the angle between the projection surface and the touching object on this
surface. The touching object is assumed to be a ﬁnger.
First model of the location of a ﬁngertip is carried out. Next two models for distinguish-
ing between objects touching the projection surface and shadows cast on the projection
surface is developed. First model is based on the difference θd in the perceived ﬁnger
orientation between the two cameras is developed. The second is based on the expected
variance of a shadow and a ﬁnger with a shadow. Last an expected minimum size of a
touching ﬁnger seen with a camera is estimated.
Finger tip position
The cameras are placed on each side of the projectors, at the same level and distance from
the wall, as where the light beam propagates from the projector. At this placement the pro-
21
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.2
jection surface is above the camera. This means, that an image of an object perpendicular
to the projection surface will always, have the point of the object closest to the projection
surface as the lowest pixel in the image. This is illustrated in Figure 3.8. Assuming we
can detect the ﬁnger in the image, then this result is useful for the touch detection since
the tip of the ﬁnger can be modelled as the lowest pixel of the ﬁnger.
Figure 3.8: The cameras view of the an object touching the screen seen from the side.
Purple circle is the camera, the gray area is the projection surface, the thin black lines
are how the camera sees the screen, b is the horizontal distance from the camera to the
wall/screen, a is the vertical distance between the camera and the object touching the wall,
θt is the angle between the object and the wall, α is the angle between the wall and the
view-line between the camera and the touch.
The touch input can however not be assumed to be perpendicular to the projection surface.
If the object is not perpendicular to projection surface, the deciding factor whether lowest
point of the object in a given frame is the one closest to the wall, is the relationship
between the angle θt and α. From Figure 3.8 it can be seen as long as α <= (π −θ) the
rule holds. The maximum θ can be described by
θmax = π −tan−1
 
b
a
!
where a is the vertical distance between the camera and the touch of the object, b is the
distance between the camera and the wall/screen.
Furthermore from Figure 3.8 can it be seen, that α is maximized, when the object touching
the wall moves vertically down towards the camera. The worst case scenario is when the
22
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.2
touch happens right on the edge. If b = 0.5m and a = 0.12mthe worst case angle will be:
θworst = π −tan−1
 
0.5
0.12
!
= 103.5deg ⇒
α = 76.5deg
which is only 13.5 degrees less than horizontal. This is a relatively small difference and is
at an angle one could expect from the user, depending on the vertical level of the screen.
However the setup is made such, that the user can touch the whole screen, which is 1.5 m
when b = 0.5m why a touch where 103.5° makes for a rather awkward ﬁnger orientation
and is assumed to not occur. The fact that the real system is thought to be upside down,
only makes it harder for the user to make such an input.
Distinguishing shadows from objects
To distinguish a ﬁnger with a shadow from a shadow two models are proposed. The ﬁrst
is based on the geometry of the cameras and the second is based on the variance shadow
and the ﬁnger with shadow.
The variance based model is simple. Under the assumption, that we can detect shadows
and ﬁngers, we assume, that a shadow will have both a low variance and a low mean
value. This is valid since the theoretical shadow does not emit any light and is therefore
perceived as black. A ﬁnger will be illuminated by light from the projector and due
to the reﬂectance properties of human skin, we can assume, that the ﬁnger will have a
mean pixel value well above the mean of a shadow. So one way to tell a shadow from a
ﬁnger with a shadow is to use the difference in mean and variance between the two. One
problem with using the mean is, that in the case of external light sources the mean of a
shadow will increase, which makes it difﬁcult to determine a threshold for the mean based
distinguishing. The variance of the shadow will however not increase signiﬁcant with the
light from external light sources, assuming the projection surface is homogeneous, and
the external light sources are diffuse. Therefore the variance can be used to distinguish
shadows from ﬁngers with shadows.
The other model is based is based on the difference in orientation of the ﬁnger in the
two different cameras. If a perspective transformation for each of the two cameras used
for touch detection is made such, that the images from the cameras are equivalent of
23
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.2
images from cameras placed in the center of the screen then all objects in the plane of
the projected area will be equal for both cameras. However, as soon as the cameras sees
anything not in this plane, the object will be seen in different position in the two cameras.
This means, that an object touching the projection surface will have different orientations
in the two camera frames. This is useful, since a shadow will lie on the projection surface
and thereby not have a different orientation in the two camera frames. This way the
difference in the orientation of a detected object can be used to determine whether this
object is a shadow or a real object.
To simulate how the cameras see an object, a line going from the cameras, through the
object touching the wall and to the edge of the button. This line will be called the ”Object
line” forward. A line going from the center of the button and away from the wall will
illustrate an object touching the wall and will be called the ”Touch line” moving forward.
The cameras are placed 29 cm from the center of the projector on each side. A coordinate-
system is deﬁned such, that the cameras are positioned in coordinates (1.04,-0.12,-0.5) and
(1.62,-0.12,-0.5) and the corners of the screen projected are: (0, 0, 0), (0 1.5, 0), (2.66,
1.5, 0) and (2.66, 0, 0). Thus any button will also have z = 0 and for this analysis the
diameter will be 0.15 m. For the analysis it is assumed, that the user will touch right in
the center of a button. In Figure 3.9 an illustration of the setup can be seen. The blue
quadrilateral is the screen, the black circle is the button, red line is the Touch line, green
and light blue are the cameras and their respective Object lines.
Figure 3.9: Illustration of how the cameras sees an object touching the a button at an angle
of 45 degrees away from the cameras.
To ﬁnd the angle between the Object lines in the projected area plane (xy-plane) the
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.2
Object planes are deﬁned. These planes are deﬁned from three coordinates each: the
respective camera position, the touch on the wall and any other point on the Touch lines.
The intersection of the xy-plane and each of the Object planes will then deﬁne a line each
in the xy-plane, which is the angle the cameras will see the object in with the described
perspective transformation. A plane can be deﬁned by Equation 3.2
ax+by+cz+d = 0
(3.2)
where (a,b,c) is a normal vector to the plane and d is a point in the plane deﬁned as
follows.
d = −(ax0 +by0 +cy0)
The normal vector to a plane is the cross product of two normal vectors in said plane. Two
vectors in the planes are deﬁned from the 4 coordinates. The vectors in the ﬁrst plane are
deﬁned as:
V1p1 = CAM1−TLw
V2p1 = CAM1−TLp
where, CAM1 is the coordinate of the camera, TLw is the Touch line at the wall, TLp is
any given point on that line. The vectors in the second plane are deﬁned as:
V1p2 = CAM2−TLw
V2p2 = CAM2−TLp
where CAM2 is the coordinates of the second camera. The normal vectors for the two
planes are then given by:
25
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.2
Np1 =


ap1
bp1
cp1

= V1p1 ×V2p1
and
Np2 =


ap2
bp2
cp2

= V1p2 ×V2p2
The angle between the two Object lines in the xy-plane can know be found by comparing
the above found normal vectors Np1 and Np2 xy-coordinates. The angle between the
vectors are found as follows:
θ = cos−1
 
Np1xy ·Np2xy
|Np1xy|·|Np2xy|
!
Three heat-maps, with a resolution of 1cm, of the variation in the angle seen by the two
cameras are made, in order to visualize and determine where the smallest angle seen by
the two cameras will occur. Firstly a map where the object is normal to the wall can be
seen in Figure 3.10.
26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.2
Figure 3.10: Heat-map of the angle variations observed by the two cameras of an object
touching the wall with an angle of 90 degrees moving around the projected area. X-axis
is the width of the projection surface in cm. Y-axis is the height of the projection surface
in cm. (0,0) is the top left corner of the projection surface.
Here it can be seen, the smallest angle between the object seen by the cameras are in the
corners towards the camera. The angle in the corners are found to be 4 degrees. The mean
angle around the screen is 26 degrees.
An object touching the wall normally is however unlikely in the top and bottom of the
screen, why a heat-map of the top half of the screen is made with an object having 45
degrees angle towards the camera, which can be seen in Figure 3.11
Figure 3.11: Heat-map of top half of the projection surface of the angle variations ob-
served by the two cameras of an object touching the wall with an angle of 45 degrees
towards the camera. X-axis is the width of the projection surface in cm. Y-axis is the
height of the projection surface in cm. (0,0) is the top left corner of the projection surface.
The smallest angle with described touch can in above ﬁgure be seen to in the vertical
middle of the screen to the sides. The angle is found to be 7 degrees. The mean angle is
found to be 27 degrees.
The bottom half of the screen is mapped with a 45 degrees angle away from the cameras
and can be seen in Figure 3.12.
27
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.2
Figure 3.12: Heat-map of bottom half of the projection surface of the angle variations
observed by the two cameras of an object touching the wall with an angle of 45 degrees
away from the camera. X-axis is the width of the screen in cm. Y-axis is the height of the
screen in cm. (0,0) is in the middle of the projection surface furthers to the left.
The smallest angle for said touch is found to be 11 degrees in the bottom corners and the
mean angle of the bottom half of the screen is 23 degrees.
Minimum perceived ﬁnger size estimation
The typical object touching the wall will be a ﬁnger. A ﬁnger seen from the cameras point
of view has certain characteristics. If a ﬁnger is said to be cylinder with a half sphere
in end touching the wall where both radius are 1.5cm, and a button is said to be 100
projected pixels wide. A minimum coverage of a button can be found. The width of a
button on the projection surface can be found as follows:
Br = Sw
Spw
Bpw
where Sw is the width of the screen in meters, Spw is the width of the screen in pixels and
Bpw is the width of the button in pixels. This results in a button width of
2.66m
1920 100 = 0.14m
When the ﬁnger touches the center of the button, this will result in the ﬁnger blocking a
certain area of the button seen from the cameras perspective. The smallest area a ﬁnger
will cover can be realized to be straight above a camera. An illustration of this kind of
coverage can be seen in Figure 3.13.
28
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.3
Figure 3.13: A ﬁnger seen from the camera perspective.
From the above ﬁgure it can be realized, that the further away from the button the cam-
era is, the smaller the angles between the tangents and of the ﬁnger will be. Thus the
minimum area covered by the ﬁnger will go towards the area of a cylinder. The relative
coverage by the ﬁnger can now be found as
Rc = CA
CB
where RC is the relative coverage by the ﬁnger, CF is the coverage of the ﬁnger and CB is
the area covered by the button. The area covered by the ﬁnger is found as follows.
CF = 1
2r2
f π +rf ·bh
where rf is the radius of the ﬁnger and bh is the height of the button. The relative coverage
is found to be:
Rc = 0.5·0.752π +0.75·7.5
152
= 5.4%
3.3
Camera Settings
To be able to detect a touch on the wall the output from the camera needs to be of a certain
quality and quantity. This section will describe the settings chosen in order to obtain said
29
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.3
quality and quantity.[11]
In order to make the setup capable of detecting a touch, the data ﬂow needs to be fast
enough to not miss a touch while being able to process recorded data real time. An
appropriate frame rate has been found to be 20 frames per second. This means, that in the
worst case scenario (a touch occur right after a frame) the touch needs to last at least
1
20 = 50ms
to be detected.
The resolution is chosen on the background of a few different parameters. The resolution
must be high enough to see, an object touching the wall at any point and still being able to
obtain the wanted frame rate while processing the images. With a resolution of 1296x972
the camera module promises a max frame rate of 42. 20fps is well below this limit. With
the described setup, a touch on the wall in the far opposite corner from the left camera,
can be seen in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Finger touching the far opposite corner of the screen seen by a camera.
In the above ﬁgure one can see a clear difference between a ﬁnger the white box and the
white box itself.
Next setting considered is the shutter speed. The shutter speed is the amount of time
the camera sensor is exposed to scene. The shutter speed is of high importance as the
cameras are recording a projected area, which will cause a ﬂicker, if the shutter speed,
Ssp, is incorrectly set. This happens as the projector has a certain frame rate where each
color channel lights up each pixel, so if the shutter speed and the projector frame rate is
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.3
not synchronized, an overexposure of the different color channels will occur in different
area of the screen. An example of this can be see in Figure 3.15.
Figure 3.15: Flicker of projected area caused by camera and projector being out of sync.
Over exposure of the different color channels can be seen in different areas of the pro-
jected area.
This effect needs to be taken into account in order to get a static video when recording a
static screen. The projector projects with a 50Hz frame rate, thus the shutter speed must
be a multiple of
Ssp =
1
50Hz = 20ms
to get a homogeneous recording. To get the optimal shutter speed the projector was set to
project a full white screen and a program was written to slightly increase the shutter speed
every second second, for each shutter speed a variance was calculated for the recorded
frames and the shutter speed with the smallest variance was chosen.
To get an appropriate brightness of the recordings, is a bit of a compromise as the camera
records a lit up area. This means, that the intensity of the light can vary quite a lot,
as the projector needs to be able to show see-able images in a fully lit-up room, which
requires a rather intense output from the projector. So the optimal camera settings in a
dark room can cause an overexposure in a lit-up room and vice versa. The main parameter
that can be controlled is the ISO. The ISO is a description of the cameras sensitivity to
light. The lower the value the less sensitive, the more light is needed. When setting the
Raspberry Pis ISO one actually sets and locks two parameters called analog gain and
digital gain. These gains cannot be set directly, which limits one to the possible ISO
values. As the cameras are recording the projected areas, they are potentially exposed to
a quite intense light source, why the ISO is set to the lowest possible value (100) to avoid
31
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. SCENE ANALYSIS
SECTION 3.3
being overexposed.
Finally the White Balance is set static to avoid changes of output from the camera. An
image of the projection surface with and without the external light source can be seen
Figure 3.16.
(a) Touch with background light turned on.
(b) Touch with background light turned off.
Figure 3.16: Touch on the wall with found camera settings.
32
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Image processing
This section describes image processing tools used in this thesis.
4.1
Image transformations
An image transformation is a process that takes an image I as an input and produces an
image I′ as an output. The image transformations described in this section are:
1. Thresholding
2. Filtering
3. Morphological transformations
The thresholding transformation applies a threshold t to an image, so the transformed
image is a binary image with
I′(x,y) =



0,
I(x,y) ≤t
1,
I(x,y) > t
This is useful to identify objects in images with higher intensities than the rest of the
image. An example is illustrated in Figure 4.1
33
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. IMAGE PROCESSING
SECTION 4.1
(a) Original image
(b) Binary image
Figure 4.1: The result of applying thresholding on an image with an object having higher
pixels values than the background.
The most common image ﬁltering techniques are based on the convolution of a kernel K
on the image[13]. A smoothing ﬁlter could consist of the kernel
K = 1
9


1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1


convoluted over the image I, such that each pixel I′(x,y) is the average of the pixel I(x,y)
and the 8 pixels surrounding I(x,y). Such a ﬁlter is called an averaging box ﬁlter. The
Gaussian kernel is also a smoothing ﬁlter, but with the kernel elements following a Gaus-
sian distribution around the center pixel. This kernel is slower than the K mentioned
above, but is better at preserving spatial information while removing high frequencies in
the image [13]. Figure 4.2 illustrates the effect of these two smoothing ﬁlters.
(a) Result of an averaging
box ﬁlter
(b) Gaussian ﬁlter
Figure 4.2: The result of applying two different smoothing ﬁlters on the image from ﬁgure
4.1b
34
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. IMAGE PROCESSING
SECTION 4.1
The Sobel kernels[21]
Kx =


−1
0
1
−2
0
2
−1
0
1


,
Ky =


−1
−2
−1
0
0
0
1
2
1


transforms I into gradient images. Kx gives the image gradient in the x direction and Ky
gives the gradient in the y direction. Figure 4.3 illustrates this effect on the image in
Figure 4.1b
(a) Result of the Sobel kernel Kx
(b) Result of the Sobel kernel Ky
Figure 4.3: The result of applying the Sobel kernels on the image from Figure 4.1b
Morphological transformations consist of erosion and dilation. Erosion of a binary image
is the process of convolution of a kernel K over an image and setting pixel to 1 if the
kernel matches at the given pixel and setting the pixel to 0 if the kernel does not. So if
S(x,y) is a window of the image I with center in (x,y) and same dimensions as the kernel
K then
I′(x,y) =



1,
S(x,y) = K
0
Dilation of a binary image also consist of a convolution of a kernel K on an image I. If
S(x,y) again is a window of the image I with center in (x,y) and same dimensions as K
and if said pixel I(x,y) is 1. Then all pixels in the window S(x,y), that are 0, are set to 1,
if the corresponding value in the kernel is 1. Pixels I(x,y) that are already 1 are kept 1.
Figure 4.4 illustrates the effect of erosion and dilation.
35
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. IMAGE PROCESSING
SECTION 4.2
(a) Result of erosion.
(b) Result of dilation
Figure 4.4: The result of erosion and dilation of the image from Figure 4.1b. The kernels
used are 3×3
4.2
Principal axis from moments
The principal axis of an object in an image is, the axis going through the object resulting
in the lowest sum of weighted distances between points in the object and the axis. The
weights are the intensities of the pixels, thus for a binary image all weights are equal.
Figure 4.5 illustrates this on a binary image. The principal axis can be used to determine
the orientation of an object in an image. [14] [16]
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the principal axis through the binary object in an image.
The principal axis can be found by using the image moments. The moment in a image is
deﬁned by
Mp,q =
w
∑
i=0
h
∑
j=0
ip jqI(i, j)
(4.1)
where w and h are the width and height of image respectively and I is the intensity of a
pixel. To ﬁnd the principal axis of an object in an image the central moments are needed.
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. IMAGE PROCESSING
SECTION 4.3
These can be found by moving the reference to the center of mass. The center of mass
can be found by following.
(ic, jc) =
M1,0
M0,0
, M0,1
M0,0

(4.2)
The central moments µp,q are then
µp,q =
w
∑
i=0
h
∑
j=0
(i−ic)p(j −jc)qI(i, j)
(4.3)
By deﬁnition the ﬁrst order central moments will result in µ0,1 = µ1,0 = 0. The second
order central moments µ2,0 and µ0,2 describe the variance along the x- and y-axis and the
ﬁnal second order central moment µ1,1 is the covariance. This results in the following
covariance-matrix.
cov(img) =

µ2,0
µ1,1
µ1,1
µ0,2


The angle of the eigenvector associated with the largest eigenvalue obtained from the
coveriance-matrix will also be the angle of the principal axis in the binary image. This
angle is found by
θ = 1
2tan−1
 
2µ1,1
µ2,0 −µ0,2
!
(4.4)
Thus the principal axis is the axis going through center of mass with a tilt of θ degrees.
4.3
Foreground detection
To detect the touch of an object on the projection surface, the object has to be detected
ﬁrst. One method for such detection is background subtraction. With background subtrac-
tion is it assumed, that the background in a video is somehow static such, that a sudden
change in a pixel value will only be caused by an object in front of the background or by
a shadow on the background. The idea is illustrated in Figure 4.6
37
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. IMAGE PROCESSING
SECTION 4.3
(a) Background image
(b) Image with foreground
object.
(c) The the result of a fore-
ground detection algorithm.
Figure 4.6: Illustration showing the concept of foreground detection.
In this project shadows and foreground objects are both considered foreground objects.
To detect the change of a pixel value a model M for the background is needed. A simple
background model Mt at time t could be the previous frame It−1 at t −1 in the video.
Mt = It−1
Then the background bgt could be detected as the pixels in a current frame It with a
difference below a set threshold k.
bgt = |Mt −It| < k = |It−1 −It| < k
The result of this approach is illustrated in Figure 4.7.
38
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. IMAGE PROCESSING
SECTION 4.3
Figure 4.7: Illustration of the result of a simple foreground detection model where the
background is modelled as the previous frame.
There are at least two problems with this approach. One is that the foreground object can
only be detected as long as it is moving, since a still standing object will give two similar
frames. So it could be used for detecting an object touching the wall, but it could not be
used for detecting an object touching the wall and continuing to touch the wall. Another
problem is, that if the object is moving in a straight line, and if the texture of the model
is somewhat homogeneous, the part of the object that is classiﬁed as foreground in one
frame may not be correctly classiﬁed in the next frame. Only the front of the object in the
direction of movement would be classiﬁed as a foreground object. This would make the
problem difﬁcult, since only a small part of the image would be classiﬁed as foreground
in each frame, and it would therefore be difﬁcult to distinguish from noise.
To overcome this problem the background could be modelled as the ﬁrst frame in the
video, assuming that the ﬁrst frame contains only the background.
Mt = I0
This approach gives good results as long as the actual background does not change. But
if e.g. someone turns on/off a light source in the room, the overall intensity of the back-
ground changes, and the whole image would be classiﬁed as foreground at every frame.
This calls for a background model that is adapting to changes in the background while
still being able to distinguish the background from foreground objects. One solution is to
model the background as a moving average µt over the last N frames.
39
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. IMAGE PROCESSING
SECTION 4.3
Mt = µt
where
µt = 1
N
t
∑
i=t−N
Ii
Then changes in the frames would be classiﬁed as a foreground object, and if the change
persist, it would continue to be classiﬁed as foreground for some time until, it would
be included in the moving average and classiﬁed as background. The problem with this
approach is the compromise between sensitivity and the adaption time. With a high N
the foreground detection would be good, but it would take long time for a change in the
background to be included in the background model. A low N could on the other hand
include the foreground object in the background model, if the foreground object did not
move enough.
This problem is not easily solved in the general problem of background subtraction as
described in [22]. But in this project, it can be assumed, that if the background changes,
it changes due to diffuse light sources in the room. That is to say, that the relative inten-
sities in the background are constant and only the average of the background is changing
with time. This can be used to estimate a normalized background bgn model, where the
mean of the background model is subtracted from the background model. The normalized
background model can be estimated as the normalized average of the ﬁrst N frames in the
video, assuming that only the background is present.
bgn = 1
N
N
∑
i=0
Ii −Ii
where Ii is the average of the pixel values in the frame Ii. If a normalized frame is close to
this normalized model of the background, the frame can be assumed to only contain the
background. This solves the problem of compromising between sensitivity and adaption
time, since the non-normalized background model used for the background subtraction is
only updated, when the frame is classiﬁed as containing only the background. The dis-
tance d between a normalized frame and the normalized background model is measured
as the maximum absolute difference between corresponding pixels in the two images
40
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. IMAGE PROCESSING
SECTION 4.3
d = max(|bgn −In,t|)
This value then has to be below a threshold kn to classify a frame as containing only
the background. The normalized background model cannot be used to detect the back-
ground/foreground, only to detect whether a foreground object is present or not. This
is because the background of a normalized frame containing a foreground object will be
shifted away from the background model. The effect is illustrated in the 2D case in Figure
4.8.
(a) Background image with
scan-line
(b) Image with foreground
object and scan-line.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Pixel position
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Pixel value
1e1
With foreground
Only background
(c) Plot of the scan-lines
Figure 4.8: In the illustration it is seen why the normalized background model is only use-
ful to detect whether a foreground object is present ore not. The background to the right
of the arm is shifted far from the true background and would be classiﬁed as foreground.
Next is the problem of choosing the right threshold k for determining whether a pixel in a
frame belongs to the background or to the foreground. One method is to use the standard
41
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. IMAGE PROCESSING
SECTION 4.3
deviation σt over the last N frames
σt =
s
1
N
t
∑
i=N−t
(Ii −µi)2
Then a popular choice of the threshold k is [22]
kt = 2.5·σt
Instead of calculating the mean µt and the standard deviation σt from N frames at each
time step, the running mean µg,t and the running standard deviation σg,t can be calculated
as [22]
µg,t = Ig,t ·ρ +(1−ρ)µg,t−1
σg,t =
q
(µg,t −It)2 ·ρ +(1−ρ)µ2
g,t−1
(4.5)
Where ρ is a time constant, determining how many frames used to calculate the running
mean and running standard deviation. To further reduce the computation time, it can be
assumed, that the standard deviation is a linear function of the mean. So it is assumed,
that the standard deviation will increase with the light intensity. This will reduce k to
k = a· µg,t +b
where a and b are constants to be estimated for the model.
42
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Development and Implementation
This section describes the development and implementation of the solution to the problem
addressed in the research aims of this thesis. The section has a short introduction to the
hardware and software tools used for the development and implementation. Next is a
description of a projector registration procedure. This registration procedure is a large
part of the work of this thesis and is used for both the auto-calibration for seamless multi-
projection and for the touch detection calibration. The registration procedure is explained
with the seamless multi-projection as case for examples and illustrations. But all methods
apply directly to the touch detection registration as well. After the description of the
registration procedure follows a description of the seamless multi-projection algorithm
and last is a description of the touch detection algorithm.
5.1
Software and hardware tools
This section describes the software and hardware tools used in this thesis.
Hardware
The main hardware components used in this thesis are:
1. Raspberry Pi 3B+
2. Arducam OV5647 Camera Board with a LS-40180 Fisheye Lens
3. ViewSonic LS830 Laser projector
The Raspberry Pi 3B+ is a single board computer. The CPU is a quad-core 1.4 GHz
BCM2837B0, Cortex-A53, 64-bit processor. The standard operating system on the Rasp-
berry Pi 3B+ is based on the Debian operating system but optimized for the hardware on
43
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.1
the Raspberry Pi. This computer was chosen both due to it small form factor, its low price
and most of all because of the numerous software and hardware modules available for the
Raspberry Pi.
The Arducam OV5647 has a 5 Mpx CMOS sensor and communicates via the CSI2 inter-
face. The LS-40180 is a ﬁsheye lens with horizontal ﬁeld of view of 194° and vertical
ﬁrld of view 142°. This camera module was chosen for the low price, its sufﬁcient ﬁeld
of view and its compatibility with Raspberry PI.
The LS830 projector is a 1080p full HD projector with maximum output of 4500 lm and a
0.23 ultra-short throw ratio[25]. This projector was chosen because of its ultra short throw
ratio, its high brightness, its low noise level and its fast start-up time. These features are
essential for the impression of the ﬁnal installation in the showroom.
Software
The main software used in this thesis is
1. Python
2. OpenCV
3. Numpy (Python Module)
4. Scikit-Image (Python Module)
5. PiCamera (Python Module)
6. Socket (Python module)
7. OpenCamera
8. Matlab
All software implemented in this thesis is written in Python. Python is an open source in-
terpreted programming language. Python was chosen due to its large amounts of package,
especially the bindings for the OpenCV library, and because of the high level program-
ming interface to the hardware on the Raspberry Pi enabling fast software development.
OpenCV (Open Source Computer Vision Library) is an image analysis software library
written in C++. This library contains more than 2500 optimized image analysis algorithms
featuring both high level and low level functionalities. OpenCV was chosen because of its
vast selection of implemented algorithms and because of it speed. OpenCV is designed as
a real time optimized image analysis library, thus enabling implementation of algorithms
at speeds much higher, than what could have been implemented within the scope of a
master thesis.
44
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
Numpy is a Python module for numerical computing. The module is implemented in
C/C++ and is like OpenCV highly optimize for fast computations. Numpy is used in this
thesis due to its array manipulation capacities and because it is a pre-requisite for the
OpenCV Python binding.
Scikit-Image is a python module designed for image analysis. It is not nearly as fast as
OpenCV and is designed for educational purposes. But it features some high level func-
tionalities, that are not available in OpenCV, e.g. piece-wise afﬁne transformations, which
are essential for some of the calibration procedures in this thesis. Since the calibration is
to be done only once, speed is not a concern.
PiCamera is a python module used for interfacing the OV5647 camera module. This mod-
ule provides both high and low level control over the available features for the OV5647
camera module.
Socket is low level network programming interface module. Sockets enables User Data-
gram Protocol (UDP) communication between the Raspberry Pis. UDP is a communica-
tion protocol where the server is sending data, and if a client is ready for it, the client will
receive it. If no clients are listening, the data is lost. This makes UDP an unsafe protocol
compared to other protocols, but it also makes this protocol a lot faster than other proto-
cols. UDP is especially useful due to its multi-casting ability where a server can send data
to multiple clients in a single transmission.
OpenCamera is an Android application enabling high control over smart phone cameras.
This application was used to capture image for projector calibration.
At last Matlab was for some of the algorithm development and data analysis. Matlab is a
programming language and a graphical user interface with a lot of build in applications.
Matlab was used because of the thorough documentation and its visual work environment
enables fast visualization of data.
5.2
Projector registration
Both the seamless multi-projection and the touch detection requires registration of the
projector. This registration is done using a camera. It is assumed, that the projectors
are projecting on a static surface S. A fully registered projector is a projector, where
the mapping of each projector pixel ppn projected unto the surface S is known in camera
coordinates as ppn
c . Performing a full registration would require localizing each projector
pixel on S in camera coordinates. But by assuming that S is continuous, the registration
can be approximated by a piecewise afﬁne transformation instead. The procedure of
piecewise afﬁne transformation is to divide the part of S illuminated by the projector to be
45
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
registered into triangles and make an afﬁne transformation of each triangle into camera
coordinates. The precision of the registration then depends on the amount of triangles
dividing the illuminated surface and the precision of these triangles.
The triangles are formed through tessellation from a number of points as described later
in this section. The registration task is then to localize keypoints in a registration image
corresponding to pixels in the projector to be registered. The procedure of the projector
registration can be outlined as follows:
1. Project images with registration patterns on the projection surface and capture pic-
tures with of projected images with a static camera
2. Make the pictures binary, such that only the registration patterns are visible
3. Identify the region of interest in the pictures where the registration pattern is present
4. Localize keypoints in the ROI
5. Perform tessellation and piecewise afﬁne transformation
This section will describe each of these steps.
5.2.1
Registration image
(a) Horizontal rectangles for registration
(b) Vertical rectangles for registration
Figure 5.1: Registration images to be projected by the projectors for key point identiﬁca-
tion.
For the identiﬁcation of keypoints in the projector, two registration images are used as
shown in Figure 5.1. The images are projected with the projector one at a time while
the camera takes images without moving as shown in Figure 5.2. The key points are
then deﬁned as the points where the vertical edges of the vertical rectangles intersect the
horizontal edges of the horizontal rectangles.
One could argue, that a chessboard pattern could simplify the registration process, so
only one image had to be projected, and one picture had to be captured. One reason for
two registration images is, that this enables clustering edges of the rectangles into easily
46
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
distinguishable clusters. Another reason is that with a chessboard pattern, the edges along
the outline of the chessboard would be discontinuous and difﬁcult to tell apart from small
lines due to noise in the image.
(a) Image of horizontal rectangles for regis-
tration taken with camera.
(b) Image of vertical rectangles for registra-
tion taken with camera.
Figure 5.2: Registration images taken with camera for key point identiﬁcation.
5.2.2
Making binary images
It is necessary to make the registration pictures binary, to localize the ROI where the
registration pattern in present. The task when making a binary image is to determine a
suitable threshold value. Assuming that the bright pixels in the registration pattern of
the registration pictures are brighter than all other pixels, the threshold value should be
set to the lowest of the bright pixel values. To determine this value, the histograms of
the pictures are considered. The histogram of the registration picture from Figure 5.2a is
shown in Figure 5.3a.
47
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
(a) Histogram of the registration picture shown
in Figure 5.2a
(b) Histogram of the registration picture shown
in Figure 5.2a after Gaussian ﬁltering. The blue
points denote local maxima, the orange point
denotes the local minimum just before the last
local maximum and the green point denotes the
orange point minus 10% of the distance between
the last local maximum and the orange point.
Figure 5.3: Histograms of the registration picture shown i Figure 5.2a
Looking at this histogram it is seen, that most pixels are in the middle of the spectrum,
but a blob of pixels are also found around the pixel intensity of 200. The threshold value
should be somewhere between the peak in the middle of the spectrum and the peak of the
blob at around intensity 200. First the histogram is smoothed using a Gaussian ﬁlter. The
standard deviation should be large enough to leave only one local maximum for each blob
and small enough to keep the approximate location of the maxima. The value is chosen
empirically and set to 8. Next the local maxima and minima with a minimum separation
of ten are localized. The position xmin of the local minimum just be fore the last maximum
is subtracted from the position xmax of the last maximum. This distance d is multiplied by
1.1 and subtracted from xmax to ﬁnd the threshold t for the binary image.
t = xmax −(xmax −xmin)·1.1
This procedure is illustrated in Figure 5.3b. The result of the threshold is shown in Figure
5.4.
48
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
(a) Binary image of horizontal rectangles for
projector registration.
(b) Binary image of vertical rectangles for
projector registration.
Figure 5.4: Registration images taken with camera for key point identiﬁcation.
5.2.3
Finding the ROI
To identify the keypoints in the registration images, a region of interest (ROI) is found.
The ROI is deﬁned as a quadrilateral of the image, where the registration pattern is
present.
The two binary images shown in Figure 5.4 are combined to one binary image. Then
each connected component in the binary image is labelled. To identify the binary label
of interest a search algorithm is applied. The algorithm goes through the labels one at a
time and check for a set of criteria. The ﬁrst check is the size of the label. If the size
of the label is smaller than the current best label, the label will not be checked further
and is excluded. This size is initialized to zero. Next the label is dilated and eroded, as
described in section 4, to remove small cavities in the blob. The contours of the blob
are found using the algorithm presented in [24]. Since there are eight rectangles in each
registration image, the combined binary image as shown in Figure 5.5 should contain one
outer contour and 49 inner contours. If this is not the case, the label is excluded. After
the search algorithm, only the binary blob describing the combined registration patterns
is left in the image.
49
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
Figure 5.5: The largest blob in the binary image formed by combining the binary images
from Figure 5.4
The corners of outline of binary blob shown in Figure 5.5 is used to warp the images for
further analysis. These corners are found by using the outer contour of the binary blob.
The outer contour is simpliﬁed to a convex polygon using the algorithm presented in [20].
This convex polygon is simpliﬁed by an approximation. The approximation is another
polygon, where the distance between edges in the simpliﬁed polygon and vertices in the
original polygon is below a set threshold as described in [5]. The vertices of the simpliﬁed
polygon are amongst the vertices of the original polygon. The threshold for the distance
between new edges and old vertices should be as high as possible while not excluding one
of the corners of the blob. This can be assured by setting the threshold well below half
the expected minimum distance between two opposing corners in the binary blob.
This simpliﬁed polygon containing the corners of the binary blob is then searched for
these corners. The corners are assumed to be the points in the polygon deﬁning the
quadrilateral with the largest area. The search for the corners is done by checking all
valid combinations of diagonal in the polygon. The algorithm is described in pseudo code
as:
largest area = 0
for i from 0 to (number of points in polygon)-3:
for j from i+2 to (number of points in polygon)-1:
for k from i+1 to j:
for l from j+1 to number of points in polygon:
new area = area defined by point i, j, k, l
if(new area > largest area):
largest area = new area
best indices = i, j, k, l
50
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
The result of the search for corners is shown in Figure 5.6a.
(a) Result of searching for corners of the
registration pattern.
The background is a
combination of the two registration images
each divided by two and added.
The red
points are the points from the simpliﬁed
polygon as describing the contour of the reg-
istration pattern. The blue lines are the di-
agonals that did not result in the largest area
quadrilateral. The green lines are the diago-
nals that resulted in the largest quadrilateral.
Center of mass
Top left
Top right
Bottom left
Bottom right
(b) The corners of the largest quadrilateral
labelled from their relative position to their
center of mass.
Figure 5.6: Result of ﬁnding and labelling corners of the registration pattern.
Now that the corners of the registration pattern has been found, they are labelled using
their relative position to the center of mass. The center of mass of the four points is
subtracted from each point. The point with two negative coordinates is assumed to be the
lower left. The point with ﬁrst coordinate negative and second positive is assumed to be
the upper left and so on. The result in shown in Figure 5.6.
Since the projection surface is not completely ﬂat, the registration pattern is not guaran-
teed to be within the quadrilateral shown in Figure 5.6. To ensure this, the contour of the
binary blob from Figure 5.5 is transformed with a perspective transform. The perspective
transform is made such, that the upper left corner is mapped into (1,0), the lower left cor-
ner is mapped into (0,0), lower right corner is mapped into (0,1) and upper right corner
is mapped into (1,1) as shown in Figure 5.7a. These four mapped corners are then shifted
vertically and horizontally such that all the mapped contour points are included within
the rectangle deﬁned by these four new points. At last 10% of the height and 10% of the
width of the new rectangle is added to the sides of the rectangle respectively, as shown in
Figure 5.7a, to ease the further search for points of interest.
51
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
Center of mass
Top left
Top right
Bottom left
Bottom right
(a) The contour of the binary blob from
Figure 5.5 transformed using a perspective
transform. The red points are the original
corners of the binary blob. The blue points
deﬁne the new expanded ROI including all
points in the contour plus 10% of the width
and height.
(b) The ROI transformed back into cam-
era space is shown as the blue quadrilateral.
Both the original corners of the binary blob
and the corners of the new ROI are shown.
Figure 5.7: The ROI for the registration shown in both perspective transformed space and
camera space
Now the four points deﬁning this expanded rectangle are transformed back into camera
space and deﬁne the ROI for the registration algorithm as shown in Figure 5.7b
5.2.4
Localizing points of interest
Now that the ROI has been identiﬁed, the ROI can be transformed using a perspective
transform to ease the localization of the points of interest. To perform this transformation
a resolution for the transformed image has to be chosen. This resolution is a compromise
between loss of data, if the resolution is too small and increased computational time with
the increase of resolution. Since the registration is only done once, the computational
time is not of great concern. Therefore the resolution of the warped image is set to height
and width equal to the size of the longest side of the ROI in camera space. The warping is
done with linear interpolation of the pixel values in the picture. Examples of such warped
pictures are shown in Figure 5.8.
52
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
(a) Example of registration picture of
horizontal rectangles after perspective
transformation of the ROI.
(b) Example of registration picture
of vertical rectangles after perspective
transformation of the ROI.
Figure 5.8: Warped registration pictures
Now the task is to ﬁnd where the horizontal edges of the horizontal rectangles intersect
the vertical edges of the vertical rectangles. But to ﬁlter out noise in the image, a mask
is ﬁrst applied. This mask is found by making the warped images binary using the same
method as with the original pictures. Then the binary images are closed by a dilation
followed by an erosion. The kernel size for the dilation and erosion should be well below
half the distance between the rectangles. Next the eight largest binary blobs are found
and the rest excluded. The contours of these eight binary blobs are then identiﬁed and
dilated as shown in Figure 5.9. These dilated contours are used as masks when searching
for edges in the registration images.
(a) Search mask for horizontal rectan-
gles.
(b) Search mask for vertical rectangles
Figure 5.9: The search masks for ﬁnding the edges in the calibration pictures
53
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
To ﬁnd the edges within the search masks, the Sobel ﬁlter described in Section 4.1 is used.
For the horizontal rectangles the Sobel kernel for the vertical gradient is used and for the
vertical rectangles the Sobel kernel for the horizontal gradient is used.
The resulting two gradient images are then clipped, so all values below a threshold t is set
to zero. This threshold is set as
tx = min(Gx)+(max(Gx)−min(Gx))·0.1
ty = min(Gy)+(max(Gy)−min(Gy))·0.1
where Gx and Gy are the gradient images in x and y direction.
The non-zero connected components for each masked, clipped, gradient image are then
labelled and the 16 largest blobs using 8-connectivity in each image are kept while the
rest is ﬁltered out. The resulting gradient lines are shown in Figure 5.10
(a) Horizontal lines
(b) Vertical lines
Figure 5.10: The result of the gradient line ﬁnding algorithm.
54
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
Figure 5.11: The search window used to ﬁnd the ﬁrst point of interest in the registration
images. The images to the right are the images from Figure 5.10 cropped with the search
window. The red lines are the principal axis of the gradient values.
To ﬁnd where these lines intersect, a search window is used. The approximate position of
the upper left corners is known from previous and is used as a starting point. The search
window is a rectangle with width and height set to 2/3 of the expected distance between
the vertical and horizontal lines respectively. The search window is then centered on the
expected position of the upper left corner as shown in Figure 5.11.
Now a two lines are ﬁtted using the image moments as described in Section 4.2. One line
is ﬁtted to the vertical line in the search window and one is ﬁtted to the horizontal line in
the search window as shown in Figure 5.11. The lines are described as
Ln :

xn
yn

=

xn1
yn1

·tn +

xn0
yn0


where n is an index unique to each line. If the two found lines are indexed with n = 1 and
n = 2, the intersection is found as the solution to


−1
0
x11
0
0
−1
y11
0
−1
0
0
x21
0
−1
0
y21


·








xi
yi
t1
t2








=








−x10
−y10
−x20
−y20








55
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.2
where xi and yi are the coordinates for the intersection. The search window is then moved
the expected distance between the vertical lines to the right and the procedure of ﬁnding
the crossing between the lines is repeated. When all 16 crossings of the top horizontal
line has been found, the next horizontal line is searched. These found crossings are then
projected back into image space and are the ﬁnal points of interest deﬁning the registration
of the projector. The resulting points of interest are shown in Figure 5.12.
(a) Points of interest in the warped regis-
tration images. The points are put together
with the sum of the two registration images.
(b) Points of interest in camera space. The
points are put together with the sum of the
two registration images.
Figure 5.12: The ﬁnal position of the points of interest in the registration images.
5.2.5
Tessellation and piece-wise afﬁne transformation
When a set of points of interest is found for a projector, a tessellation is performed to
enable a piecewise afﬁne transformation. The tessellation procedure used in this project
is the Delaunay triangulation [4]. This method connects the points to form triangles such,
that non of the points are within the circumcircle of any of the triangles. An example
of such a triangulation performed on the registration images from Figure 5.2 is shown in
Figure 5.13.
56
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.3
Figure 5.13: Delaunay triangulation of points of interest for a projector to be registered.
Each of the triangles found by the Delaunay triangulation is then used for an afﬁne trans-
formation as described in section 2.1. The piece-wise afﬁne transformation can now be
used to map every pixel in the projector to coordinates in the camera space and the regis-
tration of the projector is fulﬁlled.
5.3
Seamless multi-projection
This section describes how to map and blend an image into multiple overlapping pro-
jections generating one seamless projection of the image. One could think, that this is
simply a matter of aligning the projectors, but it is practically impossible to align pro-
jectors, such that the seam is not visible. Therefore the projectors will be overlapping
slightly. A blending is applied, such that the intensity of one projector will gradually
decrease in the overlap towards another projector.
In this section projective geometry is used enabling projective transformations as de-
scribed in section 2.1. Points describing pixels in the image to be mapped and blended
will be denoted pi, and points describing pixels in the a projector will be denoted ppn,
where n is a number labelling the projector in question. A subscript on a point describes
the coordinate system in which the point is described. In this section there are four coor-
dinate systems: camera, projector, image and world coordinates with the subscripts c, p,i
and w.
The ﬁrst step to enable seamless multi-projection is projector registration. This step is
described in Section 5.2. When the projectors to be used in the seamless multi-projection
are registered, the seamless multi-projection is carried out in two steps:
57
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.3
• Warping and splitting the image to be seamlessly displayed
• Performing edge blending on the image to be seamlessly displayed
The following sections describe these two steps.
5.3.1
Warping of images
Considering two projectors with a certain overlap in the projections, the task of warping
an image unto the projection surface S is to ﬁnd the mapping of every projector pixel in
image pixels. So the aim is to determine
pi
p for all pi
p ∈Sn
where Sn denotes the part of S illuminated by projector n.
As an example the image from Figure 5.14 will be warped unto the projection surface
illuminated by the two projectors shown in Figure 5.15.
Figure 5.14: An example image to be warped and edge blended unto two projectors.
Since the registration of the projectors give us the coordinate of each projector pixel in
camera space, the ﬁrst task is to place the image to be warped in camera space as well.
Assuming that the camera is a pinhole camera, and the projection surface is reasonably
ﬂat, the image should be projected as a quadrilateral into the camera space. To ﬁnd a
suitable quadrilateral a rule has to be chosen. One could ﬁnd the quadrilateral with the
largest area that will ﬁt within the area projected by the two projectors. But if the camera is
tilted, the largest area in camera space will not be the largest area in real world coordinates.
Further it could be argued, that the projected image should be level. But again, an image
that is level in camera space is not guaranteed to be level in real world coordinates. To
58
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.3
address these problems, the search for a suitable quadrilateral for the image projection will
not be found in camera space directly but in a perspective transformation of the camera
space. The perspective transformation will be deﬁned by the four outer most corners of
the projections as shown in Figure 5.15.
Figure 5.15: Points of interest for two overlapping projections. The blue points and out-
line describes points of interest for the left projector and the orange points and outline
describes the points of interest for the right projector. The four marked corners are the
corners used for perspective transformation to determine the quadrilateral for warping the
image to be projected into camera space.
The quadrilateral for the projection of the image into camera space is then found in the
transformed image space as the largest possible horizontal rectangle. This is found by
ﬁnding the smallest height difference between the top and bottom and within these ﬁnding
the smallest width difference between the sides. This rectangle is then projected back into
camera space as shown in Figure 5.16.
59
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.3
Figure 5.16: Points of interest for two overlapping projections. The blue points and out-
line describes points of interest for the left projector and the orange points and outline
describes the points of interest for the right projector. The red quadrilateral is the quadri-
lateral unto which the image is projected. The blue quadrilateral is the quadrilateral deﬁn-
ing the overlapping region of the image in the two projectors.
The example image from Figure 5.14 is then warped unto this found quadrilateral in
camera space as shown in Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.17: The example image from Figure 5.14 warped unto the projection surface
for mapping projector pixel coordinates into image coordinates. The red quadrilateral is
the quadrilateral into which the image is warped and the blue quadrilateral is the overlap
between the two projectors in the warped image.
Since each projector pixel coordinate is known in camera coordinates from the registration
procedure, and each image coordinate is known in camera coordinates from the warping,
the image pixels pi
i can be transformed to camera coordinates pi
c and from camera co-
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.3
ordinates to projector coordinates pi
p. But instead of doing this forward mapping of the
image, each pixel coordinate of the projector is mapped into image coordinates and linear
interpolation is used to determine the pixel value of each projector pixel. This means,
all possible projector pixels will be used, and once the mapping from projector space to
image space is found, there needs only one remapping to be done instead of ﬁrst mapping
to camera space and then to image space.
(a) The example image transformed into the
left projector.
(b) The example image transformed into the
right projector.
Figure 5.18: The example image form Figure 5.14 transformed into each projector.
5.3.2
Blending
Now that the image has been warped for each of the two projectors, the overlapping region
of the projections has to be blended. It is assumed, that the projectors are somewhat
horizontally aligned, so the blending is also horizontally. The overlap as shown in Figure
5.17 is transformed with a perspective transform into a square with sides of length one.
The height position in the square is not of interest, as the projection is rectangular, but
the horizontal position t in this transformed space is used as a blending variable. The
horizontal position in the transformed space goes from zero to one and can therefore be
used as a coefﬁcient for the pixels in the overlap. The ﬁrst idea in this project was to use
this variable directly for a linear blending. If I is a RGB value of the image to be blended
and I1 and I2 are the corresponding RGB values of two projectors, then the blending
equation for two projectors would be
I = I ·t +I ·(1−t)
(5.1)
I1 = x·t
(5.2)
I2 = x·(1−t)
(5.3)
This approach gives the minimum error in intensities if there is a small error in the warping
61
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.3
of the images. But it also introduces a discontinuity in the image gradient at the edge of
the overlap. To avoid this discontinuity the edge blending coefﬁcient was chosen as a
third order polynomial in the horizontal position t in the transformed space instead of the
position itself. This was done to minimize the rate of change in the gradient, while having
a curve that is continuous in all points. Given that the rate of change in the gradient of
the curve has to be minimized the problem is to minimize e(t)′′ where e(t) is the function
returning edge blending coefﬁcients given a horizontal position in the transformed overlap
space. This minimum can be found where e′′′(t) = 0. If e′′′(t) = 0 then it has been
shown[19], that the function that will minimize e(t)′′ is a third order polynomial
e(t) = a1 +a2t +a3t2 +a4t3
t ∈[0;1]
To ﬁnd the coefﬁcients of this polynomial, the restrictions
e′(0) = 0,
e′(1) = 0,
e(0) = 0,
e(1) = 1
are considered. Solving these four equations gives
a1 = 0,
a2 = 0,
a3 = 3,
a4 = −2
So the edge blending coefﬁcient e(t) of a pixel in the overlap between the two projectors
is found by ﬁnding the horizontal position t of the pixel in transformed space made by
transforming the overlap into a square with sides one and giving this horizontal position
as input to the function
e(t) = 3t2 −2t3
(5.4)
This function is only valid for one projector, but due to the symmetry of the setup, the
function for the other projector is simply
e(1−t) = 3(1−t)2 −2(1−t)3
62
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.3
Now the edge blending equation is
I = I ·e(t)+I ·e(1−t)
I1 = I ·e(t)
I2 = I ·e(1−t)
The result of this edge blending performed on the warped images from Figure 5.18 is
shown in Figure 5.19.
(a) The example image transformed into the
left projector with edge blending.
(b) The example image transformed into the
right projector with edge blending.
Figure 5.19: The example image form Figure 5.14 transformed into each projector with
added edge blending.
The ﬁnal touch to the edge blending is a gamma correction. The human eye is not linear
in its sensitivity to light intensity. It is logarithmic [26]. This is a known fact to projector
manufactures and therefore projectors are shipped with build in gamma correction, so if
a pixel is set to RGB value 200, it appears twice as bright, as if it is set to 100. This is
done through gamma correction where the normalized pixel values x are mapped with the
gamma correction function
I(x) = xγ
(5.5)
where γ is the gamma correction value. To take this effect into account the edge blending
equation 5.1 is modiﬁed to
I(x) = x·e(t)+x·e(1−t)
(5.6)
Since x is the variable that is sent to the projector, the function has to be changed, so the
63
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.3
gamma correction is applied to x instead of I(x). This can be done by applying I(I−1(x))
to each of the addends in equation 5.6
I(x) = I(I−1(I(x)·e(t)))+I(I−1(I(x)·e(1−t)))
This equation is the same as 5.6, but it can now be seen, that the equation can be written
in the form
I(x) = I(x1)+I(x2)
x1 = I−1(I(x)·e(t))
x2 = I−1(I(x)·e(1−t))
where x1 and x2 are the gamma corrected edge blended RGB values to sent to each pro-
jector. Applying 5.5 reduces the equation to
x1 = x·e(t)1/γ
x2 = x·e(1−t)1/γ
which are the ﬁnal gamma corrected edge blended RGB values for the overlap between
two projectors.
To determine the gamma correction used in the projectors, each of the three color channels
where examined using a lux-meter. The result is shown in Figure 5.20.
The values measured with the lux-meter where used ﬁt the gamma function 5.5 to each
color channel. The resulting gamma correction values were found to be as shown in table
5.1
γ
R2
Red
2.11
0.999
Green
2.12
0.999
Blue
2.13
0.999
Table 5.1: Gamma correction values for each color channel with R2 values.
The result of the full image warping and edge-blending is shown in Figure 5.21
64
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
Figure 5.20: Measurements of the light intensities from all three color channels of a
projector. The colors represent the corresponding color of the color channel.
Figure 5.21: The result of image warping and edge blending
5.4
Touch detection
In this section the implementation of the touch detection will be described. The different
parts of the algorithm are transformations of the image inputs, foreground description and
ﬁnally a binary classiﬁcation of the foreground object as being a touching object or not.
The overall ﬂow of the touch functionality can be seen in Figure 5.22. As described in
the scene analysis the touch functionality is implemented using two Raspberry with one
65
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
camera each. These will both act as clients and make a description of the foreground. The
parameters found in the foreground description part will be send to a server that makes
a binary classiﬁcation. The program can roughly be divided into two different parts for
the foreground description. The initialization part and the main functionality, which both
runs at 20Hz. In the initialization part of the program, the system must be in steady state,
meaning the buttons must be visible with no disturbance, as this is where the steady state
is deﬁned. Steady state for this system means, that the camera can see nothing but the
buttons in the regions of interest. The mean of each pixels in the initial backgrounds
are saved and will be refereed to as the True Background moving forward. Finally is
the Moving Average Background initialized. The initial Moving Average Background is
equal to the True Background.
Figure 5.22: The overall ﬂow of the touch program.
When the initialization is done the clients move into their main loop. The program will
look for a breach of the steady state by comparing the True Backgrounds with the the
current images of the ROIs. If a breach of the steady state occur an analysis of the current
image ROIs against the Moving Average Background will be made. If a potential touch
occur information of said touch will be send to a server. The server receives data from
two clients and from said data will the server make a binary classiﬁcation, whether it is
66
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
believed to be a touch or not. For robustness at least 3 consecutive touches needs to be
found before the classiﬁcation will believe in a touch.
5.4.1
Undistortion of ﬁsheye images
The touch detection algorithm could be designed directly on the ﬁsheye images. But the
analysis would be complicated by this special geometry. To ease the analysis, the ﬁsheye
images are undistorted by using the camera model and calibration described in Section
2.2. This allows the use of projective geometry analysis.
To further ease the analysis, each camera will have a piecewise afﬁne transformation
similar to the one described Section 2.1. This transformation is done using the calibration
images and the calibration procedure as described in Section 5.2. An example of an
undistortion of a calibration image and the localization of point of interest is illustrated in
Figure 5.23.
(a) Fisheye image captured with the ﬁsheye
camera on the right side of the projector.
The image is the sum of two calibration im-
ages. One with vertical rectangles and one
with horizontal rectangles
(b) The undistorted calibration images with
key points identiﬁed illustrated with red
dots.
Figure 5.23
The result of the piecewise afﬁne transformation of the undistorted image is illustrated in
Figure 5.24.
67
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
Figure 5.24: The result of the piecewise afﬁne transformation of the calibration pattern.
In the development of the touch algorithm the goal is to detect whether a certain area on
the projection surface is touched or not. This area will be called the touch area throughout
this section. To detect the touch within the touch area, the transformed image will be
cropped around this touch area as shown in Figure 5.25. The cropped frame is 25x25
pixels. Frames of this type will be used in the following touch detection algorithm.
Figure 5.25: The process of undistorting and transforming the projection surface followed
by a cropping around the touch area of interest.
5.4.2
Foreground detection
To detect the touch of a ﬁnger on the projection surface, a background subtraction algo-
rithm was implemented. The ﬁrst task in the implementation of the foreground detection
algorithm was to choose whether to use the Gaussian model with the foreground detection
threshold kt
kt = 2.5σt
or the linear threshold model
68
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
kt = a· µt +b
The advantage of the Gaussian is the simplicity because no parameters have to be ﬁtted.
The obvious disadvantage is the extra computational time used to calculate the running
standard deviation. A not so obvious disadvantage is the classiﬁcation of reﬂections from
the ﬁnger to be part of the foreground. The light from the projector will make a light half
circle around the ﬁnger as illustrated in Figure 5.26.
(a) Image where the reﬂection from the
ﬁnger is visible at the ﬁnger tip.
(b) Foreground detection
Figure 5.26: Gaussian foreground detection where the reﬂection from the ﬁnger is classi-
ﬁed as foreground.
With the Gaussian model for k this reﬂection is classiﬁed as foreground because of the low
variation within the constant background as shown in Figure 5.26. The linear model of
k will not classify the reﬂection as foreground, because the reﬂections only occurs when
the touch area has a certain intensity. This means, that the running mean µt is large and
so will k be, while the standard deviation will be low no matter the intensity.
Another way of getting rid of the false classiﬁcation of the reﬂection is by using the
assumption, that the ﬁnger and shadow reﬂection is less bright than the white projection
surface. With this assumption we can detect the foreground as the pixels fulﬁlling
Mt −It > k
instead of
|Mt −It| > k
But this modulation does not solve the problem of the extra computation time of the
69
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
Guassian model of k. Therefore we chose to implement the linear version of k. The
task was then to ﬁnd a way to ﬁt the parameters a and b. The goal is to ﬁnd a and b
such, that the full foreground is detected without false positives under all reasonable light
conditions. The light conditions are inﬂuenced by the projector and the external light
sources in the room. We will require, that the foreground detection is functioning, when
the projector is the only light source in the room, and the light intensity from the projector
on the touch area is more than a certain value, but the foreground detection must also
be functioning, when all external light sources in our test room are turned on, and the
projector is projecting at full intensity within the touch area. The lower intensity value for
the projector will be determined experimentally.
To ﬁnd a and b meeting these requirements, two tests were made. One with all external
light sources turned off and one with all external light sources turned on. For each test
a touch area was deﬁned as 100 × 100 pixels in the center of the projector. The touch
area was illuminated with gray scale color ranging from 0 to 255 in 10 steps with linearly
separated values. A video was made for each test, where a ﬁnger was touching the wall in
the touch area at each intensity level. A threshold value k for the foreground detecting was
set manually at each intensity to determine the optimal value. The median of the touch
area in the video was used as a background running average µt value for each intensity.
This way 20 data points (kt,µt) were collected, so a and b could be determined with a
least square ﬁtting. The criterion for an optimal value of kt was empirically determined
by adjusting k until the full ﬁnger with shadow was classiﬁed as foreground with no false
positives. Figure 5.27 illustrates this procedure.
70
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
(a) Image of touch area with
ﬁnger touching.
(b) k = 2
(c) k = 12
(d) k = 50
Figure 5.27: The procedure of choosing the right threshold k for a given background
image intensity. k = 2 is too low and a lot of noise is included in the foreground. k = 12
is a good value where only the ﬁnger is classiﬁed as foreground. k = 50 is too high and
the bright center part of the ﬁnger is not classiﬁed as foreground.
The procedure proved difﬁcult with the very low projector intensities because of the shad-
ows cast by the external light sources. In the test setup the projectors are on the ﬂoor but in
the real setup the projectors would be hanging from the ceiling. So external light sources,
which are usually mounted in the ceiling as well, would cast shadows in the same direc-
tion as the light from the projector. So these false positives from the shadows from the
ambient light sources are not considered important in the choosing of k at the different
intensities. An example of the shadows cast by the external light sources is illustrated in
Figure 5.28.
(a) Image of ﬁnger.
(b) Foreground detection.
Figure 5.28: Foreground detection where the shadow from an ambient light source is
classiﬁed as foreground.
The resulting data points (kt,µt) are shown in Figure 5.29. The values a and b are found
to be
71
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
0
50
100
150
200
Image median [8bit]
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
22.5
25.0
k
Light off
Light on
Figure 5.29: Data points used to ﬁnd a and b in kt = a·µt +b where µt is measured as the
median of a gray scale touch area and k is found as illustrated in Figure 5.27. Data was
collected with ambient room light turned on and off.
a = 0.080
b = 8.70
The value of ρ from Equation 4.5 for the running average is set to
ρ = 0.1
The last task in the foreground detection was to decide on parameters for the detection
of the presence of a foreground object (steady state check) as described in section 5.4.
These parameters are the threshold kn on the absolute difference between the normalized
background (the True Background) and the normalized current frame In,t and the amount
of normalized differences (pixel-wise) np to be above this threshold before classifying the
frame to not be in steady state and thus containing a foreground object. As described in
the scene analysis a ﬁnger is estimated to take up at least 30 pixels in a 25 × 25 pixels
window. So np has to be below this value. We decided on
72
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
np = 10
kn was found by looking at the values from Figure 5.29. It is seen, that only the lowest
two intensities had kt values less than 10. Therefore we decided on
kn = 10
5.4.3
Describing the foreground
In this section one can read about the ﬁndFinger algorithm. In Figure 5.30 a ﬂowchart of
the algorithm can be found. The goal for this algorithm is to detect a potential touch, this
includes a x-, y-coordinate, an angle of the foreground and the variance of the foreground
in the image. The x- and y-coordinates will later be used to decide whether or not the
detected object is touching the wall, and the angle and variance of the foreground will be
used to decide whether the detected object is an actual touch or for instance a shadow.
This will be described in depth in Section 5.4.4. The ﬁndFinger function is called each
time the program is not in steady state.
Figure 5.30: Flowchart of the ﬁndFinger algorithm.
The algorithm takes the binary image generated by the foreground detector and uses a
set of rules to classify the input as an potential touch or not. First step of the algorithm
is to label all connected components. This is done with 4-connectivity for two reason
73
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
ﬁrstly: the performance is better. Second and more importantly if a component only has
a diagonally connection, said component is found to be too vaguely deﬁned. When all
components are deﬁned each component is tested in ﬁve checks.
Recall in Section 3.2 it was found, that a ﬁnger will minimum cover 5.4% of the button
area, this corresponds to 33.75 pixels in the described transformed image. In Figure 5.31
an example of a touch where the ﬁnger covers 50 pixels corresponding to 8.2%. To ensure
no potential touches are disregarded due to size (say the touch happens a bit towards the
top of the button and/or a smaller ﬁnger), the size-threshold is set to 30 pixels, which
corresponds to 4.8% coverage.
(a) Image of a ﬁnger almost touching a button making two
separate objects.
(b) Binary image of a ﬁnger al-
most touching a button making
two separate objects.
Figure 5.31: Image of .
In Section 3.2 an analysis showed, that the part of the object closest to the projection
surface will be the lowest point of said object in a given frame. Furthermore must the
object touching the projection surface come from somewhere. This gives rise to three
rules. Firstly an object must be present on at least one of the side-edges or the top-edge
of the frame. Furthermore must the angle of an object in a given frame be between 5
and 175 degrees. Finally if an object touches the bottom-edge of the frame, the object is
thought to touch below the button or not touch at all and is therefore disregarded. If these
requirements are not fulﬁlled, the object is considered to be noise.
Finally if more than one object detected passes all the test, the algorithm will return false.
This has happened when the shadow made by the ﬁnger and the ﬁnger are not touching
each other seen from the camera perspective. This scenario will only occur when the
ﬁnger is not touching the button, why there is no need to let the algorithm move on. An
example can be seen in Figure 5.32.
74
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
(a) Image of a ﬁnger almost touching a button making two
separate objects.
(b) Binary image of a ﬁnger al-
most touching a button making
two separate objects.
Figure 5.32: A ﬁnger almost touching the wall.
If an object passes these tests, the angle of the object is calculated. In the ﬁrst iteration of
algorithm the angle was found from the moment in the image. This was done by ﬁrstly
applying a circle-mask to the binary image. An example of an applied mask can be seen
in Figure 5.33. The reason for applying a mask was, to prevent the shadow from having
an unnecessarily large inﬂuence on the angle in the scenario, where the shadow goes out
through the corner of the image. It can be realized, that with a central light source and
a camera on each side, that each camera will always see shadows, made from the object
blocking said light source, towards the side the camera is placed relatively to the actual
object. In other words, a camera placed to the left of the projector will always see the
actual object further to the right, than the shadow made from the object. Thus the shadow
will always pull the two angle seen by the camera towards one another. The angle of the
moment is found using Equation 4.4.
75
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
(a) Binary image of a ﬁnger
touching a button.
(b) Mask applied before cal-
culation of moment.
(c) Binary image of a ﬁnger
touching button after applied
mask.
Figure 5.33: A ﬁnger almost touching the wall.
The sign of angle of the moment is dependent on covariance. A negative covariance will
result in a negative angle and vice versa. This means the angles in Figure 5.34 will be
found to be roughly −80 degrees and 80 degrees respectively. For this iteration of the
algorithm, there was a rule removing any object, that has its lowest point on an edge.
With this rule it can be realized, that any objects will have a positive angle between 0 and
180 degrees, if a coordinate system is deﬁned as in Figure5.34. Thus any object with a
found negative angle would have π added, as we are interested in the actual difference
between the angles between two objects.
Figure 5.34: Principal axis of binary images of a ﬁnger seen by the two cameras. The
green lines is the angle, and the blue lines are the two coordinate axis.
One problem with ﬁnding the angle this way is, that the binary image used for the principal
axis calculation is based on both the ﬁnger and the shadow of the ﬁnger. If the angle
between the ﬁnger and the shadow of the ﬁnger is too large, the principal axis of the
detected binary blob will rotate approximately 90 degree. This is seen by looking at law
76
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
of sines.
sin(θ)
A
= sin(φ)
B
Where A, B, θ and φ are illustrated in Figure 5.35.
Figure 5.35: A ﬁnger with a shadow showing the variables used to see that the critical
angle between ﬁnger and shadow is 60°. If θ is larger than the critical angle, the image
moments cannot be used to ﬁnd the ﬁnger orientation.
It is seen that
φ = 180°−θ
2
so
A
B =
sinθ
sin(180°−θ)/2
When B > A the principal axis of the setup in Figure 5.35 will no longer be in the right
direction. It will be rotated approximately 90°. The largest θmax before this happens is
where A = B so A/B = 1
θmax = 180°−θmax
2
θmax = 60°
To overcome this problem, the angle θ can be approximated by looking at the contact
points between the ﬁnger and the shadow and the sides of the image. Looking at Figure
77
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
5.36 we see, that the two contact points P1 = (x1,y1) and P2 = (x2,y2) can be used to ﬁnd
an estimate the tip of the ﬁnger by ﬁnding the point O = (xO,yO) in the foreground (ﬁnger
and shadow) furthest from the line P1 −→P2 on the right side of the line. By the right side
we mean, the side of the line P1 −→P2 where the tip of the ﬁnger is located. To ensure
that we only look for O in the right direction, a check is made on the fraction of the point
coordinates. If P1 is on the left side of the image and P2 is on the top of the image then
Figure 5.36: A ﬁnger with a shadow showing the variables used to estimate the angle θ.
yO −y1
xO −x1
> y2 −y1
x2 −x1
is the criterion for the point O to be checked. If P1 is on the top of the image and P2 is on
the right side of the image then
yO −y2
xO −x2
< y1 −y2
x1 −x2
is the criterion for the point O to be checked. Then the point furthest away from the line
P1 −→P2 on the contour of the foreground object, that also satisfy the above criteria, is
found by iterating through all the contour points. The distance d between the points and
the line is found by
d = |(y2 −y1)xO +x2y1 −(x2 −x1)yO −y2x1|
p
(x2 −x1)2 +(y2 −y1)2
If more than one point are equally far from the line, the point furthest away from the point
C = (xC,yC) where
78
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
C = P1 +P2
2
is chosen. The points O and C are used to estimate the orientation of the foreground object
θ as
θ = tan−1
yC −yO
xC −yO

as shown in Figure 5.37,
Figure 5.37: Binary image of ﬁnger with hand touching button. The gray points are the
start and end point of the object. Red circle center point between start and end point and
the green circle is the ﬁnger tip.
The variance of the foreground object is then found by
σ2 = 1
N
N
∑
i
(xi −x)2
where N is the amount of pixels in the detected foreground, x is the intensity of each pixel
and x is mean pixel intensity. The Variance is found on the foreground in an grayscale
image.
The ﬁnal step in the ﬁndFinger algorithm is ﬁnding the position of the touch. As de-
scribed earlier the lowest point seen by the transformed frames will be the once closest
to the wall. This is under the assumption, that the touch occur in one point, which the
camera is able to see. However in reality, when a ﬁnger touches the wall, the ﬁnger will
block the location of the actual point of contact. So even though the lowest point of the
79
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
object is a rather good estimate of the location, a better estimate is wanted. This is done
by following the line between the points C and O. An approximation of where the touch
actual occur is found to be 2 pixels towards the point C from the point O.
5.4.4
Binary classiﬁcation of foreground
The binary classiﬁcation is the ﬁnal step of the touch algorithm, and makes the ﬁnal call
whether a touch occurred or not. The ﬁrst check the algorithm makes is whether it has
received input from both clients, if this is not the case, it decides, that no touch has hap-
pened. If the classiﬁer has received data from both clients most likely one out of three
things has happened. A shadow made by the user, change of the button (an animation for
instance) or an actual touch. As described, each client send its best guess of a potential
touch coordinates, the angle of the ﬁnger and the variance of the ﬁnger. These three vari-
ables are used in different ways to separate a touch from not a touch. Throughout this
section different analysis for the parameters will be made. First in the end of this section
will how the threshold are set be described
Firstly the variance is considered. The idea to use the variance is, that a shadow will vary
very little in color compared to a ﬁnger touching a button. To set the threshold 2 touches
on 9 button spread out around the projection surface has been made. Furthermore have
shadows around the same areas also been made. The buttons around the projection sur-
face can be seen in Figure 5.38.
Figure 5.38: Image used to for testing and to set thresholds.
For each touch the variances of 5 consecutive frames have been found. For each shadow
the variances of 2x5 consecutive frames were found. Touches and shadows were both
made with and without an external light source. A histogram of the resulting variances
80
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
found can be seen in Figure 5.39.
Figure 5.39: Histogram of the variance recorded from touches and shadows.
From this histogram a threshold should be made such, that only touches are accepted. The
largest variance of a shadows recorded was found to be 303. This was found in a single
frame. The second largest observation was 278. From Figure 5.39 it can be seen, that
most of the variances of touches are well above the variances of the shadow. This gives
the idea to look, at the variance recorded in pairs for the touches, to see what variance at
least one camera must see in order for the classiﬁer to believe a touch has occurred. This
is done by taking the largest value for each pair of frames. The results can be seen in
Figure 5.40.
81
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
Figure 5.40: Largest variance seen by the two cameras in each frame for every touch.
Here it can be seen, that the two smallest of the largest variances recorded when taking
both cameras in consideration for all touches is found to be 127 and 137.
The second parameter is the angle. The idea of checking the angle is, that if anything is
on the actual projection surface, such as a shadow, both cameras will see the same in the
transformed window. Anything not on the actual wall will be seen in different perspectives
by the two cameras. An illustration of the angle of a ﬁnger touching a central button on
the projection surface seen by the two cameras can be seen in Figure 5.41.
Figure 5.41: Illustration of angle between the objects seen by the two cameras. Grey
areas are the coverage seen by one camera, white area is the coverage the cameras have in
common. Blue and green (almost covered by the blue) dots are the touch position guesses
made from what the left and right camera respectively sees. The blue and green lines are
the angles estimations made from the left and right camera respectively.
82
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
To ﬁnd an appropriate angle difference the same recordings were used in the same manor.
However instead of looking at the angle produced by each camera, the angles were sub-
tracted from one another, this resulted in the histogram in Figure 5.42.
Figure 5.42: Histogram of the angle difference recorded from touches and shadows.
Similarly to the variance should no angles of shadows be accepted. The maximum angle
of a shadow is found to be 17.6 degrees. This angle was found in two different frames.
What is unexpected from Figure 5.42 is the negative angle recorded of a ﬁnger. This will
be further discovered in the discussion chapter.
The ﬁnal parameters send by the each client are the coordinates. These are used in two
different ways. Firstly is the Euclidean distance between the coordinates found by each
client measured in pixels. The idea for this distance measure is, that objects touching the
wall will more or less be in the same positions for both cameras. Thus if the distance is
too large, the touch is not accepted. A scenario with a none accepted touch can be seen in
Figure 5.43.
83
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
(a) Image of ﬁnger not touch-
ing the wall, but blocking the
view for the left camera.
(b) Corresponding view seen
from the right cameras per-
spective.
(c) Binary image of ﬁnger not
touching the wall, but block-
ing the view for the left cam-
era.
(d) Corresponding binary im-
age seen from the right cam-
eras perspective.
Figure 5.43: A ﬁnger almost touching the wall.
The issue with the scenario in Figure 5.43 is, that the ﬁnger present in the left image, will
cause a larger variance in the image, but as the ﬁnger is simply blocking the view from the
left camera and is not touching the wall, this should not be accepted as a touch. By ﬁnding
the distance between the positions observed, which can be seen in the binary images, this
scenario can be disregarded. We are not interested in disregarding actual touches, thus an
appropriate threshold needs to be set. A histogram of the position differences between the
coordinates from the two clients is made similarly to the previous test, by recording the
difference for the 5 frames after the ﬁnger becomes stationary in its touch. This is once
again done for two touches with and without an external light source in the 9 different
places around the projection surface. The resulting histogram can be seen in Figure 5.44.
84
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
Figure 5.44: Histogram of the distance of the coordinates send by each client for touches.
What is wanted from this histogram is to get an idea of the maximum differences one
could expect of a touch. A single value of 8.5 can be seen, this will be considered an
outlier. Thus the two largest Euclidean difference found were 3.6 and 3.0.
Finally are the fact, that a ﬁnger is relatively stationary, when it touches a button used.
This is done by comparing the Euclidean distances in pixels between the current coor-
dinates send by each client and the previous. To ﬁnd a threshold a histogram for this
distance is made for two scenarios. Firstly where the ﬁnger is either moving towards or
away from the 9 buttons around the projections surface. Secondly where the ﬁnger is
stationary on the buttons. The resulting histogram can be seen in Figure 5.45.
85
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
Figure 5.45: Histogram of the distance of the current and previous coordinates send by
each client.
What is wanted from this histogram is to disregard the distances recorded of a moving
ﬁnger, while allowing the distances of a touch. The largest value recorded for the touches
is 6.4 pixels, however this is only recorded in a single frame and will be considered an
outlier. The two second largest value of the distance for the touches is therefore found to
be 2.3 and 2.2 pixels.
To sum-up: the maximum values of the variance of a shadow was found to be 303 and 278
in a dataset of 300 frames. The two smallest touch-variances found, when only looking
at the largest of the two clients variance, were 127 and 137 in 180 pairs of frames. The
two maximum angles of shadows were found to be 17.6 degrees in 120 pair of frames.
The two largest difference in pixels between the two clients were 3.6 and 3.0 pixels in the
178 pair of frames. Finally was the two largest distances between the coordinates from
previous to current frame for each client found to be 2.3 and 2.2 in 576 frames.
To reduce the danger of potential noise three accepted frames in a row is required for a
touch to be accepted. This also means, that the threshold can be more loosely set, as the
outer regions are not expected in three consecutive frames. A ﬂowchart of the test can be
seen in Figure 5.46.
86
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
Figure 5.46: Flowchart of the decision making of the server.
With the lowest variances for touches being 127 a threshold vl for even considering an
object is set to
vl = 120
to ensure not disregarding any potential touches, while still not considering any deﬁnitely
none-touches.
The next check is made from angle and variance. We saw, that no shadows produced any
results higher than 17.6 and 303 respectively. A 5% margin is subtracted from each to set
the threshold as 3 frames are needed for a touch. This resuted in touch-variance vt of
vt = 285
and touch-angle at
at = 16.7deg
87
==PAGE:96==
CHAPTER 5. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 5.4
If any of these is fulﬁlled the algorithm will move on.
Next test is the difference between the coordinates send by the two clients dc. The thresh-
old is set to
dc = 3.7pixels
as all touches except for the outlier is wanted. Finally the threshold for the difference
between previous and current position for each client dp is set to
dp = 2.3pixels
Thus neither of cameras can see a movement larger than this. This means, that some of
the moving ﬁngers might be included, however it is found to be highly likely, that if a
ﬁnger is not moving more than 2.3 pixels, it is just about to touch the button, as the user
of the touch wall will decrease the movement speed of the ﬁnger before actual touching
the wall. Therefore it is found acceptable to include these.
88
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 6
Results and validation
This section describes the performance of the seamless multi-projection and the touch de-
tection. First a measure of quality is deﬁned for each part and then this value is measured.
For the seamless multi-projection it proved a relatively easy task to deﬁne a good quality
measure. But for the touch detection it is difﬁcult to predict user behaviour and the so-
lution is therefore validated by testing the limits in terms of light conditions, position of
touch and angle of touch.
6.1
Edge blending
This section will explain and show the performance of the edge-blending. The perfor-
mance parameters are:
1. Accuracy in the warping of the image to be projected
2. Accuracy in gamma correction in the overlapping region between projections
6.1.1
Warping
The goal of the warping of the image unto each overlapping projector is to have each
pixel in the image represented only once in each projector at the same position on the
projection surface. The accuracy of the warping is measured as the deviation between
two projections of the same image pixel by two different projectors. The aim is to have
a sub pixel accuracy in projector pixels, so that accuracy is limited by the projectors and
not by the calibration routine.
89
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.1
(a) Combination of the two validation pat-
terns for the left projector.
(b) Combination of the two validation pat-
terns for the right projector.
Figure 6.1: Combined validation patterns for warping accuracy validation. These images
are not actual captured images. Each are a combination of two pictures added on top of
each other to show both the vertical and horizontal rectangles of the validation pattern.
To estimate the performance a routine similar to the routine used for projector calibration
is used. The difference is, that the projected patterns by each projector is only projected
in the overlapping region of the two projectors, and instead of 7 horizontal and vertical
rectangles only three are used for the validation as shown in Figure 6.1. When the points
of interest are found for each projector, the euclidean distances in camera pixels between
corresponding points are found. This distance is then approximately converted into pro-
jector pixels by assuming, that all projector pixels have the same size on the projection
surface and calculating the camera pixel to projector pixel correspondence. This is done
by measuring the amount of camera pixel a rectangle with a known number of pixels in
projector coordinates. The resulting accuracy of the warping routine is shown in table 6.1.
It is seen that the aim of sub pixel accuracy is achieved.
Maximum deviation
Average deviation
0.95 pixels
0.47 pixels
Table 6.1: Accuracy of the warping routine in projector pixels calculated from the 36
validation points shown in ﬁgure 6.1
90
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.1
6.1.2
Gamma correction
The effect of the gamma correction is illustrated in Figure 6.2 where a projection with and
without gamma correction is shown.
(a) White full intensity image warped and
edge blended without gamma correction.
(b) White full intensity image warped and
edge blended with gamma correction.
Figure 6.2: The ﬁgure illustrates the effect of the gamma correction. The projection
without gamma correction has too low intensity in the overlapping region.
To validate the performance of the gamma correction, each color channel is examined
individually. For each color channel a validation images is designed. This image has ﬁve
regions with ﬁve linearly spaced RGB values from 0 to 255. The validation images are is
illustrated in Figure 6.3.
(a) Validation image for the
red color channel.
(b) Validation image for the
green color channel.
(c) Validation image for the
blue color channel.
Figure 6.3: The three validation images used to measure the quality of the gamma correc-
tion.
These validation images are warped into the overlapping region of two calibrated projec-
tors. An image of the projection is captured and blurred with an averaging box ﬁlter with
91
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.1
a kernel size of (10 × 10) to remove high frequency noise. Then ﬁve lines are extracted
from each image as illustrated in Figure 6.4.
(a) Image of a projection of
the validation image for the
red color channel.
(b) Image of a projection of
the validation image for the
green color channel.
(c) Image of a projection of
the validation image for the
blue color channel.
Figure 6.4: Images of projection of the three validation images used to measure the quality
of the gamma correction. The white lines are scan-lines used to extract data for quality
validation of the gamma correction.
The quality Q of the gamma correction is measured as the standard deviation of each
extracted line to a straight line ﬁt. This gives ﬁve quality measures for each color channel,
one for each of the ﬁve intensities. The intensity data from each of the ﬁve lines in each
of the color channels is shown in Figure 6.5
92
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Pixels
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Intensity [8 bit value]
51
102
153
204
255
(a) The scan-lines from the red validation im-
age.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Pixels
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Intensity [8 bit value]
51
102
153
204
255
(b) The scan-lines from the green validation im-
age.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Pixels
10
20
30
40
50
60
Intensity [8 bit value]
51
102
153
204
255
(c) The scan-lines from the blue validation im-
age.
Figure 6.5: The scan-lines from Figure 6.4. The legends refer to the color channel inten-
sity in the validation image along the scan-line.
The standard deviations for the ﬁve line ﬁts on the intensity lines for each color channel
is shown in table 6.2.
93
==PAGE:102==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
Channel value [8bit]
Red σ[8bit]
Green σ[8bit]
Blue σ[8bit]
51
0.59
0.63
0.70
102
0.67
0.61
0.50
153
0.82
0.61
0.58
204
1.11
0.90
0.69
255
1.75
1.31
0.59
Table 6.2: Standard deviations from straight lines ﬁtted to image intensity data in the
overlapping region of two calibrated projectors. The images used are the ones shown in
Figure 6.4.
The standard deviations are in general larger for larger image intensities. The highest
measured standard deviation is in the red validation image with color intensity 255, where
the standard deviation is 1.75. The units for these standard deviations are in camera pixel
values. To be able to judge the quality of these standard deviations three extra validation
images where projected. These projections used the same images and warping as for the
gamma validation, but instead of the edge blending, half of each image was projected on
each projector. The same procedure as for the gamma validation images was followed
to produce ﬁve scan-lines for each color channel, ﬁt a line and measure the standard
deviation. The lines extracted from these images should be close to the ideal gamma
corrected edge-blending. The resulting standard deviations are shown in Table 6.3.
Channel value [8bit]
Red σ[8bit]
Green σ[8bit]
Blue σ[8bit]
51
0.68
0.59
0.33
102
0.58
0.47
0.43
153
0.59
0.60
0.42
204
0.61
0.58
0.28
255
0.80
0.66
0.38
Table 6.3: Standard deviations from straight lines ﬁtted to image intensity data in the
overlapping region of two calibrated projectors. The images used are the same used for
generating Table 6.2 but with half the intensity for each projector instead of the edge
blending. These values are used as reference values to judge the quality of the standard
deviations for the gamma correction.
It is seen, that the standard deviation in the ideal case and the standard deviations with the
gamma correction are at most around a factor of two in difference.
94
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
6.2
Touch detection
The performance of the touch detection is difﬁcult to measure due the unpredictability in
the users of the touch interface. That is to say, if the user touches the projection surface
with a desired angle and have high variance in the ﬁnger color, then the solution will per-
form well. But such user input is naturally not guaranteed. It is therefore interesting to test
the limits of the system, and test if it is possible to generate false positive classiﬁcations.
This validation is divided into parts validating one part of the touch detection algorithm
each.
First the foreground detection is validated. Then the foreground description including
variance and angle difference between the two cameras is validated. Finally the solution
is tested to see how many consecutive accepted frames the algorithm needs in order to
separate a touch from a none-touch.
6.2.1
Foreground Detection
To validate the performance of the foreground detector the algorithm is tested on videos
of people touching the projection surface under different settings of the external light
source, different position of touch and different intensities of the touch areas. For this
purpose two test were designed. The ﬁrst test was made to test the performance at different
positions on the projection surface with and without an external light source. The second
test was designed to test the performance with different touch area intensities with and
without external light sources. Both test were carried out for both cameras, but due to the
symmetry in the camera output, only images from the left camera is illustrated.
For the ﬁrst test an image was designed with nine buttons around the projected surface
with a projector intensity of 200 on each color channel. The image can be seen in Figure
5.38. Videos of a projection of this image was then recorded with and without external
light sources. In the videos each of the nine button were touched twice. Figure 6.6 shows
the scene with and without the external light source turned on.
95
==PAGE:104==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
(a) External lights on.
(b) External lights off.
Figure 6.6: Image from the left camera showing the validation image projection with and
without external lights.
The third frame from when the ﬁnger became ’stationary’ in its touch-movement is used
as input for the foreground detection. The result of the ﬁrst touch is illustrated in Figure
6.7a and 6.7b.
(a) External lights turned on.
(b) External lights turned off.
Figure 6.7: The result of foreground detection with and without external light sources.
The nine tiles for each subﬁgure corresponds to a button of the validation image in Figure
5.38
For all the buttons with and without external light only one foreground detection failed.
This is the bottom left corner of Figure 6.7a, where the shadow made from the external
light source connects with the ﬁnger in the image. As described earlier, this type of
shadow will only occur when the external light source is placed opposite the projector
and the cameras, thus in a real setting this would not be an issue.
In the bottom center images the objects seen are much larger compared to the rest of the
images. This is an effect of the large angle between the shadow made by the projector
(vertical part) and the ﬁnger (angled part). Furthermore can the hand attached to the
96
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
ﬁnger be seen in the top of the frame, why this is also detected as foreground. The
detected ﬁngers are always presents along at least one of the three acceptable edges. But
in the bottom right corner and the mid right seen by the left camera in Figure 6.7b, the
connections between the ﬁnger and the edge of images are very thin. This could be a
very real issue for the touch detection algorithm as it will disregard the ﬁnger, if it is not
connected to an edge. A disconnection actually happens in three frames for the bottom
right corner seen by the left camera during the recordings. One frame where the ﬁnger is
moving and two where the ﬁnger is stationary. The two stationary frames are shown in
Figure 6.8
(a) Disconnected frame 1.
(b) Disconnected frame 2.
Figure 6.8: Finger from foreground detector disconnected from edge of frame.
It should be noticed, that if the window of interest was a pixel smaller or moved a pixel
to the left there would be no disconnection. This is an effect of the relatively poor res-
olution of the bottom right corner of the projection surface seen by the left camera. So
when transformation is made the edge of the button is not clearly deﬁned. An image of
the button with two extra pixel on each side can be seen in Figure 6.9.
Figure 6.9: Bottom right button seen from left camera.
In this ﬁgure it can be seen, that the edge of the button is blurred over 4 pixels. This
means, if the cropping is made such, that the edge of the button is to the dark side, the
foreground detector will look for a ﬁnger without illumination. This can be resolved by
letting a larger area than the actual button light up.
97
==PAGE:106==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
The second test was designed to see how the foreground detector worked with different
button intensities with and without external light sources. 10 different images with a
center button were made with the button intensity ranging from 0 −255 on each color
channel in equal steps. As in the previous test, the third frame after the ﬁnger becomes
stationary is used to test the foreground detector. The test was made with both left and
right camera but only images form the left camera is shown due to the symmetry in the
setup. The result of the test with the external lights source turned on is shown in Figure
6.10.
(a) Intensity=0.
(b) Intensity=28.
(c) Intensity=57.
(d) Intensity=85. (e) Intensity=113.
(f) Intensity=142. (g) Intensity=170. (h) Intensity=198. (i) Intensity=227. (j) Intensity=255.
Figure 6.10: Foreground detection with external lights on of touch on buttons with differ-
ent intensities seen by the left camera.
In the ﬁgure it is be seen, that the ﬁnger is present at all intensities. At low intensities the
object seen by the foreground detector is thinner than at higher intensities. The reason
for this is, that the button needs a certain intensity before shadows are detectable. For the
center button the projector becomes the primary source of light between intensity 57 and
85. The results of of the same test with the external light source turned off is shown in
Figure 6.11.
98
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
(a) Intensity=0.
(b) Intensity=28.
(c) Intensity=57.
(d) Intensity=85. (e) Intensity=113.
(f) Intensity=142. (g) Intensity=170. (h) Intensity=198. (i) Intensity=227. (j) Intensity=255.
Figure 6.11: Foreground detection of touch on buttons with different intensities seen by
the left camera.
With the external light source turned off it is seen, that the buttons need to have a certain
intensity before the cameras can see it and thereby the ﬁnger. When this intensity is
reached, it hardly makes any different, what intensities the buttons has for the foreground
detector to be able to detect a ﬁnger.
So the conclusion of the validation of the foreground detection algorithm is, that it works
with and without external light sources and it works on all positions of the projection
surface, given that the touch area has an intensity of at least 85.
6.2.2
Description of foreground
To decide whether a detected foreground is an object or just the shadow of an object, the
variance of the foreground and the difference in foreground orientation in the two cameras
are proposed as variables to use. In this section it is validated how separable shadows and
objects with shadows are using these two measures.
They are both tested using a projection of the 9 buttons showed in Figure 5.38. Both
validations are made for two videos recorded with and without an external light source.
During the two videos, two touches are made on each button. As the projector and cam-
eras are standing on the ﬂoor, where in the real setup, they would be mounted in the
ceiling, the touches are made such, that the palm of the hand is faced towards the ceiling.
The values of the variance and angle differences are each recorded for the 5 consecutive
frames after the ﬁnger becomes stationary in its touch-movement.
Variance
To validate the variance, histograms of the variance recorded on each button of each of
the stationary frames are made. This is done for both the left and the right camera. As the
99
==PAGE:108==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
setup is symmetric, the histograms from the left and right camera was seen to be inverted
left-right. The histograms of the left camera is shown in Figure 6.12.
Figure 6.12: Histograms of the 9 buttons around the projection surface of the variance
recorded of touches and shadows with and without external light. Blue bars are touches,
red bars are shadows, dark bars are with lights on, light bars are with lights off.
In the ﬁgure for the left camera can it be seen, that shadows are not presented on the
bottom left button. Likewise is no shadows present on the bottom right button seen by
the right camera. The reason for this is, a ﬁnger was present in the recordings, thus the
variance would not have represented a shadow.
From ﬁgure 6.12 it can be seen, the further away from the camera the less the variance
for touches becomes. This makes sense, since the resolution at these positions is low, and
objects are blurred. This effect is quite visible when comparing the bottom right and left
corners for the two cameras. The variances of the touches for the button closest to each
camera has a much larger variance than the opposite button.
The opposite can generally be said about the shadows variances. The further away from
the camera the more variance in the shadow. This is also an effect of the low resolution
at these position. The fact that the variances of touches and shadows moves towards one
another as a function of distance from the camera also means, the further up the wall the
buttons are placed, the harder the separation of the touches from the none-touches using
variance becomes.
For the bottom and middle row of buttons is there a clear difference in variance between
100
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
a shadow and a ﬁnger touching the projection surface for at least one of the cameras in all
cases. Thus for these rows the variance is a good measure to distinguish shadows from
objects with shadows.
For the top row the external light source becomes a factor. It can generally be said, that
the variance rises when the external light is off. This makes sense as the shadow made by
the ﬁnger will be darker with the lights off, while the ﬁnger it self will still be lit up by
the projector, thus as the camera sees both shadow and ﬁnger in a touch, a larger variance
is expected.
This means, that with the external lights turned off, the touches can also be separated in
the top row for at least one of the cameras. With an external light source turned on, the
cameras cannot see a difference between a ﬁnger and a shadow in the top corners. An
example of a frame of a ﬁnger and a shadow seen by the left camera with the lights on
can be seen in Figure 6.13. From this ﬁgure it makes sense, that the algorithm will have a
hard time separating the two.
(a) Finger touching the
top left button seen by
the left Camera.
(b) Shadow on the top
left button seen by the
left camera.
Figure 6.13: Illustration of the difference of a ﬁnger and a shadow touching the top left
button seen from the left camera.
For the top center bottom a difference between ﬁnger and shadow is seen by the left
camera and not by the right. With the variance threshold of 285 in the algorithm these
touches are just on positive side of the acceptance criteria and the shadows are not.
To summarize the usability of the variance as a measure to distinguish shadows from
ﬁngers with shadows, it has been shown, the further away from the camera the more
difﬁcult, it becomes to distinguish. A few false positives or negatives at this stage does
not necessarily mean, that the touch detection fail since this classiﬁcation is done over
several frames for both cameras.
101
==PAGE:110==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
Angle
To validate the angle difference seen by the two cameras, histograms of the this on each
button of each of the stationary frames are made. The histograms can be seen in Figure
6.12.
Figure 6.14: Histograms of the 9 buttons around the projection surface of the angle dif-
ference in degrees seen by the the two cameras of touches and shadows with and without
external light. Blue bars are touches, red bars are shadows, dark bars are with lights on,
light bars are with lights off.
In the histogram no angles between shadows are recorded in the bottom corners. The
reason for this is, that the ﬁnger was present in one of the cameras, and it is therefore not
a representation of the difference of angles between shadows.
The negative angles for the touches are unexpected. It can be seen, that for the most part
this happens when the external light source is turned off. From the recordings it can be
seen, that the camera with the furthest distance to the touch can have a hard time deﬁning
exactly where the ﬁnger starts and ends along the edge of the button frame. An example
can be seen in Figure 6.15.
102
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
(a) Frame of ﬁnger seen by
left camera.
(b) Binary frame of ﬁnger
seen by left camera.
Figure 6.15: Illustration of left camera having a hard time showing exactly where the edge
of the ﬁnger is.
In the ﬁgure it can be seen, that on the edge of the frame, the ﬁnger is only represented
by 3 pixels in the binary image. As the angle is deﬁned by the edge only small variations
will make relatively large changes. Furthermore along the edge of the frame, the camera
furthest away mostly just sees the shadow made by the ﬁnger, and as described earlier
will the shadow pull the angles seen by the two cameras towards one another.
However, from the histogram it be seen, that it is very hard to tell shadows and touches
apart in all the side-buttons. The touches and shadows for the center buttons are however
separable. As expected does the histogram show, that when moving away from the cam-
eras, the angle difference becomes smaller (when looking at the center buttons). Recall
the algorithm needs an angle difference of 16.7 degrees. This means all touches on the
two lowest center-buttons are accepted, however with this threshold the acceptance is not
ensured for the top button touches.
6.2.3
Binary Classiﬁcation
The binary classiﬁcation of the described foregrounds from each camera is validated on
the same videos as the validation of the foreground variance and difference in foreground
orientation. During the video with the external light turned off, the algorithm found 9
frames where a false positive was recorded. None of these frames were consecutive. The
distribution of the false positives around the 9 buttons can be seen in Table 6.4.
103
==PAGE:112==
CHAPTER 6. RESULTS AND VALIDATION
SECTION 6.2
0
3
3
0
0
1
2
0
0
Table 6.4: Distribution of false positive frame classiﬁcation on the buttons on the projec-
tion surface with external light turned off.
In the video with the external lights turned on, 2 frames with false positives were found.
These were consecutive and found in the top center button.
To ﬁlter out these false positives, three consecutive frames are used for the classiﬁcation.
All three have to be classiﬁed as containing a touching object before the touch is accepted.
With this ﬁlter no shadows were falsely classiﬁed as touches. Out of the two touches on
the nine buttons with and without external light only the two top corners with the external
light on were not classiﬁed as touches.
104
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 7
Discussion
This discussion addresses the limitations of the methods used to distinguish shadows from
touches in the touch detection and it explains why disparity maps were not used for the
touch detection.
7.1
Limitations in foreground descriptions
The difference in foreground orientation between the two cameras showed to be a useful
measure for separating shadows and touches as long as the touch is between the cameras.
From the validation it was seen, that for buttons at the sides of the projection surface, the
angles between shadows and touches were not distinguishable. To improve the ability of
the angle parameter, the cameras could be further separated from the center.
Furthermore was it seen, that at the top of the screen the angle of a touch came danger-
ously close to the set threshold. The threshold was made on behalf of all the touches and
shadows recorded, this means all buttons had the same threshold. This could be improved
by letting this threshold be a function of the angle and distance to the projector.
When looking at the histogram seen in Figure 6.14 a rather large variant of the angles was
seen. This is believed to be an artifact of one pixel on the edge having a large effect on
the angle. This means that, if the transformation is made such, that the frame looked upon
is just on the edge of the button, pixels of the ﬁnger/shadow might be overlooked, if it
blends in with the background around the button. Thus by having a larger area than the
button itself lit-up, this might be seen to improve.
The variation showed to be a tool that could separate shadows from touches around the
projection surface, especially without an external light source. However issues aroused
the further away from the cameras the buttons were. It was seen in Figure 6.13, that it
was very hard to tell a shadow and ﬁnger apart even for the naked eye, when a touch
105
==PAGE:114==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
SECTION 7.2
occurred in the top left corner of the projection surface with the external light turned on.
Two different ways of improving this have been thought of. Firstly if the resolution of
the camera was increased, the cameras would see a more detailed image of the buttons
and likely be able to see the difference. The downside by increasing the resolution is, the
computational power it would need. Another way to improve the difference in variance
could be to increase the intensity of the buttons projected as a function of the distance,
they have to the projector. A larger intensity would result in a larger difference between
the ﬁnger touching and the shadow behind, thus increasing the variance for a touch.
7.2
Disparity
A widely used method for creating depth maps form stereo images is to make a disparity
map. The idea of the disparity map is to use that fact, that the same object will be at
different positions in the two camera used in a stereo camera setup.
The epipolar geometry of stereo cameras describe how a point in one camera will lie along
a line in the other camera. There is a transformation such that these lines are horizontal in
both cameras. One such transformation is the transformation used in the algorithm used
in this project for the touch detection. With this transformation, all points on the touch
surface will lie on top of each other in each camera and as we go away from the touch
surface, the point will be shifted left in the right camera and right in the left camera. This
distance in pixels is called the disparity.
(a) Transformed image from the left camera
(b) Transformed image from the right cam-
era
Figure 7.1: Two transformed images. One from each of the two cameras used in the stereo
setup.
The question is why we did not use disparity maps to solve the problem of touch detection
when this method is the go to method for depth sensing with stereo cameras. Disparity
106
==PAGE:115==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
SECTION 7.2
maps were among the ﬁrst methods we tested in this project, but it showed not useful for
several reasons. To illustrate this, Figure 7.1 shows two images, one from each camera,
which are transformed for disparity map calculation. The disparity map was calculated
by taking a window T(x,y) of the left image with size (2,3) where (x,y) is the upper
left corner of the window. This window was then slid along a horizontal slice S(x) of
the image from the right camera. The slice S(x) had dimensions (2,iw) where iw was the
width of the image. The position of the best match p of the window on the slice was
calculated as the minimum of the sum of squared differences
p = min{∑(T(x,i)−S(x))2 ,
i ∈[0;iw −3]
Figure 7.2: The resulting disparity map from the images in Figure 7.1
where the ∑symbol denotes the sum of the 6 squared pixel differences. The result is
shown in Figure 7.2. This result could be improved in several ways [8]. But looking at
the images in Figure 7.1 we see that the task of matching the windows from the left image
to the right image is difﬁcult because of:
1. The low resolution
2. Occultation of the shadow by the ﬁnger
The low resolution is simply complicates the task by making the same object look differ-
ent in each of the cameras. The occultation complicates the task since the the part of the
shadow visible in each camera is on opposite sides of the ﬁnger. Is it a difﬁcult task to tell
the shadow apart from the ﬁnger since the line between these are very blurred. Therefore
the ﬁnger with shadow is seen as one object. The problem is that with the shadow on
different sides, it looks like the object is ﬂipping horizontally. This further complicates
107
==PAGE:116==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
SECTION 7.2
the calculation of a disparity map. For these reasons this method was not chosen as part
of the ﬁnal solution for the touch detection in this project.
108
==PAGE:117==
Chapter 8
Future work
The research aims of this thesis was to develop camera based seamless multi-projection
and touch detection as an integrated solution. A camera based solution for the seamless
multi-projection and the touch detection has been developed, but due to hardware accessi-
bility, the seamless multi-projection was developed using another camera than the ﬁsheye
cameras used for the touch detection. So to integrate the two solutions, the seamless
multi-projection has to be implemented and tested on the ﬁsheye cameras.
A main issue with the touch detection is the dependency on static projections in the touch
area.
This section describes the future work to be done in order to integrate the seamless multi-
projection on the ﬁsheye cameras and it describes the challenge of the touch detection on
non static backgrounds.
8.1
Edge blending with ﬁsheye cameras
The implementation of the edge blending for seamless multi-projection is based on the
analysis of calibration images. In the development of the solution in this project a standard
smart phone camera was use to capture these images. But one of the main motivations
for developing a camera based touch detection was to develop an integrated touch and
automatic seamless multi-projection solution, where the same cameras would be used for
both touch detection and proejctor calibration.
At ﬁrst glance the solution seems simple. The calibration pictures could just be taken with
one of the ﬁsheye cameras instead of the smart phone camera and then get undistorted as
decribed in Section 5.4.1. But even though the resolution of the ﬁsheye cameras can be
increased to 5 Mpx for still image captures, the resolution is limited by the position of
cameras close to the projection surface and the ﬁsheye lens distortion. Therefore images
109
==PAGE:118==
CHAPTER 8. FUTURE WORK
SECTION 8.2
from all the ﬁsheye cameras would have to be combined to one large panorama picture of
the projection surface. This procedure is called image stitching. There are many existing
solutions for performing image stitching[2]. The general idea is to
1. Detect keypoints in each image to be stitched
2. Match keypoints in the images
3. Find homographies
4. Warp the images
5. Perform edge blending
In the case of the ﬁsheye lenses this procedure would not produce panorama images that
look realistic. This is due to the ﬁsheye distortion. The undistortion of the ﬁsheye images
makes straight lines straight, but the resulting images are not exactly as if the image were
taken with a projective camera. This means, that no homography exist, so the ﬁsheye
images can be blended perfectly together. This is not a problem for the projector calibra-
tion though as long as the projection surface is approximately ﬂat. When the projection
surface is ﬂat, a perspective transformation for each ﬁsheye image can be found similar
to the transformation used in the touch detection algorithm. The only difference is, that
the transformation would be perspective instead of piece-wise afﬁne. When the ﬁsheye
images are transformed, they can be stitched together as described above. Everything not
being in the plane of the projection surface would not align in the stitching, but every-
thing on the projection surface would. This way multiple ﬁsheye cameras can be used to
capture calibration images for the projector calibration.
8.2
Foreground detection on varying background
A disadvantage of the solution for touch detection developed in this master thesis is the
dependency on a static background. One solution to this problem could be to use the
knowledge available about, what is being projected unto the projection surface. The con-
tent of the projections is available in the CPU of the computer controlling the projector.
For each image captured by the ﬁsheye camera, the known projection at that moment
could be subtracted and then the same foreground detection algorithm as used in this
thesis could be applied.
There are several challenges with this approach though. First challenge is to get access to
the data being projected on the projector. Since this data is in the GPU memory it needs
to be moved to the CPU to be able to use it. After the frame data has been captured,
it either needs to be send to the two computers capturing images with ﬁsheye cameras
110
==PAGE:119==
CHAPTER 8. FUTURE WORK
SECTION 8.2
or the ﬁsheye camera video streams have to be send to the computer with the access to
the projection data. One computer could be both controlling the projector and one of the
ﬁsheye cameras. This way frames only had to be sent either to or from one computer. All
this data transfer takes time and on the Raspberry Pi, we were not able to capture frames
from the GPU faster than 8 times per second. This is the main reason why this solution
was not implemented in this thesis.
But even if we were able to access the GPU data fast enough, are there still difﬁculties with
this substraction of a known projection. If we have a touch area with a known projection
as shown in Figure 8.1
(a) Original RGB image
(b) Grayscale conversion of the background
image
Figure 8.1: Known projection projected on the touch area
and compare it to an image of this projection as illustrated in Figure 8.2, then it is seen
how the two images do not have the same image intensities.
(a) Original RGB capture
(b) Grayscale conversion of the captured im-
age
Figure 8.2: Captured image of the projection on the touch area
Therefore a direct subtraction of the two images would not necessarily make the fore-
ground subtraction any easier. The difference in the original image and the captured im-
age should therefore be modelled in order to use this technique to enable touch detection
on non static backgrounds.
111
==PAGE:120==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
This conclusion summarizes the solution developed to achieve the research aims of thesis
as stated in Section 1.2 and it summarized the main performance results of these solutions.
First is a conclusion on the seamless multi-projection and second is a conclusion on the
touch detection.
9.1
Seamless multi-projection
In this thesis a seamless multi-projection solution was developed and implemented. The
implementation enables the generation of frame content on multiple overlapping projec-
tions so one seamless projection can is achieved.
The implementation is divided into two parts. First a projector registration is performed
and second the registration is used to warp and blend the images for each projector.
There are four coordinate systems in this part of the thesis: The pixel coordinates of
the image to be warped and blended, the pixel coordinates of the camera capturing the
calbration images, the pixel coordinates of the projectors and world coordinates.
The projector registration is based on pictures of calibration projections captured with
a static camera. In this thesis the Motorolla Moto G5 smart-phone camera was used to
capture the registration images, but any projective camera with a similar resolution can be
used. The registration projections consist of two images of equally separated rectangles.
One with vertical rectangles and one with horizontal rectangles. Therefore two images
have to be captured for each projector to be included in seamless multi-projection. The
registration images are used to identify keypoints for each projector. The projectors are
said to be registered when these keypoints are identiﬁed.
The ﬁrst step after the projector registration is to extract the contour of the illuminated
surface for each projector which is used to ﬁnd a suitable quadrilateral for the seamless
112
==PAGE:121==
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION
SECTION 9.1
projection. A perspective transformation is calculated from image coordinates quadrilat-
eral in camera coordinates. Then the keypoints are used to divide each projection into
triangles by tessellation. For each triangle an afﬁne transformation from projector coordi-
nates to camera coordinates is calculated. This is therefore a piecewise afﬁne transforma-
tion. Since both the image coordinates and the projector coordinates are now described
in camera coordinates, a mapping can be made from projector coordinates to image coor-
dinates. This way each pixel in each projector can be transformed into image coordinates
and the warping is done.
After the warping of the image is found, the edge blending is applied. The edge blending
ensures a gradual change in projector intensities in the overlapping region between the
projectors such, that the combined intensity of the projectors in the overlap adds up to
the desired value. To achieve this a third order polynomial function is combined with
a gamma correction. The polynomial function ensures a continuous gradient and the
gamma correction adjust for the fact, that half the RGB value is not half the pixel intensity
in the projected image due to the design of the projectors.
The result of the registration and warping was evaluated by projecting registration patterns
similar to the ones used for the projector registration but with less rectangles. These
images were projected into the overlapping region of the registered projectors using the
warping procedure. This was done for two overlapping projectors. For each projector two
images were captured with a static camera. The location of the identiﬁed keypoints in
camera coordinates were then compared for the two projectors. The standard deviation in
camera pixels were then converted into projector pixels by measuring the width in camera
pixels of an object with known width in the projector pixels while the camera was still in
the same static position. The resulting standard deviation σ in projector pixels where
σ = 0.47px
and the largest deviation e was
e = 0.95px
Which is close to the lowest possible standard deviation considering, that the projector
pixels are discrete, and that there is noise associated with the validation procedure as
well.
113
==PAGE:122==
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION
SECTION 9.2
The gamma correction was validated on all three color channels at ﬁve different pixel
intensities. The quality of the gamma correction is measured as the standard deviation
of a straight line ﬁt to blended pixel values in a overlap between two projectors where
the intensity is supposed to follow a straight line. The highest standard deviation was
at intensity 255 on the red channel with a value of 1.75 px which is below what can be
detected with the human eye.
9.2
Touch detection
To enable the touch user interaction of the developed seamless multi-projection a cam-
era based touch detection has been developed. The solution is implemented using two
Raspberry Pi’s with a ﬁsheye camera each.
The solution is divided in four parts: transformation of ﬁsheye images, foreground detec-
tion, foreground description and binary classiﬁcation.
The transformations of the ﬁsheye cameras are done through undistorting the images and
performing a piecewise afﬁne transformation. The undistortion is done using a ﬁsheye
camera model implemented in the OpenCV calibration toolbox. The warping of the im-
ages based on the registration of the projector for which to detect the touch.
The foreground detection is based on a threshold being a linear function of the running
average pixel values. Each pixel is then classiﬁed as belonging to the foreground or
the background in each frame according to this threshold. This foreground detection
showed less false positives and was faster than the traditional Gaussian foreground detec-
tion model. To enable fast adaption to external light sources a normalized estimation of
the background was used to detect the presence of foreground objects and the model is
only updated in the absence of these.
The foreground objects are put through a screening process, where objects that deﬁnitely
not are ﬁngers touching the buttons on the wall are disregarded. If one object passes the
screening following features are extracted: the variance of the object, the angle of the
object and position where it is believed to touch the wall.
These features are send to a server. If the server receives positive results from both clients,
it will compare the variances and the angle between the objects seen by the cameras to two
different thresholds. These thresholds are made from comparison to how shadows looks
upon the projection surface. Two checks are made from the estimated touch coordinates.
One that ensures the object detected is not moving, and one that seeks to ensure the object
is actually in contact with the wall. To accept a touch, three consecutive frames have to
be classiﬁed as a touching object.
114
==PAGE:123==
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION
SECTION 9.2
The performance of the touch detection was validated by recording touches at different
locations on the projection surface. We saw, that 18 out 18 touches on the projection
surface without an external light source was detected. With an external light source 14
out 18 touches were detected. The 4 touches not found were two in each of the top corners
of the screen furthest away from the cameras.
Last it was seen, that no false positives were recorded, when the system was tested against
shadows within the detection area.
115
==PAGE:124==
Bibliography
[1] Thierry Bouwmans. Traditional and recent approaches in background modeling for
foreground detection: An overview. Computer Science Review, 11-12:31–66, 2014.
[2] M. Brown and D. G. Lowe. Automatic panoramic image stitching using invariant
features. International Journal of Computer Vision, 74(1):59–73, 2007.
[3] Jun Cheng, Qun Wang, Rui Song, and Xinyu Wu. Fingertip-based interactive pro-
jector–camera system. Signal Processing, 110:54–66, 2015.
[4] B N Delaunay. Sur la sph`ere vide. Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS, 1934(6):793–800, 1934.
[5] David H Douglas and Thomas K Peucker. Algorithms for the Reduction of the Num-
ber of Points Required to Represent a Digitized Line or its Caricature, chapter 2,
pages 15–28. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2011.
[6] Alexander Duda and Udo Frese. Accurate Detection and Localization of Checker-
board Corners for Calibration. British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), 2018.
[7] Jan Gugenheimer, Enrico Rukzio, Julian Seifert, and Pascal Knierim. UbiBeam:
An Interactive Projector-Camera System for Domestic Deployment. In ITS 2014
- Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Conference on Interactive Tabletops
and Surfaces, 2014.
[8] Rostam Hamzah and Haidi Ibrahim. Literature survey on stereo vision disparity map
algorithms. Journal of Sensors, 2016:1–23, 01 2016.
[9] Richard Hartley. Multiple view geometry image analysis. Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
[10] Interactive-Asia. Optituio. https://www.interactive-asia.com/optituio/. Accessed:
2019-06-22.
116
==PAGE:125==
[11] Dave Jones. Picamera. https://picamera.readthedocs.io/en/release-1.10/index.html.
Accessed: 2019-06-22.
[12] Juho Kannala and Sami S. Brandt. A generic camera model and calibration method
for conventional, wide-angle, and ﬁsh-eye lenses. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 28(8):1335–1340, 2006.
[13] Berthold Klaus and Paul Horn. Robot vision. MIT press, 1986.
[14] R Mukundan and K R Ramakrishnan.
Moment Functions in Image Analysis —
Theory and Applications. WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 1998.
[15] Marius Pedersen, Daniel Suazo, and Jean-Baptiste Thomas.
Seam-Based Edge
Blending for Multi-Projection Systems. International Journal of Signal Process-
ing, Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, 9(4):11–26, 2016.
[16] Rapha¨el.
Moment.
http://raphael.candelier.fr/?blog=Image%20Moments.
Ac-
cessed: 2019-06-22.
[17] R. Raskar. Immersive planar display using roughly aligned projectors. In Proceed-
ings IEEE Virtual Reality 2000 (Cat. No.00CB37048), pages 109–115, March 2000.
[18] Ramesh Raskar, Jeroen Van Baar, Jin Xiang Chai, Ramesh Raskar, Jeroen Baar, and
Jin Xiang Chai. A low cost projector mosaic with fast registration. In In Fifth Asian
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 114–119, 2002.
[19] Ranjan Roy. The Discovery of the Series Formula for π by Leibniz, Gregory and
Nilakantha. Mathematics Magazine, 88(7):548–549, 2018.
[20] Jack Sklansky. Finding the convex hull of a simple polygon. Pattern Recognition
Letters, 1(2):79–83, 1982.
[21] Irwin Sobel. An Isotropic 3x3 Image Gradient Operator. Presentation at Stanford
A.I. Project 1968, 2014.
[22] C. Stauffer and W. E. L. Grimson. Adaptive background mixture models for real-
time tracking. In Proceedings. 1999 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (Cat. No PR00149), volume 2, pages 246–252
Vol. 2, June 1999.
117
==PAGE:126==
[23] Rajeev J. Surati. Scalable self-calibrating display technology for seamless large-
scale displays.
Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dept. of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 1999.
[24] Satoshi Suzuki and KeiichiA Be. Topological structural analysis of digitized binary
images by border following. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing,
30(1):32–46, 1985.
[25] Viewsonic. LS830 Datasheet. https://www.viewsonic.com. Accessed: 2019-06-22.
[26] Brian A Wandell. Foundations of vision. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA, US,
1995.
[27] R W Wood. XXIII. Fish-eye views, and vision under water. The London, Edinburgh,
and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 12(68):159–162, 1906.
[28] Z. Zhang. A ﬂexible new technique for camera calibration. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 22(11):1330–1334, Nov 2000.
118
==PAGE:127==
==PAGE:128==
 
DTU Space, Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Elektrovej 
bygning 328 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
 
www.space.dtu.dk 
 
 
