==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
June 2019
Decoupling of Aﬄuence and Environmental Impacts
Mia Heide, s133635
&
Rasmus Nøddegaard Hansen, s133604
==PAGE:2==
Abstract English
The aim of this thesis was to investigate whether aﬄuence and environmental impact can
be decoupled in Denmark, so, the emissions per person can remain within the Earth’s car-
rying capacity when everyone has an equal share of the capacity. Sustainable development
was studied by comparing nation’s ”human development index” (HDI), which represents
welfare and environmental impact with global warming as environmental impact indicator
measured in green house gas (GHG) emissions deﬁned as CO2-eq.
Currently the GHG emissions in Denmark is 15.5 t CO2 -eq/person/year (incl. interna-
tional transport) computed with an input/output model and must be cut to 0.46-1.7 t
CO2-eq/person/year, depending on uncertainties in population growth and Earth carry-
ing capacity, to achieve an absolute sustainable level. Historically improving the standard
of living causes an increase in GHG emissions. This study also look into how an emerging
economy, represented by Kenya, can achieve an increased HDI and adhere to the remain-
ing global GHG budget.
The study consists of a number of scenario analyses incl. circular economy (CE) ini-
tiatives and back-casting (BC), which consider maintaining aﬄuence in Denmark from
a HDI point of view, while reducing GHG emissions. Technology eﬃciency, technology
transformation, CE and consumption habits have been quantiﬁed using life cycle assess-
ment and speciﬁc GHG savings are determined when compared to baseline emissions.
Reduction of GHG emissions from electricity and heat is dependent on technology trans-
formation (substitute fossil fuels with renewable energy sources) and storage possibili-
ties. In the transport and construction industries, it is essential to combine technology
eﬃciency (energy optimised housing), technology transformation (electriﬁcation of the
transport sector and reuse materials in construction) and change of consumer behaviour
(using public transport and less area per person) to achieve noticeable GHG reductions.
The energy and transport industries should reduce their GHG emissions with 82%.
The food industry depends on changes in consumption habits (plant-based diet) to achieve
a noticeable GHG reduction (70% of the emissions from food should be reduced compared
to current level), as the existing technology for reducing GHG emissions in the agricul-
tural sector provide limited savings. The textile industry and other industries rely on CE
solutions such as sharing platforms, recycling and changing consumption habits to reduce
the GHG emissions. CE can reduce the Danish GHG emissions with 21%.
Via the BC scenarios, it was proven that the basic needs deﬁned by Maslow can be met
within the absolute sustainable budget of GHG per person; however, with some uncer-
tainty.
Denmark cannot achieve an absolutely sustainable GHG-emission without aﬀorestation;
however, the emission should be limited to reduce the need of area for new forest. By
reducing meat/dairy intake to 10%, 52% of the agricultural land can be converted to
forest and combined with other scenarios an absolute sustainable level can be reached.
All actors: consumers, businesses and politicians must participate to achieve the goal of
absolute sustainability and focus on maximising service for environmental impact.
Page I
==PAGE:3==
Abstract Danish
Projektet har til form˚al at undersøge om velstand og miljøp˚avirkning kan afkobles i Dan-
mark, s˚a drivhusgasudledningen per person kan blive inden for Jordens bæreevne, n˚ar alle
har en lige andel af kapaciteten. Studiet tager udgangspunkt i bæredygtig udvikling via
sammenligning af en nations ”human development index” (HDI), der repræsenterer vel-
stand og miljøp˚avirkning med global opvarmning som miljøp˚avirkningsindikator, hvilket
er m˚alt i udledning af green house gasses (GHG), og angives i CO2-eq.
Danmarks nuværende GHG udledning er 15,5 t CO2-eq/person/˚ar (inkl. international
transport) beregnet med en input/output model og skal bringes ned mellem 0,46 og 1,7
t CO2-eq/person/˚ar afhængigt af usikkerheder i befolkningstilvækst og Jorden bæreevne
for at opn˚a et absolut bæredygtigt niveau. Historisk set for˚arsager en forbedring af leve-
standarden en øget GHG-udledning. Dette studie undersøger ogs˚a, hvordan et U-land,
repræsenteret af Kenya, kan opn˚a et væsentligt øget HDI, og overholde det resterende
globale GHG budget.
Studiet best˚ar af en række scenarieanalyser inkl. cirkulær økonomi-initiativer og back-
casting (BC), der beskæftiger sig med at bevare velstanden i Danmark fra et HDI-
synspunkt, men nedbringer GHG-udledningen. Teknologieﬀektivitet, teknologitransfor-
mation, cirkulær økonomi og forbrugsvaner er blevet kvantiﬁceret vha. livscyklusanalyser,
og gennem sammenligning med baselineudledning er konkrete GHG-besparelser beregnet.
Reduktion af GHG-udledningen i produktion af el og varme er afhængig af teknologitrans-
formation (erstatte fossile brændsler med vedvarende energikilder) og lagringsmuligheder.
I transport- og byggesektorerne er det essentielt at kombinere teknologieﬀektivitet (ener-
gioptimering af boliger), teknologitransformation (elektriﬁcering af transportsektoren og
genbruge materialer i byggeriet) og ændring af forbrugeradfærd (anvende oﬀentlig trans-
port og bo p˚a færre kvadratmeter) for at opn˚a mærkbare GHG-reduktioner. Energi- og
transport sektorerne skal reducere 82% af deres samlede GHG-udledning.
Fødevaresektoren er afhængig af ændringer i forbrugsvaner (plantebaseret kost) for at opn˚a
en mærkbar GHG-reduktion (70% reduktion i udledningen skal opn˚as), da metoderne
til at mindske GHG-udledningerne i landsbrugssektoren giver begrænsede besparelser,
n˚ar man kun medregner eksisterende teknologier. Tekstilbranchen og andre brancher er
afhængige af gode CE-løsninger som deleplatforme, genbrug og ændrede forbrugsvaner for
at reducere GHG udledningen. CE kan reducere den Danske GHG udledning 21%.
Via BC-scenarierne er det bevist at basisbehovene deﬁneret af Maslow kan opfyldes in-
denfor det absolutte bæredygtige budget af GHG emissioner per person.
Det er ikke realistisk, at Danmark kan opn˚a en absolut bæredygtig GHG-udledning uden
at plante mere skov, dog bør udledningen begrænses for at reducere behovet for areal
til ny skovbrug. Ved at mindste kødindtaget til 10% af det nuværende indtag, kan 52%
af landbrugsjorden omlægges til skov og i kombination med andre scenarier kan absolut
bæredygtighed opn˚as.
Alle aktører:forbrugere, virksomheder og politikere skal i spil for at n˚a m˚alet om absolut
bæredygtighed og sætte fokus p˚a at maksimere service for den miljømæssige p˚avirkning.
Page II
==PAGE:4==
Preface
The size of this master thesis corresponds to 30 ECTS points for each student. It was
conducted in the period from January 28th, 2019 to June 28th, 2019 by Mia Heide and Ras-
mus Nøddegaard Hansen at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Department of
Management Engineering under the Division of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment.
The main supervisor of the study was Michael Z. Hauschild, Professor, Deputy Head of
Division, Group Leader, DTU, Department of Sustainability in Management Engineering,
Division of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment. Alexandra Segolene Corinne Leclerc
PhD at DTU, Department of Management Engineering, Division of Quantitative Sustain-
ability Assessment was secondary supervisor.
Front page: John W. Baumgarten Architect (2018)
Acknowledgement
A special thank goes to our main supervisor Michael Z. Hauschild for advising and for
the many interesting discussions and perspectives we gained from ours meetings and
furthermore, for the engagement in our thesis throughout this period. We would also like
to give a special thanks to Alexandra Segolene Corinne Leclerc for help with the baseline
model in Eora, Matlab script and guidance.
We would like to thank Torben Crintz from Concito for inspiration. In general we have
met large interest in our project around us and we appreciate the support and interest
from the friends, family and colleagues.
Page III
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
BC
Back casting
CE
Circular Economy
CC
Carrying capacity
CCS
Carbon capture and storage
CHP
Combined heat and power
CLT
Cross laminated timber
DH
District heating
EF
Emission intensity Factor
Eora
Data for Multi regional input output model
EROI
Energy return on investment
EoL
End of life
FD
Final Demand
FU
Functional Unit
HDI
Human Development Index
HP
Heat Pump
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change
GDP
Gross domestic product
GNH
Gross national happiness
GNI
Gross national income
GHG
Green house gas
GWP
Global warming potential
IO
Input/Output
LCA
Life cycle assessment
LCI
Life cycle inventory
LCIA
Life cycle impact assessment
LEI
Lambert energy index
LUC
Land use change
LULUCF
Land use, land use change and forestry
MRIO
Multi regional input output
NG
Natural Gas
RCB
Remaining carbon budget
RE
Renewable energy
SDG
UN Sustainable Development Goals
SBM
Sustainable business models
Page IV
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
The IPAT Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Life Cycle Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Absolute Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Consumption Based Allocation of Environmental Impacts . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Human Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Circular Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7
Consumer Awareness and Change in Business Models . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Method
15
3.1
”Safe Space” for Global Warming Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Human Development Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Baseline Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Scenario Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Scenarios in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.7
Circular Economy Scenarios in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
Back-Casting Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.9
Scenarios in Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results
33
4.1
Scenarios in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
Electricity and Heat
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.3
Agriculture and Food Habits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.4
Land Use Change and Aﬀorestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.5
Constructions and the Built Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Circular Economy Scenarios in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.1
Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.2
Construction and the Built Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2.3
Other Industries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3
Back-casting scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.4
Scenarios in Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5
Discussion
68
5.1
Reduction Potential and Evaluation of Probability for Realisation . . . . .
68
5.2
Potential of Circular Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.3
Uncertainties in Modelling Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.4
Back Casting ”How low can you go?” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.5
Questioning HDI and Altered Deﬁnition of Aﬄuence
. . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Conclusion
80
Page V
==PAGE:7==
References
82
Appendix
90
A Appendix: Baseline assessment for Kenya
90
B Appendix: Naming of scenarios
91
C Appendix: Scenarios
92
D Appendix: Back casting scenario: Food
100
E Appendix: Sensitivity Analysis
104
F Appendix: Forest Area
106
G Appendix: Detailed analysis of energy consumption in housing
107
H Appendix: Back-casting: Housing
114
I
Appendix: Details for construction materials
117
J
Appendix: Break even result
119
K Appendix: BC food example
120
L Appendix: BC clothes
121
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Global warming and climate change are some of the greatest global catastrophic risks of
our time (Butler, 2018). The IPCC special report from August 2018 uncovers that global
warming rise above 1.5 °C above the pre-industrial level would impact the ecosphere and
technosphere (IPCC, 2018b) signiﬁcantly.
Staying within 1.5 °C have been a mean to deﬁne the carrying capacity for green house
gas (GHG) emissions divided into a ”safe space” for each person, resulting in 0.46-1.7 t
CO2-eq/person/year depending on the growth of the global population.
This thesis strive to illustrate, how Denmark with a current national impact of 87.8 Mt
CO2-eq/year and 15.5 t CO2-eq per person (including international transport) calculated
in this study, can reach an absolute sustainable level. This was envisioned by exploring
possible decrease options of the GHG-emissions through diﬀerent scenarios (technology
improvement, circular economy (CE), consumer behaviour and back-casting) while keep-
ing the welfare, represented by the Human Development Index (HDI) at a constant level.
The thesis should be seen as an overview of what is needed, and in which areas and actions
the largest potentials lie within.
Figure 1.1 illustrates the relation between HDI and environmental impact for Denmark
and Kenya. The boundaries for an absolute sustainable level (marked with green in ﬁgure
1.1) is deﬁned by a high HDI at 0.7 and very high HDI at 0.8 (Global Footprint Network,
2003-2019b) and the interval for the ”safe space” of 0.46-1.7 t CO2-eq/person/year with
1 t CO2-eq/person/year as most promising.
Figure 1.1: The relation between HDI and carbon footprint for Denmark and Kenya (Global Footprint
Network, 2003-2019b). The tendency is that high HDI equals a large carbon footprint. The sustainable
level is indicated with green in the bottom right corner with a HDI larger than 0.7 or 0.8 and carbon
footprint less than 1.7 or even reduced to 1 or 0.46 t CO2-eq per person.year.
Page 1 of 122
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION
The path for both countries towards absolute sustainability is clear; the environmental
impact and the welfare (HDI) have to be decoupled.
During the modelling process a particular focus has been centred about how much CE can
contribute towards reaching absolute sustainability considering Global Warming Potential
(GWP). Additionally, the impact of a very disciplinary minimal lifestyle taking starting
point in Maslow’s hierarchy of needs have been investigated by back-casting to see the
smallest possible impact the basic needs can constitute in Denmark.
Eventually, this study also considers how a developing country, characterised by Kenya,
can increase the living standard represented by the HDI, while keeping the GHG-emissions
within the absolute sustainable boundaries.
SDG 13 Climate action is main concern in this thesis, in spite of that several of the con-
sidered scenarios create synergies with and targets other SDGs as well.
Reader’s guide:
The structure of the report follows the principles of IMRAD though an additional classic
theory section has been added. An overall framework for the scenario development is
described in the method section. A detailed description of the scenarios and choice about
methods, assumptions etc. are included in the result section, followed by the results of the
respective scenarios. In the end of the result section the research questions are answered.
An analysis of the scenario results has been conducted in the discussion section. Finally
a conclusion summarising the main ﬁndings in the thesis is given. A main appendix can
be found in the end of the report and three additional documents is attached: 1. An
Additional Appendix with inventories for all assessments carried out in SimaPro and 2.
Matlab script and 3. Document with input/output data in Excel format.
Page 2 of 122
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
2
Theory
The theory section introduces relevant concepts, calculation methods and basic prerequi-
sites for the study.
2.1
The IPAT Equation
The IPAT equation (equation 2.1) presents the relationship between population (P),
aﬄuence (A) and technology (T) and how they inﬂuence environmental impacts (I)
(Hauschild, 2015). P and A is expected to continue increasing at current state glob-
ally; thus, T the technology eﬃciency is the parameter that can limit the environmental
impact in equation 2.1, which is highly needed since the current level of environmental
impact is not sustainable (Hauschild, 2015). Studies show that the global eco-eﬃciency
should be improved a factor 4-10, or even up to a factor 50, depending on the estimate
of population size and increase of global living standard to reach a sustainable state
(Hauschild, 2015), (Bjørn et al. , 2018).
I = P · A · T = Pop · GDP
Person ·
I
GDP
(2.1)
Equation 2.1 indicates that A and T are independent, which is unfortunately not the
case. An increased aﬄuence should be oﬀset by technology development; however, tech-
nology improvements in terms of eﬃciency lead to an increase in aﬄuence. Therefore,
increased technology eﬃciency is then in question regarding being the single road to abso-
lute sustainability (Hauschild, 2015). One implication of the IPAT equation is the mutual
relationship between P, A and T because technology improvements tend towards higher
aﬄuence; hence, increase in consumption is the main driver for the growth economy. Aﬄu-
ence is predominantly associated with material wealth in the growth economy resulting in
increased consumption as a result of technology development. Consequently, it can imply
a constraint for reaching absolute sustainable targets (Nørg˚ard & Xue, 2016). A is related
to the lifestyle of people; hence a combination of improved consumer behaviour (keeping
the level of aﬄuence; however, not based on materialistic goods) and eco-eﬃciency can
result in reducing the impact in the IPAT equation.
2.2
Life Cycle Assessment
The following section describes the methodology, application possibilities and limitations
of LCA. The section is based on Hauschild et al. (2018); however, focusing on the rel-
evant content for this study. LCA is a tool for quantifying environmental impacts by
comprehending an entire system of the respective product or service. It can compare
the environmental impacts for diﬀerent product systems and services to uncover, which
has the smallest contribution to diﬀerent impact categories (e.g. global warming, strato-
spheric ozone depletion and freshwater eutrophication).
First of all the goal of the LCA should be deﬁned to describe the purpose and intention
of the study and what the outcome should be used for. The goal deﬁnition is followed
by the scope deﬁnition where activities and processes that belong to the life cycle of the
product-system are decided. Furthermore, geographical and temporal boundaries of the
Page 3 of 122
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
study are deﬁned and the relevant level of technology is chosen. In the scope deﬁnition
the Functional Unit (FU) should be deﬁned, determining the function or service that will
be provided by the system quantitatively.
There are two types of LCA frameworks, attributional and consequential. The framework
depends on the three types of decision contexts situations, A, B and C. A (Micro-level
decision support), situation B (Meso/macro-level decision support), situation C (Account-
ing). Three circumstances deﬁne which context situation that should be applied: 1; if
any decision should be made from the LCA results: if yes, 2; if there are any large-scale
consequences on some processes of the background system: if no, 3; if the system is in-
teracting with other systems.
From ﬁgure 2.1 the diﬀerent frameworks can be seen. Step two is how to solve multifunc-
tionality, which is often necessary to deal with when utilising animals: e.g. a cow is used
to produce milk and later on some parts are used for meat and leather. Then the question
is the allocation of impact assigned to each product. If the system is A or C1, system
expansion is used to handle the multifuncitonalities, using average data. Is the system
situation B the multifuntionality should on the other hand be handled with the marginal
processes (the most represented in the mix of technologies or the one that is most likely
to be replaced considering substitution). If the system is C2 allocation is used.
Figure 2.1: LCI modelling framework for diﬀerent decision types. The ﬁgure is from (Niero, 2017).
The boundaries of the system are also deﬁned in the scope. An ideal system boundary
contains all unit processes that deliver the reference ﬂow(s), but often cut oﬀrules are
deﬁned to avoid endless loops. The processes within the system boundary are either gen-
erating energy or products from raw materials/resources or treating waste to the state
where emissions are the only output.
Upon the goal and scope a life cycle inventory (LCI) should be completed showing the
Page 4 of 122
==PAGE:12==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
elementary ﬂows in the system boundary with scaling based on the FU. The inventory is
an iterative process where the initial result might be changed due to obtained knowledge
revealing that some inputs can be cut-oﬀ, because the impact from the process is very
small, and other might have to be of better data quality due to the high contribution and
uncertainty in the process/inventory.
Finally, an impact assessment (characterisation) should be carried out by modelling the
system in a relevant software-program and adding the ﬂows from the inventory. Quan-
titative results in the diﬀerent indicator categories (around 10-12) are yielded from the
assessment. Selecting the relevant impact categories if not all of them, should be done
according to the goal and scope of the study. Assessment of sensitivity and reliability of
the results can be further processed.
During all four phases of the LCA interpretation of the initial results and ﬁndings should
be assessed to continuously be followed up, resulting in yield of best possible outcome,
see the iterative process of LCA in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The iterative process of LCA, showing the four phases of LCA and the ongoing interpretation.
The ﬁgure is revised from Hauschild et al. (2018).
When completing characterisation, normalisation can be done optionally. Normalisation
supports the interpretation of the impact proﬁle from the characterisation, answering
”how much is the impact?”, by relating the characterised results to a common reference.
Normalisation is done by expressing indicator scores for all impact categories, typically
the annual impacts of an average person.
The result shown in diﬀerent impact categories diﬀer slightly depending on the choice of
method for the analysis and the result can either be chosen at mid-point or end-point
Page 5 of 122
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
level. Results at midpoint level are more precise; however, more diﬃcult to relate to
the categories that should be improved. Whereas the end-point level results have larger
uncertainty but are easier to relate to in the perspective of area of damage.
There are three ways to model recycling at end of life (EoL) independent of open-loop
recycling (the materials will be used in an other product system in the next service life)
and closed-loop recycling (where the materials will re-enter the same production line)
(Niero, 2017).
1. Cut-oﬀapproach (100:0): considers the share of recycled material that goes into man-
ufacturing of a product. The view point of this approach is from the perspective of the
product system that uses the recycled material. Recycling at EoL waste treatment of
the discarded product is outside of the system boundary; hence, no credits or emissions
for the recycled material will be accounted from the discarded product (Niero, 2017), see
ﬁgure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: The cut-oﬀapproach for recycling. The ﬁgure is revised from Niero (2017).
2. EoL recycling or avoided burden approach (0:100): considers the EoL of the materials
that are recycled. The approach focuses on the product system that provides the recy-
cled material; thus, the recycled material will be credited in the EoL phase of the initial
product (Niero, 2017).
3. Equal share method (50:50): states that the burdens of the recycling process and cred-
its for the recycled material should be shared equally between the product system that
provides the recycled material and the one using the recycled material (Niero, 2017).
LCA can either be used for decision support (choosing the least harmful product), product
development and design improvements and marketing and eco-labelling. A LCA cannot
directly tell if a product or service is suﬃcient in absolute terms.
2.3
Absolute Sustainability
Reaching absolute sustainability encompasses a ”safe space” where all individuals have
an equal share of environmental impacts deﬁned by the planetary boundaries and the
carrying capacities.
The planetary boundaries includes nine diﬀerent areas of which four boundaries are ex-
ceeded at society’s contemporary state. Besides climate change the biosphere integrity are
Page 6 of 122
==PAGE:14==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
worth highlighting as another challenge, which is heading way beyond the boundary at a
very fast pace. These two environmental indicators have been identiﬁed as crucial regard-
ing importance of functioning of the Earth system (Steﬀen et al. , 2015). An important
observation is that agriculture (production of food for the growing population) is main
contributor in the four planetary boundaries that are exceeded, which makes it ideal to
ﬁnd common solutions for all areas. Agricultural application of nitrogen and phosphorus
are particular the main contributor to breaking the biogeochemical boundary that almost
entirely comes from fertilisers in agriculture. Land-system change arises likewise from
human related land interventions layout for predominantly agricultural land use (Steﬀen
et al. , 2015). The yellow colour in ﬁgure 2.4 indicates an increased risk, whereas red
colour indicates a certain high risk.
Figure 2.4: The nine planetary boundaries showing the four areas that have reached an increased risk
(Steﬀen et al. , 2015).
Carrying capacity is deﬁned by: ”The maximum sustained environmental interference
a natural system can withstand without experiencing negative changes in structure or
functioning that are diﬃcult or impossible to reverse” (Bjørn, 2015). The Remaining
carbon budget (RCB) can be deﬁned as the carrying capacity within Global warming.
RCB is the total amount of GHG emissions that can be emitted globally before the deﬁned
threshold of 1.5 °C is exceeded. A deﬁnition and threshold for absolute sustainability is
needed since LCA only functions as a comparable tool. Absolute sustainability can be seen
as a type of normalisation; setting the result in perspective of absolute sustainable terms
and not relative to average consumption. To design sustainable products it is therefore
necessary to have an indicator of how much of each persons ”safe space” a product/service
consumes.
Page 7 of 122
==PAGE:15==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
A reoccurring question is how to allocate impacts within the safe space e.g. how to re-
late the impact from industries to individuals. One of the main tasks and constraints
to implement absolute sustainability comprise the complex allocation of impacts within
the planetary boundaries that is functional for nations and corporations (Hauschild, 2015).
1.5 °C is the proposed limit of temperature rise that this study considers as the maxi-
mum threshold for global warming. Being within the 1.5 °C limit instead of 2.0 °C the
impact on the ecosphere and technosphere will be importantly mitigated (IPCC, 2018b).
In terms of damages to Earth and climate a 1.5 °C rise of global temperature the sea
ice-free Arctic summers are foreseen to be reduced with a factor 10 compared with a 2
°C temperature rise. Sea level rise will globally be 0.1 m less if global warming is limited
to 1.5 °C compared with 2 °C, which implies that up to 10 million less people will be
exposed to related risks when no climate adaptation is assumed (IPCC, 2018b).
Unique endemism ecosystems such as coral reefs will decay within the range of 70–90%
at a raise of 1.5°C; however, the coral reefs will almost be extinct at 2 °C (>99%) with
very high certainty. Furthermore, health of human beings and livestock would both be
negatively aﬀected by global warming; reducing the temperature increase conﬁnes the
harmfully impacts on feed quality and decease propagation and it improves fresh water
availability. Hundreds of million of people will likewise avoid being victims of both climate
risks and prone to poverty in 2050 by limiting the temperature rise to 1.5 °C versus 2.0
°C (IPCC, 2018b).
2.4
Consumption Based Allocation of Environmental Impacts
The emissions associated with the occurring production in the respective location e.g.
city, nation, region etc are ”easy” to quantify. All parties to the UNFCCC and its Kyoto
Protocol are required to report annually on their inland greenhouse emissions to the UN
(European Commission, 2019). This approach will often allocate the emissions in a un-
fair distribution among countries, caused by diﬀerent import/export rates of nations and
diﬀerent production and consumption levels.
The global economy catalyses import and export trade, hence, distributing trade related
impacts world wide, which has seen an increase from 20-30 % during 1990-2010 (Kanemoto
et al. , 2016) or even above 30% for high developed countries (Isenhour & Feng, 2014).
Therefore production based emissions do not satisfy the intended purpose of this study.
To obtain a more realistic image of a nation’s carbon foot print a consumption based
emission allocation is needed. A consumption-based approach tells us why the emission
occur and not where (Isenhour & Feng, 2014).
Former studies illustrating decoupling of economic growth and environmental impact
turned out to be misleading, caused by a production based assessment approach, thus
the avoided emissions in the developed countries (e.g. Denmark, Sweden, UK) had been
moved/outsourced to emerging economies (e.g. China)(Isenhour & Feng, 2014).
Internal production in the industrialised countries might be rather eﬃcient but the out-
sourced production to emerging countries often has less restricted climate policy con-
straints.
Dependence of import constitute a great environmental impact, which should be allocated
Page 8 of 122
==PAGE:16==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
to the country (the consumer) that demands the production. On this basis multi-regional
input-output models (MRIO) have been invented to track consumption ﬂow in procure-
ment network. The MRIO is based on the Leontif’s input-output analysis of economics.
If using the Eora-database it is possible to analyse 190 countries and around 15000 sectors
with a tendency of greater sector representativeness being high for industrialised nations
and decreasing towards developing economies (Kanemoto et al. , 2016), (Lenzen et al.
, 2013). With the MRIO Eora-database it is possible to generate a consumption based
assessment of a nations associated emissions.
2.5
Human Development
Explaining human development is possible from the theory of Abraham Maslow’s pyramid
of human needs from 1943. A hierarchy of needs divided into ﬁve categories; 1. physio-
logical, 2. safety, 3. love and belongingness, 4. esteem and 5. self-actualisation where ﬁve
is the ﬁnal and highest need. Advancing in the hierarchy requires almost entire fulﬁlment
in one step of needs to be motivated to aim further; thus, a need will centralise the mind
on that particular need to be satisﬁed before aiming further (Maslow, 1943).
Human Development Index (HDI) can be seen as deﬁnition for the A in the IPAT equa-
tion (Global Footprint Network, 2003-2019b). HDI is deﬁned by three parameters; long
and healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of living (UNDP, 2018b). The three
parameters are calculated with equation 2.7 using the maximum and minimum values
from table 2.1 (UNDP, 2018b).
The minimum life years in table 2.1 is justiﬁed by the historical evidence that no country
in the 20th century had a life expectancy of less than 20 years (Maddison, 2001).
The minimum and maximum values in table 2.1 are used to transform and standardise
the three parameters into a number between 0 and 1. The life expectancy has come very
close to 85 years in several countries and 85 years is the target in many countries (UNDP,
2018b).
The maximum education years is 18, since this is equivalent to achieving a master’s degree
in most countries. Some people do not get any type of education; therefore, the minimum
education years is set to 0 (UNDP, 2018b). The minimum value for gross national income
(GNI) per capita of $100 is justiﬁed by the unmeasured market in economies close to
the minimum, which is not captured in the oﬃcial data (UNDP, 2018b). The maximum
is set to $75,000 per capita, since there is virtually no gain in human development and
well-being from an annual income per capita larger than this amount (UNDP, 2018b).
Page 9 of 122
==PAGE:17==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
Dimension
Indicator
Minimum
Maximum
Health
Life expectancy
(years)
20
85
Education
Expected years of schooling
(years)
0
18
Education
Mean years of schooling
(years)
0
15
Standard of living
Gross national income per capita
(2011 PPP $)
100
75.000
Table 2.1: The minimum and maximum values of the three dimensions to calculate the HDI (UNDP,
2018b).
IHealth =
actual value – minimum value
maximum value – minimum value
(2.2)
Expected years of schooling index =
actual value – minimum value
maximum value – minimum value
(2.3)
Mean years of schooling index =
actual value – minimum value
maximum value – minimum value
(2.4)
IEducation = Expected years of schooling index + Mean years of schooling index
2
(2.5)
IIncome =
ln(actual value) – ln(minimum value)
ln(maximum value) – ln(minimum value)
(2.6)
The three parameters in the HDI are weighted internally in their respective equations.
Therefore, the HDI are calculated by the geometric mean of the three parameters, see
equation (2.7).
HDI = ( IHealth + IEducation + IIncome ) · 1
3
(2.7)
The United Nations considers a HDI larger than 0.7 to be ”high human development”
and 0.8 to be “very high human development”.
The HDI does not reveal inequalities. In many African countries there is a small wealthy
upper class, which makes it diﬃcult to evaluate how large the lower class is and how the
conditions are for some parts of the population from the HDI (Tschirley et al. , 2015).
In general the HDI gives a good overview of the average living standard in the respective
countries; however, the ﬂuctuations within a country cannot be seen from the ﬁnal result.
Page 10 of 122
==PAGE:18==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
The HDI and the basic needs of humans deﬁned by Maslow can be related to the Sustain-
able Development Goals (SDGs). When looking at the physical needs deﬁned by Maslov,
it is clear that SDG 2 ”No hunger” and 3 ”Good heath and well-being” and 6 ”Clean water
and sanitation” cover the primary needs. SDG 1 ”No poverty”, 4 ”Quality education”,
5 ”Gender equality” and 8 ”Decent work and economic growth” represent the rest of the
SDGs with human prosperity. For the countries with high HDI the basic needs and SDGs
with human prosperity are fulﬁlled. The same accounts for the countries with low HDI
where the primary needs are not fully fulﬁlled.
On the other hand if looking at the target indicators for some of the SDGs considering
Earth resources, material and energy use (SDG 12.c Rationalise ineﬃcient fossil-fuel sub-
sidies, SDG 7.2 Increase renewable energy, SDG 9.4 Make infrastructure and industries
sustainable) it is clear that the countries with the highest HDI is not the most environ-
mental sustainable (UNDP, 2018a).
The countries that have the best living standard also have the largest environmental foot
print indicated in ﬁgure 2.5. Africa and some Asian countries have the smallest HDI;
however, it seems they should increase the HDI without having an increase or only have
a small increase in ecological footprint to reach a sustainable level. The country that is
clearly closest to a sustainable level is Sri Lanka (marked with dark green in the light
blue box in ﬁgure 2.5. Sri Lanka has a HDI = 0.76 and ecological footprint of 1.53 gha
per person. There are a few other countries close to or just within the sustainable level.
Denmark and Kenya have been chosen as case countries, this is due to the availability
and quality of data as well as representing the very high end and low extend of the HDI.
Kenya has a HDI of 0.53 and ecological footprint of 1.04 gha, which is within the bioca-
pacity of the world at 1.8 gha per person, but the HDI is much below the goal of a high
HDI. Denmark has a HDI of 0.92 and ecological footprint of 7.13 gha, which exceeds the
worlds biocapacity almost four times (Global Footprint Network, 2003-2019a).
In the general and historical perspective there is a need for high income and energy use
to improve the HDI. When the income counts 33% of HDI, achieving very high HDI by
deﬁnition requires growth, which leads to increased environmental impact as a result of
higher consumption of products and services that also have an environmental impact. The
HDI approach is therefore somewhat self-defeating in an environmental point of view, as
long as the economic growth and environmental impact is connected. The tendency can
be seen in ﬁgure 2.6, with a few countries deviating from the relation.
Page 11 of 122
==PAGE:19==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
Figure 2.5: The relation between HDI and ecological foot print for diﬀerent world regions (Global Foot-
print Network, 2003-2019b). The tendency is a high HDI equals a large ecological footprint. The sustain-
able level is indicated with light blue in the bottom right corner with a HDI larger than 0.7 and ecological
footprint less than 1.8 [gha] per person.
.
Figure 2.6: The relation between GDP, energy use per capita and HDI. The ﬁgures are from Guti´errez-
Dom`enech (2014) and Lambert et al. (January 2014)
Over-consumption does not contribute to raising the HDI, indicated by ﬁgure 2.6, or to
reach the highest need of Maslow’s pyramid of needs.
Among others Ghislandi et al.
(2019) claims that the HDI is not a good indicator of
raking well-being because GNI is included in the HDI, nevertheless, the initial focus
in this study is decoupling of environmental impact, while keeping the growth and the
Page 12 of 122
==PAGE:20==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
economic systems as it is. Therefore, HDI ﬁts well into the initial purpose of this study.
This will be further looked into in the discussion section. When looking at ﬁgure 2.6 it
is clear both regarding GDP and energy use that there is a break even point where the
HDI stops increasing signiﬁcantly as a result of increasing GDP and energy availability.
The HDI does not increase much when the GDP is larger than 40,000 dollars, but already
from 20,000 dollars a HDI of around 0.7 to 0.8 is reached. Looking at energy per capita
the HDI stabilise around 120-200 GJ per capita.
2.6
Circular Economy
The core concept of Circular Economy (CE) is to keep the materials at the highest value
possible by slowing down, narrowing or closing the resource ﬂow by prolonging the ser-
vice life and transforming the materials at the end of their service life into resources or
new product services through share, maintenance, reuse, refurbishment and recycle (Ellen
MacArthur Foundation, 2017), (Jørgensen et al. , 2018). The more cascades the materials
can go through and the longer time a product can stay in a cascade the better for the
environment. However, it is essential to reduce energy and material use when maintaining
or recycling the materials, since the environmental footprint has to be reduced compared
with virgin materials or production as usual, if CE should make sense.
When implementing CE one has to consider environmental economy. If it is ”cheaper”
meaning less polluting to maintain a product compared with investing in a new one this
cascade should be chosen. However, if destroying the potential for the product to re-
enter a cascade, the next cascaded could be reconsidered and so forth, e.g if upgrading
or repairing a product makes it non-recyclable. It is quite diﬃcult to evaluate, which
cascade is the most correct one since some materials can go through the same cascade
several times; thus, keeping the value of the material. In some situations the materials
can only circulate once in a cascade due to the choice of other chemicals and materials in
the reprocessing of the cascade.
CE calls for change in consumer behaviour. CE encourage sharing economy and reduction
of waste. It emphasises products of high quality with long life times. It contradicts the
trends of owning many products that are not utilised to its fully extent (e.g. clothes).
CE has been highlighted worldwide (among others by the media and politicians) as key
element in the transition towards greener production/consumption patterns. However,
CE cannot stand alone when striving for absolute sustainability, since the demand for
resources can exceed the planetary supply when the living standard increases worldwide
(Wang. et al. , 2018). In practice, the recycling rates cannot reach 100%, since the col-
lection, sorting and separation is limited and thus avoiding resources ending at ﬁnal EoL
is not obtained with CE (Wang. et al. , 2018). The eﬃciency of the recycling methods
and reuse rate of resources (e.g. steel) need to be improved, since CE do have a positive
eﬀect on reduction of material use (Wang. et al. , 2018).
Developed regions as EU, Japan and USA would require a technology eﬃciency improve-
ment of 40 times towards 2050 to reduce environmental impact to the necessary level
Page 13 of 122
==PAGE:21==
CONTENTS
2. THEORY
(Nørg˚ard & Xue, 2016). Thus, calling for improved resource optimisation globally. CE
has been investigated as a key to turn over the environmental harm. Particularly because
Denmark has only managed to reduce the T from the IPAT equation with a factor of 1.4,
over last 25 years far from the target of 40 times (Nørg˚ard & Xue, 2016).
2.7
Consumer Awareness and Change in Business Models
Often environmental studies or research are either consumer or technology based, despite
the combination of a technology and consumer based approach is needed when striving for
sustainable development (Bjørn et al. , 2018). Consumer awareness includes: consumer
demand, change of life style and reduction of absolute material and energy consumption
as a response to growing global consumption patterns and awareness of associated possible
rebound eﬀects (Nørg˚ard & Xue, 2016). A change in demand can either be established
with a political perspective (creating laws that supports the best environmental choices)
or from a consumer awareness raising perspective, where the consumers willingly take the
most responsible choices on an informed basis.
Presupposing the most responsible consumer choices are made possible and realistic with
implementation of successful sustainable business models (SBM) in the industries, since
the majority of people tend to choose the best product and/or lowest cost to quality ratio
product and not the most sustainable one. By focusing on providing the service and not
the product itself, businesses can better meet consumers needs while acting responsible
for the impact associated with the product and thus decouple material prosperity and
services.
SBM (build on principles from CE) have another important role in keeping the living
standard, since implementation of SBM can maintain or create the most environmental
friendly jobs on the market, in the perspective of people reducing their materialistic con-
sumption leading to decrease of conventional jobs. More jobs could be created within the
repair and maintenance sector to prolong the life time of products and within sharing and
leasing where people have the ability to rent the service they need.
The implementation time for consumer awareness and SBMs are related to the time
for political provisions or social acceptance. Consumer awareness cannot stand alone in
reaching an absolute sustainable level considering Global warming. Nevertheless, reduc-
ing the consumption and changing towards more environmentally friendly consumption
patterns will decrease the pressure on the eﬃciency factor. The emission intensity across
all technologies and sectors must be reduced, in order to meet the emission target (Bjørn
et al. , 2018). At the same time studies also show that it is very diﬃcult to reach abso-
lute sustainability or sustainable political targets if only considering improvements of the
technology eﬃciency (Heijungs et al. , 2014).
Page 14 of 122
==PAGE:22==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
3
Method
This study considers two very essential questions for Denmark and an additional question
for Kenya:
1. How can Denmark reach an absolute sustainable level of GHG-emissions keeping
the welfare (HDI) at current level?
2. How much can CE reduce the GHG-emissions when striving for absolute sustain-
ability in Denmark?
1. How can Kenya reach a high or acceptable HDI level keeping or minimising the
GHG-emission at (current) absolute sustainable level?
3.1
”Safe Space” for Global Warming Potential
To deﬁne the ”safe space”, the sustainable impact for each person assuming a fair share
of the RCB as mentioned in subsection 2.3 ”Absolute sustainability”, the indicator of a
temperature increase of 1.5 °C has been used as the threshold of the carrying capacity for
climate change. The ”safe space” considering GHG-emissions has been calculated with
two diﬀerent approaches. Both methods have resulted in an interval, which has been used
as target ranges for the countries.
Method 1
Population quantity and uncertainties in carrying capacity inﬂuence the size of the ”safe
space”, which is globally available. The carrying capacity ensuring maximum tempera-
ture rise to 1.5 °C originates from IPCC (2018a). It implies diﬀerent uncertainties, which
potentially can lead to both greater or lower carrying capacity than assessed. Dealing
with this uncertainty the RCB has been increased and decreased with 50 % as proposed
by IPCC (2018a). It results in the upper and lower boundaries of the interval of how
much GHG that can be emitted in total towards 2050.
Determining the lower number of the interval of the annual carbon budget was thus de-
ﬁned by maximum population quantity and the smallest RCB to stay within 1.5 °C (the
”worst case” scenario). Reversely, the upper boundary of the interval emerged by dividing
highest forecast GHG-emission tolerance with lowest expected quantity of the population.
IPCC computed the global RCB to stay within 1.5 °C temperature rise (with 67% proba-
bility) to 420 Gt CO2-eq. However, due to Earth system feedbacks 100 Gt CO2-eq has to
be subtracted from the 420 Gt CO2-eq, hence yielding 320 Gt CO2-eq as the GHG-budget
until 2050. This number was then increased and decreased by 50% to deﬁne upper and
lower boundaries of maximum GHG-emissions (IPCC, 2018a). This results in an interval
of 0.46-1.71 t CO2-eq per person per year until 2050 and a negative CO2 contribution
after 2050. If making the calculation with the world population of 2019 the carbon bud-
get is 0.65-1.95 t CO2-eq/person/year, which indicates that the ”safe space” per person
will decrease a bit as the world population increases. The 2019 interval does not diﬀer
signiﬁcantly from 0.46-1.71 t CO2-eq per person per year, which have been used as target
in this study. The calculations can be found in table 3.1.
Page 15 of 122
==PAGE:23==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
RCB
[Mt CO2-eq]
Mt CO2-eq
/year
Population
[bill.] 2050
t CO2-eq/
person/year
[mean CO2]
t CO2-eq/
person/year
[mean Pop]
Boundaries
[t CO2-eq/
person/year]
Min
160000
5000
8.75
1.1
0.51
0.46
Max
480000
15000
10.85
0.9
1.54
1.71
Mean
320000
10000
9.77
1.0
Table 3.1: The RCB calculated by IPCC (2018a) is accounting for 32 years (2018-2050). The uncertainty
for the RCB and the future population in 2050 is included to shape an interval for the ”safe space” per
person. The green result of 1 t CO2-eq/person has been estimated to be the most accurate absolute
sustainable carbon foot print per person. Earth system feedback of 100000 Mt CO2-eq is included.
Method 2
In the ph.d of Bjørn (2015), the global carrying capacity has been deﬁned assuming steady
state, which means that human interventions causing dynamics in the carrying capacity
are not included. Therefore in contrast to method 1, the global GHG emissions do not
need to decrease to a net negative contribution after 2050; however, the level of global
GHG emissions must stay at the same level assuming the global population stabilises at
the level of year 2050. Furthermore, the carrying capacities has been deﬁned with two
diﬀerent thresholds: 1 W/m2 (corresponding to limiting the temperature increase to 1.06
°C above the pre-industrial levels) and 2 °C temperature increase above the pre-industrial
levels. In this study the indicator for the carrying capacity has been deﬁned to 1.5 °C
temperature increase; therefore a linear tendency has been assumed between the two
results (Bjørn, 2015). Linear interpolation has been used between the global carrying
capacities in ﬁgure 3.2 to ﬁnd the global carrying capacity for a temperature increase of
1.5 °C shown in ﬁgure 3.3. The ﬁnal interval for the GHG emissions per person depending
on the size of the global population in 2050 is [480; 595] kg CO2-eq/person/year, hence
the interval from method 2 is within the interval for method 1.
1 degree
2 degree
Global carrying capacity
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
3610
6600
Global population [bill.]
6.92
6.92
Global ”safe space” per person
[kg CO2-eq/person/year]
522
985
Table 3.2: The global carrying capacity calculated by Bjørn (2015) for a temperature increase of 1 and
2 °C.
1.5 degree
1.5 degree
1.5 degree
Global carrying capacity
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
5210
5210
5210
Global population
2050 [bill. ](max, mean, min)
10.8
9.77
8.75
Global ”safe space” per person
[kg CO2-eq/pers/year]
480
533
595
Table 3.3: The global carrying capacity calculated with linear interpolation from the results in the ph.d
of Bjørn (2015).
Page 16 of 122
==PAGE:24==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
To reach an absolute sustainable level considering climate change Denmark and Kenya
should limit the GHG emissions to the levels illustrated in ﬁgure 3.4 and ﬁgure 3.5,
which are based on the intervals of GHG emission per person from method 1 and 2. The
national intervals are quite broad. In this study each boundary will be used as indicators
for how well a scenario is performing and how much the total impact should be reduced at
least. The national GHG-emissions in Denmark should be limited to 2.9-10.8 Mt CO2-eq
accounting a population of 6.3 mill. in 2050. In 2018 the national emissions should be
2.58-9.60 Mt CO2-eq/year with a population of 5.6 mill. In this study the increasing
population in Denmark has not been included in each scenario, but the national share has
been adjusted to the population in 2018; thus, not allowing a larger impact per person.
Method 1
2050
Population
[mill.]
Percentage of
world population
Total Mt CO2-eq
/year lower
Total Mt CO2-eq
/year upper
KY share
85
0.87%
39.1
145.7
DK share
6.3
0.06%
2.9
10.8
Table 3.4: The absolute sustainable share of GHG emissions for Denmark and Kenya calculated in method
1. Assuming the population of year 2050. The lower boundary are calculated with the most conservative
carrying capacity and the largest expected world population, and opposite for the upper limit of the
interval.
Method 2
2050
Population
[mill.]
Percentage of
world population
Total Mt CO2-eq
/year lower
Total Mt CO2-eq
/year upper
KY share
85
0.87%
40.8
50.6
DK share
6.3
0.06%
3
3.8
Table 3.5: The absolute sustainable share of GHG emissions for Denmark and Kenya calculated in method
2. Assuming the population of year 2050. For method 2 the carrying capacity has no range; thus, the
interval is calculated with the max and min expected world population.
3.2
Human Development Index
In this study a HDI of 0.70 has been set as a goal for Kenya, which in 2018 had a HDI of
0.53 (Global Footprint Network, 2003-2019b).
When looking into the formulas for the HDI presented in the theory section it can be seen
that the three main elements in the HDI are: health indicated by mean age, education
indicated by expected years and mean years of schooling and standard of living indicated
by gross national income per capita.
To reach a long healthy life sanitation conditions, access to clean drinking water and
quality of residential area have an impact to avoid sickness, keep protected and warm. The
availability of energy and electricity also inﬂuence the health, since the quality of hospitals,
transport and food security improve with the availability of energy and electricity.
The level of education is a political matter but it is also strongly related to the income
and the job opportunities in a country or area. The availability of electricity (light) is also
a necessity for higher education, since it is a condition for studying during the evenings.
Food security is also related to education since malnutrition in the childhood can lead to
Page 17 of 122
==PAGE:25==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
underdevelopment. The scenarios for Denmark have been developed with reference ﬂows
maintaining the three parameters that inﬂuences the HDI. How the HDI inﬂuences the
modelling of Kenya is described under results in the subsection ”Scenarios in Kenya”.
3.3
LCA
The goal for the general and CE scenarios is to identify potential national GHG savings
via combination of technology improvement, technology transformation and changes in
consumption patterns, while providing the current service demanded. The goal for each
BC scenario is to resolve the lowest impact possible and verify whether or not the total
impact from the basic needs can be within the absolute boundaries for GWP. The result
of the study will be used for academical purpose and it can be seen as a guide for politi-
cians and individual citizens regarding which types of societal and consumer changes that
should be implemented in Denmark and how far they take us on the path to comply with
the political agreements of limiting global warming to 1.5 °C.
To scope the study, GWP has been chosen as the only impact category, since this single
category indicates the focus area of this study. Each scenario has its own reference ﬂow,
to make the impact and reductions comparable within the scenario. When modelling a
change in both consumption and technology eﬃciency it relates to both A and T in the
IPAT equation, though the aﬄuence level should be kept in the Danish scenarios. The
scenarios do not have a FU, since it does not make sense when illustrating a reduction in
consumption; thus, the reference ﬂow is suﬃcient. The processes included in each scenario
are identiﬁed based on diﬀerent methods and approaches depending on the sector for the
scenario. Where forecasts have been made by other experts e.g. for the composition
of electricity and heat sources, these have been used for the scenarios. The study only
considers technologies that already exists and are commercially implemented or possible
to implement. The scenarios are modelled in SimaPro, with ReCiPe World mid-point H
as the method and the database Eco-invent 3.
Consequential modelling is used for the scenarios, since the changes are supposed to
inﬂuence the processes in the background system; thus, the scenarios are of situation B
frameworks. The recycled and reused materials in the BC-scenarios and CE scenarios
have been modelled with the cut-oﬀapproach where 100% of the impact from production
is allocated to the initial product system and EoL is included in the next product service
life.
3.4
Baseline Model
Multi Regional Input-Output (MRIO) model with Eora as data base has been used to
calculate the consumption based GHG-emissions for Denmark and Kenya in 2015. The
impacts are calculated in accordance with the Kyoto agreement, international transport
is not included in this calculation (Postdan Institute for Cimate Impact Research, 2018),
(Schmidt & Mu˜nos, 2014). The baseline for Denmark is 78.2 Mt CO2-eq/year or 13.8 t
CO2-eq/person/year (excluding international transport). For Kenya it is 44.7 Mt CO2-
eq/year or 0.95 t CO2-eq/person/year. Both baselines are highlighted with bold in table
Page 18 of 122
==PAGE:26==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
3.6. The IO model used in this study will be referred to as Eora subsequently.
Eora calculates the emissions based on the environmental extended IO-model, which in-
cludes 131 industries in Denmark and 51 industries in Kenya and a corresponding number
of industries for 188 other countries summing up to 14839 industries in total.
International transport are not included in the IO-model; thus, international transport
(shipping and ﬂights) has been handled as an additional ”block” to Eora. The impact
from shipping is estimated based on the global carbon foot print caused by shipping of
940 Mt CO2-eq/year divided with the Danish share of the global GDP (0.004%) result-
ing in 3.8 Mt CO2-eq/year. The international air transport is estimated to contribute
5.8 Mt CO2-eq. This is based on the total ﬂight distance of the Danes of 32,760 mill
person.km/year, which is based on the number of passengers from the Danish airports in
2018 and the total ﬂight distance from former years (Statistic Denmark, 2019), (Trans-
portr˚adet, 2001).
The 9.6 Mt CO2-eq/year for international transport has been added to the carbon foot-
print assessed by Eora in table 3.6 for illustrating the full picture of the Danish impact,
despite large uncertainties. The additional transport ”block” of 9.6 Mt CO2-eq per year,
is handled on its own in the scenario analysis and in the discussion.
From table 3.6 it is possible to compare diﬀerent methods for calculating the consumption
based national GHG-emissions. To make the results from Eora comparable to the others,
the impact from international transport has been added to the results from Eora.
Method
Mt CO2-eq/year
Population [mill.]
t CO2-eq/per.year
Eora IO
DK share 2015
78.2
5.660
13.8
Eora IO
KY share 2015
44.7
47.240
0.95
Eora IO +
own estimate
DK share 2015 incl
transport abroad
87.8
5.660
15.5
FORWAST IO
DK share 2003 incl
transport abroad
79.3
5.384
14.7
GTAP 2001 IO
DK share 2001 incl
transport abroad
81
5.349
15.1
CONCITO
DK share 2008 incl
transport abroad
99-115
5.476
18-21
Table 3.6: The total GHG emissions in Denmark and Kenya calculated with diﬀerent methods. The
results from Eora that are speciﬁcally calculated in this project (marked with bold) indicate the total
emissions that are used further in this study. The comparison are veriﬁed data based on (Schmidt &
Mu˜nos, 2014).
The total GHG emissions from Eora and the additional impact caused by international
transport result in 15.5 t CO2-eq/person/year, which is close to the results from other
assessment shown in table 3.6. The results from table 3.6 indicate that Denmark needs
a eco-eﬃciency factor of 9-34 when comparing with the current emission levels calculated
in table 3.4 and 3.5.
Identifying target areas required looking into the industries that would results in con-
siderable reductions. Eora revealed that GHG-emissions from import and production in
Denmark are 33% and 67%, respectively. In the following internal contributions from
Denmark and imported goods are presented to identify possible areas of action.
Page 19 of 122
==PAGE:27==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
The industries that contribute the most to the total GHG-emissions calculated with Eora
are identiﬁed in ﬁgure 3.1 for Denmark and in ﬁgure 3.4 for Kenya. For Denmark the
construction, transport, public service, food and textile industries have been identiﬁed as
areas with a great potential for reduction in GHG emissions.
An overview of the impact caused by import divided into countries, is presented in ﬁgure
3.2. The ﬁgure shows in which countries the consumption in Denmark causes the largest
impact. Germany, China, The Netherlands and Sweden stand out as the places where
most of the impact is allocated.
Figure 3.1: The baseline from Eora illustrating the GHG contribution from the 13 most contributing
industries to the impact in Denmark (when neglecting international transport). The ﬁgure is made from
the baseline result of Eora.
Page 20 of 122
==PAGE:28==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
Figure 3.2: The baseline from Eora illustrating the GHG contribution in Denmark from import by country
showing the 11 most contributing countries.
Figure 3.3: The baseline from Eora illustrating the GHG contribution in Denmark from import by sector
by country presenting the 16 most contributing sectors.
Looking at the industries with largest impact by country could identify areas of improve-
ment. The impact caused by import from sectors in other countries can be seen in ﬁgure
Page 21 of 122
==PAGE:29==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
3.3 where ”Wearing apparel from China constitute the 10th largest impact in Denmark,
and therefore is the top contributor of import. There are several other sectors of import
related to textiles in the top contributing import sectors. These are marked with blue in
ﬁgure 3.3. Impact related to import from cars and machinery are marked with green and
food import is indicated with yellow. From the analysis of the most contributing import
sectors in ﬁgure 3.3 it is clear that the demand for textiles, food and vehicles causes the
largest GHG impact.
In Kenya the import constitute a smaller part of the total impact than in Denmark with
a distribution between internal production and import being 79% and 21% respectively.
Local production and import appears in ﬁgure 3.4 with food as major impact area, but
beverages, constructions and transport also sectors of importance. None of the sectors
of import reaches the top 13 contributors. The main import impacts come from India
followed by Tanzania and South Africa. An overview of the import in Kenya is presented
in ﬁgure A.1 in Appendix A.
Figure 3.4: The baseline from Eora illustrating the GHG contribution from the 13 most contributing
industries in Kenya.
Figure 3.5 illustrates the function of the IO-model. The nations contribute with diﬀerent
industries and a diﬀerent number of industries. The interdependence between industries
are connected in a large matrix (shown in ﬁgure 3.5). The ”Final Demand” in ﬁgure 3.5
equals the consumption, meaning that reducing consumption in some industries (from
speciﬁc countries) and increasing the demand in other industries can be modelled directly
in Eora to ﬁnd the reduction according to changed consumption patterns.
Page 22 of 122
==PAGE:30==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
The emission intensity in ﬁgure 3.5 is an indicator for the GWP per dollar for each
industry. In this study the indicator is used to convert the reduction discovered in the
diﬀerent scenarios into a ﬁnal impact reduction for Denmark. The reduction potential is
converted into a factor (between 0 and 1) depending on the GHG savings of the scenario
compared with business as usual. This factor is multiplied with the emission intensity for
the relevant industries.
The baseline model from Eora with associated insights have been used to calculate some
scenarios and put the results of all scenarios into perspective. The Matlab script was used
to calculate changes in ﬁnal demand and emission intensity factors for speciﬁc sectors.
The factors can be found in the additional attachment (EORA CF). In addition to the
Eora baseline, the baseline of impact from business as usual for every scenario has been
identiﬁed in literature or modelled in SimaPro, based on litterature information. The
baseline for each scenario are presented together with the result of the scenarios, in the
result section. The sum of the baselines of the scenarios ﬁt with the total impact from
Eora.
Figure 3.5: The illustration shows how the MRIO model interconnects the diﬀerent industries in all
countries and how an impact (through an emission intensity per dollar) and a demand are allocated to
the industries. The ﬁgure is made speciﬁcally for this study.
3.5
Scenario Analysis
Consumption-based emission accounting is essential when creating both the baseline and
the scenarios in this study. Creating ecological-economic decoupling scenarios requires a
combination of consumer awareness (reducing superﬂuous material goods), improvement
of eco-eﬃciency (prioritising bio sequestering) and technology change (replacing high pol-
luting technologies with improved or new technologies) (Isenhour & Feng, 2014). These
represent three pillars that have formed the basis for the scenario development. Each sce-
nario analysis emphasise the GHG savings that can be obtained by a single pillar when
Page 23 of 122
==PAGE:31==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
relevant, and ﬁnally, the total GHG saving by combining several or all pillars. This study
focuses on illustrating how much the scenarios can contribute to reach absolute sustain-
ability and not the road map to the ﬁnal target. The three pillars have diﬀerent actors
that are responsible for the implementation. The probability for successful implementa-
tion of each scenario is addressed in the discussion.
Inherent emissions that occurred before the RCB assessment are not included in the sce-
narios e.g. existing constructions with embodied materials have already contributed to
the budget in the construction phase. The services, products and constructions are still
used in the scenarios, but it is necessary to exclude them from the scenarios for avoiding
double counting of their embodied energy.
The sources used for the baselines in Eora and in each scenario are from 2015-2018,
the uncertainty caused by diﬀerent time frames have been accepted. Hence, the data
was assumed to be 2018. Considering Denmark the impact for speciﬁc services and the
total national impact has been assumed not to have changed signiﬁcantly in that time
perspective. A larger uncertainty is related to the study of Kenya where the development
shows rapid progress.
Figure 3.6: The scenario development illustrated with the three main scenario types of interest and
modelling methods. The relation of Maslow’s pyramid of needs to the development of the BC scenarios
is illustrated with an additional information loop. The ﬁgure is made speciﬁcally for this study.
The development of scenarios in Denmark has been divided into three main approaches:
General scenarios, CE scenarios and a back-casting scenario (BC scenario) with starting
point in Maslow’s pyramid. An overall explanation of the three main scenario approaches
of Denmark is presented in the sections below. Detailed scenario descriptions and assump-
tions are found in the result section as a precursor to the respective associated results.
Page 24 of 122
==PAGE:32==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
An overview of the scenario development is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.6.
Eora is not suitable to model all scenarios, since the industries in some cases combine dif-
ferent product types, making it impossible to diﬀerentiate the impact, when the demand
for a speciﬁc product type should be reduced (e.g. reducing the meat consumption in the
sector of agriculture). Furthermore, it is not possible to change the input from one sector
into another sector, only the emission intensity for a sector can be changed, therefore it
is not possible to model changes in technologies.
Considering Denmark, one of the most essential questions is how much implementation
of CE can reduce the GHG-emissions. CE is less essential for Kenya, since less developed
communities tend to use CE at a high level, because of the economic advantages and
society being closer to nature state conditions. The level of CE should be kept in Kenya,
whereas CE has to be re-implemented in Denmark, since CE existed before the linear
economy took of in the 1980’s (Kuijpers, 2019). However, with the increase of number
of value chains in development of materials and products, more raw materials are further
processed, making CE more complex.
The scenarios are named with either EF or FD ﬁrst, indicating which of the two improve-
ments the scenario considers (or both). The sector in which the scenario is represented is
shortened to the ﬁrst three letters followed by the ﬁrst three letters of the area of concern.
See the list of abbreviations for the scenarios. An example: EF AGR indicates that the
scenario is regarding an eﬃciency improvement in the agriculture sector. Another exam-
ple: FD FOO ANI concerns the consumption demand within the food sector, and it is
about reducing animal products.
From the baseline analysis essential areas were deployed in schemes with a general and a
CE scenario focus, respectively. The scenario schemes, which can be found in Appendix
C, are structured with name, primary sector, description and reference ﬂow with addi-
tionally information about possible substituting processes and risk of rebound eﬀects. An
additional scheme for the CE scenarios can also be seen in Appendix C accounting the dif-
ferent cycles (share, maintain/repair, reuse, remanufacture, recycle) and illustrating how
GHG reduction from CE have been modelled. The reference ﬂows have been deﬁned from
a perspective of keeping the necessary services to comply with the current level of HDI.
Some scenarios consider excess consumption such as reducing food waste, large amounts
of clothes and area per person, which does not inﬂuence the HDI, as long as the needs
are kept at level. Change in food habits like reducing meat consumption might lead to
higher human health while decreasing the environmental impact, despite the fact that
some might claim that their standard of living would decease if meat was excluded from
their diet.
Comparing the impact for each scenario with business as usual results in a saving that in
the end is used to determine the savings within four main sectors (energy and transport,
non food products and constructions, forestry and food). The savings of some scenar-
ios have been converted into an eco-eﬃciency factor. This factor was used to transform
the emission intensity for the relevant industries in Eora to compute the overall national
reduction. The impact of the scenarios have been merged in the end of the end of the
Page 25 of 122
==PAGE:33==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
subsection ”CE scenarios”.
Bottom up approach was applied to create BC scenarios with the goal of sustaining the
basic needs: food, shelter and clothing from Maslow’s theory while simultaneously reduc-
ing the associated environmental impacts to a minimum. The main issue engaged was
how far disciplined minimum living and behaviour can take us and further examine the
additional savings when transforming and improving technologies.
The uncovering of the reduction of GHG-emissions by single scenarios and combining
scenarios to reach absolute sustainability for GWP in Denmark is a central purpose of
the scenarios.
3.6
Scenarios in Denmark
Two parameters in Eora can be changed: The emission intensity that is called ”EF” and
the consumption rate, which is indicated with ﬁnal demand ”FD”. Each scenario that can
be modelled in Eora focuses on identifying either technologies, CE-solutions or arguments
for changing the demand for speciﬁc industries, which will reduce the total national im-
pact.
General scenarios and CE scenarios can improve the eﬃciency ”EF”, CE scenarios is
however always a combination of sharing, which is related to consumption and recy-
cling/reusing which is related to technology. Reusing a product reduces the demand for
new products, though it can be argued that technology development is a prerequisite for
reusing options, e.g. cutting out a piece of outer wall and reusing the cut in another
building.
Eora is not capable of computing the reduced impact of all types for scenarios. If the
scenarios involve a change in technology it cannot be handled by Eora. Exchanging a
technology e.g. petrol cars with electric cars is not doable to convert into the emission
intensity. The road transport would be modelled with petrol and diesel in Eora despite
the change in EF. The change in emission intensity would improve the speciﬁc sector but
it would still be related to the same sectors; thus, petrol and diesel consumption would
still be an input to transport and the electricity would not be added.
3.7
Circular Economy Scenarios in Denmark
Overview of CE
The following describes the starting point for the CE scenarios and how CE has been
approached in the scenario development.
Share makes it possible to reduce consumption of products and materials due to a prod-
ucts ability to be used to its fully extend in terms of durability and hours by servicing the
maximum amount of people possible. Increasing the use time of the product or service
optimise the impact from the production for inactive products (no energy required to
Page 26 of 122
==PAGE:34==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
function e.g. a hammer), since the main emissions often occur in the production phase.
On the other hand active products (energy required to operate e.g. a car and an elec-
tric kettle) depend on many other factors in the use phase when considering sharing them.
Existing sharing platforms like AirBnB shares empty square meters, which already have
embodied energy and resources from the construction phase as well as the operation con-
sumes energy; thus, reducing the need for additional hotels. Shared housing reduces area
per person due to every resident having only the necessary private rooms when areas as
large living room etc. are shared. Leasing or lending products services e.g. by leasing a
car, using public transport or services, lending special occasion clothing as ViggaMT baby
and maternity wear or wedding clothes, reduces purchase of products that are sparsely
used or not used to its fully extend by one user. Through Hamsto.com it is possible to rent
out empty rooms for storage. Sharing services like this can be seen as a ﬁnancially helping
hand to those in need and avoid demand for new constructions in the long run. Rebound
eﬀect is a pitfall regarding sharing in CE. Rebound eﬀect from the share perspective may
lead to users start using a product or service that they did not need, and some people
will (unconsciously) move towards a less sustainable life style because products or services
that was not available beforehand suddenly become accessible. For example the leasing
of electric cars in Copenhagen: via an app more people used to biking or using public
transportation use cars.
Maintenance will prolong the life time of products; thus, slowing down the resource ﬂow,
and furthermore, the quality of the service often improves or stay status quo in relation
to maintenance. Prolonging the life time of a product postpone the need for replacing
the product with new ones, hence reducing the demand for new production. There exist
many examples of maintenance that initially have an environmental impact; however, in
the long run the maintenance should postpone new production and thereby be the so-
lution with the smallest impact. For example: wood protection paint is added to wood
facades every second year to prevent the wood from rot and decay, instead of changing
the whole facade more often. Cleaning in general is a way to maintain and prolong the
life time for most products. In relation to that, missing cleaning often leads to faster
degradation and shorter lifetime.
Increased Reuse of an inactive product will reduce the impact when the reused product
substitutes new ones depending on maintenance and environmental cost. On the other
hand, if the product is active, it might be a better solution for the environment to change
ineﬃcient product units to new energy eﬃcient products. This applies for some inactive
products as well. Particularly in the construction sector where service life of materials
usually lasts many years, hence not complying with required functionality and leading to
a larger energy use. There exist many platforms for buying and selling used products;
some examples are; ”Facebook Market place” and ”DBA” (all types of products), ”Gamle
Mursten” (bricks) and ”Røde Kors” (clothes).
Re-manufacture could be applied when products no longer work or have a high energy
consumption (compared with similar products), since the alternative is that the prod-
ucts is discarded. Electronic equipment might be a good case for improvement through
Page 27 of 122
==PAGE:35==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
re-manufacturing. Replacing deteriorated parts with spare parts of better quality, sepa-
rating the product into spare parts, or remaking the equipment to lowering the energy
consumption can extend the life time of products or several parts of them resulting in
optimised exploitation of embodied energy and resources. A few corporations focusing on
re-manufacturing are: ”Recirk” re-manufacturing large household appliances to resell, PC
Service Centres that buy used phones, laptops etc. to improve, then resell the electronic
appliances.
Recycle represents the last and least eﬀective value cycle. Recycling should be priori-
tised when the previous cycles are not adequately possible. Recycling applies when the
product’s service life no longer can be extended; thus, the materials will be processed to
resources applicable for new materials or products. Product’s value after recycling would
either decrease (down-cycling), be similar or improve (up-cycling).
The potential for GHG savings when recycling diﬀerent materials in Denmark can be seen
in table 3.7. Some of the recycling rates of the materials are already on level with the
potential shown in ﬁgure 3.7.
Material
GHG
Savings [%]
Recycling
Rate 2018 [%]
Potential
Rate[%]
Source
Aluminium
96
90
90
Hillman et al. (2015)
European-Aluminium (2018)
Steel
88
92-95
95
Hillman et al. (2015)
Glass
41
59-84
95
Hillman et al. (2015)
Concrete (to concrete)
12-13
0-1
95
Miljøstyrelsen (2018b)
Mineral Wool
0
0-1
95
Sohn et al. (2017)
Hørberg et al. (2006)
Iron
87
92-95
95
Johnson et al. (2008)
Miljøstyrelsen (2017)
Plastic PET/PP/PE
38
15-34
50
Hillman et al. (2015)
Plastindustrien (2015)
Textile (reusing rate)
25-90
10-45
90
Nielsen (2013)
Copper
86
40-50
95
Nilsson et al. (2017)
Plastindustrien (2018)
Asphalt
9.5-20
66
95
Chen & Wang (2018)
Table 3.7: Overview of general materials used in the production, construction and civil engineering
sector in Denmark. GHG Savings shows possible GHG-savings when comparing primary production to
secondary production. Recycling Rate 2018 is the current level of recycling in Denmark. Potential Rate
shows the possible recycling rate the materials can reach considering a certain amount of perish.
Exploring opportunities for environmental improvement through increase of CE within
larger sectors should be founded on where it is possible to obtain the greatest environ-
mental savings. Table 3.7 gives an overview of various materials and their associated
GHG-savings with highest possible closed-loop recycling and the current recycling rate
and potential recycling rate.
It seems some of the materials are close to fully being
recycled in Denmark, hence the GHG saving potential is very limited.
Page 28 of 122
==PAGE:36==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
3.8
Back-Casting Scenario
The Back-casting scenario have been constructed in two levels; ﬁrstly, the basic needs de-
ﬁned by Maslow were quantiﬁed, and then to illustrate a more realistic minimum Danish
impact, some additional services have been added to the model. The BC model presumes
that the consumer have access to/own basic matters such as furniture and kitchen equip-
ment, acquiring any additional items, reused products have been assumed, and is thus
not included in the BC model.
The basic needs in the model are:
• Food
• Clothes, towels and bed linen
• Residence
The additional needs are:
• Transport
• Energy
• Health care and education
• Other public services
The intention is to model the above mentioned needs with the lowest possible impact for
illustrating if it is possible to cover the basic needs within the ”safe space” of 0.46-1.7 t
CO2-eq/person/year.
Food
The carbon foot print for a range of diﬀerent food types have been identiﬁed by Mogensen
et al.
(2016). The impact has been allocated to the nutrients in the food per g fat, g
protein and g carbohydrate assuming a weighed share. A small additional selection of
food products have been analysed in SimaPro. The diﬀerence in kg CO2-eq per calorie
and per kg for the diﬀerent food types are illustrated in Appendix D in ﬁgure D.1 and D.2.
The nutrient content divided into fat, protein and carbohydrate is then stated for each
food type according to Sundhed.dk (2016). The GWP per g fat, protein and carbohy-
drates are calculated by assuming a weighed contribution, e.g. beef has a GWP of 13.9
kg CO2-eq per kg. It contains 110 calories per 100 g, 11.3 g fat, 20 g protein and 0.6
g carbohydrates per 100 g. The fat in the beef represent 35% of the nutrient content,
therefore, 35% of the impact is allocated to the fat, similarly 63% is allocated to protein
and 2% is allocated to carbohydrates. The same method is used to determine the impact
related to fat, protein and carbohydrates in all of the represented food types.
A selection of the analysed animal food types can be seen in ﬁgure 3.7, all of the examined
food types can be seen in Appendix D in ﬁgure D.3 and D.4 (be aware that the y-axis is
diﬀerent, since the impact from the vegan products have a much lower impact).
Page 29 of 122
==PAGE:37==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
Figure 3.7: The GWP of a selection of animal based food types. Showing the contribution divided into a
weighted share between fat, protein and carbohydrate. The data is a combination of (Sundhed.dk, 2016)
and (Mogensen et al. , 2016).
Clothes
Clothes are needed according to Maslow to stay warm and protected. In 2018 the average
amount of new clothes per person in Denmark was 13.2 kg (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018c) and
16 kg per person if including the public sector. A minimal wardrobe is estimated to have
a minimum of 24 items (excluding, training clothes, underwear and socks). There are
two options for the back-casting scenario to reach a minimum impact from a minimal
wardrobe.
Scenario 1: second hand clothes, except for underwear and socks.
Scenario 2: high quality clothes that last for many years.
Fewer items are changed each year in scenario 2 compared with scenario 1 due to expected
longer life time for new quality clothes.
Housing
Studies of housing illustrating the impact from the operational phase of dwellings to reveal
how small the impact from housing can be per person. Besides apartment, shared hous-
ing, terrace and single family houses and example of dormitory as the potentially lowest
impacting housing types were modelled. Intervals for area of living space for diﬀerent
numbers of residents were modelled to uncover total and person equivalent impacts from
the housing types.
Page 30 of 122
==PAGE:38==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
Looking into the pyramid of needs for transport, electricity, education and health could
be deﬁned as the need just above the basic needs. The minimum impact from needed
transport is modelled with the following assumptions: 15 km biking or 30 km biking at an
electric bicycle 4 times a week. 20 km travel with subway train and electric bus 5 times a
month. Longer travels are assumed needed 5-10 times a year. The distance is estimated
possible to travel from Copenhagen to Skagen (500 km) ﬁve times a year. The long dis-
tance travel equals 5000 km in total. It is assumed that an electric car is leased/borrowed
or the travel is done by regional electric train.
The additional electricity need outside the residence, primary used for connection via.
internet, computers and phones. The amount of electricity is estimated to 100 kWh a
year and modelled using the forecast by Energistyrelsen.
The impact from health care, education and other public services has to be added to the
impact from other needs, in order to give the full picture of a potential low impact in
Denmark. However, this impact is not modelled. The remaining gap in the ”safe space”
deﬁnes the size of the remaining GHG budget for other needs including the health care
and education.
3.9
Scenarios in Kenya
The scenarios for Kenya are constructed with the intention of increasing the HDI to 0.70.
The energy consumption per capita and the energy return on investment (EROI) are es-
sential for quality of life and the HDI (Lambert et al. , January 2014). An EROI of 20:1
indicates that 95% will be delivered to the society, whereas a LEI of 1:2 indicates that
only 50% of the energy will be useful in the society due to large energy consumption in
the production phase. Lambert energy index (LEI) is developed in an attempt to include
quality, quantity and distribution of energy in one measure (Lambert et al. , January
2014), it includes the EROI, average energy use per capita and income distribution (the
Gini-Indix).
In Kenya each person consumes 21.5 GJ energy in total per year; around 0.8 GJ is elec-
tricity. Reaching a HDI level of 0.70, an energy consumption of 120-150 GJ per capita is
necessary (Lambert et al. , January 2014). A threshold of well-being is: EROI of 20–30:1,
100–200 GJ/capita and LEI 0.2–0.4 Lambert et al. (January 2014). From ﬁgure 3.8 it
can be seen that Kenya needs to produce 9.5 times the amount of energy in 2050. The
LEI has to increase from 0.02-0.13 to minimum 0.2, but preferably 0.4. Increasing the
EROI is diﬃcult with renewable energy (RE). Wind power has a EROI of 16-27:1, solar
PV 5-9:1, and hydro power 72-100 Atlason & Unnthorsson (2014). It is the solar energy
capacity that remains inﬁnite in Kenya; however, limited by land area (Obiero, 2018).
Kenya has a wind power potential of more than 3,000 MW and close to 10,000 MW
geothermal power (Obiero, 2018). The current energy mix mainly consists of biomass
(69%), petroleum (22%) and electricity (9%). In 2018 installed capacity of geothermal
and wind power was 644 MW and 25.5 MW, respectively. There is a large potential of
unexplored energy capacity.
Page 31 of 122
==PAGE:39==
CONTENTS
3. METHOD
The intention of this study is to maintain the environmental impact in Kenya and increase
the HDI to 0.70. However, producing 9.5 times the current level of energy, and increasing
the electricity production signiﬁcantly, while keeping the environmental impact at the
current level, sets a high demand for low emission energy and electricity production.
2018
2050
21.5
GJ/person
120
GJ/person
49.7
Mill. habitats
85
Mill. habitats
1068
PJ annual energy use
10200
PJ annual energy use
0.804
GJ electricity/person
Table 3.8: The energy and electricity use in Kenya in 2018 and the needed energy across energy sources
in 2050 to raise the HDI to 7.5 (WorldData.info, 2018), (Lambert et al. , January 2014).
In addition to the improvement of the energy sources and much larger production, the
electricity grid has to be expanded to supply the entire population. This put even more
pressure on the low emission demand for the existing technology compared with Den-
mark. Denmark already has a well-established electricity grid. A connection to the grid
is a prerequisite for most of the existing energy sources in the supply today in Kenya.
However, the solar panels can be independent of the electricity grid. Unfortunately, an
expansion of the electricity grid is not the only infrastructure that has to be established.
Establishment of a stable water supply and houses for more people are needed. Access
to clean water are strongly related to the EROI, energy use and LEI. Nations with EROI
above 20-30:1 supply 100% of the rural population with improved water. Nations with
energy use of more than 100 GJ per capita and LEI above 0.25 supply at least 75% of the
rural population with improved water (Lambert et al. , January 2014).
It is stated that developing countries are allowed a larger share of the carrying capacity.
They haven’t build the infrastructure capacity, which is needed to raise the living stan-
dard to the necessary level, such as the developed countries have done during the last
decades (IPCC, 2018b).
This study focuses on the environmental impact from the additional and changed energy
production in Kenya, taking into consideration what is actually possible. Other sectors
have not been included.
Page 32 of 122
==PAGE:40==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
4
Results
The assessments and results of the scenarios are presented in the following section. The
results are separated into the four main themes of the scenarios: general scenarios in
Denmark, CE in Denmark, BC in Denmark and Kenya. The inventories for all scenarios
modelled in SimaPro can be seen in the Additional Appendix (EORA CF) enclosed with
the report. The assessment and documentation for the scenarios modelled in Eora can be
found in an additional Excel ﬁle and Matlab script enclosed with the report.
4.1
Scenarios in Denmark
4.1.1
Electricity and Heat
Denmark has a large annual energy use which causes large amounts of GHG emissions.
According to Energistyrelsen (2018b) the total energy use (including fuels for the trans-
port sector) was 748 PJ in 2018, and it caused an impact of around 48.6 Mt CO2-eq. This
number only gives an indication of the energy use and the impact thereof, since it is a
production based assessment and therefore not comparable to the impact from Eora.
Electricity production is one of the main contributors to the GHG-emissions, despite that
it is not directly visible in the IO-model assessed by Eora; since the electricity is hidden
inherently in diﬀerent industries. Other industries than energy production consume 118.7
PJ in Denmark (including distribution loss of 6. PJ), and additional 10 PJ is used for
energy production (Energistyrelsen, 2018a).
Thus, improving the electricity grid will
result in great GHG reductions in many industries. A baseline electricity grid has been
modelled in order to ﬁnd the impact from present use.
2017
Energy type
[%]
Coal and brown coal
17
Natural gas
7
Wind onshore >3 MW
1.7
Wind onshore 1-3 MW
2.7
Wind onshore <1 MW
21.5
Wind oﬀshore 1-3 MW
14
Hydro
12
Solar
2
Waste
4
Wood
10.7
Straw
1.5
Biogas
1.8
Oil
1
Nuclear
3
Table 4.1: The energy sources constituting the Danish electricity mix in 2017 shown as a percentage
distribution (EnergiNet, 2018).
The Danish electricity consumption consists of a mix of energy sources diﬀering from the
Danish production mix. The import/export of electricity from/to Norway, Sweden and
Page 33 of 122
==PAGE:41==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Germany is therefore included in the model of the Danish electricity mix with a simpliﬁca-
tion according to (EnergiNet, 2018); thus, hydro power from Norway, and nuclear energy
from Sweden and coal in Germany represent the imported electricity as seen in ﬁgure 4.1.
Identifying the best future electricity mix in scenario EF ENE, two forecasts from ”Ener-
gistyrelsen” and ”the DTU management Tokni project” were modelled in SimaPro with
reference ﬂow at 1 kWh. Both forecasts were developed to comply with the Paris Agree-
ment. The energy sources used for each future electricity mix can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2.
The forecasts take into account what is physically possible.
Tokni 2050
Energistyrelsen 2050
Energy type
[%]
MMMM
Energy type
[%]
Waste
0.6
Biomass
27.3
Bio reﬁnery
1
Biogas
6.9
Wind oﬀshore
43.6
Waste
6.9
Wind onshore
16.6
Wind
39.6
Solar cells
5
Solar PV
14.1
Solar cells industry
10.9
Hydro (Norway)
3
Solar cells private homes
11.1
Nuclear (Sweden)
2.1
Wood chips
1.2
Hydro (Norway)
5.8
Nuclear (Sweden)
4.2
Table 4.2: Danish electricity mix in 2050 according to Tokni DTU management (2018) and Energistyrelsen
(2014). Both forecasts have been modiﬁed to include import of electricity.
Figure 4.1: The result of scenario EF ENE comparing GWP for 1 kWh of the Danish electricity mix
modelled in SimaPro with forecasts from Tokni DTU management (2018) and Energistyrelsen (2014).
Comparing the future electricity mix estimated by Energistyrelsen (2014) and Tokni DTU
management (2018) with the baseline in 2017 (see ﬁgure 4.1) reveal noticeable GHG
reductions since Tokni reduces the impact 81% and Energistyrelsen 82.4%.
Page 34 of 122
==PAGE:42==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
The total electricity use in Denmark of 128.2 PJ (including electricity use in production
of other energy types, distribution loss and manufacturing of products that are exported,
but excluding electricity that are exported) emits 8.65 Mt CO2-eq a year, calculated in
SimaPro with the baseline electricity mix. Relating 8.65 Mt CO2-eq/year to the total of
87.8 Mt CO2-eq/year, electricity alone accounts for 10% of the national impact.
The amounts of wind and solar energy in both forecasts comprise a need for storage to
ensure the living standard and that the HDI is not aﬀected negatively. Energy storage is
not included in the assessment, since storage technologies are still under development.
Housing in Denmark consume 35.5 PJ energy a year (Energistyrelsen, 2018a) resulting in
2.5 Mt CO2-eq/year using the baseline electricity mix. The impact is reduced to 0.45 Mt
CO2-eq/year if Energistyelsen’s forecast for electricity mix is realised. Eventually, result-
ing in a total national saving of 1.95 Mt CO2-eq year depending on the composition of the
future energy sources. There are no sensitive processes in the electricity mix according to
the sensitivity analysis, see Appendix E.
From the analysis of the most contributing industries by Eora many service industries
and manufacturing companies have a large GHG contribution. It seems that the impact
is coupled to the electricity use in these industries shown in table 4.3. However, it is
generally not possible to compare all of the industries from Eora with the sectors in table
4.3 based on Energistyrelsen (2018a) and the electricity impact assessment in ﬁgure 4.1,
since the sectors are divided into diﬀerent categories.
Nevertheless, selected sectors are comparable. The retail sector contributes with 0.8 Mt
CO2-eq to the total national GHG emissions according to Eora. Figure 4.3 shows that
0.4 Mt CO2-eq of the impact from the retail sector is due to electricity use.
Electricity consumption by sector
Electricity
use [PJ]
Impact 2017
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
Impact 2050
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
Rail transport
1.465
0.10
0.02
Agriculture, forestry and
horticulture
6.331
0.43
0.08
Manufacturing companies
29.685
2.00
0.35
Building and construction
1.450
0.10
0.02
Wholesale trade
5.415
0.37
0.06
Retail
5.964
0.40
0.07
Private service
17.932
1.21
0.21
Public service
8.928
0.60
0.11
Single family houses
27.058
1.83
0.32
Apartments
8.452
0.57
0.10
Energy production/distribution
15.49
1.05
0.18
Total
128.167
8.65
1.53
Total saving
7.12
Table 4.3: The electricity consumption separated into diﬀerent sectors in Denmark, showing the GWP in
2017 from using the baseline electricity mix and the saving that can be obtained in 2050 if the electricity
mix from the forecast of Energistyrelsen is realised. Electricity use is based on Energistyrelsen (2018b).
Scenario EF HEA examined the potential of improving the heating of buildings. The
Page 35 of 122
==PAGE:43==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
baseline for the Danish district heat (DH) mix is made according to (Energistyrelsen,
2018).
Surplus energy is not modelled since it is regarded as free energy from other
productions.
District Heat Mix
2017 DK
[%]
Oil
3
Natural Gas
9
Coal
14
Waste
21
Solar
2
Biomass
46
Biogas
1
Heat Pumps
0.5
Electric Boilers
0.5
Surplus Heat
3
Table 4.4:
Danish DH mix
of 2017 as percentage of dif-
ferent energy sources (Ener-
gistyrelsen, 2018).
District Heat Mix
2050 DK
[%]
Oil
3.0
Natural Gas
4.5
Coal
1.4
Waste
33.9
Solar
12.8
Geo-Thermal
9.6
Biomass
16.3
Biogas
0.6
Heat Pumps
16.3
Electric Boilers
1.6
Table 4.5: Danish DH mix of
2050 as percentage of diﬀer-
ent energy sources (Rasmussen,
2012), (Dyrelund et al. , 2010).
District Heat Mix
2050 DK (fossil free)
[%]
Waste
16.9
Solar
12.8
Geo-Thermal
9.6
Biomass
25.2
Biogas
2.2
Heat Pumps
16.3
Surplus Heat
16.9
Table 4.6:
Fossil free Danish
DH mix of 2050 as percent-
age of diﬀerent energy sources.
Edited data from (Rasmussen,
2012), (Dyrelund et al. , 2010).
Biomass
replaces
fossil
fuels
and surplus heat replaces 50%
of the waste to energy.
The DH mix of 2017 in Denmark is presented in table 4.4 and two projected DH mixes of
2050 is shown in table 4.5 and 4.6. In the fossil free projection biomass replaces the fossil
sources from table 4.5 while surplus heat replaces 50% of the waste incineration based
on the forecast of Grøn Energi and Ea Energianalyse (2016). Waste incineration is the
only sensitive process in the fossil free DH mix so the development of this heating source
inﬂuence the impact of future DH to some extend (see Appendix E ﬁgure E.2.
The future heating supply of buildings will mainly be DH. Heat pumps (HP) are expected
to become the second most common heating type (Dyrelund et al. , 2010). The associated
impact for DH and HP are indicated in ﬁgure 4.2. It is clear that HP would be preferable
compared with DH. It has a coeﬃcient of performance (COP) value several times higher
than one; thus, producing more heat in kWh than the power used. Especially, with the
electricity consumption advancing to an increased RE level improves the performance with
a value of impact decreasing from 0.033 kg CO2-eq/kWh to 0.012 kg CO2-eq/kWh, shown
in ﬁgure 4.2. The impact from DH will decrease slightly if the forecast from Rasmussen
(2012) will come true. However, if the DH mix becomes fossil free in 2050 the impact
will be 3 times smaller compared with 2017, shown in ﬁgure 4.2. The fossil free Danish
DH mix of 2050 from table 4.6 is the applied future DH mix of the remaining part of this
paper.
Page 36 of 122
==PAGE:44==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Figure 4.2: GWP for EF HEA showing the impact per kWh of heating by HP and DH in year 2017 and
2050 with DH represented as the forecast from (Energistyrelsen, 2018) and (Rasmussen, 2012) and an
edited version of the forecast (fossil free) including use of surplus energy. Electricity use for the HP is
based on the electricity mix from 2017 and for 2050 (Energistyrelsen, 2014).
Sector DH consumption
DH
use [PJ]
Impact baseline
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
Impact 2050
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
Agriculture, forestry and
horticulture
1.585
0.170
0.054
Manufacturing
companies
3.402
0.365
0.116
Wholesale trade
4.241
0.455
0.145
Retail
3.274
0.351
0.112
Private service
14.262
1.529
0.487
Public service
10.609
1.138
0.362
Single family houses
34.192
3.666
1.168
Apartments
35.865
3.846
1.225
Distribution loss
27.011
2.896
0.923
Energy production
1.274
0.137
0.044
Total
135.7
14.6
4.6
Total saving
9.9
Table 4.7: The GWP from DH divided into diﬀerent industries (Energistyrelsen, 2018b), showing the
impact in 2017 and in 2050 when implementing the 2050 fossil free DH mix.
In Denmark there is an annual DH use of 135.7 PJ. Improving the DH to ”2050 fossil
free DH” the total national saving will result in 9.9 Mt CO2-eq/year without changing
any installations. Table 4.7 shows the savings from the improved DH divided into diﬀer-
ent sectors. However, as ﬁgure 4.2 shows the savings can be reduced even further if DH
is changed into HP. Hypothetically, if all DH was changed into HP running on the fu-
ture electricity mix estimated by ”Energistyrelsen” the distribution loss would be almost
avoided and the national savings could add up to 14.1 Mt CO2-eq/year. Out phasing
DH demands a larger system change in waste management since heat from incineration
of waste is a part of the current DH. Installations of HP in dense urban areas can also be
Page 37 of 122
==PAGE:45==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
a challenge regarding noise and aesthetics if not hidden in basements or similar compart-
ments.
Improving the energy eﬃciency of the existing building stock is another way of reducing
the impact from the residences. Insulating the residences helps maintain the value of the
buildings and as a side eﬀect, the building stock become healthier to live in (Pedersen
& Deveci, 2017). 40% heat savings in the existing building stock has been suggested by
”Dansk Byggeri” (Pedersen & Deveci, 2017) based on an evaluation of the buildings in
2017. Scenario EF HOU targets the 40% heat savings in housing. Table 4.8 shows the
baseline impact and the reduced impact from housing when implementing the electricity
mix by ”Energystyrelsen”, the fossil free DH and energy renovations. The impact from
the 40% heat savings in table 4.8 are mainly found in houses with less eco-eﬃcient heating
types (e.g. oil boilers). These heating types are assumed changed as well.
Energy type
Baseline
housing (2017)
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
EF HOU
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
EF HOU and
improved heat and
electricity mix
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
Other fuels
1.7
0.61
0.61
DH
7.5
5.7
1.82
HP
0.58
0.58
0.21
El
2.4
2.4
0.45
Total
12.2
9.3
3.1
Total saving
9.1
Table 4.8: The GWP from the national energy use in existing residences for scenario EF HOU. ”Other
fuels” includes diﬀerent local heating types. The embodied energy in additional insulation is not included
in the assessment. ”Impact of 40% heat savings” considers out phasing of oil boilers and other local
heating types with fossil fuels ﬁrst, before improving the houses with DH as heating source. The energy
use for the assessment is based on Energistyrelsen (2018b)
The impact from houses can be reduced to 3.1 Mt CO2-eq/year, which is a saving of 9.1 Mt
CO2-eq/year assuming the area per person is kept. The embodied energy in insulation and
energy windows should not be forgotten when considering energy savings in residences.
Reaching a break event point becomes more relevant and realistic when the impact from
heat and electricity is reduced signiﬁcantly. The additional insulation and other energy
saving installations and materials with embodied energy are not accounted for in table
4.8, due to large uncertainties in the amounts of insulation needed. This is where CE
enters into the picture. These products of importance are examined in the result section
4.2 ”Circular Economy Scenarios Denmark”.
4.1.2
Transport
Transport and energy are represented together in many studies considering GHG emis-
sions. This makes sense especially, when considering electriﬁcation of the transport sector.
In ﬁgure 4.3 the impact from scenario EF TRA diﬀerent cars and other transportation
vehicles can be seen. ”Electric car, Baseline” is modelled with the baseline electricity
Page 38 of 122
==PAGE:46==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
mix from 2017 in Denmark both for maintenance and operation. ”Electric car, Ener-
gistyrelsen” is modelled with the electricity mix forcasted by ”Energistyrelsen” for the
operation and maintenance. For the production an estimated future European electricity
mix with half of the impact from the average European electricity today have been used.
This is assumed due to the expected improvement of the eco-eﬃciency in other countries
in 2050 as well.
Figure 4.3: The result of scenario EF TRA compares the GWP from diﬀerent ways of transporting one
person one km. The cars are all assumed to carry one person, therefore the impact from each car type
can be divided with the number of passengers (up to 5 passengers, but in average there are 1.12 persons
in a driving car in Denmark).
From ﬁgure 4.3 it can be seen that a bicycle only contribute to global warming with 1%
relative to a petrol car (not accounting extra food consumption; the bike ride is assumed
to substitute another workout or contribute to improved health and reduce overweight).
An important point for the bicycle is that aluminium and steel are recycled at EoL. Oth-
erwise the impact per km is at the same level as electric busses when using the future
electricity mix estimated ”Energistyrelsen”. Relating the change in transport method to
the HDI, the transport distance is not changed in this scenario; thus, the same service is
provided.
The impact from taking the bus in 2017 is equal to the impact from driving an electric
car alone, fuelled by the electricity mix in 2017. When the electricity mix develops as
estimate by ”Energistyrelsen” the electric car will have a smaller impact than the diesel
bus. The electric bus (trolly bus) saves 74% and 84% of the GHG emissions compared
with electric cars and diesel busses, when assuming both electric vehicles run on the future
electricity mix estimated by ”Energistyrelsen”.
A transport scenario considering increasing the percentage of transport with bikes and
public transport instead of driving in cars have been considered.
4% of all daily car
Page 39 of 122
==PAGE:47==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
kilometres can be substituted with bicycles (Christensen & Jensen, 2008), 8% should use
public transport instead of cars; hence, substituting 12% of the transport by car. The
scenario is build upon the transport distance and other factors from the analysis in Chris-
tensen & Jensen (2008) and Ingeniøren (2018). The scenario is named FD TRA, and
details can be seen in Appendix C. The average distance travelled at roads with diﬀerent
vehicles in 2017 can be seen in ﬁgure 4.9 based on Vejdirektoratet (2017).
When analysing the impact from the baseline transport in table 4.10, the car accounts
for 92% of the GWP. Therefore a scenario FD TRA PUB where half of the transport by
car has been substituted with bus and train, has been developed. Both scenario FD TRA
and FD TRA PUB only consider a change in consumer behaviour. An additional sce-
nario combining technology improvement and consumer behaviour in FD EF TRA PUB
has also been examined (the same transport distances and vehicle types as scenario
FD TRA PUB shown in ﬁgure 4.10, have been used).
With these scenarios it is possible to tell how much individuals can reduce their impact
just by making diﬀerent choices. Most importantly the scenario shows how much the
impact can be reduced when combining consumer behaviour and eco-eﬃcient technology
development. The GWP for the road transport in 2017 and the four scenarios including
the baseline have been calculated with SimaPro. The results can be seen in ﬁgure 4.10.
Baseline
FD TRA
FD TRA PUB
Vehicle type
[Mill.person.
kilometers]
share [%]
[km/person]
[km/person]
[km/person]
Private car
59736
77.2%
10391
9144
5195
Taxi
310
0.4%
54
54
54
Bus
7300
9.4%
1270
1685
3867
MC/
electric bicycle
496
0.6%
86
86
86
Moped45/
electric bicycle
59
0.1%
10
10
10
Scooter/bicycle
2850
3.7%
496
911
496
Train
6600
8.5%
1148
1564
3746
Total
77351
100.0%
13455
13455
13455
Table 4.9: Overview of total transport distance in Denmark (Vejdirektoratet, 2017) divided into distance
per person for the scenarios: baseline, FD TRA and FD TRA PUB.
Impact transport
Baseline 2017
FD TRA
FD TRA PUB
FD EF TRA PUB
[t CO2-eq/person/year]
3.51
3.14
2.19
0.43
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
19.65
17.58
12.26
2.43
Saving
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
17.25
Table 4.10: The GWP for the baseline transport per person compared with three scenarios. Scenario
FD TRA: the km driven by car is reduced 12% per person. FD TRA PUB: 50% of the km driven by car
is substituted with public transport, and FD EF TRA PUB constitutes the same transport methods as
FD TRA PUB, but it enhances future transport by substituting 50% of the km driven with an electric
car that runs on the future electricity mix by ”Energistyrelsen”, and 50% of the km driven by car is
substituted with the future public electriﬁed transport. person.km is the same in all four scenarios.
Page 40 of 122
==PAGE:48==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
From table 4.10 it can be seen that it is possible to reach a GHG saving of 3.1 t per person
a year (equal to a 87.7% reduction) in land transport of passengers when combining con-
sumer behaviour and eco-eﬃcient technology development in scenario FD EF TRA PUB,
while keeping the transport distance per person as in 2017. On a national levels this re-
sults in a saving of 17.25 Mt CO2-eq.
Looking into freight transport trucks drove 12068 mill. ton.km and trains drove 165 mill.
ton.km in Denmark in 2018 according to Statics Denmark. Scenario EF TRA FRE exam-
ines the potential for substituting 90% of the distance [t.km] driven by trucks with freight
trains of current technology level and electric trains running on the future electricity mix
by ”Energistyrelsen”. The scenario demands an expansion of the rail tracks and logistic
challenges will occur. The result of the scenario in table 4.11 indicates that a large saving
is obtained both when shifting from truck to train, and when the train is supplied by the
future electricity mix.
EF TRA FRE
Annual
freight
transport
distance
[mill.ton.km]
Baseline
[Mt CO2-eq/
year]
90% truck freights
sub. with train
freights
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
90% truck freights
sub. with electric
trains
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
Truck
12068
2.12
0.21
0.21
Train
165
0.007
0.48
0.23
Total impact
2.127
0.69
0.44
Saving
1.44
1.69
Table 4.11: Scenario EF TRA FRE shows the GWP from transport of freight with trucks if 90% of
the truck weight distance is changed into transport with respectively current trains and electric trains
running on the future electricity mix estimated by ”Energistyrelsen”.
The total GHG emissions for Denmark was illustrated in table 3.6 in the method sec-
tion, divided into two; the assessment from Eora and an additional ”block” of 9.6 Mt
CO2-eq caused by international transport (shipping and air transport). Shipping is not
directly targeted in a scenario. The impact from shipping is excepted to decrease when
the demand for products decrease, but future technology plays a key role when consider-
ing reducing the impact from shipping. This point is addressed in the discussion. Flights
diﬀer from shipping since the main impact is caused by transport of passengers and not
goods. Many of these passengers are tourists (reaching highest level in Maslow’s pyramid
”self realisation”). In other words unless the ﬂight is due to business/education it does
not contribute to the HDI. A scenario substituting 50% and 90% of the Dane’s air travels
with trains in Europe has been developed. The scenarios are called: FD TRA AIR50 and
FD TRA AIR90.
The substituting train distances have been multiplied with 1.05 to make up for the indi-
rect travelling pathway that the trains result in compared with ﬂights. The scenario has
been modelled with diﬀerent train types, since there is a great diﬀerence in the impact
depending on fuel type and electricity mix in the diﬀerent countries. Furthermore, these
scenarios are based only on change in consumer behaviour, and therefore the technology
level of the trains is set as in year 2017.
The total saving from changing half of the ﬂights with trains as they function today in
Page 41 of 122
==PAGE:49==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Europe is 1.38-2.76 Mt CO2-eq/year indicated in ﬁgure 4.4, which equals a reduction
of 23-47% for the air transport. If 90% of the ﬂight distance where changed into train
travels the reduction would be 2.9-5.4 Mt CO2-eq/year also indicated in ﬁgure 4.5. Sce-
nario FD EF TRA AIR90 has been developed to show the GHG reduction if the trains
eco-eﬃciency are improved as well as the consumer behaviour.
Figure 4.4: The baseline illustrates the annual national consumption based GHG impact for Denmark
caused by ﬂights. Scenario FD TRA AIR50 and FD TRA AIR90 show the GWP when changing 50%
and 90% of the ﬂight distance of the Danes to rail travels in Europe.
The estimated future electricity mix in Europe based on Eser et al. (2017) and Brown
et al. (2016) is shown in table 4.12.
2030 electricity forecast for Europe [%]
Biomass
4
Solar
24.1
Wind oﬀshore
9.6
Wind onshore
19.3
Hydro
14
Natural gas
4
Nuclear
25
Table 4.12: Forecast for the energy sources for the electricity mix in 2030 in Europe (Eser et al. , 2017),
(Brown et al. , 2016).
The result shown in ﬁgure 4.5 indicates that the future electric trains (in 2030) will emit
around the same level of CO2-emissions as the most eco-eﬃcient trains in 2017. The
impact from the planes do not improve signiﬁcantly when changing the electricity mix
for the production of the planes. The impact from international air transport of 5.8 Mt
CO2-eq/year can be reduced to 0.8 Mt CO2-eq/year when changing 90% of air travels
with future electriﬁed trains.
Page 42 of 122
==PAGE:50==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Figure 4.5: The baseline illustrates the national consumption based GHG impact for Denmark caused by
ﬂights. Scenario EF AIR shows that improving the electricity mix for the production of air crafts does
not reduce the impact from the ﬂights. FD EF TRA AIR90 shows the GWP when 90% of all person.km
travelled by Danes with air crafts were changed into electric trains that run on the future electricity mix
estimated for Europe in 2030 and the remaining 10% of the air travels were done in air crafts produced
with the future electricity mix in Europe.
4.1.3
Agriculture and Food Habits
Scenario EF AGR was created to illustrate how large a GHG reduction the Danish agri-
cultural industry and the most contributing agricultural industries from other countries
could reach, by reducing the emission intensity with 12%, suggested by Olesen et al.
(2018). The relevant industries were identiﬁed in Eora and the eﬃciency for these have
been multiplied with 0.88 to reduce the emission intensity 12%. A 12% reduction is based
on the current agricultural methods in Denmark. There is a great uncertainty related to
whether it is possible to reduce the impact in all countries. 0.52 Mt CO2 can be saved
on a national level if Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden, Italy, Germany, France and
Belgium implement the GHG savings initiatives in the agricultural sector as suggested
by Olesen et al.
(2018). The scenario resulted in an unexpected small saving, which
has to do with the IO model and that the same sectors contribute with input despite an
eﬃciency improvement. If improving the eco-eﬃciency by 30% in the agricultural sector,
which is a conservative estimate compared with The Danish Society of Engineers, IDA
(2009), a saving of 4.86 Mt CO2-eq can be obtained. This is a small saving compared
with the share of the GHG emissions that agriculture is responsible for highlighted by
other studies (Miljø- og Fødevareudvalget 2017-18, 2018). There is a need for change in
food habits if a larger reduction should be achieved.
Scenario FD FOO ANI(50/100) has been developed to show the GHG reductions when
reducing meat and dairy consumption. An average person needs 375 cal from proteins
on a daily basis, this is equal to 94 g of protein (Sundhed.dk, 2016). The daily intake is
142 grams of meat, where 25% is chicken, 40.5% is pork and 34.5% is beef and lamb per
Page 43 of 122
==PAGE:51==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
habitant in Denmark (Fagt et al. , 2018). The Danes drink and eat 360 g dairy products
a day (Landbrug og fødevarer, 2018).
The average daily dairy and meat intake supply each Dane with around 42 g of protein,
assuming 5 g of protein pr 100 g dairy and 18 g of protein pr 100 g meat in average based
on DTU fødevareinstitut (2018). The 42 g of protein is the reference ﬂow in this scenario
and the service of getting protein is kept. Scenario FD FOO ANI100 substitutes 100% of
meat and dairy with grains and beans, whereas FD FOO ANI50 reduces the meat and
dairy with 50%. The impact from the meat is 8 kg CO2-eq/kg, and the impact from
the dairy is 4 kg CO2-eq/kg based on Mogensen et al. (2016). This results in 2.63 kg
CO2-eq/person a day for meat and dairy as shown in table 4.13. Food constitutes 11.2
Mt CO2-eq/year in Denmark including food waste (The Danish Society of Engineers,
IDA, 2009), of which 57% is caused by animal products (Trolle et al. , 2018). In table
4.13 the baseline for dairy and meat constitute 48% of the emissions when relating 5.39
Mt CO2-eq/year to the national impact of 11.2 Mt CO2-eq/year, since ﬁsh and eggs are
excluded.
FD FOO ANI(50/100)
Baseline
2017
FD FOO ANI50
FD FOO ANI100
Meat [g/(person.day)]
142
68.5
0
Dairy [g/(person.day)]
375
187.5
0
Soybeans [g/(person.day)]
0
29.3
58.7
Oats [g/(person.day)]
0
78.9
157.9
Total impact
[kg CO2-eq/(person.day)]
2.63
1.38
0.16
Total impact on national level
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
5.39
2.8
0.33
Table 4.13: The average consumption of meat and dairy in Denmark, and how many grams of soybeans
and oats that are needed to replace the meat and dairy while obtaining the same amounts of proteins,
and the associated GWP. The assessment is based on Mogensen et al. (2016), Fagt et al. (2018) and
(Landbrug og fødevarer, 2018).
To simplify scenario FD FOO ANI(50/100) soybeans and oats substitute meat and dairy,
which is shown in table 4.13. In soybeans there are 35.8 g of protein per 100 g and the
impact is 0.6 kg CO2-eq/kg (Mogensen et al. , 2016), (DTU fødevareinstitut, 2018). Oats
contain 13.3 g protein per 100 g and has an impact of 0.8 kg CO2-eq/kg (Mogensen et al.
, 2016), (DTU fødevareinstitut, 2018). Reaching 42 g of protein (21 g from soybeans and
21 g from oats) has an impact of 0.16 kg CO2-eq, the amounts of soybeans and oats can
be seen in table 4.13. If half of the dairy and meat consumption is omitted the saving
results in 1.25 kg CO2-eq/person a day, which equals 2.59 Mt CO2-eq/year that could be
avoided on a national level. Substituting all meat and dairy products with soybeans and
oats results in a saving of 5.06 Mt CO2-eq/year.
In Denmark 700,000 ton of edible food were wasted in 2017.
The GHG savings from reducing food waste is modelled with an average impact per
kg food type based on Mogensen et al.
(2016), and multiplied by the annual waste
reduction. Fruit and vegetables account the largest share of waste namely 41%. Meat
Page 44 of 122
==PAGE:52==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
products account 24%, bread and cakes account 20%, dry goods (such as ﬂour, pasta and
tea) account 10% and ﬁnally dairy products make up 5% (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet
og Miljøstyrelsen, 2018).
The result of scenario FD FOO WAS(50/90) can be seen in table 4.14.
FD FOO WAS(50/90)
Food
waste
[%]
Impact
[kg CO2-eq/kg]
Baseline
food waste
[t CO2-eq]
50%
reduction
[t CO2-eq]
90%
reduction
[t CO2-eq]
Vegetables
41
0.45
129150
64575
12915
Meat products
24
8
1344000
672000
134400
Bread and cakes
20
1.44
201600
100800
20160
Dry goods
(ﬂour, pasta and tea)
10
1.24
86800
43400
8680
Dairy
5
4
140000
35000
14000
Food waste per year [t]
700000
350000
70000
Total [Mt CO2-eq/year]
1.90
0.95
0.19
Total saving
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
0.95
1.71
Table 4.14: Food waste reduction by 50% and 90% with associated national GHG savings hereof. The
impact for the diﬀerent food types are based on (Mogensen et al. , 2016) and the quantities are based on
(Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet og Miljøstyrelsen, 2018)
The impact from food waste is 2.72 kg CO2-eq/kg in average, calculated based on the
weighted share of waste shown in table 4.14. Food waste contributes with 1.9 Mt CO2-eq
to the national GHG emissions a year. Other studies have nonetheless shown signiﬁcant
larger impact caused by food waste (The Danish Society of Engineers, IDA, 2009). 1.9
Mt CO2-eq/year is equal to 2.2% of the total national impact, which is caused by a waste
that does not contribute any type of value. Reducing food waste with 50% is equivalent
to a 50% reduction of GHG emissions. The same accounts for a 90% reduction, which
can be seen in table 4.14.
FD FOO WAS VEG90
without meat and dairy
Food
waste
[%]
Impact
[kg CO2-eq/kg]
New baseline
food waste
[t CO2-eq]
90%
reduction
[t CO2-eq]
Vegetables
58
0.45
181901
18190
Meat products
0
8
0
0
Bread and cakes
28
1.44
283944
28394
Dry goods
(ﬂour, pasta and tea)
14
1.24
122254
12225
Dairy
0
4
0
0
Food waste a year [t]
700000
70000
Total [Mt CO2-eq/year]
0.59
0.06
Total saving
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
1.84
Table 4.15: The GWP of reduced food waste as a result of changed diet (exclusion of meat and dairy)
and with a 90% decrease of food waste.
Page 45 of 122
==PAGE:53==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
If the food habits are changed into scenario FD FOO ANI100 the total impact from a 90%
reduction in food waste results in 0.06 Mt CO2-eq/year, which is a reduction of 1.84 Mt
CO2-eq/year. Changing the diet has a great impact on the food waste as well. Looking
at table 4.15 the impact from the new baseline of food waste is reduced to 0.59 Mt CO2-
eq/year without reducing the amount of food waste. The saving of 1.84 Mt CO2-eq/year
cannot be added to the saving from improving the agricultural sector since the savings
in the agricultural sector mainly are based on using animal waste or in other ways min-
imising the impact caused by animals. This impact would no longer be present in a large
degree if the Danes consume substantially less meat and dairy. There are furthermore a
risk for double counting the savings.
If tobacco were completely abandoned as examined in scenario FD TOB, a saving of 0.208
Mt CO2-eq/year on a national level would be reached. The scenario is calculated with
Eora, by reducing the ﬁnal demand for all sectors with tobacco, the sectors that com-
bined tobacco with other products were neglected. Furthermore, the scenario will reduce
the total impact from the health care sector, since the public health would improve as
tobacco are abandoned (and presuming not replaced by other habits with similar impact).
Scenario FD BEV examines the GHG savings that can be obtained if the intake of bever-
ages (coﬀee, beer, wine and soft drinks) were reduced to 10% of the current consumption
rates in Denmark. The scenario has been calculated based on Mogensen et al. (2016).
The model is based on average impact from the diﬀerent beverages. Reducing the con-
sumption of beverages improves public health, reduces overweight (which is classiﬁed as
over consumption) and reduces the impact from the health sector. Tea is not included
since it is evaluated to contribute to health in general. There is a potential to save more
than 1 Mt CO2-eq/year if the intake of beverages are reduced with 90% not including the
health eﬀects that might result in much larger GHG savings. This is further addressed in
the discussion.
DNK FD BEV
Annual use [mill. L]
Impact [Mt CO2-eq/year]
Wine
149
0.358
Beer
358
0.358
Coﬀee
1226
0.368
Soft drinks
566
0.170
Total impact [Mt CO2-eq/year]
1.25
Impact at 90% reduction
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
0.12
Table 4.16: The GWP when reducing the consumption of beverage 90%. The amounts of beverages
are based on Statistic Denmark (2018) and the impact for each beverage are based on Mogensen et al.
(2016).
4.1.4
Land Use Change and Aﬀorestation
Altered change of food consumption patterns from animal produced food to plant based
entails less demand for cropland to feed the equivalent amount of people, which is 17 mill
people in Denmark (a large share of the food is exported). Scenario FD LUC is considering
land use, land use change and forestry. It accounts for reduced impact when conceiving
Page 46 of 122
==PAGE:54==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
100% of the agricultural area for animal related production converted to plant based
food production and forest.
According to Statistics Denmark the Danish agricultural
area is 2,625,093 ha with 80% reserved for animal production. Around 1/4 of the area is
needed to feed the same amount of people when changing agricultural production from
animal production into plant based food. 74% of the area for animal production was
therefore assumed aﬀorested due to the area ratio between plant based and animal based
production (of 0.26) (Miljø- og Fødevareudvalget 2017-18, 2018). The area needed for
animal production diﬀers depending on animal type. Chickens only demand twice the
area as plant based food, pork demands 4 times the area, while beef demands 7 times
the area (Miljø- og Fødevareudvalget 2017-18, 2018). Additionally, import of feed for
animal stock occupies 1,088,764 ha in other countries (Miljø- og Fødevareudvalget 2017-
18, 2018). This is not included in the conversion. It creates potential for GHG savings in
other countries when the demand for animal feed in Denmark decreases.
Estimated CO2-eq emissions from cropland was 1 t/ha while the annual average CO2-eq
storage of aﬀorestation was estimated to 10 t/ha for Denmark (depending on the three
type, location and soil type deciduous forest binds 2-5 tons CO2/ha/year and coniferous
forest binds 2-30 tons CO2/ha/year (Naturstyrelsen, 2011)) yielding an annual saving of 14
Mt CO2-eq when turning into a 100% plant based agricultural production in Denmark.
See the calculations in appendix F. If considering the terminated cropland production
for animal feed in South America and other countries (that use to export animal feed to
Denmark), converted to forest as well a saving of 12 Mt CO2-eq/year could occur assuming
equal conditions as Denmark, the area could also be used for plant food production and
thus produce food for more people.
4.1.5
Constructions and the Built Environment
The Danish average housing area per person was 52.3 m2 in 2018 stated by Statistics
Denmark; hence, making it relevant to study how the following two cases improve the
GHG foot-print from housing:
• Case 1: Diﬀerent heating supply options for housing.
• Case 2: Lower the average area per person for housing by considering housing
building type and number of people living together.
Scenario FD CON ARE examines the impact from housing related to case 1 and case 2
of four diﬀerent housing types:
• Shared housing
• Apartment
• Single family house
• Terrace house
In case 1 DH and HP were studied as heating types as foreseen to be most occurring in
2050 (Dyrelund et al. , 2010). HPs were assumed to be air to water with the electricity
mix of ”Energistyrelsen” from table 4.2. The energy sources for the 2050 fossil free DH
Page 47 of 122
==PAGE:55==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
mix followed the composition from table 4.6 and is the mix that is referred to as DH for
the rest of this section. Housing types were on average assumed to be an energy renovated
house equal to the Danish energy label C with heating demand per area unit being calcu-
lated as 110 kWh/m2+3200 kWh/(heated area of residence). Every electricity consuming
unit was modelled with 2050 electricity mix as additional energy consumption to the en-
ergy label C. Noticeably is that the scenario only considers simpliﬁed operation of the
presented housing types. Embodied energy and resources from construction and mainte-
nance were not included. The tables G.6, G.7, G.8 and G.9 in Appendix G represent a
more detailed version of energy consumption as a function of the size of the housing types.
Figure G.1 illustrates the magnitude of impact of housing operations from respectively
2050 fossil free DH and HP with year 2050 electricity mix from ”Energistyrelsen” for
shared housing of various number of residents. See the ﬁgures G.10, G.11, G.12 and G.13
in Appendix G for emissions associated with DH and HP for the rest of the housing types.
The diﬀerence of impact for DH and HP for instance considering shared housing is a factor
5-10 in favour of HP.
The impact is considerably reduced when upgrading from energy label C to A2020 energy
requirements with a factor 2-4 for HP and 4-9 for DH. The results of the assessment for all
housing types (improved to energy label A2020 (heating demand being 20 kWh/m2) and
all other assumptions being equal to the energy label C scenario) can be seen in Appendix
G in ﬁgure G.1 and G.2.
The data assumed for electrical equipment in each housing unit for case 2 is presented in
Appendix G.
Apartments represent story buildings while single family houses represent detached houses,
villas and similar and terrace houses includes double houses. Shared housing are in this
study deﬁned as several people/families living together.
It implies that new types of
homes can be developed but existing single family houses can be transformed into shared
housing as well. Therefore, shared housing represent a combination of new and existing
building stock. The purpose was to uncover how a change from larger housing (single fam-
ily houses) to smaller housing (shared housing) with similar comfort and service would
reduce the overall impact.
For each housing type a certain area interval was presumed for a particular quantity of
people as presented in Appendix G in ﬁgure G.1. Apartments smaller than 60 m2 were
modelled to have averagely smaller or less amount of white goods. Larger apartments
than 60 m2 would accordingly have larger electricity consumption. The area intervals of
shared housing included common areas shared with other residents, precisely 10 m2 for
every person irrespective of size.
Looking at ﬁgure 4.6 it is seen that less area per person and more people per housing
unit results in the smallest impact. In general, shared houses and apartments with energy
label C are the options with the lowest impact for future use when 1-3 people live in the
modelled shared house and apartment sizes. Living 1-3 people in either a single family
house or a terrace house diﬀer regarding impacts depending on the size. When reaching
4 or 5 people for a housing unit the diﬀerent housing types are equalised.
A similar
tendency appears for the housing types when they were upgraded to energy label A2020,
the voluntary building class in the Danish Building Regulation, see ﬁgure 4.7 (note that
Page 48 of 122
==PAGE:56==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
the y-axis diﬀer from ﬁgure 4.6 to 4.7).
Figure 4.6: Scenario FD CON ARE the relation between size of housing with energy label C, number of
people and GWP per person for the four diﬀerent housing types when HP is used as heating source, with
future electricity mix estimated by Energistyrelsen (2014).
In the energy label C case with HP, the gap between the smallest apartment and the
largest single family house is 121 kg CO2-eq/person/year for 1 person per unit, only de-
viating 31 kg CO2-eq/person/year for 5 people per unit. With A2020 improvement and
HP as energy source the annual diﬀerence between smallest apartment and largest single
family house is 50 kg CO2-eq per person for 1 person per unit and 12 kg CO2-eq per
person for 5 people per unit illustrated in ﬁgure 4.7.
An energy label C improvement on average of the building stock results in an annual im-
pact lower than 233 kg CO2-eq per person and an annual minimum limit of 44 kg CO2-eq
per person according to ﬁgure 4.8 and 4.6 when HP is heat source. On the other hand,
with DH as energy source the annual impact would remain between 321-1677 kg CO2-
eq per person, signiﬁcantly higher than the impact from HP. An A2020 enhancement of
housing based on HP energy supply encompasses an interval between smallest and largest
impact being 15-85 kg CO2-eq/person/year when living 1-5 people together, see ﬁgure
4.7. It will be between 53-283 CO2-eq/person/year with DH as energy source with energy
label C, see ﬁgure 4.6.
Page 49 of 122
==PAGE:57==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Figure 4.7: Scenario FD CON ARE relation between size of housing with energy label A2020, number
of people and GWP per person for the four diﬀerent housing types with HP used as heating source with
future electricity mix estimated by Energistyrelsen (2014).
Shared houses and terrace houses are performing similarly with 4-5 people living together
in a housing unit as ﬁgure 4.8 indicates. Overall speaking, larger families or several people
can live in terrace houses and single family houses without having a larger GHG impact
as the intervals for 4 and 5 people show in ﬁgure 4.8. Moving 1-3 people living together
from single family houses to apartments or changing the houses to sharing houses as an
viable alternative will reduce the GHG impact signiﬁcantly. Particularly with 45% of the
Danish citizens living in single family houses.
Figure 4.8: GWP shown with ranges per person for the four housing types with diﬀerent sizes in scenario
FD CON ARE. The heating type is HD with future electricity mix estimated by Energistyrelsen (2014).
Shared housing should not replace apartments since apartments are the least impacting
form of living but instead move residents from single family and terrace houses to shared
housing. Transforming or shifting half of the single family house units with average area
of 151 m2 to shared housing units of average area of 87.5 m2 will reduce the total Danish
Page 50 of 122
==PAGE:58==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
area with 13% assuming the population is kept at present level.
CLT as structural construction element has been studied in scenario EF CON WOO
to understand the impact and potential reduction arising from substituting concrete and
recycled concrete with diﬀerent ratios of cross laminated timber (CLT) in the construction
of new buildings.
The total consumption of concrete is 4.35 million ton in Denmark
annually (Fold et al. , 2016). It has been assumed that 50% of the concrete would be for
structural purposes in new building constructions. Gravel and sand were substituted with
crushed concrete of ratio 40% and 60% with allocation according to the cut-oﬀapproach.
Replacing gravel as aggregate in roads was selected as the avoided production in the
future considering the current approach. Replacing the two concrete situations with CLT-
elements the rate was chosen to be 50% and 100% replacement of the concrete. Avoided
production in the case of CLT was modelled with biomass in the electricity forecast 4.9
and NG in the forecasted district heat (DH) mix. Also CLT made of applicable waste
wood was tested with the same approach as the virgin CLT.
With concrete as structural element the impact is 0.34 Mt CO2-eq/year and will only
slightly decrease with recycled concrete due to cement being the major impact material,
shown in ﬁgure4.9. In ﬁgure 4.9 the bars with CLT replaces 50% of the concrete and the
remaining 50% is still represented by regular concrete. Replacing 50% and 100% of the
concrete with virgin CLT the impact is reduced to 0.29 and 0.24 Mt CO2-eq/year for the
whole construction sector in Denmark, see ﬁgure 4.9. Especially drying of wood logs and
production of melamine as glue impact signiﬁcantly. At EoL incineration of wood would
often substitute fossil fuels where in this case it is biomass. Substituting NG in the incin-
eration at EoL results in a negative impact as shown in ﬁgure 4.10. However, substitution
of biomass is much more likely in 2050 if considering the forecast of heat and electricity
formerly presented in this study. Applying waste wood to manufacture CLT-elements
would decrease the impact to a level at 0.21 and 0.09 Mt CO2-eq/year when substituting
biomass at EoL incineration, shown in ﬁgure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Annual national GHG emissions of concrete used in new building constructions compared
with GWP of diﬀerent materials substituting virgin concrete: Recycled concrete, CLT and CLT of waste
wood with biomass for electricity production as the substituted process at EoL. Modelled in SimaPro.
Page 51 of 122
==PAGE:59==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Figure 4.10: Annual emissions of concrete used in new building constructions compared with diﬀerent
GWP of materials substituting virgin concrete: Recycled concrete, CLT and CLT of waste wood with
NG for electricity production as the substituted process at EoL. Modelled in SimaPro.
EF COU
Industries in Eora
Factor change
in EF
Sweden
0.6
USA
0.6
Germany
0.6
Belgium
0.6
China
0.6
United Kingdom
0.6
Netherlands
0.6
France
0.6
Italy
0.6
Poland
0.6
India
0.6
Total impact [CO2-eq/year]
66.4
Saving [Mt CO2-eq/year]
11.8
Table 4.17: Scenario EF COU shows a decrease in the Danish annual GHG emissions of 11.8 Mt CO2-
eq/year, if the top 12 countries that Denmark import from improve their emission intensity by 40%.
The result is based on Eora, therefore, the total impact is 78.2 Mt CO2-eq (international transport is
excluded).
As mentioned in the method section 33% of the Danish impact is caused by imported
products. Scenario EF COU examines the inﬂuence in Denmark if improving the eco-
eﬃciency in countries of major export for Denmark. To illustrate the dependence all
emission intensities for all industries in Eora for: Sweden, USA, Germany, China, UK,
Page 52 of 122
==PAGE:60==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Netherlands, France, Italy, Poland, Belgium and India have been improved 40%. In table
4.17 the result of the scenario can be seen. 11.8 Mt CO2-eq/year equivalent to 15% of the
Danish annual impact will be reduced if the countries responsible for the larges part of
the import reduce their emission intensity with 40%. Table 4.17 illustrates that Denmark
is quite reliant on other countries in reducing their impact from production. If the top 12
countries of import in Denmark improve their eco-eﬃciency with 40% across all sectors
15% of the total Danish GHG emissions will be avoided.
4.2
Circular Economy Scenarios in Denmark
In the following the results from the scenarios build upon CE is presented.
4.2.1
Transport
Scenario EF TRA CE examines how large GHG savings that can be reached if two families
share one car instead of owning a car each. The focus has been on the highest level of
value in CE, namely, share and furthermore, it takes the technology development into
account.
The baseline for this scenario consists of two medium size petrol cars that each drives
20.000 km a year. The sharing car has been modelled with both a petrol and an electric
car, taking the future electricity grid into perspective as well.
The CE scenario is modelled with a sharing point of view, since other actions such as
recycling rubber from tyres and electronic parts result in a negligible small GHG saving.
Each family that share one car drives 15,000 km a year instead of 20,000 km/year. This
is assumed due to the extra planning needed, which should result in only using the car
when necessary and driving more people at the same time. The 10,000 km saved by car
is substituted with transport by an electric bicycle.
Figure 4.11: Analysis of GWP for scenario EF TRA CE with transport of 2 families by car modelled in
SimaPro. The baseline scenario is modelled with two regular petrol cars where each family owns one car
to drive 20,000 km per year. In the scenario with CE petrol car, 30,000 km is modelled with a regular
petrol car with each family driving 15,000 km per year. The saved 10,000 km between the two above
mentioned cases is replaced by an electric bicycle. The same distance is used for both CE scenarios of
electric cars. The diﬀerence between the electric car scenarios are the electricity mix also used for the
electric bicycle.
Page 53 of 122
==PAGE:61==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Figure 4.11 shows that if two families share one petrol car compared with having one car
each, 24.6% of the GHG emissions can be saved, due to a reduction of 5000 km per family,
which is replaced by a electric bicycle. If the shared electric car uses the electricity mix in
2050 assumed by ”Energistyrelsen”, and is produced with the a future electricity mix as
well, the savings compared with the baseline is 85%, and 81% compared with the regular
sharing car that runs on petrol.
If the electric car runs on the electricity mix from 2017 (the baseline electricity mix) the
total savings of the shared electric car is reduced to 76% instead of 85%. If modelling an
electric car that runs on electricity produced with hard coal the saving compared with a
petrol car is 17%. Accordingly, the type of electricity mix inﬂuence the GWP much when
considering electric cars.
4.2.2
Construction and the Built Environment
The construction sector is responsible for a large part of the national GHG emissions. The
initial study in Eora showed that the two single most contributing sectors in Denmark
were construction of new buildings and civil engineering. The role and potential of CE
to reduce the GHG emission in the construction sector has been examined in the following.
Table 3.7 has been applied to investigate GHG saving potential of recycling within the
built environment and civil engineering. Two methods for the calculation were applied as
assurance of results named EF CON CE Rec and EF CON CE Eora. First method was
based on savings and remaining unfulﬁlled recycling rates from table 3.7 multiplied by the
average waste volume between 2014-2016 from (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018a). Waste volumes
from (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018a) were not separated into the same categories as in table 3.7.
Therefore, the allocation assumptions proceeded as displayed in table I.1 in Appendix I.
The saving is based on the diﬀerence between current recycling rate and potential recy-
cling rate.
With method EF CON CE Eora the most contributing sectors to construction and civil
engineering impacts were derived from the Eora baseline as ﬁgure I.2 presents in Appendix
I. Five of the sectors were related to iron and steel, hence, the materials from table 3.7
were divided into steel and remaining materials as a simpliﬁcation. Allocation of materials
and impact was accounted by applying weight percent (wt%) to divide emissions between
materials associated with buildings and civil engineering and within those two categories
as table I.3 in Appendix I displays. The potential savings were taken from table 3.7 as
for EF CON CE Rec.
Looking at the potential of the lowest level of cycles in the CE hierarchy recycling, the
environmental beneﬁts are limited regarding improving the impact on GWP due to already
high rates of recycling in Denmark. Potential savings in Denmark per year can be seen in
ﬁgure 4.12. Aggregating these impact reductions yield a potential saving between 0.012-
0.034 Mt CO2-eq/year, which is a rather small saving compared to the baseline of 11.5 Mt
CO2-eq/year for constructions identiﬁed in Eora (adding the impact from all industries
related to constructions in Eora). Mineral wool and aluminium were omitted after ﬁrst
study because no saving were possible in the mineral wool case and aluminium was already
recycled to its fully potential as shown in table 3.7 in the method section.
Page 54 of 122
==PAGE:62==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Figure 4.12: Result of initial studies of scenario EF CON CE considering recycling. The intervals show
the potential GHG savings, where the potential of iron and steel can be between zero and the upper
range because recycling is or almost is fully exploited. The assessment is based on table 3.7.
The two major waste streams from construction and civil engineering, asphalt and con-
crete, were not included in ﬁgure 4.12. Concrete was assumed to be recycled to its fully
extend mainly as aggregates for road constructions; thus, omitted from these two sce-
narios, since recycling of concrete yields very small savings experienced from scenario
EF CON WOO. Asphalt has a potential saving of 0.18-0.36 Mt CO2-eq/year. Increasing
recycling of asphalt would improve the annual savings to 0.20-0.39 Mt CO2-eq/year cal-
culated based on table 3.7, I.1, I.3 and Miljøstyrelsen (2018a). Adding the saving from
recycling of asphalt 0.3%-0.5% of the national GHG impact can be avoided. Similar re-
sults occur with Eora impact based data with lower numbers but overlapping ranges as
presented in ﬁgure 4.18.
Impact Savings
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
Total saving of national impact
[%]
EF CON CE Rec (literature)
0.20-0.39
0.3-0.5
EF CON CE Eora
0.10-0.21
0.1-0.3
Table 4.18: Comparison of GHG reductions by increased recycling of construction materials calculated
from table 3.7 and Eora baseline emissions.
Eora has been used to calculate the savings from scenario EF CON CE. The construction
sectors have been identiﬁed in Eora, see the sectors in table 4.19. The factor of change
in emission intensity and ﬁnal demand for each sector has been decided based on initial
studies of recycling and reusing potential.
Danish architects and entrepreneurs from Lendager Group, GXN, Lejerbo, MT Højgaard,
Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut (SBi) and others are pioneers in implementing CE in the
constriction sector. Lendager Group has proven that it is possible to build mainly using
used materials or other types of waste products (86% of the materials) (Lendager Group,
Page 55 of 122
==PAGE:63==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
2018). All of the aforementioned organisations have developed Circle House, where 90%
of the materials are constructed and put together. They are able to disassemble and reuse
without loosing value (Lejerbo, 2018). The factor change in emission intensities and ﬁnal
demand take large scale need for reusing options into account; thus, the demand for new
construction materials cannot be reduced 80-100%, despite the pilot project have proven
that it is doable.
EF CON CE
Industries in Eora
Factor change in
EF
Factor change in
FD
Extr. of gravel, clay, stone and salt etc.
0.9
0.6
Construction of new buildings
0.6
0.6
Repair and maintenance of buildings
0.6
1
Civil engineering
0.5
0.7
Construction materials
0,5
0.6
Mfr. of cement, bricks, tiles, ﬂags etc.
0.9
0.5
Mfr. of concrete, cement, asphalt and rockwool
0.6
0,5
Mfr. of construct. materials of metal etc.
0.8
0.6
Manufacture of other plastic products n.e.c.
0.6
0.9
Mfr. of wood and wood products
0.5
1.0
Mfr. of basic ferrous metals
0.9
0.8
Mfr. of builders’ ware of plastic
0.5
0.9
Mfr. of basic non-ferrous metals
0.9
0.8
Mfr. of paints, printing ink and mastics
1.0
0.7
First processing of iron and steel
0.9
1.0
Casting of metal products
0.9
0.8
Total impact [Mt CO2-eq/year]
70.9
Saving [Mt CO2-eq/year]
7.3
Table 4.19: The GHG saving of scenario EF CON CE modelled in Eora, with improved emission intensity
and reduced ﬁnal demand as a result of CE. The factor change in emission intensity and ﬁnal demand
are estimated based on initial studies of reuse and recycling of diﬀerent materials and a literature study
of completed projects focusing on CE in the construction sector.
Comparing the impact for rock wool and wood wool in SimaPro assuming that the thermal
conductivity and the density of insulation materials are the same, shows that wood wool
only constitutes 5% of the impact compared with rock wool. Reusing old windowpanes
by combining them with other old panes can create even more energy eﬃcient windows
than new three or four layer windows. These windows avoid production of new panes,
and since the impact from the production of the old windows are allocated to the ﬁrst
life cycle according to the cut-oﬀapproach, the saving that can be reached when reusing
panes is around 50 kg CO2-eq pr m2 window. This is around 33% of the impact from new
windows with wood frames. CE both reduces the demand for new materials and often
improves the eco-eﬃciency in the production. As the result in table 4.19 indicates CE
has a key role within the construction sector if the sector shall succeed in reaching major
GHG savings. Comparing the GHG saving of 7.3 Mt CO2-eq/year from implementing CE
in the construction sector with the baseline of 11.5 Mt CO2-eq/year for the construction
sector, the impact can be reduced to 4.2 Mt CO2-eq/year.
Page 56 of 122
==PAGE:64==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
4.2.3
Other Industries
In average the Danes buy 13 kg of new clothes a year supplemented with additional
3 kg from the public sector to be added per person (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018c). Scenario
FD WEA CE illustrates the GHG reduction in Eora when reducing the Danes’ consump-
tion of textiles with 90%. The ﬁnal demand for all global sectors in Eora considering
textiles, wearing apparel and footwear have been multiplied with 0.1 to reach the reduc-
tion of 90%. The selection of industries in which the ﬁnal demand has been changed can
be seen in table 4.20.
FD WEA CE
Industries in Eora
Factor change
in FD
Mfr. of textiles and textile products
0.1
Mfr. of wearing apparel; dressing etc. of fur
0.1
Mfr. of leather and leather products
0.1
Re. sale of clothing, footwear etc.
0.1
Wearing apparel (China)
0.1
Wearing apparel; furs (Poland)
0.1
Wearing apparels (Hong Kong)
0.1
Leather, furs, down and related products (China)
0.1
Many others related to textile production
0.1
Total impact [Mt CO2-eq/year]
72.5
Saving [Mt CO2-eq/year]
5.7
Table 4.20: Scenario FD WEA CE presents the most contributing textile categories from Eora, the change
in ﬁnal demand and the resulting total impact and GHG saving with a reduced demand of 90%.
The national savings when reducing the demand for textiles with 90% is 5.7 Mt CO2-
eq/year, this is equal to 7.3% of the Danish impact and a reduction about 1 ton CO2-
eq/person/year. Combining scenario EF COU and FD WEA CE in Eora is needed to be
able to aggregate the saving without double accounting sectors. This results in a total
reduction of 16.1 Mt CO2-eq/year, which is equal to a reduction of 21% of the Danish
baseline impact.
Scenario FD FUR CE examines the obtainable GHG savings if consumers advance aware-
ness of CE and buy used furniture and/or furniture of higher quality with longer service
life. Final demand was reduced 50% in Eora for the sectors shown in table 4.21. The total
national saving when reducing the demand for new furniture results in 1 Mt CO2-eq/year,
which can be seen in ﬁgure 4.21.
Page 57 of 122
==PAGE:65==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
FD FUR CE
Industries in Eora
Factor change
in FD
Mfr. of furniture
0.5
Furniture and products of wood, bamboo, cane, palm, straw, etc. (China)
0.5
Furniture, jewellery, musical instruments, sporting equipment,
toys and other manufacturing (Germany)
0.5
Wooden furniture (Indonesia)
0.5
Mfr. of toys, gold and silver articles etc.
0.5
Toys, sporting and athletic and recreation products (China)
0.5
Total impact [Mt CO2-eq/year]
77.2
Total saving [Mt CO2-eq/year]
1
Table 4.21: Scenario FD FUR CE, modelled in Eora, reveals the GHG savings that can be obtained when
the FD in the relevant sectors are reduced with 50%.
FD MAC CE has been developed to identify beneﬁts from implementing sharing platforms
that makes it easy to lease larger machines.
Each machine will be used to a greater
extend and the demand for new machines will be reduced. The ﬁnal demand has been
reduced 50% in Eora for the sectors shown in table 4.22. This reduction of 50% has been
chosen according to a reduction in virgin material ﬂows of 50% stated by Moriet et al.
(2015). This accounts for the following CE scenarios as well. The scenario gives a national
reduction of GHG emissions of 0.6 Mt CO2-eq/year.
FD MAC CE
Industries in Eora
Factor change
in FD
Mfr. of other general purpose machinery
0.5
Mfr. of other electrical machinery and apparatus
0.5
Mfr. of machinery for industries etc.
0.5
Mfr. af marine engines, compressors etc.
0.5
Mfr. of agricultural and forestry machinery
0.5
Machines
0.5
Total impact [Mt CO2-eq/year]
77.6
Total saving [Mt CO2-eq/year]
0.6
Table 4.22: Scenario FD MAC CE, modelled in Eora, indicates a national GHG saving of 0.6 Mt CO2-
eq/year. The industries of relevance are all located in Denmark.
Scenario FD WHO CE evaluate the eﬀect of implementing sharing platforms (CE) in the
whole sale sector for the non-food products. The scenario is modelled in Eora by reducing
the ﬁnal demand 50% for the sectors of inﬂuence listed in table 4.23. A saving of 1.8 Mt
CO2-eq/year can be reached if the demand for new non-food products in the whole sale
sector can be reduced 50%.
Page 58 of 122
==PAGE:66==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
FD WHO CE
Industries in Eora
Factor change
in FD
Ws. and commis. trade, exc. of m. vehicles
0.5
Mfr. of hand tools, metal packaging etc.
0.5
Mfr. of medical and optical instrum. etc.
0.5
Instruments, meters and other measuring equipment
0.5
Total impact [Mt CO2-eq/year]
76.4
Total saving [Mt CO2-eq/year]
1.8
Table 4.23: Scenario FD WHO CE showing the four industries in which the ﬁnal demand have been
reduced to 50% in Eora as a result of CE.
The CE scenarios have been combined with EF COU (with an eco-eﬃciency of 10%, 20%,
30% and 40%) in Eora. The GHG saving of the combined scenarios is between 11.8-18.9
Mt CO2-eq/year.
Reaching absolute sustainability demands several actions in several industries. The sce-
narios have shown that combining change in consumption patterns to reduce the demand
for new products can result in quite large GHG savings, but the savings in each scenario
are far from reaching an absolute sustainable level. Combining all CE scenarios (including
food waste) a saving of 18.2 Mt CO2-eq/year can be reached, which equals a reduction
of 20.7% of the total national impact. This saving overlaps some of the other scenarios
(EF ENE, FD FOO ANI BC) therefore the impact considering all non-food products has
been adjusted in the ﬁnal result. The same accounts for the baseline, so the non food
products constitute the remaining part of the baseline, since food, energy and transport
are already accounted in the other categories.
Only a few scenarios considering technology improvement and change in technology
showed signiﬁcant GHG savings.
Combining all types of actions and aggregating the
GHG savings from all scenarios, an absolute sustainable level of GHG emissions in Den-
mark can be reached.
Table 4.24 illustrates the total GHG emissions in Denmark when the scenarios with the
largest GHG savings are aggregated, mentioned with an overall category and scenario
name. To avoid double counting some scenarios have been omitted. The scenarios con-
sidering improvement in agriculture is not included, because a larger saving was identiﬁed
when changing food habits. Rail, agriculture, housing and half of the impact from man-
ufacturing from scenario EF ENE in table 4.3 have not been included to avoid double
counting. Housing has also been excluded from EF HEA, since the impact is handled in
scenario EF CON HOU. The impact from the baseline in ﬁgure 4.24 adds up to the same
impact as Eora; however, divided into very diﬀerent and simpliﬁed categories.
In both 2050 cases presented in table 4.24 the total national impact is below the best
estimate for absolute sustainability of 5.6 Mt CO2-eq/year, but requiring the whole pop-
ulation to change into a vegetarian diet and converting 59% of the agricultural area to
forest (which is equal to 30% of the national area) as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.13.
Page 59 of 122
==PAGE:67==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Category
(scenario)
Baseline
2018
[Mt CO2
-eq/year]
Impact
2050
[Mt CO2
-eq/year]
Impact 2050
-13% area
[Mt CO2
-eq/year]
Break even
mean
[Mt CO2
-eq/year]
Break even
upper
[Mt CO2
-eq/year]
Electricity (EF ENE)
4.63
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.47
Heat (EF HEA)
6.69
2.13
2.13
2.13
2.13
Housing (EF CON HOU)
12.2
3.09
2.69
2.69
2.69
Transport
(EF FD TRA PUB)
19.7
2.45
2.45
2.45
2.45
Freight (EF TRA FRE)
2.13
0.44
0.44
0.44
0.44
Air transport
(FD EF TRA AIR90)
5.80
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.80
Food (FD FOO ANI BC)
9.30
2.80
2.80
3.31
4.10
Food waste
(FD FOO WAS VEG90)
1.90
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
CE construction
(EF CON CE)
11.5
4.2
3.7
3.7
3.7
CE* (non food)
10.2
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Shipping
3.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
Forest (FD LUC)
0
-14
-14
-12.2
-9.0
Total national impact
[Mt CO2-eq/year]
87.8
4.2
3.3
5.6
9.6
Table 4.24: Aggregated GHG emissions from selected scenarios. CE* is best estimate of the baseline
impact from non food products and import and a contribution from CE and improvement in other
countries. ”Impact 2050 -13% area” includes the saving from having 13% less area for housing per person
with current population. ”Break even mean” shows a more optimal combination of the scenarios and
reaches best guess of the absolute sustainable level of GHG emissions. Break even upper indicates what
should at least be done reaching the upper boundary of the national ”safe space”. Less energy loss are
included in EF ENE for 2050.
The 2.8 Mt CO2-eq/year for food, FD FOO ANI BC, in table 4.24 is based on the BC
scenario, which will be presented in section ”Back-casting scenario”. The impact from
shipping has to decrease, despite no scenario targets this area directly. The saving of
3 Mt CO2-eq/year is estimated from a CE perspective with less demand for import of
new products and expected change in fuel type (further debated in the discussion section).
A break even calculation has been completed with 5.6 Mt CO2-eq/year as target, quan-
tifying the allowed meat consumption and needed forest area if the remaining budget for
each person is spend on meat. At break even of 5.6 Mt CO2-eq/year the intake of meat
is 10% of the average intake in 2018 and the aﬀorestation area is 52% of the current
agricultural area. See the calculation in Appendix F and ﬁgure 4.13 to see an overview
of the change in use of the agricultural area in Denmark both considering the break even
scenarios and 100% conversion to plant based food. The contribution from each sector
to reach absolute sustainability in the break even calculations can be seen in table 4.24
and an overview of ”break even mean” is illustrated in Appendix J in ﬁgure J.1. The
internal GHG savings (shown as percentages) within main sectors based on the ”Break
even mean” calculation can be seen in table 4.25. The table indicates how much each
sector reduces their impact compared with the baselines of the sectors.
Page 60 of 122
==PAGE:68==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Figure 4.13: Chart 1 shows the current distribution of agricultural area in Denmark divided into plant
based food production and animal production. Chart 2 shows the distribution of area between plant based
food production and forest when all animal production is changed into plant based food production, which
require an area almost a quarter of what animal production occupies. Chart 3 shows the distribution of
area between forest, plant based food production and animal production when the total Danish impact
is 5.6 Mt CO2-eq/year. Eventually, the distribution of area between forest, plant based food production
and animal production is presented in chart 4 when then the break even point ensures that the total
Danish impact is within the upper boundary of the national ”safe space” 9.6 Mt CO2-eq/year.
Saving [Mt CO2-eq]
Internal saving in sector [%]
Energy and Transport
45
82%
CE and import
18
79%
Forest
12.2
Food and agriculture
7.8
70%
Table 4.25: The reduction in GWP in main sectors based on the break even mean calculation.
The percentages show the savings within each main sector compared with the baselines for the sectors.
4.3
Back-casting scenario
The results of the back-casting scenario will be presented below divided into the ﬁrst three
needs deﬁned by Maslow: food, clothes and shelter.
Food
The composition of comestibles was determined by the amount of protein, fat, carbohy-
drates needed for an average person. According to Sundhed.dk (2016) men need 2500-3000
calories per day, and women 1500-2000 calories of which 25-40% should be fats, 10-12%
should be protein and 45-60% should be carbohydrates. The daily calorie intake depends
on many factors, therefore to simplify the model, 2500 calories has been chosen as a rep-
resentative amount. See table 4.26 for the values used in the scenario.
The combination and amounts of diﬀerent low impact food products for the BC scenario
were based on one daily intake for one person and multiplied by 365, to get an estimate of
Page 61 of 122
==PAGE:69==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
the lowest possible annual impact from food, complying with the recommended nutrition
guidelines. To reach a low impact from the food consumption while taking the needed
nutrients into account ﬁgure D.3 and D.4 shown in Appendix D have been used. The
amounts of the diﬀerent low impact food types have been chosen to comply with the
demand from table 4.26.
Kcal per g
Kcal per day
% of daily intake
g per day
Fat
9
825
33
92
Protein
4
375
15
94
Carbohydrate
4
1300
52
325
Total
2500
Table 4.26: The daily intake recommended by Sundhed.dk (2016) used in the back-casting food scenario.
Table 4.27 should be seen as an example of how a low impact diet could look like, other
combinations can be made, see Appendix K for another example.
Low impact food
consumption represent at least 367 kg CO2-eq of the 460 - 1700 kg CO2-eq share. Food
consumes 21.5-76.5% of the share in the very best case. This impact does not contain any
impact from beverages.
Waste
[%]
Fat
[g]
Protein
[g]
Carbohydrate
[g]
Calories
[Kcal]
Impact
[kg CO2-eq]
Soybean 80 g
0%
14.7
28.6
14.0
328.8
0.048
Oat 70 g
1%
4.7
9.3
40.6
257.6
0.057
Magerine 10 g
5%
8.2
0.0
0.0
72.4
0.017
Carrot 100 g
5%
0.4
0.8
6.3
38.0
0.021
Potato 150 g
5%
0.3
3.3
27.3
544.5
0.032
Rye bread 180 g
0%
2.52
9.9
67.14
361.8
0.144
Banana 100 g
0%
0.2
1.1
21
95
0.050
Apple 100 g
0%
0.3
0.3
8.7
43
0.010
Mussels 40 g
0%
0.88
4.76
1.48
33.2
0.004
Egg (1= 61 g)
0%
5.612
7.503
0.732
82.96
0.122
Rape seed oil 10 g
5%
10
0
0
88.4
0.019
Chocolate, dark 50 g
0%
15.9
2.15
30.5
274
0.045
Cucumber 100 g
5%
0.1
0.7
1.7
12
0.063
Pasta 100 g
0%
1.8
12.3
72.4
366
0.120
Herring ﬁllet 40 g
5%
10.88
13.2
0
149.6
0.076
Olives 50 g
0%
4.9
0.5
1.45
55.5
0.016
Creme fraice 18% 50 g
5%
9.3
1.4
1.8
95
0.163
Total daily impact
[kg CO2-eq/day]
1.01
Total annual impact
[kg CO2-eq/year]
366.8
Table 4.27: Low emission food consumption for one person for one day (preparation excluded). The
combination of food types and amounts live up to the recommended intake of fats, proteins and car-
bohydrates (Sundhed.dk, 2016). Assuming similar diet all year, the total impact from food excluding
preparation results in 367 kg CO2-eq. Low amounts of food waste is included.
To get an insight in the impact from beverages, coﬀee/wine/beer are modelled in ﬁgure
Page 62 of 122
==PAGE:70==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
4.28 with two diﬀerent consumption patterns. Both beverage scenarios in ﬁgure 4.28 are
much below the average Danish consumption. The Danes drink 11.7 units of alcohol a
week, of which 4.3 are beer and 5.2 are wine (Statistic Denmark, 2018).
[kg CO2-eq/year]
[kg CO2-eq/year]
Coﬀee 1 cup a day
21.9
Coﬀee 3 cups a week
9.36
Wine 1 glass a week
15.6
Wine 2 glass a month
7.8
Beer 2 a week
34.7
Beer 2 a month
8.0
Total
72.2
Total
25.2
Table 4.28: GWP from two scenarios for a low consumption of beverages for one person a year based on
(Mogensen et al. , 2016).
An impact of 0.5 t CO2-eq/person/year for food (slightly larger than proven possible) has
been chosen as a realistic average impact per person in 2050 in Denmark. It results in a
national impact of 2.8 Mt CO2-eq/year shown in table 4.24.
Clothes
The impact from two minimalistic clothing lifestyles (second hand clothes and new quality
clothes) have been determined and analysed. The result can be seen in table 4.29.
In this BC scenario the rebound eﬀect should not exist if illustrating the lowest impact
possible; therefore, the compensation rate for buying second hand clothes is 100% and
the impact is 0 from buying reused clothes.
The life time for quality clothes is estimated to be eight years in a minimum wardrobe
of 24 pieces. Three pieces will be changed with new quality clothes each year; thus, the
whole wardrobe is replaced within eight years. It is estimated that the life time of the
second hand clothes is half the life time of new quality clothes; thus, six ”new” pieces is
needed every year. Three pieces of clothes are estimated to weight 1 kg in the SimaPro
model.
In addition to the 24 pieces in each scenario, underwear, socks, shoes and training clothes
are needed. All assumptions regarding the BC clothing scenario can be seen in Appendix
L.
Second hand
[kg CO2-eq/
person/year]
Quality
[kg CO2-eq/
person/year]
Used clothes
0.0
New clothes
30.1
New towels and underwear
15.6
New towels and underwear
15.6
Washing of clothes
8
Washing of clothes
8
Shoes
4.9
Shoes
4.9
Waste (incineration)
0.15
Waste (incineration)
0.08
Total
28.6
Total
58.7
Table 4.29: The GWP from the two clothing scenarios modelled in SimaPro. Scenario 1, buying second
hand clothes, is preferable to new high quality clothes under the statement that the impact from the
production is allocated 100% to the initial user.
Biomass has been chosen as marginal electricity when incinerating the discarded clothes,
but in general the incineration has a very low impact in relation to the other factors,
Page 63 of 122
==PAGE:71==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
making the EoL less critical.
The impact from the BC clothing scenarios is smallest when buying reused clothes with
an impact of 28.6 kg CO2-eq/person/year.
Housing
As formerly concluded, decreasing the energy demand will lower the operational impact
from housing. Accordingly, a downtrend in area per person would further improve the
GHG emissions associated with housing.
Embodied energy in materials for retroﬁtting existing housing or constructing new build-
ings to comply with A2020 is not considered in this case. The smallest impact a person
can reach from residence in 2050 is 13 kg CO2-eq/person/year as the green vertical line
indicates on ﬁgure 4.14 showing the impact from a dorm with energy label A2020. How-
ever, living 4-5 people in apartments show a similar GHG impact as the dorm, with 15
kg CO2-eq/person/year.
Figure 4.14: Annual GHG impact range per person for the four housing types with diﬀerent sizes with
A2020 energy label, based on HP as heat source (with 2050 electricity forecast by ”Energistyrelsen”).
The green vertical line indicates the impact from dorms with 250 m2 shared by 15 people.
Transport
The impact from the additional need ”transport” in the BC scenario is presented in
table 4.30. Diﬀerent transport scenarios are presented (some with car other with train),
because diﬀerent needs have been taken into consideration. The BC 2050 scenario in
ﬁgure 4.30 is the smallest estimated impact a person can reach from transportation in
2050, assuming a realistic/fair amount of transport and all vehicles electriﬁed with the
future electricity mix estimated by ”Energistyrelsen”.
The minimal impact is 136 kg
CO2-eq per person/year in 2050 and 342 kg CO2-eq per person/year in 2017 assuming
the same consumer behaviour. Assuming all public transport methods on land is changed
Page 64 of 122
==PAGE:72==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
from diesel/petrol into electricity as in 2017 the impact from the transport could be
reduced to 223 kg CO2-eq, which is around a third of the impact compared with business
as usual in 2017 (see ﬁgure 4.30 scenario ”Baseline 2017 with train” and ”Baseline 2017
electric”). If a car is needed the impact increases to 651 kg CO2-eq/year in 2017 despite
a limited use and the use of an electric car.
Back-casting 2050
(Energistyrelsen)
[person.km]
[kg CO2-eq/year]
Regional electric train
5000
86
Electric bus
1200
19
Urban electric train
1200
18
Bicycle
3120
13
Total
136
Baseline 2017 with train
[person.km]
[kg CO2-eq/year]
Regional train (diesel and electricity)
5000
171
Diesel bus
1200
121
Urban electric train
1200
36
Bicycle
3120
13
Total
342
Baseline 2017 with car
[person.km]
[kg CO2-eq/year]
Electric car
5000
480
Diesel bus
1200
121
Urban electric train
1200
36
Bicycle
3120
13
Total
651
Baseline 2017 electric
[person.km]
[kg CO2-eq/year]
Regional electric train
5000
129
Electric bus
1200
45
Urban electric train
1200
36
Bicycle
3120
13
Total
223
Table 4.30: The back-casting 2050 scenario is the smallest estimated impact a person can reach from
transportation in 2050. The same transport methods are used in ”Baseline 2017 with train” but the
current transport vehicles are used in the model. ”Baseline 2017 electric” shows all the transportation
methods changed from petrol and diesel into electricity using the electricity mix of 2017. The scenarios
are modelled in SimaPro.
An additional electricity need of 100 kWh results in a impact of 3.5 kg CO2-eq/person/year
when using the electricity forecast by ”Energistyrelsen”.
When adding the impact from the basic needs, the total impact is 0.472 t CO2-eq/person/
year in 2017 excluding consumption of beverages, transport and additional electricity and
0.842 t CO2-eq/person/year including consumption of beverages, transport and additional
electricity, which is the absolute lowest impact a person in Denmark can reach today, with-
out including a share of the public emissions.
Page 65 of 122
==PAGE:73==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Taking the future perspective, the basic needs can be covered emitting 0.41 t CO2-
eq/person/year excluding beverages, transport and additional electricity.
If including
a minimal level of transport, additional electricity and beverages (with the same impact
per L as in 2017), the impact is 0.573 t CO2-eq/person/year. This result leaves very little
space to health care, education, other public services and consumption in general, since
the ”save space” of 0.46-1.7 t CO2-eq/person/year is already exceeded with 0.383 t CO2-
eq/person/year or leaves only up to 0.857 t CO2-eq/person/year in the 2017 scenario. In
2050 maximum 1.127 t CO2-eq/person is left of the annual GHG budget; however, the
lower boundary is still exceeded with 113 kg CO2-eq/person/year.
4.4
Scenarios in Kenya
69% of the energy in Kenya comes from biomass (charcoal and wood fuel)(IEA Electric-
ity Information, 2018). The large consumption of unsustainable biomass leads to mass
deforestation that accelerates climate change and furthermore, leads to health risks in
households due to exposure of indoor smoke. It is important that many people become
independent of biomass, and a good way to do that is to supply the households with
electricity for cooking, heating and lighting.
The baseline for the electricity mix in Kenya with the share of the diﬀerent energy sources
in 2016 can be seen in ﬁgure 4.31, based on IEA Electricity Information (2018).
2016
Energy source
[%]
Oil
20.7
Biofuel
1.3
Hydro power
34.3
Geothermal
43.1
Solar PV
0.01
Wind
0.6
Table 4.31: Kenya electricity mix in 2016 (IEA Electricity Information, 2018).
Constructing a new electricity mix for Kenya with suﬃcient energy production to raise
the living standard to 0.7 is attempted by exploring the potential of RE in Kenya. Oil
is the only fossil fuel used and thus the only obvious matter to replace in the electricity
mix in 2016 to decrease the impact per kWh. The proposed electricity mix can be seen
in table 4.32. The amount of solar PV has to be increased signiﬁcantly, since the country
has a great potential to take advantage of the many hours of sun during the whole year
(Abagi, 2010).
If the energy need for Kenya should be covered only using solar cells around 1.5% area of
Kenya would be used (derived from Kiplagatab et al. (2011)).
Page 66 of 122
==PAGE:74==
CONTENTS
4. RESULTS
Energy source
[PJ]
EROI
Wind oﬀshore
1016
27:1
Wind onshore
880
16-20:1
Solar PV
7908
5-9:1
Hydro power
45
72-100:1
Geothermal
315
30:1
Cogeneration waste
34
6:1
Cogeneration bagasse
2
6:1
Total
10200
Weighted EROI
Share of total energy need
100 %
12.7:1
Table 4.32: The potential of RE sources in Kenya mainly for electricity production and the respective
EROI values. The table is based on (Kazimierczuk, 2019), (Elsner, 2019), (Atlason & Unnthorsson, 2014),
(Scarlata et al. , 2015) and (Kiplagatab et al. , 2011).
In 2016 the GWP per kWh electricity in Kenya was: 0.37 kg CO2-eq, calculated in
SimaPro with data from table 4.31. In the future electricity production, taking what is
feasible into account, the GWP per kWh electricity is reduced to: 0.095 kg CO2-eq per
kWh, calculated in SimaPro using the data from table 4.32. The new electricity mix
results in a saving of 75% per kWh compared with the electricity mix in 2016.
Table 4.32 illustrates that it is possible to produce 100% of the needed energy in Kenya
(10,200 PJ) with RE when exploiting solar radiation by PV while a HDI of 0.7 is the goal.
The total impact results in 269 Mt CO2-eq/year, which exceeds the boundary of 39.1-
145.7 Mt CO2-eq/year for 85 mill inhabitants, with a factor 1.8-6.9, only including energy
and no other sectors. Thus, limiting the growth of the population (to limit the need for
energy) and/or improving the eco-eﬃciency of the RE is highly needed if the dependency
of energy use and well-being (HDI) is maintained. Limiting the population growth to
some degree is an option, though the RE sources cannot supply the current population
with 120 GJ/person without exceeding the national ”safe space”.
The EROI of the RE sources can be seen in table 4.32. The weighted average EROI for
the RE in the proposed future electricity production is 12.7:1, which is below the interval
of 20-30:1 that deﬁnes a high living standard (Lambert et al. , January 2014). Reaching a
better EROI is not possible with RE in Kenya, since table 4.32 shows the full exploitation
of the RE sources.
It is clear that a decoupling of energy use and service is necessary. Decoupling of energy
use and provision of services was also the case for the Danish scenarios, both regarding
transport, heating for housing and the CE scenarios. The other scenarios for Denmark
illustrated a decoupling of impact and service. Both decoupling of energy use and im-
pact from services will be necessary in Kenya too, for providing more service and thus
increasing the HDI without increasing the national GHG emissions. The additional need
for infrastructure distribution of the electricity was not included in the assessment.
Page 67 of 122
==PAGE:75==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
5
Discussion
The discussion is initiated by a review of each scenario including an evaluation of the
reduction potential and likelihood of implementation. The main factors that inﬂuence
the probability of implementation and development of initiatives can be seen in ﬁgure
5.1. The legislation is the factor that has the most dominant role and it sets the frame for
the others. Government decisions are often the fastest and most secure way to implement
the scenarios. CE mainly inﬂuences the consumers and companies in the development of
SBM. New technologies are developed by researchers and companies, but the investment
in research is also dependent on political decisions, which is indicated by legislation in
ﬁgure 5.1.
Potential in development of future technologies has been excluded in this
study but is expected to enhance potential for optimising human welfare (services) while
lowering the environmental cost. The consumers have the ”power of consumers”, hence
they can create a demand for sustainable businesses and force unsustainable businesses
to closing.
Figure 5.1: Illustration made speciﬁcally for this study, showing the actors that inﬂuence the implemen-
tation of the scenarios examined in this study and how they interact with legislation setting the overall
frame.
5.1
Reduction Potential and Evaluation of Probability for Re-
alisation
Electricity and Heat
In scenario EF ENE the two forecast; ”Tokni 2050” and ”Energistyrelsen 2050” have sim-
ilar impact despite that the constituting RE sources varies. The reduced impact is mainly
caused by the exclusion of fossil fuels in both scenarios. Former forecasts of electricity
Page 68 of 122
==PAGE:76==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
mix have proven wrong, therefore this forecast have a low probability of being realised,
due to potential technology development and outcomes of policy making. The impact
associated with the two forecasts would be quite certain because the data quality is high
and the technologies are already implemented; though, on a smaller scale than in the
scenario.
A national electricity production exclusively based on RE sets a signiﬁcant
demand for energy storage. Technology development has an important role in realising
scenario EF ENE by developing eﬀective storage methods with minimal energy loss and
low emission rates. New energy storage types have emerged during the last years, e.g.
heat stone storage; though, without major breakthrough to date (DTU Energy, 2019).
The probability of implementation of scenario EF HEA is very dependent on the forecast
of DH. Looking into political statement it is quite sure that the DH will be fossil free in
2050. The impact of the scenario is of high certainty due to data quality and well known
technologies. HP has a smaller GWP than DH with very high certainty, but HP cannot
be applied in cities without noise and architectural distortions. The impact for HP follows
the development in electricity mix; thus, having the same uncertainty.
Implementing heat savings of 40% in the existing building stock would be doable with
mainly aesthetics and economical expenses as the constraint. Taking the rebound eﬀect
and the dependency of the embodied energy in the insulation materials into account, the
impact from scenario EF CON HOU is uncertain.
Transport
Scenario FD TRA and FD TRA PUB have a medium to low probability of being realised
relying on behavioural changes of the consumers. With political initiatives these scenarios
could easier be realised. FD TRA is more probable than FD TRA PUB since it is based
on research and surveys of habits and willingness to bike as a transport method. Antici-
pating that the scenarios occur, the impact is certain, since it relies on current technology
level and high data quality.
Scenario FD EF TRA PUB relies on consumers and the development of an electriﬁed
infrastructure and the future electricity, to be realised. It is doable to move 50% of the
car travelling distances into public transport, but it demands an improved public infras-
tructure, which relies on political decisions. Autonomous vehicles transporting people to
the public stops can be an optimal factor in the transition of changing the behaviour of
people, if considering future technologies. Shifting the existing 50% of travelling distance
by petrol car to electric cars is also doable but it also needs political support to succeed.
The large GHG savings and the fact that the transition towards electrifying the transport
sector has started, makes the scenario attractive and probable. The associated impact
would be of medium to high certainty relying majorly on the uncertainties related to the
electricity mix and impact from electric car batteries.
The increasing awareness about global warming and the focus on impact from ﬂights make
scenario FD TRA AIR (50/90) feasible to some extent, since the movement has already
started. More people boycott the ﬂights and choose to travel by train instead. Since
the technology can not reduce the impact from ﬂights yet this scenario only looks into
the potential of avoiding ﬂights, relying on consumer choices, which can be supported by
legislation and fees.
Page 69 of 122
==PAGE:77==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
Policy regulation and improved train network in Denmark and Europe are necessary
means to make the train travels convenient. Saving potential from substituting ﬂight
travels with trains are very dependent on electriﬁcation of trains and improvement of the
European electricity mix or technology of the trains. Yet, most places the GWP when
travelling by train compared with planes is several times smaller with very high certainty.
Agriculture and Food Habits
12% improvement in the EF AGR scenario was based on sources accounting for econom-
ical low hanging fruits making the scenario realistic to implement. Associated impact
reduction of 0.52 Mt CO2-eq/year should be of same high certainty because it is based on
Eora, but not all agricultural impacts were accounted, since the impact can be inherent
in other industries. Larger savings have also been revealed in other studies (Olesen et al.
, 2018). With 30% eco-eﬃciency improvement in the agricultural sector (lower than sug-
gested by The Danish Society of Engineers, IDA (2009)), the saving increases to 4.8 Mt
CO2-eq/year, without changing food habits (accounting the same inherent uncertainty).
Replacing protein intake from meat and dairy with plant based marginal alternatives as
soybeans and oats in scenario FD FOO ANI (50/100) could practically be initiated to-
morrow, since it is mainly relying on consumer choices. The awareness raising has already
started. On the other hand it requires a drastic change of mindset with possibly many op-
ponents; therefore, transforming 100% of the diet and animal production are unrealistic.
Some animal products cannot be dispensed with, e.g. infant formula, therefore it is diﬃ-
cult to imagine a 100% plant based production (especially if other countries should follow
the same model as in Denmark). The reduced animal production and manure might also
imply a concern if replaced by chemical fertilisers. Only substituting the animal proteins
with soybeans and oats are an extensive simpliﬁcation. The impact would probably be of
large variation depending on the substituting plants. Nevertheless, legumes are expected
to have a main role in the transition towards consuming less meat. The estimated GHG
savings is of high certainty due to high quality of data. Alternatives for protein sources
such as insects, micro algae and starﬁsh are considered on a global scale for future food
production both with the point of view of providing proteins for a growing population and
minimising the environmental footprint. Currently the alternatives are more expensive
compared with current sources of protein. The consumers have to be nudged towards the
more sustainable choices, and larger actors have to demand plant based food from the
farmers, letting the dairy industry and butchers play a smaller role on the market.
Minimising food waste in FD FOO WAS with 50% could be doable. It requires large con-
sumer behaviour changes and companies to exploit food waste and byproducts from own
production and explore opportunities of synergies with other companies. The concepts of
CE and focus on depreciation in the service sector would decrease food waste. The 50%
reduction goal has a medium realisation probability.
90% percent reduction of food waste is theoretically possible, but it requires much more
eﬀort in obtaining high awareness among households and the service sector than the
50% scenario. The associated impact reductions of the case studies are with high cer-
tainty because it is based on actual data of waste types (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet og
Miljøstyrelsen, 2018).
Page 70 of 122
==PAGE:78==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
Sorting household waste increases the awareness of the consumers, since most people
feel guilty when throwing out food. Furthermore, a cultural education in evaluating the
freshness of the food along with cooking skills are needed to avoid household food waste
(Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet og Miljøstyrelsen, 2018). Many technologies, considering
intelligent packaging and refrigerators and tracking of data from farm to fork that will
help reduce the food waste is under development.
Reducing food waste is less critical when people have a plant based diet, since the impact
per kg food is much less and it is much easier to produce a suﬃcient amount of food for
the growing population; however, it should still be prioritised despite a change in diet,
especially considering SDG 2 ”no hunger”.
Scenario FD BEV illustrated the potential impact reduction for a consumption of bev-
erages cut down to 10% of the current average intake per citizen. Consumer behaviours
need to be modiﬁed signiﬁcantly (with possible great opponents), making the scenario
less likely, unless legislation changes in this area. The saving of 1.1 Mt CO2-eq/year is
of medium certainty, because the study is based on actual intake and the impact per
litre beverage is based on other thorough studies (Mogensen et al. , 2016), but other as-
sessments of impact from beverage consumption showed even larger impact Trolle et al.
(2018).
The impact that can be saved if all tobacco was banned, as in scenario FD TOB, is very
certain (however, a little conservative) since the scenario includes most relevant tobacco
sectors in Eora. The scenario can only be realised with strict political regulation in the
short time frame perspective.
Construction and the Built Environment
Reducing residence area by 13% by increasing number of people per area can be obtained
over a longer period of time with augmented popularity of shared houses, apartments
and urban life, and by constructing fewer new buildings that furthermore are designed
with better sharing opportunities. The area of new houses should ensure less area per
person even with population increasing. As the urbanisation is growing the area available
per person will decrease. The GHG savings related to a decrease in area per person are
correlated to the energy eﬃciency of the residences. Reducing the area per person even
more than suggested in this study is doable.
Scenario EF CON WOO investigated potential GHG savings by substituting concrete
with CLT of virgin and reused wood with a rate of 50% and 100%. The GHG savings
from this scenario is very dependent on the substituted energy source when incinerating
the CLT. CLT replacing 50% of the concrete would be a feasible scenario while replacing
100% seems diﬃcult due to diﬀerent properties needed in the diﬀerent environments in
the constructions (e.g.
because of moisture).
The GHG savings can be trusted to a
great extend if the scenario occurs.
The uncertainty mainly lies within the assumed
annual amount of concrete intended for new buildings and the substituting energy source.
Regular timber should substitute concrete in smaller constructions, with lower strength
requirements, since larger GHG savings will occur when using timber compared with CLT
(see Appendix I).
Page 71 of 122
==PAGE:79==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
Other
Scenario EF COU is build upon a reduced emission intensity (40%) in the countries that
Denmark import most from, showing the saving that can be obtained in Denmark by im-
provement in other countries. Further, the GHG saving from combining reduced demand
for non food products and improved eco-eﬃciency in the countries of import (10%, 20%,
30% and 40%) has been examined. It is certain that Denmark depends on other coun-
tries to reduce their emission intensity both with current and reduced import rates. It is
realistic that the countries of import will be able to improve the emission intensity 10%.
This can be suﬃcient for Denmark for reaching absolute sustainability with signiﬁcant
reduced import rates. If the impact from import is reduced further it will allow a larger
GHG budget per person for meat consumption or other preferences. However, the import
of product types and the countries of production can change and therefore the associated
impact from the imported products could both increase and decrease.
Danish production/manufacturing and companies are not targeted through speciﬁc sce-
narios in this thesis other than by energy use.
Some phenomenons like use of (big)
data, IT and artiﬁcial intelligence are expected to optimise processes (generate better
eco-eﬃciency) and deliver eﬀective service. It can also minimise material use and waste,
improve frequency of maintenance (extend service life) and create the base for other inno-
vative solutions that reduce the impact for the services the society demands. Companies
can focus on SDG 17 ”Partnerships for the goals” advantageously to share their strengths
and combine their resources.
”Waste” or streams of byproducts in one company can through synergies become the raw
materials in other companies. The experience in one company e.g. data analysis can be
useful to optimise production or reduce energy/water use in other companies.
The companies should focus on avoiding burden shifting and rebound eﬀects
Combining Scenarios to Reach the Greatest Savings
Several of the scenarios have consequential cascading beneﬁts that are very diﬃcult to
include in the calculations. Changing to a more plant based diet and converting a large
part of the agricultural area into forests, as in scenario FD LUC, create many cascading
beneﬁts illustrated in ﬁgure 5.2 and ﬁgure 5.3. The two break even points at respectively
best case and most possible case reduces the impact with 9.6 and 12.2. The CO2 uptake
in forests are associated with some uncertainty since the carbon uptake diﬀer with soil
quality, type of forest, tree age etc (Nabuurs et al. , 2018). When the forest is matured
the CO2 uptake per year decreases signiﬁcantly. Increasing forest area with proper forest
management can generate and ensure future construction materials. The timber from
matured forests works as a carbon storage in buildings while new forests cultivate to store
carbon again.
Furthermore, this model ﬁts into the expected plan of generating negative impacts after
2050. The known technologies that can withdraw CO2 from the atmosphere on a large
scale all depends on bio resources e.g. implementation of carbon capture and storage
(CCS) at biomass CHP plants (Boot-Handford et al. , 2014) and hydro pyrolysis that
carbonises organic residues from the agriculture (e.g. straw and manure) and produce bio
fuels (Stummann et al. , 2018). Therefore, using the woody residues from the thinnings
in the forests and from the sawmills and the agricultural residues are essential elements
in withdrawing CO2.
Page 72 of 122
==PAGE:80==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
Electrofuels are an alternative to or even a supplement to hydro pyrolysis. Both elec-
trofuels and hydro pyrolysis producing bio fuels can be used in heavy transport (ships
and airplanes) and the byproducts for electrofuels are petrol and diesel, which can be
used in petrol and diesel cars without changing the technical equipment (Rasmussen &
Mortensen, 2018). Electrofuels need CO2, which is ideal to collect from the CHP plants
or at biogas plants. Therefore, biomass plays a role in this technology, too (Rasmussen &
Mortensen, 2018). Furthermore, both technologies need hydrogen, which can be produced
by electrolysis with power from wind turbines and solar PV (Rasmussen & Mortensen,
2018), (Stummann et al. , 2018). The shipping industry has in this study been assumed
to reduce the impact from 3.8 to 0.8 Mt CO2-eq/year. The savings should be realised with
a combination of development of electrofuels, bio fuels and less transport as a result of
reduced demand for import of products. Great uncertainties are related to this estimate
but is important for Denmark to stay within its carrying capacity.
Figure 5.2: A chart, made speciﬁcally for this study, illustrating coherence between consumers demanding
plant based food leading to less necessary area for agriculture, which is aﬀorested instead. When matured,
the timber can be used as construction wood, storing carbon for many years.
The residues can be
incinerated for energy production in CHP pants with CCS or used in hydro pyrolysis for carbonisation
and bio fuels when fully developed (Stummann et al. , 2018). The icons are from ﬂaticon.com.
The GHG saving potential for CCS at CHP plants, electrofuels and hydro pyrolysis for bio
fuels are not quantiﬁed in this study beyond the estimate for shipping. This is due to lim-
ited data and since all technologies are under development. Nevertheless, both electrofuels
and hydro pyrolysis for bio fuels have the potential to reduce the GHG emissions that oc-
cur in the aviation industry, too. The development of these fuels are highly needed, since
few other options are available besides signiﬁcantly reduced use as examined in this study.
The additional forest area have proven very important in the role of reaching an absolute
sustainable level of GHG emissions, while keeping the well-being of the population. This
is due to the CO2 uptake in the forests that makes it possible to elude signiﬁcant GHG
Page 73 of 122
==PAGE:81==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
reductions in the health care and educational sector. These sectors have not been targeted
directly in any scenario.
Decreasing land use for agricultural purposes would further improve the exceedance of the
planetary boundary ”Biosphere integrity” recognised as essential for the Earth system in
nexus with climate change.
The planetary boundaries: ”Land-system change” and ”Biogeochemical ﬂows” would be
pulled back towards their carrying capacities as well, as a result of less area for agricul-
ture. SDG 15 ”Life on land” beneﬁts much from the increased forest areas; especially, if
some of the areas will be classiﬁed as natural forest (however, this leads to a limited CO2
uptake). Biodiversity might not beneﬁt much of aﬀorestation for harvesting for construc-
tion materials.
A healthy plant based diet, bike rides and public transport, less air pollution in cities as
a result of electriﬁed transport, no tobacco and substantially less alcohol will increase the
health parameter in the HDI and reduce the impact from the health care sector as ﬁgure
5.3 illustrates. It will also increase the life expectancy, which is paradoxically since the
population thereby increases and so does the total national GHG emissions.
Figure 5.3: Illustration of the cascading beneﬁts when combining several of the scenarios, indicating that
further GHG reductions can be reached from the scenarios. The illustration is made speciﬁcally for this
study. Icons are from ﬂaticon.com .
Springmann et al. (2016) concluded that if the whole world changed into a plant based
diet the economic savings as a percentage of expected GDP in 2050 would amount to
2.0–4.0% for vegetarian diets and 2.2–4.4% for vegan diets. The main economic savings
would take place in the health care sector and thus result in massive GHG savings mainly
Page 74 of 122
==PAGE:82==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
placed in the developed countries.
Investing in sustainable actions that counteract climate change (like the ones investigated
in this study) generally prove to have a high return of investment (Project Drawdown,
2019). There are no reasonable arguments against e.g. a plant based diet and therefore,
the society should invest in actions and interventions like the ones illustrated in ﬁgure 5.3.
Especially, since it is also related to the approaches and cascading beneﬁts in ﬁgure 5.2.
The challenges considering changing diets are culture aspects and diﬃculties in changing
habits.
5.2
Potential of Circular Economy
The saving from scenario EF TRA CE is very dependent on the assumed reduced distance
driven. By sharing and having electric cars on current and future electricity mix 81-85%
of impact can be saved. When sharing a car the number of km per person could increase
due to the availability of a car, but it could also decrease more than estimated in this
study. The scenario could easily be realised in some areas, but it does not end up with a
total national saving since the entire population is not included due to low feasibility in
some regions.
Scenario EF CON CE proves that it is possible to reduce the impact signiﬁcantly in the
construction sector with CE by going beyond recycling. It is doable to implement CE
and attention has already been drawn to CE in the construction sector. The saving of 7.3
Mt CO2-eq/year is of medium certainty since several initial studies have been examined
(Lejerbo, 2018), but the GHG savings varies much from project to project and considering
either reuse or recycle.
Scenario FD WEA CE (with 90% reduced demand of new clothes) is optimistic and
pushed to the extreme; nevertheless, it is practically doable and only dependent on con-
sumer changes. The GHG saving is very certain since it is modelled in Eora including all
global sectors.
The three scenarios FD FUR CE, FD MAC CE and FD WHO CE all depend on sharing
platforms or company synergies to be realised. Successful companies having a funda-
mental business model considering sharing, leasing and repair have emerged in numbers
during the last few years. It is expected that an even larger focus will be addressed to
this type of businesses. The level of sharing and repair that can be obtained have been
estimated in the scenarios. The reduction in demand is quite uncertain, but the result at
50% reduction in demand are very certain. Platforms for developing shared economy cur-
rently have inherent barriers in taxation, assurance and validation requirements. Increase
in sharing economy would need a behavioural change in society beyond the ﬁrst movers to
really advent. The correlated uncertainty linked to the saving of sharing economy would
be the rebound eﬀect of making a service available to someone not used to have access to
that service.
Reducing the import quantities (of products that do not add value or is not used to it’s
fully potential e.g. as a result of food waste or over-consumption) while improving the
Page 75 of 122
==PAGE:83==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
emission intensities are the easiest savings when considering import.
Reducing the import and thereby the shipping rates might reduce the need for some jobs,
which will decrease the HDI. Jobs will, nevertheless, be created when CE and sharing
economy is implemented. The market for sharing platforms and maintenance companies
will increase as a result of implementation of CE.
The total saving when aggregating all feasible scenarios shows that it is possible to reach
absolute sustainability interval in Denmark as deﬁned in this study under the condition
that the HDI is kept at current level in the scenarios. The HDI can be kept due to assur-
ance of jobs, public health (reduction of unhealthy- and over-consumption) and avoiding
change in the educational sector. Many of the scenarios are not likely to be implemented
from tomorrow or to the degree included in this study; however, other actions than the
ones considered also have potential to generate GHG reductions.
CE have proven to contribute with a saving of 20.7% (or 18.2 Mt CO2-eq/year with-
out including an eco-eﬃciency in other countries) in this study, accounting food waste
as part of CE implementation, but excluding transport and housing. The highest level
of CE, sharing, results in the largest GHG savings, when comparing to the other value
cycles e.g. recycling. If including shared housing and cars the potential of CE can be
much larger than anticipated in this study. CE will in general have a larger inﬂuence
in other impact categories than climate change, since CE reduces extraction of virgin
materials and resources from new production. Electricity and heat will still be used in
CE to recycle/re-manufacture the products. CE has proven important when considering
keeping the needed service level, while reducing the environmental footprint. When the
consumption is reduced mainly as a result of CE and SBM, consumers will have additional
money available. These money should be spend elsewhere, preferably in the entertain-
ment sector, where most sport types, cinemas and theatres have a rather low impact per
monetary unit. This builds on the concept of moving towards ”consuming” experiences
instead of goods to lower the impacts.
5.3
Uncertainties in Modelling Method
Uncertainties are related to the ”safe space” of 0.46-1.7 t CO2-eq/person/year. Earth
tipping elements at risk (such as Greenland ice sheet, the Jet stream and the Amazon
rain forest) have only been enhanced by a very simple method suggest by IPCC. It is very
unsure at what temperature increase most of the tipping elements will occur and what the
exact eﬀect will be. But it is quite sure that if some Earth tipping elements are reached,
it will have a cascading eﬀect on temperature rise and thus increase the risk of triggering
other Earth tipping elements. The ”safe space” is a little conservative considering the
impact per person.year until 2050. This is due to the use of the world population in
2050 for the calculation and not a dynamic number of inhabitants. If the world popu-
lation stabilise at current level the safe space would be 0.65-1.95 t CO2-eq/person/year.
Unfortunately Denmark will use the country’s share of the RCB until 2050 in just 1-3.5
years and therefore reaching 0.46-1.7 t CO2-eq/person in 2050 is not suﬃcient. The more
years it takes to reduce the impact to an absolute sustainable level the sooner a negative
national impact is needed.
Page 76 of 122
==PAGE:84==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
In the initial scope of the study GWP was chosen as the only impact category, which had
led to disregarding all other impact categories. If some scenarios will lead to e.g. a large
change in water consumption or use of scarce metals/resources it has not been touched
upon. Nonetheless, all scenarios have been generated from a perspective of reducing, re-
placing and bio sequestering. Replacing and bio sequestering are the main issues regarding
burden shifting to other impact categories, since reducing will have a decreasing eﬀects
on all impact categories. The expected inﬂuence in some impact categories have been
considered in the development of the scenarios considering replacing and bio sequestering,
e.g. if lithium in the batteries in electric cars would be a limitation or the best alterna-
tive to fossils fuels with the current technology. In general focusing on one technology is
uncertain with regard to burden shifting and creating suﬃcient energy supply with RE
sources. Taking the transport example; only focusing of electriﬁcation sets high demands
for electricity production and car batteries, whereas electrofuels and bio fuels can store
more energy at surplus production and the fuels can be used in the current motors. The
alternative fuels also solve issues from the agricultural sector.
The fact that the study only considers existing technologies is a large limitation. Some
of the initiatives that potentially can result in large GHG savings in Denmark might be
future technologies that are currently under development. The scope of only looking at
existing technologies in the LCA was due to the choice of creating several scenarios across
industries and not focusing on few speciﬁc technologies. Future technologies would take
much more eﬀort to model, since the data does not exists. This would limit the possibility
to look into all essential industries across Denmark.
Eora and the IO model is the best tool to calculate the total impact for a nation. How-
ever, Eora is very limited considering modelling of scenarios. Therefore several modelling
methods have been necessary, which leads to even larger uncertainties than initially ex-
pected. SimaPro has been used to model scenarios following the methods of LCA, but
large uncertainties related to estimates of the material ﬂows and energy use are unavoid-
able when modelling large systems covering whole nations.
Consequential modelling using marginal data has been chosen for the assessments, though
large uncertainties are related to the forecasts and the time frame of the study. Long-term
marginal processes was applied in some scenarios, but these marginal processes could gen-
erally be withdrawn in the long-term (e.g. waste to energy plant). These processes (both
waste to energy and biomass) were modelled due to being included in the sources of the
forecasts for heat and electricity in 2050. Consequential modelling was applied because
all scenarios would make structural changes in their respective sectors.
Embodied energy in buildings are not accounted in the assessment of impact per m2 per
person. An A2020 house have a larger embodied energy level than a C house due to
additional insulation. As this study showed the impact from energy renovation can be
limited depending on the choice of insulation material. Paper- and wood wool showed to
have a signiﬁcant smaller impact than rock wool. Depending on the heating method (and
impact here of) the impact from the construction materials can exceed the impact from
Page 77 of 122
==PAGE:85==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
the saved heat during the life time of the buildings if the materials are produced with e.g.
large amounts of coal as rock wool (Sohn et al. , 2017).
5.4
Back Casting ”How low can you go?”
The BC scenario illustrates that it is possible to supply the basic needs within the ”safe
space” both in 2017 and in 2050, though, implying only a small budget for public services,
health care and education. The basic needs costs 857 kg CO2-eq as best case in 2017,
but relating the impact to the ”safe space” of 460-1700 kg CO2-eq/person/year the lower
boundary of the budget is exceeded just covering the basic needs, and the same picture
shows for 2050. This BC of a disciplined living standard accommodate some limitations,
since it only considers the best case scenario for a low impact for one person. It does not
give a realistic picture of how little the impact per person could be in general. Active
or highly active people would struggle to be at the supposed diet with a probability of
increasing the intake.
Clothing would have a high possibility of being complied with. Since dorms are only for
students many people would not qualify for this housing type; however, apartments and
shared houses would be available for the masses. Apartments have an impact of 15 kg
CO2-eq/year/person and the shared houses reach down to 18 kg CO2-eq/year/person in
the best cases, which is within the same range of impact as dorms. Transportation in the
BC is reasonable to reach in a broader perspective with the issue that travelling distance
diﬀer from person to person. People on the countryside in general would have to travel
longer distances, and commuters can live far from their daily workplaces, but on the other
hand it is possible to have an even smaller need for transport than the BC suggests.
5.5
Questioning HDI and Altered Deﬁnition of Aﬄuence
The modern society’s development relies on correlation of economic growth and energy
use. 33% of the HDI depends on the GNI that has a strong coupling to energy use (in
most countries), which currently leads to a large environmental impact.
This study examined the possibilities to decrease the impact from energy use, making
it possible to keep an equal to current high consumption rate but reducing the impact
per monetary unit with the HDI presumed retained. The high demand for energy use to
reach a HDI of more than 0.7 is, however, very diﬃcult to produce within the national
”safe spaces” despite that the energy production is purely based on RE, as this study
showed for Kenya. Replacing all fossil fuels only by wind power in Denmark (focusing
on electriﬁcation), demands more than 8 times the current energy production from wind
turbines, which is an optimistic estimate since energy transformation losses are not ac-
counted (Energistyrelsen, 2018b).
Improved eﬃciency of RE technologies and energy storage are highly needed. A change in
consumption patterns and a decrease in consumption (of energy) will inﬂuence the level
of HDI of current deﬁnition in which GNI and HDI are proportional. In this study the
scenarios in Denmark proved that the current services can be supplied with less energy
Page 78 of 122
==PAGE:86==
CONTENTS
5. DISCUSSION
and by that a decoupling of energy use and the HDI has been reached.
The HDI can also beneﬁt from a changed consumption pattern because new position op-
portunities replace obsolete jobs caused by a transition in demand for companies that
enhances CE and shared services, but if new jobs remain absent the GNI will be aﬀected
and hence the HDI. A large reduction in GNI could be compensated with a modest in-
crease in either life expectancy or years of schooling due to the weighting of GNI, health
and education in the HDI (Ghislandi et al. , 2019). Further, intrinsic variance in the vari-
ables of HDI would not reveal inequalities within each or across the variables. Generally,
there is strong correlation between GNI, health and education as they are a measure of
the same or similar development because of the current economical social model.
A new measure of well-being curving away particularly from GNI based measures as the
HDI could make it easier to prove that welfare and low environmental impact can go hand
in hand and it could help promoting other political targets than economic growth. A main
purpose would be focusing less on materialistic ownership and consumption and putting
more attention to service and entertainment with a small impact per monetary unit and
promoting happiness as key goal. The SDGs, Gross national happiness (GNH) and general
level of eco-eﬃciency could be used as frameworks for such a measure. Various suggestion
for a well-being measure have appeared in diﬀerent countries (e.g.
New Zealand and
Bhutan); however, the GDP is still the main measure globally (which it has been since
1944), but it is no longer the only one.
Page 79 of 122
==PAGE:87==
CONTENTS
6. CONCLUSION
6
Conclusion
There is mainly one way to decouple human well-being and environmental impact: max-
imise human welfare for the environmental costs by decoupling the economic growth from
environmental impact to maintain the current economic system. Although, moving away
from the current economic growth and measuring in GNH instead of or along with GDP
might enable and increase the chances of a successful decoupling of human well-being and
environmental impact. Denmark’s annual impact is 87.8 Mt CO2-eq (incl. international
transport) but the current carrying capacity is 2.58-9.6 Mt CO2-eq per year with a pop-
ulation of 5.6 mill. people.
Reducing energy consumption and converting energy production into RE plays a key role
in obtaining absolute sustainability, though, requiring development of large scale eﬃcient
energy storage. Taking a global perspective, reducing the need for energy in reaching a
high HDI is essential for all countries; thus, limiting the pressure on and need for RE. The
impact from energy production with RE will exceed the national ”safe spaces” when the
energy demand is kept at current level for a high living standard, as the study of Kenya
revealed.
The technological application and development is an important (however, not suﬃcient)
element in reaching absolute sustainability.
As this study presents, novel technologies within the energy sector reduce the national
impact from electricity by 4.16 Mt CO2-eq/year, and heat by 4.6 Mt CO2-eq/year (excl.
housing). In housing 9.5 Mt CO2-eq/year can be avoided when changing the electricity
and heat sources into RE, while reducing the need for heat with 40% and the area with
13%.
In the Danish transport sector a saving of 17.2 Mt CO2-eq/year can be obtained by elec-
trifying the transport, improving the electricity mix and change of consumer behaviour
towards more public transportation.
Changing into an environmental friendly diet without meat and dairy have the potential
to avoid 6.5 Mt CO2-eq/year, improve human health and reduce the impact from the
health care sector. Changing into a 100% plant based diet and transforming 59% of the
current agricultural area to forest can further withdraw 14 Mt CO2-eq/year. A diet change
including 10% of the current intake of meat/dairy makes it possible to transform 52% of
the agricultural area into forest, which withdraws 12.2 Mt CO2-eq/year, while providing
food for the same amount of people.
Reducing food waste and changing into plant rich diets are furthermore endeavours for
food security and water supply for a growing population, which goes hand in hand with
SDG 2 and 6.
Additionally, increased aﬀorestation will ensure future building materials and create the
baseline for CCS if developed further. The aﬀorestation will positively eﬀect ”Biosphere
integrity”, ”Biogeochemical ﬂows” and ”Land-system change”. This aﬀorestation in com-
bination with reduced impact on climate change is an essential step for improving the
function of the Earth system.
Page 80 of 122
==PAGE:88==
CONTENTS
6. CONCLUSION
Transforming the current linear economy into CE and focusing on using the capacity
of each product more will reduce demand for virgin resources and products. Reducing
demand for: new products within the built environment, production of wholesale goods,
textiles, food waste (90% reduction) and machines revealed a reduction in GHG emissions
of 18.2 Mt CO2-eq/year, which equals 21% of the present Danish impact. Inherent un-
certainties apply in reaching the assessed demand reductions in the CE scenarios. If they
are accomplished CE would certainly be of importance in the transition towards more
sustainable businesses and consumption while targeting SDG 8 and 12 and in reaching
absolute sustainability.
It is possible to cover the basic human needs within the ”safe space” of 0.46-1.7 t CO2-
eq/person/year, shown with the BC scenario in this study.
The basic needs encom-
pass 0.47 t CO2-eq/person/year with current technology eﬃciency, and 0.41 t CO2-
eq/person/year in 2050. The impacts from the basic needs leave very little space for
other services such as education and health care. The CO2-uptake, as discovered in the
FD LUC scenario, is hence a key element. If all initiatives presented in the ”break even
mean” case are successfully implemented Denmark can reach a total impact at most
promising absolute sustainable level including a small personalised budget for e.g. meat.
This study presents possibilities of decoupling of aﬄuence and environmental impacts
when behavioural change of consumers, CE, technology replacement and eco-eﬃciency
accompanies each other. Reaching absolute sustainability in Denmark is doable; however,
every actor must contribute in achieving low environmental cost for the services needed
to preserve the human welfare.
Page 81 of 122
==PAGE:89==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
References
Abagi, N. 2010. Energy Assessment Kenya. https://wecaresolarkenya.wordpress.com/
energy-assessment-kenya/. last seen 09-03-2019.
Atlason, R., & Unnthorsson, R. 2014. Ideal EROI (energy return on investment) deepens
the understanding of energy systems. Elsevier Ltd, 244.
Bjørn, A. 2015. Better, but good enough? Indicators for absolute environmental sustain-
ability in a life cycle perspective. PhD Thesis DTU Management Engineering, 66.
Bjørn, A., Kalbara, P., Nygaard, S. Elsborg, Kabins, S., Jensen, C.L., Birkved, M.,
Schmidt, J., & Hauschild, M.Z. 2018.
Pursuing necessary reductions in embedded
GHG emissions of developed nations: Will eﬃciency improvements and changes in
consumption get us there? Global Environmental Change, 52, 314–324.
Boot-Handford, M.E., Abanades, J.C., Anthony, E.J., Blunt, M.J., Brandani, S., Dowell,
N. Mac, Fern´andez, J.R., Ferrari, M.C., Gross, R., Hallett, J.P., Haszeldine, R.S.,
Heptonstall, P., Lyngfelt, A., Makuch, Z., Mangano, E., Porter, R.T.J., Pourkashanian,
M., Rochelle, G.T., Shah, N., Yao, J.G., & Fennell, P.S. 2014. Carbon capture and
storage update. Energy Environmental Science, 7.
Brown, T., Schierhorn, P.P, & E. Tr¨oster, T. Ackermann. 2016. Optimising the European
transmission system for 77% renewable electricity by 2030. IEEE, 10.
Butler, C.D. 2018.
Climate Change, Health and Existential Risks to Civilization: A
Comprehensive Review (1989–2013). Int J Environ Res Public Health.
Chen, X., & Wang, H. 2018. Life cycle assessment of asphalt pavement recycling for
greenhouse gas emission with temporal aspect. Journal of Cleaner Production, 187.
Christensen, L., & Jensen, T.C. 2008. Korte ture i bil: Kan bilister ændre adfærd til gang
eller cykling. Lyngby: Technical University of Denmark, Transport.
DTU Energy. 2019.
Storing energy with hot stones and a new twist on old ideas
EnergyEnergy storage. https://www.energy.dtu.dk/english/news/2019/03/energy-
storage-in-hot-stones?id=a7998add-10f4-4dd5-90c5-62b8946ce1e8.
Last seen
19-06-2019.
DTU fødevareinstitut. 2018. Alfabetisk fødevareliste. https://frida.fooddata.dk/food/
lists/alphabetic/m?#headingM. last seen 26-03-2019.
Dyrelund, A., Fafner, K., Ulbjerg, F, S. Knudsen, S, B.V, H. Lund, Mathiesen,
& Sørensen, R.M. 2010.
Varmeplan Danmark 2010.
http://vbn.aau.dk/files/
39039850/Varmeplan Danmark 2010 Hovedrapport.pdf. last seen 03-04-2019.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 2017.
Infographic Circular Economy System Diagram.
https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy/infographic.
Last seen 18-02-2019.
Page 82 of 122
==PAGE:90==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Elsner, P. 2019. Continental-scale assessment of the African oﬀshore wind energy poten-
tial: Spatial analysis of an under-appreciated renewable energy resource. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 104, 394–407.
EnergiNet. 2018. HVOR KOMMER STRØMMEN FRA. https://energinet.dk/El/
Miljoedeklarationer/Hvor-kommer-stroemmen-fra. Last seen 08-03-2019.
Energistyrelsen. 2014. Energiscenarier frem mod 2020, 2035 og 2050. https://ens.dk/
sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/faktaark energiscenarier 15052014.pdf.
Last
seen 20-06-2019.
Energistyrelsen. 2018.
Basisfremskrivning 2018:
Energi- og klimafremskrivning til
2030 under fravær af nye tiltag.
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/
basisfremskrivning 2018.pdf. last seen 21-06-2019.
Energistyrelsen. 2018a.
Energistatistik 2017.
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/
Statistik/pub2017dk.pdf. Last seen 08-03-2019.
Energistyrelsen.
2018b.
Hovedtal
fra
Energistyrelsens
foreløbige
energis-
tatistik
for
2018.
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Statistik/
preliminary energy statistics 2018.xlsx. Last seen 17-05-2019.
Energistyrelsen. 2019.
Hvad koster apparatet i strøm?
https://sparenergi.dk/
forbruger/el/dit-elforbrug. last seen 03-04-2019.
Eser, P., Chokani, N., & Abhari, R.S. 2017.
Optimal RES portfolio to achieve 45%
renewable electricity in central Europe by 2030. IEEE.
European-Aluminium. 2018.
Aluminium beverage can recycling at 74%!
https:
//www.european-aluminium.eu/media/2275/european-aluminium-press-release-
2015canrecyclingresult.pdf. last seen 29-03-2019.
European Commission. 2019. Emissions monitoring reporting. https://ec.europa.eu/
clima/policies/strategies/progress/monitoring en. last seen 15-06-2019.
Fagt, S., Matthiessen, J., & Biltoft-Jensen, A. 2018. Hvor meget kød spiser danskerne?
– data fra statistikker og kostundersøgelser. E-artikel fra DTU Fødevareinstituttet, nr.
4, 2018, 1–6.
Fold, N., Kalvig, P., & Rosholm, L.S. 2016.
R˚astoﬀorsyning:
Fra sand og sten
til betonbyggeri. http://mima.geus.dk/wp-content/uploads/Beton-rapport-final-
170117.pdf. last seen 23-04-2019.
Ghislandi, S., Sanderson, W.C., & Scherbov, S. 2019.
A Simple Measure of Human
Development: The Human Life Indicator. Population and Development Review, 45,
219–233.
Global
Footprint
Network.
2003-2019a.
Ecological
Footprint.
https://
www.footprintnetwork.org/our-work/ecological-footprint/.
Last
seen
29-
01-2019.
Page 83 of 122
==PAGE:91==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Global
Footprint
Network.
2003-2019b.
Sustainable
Development.
https://
www.footprintnetwork.org/our-work/sustainable-development/. Last seen 29-01-
2019.
Grøn Energi and Ea Energianalyse. 2016. ENERGIFORSYNING 2030 - Baggrundsrap-
port. Grøn Energi, 50–70.
Guti´errez-Dom`enech, M. 2014. Does a country’s GDP reﬂect its well-being?
Dossier,
La caixa resaerch, Macroeconomics Unit, Strategic Planning and Research Department,
CaixaBank.
Hauschild, M. Z. 2015. Better - but good enough? On the need to consider both eco-
eﬃceincy and eco.eﬀectiveness to gauge industrial sustainability. The 22nd CIRP con-
ference on Life Cycle Engineering, 1–7.
Hauschild, M.Z., Rosenbaum, R.K., Olsen, S.I., & editors. 2018. Life Cycle Assessment
Theory and Practice. Springer.
Heijungs, R., de Koning, A., & Guin´ee, J.B. 2014.
Maximizing aﬄuence within the
planetary boundaries. Life cycle sustainability assessment, 1331–1335.
Hillman, K., Damgaard, A., Eriksson, O., Jonsson, D., & Fluck, L. 2015. Climate Beneﬁts
of Material Recycling: Inventory of Average Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Denmark,
Norway and Sweden. Norden, TemaNord, No. 547.
Hørberg, L., Larsø, P., Rieber, A., Vistisen, D., Gotthjælp, K., Skov, N., Niemann, A.L,
Strufe, N., & Busch, N.J. 2006. Genanvendelse af brugt stenuld. https://www2.mst.dk/
Udgiv/publikationer/2006/87-7052-151-4/pdf/87-7052-152-2.pdf. last seen 29-
03-2019.
IEA Electricity Information. 2018.
Share of electricity generation by fuel Kenya
2016.
https://www.iea.org/statistics/?country=KENYA&year=2016&category=
Electricity&indicator=undefined&mode=chart&dataTable=ELECTRICITYANDHEAT.
Last seen 08-03-2019.
Ingeniøren. 2018.
Elcykler kan erstatte bilen p˚a de længere ture.
https://ing.dk/
artikel/elcykler-kan-erstatte-bilen-paa-de-laengere-ture-212291. last seen
16-03-2019.
IPCC. 2018a. SPECIAL REPORT: GLOBAL WARMING OF 1.5. Chapter 2. https://
www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2018/11/SR15 Chapter2 Low Res.pdf.
Last seen 10-02-2019.
IPCC. 2018b. SPECIAL REPORT: GLOBAL WARMING OF 1.5. Summary for Policy-
makers. https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/summary-for-policy-makers/. Last
seen 10-02-2019.
Isenhour, C., & Feng, K. 2014. Decoupling and displaced emissions: on Swedish con-
sumers, Chinese producers and policy to address the climate impact of consumption.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 320–329.
Page 84 of 122
==PAGE:92==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
John W. Baumgarten Architect. 2018.
SUSTAINABLE DESIGN GOING GREEN.
https://www.jwbarch.com/sustainable-architecture-design-firm/.
Last seen
18-06-2019.
Johnson, J., Reck, B.K, Wang, T., & Graedel, T.E. 2008. The energy beneﬁt of stainless
steel recycling. Energy Policy, 36, 181–192.
Jørgensen, M.S., Remmen, A., Guldmann, E., Brodersen, S., & Pedersen, S. 2018. Slowing
and narrowing resource ﬂows as part of circular economy business strategies. Thesis
presented at Third International Conference of the Sustainable Consumption Research
and Action Initiative (SCORAI), Copenhagen, Danmark.
Kanemoto, K., Moran, D., & Hertwich, E.G. 2016. Mapping the Carbon Footprint of
Nations. Environmental Scinece & Tecnology, 10512–10517.
Kazimierczuk, A.H. 2019. Wind energy in Kenya: A status and policy framework review.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 107, 434–445.
Kiplagatab, J.K., Wanga, R. Z., & Lia, T.X. 2011. Renewable energy in Kenya: Resource
potential and status of exploitation. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15,
2960–2973.
Kuijpers, M. 2019. Circular Economy: Ancient Populations Pioneered the Idea of Re-
cycling Waste 2019. https://www.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/feature-story/circular-
economy-ancient-populations-pioneered-idea-recycling-waste.
last seen 09-
03-2019.
Lambert, J.G., Hall, C.A.S., Balogh, S., Gupta, A., & Arnold, M. January 2014. Energy,
EROI and quality of life. Energy Policy, 64, 153–167.
Landbrug og fødevarer. 2018. STATISTIK/ STATISTICS 2017 mejeri/dairy. Landbrug
og fødevarer, 37.
Lejerbo. 2018.
Om Circle House.
https://www.lejerbo.dk/om-lejerbo/byggeri/
circle-house. last seen 03-06-2019.
Lendager Group. 2018. Upcycle house. https://lendager.com/arkitektur/upcycle-
house/#kontekst. last seen 03-06-2019.
Lenzen, M., Moran, D., Kanemoto, K., & Geschke, A. 2013.
BUILDING EORA: A
GLOBAL MULTI-REGION INPUT–OUTPUT DATABASE AT HIGH COUNTRY
AND SECTOR RESOLUTION. Economic Systems Research, 25.
Maddison, A. 2001. Development Centre Studies, The World Economy A MILLENNIAL
PERSPECTIVE. Springer, Page 30.
Maslow, Abraham. H. 1943. A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 50,
370–396.
Page 85 of 122
==PAGE:93==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Miljø-
og
Fødevareministeriet
og
Miljøstyrelsen.
2018.
Kortlægning
af
sam-
mensætningen
af
dagrenovation
og
kildesorteret
organisk
aﬀald
fra
hushold-
ninger.
https://mst.dk/service/publikationer/publikationsarkiv/2018/
apr/kortlaegning-af-sammensaetningen-af-dagrenovation-og-kildesorteret-
organisk-affald-fra-husholdninger/. last seen 07-05-2019.
Miljø- og Fødevareudvalget 2017-18. 2018. S˚ADAN LIGGER LANDET... – tal om land-
bruget 2017. Danmarks Naturfredningsforening, 6–11.
Miljøstyrelsen. 2017. Ofte stillede spørgsm˚al om metalaﬀald fra husholdningerne. https:
//genanvend.mst.dk/tema/metal/. last seen 29-03-2019.
Miljøstyrelsen.
2018a.
Aﬀaldsstatistikken
2016.
https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/
publikationer/2018/06/978-87-93710-39-9.pdf. last seen 26-03-2019.
Miljøstyrelsen. 2018b. Genanvendelse af knust beton i nye betonkonstruktioner. https://
www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/2018/08/978-87-93710-69-6.pdf. last seen 29-
03-2019.
Miljøstyrelsen.
2018c.
Kortlægning af tekstilﬂows i Danmark,
Miljøprojekt nr.
2017.
https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/2018/06/978-87-93710-32-
0.pdf. last seen 03-04-2019.
Mogensen, L., Knudsen, M.T., & Hermansen, J.E. 2016.
Tabel over fødevarers kli-
maaftryk. Aarhus Universitet, Institut for Agroøkologi. DCA – Nationalt Center for
Fødevarer og Jordbrug.
Moriet, A., Bl´eriot, J., Hubold, S., Opsomer, R., Linder, M., & Banks, I. 2015. Potential
for Denmark as a circular economy a case study from: Delivering the circular economy
– A toolkit for policy makers. last seen 24-06-2019.
Nabuurs, G.J, Arets, E.J.M.M, & Schelhaas, M.J. 2018. Understanding the implications
of the EU-LULUCF regulation for the wood supply from EU forests to the EU. Carbon
Balance and Management, 1–10.
Naturstyrelsen. 2011.
Fremtidens skov - anbefalinger fra Skovpolitisk Udvalg 2011.
Skovpolitisk udvalg, 2011, 16.
Nielsen,
R. 2013.
Tekstile genanvendelsespotentialer Analyse af økonomisk og
miljømæssigt potentiale i genanvendelse af tekstile aﬀaldsfraktioner i Danmark.
Styrelsen for Forskning og Innovation, 38.
Niero, M. 2017. How to perform allocation for recycling processes. last seen 08-04-2019.
Nilsson, A.E., Aragon´es, M.M., Torralvo, F.A., & Dunon, V. 2017. Supplementary Ma-
terials: A Review of Carbon Footprint of Cu and Zn Production from Primary and
Secondary Sources. Minerals, 7.
Nørg˚ard, J., & Xue, J. 2016. Between Green Growth and Degrowth: Decoupling, Rebound
Eﬀects and the Politics for Long-Term Sustainability. Rethinking Climate and Energy
Policies, 267–284.
Page 86 of 122
==PAGE:94==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Obiero, B. 2018. Energy Consumption and the Rising Prices in Kenya: What are the Im-
plications? https://kippra.or.ke/energy-consumption-and-the-rising-prices-
in-kenya-what-are-the-implications/. last seen 21-05-2019.
Olesen, J.E., Petersen, S.O., Lund, P., Jørgensen, U., T. Kristensen, L. Elsgaard,
Sørensen, P., & Lassen, J. 2018. VIRKEMIDLER TIL REDUKTION AF KLIMA-
GASSER I LANDBRUGET, DCA rapport. DCA - Nationalt Center for Fødevarer og
Jordbrug, 130.
Pedersen, C.D., & Deveci, N.N. 2017. Byggeriets Energianalyse 2017. Dansk byggeri, 12.
Plastindustrien. 2015. Hvor meget plast bliver der egentlig genanvendt? – Data om plas-
taﬀald og genanvendelse.
https://plast.dk/meget-plast-egentlig-genanvendt-
data-plastaffald-genanvendelse/. last seen 29-03-2019.
Plastindustrien. 2018.
Hvor meget plast bliver der egentlig genanvendt?
– Data om
plastaﬀald og genanvendelse.
https://copperalliance.eu/benefits-of-copper/
recycling/. last seen 29-03-2019.
Postdan Institute for Cimate Impact Research. 2018. The PRIMAP-hist national his-
torical emissions time series. https://www.pik-potsdam.de/paris-reality-check/
primap-hist/#scenario=histcr&id=dnk&entity=kyotoghgar4.
Last seen 18-02-
2019.
Project Drawdown. 2019.
100 Solutions to Reverse Global Warming.
https://
www.drawdown.org/. last seen 09-06-2019.
Rasmussen, F.J. 2012.
Certiﬁcation of sustainable buildings in a life cycle as-
sessment
perspective.
http://production.datastore.cvt.dk/oafilestore?oid=
575e962ae6f951534a002b83&targetid=56d754eabf19455102002253. last seen 03-04-
2019.
Rasmussen, K.D., & Mortensen, A.W. 2018. ”Tragedy of the Planet?” Characterizing Cli-
mate Change as a Tragedy of the Commons Type of Challenge. University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
Scarlata, N., Motolaa, V., Dallemandab, J. F., Monforti-Ferrarioa, F., & Moforb, Linus.
2015. Evaluation of energy potential of Municipal Solid Waste from African urban
areas. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 50, 1269–1286.
Schmidt, J. H., & Mu˜nos, I. 2014. The carbon footprint of Danish production and consump-
tion: Literature review and model calculations. http://vbn.aau.dk/files/196725552/
dk carbon footprint 20140305final.pdf. last seen 02-04-2019.
Sohn, J., L. Kalbar, P. Pradip, Banta, G.T., & Birkved, M. 2017. Life-cycle based dy-
namic assessment of mineral wool insulation in a Danish residential building application.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 142, 3243–3253.
SparEnergi.dk.
2018.
Vaskemaskiner.
https://pioti.unilever.com/PIOTI/DA/
p4.asp?sele\ctCountry=DK&language=DA&productid=3055545. last seen 09-06-2019.
Page 87 of 122
==PAGE:95==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Springmann, M.H., Godfray, C.J., Rayner, M., & Scarborough, P. 2016. Analysis and
valuation of the health and climate change cobeneﬁts of dietary change. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 4146–4151.
Statistic Denmark. 2018.
DER SÆLGES MINDRE ØL OG VIN, MEN FLERE
CIGARETTER. https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyt/NytHtml?cid=27167. last
seen 01-06-2019.
Statistic Denmark. 2019.
REKORD˚
AR FOR FLYPASSAGERER I 2018.
https:
//www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyt/NytHtml?cid=27060. last seen 26-04-2019.
Steﬀen, W., Richardson, K., Rockstr¨om, J., Cornell, S., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E.M., Biggs,
R., Carpenter, S.R., de Vries, W., de Wit, C.A., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J.,
Mace, G.M., Persson, L.M., Ramanathan, V., Reyers, B., & S¨orlin, S. 2015. Planetary
boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. Science, 347.
Stummann, M.Z, Høj, M., Jensen, P.A., Gabrielsend, J., Clausen, L.R, & Jensen, A.D.
2018. Fremstilling af CO2-neutral benzin og diesel - ved katalytisk hydropyrolyse af
biomasse - en spændende teknologi med mulighed for energilagring. Dansk Kemi, 18–20.
Sundhed.dk.
2016.
Danske næringsstofsanbefalinger.
https://www.sundhed.dk/
sundhedsfaglig/laegehaandbogen/sundhedsoplysning/sundhedsoplysning/
kost/danske-naeringsstofsanbefalinger/. last seen 19-03-2019.
The Danish Society of Engineers, IDA. 2009.
The IDA Climate Plan 2050.
https:
//ida.dk/media/2427/klima hovedrapport uk - web 0.pdf. last seen 10-06-2019.
Tokni
DTU
management.
2018.
Carbon
budget
Paris.
http://
energiaftalen.tokni.com/. Last seen 08-03-2019.
Transportr˚adet. 2001. DANSKERNES FLYVANER - en survey. http://www.trg.dk/
transportraadet/pup/RA/RA-01-02.pdf. last seen 26-04-2019.
Trolle, E., Lassen, A.D., Fagt, S., Christensen, L.M, & Mogensen, L. 2018. P˚a vej mod
en sundere og mere bæredygtig kost. E-artikel fra DTU Fødevareinstituttet, 1–17.
Tschirley, D., Reardon, T., Dolislager, M., & Snyder, J. 2015. The Rise of a Middle Class in
East and Southern Africa: Implications for Food System Transformation. International
Development, 27, Issue 5, 628–646.
UNDP. 2018a.
Dashboard 4. Environmental sustainability.
http://hdr.undp.org/en/
composite/Dashboard4. Last seen 08-02-2019.
UNDP.
2018b.
Technical
notes,
Calculating
the
human
development
in-
dices—graphical
presentation.
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/
hdr2018 technical notes.pdf. Last seen 06-02-2019.
Unilever. 2016. Neutral Storvask, vaskepulver. https://pioti.unilever.com/PIOTI/DA/
p4.asp\?selectCountry=DK&language=DA&=3055545. last seen 09-06-2019.
Page 88 of 122
==PAGE:96==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Vejdirektoratet.
2017.
NØGLETAL
OM
VEJTRANSPORT.
http://
www.vejdirektoratet.dk/DA/viden og data/statistik/trafikken%20i%20tal/
hvor meget korer vi/Sider/Persontransportarbejde.aspx. last seen 24-04-2019.
Wang., P., Kara, S., & Hauschild, M.Z. 2018. Role of manufacturing towards achieving
circular economy: The steel case. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology, 21–24.
WorldData.info. 2018. Energy consumption in Kenya. https://www.worlddata.info/
africa/kenya/energy-consumption.php. Last seen 08-03-2019.
Page 89 of 122
==PAGE:97==
REFERENCES
A. APPENDIX: BASELINE ASSESSMENT FOR KENYA
A
Appendix: Baseline assessment for Kenya
Figure A.1: The baseline impact from Eora illustrating the GHG contribution from import by country
showcasing the 11 most contributing countries for Kenya.
Figure A.2: The baseline impact from Eora illustrating the GHG contribution from import by sector by
country presenting the 16 most contributing sectors by country for Kenya.
Page 90 of 122
==PAGE:98==
REFERENCES
B. APPENDIX: NAMING OF SCENARIOS
B
Appendix: Naming of scenarios
Naming of scenarios
Abbreviation
Explanation
Demand or eﬃciency
EF
Eco-eﬃciency or emission intensity
is related to an improvement or
change in technology
FD
Final demand is related
to consumer habits
Primary sector
ENE
Energy production
HEA
Heat Production
TRA
Transport
CON
Construction
FOO
Food
AGR
Agriculture
LUC
Land use change
WEA
Textile and wearing apparel
COU
Most importing countries
BEV
Beverages
PUB
Public transport
FRE
Freight
TOB
Tobacco
Area of concern
AIR
Flights
ANI
Animal products
WAS
Waste
VEG
Food excl. meat and dairy
WOO
Wood
HOU
Housing and energy savings
FUR
Furniture
MAC
Machines
WHO
Whole sale
Table B.1: Abbreviation and explanations of naming of scenarios.
Page 91 of 122
==PAGE:99==
REFERENCES
C. APPENDIX: SCENARIOS
C
Appendix: Scenarios
Name of
Scenario
Primary sector
Product/service
description
Reference
ﬂow
Substituting
processes
Risk for rebound
eﬀect
Modelled in
EF ENE
Energy
Forecast made by
Energistyrelsen
and DTU Tokni for the
energy sources in 2050
1 kWh
None
When the electricity has a
smaller foot-print per kWh,
the focus on energy
savings could phase out
SimaPro
EF HEA
Energy
Forecast for DH mix
for 2050 and HP
based on Energistyrelsens
energy mix of 2050
1 kWh
None
None
SimaPro
EF HOU
Construction
and
energy saving
Insulation of old
constructions.
Assuming 40%
heat savings.
Annual
heating
in dwellings
residents keep the
heating
appliances at the same
temperature and
wear less clothes/shoes
SimaPro
EF TRA
Transport
and energy
Impact from diﬀerent
transport methods.
Electric
cars/trains/busses
instead of regular
diesel/petrol vehicles
and energy grid from
Energistyrelsen/baseline
1 person.km
None
Could occur for cars if
people think the impact
is less per km
therefore it is
alright to drive more
SimaPro
FD TRA
Transport
Bikes 4%, busses 4%
and trains 4% su-
bstitute 12% car transport.
13455 km/person
in average a year.
13455
person.km
Busses and
bike
transport
substitute car
transport.
None
SimaPro
Table C.1: Scenario descriptions of general scenarios in Denmark.
Page 92 of 122
==PAGE:100==
REFERENCES
C. APPENDIX: SCENARIOS
Name of
Scenario
Primary sector
Product/service
description
Reference
ﬂow
Substituting
processes
Risk for rebound
eﬀect
Modelled in
FD TRA PUB
Transport
Public transport
substitutes 50%
of the transport
by car
13455
person.km
50% less transport
by car (petrol).
Public transport
substitutes
car transport.
None
SimaPro
FD EF TRA PUB
Transport
Public transport
substitutes
50% of the transport
by car and all
vehicles are
electriﬁed with the
future electricity
mix (Energistyrelsen).
13455
person.km
50% less transport
by car (petrol).
Public transport
substitutes
car transport.
MCs are changed
into electric bicycles.
None
SimaPro
EF TRA FRE
Transport
90% of truck transport
is substituted with
train transport
Same service
is provided
Trains substitute
trucks
None
SimaPro
FD TRA AIR50
Transport
50% of the total ﬂight
distance is
changed into
train distance.
32640 mill.
person.km
Train travels
substitute ﬂights
People might travel
more, however,
considering
the additional time
needed there is
only a small risk.
SimaPro
FD TRA AIR90
Transport
90% of the total
ﬂight distance
is changed
into train distance.
32640 mill.
person.km
Train travels
substitute ﬂights
People might travel
more, however
considering
the additional
time needed there
is only a small risk.
SimaPro
Table C.2: Scenario descriptions of general scenarios in Denmark.
Page 93 of 122
==PAGE:101==
REFERENCES
C. APPENDIX: SCENARIOS
Name of
Scenario
Primary sector
Product/service
description
Reference
ﬂow
Substituting
processes
Risk for rebound
eﬀect
Modelled in
FD EF TRA
AIR90 &
EF AIR
Transport
90% of the total
ﬁght distance
is changed into
train travel and
the European trains
are changed into
electric trains,
which runs on
a future electricity
mix for Europe.
In scenario EF AIR
the electricity in the
production of the air
crafts are changed
into future
electricity mix.
32641 mill.
person.km
Train travels
substitute ﬂights
People might
travel more,
however,
considering
the additional
time needed there
is only a small risk.
SimaPro
EF AGR(12/30)
Agriculture
12%/30% eco-
eﬃciency in
agriculture
None
Eora
FD FOO ANI100
FD FOO ANI50
Food
Consumer awareness
towards a plant based
diet with less meat
and dairy. A 50 %
and 100 % reduction
in meat and dairy
consumption.
The meat and dairy
is replaced by grains
and beans
supplying the same
amounts of proteins.
21/42 g protein
from meat
and dairy is
substituted
with
/grains/beans
Beans and grains
substitute
meat production
No or less meat
might result
in more car
or air transport,
because people
think they
have compensated
for the extra travel.
SimaPro
Table C.3: Scenario descriptions of general scenarios in Denmark.
Page 94 of 122
==PAGE:102==
REFERENCES
C. APPENDIX: SCENARIOS
Name of
Scenario
Primary sector
Product/service
description
Reference
ﬂow
Substituting
processes
Risk for rebound
eﬀect
Modelled in
FD FOO WAS50
FD FOO WAS90
FD FOO WAS VEG90
Food waste
Reduce food waste
by 50% and 90%
and change
into plant diet
700 000 ton
of food waste
None
None
SimaPro/
litterature
FD TOB
Tobacco
100% reduction
of tobacco.
The service is
removed and
public heath is
improved
None
People eat/
drink
instead
Eora
FD BEV
Beverage
90% reduction of
beverage
consumption
The service is reduced
but reducing the
consumption of
beverages
improves public heath,
reduces overweight
(over consumption)
None
People eat
more
sweets instead
Eora
FD LUC
Forest
74% of the agricultural
area for animal
production has
been changed
to forest area
and 26% into
plant based
food production.
Food for 17 mill
people
Plant food
substitutes
animal
production
None
SimaPro
FD CON ARE
Construction
Impact per person
for various housing
types of various
sizes heated with
respectively
DH and HP.
Living area/person
None
Saving money
on heating expenses
due to reduced area
results in
more money for
consuming other
products
SimaPro
Table C.4: Scenario descriptions of general scenarios in Denmark.
Page 95 of 122
==PAGE:103==
REFERENCES
C. APPENDIX: SCENARIOS
Name of
Scenario
Primary sector
Product/service
description
Reference
ﬂow
Substituting
processes
Risk for rebound
eﬀect
Modelled in
EF CON WOO
Construction
CLT substitute
concrete in new
constructions
Same amount of
new constructions
can be built
None
SimaPro
EF COU
Import
Sharing technology
and knowledge
with countries DK
imports from.
Eﬃciency improvement
of 40% of the
countries that DK
import most from;
Germany, Sweden,
Netherlands, France,
Italy, Poland, USA,
China, Belgium and India
No change in demand,
thus, the reference ﬂow
is the same, but the
impact from the
imported products
are reduced.
None
None
Eora
Table C.5: Scenario descriptions of general scenarios in Denmark.
Page 96 of 122
==PAGE:104==
REFERENCES
C. APPENDIX: SCENARIOS
Name of scenario
Primary
sector
Product/service
description
Reference
ﬂow
Substituting
processes
Risk for
rebound eﬀect
Modelled
in SimaPro
/Eora
EF TRA CE
Transport
Road transport for
families living at
the country side or
villages. Two families
share one car, and drive
30 000 km a year
(modelled both with
electric- and petrol car).
Compared with transport
of two families in
regular petrol
cars 20,000 km
per car. Two electric
bikes substitutes the
10,000 km
Transport two
families of four
20 000 km /
year per family.
5000 km
at electric
bicycle
per family
Families not
using
car will start
using car
SimaPro
EF CON
CE Rec
Construction
Recycling of various
construction and civil
engineering materials.
This scenario is based
on waste volume
streams from
Miljøstyrelsen.
Annual average
waste mass in ton
for 2014-2016
for the included
materials
Current
production
of the material
None
Literature
EF CON
CE Eora
Construction
Recycling of various
construction and
civil engineering
materials.
This scenario is based on
impacts from the major
construction- and
construction
material sectors in Eora.
Average waste
mass in tons for
2014-2016 for
the included
materials
Current
production
of the material
None
Eora
Table C.6: Descriptions of CE scenarios
Page 97 of 122
==PAGE:105==
REFERENCES
C. APPENDIX: SCENARIOS
Name of scenario
Primary
sector
Product/service
description
Reference
ﬂow
Substituting
processes
Risk for
rebound eﬀect
Modelled
in SimaPro
/Eora
EF CON CE
Construction
All materials are reused
or recycled to a large
extent
All construction
materials in DK
Reused/recycled
materials
substitute
virgin materials
None
Eora
FD WEA CE
Textile
Consumer awareness
buying 90% less clothes.
Service of dressing
everyday is kept.
Over-consumption
is removed
90% less
new clothes
Buying more
clothes than
needed
when buying
reused due to
cheaper prices
Eora
FD FUR CE
Furniture
Consumer awareness,
buying less and better
quality or used
furniture
result in a 50%
reduction in need
for new furniture
Same services is
provided
None
None
Eora
FD MAC CE
Large machinery
Increasing consumer
awareness.
Leasing machines to
reach a higher
utilisation rate,
estimated reduction
in demand 50%.
Same services is
provided
None
People have more
money to spend
else were
Eora
FD WHO CE
Whole sale
Increasing consumer
awareness. Leasing of
non-food products to
reach a higher utilisation
rate results in a
reduction in demand
of 50%
Same service is
provided
None
People have
more money
to spend else were
Eora
Table C.7: Description of CE scenarios.
Page 98 of 122
==PAGE:106==
REFERENCES
C. APPENDIX: SCENARIOS
Name of scenario
Share
Maintain
Reuse/redistribute
Remanufacture
Recycle
EF TRA CE
Two families
share one car
Regular maintenance
of car once a year.
Reuse/redistribute parts
(seats, electronic parts, tyres)
in other cars and other sectors
Refurbish if larger
damages occurs
Scrape of car
(metal parts)
EF CON
CE Rec
Recycle all
materials
EF CON
CE Eora
Recycle all
materials
Table C.8: Description of CE scenarios.
Name of scenario
Share
Maintain
Reuse/redistribute
Re-manufacture
Recycle
EF CON CE
Reuse of cutout or
disassemble blocks
in new constructions
or civil engineering.
Reuse of structural
wood for new
purposes in construction.
Reuse of existing
load bearing
construction
in building
transformations.
Re-manufacture
windows
Crush concrete
as substitution
for gravel and sand
(aggregates)
in new concrete.
FD WEA CE
Sharing platforms.
Repair clothes
to have a longer
service life.
Buying more
second hand
clothes
Change the shape
of the textiles
and reuse as wipes
Incineration or
recycling of ﬁbres
FD FUR CE
Platforms to sell
and buy used
products
Maintain
to extent the
life time.
Sell/resell if the quality
is alright after initial
service life
Recycle the parts
that can be recycled
at EoL
FD MAC CE
Sharing platforms
Maintain
to extent the
life time.
Sell/resell if the quality
is alright after initial
service life
Recycle the parts
that can be recycled
at EoL
FD WHO CE
Sharing platforms
Maintain
to extent the
life time.
Sell/resell if the quality
is alright after initial
service life
Recycle the parts
that can be recycled
at EoL
Table C.9: Descriptions of CE scenarios.
Page 99 of 122
==PAGE:107==
REFERENCES
D. APPENDIX: BACK CASTING SCENARIO: FOOD
D
Appendix: Back casting scenario: Food
Figure D.1: GWP in kg CO2-eq pr calorie in diﬀerent types of food. Data from (Sundhed.dk, 2016) and (Mogensen et al. , 2016).
Page 100 of 122
==PAGE:108==
REFERENCES
D. APPENDIX: BACK CASTING SCENARIO: FOOD
Figure D.2: GWP pr kg food considering diﬀerent types of food. Data from (Sundhed.dk, 2016) and (Mogensen et al. , 2016)
Page 101 of 122
==PAGE:109==
REFERENCES
D. APPENDIX: BACK CASTING SCENARIO: FOOD
Figure D.3: GWP for one g of the representative animal based types of food. Showing the contribution divided into a weighted share between fat, protein
and carbohydrate. The data is a combination of (Sundhed.dk, 2016) and (Mogensen et al. , 2016)
Page 102 of 122
==PAGE:110==
REFERENCES
D. APPENDIX: BACK CASTING SCENARIO: FOOD
Figure D.4: GWP for one g of the representative plant based types of food. Showing the contribution divided into a weighted share between fat, protein
and carbohydrate. Be aware that the y-axis has another range than ﬁgure 3.7. The data is a combination of (Sundhed.dk, 2016) and (Mogensen et al. ,
2016)
Page 103 of 122
==PAGE:111==
REFERENCES
E. APPENDIX: SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
E
Appendix: Sensitivity Analysis
Energistyrelsen
Electricity 2050
kg CO2-eq/kWh
Output + 10%
Delta output
Input + 10%
Input
Delta input
| S |
Hydro power 10%
0.043
0
0.03256
0.0296
0.00296
0
PV roof 10%
0.044
-0.001
0.04554
0.0414
0.00414
0.2326
Wind (oﬀshore) 1-3 MW 10%
0.044
-0.001
0.385
0.35
0.035
0.2326
Wind (onshore) 1-3 MW 10%
0.043
0
0.05104
0.0464
0.00464
0
Biogas 10%
0.043
0
0.07601
0.0691
0.00691
0
PV open inst. 10%
0.044
-0.001
0.11
0.1
0.01
0.2326
Biomass 10%
0.045
-0.002
0.3003
0.273
0.0273
0.4651
Nuclear 10%
0.043
0
0.02354
0.0214
0.00214
0
Waste Incineration 10%
0.043
0
0.07601
0.0691
0.00691
0
Output
| Savg|=
0.14535
Baseline
0.043
Table E.1: Sensitivity analysis of the electricity mix by Energistyrelsen for 2050. Showing that there are no sensitive processes since no process have |S| ≥5
and average |S| ≤3.
S = ∆Output/Output
∆Input/Input
(E.1)
Page 104 of 122
==PAGE:112==
REFERENCES
E. APPENDIX: SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
DH fossil free mix
2050
[kg CO2-eq]
Output + 10%
Delta output
Input + 10%
Input
Delta input
| S |
Waste Incineration
0.133
0.010
0.186
0.169
0.017
0.81
Biomass
0.124
0.001
0.277
0.252
0.025
0.08
Biogas
0.124
0.001
0.025
0.022
0.002
0.08
Solar Collector
0.124
0.001
0.141
0.128
0.013
0.08
Heat Pump
0.124
0.001
0.179
0.163
0.016
0.08
Geothermal
0.124
0.001
0.105
0.096
0.010
0.08
Baseline
Output
0.123
| Savg|=
0.20
Table E.2: Sensitivity analysis of the DH mix for 2050. The waste incineration process makes the DH fossil free mix sensitive, since it has |S| ≥0.5. Despite
the average |S| ≤3.
Page 105 of 122
==PAGE:113==
REFERENCES
F. APPENDIX: FOREST AREA
F
Appendix: Forest Area
Total
agricultural
area [ha]
Current
plant
based food
production
area [ha]
Additional plant
based food area
due to aﬀore-
station of animal
production [ha]
Aﬀorestation
area [ha]
New area
for animal
production
[ha]
100% of animal
production area
changed to
forest and plant
based food
production
2,625,093
525,019
546,019
1,554,055
-
50% of animal
production area
changed into
forest
2,625,093
525,019
378,013
1,050,037
672,024
Table F.1: Overview of area distribution when changing the entire area of animal production (80%)(Miljø-
og Fødevareudvalget 2017-18, 2018) into plant based food production and forest and changing 50% of the
animal production area into forest.
In table F.1 two scenarios of either going entirely plant based in the Danish food produc-
tion and consumption or a more combined approach ﬁnding the break even point between
plant and animal based production when only 50% of the animal based production is
changed into forest.
When half of the agricultural area for animal production is aﬀorested, the break even
point between plant and animal based food to produce food for 17 mill. people is 18%
for plant based food and 32% for animal based food.
These ﬁndings have been used in linear interpolation to determine the break even area
needed for forest, plant based food production and production of animal products at 5.6
and 9.6 Mt CO2-eq/year in Denmark presented F.2.
50% aﬀorestation
Upper boundary
Mean
Impact 2050
-13% area
Aﬀorestation increase [%]
50
64
87
100
Total Danish impact
[Mt CO2-eq]
11.98
9.6
5.6
3.26
Table F.2: Necessary aﬀorestation area for the mean and upper boundary of the carrying capacity
from linear interpolation between 50% and 100% aﬀorestation respectively. The impact from the 100%
aﬀorestation scenario is based on the result from table 4.24. The impact from the 50% aﬀorestation
scenario is calculated by reducing the impact from aﬀorestation with 50% (-14 Mt CO2-eq/year to -7 Mt
CO2-eq/year) and adding 50% of the current impact from meat and dairy.
Page 106 of 122
==PAGE:114==
REFERENCES
G. APPENDIX: DETAILED ANALYSIS OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
HOUSING
G
Appendix: Detailed analysis of energy consump-
tion in housing
Table G.1 to G.5 are used as data in the following assessments/tables in this Appendix
and Appendix H.
Area Interval [m2]
No. of people
Area Interval [m2]
No. of people
Shared housing
30-40
1
Single family
house
80-90
1
45-65
2
85-110
2
65-85
3
95-120
3
80-120
4
115-140
4
100-145
5
130-170
5
Apartment
30-35
1
Terrace house
70-90
1
45-55
2
75-95
2
50-75
3
85-105
3
70-90
4
90-115
4
85-110
5
100-130
5
Table G.1: Overview of the four diﬀerent housing types with area intervals with the related number of
people with aﬃliation to the area. The areas are estimated speciﬁcally for this study.
Housing Type
Refrigerator
incl. freezer
Oven
TV
Dishwasher
Internet
Lighting
Apartment < 60 m2
X
X
X
X*
X
X
Apartment > 60 m2
X
X
X
X
X
X
Single family house
X
X
X
X
X
X
Terrace house
X
X
X
X
X
X
Shared housing
X
X
X
X
X
X
Table G.2: Assumed estimates of utilities to be present in the diﬀerent housing types.
*Some apartments were assumed not to have installed some utilities, resulting in a lower average of
electricity use.
Housing Type
Refrigerator
incl. freezer
Oven
TV
Dishwasher
Internet
Lighting
Apartment < 60 m2
140
80
35
60
70
8 kWh/m2
Apartment > 60 m2
160
120
35
210
70
8 kWh/m2
Single family house
160
120
35
310
70
8 kWh/m2
Terrace house
160
120
35
310
70
8 kWh/m2
Shared housing
160
120
35
310
70
8 kWh/m2
Table G.3: Energy consumption for the various utilities during one year [kWh/year]. Refrigerator, oven
and dishwasher is based on A+++ energy consumption and TV is based on A++ energy consumption
from Energistyrelsen (2019).
Page 107 of 122
==PAGE:115==
REFERENCES
G. APPENDIX: DETAILED ANALYSIS OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
HOUSING
Housing
Type
Refrigerator
incl. freezer
Oven
TV
Dishwasher
Internet
Lighting
Apartment
< 60 m2
Kølefryseskab
150/75 liter
Elovn
65 liter
38”
Bord-
opvaskemaskine
Internet-
forbindelse
LED
Apartment
> 60 m2
Kølefryseskab
200/100 liter
Elovn
65 liter
39”
Smal
Opvaskemaskine
Internet-
forbindelse
LED
Single family
house
Kølefryseskab
200/100 liter
Elovn
65 liter
40”
Alm.
Opvaskemaskine
Internet-
forbindelse
LED
Terrace house
Kølefryseskab
200/100 liter
Elovn
65 liter
41”
Alm.
Opvaskemaskine
Internet-
forbindelse
LED
Shared housing
Kølefryseskab
200/100 liter
Elovn
65 liter
42”
Alm.
Opvaskemaskine
Internet-
forbindelse
LED
Table G.4: Type of utility chosen from (Energistyrelsen, 2019). Refrigerator, oven and dishwasher is based
on A+++ energy consumption and TV is based on A++ energy consumption from Energistyrelsen (2019).
The table is not translated due to having the ability to retrieve the data from the reference source.
Housing Type
Refrigerator
incl. freezer
[hr/day]
Oven
[use/week]
TV
[hr/day]
Dishwasher
[use/week]
Internet
[hr/day]
Lighting
[hr/day]
Apartment
< 60 m2
24
4
2.5
2
24
3.5
Apartment
> 60 m2
24
6
2.5
5
24
3.5
Single family
house
24
6
2.5
7
24
3.5
Terrace house
24
6
2.5
7
24
3.5
Shared housing
24
6
2.5
7
24
3.5
Table G.5: Estimated use of utilities either hr/day or times/week.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Electricity
Use Range
[kWh]
Heating
Use Range
[kWh]
30-40
1
935-1015
6500-7600
45-65
2
1055-1215
8150-10350
65-85
3
1215-1375
10350-12550
80-120
4
1335-1655
12000-16400
100-145
5
1495-1855
14200-19150
Table G.6: Calculated heat and electricity consumption for shared houses of various sizes.
Page 108 of 122
==PAGE:116==
REFERENCES
G. APPENDIX: DETAILED ANALYSIS OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
HOUSING
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Electricity
Use Range
[kWh]
Heating
Use Range
[kWh]
30-35
1
625-665
6500-7050
45-55
2
745-825
8150-9250
50-75
3
785-1195
8700-11450
70-90
4
1155-1315
10900-13100
85-110
5
1275-1475
12550-15300
Table G.7: Calculated heat and electricity consumption for apartments of various sizes based on table
G.3.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Electricity
Use Range
[kWh]
Heating
Use Range
[kWh]
80-90
1
1335-1415
12000-13100
85-110
2
1375-1575
12550-15300
95-120
3
1455-1655
13650-16400
115-140
4
1615-1815
15850-18600
130-170
5
1735-2055
17500-21900
Table G.8: Calculated heat and electricity consumption for single family houses of various sizes.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Electricity
Use Range
[kWh]
Heating
Use Range
[kWh]
70-90
1
1255-1415
10900-13100
75-95
2
1295-1455
11450-13650
85-105
3
1375-1535
12550-14750
90-115
4
1415-1615
13100-15850
100-130
5
1495-1735
14200-17500
Table G.9: Calculated heat and electricity consumption for terrace houses of various sizes.
Page 109 of 122
==PAGE:117==
REFERENCES
G. APPENDIX: DETAILED ANALYSIS OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
HOUSING
Figure G.1: Comparison of GWP for shared housing with energy label C for scenario FD CON HEA with
HP (2050 Energistyrelsen electricity mix) and DH (2050 fossil free mix) respectively as heating source.
The ranges indicate a variety in impact correlated with the varying size ranges of the shared houses.
Electricity is also included. Impacts are assessed in SimaPro.
Figure G.2: Comparison of GWP for shared housing with energy label A2020 for scenario FD CON HEA
with HP (Energistyrelsen electricity mix) and DH (2050 fossil free) respectively as heating source. The
ranges indicate a variety in impact correlated with the varying size ranges of the shared houses. Electricity
is also included. Impacts are assessed in SimaPro.
Page 110 of 122
==PAGE:118==
REFERENCES
G. APPENDIX: DETAILED ANALYSIS OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
HOUSING
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
30-40
1
126-144
842-981
126-144
842-981
45-65
2
153-189
1051-1329
76-94
529-665
65-85
3
189-224
1329-1607
63-75
443-526
80-120
4
215-287
1538-2094
54-72
384-524
100-145
5
251-332
1816-2442
50-66
363-488
Table G.10: GHG emissions for shared housing with HP (2050 Energistyrelsen electricity mix) and DH
(2050 fossil free mix) per year and per person per year. Modelled in SimaPro. The ranges varies with
the area intervals.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
30-35
1
112-121
829-898
112-121
829-898
45-55
2
139-157
1037-1177
70-79
519-588
50-75
3
148-202
1107-1464
49-67
369-488
70-90
4
193-229
1394-1673
48-57
349-418
85-110
5
220-265
1603-1951
44-53
321-390
Table G.11: GHG emissions for apartments with HP (2050 Energistyrelsen electricity mix) and DH (2050
fossil free mix) per year and per person per year. Modelled in SimaPro. The ranges varies with the area
intervals.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
80-90
1
215-233
1538-1677
215-233
1538-1677
85-110
2
224-269
1607-1955
112-135
804-978
95-120
3
242-287
1747-2094
81-96
582-698
115-140
4
278-323
2025-2373
70-81
506-593
130-170
5
305-377
2234-2790
61-75
447-558
Table G.12: GHG emissions for single family houses with HP (2050 Energistyrelsen electricity mix) and
DH (2050 fossil free mix) per year and per person per year. Modelled in SimaPro. The ranges varies
with the area intervals.
Page 111 of 122
==PAGE:119==
REFERENCES
G. APPENDIX: DETAILED ANALYSIS OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
HOUSING
Area
Range [m2]
No. of
people
per house
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
70-90
1
198-233
1399-1677
198-233
1399-1677
75-95
2
206-242
1468-1747
103-121
734-873
85-105
3
224-260
1607-1886
75-87
536-629
90-115
4
233-278
1677-2025
58-70
419-506
100-130
5
251-305
1816-2234
50-61
363-447
Table G.13: GHG emissions for terrace houses with HP (2050 Energistyrelsen electricity mix) and DH
(2050 fossil free mix) per year and per person per year. The ranges varies with the area intervals.
Figure G.3: Annual GHG emissions range per person for the four housing types with diﬀerent sizes with
energy label C based on 2050 fossil free DH as heat source. Modelled in SimaPro.
Total no. of units
Mean area [m2]
Total area [m2]
Single family houses
1,164,718
151
175,872,418
Terrace houses
400,001
93
37,200,093
Apartments
1,039,142
78
81,053,076
Sum
2,603,861
-
294,125,587
Table G.14: Overview of housing types and related information from Statistics Denmark.
In an example, moving or changing 50% of the single family houses to shared housing
resulted in a 13% reduction of the area in m2. The result was calculated by multiplying
50% of the number of units of single family houses by the average area of the shared
houses 87.5 m2 yielding 50,956,413 m2. This was added to 50% of the total area of terrace
houses and apartments, resulting in 257,145,791 m2 which is 87% of the sum of the total
Page 112 of 122
==PAGE:120==
REFERENCES
G. APPENDIX: DETAILED ANALYSIS OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
HOUSING
area from table G.14; thus, resulting i a reduction of 13% assuming the current number
of inhabitants.
Page 113 of 122
==PAGE:121==
REFERENCES
H. APPENDIX: BACK-CASTING: HOUSING
H
Appendix: Back-casting: Housing
Table G.1 to G.5 are used as data in the following assessments/tables in this Appendix.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Electricity
Use Range
[kWh]
Heating
Use Range
[kWh]
30-40
1
935-1015
600-800
45-65
2
1055-1215
900-1300
65-85
3
1215-1375
1300-1700
80-120
4
1335-1655
1600-2400
100-145
5
1495-1855
2000-2900
Table H.1: Heat and electricity consumption for shared housing of various sizes.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Electricity
Use Range
[kWh]
Heating
Use Range
[kWh]
30-35
1
625–665
600-700
45-55
2
745-825
900-1100
50-75
3
785-1195
1000-1500
70-90
4
1155-1315
1400-1800
85-110
5
1275-1475
1700-2200
Table H.2: Heat and electricity consumption for apartments of various sizes.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Electricity
Use Range
[kWh]
Heating
Use Range
[kWh]
80-90
1
1335-1415
1600-1800
85-110
2
1375-1575
1700-2200
95-120
3
1455-1655
1900-2400
115-140
4
1615-1815
2300-2800
130-170
5
1735-2055
2600-3400
Table H.3: Heat and electricity consumption for single family houses of various sizes.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Electricity
Use Range
[kWh]
Heating
Use Range
[kWh]
70-90
1
1255-1415
1400-1800
75-95
2
1295-1455
1500-1900
85-105
3
1375-1535
1700-2100
90-115
4
1415-1615
1800-2300
100-130
5
1495-1735
2000-2600
Table H.4: Heat and electricity consumption for terrace houses of various sizes.
Page 114 of 122
==PAGE:122==
REFERENCES
H. APPENDIX: BACK-CASTING: HOUSING
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
30-40
1
48-54
114-142
48-54
114-142
45-65
2
57-69
156-213
29-39
78-106
65-85
3
69-81
213-269
23-27
71-90
80-120
4
78-103
255-367
20-26
64-92
100-145
5
91-118
311-438
18-24
62-88
Table H.5: GHG emissions for shared housing with HP (2050 electricity mix) and DH (fossil free mix)
per year and per person per year. Modelled in SimaPro. The ranges varies with the area intervals.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
30-35
1
35-38
101-115
35-38
101-115
45-55
2
44-50
143-171
22-25
72-86
50-75
3
56-71
166-236
19-24
55-79
70-90
4
68-80
222-279
17-20
56-70
85-110
5
77-92
265-335
15-18
53-67
Table H.6: GHG emissions for apartments with HP (2050 electricity mix) and DH (fossil free mix) per
year and per person per year. Modelled in SimaPro. The ranges varies with the area intervals.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
80-90
1
78-85
255-283
78-85
255-283
85-110
2
81-97
269-339
41-48
134-170
95-120
3
88-103
297-367
29-34
99-122
115-140
4
100-115
353-423
25-29
88-106
130-170
5
109-133
395-508
22-27
79-102
Table H.7: GHG emissions for single family houses with HP (2050 electricity mix) and DH (fossil free
mix) per year and per person per year. Modelled in SimaPro. The ranges varies with the area intervals.
Area
Range [m2]
No. of people
per house
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/year]
Impact HP
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
Impact DH
[CO2-eq/
person/year]
70-90
1
72-85
227-283
72-85
227-283
75-95
2
75-88
241-297
38-44
120-148
85-105
3
81-94
269-325
27-31
90-108
90-115
4
85-100
283-353
21-25
71-88
100-130
5
91-109
311-395
18-22
62-79
Table H.8: GHG emissions for terrace houses with HP (2050 electricity mix) and DH (fossil free mix) per
year and per person per year. Modelled in SimaPro. The ranges varies with the area intervals.
Page 115 of 122
==PAGE:123==
REFERENCES
H. APPENDIX: BACK-CASTING: HOUSING
Figure H.1: Annual GHG impact range per person for the four housing types with diﬀerent sizes with
A2020 energy label based on 2050 fossil free DH as heat source. The green vertical line shows impact
from dorm with 250 m2 area shared between 15 people at 36 kg CO2-eq.
Page 116 of 122
==PAGE:124==
REFERENCES
I. APPENDIX: DETAILS FOR CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
I
Appendix: Details for construction materials
In ﬁgure I.1 Allocation shows how much from the Material Fraction column that is allo-
cated to the respective material in the Material column eventually yielding the volume
of the respective materials. The EF CON CE Rec ranges of volumes that were not yet
recycled to fully potential were computed based on the gap between recycling rate today
and total potential recycling rate from table 3.7. Finally, ranges of volumes were mul-
tiplied with savings of GHG between primary and secondary production emissions from
3.7 using the following formula:
impact · savings [%] · (potential recycling rate - recycling rate today).
Material
Material Fraction (Miljøstyrelsen)
Allocation
Volume [Mt]
Aluminium
Aluminium, cobber, bronze, brass
25%
0.069
Steel
Iron and steel
50%
0.097
Glass
0.016
Concrete
1.055
Mineral Wool
0.011
Iron
Iron and steel
50%
0.138
Plastic PET/PP/PE
0.006
Copper
Aluminium, cobber, bronze, brass
25%
0.004
Asphalt
0.984
Table I.1: Allocation of materials from statistics of (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018a) to be the same categories of
materials of table 3.7 and the ﬁnal volumes of the materials are presented.
Country
Industry
Impact [Mt CO2-eq/year]
Denmark
Construction of new buildings
4.2
Denmark
Civil Engineering
3.9
Denmark
Repair and maintenance of buildings
2.1
Denmark
Construction materials
0.8
Denmark
Mfr. of construct. materials of metal etc.
0.3
Japan
Metal products for construction
2.2 · 10−4
Australia
Fabricated construction steel
2.6 · 10−5
Kazakhstan
Metal construction
3.1 · 10−6
Uzbekistan
Metal construction
3.1 · 10−6
Table I.2: Most contributing sectors to the construction and civil engineering industry regarding GHG-
impact in Eora. The table is divided in various construction materials (upper part) and steel and iron
(lower part).
Page 117 of 122
==PAGE:125==
REFERENCES
I. APPENDIX: DETAILS FOR CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
Material (Vir/Rec)
Volume [Mt]
wt% of Buildings
wt% of Civil Engineering
Aluminium
0.069
11%
Glass (80%/20%)
0.016
2%
Concrete
1.055
83%
35%
Mineral Wool
0.011
2%
Plastic PET/PP/PE
0.006
0.9%
Copper
0.004
0.7%
Asphalt (81%/19%)
0.984
65%
Table I.3: Wt% of the materials from (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018a) deﬁning how much GHG emissions should
be allocated from table I.2 emissions.
Concrete/Wood Ratio
[m3/m3]
Concrete Wall
[kg CO2-eq]
Wooden Wall
Kiln Dried
[kg CO2-eq]
Wooden Wall
Air Dried
[kg CO2-eq]
1:0.5
183
23
18.5
1:1
183
46
37
1:2
183
92
74
Table I.4: Comparison of concrete and wood as structural element in walls. Diﬀerent volumes of wood
(0.5, 1 and 2 m3) were compared to 1 m3 of concrete with associated impact in kg CO2-eq. Two diﬀerent
drying methods for the construction wood were modelled; kiln dried and air dried. Diﬀerent volumes
were used due to uncertainty in volume of wood that is needed to replace 1 m3 of concrete.
Page 118 of 122
==PAGE:126==
REFERENCES
J. APPENDIX: BREAK EVEN RESULT
J
Appendix: Break even result
Figure J.1: Combining the scenarios and reaching an absolute sustainable level of 5.6 Mt CO2-eq/year in
Denmark including all industries and international transport (the break even mean result). The colours
indicate in which main sector the savings is found. Grey: Transport, Green: Energy, Orange: Food,
Purple: Construction, Yellow: Non food products, Bright green: forest, Blue: total impact.
Page 119 of 122
==PAGE:127==
REFERENCES
K. APPENDIX: BC FOOD EXAMPLE
K
Appendix: BC food example
Figure K.1: Low emission food consumption for one vegetarian for one day, preparation is excluded.
The combination of food types and amounts live up to the recommended intake of fats, proteins and
carbohydrates (Sundhed.dk, 2016). Assuming similar diet all year, the total impact from food excluding
preparation results in 402 kg CO2-eq. Food waste is included.
Page 120 of 122
==PAGE:128==
REFERENCES
L. APPENDIX: BC CLOTHES
L
Appendix: BC clothes
The maintenance/washing and repair of the clothes is assumed to be the same in both
scenarios. The water consumption depends on the capacity of the machines, in this study
44 litres per. wash for 6-7 kg clothes is chosen. It is assumed that the clothes is washed
in a shared machine of 6-7 kg for a housing association, since it is unrealistic that a larger
machine can be ﬁlled for each wash, when the person owns 24 items.
55% of the energy can be saved when decreasing the temperature to 30°C from 60°C.
It is assumed that the clothes will be washed once every second week at 30 °C, and bed
linen, underwear and towels once every second week at 60°C. Considering the whole year
this result in 24 washes at 30°C and 24 washes at 60°C. 7 kg washing machine A+++
uses 0.81 kWh per wash (diﬀerent temperatures included)(SparEnergi.dk, 2018), thus 0.81
kWh · 48 washes equals 38.8 kWh a year per person.
The amount of soap depends on how much lime there is in the water. In this scenario 0.8
dl soap is used for 7 kg of clothes, which results in 3.4 L of soap a year (Unilever, 2016).
If two or more people live together it is easier to ﬁll a larger machine and thus reduce the
energy use.
A new towel (1 kg cotton) is included every third year, assuming tree towels per person
and a life time of 9 years for each towel.
New underwear and socks are modelled in
SimaPro using 0.3 kg cotton per year per person, and 0.1 kg viscose representing new
training clothes for one year. It is assumed that 1-2 pair of new shoes is necessary a year.
The shoes are modelled using 0,3 kg synthetic rubber, 0.3 kg polyvinylidenchloride, 0.3
kg polyurethane and 0.1 kg leather a year.
Incineration has been chosen as the most realistic treatment at EoL. Recycling has not
been chosen because of larger uncertainties related to the recycling methods. Reusing the
clothes is not an option due to the assumed lifetime.
Page 121 of 122
==PAGE:129==
DTU Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Akademivej
DTU - Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby
T
+45 4525 4800
